 C A N C E R
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
A single dose of peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed
CAR T cells mediates antigen loss and induces adaptive
resistance in patients with recurrent glioblastoma
Donald M. O’Rourke,1 MacLean P. Nasrallah,2* Arati Desai,3* Jan J. Melenhorst,4*
Keith Mansfield,5* Jennifer J. D. Morrissette,6 Maria Martinez-Lage,2† Steven Brem,1
Eileen Maloney,1 Angela Shen,7 Randi Isaacs,5 Suyash Mohan,8 Gabriela Plesa,4 Simon F. Lacey,4
Jean-Marc Navenot,4 Zhaohui Zheng,4 Bruce L. Levine,4 Hideho Okada,9 Carl H. June,4
Jennifer L. Brogdon,5 Marcela V. Maus10‡
We conducted a first-in-human study of intravenous delivery of a single dose of autologous T cells redirected to
the epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) mutation by a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR). We re-
port our findings on the first 10 recurrent glioblastoma (GBM) patients treated. We found that manufacturing
and infusion of CAR-modified T cell (CART)–EGFRvIII cells are feasible and safe, without evidence of off-tumor
toxicity or cytokine release syndrome. One patient has had residual stable disease for over 18 months of follow-
up. All patients demonstrated detectable transient expansion of CART-EGFRvIII cells in peripheral blood. Seven
patients had post–CART-EGFRvIII surgical intervention, which allowed for tissue-specific analysis of CART-EGFRvIII
trafficking to the tumor, phenotyping of tumor-infiltrating T cells and the tumor microenvironment in situ, and
analysis of post-therapy EGFRvIII target antigen expression. Imaging findings after CART immunotherapy were
complex to interpret, further reinforcing the need for pathologic sampling in infused patients. We found
trafficking of CART-EGFRvIII cells to regions of active GBM, with antigen decrease in five of these seven patients.
In situ evaluation of the tumor environment demonstrated increased and robust expression of inhibitory mol-
ecules and infiltration by regulatory T cells after CART-EGFRvIII infusion, compared to pre–CART-EGFRvIII in-
fusion tumor specimens. Our initial experience with CAR T cells in recurrent GBM suggests that although
intravenous infusion results in on-target activity in the brain, overcoming the adaptive changes in the local
tumor microenvironment and addressing the antigen heterogeneity may improve the efficacy of EGFRvIII-
directed strategies in GBM.
INTRODUCTION
Malignant gliomas are the most common type of primary brain tu-
mors, with glioblastoma (GBM) being the most common and most
malignantof the glial tumors. No currenttreatment is curative because
these tumors are invasive and grow aggressively in the central nervous
system (CNS). No significant advancements in the treatment of GBM
have occurred in the past 25 years except for temozolomide chemo-
therapy combined with radiotherapy, which demonstrated a limited
prolongation of survival (1). Novel antiangiogenic agents (2, 3) and
a variety of targeted kinase inhibitors (4) may be of limited efficacy
when used as monotherapy. Median survival for newly diagnosed
GBM is still less than 2 years (5). Even with standard-of-care therapy
with chemoradiation and adjuvant temozolomide, GBM patients with
significant residual disease after surgery have an average survival that
is on the order of 6 months, with even poorer survival observed when
the disease recurs in a multifocal fashion (1, 6). GBM tumors with un-
methylated O6-methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT), a DNA
repair enzyme, are also more resistant to radiation and temozolomide
(7, 8), making unmethylated MGMT a poor prognostic marker.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) variant III (EGFRvIII) is
the most common variant of the EGFR observed in human tumors (9).
It results from the in-frame deletion of exons 2 to 7 and the generation
of a novel glycine residue at the junction of exons 1 and 8. This novel
juxtaposition of amino acids within the extracellular domain of the
EGFR creates a tumor-specific, oncogenic, and immunogenic epitope.
EGFRvIII is expressed in about 30% of newly diagnosed GBM cases
(10), and in patients surviving a year or longer, the expression of
EGFRvIII is thought to be a negative prognostic indicator, regardless
of other factors such as extent of resection and age (11–13), perhaps in
part because its oncogenic properties confer increased stability and
sustained tumorigenic signaling (14). One therapeutic approach has
been the targeting of the EGFRvIII mutant oncoprotein with a peptide
vaccine strategy (rindopepimut). In phase 2 studies, rindopepimut
was well tolerated and immune responses were observed (15); howev-
er, antigen escape variants have been noted (16), indicating that
EGFRvIII may not be a sole driver mutation or otherwise necessary
to maintain the tumorigenic phenotype.
1Department of Neurosurgery, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 2Division of Neuropathology, Depart-
ment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 3Department of Medi-
cine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA. 4Center for Cellular Immunotherapies, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 5Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cam-
bridge, MA 02139, USA. 6Division of Precision and Computational Diagnostics, De-
partment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 7Novartis Oncol-
ogy, East Hanover, NJ 07936, USA. 8Division of Neuroradiology, Department of
Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Phil-
adelphia, PA 19104, USA. 9Department of Neurosurgery, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. 10Cellular Immunotherapy Program,
Cancer Center and Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Bos-
ton, MA 02129, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Present address: Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Bos-
ton, MA 02114, USA.
‡Corresponding author. Email: mvmaus@mgh.harvard.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
1 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Adoptive immunotherapy with redirected T cells obviates the
need for antigen presentation and stimulation of a primary immune
response and is potentially more effective and could have more favor-
able kinetics compared to vaccines. T cells redirected with chimeric
antigen receptors (CARs) targeting the B cell marker CD19 have shown
marked and durable efficacy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, and B cell lymphomas (17–20). CAR T cells
directed to solid tumors have not demonstrated efficacy as frequently
(21–23), but in a recent report, genetically modified T cells directed
to the interleukin-13 (IL-13) receptor a2 and infused multiple times
intratumorally and intrathecally induced complete regression of meta-
static GBM in one patient (24). We recently generated a CAR directed
to EGFRvIII and described its target specificity, functional properties,
and efficacy against EGFRvIII-expressing tumor cells in vitro and in
xenogeneic mouse models (25, 26). We now report on the results of
our first-in-human clinical trial of CAR-modified T cell (CART)–
EGFRvIII in patients with recurrent GBM expressing EGFRvIII.
RESULTS
Clinical protocol design
We opened a phase 1 study (NCT02209376) to evaluate the feasibil-
ity and safety of manufacturing and administering CART-EGFRvIII
cells to patients with EGFRvIII-expressing recurrent GBM. Patients
with newly diagnosed or recurrent GBM referred to or treated at the
University of Pennsylvania were offered testing of their tumor for
expression of the EGFRvIII mutation by a validated RNA-based
next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay; an antibody to test EGFRvIII
expression by immunohistochemistry is desirable but was not availa-
ble. Testing for EGFRvIII expression could be performed as a standard-
of-care assay or as part of the screening procedures for enrollment on
this clinical protocol. Patients were considered to have positive
EGFRvIII expression if their tumors expressed EGFRvIII with a
minimum of 100 reads. EGFRvIII percentage was calculated as
(EGFRvIII reads)/[wild-type (WT) EGFR reads + EGFRvIII reads].
First preference was given to those with greater than 30% EGFRvIII,
but in cases with extensive wild-type EGFR amplification, individuals
with tumors containing as low as 6% EGFRvIII were considered eligi-
ble. In cases where patients had had previous EGFRvIII-directed
therapy (such as rindopepimut), EGFRvIII expression had to be con-
firmed after recurrence to avoid treating patients whose tumors had
already lost EGFRvIII expression. Additional eligibility criteria in-
cluded adequate organ function and performance status and a histo-
pathologic diagnosis of GBM. Written informed consent was obtained
for leukapheresis and treatment in two separate steps. Determination
of EGFRvIII-expressing GBM was required for leukapheresis on the
first step (step 1) of this protocol; evidence of recurrent or progres-
sive disease triggered manufacturing of the CART-EGFRvIII prod-
uct (Fig. 1A). Upon enrollment on the treatment phase (step 2) of
the protocol, subjects underwent baseline magnetic resonance im-
aging (MRI), and their CART-EGFRvIII product was infused with-
in 1 week (on day 0). The primary end points of the trial were safety
and feasibility, and the secondary end points included response rate
and overall survival. Correlative studies included measurement of
expansion and persistence of CART-EGFRvIII cells by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and flow cytometry and cyto-
kine release associated with infusion of CART-EGFRvIII cells.
The study was opened after obtaining national and local regulatory
approvals.
Over the course of 2 years, tumor specimens from 369 patients
with histologically confirmed GBM were tested for EGFRvIII at our
institution as standard of care using the NGS assay. Of these, 79
(21%) tested positive for EGFRvIII. The protocol completed accrual
in less than 20 months. In that time, 17 patients whose tumors had
tested positive for EGFRvIII were consented for leukapheresis and
underwent initial screening on step 1 of the protocol (Fig. 1B). Of
these, three had clinical decline before proceeding to leukapheresis.
Fourteen subjects had their T cells collected by leukapheresis; one sub-
ject was subsequently withdrawn from the study by the investigator
(due to rapid decline just before infusion), and three subjects (all with
MGMT promoter–methylated GBM, which portends a better progno-
sis and responsiveness to standard chemotherapy) had not yet pro-
gressed to enroll on the treatment step of the protocol. Ten subjects
have been infused with CART-EGFRvIII cell products.
Neurosurgical intervention in CART-EGFRvIII–infused patients
The original protocol design had an initial response assessment
1 month after CART-EGFRvIII infusion. In the first five subjects,
the 1-month MRI was interpreted as stable disease by RANO (Re-
sponse Assessment in Neuro-Oncology) criteria; one patient (207)
had evidence of progression on MRI. However, after infusion of the
first three subjects on this study and recognizing the complexity of the
MRI findings and their interpretation, particularly in the context of
an immunotherapy, we focused the study on understanding CART-
EGFRvIII cell trafficking to the brain and their effects in the tumor.
Unfortunately, there are no currently available clinical methods to
directly image CART-EGFRvIII cell trafficking in the brain, making
it impossible to noninvasively measure in situ CART-EGFRvIII phar-
macokinetics or pharmacodynamics. Neurosurgical intervention was
not obligatory as part of the original protocol design or an end point
of this study but was clinically indicated at some point during the
course of post-CART infusion treatment in seven patients. The tim-
ing of neurosurgical intervention was based on imaging findings
suggestive of disease progression, as determined by the clinical and
neuroradiology teams. Overall, there were three groups of subjects:
(i) those who did not undergo surgery after CART infusion (the first
three subjects treated in this study, all of whom had multifocal and/or
deep-seated recurrence not amenable to surgical resection before
CART infusion), (ii) those who underwent “late surgery” for pre-
sumed recurrence based on radiographic imaging after CART in-
fusion (the second group of three subjects treated who had surgery
once at either day 34, day 55, or day 104 after CART-EGFRvIII in-
fusion), and (iii) those who underwent “early surgery” in whom it
was determined that surgery was indicated because of clear sympto-
matic progression. In this latter subgroup of four subjects, the CART
product had been manufactured before clinical decline, and we
therefore determined that surgery after CART infusion would pro-
vide an opportunity to evaluate CART-EGFRvIII biology without a
delay in clinical intervention. This early surgery subgroup enabled
the evaluation of the kinetics of early CART-EGFRvIII trafficking
and alteration of the tumor microenvironment in GBM. The late
surgery group allowed for the opportunity to evaluate the duration
of CART-EGFRvIII persistence and potential activity in the tumor.
Although the patients who underwent early surgery were not evalu-
able for radiographic response or progression-free survival assess-
ments relative to CART-EGFRvIII infusion, the surgical procedures
provided the only direct opportunity to evaluate the biology of adop-
tive T cell transfer across the blood-brain barrier in human patients
with GBM.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
2 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 14
Apheresed
3
Clinical
decline
3
Pending progression/ 
manufacturing
1 withdrawn
17
EGFRvIII+ subjects 
consented on step 1
10
Consented to step 2
10
Subjects
infused
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
207
211
202
201
204
213
217
216
205
209
Time (days)
Subject number
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Duration on study
Total follow-up
*    Surgical resection
EGFRvIII+ glioblastoma
MRI brain
research studies
Progression of disease
Triggers
manufacturing
Consent for treatment/ 
enrollment step 2 
MRI brain
CAR T cell infusion
(
)Follow-up
Leukapheresis
Day 0
Day 1
-
Day 3
-
-
-
Day 7
-
-
Day 10
-
-
-
Day 14
-
-
-
-
-
-
Day 21
-
-
-
-
-
-
Day 28
Follow-up every 4 weeks
until month 6
Follow-up every 2 months
until 2 years
Screening for step 1
A  
B  
C 
D 
Overall survival
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percent survival
Days after infusion
Median OS: 251 days
Fig. 1. Protocol design, consort diagram, and clinical outcomes in subjects infused with CART-EGFRvIII. (A) Protocol schema for EGFRvIII testing, leukapheresis,
and manufacturing, treatment with CAR T cells directed to EGFRvIII, and follow-up. (B) Consort diagram indicating the number of subjects screened and enrolled on
the study. (C) Swimmer’s plot describing time on study for each subject (black), duration of follow-up off study (that is, survival beyond progression or initiation of
other therapy) (gray), and present status. Arrows indicate ongoing survival. Asterisks indicate surgical intervention. Dashed vertical line indicates 1-year time point.
(D) OS plotted as Kaplan-Meier estimate for all subjects. X axis is shown in days. Tick marks indicate each censored subject (that is, subjects who are alive at the data
cutoff point).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
3 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clinical results
Study subjects
The patient characteristics, level of EGFRvIII expression, and CART-
EGFRvIII dose received are shown in summary form in Table 1. The
characteristics of individual patients are shown in table S1, and individ-
ual product and dose characteristics are shown in table S2. The ages
ranged from 45 to 76 years, and 50% of the subjects were male. The
median time from diagnosis to infusion was 358 days, with a range
of 179 to 682 days. Of the 10 subjects infused, 2 were treated with
CART-EGFRvIII as their second line of treatment (that is, with evi-
dence of progressive disease after completion of first-line standard
treatment with surgery, chemoradiation, and one or more cycles of ad-
juvant temozolomide). Four were treated with CART-EGFRvIII as
third-line treatment, and four were treated with CART-EGFRvIII as
fourth-line treatment. Previous second- and third-line treatments in-
cluded surgery, bevacizumab, chemotherapy (CCNU and/or carbopla-
tin and/or lomustine), or dendritic cell vaccine. The details of each
patient’s age, time from initial diagnosis, performance status, steroid
dose, EGFRvIII expression levels, and previous treatments are de-
scribed in table S1. Nine of the 10 subjects had multifocal disease, a
group of patients who are often excluded from other clinical trials be-
cause of poor prognosis; the 10th subject had a deep-seated multilobu-
lated GBM involving the thalamus and midbrain that was not amenable
to complete surgical resection and is uniformly associated with poor
prognosis. All subjects had GBM with unmethylated MGMT promoter
at some point in the course of their disease, a poor prognostic indicator
(27). Karnofsky performance status ranged from 60 to 100%, with most
subjects in the 80 to 90% range at infusion. Subjects were allowed to
maintain a limited and stable dose of concurrent dexamethasone of
up to 4 mg daily, but efforts were made to wean patients from steroids
when clinically feasible, so as to avoid suppression of the CAR T cells;
two patients were receiving steroids at the time of CART-EGFRvIII
infusion. The median level of expression of EGFRvIII was 71% and
ranged from 6% (in a subject with extensive amplification of wild-type
EGFR) to 96%. Despite previous treatment with temozolomide and
radiation, all subjects had successful manufacturing of their CART-
EGFRvIII cell product. The CART-EGFRvIII product is composed
of autologous T cells transduced with a lentiviral vector coding for a
CAR that binds to EGFRvIII with a humanized single-chain variable
fragment and signals using CD3z and the 4-1BB costimulation domain,
which we previously described (26). The product was manufactured
using our established methods to stimulate, transduce, and formulate
the CAR T cells for intravenous infusion (28–30). The median trans-
duction efficiency of 19.75% met the target dose of 1 × 108 to 5 × 108
CART-EGFRvIII+ and all other release criteria (Table 1). The transduc-
tion efficiency and exact dose are described for each patient in table S2.
Safety
As a phase 1 trial, the primary end point of this study was safety. The
individual and significant post-CART infusion events and treatments
are described and listed in table S3. All adverse events considered by
the principal investigator to be related to CART-EGFRvIII cells are
listed in table S4. The adverse events of special interest were
considered to be (i) evidence of off-target toxicity related to EGFR,
(ii) systemic cytokine release syndrome (characterized by fever, hypo-
tension, and elevated inflammatory markers), and (iii) neurologic
changes. No subjects experienced evidence of EGFR-directed toxicity
(such as rash, diarrhea, or pulmonary symptoms) or systemic cytokine
release syndrome. Three subjects experienced clinically significant
neurologic events, which are common in this population because of
the nature of the disease but could also be related to CART-EGFRvIII–
induced immune responses in the confined intracranial space. One
subject (202) had a seizure at day 9, followed by several days of altered
mental status. The etiology of the seizure was unclear, because the pa-
tient also had viable GBM and hyponatremia. In addition to high-dose
steroids and antiepileptics, this subject was treated with siltuximab
(anti–IL-6) at day 15 in an effort to treat hypothesized “intracranial”
cytokine release; the subject recovered to his baseline mental status
over several days, but the recovery could not be attributed to a single
intervention. A second patient (211) had neurologic decline at day 15
and was treated with high-dose steroids followed by siltuximab at
day 29, but the overall clinical assessment was more consistent with
progressive disease. A third patient (213) experienced neurologic de-
cline in the postoperative setting, which was attributed to delayed
hemorrhage in the operative bed that required clinical observation
but not repeat surgical intervention. In summary, there were no
dose-limiting toxicities, and CART-EGFRvIII was not associated
with EGFR-directed toxicity, systemic cytokine release syndrome,
or the neurotoxicity signs and symptoms observed with CD19-
directed immunotherapy (31–33). However, neurologic effects such
as seizures could be related to disease or localized T cell activation
with an intracranial compartmentalized cytokine release.
Clinical end points
All subjects’ tumors were assessed by MRI per protocol and clinical
standards. Subjects remained on this study until clear disease pro-
gression or initiation of other medical treatments and then were
Table 1. Patient and product characteristics.
Median (n = 10)
Range
Age
59.5
45–76
Sex (male)
50%
Time from initial diagnosis to
infusion (in days)
358
179–682
Line of treatment at infusion
2
20%
3
40%
4
40%
Karnofsky performance status
100
20%
90
30%
80
30%
70
10%
60
10%
Receiving steroids at infusion
20%
EGFRvIII expression
71%
(6–96%)
% T cells transduced
19.75%
(4.8–25.6%)
Dose of CART-EGFRvIII
5 × 108
(1.75 × 108–5 × 108)
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
4 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 followed on a long-term follow-up study as mandated by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for subjects receiving genetically
modified products. Duration of follow-up while on study and duration
of follow-up off study are indicated in Fig. 1C. Asterisks indicate the
timing of neurosurgical intervention, which, in one subject (207), co-
incided with clear progression and removal from study. One patient
remains alive and wellwithout further therapy for more than 18 months
after a single infusion of CART-EGFRvIII (subject 209). Two other
subjects are alive but have clearly progressed by imaging criteria. A
Kaplan-Meier plot of overall survival (OS) is shown (Fig. 1D), with
median OS of 251 days (~8 months) in these 10 subjects. Progression-
free survival was not evaluable because of the confounding factor of
neurosurgical intervention in most of the subjects.
Peripheral blood engraftment and persistence
of CART-EGFRvIII
We detected CART-EGFRvIII cells in all infused subjects by qPCR
analysis and flow cytometric analysis of peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs). The ability to detect infused CAR T cells
has been defined as engraftment (34), although it does not necessar-
ily define a duration. CAR gene marking via qPCR analysis was
quantified relative to genomic DNA as described (28). CART-EGFRvIII
cells were quantified as percent staining with soluble bis-biotinylated
EGFRvIII of the gated T cell population (fig. S1); this reagent, a soluble
version of the extracellular domain of soluble EGFRvIII, was extensively
validated in preclinical and translational studies (26). All subjects in-
fused had detectable circulating CART-EGFRvIII cells in the first
month after infusion. The peak expansion occurred between days 3
and 10 in all subjects. Patient 202 received high-dose dexamethasone
at day 9, and a transient decrease in CART-EGFRvIII in the peripheral
blood was noted by both flow cytometry and qPCR. No lymphode-
pleting chemotherapy was administered to the subjects, but several
of them were lymphopenic at baseline. No correlation between the
absolute lymphocyte count and the peak engraftment was observed
(fig. S2). In general, there was consistency between engraftment
measured by flow cytometry and qPCR, although CART-EGFRvIII
cells were detected longer by qPCR in some cases, potentially indi-
cating persistence of genetically modified cells with loss of transgene
expression, or, more likely, the higher sensitivity of qPCR compared
to flow cytometry. After day 14, there was a rapid decline in the level
of circulating CART-EGFRvIII cells, and all subjects had lost flow
cytometry–detectable CART-EGFRvIII cells in blood by day 30
(Fig. 2A).
Although we did not observe clinical evidence of the typical cy-
tokine release syndrome observed in patients with hematologic ma-
lignancies treated with CAR T cells, we collected serum at specified
time points after CART-EGFRvIII infusion. We quantified 30 cyto-
kines in the peripheral blood in all infused subjects. Five of the 10 subjects
had 10-fold or higher elevations in IL-6, with one peak between 1 and
7 days after infusion in 4 subjects (Fig. 2B). Both subjects who received
siltuximab for suspected intracranial cytokine release had significantly
higher levels of IL-6 as measured in our assay after the siltuximab was
infused. However, this was likely to be a false-positive measurement,
because it did not correlate with clinical symptoms such as fever, or
laboratory abnormalities such as elevations in C-reactive protein. It is
known that cytokine-antibody pharmacodynamics are challenging to
measure, and siltuximab in particular interferes with standard anti-
body-based measurements of IL-6 (35, 36). C-reactive protein levels
were measured in subjects suspected of having cytokine release syn-
drome. The increased levels of IL-6 at early time points tracked with
increased levels of C-reactive protein but did not correlate with the
very high levels of IL-6 measured after siltuximab (Fig. 2B), con-
firming the likely false-positive levels of measured IL-6. Two subjects
had >10-fold elevations in either IL-5 (patient 204) or IL-10 (patient
207), but no other cytokines were elevated over 10-fold from baseline
in any of the subjects within the first 2 months of CART-EGFRvIII
infusion (table S6).
Imaging assessments after CART-EGFRvIII infusion
All infused subjects had their disease assessed with a baseline MRI
before infusion, and the first six subjects had a disease assessment
MRI 4 weeks after infusion. At day 28, all but one of the subjects
had stable disease as determined by post-contrast T1-weighted
images. One of these subjects (207) had evidence of progression
on MRI at day 28; he underwent re-resection at day 34 and was found
to have progressive disease with pseudopalisading necrosis and no
evidence of T cell infiltration upon neurohistopathologic evaluation
(fig. S3). This subject also had one of the lowest peak levels of CART-
EGFRvIII in the blood. In the other five subjects, a follow-up MRI
scan at month 2 demonstrated imaging changes that were suggestive
of either treatment effects or progression. For example, subject 205
had worsening contrast enhancement and T2 signal abnormality on
the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images at day 28 but
was considered to have stable disease by RANO criteria; she was ob-
served closely and was clinically stable (Fig. 3A). At month 2, her
imaging findings of contrast enhancement, T2 signal abnormality,
and mild mass effect in the left temporal lobe progressed further
(Fig. 3A). She underwent re-resection, which provided an opportu-
nity to examine the pathological status of her disease and information
regarding the trafficking and presence of CART-EGFRvIII. On patho-
logic evaluation, there was significant lymphocytic and macrophage
infiltration and low tumor viability, which was interpreted patholog-
ically as favoring treatment effects over true GBM progression (Fig. 3B).
However, this patient died of her disease ~8 months after CART-
EGFRvIII infusion (~6 months after surgery).
Another subject (209) underwent “late” surgery for a heteroge-
neously enhancing lesion in the left temporal lobe on day 104 after
CART-EGFRvIII infusion. In the 3-month period after CART-
EGFRvIII infusion, this patient’s MRI imaging studies showed only
incremental change that was consistently interpreted as stable dis-
ease by radiographic criteria; however, she then experienced a clin-
ical change with increase in headaches, and therefore, the clinical
team recommended surgical resection to evaluate tumor histology
to guide future treatment. She underwent surgery at day 104, and
postoperative MRI imaging demonstrated no residual enhancing
lesion (Fig. 3C, middle panels). Follow-up MRI (T1 post-contrast
images) at 7 and 12 months demonstrate a small focus of enhance-
ment superior to the surgical cavity that remained stable over 18 months
without any further therapy or interventions (Fig. 3C, bottom panels).
Neuropathological examination of the surgical specimen obtained at
day 104 showed infiltrative tumor with small areas of solid tumor, as
well as treatment-related changes, including reactive brain parenchyma
and geographic necrosis. The post-infusion tumor was less densely
cellular than that of the original resection and had no pseudopalisading
necrosis.Afewfociofmicrovascularproliferationwerepresent,andmito-
seswere not prominent. Collectively, these observationswere felt to rep-
resent a mixed picture of treatment effects with some residual disease.
This patient remains clinically stable with excellent performance status
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
5 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 at 18 months [ECOG(Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) grade 1].
The extent to which CART-EGFRvIII infusion contributed to this
patient’sclinicalandradiographic stability cannotbe clearlydetermined.
CART-EGFRvIII trafficking to the brain and effects on EGFR
target expression
Seven subjects who were treated with CART-EGFRvIII had surgical
resections at various intervals after the infusion. In these subjects, the
post-infusion tumor was analyzed for CART-EGFRvIII cell infiltra-
tion by qPCR to assess the level of CART-EGFRvIII infiltration to
brain tumor compared to peripheral blood obtained at the same time
point. We found that the highest levels of CART-EGFRvIII cells in
the tumor were detected at the early time points, that is, in the four
subjects who had surgery within 14 days of infusion, consistent with
the initial engraftment in the peripheral blood. In one subject (205),
CART-EGFRvIII cells were detected in the tumor 2 months after in-
fusion but at lower levels than in the blood; however, they were not
detected at all in the subject who had the lowest level of engraftment
in the blood (207) and early progression. In the subject who had sur-
gery 3 months after CART infusion, CART-EGFRvIII was not de-
tected in the tumor despite continued low-level detection in the
peripheral blood (209) by qPCR (but not flow cytometry). CART-
EGFRvIII cells were found at higher concentrations in the brain than
in the peripheral blood in two subjects (216 and 217; Fig. 4A), both of
whom had their tumors resected within 2 weeks of CART-EGFRvIII
infusion. In these cases, CART-EGFRvIII DNA sequences were 3 or
100 times higher in brain specimens than in the peripheral blood,
suggesting effective trafficking and likely expansion of CART-
EGFRvIII cells in situ within active regions of GBM (Fig. 4A).
One indication of on-target effects is the decrease of antigen ex-
pression in the remaining tumor bed and tissue. In the subjects who
underwent resection after CART-EGFRvIII infusion, we compared
paired pre-infusion specimens to post-infusion specimens for expres-
sion of EGFRvIII (Fig. 4B) and EGFR (Fig. 4C) by the same RNA-
based NGS assay used for screening. We found that expression levels
of EGFRvIII declined in five of the seven infused subjects in whom
post-infusion tumor was assessed (P = 0.03). In subject 207 [who had
had poor engraftment, early progression (at month 1), and no detect-
able CART-EGFRvIII in the tumor], there was no effect on EGFRvIII
expression. In subject 217, there were varying levels of EGFRvIII expres-
sion in multiple areas of the tumor sampled and tested, yielding a mean
stable level of EGFRvIII expression after CART-EGFRvIII infusion.
A  
B 
207 (IL-10)
Fig. 2. Engraftment of CART-EGFRvIII and cytokine modulation in the peripheral blood. (A) CART-EGFRvIII engraftment and persistence in the peripheral blood by
flow cytometry detecting the CAR on CD3+ T cells (left y axis, blue curve) and by qPCR detecting CAR sequences (right y axis, red curve) in PBMC genomic DNA.
Pharmacokinetics over the first 30 days for each subject are shown. (B) Fold change in IL-6 levels in the peripheral blood of each subject over time (black squares,
plotted on the left y axis). Baseline IL-6 levels for subjects 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 209, 211, 213, 216, and 217 were 2.57, 7.5, 8.58, 4.90, 1.78, 4.40 , 0.35, 3.11, 8.89, and
33.85 pg/ml, respectively. Baseline level of IL-10 in subject 207 was 2.03 pg/ml. Data for all other cytokines are shown in table S6. C-reactive protein (CRP) levels are
plotted in the subjects in whom it was measured over time (green triangles, right y axis). Significant clinical events such as seizures, surgery, or administration of
siltuximab are noted on the x axis.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
6 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 EGFRvIII expression decreased in the other five subjects and was un-
detectable in two subjects. In contrast, the level of EGFR amplification
did not change in a statistically significant fashion (P > 0.999), suggest-
ing that this antigen was targeted neither by CART-EGFRvIII cells nor
by other tumor infiltrating lymphocytes.
In situ clonotypic T cell repertoire
On routine neuropathology evaluation, we noticed that several
subjects had a robust lymphocytic infiltrate in their tumors after
CART-EGFRvIII infusion, which seemed out of proportion to the
level of CART-EGFRvIII genomic sequences observed (fig. S3).
We sought to quantify the T cell infiltrate in subjects whose tumor
was resected at different time points after infusion (day 6, day 55, and
day 104 in subjects 211, 205, and 209, respectively). In these three
subjects, we analyzed the T cell clonotypic repertoire in pre- and
post-infusion brain tumor specimens, along with the matching in-
fusion products, by deep sequencing the T cell receptor (TCR) Vb
chain of tumor-infiltrating T cells.
First, we found that in all three of these subjects, the number of
unique TCR Vbs identified in the tumor samples increased by several
thousands in post-infusion specimens, and only a small portion of
these unique TCRs were shared with preexisting tumor-infiltrating
specific T cells (Fig. 4D). Thus, there was a marked increase in the
number and clonotypic diversity of tumor-infiltrating T cells after
intravenous CART-EGFRvIII infusion.
The infusion products (derived from peripheral blood) contained
many more unique clonotypes (60,000 to 80,000) than pre-infusion
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (100 to 1000) or post-infusion tumor-
infiltrating lymphocytes (2000 to 18,000). In each subject, less than 5%
of the clonotypes in the infusion product was identified in the post-
CART cell tumor biopsy [3226/(3226 + 61,327) in patient 205, 800/
(800 + 77,794) in patient 209, and 1768/(1768 + 78,092) in patient
211]. Conversely, greater than 25% in subjects 205 and 209 and close
to 10% in patient 211 of all post-infusion clonotypes in the brain biop-
sies were identified in the infusion product [3226/(7912 + 3226) in
patient 205, 800/(800 + 2068) in patient 209, and 1768/(1768 +
16,745) in patient 211] (Fig. 4E). These data suggest that although only
a small fraction of the >2.5 billion infused T cells eventually infiltrated
the tumor, the clones present in the infusion product made up a rela-
tively large fraction of the T cell repertoire infiltrating the tumor after
Baseline 
Month 1 
Month 2 
T1 Gad 
FLAIR 
A 
B 
C 
Immediate postoperative
Day 104
 
Month 12 
Baseline 
H&E 
CD3 
Axial T1 
Baseline 
Month 1 
Month 3 
Axial T1+C 
Month 7 
Subject 209 
Subject 205 
Fig. 3. Effects of CART-EGFRvIII on radiological and/or pathological assessments in two subjects. (A) MRI performed before and after administration of gado-
linium (gad) in subject 205. T1 post-contrast and FLAIR images are shown for the indicated time points. (B) Histological analysis of surgical specimens obtained from
subject 205, 2 months after CART-EGFRvIII infusion. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)–stained sections and immunohistochemistry for CD3 to demonstrate T cells are
shown. Scale bar, 200 mm. (C) MRI (T1 post-contrast images) shown at the indicated time points for subject 209. This subject underwent surgical resection of one
portion of the tumor after the 3-month scan.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
7 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pre-CART
Post-CART
0
20
40
60
80
100
EGFRvIII % of total EGFR reads
EGFRvIII by NGS 
207
217
216
209
211
205
213
0.0313
Pre-CART
Post-CART
0
5
10
15
20
EGFR amplification
EGFR amplification by NGS
207
213
217
211
209
205
216
>0.9999
CART-EGFRvIII
211 (d6)
213 (d6)
217 (d6)
216 (d13)
207 (d34)
205 (d55)
209 (d104)
0
1
2
3
20
40
60
80
100
Subject # (day post-CART)
Ratio of brain:blood
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
Subject 205 
Subject 209 
Subject 211 
Fig. 4. T cell trafficking and effectonEGFR mutations in brain tumors after intravenous infusion of CART-EGFRvIII. (A)Comparison of CART-EGFRvIII quantification in brain
tumor specimens compared toperipheral blood in each of the seven patients who underwent surgical resection at various time points (subject # and day # indicated on the x axis)
after CART-EGFRvIII infusion. Ratio is calculated on the basis of copies per microgram of genomic DNA in cells. (B) Levels of expression of EGFRvIII as determined by NGS of purified
genomic DNAin brain tumor specimens obtained beforeor after CART-EGFRvIII infusion. Subject numbers are indicated along the right, and each subject is color-coded for clarity.
Where more than one sample was obtained and tested separately, points show the mean. Bar indicates P value between pre- and post-CART levels in paired specimens by the
Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test. (C) EGFR amplification in brain tumor specimens obtained pre– and post–CART-EGFRvIII infusion from all tissue samples tested. Bar
indicates P value between pre- and post-CART levelsin paired specimensby the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test. Subject numbers areindicated along theright, and each
subject is color-coded for clarity. (D) TCRb CDR3 deep sequencing analysis of T cells infiltrating brain tumor specimens obtained before and after CART-EGFRvIII and (E) in the
matching infusion product and post-CART brain tumor–infiltrating lymphocytes in three subjects (205, 209, and 211). Unique TCR sequences in the pre-infusion tumor biopsy are
shown in the green box along the x axis in (D) and in the infusion product in the green box along the x axis in (E). In (D) and (E), these are compared with post-infusion tumor
specimen clonotype repertoire shown in red along the y axis. Shared clonotypes are displayed in a blue box.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
8 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 infusion. However, we could not glean from these data whether these
were the same T cell clonotypes that had been transduced with CAR.
In situ characterization of tumor-infiltrating T cells,
CART-EGFRvIII cells, and the tumor microenvironment
To determine the extent to which the lymphocytic infiltrates observed
in the tumors were CARTs, we developed an RNAscope in situ hy-
bridization (RNAscope ISH) assay to detect and quantify the expres-
sion of conserved elements in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of
the CAR vector. This assay quantifies RNA molecules per cell and was
validated and tested to confirm CAR expression in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue (fig. S4). In the patient whose tumor
was resected 2 weeks after infusion (216), we detected large numbers
of T cells and CART-EGFRvIII cells in situ (Fig. 5A). Compared to
pre-infusion brain tumor specimens from the same patient, the post-
infusion T cell infiltrate appeared to be greater, composed of more
CD8 T cells, and more activated cells, based on expression of interferon-g
(IFN-g), granzyme B, and CD25. However, in all subjects examined, the
T cell infiltrate was patchy, with substantial infiltration in some areas
of the tumor but not in others (Fig. 5, A and C). In all four subjects
who had their tumors resected within 2 weeks of CART-EGFRvIII in-
fusion (211, 213, 216, and 217), we detected CAR+ cells by RNAscope
ISH (Fig. 5C). These T cells were composed of a mixture of CD8+ and
CD8− T cells, and many had an activated phenotype.
We also evaluated the surrounding tumor microenvironment for
expression of immunosuppressive molecules, including indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO),
programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1), transforming growth
factor–b (TGFb), and IL-10 and FoxP3 as markers of regulatory T cells.
All antibody stains were validated, as shown for PD-L1 in fig. S5.
Compared to pre-infusion tumor specimens, post-CART–infusion
tumor specimens had markedly increased expression of many immu-
nosuppressive molecules, particularly IDO1 and FoxP3, and in some
cases, IL-10, PD-L1, and/or TGFb (Fig. 5, B and C). The level of
programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1) expression in the infiltrating
lymphocytes was also assessed but did not appear to change in the
post-infusion infiltrating lymphocytes compared to the pre-infusion
lymphocytes (Fig. 5C). To confirm and quantify the relative percent-
age of FoxP3+ T regulatory cells, we also performed immunohisto-
chemistry to colocalize staining of CD3 and FoxP3 (representative
sample from patient 216 is shown in Fig. 6A). Because of technical
incompatibility of methodologies, we were not able to colocalize
CAR expression with FoxP3 staining in situ. In four of the five paired
pre- and post-infusion tumor samples, we were able to detect increases
in the relative proportion of FoxP3+ cells compared to total CD3 cells
(Fig. 6B). Using similar methodology, we were also able to confirm a
relative increase in proliferation of CD8 T cells in situ after CART-
EGFRvIII infusion in three of the five subjects (representative sample
from patient 213 shown in Fig. 6C, with quantified data for five
subjects in Fig. 6D). Perhaps because of small sample size, neither
the relative increase in FoxP3+ expression in CD3 cells nor Ki67 ex-
pression in CD8 cells met statistical significance.
Together, these findings suggest that CART-EGFRvIII trafficked
from the intravenously infused product to the brain tumor, prolif-
erated initially in situ, and exerted some direct anti-target activity,
based on decreased levels of EGFRvIII expression, but this immune
activation was also associated with compensatory adaptive resistance
mechanisms, including up-regulation of IDO1 and PD-L1, and re-
cruitment of IL-10–secreting, FoxP3-expressing regulatory T cells.
DISCUSSION
We conducted a first-in-human pilot study of CAR T cells directed
to EGFRvIII in 10 patients with recurrent EGFRvIII+ GBM and op-
timized our study to maximize the biologic information obtained
from a small number of patients. Notably, our patient population
consisted of heavily treated, refractory patients with multifocal,
MGMT-unmethylated recurrent GBMs, a group of patients whose
overall survival is extremely poor. We were able to demonstrate that
manufacturing the target dose of CART-EGFRvIII cells was feasible
in patients with recurrent GBM who had received multiple previous
doses of temozolomide and completed a course of radiation. Even
the subjects who had moderate lymphopenia had a successful man-
ufacturing process, suggesting that the T cell dysfunction observed
in GBM patients (37) does not exclude the possibility of T cell–based
therapies. In terms of safety, our greatest concern during our pre-
clinical development process was the possibility of cross-reactivity
with wild-type EGFR; this was tested extensively in silico, in vitro,
and in skin-grafted xenogeneic models (26). Reassuringly, we did
not observe any evidence of cross-reactivity to wild-type EGFR in this
clinical setting.
The standard of care in assessing tumor progression and responses
in GBM is MRI. However, we found that imaging assessments were
difficult to interpret in the setting of immunotherapy, where transient
potential treatment-related changes such as inflammation could not
easily be distinguished from tumor progression. In this study and in
the field of brain tumor immunotherapy more generally, advanced
imaging analysis is being investigated as a way to differentiate pseudo-
progression and immune-related effects from true disease progression
(38, 39). We could not formally assess responses by imaging criteria in
most of our patients because of their interval surgery. We observed
that one patient has not required any further therapy for more than
18 months after CART infusion. We did not observe marked tumor
regression by MRI in any patients. However, larger cohorts are needed
to make any definitive conclusions about the potential for clinical ben-
efit with this CART-EGFRvIII product.
The two most severe and most common toxicities of CAR T cells
directed to CD19 are cytokine release syndrome and neurologic tox-
icity (31, 40). These two potentially but not absolutely related syn-
dromes are related to the high tumor burden and antigen load
present in patients with B cell lymphoblastic malignancies. In con-
trast, GBM patients are not expected to bear large tumor burdens,
and thus, we did not expect or observe systemic cytokine release syn-
drome as manifested by fevers or hypotension. However, given the
enclosed intracranial space and the potential for catastrophic local-
ized inflammation, the possibility of localized cytokine release was
considered in any subject who developed new neurologic symptoms
in the first month after CART-EGFRvIII cell infusion. For this rea-
son, two subjects received siltuximab along with corticosteroids and
supportive care for new neurologic symptoms, such as seizures or
worsening neurologic deficits. We chose to use siltuximab rather
than tocilizumab, because although tocilizumab has an established
role for the treatment of systemic cytokine release syndrome, it is
not clear that tocilizumab crosses the blood-brain barrier to a suffi-
cient degree to ameliorate neurotoxicity or brain exposure to IL-6.
The mechanism of action of tocilizumab, which blocks the IL-6 re-
ceptor, transiently increases the level of IL-6 in the circulation (36),
potentially exposing the brain to even higher levels of IL-6. Siltuximab
binds soluble IL-6 and therefore was hypothesized to be safer for reduc-
ing CNS exposure. The only effect we observed after the administration
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
9 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of siltuximab was the inability to accurately measure IL-6 in
the circulation afterward; fortunately, the level of C-reactive
protein proved to be informative in this setting because it did
not track with the increased IL-6 levels after siltuximab.
We observed that all infused subjects had detectable en-
graftment of CART-EGFRvIII cells in the peripheral blood,
despite the relative lack of antigen in the circulation and the
absence of lymphodepletion. These data suggest that CART-
EGFRvIII cells had a transient growth advantage compared to
the endogenous lymphocyte population, which could be re-
lated to either the ex vivo costimulation process (41) or the ex-
pression of the transgene. CAR T cells carrying the 4-1BB
costimulation domain have been observed to have tonic
signaling (42) and increased oxidative phosphorylation (43),
which could facilitate the observed engraftment. However,
CART-EGFRvIII cells engraft by 50-fold less than CD19-
specific CAR T cells bearing the same 4-1BB signaling domain,
lentiviral backbone, and manufacturing process, suggesting
that antigen-driven expansion is more robust than CAR-
mediated tonic signaling or bead (costimulation)–mediated ex-
pansion (44). Alternatively, the lower level of engraftment in
the peripheral blood may in part reflect T cell homing to
antigen-expressing tissues. Unlike CD19-specific CAR T cells,
which encounter high numbers of antigen-bearing cells in
blood, marrow, and lymphoid organs, CART-EGFRvIII cells
encounter low levels of antigen only in the brain tumor. The
lack of robust persistence in the peripheral blood beyond
1 month is an expected finding, and years-long persistence
could be a cause for concern.
Although measuring engraftment of CART-EGFRvIII
cells in the peripheral blood is a minimal requirement, we
expected that efficacy of an intravenous injection would de-
pend on the ability of CART-EGFRvIII cells to traffic to the
brain, which may depend in part on the expression of VLA-
4 (very late antigen–4) (45). In subjects who had a surgical re-
section after their CART-EGFRvIII infusion, we were able to confirm
that CART-EGFRvIII cells did traffic to the tumor site. In two of these
subjects, the T cells also proliferated in the brain, as measured by
Ki67 staining; this is in agreement with the observed concentration gra-
dient of CART-EGFRvIII from the tumor to the peripheral blood. We
could not define the kinetics of the CART-EGFRvIII trafficking pre-
cisely, but on the basis of this study, there appears to be a defined time
window of maximal and detectable trafficking of CART-EGFRvIII
cells to the brain. This coincides with (or may slightly follow) the peak
engraftment in the peripheral blood, at 1 to 2 weeks after infusion.
Finally, we also noted the heterogeneity in T cell infiltration of brain
tumors, although the exact mechanisms that drive T cell trafficking
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
Pre
Post
C 
B 
A 
Fig. 5. Immunohistochemistry of the tumor microenvironment in GBM
specimens before and after CART-EGFRvIII infusion. (A) T cell infiltration
and phenotyping in pre– and post–CART-EGFRvIII infusion specimens from
subject 216; pre-infusion specimensare fromday −81, whereas post-infusion
specimens are from day +13, relative to CART-EGFRvIII infusion at day 0. Top
row shows low-power magnification of CD3 immunohistochemical stain,
with high-power magnification as inset; ISH specifically for CAR sequences.
T cell phenotyping is shown with ISH for IFN-g and with immunohisto-
chemistry for CD8, granzyme B (GRZMB), and the IL-2 receptor a chain
(CD25). Scale bars, 4 mm (low-power graphs) and 200 mm (high-power
graphs). (B) In situ assessment of immunosuppressive molecules in the tu-
mor microenvironment is shown before and after CART-EGFRvIII infusion in
patient 216, including IDO1, PD-L1, FoxP3, TDO, IL-10, and TGFb. (C) Summa-
ry table with heat map of T cell infiltration, CART-EGFRvIII trafficking, and
tumor microenvironment in seven subjects before and after treatment with
CART-EGFRvIII. NP, not performed; 0, not detectable. Date indicates day of
specimen relative to CART-EGFRvIII infusion, which was designated as day 0.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
10 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and regional infiltration are poorly understood. As larger studies
of CAR T cells are performed in solid tumors, it will be interesting
and important to determine what level of trafficking, proliferation, or
persistence is required for the CAR T cells to exert antigen-specific
activity.
We observed that most of our subjects had specific loss or de-
creased expression of EGFRvIII in tumors resected after CART in-
fusion, whereas there was no change in the degree of EGFR
amplification or other tumor mutations. One patient (207) who
had poor expansion in blood also demonstrated no presence of
CART in tumor, no antigen loss, and early disease progression. Al-
though there are no direct ways to demonstrate the actual killing of
tumor cells by CART in situ, these data, along with our preclinical
data (26), support a mechanism of action of CART-EGFRvIII cells,
which engraft in the peripheral blood, traffic to the brain, and exert
antigen-directed cytolysis. However, on the basis of a report showing
that EGFRvIII+ cells can decrease after the standard-of-care chemo-
radiation therapy (46), we cannot exclude a possibility that the ob-
served decrease of EGFRvIII+ cells was not entirely attributable to the
CART therapy. In addition, EGFRvIII demonstrates complex biology
and appears to fluctuate in expression over time, perhaps identifying
a stem cell pool of GBM cells (47). It is intriguing to speculate that
CART EGFRvIII therapy may be able to modify a subpopulation of
GBM stem cells. EGFR gene amplification may be present in all cells,
whereas EGFRvIII appears to be focally expressed with both spatial and
temporal variations (48). These same authors showed that EGFRvIII
canalsobereexpressedinpoolsofcellsthathavepreviouslylostexpression,
illustrating the heterogeneity of EGFRvIII expression and diverse mech-
anisms of regulation.
A major barrier to targeting EGFRvIII as a single antigen is the het-
erogeneity of its expression. In cases where several samples of brain
tumor were collected and analyzed separately, we noted wide regional
variation of EGFRvIII expression by our highly quantitative assay. We
also noted significant tumor heterogeneity for other mutations in
EGFR. In some cases, after CART infusion, there was loss of other mis-
sense mutations in EGFR, with retention of other mutations such as
PIK3CA and EGFR amplification. This suggests that in at least some
cases, EGFRvIII may not be an early or initiating mutation. One of the
main questions that this study invokes is whether successful targeting
of EGFRvIII will translate into a durable clinical benefit or whether
antigen escape will occur so rapidly and frequently that there is
minimal clinical impact from targeting EGFRvIII alone. EGFRvIII an-
tigen escape has been observed in other vaccination-based studies
(16), but the frequency and kinetics of this escape could vary.
A major observation from this study is the effect of CART-EGFRvIII
cells on the tumor microenvironment. We found that within the first
2 weeks of CART-EGFRvIII infusion, there was efficient trafficking
of CART cells to the brain tumor, but there was also a much greater
influx of nontransduced, polyclonal T cells, suggesting a secondary
response by non–CAR-expressing T cells. At first blush, the possibility
of epitope spreading induced by CART-EGFRvIII and possibly result-
ing in recognition of native or mutated tumor antigens was en-
couraging, given that the presence of lymphocytes within malignant
gliomas can be a positive prognostic indicator of survival (49, 50). How-
ever, in situ phenotypic analysis of the post-infusion T cell infiltrate in-
dicated that many of these cells appeared to be immunosuppressive
regulatory T cells, based on their expression of CD4, CD25, and FoxP3.
In addition, compared to pre-CART tumor specimens, there was
consistent up-regulation of expression of other immunosuppressive
molecules such as IDO1, PD-L1, and IL-10 after CART-EGFRvIII in-
fusion. This observation suggests that CART-EGFRvIII activation in-
duced a compensatory multifactorial immunosuppressive response
insitu,perhapsdrivenbyaninitialproductionofIFN-g.Thisalsosuggests
the possibility of synergy between CAR T cells and inhibition of IDO1
with small-molecule drugs and/or the PD1/PD-L1 axis with checkpoint
blocking antibodies.
In conclusion, our study demonstrated that manufacturing of
CART-EGFRvIII cells from patients with recurrent GBM is feasible
and that there was no cross-reactivity of wild-type EGFR with our
construct. Any clinical benefit could not be definitively determined
from this small study, but we observed that CART-EGFRvIII cells
infused intravenously did traffic to the brain tumor and exert antigen-
directed activity. The major barriers to clinical efficacy of this therapy
CD3/FoxP3/Hem 
CD3/FoxP3/Hem 
A 
B 
Pre CAR cell infusion 
Post CAR cell infusion 
Ki67/CD8/Hem 
Ki67/CD8/Hem 
C 
D 
Pre CAR cell infusion 
Post CAR cell infusion 
Fig. 6. Immunohistochemical colocalization of CD3/FoxP3 and CD8/Ki67.
(A and B) Analysis of brain tumor samples performed pre– and post–CART-EGFRvIII
infusion. Representative analysis of CD3/FoxP3 from patient 216 is shown in (A),
with quantitative analysis of percent FoxP3+ CD3 cells shown for five subjects’ brain
tumor samples in (B). Two-tailed paired t test analysis did not demonstrate statis-
tical significance (P = 0.10). Hem, hematoxylin. (C) Representative analysis of CD8/
Ki67 staining in patient 213, and (D) quantitative analysis of percent Ki67+ CD8 cells
for five subjects’ brain tumor samples. Two-tailed paired t test analysis did not dem-
onstrate statistical significance (P = 0.07).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
11 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 are the heterogeneity of EGFRvIII expression and the inhibitory tumor
microenvironment, which becomes even more immunosuppressive
after CART cells. Although the former willrequire targetingadditional
antigens, the latter may be overcome with existing drugs that target
immunosuppressive molecules.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
This clinical trial was a phase 1 open-label study where the primary ob-
jectives were safety and feasibility. The study was designed to screen an
unlimited number of tumor samples and infuse up to 12 patients. Safety
was determined according to National Cancer Institute’s Common Ter-
minology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0. Manufacturing fea-
sibility was defined as the frequency of the inability to prepare a dose
of at least 1 × 107 CART-EGFRvIII. Clinical feasibility was defined as
the ability to infuse subjects who had their CART-EGFRvIII product
manufactured. No dose escalation was planned, but dose de-escalation
was planned if there were >33% of the subjects experiencing a dose-
limiting toxicity, defined as a grade 3 or higher toxicity that was un-
expectedand attributable to CART-EGFRvIII. The study was approved
by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, FDA, Abramson Can-
cer Center Clinical Trials Scientific Review Committee, and the Penn
Institutional Biosafety Committee and Institutional Review Board. The
clinical trial (NCT02209376) was conducted as outlined in Fig. 1A. Pa-
tientswithnewlydiagnosedorrecurrentGBMwereeligibleforscreening
for EGFRvIII expression in their resected tumor specimen. Patients
with confirmed EGFRvIII expression were eligible for leukapheresis
and having their CART-EGFRvIII cells manufactured on step 1 of this
study. Peripheral blood T cells were stimulated and transduced with a
lentiviral vector encoding the CAR: humanized anti-EGFRvIII single-
chain variable fragment fused to the hinge and transmembrane domain
of CD8 and the human 4-1BB and CD3z intracellular signaling do-
mains. CART-EGFRvIII cells were manufactured at the Cell and Vac-
cine Production Facility at the University of Pennsylvania, which
operates under good manufacturing practices. CART-EGFRvIII cells
were formulated and cryopreserved until the patient was eligible and
consented for treatment. CART-EGFRvIII cells were administered by
a single intravenous infusion.
EGFRvIII NGS assay
Biopsy specimens were sent as rolls from FFPE when the estimated
tumor percentages were greater than 50% or as slides, which were
macrodissected when the tumor percentage was less than 50%. Total
nucleic acids were extracted from the tissue using Agencourt FormaPure
(Beckman Coulter). Complementary DNA was synthesized from
material equivalent of 200 ng of RNA based on the RNA Qubit (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) reading. PCR primers were designed to capture wild-
type EGFR spanning exons 1 and 2, EGFRvIII spanning exons 1 to 8,
and three housekeeping genes (HPRT, SDHA, and RPL13A). The assay
also includes three primer sets with increasing target sizes built in the
assay; this allows for assessment of the RNA degradation level of the
sample in a single assay [exons 9 to 9, 93 base pairs (bp); exons 9 to
10, 141 bp; exons 9 to 12, 251 bp]. The NGS library preparation is a
two-step PCR method: The first step is a multiplex PCR followed by
second PCR to add Illumina sequencing index and adaptors. Subse-
quently, the sequencing library is quantitated on TapeStation (Agilent)
and then sequenced on MiSeq (Illumina). A custom bioinformatics
pipeline was developed to process the data. EGFRvIII ratio is calculated
by the following formula built in the bioinformatics pipeline: EGFRvIII
ratio = (EGFRvIII reads)/(EGFRvIII reads + WT EGFR reads).
Measurement of transgene persistence in vivo
Research sample processing, freezing, and laboratory analyses were
performed in the Translational and Correlative Studies Laboratory at
the University of Pennsylvania, using established standard operating
procedures (SOPs) and/or protocols for sample receipt, processing,
freezing, and analysis.
CART-EGFRvIII cells were quantified from peripheral blood
samples obtained at protocol-specified time points. Samples
(peripheral blood) were collected in lavender top (K2EDTA) or red
top (no additive) Vacutainer tubes (Becton Dickinson). Lavender
top tubes were delivered to the laboratory within 2 hours of the sample
draw. Samples were processed within 16 hours of drawing according
to the established SOP. PBMCs were purified, processed, and stored in
the vapor phase of liquid nitrogen. Red top tubes were processed with-
in 2 hours of the draw including coagulation time, and serum was
isolated by centrifugation, aliquoted, and stored at −80°C.
Cells were evaluated by flow cytometry directly after Ficoll-Paque
processing. Immunophenotyping of PBMC was performed using about
2 × 105 to 5 × 105 total cells per condition depending on cell yield in
samples. FMO (fluorescence minus one) secondary only controls were
used for CAR-EGFRvIII evaluation. Reagents and protocols used for
flow cytometry are described in the Supplementary Materials.
Genomic DNA was isolated directly from whole blood, and qPCR
analysis was performed usingABI TaqMantechnology and a validated
assay to detect the integrated CAR transgene sequence as described
(51) using triplicates of 200 ng of genomic DNA per time point for
peripheral blood and marrow samples. To determine copy number
per unit DNA, an eight-point standard curve was generated consisting
of 5 to 106 copies of lentivirus plasmid spiked into 100 ng of nontrans-
duced control genomic DNA. The number of copies of plasmid pre-
sent in the standard curve was verified using digital qPCRwith the same
primer/probe set and performed on a QuantStudio 3D digital PCR in-
strument (Life Technologies). Each datapoint (sample and standard
curve) was evaluated in triplicate with a positive Ct value in three of
three replicates with percent coefficient of variation of less than 0.95%
for all quantifiable values. To control for the quality of interrogated
DNA, we performed a parallel amplification reaction using 20 ng of
genomic DNA and a primer/probe combination specific for a non-
transcribed genomic sequence upstream of the CDKN1A (p21) gene
as described (28). These amplification reactions generated a correction
factor to adjust for calculated versus actual DNA input. Copies of trans-
gene per microgram of DNA were calculated according to the formula:
copies per microgram of genomic DNA = (copies calculated from
CART-EGFRvIII standard curve) × correction factor/(amount DNA
evaluated in nanograms) × 1000 ng.
NGS of TCRb gene rearrangements
Genomic DNA was extracted from tumor biopsies before and after
CART-EGFRvIII therapy and from the infusion product, and the
third complementarity-determining regions of the TCRb locus were
amplified and deep-sequenced (Adaptive Technologies). Data anal-
ysis was performed using ImmunoSEQ or exported and examined
using Excel or Prism. For bivariate analysis of the pre- versus post-
CART and infusion product versus post-CART cell samples, log
scatter data were exported to Excel. Zero values were converted to
0.0001 using Excel, and the resultant data were imported into Prism.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
12 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Immunohistochemistry and RNAscope ISH
For immunohistochemistry, FFPE tissues were used. As outlined be-
low, molecular localization studies were conducted using a Ventana
Discovery Ultra autostainer. In brief, tissues were sectioned at 5 mm,
barcoded, and then placed in the autostainer for paraffin extraction
and rehydration [EZ Prep (Ventana #950-100)]. The antibodies and
final concentrations are described in table S2. We used the SP263
Ventana PD-L1 immunohistochemistry assay, an approved com-
panion diagnostic for nivolumab. Antigen retrieval [CC1 (Ventana
#950-124)], primary antibody dilution, incubation temperature and
duration, detection technique, and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine chromo-
gen [ChromoMap DAB Kit (Ventana #760-159)] were optimized on
nonstudy archived tissue and included evaluation of isotype-
matched irrelevant antibody controls and known negative and pos-
itive tissues. Slides were counterstained [hematoxylin (Ventana
#760-2021)] and coverslipped [Micromount (Leica Biosystems
#3801731)]. For photomicrographs, slides were scanned at ×20 mag-
nification using an Aperio slide AT2 scanner (Leica Biosystems). In-
dividual images were captured with an Olympus BX46 microscope
coupled to an Olympus DP72 digital camera and DP2-BSW imaging
software or Nuance spectral imaging system (PerkinElmer). Quan-
titative image analysis was performed using Halo software cytonuclear
and multiplex modules IHC (Indica Labs).
ISH was performed using Advanced Cell Diagnostics (ACDBio)/
Ventana Medical Systems (Roche Group) probes and reagents. The
CAR-3′UTR (catalog #438086) and IFN-g (catalog #310501) probes
(table S5) were designed by ACD using the CAR construct accession
no. KJ698853.1 (covering the region of nucleotides 64 to 854) and the
IFN-g accession no. NM_000619 (covering the region of nucleotides
80 to 1152), respectively. Tumor processing and the reagents and
protocols used for ISH are described in the Supplementary Materials.
Statistics
Because of the small sample size of patients, the majority of this
study is descriptive. In evaluating EGFRvIII expression and EGFR
amplification, the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test was
used to evaluate significance in before and after samples from the
same patient. Spearman correlations were used to determine signif-
icance between two variables.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/399/eaaa0984/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Sample stain of peripheral blood T cells for CART-EGFRvIII.
Fig. S2. Lack of correlation between engraftment and absolute lymphocyte count.
Fig. S3. Histology and CD3 immunohistochemistry stain of pre- and post-CART infusion tumor
specimens.
Fig. S4. Validation of RNAscope ISH.
Fig. S5. Validation of PD-L1 staining.
Table S1. Individual patient characteristics.
Table S2. Individual product characteristics.
Table S3. Individual post-CART infusion events.
Table S4. Adverse events at least possibly related to CART-EGFRvIII.
Table S5. Immunohistochemical antibodies and ISH probes used.
Table S6. Primary cytokine data (separate Excel file).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. R. Stupp, W. P. Mason, M. J. van den Bent, M. Weller, B. Fisher, M. J. B. Taphoorn,
K. Belanger, A. A. Brandes, C. Marosi, U. Bogdahn, J. Curschmann, R. C. Janzer, S. K. Ludwin,
T. Gorlia, A. Allgeier, D. Lacombe, J. G. Cairncross, E. Eisenhauer, R. O. Mirimanoff;
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Brain Tumor and
Radiotherapy Groups; National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group,
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N. Engl.
J. Med. 352, 987–996 (2005).
2. A. S. Chi, A. D. Norden, P. Y. Wen, Antiangiogenic strategies for treatment of malignant
gliomas. Neurotherapeutics 6, 513–526 (2009).
3. J. J. C. Verhoeff, O. van Tellingen, A. Claes, L. J. A. Stalpers, M. E. van Linde, D. J. Richel,
W. P. J. Leenders, W. R. van Furth, Concerns about anti-angiogenic treatment in patients
with glioblastoma multiforme. BMC Cancer 9, 444 (2009).
4. S. Sathornsumetee, D. A. Reardon, Targeting multiple kinases in glioblastoma multiforme.
Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 18, 277–292 (2009).
5. R. Stupp, S. Taillibert, A. A. Kanner, S. Kesari, D. M. Steinberg, S. A. Toms, L. P. Taylor,
F. Lieberman, A. Silvani, K. L. Fink, G. H. Barnett, J.-J. Zhu, J. W. Henson, H. H. Engelhard,
T. C. Chen, D. D. Tran, J. Sroubek, N. D. Tran, A. F. Hottinger, J. Landolfi, R. Desai,
M. Caroli, Y. Kew, J. Honnorat, A. Idbaih, E. D. Kirson, U. Weinberg, Y. Palti, M. E. Hegi,
Z. Ram, Maintenance therapy with tumor-treating fields plus temozolomide vs
temozolomide alone for glioblastoma: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 314,
2535–2543 (2015).
6. C. G. Patil, A. Yi, A. Elramsisy, J. Hu, D. Mukherjee, D. K. Irvin, J. S. Yu, S. I. Bannykh,
K. L. Black, M. Nuño, Prognosis of patients with multifocal glioblastoma: A case-control
study. J. Neurosurg. 117, 705–711 (2012).
7. A. L. Rivera, C. E. Pelloski, M. R. Gilbert, H. Colman, C. De La Cruz, E. P. Sulman, B. N. Bekele,
K. D. Aldape, MGMT promoter methylation is predictive of response to radiotherapy
and prognostic in the absence of adjuvant alkylating chemotherapy for glioblastoma.
Neuro Oncol. 12, 116–121 (2010).
8. M. Esteller, J. Garcia-Foncillas, E. Andion, S. N. Goodman, O. F. Hidalgo, V. Vanaclocha,
S. B. Baylin, J. G. Herman, Inactivation of the DNA-repair gene MGMT and the
clinical response of gliomas to alkylating agents. N. Engl. J. Med. 343, 1350–1354
(2000).
9. G. Li, A. J. Wong, EGF receptor variant III as a target antigen for tumor immunotherapy.
Expert Rev. Vaccines 7, 977–985 (2008).
10. E. Padfield, H. P. Ellis, K. M. Kurian, Current therapeutic advances targeting EGFR and
EGFRvIII in glioblastoma. Front. Oncol. 5, 5 (2015).
11. A. B. Heimberger, D. Suki, D. Yang, W. Shi, K. Aldape, The natural history of EGFR and
EGFRvIII in glioblastoma patients. J. Transl. Med. 3, 38 (2005).
12. A. B. Heimberger, R. Hlatky, D. Suki, D. Yang, J. Weinberg, M. Gilbert, R. Sawaya, K. Aldape,
Prognostic effect of epidermal growth factor receptor and EGFRvIII in glioblastoma
multiforme patients. Clin. Cancer Res. 11, 1462–1466 (2005).
13. E. S. Tykocinski, R. A. Grant, G. S. Kapoor, J. Krejza, L.-E. Bohman, T. A. Gocke, S. Chawla,
C. H. Halpern, J. Lopinto, E. R. Melhem, D. M. O’Rourke, Use of magnetic perfusion-
weighted imaging to determine epidermal growth factor receptor variant III expression
in glioblastoma. Neuro Oncol. 14, 613–623 (2012).
14. A. H. Thorne, C. Zanca, F. Furnari, Epidermal growth factor receptor targeting and
challenges in glioblastoma. Neuro Oncol. 18, 914–918 (2016).
15. J. Schuster, R. K. Lai, L. D. Recht, D. A. Reardon, N. A. Paleologos, M. D. Groves,
M. M. Mrugala, R. Jensen, J. M. Baehring, A. Sloan, G. E. Archer, D. D. Bigner, S. Cruickshank,
J. A. Green, T. Keler, T. A. Davis, A. B. Heimberger, J. H. Sampson, A phase II, multicenter
trial of rindopepimut (CDX-110) in newly diagnosed glioblastoma: The ACT III study.
Neuro Oncol. 17, 854–861 (2015).
16. J. H. Sampson, A. B. Heimberger, G. E. Archer, K. D. Aldape, A. H. Friedman, H. S. Friedman,
M. R. Gilbert, J. E. Herndon II, R. E. McLendon, D. A. Mitchell, D. A. Reardon, R. Sawaya,
R. J. Schmittling, W. Shi, J. J. Vredenburgh, D. D. Bigner, Immunologic escape after
prolonged progression-free survival with epidermal growth factor receptor variant III
peptide vaccination in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 28,
4722–4729 (2010).
17. S. L. Maude, N. Frey, P. A. Shaw, R. Aplenc, D. M. Barrett, N. J. Bunin, A. Chew,
V. E. Gonzalez, Z. Zheng, S. F. Lacey, Y. D. Mahnke, J. J. Melenhorst, S. R. Rheingold,
A. Shen, D. T. Teachey, B. L. Levine, C. H. June, D. L. Porter, S. A. Grupp, Chimeric antigen
receptor T cells for sustained remissions in leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 1507–1517
(2014).
18. C. J. Turtle, L.-A. Hanafi, C. Berger, T. A. Gooley, S. Cherian, M. Hudecek, D. Sommermeyer,
K. Melville, B. Pender, T. M. Budiarto, E. Robinson, N. N. Steevens, C. Chaney, L. Soma,
X. Chen, C. Yeung, B. Wood, D. Li, J. Cao, S. Heimfeld, M. C. Jensen, S. R. Riddell,
D. G. Maloney, CD19 CAR-T cells of defined CD4+:CD8+ composition in adult B cell ALL
patients. J. Clin. Invest. 126, 2123–2138 (2016).
19. D. L. Porter, W.-T. Hwang, N. V. Frey, S. F. Lacey, P. A. Shaw, A. W. Loren, A. Bagg,
K. T. Marcucci, A. Shen, V. Gonzalez, D. Ambrose, S. A. Grupp, A. Chew, Z. Zheng,
M. C. Milone, B. L. Levine, J. J. Melenhorst, C. H. June, Chimeric antigen receptor T cells
persist and induce sustained remissions in relapsed refractory chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 303ra139 (2015).
20. J. N. Kochenderfer, M. E. Dudley, S. H. Kassim, R. P. T. Somerville, R. O. Carpenter,
M. Stetler-Stevenson, J. C. Yang, G. Q. Phan, M. S. Hughes, R. M. Sherry, M. Raffeld,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
13 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 S. Feldman, L. Lu, Y. F. Li, L. T. Ngo, A. Goy, T. Feldman, D. E. Spaner, M. L. Wang, C. C. Chen,
S. M. Kranick, A. Nath, D.-A. Nathan, K. E. Morton, M. A. Toomey, S. A. Rosenberg,
Chemotherapy-refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and indolent B-cell malignancies
can be effectively treated with autologous T cells expressing an anti-CD19 chimeric
antigen receptor. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 540–549 (2015).
21. M. H. Kershaw, J. A. Westwood, L. L. Parker, G. Wang, Z. Eshhar, S. A. Mavroukakis,
D. E. White, J. R. Wunderlich, S. Canevari, L. Rogers-Freezer, C. C. Chen, J. C. Yang,
S. A. Rosenberg, P. Hwu, A phase I study on adoptive immunotherapy using gene-modified
T cells for ovarian cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 12 (Pt. 1), 6106–6115 (2006).
22. G. L. Beatty, A. R. Haas, M. V. Maus, D. A. Torigian, M. C. Soulen, G. Plesa, A. Chew, Y. Zhao,
B. L. Levine, S. M. Albelda, M. Kalos, C. H. June, Mesothelin-specific chimeric antigen
receptor mRNA-engineered T cells induce anti-tumor activity in solid malignancies.
Cancer Immunol. Res. 2, 112–120 (2014).
23. N. Ahmed, V. S. Brawley, M. Hegde, C. Robertson, A. Ghazi, C. Gerken, E. Liu, O. Dakhova,
A. Ashoori, A. Corder, T. Gray, M.-F. Wu, H. Liu, J. Hicks, N. Rainusso, G. Dotti, Z. Mei,
B. Grilley, A. Gee, C. M. Rooney, M. K. Brenner, H. E. Heslop, W. S. Wels, L. L. Wang,
P. Anderson, S. Gottschalk, Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-specific
chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells for the immunotherapy of HER2-positive
sarcoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 1688–1696 (2015).
24. C. E. Brown, D. Alizadeh, R. Starr, L. Weng, J. R. Wagner, A. Naranjo, J. R. Ostberg,
M. S. Blanchard, J. Kilpatrick, J. Simpson, A. Kurien, S. J. Priceman, X. Wang,
T. L. Harshbarger, M. D’Apuzzo, J. A. Ressler, M. C. Jensen, M. E. Barish, M. Chen, J. Portnow,
S. J. Forman, B. Badie, Regression of glioblastoma after chimeric antigen receptor T-cell
therapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 2561–2569 (2016).
25. M. Ohno, T. Ohkuri, A. Kosaka, K. Tanahashi, C. H. June, A. Natsume, H. Okada, Expression
of miR-17-92 enhances anti-tumor activity of T-cells transduced with the anti-EGFRvIII
chimeric antigen receptor in mice bearing human GBM xenografts. J. Immunother. Cancer 1,
21 (2013).
26. L. A. Johnson, J. Scholler, T. Ohkuri, A. Kosaka, P. R. Patel, S. E. McGettigan,
A. K. Nace, T. Dentchev, P. Thekkat, A. Loew, A. C. Boesteanu, A. P. Cogdill, T. Chen,
J. A. Fraietta, C. C. Kloss, A. D. Posey Jr., B. Engels, R. Singh, T. Ezell, N. Idamakanti,
M. H. Ramones, N. Li, L. Zhou, G. Plesa, J. T. Seykora, H. Okada, C. H. June, J. L. Brogdon,
M. V. Maus, Rational development and characterization of humanized anti–EGFR
variant III chimeric antigen receptor T cells for glioblastoma. Sci. Transl. Med. 7,
275ra22 (2015).
27. M. E. Hegi, L. Liu, J. G. Herman, R. Stupp, W. Wick, M. Weller, M. P. Mehta, M. R. Gilbert,
Correlation of O6-methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation
with clinical outcomes in glioblastoma and clinical strategies to modulate MGMT activity.
J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 4189–4199 (2008).
28. M. Kalos, B. L. Levine, D. L. Porter, S. Katz, S. A. Grupp, A. Bagg, C. H. June, T cells with
chimeric antigen receptors have potent antitumor effects and can establish memory in
patients with advanced leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 95ra73 (2011).
29. D. L. Porter, B. L. Levine, M. Kalos, A. Bagg, C. H. June, Chimeric antigen receptor-modified
T cells in chronic lymphoid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 365, 725–733 (2011).
30. B. L. Levine, J. Miskin, K. Wonnacott, C. Keir, Global manufacturing of CAR T cell therapy.
Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 4, 92–101 (2017).
31. S. L. Maude, D. Barrett, D. T. Teachey, S. A. Grupp, Managing cytokine release
syndrome associated with novel T cell-engaging therapies. Cancer J. 20, 119–122
(2014).
32. D. T. Teachey, S. R. Rheingold, S. L. Maude, G. Zugmaier, D. M. Barrett, A. E. Seif,
K. E. Nichols, E. K. Suppa, M. Kalos, R. A. Berg, J. C. Fitzgerald, R. Aplenc, L. Gore,
S. A. Grupp, Cytokine release syndrome after blinatumomab treatment related to
abnormal macrophage activation and ameliorated with cytokine directed therapy.
Blood 121, 5154–5157 (2013).
33. D. T. Teachey, S. F. Lacey, P. A. Shaw, J. J. Melenhorst, S. L. Maude, N. Frey, E. Pequignot,
V. E. Gonzalez, F. Chen, J. Finklestein, D. M. Barrett, S. L. Weiss, J. C. Fitzgerald,
R. A. Berg, R. Aplenc, C. Callahan, S. R. Rheingold, Z. Zheng, S. Rose-John, J. C. White,
F. Nazimuddin, G. Wertheim, B. L. Levine, C. H. June, D. L. Porter, S. A. Grupp,
Identification of predictive biomarkers for cytokine release syndrome after chimeric
antigen receptor T-cell therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer Discov. 6,
664–679 (2016).
34. C. M. Paulos, M. M. Suhoski, G. Plesa, T. Jiang, S. Basu, T. N. Golovina, S. Jiang,
N. A. Aqui, D. J. Powell Jr., B. L. Levine, R. G. Carroll, J. L. Riley, C. H. June,
Adoptive immunotherapy: Good habits instilled at youth have long-term benefits.
Immunol. Res. 42, 182–196 (2008).
35. W. Wang, X. Wang, R. Doddareddy, D. Fink, T. McIntosh, H. M. Davis, H. Zhou, Mechanistic
pharmacokinetic/target engagement/pharmacodynamic (PK/TE/PD) modeling in deciphering
interplay between a monoclonal antibody and its soluble target in cynomolgus monkeys.
AAPS J. 16, 129–139 (2014).
36. F. Chen, D. T. Teachey, E. Pequignot, N. Frey, D. Porter, S. L. Maude, S. A. Grupp, C. H. June,
J. J. Melenhorst, S. F. Lacey, Measuring IL-6 and sIL-6R in serum from patients treated
with tocilizumab and/or siltuximab following CAR T cell therapy. J. Immunol. Methods
434, 1–8 (2016).
37. S. A. Grossman, X. Ye, G. Lesser, A. Sloan, H. Carraway, S. Desideri, S. Piantadosi, NABTT
CNS Consortium, Immunosuppression in patients with high-grade gliomas treated
with radiation and temozolomide. Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 5473–5480 (2011).
38. H. Okada, M. Weller, R. Huang, G. Finocchiaro, M. R. Gilbert, W. Wick, B. M. Ellingson,
N. Hashimoto, I. F. Pollack, A. A. Brandes, E. Franceschi, C. Herold-Mende, L. Nayak,
A. Panigrahy, W. B. Pope, R. Prins, J. H. Sampson, P. Y. Wen, D. A. Reardon,
Immunotherapy response assessment in neuro-oncology: A report of the RANO working
group. Lancet Oncol. 16, e534–e542 (2015).
39. D. A. Reardon, H. Okada, Re-defining response and treatment effects for neuro-oncology
immunotherapy clinical trials. J. Neurooncol 123, 339–346 (2015).
40. D. W. Lee, R. Gardner, D. L. Porter, C. U. Louis, N. Ahmed, M. Jensen, S. A. Grupp,
C. L. Mackall, Current concepts in the diagnosis and management of cytokine release
syndrome. Blood 124, 188–195 (2014).
41. G. G. Laport, B. L. Levine, E. A. Stadtmauer, S. J. Schuster, S. M. Luger, S. Grupp,
N. Bunin, F. J. Strobl, J. Cotte, Z. Zheng, B. Gregson, P. Rivers, R. H. Vonderheide,
D. N. Liebowitz, D. L. Porter, C. H. June, Adoptive transfer of costimulated T cells
induces lymphocytosis in patients with relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkin
lymphoma following CD34+-selected hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood 102,
2004–2013 (2003).
42. A. H. Long, W. M. Haso, J. F. Shern, K. M. Wanhainen, M. Murgai, M. Ingaramo,
J. P. Smith, A. J. Walker, M. E. Kohler, V. R. Venkateshwara, R. N. Kaplan, G. H. Patterson,
T. J. Fry, R. J. Orentas, C. L. Mackall, 4-1BB costimulation ameliorates T cell exhaustion
induced by tonic signaling of chimeric antigen receptors. Nat. Med. 21, 581–590
(2015).
43. O. U. Kawalekar, R. S. O’Connor, J. A. Fraietta, L. Guo, S. E. McGettigan, A. D. Posey Jr.,
P. R. Patel, S. Guedan, J. Scholler, B. Keith, N. W. Snyder, I. A. Blair, M. C. Milone, C. H. June,
Distinct signaling of coreceptors regulates specific metabolism pathways and impacts
memory development in CAR T cells. Immunity 44, 380–390 (2016).
44. A. P. Rapoport, E. A. Stadtmauer, N. Aqui, D. Vogl, A. Chew, H.-B. Fang, S. Janofsky,
K. Yager, E. Veloso, Z. Zheng, T. Milliron, S. Westphal, J. Cotte, H. Huynh, A. Cannon,
S. Yanovich, G. Akpek, M. Tan, K. Virts, K. Ruehle, C. Harris, S. Philip, R. H. Vonderheide,
B. L. Levine, C. H. June, Rapid immune recovery and graft-versus-host disease–like
engraftment syndrome following adoptive transfer of costimulated autologous T cells.
Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 4499–4507 (2009).
45. K. Sasaki, X. Zhu, C. Vasquez, F. Nishimura, J. E. Dusak, J. Huang, M. Fujita, A. Wesa,
D. M. Potter, P. R. Walker, W. J. Storkus, H. Okada, Preferential expression of very late
antigen-4 on type 1 CTL cells plays a critical role in trafficking into central nervous system
tumors. Cancer Res. 67, 6451–6458 (2007).
46. M. J. van den Bent, Y. Gao, M. Kerkhof, J. M. Kros, T. Gorlia, K. van Zwieten, J. Prince,
S. van Duinen, P. A. Sillevis Smitt, M. Taphoorn, P. J. French, Changes in the EGFR
amplification and EGFRvIII expression between paired primary and recurrent
glioblastomas. Neuro Oncol. 17, 935–941 (2015).
47. C. A. Del Vecchio, K. C. Jensen, R. T. Nitta, A. H. Shain, C. P. Giacomini, A. J. Wong,
Epidermal growth factor receptor variant III contributes to cancer stem cell phenotypes
in invasive breast carcinoma. Cancer Res. 72, 2657–2671 (2012).
48. C. A. Del Vecchio, C. P. Giacomini, H. Vogel, K. C. Jensen, T. Florio, A. Merlo, J. R. Pollack,
A. J. Wong, EGFRvIII gene rearrangement is an early event in glioblastoma
tumorigenesis and expression defines a hierarchy modulated by epigenetic mechanisms.
Oncogene 32, 2670–2681 (2013).
49. L. Palma, N. Di Lorenzo, B. Guidetti, Lymphocytic infiltrates in primary glioblastomas and
recidivous gliomas. Incidence, fate, and relevance to prognosis in 228 operated cases.
J. Neurosurg. 49, 854–861 (1978).
50. W. H. Brooks, W. R. Markesbery, G. D. Gupta, T. L. Roszman, Relationship of
lymphocyte invasion and survival of brain tumor patients. Ann. Neurol. 4, 219–224
(1978).
51. S. Janetzki, C. M. Britten, M. Kalos, H. I. Levitsky, H. T. Maecker, C. J. M. Melief, L. J. Old,
P. Romero, A. Hoos, M. M. Davis, “MIATA”—Minimal information about T cell assays.
Immunity 31, 527–528 (2009).
Acknowledgments: We thank S. Frangos and S. Levy for clinical trial support. The assistance
of J. Finklestein and F. Nazimuddin for sample processing, I. Kulikovskaya and M. Gupta
for qPCR analyses, D. Ambrose for flow cytometry analyses, F. Chen and N. Kengle
for Luminex cytokine analyses, and V. Gonzalez and Y. Tanner for data management is
appreciated. Assistance from M. Liu with regard to immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization is also appreciated. Funding: M.V.M. was supported by NCI K08CA166039.
This work was performed within an alliance between the University of Pennsylvania
and Novartis for the development of CAR T cells for cancer. H.O. was supported by R21
NS083171. Author contributions: D.M.O., A.D., E.M., A.S., R.I., S.M., G.P., H.O., C.H.J.,
and M.V.M .designed the clinical study. D.M.O., M.P.N., A.D., M.M.-L., S.B., E.M., A.S., R.I., S.M.,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
14 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Z.Z., B.L.L., H.O., and M.V.M. acquired and interpreted the clinical data. M.P.N., J.J.M.,
K.M,. J.J.D.M., M.M.-L., S.F.L., J.-M.N., J.L.B., C.H.J., and M.V.M. designed correlative and
laboratory assays and acquired and interpreted data from these. All authors contributed
to the drafting of the manuscript. Competing interests: M.V.M., B.L.L., J.B., J.J.M., C.H.J.,
and H.O. are inventors on patent application #20170008963 and granted U.S. patent
# 9394368 held by the University of Pennsylvania and Novartis that cover the use of CAR
T cells targeting EGFRvIII. K.M., R.I., and J.L.B. are employees of Novartis; A.S. is a former
employee of Novartis. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability: Reasonable requests for additional data or materials will
be fulfilled under appropriate agreements.
Submitted 21 December 2016
Accepted 9 May 2017
Published 19 July 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa0984
Citation: D. M. O’Rourke, M. P. Nasrallah, A. Desai, J. J. Melenhorst, K. Mansfield, J. J. D. Morrissette,
M. Martinez-Lage, S. Brem, E. Maloney, A. Shen, R. Isaacs, S. Mohan, G. Plesa, S. F. Lacey, J.-M.Navenot,
Z. Zheng, B. L. Levine, H. Okada, C. H. June, J. L. Brogdon, M. V. Maus, A single dose of peripherally
infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR T cells mediates antigen loss and induces adaptive resistance in
patients with recurrent glioblastoma. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
O’Rourke et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaa0984 (2017)
19 July 2017
15 of 15
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 loss and induces adaptive resistance in patients with recurrent glioblastoma
A single dose of peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR T cells mediates antigen
Brogdon and Marcela V. Maus
Simon F. Lacey, Jean-Marc Navenot, Zhaohui Zheng, Bruce L. Levine, Hideho Okada, Carl H. June, Jennifer L.
Maria Martinez-Lage, Steven Brem, Eileen Maloney, Angela Shen, Randi Isaacs, Suyash Mohan, Gabriela Plesa, 
Donald M. O'Rourke, MacLean P. Nasrallah, Arati Desai, Jan J. Melenhorst, Keith Mansfield, Jennifer J. D. Morrissette,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa0984
, eaaa0984.
9
Sci Transl Med 
patients' brains. The results of this trial indicate that CAR T cell therapy is a viable option for treating glioblastoma.
the 10 patients enrolled, 7 had surgical intervention, allowing for some analysis of the tumors and T cells in 
because other CAR T cell products have been implicated in devastating central nervous system complications. Of
cells targeted to EGFR variant III in glioblastoma patients. Treatment seemed to be well tolerated, which is critical 
 conducted a phase 1 safety study of autologous CAR T
et al.
now being investigated for solid tumors. O'Rourke 
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells have been successfully implemented for treating leukemia and are
Speeding toward CAR T cell therapy for glioblastoma
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/399/eaaa0984
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/07/17/9.399.eaaa0984.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/481/eaaw2127.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/473/eaao5253.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6389/660.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/430/eaao2731.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/410/eaal4291.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/370/370ra180.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/374/eaaj2013.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/373/eaag2196.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/275/275ra22.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/399/eaaa0984#BIBL
This article cites 51 articles, 18 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
