  
1
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
Finnish Subacromial Impingement 
Arthroscopy Controlled Trial 
(FIMPACT): a protocol for a randomised 
trial comparing arthroscopic 
subacromial decompression and 
diagnostic arthroscopy (placebo control), 
with an exercise therapy control, in the 
treatment of shoulder 
impingement syndrome
Mika Paavola,1 Antti Malmivaara,2 Simo Taimela,1 Kari Kanto,3 Teppo LN Järvinen,1 
 
on behalf of the FIMPACT Investigators
To cite: Paavola M, 
Malmivaara A, Taimela S, 
et al. Finnish Subacromial 
Impingement Arthroscopy 
Controlled Trial (FIMPACT): 
a protocol for a randomised 
trial comparing arthroscopic 
subacromial decompression and 
diagnostic arthroscopy (placebo 
control), with an exercise 
therapy control, in the treatment 
of shoulder impingement 
syndrome. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-014087
 
► Prepublication history for 
this paper is available online. 
To view these files please visit 
the journal online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjopen- 
2016- 
014087).
Received 30 August 2016
Revised 13 February 2017
Accepted 9 March 2017
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr. Mika Paavola;  
 
mika. 
paavola@ 
hus. 
fi
Protocol
ABSTRACT
Introduction Arthroscopic subacromial decompression 
(ASD) is the most commonly performed surgical 
intervention for shoulder pain, yet evidence on its efficacy 
is limited. The rationale for the surgery rests on the tenet 
that symptom relief is achieved through decompression 
of the rotator cuff tendon passage. The primary objective 
of this superiority trial is to compare the efficacy of 
ASD versus diagnostic arthroscopy (DA) in patients 
with shoulder impingement syndrome (SIS), where DA 
differs only by the lack of subacromial decompression. 
A third group of supervised progressive exercise therapy 
(ET) will allow for pragmatic assessment of the relative 
benefits of surgical versus non-operative treatment 
strategies.
Methods and Analysis Finnish Subacromial Impingement 
Arthroscopy Controlled Trial is an ongoing multicentre, 
three-group randomised controlled study. We performed 
two-fold concealed allocation, first by randomising patients 
to surgical (ASD or DA) or conservative (ET) treatment in 
2:1 ratio and then those allocated to surgery further to ASD 
or DA in 1:1 ratio. Our two primary outcomes are pain at 
rest and at arm activity, assessed using visual analogue 
scale (VAS). We will quantify the treatment effect as the 
difference between the groups in the change in the VAS 
scales with the associated 95% CI at 24 months. Our 
secondary outcomes are functional assessment (Constant 
score and Simple shoulder test), quality of life (15D and 
SF-36), patient satisfaction, proportions of responders and 
non-responders, reoperations/treatment conversions, all at 
2 years post-randomisation, as well as adverse effects and 
complications. We recruited a total of 210 patients from 
three tertiary referral centres. We will conduct the primary 
analysis on the intention-to-treat basis.
Ethics and Dissemination The study was approved by 
the Institutional Review Board of the Pirkanmaa Hospital 
District and duly registered at  
ClinicalTrials. 
gov. The 
findings of this study will be disseminated widely through 
peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations.
Trial registration number NCT00428870; Pre-results.
InTroducTIon
Subacromial decompression is one of the 
most frequently performed procedures in 
orthopaedics.1 2 It is carried out to treat 
patients with shoulder pain attributed to 
‘subacromial impingement syndrome’ (SIS). 
Conventional wisdom dictates that SIS is 
caused by’ impingement’ of the rotator cuff 
(RC) between the humeral head and the 
Strengths and limitations of this study
 
► Efficacy design: Strict eligibility criteria
 
► Placebo-surgery controlled trial: Blinding of both 
the participants and the outcome assessors in the 
comparison between index surgery and control 
(placebo surgery)
 
► Inclusion of a non-surgical treatment option to allow 
a pragmatic assessment of the relative benefits of 
surgical versus non-operative treatment strategies
 
► Potential 
confounding 
due 
to 
participants’ 
knowledge of the treatment delivered in our 
secondary comparison between surgical and non-
operative treatments
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
overlying acromion while lifting the arm. The appro-
priateness of this mechanistic explanation has been 
challenged lately where the generic label of ‘subacromial 
pain syndrome’ is currently advocated.3 4 The aim of the 
subacromial decompression procedure, typically carried 
out arthroscopically, is to decompress the RC tendon 
passage through the subacromial space through resection 
and smoothening of the hypertrophied or prominent 
anterolateral undersurface of the acromion. Manage-
ment of shoulder pain has been estimated to account for 
4.5 million visits annually to physicians in the USA alone,5 
accounting for US$3 billion in costs each year.6 Since 
44%–65% of all shoulder complains are related to SIS, 
it is estimated that annual direct medical costs of SIS are 
over $1 billion in the USA.7 8
Since the introduction of subacromial decompression 
surgery in the early 1970s9, the number of procedures 
has steadily increased across the entire western world. 
With the advent of arthroscopy, the number of these 
surgeries has increased dramatically—fivefold from the 
1980s to 2005 in the USA10 and 700% between 2000 and 
2010 in the UK.11 Remarkably, there is a stark absence 
of evidence from high-quality controlled trials to support 
the existing practice of performing subacromial decom-
pression for patients with SIS. Two recent systematic 
reviews concluded that subacromial decompression 
provides no superior benefits in terms of pain relief, 
function or quality of life compared with non-surgical 
treatment.12 13 There is even a placebo controlled trial to 
show the beneficial effect of exercise therapy (ET) over 
placebo physiotherapy.14 However, the proponents of the 
procedure have argued that the evidence is skewed in 
favour of the therapeutic potential of surgery due to a 
significant crossover (5%–15%) from conservative treat-
ment to surgery.14–16 Although such concern is obviously 
warranted, it should also be recalled that surgeons’ own 
perceptions on the success of any surgery might similarly 
be biased due to a considerable surgical placebo effect.
The outcome of any medical (surgical) interven-
tion—particularly when treating primarily subjective 
symptoms—is a cumulative effect of three main elements: 
placebo effects, critical therapeutic (surgical) element 
and non-specific effects, most importantly, the normal 
variation in the course of the disease and the regression-
to-the-mean phenomenon.17 18 Conceding that the act of 
surgery per se produces a profound placebo response, a 
‘true’ treatment effect is impossible to disentangle from 
the non-specific (placebo) effects—such as the patients’ 
or researchers’ expectations of benefit—without a placebo 
comparison group.19 The critical therapeutic element is 
the component of the surgical procedure that is believed 
to provide the therapeutic effects (here, subacromial 
decompression), which are distinct from aspects of the 
procedures that are diagnostic or required to access the 
disease being treated (here, shoulder arthroscopy).
To the best of our knowledge, there is only one other 
ongoing study aiming to assess the true efficacy of 
subacromial decompression surgery in patients with SIS 
using a placebo controlled study design. According to the 
published protocol of this CSAW (Can Shoulder Arthros-
copy Work?) trial,20 the investigators have chosen a very 
similar approach to that of our Finnish Subacromial 
Impingement Arthroscopy Controlled Trial (FIMPACT). 
In brief, the CSAW trial is a three-group pragmatic 
randomised controlled trial comparing arthroscopic 
acromioplasty, active monitoring with specialist reas-
sessment and investigational shoulder arthroscopy only. 
CSAW aims for recruitment of 300 patients with SIS to 
assess the efficacy of the surgery against no surgery, the 
need for a specific component of the surgery (acromio-
plasty) and the quantification of the possible placebo 
effect. As readily apparent, the two trials (FIMPACT vs 
CSAW) are very similar in design with the only notable 
differences being the primary outcome measure (pain at 
rest and after activity vs Oxford Shoulder Score, a score 
that assesses both pain and activities of daily living impair-
ment), the primary outcome assessment point (24 months 
vs 6 months) and the intervention delivered for the third 
group (ET vs active monitoring with specialist reassess-
ment), respectively.
The primary hypothesis of our FIMPACT trial is that 
arthroscopic subacromial decompression (ASD) is supe-
rior to diagnostic arthroscopy (DA) in patients with SIS. 
In addition, we will perform a pragmatic comparison 
of surgical and non-surgical treatment options (ASD vs 
ET). The relative benefits of ASD and ET will be assessed 
without a priori hypothesis of the superiority of one or 
the other.
MaTerIals and MeThods
overview of study design
The FIMPACT trial is an ongoing multicentre, three-
group randomised controlled superiority study with a 
primary objective to assess the efficacy of ASD versus DA 
in patients diagnosed with SIS. Our design also enables 
the pragmatic comparison of surgical and non-surgical 
treatment strategies (ASD vs ET) (figure 1). To obtain 
three balanced study groups (of similar group size), we 
performed a twofold, sequential randomisation as follows: 
First, we randomised patients to surgical or conserva-
tive treatment in a 2:1 ratio and then randomised those 
allocated to surgery to ASD or DA in a 1:1 ratio. The 
initial patient screening for the trial began at one site 
(Tampere) on 1 February 2005 and was then expanded 
to two additional tertiary referral centres in March 2006 
and December 2006 to improve recruitment and overall 
generalisability of the results. The recruitment was 
completed (all 210 required patients enrolled) in August 
2013.
ethical approval
Ethical approval was obtained on 28 December 2004 from 
the institutional review board of the Pirkanmaa Hospital 
District (R04200). Local research and development 
approvals were gained for each recruiting centre.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
  
3
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access
Participant selection
We assessed for eligibility all patients complaining of 
subacromial shoulder pain to any of the participating 
clinics. These participants were screened according to 
the inclusion and exclusion criteria and a recruitment 
surgeon confirmed the clinical diagnosis of SIS. To 
qualify as a recruitment surgeon, all trial surgeons had to 
have experience of more than 500 shoulder arthroscopies 
before the start of the trial. Detailed clinical examination 
of the shoulder was performed on all referred patients to 
rule out possible instability, clinical signs of RC rupture, 
frozen shoulder or other causes of symptoms. Standard 
X-rays and MRI were obtained from all potential partici-
pants and assessed by both a musculoskeletal radiologist 
and an orthopaedic surgeon. For patients found eligible 
for this study (fulfilling indications for ASD), we obtained 
written informed consent and randomised them into 
non-operative or operative groups (1:2) immediately 
after the baseline appointment. If patient had bilateral 
symptoms, only one shoulder was included in the study.
eligibility criteria
We used specific eligibility criteria to ensure that recruited 
participants were only those with SIS. Accordingly, a 
standardised clinical examination was first performed, 
followed by a subacromial injection test. To exclude 
patients with concomitant pathology, particularly RC 
rupture, standard X-rays and MRI with intra-articular 
contrast injection (MRA) were carried out on all poten-
tial participants.
Inclusion criteria
1. Adult men or women ages 35 years to 65 years
2. Subacromial pain for greater than 3 months with 
no relief from non-operative means (physiotherapy, 
non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory 
medication, 
corticosteroid injections and rest)
3. Pain provoked by abduction and positive painful 
arc sign
4. Positive impingement test (temporary relief of pain 
by subacromial injection of lidocaine)
5. Pain in at least two out of three of isometric tests 
(abduction 0° and 30° or external rotation)
6. Provision of informed consent from the participant
7. Ability to speak, understand and read in the 
language of the clinical site
exclusion criteria
1. Full thickness tear of the RC tendons diagnosed on 
clinical examination (marked weakness in any of 
the examined muscles) or MRA  
Figure 1 Flow chart of the trial: enrolment, assigned intervention and follow-up scheme. MRA, MRI with intra-articular 
contrast; RC, rotator cuff.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 4
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
2. Osteoarthritis 
of 
the 
glenohumeral 
and/or 
acromioclavicular joint diagnosed on clinical 
examination and on X-rays
3. Substantial calcific deposits in the RC tendons 
found in the preoperative imaging
4. Previous surgical procedure on the affected 
shoulder
5. Evidence 
of 
shoulder 
instability 
(positive 
apprehension/positive sulcus sign)
6. Symptomatic cervical spine pathology
7. History of alcoholism, drug abuse, psychological 
or psychiatric problems that are likely to invalidate 
informed consent
8. Patient declined to participate
recruitment process
Consultant orthopaedic surgeons carried out eligibility 
screening among patients referred to the study centres 
through standard clinical practice for shoulder pain. 
Patients meeting the eligibility criteria were introduced 
to the study. If patients expressed interest in partici-
pating, written information about the study was provided 
and they were asked to opt in. If the interest continued, 
arrangements were made for obtaining required imaging 
(X-rays and MRA) and for a separate baseline appoint-
ment.
Informed consent
At the first appointment, all participants were introduced to 
the detailed written information about the study and asked 
to sign a written informed consent form provided in the 
online supplementary appendix. At the baseline appoint-
ment (arranged within 45 days of initial contact), baseline 
data were completed and participant’s willingness to partic-
ipate in the study was confirmed. This procedure ensured 
that all potential participants had a reflection period for 
consent of at least 48 hours before giving their final consent 
to participate. Particular attention was paid to ensure that 
the participants realised that on entering the study they may 
receive only DA, in which case the subacromial decompres-
sion would not be performed. They were also informed that 
participation in the study is entirely voluntary and any deci-
sion they make would not affect their possible future care. 
In addition, every participant was informed of their right to 
withdraw from the trial whenever they desire without the 
need to supply any reason for such decision.
Baseline assessment
Baseline assessment included documentation of gender, 
birth date, education, employment, hand dominance, 
time from the onset of symptoms, recreational habits and 
employment status. We asked participants to assess their 
general heath and usage of pain medication. Modalities 
of any prior conservative treatment were also recorded 
(table 1).
Baseline clinical symptoms
The recruiting surgeon carried out a clinical history and 
a clinical examination related to shoulder pain. Shoulder 
complaints other than SIS, such as full-thickness RC tears, 
frozen shoulder, osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular 
joint and instability were ruled out as much as clinical 
diagnosis allows.
Baseline imaging
Standard X-rays of the shoulder were obtained to assess 
possible glenohumeral or acromioclavicular osteoar-
thritis. An MRA was also obtained to rule out any other 
intra-articular or extra-articular pathologies. A musculo-
skeletal radiologist and an orthopaedic surgeon assessed 
all the images.
randomisation and concealment
We used a two-phase sequential randomisation. In phase 
I, the participants were randomised into non-surgical 
or surgical treatment with allocation ratio 1:2. In phase 
II, those allocated to surgical treatment were further 
randomised to ASD or DA with 1:1 ratio (figure 1).
An independent statistician with no involvement in the 
execution of the trial prepared separate randomisation 
lists for each study centre using a computer-generated 
algorithm. Randomisation was carried out using sequen-
tially numbered sealed opaque envelopes. The envelopes 
were kept in a secure, agreed location at each centre. To 
ensure concealment, block randomisation was applied 
using blocks varying in size randomly, the block size 
known only by the statistician.
To initially enter a participant into the study (phase 
I), an envelope containing the treatment assignment 
(non-surgical (ET) or surgery (ASD or DA), ratio 1:2) was 
opened during the baseline appointment. Participants 
randomised to ET started standardised physiotherapy 
within 2 weeks of the baseline appointment. Participants 
allocated to surgical treatment were scheduled for surgery 
aimed to be completed within 12 weeks of randomisation.
At the day of surgery, a DA was first carried out to 
confirm the eligibility of the participant (to rule out 
full-thickness RC tear and other obvious intra-articular 
pathology). Research/staff nurse then completed the 
randomisation procedure (phase II) by opening an enve-
lope containing the surgical treatment allocation (ASD or 
DA, ratio 1:1). The allocation was revealed to the surgeon 
by showing the paper, but not expressed verbally.
Interventions
Diagnostic arthroscopy
All participants in the two operative groups first under-
went arthroscopic examination of the shoulder with the 
use of standard posterior and lateral portals and a 4 mm 
arthroscope. To maintain concealment, the surgery was 
carried out under general anaesthesia. The orthopaedic 
surgeon evaluated and graded possible intra-articular 
pathological changes. The RC integrity was also evaluated 
from the subacromial space without performing routine 
bursectomy. If the integrity of the RC could not be 
assessed, bursal tissue was bluntly stretched with troachar 
or resected on the tendon side to allow visualisation. 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
  
5
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access
If arthroscopic examination revealed any unexpected 
pathology (such as capsular pathology, full-thickness RC 
tear or osteoarthritis), the patient was treated according 
to current clinical practice guidelines for the given 
pathology while under the same anaesthesia. In such a 
case, the participant was excluded from the trial. Patients 
with partial tears were included in the study, while patients 
with a full-thickness tear were excluded and RC repair was 
carried out.
After the arthroscopic examination of the gleno-
humeral joint and subacromial space, confirming the 
eligibility of the participant, the participants were 
randomly assigned to receive either ASD or DA only. If 
the patient was allocated to the DA group, the operation 
was terminated. To ensure concealment of the partic-
ipants and the staff other than those in the operating 
theatre, the participants were kept in the operating 
theatre for the required time to perform subacromial 
decompression.
Arthroscopic subacromial decompression
Debridement of the subacromial bursa was performed 
with a shaver and/or electrocoagulation, followed by the 
resection of the bony spurs and projecting anterolateral 
Table 1 Baseline characteristics
ASD
DA
ET
Age (years), mean (SD)
Gender (female/male), n (%)
Dominant hand affected, n (%)
Socioeconomic status/workload
   
Heavy manual labour (construction work, etc), n (%)
   
Heavy manual labour (variable workload), n (%)
   
Mostly manual labour including daily office work, n (%)
   
Mostly office work with occasional manual assignments, n (%)
   
Full-time office work, n (%)
   
Unemployed, n (%)
   
Pensioner/disability pensioner, n (%)
   
Student, n (%)
   
Home maker/housewife/other, n (%)
   
Subjective health
Duration of symptoms (months), mean (SD)
Ability to work normally regardless of the shoulder symptoms? (yes/no), n (%)
Recreational ability regardless of the shoulder symptoms? (yes/no), n (%)
Prior treatments
  
Rest, n (%)
  
Pain medication, n (%)
  
Topical pain medication, n (%)
  
Corticosteroid injection, n (%)
  
Ultrasound, laser or any other similar therapies, n (%)
  
Physiotherapy including ET, n (%)
  
Other, n (%)
Generic health states
  
15D
  
SF-36
Pain measurements/shoulder scores
  
Pain at rest (0–100 VAS Scale), mean (SD)
  
Pain during activity (0–100 VAS Scale), mean (SD)
  
Constant-Murley Score (CS), mean (SD)
  
The simple shoulder test (SST), mean (SD)
ASD, arthroscopic subacromial decompression; DA, diagnostic arthroscopy; ET, exercise therapy; SF-36, Short Form 36; VAS, Visual 
Analogue Scale.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 6
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
undersurface of the acromion by a shaver as described by 
Ellman.21
Postoperative care
In both the ASD and the DA groups, the postoperative 
rehabilitation was identical. All surgically treated partici-
pants received one visit to an independent physiotherapist 
for guidance and instructions for home exercises. Subse-
quent rehabilitation was carried out according to the 
standardised rehabilitation protocols of the participant 
centres. Since the initial rehabilitation after a surgery 
needs to be ‘tempered’ due to joint irritation, the reha-
bilitation protocol of the operatively treated groups (ASD 
and DA) was not identical to the ET group.
Exercise therapy
In the ET group, supervised progressive physiotherapy 
was started within 2 weeks of randomisation using a stan-
dardised protocol. The protocol was based on the same 
principles as the regimen shown effective for the treat-
ment of SIS earlier,14 but was updated—with the help 
of the principal investigator of the original study14—to 
conform with the state-of-the-art ET for SIS. The regimen 
was based on daily home exercises, and included 15 visits 
to an independent physiotherapist for guidance and 
monitoring of the progress, carried out approximately 
once a week. The aim of the supervised exercise treat-
ment was to restore painless, normal mobility of the 
shoulder girdle, eliminate any capsular tightness and to 
increase the dynamic stability of the glenohumeral joint 
and the scapula.
compliance to treatment allocation and possible crossover
Participants allocated to the ET group were told at the 
time of giving consent that they would be allowed to 
consider crossing over to the ASD group if they didn’t 
get adequate relief of symptoms (preferably no sooner 
than 6 months post randomisation). Similarly, in the 
two surgical treatment groups, the participants were 
informed of the possibility of unblinding if debilitating 
symptoms persisted 6 months or more after operation. If 
the participant was allocated to the DA group, ASD was 
offered. If the participant had undergone ASD, he/she 
was offered extended physiotherapy. No prespecified 
criteria were used for determining ‘inadequate relief of 
symptoms/debilitating symptoms’, rather it was left to the 
participants and the study physicians to make the clinical 
judgement together.
outcome measures
The outcomes used in this study and the timetable for 
follow-up assessments are summarised in table 2.
Primary outcome measure
Visual Analogue Scale
As the primary outcome measure, we used a Visual 
Analogue Scale (VAS) to measure the patient’s perceived 
pain intensity at rest and at arm activity during the 
24 hours preceding the assessment. Shoulder pain was 
assessed on a 100 mm scale ranging from 0 (no pain) to 
100 (extreme pain). We considered 15 as the minimal 
clinically important difference (MCID) for VAS.22
secondary outcome measures
Constant-Murley Score
The Constant-Murley Score (CS) is the most commonly 
used scoring system for evaluation of various disorders 
of the shoulder.23 It consists of both objective (range of 
motion and strength) and subjective measurements (pain 
assessment, workload and leisure time activities), which 
are summarised in a score between 0 and 100. A higher 
score indicates better shoulder function. The minimal 
detectable change of the Constant Score is 17 for patients 
with SIS.24
In addition, as night pain is considered one of the hall-
mark symptoms in patients with SIS and our two primary 
outcome measures (patient’s perceived pain intensity at 
rest and at arm activity in the last 24 hours) do not specif-
ically address this issue, a specific question from the CS 
(unaffected sleep: ‘Yes’ or ‘No’) will be analysed sepa-
rately.
Simple shoulder test
The simple shoulder test (SST) was developed to assess 
any impairment of the patient’s activities of daily living.25 
The SST consists of 12 questions with yes (1) or no (0) 
response options. The maximum SST score is 12 indi-
cating normal shoulder function, minimum score of 0 
points refers severely diminished shoulder function. The 
SST has good reliability and responsiveness in patients 
with RC symptoms.26 The MCID for the SST in RC disease 
is 2 points.27
15D
The 15D instrument (a health-related quality of life 
instrument with 15 dimensions) is a generic health-re-
lated quality of life (HRQoL) instrument comprising 
15 dimensions.28 For each dimension, the respondent 
must choose one of the five levels that best describes his/
her state of health at that moment (the best level being 
1 and the worst level being 5). A set of utility or prefer-
ence weights is used in an addition aggregate formula to 
generate a single index number, the utility or 15D score. 
The maximum 15D score is 1(no problems on any dimen-
sion) and the minimum score is 0 (being dead). The 
responsiveness, reliability and validity of 15D have been 
thoroughly established, and this instrument has been 
used extensively in clinical and healthcare research.29 30
Short form 36
The short form or SF-36 is a generic HRQoL instrument 
to quantify the physical, functional and psycholog-
ical aspects of HRQoL. It consists of 36 questions in 
eight subscales that assess physical, functional, social 
and psychological well-being.31 The score ranges from 
0 to 100, where a higher score is associated with better 
health. The Physical and Mental Component Summary 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
  
7
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access
Table 2 Outcomes and follow-up time points
Assessment
Screening
Enrolment 
(baseline)
Surgery
3 
months
6 
months
12 
months
24 
months
5 
years
10 
years
Screening form
X
Informed consent
X
Baseline characteristics form
X
X-ray and MRI
X
X
Randomisation
X (first)
X (second)
Arthroscopic findings form
X
Follow-up form*
X
X
Clinical examination
X
X
X
X
X
Complications/adverse effects form†
(X)
(X)
(X)
(X)
(X)
(X)
(X)
VAS, at rest
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
VAS, at arm activity
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Constant- Murley Score (CS)
X
X
X
X
X
Simple shoulder test (SST)
X
X
X
X
X
SF-36
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
15D
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Return to work
X
X
X
X
X
X
Return to previous leisure activities
X
X
X
X
X
X
Responder analysis
X
X
X
X
X
X
Patients' satisfaction to the treatment
X
X
X
X
X
X
Patients' assessment of the treatment 
allocation
X
Health resource utilisation
X
X
X
X
X
X
*Letter/telephone interview
†If required
 SF-36, Short Form 36; VAS, Visual Analogue Scale.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 8
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
Scales are then calculated as composites of the related 
subscales. The SF-36 is one of most widely used measures 
of HRQoL.32
Patient satisfaction and responder analysis
We elicited patients’ global assessment of satisfaction 
to the treatment with this question: ‘Are you satisfied 
with the treatment you have received?’ We used a VAS 
scale ranging from 0 (completely disappointed) to 100 
(completely satisfied).
Additionally, we elicited patient satisfaction to the 
treatment outcome with the following question at each 
follow-up time point (table 2): ‘How satisfied are you 
with the outcome of your treatment?’ on a 5-item scale. 
The response options for this question are provided in 
the online supplementary appendix. Participants who 
reported very satisfied or satisfied will be categorised as 
‘Responders’ and patients who responded very dissatis-
fied or dissatisfied as ‘Non-responders’.
Return to previous leisure activities
Similarly, at each follow-up (table 2), participants were 
asked to respond to the following question: ‘Have you 
been able to return to your previous leisure activities?’ 
(‘yes’ or ‘no’).
Patients’ perception of operative treatment-group assignment
At the 3-month follow-up point, the patients in the two 
operative groups were asked to guess whether they had 
undergone ASD or DA.
Health resource utilisation and costs
For the cost-effectiveness analysis, at each follow-up visit 
the participants were asked to fill in a questionnaire 
inquiring about the use of healthcare resources. The ques-
tionnaire contains a list of items of healthcare resources 
available and the participants were asked to fill in the 
number of visits per item during the recall period of each 
follow-up time point. The resource use will be calculated 
based on the number of visits times unit cost per item and 
expressed as mean costs by items of resource use, and the 
mean direct total healthcare resource costs. All costs will 
be discounted to the 2016 price level.
Time to return to work
Information about return to work was recorded at each 
follow-up time point (table 2).
Complications and adverse effects
Complications directly related to the interventions 
were registered. The participants were also encouraged 
to contact the participating hospitals if any adverse 
effects (AEs) occurred and contacts to the healthcare 
system were monitored at every follow-up visit. Potential 
AEs were categorised to serious adverse effects (SAEs) and 
minor adverse effects (MAEs) if the participants sought 
treatment. Death, cardiovascular or gastrointestinal 
effects, deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, 
systemic or local infection were categorised as SAEs and 
shoulder symptoms like pain, swelling and decreased 
range of motion were categorised as MAEs. The number 
and severity of complications and AEs will be assessed.
Follow-up
The full follow-up process is shown in figure 1. In brief, the 
participants filled in the above noted (mailed) outcome 
questionnaires at 3 months, 6 months, 12 months and 
24 months postrandomisation, in addition to which they 
were also assessed clinically at 6 months and 24 months 
(and 5 years and 10 years) postrandomisation by a study 
physiotherapist unaware of treatment allocation, treat-
ment given or possible unblinding. Outcome assessors 
were instructed not to inquire anything about prior treat-
ment. Further, participants wore a T-shirt on all follow-up 
examinations.
adherence and loss to follow-up
Several procedures were implemented to limit loss to 
follow-up, including excluding individuals likely to pose 
suboptimal adherence to study follow-up, obtaining veri-
fied contact information from each consented participant 
and having a local research nurse remind participants 
of upcoming follow-up/clinic visits. All attempts were 
made to make follow-up as convenient for the patients as 
possible. Participants were required to visit the outpatient 
clinic only at 6 months and 24 months (and 5 years and 
10 years) postrandomisation, while the 3-month and 
12-month follow-ups were carried out using mailed ques-
tionnaires to minimise inconvenience to the participants. 
The follow-up visits had no more discomfort for the partic-
ipant than the routine clinical shoulder examinations. 
The follow-up schedule did not involve extra costs to the 
participants. Follow-up rate was monitored throughout 
the trial and patients who did not return follow-up ques-
tionnaires would receive reminder telephone calls. Using 
strategies highly similar to these in our previous place-
bo-surgery controlled trial,33 a 99% follow-up rate was 
achieved.
The number and proportion of individuals eligible for 
and compliant with each follow-up was documented. Indi-
viduals who died during the study (from causes unrelated 
to the study or procedure) will be tabulated. An analysis 
of the demographic and prognostic characteristics will 
be carried out between the individuals who withdrew 
and those who remained in the study. For continuous 
variables, parametrical or non-parametrical analysis of 
variance will be used. For categorical variables, χ2 or Fish-
er’s exact test will be applied.
Missing items
We will use multiple imputation to handle missing data 
for those statistical analyses that cannot handle occa-
sional missing values. All variables to be included in the 
final analyses will be included in the chained equations 
imputation model. The imputation algorithm, a fully 
conditional specification, uses a specific univariate model 
for each variable and, for each specific imputed data set, 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
  
9
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access
iteratively imputes each variable with missing values and 
uses the imputed values in the imputation of other vari-
ables.
sample size
The sample size calculation was based on the two primary 
outcome measures, VAS at rest and at arm activity, at 
24 months postrandomisation. The FIMPACT trial 
was powered to detect a minimal clinically important 
improvement (MCII) in a VAS Pain Score (improve-
ment of at least 15; assumed SD 25) between ASD and 
DA (or ET). To achieve a somewhat unconventional 
(stringent) 90% study power and using a two-sided type 
I error rate (5%), our trial requires 68 patients per study 
group to show clinically meaningful advantage of ASD 
over DA (or ET). Acknowledging the stringent power 
threshold, we reserved only 3% surplus for potential 
loss to follow-up/crossovers (3%), and accordingly, we 
set the recruitment target at 70 patients per treatment 
group.
safety analysis
There are no anticipated safety issues with the FIMPACT 
Study. Identically to our previous placebo-surgery 
controlled trial,33 an interim analysis, as requested by the 
ethics board, was carried out after the enrolment of 45 
participants by an independent data and safety monitoring 
board (the National Institute for Health and Welfare) to 
ensure that the rates of complications or reoperations 
were within acceptable limits (within the normal rate of 
complications and/or reoperations related to shoulder 
arthroscopy). Since we found no marked discrepancy 
in our crude assessment of the incidence of complica-
tions/reoperations, no unsealing of group assignments 
(unblinding) was carried out. No other interim analysis 
was carried out.
data management
Questionnaire forms on paper were the primary data 
collection tools for the study. On receipt of the ques-
tionnaire forms, a study nurse made a visual check of 
the responses and queried missing data when possible. 
Research assistants, blinded to the group allocation, 
stored the forms into an electronic database by double 
data entry to minimise typing errors. The researchers, 
blinded to the group allocation, perform a visual check 
of the data in the electronic database and then queried 
all missing, implausible and inconsistent data. Patient 
records in the participating hospitals were used when 
collecting missing data or interpreting inconsistent or 
implausible data. The final analysis was performed on 
data transferred to the file ‘FIMPACT-full data_final’, 
having been documented as meeting the cleaning and 
approval requirements of our independent statistician 
and after the finalisation and approval of the accompa-
nying statistical analysis plan (SAP) document. Participant 
files will be maintained in storage (both in electronic and 
paper formats) at the coordinating centre for a period of 
10 years after completion of the study (10-year follow-up 
visits).
sTaTIsTIcal MeThods
statistical analysis plan
Please refer to the online supplementary appendix for 
a more complete SAP, which we briefly summarise here. 
An independent statistician who is unaware of the group 
assignments will perform all the analyses.
We will summarise the baseline characteristics of 
the participants by group, reported as a mean (SD) or 
median (first quartile, third quartile) for continuous vari-
ables and count (per cent) for categorical variables.
We will analyse the data in a blinded manner. All 
p values will be reported to three decimal places with 
those less than 0.001 reported as p<0.001. The criterion 
for statistical significance will be set at α=0.05.
Primary analysis
We will carry out the primary analysis according to the 
intention-to-treat principle: participants are retained in 
the groups to which they were initially randomised.
The primary comparison will be on the efficacy of ASD 
(ASD vs DA). We will perform the primary comparison 
on the efficacy of ASD (ASD vs DA) as a between-group 
comparison using a repeated measures mixed-effects 
model (RMMM). Study group and time of assessment 
(baseline, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months and 24 months) 
will be included as fixed factors and patient as a random 
factor. The model will include interactions between study 
group and time of assessment. The baseline value will be 
included as a covariate. The RMMM model will be used 
to quantify the treatment effect as the difference between 
the groups in pain scores (VAS) with the associated 95% 
CI and p -value at 24 months postprimary randomisation. 
To safeguard against potential multiplicity bias,34 we will 
require a statistically significant treatment effect on both 
of our primary outcome variables, that is, pain at rest and 
pain at activity.
The same statistical model will also apply to the prag-
matic comparison of the relative benefits of surgical 
versus non-operative treatment strategies on SIS (ASD vs 
ET).
secondary analyses
We will also use the RMMM model to analyse secondary 
outcomes where applicable. The results will be reported 
as the differences between the groups with the associated 
95% CI and p value at 24 months postprimary randomi-
sation.
Categorical variables, reoperations or treatment conver-
sions, and complications as well as AEs will be analysed 
using logistic regression analysis or Poisson regression 
dependent on whether subjects with complications or 
(multiple) complications (per subject) are analysed.
These secondary analyses will be supportive, explan-
atory and/or hypothesis-generating, which is why 
multiplicity is not a problem.2
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 10
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
sensitivity analyses
We will carry out the following sensitivity analyses: (1) 
per-protocol analyses, in which the above noted primary 
and secondary analyses will be carried out again with 
patients who received the interventions as allocated; 
(2) and potential effects due to the treatment providing 
centres.
subgroup analyses and hypothesised effects
We have identified three important subgroups. We will 
perform these three subgroup analyses with the primary 
end point as the outcome and the direction of hypothe-
sised effect described35:
1. Duration of symptoms—Neer originally suggested 
that ASD should be considered for patients 
with persistent symptoms despite over 1 year of 
conservative 
treatment.36 
Recent 
randomised 
controlled trials failing to find efficacy on ASD (vs 
conservative treatment) have prompted arguments 
that ASD should be reserved to situations when 
long-term conservative treatment has failed.37 
Although a recent study specifically addressed this 
question and failed to support this hypothesis,38 
we still intend to compare the treatment effects 
of participants stratified based on the duration 
of symptoms. Accordingly, we will compare those 
with symptoms less than 12 months to those with 
symptoms longer than 12 months. We hypothesise 
that subacromial decompression will work better in 
patients with duration of symptoms longer than 12 
months than for patients with symptoms less than12 
months.
2. Severity of symptoms—A subgroup analysis will 
also be conducted comparing the treatment 
effects in patients with severe (VAS 70 or more), 
moderate (VAS 55 to 69) and mild (VAS less than 
55) symptoms at baseline. We hypothesise that 
subacromial decompression will work better in 
patients with more severe (VAS 70 or more) than 
moderate (VAS 55 to 69) or mild (VAS less than 55) 
symptoms at baseline.
3. Acromial anatomy—A hook-type acromion has 
been suggested as an independent risk factor for 
subacromial impingement.39 To assess the validity 
of this suggestion, a subgroup analysis will be 
conducted comparing the treatment effects in 
patients with flat (type I), curved (type II) or hooked 
(type III) acromion according to classification by 
Bigliani et al40 We hypothesise that subacromial 
decompression will work better in patients with 
hooked (type III) than curved (type II) or flat (type 
I) acromion at baseline.
effect modifying and mediating factors
Multiple regression models will be used to assess the 
potential effect modifying factors (eg, age, gender, 
psychological well-being, mental health, occupational 
shoulder load, education level and hand dominance) and 
effect mediating factors (eg, absence of complications 
and adherence to rehabilitation) on pain, functional 
disability and quality of life. These analyses are supportive, 
explanatory and/or hypothesis generating.
Blinded data interpretation
To safeguard against potential risk of bias during inter-
pretation, we will use our recently introduced method of 
‘blinded data interpretation’.41 So far, this method has 
been successfully applied to three previous trials.33 42 43 
Please refer to the online supplementary appendix for 
a more complete description of the process (blinded 
data interpretation plan), which we briefly summarise 
here. An independent statistician will provide the writing 
committee of the FIMPACT trial (authors of this protocol) 
with blinded results from the analyses with study groups 
labelled as group A, group B and group C. The writing 
committee will then contemplate on the interpretation 
of the results until a consensus is reached and agree in 
writing on all alternative interpretations of the findings. 
Once reaching a consensus, we will record the minutes 
of this meeting as a statement of interpretation docu-
ment signed by all members of the writing committee. 
Only after reaching this common agreement will the data 
manager and independent statistician break the rando-
misation code.
dIscussIon
In this protocol paper, we describe the execution of a 
randomised, placebo-surgery controlled trial for the 
assessment of the efficacy of ASD in patients with SIS. 
Acknowledging the potential of surgery to produce 
powerful placebo effects,44 our primary comparator is 
DA, differing from the ASD only by lacking the critical 
therapeutic element of the ASD (subacromial decom-
pression). We will also conduct the pragmatic comparison 
of surgical and non-surgical treatment options of SIS by 
including a third group of progressive ET (figure 1, ASD 
vs ET).
Interpretations and generalisability
Our interpretation scheme primarily rests on the tenet 
that the minimum requirement for the clinical viability 
of ASD is that it needs to show superiority to DA—a ther-
apeutically inert and thus a clinically non-viable option. 
To test this, we have chosen a classic efficacy or ‘can it work’ 
design:45–47 The recruited participants are those who—
according to current evidence—should have an ‘optimal 
response’ to ASD and the participants and outcome asses-
sors are blinded to the interventions given. This design 
should thus yield findings that are widely applicable to 
patients with characteristic clinical signs and symptoms 
of SIS. We will also compare ASD with a non-operative 
treatment option for SIS, the progressive ET, in a more 
pragmatic comparison, which is confounded by the lack 
of blinding of the participants (figure 2).
The generalisability of our primary (efficacy) compar-
ison may be questioned as the patients are carefully 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
  
11
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access
selected (strict eligibility criteria) and treated by expe-
rienced shoulder surgeons. Nevertheless, the eligibility 
criteria are in agreement with the existing treatment 
guidelines on SIS.4 The results should thus be applicable 
to the specific populations currently receiving treatment 
for their SIS. As for the skill level of the surgeons, the 
index surgical procedure (ASD) is a relatively simple 
procedure and thus likely not very sensitive to individual 
surgeons’ experience. For example, the amount of bone 
removed from the undersurface of the acromion seems 
to have at best a marginal effect on the outcome. Even 
bursectomy alone has been shown to produce the same 
therapeutic effect as standard acromioplasty.48
rationale for outcome assessment and statistical analysis
Traditionally, the assessment of the treatment effects of 
two or more interventions has relied primarily on the 
statistical significance of the mean differences of the 
intervention groups. However, as described in a recent 
paper,49 to truly assess the clinical relevance of a treatment, 
one also needs information about the distribution of indi-
vidual responses. In essence, one needs to look at how 
many people on treatment and on comparator group(s) 
had a response at least as great as the MCID. Such indi-
viduals have been described as ‘responders,’ and this 
approach of comparing treatment groups as a ‘responder 
analysis’.50 51 The authors49 suggested that ‘Clinical trials 
should specify in their protocol that they will report the distribu-
tion of results in individual participants as well as the mean 
difference. Researchers should publish plots of individual results 
and responder analyses in clinical trial reports.’ The FIMPACT 
trial adheres to this suggested approach. Accordingly, 
we will elaborate several relevant and often interrelated 
issues, such as the study power, the primary outcomes and 
their interpretation, the MCID, as well as the approach 
we have chosen for carrying out a responder analysis.
study power
Traditionally the sample size is calculated based on the 
MCID or MCII, that is, the smallest change in measure-
ment that signifies an important/detectable improvement 
in a patient’s symptom(s). MCII/MCID is not a static value 
even for one outcome instrument, but rather can have 
different values when assessed with different methods or 
in different patient populations. We chose VAS at rest and 
during arm activity as our primary outcomes, because 
shoulder pain is the primary complaint of patients 
with SIS. The FIMPACT trial was powered to detect 
an improvement of at least 15 on a 0–100 VAS scale52 
between ASD and ET. This yielded a sample size estimate 
of 70 participants per group. To safeguard against lack of 
study power, we chose a statistical threshold of 90% over 
the more conventional 80%. In this context, Norman et 
al53 recently introduced a thought-provoking proposal 
arguing that a standard (‘off-the-peg’) sample size of 
64 per group would be just as valid an estimate as one 
obtains by more traditional (‘made-to-measure’) sample 
size calculations.53 Finally, although the statistical power 
is a vital step in the planning phase of any clinical trial, the 
actual quality of evidence (certainty in the obtained esti-
mates) can only be appropriately assessed from the CI of 
the data obtained.54
Figure 2 Study design and interpretation of results. ASD, arthroscopic subacromial decompression; DA, diagnostic 
arthroscopy; ET, exercise therapy; SIS, subacromial impingement syndrome.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 12
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
responder analysis
As noted above, instead of focusing only on the statistical 
significance of the mean differences between treatment 
groups in the VAS (ie, the mean improvement from base-
line to 24 months), we will also carry out ‘a responder 
analysis’. In principle, this analysis allows physicians to 
inform a patient of his or her chance of experiencing a clin-
ically meaningful improvement from the treatment, both 
in absolute terms and in comparison, to a control group. 
The difference between responders and non-responders 
can be considered the net benefit of the treatment. One 
proposed means to carry out a responder analysis relies 
on the assessment of the proportion of patients reaching 
the patient-acceptable symptom state (PASS) and the 
patient-disappointing symptoms state (PDSS). As no 
universal consensus exists on either the PASS or the PDSS 
in the context of SIS, we chose to anchor our responder 
analysis to the patient’s assessment of satisfaction with 
the shoulder treatment outcome: Patients reporting very 
satisfied or satisfied will be categorised as ‘Responders’ 
and those reporting very dissatisfied or dissatisfied as 
‘Non-responders’. Given the obvious coarseness of this 
approach, we plan to evaluate the appropriate criteria for 
PASS and PDSS in more detail in the future, exploring 
the potential contribution of, for example, arm pain at 
rest and at activity, shoulder function, and night pain.
ethics of placebo surgery
A recent systematic review of the use of surgical placebo 
shows that in more than half of these studies the treat-
ment group that included critical surgical/therapeutic 
element had no greater effect than a placebo group.18 
The review also showed that risks of AEs were small and 
the placebo group was safer than the surgery under inves-
tigation. These findings make a compelling case for the 
use of surgical placebo controls when a placebo effect 
may be present. Regarding the ethics of surgical placebo 
controls, the authors of the review state ‘Placebo controlled 
surgical trials raise important ethical concerns but are justified 
when there is a genuine equipoise; that is, a disagreement in the 
medical community about whether one treatment is superior to 
another, because standard treatment does not exist or its effi-
cacy is questioned.’ They continue by concluding: ‘Placebo 
controlled trials in surgery are as important as they are in medi-
cine, and they are justified in the same way. They are powerful, 
feasible way of showing the efficacy of surgical procedures. They 
are necessary to protect the welfare of present and future patients 
as well as to conduct proper cost effectiveness analyses. Only 
then may publicly funded surgical interventions be distributed 
fairly and justly. Without such studies ineffective treatment may 
continue unchallenged.’ Our views regarding the ethics of 
using a surgical placebo group are perfectly aligned with 
these notions.
limitations of the study
One possible confounder in our trial is that subacromial 
pain is also the hallmark symptom of a RC tear, although 
the latter patients usually also represent with muscle 
weakness. To exclude patients with a (clinically relevant) 
RC tear, our eligibility screening included two preoper-
ative assessments: (A) clinical exams targeted at finding 
obvious weakness of the RC muscles and (B) MRA, an 
imaging modality with a shown 92 specificity and 94 
sensitivity for ‘full-thickness’ RC tears.55 In addition to 
these, we also carried out (C) a DA in the ASD and DA 
groups prior to randomisation. Despite the thorough 
preoperative screening, 10% (14/136) of the participants 
allocated to the two surgical groups had to be excluded 
because of acromioclavicular arthrosis (n=1) or intra-ar-
ticular pathology found at DA (n=13). Although this does 
not have any effect on our primary comparison (ASD vs 
DA), one could argue that the ET and operatively treated 
groups (ASD and DA) are not fully comparable. At the 
same time we don’t know the clinical relevance of small 
RC tears or superior labrum anterior to posterior (SLAP) 
lesions, which don’t result in obvious muscle weakness 
and/or are not apparent in MRA. In the end, if this bias 
proves clinically relevant in our analysis, it will skew our 
results by favouring the ASD group in the pragmatic 
comparison (ASD vs ET). Another concern related to the 
pragmatic comparison (ASD vs ET) is that the progres-
sive ET regimen carried out in the ET group is different 
from the postoperative rehabilitation carried out by 
patients in the ET group, for obvious reasons; surgically 
treated patients need time to recover from the initial 
surgical trauma. Furthermore, patients with ASD are also 
subject to some degree of postoperative immobilisation, 
extended sick leave, and modifications in pain medica-
tion and activities, all of which potentially have an effect 
on the outcome of treatment.
Another obvious concern related to our study design 
is the discrepant timing of the start of the actual treat-
ment between the ET and the two surgical groups due to 
the time required to arrange the surgery. Acknowledging 
this, the 2-year follow-up was chosen as our primary time 
point for assessing the benefits of treatment, as we assume 
that by this time the potential confounding effect of 
slightly different follow-up times should be diluted to a 
minimum. This is also the reason why we use data from 
the shorter-term follow-up visits (ie, visits performed at 
3 months, 6 months and 12 months after randomisation) 
primarily to illustrate the trajectory of the treatment 
response in the three groups. Concerns over the varying 
time span from the randomisation of the patients to the 
trial to the actual induction of treatment (due to delay 
in surgery) also applies to the CSAW trial.20 To compen-
sate for the waiting list effects, the CSAW investigators 
have chosen a slightly different strategy: Although the 
primary outcome assessment is performed at 6 months 
after randomisation in the CSAW trial, they have intro-
duced additional follow-up assessments, referenced from 
surgery, for patients waiting for longer than 4 months for 
their surgery after randomisation. They have also set a 
secondary outcome measurement point at 1 year postran-
domisation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
  
13
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access
eThIcs and dIsseMInaTIon
ethics
FIMPACT trial is conducted in accordance with the 
principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. This trial has 
been approved by the Institutional Review Board of the 
Pirkanmaa Hospital District and each participating centre 
granted clinical trial authorisation prior to recruitment. 
The trial has been registered to  
ClinicalTrials. 
gov registry 
and any revisions about the protocol are documented in 
this registry. For each participant, informed consent is 
obtained prior to any study-related procedures.
dissemination policy
We aim to produce high-impact publications of the results 
of the trial and present the findings to the clinicians who 
manage shoulder pain in the front line. The investigators 
will be involved in preparing drafts of the manuscripts, 
abstracts, press releases and any other publications 
arising from the trial. The final reporting will follow the 
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) 
Statement guidelines. Authorship will be determined 
in accordance with the International Committee of 
Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) guidelines and other 
contributors will be acknowledged. The funders will be 
acknowledged in all resulting publications. There is no 
intended use of professional writers.
Date and version identifier
30 August 2016: Original protocol, (V.1.0) 
5 December 2016: Revised protocol, major revision 
(V.2.0) 
13 February 2017: Re-revised protocol, minor revision 
(V.2.1) 
All versions available at http:// 
bmjopen. 
bmj. 
com
Author affiliations
1Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Helsinki University Hospital and 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Center for Health and Social Economics, 
Helsinki, Finland
3Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Hatanpää City Hospital, Tampere, 
Finland
Acknowledgements The FIMPACT investigators thank Professor Jonas Ranstam 
(Lund University) for the statistical analysis plan and Dr Pekka Paavolainen and 
Professor Markku Järvinen for their critical contributions and support on the early 
phases of the planning and execution of the trial.
Collaborators Participating Clinical Sites: Helsinki University Hospital, Jorvi 
Hospital: Kalevi Hietaniemi, Juha Kalske, Vesa Lepola, Jyrki Salmenkivi, Sikri 
Tukiainen. Helsinki University Hospital, Herttoniemi Hospital: Jarkko Pajarinen, 
Mikko Salmela, Vesa Savolainen, Ilkka Sinisaari. Hatanpää City Hospital, Tampere: 
Timo Järvelä, Kari Kanto, Janne Lehtinen, Mikael Salmela. FIMPACT Methods 
Center: Leena Caravitis, Sari Karesvuori, Pirjo Toivonen (Project management), 
Mathias Bäck (Data management), Ville Haapamäki (Imaging) (Helsinki University 
Hospital and University of Helsinki), Jari Inkinen (Physiotherapy) (Fysios Finlayson, 
Physiotherapy center Kunnon Klinikka Oy, Tampere), Esa Läärä (Randomization) 
(University of Oulu), Harri Sintonen (QoL outcomes) (National Institute for Health and 
Welfare).
Contributors Concept and design: MP, AM, ST and TLNJ. Drafting and critical 
revision of the article for important intellectual content: MP, AM, ST, TLNJ, KK. Final 
approval of the article: MP, AM, ST, TLNJ, KK. Ensuring the accuracy of the work: MP, 
AM, ST, TLNJ, KK. Statistical expertise: Jonas Ranstam. Obtaining of funding: TLNJ 
and Markku Järvinen. Primary sponsor: MP. Steering committee: MP, TLNJ, AM, ST. 
Writing committee: TLNJ, ST, AM, MP, KK. 
Funding The FIMPACT trial was supported by the Sigrid Juselius Foundation, 
the State funding for university/level health research, Pirkanmaa and Helsinki 
University Hospital Districts, the Academy of Finland, and the Jane and Aatos Erkko 
Foundation. The funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; 
collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; and preparation, 
review, or approval of this protocol.
Competing interests ST reports personal fees from Evalua group of companies, 
personal fees from DBC group of companies, and personal fees from insurance 
companies, outside the submitted work.KK reports an honorarium for a lecture from 
Linvatec, outside the submitted work. TLNJ reports an honorarium for a lecture on 
osteoporosis from AMGEN (donated to AllTrials campaign). Authors not named here 
have disclosed no conflicts of interest.
Patient consent Obtained.
Ethics approval The institutional review board of the Pirkanmaa Hospital District 
(R04200).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4.0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRenCeS
 1. Paloneva J, Lepola V, Karppinen J, et al. Declining incidence of 
acromioplasty in Finland. Acta Orthop 2015;86:220–4.
 2. Vitale MA, Arons RR, Hurwitz S, et al. The rising incidence of 
acromioplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2010;92:1842–50.
 3. Engebretsen K, Grotle M, Bautz-Holter E, et al. Radial extracorporeal 
shockwave treatment compared with supervised exercises in 
patients with subacromial pain syndrome: single blind randomised 
study. BMJ 2009;339:b3360.
 4. Diercks R, Bron C, Dorrestijn O, et al. Dutch Orthopaedic 
Association. Guideline for diagnosis and treatment of subacromial 
pain syndrome: a multidisciplinary review by the Dutch Orthopaedic 
Association. Acta Orthop 2014;85:314–22.
 5. Oh LS, Wolf BR, Hall MP
, et al. Indications for rotator cuff repair: a 
systematic review. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2007;455:52–63.
 6. Aurora A, McCarron J, Iannotti JP
, et al. Commercially available 
extracellular matrix materials for rotator cuff repairs: state of 
the art and future trends. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2007;16(5 
Suppl):S171–S178.
 7. Michener LA, McClure PW, Karduna AR. Anatomical and 
biomechanical mechanisms of subacromial impingement syndrome. 
Clin Biomech 2003;18:369–79.
 8. Koester MC, George MS, Kuhn JE. Shoulder impingement syndrome. 
Am J Med 2005;118:452–5.
 9. Neer CS. Anterior acromioplasty for the chronic impingement 
syndrome in the shoulder: a preliminary report. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
1972;54:41–50.
 
10. Yu E, Cil A, Harmsen WS, et al. Arthroscopy and the dramatic 
increase in frequency of anterior acromioplasty from 1980 to 2005: 
an epidemiologic study. Arthroscopy 2010;26(9 Suppl):S142–S147.
 
11. Judge A, Murphy RJ, Maxwell R, et al. Temporal trends and 
geographical variation in the use of subacromial decompression and 
rotator cuff repair of the shoulder in England. Bone Joint J 2014;96-
B:70–4.
 
12. Dong W, Goost H, Lin XB, et al. Treatments for shoulder impingement 
syndrome: a PRISMA systematic review and network meta-analysis. 
Medicine 2015;94:e510.
 
13. Shi LL, Edwards TB. The role of acromioplasty for management 
of rotator cuff problems: where is the evidence? Adv Orthop 
2012;2012:1–5.
 
14. Brox JI, Staff PH, Ljunggren AE, et al. Arthroscopic surgery 
compared with supervised exercises in patients with rotator cuff 
disease (stage II impingement syndrome). BMJ 1993;307:899–903.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
 14
Paavola M, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014087. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087
Open Access 
 
15. Haahr JP
, Østergaard S, Dalsgaard J, et al. Exercises versus 
arthroscopic decompression in patients with subacromial 
impingement: a randomised, controlled study in 90 cases with a one 
year follow up. Ann Rheum Dis 2005;64:760–4.
 
16. Ketola S, Lehtinen J, Rousi T, et al. No evidence of long-term 
benefits of arthroscopicacromioplasty in the treatment of shoulder 
impingement syndrome: Five-year results of a randomised controlled 
trial. Bone Joint Res 2013;2:132–9.
 
17. Ernst E, Resch KL. Concept of true and perceived placebo effects. 
BMJ 1995;311:551–3.
 
18. Wartolowska K, Judge A, Hopewell S, et al. Use of placebo controls 
in the evaluation of surgery: systematic review. BMJ 2014;348:g3253.
 
19. Buchbinder R. Meniscectomy in patients with knee osteoarthritis and 
a meniscal tear? N Engl J Med 2013;368:1740–1.
 
20. Beard D, Rees J, Rombach I, et al. CSAW Study Group. The CSAW 
Study (Can Shoulder Arthroscopy Work?) - a placebo-controlled 
surgical intervention trial assessing the clinical and cost effectiveness 
of arthroscopic subacromial decompression for shoulder pain: study 
protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials 2015;16:210.
 
21. Ellman H. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression: analysis of one- 
to three-year results. Arthroscopy 1987;3:173–81.
 
22. Tashjian RZ, Deloach J, Porucznik CA, et al. Minimal clinically 
important differences (MCID) and patient acceptable symptomatic 
state (PASS) for visual analog scales (VAS) measuring pain in 
patients treated for rotator cuff disease. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 
2009;18:927–32.
 
23. Constant CR, G. Murley AH. A clinical method of functional 
Assessment of the shoulder. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1987;160:164–4.
 
24. Henseler JF
, Kolk A, van der Zwaal P
, et al. The minimal detectable 
change of the Constant score in impingement, full-thickness 
tears, and massive rotator cuff tears. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 
2015;24(3):376–81.
 
25. Matsen FA, Ziegler DW, DeBartolo SE. Patient self-assessment 
of health status and function in glenohumeral degenerative joint 
disease. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 1995;4:345–51.
 
26. Godfrey J, Hamman R, Lowenstein S, et al. Reliability, validity, and 
responsiveness of the simple shoulder test: psychometric properties 
by age and injury type. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 2007;16:260–7.
 
27. Tashjian RZ, Deloach J, Green A, et al. Minimal clinically important 
differences in ASES and simple shoulder test scores after 
nonoperative treatment of rotator cuff disease. J Bone Joint Surg Am 
2010;92:296–303.
 
28. Sintonen H. The 15D instrument of health-related quality of life: 
properties and applications. Ann Med 2001;33:328–36.
 
29. Moock J, Kohlmann T. Comparing preference-based quality-of-life 
measures: results from rehabilitation patients with musculoskeletal, 
cardiovascular, or psychosomatic disorders. Qual Life Res 
2008;17:485–95.
 
30. Bowling A. Measuring health. A review of quality of life measurement 
scales. 3rd ed. Berkshire: Open University Press, 2004.
 
31. Ware JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item short-form health survey 
(SF-36). I. Conceptual framework and item selection. Med Care 
1992;30:473–83.
 
32. Garratt A, Schmidt L, Mackintosh A, et al. Quality of life 
measurement: bibliographic study of patient assessed health 
outcome measures. BMJ 2002;324:1417.
 
33. Sihvonen R, Paavola M, Malmivaara A, et al. Arthroscopic partial 
meniscectomy versus sham surgery for a degenerative meniscal tear. 
N Engl J Med 2013;369:2515–24.
 
34. Ranstam J. Multiple P-values and Bonferroni correction. 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2016;24:763–4.
 
35. Sun X, Ioannidis JP
, Agoritsas T, et al. How to use a subgroup 
analysis: users' guide to the medical literature. JAMA 
2014;311:405–11.
 
36. Neer CS. 2nd. impingement lesions. Clin Orthop Relat Res 
1983;173:70–7.
 
37. Dong W, Goost H, Lin XB, et al. Treatments for shoulder impingement 
syndrome: a PRISMA systematic review and network meta-analysis. 
Medicine 2015;94:e510.
 
38. Ketola S, Lehtinen J, Rousi T, et al. Which patients do not 
recover from shoulder impingement syndrome, either with 
operative treatment or with nonoperative treatment? Acta Orthop 
2015;86:641–6.
 
39. Tangtrakulwanich B, Kapkird A. Analyses of possible risk 
factors for subacromial impingement syndrome. World J Orthop 
2012;3:5–9.
 
40. Bigliani LU MD. April EW The morphology of the acromion and its 
relationship to rotator cuff tears. Orthop Trans 1986;10:228.
 
41. Järvinen TL, Sihvonen R, Bhandari M, et al. Blinded interpretation of 
study results can feasibly and effectively diminish interpretation Bias. 
J Clin Epidemiol 2014;67:769–72.
 
42. Skou ST, Roos EM, Laursen MB, et al. A randomized, controlled trial 
of total knee replacement. N Engl J Med 2015;373:1597–606.
 
43. Bhandari M, Jeray KJ, Petrisor BA, et al. A trial of Wound Irrigation 
in the initial management of Open Fracture Wounds. N Engl J Med 
2015;373:2629–41.
 
44. Jonas WB, Crawford C, Colloca L, et al. To what extent are surgery 
and invasive procedures effective beyond a placebo response? 
a systematic review with meta-analysis of randomised, sham 
controlled trials. BMJ Open 2015;5:e009655.
 
45. Haynes B. Can it work? does it work? is it worth it? the testing of 
healthcareinterventions is evolving. BMJ 1999;319:652–3.
 
46. Djulbegovic B, Paul A. From efficacy to effectiveness in the face 
of uncertainty: indication creep and prevention creep. JAMA 
2011;305:2005–6.
 
47. Järvinen TL, Sievänen H, Kannus P
, et al. The true cost of 
pharmacological disease prevention. BMJ 2011;342:d2175.
 
48. Donigan JA, Wolf BR. Arthroscopic subacromial decompression: 
acromioplasty versus bursectomy alone--does it really matter? a 
systematic review. Iowa Orthop J 2011;31:121–6.
 
49. Cates C, Karner C. Clinical importance cannot be ruled out using 
mean difference alone. BMJ 2015;351:h5496.
 
50. Guyatt GH, Juniper EF
, Walter SD, et al. Interpreting treatment effects 
in randomised trials. BMJ 1998;316:690–3.
 
51. Snapinn SM, Jiang Q. Responder analyses and the assessment of a 
clinically relevant treatment effect. Trials 2007;8:31.
 
52. Tashjian RZ, Deloach J, Porucznik CA, et al. Minimal clinically 
important differences (MCID) and patient acceptable symptomatic 
state (PASS) for visual analog scales (VAS) measuring pain in 
patients treated for rotator cuff disease. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 
2009;18:927–32.
 
53. Norman G, Monteiro S, Salama S. Sample size calculations: should 
the emperor's clothes be off the peg or made to measure? BMJ 
2012;345:e5278.
 
54. Goodman SN, Berlin JA. The use of predicted confidence intervals 
when planning experiments and the misuse of power when 
interpreting results. Ann Intern Med 1994;121:200–6.
 
55. Lenza M, Buchbinder R, Takwoingi Y, et al. Magnetic resonance 
imaging, magnetic resonance arthrography and ultrasonography 
for assessing rotator cuff tears in people with shoulder pain for 
whom surgery is being considered. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013;9:CD009020.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014087 on 6 June 2017. Downloaded from 
