 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 October 2018
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01103
Edited by:
Richard Schulz,
University of Alberta, Canada
Reviewed by:
Victor H. Hernandez,
Universidad de Guanajuato, Mexico
Mohammed A. Nayeem,
West Virginia University, United States
Amit P
. Bhavsar,
University of Alberta, Canada
*Correspondence:
Anna Rita Fetoni
annarita.fetoni@unicatt.it
Diana Troiani
diana.troiani@unicatt.it
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Translational Pharmacology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Pharmacology
Received: 21 June 2018
Accepted: 10 September 2018
Published: 08 October 2018
Citation:
Paciello F, Fetoni AR, Rolesi R,
Wright MB, Grassi C, Troiani D and
Paludetti G (2018) Pioglitazone
Represents an Effective Therapeutic
Target in Preventing
Oxidative/Inflammatory Cochlear
Damage Induced by Noise Exposure.
Front. Pharmacol. 9:1103.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01103
Pioglitazone Represents an Effective
Therapeutic Target in Preventing
Oxidative/Inflammatory Cochlear
Damage Induced by Noise Exposure
Fabiola Paciello1,2,3†, Anna Rita Fetoni1,2,3*†, Rolando Rolesi1, Matthew B. Wright4,
Claudio Grassi1,5, Diana Troiani5* and Gaetano Paludetti1,2
1 Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2 Institute of Otolaryngology, Università Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 3 Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, CNR, Rome, Italy, 4 Strekin AG, Basel, Switzerland,
5 Institute of Human Physiology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy
Recent progress in hearing loss research has provided strong evidence for the
imbalance of cellular redox status and inflammation as common predominant
mechanisms of damage affecting the organ of Corti including noise induced hearing
loss. The discovery of a protective molecule acting on both mechanisms is challenging.
The thiazolidinediones, a class of antidiabetic drugs including pioglitazone and
rosiglitazone, have demonstrated diverse pleiotrophic effects in many tissues where
they exhibit anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, tissue protective effects and regulators
of redox balance acting as agonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs). They are members of the family of ligand regulated nuclear hormone receptors
that are also expressed in several cochlear cell types, including the outer hair cells.
In this study, we investigated the protective capacity of pioglitazone in a model of
noise-induced hearing loss in Wistar rats and the molecular mechanisms underlying
this protective effects. Specifically, we employed a formulation of pioglitazone in a
biocompatible thermogel providing rapid, uniform and sustained inner ear drug delivery
via transtympanic injection. Following noise exposure (120 dB, 10 kHz, 1 h), different
time schedules of treatment were employed: we explored the efficacy of pioglitazone
given immediately (1 h) or at delayed time points (24 and 48 h) after noise exposure
and the time course and extent of hearing recovery were assessed. We found that
pioglitazone was able to protect auditory function at the mid-high frequencies and
to limit cell death in the cochlear basal/middle turn, damaged by noise exposure.
Immunofluorescence and western blot analysis provided evidence that pioglitazone
mediates both anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant effects by decreasing NF-κB and
IL-1β expression in the cochlea and opposing the oxidative damage induced by noise
insult. These results suggest that intratympanic pioglitazone can be considered a valid
therapeutic strategy for attenuating noise-induced hearing loss and cochlear damage,
reducing inflammatory signaling and restoring cochlear redox balance.
Keywords: PPAR agonist, acoustic trauma, antioxidant, antinflammatory, audiology, personalized medicine
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
1
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 2
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
INTRODUCTION
Recent progress in hearing loss research has provided strong
evidence for common predominant mechanisms of damage
affecting the organ of Corti: the imbalance of cellular redox
status and inflammation. Although the detailed mechanisms and
pathways activated by specific insults (e.g., noise, aging,
aminoglycoside
antibiotics,
and
anticancer
drugs)
have
not been completely clarified, it has been demonstrated
that
overproduction
of
reactive
oxygen
species
(ROS),
with subsequent lipid peroxidation and cell damage and
pro-inflammatory
cytokine
expression
are
central
themes
underlying hearing loss (Priuska and Schacht, 1995; Sergi et al.,
2006). The ever−increasing understanding of cochlear biological
systems is indeed providing a range of exciting novel biological
targets, whose modulation may enable novel therapeutic options.
We have previously demonstrated in animal models that,
by targeting endogenous defense pathways, it is possible to
attenuate hearing loss and cochlear damage. We have addressed
redox unbalance in noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) and
drug-related ototoxicity and we provided evidence on cochlear
protection by the activation of the Nrf-2/HO-1 axis through the
supplementation of different antioxidant compounds such as
coenzyme Q and the polyphenols ferulic acid, rosmarinic acid,
and curcumin (Fetoni et al., 2010, 2014a, 2015). However, several
issues such as those related to the absorption and distribution of
polyphenols and other herbal products and interactions, with the
lack of robust clinical trials demonstrating the efficacy and safety
of these new formulations, limit their prescription as adjuvant
or preventive therapy in conditions linked to oxidative stress
(Mancuso, 2015). Therefore, preclinical studies are desirable
focusing, not only on cytoprotective mechanisms, but also on
upstream cytoxicity pathways in order to identify pathways and
drugs able to address both oxidative stress and inflammation.
Notably, in the last decades, a growing body of research has been
dedicated to the PPARs, including PPARα, PPARβ/δ, and PPARγ.
These receptors comprise a subfamily of the nuclear receptor
superfamily of ligand-activated transcriptional factors that play
critical physiological roles as lipid sensors and regulators of
diverse metabolic pathways (Issemann and Green, 1990; Green,
1995; Kersten et al., 2000; Berger and Moller, 2002; Wang et al.,
2013). Moreover, PPARs participate in the regulation of redox
balance by upregulating the transcription of antioxidant related
genes and by inhibiting the generation of ROS (Chen et al.,
2012; Wang and Liu, 2012; Abushouk et al., 2017). To date, most
studies have evaluated the role of PPARγ in major metabolic
organs such as liver, adipocytes, pancreas, or skeletal muscles
(Tontonoz and Spiegelman, 2008; Ahmadian et al., 2013),
leading to target PPARγ for the treatment of type 2 diabetes
with the development of the thiazolidinedione (TZD) class of
drugs (Lehmann et al., 1995). The TZD drug pioglitazone, a
PPARγ agonist approved by the FDA, is also known to decrease
inflammatory mediators in patients with type 2 diabetes and
coronary artery disease and to have favorable effects on vascular
function (Wang et al., 2005; Forst et al., 2008; Cabrera et al.,
2012; Kauppinen et al., 2013). Moreover, pioglitazone is the
only approved PPARγ agonist with significant ability to cross
the blood-brain barrier and has demonstrated neuroprotective
benefits in models of Alzheimer’
s disease, Parkinson’
s disease,
epilepsy and stroke (Kiaei et al., 2005; Hirsch and Hunot, 2009;
Barnum and Tansey, 2010; Carta et al., 2011; Esposito and
Cuzzocrea, 2011; Sekulic-Jablanovic et al., 2017).
Interestingly, the expression of PPARs in the cochlea have been
reported recently (Sekulic-Jablanovic et al., 2017). PPARγ and
PPARα were found to be highly expressed in several cochlear cell
types, including inner and outer hair cells (HCs). Furthermore,
in organ of Corti explants, pioglitazone and other related drugs
effectively prevent gentamicin-induced toxicity to hair cells by
blocking increased ROS, lipid peroxidation, the activation of pro-
apoptotic caspases induced by gentamicin and by potentiating
intrinsic cellular antioxidant defenses (Sekulic-Jablanovic et al.,
2017). Moreover, PPAR agonists, such as pioglitazone, have also
well-characterized pleiotropic effects, which may offer additional
mechanisms of protection in hearing loss (Rizos et al., 2008).
Based on these findings, we aimed in the present work
to evaluate the therapeutic potential of pioglitazone in the
protection from NIHL. In order to ensure rapid and controlled
drug delivery to the inner ear, we employed a formulation
of pioglitazone in a biocompatible thermogel administered by
transtympanic injection. Following noise exposure, immediate
and delayed treatment regimens were employed and the time
course and extent of hearing recovery were assessed. These
results, along with effects on markers of cochlear oxidative stress
and inflammation, suggest that pioglitazone is a compelling
therapeutic target for the treatment of NIHL via multiple
protective mechanisms, including early reduction in cochlear
oxidative stress and long-term reduction in inflammatory
signaling.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Male adult Wistar rats (UCSC Laboratories), 250–
350 g, age
2 months, with intact Preyer’
s reflex, were used for these studies.
The experiments were performed on a total of 126 animals,
randomized and assigned to 6 experimental groups as follows:
(1) control animals (Ctrl group, n = 24); (2) animals exposed
to acoustic trauma (Noise group, n = 24); (3) control animals
treated with pioglitazone 1.2% suspension in the left ear and
with matching vehicle in the right ear (Ctrl-Pio and Ctrl-vehicle
group n = 6); (4) animals exposed to acoustic trauma and treated
with pioglitazone 1.2% suspension in the left ear (Noise-Pio 1 h
post group) and with vehicle in the right ear (Noise-vehicle 1 h
post group) 1 h after acoustic trauma (n = 24); (5) animals
exposed to acoustic trauma and treated with pioglitazone 1.2%
suspension in the left ear (Noise-Pio 24 h post group) and
with vehicle in the right ear (Noise-vehicle 24 h post group)
24 h after acoustic trauma (n = 24) and (6) animals exposed to
acoustic trauma and treated with pioglitazone 1.2% suspension
in the left ear (Noise-Pio 48 h post group) and with vehicle
in the right ear (Noise-vehicle 48 h post group) 48 h after
acoustic trauma (n = 24). Animals were housed two per cage
at a controlled temperature (22–
23◦C) and constant humidity
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
2
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 3
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
(60–
75%), under a 12 h light/dark cycle, with food (Mucedola
4RF21, Italy) and water ad libitum, for the complete experimental
period.
All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and
to reduce the number of animals, in accordance with the
European Community Council Directive of 24 November 1986
(86/609/EEC). All procedures were performed in compliance
with the Laboratory of Animal Care and Use Committee of
the Catholic University, School of Medicine of Rome and were
approved by the Italian Department of Health (Ministero della
Salute).
Acoustic Trauma
As described previously (Fetoni et al., 2015), acoustic trauma
was induced by a continuous pure tone of 10 kHz generated by
a waveform generator (LAG-120B, Leader, NY, United States)
and amplified by an audio amplifier (A-307R, Pioneer, CA,
United States). Under anesthesia (ketamine, 35 mg/kg and
medetomidine-domitor, 0.25 mg/kg), all animals were placed in
a soundproof room in a fixation cradle with their head gently
maintained in a fixed position by a neck and nose ring. Then,
they were exposed for 60 min to a 120 dB SPL sound presented to
the ears in free field via loudspeakers (TW034X0, Audax, France)
positioned at a distance of 10 cm in front of the animal’
s head.
Sound level was measured using a calibrated 1/4 in. microphone
(Model 7017, ACO Pacific Inc., Belmont, CA, United States) and
a calibrated preamplifier (Acoustic Interface System, ACO Pacific
Inc.).
Drug Administration
Animals received 1.2% pioglitazone suspension (Strekin AG,
Basel, Switzerland) formulated in a temperature-sensitive gel
formulation or the matching vehicle control gel (vehicle)
via a single transtympanic injection. The vehicle formulation
(Strekin AG, Basel, Switzerland) was composed of water, a
detergent/surfactant, a buffer system to maintain the pH and a
copolymer as the thermo-reversible component. The formulation
was designed in accordance with published guidance to ensure
it remains liquid at temperatures below 25◦C and transitions
to a viscous gel at temperatures above 35◦C (Malmsten and
Lindman, 1992). The final drug product was sterile. In order to
evaluate the ability of pioglitazone to rescue hearing from acute
acoustic trauma, animals were treated 1, 24, or 48 h after noise
exposure. All surgical procedures were conducted under aseptic
conditions, using aseptic techniques and under deep anesthesia
(ketamine, 70 mg/kg and medetomidine-domitor, 0.5 mg/kg).
In preparation for injection, the round window (RW) and
the niche of RW were localized using a surgical microscope.
Injection was performed using a 22 gauge, 1.5 inch, short beveled
needle attached to a 100 µl luer-lock Hamilton syringe with
the help of an operating microscope. A small perforation of the
tympanic membrane was performed anterior to the malleus to
equalize middle ear pressure (Fetoni et al., 2014b). A second
perforation was made in a postero-inferior membrane region,
through which 30 µl of either the pioglitazone 1.2% suspension
or vehicle were injected at a constant rate (2 µl/s) into the
RW niche area. Following dose administration, the animals
were maintained for at least 10 min with the dosed ear facing
upward in order to ensure test article delivery and contact with
the RW. The animals were then turned onto the contralateral
side and the opposite ear was then injected using the same
procedure.
Electrophysiological Measurements of
Auditory Function
Hearing function was evaluated in all animals by measuring
auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) at low (6 kHz), mid (12,
16, 20 kHz) and high (24, 32 kHz) frequencies. ABRs were
assessed bilaterally prior to noise exposure to assure normal
hearing and reassessed 1, 3, 7, 14 and 21 days after transtympanic
drug injection to follow the course of recovery. During
the procedure, animals were mildly anesthetized (ketamine,
35 mg/kg and medetomidine-domitor, 0.25 mg/kg) and placed in
the anechoic room. As previously described (Fetoni et al., 2016),
three electrodes were subcutaneously inserted into the right
mastoid (active), vertex (reference) and left mastoid (ground).
A PC-controlled TDT System 3 (Tucker– Davis Technologies,
Alachua, FL, United States) data acquisition system with real
time digital signal processing was used for auditory stimulus
generation and ABR recording. Tone bursts, consisting of pure
tones from 6 to 32 kHz (1 ms rise/fall time, 10 ms total
duration, 20/s repetition rate), were presented monaurally in
open field. Responses were filtered (0.3–
3 kHz), digitized and
averaged across 500 discrete samples at each frequency-sound
level combination. Threshold values were defined as the lowest
stimulus level (dB) that yielded a repeatable waveform-based
onset.
Hair Cell Count
Rhodamine–
Phalloidin
is
a
high-affinity
F-actin
probe
conjugated
to
the
red–
orange
fluorescent
dye
tetramethylrhodamine (TRITC). This stain is used to visualize
the stereociliary arrays and cuticular plate of hair cells (HCs).
After functional analyses (day 21 from drug injection) animals
(n = 6/group) were sacrificed with a lethal dose of anesthetic,
then cochleae were quickly removed and surface preparations
of the organ of Corti were made for hair cell counting. Briefly,
isolated cochleae were fixed with 10% buffered formalin for
4 h. Following removal of the bony capsule and the lateral
wall tissues, the epithelium of the organ of Corti was separated
from the bony modiolus and dissected into half-turns in
0.1 M PBS under a dissecting microscope. The preparations
were then incubated with a solution containing 0.5% Triton
X-100 and rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin (1:100 dilution;
Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, United States)
for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. The specimens were
washed twice in PBS and then mounted on slides containing
an antifade medium (ProLong, Cat. No. P36930, Invitrogen).
Quantification of hair cells was performed with a confocal
laser scanning system (Nikon Ti-E, Confocal Head A1 MP,
Tokyo, Japan) using filters with an excitation of 516 nm and an
emission of 543 nm. Z-stack series of 3–
5 µm thickness were
acquired as images of 1024 × 1024 pixels recorded at intervals
of 0.5 µm. Images were taken at 40× magnification (Plan
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
3
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 4
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
Fluo objective, Nikon). Hair cells were counted in segments of
∼250 µm sections along the length of the basilar membrane.
The criterion to assess HC loss was the presence of either a
dark spot and/or the typical phalangeal scar of supporting
cells in the spaces previously filled by hair cells (Fetoni et al.,
2013).
Superoxide and 8-Isoprostane Detection
Dihydroethidium (DHE) and 8-Isoprostane immunostainings
were used to assess superoxide anion and lipid peroxidation
production, respectively. At day 7 after drug injection, a cohort
of animals (6 animals/group) was sacrificed following ABR
recording and the cochleae were quickly removed and fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4◦C and pH 7.5. The
cochleae were then decalcified for 15 d in EDTA (10% EDTA,
changed daily), incubated for 48 h in sucrose (30%), embedded
in OCT (Killik, Bio-optica, Milan, Italy) and cryosectioned
at a thickness of 12 µm (Cryostat CM 1950; SLEE medical
GmbH, Mainz, Germany). For all immunofluorescence analysis,
control experiments were performed by omitting the primary
antibody during processing of tissues randomly selected across
experimental groups. Staining was absent in cochlear samples,
indicating neither spontaneous fluorescence nor non-specificity
of antibody (data not shown). Tissues from all groups were always
processed together during the procedures to limit variability
related to antibody penetration, incubation time, post-sectioning
age and condition of tissue.
Detection of Superoxide (DHE Assay)
DHE is a lipophilic cell-permeable dye that is rapidly oxidized to
ethidium in the presence of free radical superoxide. The resulting
ethidium intercalates into nDNA yielding a fluorescent signal
indicating free radical level in the tissue (Fetoni et al., 2013).
The cochlear specimens were incubated with 1 µM DHE (Cat.
No. D23107, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, United States) in PBS
for 30 min at 37◦C and then cover-slipped with an antifade
medium (ProLong Gold, Invitrogen). Tissue fluorescence was
imaged by two-photon excitation (792 nm, <140 fs, 90 MHz)
performed by ultrafast tunable mode locked titanium: sapphire
laser (Chameleon, Coherent). Images were captured at 20×
magnification (Plan Apo objective, Nikon).
8-Isoprostane Immunostaining
8-Isoprostane, a biomarker of oxidative stress, is a prostaglandin
((PG)-F2-like compound) that is produced in vivo by the free
radical-catalyzed peroxidation of arachidonic acid. To detect
8-Isoprostane, slides were incubated in a blocking solution
containing 1% fatty acid-free bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.5%
Triton X-100, and 10% normal goat serum in PBS for 1h at room
temperature (Sigma-Aldrich, San Louis, MO, United States).
The specimens were then incubated overnight at 4◦C with
rabbit polyclonal anti-8-Isoprostane primary antibody (Cat. No.
IS20, Oxford Biomedical Research, Oxford, United Kingdom)
diluted 1:100 in PBS. Slides were then washed twice in PBS and
incubated at room temperature for 2 h, light-protected, in Alexa
Fluor-labeled anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488,
IgG; Cat. No. A32731, Invitrogen) diluted 1:400 in 0.1 M PBS.
Slides were washed once more in PBS, then counterstained with
DAPI (blue fluorescence, 1:500, Cat. No. D1306, Invitrogen),
to identify cell nuclei, for 20 min in the dark at room
temperature. Slides were then cover-slipped with an antifade
medium (ProLong Gold, Invitrogen). Images of 8-Isoprostane
immunolabeled specimens (20×) were captured using a confocal
laser-scanning microscope (Nikon Ti-E, Confocal Head A1 MP)
equipped with argon/argon–
krypton and helium/neon lasers for
488 and 519 excitation. DAPI staining was imaged by two-photon
excitation (740 nm, <140 fs, 90 MHz) performed by an ultrafast
tunable mode-locked titanium:sapphire laser. The 8-Isoprostane
positive cells were identified by green fluorescence.
To perform semi-quantitative analysis of fluorescence signals,
the fluorescence intensity of each area of interest, corresponding
to spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs), organ of Corti and stria
vascularis, was quantified with ImageJ (version 1.51s) on N = 12
slices selected randomly from 6 animals for each experimental
group.
NF-κB and IL-1β Immuno-Detection
Inflammatory cells in the cochlea are activated in response to
various types of insults that induce cochlear damage. NF-κB
is a critical regulator of the inducible expression of genes
involved in immunity and inflammation, as well as in cell
growth and death. We evaluated the effects of pioglitazone
on NF-κB and IL-1β, a pro-inflammatory cytokine implicated
in cochlear damage (Komeda et al., 1999; Satoh et al., 2002;
Wang et al., 2003). Cochlear tissue (from 6 animals/group,
day 7), prepared as described in the previous section, were
incubated in a blocking solution containing 1% BSA, 0.5%
Triton X-100 and 10% normal goat serum in PBS for 1h at
room temperature. Slides were then incubated overnight at 4◦C
with a solution containing a rabbit monoclonal anti-NF-κB
primary antibody (1:100, Cat. No. #8242, Cell Signaling, Denver,
MA, United States) or a rabbit polyclonal anti-IL-1β primary
antibody (1:100, Santa Cruz Tech., Cat. No. sc-7884, Santa Cruz,
CA, United States) diluted 1:100 in PBS. Slides were washed
twice in PBS and then incubated at room temperature for 2 h,
light protected, in Alexa Fluor-labeled anti-rabbit secondary
antibody (Alexa Fluor 546, Cat. No. A110040 and Alexa Fluor
488, IgG, Cat. No. A32731, Invitrogen) diluted 1:400 in 0.1 M
PBS. After another wash in PBS, samples were counterstained
with DAPI (blue fluorescence, 1:500) for 20 min in the dark
at room temperature. Control experiments were performed
by omitting the primary antibody during processing of tissue
randomly selected across experimental groups, indicating neither
spontaneous fluorescence nor non-specificity of antibody (data
not shown). The slides were cover-slipped with an antifade
medium (ProLong Gold, Invitrogen) and then images of NF-κB
(red fluorescence) and IL-1β (green fluorescence) were captured
using a confocal laser scanning microscope (Nikon Ti-E,
Confocal Head A1 MP) equipped with argon/argon–
krypton and
helium/neon lasers for 488 and 519 excitation. Images were taken
at 20× magnification. The analysis of fluorescence intensity of
each area of interest, corresponding to SGNs, organ of Corti and
stria vascularis, was quantified as indicated above.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
4
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 5
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
Western Blotting
Western
blots
were
performed
in
order
to
confirm
immunofluorescence results on NF-κB and IL-1β expression.
Animals (6 animals/group) were sacrificed after the last ABR
recording at day 7 after drug treatment. Similar to a method
described previously (Fetoni et al., 2015), dissected cochleae were
collected on ice, stored at −80◦C, and then homogenized with
RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich). After centrifugation (12,000 rpm,
15 min, 4◦C), protein concentrations in supernatants were
determined using the Micro BCA kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL,
United States). An aliquot of each supernatant containing 60 µg
protein was mixed with a 4X reducing buffer then boiled for 3 min
and then separated by 4–
15% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel.
ColorburstTM markers (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as molecular
weight standards. Separated proteins were then transferred
onto nitrocellulose membranes in a solution containing 50 mM
Tris/HCl, 380 mM glycine and 20% methanol and stained with
Ponceau S (ICN Biochemicals, Dublin, OH, United States).
Non-specific sites were blocked with 5% dry milk in TTBS and
membranes were incubated overnight at 4◦C with anti-NF-κB
(1:1000; Cell signaling) and anti-IL-1β (1:500; Santa Cruz Tech.)
antibodies. Membranes were washed and incubated with a
horseradish peroxidase conjugated anti-rabbit IgG secondary
antibody (1:2000; Promega, Madison, WI, United States) and
then developed using enhanced chemiluminescence reagents
(Cat. No. RPN2232, GE Healthcare, Cardif, United Kingdom).
Equal protein loading among individual lanes was confirmed
by re-probing the membranes with an anti-α-tubulin mouse
monoclonal
antibody
(1:1000;
Abcam,
Cambridge,
MA,
United States).
Statistics
Results are presented as mean ± SEM. Data have been
analyzed by using Student’
s t-test to determine significant
differences between groups. Morphological data on OHC survival
were evaluated by two-way ANOVA with repeated measures
(groups × cochlear turns). Post hoc comparisons were assessed
with Tukey’
s test (Statistica, Statsoft, Tulsa, OK, United States).
The level of significance was set at 0.05.
RESULTS
Pioglitazone Attenuates Hearing Loss
and Promotes OHC Survival
To investigate the protection by pioglitazone on auditory
function, we evaluated hearing by ABR in animals prior to noise
exposure and 1, 3, 7, 14, and 21 days after single transtympanic
administration of 1.2% pioglitazone or matching vehicle. Baseline
ABR thresholds did not differ among the experimental groups,
consistent with previous data (Fetoni et al., 2015). We included
in this study male Wistar rats, in order to better assess the
extent of pioglitazone effectiveness, considering that in females
sexual and glucocorticoid hormones can positively influence
the responses to stress and inflammatory reactions (Canlon
et al., 2007; Motohashi et al., 2010; Meltser et al., 2008).
However, in a further study, sex differences could be evaluated.
Acute noise exposure induced a transient threshold shift of
about 40–
50 dB in the mid-high frequency region in the first
3 days after insult. Hearing loss partially recovered by 3 weeks,
leaving a permanent threshold shift of approximately 25–
30 dB.
No significant differences were observed between Noise and
Noise-vehicle groups (data not shown), indicating that neither
the transtympanic injection procedure nor vehicle, per se, had
a significant effect on auditory function. Moreover, control
experiments in normal-hearing animals showed that pioglitazone
or vehicle injection, per se, did not significantly alter auditory
thresholds, monitored up to day 21 after the transtympanic
injection (Supplementary Figure S1).
We explored the efficacy of pioglitazone given immediately
(1 h) vs. at delayed time points (24 and 48 h) after noise exposure.
As indicated in Figure 1, animals treated 1 h after noise exposure
showed a significantly reduced threshold shift of about 20–
30 dB
at mid-high frequencies in pioglitazone-treated ears, compared
to about 40–
50 dB threshold shift observed in the contralateral
vehicle-treated ears (Figures 1A,B). The reduction in threshold
shift was evident at day 1 following pioglitazone treatment and
persisted at all time points throughout the 3 week follow up
period (Figures 1A,B,G). Notably, by day 21 post-treatment,
pioglitazone-treated ears had recovered to within 10 dB of
baseline at mid and high frequencies, while vehicle treated ears
exhibited a residual hearing loss of approximately 20–
30 dB
(Figure 1G).
Previous studies have shown that early drug intervention
prior to or shortly after noise, is critically required in order to
successfully target early pathological mechanisms. Therefore, it
was of interest to assess delayed treatment. Pioglitazone, when
administered 24 h after noise exposure was able to reduce
the threshold shift of treated vs. control ears by approximately
10–
15 dB better at mid frequencies than high frequencies
(Figures 1C,D) which persisted through the follow up period.
As shown in Figure 1H, at the end of treatment, a protective
effects of about 15 dB persisted. Pioglitazone treatment at 48 h
attenuated threshold shift by about 10–
15 dB that was evident
up to the last time point at 3 weeks after noise exposure
(Figures 1E,F,I).
Furthermore,
we
examined
OHC
viability
in
surface
preparations of the basilar membrane of organ of Corti prepared
at 3 weeks following noise exposure and treatment. Figure 2
illustrates Rh-Ph staining and OHC counts in Ctrl, Noise,
Noise-vehicle and Noise-Pio groups for the 1, 24 and 48 h
treatment interventions after acoustic trauma. Noise exposure
induced mostly loss of OHCs, which was reflected by dark spots,
phalangeal scars and disappearance of both cuticular plates and
hair bundles (arrows) limited mainly to the middle-basal cochlear
turns (Figure 2B). Noise exposure alone decreased OHC count
in the middle turn to approximately 60% of remaining cells as
compared to the Ctrl group (Figures 2B,G–I). The Noise-vehicle
group showed similar hair cell loss, with no significant differences
with respect to Noise group (Figures 2C,G–I). Pioglitazone,
administered 1 h after acoustic injury, significantly reduced the
OHC loss in the middle turn, where cell count was approximately
85–
90% vs. the Noise group (Figures 2D,G). Pioglitazone,
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
5
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 6
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 1 | Pioglitazone protects against noise-induced hearing loss. (A–F) Graphs show mean threshold shift values (means ± SEM) for mid frequencies
(12–16 kHz, A,C,E) and high frequencies (20–24–32 kHz, B,D,F) measured 1, 3, 7, 14 and 21 days after vehicle (black squares; n = 24) or pioglitazone injection
(gray diamonds; n = 24) in animals exposed to noise and treated 1 h (A,B), 24 h (C,D), or 48 h (E,F) after the acoustic trauma. (G–I) Graphs show threshold values
(means ± SEM) across all frequencies analyzed at day 21 in animals exposed to noise and treated with pioglitazone or vehicle at different time points. Baseline
values refer to auditory thresholds estimated prior to pioglitazone or vehicle injection in each condition. Pioglitazone administered 1 h after acoustic trauma provides
the major protection, attenuating threshold shift by about 15 dB for mid frequencies and 20 dB for high frequencies. Notably, low frequency (6 kHz) was less affected
by acoustic trauma, consistent with our noise exposure protocol (pure tone centered to 10 kHz). Delayed administration (24 and 48 h post noise exposure) shows
significant but slightly minor protection (about 10-15 dB). A-F: asterisks indicate significant differences between groups (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001). (G–I)
Asterisks refer to significant differences between Noise + Pio and Noise + Vehicle groups (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001).
administered 24 or 48 h after acoustic trauma, promoted OHC
survival reaching approximately 75 and 85% vs. controls in the
middle-basal turn (Figures 2E,F,H,I), which was slightly less
effective as compared to the 1 h post treatment (Figure 2G). No
significant differences were observed among groups in the apical
turn (Figures 2G–I), accordingly to the electrophysiological data.
The effects of pioglitazone promote OHC survival support the
functional improvement in hearing capacity. The registration of
distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAEs), generated by
active OHCs can provide a further evidence of the effectiveness
of pioglitazone on the sensory epithelia, main target of acoustic
trauma (Fetoni et al., 2016). Together, these results show that
early pioglitazone intervention, when it may counteract the
early oxidative stress response, is most effective to prevent
NIHL. However, the observation that delayed treatment was also
effective, although to a lesser extent, suggests that pioglitazone
may target additional mechanisms.
Pioglitazone Reduces Cochlear
Oxidative Stress Induced by Noise
Exposure
To assess the protective effects of pioglitazone against noise-
induced oxidative stress, we performed immunofluorescence
analyses on cochlear sections to detect superoxide anion radicals
(DHE staining) and the lipid peroxidation product 8-Isoprostane.
Figure 3 illustrates the level of superoxide in cochlear
cryosections detected by DHE fluorescence. Red fluorescence
was faint in control cochleae from animals not exposed to noise
(Figure 3A). Noise exposure in both control animals (Figure 3B),
as well as in Noise-vehicle treated animals (Figure 3C),
dramatically increased cochlear superoxide levels, as reflected by
increased DHE staining, detected particularly in SGNs, the organ
of Corti and the stria vascularis, as also confirmed by fluorescence
intensity quantification (Figure 3G). No significant differences
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
6
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 7
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 2 | Morphological evaluation and hair cell count. (A–F) Representative images of surface preparation of the organ of Corti showing F-actin distribution in the
middle-basal cochlear turn. A typical distribution of three rows of outer hair cells (OHCs) and one row of inner hair cells (IHCs) is shown in (A). Noise exposure (B)
caused OHC loss (dark spots, indicated with arrows). Pioglitazone significantly reduced OHC death (D–F) with respect to Noise-vehicle condition (C), specifically if
administered 1 h after noise insult (D). Scale bar: 20 µm. (G–I) Cochleograms (means ± SEM) showing percentage of OHC survival in the three different
administration schedules. Noise induced about 40% and 20% of cell death in the middle and basal turns respectively. Pioglitazone administration attenuates cell
death of about 20–25%. Asterisks indicate significant differences between groups (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; n = 6 animals/group).
were observed among Noise-vehicle 1, 24 and 48 h post groups
(data not shown). The increased oxidative stress induced by
noise exposure was significantly blocked by pioglitazone in ears
treated 1 h after acoustic trauma in all cochlear structures
(Figures 3D,G). Delayed administration of pioglitazone to 24 or
48 h after noise only slightly reduced DHE signal (Figures 3E,F).
According to the optical density analyses, significant differences
in superoxide expression were observed in all cochlear structures
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
7
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 8
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 3 | Early pioglitazone administration reduces superoxide amount in the cochlea. (A–F) Representative images of cochlear cryo-sections (middle-basal turns)
stained with DHE (red fluorescence). Insets of the organ of Corti are shown in (C,D). Superoxide fluorescence was faint in the cytoplasm of control cochleae (A).
Noise exposure increased superoxide amount, mainly in spiral ganglion neurons, organ of Corti and stria vascularis (B). No difference in superoxide amount was
found between Noise and Noise-vehicle conditions (B,C). When administered 1 h after noise exposure, pioglitazone significantly decreased superoxide expression in
the main cochlear structures (D). Administration of either 24 h (E) and 48 h (F) post-noise also reduced superoxide but to a lesser extent as compared to earlier
administration. Scale bar: 100 µm. (G) Histograms (means ± SEM), related to Noise-Pio and Noise + vehicle groups, show quantification of fluorescence intensity
(A.U., arbitrary units) in the principal cochlear structures: spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs), organ of Corti (oC) and stria vascularis (StV). Asterisks indicate significant
differences between groups (∗p < 0.05; n = 12 slices selected randomly from 6 animals for each experimental group).
only in the samples from animals treated shortly (1 h) after
noise exposure. Delayed treatments did not lead to significant
differences in all structures even if DHE expression was slightly
more evident in the stria vascularis (Figure 3G).
To determine the level of lipid peroxidation, we performed
8-Isoprostane immunofluorescence in cochlear sections. Figure 4
illustrates that, similarly to the results for DHE, noise exposure
induced the production of 8-Isoprostane, indicating a significant
lipid peroxidative damage as a consequence of noise trauma
(Figure 4B vs. Figure 4A). The increase in 8-Isoprostane
was most evident in SGNs, the organ of Corti and the
stria vascularis, the same structures which had also exhibited
the greatest increase in superoxide. As reported for DHE
staining, no significant differences were observed among
Noise-vehicle 1, 24 and 48 h post groups (data not shown).
Notably, pioglitazone administered 1 h after noise exposure,
completely blocked the increase in 8-Isoprostane fluorescence
vs.
vehicle-treated
ears
(Figures 4C
vs.
Figure 4D),
in
particular in the stria vascularis. Delayed treatment with
pioglitazone (24 or 48 h) also reduced 8-Isoprostane, with
residual signal present mainly in the SGNs (Figures 4E,F).
Fluorescence signal quantification in the SGNs, organ of
Corti and stria vascularis confirmed that the efficacy of
pioglitazone to counteract lipid peroxidation induced by noise
was evident primarily when administered 1 h after trauma
(Figure 4G).
Pioglitazone Reduces the Noise-Induced
Inflammatory Response
We then evaluated the effects of pioglitazone on NF-κB,
a critical regulator of the inducible expression of genes in
inflammation and on IL-1β, a pro-inflammatory cytokine
implicated in cochlear damage. Figures 5, 6 show pNF-κB and
IL-1β immunofluorescence in cochlear sections from control
and noise-exposed animals, as well as noise-exposed animals
treated with vehicle or pioglitazone 1, 24 or 48 h after
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
8
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 9
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 4 | Pioglitazone reduces lipid peroxidation when administered 1 h after noise exposure. (A–F) Representative images of cochlear cryo-sections
(middle-basal turns) stained with a marker of lipid peroxidation (8-Isoprostane, green fluorescence) and stained with DAPI (blue fluorescence). Insets of high
magnification of the organ of Corti are shown in (C,D). Noise exposure induces an increase of lipid peroxidation in all cochlear structures (B), with no difference with
respect to animals exposed to noise and treated with vehicle (C). Lipid peroxidation was absent in the cytoplasm of control cochleae (A). Noise exposure increased
8-Isoprostane amount, mainly in spiral ganglion neurons, organ of Corti and specifically stria vascularis (see arrow in B). No difference was found between Noise and
Noise-vehicle conditions (C). When administered 1 h after noise exposure, pioglitazone significantly decreased 8-Isoprostane expression (D). Administration 24 h (E)
and 48 h (F) post noise showed small but detectable effect in counteracting lipid peroxidation. Scale bar: 100 µm. (G) Histograms (means ± SEM) show
quantification of fluorescence intensity (A.U., arbitrary units) as described in Figure 3. SGNs, spiral ganglion neurons; oC, organ of Corti; StV, stria vascularis.
Asterisks indicate significant differences between groups (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; n = 12 slices selected randomly from 6 animals for each experimental group).
acoustic trauma. No significant differences were observed among
Noise-vehicle 1, 24 and 48 h post groups (data not shown).
Noise exposure dramatically induced NF-κB phosphorylation
(red fluorescence) in all cochlear structures in control and
vehicle treated ears (Figures 5B,C). Pioglitazone effectively
blocked the noise-induced increase in pNF-κB at all treatment
intervals following acoustic trauma (Figures 5D–F), as also
confirmed by optical density analysis in the principal cochlear
structures (Figure 5G). Similar results were observed for
IL-1β. Noise exposure significantly upregulated IL-1β, with
the most intense signal detected in the SGNs and the stria
vascularis (Figures 6B,C). Pioglitazone effectively blocked the
noise-induced increase in IL-1β, with no signal detected at any
time point in the SGNs or in the organ of Corti and only faint
signal detected in the stria vascularis at day 7 post-treatment
(Figures 6D–G). Interestingly, these results suggest that, while
delayed treatment with pioglitazone is less effective vs. early
treatment to reduce oxidative stress (Figure 7A), even late
administration of pioglitazone is able to block the noise-induced
inflammatory response, as reflected by attenuation of pNF-κB
(Figure 7B).
To extend and confirm the immunofluorescence results,
we
performed
western
blot
analysis
in
cochlear
lysates.
Figure 7C shows pNF-κB and IL-1β immunoreactive bands
in protein samples from cochleae isolated from normal
hearing controls and noise-exposed animals treated with
pioglitazone or vehicle. Data are shown for the different
drug administration schedules (1, 24 or 48 h after noise
exposure) at day 7 after drug treatment. Similar to the
immunofluorescence
results,
pioglitazone
inhibited
the
noise-induced
increase
of
both
NF-κB
phosphorylation
and IL-1β (Figure 7C). The western blot data, consistent
with
the
immunofluorescence
results,
confirmed
that
pioglitazone
effectively
reduces
inflammatory
pathways
following both early or delayed administration after noise
trauma.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
9
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 10
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 5 | Pioglitazone reduces cochlear expression of NF-κB. (A–F) pNF-κB (red fluorescence) and DAPI staining (blue fluorescence) in cochlear cryo-sections
(middle-basal turns) of all experimental groups. Insets of high magnification of the organ of Corti are shown in (C,D). NF-κB expression increased after noise
exposure in all cochlear structures (B) with no differences between Noise and Noise-vehicle groups (C). Local delivery of pioglitazone attenuated NF-κB
phosphorylation when administered 1 h post noise (D) as well as when administered either 24 and 48 h post noise (E,F). (G) Histograms (means ± SEM) show
quantification of fluorescence intensity (A.U., arbitrary units) as described in Figure 3. SGNs, spiral ganglion neurons; oC, organ of Corti; StV, stria vascularis.
Asterisks indicate significant differences between groups (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; n = 12 slices selected randomly from 6 animals for each experimental group).
DISCUSSION
To date, no drugs have been specifically developed and
approved for the treatment of hearing loss-related disorders,
despite extensive research on preventative approaches. The
results presented here in a NIHL in vivo model, demonstrate
that, pioglitazone, the PPARγ agonist, may represent an
effective
and
innovative
therapeutic
strategy
for
hearing
loss-related diseases such as sensorineural hearing loss, aging
and ototoxicity. Our results provide evidence that pioglitazone
reduces noise-induced inflammatory responses and cochlear
oxidative stress. Specifically, a single transtympanic injection
of pioglitazone at different time points after noise exposure
decreased: (i) ABR threshold shift at all time points analyzed;
(ii) cell death in the organ of Corti; (iii) cochlear superoxide
production and lipid peroxidation and (iv) cochlear NF-κB and
IL-1β inflammatory response.
Transtympanic Pioglitazone Attenuates
NIHL
Many of the immediate responses in the cochlea to acute
trauma (ROS generation, lipid peroxidation, HC apoptosis)
are rapid and transient (Henderson et al., 2006). Therefore,
formulations and methods to provide drugs as quickly as
possible to the site of injury are desired. There have been
efforts to achieve this through devices and sustained-release
drug delivery systems such as the use of nanoparticles or
biodegradable hydrogels, that can increase the residence time
of a given drug in the middle ear and provide rapid
controlled drug delivery to the inner ear. A promising approach
is represented by the thermosensitive gels. These polymers
provide the advantage of a transition to gel in the tympanic
cavity at body temperature increasing the residence time of
the drug in the middle ear (Liu et al., 2014). Our results
show that the pioglitazone gel formulation was safe, given
that no threshold elevation or cochlear cytotoxic effects were
found in control animals that underwent pioglitazone or
vehicle injection (Supplementary Figure S1). At functional
and morphological level, the 1.2% pioglitazone gel suspension
was able to effectively protect hearing at mid-high frequencies
and to limit loss of OHCs at the basal/middle turn damaged
by noise exposure after a single drug injection. The best
pioglitazone protection against NIHL was achieved when drug
administration occurred 1 h after acoustic trauma, consistent
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
10
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 11
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 6 | Pioglitazone counteracts the increase of IL-1β expression. (A–F) Representative images of IL-1β expression (green fluorescence) in cochlear
cryo-sections (middle-basal turns) stained with DAPI (blue fluorescence). Insets of high magnification of the organ of Corti are shown (C,D). The IL-1β expression
increase observed after noise exposure (B) was significantly reduced after pioglitazone treatment (D–F). No difference was found between Noise and Noise-vehicle
groups (C). Scale bar: 100 µm. (G) Histograms (means ± SEM) show quantification of fluorescence intensity (A.U., arbitrary units) as described in Figure 3. SGNs,
spiral ganglion neurons; oC, organ of Corti; StV, stria vascularis. Asterisks indicate significant differences between groups (∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; n = 12 slices
selected randomly from 6 animals for each experimental group).
with interference in early mechanisms of cochlear response to
trauma (Figure 1). Interestingly, even delayed administration of
pioglitazone 24 or 48 h after noise exposure showed a reduced but
significant effect to protect hearing from noise trauma (reduced
threshold shift elevation of about 10–
15 dB, Figures 1A,B).
Therefore, in a clinical perspective, this molecule is effective
in the most common condition in which patients require
treatment after noise insult. Preventive effects of pioglitazone
on subjects exposed to risk factors for NIHL could also be
hypothesized, however, further experimental studies should be
undertaken.
Inflammation and Oxidative Stress Are
Attenuated by Pioglitazone
In our model, the local delivery of pioglitazone had potent
anti-inflammatory effects in the cochlea through reduced
NF-κB and IL-1β cochlear expression (Figures 5, 6). This
anti-inflammatory effect persisted at all administration time
schedules and was potentially responsible for the significant
protection against NIHL in animals with delayed treatment
with pioglitazone at 24 and 48 h after noise injury. Indeed,
several inflammation-related genes and proteins have been
implicated in the cochlear response both to acute noise
exposure
(Yamamoto
et
al.,
2009;
Gratton
et
al., 2011;
Nakamoto et al., 2012; Fujioka et al., 2014) and following
chronic environmental noise exposure (Tan et al., 2016).
Indeed, in our model of acute noise exposure, the expression
of
inflammatory
regulators,
IL-1β
and
phospho-NF-κB,
increased. NF-κB is a major transcription factor sequestered
in the cytoplasm with direct interaction with the inhibitory
kappa B (IkB) family (Hayden and Ghosh, 2004, 2008;
Gloire et al., 2006). Under stress conditions, the IkB is
phosphorylated, releasing NF-κB dimer which translocates
into the nucleus and drives gene expression (Hayden and
Ghosh, 2011, 2012, 2014; Luan et al., 2013). NF-κB governs
the transcription of a wide array of genes that are of central
importance in inflammation and immunity (Hayden and
Ghosh, 2008; Vallabhapurapu and Karin, 2009). In this study,
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
11
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 12
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
FIGURE 7 | Pioglitazone targets the oxidative/inflammatory interplay in cochlear damage. (A,B) Graphs show the shift/decrease of fluorescence intensity (measured
by comparing Noise-vehicle vs. Noise-Pio conditions) for the different immunofluorescence analysis (8-Isoprostane and NF-κB), at the different drug administration
schedules (1, 24 or 48 h post noise exposure). Data are expressed as means ± SEM (A.U., arbitrary units). (C) Representative immuno-reactive bands for pNF-κB
and IL-1β in controls and animals exposed to noise and treated with pioglitazone (N + P; n = 6) or vehicle (N + V; n = 6) at the different time points (1, 24, or 48 h
after noise exposure) 7 days after administration. Reduction of both NF-κB and IL1-β was clearly detected 7 days after drug treatment.
pioglitazone treated animals exhibited a decrease of NF-κB
phosphorylation and suppression of IL-1β in all cochlear
structures. In support of a likely role in cochlear protection,
it has been suggested that NF-κB signaling plays a role in the
effects of pioglitazone to protect against focal cerebral ischemia
in rats (Zhang et al., 2011) and in several rodent models of
neurological diseases (Nakamura et al., 2007; Park et al., 2007;
Swanson et al., 2011). In these diverse models, pioglitazone
demonstrated
neuroprotective
and/or
restorative
effects,
mainly associated with modulation of inflammation. Notably,
pioglitazone upregulated the expression of IκB in the brain
in an experimental model of autoimmune encephalomyelitis
(Feinstein et al., 2002) and in cultured neurons (Zhang et al.,
2011).
In addition to the beneficial effects on inflammation,
pioglitazone effectively reduced oxidative stress, reflected by
ROS and lipid peroxidation decrease. Indeed, the oxidative
stress induced by noise exposure (Figures 3, 4, superoxide and
8-Isoprostane production) was counteracted by pioglitazone both
when administered 1 h after the acoustic trauma and, to a
lesser extent, when given 24 or 48 h after noise exposure. Our
in vivo data are consistent with recent data obtained in vitro in a
gentamicin ototoxicity model where it reported that pioglitazone
provided protection against ROS increase, lipid peroxidative
damage and HC apoptosis by upregulating redox pathway genes
and by potentiating the cell own antioxidant defenses (Sekulic-
Jablanovic et al., 2017). In the cited report, pioglitazone rescued
hair cells from gentamicin oxidative toxicity and apoptosis by
targeting PPARγ and PPARα proteins expressed in cochlear
structures. Our data presented here imply that these mechanisms
may be also relevant in vivo and offer the potential to achieve
clinically meaningful effects for pioglitazone in the treatment
of hearing loss. Although further experimentation is needed to
explore PPARγ activation by pioglitazone in the cochlea, our
data could also be consistent with previous reports in which
pioglitazone effectively enhanced enzymatic antioxidant defenses
in the brain (Shimazu et al., 2005; Suge et al., 2012) and with
the demonstration that PPARγ is able to protect cells from
apoptosis through strong anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
effects (Abdallah, 2010; Barroso et al., 2013). Notably, at
molecular level, PPARγ activation stabilizes mitochondria, averts
oxidative damage and supports neuronal survival (Fuenzalida
et al., 2007). Moreover, it has been reported that pioglitazone
specifically binds to an additional target within mitochondrial
membranes, a class of proteins (mitoNEET), required for
increasing mitochondrial inner membrane integrity and for
ROS homeostasis (Paddock et al., 2007; Mittler et al., 2018).
Mitochondria are the major source of ROS generated in cochlear
cells after injury and, thus, the robust protective effects of
pioglitazone are not surprising and consistent with a wide body of
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
12
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 13
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
literature (Henderson et al., 2006; Lenaz et al., 2007; Fetoni et al.,
2015). In order to explore the antioxidant effects in the cochlea
in the NIHL model, the timing of treatment was crucial. In our
model, the ability of pioglitazone to reduce oxidative imbalance
was most effective in the early time window of administration (1 h
after noise exposure), which is consistent with the known kinetics
of cochlear ROS generation in the cochlea (Seidman et al., 1999;
Ohinata et al., 2000; Jaumann et al., 2012). Our previous reports
have shown that ROS are detected early, within the first 2 h
following noise trauma and remain elevated up to 7.5 h. Lipid and
protein peroxidation occurs around ∼4 h following noise insult
(Maulucci et al., 2014). Thus, antioxidant rescue by pioglitazone
was greatest when administered in an early time window, which
prevented the initial formation of ROS which, when triggered,
can promote ongoing cellular damage. These data are consistent
with similar results that have been obtained in NIHL animal
models employing polyphenols as treatments (Fetoni et al., 2015,
2014a).
Altogether, the protective effects of pioglitazone appear to
be related to anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative mechanisms,
suggesting a possible ROS/NF-κB signaling crosstalk/relationship
in the cochlea. It has been reported that ROS interact with
NF-κB signaling pathways in many ways. The transcription of
NF-κB dependent genes has been shown to influence the levels
of ROS in the cell and, in turn, the levels of NF-κB activity
are also influenced by the levels of ROS (Gloire et al., 2006;
Morgan and Liu, 2011; Blaser et al., 2016). Interestingly, in our
study the antioxidant effects of pioglitazone were evident mostly
during the peri-traumatic period (1 h post-noise administration)
when ROS production begins to rise, while the anti-inflammatory
effect persisted for a longer time after noise exposure (24
and 48 h administration), when ROS was already declining
(Kurabi et al., 2017). Thus, it is plausible that, soon after
noise exposure, pioglitazone may negatively regulate ROS/NF-κB
crosstalk (see Figures 7A,B illustrating decrease of both lipid
peroxidation and inflammation). Later on (24 and 48 h after
noise exposure), when ROS/NF-κB crosstalk is maximal and ROS
production has declined, pioglitazone exhibits the majority of its
anti-inflammatory effects (see Figure 7). NF-κB redox regulation
has been intensely studied in several cell-types and biological
conditions and, although it is now clear that NF-κB activation
mechanism relies mainly on IkB activation, the redox-sensitive
pathways triggering this activation, as well as the ROS/NF-κB
interplay are reported to be quite different depending on the
cell-type (Morgan and Liu, 2011).
Furthermore, a remarkable effect of pioglitazone was revealed
in the cochlear vascular structure, the stria vascularis, where it
reduced the 8-Isoprotane fluorescence signal, in particular in the
animals treated 1 h after noise exposure. Given that isoprostanes
can potentially lead to reduced cochlear blood flow (Seidman
et al., 1999; Ohinata et al., 2000; Jaumann et al., 2012), these
data suggest that pioglitazone can potentially activate the hypoxia
response pathway associated with cochlear redox unbalance
induced by noise exposure (Zhang et al., 2014). Further work will
be needed to explore this hypothesis.
In summary, these results reveal that pioglitazone has multiple
protective mechanisms in the cochlea, favorably affecting
oxidative stress and inflammation. However, even if pioglitazione
acts as an agonist of PPARγ in several conditions, further studies
are needed to demonstrate their activation in the protection
against cochlear stress status. Early intervention is expected to
provide the greatest protection against exogenous insults, while
later favorable effects on inflammation may contribute to either
greater or sustained efficacy and will also extend the window of
opportunity for effective therapy. These factors are important in
the treatment of hearing loss after acute noise trauma or sudden
sensorineural hearing loss, where rapid intervention is critical.
Pioglitazone, via its multiple favorable mechanisms of cochlear
protection, may offer an attractive option for the treatment of
sensorineural hearing loss.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FP: data collection and interpretation. AF: study design, data
collection, data analysis direction and supervision, and wrote the
manuscript. RR: data collection. MW: study design. CG: data
quality control. DT: data analysis direction and supervision, and
wrote the manuscript. GP: study design, data quality control, and
manuscript editing.
FUNDING
This
work
was
supported
with
funds
by
Strekin
AG
(Basel, Switzerland) through MW who participated in the study
design and by intramural grants from Università Cattolica (AF
and GP). The confocal analysis was performed at the “
Labcemi”
core facility of the Università Cattolica.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.
2018.01103/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abdallah, D. M. (2010). Anticonvulsant potential of the peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor γ agonist pioglitazone in pentylenetetrazole-induced acute
seizures and kindling in mice. Brain Res. 10, 246–
253. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.
2010.06.034
Abushouk, A. I., El-Husseny, M. W. A., Bahbah, E. I., Elmaraezy, A., Ali,
A. A., Ashraf, A., et al. (2017). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
as therapeutic targets for heart failure. Biomed. Pharmacother. 95, 692–
700.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.08.083
Ahmadian, M., Suh, J. M., Hah, N., Liddle, C., Atkins, A. R., Downes, M., et al.
(2013). PPARγ signaling and metabolism: the good, the bad and the future. Nat.
Med. 19, 557–
566. doi: 10.1038/nm.3159
Barnum, C. J., and Tansey, M. J. (2010). “
Modeling neuroinflammatory
pathogenesis of Parkinson’
s disease,”in Progress in Brain Research, Vol. 184, eds
G. A. Kerkhof and H. P. A. Van Dongen (London: Elsevier), 113–
132.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
13
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 14
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
Barroso, E., Astudillo, A. M., Balsinde, J., and Vázquez-Carrera, M. (2013).
PPARβ/δ activation prevents hypertriglyceridemia caused by a high fat diet.
Involvement of AMPK and PGC-1α-lipin1-PPARα pathway. Clin. Investig.
Arterioscler. 25, 63–
73. doi: 10.1016/j.arteri.2013.01.001
Berger, J., and Moller, D. E. (2002). The mechanisms of action of PPARs.
Annu.
Rev.
Med.
53,
409–
435.
doi:
10.1146/annurev.med.53.082901.
104018
Blaser, H., Dostert, C., Mak, T. W., and Brenner, D. (2016). TNF and ROS crosstalk
in inflammation. Trends Cell. Biol. 26, 249–
261. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2015.12.002
Cabrera, J. A., Ziemba, E. A., Colbert, R., Kelly, R. F., Kuskowski, M., Arriaga, E. A.,
et al. (2012). Uncoupling protein-2 expression and effects on mitochondrial
membrane potential and oxidant stress in heart tissue. Transl. Res. 159,
383–
390. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2011.11.001
Canlon, B., Meltser, I., Johansson, P., and Tahera, Y. (2007). Glucocorticoid
receptors modulate auditory sensitivity to acoustic trauma. Hear. Res. 226,
61–
69. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2006.05.009
Carta, A. R., Frau, L., Pisanu, A., Wardas, J., Spiga, S., and Carboni, E. (2011).
Rosiglitazone decreases peroxisome proliferator receptor-γ levels in microglia
and inhibits TNF-α production: new evidences on neuroprotection in a
progressive Parkinson’
s disease model. Neuroscience 27, 250–
261. doi: 10.1016/
j.neuroscience.2011.07.046
Chen, T., Jin, X., Crawford, B. H., Cheng, H., Saafir, T. B., Wagner, M. B.,
et al. (2012). Cardioprotection from oxidative stress in the newborn heart by
activation of PPARγ is mediated by catalase. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 53, 208–
215.
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.05.014
Esposito, E., and Cuzzocrea, S. (2011). Targeting the peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptors (PPARs) in spinal cord injury. Expert. Opin. Ther. Targets.
15, 943–
959. doi: 10.1517/14728222.2011.581231
Feinstein,
D.
L.,
Galea,
E.,
Gavrilyuk,
V.,
Brosnan,
C.
F.,
Whitacre,
C. C., Dumitrescu-Ozimek, L., et al. (2002). Peroxisome proliferator-
activated
receptor-gamma
agonists
prevent
experimental
autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. Ann. Neurol. 51, 694–
702. doi: 10.1002/ana.10206
Fetoni, A. R., De Bartolo, P., Eramo, S. L., Rolesi, R., Paciello, F., Bergamini, C.,
et al. (2013). Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) as a target of oxidative
stress-mediated damage: cochlear and cortical responses after an increase in
antioxidant defense. J. Neurosci. 33, 4011–
4023. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
2282-12.2013
Fetoni, A. R., Eramo, S. L., Paciello, F., Rolesi, R., Podda, M. V., Troiani, D.,
et al. (2014a). Curcuma longa (curcumin) decreases in vivo cisplatin-
induced ototoxicity through heme oxygenase-1 induction. Otol. Neurotol. 35,
e169–
e177. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000302
Fetoni, A. R., Lattanzi, W., Eramo, S. L., Barba, M., Paciello, F., Moriconi, C.,
et al. (2014b). Grafting and early expression of growth factors from adipose-
derived stem cells transplanted into the cochlea, in a Guinea pig model
of acoustic trauma. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8:334. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.
00334
Fetoni, A. R., Mancuso, C., Eramo, S. L., Ralli, M., Piacentini, R., Barone, E.,
et al. (2010). In vivo protective effect of ferulic acid against noise-induced
hearing loss in the guinea-pig. Neuroscience 169, 1575–
1588. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2010.06.022
Fetoni, A. R., Paciello, F., Rolesi, R., Eramo, S. L., Mancuso, C., Troiani, D., et al.
(2015). Rosmarinic acid up-regulates the noise-activated Nrf2/HO-1 pathway
and protects against noise-induced injury in rat cochlea. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
85, 269–
281. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.04.021
Fetoni, A. R., Rolesi, R., Paciello, F., Eramo, S. L. M., Grassi, C., Troiani, D., et al.
(2016). Styrene enhances the noise induced oxidative stress in the cochlea and
affects differently mechanosensory and supporting cells. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
101, 211–
225. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.10.014
Forst, T., Wilhelm, B., Pfützner, A., Fuchs, W., Lehmann, U., Schaper, F., et al.
(2008). Investigation of the vascular and pleiotropic effects of atorvastatin and
pioglitazone in a population at high cardiovascular risk. Diab. Vasc. Dis. Res. 5,
298–
303. doi: 10.3132/dvdr.2008.043
Fuenzalida, K., Quintanilla, R., Ramos, P., Piderit, D., Fuentealba, R. A.,
Martinez, G., et al. (2007). Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
up-regulates the Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic protein in neurons and induces
mitochondrial stabilization and protection against oxidative stress and
apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 37006–
37015. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700447200
Fujioka, M., Okano, H., and Ogawa, K. (2014). Inflammatory and immune
responses in the cochlea: potential therapeutic targets for sensorineural hearing
loss. Front. Pharmacol. 5:287. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00287
Gloire, G., Legrand-Poels, S., and Piette, J. (2006). NF-kappaB activation by
reactive oxygen species: fifteen years later. Biochem. Pharmacol. 72, 1493–
1505.
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2006.04.011
Gratton, M. A., Eleftheriadou, A., Garcia, J., Verduzco, E., Martin, G. K., Lonsbury-
Martin, B. L., et al. (2011). Noise-induced changes in gene expression in the
cochleae of mice differing in their susceptibility to noise damage. Hear. Res.
277, 211–
226. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.12.014
Green, S. (1995). PPAR: a mediator of peroxisome proliferator action. Mutat. Res.
333, 101–
109. doi: 10.1016/0027-5107(95)00136-0
Hayden, M. S., and Ghosh, S. (2004). Signaling to NF-kappaB. Genes Dev. 218,
2195–
2224. doi: 10.1101/gad.1228704
Hayden, M. S., and Ghosh, S. (2008). Shared principles in NF-kappaB signaling.
Cell 132, 344–
362. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.020
Hayden, M. S., and Ghosh, S. (2011). NF-κB in immunobiology. Cell. Res. 21,
223–
244. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.13
Hayden, M. S., and Ghosh, S. (2012). NF-κB, the first quarter-century: remarkable
progress and outstanding questions. Genes Dev. 26, 203–
234. doi: 10.1101/gad.
183434.111
Hayden, M. S., and Ghosh, S. (2014). Regulation of NF-κB by TNF family cytokines.
Semin. Immunol. 26, 253–
266. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.05.004
Henderson, D., Bielefeld, E. C., Harris, K. C., and Hu, B. H. (2006). The role of
oxidative stress in noise-induced hearing loss. Ear Hear. 27, 1–
19. doi: 10.1097/
01.aud.0000191942.36672.f3
Hirsch, E. C., and Hunot, S. (2009). Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’
s disease:
a target for neuroprotection? Lancet Neurol. 8, 382–
397. doi: 10.1016/S1474-
4422(09)70062-6
Issemann, I., and Green, S. (1990). Activation of a member of the steroid hormone
receptor superfamily by peroxisome proliferators. Nature 347, 645–
650.
doi: 10.1038/347645a0
Jaumann, M., Dettling, J., Gubelt, M., Zimmermann, U., Gerling, A., Paquet-
Durand, F., et al. (2012). cGMP-Prkg1 signaling and Pde5 inhibition shelter
cochlear hair cells and hearing function. Nat. Med. 18, 252–
259. doi: 10.1038/
nm.2634
Kauppinen, A., Suuronen, T., Ojala, J., Kaarniranta, K., and Salminen, A.
(2013). Antagonistic crosstalk between NF-κB and SIRT1 in the regulation of
inflammation and metabolic disorders. Cell. Signal. 25, 1939–
1948. doi: 10.
1016/j.cellsig.2013.06.007
Kersten, S., Desvergne, B., and Wahli, W. (2000). Roles of PPARs in health and
disease. Nature 405, 421–
424. doi: 10.1038/35013000
Kiaei, M., Kipiani, K., Chen, J., Calingasan, N. Y., and Beal, M. F. (2005).
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonist extends survival in
transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp. Neurol. 191,
331–
336. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2004.10.007
Komeda, M., Roessler, B. J., and Raphael, Y. (1999). The influence of interleukin-1
receptor antagonist transgene on spiral ganglion neurons. Hear. Res. 131, 1–
10.
doi: 10.1016/S0378-5955(99)00006-4
Kurabi, A., Keithley, E. M., Housley, G. D., Ryan, A. F., and Wong, A. C. (2017).
Cellular mechanisms of noise-induced hearing loss. Hear. Res. 349, 129–
137.
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2016.11.013
Lehmann, J. M., Moore, L. B., Smith-Oliver, T. A., Wilkison, W. O., Willson, T. M.,
and Kliewer, S. A. (1995). An antidiabetic thiazolidinedione is a high affinity
ligand for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma).
J. Biol. Chem. 270, 12953–
12956. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.22.12953
Lenaz, G., Fato, R., Formiggini, G., and Genova, M. L. (2007). The role of coenzyme
Q in mitochondrial electron transport. Mitochondrion 7(Suppl.), S8–
S33.
doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2007.03.009
Liu, H., Feng, L., Tolia, G., Liddel, M. R., Hao, J., and Li, S. K. (2014). Evaluation of
intratympanic formulations for inner ear delivery: methodology and sustained
release formulation testing. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 40, 896–
903. doi: 10.3109/
03639045.2013.789054
Luan, H., Kan, Z., Xu, Y., Lv, C., and Jiang, W. (2013). Rosmarinic acid
protects against experimental diabetes with cerebral ischemia: relation to
inflammation response. J. Neuroinflammation 10:28. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-
10-28
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
14
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
 fphar-09-01103
October 5, 2018
Time: 14:11
# 15
Paciello et al.
PPAR Agonist Protects Against NIHL
Malmsten, M., and Lindman, B. (1992). Self-assembly in aqueous block copolymer
solutions. Macromolecules 25, 5440–
5445. doi: 10.1021/ma00046a049
Mancuso, C. (2015). Key factors which concur to the correct therapeutic evaluation
of herbal products in free radical-induced diseases. Front. Pharmacol. 6:86.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00086
Maulucci, G., Troiani, D., Eramo, S. L., Paciello, F., Podda, M. V., Paludetti, G.,
et al. (2014). Time evolution of noise induced oxidation in outer hair cells:
role of NAD(P)H and plasma membrane fluidity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1840,
2192–
2202. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.04.005
Meltser, I., Tahera, Y., Simpson, E., Hultcrantz, M., Charitidi, K., Gustafsson, J. A.,
et al. (2008). Estrogen receptor β protects against acoustic trauma in mice.
J. Clin. Invest. 118, 1563–
1570. doi: 10.1172/JCI32796
Mittler, R., Darash-Yahana, M., Sohn, Y. S., Bai, F., Song, L., Cabantchik, I. Z., et al.
(2018). NEET proteins: a new link between iron metabolism, reactive oxygen
species, and cancer. Antioxid. Redox Signal. doi: 10.1089/ars.2018.7502 [Epub
ahead of print].
Morgan, M. J., and Liu, Z. G. (2011). Crosstalk of reactive oxygen species and
NF-κBsignaling. Cell Res. 21, 103–
115. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.178
Motohashi, R., Takumida, M., Shimizu, A., Konomi, U., Fujita, K., Hirakawa, K.,
et al. (2010). Effects of age and sex on the expression of estrogen receptor
alpha and beta in the mouse inner ear. Acta Otolaryngol. 130, 204–
214.
doi: 10.3109/00016480903016570
Nakamoto,
T.,
Mikuriya,
T.,
Sugahara,
K.,
Hirose,
Y.,
Hashimoto,
T.,
Shimogori, H., et al. (2012). Geranylgeranylacetone suppresses noise-induced
expression of proinflammatory cytokines in the cochlea. Auris Nasus Larynx
39, 270–
274. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2011.06.001
Nakamura, T., Yamamoto, E., Kataoka, K., Yamashita, T., Tokutomi, Y., Dong,
Y. F., et al. (2007). Pioglitazone exerts protective effects against stroke in stroke-
prone spontaneously hypertensive rats, independently of blood pressure. Stroke
38, 3016–
3022. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.486522
Ohinata, Y., Miller, J. M., Altschuler, R. A., and Schacht, J. (2000). Intense noise
induces formation of vasoactive lipid peroxidation products in the cochlea.
Brain Res. 878, 163–
173. doi: 10.1016/S0006-8993(00)02733-5
Paddock, M. L., Wiley, S. E., Axelrod, H. L., Cohen, A. E., Roy, M., Abresch,
E. C., et al. (2007). MitoNEET is a uniquely folded 2Fe 2S outer mitochondrial
membrane protein stabilized by pioglitazone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
14342–
14347. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707189104
Park, S. W., Yi, J. H., Miranpuri, G., Satriomoto, I., Bowen, K. K., Resnick,
D. K., et al. (2007). Thiazolidinedione class of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma agonists prevents neuronal damage, motor dysfunction,
myelin loss, neuropathic pain, and inflammation after spinal cord injury in
adult rats. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 320, 1002–
1012. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.
113472
Priuska, E. M., and Schacht, J. (1995). Formation of free radicals by gentamicin
and iron and evidence for an iron/gentamicin complex. Biochem. Pharmacol.
50, 1749–
1752. doi: 10.1016/0006-2952(95)02160-4
Rizos, C. V., Liberopoulos, E. N., Mikhailidis, D. P., and Elisaf, M. S. (2008).
Pleiotropic effects of thiazolidinediones. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 9,
1087–
1108. doi: 10.1517/14656566.9.7.1087
Satoh, H., Firestein, G. S., Billings, P. B., Harris, J. P., and Keithley, E. M.
(2002). Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, an initiator, and etanercept, an inhibitor of
cochlear inflammation. Laryngoscope 112, 1627–
1634. doi: 10.1097/00005537-
200209000-00019
Seidman, M. D., Quirk, W. S., and Shirwany, N. A. (1999). Mechanisms of
alterations in the microcirculation of the cochlea. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 884,
226–
232. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb08644.x
Sekulic-Jablanovic, M., Petkovic, V., Wright, M. B., Kucharava, K., Huerzeler, N.,
Levano, S., et al. (2017). Effects of peroxisome proliferator activated receptors
(PPAR)-γ and -α agonists on cochlear protection from oxidative stress. PLoS
One 12:e0188596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188596
Sergi, B., Fetoni, A. R., Paludetti, G., Ferraresi, A., Navarra, P., Mordente, A., et al.
(2006). Protective properties of idebenone in noise-induced hearing loss in
the guinea pig. Neuroreport 17, 857–
861. doi: 10.1097/01.wnr.0000221834.18
470.8c
Shimazu, T., Inoue, I., Araki, N., Asano, Y., Sawada, M., Furuya, D., et al. (2005).
A peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonist reduces infarct
size in transient but not in permanent ischemia. Stroke 36, 353–
359. doi: 10.
1161/01.STR.0000152271.21943.a2
Suge, R., Shimazu, T., Hasegawa, H., Inoue, I., Hayashibe, H., Nagasaka, H., et al.
(2012). Cerebral antioxidant enzyme increase associated with learning deficit in
type 2 diabetes rats. Brain Res. 1481, 97–
106. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.056
Swanson, C. R., Joers, V., Bondarenko, V., Brunner, K., Simmons, H. A., Ziegler,
T. E., et al. (2011). The PPAR-γ agonist pioglitazone modulates inflammation
and induces neuroprotection in parkinsonian monkeys. J. Neuroinflammation
8:91. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-91
Tan, W. J., Thorne, P. R., and Vlajkovic, S. M. (2016). Characterization of cochlear
inflammation in mice following acute and chronic noise exposure. Histochem.
Cell Biol. 146, 219–
230. doi: 10.1007/s00418-016-1436-5
Tontonoz, P., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2008). Fat and beyond: the diverse biology
of PPARgamma. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 77, 289–
312. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
biochem.77.061307.091829
Vallabhapurapu, S., and Karin, M. (2009). Regulation and function of NFkappaB
transcription factors in the immune system. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27, 693–
733.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132641
Wang, G., Wei, J., Guan, Y., Jin, N., Mao, J., and Wang, X. (2005). Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonist rosiglitazone reduces clinical
inflammatory responses in type 2 diabetes with coronary artery disease after
coronary angioplasty. Metabolism 54, 590–
597. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2004.
11.017
Wang, L., Teng, R., Di, L., Rogers, H., Wu, H., Kopp, J. B., et al. (2013).
PPARα and Sirt1 mediate erythropoietin action in increasing metabolic activity
and browning of white adipocytes to protect against obesity and metabolic
disorders. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 62, 4122–
4131. doi: 10.2337/db13-0518
Wang, X., Truong, T., Billings, P. B., Harris, J. P., and Keithley, E. M. (2003).
Blockage of immune-mediated inner ear damage by etanercept. Otol. Neurotol.
24, 52–
57. doi: 10.1097/00129492-200301000-00012
Wang, Y., and Liu, C. (2012). Quantitative evaluation of common polymorphism
(rs1801282) in the PPARγ2 gene and hypertension susceptibility. Gene 502,
159–
162. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.035
Yamamoto, H., Omelchenko, I., Shi, X., and Nuttall, A. L. (2009). The influence
of NF-kappaB signal-transduction pathways on the murine inner ear by
acoustic overstimulation. J. Neurosci. Res. 87, 1832–
1840. doi: 10.1002/jnr.
22018
Zhang, M., Gao, X., Bai, S.-j., Ye, X.-m., and Zhang, J. (2014). Effect of pioglitazone
on expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α and vascular endothelial growth
factor in ischemic hindlimb of diabetic rats. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 18,
1307–
1314.
Zhang, H. L., Xu, M., Wei, C., Qin, A. P., Liu, C. F., Hong, L. Z., et al.
(2011). Neuroprotective effects of pioglitazone in a rat model of permanent
focal cerebral ischemia are associated with peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma-mediated suppression of nuclear factor-κB signaling pathway.
Neuroscience 176, 381–
395. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.12.029
Conflict of Interest Statement: MW is an employee of Strekin AG and receives
salary and stock options. The funders had no role in data collection and
interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. This does not
alter our adherence to Frontiers in Pharmacology policies on sharing data and
materials.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
The reviewer AB and handling Editor declared their shared affiliation.
Copyright © 2018 Paciello, Fetoni, Rolesi, Wright, Grassi, Troiani and Paludetti.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org
15
October 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1103
