 Broken Promises: Abstinence Pledging and Sexual and 
Reproductive Health
Anthony Paik,
University of Massachusetts–Amherst
Kenneth J. Sanchagrin, and
Appalachian State University
Karen Heimer
University of Iowa
Abstract
Approximately 12% of girls and young women in the United States pledge abstinence. Yet most 
break their pledges, engaging in first intercourse before marriage. The extant literature reports few 
differences between pledge breakers and nonpledgers in sexually transmitted infections and 
nonmarital pregnancies. The present research maintains that previous studies may have obscured 
important differences in exposure risk and hypothesizes that female pledge breakers who have 
higher exposure risk are more likely to experience human papillomavirus (HPV) and nonmarital 
pregnancies. To test this hypothesis, this study uses the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent 
to Adult Health, logistic regression, and event history modeling. The results show that, after 
accounting for differences in exposure risk, pledge breakers have higher risk of HPV and 
nonmarital pregnancy. As a set, the results are consistent with the argument that pledgers use 
condoms and contraceptives less consistently and highlight unintended consequences of 
abstinence promotion.
Keywords
Adolescent sexuality; emerging adulthood; marriage; pregnancy; sex education; sexual health
Nonmarital pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are significant threats to 
the sexual and reproductive health of adolescents and young adults. In the United States, 
approximately 75% of pregnancies among women aged 15–24 are nonmarital; of those, 
three quarters are unintended (Zolna & Lindberg, 2012). Fifteen- to 24-year-olds also 
represent half of new sexually transmitted infections, with human papillomavirus (HPV) 
accounting for more than 70% of new cases (Satterwhite et al., 2013). Given these statistics, 
identifying individual and institutional factors promoting nonmarital pregnancies and STIs, 
such as HPV, is an important concern.
Department of Sociology, University of Massachusetts-Amherst, W33B/D Machmer Hall, Amherst, MA 01003 
(apaik@soc.umass.edu). 
This article was edited by Jennifer Glass.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Marriage Fam. 2016 April 1; 78(2): 546–561. doi:10.1111/jomf.12279.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A key institutional practice in the 1990s and 2000s purportedly addressing nonmarital 
pregnancies and STIs was the promotion of abstinence from sexual intercourse until 
marriage. Abstinence-only programming was delivered primarily two forms. First, the 
delivery of abstinence-only sex education (AOSE) was vastly expanded through $1.5 billion 
in federal funds during the George W. Bush administration (SIECUS, 2015). A second 
intervention, promoted by religious and nonprofit groups and AOSE programs, was the use 
of “virginity pledges” (Bearman & Brückner, 2001). Pledging typically involves public 
declarations by adolescents to remain abstinent until marriage (Bearman & Brückner 2001; 
Williams, 2011). Under the Obama administration, abstinence-only programming has been 
largely displaced in national policy making designed to reduce nonmarital pregnancies and 
STIs among U.S. teens and young adults (Joseph, 2012), but its use remains widespread at 
the state and local levels. Currently, 25 states still require that abstinence be stressed in sex 
education, and 19 states mandate content promoting sexual behavior only within marriages 
(Boonstra, 2014). On the basis of the 2006–2010 National Survey of Family Growth 
(NSFG), 12% and 7% of female and male respondents under age 25, respectively, reported 
pledging to remain a virgin until marriage (Brewster, Valle, & Harker Tillman, 2013).
A key question centers on the possibility that abstinence-promotion efforts have perverse 
unintended consequences on the sexual and reproductive health of teenagers and young 
adults. Might they actually increase risks of nonmarital pregnancies and STIs? In this 
research, we examine whether virginity pledging is associated with increased risks of 
nonmarital pregnancies and HPV among sexually active girls and young women. Although 
the extant literature has found little evidence of worse sexual and reproductive health 
outcomes for pledge breakers than for sexually active nonpledgers (e.g., Adamczyk & 
Felson, 2008; Brückner & Bearman, 2005; Ford et al., 2005), none of this research has 
accounted for the fact that the two groups may have different levels of exposure risk for 
pregnancy and HPV. This research addresses this critical gap by comparing pledgers and 
nonpledgers who have similar exposure risks. Our results on pledge breaking not only shed 
light on the health outcomes of millions of pledge breakers but also highlight, more 
generally, the potential consequences of abstinence beliefs and abstinence-only promotion 
efforts, which are common at the state and local policy-making levels and may return as 
federal policy in the near future.
This article is organized as follows: We first review the literature on pledging and health 
outcomes. To develop our theoretical expectations, we then draw on Swidler's (1986) notion 
of cultural lag, or the idea that individuals find it difficult to abandon familiar strategies of 
action, scripts, or repertoires even when the associated underlying cultural beliefs are no 
longer relevant for the individual. While not completely protective, condoms are an 
important means by which youth can reduce their risks of pregnancy and STIs, including 
HPV (Centers for Disease Control, CDC, 2014a, 2014b). Because of cultural-lag effects, we 
argue that pledge breakers are less likely to practice safe sex, thereby increasing their risks 
of getting pregnant and contracting HPV over nonpledgers with similar exposure risk. 
Because data on condom-use consistency tend to be relationship specific or limited to one-
year periods and may contain substantial measurement error, we examine health outcomes 
directly linked to inconsistent condom use: nonmarital pregnancy and STIs. HPV is the most 
prevalent STI and is untreatable, which allows for assessment of its relationships with sexual 
Paik et al.
Page 2
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activity. We use HPV test results from a representative sample of sexually active young 
women. We test our expectations empirically, using the National Longitudinal Study of 
Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), by examining whether pledge status among 
sexually active female respondents is associated with HPV acquisition and nonmarital 
pregnancy.
Background
Research on the health implications of pledging has focused on both sexual behavior and 
health outcomes, such as nonmarital pregnancy and STIs. Pledgers, on average, are more 
likely to delay sexual involvement, have fewer sex partners, and marry earlier (Bearman & 
Brückner, 2001; Brückner & Bearman, 2005; Meier, 2007; Uecker, 2008). Observed 
associations between pledging and more limited sexual behavior, however, may reflect 
selection effects—that is, the tendency for individuals prone to eschewing nonmarital sexual 
behavior to select into pledging—as opposed to indicating any causal effect (Rosenbaum, 
2009; but see Martino, Elliott, Collins, Kanouse, & Berry, 2008). Bearman and Brückner 
(2001) and Rosenbaum (2009) also found that pledge breakers tend to use condoms less 
consistently than nonpledgers, whereas Martino et al. (2008) observed no difference. It is 
worth noting that the previously mentioned discrepancies between Rosenbaum (2009) and 
Martino et al. (2008), both of which employed propensity-scoring techniques, may reflect 
the fact that the latter used substantially fewer variables to match pledgers and nonpledgers. 
Nevertheless, the majority of pledge takers eventually break their pledges, having sexual 
intercourse while unmarried (Brückner & Bearman, 2005), which highlights the need for 
more research on subsequent health outcomes.
Currently, there is little evidence that pledge breakers have worse health outcomes than 
nonpledgers. Specifically, the extant literature reports no differences in the prevalence of 
Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Trichomonas vaginalis, and HPV between 
sexually active pledgers and nonpledgers (Brückner & Bearman, 2005; Ford et al., 2005; 
Rosenbaum, 2009); however, the former have slightly lower odds of nonmarital pregnancies 
(Adamczyk & Felson, 2008). This null finding may reflect, one the one hand, the fact that 
pledge breakers exhibited fewer sexual risk factors, such as early sexual debut and high 
numbers of sex partners, and on the other hand, that they were more likely to be inconsistent 
users of condoms. To the best of our knowledge, however, no study to date has reported 
increased risks of STIs and nonmarital pregnancies among pledge breakers.
So why might pledge breakers have increased risks of negative health outcomes? In addition 
to the already-mentioned research showing less consistent condom use among pledgers, 
randomized and quasi-randomized controlled studies report some adverse effects of AOSE 
on sexual and reproductive health: one out of seven trials found increased risk of STIs, and 
one out of eight found increased risk of pregnancy (Underhill, Montgomery, & Operario, 
2007). We also argue that researchers have failed to identify health disparities between 
sexually active pledge breakers and nonpledgers because prior research has not adequately 
accounted for differences in exposure risk. Whether as a result of taking an abstinence 
pledge or selectivity, pledgers tend to have fewer sex partners and to delay sex longer 
(Brückner & Bearman, 2005). Consequently, studies showing no health disparities between 
Paik et al.
Page 3
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pledge breakers and nonpledgers may reflect the fact that the former tends to have lower 
exposure risk. Indeed, given the likelihood that sexually active pledgers may be less 
consistent users of condoms, they should have increased risks for STIs and nonmarital 
pregnancies than nonpledgers with similar exposure profiles. We test this expectation here.
Conceptual approach
We draw on theories of culture to develop expectations between abstinence beliefs and 
sexual and reproductive health. Since the introduction of Swidler's (1986) tool-kit 
conception of culture, it has become a truism that culture matters. Researchers have sought 
to advance the field in several ways, including arguing for, among other things, the 
importance of cognition (e.g., Vaisey, 2009), the interplay between culture and structure (for 
a review, see Pachucki & Breiger, 2010), the effects of cultural heterogeneity (e.g., Harding, 
2007), and patterns of cultural persistence (e.g., Kirk & Papachristos, 2011; Tavory & 
Swidler, 2009). The issue of cultural lag or persistence highlights how skills, habits, 
repertoires, and strategies for action are causal for maintaining patterns of behavior in the 
absence of the ideas or beliefs that originally motivated them. It not only suggests a 
conception of culture as a set of skills or repertoires but also directs attention to the social 
contexts under which cultural persistence occurs. Importantly, Tavory and Swidler (2009) 
show that cultural meanings attributed to condom use caused individuals to refrain from 
adopting them, even when they were at risk for acquiring human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV). However, this qualitative finding has not been replicated using more generalizable 
samples, such as population-based data.
We follow Tavory and Swidler (2009) and argue that pledgers are slow to adapt their 
scripting of sexual behavior interactions once they become sexually active. Abstinence 
programming generally promotes three specific beliefs: (a) the importance of abstaining 
from sex until marriage, (b) the ineffectiveness of contraceptives, and (c) a “biblical” 
conception of marriage (Uecker, 2008). Because abstinence beliefs are typically associated 
with increased distrust of the efficacy of contraceptives, pledge breakers will be less likely 
to become proactive about managing their increased risks for STIs and pregnancy through 
the adoption of condoms or other forms of contraception after becoming sexually active. 
Thus, we hypothesize that pledge breakers are more likely than nonpledgers to acquire HPV 
and to experience a nonmarital pregnancy once exposure risk has been accounted for.
How do we compare sexually active pledgers and nonpledgers with similar exposure risk? 
To identify key factors of exposure risk, we draw on a formal model of STI infection risk 
(Laumann, Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels, 1994). Specifically, the probability of acquiring 
an HPV infection from a randomly chosen sex partner is as follows:
(1)
where Phpv is the probability of being infected with HPV, Pa is the probability of acquiring 
an infection from a single act of unprotected vaginal intercourse; n is the number of sex acts 
with a specific partner; Pnc is the probability of sex without a condom; and Pi is the 
Paik et al.
Page 4
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 probability of having sex with an infected partner. Here, the quantity (1 – Pa)nPnc yields the 
probability of not being infected after nPnc acts of unprotected sex with a specific partner. 
We assume, for simplicity, that the probability of infection is 0 with condoms. On the basis 
of this model, exposure risk for HPV increases with (a) the number of unprotected sex acts, 
conditional on having sex with a partner who has HPV, and (b) and the probability of 
partnering with an infected partner.
This research focuses on exposure risk chiefly linked to the number of sex partners, which 
influences the probability of partnering with an infected partner. Unfortunately, the count of 
unprotected sex acts across multiple partners is difficult to measure; thus, we cannot 
empirically examine this issue. Nevertheless, the quantity nPnc is primarily consequential 
when an STI has a low probability of infection. In contrast, HPV is quite contagious, so our 
omission of this dimension of exposure risk matters less than for other STIs. The assumption 
that the probability of partnering with an infected partner is the same across pledgers and 
nonpledgers is also likely too strong; we take up the limitations of the random-mixing 
assumption in the discussion. Thus, comparing pledge breakers to nonpledgers with similar 
numbers of prior sex partners should enable us to examine whether the former have 
increased risk of HPV.
For nonmarital pregnancies, we assume the probability of nonmarital pregnancy, Pnp, is a 
function of the probability of conception from a single unprotected act of vaginal 
intercourse, Pc; number of sex acts, n; and probability of sex without contraceptives, Pnocon. 
For simplicity, we assume that Pc is constant—when in fact it varies by age and over time—
and that the probability of conception with contraception is 0. As such, the probability of 
nonmarital pregnancy is as follows:
(2)
Here, the quantity (1 – Pc)nPnocon captures the probability of not conceiving after the 
number of sex acts without contraception nPnocon. The equation indicates that probabilities 
of nonmarital pregnancy are related primarily to the number of unprotected sex acts that an 
individual engages in. Similar to the HPV model, we lack information about the number of 
sex acts over multiple years and across different partners, so we control for differences in 
exposure time, where the beginning of exposure risk starts at the age of first sexual 
intercourse. This will allow us to examine whether pledgers have increased risk for 
nonmarital pregnancy as a result of inconsistent use of contraception. Taken together, by 
comparing pledge breakers and nonpledgers with similar exposure risk in terms of prior sex 
partners and time since first sexual intercourse, we will be able to estimate whether pledge 
breakers have increased risks of HPV and nonmarital pregnancies as a result of lower 
likelihoods of condom and contraceptive use, respectively.
Method
Data were drawn from Add Health, a nationally representative, longitudinal study of 
adolescents, originally in Grades 7–12, with four waves of data collection (1994–2008). This 
Paik et al.
Page 5
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 study utilized Waves 1 and 3; the latter included measures for both HPV test results (women 
only) and event history data on fertility. In 1994 and 1995, 20,745 adolescents were 
interviewed for the in-home portion of Wave 1, which solicited information on respondents' 
demographic characteristics, health, and health related behaviors, as well as contextual data 
on their families, neighborhoods, schools, social networks, and romantic relationships (79% 
response rate). In 2001 and 2002, 15,197 respondents were reinterviewed for Wave 3 (76% 
response rate) when they were young adults. Add Health collected the timing of pregnancy 
events, if any, for all sexually active female respondents, but HPV tests only for a subsample 
of them, so we employed two analytical samples. Men were not included in this study 
because they were not tested for HPV and their knowledge of their partners' pregnancies 
were likely to be incomplete.
For the HPV analysis, our analytical sample was based on subsample of sexually active 
women (n = 3,741) who had urine specimens tested for HPV at Wave 3. Seven thousand 
female respondents at Wave 3 were randomly selected for inclusion into this sample, with 
90% providing urine samples. From this subsample, HPV tests were administered to the 
urine samples of the sexually active women (Manhart et al., 2006). In total, therefore, HPV 
test results were available for 3,583 sexually active women, and sampling weights allowing 
for nationally representative estimates of sexually active women were available for 3,369 
respondents. Listwise deletion due to missing data on other variables reduced the analytical 
sample by about 3% to 3,254 women. It is important to note that this analytical sample is 
essentially cross-sectional in nature, since the timing of HPV acquisition is unknown.
For the nonmarital pregnancy sample, event history data for pregnancies at Wave 3 allowed 
us to more fully exploit the longitudinal data available. We focused on a cohort of female 
seventh and eighth graders at Wave 1 who never had first vaginal intercourse; this 
minimized left truncation and left censoring in the data. Of 2,238 girls in these grades, 
16.1% had experienced first sexual intercourse, 2.3% had become pregnant, and less than .
01% had married before Wave 1. Seventeen percent of these girls who did not become 
sexually active by Wave 3 were treated as fully censored on the right. After excluding left-
truncated, left-censored, and fully right-censored cases, the resulting sample size was 1,395 
respondents. Listwise deletion of observations with missing data further reduced the sample 
size by 4% to 1,335 women. Table 1 provides unweighted descriptive statistics of dependent 
and independent measures.
Measures
Dependent Measures
HPV status: A dichotomous variable indicated a positive or negative test result for HPV in 
each respondent's urine specimen, collected at Wave 3.
Nonmarital pregnancy or marriage: This dependent variable assessed the timing and type 
of the first family formation event (i.e., nonmarital pregnancy or marriage). At Wave 3, 
respondents were asked about their marital status and, if they were married, the month and 
year of their weddings. For each sex partner between Waves 1 and 3, respondents were 
asked whether they had become pregnant. A follow-up question asked about pregnancy 
Paik et al.
Page 6
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outcomes and dates of pregnancy resolution. To estimate the timing of pregnancy, we took 
the pregnancy resolution date and subtracted 9 months for live births and 5 months for other 
outcomes, including abortions, miscarriages, and stillbirths. The timing of the first family 
formation event was based on the date of first pregnancy or first marriage, whichever came 
first. Women who experienced neither event were treated as right censored at Wave 3.
Independent Measures
Pledge status: To determine pledge status, we employed the following Wave 1 question: 
“Have you ever taken a public or written pledge to remain a virgin until marriage?” The 
resulting measure was binary, with respondents receiving a value of 1 if they had taken a 
virginity pledge, and 0 otherwise.
Logged number of sex partners: On the basis of our conceptual framework, sexual 
experience with multiple partners was a key exposure risk for HPV acquisition. 
Consequently, we employed the logged number of sex partners at Wave 3. At Wave 3, 
respondents who reported ever having vaginal intercourse were asked the following 
question: “With how many partners have you ever had vaginal intercourse, even if only 
once?” Because of the skew of this variable, we transformed this variable by its natural log. 
This variable was employed in the HPV analysis but not the pregnancy model, since 
including time-invariant measures of time-varying processes yields misspecified event 
history models (Yamaguchi, 1991).
Timing of sexual debut: Age of sexual debut was based on a Wave 3 question about the 
reported age of first vaginal intercourse. For the nonmarital pregnancy analysis, the number 
of years since sexual debut was used as our exposure measure of the risk period. The 
beginning of the risk period was based on respondents' reported of age of first vaginal 
intercourse, which was reported in years at Wave 3. The exit year was based on respondents' 
reports of the date and outcome of their first pregnancies, the formation of their first 
marriage, or the Wave 3 interview date, whichever came first. In the HPV model, 
respondents' age of sexual debut was included as a control.
Sociodemographic and personal controls: On the basis of prior research on pledging 
outcomes, we included several Wave 1 controls for sociodemographic and personal 
characteristics, including age, race/ethnicity, parental education, family structure, religious 
affiliation, religiosity, educational performance, and depressive symptoms (Adamczyk & 
Felson, 2008; Bearman & Brückner, 2001). Race/ethnicity was a four-item measure 
consisting of the following categories: White, African American, Latina, and other. Parents' 
education was a categorical measure of the highest level of education attained by the 
respondents' residential or nonresidential parent(s). This five-item measure contained the 
following categories: less than high school, high school graduation or equivalent, some 
college, graduation from a four-year college, and postgraduate degree. Family structure was 
assessed using a four-item measure that distinguished households in the following 
categories: two biological parents, stepparents, single mothers, and other. Through the 
question “What is your religion?” we employed a five-item measure to distinguish the 
following religious affiliations: (a) “mainline” Protestant (Congregational, Episcopal, 
Paik et al.
Page 7
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lutheran, Methodist, Presbyterian, and United Church of Christ), (b) “other” Protestant 
(Adventist, African Methodist Episcopal, African Methodist Episcopal Zion, Christian 
Methodist Episcopal, Assemblies of God, Baptist, Christian Church–Disciples of Christ, 
Holiness, Jehovah's Witness, Latter Day Saints–Mormon, National Baptist, Pentecostal, and 
“other” Protestant), (c) Catholic or Orthodox Christian, (d) other (Christian Science, 
Friends–Quaker, Baha'i, Buddhist, Hindu, Muslim, Jewish, Unitarian, and “other”), and (e) 
no religion.
We measured religiosity with a summated scale of two 4-point items from Wave 1 assessing 
the frequency of religious attendance and youth group participation (ranging from 1 = never 
to 4 = once a week or more; α = .75). To tap educational performance, we calculated mean 
grade point average (GPA) using respondents' self-reported grades at Wave 1 in 
mathematics, science, English, and history. Dropouts, who are likely to have had low 
educational performance, were coded as receiving D or below, and a student who was not 
graded with letter grades in a given course, such as a pass-fail system, were coded as having 
received a B. Depression was a summated scale of the following 17 items from Wave 1 
assessed on four-point scales (ranging from 1 = never or rarely to 4 = most of the time or all 
the time; α = .87): whether in the previous week the respondent was bothered by things that 
normally were of no concern, experienced poor appetite, could not shake the blues, had 
trouble concentrating, talked less than usual, enjoyed life, had a hard time starting things, or 
felt depressed, felt that people were unfriendly, felt too tired to do things, felt like a failure, 
felt fearful, felt happy, felt lonely, felt sad, felt unliked, or felt like life was not worth living. 
The items for “enjoyed life” and “happy” were reversed coded.
School-level controls: Finally, we included two school-level measures in the analyses. First, 
because pledge taking was a measured success criterion of AOSE during the Bush 
administration, we employ a school-level measure of virginity pledging as a proxy for 
respondents' exposure to AOSE; this measure was also identified in prior research as an 
important predictor of pledging (Bearman & Brückner 2001). We constructed this measure 
as the percentage of students in each school who took virginity pledges. Second, to assess 
possible school-level community support for pledging, we also included a measure of the 
percentage of students in each school who self-identified as being an evangelical Christian. 
For the nonmarital pregnancy analysis, we limited both of these measures only to seventh 
and eighth graders.
Models
On the basis of the availability of the data, we employed two complementary modeling 
strategies. For the HPV analysis, we lacked timing information about when women became 
infected with HPV, so we employed cross-sectional methods in the form of logistic 
regression and assessed differences in exposure risk based on the number of sex partners. 
For nonmarital pregnancies, we had specific dates about age of first intercourse and month 
and year of first pregnancies or marriages; as such, we employed a competing-risks event 
history model and assessed exposure in terms of duration of sexual activity. Both models 
used listwise deletion, but it is worth noting that versions employing multiple imputation 
generated similar results (results available on request).
Paik et al.
Page 8
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For the HPV analysis, we estimated a logistic regression model of HPV status at Wave 3 
among sexually active women, age 18 or older. To the best of our knowledge, no 
population-based studies have biomarker information about the timing of HPV acquisition. 
To assess exposure in this model, we utilized an interaction term consisting of respondents' 
pledge status multiplied by number of partners reported at Wave 3; this allowed us to 
estimate the likelihood of infection at different levels of exposure (i.e., for different numbers 
of partners). We employed weights specific to the HPV subsample, so the results are 
generalizable to sexually active young women in the United States and based on biomarker 
results.
Our modeling of nonmarital pregnancy, in contrast, allowed us to more rigorously specify 
temporal ordering by drawing on a defined risk period between the age of first sexual 
intercourse and the timing of first nonmarital pregnancy. Waves 1 and 3 constituted the 
beginning and end dates, respectively, of the observation period, and entry into the risk set 
was based on the timing of first sexual intercourse. It also allowed us to test our hypothesis 
about increased risks for pledge breakers on an entirely different health outcome. For the 
nonmarital pregnancy analysis, we utilized the event history data available to sequence 
pledging, sexual activity, nonmarital pregnancies, as well as the competing event of 
marriage. There is some left censoring in the data—instances in which female youth 
reported sexual debut before Wave 1—which we sought to minimize by focusing on the 
youngest cohorts (i.e., seventh and eighth graders) who had low proportions of sexual 
activity.
A key advantage of our event history model is that we also accounted for entry into 
marriage, which is a competing risk of nonmarital pregnancy. To examine the timing of 
nonmarital pregnancy and marriage, we employed a discrete-time, competing-hazard model 
(Box-Steffensmeier & Jones 2004), which rendered maximum-likelihood estimates for the 
independent variables on hazards of first family-formation events. Discrete-time models are 
appropriate for handling duration data, such as ours, reported in discrete-time intervals and 
censored on the right. The competing-hazards specification allowed for examining multiple 
types of outcomes: no family-formation event, nonmarital pregnancy, or marriage. To 
handle competing events, we utilized discrete-time, multinomial-logit models, which 
required constructing person-year data and creating a three-category dependent variable to 
reflect the two destination states, in addition to a category for women who did not 
experience a pregnancy or marriage during the risk period. Following Yamaguchi (1991), 
we controlled for sample selectivity due to censoring by introducing controls for age at entry 
into the risk period and age cohort. We did not include measures for number of partners or 
recent condom use, as time-invariant measures of time-varying processes yield misspecified 
event history models (Yamaguchi, 1991). We examined several specifications of duration 
dependence, including linear, quadratic, natural log, and temporal dummies.
Results
Table 1 examines group differences across the variables used in this research. Pledgers 
accounted for 23% of respondents (307 of 1,335 respondents) in the nonmarital analysis, 
which was limited to seventh and eighth graders at Wave 1 who had not experienced first 
Paik et al.
Page 9
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sexual intercourse at that time, whereas only 15% (494 of 3,254 respondents) of seventh 
through 12th graders had pledged at Wave 1 in the HPV analysis. The longitudinal data also 
allowed us to examine the percentage of adolescents who never had sex. Specifically, we 
observed no “pledge effect” among seventh and eighth graders who were not sexually active 
at Wave 1: approximately the same percentage of pledgers and nonpledgers—81% and 83% 
(p > .05), respectively—experienced first sexual intercourse by Wave 3 (results available on 
request). In terms of dependent variables, the portion infected by HPV was approximately 
the same, at 26%–27% for pledgers and nonpledgers (p>.05), whereas a greater percentage 
of pledgers than nonpledgers, experienced a nonmarital pregnancy between Waves 1 and 3 
(31% vs. 24%, p < .05).
There were several significant differences in the HPV subsample, including lower age, 
higher grades, and less depressive symptoms for pledgers. In addition, pledgers were more 
likely to be Latinas, raised by two biological parents, and to have parents with lower 
educational attainment. Pledgers also exhibited higher levels of religiosity (p < .001), and a 
larger proportion of them were affiliated with non-mainline Protestant denominations (p < .
001). They had fewer sex partners (mean of 4 vs. 6, p < .001), experienced sexual debut later 
(mean of 17.3 vs. 16.3, p < .001), and attended schools with higher proportions of pledgers 
(p < .001) and evangelicals (p < .001) in the student body.
Our analytical sample for nonmarital pregnancy, which took advantage of the longitudinal 
data in Add Health, showed fewer differences. Compared to nonpledgers, pledgers were still 
more likely to be non-White and come from families with less schooling, but the two groups 
do not vary much across other demographic measures. We still observed that pledgers were 
more likely to be embedded in religious social contexts (i.e., religiosity, “other” Protestant 
affiliations, and going to schools with other pledgers and evangelicals). Notably, there was 
no difference in age of sexual debut between pledgers and nonpledgers. Thus, consistent 
with the extant literature, this descriptive analysis suggested that pledgers tend to be 
embedded in more religious social contexts and, at least in the cross-sectional data, appear to 
engage in delayed sexual activity and have fewer sex partners. However, the longitudinal 
data suggested, at least descriptively, that virginity pledges are not effective for delaying 
sexual debut.
HPV Analysis
Figure 1 shows that the overall prevalence of HPV among sexually active pledgers (i.e., 
pledge breakers) and nonpledgers was the same, both at approximately 27%. In contrast, the 
percentage of pledgers who were HPV positive was larger than nonpledgers among those 
with at least two sex partners. According to Pearson chi-square tests, however, the only 
statistically significant difference was for women with six to 10 partners (51% vs. 33% for 
pledgers and nonpledgers, respectively; p < .05). At even higher levels of sexual experience
—11 or more prior sex partners—the prevalence of HPV was lower for nonpledgers than for 
those with six to 10 prior sex partners, but the relatively small number of women with more 
than 10 prior sex partners makes this estimate less reliable, and the difference is not 
statistically significant. Descriptive analysis of Figure 1 suggests that the association 
between pledging and STI status likely depends on the number of prior sex partners. We 
Paik et al.
Page 10
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 included number of prior sex partners and tested whether the association between pledging 
and HPV status depended on number of prior partners.
We next examined whether the pledging disadvantage, shown in Figure 1, remained after 
introducing controls. Table 2 presents a logistic regression of HPV status on pledge status 
and controls (Model 1) and then adds in subsequent models number of prior sex partners 
(Model 2) and an interaction term (Model 3) as predictors. We examined alternative 
functional forms for the number of partners, including linear, quadratic, natural log, 
categorical, and binary specifications, and found the log transformation to be the best fitting 
according to the Bayesian and Akaike information criteria (results available on request). As 
such, in the models presented here, we employed the natural log of number of sex partners. 
Based on Wald tests, Model 3 provided the best fit to the data.
Across all three models the main effect for pledge status was nonsignificant. The variable 
logged numbers of prior sex partners, our measure of exposure risk, was significant in both 
Models 2 and 3 (p < .001). Importantly, the interaction between these two variables, 
presented in Model 3 was positive and significant (p < .05), which indicates increasing odds 
of HPV for pledge breakers as number of sex partners increases. Figure 2 presents predicted 
probabilities of HPV infection by pledging status and number of prior sex partners to show 
this interactive relationship. This figure assumes mean values for the continuous variables 
(e.g., depression, parents' education, grade point average, religiosity) and modal values for 
categorical variables (e.g., White, two biological parents, other Protestant). For both pledge 
breakers and nonpledgers, the probability of HPV infection increased with more sexual 
partnering experiences. For example, the probability of infection for a nonpledger with six 
prior sex partners was approximately .32. Among pledge breakers, however, the risk of 
infection increased more quickly. A pledge breaker with six prior sex partners had a risk of 
infection of about .40, which was the same level of risk for a nonpledger with 15 partners.
Figure 2 also presents differences in probabilities between pledgers and nonpledgers, along 
with 95% confidence intervals. The figure shows that this difference becomes significant at 
six or more sex partners. Thus, the risk of HPV infection increased at a significantly faster 
rate for pledgers as exposure risk increased. This result supports our hypothesis that pledge 
breakers have increased risk of HPV than nonpledgers with similar exposure risk. Our 
results also show that this disparity was fairly large and significant at higher levels of prior 
sex partners. It is worth noting, however, that a negative binomial regression of the number 
of sex partners on pledge status and control variables showed that abstinence pledgers 
accumulated partners at a slower rate (results available on request). Thus, pledge breakers 
accumulated partners at a slower rate than nonpledgers but experienced a greater risk of 
contracting HPV for each additional partner.
Table 2 also shows that several sociodemographic and personal controls were associated 
with the likelihood of HPV acquisition. Model 3 shows that age was associated with a lower 
likelihood of HPV. We suspect that this variable was an important control for selectivity into 
the sample, since older Wave 1 pledgers were more likely to be selected on sexual activity 
(i.e., a greater proportion of older adolescents engaged in sexual activity) than younger 
cohorts who were mostly sexually inactive at Wave 1. Those raised in other family 
Paik et al.
Page 11
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 structures, including being raised by relatives, have lower odds (e–.57 = .56, p < .01) of HPV 
infection. There were also racial disparities: the odds of being infected with HPV for African 
Americans, compared to White respondents, was 1.37 times (e.32, p < .05) higher. It is worth 
noting that the odds ratio for Latinas was similar to that of African American women but not 
statistically significant. Finally, the variable of depressive symptoms was associated with an 
increased likelihood of HPV acquisition (e.24 = 1.27, p < .05).
Nonmarital Pregnancy Analysis
Figure 3 presents Kaplan-Meier estimates for the transition to nonmarital pregnancy. Entry 
into the risk period was defined as age of first sex, and observations with no pregnancy were 
right censored at Wave 3. These results show that approximately 30% of pledgers, but only 
18% of nonpledgers, experienced a nonmarital pregnancy within six years after first sexual 
intercourse. The log rank test for equality of the survivor function indicated that pledge 
breakers had higher risks for transitioning to nonmarital pregnancy compared to nonpledgers 
(χ2 = 14.61; p < .000). Thus, the pledging disadvantage was not only statistically significant 
but also substantial in size compared to nonpledgers with similar levels of sexual experience 
(i.e., years since sexual debut), and large disparities were present at higher levels of 
exposure risk.
Next, we examined whether pledging also increased the risk of nonmarital pregnancy in 
multivariable analyses. Table 3 presents estimates from the discrete-time, competing-risks 
model of nonmarital pregnancy and marriage. In terms of duration dependence, the logged 
specification of time yielded the best goodness of fit in comparison to linear, quadratic, and 
temporal-dummy specifications (results available on request). We also tested a model with 
an interaction between pledging and logged exposure time, which was nonsignificant, and 
the model presented in Table 3 was more parsimonious (results available on request).
Consistent with the Kaplan-Meier estimates, Table 3 indicates that pledging was associated 
with an increase in the risk of nonmarital pregnancy by slightly more than 50% (HR = 1.51, 
p < .05), controlling for logged years since sexual debut (exposure risk) and other covariates. 
This finding is consistent with our hypothesis that once differences in exposure risk are 
accounted for, pledge breakers actually have increased risks of negative health outcomes. 
Logged years since debut was, not surprisingly, strongly associated with risk of nonmarital 
pregnancy, whereas age of sexual debut was not significant. This suggests that the hazard of 
nonmarital pregnancy was affected not by age of sexual debut but by number of years of 
sexual activity. In terms of sociodemographic controls, Latinas had a greater risk of 
nonmarital pregnancy (HR = 2.2, p < .01) than Whites. Grade point average, alternatively, 
was associated with a lower probability of nonmarital pregnancy: a one-point increase in 
GPA was associated with a 38% (HR = .62, p < .001) decrease in the hazards of nonmarital 
pregnancy. Further, in a separate analysis, we also examined whether there were differences 
between pledgers and nonpledgers regarding pregnancy intentions and found no statistically 
significant difference between the groups. In fact, consistent with prior research, the 
proportion of pregnancies that were planned among both groups was only around 20%–25% 
(results available on request). Taken together, both sets of results are consistent with the 
Paik et al.
Page 12
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 notion that pledge breakers were less likely to be consistent users of condoms; as their 
exposure risk increased, they had increased risk of negative health outcomes.
A different pattern was apparent for marriage formation. Both age of sexual debut and years 
since sexual debut were associated with entry into marriage. A delay of one year in the onset 
of first sexual intercourse was associated with a 43% (HR = 1.43, p < .001) increase in 
likelihood of marriage, whereas years since sexual debut was also associated with a 
significant increase in the probability of marriage formation. In addition, the percentage of 
evangelical Christian youth in a given school substantially increased the probability of 
marriage in this sample of young women. Specifically, a one-percentage-point increase in 
evangelical youth in respondents' schools was associated with a 3% (HR = 1.031, p < .01) 
increase in the probability of marrying. By contrast, two factors were associated with 
reduced hazards of marriage. Specifically, each one-point increase in respondents' GPA was 
associated with a 38% (HR = .62, p < .05) reduction in the likelihood of marriage, and 
African American women had a strikingly 90% lower hazard rate (HR = .1, p < .001) than 
White women.
Discussion
After accounting for differences in exposure risk between sexually active pledgers and 
nonpledgers, this research reveals that pledgers have increased risks for HPV and nonmarital 
pregnancies. Specifically, pledge breakers were more likely to become infected with HPV 
once they reached approximately six or more sex partners. Similarly, controlling for the 
amount of time female respondents were sexually active, we showed that pledgers had 
increased hazards of nonmarital pregnancy than nonpledgers. Both findings are consistent 
with the argument that pledge breakers are less likely to use condoms or contraceptives 
consistently. By projection, we maintain that as exposure risk increases, this pattern of 
behavior can translate into health disparities. Moreover, our findings complement one 
another. The HPV models show significant results using urine test results as opposed to self-
reports but are somewhat limited because they are cross-sectional. Nevertheless, the event 
history analysis strengthens our confidence in the results from the cross-sectional analysis. 
We maintain that the results indicate that abstinence beliefs associated with pledging have 
the unintended consequence of increasing risks of HPV and nonmarital pregnancies among 
pledge breakers, thereby contributing to the reduced sexual and reproductive health of teens 
and young adults.
In terms of theory, our results are consistent with Swidler's (1986) cultural-lag hypothesis. 
As individuals become sexually active, they draw on preexisting cultural scripts and 
repertoires, or figure out for themselves how to respond to novel situations. In the context of 
sexual activity, adolescent girls and young women face decisions about the use of condoms 
or contraceptives. Abstinence pledgers are more likely to receive cultural messages 
downplaying the effectiveness of condoms and contraceptives, as well as to be exposed to 
the framing of premarital sexual activity as a form of failure. As a consequence, girls and 
young women who pledge may be less “prepared” to manage the risks associated with 
sexual activity by obtaining condoms and contraceptives themselves, or less apt to initiate 
conversations about precautions with their partners. Our evidence is consistent with the idea 
Paik et al.
Page 13
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that skills, habits, repertoires, and strategies for action can and do continue to pattern 
behavior even when the ideas and beliefs that originally motivated them are absent or no 
longer salient to an individual. Young adults are slow to adapt their scripts and habits 
regarding contraceptive use and often fall back on previously acquired information, such as 
the mistrust of contraceptives conveyed by abstinence-only programs. This cultural context 
sets the stage for increased risk of nonmarital pregnancies and STIs. Future research might 
examine this argument vis-à-vis other cultural arguments about sexual and fertility 
behaviors, such as hypotheses on cultural heterogeneity (Harding, 2007).
This research has several implications. First, our research shows that findings of no 
differences in STIs and even a slight pledging advantage for nonmarital pregnancy may be a 
product of modeling issues. On the one hand, our analysis of seventh and eighth graders 
reveals, in fact, a pledging disadvantage in nonmarital pregnancies and no difference in 
sexual debut. This suggests that pledge studies relying on the entire Add Health sample and 
using pledge variables from later waves might have measurement error where a number of 
sexually active pledgers have recanted (e.g., Adamczyk & Felson, 2008; Brückner & 
Bearman 2005). On the other hand, even if pledgers are a low-risk group, exhibiting later 
sexual debut and a slower rate of sex partner accumulation, our results indicate that pledging 
enhances their risks as their exposure risk increases. Studies failing to account for 
differences in exposure, then, may be comparing two groups with different levels of 
exposure.
Second, in terms of public policy, our research highlights the unintended consequences of 
abstinence-only promotion. If adolescents either are provided inaccurate information about 
condom use or contraception or are socialized to be hostile to these practices, they could be 
in a bind when they break pledges, as almost all of them do. Even though this research 
focuses on the effects of abstinence pledging, a direct implication is that abstinence-only 
beliefs, more generally, can have perverse unintended consequences. Among girls and 
young women who have learned to believe that sex is appropriate only in marriage, when 
exposure risk (i.e., number of partners) increases, their risk for STIs and nonmarital 
pregnancies should also increase. This highlights the importance of comprehensive sexual 
education, or at least some form of abstinence-plus education that ensures that young adults 
are adequately prepared to effectively manage their sexual and reproductive health once they 
become sexually active. Importantly, randomized or quasi-randomized control trials showed 
that comprehensive sex education, which includes instruction on safe-sex practices as a 
compliment to abstinence programming, generated protective effects on sexual behavior, 
STIs, and pregnancies (Kirby, Laris, & Rolleri, 2007; Underhill, Operario, & Montgomery, 
2007).
That said, the research clearly shows that reducing exposure risks in terms of having fewer 
sex partners or delaying first sexual intercourse is a pathway for reducing STI acquisition 
and nonmarital pregnancies. The key is to develop effective interventions that reduce both 
amount of exposure risk and likelihood of negative outcomes when sexually active. From 
this perspective, the current trend of developing evidence-based interventions is sound 
policy (Schalet et al., 2014). An unanswered question is whether abstinence pledging has 
Paik et al.
Page 14
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 similar effects on boys and young men. This is an issue that should be addressed by future 
research.
Like any research, our study is not without limitations. First, there is measurement error in 
our key variables. For example, it is possible that pregnancies are more underreported by 
those who hold more conservative values. However, if pledgers are more likely to 
underreport pregnancy rates, then this bias would likely make this research an even more 
conservative test of pledge effects. We also relied on a single question for our pledge 
variable obtained during the first wave of data collection. We used this measure to 
strengthen temporal ordering and to minimize recall bias, as it has been shown that pledgers 
tend to forget that they had pledged previously once they become sexually active 
(Rosenbaum, 2006). Second, there are several sampling limitations. We cannot assess 
whether our findings are generalizable beyond the period covered by the Add Health data, 
and we note that the survey was conducted during the period of initial frenzy surrounding 
AOSE and the virginity pledge movement of the early 1990s. It is not clear, therefore, 
whether the respondents who engaged in pledging behavior in our data would be different 
from the types of individuals who may engage in similar behaviors today. More important, 
HPV tests were limited to a subsample of sexually active women at Wave 3; as such, 
selectivity based on sexual activity may bias our estimates of pledge effects. We believe, 
however, that sexually active pledge breakers may be more similar to nonpledgers than 
pledgers who remain abstinent. As such, our test is likely to be conservative.
Finally, we recognize some data and modeling limitations. Ideally, our modeling would 
include measures for whether adolescents were exposed to AOSE, either school- or religion-
based programs. This type of measure would allow us to more accurately specify abstinence 
beliefs in the sample and allow for making stronger inferences about pledge effects in 
relation to both comprehensive and abstinence-only sex education. Similarly, although we 
sought to control for exposure risk, the data do not contain measures of condom or 
contraceptive use consistency and frequency of sex for the time frames examined. 
Consequently, our measurements of exposure risk, which are based on number of partners 
and exposure time, are approximations. We also assumed that pledgers and nonpledgers 
were equally likely to have sex with HPV-positive individuals. It is possible that this 
probability depends on pledge status and could be examined in future research. One 
possibility is that pledgers tend to choose partners with less sexual experience. If this is the 
case, then the random-mixing assumption is a conservative one. Also, we acknowledge that 
our models cannot demonstrate a causal relationship between pledging and health and 
reproductive outcomes. We note, however, that selection into pledging is important on its 
own right and suggest that pledge effects could be better understood as a proxy for 
underlying abstinence beliefs. This suggests that examining pledge effects may help 
facilitate understanding more generally about the unintended consequences of abstinence 
beliefs.
In summary, this study has sought to examine the relationship between the broken promises 
of abstinence pledging and negative sexual and reproductive health outcomes. We have 
demonstrated that pledging can be associated with negative health effects for young adults 
once they engage in sexual activity. Furthermore, this research indicates that it is incumbent 
Paik et al.
Page 15
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 upon researchers in this area to account for differences in exposure risk when assessing the 
efficacy of the types of programs discussed in this study.
Acknowledgments
This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. 
Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and 
funded by Grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment 
is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Information on how to obtain 
the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct 
support was received from Grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis.
References
Adamczyk A, Felson J. Fetal positions: Unraveling the influence of religion on premarital pregnancy 
resolution. Social Science Quarterly. 2008; 89:17–38.10.1111/j.1540-6237.2008.00519.x
Bearman PS, Brückner H. Promising the future: Virginity pledges and first intercourse. American 
Journal of Sociology. 2001; 106:859–912.10.1086/320295
Boonstra HD. What is behind the declines in teen pregnancy rates? Guttmacher Policy Review. 2014; 
17:15–21.
Box-Steffensmeier, JM.; Jones, B. Event history modeling: A guide for social scientists. New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press; 2004. 
Brewster, KL.; Valle, G.; Harker Tillman, K. The relative timing of sexual behaviors among youth in 
the United States; Paper presented at the meeting of the Population Association of America; New 
Orleans, LA. 2013. 
Brückner H, Bearman PS. After the promise: The STD consequences of adolescent virginity pledges. 
Journal of Adolescent Health. 2005; 36:271–278.10.1016/j.jadohealth.2005.01.005 [PubMed: 
15780782] 
Centers for Disease Control; 2014a. Genital HPV infection: Fact sheet. Retrieved from http://
www.cdc.gov/std/HPV/STDFact-HPV.htm
Centers for Disease Control; 2014b. Trends in the prevalence of sexual behavior and HIV testing 
national YRBS: 1999–2013. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/yrbs/pdf/trends/
us_sexual_trend_yrbs.pdf
Ford CA, Wells Pence B, Miller WC, Resnick MD, Bearinger LH, Pettingell S, Cohen M. Predicting 
adolescents' longitudinal risk for sexually transmitted infection: Results from the National 
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. JAMA Pediatrics. 2005; 159:657–664.10.1001/archpedi.
159.7.657
Harding DJ. Cultural context, sexual behavior, and romantic relationships in disadvantaged 
neighborhoods. American Sociological Review. 2007; 72:341–364.10.1177/000312240707200302
Joseph R. Sex, abortion and Obama. Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health Care. 2012; 
38:187–190.10.1136/jfprhc-2011-012513 [PubMed: 22090161] 
Kirby DB, Laris BA, Rolleri LA. Sex and HIV education programs: Their impact of sexual behaviors 
of young people throughout the world. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2007; 40:206–217.10.1016/
j.jadohealth.2006.11.143 [PubMed: 17321420] 
Kirk D, Papachristos AV. Cultural mechanisms and the persistence of neighborhood violence. 
American Journal of Sociology. 2011; 116:1190–1233.10.1086/655754
Laumann, EO.; Gagnon, JH.; Michael, RT.; Michaels, S. The social organization of sexuality. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press; 1994. 
Manhart LE, Holmes KK, Koutsky LA, Wood TR, Kenney DL, Feng Q, Kiviat NB. Human 
papillomavirus infection among sexually active young women in the United States: Implications 
for developing a vaccination strategy. Sexually Transmitted Diseases. 2006; 33:502–
508.10.1097/01.olq.0000204545.89516.0a [PubMed: 16572039] 
Paik et al.
Page 16
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Martino S, Elliott M, Collins R, Kanouse D, Berry S. Virginity pledges among the willing: Delays in 
first intercourse and consistency of condom use. Journal of Adolescent Health. 2008; 43:341–
348.10.1016/j.jadohealth.2008.02.018 [PubMed: 18809131] 
Meier AM. Adolescent first sex and subsequent mental health. American Journal of Sociology. 2007; 
112:1811–1847.10.1086/512708
Pachucki MA, Breiger RL. Cultural holes: Beyond rationality in social networks and culture. Annual 
Review of Sociology. 2010; 36:205–224.10.1146/annurev.soc.012809.102615
Rosenbaum JE. Reborn a virgin: Adolescents' retracting of virginity pledges and sexual histories. 
American Journal of Public Health. 2006; 96:1098–1103.10.2105/AJPH.2005.063305 [PubMed: 
16670225] 
Rosenbaum JE. Patient teenagers? A comparison of the sexual behavior of virginity pledgers and 
matched nonpledgers. Pediatrics. 2009; 123:e110–e120.10.1542/peds.2008-0407 [PubMed: 
19117832] 
Satterwhite CL, Torrone E, Meites E, Dunne EF, Mahajan R, Ocfemia MCB, Weinstock H. Sexually 
transmitted infections among US women and men: Prevalence and incidence estimates, 2008. 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases. 2013; 40:187–193.10.1097/OLQ.0b013e318286bb53 [PubMed: 
23403598] 
Schalet AT, Santelli JS, Russell ST, Halpern CT, Miller SA, Pickering SS, Hoenig JM. Broadening the 
evidence for adolescent sexual and reproductive health and education in the United States. Journal 
of Youth and Adolescence. 2014; 43:1595–1610.10.1007/s10964-014-0178-8 [PubMed: 
25200033] 
SIECUS. A brief history of federal funding for sex education and related programs. Retrieved from 
http://www.siecus.org/document/docWindow.cfm?
fuseaction=document.viewDocument&documentid=69&documentFormatId=69
Swidler A. Culture in action: Symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review. 1986; 51:273–
286.
Tavory I, Swidler A. Condom semiotics: Meaning and condom use in rural Malawi. American 
Sociological Review. 2009; 74:171–189.10.1177/000312240907400201
Uecker JE. Religion, pledging, and the premarital sexual behavior of married young adults. Journal of 
Marriage and Family. 2008; 70:728–744.10.1111/j.1741-3737.2008.00517.x
Underhill K, Montgomery P, Operario D. Sexual abstinence only programmes to prevent HIV 
infection in high income countries: Systematic review. British Medical Journal. 2007; 335:248–
260.10.1136/bjm.39245.446586.BE [PubMed: 17656503] 
Underhill K, Operario D, Montgomery P. Systematic review of abstinence-plus HIV prevention 
programs in high-income countries. PLOS Medicine. 2007; 4:e275.10.1371/journal.pmed.0040275 
[PubMed: 17880259] 
Vaisey S. Motivation and justification: A dual process model of culture in action. American Journal of 
Sociology. 2009; 114:1675–1715.10.1086/597179
Williams JC. Battling a “sex-saturated society”: The abstinence movement and the politics of sex 
education. Sexualities. 2011; 14:416–443.10.1177/1363460711406460
Yamaguchi, K. Event history analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1991. 
Zolna, M.; Lindberg, LD. Unintended pregnancy: Incidence and outcomes among young adult 
unmarried women in the United States, 2001 and 2008. Washington, DC; Guttmacher Institute; 
2012. Retrieved from http://alanguttmacherinstitute.com/pubs/unintended-pregnancy-
US-2001-2008.pdf
Paik et al.
Page 17
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. HPV Prevalence by Pledging Status and Number of Prior Sex Partners (n = 3,254)
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
Paik et al.
Page 18
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Predicted Probabilities of HPV Infection by Number of Sex Partners and Abstinence 
Pledging
Paik et al.
Page 19
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier Estimates for Nonmarital Pregnancy
Paik et al.
Page 20
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Paik et al.
Page 21
Table 1
Unweighted Descriptive Statistics of Variables
HPV Analysis (n = 3,254)
Nonmarital Pregnancy Analysis (n = 1,335)
No Pledge
Pledge
No Pledge
Pledge
Variables
M
SD
M
SD
Sig.
Range
M
SD
M
SD
Sig.
Range
HPV infection
0.27
0.44
0.26
0.44
0–1
Pregnancy/marriage (none)
0.71
.46
0.59
0.49
***
0–1
 Nonmarital pregnancy
0.24
.43
0.31
0.46
*
0–1
 Marriage
0.06
.23
0.09
0.29
*
0–1
Number of partners (ln)
5.99
6.46
3.99
4.94
***
1–50
Age
16.22
1.66
15.76
1.66
***
13–21
13.84
.69
13.92
0.81
12–18
Parents' education (less than HS)
0.14
0.35
0.18
0.39
*
0–1
0.11
.32
0.16
0.37
*
0–1
 High school grad or GED
0.30
0.46
0.31
0.46
0–1
0.32
.47
0.30
0.30
0–1
 Some college
0.21
0.41
0.20
0.40
0–1
0.20
.40
0.23
0.42
0–1
 College graduate
0.22
0.42
0.21
0.41
0–1
0.25
.43
0.21
0.41
0–1
 Postgraduate degree
0.12
0.32
0.10
0.30
0–1
0.11
.32
0.09
0.29
0–1
Family structure (two bio)
0.50
0.50
0.57
0.49
**
0–1
0.55
.50
0.54
0.50
0–1
 Stepparent
0.09
0.29
0.07
0.25
*
0–1
0.10
.30
0.08
0.27
0–1
 Single mother
0.27
0.44
0.26
0.44
0–1
0.27
.44
0.27
0.45
0–1
 Other
0.14
0.35
0.10
0.30
**
0–1
0.08
.27
0.10
0.31
0–1
GPA
2.80
0.79
2.89
0.77
*
1–4
3.02
.73
3.00
0.65
1–4
Race/ethnicity (White)
0.55
0.50
0.47
0.50
***
0–1
0.65
.48
0.52
0.50
***
0–1
 Black
0.24
0.43
0.26
0.44
0–1
0.20
.20
0.29
0.45
**
0–1
 Latina
0.14
0.35
0.20
0.40
**
0–1
0.09
.09
0.16
0.36
**
0–1
 Other
0.07
0.25
0.08
0.27
0–1
0.06
.06
0.04
0.19
0–1
Religiosity
2.73
1.05
3.21
0.91
***
1–4
2.54
1.09
3.06
1.05
***
1–4
Religious affiliation (mainline)
0.13
0.33
0.10
0.30
0–1
0.16
.37
0.13
0.34
0–1
 Other Protestant
0.43
0.49
0.60
0.49
***
0–1
0.43
.49
0.58
0.49
***
0–1
 Catholic/Orthodox
0.26
0.44
0.22
0.42
*
0–1
0.24
.43
0.18
0.38
**
0–1
 Other religion
0.05
0.22
0.03
0.17
*
0–1
0.05
.21
0.04
0.19
0–1
 None
0.14
0.34
0.05
0.23
***
0–1
0.12
.33
0.07
0.25
**
0–1
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Paik et al.
Page 22
HPV Analysis (n = 3,254)
Nonmarital Pregnancy Analysis (n = 1,335)
No Pledge
Pledge
No Pledge
Pledge
Variables
M
SD
M
SD
Sig.
Range
M
SD
M
SD
Sig.
Range
Depression
1.60
0.44
1.55
0.42
*
1–4
1.46
.38
1.48
0.38
1–3
Age of sexual debut
16.32
2.17
17.26
2.16
***
10–25
16.45
1.55
16.59
1.53
12–21
Percentage of school that pledged
12.15
6.52
17.27
9.71
***
2–57
15.17
7.98
21.63
12.05
***
0–67
Percentage evangelical in school
43.50
21.22
50.79
22.78
***
6–97
45.61
23.12
53.98
22.85
***
0–96
N
2,760
494
1,028
307
Note. Wald χ2 tests and t-tests were used for categorical and continuous variables, respectively.
*p < .05.
**p < .01.
***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Paik et al.
Page 23
Table 2
Logistic Regression of HPV on Pledging Status, Number of Sex Partners, and Controls (n = 3,254)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
B
SE B
B
SE B
B
SE B
Pledge
0.00
0.15
0.11
0.15
–0.36
0.25
Number of partners (ln)
0.50***
0.07
0.43***
0.07
Pledge × num. of partners (ln)
0.41*
0.16
Age
–0.09**
0.03
–0.14***
0.03
–0.13***
0.03
Parents' education (less than HS)
 High school grad or GED
0.12
0.17
0.05
0.17
0.04
0.17
 Some college
0.17
0.18
0.09
0.18
0.09
0.17
 College graduate
0.01
0.20
–0.15
0.20
–0.16
0.20
 Postgraduate degree
0.43*
0.20
0.27
0.20
0.27
0.20
Family structure (two bio)
 Stepparent
0.02
0.18
–0.01
0.18
–0.01
0.18
 Single mother
–0.05
0.14
–0.12
0.14
–0.13
0.14
 Other
–0.51**
0.17
–0.58***
0.18
–0.57**
0.18
GPA
–0.05
0.07
–0.04
0.07
–0.04
0.07
Race/ethnicity (White)
 Black
0.28
0.16
0.32*
0.16
0.32*
0.16
 Latina
0.30
0.21
0.41
0.21
0.43
0.22
 Other
–0.39
0.30
–0.40
0.31
–0.40
0.31
Religiosity
0.04
0.06
0.03
0.07
0.04
0.07
Religious affiliation (mainline)
 Other Protestant
0.10
0.18
0.10
0.18
0.10
0.18
 Catholic/Orthodox
–0.05
0.20
–0.06
0.20
–0.07
0.20
 Other religion
–0.11
0.28
–0.13
0.29
–0.13
0.29
 None
–0.06
0.22
0.01
0.23
0.01
0.23
Depression
0.28*
0.11
0.25*
0.11
0.24*
0.11
Age of sexual debut
–0.05
0.03
0.06*
0.03
0.06
0.03
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Paik et al.
Page 24
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
B
SE B
B
SE B
B
SE B
Percentage of school that pledged
–0.01
0.01
–0.01
0.01
–0.01
0.01
Percentage evangelical in school
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Constant
0.60
0.75
–0.89
0.77
–0.86
0.77
Wald χ2 test
50.6***
6.48*
*p < .05.
**p < .01.
***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Paik et al.
Page 25
Table 3
Discrete-Time Multinomial Logistic Regression of Nonmarital Pregnancy and Marriage 
(n = 1,335; Obs. = 5,319)
Nonmarital Pregnancy
Marriage
Predictor
HR
SE
HR
SE
Time (ln)
2.07***
0.25
4.96***
1.83
Pledge
1.51*
0.24
1.29
0.36
Age
0.96
0.11
1.21
0.27
Parents' education (less than HS)
 High school grad or GED
1.00
0.21
0.72
0.32
 Some college
1.03
0.25
0.59
0.33
 College graduate
0.84
0.20
0.59
0.30
 Postgraduate degree
0.54
0.22
0.32
0.26
Family structure (two bio)
 Stepparent
1.13
0.28
0.87
0.34
 Single mother
1.27
0.20
1.51
0.34
 Other
1.04
0.29
0.53
0.26
GPA
0.62***
0.07
0.62*
0.13
Race/ethnicity (White)
 Black
1.42
0.35
0.10***
0.06
 Latina
2.20**
0.56
1.60
0.87
 Other
1.48
0.64
0.14
0.19
Religiosity
0.98
0.08
1.26
0.18
Religious affiliation (mainline)
 Other Protestant
0.91
0.27
1.56
0.67
 Catholic/Orthodox
0.93
0.26
0.55
0.34
 Other religion
1.10
0.47
1.29
1.22
 None
0.75
0.25
2.58
1.61
Depression
0.98
0.19
0.85
0.32
Age of sexual debut
0.99
0.05
1.42***
0.12
Percentage of school that pledged
0.98
0.01
0.99
0.02
Percentage evangelical in school
1.01
0.00
1.03**
0.01
F(46, 34)
5.51***
Note. HR = hazard ratios.
*p < .05.
**p < .01.
***p < .001 (two-tailed test).
J Marriage Fam. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
