    
  1
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
The Participatory Zeitgeist: an explanatory theoretical 
model of change in an era of coproduction and 
codesign in healthcare improvement
Victoria Jane Palmer,1 Wayne Weavell,1 Rosemary Callander,1 Donella Piper,2 
Lauralie Richard,1,3 Lynne Maher,4,5 Hilary Boyd,6 Helen Herrman,7 John Furler,1 
Jane Gunn,1 Rick Iedema,8 Glenn Robert9
Original research
To cite: Palmer VJ, 
Weavell W, Callander R, et al. 
Med Humanit Epub ahead 
of print: [please include Day 
Month Year]. doi:10.1136/
medhum-2017-011398
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Victoria Jane Palmer, 
The Department of General 
Practice, Melbourne Medical 
School, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Health Sciences, 
The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia;  
 
vpalmer@ 
unimelb. 
edu. 
au
Accepted 22 May 2018
AbsTrACT
Healthcare systems redesign and service 
improvement approaches are adopting participatory 
tools, techniques and mindsets. Participatory methods 
increasingly used in healthcare improvement coalesce 
around the concept of coproduction, and related 
practices of cocreation, codesign and coinnovation. 
These participatory methods have become the 
new Zeitgeist—the spirit of our times in quality 
improvement. The rationale for this new spirit of 
participation relates to voice and engagement (those 
with lived experience should be engaged in processes 
of development, redesign and improvements), 
empowerment (engagement in codesign and 
coproduction has positive individual and societal 
benefits) and advancement (quality of life and 
other health outcomes and experiences of services 
for everyone involved should improve as a result). 
This paper introduces Mental Health Experience 
Co-design (MH ECO), a peer designed and led 
adapted form of Experience-based Co-design (EBCD) 
developed in Australia. MH ECO is said to facilitate 
empowerment, foster trust, develop autonomy, 
self-determination and choice for people living with 
mental illnesses and their carers, including staff at 
mental health services. Little information exists about 
the underlying mechanisms of change; the entities, 
processes and structures that underpin MH ECO and 
similar EBCD studies. To address this, we identified 
eight possible mechanisms from an assessment 
of the activities and outcomes of MH ECO and a 
review of existing published evaluations. The eight 
mechanisms, recognition, dialogue, cooperation, 
accountability, mobilisation, enactment, creativity 
and attainment, are discussed within an ’explanatory 
theoretical model of change’ that details these and 
ideal relational transitions that might be observed or 
not with MH ECO or other EBCD studies. We critically 
appraise the sociocultural and political movement in 
coproduction and draw on interdisciplinary theories 
from the humanities—narrative theory, dialogical 
ethics, cooperative and empowerment theory. The 
model advances theoretical thinking in coproduction 
beyond motivations and towards identifying 
underlying processes and entities that might impact 
on process and outcome. 
Trial registration number The Australian and New 
Zealand Clinical Trials Registry, ACTRN12614000457640 
(results).
The new ZeiTgeisT: pArTiCipATion
The current preoccupation with methods for citizen 
engagement, public participation and involvement 
of people with lived experience in health system 
redesign and service improvement might be said to 
represent the new Zeitgeist—the spirit of our times.1 
Participation has become a distinct cultural and polit-
ical movement characterised by user involvement 
in healthcare across a continuum encompassing 
shared decision-making in clinical treatments and 
management, quality improvement, service rede-
sign and evaluation. This movement has seen a 
proliferation of approaches in healthcare quality 
improvement that use coproduction and related 
(though distinct) models of codesign, coinnovation 
and cocreation. The term coproduction historically 
referred to ‘citizens as coproducers’ of public goods 
and services, the roots of which can be traced to 
public administration discourses of the 1970s.1 In 
this context, citizens were seen to be coproducers 
of government-funded and delivered public services 
and by their engagement in service use and delivery, 
citizens created a public benefit or value.2 In recent 
times, coproduction has been applied more directly 
to clients (or service users) of an organisation (both 
public and privately funded) who engage in copro-
ducing goods and services. The value generated in 
this exchange might be said to differ and be largely 
private since most benefits produced from involve-
ment in the production of goods and services are 
to the client and organisation.2 3 Coproduction has 
gradually been integrated into public infrastruc-
tures procurement and management, and is said to 
generate better outcomes and optimal utilisation; 
however, the empirical evidence for demonstrable 
outcomes is limited.3 4 What is evident is a political 
and sociocultural mindset shift from ‘experts know 
and decide everything’ to ‘we need to decide things 
together’. Authors in the USA have commented 
that ‘if the healthcare reformation movement has 
accomplished any significant change indelibly 
seared to the American culture and Zeitgeist, it’s 
this: ‘patients’ no longer remain detached specta-
tors in the care they receive.’5 While participation 
in healthcare is apparent on a number of fronts, it 
by no means follows that the spirit of participation 
has become normative and embedded within the 
design processes and service improvement efforts of 
healthcare organisations or systems. What is notable 
though is increased reference to the importance of 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 2 
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
coproduced services particularly in mental healthcare policies in 
the UK, Australia, Canada and other Western nations6–9 as well 
as in low/middle-income countries particularly in response to a 
lack of government provision of such services.10 11 
Involvement in public governance and participation in 
health systems redesign and service improvement are certainly 
not solely 21st-century concepts.2 Looking back over the past 
30 
years there is a discernible ‘period’ of public involvement in 
service redesign and improvement efforts. In the UK, the estab-
lishment of INVOLVE (a national advisory group to support 
public involvement in health and social care research) heralded 
a new era for public and patient participation in healthcare 
research.12 Evidence of the involvement push in service improve-
ment and redesign efforts is apparent in mental health policy 
from the 1990s and was most recently expressed in the United 
Nations (UN) special report on the right of everyone to the 
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and 
mental health.6 7 9 13 The UN report referenced the empower-
ment of people with mental health needs as critical to improving 
conditions of treatment and support. To achieve this, the report 
outlined that self-advocacy, peer support networks, trialogues 
and methods of working such as coproduction were essential 
to ensure representation and meaningful participation in health 
service development and provision.8 The pattern repeats in 
Berwick’s recent call to arms for a third (and moral) era in medi-
cine and healthcare:
…(T)he more patients and families become empowered, shaping 
their care, the better that care becomes, and the lower the costs. 
Clinicians, and those who train them, should learn how to ask less, 
‘What is the matter with you?’ and more, ‘What matters to you?’ 
‘Co-production’, ‘co-design’ and person-centred care are among 
the new watchwords, and professionals and those who train them, 
should master those ideas and embrace the transfer of control over 
people’s lives to the people.14
Three transitions are notable in these developments. First, 
healthcare recipients are no longer just spectators in their care 
and, second, their closer involvement is assumed to produce 
value (how much this is public or private has not been estab-
lished). Third, coproduction and codesign are emerging as 
means to facilitate various ends including, but not limited to, 
both greater individual control and system efficiencies. Clarke 
et al15 have cautioned that ‘coproduction’ (and associated vari-
ants) may already be in danger of losing meaning as it enters 
mainstream management discourse and practice. Recent 
academic critiques of coproduction echo this highlighting a lack 
of critical engagement with issues of power, power relations 
and questions of representation in coproduction and codesign 
approaches. These critiques signal a need to address questions 
around whether participation fosters inclusion or reinstates 
existing social exclusions. Or, if the instruments thought to be 
alternatives to the social structure have become tools that serve 
the dominant agents.16 Consequently, service user empowerment 
and democratisation of service provision through coproduction 
is seen to be at risk of being deployed simplistically.17 18 The 
‘dark side’ of coproduction has been noted, where inequities 
may be reinforced, particularly if they take the form of a substi-
tution of labour and are used solely to provide cover for political 
decisions.19 Brandsen and Honingh20 have argued that public 
participation and collaboration on the one hand may be attrib-
uted to an emerging public governance paradigm where citizens 
are engaged in democratic processes and given a voice in govern-
ance and decision-making. On the other hand, this involvement 
could be seen as attempts to harness societal and citizen efforts 
as a response to dwindling government resources,19 a perceived 
loss of public value and trust in government services, and a drive 
to reinvigorate voluntary participation and strengthen social 
cohesion as a response to fragmentation and a highly individual-
ised society.17 20 Others have argued that, while well intentioned, 
the implementation of coproduction in the healthcare sector and 
particularly in mental health remains uncritical:
…the shift towards greater user involvement is typically couched by 
its advocates as being ethically straightforward and as an unalloyed 
good, because it represents a transformation of users from a role of 
passivity and dependence on the paternalism of professionals to more 
active, empowered and respected autonomous persons …[this] fail[s] 
to represent the ethical complexities embedded in welfare [and ser-
vice] relationships.21
Bringing people together to redesign and improve services 
as coproducers is indeed recreating the ways in which public 
governance, policy and health services are enacted and func-
tion. It is also changing the relationships between providers and 
recipients of those services. Renedo et al have identified that 
when involved in improvement, people come to think and act 
in new spheres of organisational cultures. Quoting work of 
Cornwall and Gaventa (2000, p 50), they argued, “people make 
a transition from being ‘users and choosers’ to being ‘makers 
and shapers’.”22 This transition is not always easy and the social 
and cultural context must be accounted for. In mental health 
services, people are no longer seen to be passive recipients of 
services, they have been reframed as designers, learners and 
actors who shape the outcomes that they desire from organi-
sations.23 24 In this regard, the participatory Zeitgeist is char-
acterised by an increased focus on coproduction and codesign 
approaches, and an acknowledgement that people with lived 
experience must be central in decision-making.25 More than this, 
experience has become a form of expert knowledge viewed as 
an essential part of some coproduction processes, particularly 
those facilitated within mental health or settings where people’s 
voices have been largely unheard due to dominant institutional 
and social forces at play. This confluence of approaches and 
agendas is challenging since coproducers have diverse values, 
needs and priorities generally,4 and people with lived experience 
are not a cohesive and homogenous group.26 How the coproduc-
tion field grapples with these differences and possible conflicts is 
important to the healthcare improvement era. Currently though 
theoretical models that assist to evaluate and explain the engage-
ment, diversity and transitionary experiences of people in copro-
duction efforts are lacking.
In the mental healthcare setting coproduction and Experi-
ence-based Co-design (EBCD) in particular offers a way to shift 
power dynamics. EBCD follows six stages to identify the positive 
experiences in services and the areas for improvements (called 
touch points) and then undertake a codesign process to imple-
ment improvements with staff, service users and carers.23 EBCD 
is qualitative in orientation and has appeal for people who may 
have experienced health systems as largely paternalistic, domi-
nating forces with a disregard for their views and values; an 
experience that has unfortunately been all too common for many 
people living with mental illness and their carers. This disregard 
of voice and experience has been a major impetus for the growth 
of the service user/survivor movement which has served also to 
raise awareness of the importance of lived experience in service 
redesign and quality improvement efforts. Despite the increase 
in peer networks and embedded models of service users within 
quality improvement initiatives as demonstrated by researchnet 
in the UK,25 Tomes has noted that the ability to redistribute 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
  3
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
power to ‘end users in a fragmented, politicised health care 
system remains a daunting prospect.’27 Coupled with this is the 
risk of essentialising lived experience by use of the term as an 
umbrella and universal concept.26
It is time to critically evaluate the participatory Zeitgeist as it 
is being enacted in mental health systems redesign and quality 
improvement efforts. Greater explication and examination of 
the claimed outcomes and sustained impacts of coproduction 
in healthcare is required to advance the field theoretically and 
practically.1 This includes developing a deeper understanding of 
people’s experiences of the transition from ‘users and choosers’ 
to ‘makers and shapers’.22 In the examination of such transitions 
it must be acknowledged that participation experiences are not 
universal, organisational cultures are diverse and the direction 
may not always be from user to maker. To fully examine outcomes 
and explore processes of coproduction using theoretical models, 
it is necessary to identify the mechanisms, those ‘underlying enti-
ties, processes, or structures which [may] operate in particular 
contexts to generate outcomes of interest.’28 In coproduction 
generally there has been less attention to the identification 
of mechanisms. A survey conducted across the UK, France, 
Germany, Denmark and the Czech Republic of the coproduction 
behaviours of citizens with respect to public services related to 
neighbourhood safety, the environment and health found that 
intrinsic reward—the belief that citizens can make a difference—
was a determinant for coproduction. Results did have contextual 
variation across nations but largely indicated that where there 
was an awareness of government shortfalls in performance, 
coproduction was more likely.29 A repeat of the same survey in 
Australia also identified that citizens who thought that they could 
make a bigger difference reported higher levels of coproduction 
although the factors that contributed to this varied.3 While this 
highlights some of the motivations for involvement in coproduc-
tion of public services, the literature from healthcare improve-
ment projects using EBCD and coproduction remains mostly 
qualitative and largely comprises thousands of case studies that 
are strong on the nature and level of coproduction but weak on 
wider, long-term impacts.30 Studies suggest service outcomes can 
be transformed without increasing costs, but this has not been 
systematically evaluated.30 A systematic review of coproduction 
and cocreation approaches in the public sector drew similar 
conclusions; process and factors for success have been given a 
lot of attention but there is less evidence for outcomes.31
Similarly, evaluations of completed EBCD projects in the UK 
in particular have documented improvements in operational 
efficiencies, interpersonal dynamics of care, reduced complaints 
and better communication, team relationships and service users 
feeling listened to and involved.32 The majority of these studies 
have been within hospital settings,33 specifically in head and neck 
cancer services, breast and lung cancer services, gynaecology and 
colorectal,34 35 lung cancer and intensive care units,34 stroke 
rehabilitation15 and end of life care in emergency departments.36 
A few studies have been conducted in the mental health setting 
but these are limited.32 33 EBCD evaluations have examined: 
the processes of EBCD employed, the potential outcomes, the 
codesigned improvements and their implementation, including 
sustainability and spread. Despite the documented potential 
individual level outcomes related to increased self-determination 
and agency, empowerment, hope, trust, confidence,6 9 improved 
accessibility and acceptability of services, quality of life13 37 38 and 
clinical effectiveness and patient safety,39 the evidence to support 
these outcomes is limited and explorations of the mechanisms 
which may bring about these outcomes, or assist to explain 
change or no change are scant.
In health and medical research, the randomised controlled 
trial (RCT) is upheld as the gold standard for generating such 
evidence about outcomes. Only one RCT of an EBCD approach 
has been completed testing if a method called Mental Health 
Experience Co-design (MH ECO) developed in Australia 
improves psychosocial recovery outcomes for people experi-
encing severe mental illness (schizophrenia, bi-polar disorder, 
psychosis, and major depressive disorder).40–42 In this paper, 
we use the MH ECO example to build an explanatory theoret-
ical model of change that will assist in the future evaluation of 
the trial outcomes for MH ECO and provide a basis for further 
understanding and examination of coproduction and other 
EBCD studies in the future. In terms of the latter, it is antici-
pated that this current proposed model is preliminary and would 
undergo further expansion, reduction and/or refinements as it is 
applied to other studies in different settings using other EBCD 
approaches. Before outlining the explanatory theoretical model 
of change, we provide an overview of the example from which 
this was developed, MH ECO and its origins.
MenTAl heAlTh experienCe Co-design
MH ECO is an example of a service user and carer peer devel-
oped and led systems redesign and quality improvement meth-
odology; it is the first EBCD informed intervention to be tested 
within an RCT design in the world. The impetus for develop-
ment of MH ECO began in 2006 partly as a response to the 
wider sociocultural and political movement to involve and 
embed people with lived experience in service redesign and 
quality improvement. The Victorian State government had 
identified a need for involvement of service users and carers of 
mental health services in treatment and care planning. There had 
also been the development of Australian National Standards for 
Mental Health Services which detailed the importance of service 
user and carer involvement in service planning, system redesign 
and evaluation.43 There was also dissatisfaction with standard 
methods for collecting feedback on public mental health services 
based on a survey which historically had small response rates 
and did not adequately capture the experiences of service users 
and carers; an issue previously noted within quality improve-
ment fields.44
The original tripartite partnership between the peak service 
user and carer agencies (the Victorian Mental Illness Awareness 
Council and Tandem representing mental health carers) and 
State government began, then, with the goal of increasing partic-
ipation and representation of service users and carers in the 
annual experiences of public mental health services survey. This 
involved identification of areas of importance for service users 
and carers about the kinds of experiences that people thought 
were important to find out about. The survey underwent testing 
and piloting for redesignand was administered by telephone. 
Following its completion, the next step was the development of 
MH ECO as a quality improvement approach.43 45 The govern-
ment agency responsible held the view that data alone were 
not enough—resourcing and action for change would also be 
required.
The decision was made to pilot the development of a quality 
improvement methodology using the EBCD model published 
in the UK in one of the participating non-clinical community 
mental health support service organisations from the survey 
redesign project.45 MH ECO drew on the existing EBCD model 
used within the National Health Service in the UK primarily 
because the service user or person with lived experience was 
situated within the design process and it offered guidance on 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 4 
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
a participatory but structured approach to bring staff, service 
users and carers together to collaborate for changes.46 The MH 
ECO methodology development did not begin however with the 
traditional EBCD information gathering stages of observations 
or face-to-face, or in-depth narrative interviews and films with 
service users and carers. Instead, experience findings and the top 
three touch points identified from the survey were identified for 
use23 32 34; it is important to note though that the final MH ECO 
model included the option for in-depth interviews, development 
of personal stories and for services to adopt different methods 
for gathering information about experiences. The identification 
of touch points from pre-existing experiences data was also used 
within a study completed in the psychiatric inpatient setting 
where existing in-depth interview transcripts were analysed and 
touch points developed before codesign work commenced.32 
Films were not created for the MH ECO pilot because of limi-
tations of time and feedback from service users who felt that 
watching themselves on film was uncomfortable.
Table 1 provides an overview of the final format for the MH 
ECO methodology. It shows the establishment phase, the collec-
tion of experiences, the exploration of touch points using a focus 
group approach, the use of collaboration groups and codesign 
working groups and a final celebration event. MH ECO also 
adopts a highly structured approach with peers with lived expe-
rience facilitating focus groups, collaboration group and code-
sign group meetings. Within these meetings participants adopt 
different roles and responsibilities but the codesign process 
is always facilitated.
After the pilot was completed, MH ECO was further adapted 
for delivery within a cluster RCT to determine its effectiveness 
Table 1 The MH ECO methodology
engagement
*MH ECO final methodology did indicate that an experiences survey developed with 
service users and carers could be used to identify touch points.
setting up
Meetings with staff explaining project and identification of a project lead. Engagement 
of staff and determining the best method for collection of experience data.
information gathering
*MH ECO final methodology did not include observations of care or service experiences 
to understand the person’s journey.
Collecting experience stories
Interviewing or surveying (depending on the service’s choices) service users and carers 
about experiences.
Review of interview (or survey) responses to identify the repeated themes (strongest 
response areas), shared across those interviewed. Themes comprise the touch points, of 
which the top three areas to improve on are selected.
Understanding experience
*MH ECO final methodology did not include the creation of films or showing visual 
accounts of experiences to develop shared understanding of areas for improvement. 
Statements of touch points were also presented neutrally as a way of checking 
member’s connection with the touch point—that is, feeling strongly or less strongly 
about an area for improvement.
sharing experiences in focus groups
The top three touch points identified from interviews (or survey) developed into neutral 
statements.
Neutral statements are explored with individual groups (service users, carers and staff 
meet separately) to determine feeling strong or less strongly around these.
The strong emotions are used to prioritise areas for improvement for each group.
Touch point priority areas for each group are reviewed and points of connection across 
the groups determined.
Training for codesign
learning to work together
Orientation for service users and carers about group processes and exploring power 
dynamics of working together with staff. Staff join with service users and carers and 
collectively learning about the codesign process.
establishment of collaboration group
A strategic group of six to eight people that comprised senior leaders within an 
organisation to facilitate best chance of implementation of changes, plus service users 
and carers.
*MH ECO final methodology included a collaboration group of senior leaders within 
organisations to ensure better chance of improvements being implemented.
Meeting 1—setting codesign objectives
The collaboration group is provided with the prioritised touch point areas from the focus 
groups.
They review these and discuss the touch points.
This group is supported to formulate codesign objectives (ie, which touch point and 
what is the objective for change around this, also referred to as an improvement 
objective). This objective is handed over to the codesign working groups.
Meeting 2—developing an implementation plan
The collaboration group develop an implementation plan when they receive the 
codesign working groups’ action plan (explained below). Implementation plans establish 
further how to take the suggested changes from the action plans and identify who is 
responsible within what time frames co-designed changes might be implemented.
Meeting 3—review of implementation
Collaboration groups review what was implemented, by when and what the barriers 
were to that implementation.
establishment of codesign groups
Working groups of eight people with project staff, service users and carers to codevelop 
an action plan for changes.
*MH ECO final methodology suggested that there could be up to three codesign groups 
to each work on up to three touch point areas for improvement.
Meeting 1—process mapping
Examine the objective for which an action plan will be developed (discuss, create 
process map to identify the problem areas or sticking points).
Meeting 2—brainstorming
Look at other solutions and brainstorm for codesigned solutions. In the implementation 
of MH ECO for the study in question a number of evidence syntheses were prepared to 
support decision-making within the group and ideas generation for changes.
Meeting 3—action plan formulation
The group is facilitated to codevelop an action plan for changes which includes the 
identification of strategies to achieve the objective for change, the tasks that are 
required to get there and identifies who is responsible and by when.
MH ECO, Mental Health Experience Co-design.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
  5
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
for improving psychosocial recovery outcomes for people living 
with severe mental illness. This was premised on the early pilot 
findings of increased self-determination, empowerment, hope 
and positive experiences and how these concepts fit with current 
conceptions of psychosocial recovery.42 47 As has been shown 
before, the trial involved a multidisciplinary team of investi-
gators trained in the humanities, applied ethics, primary care, 
psychiatry, sociology and quality and safety improvement. The 
original peak agencies responsible for the development of the 
MH ECO model were engaged as partners (VMIAC an
d Tandem)) and two nominated persons with lived expe-
rience facilitated the delivery of MH ECO in the trial. Those 
facilitators and the broader research team were engaged in the 
process of identifying anticipated outcomes from MH ECO 
which were presented in a programme logic model developed 
for the trial. The research team collectively reviewed the inputs 
of MH ECO (the information gathering and codesign activi-
ties, and processes) and considered these against the anticipated 
outcomes from the programme logic model combined with 
existing findings in published EBCD evaluations. Eight mech-
anisms were identified as the potential ‘underlying entities, 
processes, or structures’ operating within MH ECO. These were 
discussed by the research team and agreements were reached on 
how these mechanisms might be essential to generating the antic-
ipated outcomes of MH ECO. The mechanisms were organised 
in figure 1 as a way to show the flow of mechanisms against 
stages, activities and process of the methodology. Importantly, 
the connected lines signify interconnectedness between mech-
anisms rather than a distinct linear flow where one mechanism 
might move on to the next.
It is important to note that the eight mechanisms—recogni-
tion, dialogue, cooperation, accountability, mobilisation, enact-
ment, creativity and attainment—do not exist in isolation, there 
is complexity of the environment and organisational contexts 
which shape these. In addition, the mechanisms coexist within 
the relational context of EBCD work. Table 2 presents the mech-
anisms within an explanatory theoretical model. The explanatory 
theoretical model shows the inter-relationship between mecha-
nisms and what the research team has identified as a series of 
ideal relational transitions that could occur in coproduction and 
codesign activities. Combined, mechanisms and transitions help 
to explain, examine and understand the processes of codesign (in 
this case the example of MH ECO is used) and their relationship 
with outcomes more directly. In future work, in examining the 
processes and outcomes of activities using codesign the model 
itself may be refined with new mechanisms identified and rela-
tional transitions considered.
nArrATive Theory And episTeMiC jUsTiCe
The explanatory theoretical model begins with an idealised (or 
perhaps more accurately even a non-ideal) version of an ‘I’ that 
suggests when service users, carers and staff begin the codesign 
journey their experiences may be presented as part of narrative 
Figure 1 The eight mechanisms of change identified within Mental Health Experience Co-design methodology.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 6 
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
of a separated or isolated self. It should be noted that this rela-
tional positioning is idealised and in reality people may come to 
a coproduction or codesign process starting at a different point; 
not everyone will see themselves in this way. There may be people 
who are more oriented towards ‘You’ or ‘Us’ in their relation-
ships; the point here is more in the explanatory potential of the 
relational transitions. Use of the model may assist to highlight 
the different starting points of individuals, including acknowl-
edging how their own contextual factors and backgrounds might 
shape this. The explanatory model may then assist to document 
and evaluate whether the shifts and transitions do occur and, 
importantly because of the identification of mechanisms coupled 
with these, whether or not those shifts and transitions were 
made possible because of different relational capacities.
Our explanatory theoretical model commences with 'I' because 
codesign projects do start with a focus on ‘I’—service users are 
asked what happened. What services did you receive? How was 
your care experienced? What could improve? Equally carers are 
asked for their stories about their experiences of the system or 
service. This is an essential step in EBCD studies in contrast to 
Table 2 An explanatory theoretical model of change for an experience-based codesign approach
Mechanisms of change
relational transitions
explanatory theories
Recognition
 
 
 
 
‘I’—‘Them’ 
 
► Isolated/vulnerable
 
► Introspective/introverted
 
► Burdened/self-focus
 
► Underappreciated/not valued
 
► Overlooked/invisible/fallen through the 
cracks/not listened to
 
► Marginalised/stigmatised
 
► Discriminated against
 
► Harmed
 
► Targeted
 
► Separated
Narrative theory and epistemic justice:
Stories are central to identity formation and how individuals and others 
understand experiences. Storytelling enables experiential knowledge to 
be shared among willing listeners. It creates conditions of engagement 
with a problem or experience. The mechanism of recognition is an 
important part of storytelling—experiential knowledge must be afforded 
equal weight to other kinds of positivist knowledge—it must be 
recognised as being of value to all people involved. Experience-based 
codesign begins with the idea that sharing stories of experience is 
important to redesign and improvement efforts; it is the way that people 
talk about their experiences of coming in touch with different parts of 
a service. Here, narrative identity and epistemic justice (the question of 
whose knowledge is seen to count) provide the theoretical underpinning 
to unpack how recognition of experience and identities is facilitated or 
not in codesign work.
Dialogue
 
‘Them’—‘I’—‘You’
 
► Not alone/others with similar 
experience
 
► Disbelief about experiences
 
► Appreciating another’s point of view
 
► Building greater understanding of 
institutionalienvironmental constraints
 
► Feeling listened to/heard
 
► Building a community of shared 
understanding
Dialogical ethics and narrative contract:
Sharing stories is dependent on dialogue between people and dialogue 
is also an important mechanism for developing agreements and shared 
understanding about experiences; a narrative contract. Dialogue is 
important in codesign work because it is part of the interaction with 
others that is needed to make decisions about improvement areas, 
agree on choices and build creative solutions. Through dialogue it is 
possible for service users and carers to recognise that some experiences 
are shared, staff recognise the need to value experience—sometimes 
dialoguing enables a difference of perspective to emerge and to allow 
different priorities to emerge. Service users and carers can also develop 
understanding of the structural constraints for staff in achieving change. 
Dialogue is not always facilitative it can hinder, be conflictual and people 
can disagree, but it is viewed as an underlying process for achieving 
shared understanding which makes it an essential mechanism. Here, 
dialogical ethics provides the theoretical underpinning to unpack this 
mechanism and relational work.
Cooperation
Accountability
Mobilisation
 
 
 
‘You’—‘Us’
 
► Focus on others insteaad of I
 
► Perceptual broadening
 
► Feeling valued for experience
 
► Feeling safe and confident to speak up
 
► Adoption of role as change agent
 
► Improvement in self-esteem
Cooperative theory:
As experience-based codesign progresses people form into groups 
where there is shared knowledge of multiple experiences and roles. 
The mechanism of cooperation comes into effect here where a sense of 
solidarity for a common cause evolves; without which people cannot 
agree on improvement areas or solutions that need to be implemented—
this means that codesign can be thwarted. In the ideal, if cooperation 
is facilitated, people develop a sense of working together and build a 
shared agenda for change. Here, the mechanism of accountability enables 
the collective agenda for change to grow. A collective agenda shapes 
group motivation and agreement to mobilise to act. At first, some might 
be motivated by the desire to change things for oneself in the early 
stages (private value) but shift to changing things for others (public 
value) might also drive this. Here theories of cooperation help to unpack 
the mechanisms and transitions at work.
Enactment
Creativity
Attainment
 
 
 
 
 
‘Us’—‘We’
 
► Shared decision-making
 
► Contribution to something bigger than 
‘I’ or ‘We’
 
► Collective agency
 
► Responsibility for change for others
 
► Belonging to a ‘community’
Empowerment and design theories:
As experience-based codesign progresses, new changes need to be 
enacted; without this nothing gets done. Enactment is dependent to 
some degree on creativity which enables people to bring their different 
experiences and skills to the codesign process. This might also mean 
bringing in others who can foster new ways of thinking creatively. 
Attainment is required for implementation. Here, empowerment and 
design theories provide a theoretical underpinning to examine these 
mechanisms and transitions.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
  7
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
other coproduction activities, as these preliminary stories enable 
the identification of individual touch points and from this, we 
can establish those touch points which are shared across people. 
The beginning point for EBCD is how services or healthcare 
could be better experienced. Thus, the early stories elicited can 
naturally hinge on a separated ‘I’ being the main protagonist as 
people draw on memories of negative experiences; it does not 
mean that people have not shared a collective story about posi-
tive experiences, however the improvement process focuses on 
what could be better and engages people in a collective response 
to this. The ‘I’ story can thus be one that is pitted against ‘Them’ 
but it does not always have to be, there are many variations in 
how stories are recounted by participants and sometimes people 
enlist ‘Us’ as pitted against them to foster collective power.  It 
is important to note that there are positive stories within these 
that are often shared but the focus for improvements is on the 
negative.
The importance of using ‘I’ and ‘Them’ as a basis for the 
beginning of the explanatory theoretical model is individuals 
(I) come together with others to share stories of experience. 
What’s made possible from this is a sense of collective identity 
formation. Sharing stories does not make relationships equal or 
automatically disrupt power imbalances, but stories do enable 
shared experiences to become part of a collective identity 
forming process. Narrative theory is thus essential to  EBCD and 
allows the connection between storytelling and identity forma-
tion to be acknowledged; this is the case also in the MH ECO 
methodology. Storytelling offers the opportunity for people to 
recognise that some experiences are shared by others and people 
can start to appreciate there are limitations for change, or ways 
in which broader social and organisational forces constrain the 
best possible experience of care being in place. Storytelling does 
not always mean that people automatically feel a sense of shared 
experience, but listening is facilitated by the recognition of the 
importance of each other’s experience. For stories to do their 
work of helping people to move out of a focus on ‘I’ (where 
it does exist) and a possible viewpoint of their world as pitted 
against ‘Them’ the mechanism of recognition is essential. When 
recognition is present it is more likely for the relational transi-
tion from ‘I’ and ‘Them’ to occur; ‘You’ may come into focus. 
This recognition is signalled in the valuing of experience and a 
recognising effort on the part of individuals to hear the story of 
experience differently.
This potential relational shift and the role of recognition 
inherent to it creates what Miranda Fricker calls epistemic 
justice.48 Fricker distinguished between two forms of epistemic 
injustice: testimonial injustice and hermeneutic injustice. Testi-
monial injustices are those injustices that occur when a person’s 
word is afforded less credibility or their knowledge invalidated 
through discounting or diminishing their account because of 
prejudice. Hermeneutic injustice is when the meaning of expe-
rience is downgraded and interpreted incorrectly. Examples of 
this are when collective understandings are skewed by expe-
riences being discredited, or downplayed because of acuity of 
illness or individuals being framed as not being able to under-
stand the complex procedures within organisations. Recognition 
that both kinds of injustices have usually been experienced by 
service users and carers in the mental health setting is critical 
and similarly staff may have had such experiences; Fricker’s 
point is that some groups are more likely than others to expe-
rience testimonial or hermeneutic injustices. Fricker’s argument 
is that power asymmetries skew our collective understandings 
such that the understandings of the more powerful social groups 
dominate; the task of codesign work is to align symmetries.15 
Recognition is thus considered to be a mechanism important to 
codesign outcomes because it has an enabling function in terms 
of facilitation of movement between people to an understanding 
of experience where epistemic justice is present. The mechanism 
is seen to be one of the critical elements of  the explanatory theo-
retical model because without this shared understanding may 
not eventuate and without shared understanding there could be 
limitations in how people work together to enact the codesign 
of improvements.
diAlogiCAl eThiCs And nArrATive ConTrACT
The explanatory theoretical model illustrates  that in the ideal, 
groups can create conditions where testimonial and hermeneutic 
injustices are countered because people to feel heard and valued; 
people can experience this because the mechanism of recogni-
tion is invoked through storytelling and listening. Story sharing 
is one way to facilitate the transition from ‘Them’ to ‘You’, but 
it is also dependent on the dialogue about the experiences that 
ensues. In cases where people may have experienced feeling 
mistrusted or delegitimised, storytelling becomes particularly 
important for creating a space of feeling heard and enabling 
shared experience.49 In the MH ECO example service users, 
staff and carers first meet separately in focus groups, with peers, 
to share their experiences and views on areas of change and to 
prioritise the improvement areas. Here, there is a group of peers 
who may have had similar experiences of services and dialogue 
about experience may assist in the creation of the conditions for 
a relational shift to begin where people can move out of ‘Them’ 
and into seeing ‘You’, this is made possible because of a shared 
recognition of our humanity. Similarly, some focus groups might 
have more of a relation of ‘Us’ at play where the ‘Us’ is used 
to reinforce group power of experience. Dialogue here may 
also be critical to shifting any oppositional dynamics for people 
to recognise and see and hear that they are not alone in their 
experiences.
Dialogue enables what Arthur Frank calls a ‘moral moment’ 
to occur which can facilitate or hinder relational transitions 
from ‘I’ or ‘Them’ to ‘You’. Frank drew on Bakhtin’s concept 
of a dialogic ethic to capture this moment and bring into focus 
others.50 In dialogue the ‘moral demand is to grant equal 
weight to the other’s voice,’ much like Fricker’s notion of epis-
temic justice, committing to dialogue with people is: ‘more 
than recognising their inherent dignity and defending their 
rights; it’s being willing to allow their voice to count as much 
as yours.’50 The moral moment is when ‘I’ must decide to give 
equal weight to other cognisant and knowing I’s around ‘[me]’. 
But in giving that weight there is not a closing off of dialogue. 
This illustrates how dialogue might be a mechanism for rela-
tional transitions from ‘I’ or ‘Them’ to seeing ‘You’. A wider 
horizon may form in the possibility of seeing one's self as inter-
connected, dependent on others and interacting with them to 
harness capacity for change. This does not gaurantee  transition 
s however our point is that the mechanism of dialogue plays a 
role in this.
Dialogue might also be said to build what Gabriel called a 
‘narrative contract’: the shared agreement between teller and 
audience of what is possible (meaningful, recognisable and believ-
able). Without shared agreement a story might be challenged 
on two possible different grounds: by the ‘So What?’ question, 
which implies that the story fails to carry shared meaning, and 
by the ‘Did It Really?’ question, which implies that the story fails 
to carry verisimilitude.51 52 The latter again reinforces how epis-
temic injustice can come into play once more and how dialogue 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 8 
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
and recognition are important mechanisms for building narra-
tive contracts that can challenge this.
CooperATive Theory
If recognition and dialogue are the basis from which collective 
identities and narrative contracts can develop within group 
discussions, then it is possible to suggest that they are mecha-
nisms with a generative function in the movement from ‘You’ 
to ‘Us’. But those mechanisms require underlying processes 
and structures of cooperation, accountability and mobilisation 
to fully bring ‘Us’ relations into being, including shifting the 
orientation beyond ‘Us’ to ‘We’. To illustrate this from the MH 
ECO methodology again service users, carers and staff remain 
separated among peers during the focus group stage. The peer 
groups enable shared understanding and agreement of experi-
ences to develop which may create the foundations for collective 
identity formation but, there is equally the possibility that shared 
experience can be used to reinforce separateness and create a 
more exclusive and closed off community of ‘Us’ only. For the 
relational transition to occur from ‘You’ to ‘Us’ to ‘We’ peer 
groups must necessarily broaden outwards; connections across 
experiences are important and a new community needs to form 
otherwise what remains is a closed off moral enclave.
This suggests that mechanisms of cooperation, accounta-
bility and mobilisation play a role within relational transitions. 
As Locock et al concluded from participants recounting their 
involvement in accelerated EBCD, it was the mutual encounter 
that left them feeling most energised…codesign offered a space 
for active partnerships and for revelation and transformation of 
values to take place.34 In MH ECO the space for new community 
is facilitated when people move out of the siloed individual story-
telling and focus groups stages and into training (or orientation) 
and shared agreements for codesign activities. At this stage in the 
MH ECO methodology all three groups finally come together 
to talk about working in groups and what to expect from the 
codesign group meetings. This provides the opportunity to start 
to build the sense that being together can create something 
new both for individuals and others. There is movement out of 
shared experiences into shared purposes; the basis of cooper-
ation. As Axelrod and Hamilton noted, ‘cooperation can only 
take place in situations that contain a mixture of conflicting and 
complementary interests.’53
Having a transitional space to move from siloed, separated 
groups to a collective group with shared purpose allows for a 
sense of commitment to change to emerge. By sharing in common 
purpose a collective identity forms through what Isaacs and 
Massey have called the dialogical process, ‘[this] emerges out of 
and is shaped by our creative engagement with others which often 
involves the telling of stories to one another.’54 In this collective 
identity formation, differences are still apparent and the group 
is by no means homogeneous, but there is agreement around 
being together and mobilising for change. There is the potential 
for polyphony as multiple voices come together. The additional 
element of polyphony is in keeping with the notion of cooperation 
not as 100% agreement 100% of the time, and draws on Bakh-
tin’s (1984) portrayal of this as, ‘a multiplicity of independent and 
unmerged voices and consciousnesses … each with equal rights 
and its own world [that] combine, but do not merge, into the 
unity of an event.’55 The emphasis here is on simultaneous inter-
action and clash, and a dialogic ethic that does not close off the 
conversation but enables the formation of cooperation through 
collective identities ‘Us’ and ‘We’. Here it is possible, then, to see 
that interactions between dialogue, recognition and cooperation.
Creative engagement during orientation processes enables 
worries and previous negative involvement experiences to dissi-
pate and for a supportive, trusting and safe environment to 
continue to form. Here, ‘Us’ potentially becomes ‘We’ but it may 
not be one ‘We’ or everyone involved in ‘We’. The important 
element of the explanatory theoretical model here is that we see 
that the cooperative identity in the process of formation sees 
the possibilities for depending on others in the room for sharing 
resources. In this regard there is a culture of interdependency 
that forms around mobilisation for change. Reciprocity and 
deliberative dialogue are important and they assist to foster 
collective capacity for change. Identity then becomes the matter 
of combined values, commitments and beliefs which is not a 
static nor fixed conception.56
eMpowerMenT And design Theories
Mobilisation, then, is a mechanism within group culture that 
builds on shared purpose becoming a shared commitment. In 
EBCD and MH ECO, creative and collective capacity for change 
is brought together by people being supported to make decisions 
about changes and to codesign solutions to the improvement 
areas. As Robert and Macdonald have highlighted, Woodman’s 
notion of organisational creativity emphasises ‘the importance 
of building creative capacity’ within complex systems.15 The use 
of ‘what if…?’ kind of codesign activities that take people out 
of their normal hierarchies and task roles and use their insights 
and expertise to reimagine a service, as well as the adoption of 
‘democratic’ methods inherent to codesign projects, challenge 
‘top management… proprietary’ issues and assist in breaking 
down ‘barriers to creativity’.15 Deciding about changes and 
working together on these solutions provides an avenue to 
develop control and ownership, these concepts can facilitate a 
sense of empowerment. The possibilities here can be expansive 
but how much they are realised depends on the mechanisms of 
enactment and creativity; without enactment of change all that 
is left is ideas.
In the MH ECO methodology the deeper bonds of ‘We’ can 
be formulated over time through consecutive collaboration and 
codesign meetings with people taking on different roles in those 
meetings that afford them other responsibilities and forms of 
power. These roles enable the development of a feeling or expe-
rience that they can be empowered to make a change and enact 
differences within organisations, but here the enactment must 
occur too for improvement efforts to be realised. Enactment 
makes it more likely that people start to see that their efforts will 
improve things not just for themselves but for others who may 
come to receive services later. If enactment is not present then 
the result might be one of disappointment or feeling de-valued 
since there is a good deal of time and investment of energy 
required for codesign to occur. In this sense, there is both indi-
vidual and collective value produced, value might be in the form 
of greater individual self-confidence or feelings of contribution 
and speaking up, or recognition of the effect for building better 
communities and experiences that will be shared by others. Here 
we can examine the production or otherwise of this drawing 
both on the concepts of empowerment and design theories.
However, we note that codesign carries a risk that the rela-
tional transition to ‘We’ may easily revert back to ‘Them’ or ‘I’ 
even, as people can lose motivation and faith when improve-
ments are seen to not be implemented. For this reason, the 
mechanism of attainment is seen to be an important element for 
the explanatory theoretical model of change. That is, we must 
be able to identify that people feel a sense that changes will be 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
  9
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
implemented and that the organisations continue to recognise 
the importance of their dialogue back to service users and carers 
about these changes.
FUrTher TheoreTiCAl AdvAnCeMenTs For 
CoprodUCTion
It is now timely to pause and reflect back on where this story 
began. It is indeed plausible for coproduction and associated 
practices of EBCD to be viewed as a constitutive part of the 
‘constant change’, kaizen (continuous improvement), innovation 
ethic that now dominates in all sectors; a Zeitgeist if you will. In 
many ways, Raymond Williams’ concept of ‘structure of feeling’ 
helps us to understand this some more.57 Coined to ‘negotiate 
the theoretical difficulties involved in bringing together the 
myriad aspects of cultural change into focus within a signal anal-
ysis,’58 structure of feelings referred to:
areas of social experience which are currently being defined (…) a so-
cial experience still in process (…) but that has its emergent, connect-
ing and dominant characteristics, indeed its specific hierarchies.59
This structure of feeling represents ‘a mood or way of thinking 
discernible retrospectively across the entire socio-cultural and 
political spectrum at any given time.’60 Coproduction is a socially 
deliberative process, and such a process is inevitably relational 
and emotional (or ‘affective’) because participants need to pay 
attention to new people, new interactions and new ideas.60 This 
new structure of feeling brings with it relational opportunities 
and challenges for exploration.
The ability to codesign with others and produce workable 
futures confirms social and organisational relevance and shapes 
ways of going on that are ‘more or less’ democratically devel-
oped. Yet, the tension persists, between contextual economic 
and political conditions within which coproduction efforts may 
arise and the desirable outcomes of equality, democracy and 
empowerment. Balancing the needs of participants with real-
istic goals is important, recognising that for some private benefit 
motivates more than public good, and that some coproduction 
efforts are driven more by scarcity of resources and dwindling 
publicly funded services. These contextual drivers are important 
to acknowledge, they shape the relational space within which 
people come together and the organisational contexts within 
which coproduction efforts are occurring. So far these contex-
tual factors have not been accounted for in the description of the 
explanatory theoretical model but it is acknowledged that this 
will play a role in the considerations and evaluations of how the 
relational worlds are enacted within codesign.
It is important to re-emphasise here that the explanatory 
theoretical model brings together mechanisms and transitions 
that have been identified as important for the MH ECO model. 
Such mechanisms and transitions have been noted within other 
studies utilising coproduction and EBCD but there is further 
work to be done to advance this theoretical model according to 
those studies. A detailed explanatory theoretical model advances 
the field in the ability to understand and explore what does and 
does not work in coproduction in the relational spaces within 
which efforts occur and to develop ways to attend to enhance 
the things that do and those that do not. More importantly it 
offers the potential to understand why. We have acknowledged 
in the descriptions of the transitions that there is the possibility 
for an ‘I’ and ‘Them’ process to remain at work, peers (both 
people with lived experience and staff) can reinforce negative 
thinking and experiences, and power dynamics and hierarchies 
of organisations can be reinstated in ways that close off the 
opportunities for transitions. There may be contextual factors 
that limit possible transitions and these must be considered in 
any given exploration. We have also noted that people might 
begin from a starting point of Us or We orientations and not 
solely be isolated and separated.
The explanatory theoretical model presented illustrates that 
coproduction efforts seek to go well beyond the collaborative 
design of practical solutions. Practical solutions are important 
and indeed they are part of the goal of collective efforts, but 
they represent something else that is of even greater signifi-
cance: the acquisition by service users, carers and staff of the 
ability to negotiate (more or less) mutually acceptable ways of 
going forward into the future, and knowing that all present have 
helped shape that future. For this reason, the implementation of 
those practical solutions is an equally important topic, but one 
that cannot be addressed within the current remit of this paper. 
Admittedly, and on the one hand, this process entangles code-
sign participants in what Sloterdijk has referred to as a spiralling 
demand for dialogic and inventive competencies.61 On the other 
hand, however, Sloterdijk is clear about codesign bestowing on 
participants a sense of being able to ‘simulate sovereignty’ over 
their future confirming the positive and productive aspects of 
their relationships and activities.61 This may have a generative 
effect of positive interpersonal and portable experiences, but 
without attendance to the contextual and environmental forces 
that shape these practices and a commitment to transformation 
of these within coproduction and codesign efforts, there is a 
risk that sovereignty becomes mere rhetoric. Indeed, within the 
complexities of mental health and overall involvement in service 
improvements, sovereignty is not merely transferred by virtue of 
participation.
This latter point explains why codesign as situated copro-
duction of a shared future may have significant implications for 
service users, carers and staff well-being, but one that exists in 
tension. Their future (or at least aspects of it) has been collec-
tively sketched out, they have all had some possible role in this 
planning and the sharing of the planning yields some degree 
of confidence in the plans having legitimacy; playing a role in 
this planning confers that legitimacy on to me (‘I’) as individual 
participating stakeholder, and seeing the plans being realised 
provides the final confirmation of that legitimacy (‘We’). The 
extent of how transformative this realisation is must by the focus 
of future theorisation efforts in the field.
It is now also possible to envisage the significance of these 
participatory endeavours for healthcare in general, and for 
healthcare redesign and systems reform in particular. Both 
are complex endeavours. For that reason, a brief digression is 
warranted into how the complexity of healthcare as a system has 
been construed. Where ‘complexity science’ favours a ‘view from 
nowhere’62 that sees phenomena as objectifiable with the aim to 
depict the totality of healthcare from a safe distance, codesign 
theory accepts that healthcare complexity manifests for staff and 
service users where care happens; in the here and now. Code-
sign theory accepts that the here and now is empirically complex 
thanks to past management decisions, design choices, technolog-
ical complications, human affordances, spatial constraints and 
circumstantial specifics, and this might carry forward into the 
future. In that sense, codesign aligns with Giddens’ view of the 
‘structuration’ of the here and now—a dynamic implicating local 
actors, pasts, resources and potentials.63 64 Giddens’ perspective 
has been integrated since into ‘practice theory’65 emphasising 
how humans ongoingly perform the here and now into existence 
(cf Butler’s notion of ‘performativity’).66 However, the general 
point remains of relevance to how we conceive of healthcare 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
 10 
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
complexity, of how clinicians and service users are caught up 
in complexity. For codesign, complexity manifests itself not in 
some abstract system elsewhere, but in the immediacy of the 
here and now, imposing tasks and challenges.
ConClUsion
Ultimately then, processes of coproduction (and related but 
distinct practices such as EBCD, cocreation and coinnovation) 
embody and propose solutions to here-and-now complexity but 
one that is connected to past experiences that must be shaped 
into new prospective futures. Participation itself engages local 
stakeholders in apprehending complexity as empirical reality, 
and in sketching out ways of going forward amidst uncertainty, 
it does not mean that everyone is on equal footing or in agree-
ment; but to get closer to this ideal the field of coproduction, 
as others have acknowledged,1 2 needs to have better identifi-
cation, detail and understanding of the underlying mechanisms 
(those process, entities and structures) that might facilitate the 
conditions for this. Codesign accepts the limits that apply to 
local actors’ knowledge and decisions, but takes heart from the 
practical benefits and legitimacy generated through multistake-
holder dialogue, respectfully achieved conclusions and feasible 
initiatives. Codesign thus embodies a uniquely pragmatic and 
humble stance: various scenarios may be sketched out appearing 
equally feasible67; no scenario, decision or outcome is likely to 
be optimal, and scenarios, decisions and outcomes remain open 
for redesign and renegotiation in the future.
Codesign is now a general competence that is beginning to 
spread from organisations who focus on engaging service users 
and professional front line teams and their leaders in cocreated 
changes, into everyday practices of our sociocultural and polit-
ical life. In this regard, codesign engenders opportunities for 
citizens to become part of ‘how we go on’68 within the moral 
era of medicine. If this third era is one that is characterised by 
increasing levels of participation then an explanatory theoretical 
model of change that can critically evaluate coproduction efforts 
is important, if not essential In many respects, the new Zeitgeist 
signals to a collective spirit in the face of a highly individual-
ised, competitive sociocultural landscape but as other authors 
have noted this is not without complications and cautions. Is 
this movement of participation any different from coopera-
tive practices we have seen in the past we ask? For example, 
the Mondragon cooperative social system in the Basque region 
of Spain emerged directly from the needs of the populace for 
welfare, education and economy to cocreate their own structures 
and systems but, as quickly as the social system formed it too fell 
prey to greater economic and political forces transforming into 
a corporation. The lesson is one about the question of value and 
the looming possibilities of economic capture.
Author affiliations
1The Department of General Practice, Melbourne Medical School, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Health Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia
2Business School, University of New England, Armidale, New South Wales, Australia
3Department of General Practice and Rural Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, The 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
4Ko Awatea, Health System Innovation and Improvement, Counties Manukau Health, 
Auckland, New Zealand
5School of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
6Strategy, Participation and Improvement Group, Auckland District Health Board, 
Auckland, New Zealand
7Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health, Centre for Youth 
Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
8Centre for Team Based Practice and Learning in Health Care, Health Schools, King’s 
College London, London, UK
9Department of Adult Nursing, Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and 
Midwifery, King’s College London, London, UK
Correction notice This article has been corrected since it was published Online 
First. References 15, 17, 23, 24, 33-35, 40, 45 and 56 were updated. 
Twitter @VictoriaJPalmer
Acknowledgements In addition to the authors listed, the CORE study is 
dependent on the commitment provided by non-government and community health 
centre providers of mental health services as partners in the project. The study team 
acknowledge the support of the staff, service users and carers of these organisations 
and the ongoing work of the Victorian Mental Illness Awareness Council (VMIAC) 
and TANDEM representing Victorian mental health carers in their development of the 
original Mental Health Experience Co-design methodology (MH ECO). The authors 
acknowledge the research support of Kali Godbee (study coordinator), Roxanne 
Kritharidis (intervention coordinator), Konstancja Densley (data manager) and Dr 
Patty Chondros (lead biostastician).
Contributors VJP conceived the larger CORE study in conjunction with staff 
located in community mental health services. VJP, WW, RC and HH workshopped the 
activities of MH ECO to identify preliminary mechanisms of change. GR, RI, JG, JF, DP 
and LR reviewed and contributed to the refinement of these. VJP, WW and RC led 
the development of the explanatory theoretical model with expansion from RI, GR, 
LM, HB and HH. All named authors participated in the preparation of the manuscript, 
providing written comments on drafts and approving the final version.
Funding The CORE study was funded by the Mental Illness Research Fund and the 
Psychiatric Illness and Intellectual Disability Donations Trust Fund (MIRF 28). The 
Mental Illness Research Fund aims to support collaborative research into mental 
illness that may lead to better treatment and recovery outcomes for Victorians with 
mental illness and their families and carers. 
Competing interests None declared.
patient consent Not required.
ethics approval The University of Melbourne Human Research Ethics Committee 
(HREC No 1340299.1-12) has approved this study. The Federal Government 
Department of Health has approved the collection of Medicare and Pharmaceutical 
Benefits Scheme data and the State Government of Victoria has approved the 
collection of hospital admission and triage data. 
provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
data sharing statement Unpublished data are available from the study related 
to action plans and improvement areas and codesign process evaluation work. Data 
requests are considered on a case-by-case basis and must include ethics approvals.
open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Alford J. The multiple facets of co-production: building on the work of Elinor Ostrom. 
Public Manage Rev 2014;16:299–316.
 2 Alford J. Engaging public sector clients, from service delivery to coproduction. New 
York:  Pallgrave MacMillan, 2009.
 3 Alford J, Yates S. Co-production of public services in Australia: the roles of government 
organisations and co-producers. Austral J Pub Admin 2016;75:159–75.
 4 Wiewiora A, Keast R, Brown K. Opportunities and Challenges in Engaging Citizens in 
the Co-Production of Infrastructure-Based Public Services in Australia. Public Manage 
Rev 2016;18:483–507.
 5 Barlow R. Engaging patients with digital assistance: engagement, paticipation 
strategies and tactics reflect mindset shift. Healthcare Purchasing News 2016.
 6 Centre for Mental Health, Department of Health, Mind, NHS Confederation Mental 
Health Network, Rethink Mental Illness, Turning Point. No health without mental 
health: implementation framework. London: Mental Health Strategy Branch, 2012.
 7 Department of Health. Liberating the NHS: no decision about me without me. 
England: Department of Health, 2012.
 8 Pūras D. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment 
of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health2017 25/9/2017. 
https:// 
documents- 
dds- 
ny. 
un. 
org/ 
doc/ 
UNDOC/ 
GEN/ 
G17/ 
076/ 
04/ 
PDF/ 
G1707604. 
pdf? 
OpenElement.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
  11
Palmer VJ, et al. Med Humanit 2018;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/medhum-2017-011398
original research
 9 World Health Organization. Mental health action plan 2013-2020. Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2013.
 
10 Greenhalgh T, Jackson C, Shaw S, et al. Achieving research impact through co-creation 
in community-based health services: literature review and case study. Milbank Q 
2016;94:392–429.
 
11 Cepiku D, Giordano F. Co-Production in Developing Countries: Insights from the 
community health workers experience. Public Manage Rev 2014;16:317–40.
 
12 Madden M, Speed E. Beware Zombies and Unicorns: Toward Critical Patient and 
Public Involvement in Health Research in a Neoliberal Context. Front Sociol 2017;2.
 
13 Crawford MJ, Rutter D, Manley C, et al. Systematic review of involving patients in the 
planning and development of health care. BMJ 2002;325:1263.
 
14 Berwick DM. Era 3 for medicine and health care. JAMA 2016;315:1329–30.
 
15 Clarke D, Jones F, Harris R, et al. What outcomes are associated with developing 
and implementing co-produced interventions in acute healthcare settings? A rapid 
evidence synthesis. BMJ Open 2017;7:e014650.
 
16 Gradinaru I. The Paradox of Participation. The power of dominantion and the power of 
change. Argum: J Sem Discurs Log Argumen Theor Rhetor 2012;10:128–39.
 
17 Iedema R, Merrick E, Piper D, et al. Co-designing as a discursive practice in emergency 
health services: the architecture of deliberation. J Appl Behav Sci 2010;46:73–91.
 
18 Farr M. Citizens and the co-creation of public service innovation. In: Osborne SP, 
Brown L, eds. Handbook of innovation in public services. Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar, 2013:445–58.
 
19 Fotaki M. Co-production under the financial crisis and austerity: a means of 
democratizing public services or a race to the bottom? J Manage Inq 2015;24:433–8.
 
20 Brandsen T, Honingh M. Distinguishing different types of coproduction: a conceptual 
analysis based on the classical definitions. Public Adm Rev 2016;76:427–35.
 
21 Cribb A, Gewirtz S. New welfare ethics and the remaking of moral identities in an era 
of user involvement. Globalisation, Societies and Education 2012;10:507–17.
 
22 Renedo A, Marston CA, Spyridonidis D, et al. Patient and public involvement 
in healthcare quality improvement: how organizations can help patients and 
professionals to collaborate. Public Management Review 2015;17:17–34.
 
23 Bate P, Robert G. Experience-based design: from redesigning the system around 
the patient to co-designing services with the patient. Qual Saf Health Care 
2006;15:307–10.
 
24 Bate P, Robert G. Bringing User Experience to Healthcare Improvement: The Concepts, 
Methods and Practices of Experience Based Design. London: Radcliffe Publishers, 
2007.
 
25 Springham N, Wraight S, Prendergast C, et al. ResearchNet: research as recovery. 
Mental Health and Social Inclusion 2011;15:34–7.
 
26 Voronka J. The Politics of ’people with lived experience’ experiential authority 
and the risks of strategic essentialism. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology 
2016;23:189–201.
 
27 Tomes N. The patient as a policy factor: a historical case study of the consumer/
survivor movement in mental health. Health Aff 2006;25:720–9.
 
28 Astbury B, Leeuw FL. Unpacking black boxes: mechanisms and theory building in 
evaluation. Am J Eval 2010;31:363–81.
 
29 Parrado S, Van Ryzin GG, Bovaird T, et al. Correlates of co-production: evidence from a 
five-nation survey of citizens. Inter J Public Manage 2013;16:85–112.
 
30 Loeffler E, Bovaird T. User and community co-production of public services: what does 
the evidence tell us? Inter J Public Admin 2016;48:1–14.
 
31 Voorberg WH, Bekkers VJJM, Tummers LG. A systematic review of co-creation and 
co-production: embarking on the social innovation journey. Public Manage Rev 
2015;17:1333–57.
 
32 Larkin M, Boden ZV, Newton E. On the brink of genuinely collaborative care: 
experience-based co-design in mental health. Qual Health Res 2015;25:1463–76.
 
33 Locock L, Robert G, Boaz A, et al. Using a national archive of patient experience 
narratives to promote local patient-centered quality improvement: an ethnographic 
process evaluation of ’accelerated’ experience-based co-design. J Health Serv Res 
Policy 2014;19:200–7.
 
34 Donetto S, Tsianakas V, Robert G. Using Experience-based Co-design (EBCD) to 
improve the quality of healthcare mapping where we are now and establishing future 
directions. London: Kings College London, 2014.
 
35 Tsianakas V, Robert G, Maben J, et al. Implementing patient-centred care: using 
experience-based co-design to improve patient experience in breast and lung cancer 
services. Support Care Cancer 2012;20:2639–47.
 
36 Wright RJ, Lowton K, Robert G, et al. Emergency department staff priorities for 
improving palliative care provision for older people: A qualitative study. Palliat Med 
2018;32:417–25.
 
37 Batalden M, Batalden P, Margolis P, et al. Coproduction of healthcare service. BMJ 
Qual Saf 2016;25:509–17.
 
38 Beresford P, Croft S. Citizen involvement: a practical guide for change. 
Basingstoke:  Macmillan, 1993.
 
39 Doyle C, Lennox L, Bell D. A systematic review of evidence on the links between 
patient experience and clinical safety and effectiveness. BMJ Open 2013;3:e001570.
 
40 Palmer V, Chondros P, Piper D, et al. The CORE study protocol: a stepped wedge 
cluster randomized controlled trial to test a co-design technique to optimize 
psychosocial recovery outcomes for people affected by mental illness in the 
community mental health setting. BMJ Open 2015;5:e006688.
 
41 Corrigan PW, Faber D, Rashid F, et al. The construct validity of empowerment among 
consumers of mental health services. Schizophr Res 1999;38:77–84.
 
42 Corrigan PW, Salzer M, Ralph RO, et al. Examining the factor structure of the recovery 
assessment scale. Schizophr Bull 2004;30:1035–41.
 
43 Australian Government. National standards for mental health services. Australia: 
Common Wealth of Australia, 2010.
 
44 Coulter A, Locock L, Ziebland S, et al. Collecting data on patient experience is not 
enough: they must be used to improve care. BMJ 2014;348:g2225.
 
45 Fairhurst K, Weavell W. Co-designing mental health services – providers, consumers 
and carers working together. New Paradigm, 2011; Autumn: 54-58.
 
46 Goodrick D, Bhagwandas R. Evaluation of mental health experience co-design (MH 
ECO). Victoria: Department of Health, 2011.
 
47 Drake RE, Whitley R. Recovery and severe mental illness: description and analysis. Can 
J Psychiatry 2014;59:236–42.
 
48 Fricker M. Epistemic injustice: Power and the ethics of knowing. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2007.
 
49 Bülow PH. Sharing experiences of contested illness by storytelling. Discourse & Society 
2004;15:33–53.
 
50 Frank A. The renewal of generosity illness, medicine and how to live. Chicago and 
London: The University of Chicago Press, 2004.
 
51 Gabriel Y. The voice of experience and the voice of the expert–can they speak to each 
other. In: Brian Hurwitz TG, Skultans V, eds. Narrative research in health and illness. 
Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 2004:168–86.
 
52 Gabriel Y. Narratives, stories and texts. In: Grant D, Hardy C, Oswick C, Putnam 
LL, eds. The SAGE handbook of organizational discourse. London, UK: SAGE, 
2004:61–78.
 
53 Axelrod R, Hamilton WD. The evolution of cooperation. Science 1981;211:1390–6.
 
54 Isaacs P, Massey D. Mapping the applied ethics agenda. Third annual meeting of the 
association for practical and professional ethics. Cleveland, OH, 1994.
 
55 Belova O, King I, Sliwa M. Introduction: polyphony and organization studies: Mikhail 
Bakhtin and beyond. Organization Studies 2008;29:493–500.
 
56 Palmer V. Narratives Beyond Civility: the role of moral protest and cooperation in 
ethical communities. Queensland: Queensland University of Technology, 2006.
 
57 Williams R. The long revolution. Cardigan: Parthian Press, 2011.
 
58 Matthews S. Change and Theory in Raymond Williams’s Structure of Feeling. Pretexts: 
Literary and Cultural Studies 2001;10:179–94.
 
59 Williams R. Marxism and literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977:128–35.
 
60 Pheasant-Kelly F. Towards a structure of feeling: abjection and allegories of disease in 
science fiction ’mutation’ films. Med Humanit 2016;42:238–45.
 
61 Sloterdijk P. The aesthetic imperative: writings on art. Oxford: Polity Press, 2017.
 
62 Nagel T. The view from nowhere. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1989.
 
63 Giddens A. Central problems in social theory: Action, structure, and contradiction in 
social analysis. Berkley, CA: University of California Press, 1979.
 
64 Bryant C, Jary D. Giddens' theory of structuration: a critical appreciation. London, UK: 
Routledge, 1991.
 
65 Schatzki TR. The site of the social: a philosophical account of the constitution of social 
life and change. Penn: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2002.
 
66 Butler J. Performativity’s Social Magic. In: Schatzki T, Natter W, eds. The social and 
political body. New York:  The Guilford Press, 1996.
 
67 Mitchell S. Unsimple truths: science, complexity, and policy. Chicago IL: Chicago 
University Press, 2009.
 
68 Wittengenstein L. Philosophical investigations. London: Blackwell Publishers, 1953.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://mh.bmj.com/
Med Humanities: first published as 10.1136/medhum-2017-011398 on 28 June 2018. Downloaded from 
