 Leading Edge
Review
The Basis of Oncoimmunology
A. Karolina Palucka1,2,* and Lisa M. Coussens3,*
1The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 10 Discovery Drive, Farmington, CT 06032, USA
2Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Dallas, TX 75204, USA
3Department of Cell, Developmental & Cancer Biology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson
Park Road, Mail Code L215, Room 5508, Richard Jones Hall, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA
*Correspondence: karolina.palucka@jax.org (A.K.P.), coussenl@ohsu.edu (L.M.C.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.049
Cancer heterogeneity, a hallmark enabling clonal survival and therapy resistance, is shaped by
active immune responses. Antigen-specific T cells can control cancer, as revealed clinically by
immunotherapeutics such as adoptive T-cell transfer and checkpoint blockade. The host immune
system is thus a powerful tool that, if better harnessed, could significantly enhance the efficacy of
cytotoxic therapy and improve outcomes for cancer sufferers. To realize this vision, however, a
number of research frontiers must be tackled. These include developing strategies for neutralizing
tumor-promoting inflammation, broadening T-cell repertoires (via vaccination), and elucidating the
mechanisms by which immune cells organize tumor microenvironments to regulate T-cell activity.
Such efforts will pave the way for identifying new targets for combination therapies that overcome
resistance to current treatments and promote long-term cancer control.
Introduction
Cancer is an insidious disease traditionally classified by cell
and tissue type of origin. Cancer has historically been treated
according to a ‘‘one size fits all’’ approach based on broad path-
ologic criteria and involving various regimens of cytotoxic ther-
apy. With the advent of modern sequencing methodologies,
however, we now appreciate that significant genomic, transcrip-
tomic, and epigenetic heterogeneity exists within individual
tumor types; this recognition has enabled subclassification of
tumors of common origin. This, in turn, has led to improved out-
comes for some cancer types, as response rates to targeted and
cytotoxic therapies increase when patients are stratified based
on the molecular characteristics of their tumors. Examples
include imatinib in chronic myelogenous leukemia (Druker
et al., 2006), HER2-targeted therapies for HER2-positive breast
cancer (Shepard et al., 1991), and estrogen antagonists for
estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancers (Heiser et al., 2012).
These molecular advances helped to usher in a new era of
precision medicine that is reshaping clinical treatment across
the cancer spectrum. However, there remain significant frac-
tions of patients that do not respond to ‘‘designer’’ therapies
even when their tumors are classified based on molecular and
pathologic criteria. Additional tumor or systemic characteristic(s)
are thus unaccounted for that not only impact neoplastic growth
and dissemination, but also impact response to therapy.
Recent seminal in vivo studies revealed that neoplastic cells rely
on the diversity of normal resident and recruited accessory cells to
support theirevolution(Hanahan and Coussens, 2012).Accessory
cells are now recognized as ‘‘neoplastic cell-extrinsic hallmarks
of cancer’’ and include those forming the hematogenous and
lymphatic vasculature, tissue-specific mesenchymal support
cells, and myeloid and lymphoid-lineage immune cells. Accessory
cells integrate with the dynamic soluble and insoluble matrices
constituting the ‘‘tumor stroma’’; collectively, they fuel neoplastic
evolution (Hanahan and Coussens, 2012). In other words, recip-
rocal interactions between accessory cells, their mediators, struc-
turalcomponentsoftheextracellularmatrix(ECM),and genetically
altered neoplastic cells regulate all aspects of tumorigenicity.
These realizations fueled the development of anti-cancer agents
targeting the vasculature (Kerbel, 2011) and, more recently,
propelled clinical investigations into the efficacy of immune
therapeutic approaches that neutralize tumor-promoting chronic
inflammation and/or embolden or unleash cytotoxic activities of
antigen-specific T cells (Coussens et al., 2013; Pardoll, 2012).
Indeed, cancer is visible to the immune system, i.e., immuno-
genic, during early neoplasia. Classic studies from Schreiber and
colleagues in mice with carcinogen-initiated sarcomas revealed
that the immune system could recognize and reject cancerous
cells (Dunn et al., 2004). Elimination can be explained by cyto-
toxic antigen-specific T cells responding to relatively high muta-
tional burdens induced by carcinogens and thus providing
neo-antigens for T-cell priming; these findings established the
principles of elimination, equilibrium, and eventually escape
when neoplastic cells become invisible to the immune system
(Dunn et al., 2004). Neoplastic cells in part escape when tumor
arises out of chronically inflamed tissues—there, chronic infiltra-
tion of tissue by leukocytes (e.g., type 2 cytokine-activated
myeloid cells and immune-suppressive B, T, and myeloid sub-
sets) subvert T-cell-directed elimination and thus aid tissue-
based programs, e.g., angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, matrix
remodeling, etc., supporting neoplastic progression (Coussens
et al., 2013).
Mounting observations in humans support the concept that
cancer initiation and progression are significantly impacted by
altered or misled immune responses (Figure 1). Individuals
suffering from chronic inflammatory conditions are at increased
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1233
 risk for developing cancer (Thun et al., 2004). Incidence of viral
(DNA tumor virus) and carcinogen-associated cancers is
increased in immune-compromised individuals, even as the rela-
tive risk of cancer types lacking viral or carcinogen etiology is
diminished (reviewed in de Visser et al., 2006). Age-related im-
munosenescence likely plays a role in increased incidence of
malignancy in aged individuals (Campisi et al., 2011). The advent
of some biologic therapies impacting how tissues activate and
resolve inflammation, e.g., tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockade
(Bongartz et al., 2006), also skews cancer incidence metrics.
However, the role(s) that immune pathways play in driving malig-
nancy remains to be clarified. How does the immune system
recognize tissue-specific mediators triggering and maintaining
chronic inflammatory responses? What oncogenic events and
altered metabolic states lead to the generation of neo-antigens
that in turn induce T-cell responses? What physiological mech-
anisms regulate immune homeostasis such that (acute) inflam-
mation can be resolved as rapidly as it is activated (a critical
control program to thwart autoimmunity)? What is the role of
the host microbiota in regulating systemic immune responses
to neoplasia? How do neoplastic cells survive immune attack
by T cells? These questions are in need of answering to effec-
tively move cancer research and cancer medicine forward.
A common feature of all cancers, regardless of origin, is
prominent presence of diverse assemblages of immune cells
(Coussens et al., 2013). The consequences of such infiltrates
on the fate of cancerous cells are diverse (Figure 2). For
example, under continual immune pressure, i.e., antigen pre-
sentation to T cells, neoplastic cells become ‘‘immune-edited’’
to escape immune surveillance (Dunn et al., 2004) and instead
co-opt immune cells to favor their sustained proliferation (Balk-
will et al., 2005). Nonetheless, recent studies demonstrate that
the presence of lymphoid aggregates is linked with improved re-
sponses to cancer therapies—for example, standard cytotoxic
therapies, vaccine-based treatments, or immune checkpoint
blockade (Topalian et al., 2015). Such ‘‘hot’’ tumors are thus
more amenable to control than ‘‘cold’’ tumors, i.e., tumors
with diminished T-cell infiltrates, thus driving modern cancer
medicine to investigate how to reprogram the tumor microenvi-
ronment (TME) to attract the right type of immune infiltrate. This
topic, along with other open questions in the field of oncoimmu-
nology, are discussed here.
The Makings of the Immune Response to Cancer
Tumors are organized tissues with numerous reciprocal local
and systemic connections with immune cell populations of
both the myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Here, we summarize
the key myeloid and lymphoid populations regulating the im-
mune response to cancer and how the fundamental physiolog-
ical processes that they govern are harnessed for neoplastic
progression and tumor formation.
The Myeloid Compartment
Myeloid cells have multiple homeostatic functions that are co-
opted by evolving neoplasms; these can be roughly summarized
as: (1) antigen capture for degradation (macrophages) or presen-
tation (dendritic cells [DCs]); (2) tissue repair (macrophages), and
(3) effector functions (mast cells, monocytes, and granulocytes).
Neoplastic cells can alter the steady-state activity of all myeloid
cells present in the TME, including tissue-resident and blood-
derived cells, by secreting factors such as interleukin (IL)-6 or
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF),
that increase recruitment and proliferation of immature myeloid
cells atypical under physiological conditions (Gabrilovich et al.,
2012).
An important feature of myeloid cells is their functional plas-
ticity in response to environmental signals. This property can
dictate such opposite outcomes as antigen degradation or anti-
gen presentation when macrophages acquire DC capabilities
(Banchereau et al., 2000), tissue repair rather than inflammation
when macrophages are polarized toward type 2 states, and pro-
tective or non-protective T-cell immunity when programmed by
cancer-derived factors (Balkwill et al., 2005). Thus, plasticity
Figure 1. The Makings of Tumor Immunity
The communication between cancer and the im-
mune system is a dynamic process, reminiscent of
a balance. When immunity to cancer is ‘‘up’’ and
the suppressive processes are ‘‘down,’’ cancer is
under control. However, a strong anti-tumor im-
mune response will trigger largely physiological
processes designed to dampen effector T cells to
prevent tissue damage and maintain tissue ho-
meostasis. Given that the immunity might have
evolved mainly to maintain self, to establish
coexistence with environment, and to occasionally
protect self from external threats, the suppression
prevails. Multiple pathways of suppression are at
play in tumor microenvironments, including cells
such as TH2-polarized macrophages, immature and suppressive monocytes, regulatory B cells, and regulatory T cells, as well as molecules such as checkpoints
that control T-cell differentiation (for example, CTLA-4 and IDO) and effector function (such as PD-1). Pharmacological blockade of these inhibitory pathways can
tip the balance toward anti-cancer effector T cells. The latter ones can be primed or boosted by antigen-presenting cells (DCs) and/or by co-stimulatory signals
(for example, CD137 ligands). Recent studies demonstrate that thymus-independent neo-antigens generated in adult life by somatic mutation or post-trans-
lational regulation (for example, phosphorylation) might be more immunogenic (or perhaps linked with less suppression) than shared tumor antigens. Neo-
antigens can occur as random results of somatic mutation, as well as a by-product of anticancer treatments, e.g., chemotherapy (CTX) or radiation therapy (RT),
or by targeting epigenetic control mechanisms or drugs intervening with DNA repair pathways. They can be presented to T cells in exogenous vaccines, as well as
endogenously via DCs that captured dying neoplastic cells. When T cells specific to defined antigens kill neoplastic cells, such a process can enable generation of
responses to other antigens, so called epitope spreading. A critical factor in the balance between immunogenicity and suppression is inflammation (which, in turn,
is impacted by the microbiome); indeed, the type of inflammation (tumor-destructing TH1 or tumor-promoting TH2 and TH17) should become a part of TNM
grading, along with pathology, microbiome phenotype, and immune infiltrate assessment.
1234
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 and communication within the myeloid compartment and be-
tween myeloid and other immune cells and stromal components
is critical for tumor formation.
Cancer Antigen Presentation and Dendritic Cells. Cancer anti-
gens are presented to T cells either at tumor sites or in draining
lymph nodes by DCs (Figure 3). Cancer antigens, soluble and
cell borne, are transported to lymph nodes via lymphatic vessels.
Soluble antigen is captured by lymph-node-resident DCs, while
tissue-resident DCs capture antigen at tumor sites; either popu-
lation can present antigen locally or migrate through lymphatic
vessels to present in lymph nodes (Steinman, 2011). DCs display
protein antigens in the context of classical major histocompatibil-
ity (MHC) class I and MHC class II molecules or lipid antigens in
the context of non-classical CD1 molecules that allow selection
of rare antigen-specific T lymphocytes, including CD8+ T cells,
CD4+ T cells, and NK T cells. Compared with other antigen-pre-
senting cells (APCs), DCs are extremely efficient in their ability
to induce antigen-specific T-cell responses, justifying their
name ‘‘professional APCs’’ (Lanzavecchia and Sallusto, 2001).
Naive CD8+ T cells differentiate into cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) in lymphoid organs upon encounter with DCs, presenting
tumor-derived peptides in the context of co-stimulation through
CD80, CD70, and 4-1BB, as well as through DC-derived cyto-
kines such as IL-12, type I interferon, and IL-15 (Steinman,
2012). The priming of new T-cell repertoires during tumorigenesis
may be critical for clinical success of therapeutic agents aiming to
unleash antigen-specific CTL activities. Naive CD4+ T cells can
give rise to helper cells with distinct cytokine profiles or to Fox-
P3+ regulatory T cells (Treg), whose role is to dampen CTL activity
and avoid autoimmune responses (Zhu and Paul, 2008).
Figure 2. Immune-Mediated Landscape
The yin and yang implications of tumor-immune
system communications form the basis for dis-
ease pathophysiology and, at the same time, tar-
gets for therapeutic intervention. The disease
landscape emerging from these multi-factorial in-
teractions is orchestrated by the three compart-
ments, i.e., the cancer, the immune system, and
the host. The outputs are numerous and dramati-
cally opposite, as well as both local and systemic,
and include: immunity that might control cancer;
chronic inflammation that can be linked with tissue
remodeling processes and metabolic changes
that support neoplastic cell survival and primary
tumor
development;
angiogenesis
and
lym-
phangiogenesis that can also support metastatic
dissemination; as well as systemic consequences
for the host including cachexia. Clearly, therapy
going forward will require a well-timed and
orchestrated combination of therapies, targeting
multiple modes of communication and effect, to
combat this multi-factorial disease, taking into
account the patient’s steady-state commensal
bacteria complexity and load and how that is
impacted by therapy.
DCs express numerous pattern recog-
nition receptors, including lectins, Toll-
like receptors (TLRs), NOD-like receptors
(NLRs), and helicases, through which
they can sense microbes and tissue dam-
age (cancer) such as increased pericellular nucleic acids (Pulen-
dran, 2015). If DCs do not receive maturation signals, such as
when exposed to high levels of IL-10 (Ruffell et al., 2014), they
remain immature and antigen presentation instead leads to T-
cell suppression. DC plasticity in response to extrinsic signals,
together with the existence of discrete subsets with unique func-
tions, empowers DCs as key initiators and regulators of the im-
mune response (Pulendran, 2015). We will illustrate this point
briefly; mouse and human DC subset biology was recently re-
viewed elsewhere (Merad et al., 2013).
The diversity of human DC subsets was revealed by studies
of blood and skin DCs. Three main cell-surface markers
distinguished human-blood-circulating DC subsets: CD303
(BDCA-2) on plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), CD1c (or BDCA-1) ex-
pressed on the majority of circulating DCs, and CD141/
BDCA-3 expressed on a small fraction (Merad et al., 2013). Hu-
man CD141+CD1c� DCs uniquely express TLR3, produce IL-12,
and efficiently cross-prime CD8+ T cells when activated with
poly I:C (Joffre et al., 2012). However, other human DCs, such
as epidermal Langerhans cells and CD1c+ DCs, also cross-
present antigens to CD8+ T cells. Indeed, our studies have
unraveled the basic principles by which human DC subsets
differentially regulate CD8+ T cells (Klechevsky et al., 2008).
Thus, human Langerhans cells are highly efficient at priming
cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, while CD14+ dermal DCs prime type 2
cytokine-secreting CD8+ T cells (Klechevsky et al., 2008). Blood-
and tissue-resident CD1c+ DCs, but not CD141+ DCs, exposed
to live-attenuated influenza virus promote CD103 (aE integrin)
expression on CD8+ T cells and their accumulation in epithelia
(Yu et al., 2013).
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1235
 The Lymphoid Compartment
The lymphoid compartment in tumors includes natural killer (NK)
cells, gd T cells, NK T cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and B
cells. Their functional activity depends upon expression of re-
striction elements, including peptide-MHC complexes (pMHC;
for T cells), the MHC class I molecule (for NK cells), or surface
proteins (for B-cell products, i.e., antibodies) that can be recog-
nized in a specific manner. In addition, lymphoid cells can
be induced to secrete different types of cytokines based on
effector functions. For example, following an activating stimulus,
Figure 3. The Priming of Cancer Immunity
The cycle of anti-tumor immunity starts presumably with presentation of cancer antigens liberated in the process of cell turnover; this same pathway can be
followed for vaccination, as illustrated herein. Antigens are sensed and captured either by tissue-resident DCs or by DCs in draining lymph nodes (LNs). DCs
initiate an immune response by presenting captured antigens, in the form of peptide-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule complexes, to naive (that
is, antigen inexperienced) T cells in lymphoid tissues. When compared with other APCs, such as macrophages, DCs are extremely efficient and can elicit very low
numbers of T cells to respond. Naive CD8+ T cells differentiate into CTLs in lymphoid organs upon encounter with DCs presenting tumor-derived peptides in the
context of co-stimulation through CD8, CD70, and 4-1BB, as well as DC-derived cytokines such as IL-12 and IL-15. Naive CD4+ T cells can give rise to helper cells
(e.g., TH) with distinct cytokine profiles or to regulatory T cells (Treg) whose role is to dampen the immune response. T cells migrate through blood and lymphatics.
Upon arrival in tumor beds, CD8+ T cells must confront numerous barriers including: (1) intrinsic regulators, for example, CD28-CTLA-4, PD1-PDL1, and ILTs, as
well as extrinsic regulators cells such as Tregs, Bregs, or myeloid cells; (2) a corrupted TME with pro-tumor inflammation; (3) impaired cross-presentation due to
TME-based DC inhibition; (4) antigen loss and immune evasion of tumor target; and (5) tissue-specific alterations such as fatty cells in breast cancer or des-
mofibrosis in pancreatic cancer stroma. Killing of tumor cells either via T cells or by standard therapy can lead to endogenous antigen release and DC activation,
so called ‘‘endogenous vaccination,’’ thereby closing the cycle. Inevitable to this is the induction of tissue resistance mechanisms, for example, expression of PD-
L1 on neoplastic or other immune cells, as the result of powerful effector immunity, including actions of IFNg. Thus, future immunotherapy approaches will be
based on combinations of different therapeutics targeting distinct components of this cycle, for example, via intratumoral delivery of activating agents able to
reprogram the function of infiltrating leukocytes.
1236
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 TH1-polarized CD4+ T cells secrete IL-2, TNFa, and IFNg; in
conjunction with cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, they promote macro-
phage cytotoxic activity (Stout and Bottomly, 1989) and can
induce upregulation of antigen processing and expression of
MHCI and II molecules in professional APCs (i.e., macrophages
and DCs). In contrast, expression of IL-4, -5, -6, -10, and -13 by
TH2-polarized CD4+ T cells can induce T-cell anergy and loss of
T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity, enhance humoral immunity, and
regulate the tumor-promoting activities of macrophages (De-
Nardo et al., 2009).
CD8+ T cells are considered the major anti-cancer effector
cells, as they can give rise to CTLs that kill neoplastic cells pre-
senting a specific pMHC complex (Appay et al., 2008). CTLs can
be generated through either the priming of naive T cells or re-
programming of memory T cells. Naive CD8+ T cells differentiate
into CTLs in lymphoid organs upon encounter with APCs pre-
senting tumor-derived peptides in the context of appropriate
co-stimulation and cytokine help. The ideal properties of anti-
cancer CD8+ T cells include: high affinity for pMHC on tumor
cells; high levels of cytotoxic mediators, e.g., granzymes A and
B and perforin; expression of surface molecules, allowing traf-
ficking into the tumor; and extended longevity and memory,
thus enabling CTL generation upon antigen re-exposure (Appay
et al., 2008).
Memory T cells have long been described as two circulating
populations: (1) central memory T cells that migrate between
the secondary lymphoid organs and are capable of mounting
proliferative responses on pathogen re-encounter and (2)
effector memory T cells that traffic between blood and extralym-
phoid compartments for peripheral immune surveillance (Mueller
et al., 2012). Tissue-resident memory T cells are a third and
phenotypically distinct category. Studies in mice and humans
have revealed that this latter population can be superior to circu-
lating central memory T cells at providing rapid long-term pro-
tection against re-infection (Sheridan and Lefranc
¸ ois, 2011).
Therefore, an active mechanism of peripheral T-cell retention
likely exists not only to facilitate clearance of infected cells, but
also to promote accumulation at sites having cleared an infec-
tious virus. CD103/b7 integrin endows peripheral CD8+ T cells
with a unique capacity to access epithelial compartments.
Expression of CD103 on CTLs mediates adherence to E-cad-
herin and appears to be important in the final stages of
neoplastic cell lysis and rejection (Le Floc’h et al., 2007). Indeed,
for mucosal cancer vaccines, homing to and retention of CD8+
T cells in mucosa is critical for efficacy (Sandoval et al., 2013).
Upon arrival in tumor beds, CD8+ T cells must confront
numerous barriers, including intrinsic checkpoint regulators,
such as CD28-CTLA-4, PD1-PD-L1, and immunoglobulin-like
transcript receptors (ILTs) (Pardoll, 2012); extrinsic checkpoint
regulators, such as Treg cells (Fehe
´ rvari and Sakaguchi, 2004)
or myeloid cells (Gabrilovich et al., 2012); a corrupted TME
with protumor inflammation (Coussens et al., 2013); antigen
loss and immune evasion of tumor targets (Klebanoff et al.,
2011); and tissue-specific alterations, such as fatty cells in
breast cancer or desmofibrosis in pancreatic cancer stroma.
Defining strategies for bypassing these obstacles and improving
the clinical efficacy of T-cell therapies is the object of intense
study.
An important concept recently proposed by Mellman and col-
leagues is the cancer-immunity cycle (Chen and Mellman, 2013).
It becomes apparent that any effective immune response against
cancer will generate resistance via physiological pathways that
evolved to protect tissue homeostasis. Here, we discuss how
this cycle is altered in cancer pathogenesis and how it can be
harnessed therapeutically. Clearly, combination therapies that
intervene at several distinct pathways within the cancer-immu-
nity cycle are needed to achieve cancer control.
Chronic Inflammation and Alterations of Leukocyte
Compartments in Cancer
Basic Principles
Unabated inflammation is a hallmark of cancer and is mediated
by immune cells attracted to or residing at sites of neoplastic
transformation (Balkwill et al., 2005). Indeed, immune cells are
selectively recruited into early neoplastic tissues, likely in
response to hard-wired pathways utilized by all tissues to
resist/repair damage caused by bacterial, viral, or other patho-
genic assaults. When successful, ‘‘initiated’’ pre-neoplastic cells
are purged by the immune system (Dunn et al., 2004). When the
immune system fails, neoplastic cells are retained in ‘‘damaged’’
TMEs and provide a survival advantage resulting from abundant
bioavailable mediators liberated as a function of tissue remodel-
ing (Hanahan and Coussens, 2012). Ensuing neoplastic progres-
sion requires sustained presence of select immune subtypes
that, combined with ongoing host-derived programs (angiogen-
esis, matrix, and tissue remodeling, etc.), contribute to cancer
progression (Hanahan and Coussens, 2012) (Figure 2).
The classic view that immune cells merely facilitate tumor
rejection has been supplanted by a more complex view of leuko-
cytes having both tumor-promoting and tumor-inhibiting proper-
ties (Coussens et al., 2013). This is best explained by the
existence of (at least) two types of inflammation with opposing
effects on tumors: chronic inflammation, which promotes
neoplastic cell survival, angiogenesis, tissue remodeling, and
metastasis, and acute inflammation that triggers neoplastic cell
destruction. While chronic inflammation is often linked with the
presence of TH2 responses, acute inflammation associated
with cancer destruction is linked to TH1 responses.
As neoplastic cells escape elimination, some become less
immunogenic by downregulating MHC molecules; however,
most if not all also activate intrinsic gene-expression programs
that are inherently T-cell suppressive and myelo-stimulatory,
e.g., TH2 responses. Cytokines implicated in these scenarios
include transforming growth factor b (TGFb); IL-4, -13, -8,
and -10; thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP); and indole-
amine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) (Coussens et al., 2013). This en-
ables recruitment of FoxP3+CD4+ Treg cells, TH2-CD4+ T cells,
TH2-polarized macrophages and monocytes, and B regulatory
cells (Bregs). In response to TH2-mediated activation, myeloid
cells commonly increase synthesis of angiogenic (e.g., VEGF),
growth and/or survival (e.g., EGF, TNFa) factors that directly
regulate epithelial cell proliferation, as well as tissue-remodeling
enzymes (e.g., metallo-, cysteine, and serine proteases). These
activities are remarkably pro-tumorigenic in that they nurture
a TME favoring neoplastic cell survival and sustained prolif-
eration (Balkwill et al., 2005). Simultaneous TH2 activation of
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1237
 macrophages and monocytes also increases expression of mol-
ecules, e.g., inducible nitric oxide synthase or Arginase 1, that
directly and indirectly suppress CD8+ T-cell proliferation and cy-
tokines such as IL-10 that inhibit DC maturation and antigen
cross-presentation to T cells (Ruffell et al., 2014). Thus, TH2-
type immune microenvironments are both tumor promoting
and immune suppressive. Notably, in the colon, tumor-promot-
ing immunity via IL-17 (TH17)-mediated activation of myeloid
and lymphoid cells has been reported (Wang et al., 2009; Wu
et al., 2009).
Tumor-Promoting Activities of the Myeloid
Compartment
Owing to their established role in wound healing, we investigated
the ability of myeloid cells infiltrating early benign tissues to fos-
ter malignancy. In mice prone to squamous carcinogenesis,
mast cells and macrophages activate pro-neoplastic angiogenic
and tissue-remodeling programs (Coussens et al., 1999). In other
studies of mice bearing mammary carcinomas, macrophages
could regulate neoplastic cell dissemination and metastasis via
EGF-mediated paracrine interactions with neoplastic epithelial
cells (Lin et al., 2001). In human cancers, multiple studies
have reported that the presence of macrophages in stroma cor-
relates with aggressive disease and outcome (Komohara et al.,
2014). Macrophages are recruited into tumors following activa-
tion of colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) by either
CSF1 or IL-34, two high-affinity ligands for CSF1R; the chemo-
kine CCL2 may also facilitate macrophage recruitment (Qian
et al., 2011). A CSF1-response gene-expression signature has
been identified in 17%–25% of breast cancers associated with
decreased
estrogen
receptor
and
progesterone
receptor
expression (Beck et al., 2009); serum concentrations of CSF-1
correlate positively with breast tumor size and predict poor sur-
vival (Aharinejad et al., 2013). In addition, in two independent
breast cancer cohorts, intratumoral macrophage presence was
correlated with potentially prognostic tumor features (high-
grade, hormone receptor negativity; basal-like subtype; and
increased risk of death) (Komohara et al., 2014). Macrophages
therefore serve as promising targets for novel therapeutic inter-
ventions,
particularly
for
patients
with
high-risk
disease.
Conversely, favorable prognosis has been associated with
some tumor types exhibiting increased macrophage infiltration,
e.g., non-small-cell lung cancer, prostate, colorectal, and gastric
cancers (Komohara et al., 2014). Whether these distinctions
reflect true differences in macrophage biology and function or
arise due to discordant detection methodologies is unclear.
Neutrophils, on the other hand, are typically less abundant than
macrophages in solid tumors, but their presence correlates with
reducedsurvivalinheadandneckandbreastcancers, andsimilar
to macrophages, neutrophils develop polarized phenotypes that
either favor or restrict tumor progression (Fridlender and Albelda,
2012). Recent studies identified granule products that suppress
T-cell function (Sippel et al., 2011). Neutrophil expansion in mam-
mary carcinomas of mice bearing mutant p53 alleles is driven
by T-cell-derived IL-17; this results in systemic granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)-dependent expansion and
polarization toward a T-cell-suppressive phenotype that facili-
tates metastatic dissemination and colonization (Coffelt et al.,
2015). In contrast, neutrophils create a tumor-restrictive microen-
vironment in the lung that resists neoplastic progression and
metastatic dissemination (Fridlender and Albelda, 2012).
Eosinophils, like other myeloid lineage cells, can exert cyto-
toxic immune-effector activities. Tumor-associated tissue eosin-
ophilia (TATE) is associated with improved prognosis for a
number of malignancies, including gastrointestinal, bladder,
and prostate cancers; in contrast, TATE is associated with
poor outcome in Hodgkin’s lymphoma, cervical carcinoma,
and oral squamous cell carcinoma (Davis and Rothenberg,
2014). Eosinophils have been associated with degranulation
and release of cytotoxic proteins that mediate tumor rejection;
recent results also reveal their role in normalizing the vasculature
to improve CD8+ T-cell trafficking associated with tumor regres-
sion (Carretero et al., 2015).
Monocytes,onceintissues,candifferentiateintomacrophages
and DCs. Two circulating monocyte populations have been iden-
tified: classical inflammatory monocytes that are CCR2HIGH and
non-classical patrolling monocytes that are CX3CR1HIGH (Geiss-
mann et al., 2003). Recruitment of inflammatory monocytes into
tissues is normally guided by the CCR2-CCL2 axis in response
to parasitic or bacterial infections; in tumors, when CCR2HIGH
monocytes are recruited, they can promote neoplastic cell sur-
vival and extravasation through VEGF and CSF1 production
(Qian et al., 2011). CCR2HIGH monocytes promote survival of met-
astatic cells through a CCL3-dependent mechanism (Kitamura
et al., 2015). CX3CR1HIGH monocytes instead patrol capillaries
in response to the CXC3R1-CX3CL1 axis; in these locales, they
are positioned to scavenge particles and debris and thus are
more likely to be found in wounds when inflammation is resolving.
At sites of metastasis, CX3CR1HIGH monocytes recruit NK cells
that, in turn, kill metastatic cells, thereby providing a potent sur-
vival advantage (Hanna et al., 2015). In pancreatic adenocarci-
nomas, activation of the Ras oncogene leads to increased
expression of GM-CSF and recruitment of immature monocytes
that subsequently suppress CD8+ T-cell proliferation to enhance
tumor progression (Pylayeva-Gupta et al., 2012), analogous to
other tumor systems (Gabrilovich et al., 2012).
Mast cells, present in all vascularized tissues, respond to
diverse stimuli by either secreting or releasing (via degranulation)
biologically active compounds, e.g., proteolytic enzymes, hepa-
rin, histamine, prostaglandins, cytokines, and chemokines. Mast
cells are key for maintaining tissue homeostasis and are best
known for their effector functions following IgE-stimulated
allergic responses and anaphylaxis (Metz et al., 2007). Mast cells
have been implicated in the vascularization of a multitude of
solid human tumor types, likely owing to their proteolytic prod-
ucts and high VEGF expression following activation (Coussens
et al., 1999; Marichal et al., 2013) following CCL2-mediated
recruitment where their bioactive mediators promote neoplastic
progression.
Tissue Specificity of Myeloid Programming
While it is conceptually unclear how some myeloid cells adopt a
TH2 or protumorigenic state to support neoplastic progression,
some clues have emerged in recent genetic studies. Several
groups revealed that lymphocytes drive initial myeloid cell pro-
gramming to foster chronic inflammation in a tissue-specific
manner. For example, during mammary branching morpho-
genesis and ductal carcinogenesis, cytokines derived from
1238
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 TH2-CD4+ T cells, e.g., IL-4 and -13, activate macrophages and
monocytes infiltrating mammary tissue (DeNardo et al., 2009;
Plaks et al., 2015). In neoplastic scenarios, signaling down-
stream of IL-4 receptors on monocytes and macrophages
triggers protumorigenic TH2 gene-expression programs that
activate tissue-remodeling cascades via expression and activa-
tion of cathepsin proteases and immune-suppressive programs
via upregulation of IL-10 and immune-checkpoint molecules
(DeNardo et al., 2009; Gocheva et al., 2010; Mitchem et al.,
2013; Ruffell et al., 2014). Mast cells and macrophages (as well
as other myeloid cell types) are TH2 programmed in early squa-
mous and pancreatic carcinomas by a diversity of pathways,
which also include activation of immunoglobulin receptors
(FcgRs) by immune complexes (ICs) (Affara et al., 2014; Andreu
et al., 2010). ICs are composed of antigen-specific antibodies
and complement proteins that variably activate FcR and comple-
ment receptors depending on composition of IC and status of
the myeloid cell being activated (Karsten and Ko
¨ hl, 2012). While
these humoral immune-regulated paracrine programs were
known to shape outcomes in chronic inflammatory diseases,
recognition of their significance in solid tumors was paradigm
shifting and highlighted the significance of hard-wired tissue-
specific programs shaping host response to disease. These
data illustrate the diversity of pathways utilized by innate immune
cells to propel cancer by directly enhancing tissue-based pro-
grams favoring survival of neoplastic cells, in concert with direct
and indirect activation of programs to extinguish cytotoxic im-
mune responses aiding immune escape (Figure 2).
TH2-Based Targets for Anti-cancer Therapy
The collective evidence not only supports a protumorigenic role
for chronic inflammation in cancer, but also indicates that inflam-
mation is malleable, akin to the healing of acute wounds during
which immune cells toggle between TH1 and TH2 states. Thus,
the hypothesis that TH2-driven myeloid cells could be re-pro-
grammed, or at least neutralized, to reduce the presence or
immunosuppressive status of macrophages, trigger anti-tumor
immunity, and/or suppress tumor growth has been tested in
several tissue-specific cancer models. We and others have eval-
uated CSF1-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (aCSF1 mAB)
and small-molecule CSF1R inhibitors for their ability to suppress
macrophage survival and/or presence in tumors, in combination
with chemotherapy (CTX) or radiation therapy (RT) (DeNardo
et al., 2011; Ruffell et al., 2014; Shiao et al., 2015). These studies
reveal increased chemo- and radiation sensitivity associated
with anti-tumor immune responses directed by CD8+ T-cell infil-
tration of tumors, culminating in reduced primary tumor growth
and metastasis with increased survival. Other preclinical studies
revealed that CSF1/CSF1R blockade, as monotherapy or com-
bined with CTX/RT, improved outcomes for glioma, prostate,
and pancreatic adenocarcinoma, as well as melanoma, whereas
CSF1R blockade improved antitumor efficacy of immune check-
point blockade and adoptive T-cell therapy (reviewed in Ruffell
and Coussens, 2015). Importantly, administration of RG7155, a
CSF1R-blocking mAb, in patients with diffuse-type giant cell
tumors, reduced CSF1R+CD163+ macrophage levels; this trans-
lated into objective clinical responses (Ries et al., 2014). Treat-
ment of tenosynovial giant-cell tumors with a small-molecule
inhibitor of CSF1R kinase increased progression-free survival
and improved outcomes as a monotherapy (Tap et al., 2015).
The macrophage presence in tumors has also been therapeuti-
cally manipulated by targeting the macrophage signaling protein
acting through its transmembrane receptor kinase RON, wherein
activation of RON in macrophages favors conversion of micro-
metastatic lesions to overt metastases by suppressing antitumor
immune responses. Functional RON blockade in preclinical
models potentiates tumor-specific CD8+ T-cell responses, indi-
cating that RON inhibitors may also improve outcomes for can-
cer patients (Eyob et al., 2013).
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) is an attractive target, as BTK is
activated downstream of the B-cell receptor and FcgR and PI3Kg
in some myeloid subsets (Smith et al., 2001). In vitro, neoplastic
cell challenge via co-culture with splenic cells from B-cell-defi-
cient versus B-cell-proficient mice revealed that IFNg release
from CD8+ and NK cells is increased when B cells were absent,
whereas presence of B cells or B-cell-derived IL-10 was associ-
ated with reduced IFNg (Inoue et al., 2006). Though these in vitro
studies indicate that B cells can direct T-cell responses, the role
of myeloid cells as mediators of these responses is now clear and
indicates that therapies targeting common pathways in B cells
and/or myeloid cells, such as SYK, BTK, PI3Kg, may be effica-
cious in solid tumors, analogous to efficacy observed for BTK
and PI3Kd inhibitors in B-cell malignancies (Hendriks et al.,
2014). This concept was recently validated preclinically, whereby
BTK inhibition enhanced survival of mice bearing pancreatic
adenocarcinoma (Gunderson et al., 2016; Masso
´ -Valle
´ s et al.,
2015), neuroendocrine cancers (Soucek et al., 2011), and other
subcutaneous tumors (Sagiv-Barfi et al., 2015) in which a com-
mon feature was reduced inflammation and inflammatory des-
moplasia with evidence of macrophage repolarization.
If these preclinical findings are any indication, immune thera-
pies
targeting
macrophages
and/or
other
protumorigenic
immune cells could alter the human tumor immune microenvi-
ronment in a way that fosters cytotoxic properties of CD8+
T cells. As immune-checkpoint inhibitors of pathways regulating
T-cell activity are proving efficacious for subsets of cancer
patients, we predict that combining these two immune-based
approaches represents a compelling clinical opportunity. How-
ever, it is likely that not all tumors will respond; thus, identifying
predictive biomarkers and correlates of therapeutic response
is a top priority. Based on preclinical data evaluating macro-
phage antagonists and checkpoint inhibitors, we predict that
biomarkers of response will also be reflected by changes in pe-
ripheral blood. Such biomarkers will form the basis for simple,
non-invasive diagnostic and/or prognostic screens aiding early
detection in susceptible populations (Figure 4).
In preclinical models, regardless of tumor or approach, TH1
immunity emerges when dominant TH2-driver pathways are
attenuated; when concomitant with cytotoxic therapy, tumor
growth stalls or regresses by CD8+ T-cell-dependent mecha-
nisms. These findings highlight the importance of neutralizing
pro-tumor inflammation as a therapeutic strategy and indicate
that tumor-infiltrating CTLs can be mobilized in tumors with
low mutational burdens. These data also highlight the clinical
need for biomarkers that identity tissue-specific programs
driving TH2 immune responses; such data is needed to inform
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1239
 precision medicine strategies employing TH2 blockade, in con-
cert with other immune, targeted, or cytotoxic approaches
(Figure 4).
Immune-Targeted Therapies Focused on T Cells
Basic Principles
Cancer immunotherapy historically relied on two principal mech-
anisms of action: (1) ‘‘passive’’ immunotherapy via provision of
anti-tumor antibodies, e.g., Trastuzumab (aHER2 mAB) or Ritux-
imab (aCD20 mAB), or adoptive transfer of cytotoxic T and NK
cells; and (2) ‘‘active’’ immunotherapy that mobilizes the pa-
tient’s immune cells via checkpoint blockade, i.e., administration
of antibodies directed against immune-regulatory checkpoint
molecules expressed on T cells or via vaccines that expand
antigen-specific T cells. In all circumstances, T cells are the
drug; we are learning that T cells have the ability to clinically
control some cancers (Postow et al., 2015). T cells can be tar-
geted in three major ways: (1) by being liberated by checkpoint
inhibitors; (2) through adoptive transfer when T cells are missing,
as validated by the clinical success of genetically engineered
T-cell therapies; and (3) through induction in vivo by vaccination
or endogenous mechanisms subsequent to other anti-cancer
therapies (e.g., CTX, targeted therapies, or anticancer anti-
bodies) (Palucka and Banchereau, 2013).
Immune Checkpoint Blockade
Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) can unleash the power of
naturally occurring T cells by eliminating negative signals that
block T-cell function (Pardoll, 2012). ICB has produced durable
clinical responses and improved survival across a variety of can-
cers (Topalian et al., 2015). CTL expansion and function are care-
fully regulated by cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4
(CTLA-4), programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), and other
molecules so as to maintain a delicate balance between the res-
olution of infection, the elimination of infected cells, the protec-
tion of tissue homeostasis, and the prevention of autoimmune
Figure 4. Multi-Modal Biomarker-Based Approach for Optimal Im-
mune-Mediated Tumor Control
Cancer medicine is evolving. Going forward, individuals with cancer will be
evaluated for biomarkers enabling stratification to determine most optimal
combinations for therapy based on tumor-based and systemic biomarkers.
Eventually, all patients with cancer will be treated with checkpoint inhibitors,
either directly or after interventions targeting inflammation (for example, with
TH2-blockade therapies, radiation therapy, or epigenetic modulation), or
vaccination via DCs to boost T-cell repertoires, or adoptive T cell transfer.
Based on the known tissue-embedded programs empowered to control auto-
immunity, it is reasonable to anticipate that a majority of patients will develop
acquired resistance followed by immune escape; this will lead to the next cycle
of treatments incorporating multi-modal biomarkers (e.g., based on micro-
biome phenotype, circulating cell-free DNA [cfDNA], circulating cytokine
levels) and perhaps NK cells recognizing loss of MHC class I by neoplastic
cells, thus rendering them invisible to T cells. Cytotoxic treatments such as
with NK cells or standard cytotoxic therapy (CTX or RT) or oncolytic viruses will
release neo-antigens that can be used for generation of the next round of
effector T cells. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) of tumor samples as well as
cfDNA will yield information on mutational load that can, in turn, be used as one
class of neo-antigens for vaccination and priming of new T-cell repertoires.
T-cell receptors (TCR) can be assessed using genomic approaches enabling
sequencing of TCRb chains to assess repertoire diversity. Given the impor-
tance of T-cell specificity for relevant antigens, strategies enabling paired
sequencing of a and b TCR chains will be invaluable, as will high-throughput
tetramer analysis. In addition, RNA-seq and epigenetic analysis of tumors and
their infiltrates will enable assessment of the type and flavor of inflammation.
Future studies will incorporate metabolomics to this biomarker portfolio.
1240
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 attack. CTLA-4 is a cell-surface receptor expressed by activated
T cells with homology to the T-cell costimulatory molecule CD28.
Although CD28 and CTLA-4 are both ligands for B7-1 (CD80) and
B7-2 (CD86), they serve opposing roles in regulating T-cell acti-
vation. CD28 provides costimulatory signals required for T-cell
activation, whereas CTLA-4 negatively modulates T-cell re-
sponses by raising the activation threshold for T-cell priming;
thus, CTLA-4 is likely most important during priming. PD-1
binds programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1; a.k.a., B7-H1 or
CD274) expressed by neoplastic cells, various immune cells,
mesenchymal support cells, and vascular cells; this interaction
negatively regulates T-cell activation when engaged with an
APC and/or effector function when engaged with other PD-L1-
positive cells. Indeed, binding of PD-L1 to its receptors sup-
presses T-cell migration and proliferation and restricts cancer
cell killing (Topalian et al., 2015); thus, PD-1 is important in regu-
lating effector functions after CD8+ T cells are activated. PD-1
and CTLA-4 regulate distinct phases of T-cell differentiation
and function, and their inhibition might need to be optimally
phased for maximum efficacy. This concept needs to be incor-
porated in the next generation of clinical trials of combination
therapy regimens, especially when combined with vaccines or
agents that reprogram myeloid cells to foster a TH1-type activa-
tion state.
Indeed, combination therapies targeting the two checkpoints,
i.e., CTLA-4 and PD-1, further increase progression-free survival
in patients with metastatic melanoma (Larkin et al., 2015); how-
ever, in other cancers, these responses are present in fewer
patients. Resolving the natural and acquired resistance to
checkpoint inhibition therapy represents the next frontier in basic
research and clinical development (Figure 4). As the effector
arm of checkpoint inhibition, T cells could underpin the major
resistance mechanisms for checkpoint blockade. Thus, non-re-
sponding patients might actually lack naturally occurring T cells
with specificity against neoplasias, and/or their T cells could be
held hostage and rendered dysfunctional in TMEs via pathways
other than checkpoints, such as immune-suppressive microen-
vironments directed by TH2-activated myeloid, Treg, or Breg
cells (Coussens et al., 2013). Links between treatment resistance
and T-cell shortage are supported by recent findings that tumor-
specific mutations generate neo-antigens that, in turn, may drive
anti-tumor responses. Indeed, whole-exome sequencing of ma-
lignant melanomas from patients treated with CTLA-4 blockers
demonstrated an association between mutational load and de-
gree of clinical benefit (Snyder et al., 2015); however, in other
melanoma cohorts, recurrent neo-antigen peptide sequences
were not found to predict responder populations (Van Allen
et al., 2015). In non-small-cell lung cancers treated with aPD-1
mAb, higher mutation burden in tumors was associated with du-
rable clinical benefit and progression-free survival (Rizvi et al.,
2015). Neo-antigens arising as products of somatic mutations
are not presented in the thymus; thus, they can be recognized
by the immune system as foreign antigens, similar to viral anti-
gens or organ transplants, because the T cells have not been
eliminated or tolerized. These concepts were put forward early
(Srivastava, 2000) but validated only recently (Schumacher and
Schreiber, 2015), thanks to the availability of massively parallel
sequencing.
Cancer Vaccines
Patients may fail or resist checkpoint therapy owing to a lack of
pre-existing T cell infiltrates. Therefore, vaccination and adoptive
transfer strategies to first induce and expand the breadth of
endogenous T-cell responses could prove useful. Vaccines are
composed of antigens and adjuvants. Responses to vaccination
and adjuvants involve DCs that capture and present vaccine an-
tigens, thereby facilitating differentiation of lymphocytes and
subsequent immunity (Figure 3). DCs also integrate the adjuvant
signals and determine the quality of induced immune responses.
Several phase III clinical trials testing various cancer vaccine
platforms, including DC-based and viral-vector-based vaccines,
are ongoing. These exogenous vaccine platforms will need to be
accompanied by high-throughput genomics to incorporate
personalized cancer-specific mutations and candidate peptide
antigens.
Indeed,
proof-of-concept
trials
in
patients
with
advanced melanoma demonstrated that naturally occurring
neo-antigen-specific immunity was enhanced by vaccination
with DCs loaded with patient-specific peptides (Carreno et al.,
2015). Another concept is endogenous vaccination based on
antigen released upon standard CTX/RT or oncolytic viruses
(i.e., viruses that preferentially infect and kill cancer cells); this,
however, requires effective antigen presentation to generate
therapeutic T-cell immunity (Palucka and Banchereau, 2013).
DCs are skewed by tumors toward pro-tumor immunity; thus, re-
programming to foster TH1-skewed mature functionality in vivo is
critical for success of endogenous vaccination. Our understand-
ing of cancer genomics, the biology of antigen presentation, and
T-cell biology has advanced impressively and continues to in-
crease; this knowledge will feed into the development of the
next-generation cancer vaccines that, combined with check-
point inhibitors, hold promise for improving outcomes for cancer
patients (Figure 4).
DC vaccines can be exploited as anti-cancer therapeutics
through various strategies, including: non-targeted peptide/
protein and nucleic-acid-based vaccines captured by DCs
in vivo; vaccines composed of antigens directly coupled to
anti-DC-antibodies; or vaccines composed of ex-vivo-gener-
ated DCs loaded with tumor antigens (Palucka and Banchereau,
2013). DCs are also engaged in response to complex vaccine
preparations such as GVAX, a tumor-cell-based vaccine in
which neoplastic cells genetically modified to express GM-CSF
attract and activate DCs (Le et al., 2010). Other vaccine plat-
forms are based on recombinant-attenuated Listeria monocyto-
genes (Lm), an intracellular bacterium that targets DCs in vivo
and utilizes MHCI and II antigen-processing pathways (Le
et al., 2012), as well as intratumoral delivery of oncolytic viruses;
these can be modified to express GM-CSF to attract DCs and
lymphocytes at the lysed tumor site (Russell et al., 2012). Finally,
pioneering studies from Ralph Steinman and Michel Nussenz-
weig demonstrated the principle of targeting antigens to DCs
in vivo through coupling of antigens to antibodies specific to
DC surface receptors such as DEC205 or DCIR (Bonifaz et al.,
2002; Soares et al., 2007). Importantly, in the absence of adju-
vants, targeting antigens to DEC205+ DCs in vivo induces anti-
gen-specific tolerance (Hawiger et al., 2001). Administration of
these complex vaccines with DC activators such as TLR3,
TLR7-8, or CD40 agonists enables maturation of DCs and
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1241
 consequent establishment of immunity rather than tolerance
(Bonifaz et al., 2002; Soares et al., 2007). It remains to be seen
which vaccine platform will be most effective at priming and
boosting T cells in patients; this clearly represents the next fron-
tier in research.
T-Cell-Dependent Nature of Cytotoxic and Targeted
Therapy
Cancer medicine evolved largely based on the principle that
rapidly proliferating malignant cells can be eradicated by cyto-
toxic regimens (CTX or RT) or by targeted drugs attacking attri-
butes of mutationally corrupted cells. As discussed above, the
recent advent and remarkable efficacy of immune-checkpoint
inhibitors revealed the clinical potential of harnessing endoge-
nous mechanisms of anti-tumor immunity in tumors harboring
significant mutational burdens. Upon reflection, however, it is
appreciated that conventional cytotoxic approaches modulate
the composition and functional bioactivity of intratumoral leuko-
cytes, in addition to effects on neoplastic cells (Galluzzi et al.,
2015). Furthermore, in some scenarios, the efficacy of neoadju-
vant CTX correlates with increased presence of intratumoral im-
mune-effector T cells (Galluzzi et al., 2015). These correlations
are not limited to cytotoxic regimens—the tyrosine kinase inhib-
itor imatinib also leads to increased presence of CTLs and NK
cells in gastrointestinal tumors in a manner that correlates with
disease outcome (Kroemer et al., 2013), while efficacy against
chronic myelogenous leukemia can be reversed by co-adminis-
tration of type I IFN (Galluzzi et al., 2015). A recent study in breast
cancer also revealed that efficacy of transtuzumab emtansine is
linked to elicitation of anti-tumor immune responses (Mu
¨ ller
et al., 2015).
Malignant cells can emit danger signals, albeit distinct from
those of normal tissue, that are sensed by immune cells and
thus are antigenic. Increased antigenicity is linked to either muta-
tional burden, where peptides from mutant proteins are pre-
sented by MHC molecules (Gubin et al., 2014), or to ectopic
expression of cancer testis or oncofetal antigens typically only
expressed during embryonic or fetal development (Whitehurst,
2014). The increased adjuvanticity of neoplastic cells is linked
to metabolic stress caused by their sustained proliferation and
to their ability to adapt and survive in hypoxic TMEs (Krysko
et al., 2012). Furthermore, preclinical data have emerged sup-
porting the proposition that tumors treated with conventional
CTX engage antigenic and adjuvant immune-mediated mecha-
nisms. In murine tumor models, the anti-neoplastic effects of
anthracyclines are significantly reduced when either gd or
CD8+ T cells are depleted, but not when B or NK cells are
absent, DC infiltration is blocked or corrupted, immune-stimula-
tory type I IFNs or IL-17 are lacking, or DAMP-mediated
recruitment and activation of effector cells is thwarted (Kroemer
et al., 2013). Cyclophosphamide, oxaliplatin, and bortezomib
similarly rely on immune-mediated mechanisms for their effi-
cacy; these commonly used cytotoxics elicit effector cell activity
via plasma membrane exposure of calreticulin and release of the
chromatin-binding protein high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1).
This, in turn, fosters DC maturation and TLR4 and RAGE activa-
tion (Apetoh et al., 2007), thus increasing adjuvanticity of malig-
nant cells.
Taxanes, broadly used microtubule inhibitors, and vinca alka-
loids promote polyploidization due to mitotic interference, thus
leading to endoplasmic reticulum stress responses favoring cal-
reticulin exposure and immune-mediated elimination (Senovilla
et al., 2012). Clinically, docataxel, vinorelbine, and cisplatin all
lead to increased abundance of circulating CTLs and decreased
presence of Treg cells and immature myeloid cells harboring
T-cell-suppressive activity; this latter effect is also shared by
gemcitabine, a common CTX for pancreatic adenocarcinomas,
and 5-fluoruracil. Interestingly, paclitaxel is also a TLR4 ligand
and thus enhances T-cell priming by DCs (Pfannenstiel et al.,
2010).
Cyclophosphamide also provokes relocalization of intestinal
gram-positive bacteria to secondary lymphoid organs, resulting
in generation of TH17 cells secreting IL-17 and IFNg that promote
anti-tumor immune responses (Viaud et al., 2013). In murine tu-
mor models, therapies targeting TH2-based programs (e.g.,
CSF1R or RON antagonists, BTK or SYK inhibitors, B-cell deple-
tion, aIL-4 or aIL-13 mAbs) enhance efficacy of either CTX or RT
by T-cell-dependent mechanisms (Ruffell and Coussens, 2015).
Perhaps the most compelling evidence is that provided by recent
data revealing that immune-checkpoint blockade, when com-
bined with CTX, improves overall survival in several cancer types
beyond CTX alone (Topalian et al., 2015). The ability of these
agents to activate adaptive stress-response pathways and
send danger signals operative as immunologic adjuvants inher-
ently increases the antigenicity of tumors even when mutational
burden is low. These untoward effects can be capitalized upon to
improve outcomes for individuals with cancer.
A Role for the Microbiome in Regulating Systemic
Cancer Risk and Response to Therapy
If the precision medicine equation wasn’t sufficiently compli-
cated by neoplastic cell genomics, epigenomics, host immune
responses, and the TME, mounting evidence points to an addi-
tional consideration when attempting to stratify patients and pre-
dict therapy response: the host microbiome. The context and
composition of common microorganisms living in the gut not
only shapes local immune responses, but also regulates sys-
temic immunity and thus impacts the risk of and progression to
malignancy and the response to anti-cancer therapies. Intra-
abdominal infections and use of antibiotics has long been asso-
ciated with increased incidence of colorectal cancer (Wang et al.,
2014). In mouse models, attenuating or selectively altering the
composition of gut microorganisms influences both the inci-
dence and progression of cancer (Zitvogel et al., 2015). Intestinal
microorganisms not only impact local risk of tumorigenesis, but
also influence neoplastic progression distally by altering inflam-
matory and metabolic circuitry. These experimental results
correlate with epidemiologic data revealing increased incidence
of breast cancer in women with significant history of antibiotic
use (Zitvogel et al., 2015).
Gut microbiota composition is dramatically impacted by com-
mon anti-neoplastic drugs, including RT, allogeneic stem-cell
transplantation, and select CTXs, notably 5-fluorouracil and iri-
notecan (Zitvogel et al., 2015). Along these lines, the gut micro-
biota affects the amenability of some tumor types to therapy
by impacting regulatory aspects of the immune response.
1242
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 Examples include translocation of gut microbiota across the in-
testinal epithelium in response to lympho-depleting irradiation
in which DCs are inadvertently activated, leading to altered
serum cytokines and improved responses to adoptively trans-
ferred CTLs; these beneficial effects are abated by antibiotics
(Paulos et al., 2007). Similarly, cyclophosphamide alters compo-
sition of gut microbiota, resulting in translocation of gram-
positive bacteria into secondary lymphoid organs wherein
pathogenic TH17 and memory TH1 cells are activated; tumors
grown in germ-free mice, or antibiotics tropic for gram-positive
bacteria exhibit reduced TH17 responses and tumor resistance
to cyclophosphamide (Viaud et al., 2013). Antibiotic eradication
of gram-positive bacteria also impairs the efficacy of CpG-oligo-
nucleotide immunotherapy and platinum CTX by altering myeloid
cells within the TME (Iida et al., 2013). Bifidobacterium occu-
pancy supports anti-tumor immunity against melanoma and im-
proves the efficacy of aPD-L1 and aCTLA-4 mAb therapy by
altering DC activity, leading to improved antigen-specific CD8+
T cell function—these effects were reduced by ampicillin,
colistin, or streptomycin but were enhanced by vancomycin
due to preferential enhancement of Bacteroidales colonization
(Ve
´ tizou et al., 2015). These data underscore the impact of gut
commensals on therapeutic responsiveness.
Could selectively manipulating the gut microbiota impact risk
of developing cancer, limit incidence of select tumor types,
and/or improve activity of some anti-cancer therapies? Zitvogel
and colleagues have proposed four distinct approaches for
manipulating the gut microbiota to boost cancer therapy: (1) pref-
erential use of antibiotics selective for untoward bacterial
species; (2) increased use of probiotics; (3) increased use of
prebiotics to stimulate healthy gut colonization; and (4) use of
postbiotics, nonviable products of microbiota that exert biolog-
ical activities in hosts (Zitvogel et al., 2015). Prospective stool
analysis and monitoring in cancer patients receiving therapy
will surely reveal biomarkers that, if harnessed, could improve
patient stratification and/or support new microbiota-based stra-
tegies for boosting therapeutic responsiveness, e.g., fecal trans-
plant of beneficial species.
Multi-Modal Tumor and Systemic Biomarkers for
Stratification and Resistance Monitoring
A major clinical goal is to understand the multi-modal tissue-
based and systemic pathways regulating therapy responses so
as to minimize resistance and maximize efficacy of cancer med-
icine (Figure 4). Whether therapies target tumor-intrinsic path-
ways, host pathways, or commensal microbiota, it is clear that
understanding non-genomic mechanisms of resistance from
an integrated standpoint is critical.
Understanding which immune cell types are present in and
around a tumor currently provides invaluable retrospective infor-
mation regarding tumor ecology and/or tumor response to
therapy. However, we must improve our ability to integrate infor-
mation on not only the complexity of leukocytes in tumors, but
also their geography in tumor nests and stroma. Immune cells
are scattered in tumor core and within tumor stroma, in invasive
margins, and in organized lymphoid structures often distant from
neoplastic cells. Investigating the mechanisms governing forma-
tion of tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) found in numerous
cancers represents a new frontier for biomedical research.
Such topology has been reported by Galon and colleagues to
be clinically meaningful in colorectal cancer, where a statistically
significant correlation between immune cell density and patient
outcome was revealed (Galon et al., 2006). Moreover, develop-
ment of TLS in individuals with pancreatic adenocarcinoma
treated with vaccines correlated with improved clinical out-
comes (Le et al., 2015). Furthermore, compared with single-re-
gion analysis, combined analysis of the tumor core and invasive
margins improved the accuracy of survival prediction in different
patient groups (Galon et al., 2006). These early results form the
basis for immune stratification of patients, or the so-called Im-
munoscore, and its coordinated assessment in the clinic (As-
cierto et al., 2013). An international consortium has been initiated
to validate and promote the Immunoscore in routine clinical set-
tings (Ascierto et al., 2013); results of this international effort may
lead to implementation of the Immunoscore as a new classifica-
tion metric, designated TNM-I (TNM-Immune).
Will the Immunoscore provide enough additional information
to prospectively predict response to therapy? Likely not. We
predict that integrating the Immunoscore with additional metrics
will be critical for guiding patient stratification and phasing of
combinatorial therapies. Such metrics will include genomic
and exomic features of neoplastic cells (through sequencing
of neoplastic cells themselves or cfDNA, tracking the expansion
of tumor-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, monitoring serum
cytokine fluxes, and evaluating the composition and health of
commensal bacteria (Figure 4). Serum cytokines have long
been enigmatic due to their labile nature and the detection
limitations of conventional methodologies. That said, serum
biomarker signatures are now able to discern asymptomatic
early stage pancreatic cancer from healthy controls with 96%
accuracy (Ghatnekar et al., 2013) and can be used to monitor
the pharmacodynamics of CSF1R-targeted therapies (Butowski
et al., 2015). Moreover, transcriptional profiling of blood mono-
cytes in renal cell carcinoma identifies biomarkers correlating
with tumor staging (Chittezhath et al., 2014), and mRNA
sequencing of tumor-educated blood platelets distinguishes
cancer patients from healthy individuals with 96% accuracy
(Best et al., 2015). Thus, multi-modal functional diagnostic stra-
tegies integrating the tumor, host, and commensals will likely
forge the advent of next-generation precision bioinformatics to
match patients with appropriately combined and phased anti-
cancer therapies.
Oncoimmunology Treatment Paradigm
Future immunotherapies will be based on cycles of interventions
designed to boost and modulate anti-cancer immunity (Figure 4).
Indeed, as we rediscover and refine the fundamental principles
of tumor immunology, it is increasingly clear that curing cancer
might not be a realistic goal. Rather, aiming for a continuum of
treatment cycles designed and based on mechanistic in vivo
studies and in-depth analysis of each patient’s tumor will be
necessary for optimizing outcomes. Clinical trials with check-
point inhibitors teach us that in situ immune infiltration is critical
for tumor regression; however, not all immune infiltrates are
equal, and as discussed throughout this article, the quality of im-
mune response is a critical factor for therapeutic success. This,
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1243
 in turn, is determined by underlying inflammation, which we
assert must become a staging parameter, along with classical
pathology-based schemas and the Immunoscore. It will also
need to be established to what extent inflammation, which
clearly plays a role in epithelial tumors, impacts other tumor
types, e.g., melanoma or sarcomas. Additional parameters
pertain to the specificity of infiltrating T cells against cancer
antigens, as again, the infiltrate with passenger T cells might
not be therapeutically useful and should be tested. Eventually
all patients will be treated with checkpoint inhibitors, either
directly or after interventions targeting inflammation, by vaccina-
tion to boost T-cell repertoires or by adoptive T-cell transfer. The
majority of patients will subsequently develop acquired resis-
tance followed by immune escape; this will lead to the next
cycle of treatments incorporating multi-modal biomarkers (e.g.,
based on microbiome phenotype, cfDNA, circulating cytokine
levels) and perhaps NK cells recognizing loss of MHC class I
by neoplastic cells, thus rendering them invisible to T cells.
Cytotoxic treatments, such as with NK cells, standard CTX/RT,
or oncolytic viruses, will release neo-antigens that can be
used to generate the next round of effector T cells. To this
latter point, we must fully understand the rules of T-cell priming
in vivo in humans, identify the most effective ways to utilize
DCs for priming, and develop strategies for mobilizing the
naive T-cell repertoire from the thymus in adults (Sporte
` s et al.,
2008). In later rounds of therapy, the scope of neo-antigens will
likely be broadened as, in addition to somatic mutations, neo-
antigens can be generated via epigenetic and post-translational
regulation. Last but not least, the role of Tregs, so well estab-
lished in murine cancer, will need to be redefined in humans.
Resolving all of these challenges will surely keep us busy for a
long while.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank members of the Palucka and Coussens laboratories for
critical insight and discussions; Amanda Lund and Jeffrey Nolz for critical
feedback; Anna Lisa Lucido for help with editing the manuscript; and all
authors contributing to studies discussed herein but not mentioned due
to space consideration. A.K.P. thanks Jacques Banchereau, a long-time
collaborator. The authors acknowledge support from the NIH/NCI and Susan
B. Komen Foundation (A.K.P. and L.M.C.), Baylor Research Foundation
(A.K.P.), DOD BCRP Era of Hope Scholar Expansion Award, Breast Cancer
Research Foundation, a Stand Up To Cancer–Lustgarten Foundation
Pancreatic Cancer Convergence Dream Team Translational Research Grant
(SU2C-AACR-DT14-14), and Brenden-Colson Center for Pancreatic Care
(to L.M.C.).
REFERENCES
Affara, N.I., Ruffell, B., Medler, T.R., Gunderson, A.J., Johansson, M., Born-
stein, S., Bergsland, E., Steinhoff, M., Li, Y., Gong, Q., et al. (2014). B cells
regulate macrophage phenotype and response to chemotherapy in squamous
carcinomas. Cancer Cell 25, 809–821.
Aharinejad, S., Salama, M., Paulus, P., Zins, K., Berger, A., and Singer, C.F.
(2013). Elevated CSF1 serum concentration predicts poor overall survival in
women with early breast cancer. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 20, 777–783.
Andreu, P., Johansson, M., Affara, N.I., Pucci, F., Tan, T., Junankar, S., Korets,
L., Lam, J., Tawfik, D., DeNardo, D.G., et al. (2010). FcRgamma activation reg-
ulates inflammation-associated squamous carcinogenesis. Cancer Cell 17,
121–134.
Apetoh, L., Ghiringhelli, F., Tesniere, A., Criollo, A., Ortiz, C., Lidereau, R., Mari-
ette, C., Chaput, N., Mira, J.P., Delaloge, S., et al. (2007). The interaction be-
tween HMGB1 and TLR4 dictates the outcome of anticancer chemotherapy
and radiotherapy. Immunol. Rev. 220, 47–59.
Appay, V., Douek, D.C., and Price, D.A. (2008). CD8+ T cell efficacy in vacci-
nation and disease. Nat. Med. 14, 623–628.
Ascierto, P.A., Capone, M., Urba, W.J., Bifulco, C.B., Botti, G., Lugli, A., Mar-
incola, F.M., Ciliberto, G., Galon, J., and Fox, B.A. (2013). The additional facet
of immunoscore: immunoprofiling as a possible predictive tool for cancer
treatment. J. Transl. Med. 11, 54.
Balkwill, F., Charles, K.A., and Mantovani, A. (2005). Smoldering and polarized
inflammation in the initiation and promotion of malignant disease. Cancer Cell
7, 211–217.
Banchereau, J., Briere, F., Caux, C., Davoust, J., Lebecque, S., Liu, Y.J., Pu-
lendran, B., and Palucka, K. (2000). Immunobiology of dendritic cells. Annu.
Rev. Immunol. 18, 767–811.
Beck, A.H., Espinosa, I., Edris, B., Li, R., Montgomery, K., Zhu, S., Varma, S.,
Marinelli, R.J., van de Rijn, M., and West, R.B. (2009). The macrophage colony-
stimulating factor 1 response signature in breast carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res.
15, 778–787.
Best, M.G., Sol, N., Kooi, I., Tannous, J., Westerman, B.A., Rustenburg, F.,
Schellen, P., Verschueren, H., Post, E., Koster, J., et al. (2015). RNA-Seq of
Tumor-Educated Platelets Enables Blood-Based Pan-Cancer, Multiclass,
and Molecular Pathway Cancer Diagnostics. Cancer Cell 28, 666–676.
Bongartz, T., Sutton, A.J., Sweeting, M.J., Buchan, I., Matteson, E.L., and
Montori, V. (2006). Anti-TNF antibody therapy in rheumatoid arthritis and the
risk of serious infections and malignancies: systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of rare harmful effects in randomized controlled trials. JAMA 295, 2275–
2285.
Bonifaz, L., Bonnyay, D., Mahnke, K., Rivera, M., Nussenzweig, M.C., and
Steinman, R.M. (2002). Efficient targeting of protein antigen to the dendritic
cell receptor DEC-205 in the steady state leads to antigen presentation on ma-
jor histocompatibility complex class I products and peripheral CD8+ T cell
tolerance. J. Exp. Med. 196, 1627–1638.
Butowski, N., Colman, H., De Groot, J.F., Omuro, A.M., Nayak, L., Wen, P.Y.,
Cloughesy, T.F., Marimuthu, A., Haidar, S., Perry, A., et al. (2015). Orally
administered colony stimulating factor 1 receptor inhibitor PLX3397 in recur-
rent glioblastoma: an Ivy Foundation Early Phase Clinical Trials Consortium
phase II study. Neuro. Oncol. Published online October 8, 2015. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/nov245.
Campisi, J., Andersen, J.K., Kapahi, P., and Melov, S. (2011). Cellular senes-
cence: a link between cancer and age-related degenerative disease? Semin.
Cancer Biol. 21, 354–359.
Carreno, B.M., Magrini, V., Becker-Hapak, M., Kaabinejadian, S., Hundal, J.,
Petti, A.A., Ly, A., Lie, W.R., Hildebrand, W.H., Mardis, E.R., and Linette,
G.P. (2015). Cancer immunotherapy. A dendritic cell vaccine increases the
breadth and diversity of melanoma neoantigen-specific T cells. Science 348,
803–808.
Carretero, R., Sektioglu, I.M., Garbi, N., Salgado, O.C., Beckhove, P., and
Ha
¨ mmerling, G.J. (2015). Eosinophils orchestrate cancer rejection by normal-
izing tumor vessels and enhancing infiltration of CD8(+) T cells. Nat. Immunol.
16, 609–617.
Chen, D.S., and Mellman, I. (2013). Oncology meets immunology: the cancer-
immunity cycle. Immunity 39, 1–10.
Chittezhath, M., Dhillon, M.K., Lim, J.Y., Laoui, D., Shalova, I.N., Teo, Y.L.,
Chen, J., Kamaraj, R., Raman, L., Lum, J., et al. (2014). Molecular profiling re-
veals a tumor-promoting phenotype of monocytes and macrophages in hu-
man cancer progression. Immunity 41, 815–829.
Coffelt, S.B., Kersten, K., Doornebal, C.W., Weiden, J., Vrijland, K., Hau, C.S.,
Verstegen, N.J., Ciampricotti, M., Hawinkels, L.J., Jonkers, J., et al. (2015). 17-
producing gammadelta T cells and neutrophils conspire to promote breast
cancer metastasis (IL: Nature).
1244
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 Coussens, L.M., Raymond, W.W., Bergers, G., Laig-Webster, M., Behrendt-
sen, O., Werb, Z., Caughey, G.H., and Hanahan, D. (1999). Inflammatory
mast cells up-regulate angiogenesis during squamous epithelial carcinogen-
esis. Genes Dev. 13, 1382–1397.
Coussens, L.M., Zitvogel, L., and Palucka, A.K. (2013). Neutralizing tumor-pro-
moting chronic inflammation: a magic bullet? Science 339, 286–291.
Davis, B.P., and Rothenberg, M.E. (2014). Eosinophils and cancer. Cancer
Immunol. Res. 2, 1–8.
de Visser, K.E., Eichten, A., and Coussens, L.M. (2006). Paradoxical roles of
the immune system during cancer development. Nat. Rev. Cancer 6, 24–37.
DeNardo, D.G., Barreto, J.B., Andreu, P., Vasquez, L., Tawfik, D., Kolhatkar,
N., and Coussens, L.M. (2009). CD4(+) T cells regulate pulmonary metastasis
of mammary carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of macrophages.
Cancer Cell 16, 91–102.
DeNardo, D.G., Brennan, D.J., Rexhepaj, E., Ruffell, B., Shiao, S.L., Madden,
S.F., Gallagher, W.M., Wadhwani, N., Keil, S.D., Junaid, S.A., et al. (2011).
Leukocyte complexity predicts breast cancer survival and functionally regu-
lates response to chemotherapy. Cancer Discov. 1, 54–67.
Druker, B.J., Guilhot, F., O’Brien, S.G., Gathmann, I., Kantarjian, H., Gatter-
mann, N., Deininger, M.W., Silver, R.T., Goldman, J.M., Stone, R.M., et al.;
IRIS Investigators (2006). Five-year follow-up of patients receiving imatinib
for chronic myeloid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 2408–2417.
Dunn, G.P., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (2004). The three Es of cancer immu-
noediting. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 22, 329–360.
Eyob, H., Ekiz, H.A., Derose, Y.S., Waltz, S.E., Williams, M.A., and Welm, A.L.
(2013). Inhibition of ron kinase blocks conversion of micrometastases to overt
metastases by boosting antitumor immunity. Cancer Discov. 3, 751–760.
Fehe
´ rvari, Z., and Sakaguchi, S. (2004). CD4+ Tregs and immune control.
J. Clin. Invest. 114, 1209–1217.
Fridlender, Z.G., and Albelda, S.M. (2012). Tumor-associated neutrophils:
friend or foe? Carcinogenesis 33, 949–955.
Gabrilovich, D.I., Ostrand-Rosenberg, S., and Bronte, V. (2012). Coordinated
regulation of myeloid cells by tumours. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 253–268.
Galluzzi, L., Buque
´ , A., Kepp, O., Zitvogel, L., and Kroemer, G. (2015). Immu-
nological Effects of Conventional Chemotherapy and Targeted Anticancer
Agents. Cancer Cell 28, 690–714.
Galon, J., Costes, A., Sanchez-Cabo, F., Kirilovsky, A., Mlecnik, B., Lagorce-
Page
` s, C., Tosolini, M., Camus, M., Berger, A., Wind, P., et al. (2006). Type,
density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal tumors predict
clinical outcome. Science 313, 1960–1964.
Geissmann, F., Jung, S., and Littman, D.R. (2003). Blood monocytes consist of
two principal subsets with distinct migratory properties. Immunity 19, 71–82.
Ghatnekar, O., Andersson, R., Svensson, M., Persson, U., Ringdahl, U., Zeilon,
P., and Borrebaeck, C.A. (2013). Modelling the benefits of early diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer using a biomarker signature. Int. J. Cancer 133, 2392–2397.
Gocheva, V., Wang, H.W., Gadea, B.B., Shree, T., Hunter, K.E., Garfall, A.L.,
Berman, T., and Joyce, J.A. (2010). IL-4 induces cathepsin protease activity
in tumor-associated macrophages to promote cancer growth and invasion.
Genes Dev. 24, 241–255.
Gubin, M.M., Zhang, X., Schuster, H., Caron, E., Ward, J.P., Noguchi, T., Iva-
nova, Y., Hundal, J., Arthur, C.D., Krebber, W.J., et al. (2014). Checkpoint
blockade cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-specific mutant antigens.
Nature 515, 577–581.
Gunderson, A.J., Kaneda, M.M., Tsujikawa, T., Nguyen, A.V., Affara, N.I., Ruf-
fell, B., Gorjestani, S., Liudahl, S.M., Truitt, M., Olson, P., et al. (2016). Bruton’s
Tyrosine Kinase (BTK)-dependent immune cell crosstalk drives pancreas can-
cer. Cancer Discov. Published online December 29, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1158/2159-8290.
Hanahan, D., and Coussens, L.M. (2012). Accessories to the crime: functions
of cells recruited to the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell 21, 309–322.
Hanna, R.N., Cekic, C., Sag, D., Tacke, R., Thomas, G.D., Nowyhed, H., Herr-
ley, E., Rasquinha, N., McArdle, S., Wu, R., et al. (2015). Patrolling monocytes
control tumor metastasis to the lung. Science 350, 985–990.
Hawiger, D., Inaba, K., Dorsett, Y., Guo, M., Mahnke, K., Rivera, M., Ravetch,
J.V., Steinman, R.M., and Nussenzweig, M.C. (2001). Dendritic cells induce
peripheral T cell unresponsiveness under steady state conditions in vivo.
J. Exp. Med. 194, 769–779.
Heiser, L.M., Sadanandam, A., Kuo, W.L., Benz, S.C., Goldstein, T.C., Ng, S.,
Gibb, W.J., Wang, N.J., Ziyad, S., Tong, F., et al. (2012). Subtype and pathway
specific responses to anticancer compounds in breast cancer. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 109, 2724–2729.
Hendriks, R.W., Yuvaraj, S., and Kil, L.P. (2014). Targeting Bruton’s tyrosine ki-
nase in B cell malignancies. Nat. Rev. Cancer 14, 219–232.
Iida, N., Dzutsev, A., Stewart, C.A., Smith, L., Bouladoux, N., Weingarten, R.A.,
Molina, D.A., Salcedo, R., Back, T., Cramer, S., et al. (2013). Commensal bac-
teria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the tumor microenvi-
ronment. Science 342, 967–970.
Inoue, S., Leitner, W.W., Golding, B., and Scott, D. (2006). Inhibitory effects of
B cells on antitumor immunity. Cancer Res. 66, 7741–7747.
Joffre, O.P., Segura, E., Savina, A., and Amigorena, S. (2012). Cross-presen-
tation by dendritic cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 557–569.
Karsten, C.M., and Ko
¨ hl, J. (2012). The immunoglobulin, IgG Fc receptor and
complement triangle in autoimmune diseases. Immunobiology 217, 1067–
1079.
Kerbel, R. (2011). Anti-angiogenesis in cancer; met and unmet goals - an inter-
view with Robert Kerbel by Francesco Bertolini. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 55, 395–398.
Kitamura, T., Qian, B.Z., and Pollard, J.W. (2015). Immune cell promotion of
metastasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 73–86.
Klebanoff, C.A., Acquavella, N., Yu, Z., and Restifo, N.P. (2011). Therapeutic
cancer vaccines: are we there yet? Immunol. Rev. 239, 27–44.
Klechevsky, E., Morita, R., Liu, M., Cao, Y., Coquery, S., Thompson-Snipes, L.,
Briere, F., Chaussabel, D., Zurawski, G., Palucka, A.K., et al. (2008). Functional
specializations of human epidermal Langerhans cells and CD14+ dermal den-
dritic cells. Immunity 29, 497–510.
Komohara, Y., Jinushi, M., and Takeya, M. (2014). Clinical significance of
macrophage heterogeneity in human malignant tumors. Cancer Sci. 105, 1–8.
Kroemer, G., Galluzzi, L., Kepp, O., and Zitvogel, L. (2013). Immunogenic cell
death in cancer therapy. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31, 51–72.
Krysko, D.V., Garg, A.D., Kaczmarek, A., Krysko, O., Agostinis, P., and Vande-
nabeele, P. (2012). Immunogenic cell death and DAMPs in cancer therapy.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 860–875.
Lanzavecchia, A., and Sallusto, F. (2001). The instructive role of dendritic cells
on T cell responses: lineages, plasticity and kinetics. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 13,
291–298.
Larkin, J., Chiarion-Sileni, V., Gonzalez, R., Grob, J.J., Cowey, C.L., Lao, C.D.,
Schadendorf, D., Dummer, R., Smylie, M., Rutkowski, P., et al. (2015). Com-
bined Nivolumab and Ipilimumab or Monotherapy in Untreated Melanoma.
N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 23–34.
Le, D.T., Pardoll, D.M., and Jaffee, E.M. (2010). Cellular vaccine approaches.
Cancer J. 16, 304–310.
Le, D.T., Dubenksy, T.W., Jr., and Brockstedt, D.G. (2012). Clinical develop-
ment of Listeria monocytogenes-based immunotherapies. Semin. Oncol. 39,
311–322.
Le, D.T., Wang-Gillam, A., Picozzi, V., Greten, T.F., Crocenzi, T., Springett, G.,
Morse, M., Zeh, H., Cohen, D., Fine, R.L., et al. (2015). Safety and survival with
GVAX pancreas prime and Listeria Monocytogenes-expressing mesothelin
(CRS-207) boost vaccines for metastatic pancreatic cancer. J. Clin. Oncol.
33, 1325–1333.
Le Floc’h, A., Jalil, A., Vergnon, I., Le Maux Chansac, B., Lazar, V., Bismuth, G.,
Chouaib, S., and Mami-Chouaib, F. (2007). Alpha E beta 7 integrin interaction
with E-cadherin promotes antitumor CTL activity by triggering lytic granule po-
larization and exocytosis. J. Exp. Med. 204, 559–570.
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1245
 Lin, E.Y., Nguyen, A.V., Russell, R.G., and Pollard, J.W. (2001). Colony-stimu-
lating factor 1 promotes progression of mammary tumors to malignancy.
J. Exp. Med. 193, 727–740.
Marichal, T., Tsai, M., and Galli, S.J. (2013). Mast cells: potential positive and
negative roles in tumor biology. Cancer Immunol. Res. 1, 269–279.
Masso
´ -Valle
´ s, D., Jauset, T., Serrano, E., Sodir, N.M., Pedersen, K., Affara,
N.I., Whitfield, J.R., Beaulieu, M.E., Evan, G.I., Elias, L., et al. (2015). Ibrutinib
exerts potent antifibrotic and antitumor activities in mouse models of pancre-
atic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 75, 1675–1681.
Merad, M., Sathe, P., Helft, J., Miller, J., and Mortha, A. (2013). The dendritic
cell lineage: ontogeny and function of dendritic cells and their subsets in the
steady state and the inflamed setting. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31, 563–604.
Metz, M., Grimbaldeston, M.A., Nakae, S., Piliponsky, A.M., Tsai, M., and Galli,
S.J. (2007). Mast cells in the promotion and limitation of chronic inflammation.
Immunol. Rev. 217, 304–328.
Mitchem, J.B., Brennan, D.J., Knolhoff, B.L., Belt, B.A., Zhu, Y., Sanford, D.E.,
Belaygorod, L., Carpenter, D., Collins, L., Piwnica-Worms, D., et al. (2013).
Targeting tumor-infiltrating macrophages decreases tumor-initiating cells, re-
lieves immunosuppression, and improves chemotherapeutic responses. Can-
cer Res. 73, 1128–1141.
Mueller, S.N., Gebhardt, T., Carbone, F.R., and Heath, W.R. (2012). Memory
T cell subsets, migration patterns, and tissue residence. Annu. Rev. Immunol.
31, 137–161.
Mu
¨ ller, P., Kreuzaler, M., Khan, T., Thommen, D.S., Martin, K., Glatz, K., Savic,
S., Harbeck, N., Nitz, U., Gluz, O., et al. (2015). Trastuzumab emtansine
(T-DM1) renders HER2+ breast cancer highly susceptible to CTLA-4/PD-1
blockade. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 315ra188.
Palucka, K., and Banchereau, J. (2013). Dendritic-cell-based therapeutic can-
cer vaccines. Immunity 39, 38–48.
Pardoll, D.M. (2012). The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immuno-
therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 252–264.
Paulos, C.M., Wrzesinski, C., Kaiser, A., Hinrichs, C.S., Chieppa, M., Cassard,
L., Palmer, D.C., Boni, A., Muranski, P., Yu, Z., et al. (2007). Microbial translo-
cation augments the function of adoptively transferred self/tumor-specific
CD8+ T cells via TLR4 signaling. J. Clin. Invest. 117, 2197–2204.
Pfannenstiel, L.W., Lam, S.S., Emens, L.A., Jaffee, E.M., and Armstrong, T.D.
(2010). Paclitaxel enhances early dendritic cell maturation and function
through TLR4 signaling in mice. Cell. Immunol. 263, 79–87.
Plaks, V., Boldajipour, B., Linnemann, J.R., Nguyen, N.H., Kersten, K., Wolf, Y.,
Casbon, A.J., Kong, N., van den Bijgaart, R.J., Sheppard, D., et al. (2015).
Adaptive Immune Regulation of Mammary Postnatal Organogenesis. Dev.
Cell 34, 493–504.
Postow, M.A., Callahan, M.K., and Wolchok, J.D. (2015). Immune Checkpoint
Blockade in Cancer Therapy. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 1974–1982.
Pulendran, B. (2015). The varieties of immunological experience: of pathogens,
stress, and dendritic cells. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 33, 563–606.
Pylayeva-Gupta, Y., Lee, K.E., Hajdu, C.H., Miller, G., and Bar-Sagi, D. (2012).
Oncogenic Kras-induced GM-CSF production promotes the development of
pancreatic neoplasia. Cancer Cell 21, 836–847.
Qian, B.Z., Li, J., Zhang, H., Kitamura, T., Zhang, J., Campion, L.R., Kaiser,
E.A., Snyder, L.A., and Pollard, J.W. (2011). CCL2 recruits inflammatory mono-
cytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis. Nature 475, 222–225.
Ries, C.H., Cannarile, M.A., Hoves, S., Benz, J., Wartha, K., Runza, V., Rey-
Giraud, F., Pradel, L.P., Feuerhake, F., Klaman, I., et al. (2014). Targeting tu-
mor-associated macrophages with anti-CSF-1R antibody reveals a strategy
for cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 25, 846–859.
Rizvi, N.A., Hellmann, M.D., Snyder, A., Kvistborg, P., Makarov, V., Havel, J.J.,
Lee, W., Yuan, J., Wong, P., Ho, T.S., et al. (2015). Cancer immunology. Muta-
tional landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in non-small cell lung
cancer. Science 348, 124–128.
Ruffell, B., and Coussens, L.M. (2015). Macrophages and therapeutic resis-
tance in cancer. Cancer Cell 27, 462–472.
Ruffell, B., Chang-Strachan, D., Chan, V., Rosenbusch, A., Ho, C.M., Pryer, N.,
Daniel, D., Hwang, E.S., Rugo, H.S., and Coussens, L.M. (2014). Macrophage
IL-10 blocks CD8+ T cell-dependent responses to chemotherapy by sup-
pressing IL-12 expression in intratumoral dendritic cells. Cancer Cell 26,
623–637.
Russell, S.J., Peng, K.W., and Bell, J.C. (2012). Oncolytic virotherapy. Nat. Bio-
technol. 30, 658–670.
Sagiv-Barfi, I., Kohrt, H.E., Czerwinski, D.K., Ng, P.P., Chang, B.Y., and Levy,
R. (2015). Therapeutic antitumor immunity by checkpoint blockade is
enhanced by ibrutinib, an inhibitor of both BTK and ITK. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 112, E966–E972.
Sandoval, F., Terme, M., Nizard, M., Badoual, C., Bureau, M.F., Freyburger, L.,
Clement, O., Marcheteau, E., Gey, A., Fraisse, G., et al. (2013). Mucosal
imprinting of vaccine-induced CD8+ T cells is crucial to inhibit the growth of
mucosal tumors. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 172ra20.
Schumacher, T.N., and Schreiber, R.D. (2015). Neoantigens in cancer immu-
notherapy. Science 348, 69–74.
Senovilla, L., Vitale, I., Martins, I., Tailler, M., Pailleret, C., Michaud, M., Gal-
luzzi, L., Adjemian, S., Kepp, O., Niso-Santano, M., et al. (2012). An immuno-
surveillance mechanism controls cancer cell ploidy. Science 337, 1678–1684.
Shepard, H.M., Lewis, G.D., Sarup, J.C., Fendly, B.M., Maneval, D., Mordenti,
J., Figari, I., Kotts, C.E., Palladino, M.A., Jr., Ullrich, A., et al. (1991). Mono-
clonal antibody therapy of human cancer: taking the HER2 protooncogene
to the clinic. J. Clin. Immunol. 11, 117–127.
Sheridan, B.S., and Lefranc
¸ ois, L. (2011). Regional and mucosal memory
T cells. Nat. Immunol. 12, 485–491.
Shiao, S.L., Ruffell, B., DeNardo, D.G., Faddegon, B.A., Park, C.C., and Cous-
sens, L.M. (2015). TH2-Polarized CD4(+) T Cells and Macrophages Limit Effi-
cacy of Radiotherapy. Cancer Immunol. Res. 3, 518–525.
Sippel, T.R., White, J., Nag, K., Tsvankin, V., Klaassen, M., Kleinschmidt-
DeMasters, B.K., and Waziri, A. (2011). Neutrophil degranulation and immuno-
suppression in patients with GBM: restoration of cellular immune function by
targeting arginase I. Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 6992–7002.
Smith, C.I., Islam, T.C., Mattsson, P.T., Mohamed, A.J., Nore, B.F., and Vihi-
nen, M. (2001). The Tec family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases: mammalian
Btk, Bmx, Itk, Tec, Txk and homologs in other species. BioEssays 23,
436–446.
Snyder, A., Wolchok, J.D., and Chan, T.A. (2015). Genetic basis for clinical
response to CTLA-4 blockade. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 783.
Soares, H., Waechter, H., Glaichenhaus, N., Mougneau, E., Yagita, H., Mize-
nina, O., Dudziak, D., Nussenzweig, M.C., and Steinman, R.M. (2007). A sub-
set of dendritic cells induces CD4+ T cells to produce IFN-gamma by an IL-12-
independent but CD70-dependent mechanism in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 204,
1095–1106.
Soucek, L., Buggy, J.J., Kortlever, R., Adimoolam, S., Monclu
´ s, H.A., Allende,
M.T., Swigart, L.B., and Evan, G.I. (2011). Modeling pharmacological inhibition
of mast cell degranulation as a therapy for insulinoma. Neoplasia 13, 1093–
1100.
Sporte
` s, C., Hakim, F.T., Memon, S.A., Zhang, H., Chua, K.S., Brown, M.R.,
Fleisher, T.A., Krumlauf, M.C., Babb, R.R., Chow, C.K., et al. (2008). Adminis-
tration of rhIL-7 in humans increases in vivo TCR repertoire diversity by prefer-
ential expansion of naive T cell subsets. J. Exp. Med. 205, 1701–1714.
Srivastava, P.K. (2000). Immunotherapy of human cancer: lessons from mice.
Nat. Immunol. 1, 363–366.
Steinman, R. (2011). Cancer therapeutics: time to swim downstream? Oncol-
ogist 16, 1479–1480.
Steinman, R.M. (2012). Decisions about dendritic cells: past, present, and
future. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 1–22.
Stout, R.D., and Bottomly, K. (1989). Antigen-specific activation of effector
macrophages by IFN-gamma producing (TH1) T cell clones. Failure of IL-4-
producing (TH2) T cell clones to activate effector function in macrophages.
J. Immunol. 142, 760–765.
1246
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
 Tap, W.D., Wainberg, Z.A., Anthony, S.P., Ibrahim, P.N., Zhang, C., Healey,
J.H., Chmielowski, B., Staddon, A.P., Cohn, A.L., Shapiro, G.I., et al. (2015).
Structure-Guided Blockade of CSF1R Kinase in Tenosynovial Giant-Cell
Tumor. N. Engl. J. Med. 373, 428–437.
Thun, M.J., Henley, S.J., and Gansler, T. (2004). Inflammation and cancer: an
epidemiological perspective. Novartis Found. Symp. 256, 6–21, discussion
22–28, 49–52, 266–269.
Topalian, S.L., Drake, C.G., and Pardoll, D.M. (2015). Immune checkpoint
blockade: a common denominator approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Cell
27, 450–461.
Van Allen, E.M., Miao, D., Schilling, B., Shukla, S.A., Blank, C., Zimmer, L.,
Sucker, A., Hillen, U., Foppen, M.H., Goldinger, S.M., et al. (2015). Genomic
correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic melanoma. Science
350, 207–211.
Ve
´ tizou, M., Pitt, J.M., Daille
` re, R., Lepage, P., Waldschmitt, N., Flament, C.,
Rusakiewicz, S., Routy, B., Roberti, M.P., Duong, C.P., et al. (2015). Anticancer
immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota. Science
350, 1079–1084.
Viaud, S., Saccheri, F., Mignot, G., Yamazaki, T., Daille
` re, R., Hannani, D.,
Enot, D.P., Pfirschke, C., Engblom, C., Pittet, M.J., et al. (2013). The intestinal
microbiota modulates the anticancer immune effects of cyclophosphamide.
Science 342, 971–976.
Wang, L., Yi, T., Kortylewski, M., Pardoll, D.M., Zeng, D., and Yu, H. (2009). IL-
17 can promote tumor growth through an IL-6-Stat3 signaling pathway. J. Exp.
Med. 206, 1457–1464.
Wang, J.L., Chang, C.H., Lin, J.W., Wu, L.C., Chuang, L.M., and Lai, M.S.
(2014). Infection, antibiotic therapy and risk of colorectal cancer: a nationwide
nested case-control study in patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int. J. Can-
cer 135, 956–967.
Whitehurst, A.W. (2014). Cause and consequence of cancer/testis antigen
activation in cancer. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 54, 251–272.
Wu, S., Rhee, K.J., Albesiano, E., Rabizadeh, S., Wu, X., Yen, H.R., Huso, D.L.,
Brancati, F.L., Wick, E., McAllister, F., et al. (2009). A human colonic
commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of T helper type 17
T cell responses. Nat. Med. 15, 1016–1022.
Yu, C.I., Becker, C., Wang, Y., Marches, F., Helft, J., Leboeuf, M., Anguiano, E.,
Pourpe, S., Goller, K., Pascual, V., et al. (2013). Human CD1c+ dendritic cells
drive the differentiation of CD103+ CD8+ mucosal effector T cells via the cyto-
kine TGF-b. Immunity 38, 818–830.
Zhu, J., and Paul, W.E. (2008). CD4 T cells: fates, functions, and faults. Blood
112, 1557–1569.
Zitvogel, L., Galluzzi, L., Viaud, S., Ve
´ tizou, M., Daille
` re, R., Merad, M., and
Kroemer, G. (2015). Cancer and the gut microbiota: an unexpected link. Sci.
Transl. Med. 7, 271ps1.
Cell 164, March 10, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
1247
