 GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION, 
CARE AND TREATMENT OF PERSONS 
WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS B INFECTION 
MARCH 2015
GUIDELINES
  GUIDELINES
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREVENTION, 
CARE AND TREATMENT OF PERSONS 
WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS B INFECTION 
MARCH 2015
 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Guidelines for the prevention, care and treatment of persons with chronic hepatitis B infection.
1.Hepatitis B – prevention and control. 2.Hepatitis B – diagnosis. 3.Hepatitis B – drug therapy. 
4.Guideline. I.World Health Organization.
ISBN 978 92 4 154905 9 
 
 
 
(NLM classification: WC 536)
© World Health Organization 2015
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO 
website (www.who.int) or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 
Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; 
e-mail: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for 
non-commercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website 
(www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not 
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning 
the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent 
approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply 
that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to 
others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of 
proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the 
information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed 
without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation 
and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be 
liable for damages arising from its use.
  
Printed in France.
Design and layout: blossoming.it
 v
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
IX
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
XII
GLOSSARY OF TERMS   
XV
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
XIX
Summary of recommendations for persons with chronic 
hepatitis B infection 
 
 
xxii 
Algorithm of WHO recommendations on the management 
of persons with chronic hepatitis B infection 
xxvi 
Structure of the guidelines along the continuum of care 
xxviii
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
1
1.1. Goals and objectives  
1 
1.2. Related WHO materials and guidelines 
 
2 
1.3. Target audience 
 
 
2 
1.4. Guiding principles 
 
 
2
2. METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS OF DEVELOPING 
THE GUIDELINES 
5
2.1. WHO guideline development process 
5 
2.2. Roles 
8 
2.3. Management of conflicts of interest 
8 
2.4. Disseminating and monitoring implementation of the guidelines 
9
3. BACKGROUND 
 
 
10
3.1. Epidemiology and burden 
 
 
10 
3.2. Virology 
 
 
13 
3.3. Transmission 
 
 
13 
3.4. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B  
 
14 
3.5. Diagnosis and staging 
 
 
17 
3.6. Screening  
 
19 
3.7. Prevention through vaccination 
 
 
19 
3.8. Antiviral therapy 
 
 
20 
3.9. Special populations  
 
 
22
 vi
4. RECOMMENDATIONS: NON-INVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF LIVER 
DISEASE STAGE AT BASELINE AND DURING FOLLOW UP 
 
25
4.1. Background 
 
 
25 
4.2. Summary of the evidence 
 
 
28 
4.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
 
 
32
5. RECOMMENDATIONS: WHO TO TREAT AND WHO 
NOT TO TREAT IN PERSONS WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS B 
36
5.1. Background 
 
 
39 
5.2. Summary of the evidence 
 
 
39 
5.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
 
 
44
6. RECOMMENDATIONS: FIRST-LINE ANTIVIRAL 
THERAPIES FOR CHRONIC HEPATITIS B 
 
47
6.1. Background 
 
 
48 
6.2. Summary of the evidence 
 
 
48 
6.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
 
 
51
7. RECOMMENDATIONS: SECOND-LINE ANTIVIRAL 
THERAPIES FOR MANAGEMENT OF TREATMENT FAILURE 
 
58
7.1. Background 
 
 
58 
7.2. Summary of the evidence 
 
 
59 
7.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
 
 
60
8. RECOMMENDATIONS: WHEN TO STOP TREATMENT  
 
64
8.1. Background 
 
 
65 
8.2. Summary of the evidence 
 
 
65 
8.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
 
 
66
9. RECOMMENDATIONS: MONITORING  
 
69
9.1. Monitoring for disease progression and treatment response 
       in persons with CHB prior to, during and post-treatment 
 
69 
 
9.1.1. Background 
 
 
70 
 
9.1.2. Summary of the evidence  
 
71 
 
9.1.3. Rationale for the recommendations  
 
72 
9.2. Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity  
 
74 
 
9.2.1. Background 
 
 
77 
 
9.2.2. Summary of the evidence  
 
77 
 
9.2.3. Rationale for the recommendations  
 
79 
9.3. Monitoring for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
 
 
81 
 
9.3.1. Background 
 
 
81 
 
9.3.2. Summary of the evidence  
 
81 
 
9.3.3. Rationale for the recommendations  
 
84
 vii
10. RECOMMENDATIONS FROM EXISTING WHO 
GUIDANCE: PREVENTION 
 
 
87
10.1. Infant and neonatal hepatitis B vaccination  
 
87 
10.2. Prevention of mother-to-child HBV transmission using 
         antiviral therapy 
89 
10.3. Prevention of hepatitis B transmission and measures to 
         reduce disease progression in persons with chronic hepatitis B 
94 
10.4.  Prevention of hepatitis B and C transmission in health-care settings 
95 
10.5. Prevention of hepatitis B and C and sexual transmission 
         in persons who inject drugs 
 
 
96
11. MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
SPECIFIC POPULATIONS 
 
 
98
11.1.   Coinfections 
 
 
98 
 
11.1.1. HBV/HIV coinfection 
 
 
98 
 
11.1.2. HBV/HDV coinfection 
 
 
102 
 
11.1.3. HBV/HCV coinfection 
 
 
103 
 
11.1.4. HBV/Tuberculosis coinfection 
 
 
103 
11.2.   Decompensated cirrhosis and advanced liver disease 
 
104 
11.3.   Extrahepatic manifestations 
 
 
105 
11.4.   Acute hepatitis B  
 
105 
11.5.   Children and adolescents  
 
105 
11.6.   Pregnant women  
 
106 
11.7.   Persons who inject drugs  
 
106 
11.8.   Dialysis and renal transplant patients 
 
 
106 
11.9.   Health-care workers 
 
 
107 
11.10. Indigenous peoples 
 
 
107
12. IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
NATIONAL PROGRAMMES 
 
 
108
12.1. Introduction 
 
 
108 
12.2. Key principles 
 
 
108 
12.3. Key considerations to support country planning and 
         decision-making 
 
 
109
REFERENCES  
 
114
 viii
WEB APPENDICES
All Appendices will be available through weblink 
(http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/hepatitis/hepatitis-b-guidelines/en/)  
Appendix 1: PICO questions  
Appendix 2: Systematic review (SR) reports and evidence summaries 
Appendix 3: Summary of declared interests
 ix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many professionals from a range of backgrounds and specialities have 
contributed to the development of this guidance. WHO is sincerely grateful for 
their time and support.
Guidelines Development Group
The chairs of the Guidelines Development Group were Olufunmilayo Lesi 
(University of Lagos/Lagos University Teaching Hospital, Nigeria) and Brian 
McMahon (Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium Alaska, USA). Nandi Siegfried 
(South African Cochrane Centre, Medical Research Council of South Africa) was 
the guidelines methodologist.
The following experts served on the Guidelines Development Group:
Priya Abraham (Christian Medical College & Hospital, India); Avelin F Aghokeng 
(Virology Laboratory CREMER/IMPM/IRD, Cameroon); Isabelle Andrieux-Meyer 
(Médecins Sans Frontières, Switzerland); Joan Block (Hepatitis B Foundation, 
USA); Milagros Davalos Moscol (Hospital Edgardo Rebagliati, Peru); Manal 
Hamdy El-Sayed (Ain Shams University, Egypt); Charles Gore (World Hepatitis 
Alliance, Switzerland); Kwang Hyub Han (Yonsei University, South Korea); 
Jidong Jia (Capital Medical University, China); Ahmed Khatib (Ministry of Health, 
Tanzania); Giten Khwairakpam (TREAT Asia/amfAR, Thailand);  Karine Lacombe 
(Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne-Universités, France); Nancy Leung (Asiahep 
Hong Kong Ltd, Hong Kong);  Anna Lok (University of Michigan and American 
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, USA); Ponsiano Ocama (Makerere 
University College of Health Sciences, Uganda); Huma Qureshi (Pakistan 
Medical Research Council, Pakistan); Lewis Roberts (Mayo Clinic, USA); Edna 
Strauss (University of São Paulo, Brazil); Ali Sulaiman (University of Indonesia 
– Faculty of Medicine, Indonesia); Mark Thursz (Imperial College Faculty of 
Medicine, UK); Cihan Yurdaydin  (University of Ankara Medical School, Turkey).
External peer review group
We thank the following experts for reviewing the final guidelines document and 
providing valuable input.
Adele Benzaken (Ministry of Health, Brazil), Nikoloz Chkhartishvili (Infectious 
Diseases, AIDS and Clinical Immunology Research Centre, Georgia), Serge 
 x
Eholie (Trichville Hospital, Ivory Coast), Shaffiq Essajee (Clinton Health Access 
Initiative, USA), Silvia Franceschi (International Agency for Research on 
Cancer, France), Nina Grundmann (International Federation of Pharmaceutical 
Manafacturers and Associations, Switzerland), Margaret Hellard (Burnet 
Institute, Australia), Karen Kyuregyan (Ministry of Health, Russia), Seng Gee Lim 
(National University of Singapore, Singapore), David Muljono (Eijkman Institute 
for Molecular Biology, Indonesia), Samuel So (Stanford University, USA), George 
Siberry (National Institutes of Health, USA), Mark Sonderup (University of 
Cape Town & Groote Schuur Hospital, South Africa), Vincent Soriano (IdiPAZ-
La Paz University Hospital & Autonomous University, Spain), Mihai Voiculescu 
(BalkanHep, Romania), Gilles Wandeler (University of Bern, Switzerland).
Contributors to the systematic reviews
We would like to credit the following researchers for conducting the systematic 
reviews, evidence profiles and GRADE tables: Ivan Solà, David Rigau Comas 
(Centre Cochrane Iberoamericà, Spain); Victoria Wakefield, Charlotta Karner 
(BMJ – Technology Assessment Group, London, UK); Emmanouil Tsochatzis 
(Royal Free Sheila Sherlock Liver Centre and UCL Institute for Liver and Digestive 
Health, UCL and Royal Free Hospital, UK).
We appreciate the contribution from Grammati Sarri and Jill Parnham (National 
Clinical Guideline Centre [NCGC], Royal College of Physicians, UK) for providing 
technical presentations and sharing their network meta-analyses with the 
Guidelines Development Group.
Overall coordination
Philippa Easterbrook (Global Hepatitis Programme) coordinated the guidelines 
development.
Steering Committee
The following WHO staff formed the Guidelines Steering Committee:
Philippa Easterbrook, Stefan Wiktor, Tatsuya Yamashita (Global Hepatitis 
Programme, HIV Department); Marco Vitoria, Nathan Shaffer, Jessica Markby, 
Annette Verster (HIV Department); Anita Sands, Ana Padilla (Essential Medicines 
and Health Products); Neelam Dhingra-Kumar (Blood Safety); Ana Maria Henao 
Restrepo (Immunization, Vaccines, and Biologicals); Benedetta Allegranzi, 
Selma Khamassi (Injection Safety); Ying-Ru Lo (HIV & STI, WHO Regional Office 
for the Western Pacific).
 xi
The guidelines were drafted by Geoffrey Dusheiko (UCL Institute of Liver 
and Digestive Health, Royal Free Hospital, UK) and Philippa Easterbrook 
(Global Hepatitis Programme, WHO). Additional contributions were provided by 
Emmanouil Tsochatzis (Royal Free Sheila Sherlock Liver Centre and UCL Institute 
for Liver and Digestive Health, UCL and Royal Free Hospital, UK), Huma Qureshi 
(Pakistan Medical Research Council, Pakistan), and Karine Lacombe (Hôpital 
Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne-Universités, France). Drafts were reviewed and input 
provided by the members of the Guidelines Development Group, peer reviewers, 
and WHO Secretariat staff. Bandana Malhotra edited the document. 
We extend our gratitude to the following consultants and interns for excellent 
support to the steering committee and the Guidelines Development Group: 
Ioannis Hodges-Mameletzis, Sarah Hess, and Zainab Hussain. We also thank 
other WHO staff for peer review of the guidelines: Karen Hennesey (Expanded 
Programme on Immunization), Selma Khamassi (Injection Safety), Jessica 
Markby, Vincent Habiyambere, Francoise Renaud, Oyuntungalag Namjilsuren 
(HIV Department) Annabel Baddeley, Haileyesus Getahun (TB Department), 
Anita Sands (Essential Medicines & Health Products), Vason Pinyowiwat (WHO 
Regional Office for South-East Asia), Masaya Kato, Amitabh Suthar (WHO 
Country Office Viet Nam), Nick Walsh (WHO Regional Office for the Western 
Pacific).
Funding 
Funding for the development of these guidelines was provided by the United 
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
 xii
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
AFP 
 
alpha-fetoprotein
AIDS 
 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
ALP 
 
alkaline phosphatase
ALT 
 
alanine aminotransferase
APRI 
 
aspartate aminotransferase-to-platelet ratio index 
ART 
 
antiretroviral therapy
ARV 
 
antiretroviral
AST 
 
aspartate aminotransferase
anti-HBc  
hepatitis B core antibody
anti-HBe  
antibody to hepatitis B e antigen 
anti-HBs  
 
antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen 
ARFI 
 
acoustic radiation force impulse
BMI 
 
body mass index
CAPD 
 
continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
cccDNA  
covalently closed circular DNA
CG 
 
Cockcroft–Gault
CHB 
 
chronic hepatitis B
CI 
 
confidence interval
CrCl 
 
creatinine clearance
DART 
 
Development of AntiRetroviral Therapy in Africa (trial)
DTP 
 
diphtheria–tetanus–pertussis (vaccination)
eGFR 
 
estimated glomerular filtration rate
ELISA 
 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
FDA 
 
(US) Food and Drug Administration
FIB-4 
 
fibrosis-4 score
GAVI Alliance 
The Vaccine Alliance (formerly the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization)
GFR 
 
glomerular filtration rate
gGT 
 
gamma glutamyl transpeptidase
GRADE   
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation
HBcAg  
hepatitis B core antigen
HBeAg  
hepatitis B e antigen
HBIG 
 
hepatitis B immune globulin
HBsAg 
 
hepatitis B surface antigen
HBV 
 
hepatitis B virus
HCC 
 
hepatocellular carcinoma
HCV 
 
hepatitis C virus
 xiii
HDV 
 
hepatitis D virus
HIV 
 
human immunodeficiency virus
HR 
 
hazard ratio
IFN 
 
interferon
INR 
 
international normalized ratio
IVD 
 
in-vitro diagnostic devices
LMICs 
 
low- and middle-income countries
MDRD 
 
modification of diet in renal disease
MRD 
 
multidrug resistance-associated protein
NA 
 
nucleos(t)ide analogue
NAT 
 
nucleic acid testing
NICE 
 
National Institute of Health and Care Excellence
NIT 
 
non-invasive test
NMA 
 
network meta-analysis
OAT 
 
organic anion transporter
OR 
 
odds ratio
ORF 
 
open reading frame
PCR 
 
polymerase chain reaction
PEG-IFN  
pegylated interferon
PI 
 
protease inhibitor
PICO  
 
population, intervention, comparison, outcomes
PICOT 
 
population, intervention, comparison, outcomes, time
PWID 
 
people who inject drugs
RNA 
 
ribonucleic acid
RCT 
 
randomized controlled trial
RR 
 
relative risk
RUP 
 
reuse prevention
SAGE 
 
(WHO) Strategic Advisory Group of Experts
SIGN 
 
Safe Injection Global Network
SIP 
 
sharp injury prevention
siRNA 
 
short-interfering RNA
STD 
 
sexually transmitted disease
ULN 
 
upper limit of normal
UNAIDS  
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNODC  
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
WHO  
 
World Health Organization
WHO ASSIST 
Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test
 xiv
ABBREVIATIONS AND NAMES OF ANTIVIRAL DRUGS
3TC 
 
lamivudine
ADV 
 
adefovir
EFV 
 
efavirenz
ETV 
 
entecavir
FTC 
 
emtricitabine
TAF 
 
tenofovir alafenamide fumarate
TBV 
 
telbivudine
TDF 
 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
 xv
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
Acute HBV infection
New-onset hepatitis B infection that may or may not be icteric 
or symptomatic. Diagnosis is based on detection of hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg) and IgM antibodies to hepatitis B core 
antigen (anti-HBc). Recovery is accompanied by clearance of 
HBsAg with seroconversion to anti-HBs (antibodies to hepatitis B 
surface antigen), usually within 3 months.
Chronic HBV infection
Defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for 
six months or more after acute infection with HBV. Throughout the 
guidelines, the term chronic hepatitis B (CHB) has been used to 
indicate chronic HBV infection.
Immune-tolerant phase
High replicative phase of infection seen in the early stage of CHB 
among people infected at birth or in early childhood
Immune-active phase
Phase of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-positive disease 
characterized by fluctuating aminotransferases and high HBV 
DNA concentrations. May result in seroconversion from HBeAg to 
anti-HBe (antibody to hepatitis B e antigen)
Inactive phase (or 
immune-control phase)
Low replicative phase of chronic hepatitis B characterized 
by HBeAg negativity, anti-HBe positivity, normal alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) and HBV DNA concentration below 2000 
IU/mL
HBeAg seroconversion
Loss of HBeAg and seroconversion to anti-HBe
HBeAg-negative chronic 
hepatitis B (immune-
escape phase)
HBeAg-negative but anti-HBe-positive disease with variable levels 
of HBV replication and liver injury
HBsAg seroconversion
Loss of HBsAg and development of anti-HBs
HBeAg reversion
Reappearance of HBeAg in a person who was previously HBeAg 
negative and usually associated with increased HBV replication
Cirrhosis
An advanced stage of liver disease characterized by extensive 
hepatic fibrosis, nodularity of the liver, alteration of liver architecture 
and disrupted hepatic circulation
Decompensated cirrhosis
Clinical complications of cirrhosis become manifest, including 
jaundice, ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, oesophageal 
varices and bleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, sepsis and renal 
failure
Hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC)
Primary cancer of the liver arising in hepatocytes
NATURAL HISTORY OF HBV INFECTION
 xvi
Hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg)
HBV envelope protein and excess coat particles detectable in the 
blood in acute and chronic hepatitis B infection
Hepatitis B core antigen 
(HBcAg)
HBV core protein. The core protein is coated with HBsAg and 
therefore not found free in serum
Hepatitis B e antigen 
(HBeAg)
Viral protein found in the high replicative phase of hepatitis B. 
HBeAg is usually a marker of high levels of replication with wild-
type virus but is not essential for viral replication
Hepatitis B surface 
antibody (anti-HBs)
Antibody to HBsAg. Develops in response to HBV vaccination and 
during recovery from acute hepatitis B, denoting past infection 
and immunity
Anti-HBe
Antibody to HBeAg.  Detected in persons with lower levels of HBV 
replication but also in HBeAg-negative disease (i.e. HBV that does 
not express HBeAg)
Hepatitis B core antibody 
(anti-HBc)
Antibody to hepatitis B core (capsid) protein. Anti-HBc antibodies 
are not neutralizing antibodies and are detected in both acute and 
chronic infection
IgM anti-HBc
Subclass of anti-HBc. Detected in acute hepatitis B but can be 
detected by sensitive assays in active chronic HBV
IgG anti-HBc
Subclass of anti-HBc detected in past or current infection
Occult HBV infection
Persons who have cleared hepatitis B surface antigen, i.e. they are 
HBsAg negative but HBV DNA positive, although at very low levels 
(invariably <200 IU/mL); most are also anti-HBc positive
Treatment failure
May be primary or secondary.
In settings where HBV DNA testing is available: Primary antiviral 
treatment failure may be defined as failure of an antiviral drug 
to reduce HBV DNA levels by ≥1 x log10 IU/mL within 3 months 
of initiating therapy. Secondary antiviral treatment failure may be 
defined as a rebound of HBV DNA levels of ≥1 x log10 IU/mL from 
the nadir in persons with an initial antiviral treatment effect (≥1 x 
log10 IU/mL decrease in serum HBV DNA).
In settings where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment 
failure and drug resistance may be suspected based on the 
following features: receiving antiviral drugs with a low barrier 
to resistance together with documented or suspected poor 
adherence, laboratory measures such as an increase in serum 
aminotransferases, and/or evidence of progressive liver disease. 
Note: Elevation in ALT level tends to occur late and is a relatively 
poor predictive marker of resistance.
Confirmation of antiviral drug failure can be established by 
sequencing the HBV DNA polymerase and identifying specific 
genetic markers of antiviral drug resistance.
SEROLOGICAL MARKERS OF HBV
 xvii
Alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) and aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST)
Intracellular enzymes which, as they are released after cell injury 
or death, reflect liver cell injury
HBV DNA
HBV viral genomes that can be detected and quantified in serum. 
HBV DNA correlates with levels of circulating viral particles. HBV 
DNA is measured as IU/mL or copies/mL.
1 IU/mL ~ 5.3 copies/mL, and so values given as copies/mL can 
be converted to IU/mL by dividing by a factor of 5. (i.e. 10 000 
copies/mL = 2000 IU/mL;100 000 copies/mL = 20 000 IU/mL; 1 
million copies/mL = 200 000 IU/mL). All HBV DNA values in the 
recommendations in these guidelines are reported in IU/mL.
An undetectable viral load is an HBV DNA level below the level of 
sensitivity of the laboratory assay. For sensitive polymerase chain 
reaction assays, this is generally a concentration below 15 IU/ml.
AFP (alpha-fetoprotein)
A host cellular protein. High levels can occur in persons with 
hepatocellular carcinoma.    
Persistently abnormal or 
normal ALT level
ALT levels fluctuate in persons with chronic hepatitis B and require 
longitudinal monitoring to determine the trend. Upper limits for 
normal ALT have been defined as below 30 U/L for men and 19 
U/L for women, although local laboratory normal ranges should be 
applied. Persistently abnormal or normal may be defined as three 
ALT determinations  above or below the upper limit of normal, 
made at unspecified intervals during a 6–12-month period or 
predefined intervals during a 12-month period.
TESTS FOR ASSESSMENT AND MONITORING OF 
HEPATITIS B INFECTION
APRI
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) is 
a simple index for estimating hepatic fibrosis based on a formula 
derived from AST and platelet concentrations.
A formula for calculating the APRI is given: APRI = * (AST/ULN) x 
100) / platelet count (109/L). An online calculator can be found at: 
http://www.hepatitisc.uw.edu/page/clinical-calculators/apri 
FIB-4
A simple index for estimating hepatic fibrosis based on a calculation 
derived from AST, ALT and platelet concentrations, and age. Formula 
for calculating FIB-4: FIB-4 = (age (yr) x AST (IU/L)) / (platelet count 
(109/L x [ALT (IU/L)1/2]). An online calculator can be found at:
http://www.hepatitisc.uw.edu/page/clinical-calculators/fib-4
FibroTest (FibroSure)
Commercial biomarker test that uses the results of six blood 
markers to estimate hepatic fibrosis
Transient elastography 
(FibroScan)
A technique to measure liver stiffness (as a surrogate for fibrosis) 
and is based on the propagation of a shear wave through the liver
ASSESSMENT OF LIVER FIBROSIS BY NON-INVASIVE TESTS 
 xviii
PERFORMANCE OF DIAGNOSTIC TESTS 
Positive predictive value 
(PPV)
The probability that when a person’s test result is positive, they 
truly have the infection/disease. Predictive values are influenced 
by the prevalence of the disease in the population.
Negative predictive value 
(NPV)
The probability that when a person’s test result is negative, they truly do 
not have the infection/disease
Sensitivity of a test 
The ability of a test to correctly identify those with the infection or 
disease (i.e. true positives/true positives + false negatives)
Specificity of a test 
The ability of a test to correctly identify those without the infection 
or disease (i.e. true negatives/true negatives + false positives)
True negative (TN)
When a person’s test is negative and they truly do not have the 
infection or disease
True positive (TP)
When a person’s test is positive and they truly have the infection 
or disease
False negative (FN)
When a person’s test is negative, but they do have the infection 
or disease. Such misclassifications are generally due to assay or 
test inaccuracy.
False positive (FP)
When a person’s test is positive but they do not have the infection 
or disease. Such misclassifications are generally due to assay or 
test inaccuracy.
 xix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Hepatitis B infection is caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV), an enveloped DNA 
virus that infects the liver, causing hepatocellular necrosis and inflammation. 
HBV infection can be either acute or chronic, and the associated illness ranges 
in severity from asymptomatic to symptomatic, progressive disease. Chronic 
hepatitis B (CHB) – defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) for six months or more – is a major public health problem. Worldwide, 
there are an estimated 240 million chronically infected persons, particularly in 
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). The major complications of CHB 
are cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Between 20% and 30% of 
those who become chronically infected will develop these complications, and 
an estimated 650 000 people will die annually due to CHB. The majority of 
people are unaware of their HBV infection, and therefore often present with 
advanced disease. Universal hepatitis B immunization programmes that target 
infants, with the first dose at birth, have been highly effective in reducing the 
incidence and prevalence of hepatitis B in many endemic countries. However, 
these programmes will not have an impact on HBV-related deaths until several 
decades after their introduction. 
Antiviral agents active against HBV are available, and have been shown to 
suppress HBV replication, prevent progression to cirrhosis, and reduce the risk 
of HCC and liver-related deaths. However, currently available treatments fail to 
eradicate the virus in most of those treated, necessitating potentially lifelong 
treatment. In addition, these drugs are not widely available or used in LMICs, 
and therefore timely intervention to prevent the onset of advanced liver disease 
does not occur. 
These are the first World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for the 
prevention, care and treatment of persons living with CHB infection, and 
complement similar recent published guidance by WHO on the prevention, 
care and treatment of infection due to the hepatitis C virus (HCV). In contrast 
to several recent international guidelines on the management of CHB infection 
from the United States, Europe, Asia-Pacific and the United Kingdom (UK), the 
primary audience for these WHO guidelines is country programme managers in 
all settings, but particularly in LMICs to help plan the development and scale up 
of hepatitis B prevention, care and treatment. These guidelines are also intended 
for health-care providers who care for persons with CHB in these settings. 
 xx
The recommendations are structured along the continuum of care for persons 
with CHBa, from initial assessment of stage of disease and eligibility for treatment, 
to initiation of first-line antiviral therapy and monitoring for disease progression, 
toxicity and HCC, and switch to second-line drugs in persons with treatment 
failure. They are intended for use across age groups and adult populations. 
The recommendations in these guidelines are covered in Chapters 5 to 10, and 
promote the use of simple, non-invasive diagnostic tests to assess the stage of 
liver disease and eligibility for treatment; prioritize treatment for those with most 
advanced liver disease and at greatest risk of mortality; and recommend the 
preferred use of nucleos(t)ide analogues with a high barrier to drug resistance 
(tenofovir and entecavir, and entecavir in children aged 2–11 years) for first- and 
second-line treatment. These guidelines also recommend lifelong treatment in 
those with cirrhosis; and regular monitoring for disease progression, toxicity of 
drugs and early detection of HCC. An additional chapter highlights management 
considerations for specific populations, including those coinfected with HIV, HCV 
and hepatitis D virus (HDV); children and adolescents; and pregnant women.
Recommendations for the treatment of HBV/HIV-coinfected persons are based 
on the WHO 2013 Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs 
for treating and preventing HIV infection, which will be updated in 2015. The 
use of interferon or pegylated interferon as antiviral therapy was excluded from 
consideration in these guidelines, as their use is less feasible in LMICs due to 
their high cost and significant adverse effects requiring careful monitoring.
Existing recommendations for the prevention of HBV transmission from relevant 
WHO guidelines are summarized in Chapter 10. These include prevention 
of perinatal and early childhood HBV infection through infant hepatitis B 
vaccination; catch-up vaccination and other prevention strategies in key affected 
populations, including persons who inject drugs, men who have sex with men, 
and sex workers; as well as prevention of HBV transmission in health-care 
settings. The use of alcohol reduction interventions to reduce progression of liver 
disease in those with CHB is also highlighted. 
Several key topics were not included in the scope of work for these guidelines, but 
will be covered in future guidelines as well as planned consolidated guidelines on 
persons with chronic hepatitis B and C infection for publication in 2016. These 
include hepatitis B and C testing algorithms and strategies on who to screen; 
updated recommendations on hepatitis C treatment; diagnosis and management 
of acute hepatitis B and C; and management of advanced liver disease. Updated 
recommendations on the use of hepatitis B vaccination will be considered and 
issued by the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) 
a Defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for six months or more. The term chronic hepatitis B 
(CHB) is used to mean chronic infection with HBV throughout these guidelines.
 xxi
in 2015. There will also be a need for future operational guidance on strategies to 
improve retention in care and adherence to antiviral therapy as well as delivery of 
hepatitis care, including opportunities to integrate with maternal and child health 
clinics, tuberculosis clinics, and services that treat HIV and drug dependence.
The development of these guidelines was conducted in accordance 
with procedures established by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee. 
Clinical recommendations in the guidelines were formulated by a regionally 
representative Guidelines Development Group at a meeting held in June 2014, 
and are based on the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation) approach to reviewing evidence and formulating 
recommendations. This includes assessment of the quality of evidence, 
consideration of the overall balance of benefits and harms (at individual and 
population levels), patient/health worker values and preferences, resource 
use, cost–effectiveness and feasibility.
As with other WHO guidelines on the use of antiretroviral therapy, these 
guidelines are based on a public health approach to the use of antiviral drugs 
for the treatment of CHB, which considers feasibility and effectiveness across a 
variety of resource-limited settings, including where access to specialized tests 
such as measurement of HBV DNA viral load or liver biopsy for staging of liver 
disease is limited. The process has also identified key gaps in knowledge that will 
guide the future research agenda. Most of the evidence was based on studies 
in adults from Asia, North America and western Europe, and there is a striking 
lack of data to inform management from sub-Saharan Africa, and in children.
These recommendations provide opportunities to save lives, improve clinical 
outcomes of persons living with CHB, reduce HBV incidence and transmission, 
and stigma due to disease, but they also pose practical challenges to policy-
makers and implementers in LMICs. Chapter 12 covers implementation 
considerations across the health system for national programmes in adopting 
the key recommendations. These address the necessary decision-making 
and planning for the development of hepatitis treatment programmes in the 
context of HBV epidemiology, health systems capacity, laboratory services and 
supply systems for drugs and other commodities, as well as available financial 
resources, and ethical and human rights considerations. There are particular 
challenges to the implementation of lifelong care and treatment programmes 
for persons with CHB in LMICs, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, where there 
is currently very limited access to diagnostic assays, antiviral therapies and 
appropriate infrastructure.
 xxii
a Defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for six months or more.  
All recommendations in these guidelines apply to persons with CHB infection.
CHAPTER 4: NON-INVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF LIVER DISEASE STAGE AT BASELINE 
AND DURING FOLLOW UP
• 
APRI (aspartate aminotransferase [AST]-to-platelet ratio index) is recommended 
as the preferred non-invasive test (NIT) to assess for the presence of cirrhosis 
(APRI score >2 in adults) in resource-limited settings. Transient elastography 
(e.g. FibroScan) or FibroTest may be the preferred NITs in settings where they 
are available and cost is not a major constraint. (Conditional recommendation, 
low quality of evidence)
CHAPTER 5: WHO TO TREAT AND WHO NOT TO TREAT IN PERSONS WITH CHRONIC 
HEPATITIS B
Who to treat 
• 
As a priority, all adults, adolescents and children with CHB and clinical 
evidence of compensated or decompensated cirrhosis (or cirrhosis based on 
APRI score >2 in adults) should be treated, regardless of ALT levels, HBeAg 
status or HBV DNA levels. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence)
• 
Treatment is recommended for adults with CHB who do not have clinical evidence 
of cirrhosis (or based on APRI score ≤2 in adults), but are aged more than 30 years 
(in particular), and have persistently abnormal ALT levels and evidence of high-
level HBV replication (HBV DNA >20 000 IU/mL), regardless of HBeAg status. 
 
(Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
 
›
Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment may be considered 
based on persistently abnormal ALT levels alone, regardless of HBeAg 
status. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Existing 
recommendation for 
HBV/HIV-coinfected 
persons1
• 
In HBV/HIV-coinfected individuals, ART should be initiated in all those with 
evidence of severe chronic liver disease, regardless of CD4 count; and in all 
those with a CD4 count ≤500 cells/mm3, regardless of stage of liver disease. 
(Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
1 Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV 
infection: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2013. These guidelines will be updated in 2015.
Who not to treat but 
continue to monitor
• 
Antiviral therapy is not recommended and can be deferred in persons 
without clinical evidence of cirrhosis (or based on APRI score ≤2 in 
adults), and with persistently normal ALT levels and low levels of HBV DNA 
replication (HBV DNA <2000 IU/mL), regardless of HBeAg status or age. 
 
(Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
 
›
Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment can be deferred in 
HBeAg-positive persons aged 30 years or less and persistently normal 
ALT levels.  (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
• 
Continued monitoring is necessary in all persons with CHB, but in particular 
those who do not currently meet the above-recommended criteria for who to 
treat or not treat, to determine if antiviral therapy may be indicated in the future 
to prevent progressive liver disease. These include: 
 
-
persons without cirrhosis aged 30 years or less, with HBV DNA levels 
>20 000 IU/mL but persistently normal ALT levels; 
 
-
HBeAg-negative persons without cirrhosis aged 30 years or less, with 
HBV DNA levels that fluctuate between 2000 and 20 000 IU/mL, or who 
have intermittently abnormal ALT levels;
 
›
Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Persons without cirrhosis aged 30 
years or less, with persistently normal ALT levels, regardless of HBeAg status.
Summary of recommendations for persons with chronic hepatitis B infectiona 
 xxiii
CHAPTER 6: FIRST-LINE ANTIVIRAL THERAPIES FOR CHRONIC HEPATITIS B
• 
In all adults, adolescents and children aged 12 years or older in whom 
antiviral therapy is indicated, the nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs) which 
have a high barrier to drug resistance (tenofovir or entecavir) are 
recommended. Entecavir is recommended in children aged 2–11 years. 
 
(Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
• 
NAs with a low barrier to resistance (lamivudine, adefovir or telbivudine) can 
lead to drug resistance and are not recommended. (Strong recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence)
Existing 
recommendation for 
HBV/HIV-coinfected 
persons 1
• 
In HBV/HIV-coinfected adults, adolescents and children aged 3 years or 
older, tenofovir + lamivudine (or emtricitabine) + efavirenz as a fixed-dose 
combination is recommended as the preferred option to initiate ART. (Strong 
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
1 Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV 
infection: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013. These guidelines will be updated in 2015.
CHAPTER 7: SECOND-LINE ANTIVIRAL THERAPIES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF 
TREATMENT FAILURE
• 
In persons with confirmed or suspected antiviral resistance (i.e. history of 
prior exposure or primary non-response) to lamivudine, entecavir, adefovir or 
telbivudine, a switch to tenofovir is recommended. (Strong recommendation, 
low quality of evidence)
CHAPTER 8: WHEN TO STOP TREATMENT
Lifelong NA therapy
• 
All persons with cirrhosis based on clinical evidence (or APRI score >2 in 
adults) require lifelong treatment with nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs), and 
should not discontinue antiviral therapy because of the risk of reactivation, 
which can cause severe acute-on-chronic liver injury. (Strong recommendation, 
low quality of evidence)
Discontinuation
• 
Discontinuation of NA therapy may be considered exceptionally in:
 
-
persons without clinical evidence of cirrhosis (or based on APRI score 
≤2 in adults); 
 
-
and who can be followed carefully long term for reactivation; 
 
-
and if there is evidence of HBeAg loss and seroconversion to anti-HBe 
(in persons initially HBeAg positive) and after completion of at least one 
additional year of treatment; 
 
-
and in association with persistently normal ALT levels and persistently 
undetectable HBV DNA levels (where HBV DNA testing is available). 
 
›
Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Discontinuation of NA therapy 
may be considered in persons who have evidence of persistent HBsAg 
loss and after completion of at least one additional year of treatment, 
regardless of prior HBeAg status. (Conditional recommendation, low 
quality of evidence)
Retreatment
• 
Relapse may occur after stopping therapy with NAs. Retreatment is 
recommended if there are consistent signs of reactivation (HBsAg or HBeAg 
becomes positive, ALT levels increase, or HBV DNA becomes detectable 
again) (where HBV DNA testing is available). (Strong recommendation, low 
quality of evidence)
 xxiv
CHAPTER 9: MONITORING
9.1: Monitoring for disease progression and treatment response in persons with CHB prior to, during and 
post-treatment
• 
It is recommended that the following be monitored at least annually:
 
-
ALT level (and AST for APRI), HBsAg, HBeAg, and HBV DNA levels 
(where HBV DNA testing is available)
 
-
Non-invasive tests (APRI score or FibroScan) to assess for the presence 
of cirrhosis, in those without cirrhosis at baseline;
 
-
If on treatment, adherence should be monitored regularly and at each 
visit. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
More frequent 
monitoring
• 
In persons who do not yet meet the criteria for antiviral therapy: More 
frequent monitoring for disease progression may be indicated in: persons 
who have intermittently abnormal ALT levels or HBV DNA levels that fluctuate 
between 2000 IU/mL and 20 000 IU/mL (where HBV DNA testing is available), 
and in HIV-coinfected persons. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of 
evidence)
• 
In persons on treatment or following treatment discontinuation: More 
frequent on-treatment monitoring (at least every 3 months for the first 
year) is indicated in: persons with more advanced disease (compensated 
or decompensated cirrhosis); during the first year of treatment to assess 
treatment response and adherence; where treatment adherence is a concern; 
in HIV-coinfected persons; and in persons after discontinuation of treatment. 
(Conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
9.2: Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity
• 
Measurement of baseline renal function and assessment of baseline risk for 
renal dysfunction should be considered in all persons prior to initiation of 
antiviral therapy. 
• 
Renal function should be monitored annually in persons on long-term tenofovir 
or entecavir therapy, and growth monitored carefully in children.  (Conditional 
recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
9.3: Monitoring for hepatocellular carcinoma
• 
Routine surveillance for HCC with abdominal ultrasound and alpha-fetoprotein 
testing every six months is recommended for: 
 
-
persons with cirrhosis, regardless of age or other risk factors (Strong 
recommendation, low quality of evidence)
 
-
persons with a family history of HCC (Strong recommendation, low quality 
of evidence)
 
-
persons aged over 40 years (lower age may apply according to regional 
incidence of HCC), without clinical evidence of cirrhosis (or based on 
APRI score ≤2), and with HBV DNA level >2000 IU/mL (where HBV 
DNA testing is available). (Conditional recommendation, low quality of 
evidence)
 xxv
CHAPTER 10: PREVENTION
10.1: Infant and neonatal hepatitis B vaccination 
Existing 
recommendations in 
infants and neonates1
• 
All infants should receive their first dose of hepatitis B vaccine as soon as 
possible after birth, preferably within 24 hours, followed by two or three doses. 
1 WHO. Hepatitis B vaccines. Wkly Epidemiol Rec. 2009;84:405–20.
10.2: Prevention of mother-to-child HBV transmission using antiviral therapy 
• 
In HBV-monoinfected pregnant women, the indications for treatment are the 
same as for other adults, and tenofovir is recommended. No recommendation 
was made on the routine use of antiviral therapy to prevent mother-to-child 
HBV transmission.
Existing 
recommendations in 
HIV-infected pregnant 
and breastfeeding 
women2
• 
In HIV-infected pregnant and breastfeeding women (including pregnant 
women in the first trimester of pregnancy and women of childbearing age), a 
once-daily fixed-dose combination of tenofovir + lamivudine (or emtricitabine) 
+ efavirenz is recommended as first-line ART. This recommendation applies 
both to lifelong treatment and to ART initiated for PMTCT and then stopped. 
 
(Strong recommendation, low to moderate quality of evidence) 
2 Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV 
infection: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2013. These guidelines will be updated in 2015.
 xxvi
ALGORITHM OF WHO RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF PERSONS WITH 
CHRONIC HEPATITIS B INFECTIONa 
ASSESSMENT FOR TREATMENT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MONITORING
DETECTION OF HCCf 
(persons with cirrhosis or HCC family history)
DISEASE PROGRESSION AND/OR 
TREATMENT RESPONSE IN ALLf
• Adherence at each visit, if on treatment
• ALT, HBV DNA and HBeAg
• Clinical criteria and NITs (APRI in adults or FibroScan)
TOXICITY MONITORING 
IN PERSONS ON TREATMENT
Renal functiong and risk factors for renal dysfunction
STOPPING TREATMENT
NO CIRRHOSIS
• and HBeAg loss and seroconversion to anti-HBe and after 
completion of at least one additional year of treatment
• and persistently normal ALT
• and persistently undetectable HBV DNA
CIRRHOSIS
Lifelong treatment
HBsAg positive
CIRRHOSIS
• Clinical criteriab
• NITs (APRI score >2 in adults 
or FibroScan)
INITIATE NA THERAPY 
AND MONITOR
• Tenofovir or entecavir
• Entecavir in children aged 
2–11 years
HBV DNA
<2000 IU/mL
HBV DNA
2000– 
20 000 IU/mL
HBV DNA
>20 000 IU/mL
ALTd,e 
Persistently 
abnormal
AGE 
≤30 years
AGEc 
>30 years
(in particular)
ALTd,e 
Persistently 
normal
ALTd,e 
Persistently 
normal
ALTd,e 
Intermittently 
abnormal
DEFER TREATMENT AND MONITOR
HBV DNA 
<2000 IU/mL
No
Yes
Every 6 months
Every 12 months
Baseline and 
every 12 months
 xxvii
NITs non-invasive tests, ALT alanine aminotransferase, APRI aspartase aminotransferase-to-platelet ratio index
a Defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for six months or more. The algorithm does not capture all potential scenarios, 
but the main categories for treatment or monitoring. Recommendations for settings without access to HBV DNA testing are provided in the 
relevant chapters.
b Clinical features of decompensated cirrhosis: Portal hypertension (ascites, variceal haemorrhage and hepatic encephalopathy), 
coagulopathy, or liver insufficiency (jaundice). Other clinical features of advanced liver disease/cirrhosis may include: hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly, pruritus, fatigue, arthralgia, palmar erythema, and oedema.
c The age cut-off of >30 years is not absolute, and some persons with CHB less than 30 years may also meet criteria for antiviral treatment.
d ALT levels fluctuate in persons with chronic hepatitis B and require longitudinal monitoring to determine the trend. Upper limits for normal 
ALT have been defined as below 30 U/L for men and 19 U/L for women, though local laboratory normal ranges should be applied. Persistently 
normal/abnormal may be defined as three ALT determinations below or above the upper limit of normal, made at unspecified intervals during 
a 6–12–month period or predefined intervals during 12-month period. 
e Where HBV DNA testing is not available, treatment may be considered based on persistently abnormal ALT levels, but other common causes 
of persistently raised ALT levels such as impaired glucose tolerance, dyslipidaemia and fatty liver should be excluded.
f All persons with CHB should be monitored regularly for disease activity/progression and detection of HCC, and after stopping treatment 
for evidence of reactivation. More frequent monitoring maybe required in those with more advanced liver disease, during the first year of 
treatment or where adherence is a concern, and in those with abnormal ALT and HBV DNA levels >2000 IU/mL, not yet on treatment.
g Before initiation, assessment should be done of renal function (serum creatinine level, estimated glomerular filtration rate, urine dipsticks for 
proteinuria and glycosuria, and risk factors for renal dysfunction (decompensated cirrhosis, CrCl <50 mL/min, poorly controlled hypertension, 
proteinuria, uncontrolled diabetes, active glomerulonephritis, concomitant nephrotoxic drugs, solid organ transplantation, older age, BMI 
<18.5 kg/m2 (or body weight <50 kg), concomitant use of nephrotoxic drugs or a boosted protease inhibitor (PI) for HIV). Monitoring should 
be more frequent in those at higher risk of renal dysfunction.
 xxviii
STRUCTURE OF THE GUIDELINES ALONG THE CONTINUUM OF CARE
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 5
Linkage 
to care
Retention 
in care
Adherence 
support
WHO TO TREAT 
AND 
NOT TO TREAT
GENERAL 
PREVENTION
INITIAL 
ASSESSMENT: 
Use of NITs for 
staging of liver disease
Prevention of transmission 
and measures to reduce 
disease progression
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 4
MONITORING
 xxix
CHAPTER 6
Retention 
in care
Adherence 
support
Retention 
in care
Adherence 
support
INITIATION 
OF FIRST-LINE 
ANTIVIRAL 
THERAPY
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
SECOND-LINE 
ANTIVIRAL THERAPY 
FOR TREATMENT 
FAILURE
WHEN TO STOP 
TREATMENT
Retention 
in care
Adherence 
support
MONITORING
CHAPTER 9.1: DISEASE PROGRESSION AND TREATMENT RESPONSE
CHAPTER 9.2: MONITORING FOR TOXICITY
CHAPTER 9.3: MONITORING FOR HCC
 xxx
 1
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Goals and objectives 
Existing guidelines for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B and C infection have 
been developed by national and international medical organizations, but relate 
mainly to the treatment of persons living in high-income countries. In 2014, 
the World Health Organization (WHO) issued its first evidence-based treatment 
guidelines for persons living with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in low- and 
middle-income countries (LMICs) (1). The present guidelines are the first 
WHO guidelines on the prevention, care and treatment of persons with chronic 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection – defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) for six months or more. They provide a framework for the 
development or strengthening of hepatitis B treatment programmes in LMICs, 
but are also of relevance to some high-income countries (2). Although most of 
the recommendations are related to treatment, there are also recommendations 
across the continuum of care on assessment, monitoring and general care. 
These recommendations will be updated and revised as appropriate.
Several key topics were not included in the scope of work for this guideline, but 
will be covered in future guidelines as well as in planned consolidated guidelines 
on the management of persons with chronic hepatitis B and C for publication 
in 2016. In addition to incorporating the current treatment recommendations, 
these will include hepatitis B and C testing algorithms and strategies on who to 
screen; management of advanced liver disease; and diagnosis and management 
of acute hepatitis B and C. The use of interferon (IFN) or pegylated interferon 
(PEG-IFN)a as antiviral therapy was not considered in these guidelines. 
Although there are some advantages of IFN therapy, such as a finite duration of 
therapy and possibly a higher rate of HBsAg loss, IFN is less feasible for use in 
resource-limited settings, as it requires administration by injection, is expensive, 
inconvenient to use, less well tolerated, and requires careful monitoring. IFN 
also cannot be used in infants less than 1 year and in pregnant women.
a Throughout these guidelines, IFN and PEG-IFN refer to IFN alpha or PEG-IFN alpha.
 2
1.2. Related WHO materials and guidelines
These guidelines on the management of CHB  are intended to complement 
existing WHO guidance on the primary prevention of hepatitis B through both 
hepatitis B vaccination and by improving blood and injection safety, as well as 
guidance among persons who inject drugs (PWID) and other vulnerable groups, 
including those living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. 
The existing WHO guidance includes: prevention of perinatal and early childhood 
HBV infection through infant hepatitis B vaccination (3); treatment of HBV/HIV-
coinfected persons in the consolidated antiretroviral (ARV) guidelines (which will 
be updated in 2015) (4); prevention measures, including catch-up vaccinations 
in key affected populations (5), including PWID, men who have sex with men and 
sex workers (6–8), and prevention of HBV infection in health-care settings (9–11). 
The use of alcohol reduction interventions to reduce progression of liver disease 
was recommended in the recent WHO HCV treatment guidelines (1). New WHO 
recommendations on the use of auto-disable syringes in immunization services, 
and safety-engineered injection devices, including reuse prevention (RUP) 
syringes and sharp injury prevention (SIP) devices for therapeutic injections, will 
be published in early 2015.
1.3. Target audience
These guidelines are primarily targeted at policy-makers in ministries of health 
working in LMICs to assist in developing national hepatitis B prevention and 
treatment plans and policy, and country-specific treatment guidelines. In 
addition, it is anticipated that nongovernmental agencies and health professionals 
organizing treatment and screening services for hepatitis B will use the guidelines 
to define the necessary elements of such services. These guidelines will also be 
a useful resource for clinicians who manage persons with CHB.
1.4. Guiding principles
The overarching objective of WHO is to achieve the highest possible level of 
health for all people. These guidelines have been developed with this principle 
in mind and that of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (12). People infected with viral hepatitis may come from vulnerable or 
marginalized groups with poor access to appropriate health care, and be subject 
to discrimination and stigma. It is therefore essential that these guidelines and 
the policies derived from them incorporate basic human rights, including the 
right to confidentiality and informed decision-making when considering whether 
to be screened and treated for HBV infection.
 3
The public health approach
In accordance with existing WHO guidance on HIV, these guidelines are based 
on a public health approach to scaling up the use of antiviral therapy for HBV 
infection (13). The public health approach seeks to ensure the widest possible 
access to high-quality services at the population level, based on simplified and 
standardized approaches, and to strike a balance between implementing the 
best-proven standard of care and what is feasible on a large scale in resource-
limited settings.
Promoting human rights and equity in access to health care
Access to health care is a basic human right and applies equally to men, women 
and children, regardless of gender, race, sexual preference, socioeconomic status 
or behavioural practices, including drug use. The promotion of human rights and 
equity in access to HBV prevention, treatment, care and support are guiding 
principles central to these guidelines. Persons with HBV infection may also come 
from vulnerable groups because of low socioeconomic status, poor access to 
appropriate health care, or because they belong to groups that are marginalized 
or stigmatized such as PWID, men who have sex with men, migrants, indigenous 
peoples or prisoners. In general, HBV treatment programmes need to ensure 
that treatment is accessible to the persons with most advanced disease who 
need it most, as well as pregnant women, children and vulnerable groups, and 
that they are provided treatment in an environment that minimizes stigma and 
discrimination. Informed consent – notably for HBV testing but also for initiating 
antiviral therapy – should always be obtained. Adequate safeguards must be in 
place to ensure confidentiality.
Some countries may face significant challenges as they seek to implement these 
recommendations for the care and treatment of persons with CHB, in the context 
of constraints in resources and health systems. A key challenge may involve the 
need to give priority to ensuring access to treatment for those who have the most 
advanced disease. Each country will need to plan its own approach to ensuring 
that other care and treatment programmes such as ARVs for HIV infection are 
not disrupted, and that expanded access is fair and equitable.
Service provision
Provision of quality screening, care and treatment for persons with CHB requires 
the involvement of appropriately trained individuals as well as facilities suitable for 
regular monitoring, especially for those on therapy. Facility requirements for providing 
treatment for HBV will depend on the setting, but will require access to appropriate 
laboratory facilities for monitoring treatment response, and adequate supplies 
of medication. Operating testing services under quality management systems is 
essential for the provision of quality testing results. The protection of confidentiality 
and a non-coercive approach are fundamental principles of good clinical practice. 
 4
Implementation based on local context
Implementation of the recommendations in these guidelines should be informed 
by local context, including national HBV epidemiology, health systems and 
laboratory capacity, supply systems for drugs and other commodities, availability 
of financial resources, the organization and capacity of the health system and 
anticipated cost–effectiveness of the various interventions. Chapter 12 in these 
guidelines addresses decision-making and planning for the development of 
hepatitis treatment programmes, and implementation considerations for the key 
recommendations relevant to country programme managers.
 5
2. METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS OF 
DEVELOPING THE GUIDELINES
2.1. WHO guideline development process 
These WHO guidelines were developed following the recommendations 
for standard guidelines as described in the WHO Handbook for Guideline 
Development, 2012 (1). The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) framework was followed for this process 
(2–11) (Tables 2.1 and 2.2). A Guidelines Development Group was formed, 
ensuring representation from various stakeholder groups, including members 
of organizations that represent persons living with chronic hepatitis, advocacy 
groups, researchers, clinicians and programme managers. Geographical 
representation and gender balance were also considerations in selecting Group 
members. There was an initial scoping and planning process to formulate 
questions across the continuum of hepatitis B care and treatment most relevant 
to LMICs and determine patient-important outcomes. These questions were 
structured in PICO format (population, intervention, comparison, outcomes) 
and patient-important outcomes were identified for each research question (see 
Web appendix 1 for PICO questions). These outcomes were refined and ranked 
based on their importance for the patient population (3). 
Systematic 
reviews 
and 
meta-analyses 
of 
the 
primary 
literature 
were 
commissioned 
externally to address the research questions and patient-important outcomes. 
Criteria for inclusion and exclusion of literature (e.g. study design, sample size, 
duration of follow up) for the reviews were based on the evidence needed and 
available to answer the research questions. Search strategies and summaries of 
evidence are reported in Web appendix 2. 
The quality of the evidence was assessed and either rated down or rated up based on 
the following criteria: rated down based on (i) risk of bias (using the Cochrane Risk of 
Bias assessment tool), including publication bias; (ii) inconsistency or heterogeneity; 
(iii) indirectness (addressing a different population than the one under consideration); 
or (iv) imprecision. Conversely, the quality of the evidence was rated up if there was no 
reason to rate it down, and if it met any of the following three criteria: (i) large effect size; 
(ii) dose–response; or (iii) plausible residual confounders (i.e. when biases from a study 
might be reducing the estimated apparent intervention effect). Based on the rating of 
the available evidence, the quality of evidence was categorized as high, moderate, low 
or very low (Table 2.1). Summaries of the quality of evidence to address each outcome 
were entered in the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation (GRADE) profiler software (GRADEpro 3.6) (see Web appendix 2).
 6
BOX 2.1  Approach to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations 
using the GRADE system
The GRADE system separates the rating of the quality of evidence from the rating of the 
strength of the recommendation. 
The quality of evidence is defined as the confidence that the reported estimates of effect 
are adequate to support a specific recommendation. The GRADE system classifies the 
quality of evidence as high, moderate, low and very low (4–10). Randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) are initially rated as high-quality evidence but may be downgraded for several 
reasons, including the risk of bias, inconsistency of results across studies, indirectness 
of evidence, imprecision and publication bias. Observational studies are initially rated as 
low-quality evidence but may be upgraded if the magnitude of the treatment effect is very 
large, if multiple studies show the same effect, if evidence indicates a dose–response 
relationship or if all plausible biases would underestimate the effect (10). The higher the 
quality of evidence, the more likely a strong recommendation can be made.
The strength of a recommendation reflects the extent to which the Guidelines Development 
Group was confident that the desirable effects of following a recommendation outweigh 
the potential undesirable effects. The strength is influenced by the following factors: the 
quality of the evidence, the balance of benefits and harms, values and preferences, 
resource use and the feasibility of the intervention (Table 2.2).
The GRADE system classifies the strength of a recommendation in two ways: “strong” 
and “conditional” (11). A strong recommendation is one for which the Guidelines 
Development Group was confident that the desirable effects of adhering to the 
recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects. A conditional recommendation is 
one for which the Guidelines Development Group concluded that the desirable effects 
of adhering to the recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects but the 
Guidelines Development Group is not confident about these trade-offs. The implications 
of a conditional recommendation are that, although most people or settings would adopt 
the recommendation, many would not or would do so only under certain conditions.
The reasons for making a conditional recommendation include the absence of high-quality 
evidence, imprecision in outcome estimates, uncertainty regarding how individuals value 
the outcomes, small benefits, and benefits that may not be worth the costs (including the 
costs of implementing the recommendation).
 7
TABLE 2.1 GRADE categories of the quality of evidence (4–10) 
Level of evidence
Rationale
High
Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the 
estimate of effect.
Moderate
Further research is likely to have an important impact on our 
confidence in the effect.
Low
Further research is very likely to have an estimate of effect and is 
likely to change the estimate.
Very low
Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.
TABLE 2.2 Key domains considered in determining the strength of recommendations
Domain
Rationale
Benefits and risks
Desirable effects (benefits) need to be weighed against undesirable 
effects (risks). The more that the benefits outweigh the risks, the 
more likely that a strong recommendation will be made.
Values and preferences
(acceptability)
If the recommendation is likely to be widely accepted or highly valued, 
a strong recommendation will probably be made. If there are strong 
reasons that the recommended course of action is unlikely to be 
accepted, a conditional recommendation is more likely to be made.
Costs and financial 
implications
(resource use)
Lower costs (monetary, infrastructure, equipment or human 
resources) or greater cost–effectiveness will more likely result in a 
strong recommendation.
Feasibility
If an intervention is achievable in a setting where the greatest impact 
is expected, a strong recommendation is more probable.
At the June 2014 meeting of the Guidelines Development Group, for each of the 
PICO questions (see Web appendix 1), the results of the systematic reviews and 
the evidence profiles (see Web appendix 2) were presented, and reviewed to 
ensure that there was understanding and agreement on the scoring criteria. Drug 
availability and costs of diagnostics and drugs were also considered based on 
the available evidence and presentations from invited external expert speakers. 
Recommendations were then formulated based on the overall quality of the 
evidence, in addition to other considerations, including the balance between 
benefits and harms, values and preferences, and resource implications (Table 
2.2). However, no formal survey of acceptability of the proposed interventions 
among patients or health-care workers was undertaken for these guidelines. 
These were assessed through discussions among members of the Guidelines 
Development Group. The strength of the recommendations was rated as either 
strong (the panel was confident that the benefits of the intervention outweighed 
the risks) or conditional (the panel considered that the benefits of the intervention 
 8
probably outweighed the risks). Recommendations were then formulated and the 
wording finalized by the entire Group. Implementation needs were subsequently 
evaluated, and areas and topics requiring further research identified. 
The final recommendations were agreed on by consensus during a teleconference 
in July 2014. After all of the comments and questions from members of the 
Guidelines Development Group were addressed, a draft document was prepared 
and circulated to the members of the Guidelines Development Group. Suggested 
changes were incorporated into a second draft, which was circulated again to 
the Guidelines Development Group, as well as to the WHO Steering Group, and 
external peer reviewers. This document was further revised to address their 
comments, but modifications to the recommendations or to the scope were not 
considered.
2.2. Roles 
The Guidelines Development Group helped formulate the PICO questions 
(see Web appendix 1), reviewed the evidence profiles (see Web appendix 2), 
formulated and agreed upon the wording of the recommendations, and reviewed 
all drafts of the guidelines document. The peer reviewers reviewed the draft 
guidelines document and provided comments and suggested editorial changes.
The guideline methodologist ensured that the GRADE framework was 
appropriately applied throughout the guidelines development process. This 
included a review of the PICO questions, ensuring the comprehensiveness 
and quality of the systematic reviews, and preparation of evidence profiles 
and decision-making tables. The methodologist also provided guidance to the 
Guidelines Development Group in formulating the wording and strength of the 
recommendations.
2.3. Management of conflicts of interest 
In accordance with WHO policy, all members of the Guidelines Development 
Group and peer reviewers were required to complete and submit a WHO 
Declaration of Interest form (including participation in consulting and advisory 
panels, research support and financial investment) and, where appropriate, also 
provide a summary of research interests and activities. The WHO Secretariat 
then reviewed and assessed the declarations submitted by each member and, 
at the June 2014 meeting of the Guidelines Development Group, presented a 
summary to the Guidelines Development Group (see Web appendix 3). The 
WHO Secretariat considered significant and predominant funding from a single 
company whose drug was being considered for use in the treatment of HBV 
(e.g. tenofovir by Gilead Sciences). The Secretariat found no case where there 
 9
was exclusive membership of an advisory panel, receipt of consulting fees or 
financial support through research grants from one pharmaceutical company. 
One member had received a research grant from Gilead, but this was for a 
community-based screening project, and unrelated to treatment. The Secretariat 
therefore concluded that no member should be excluded from actively taking 
part in formulating the recommendations during the meeting.  For the peer review 
group, the WHO Secretariat was satisfied that there had been a transparent 
declaration of financial interests, and no case necessitated exclusion from the 
review process.
2.4. Disseminating and monitoring implementation of 
the guidelines 
The guidelines will be launched in March 2015 at the annual meeting of the 
Asian Pacific Association for the Study of the Liver, which brings together 
approximately 5000 persons involved in hepatitis care. The guidelines will also 
be accessible on the WHO website with links to other related websites, and 
translated into the official UN languages. The Secretariat staff will work with the 
hepatitis points of contact in the WHO regional offices to ensure dissemination 
to WHO country offices and ministries of health, as well as key international, 
regional and national collaborating centres (e.g. civil society, foundations, 
donors), and national programmes. Additional tools will be developed to support 
country implementation.
Implementation of these guidelines will be assessed by the number of countries 
that incorporate them into their national treatment guidelines. This will be 
monitored through the biannual survey that forms the basis for the WHO Global 
policy report on the prevention and control of viral hepatitis. In the future, the 
impact of the guidelines would be measured by monitoring the number of 
persons treated for CHB. However, at present, there is no monitoring system 
that can collect this information at a national level.
 10
3. BACKGROUND
3.1. Epidemiology and burden 
Hepatitis B infection is caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV), an enveloped DNA 
virus that infects the liver and causes hepatocellular necrosis and inflammation. HBV 
infection can be either acute or chronic, and may range from asymptomatic infection 
or mild disease to severe or rarely fulminant hepatitis (1). Acute hepatitis B is usually a 
self-limiting disease marked by acute inflammation and hepatocellular necrosis, with 
a case fatality rate of 0.5–1% (1). Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) infectiona encompasses 
a spectrum of disease, and is defined as persistent HBV infection (the presence 
of detectable hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg] in the blood or serum for longer 
than six months), with or without associated active viral replication and evidence of 
hepatocellular injury and inflammation (1). Age is a key factor in determining the risk 
of chronic infection (Figure 3.1). Chronicity is common following acute infection in 
neonates (90% of neonates born to hepatitis B e antigen [HBeAg]-positive mothers) 
and in young children under the age of 5 years (20–60%), but occurs rarely (<5%) 
when infection is acquired in adulthood (2,3). Worldwide, the majority of persons with 
CHB were infected at birth or in early childhood.
The spectrum of disease and natural history of chronic HBV infection are diverse. 
In some people, CHB is inactive and does not lead to significant liver disease. In 
others, it may cause progressive liver fibrosis, leading to cirrhosis with end-stage 
liver disease, and a markedly increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 
independent of the presence of cirrhosis – usually many years after initial infection 
(4). Longitudinal studies of untreated persons with CHB show an 8–20% cumulative 
risk of developing cirrhosis over five years (2–6). In those with cirrhosis, there is 
an approximately 20% annual risk of hepatic decompensation (7) and the annual 
incidence of hepatitis B-related HCC is high, ranging from <1% to 5% (7). Untreated 
patients with decompensated cirrhosis have a poor prognosis, with 15–40% survival 
at five years (5,7,8). Several host and viral factors, especially coinfections with HIV, 
HCV and hepatitis D virus (HDV), together with other cofactors such as alcohol use, 
may increase the rate of disease progression and risk of developing HCC (2,3,5,6) . 
It is estimated that worldwide, 2 billion people have evidence of past or present 
infection with HBV, and 240 million are chronic carriers of HBV surface antigen 
(HBsAg) (9). Age-specific HBsAg seroprevalence varies markedly by geographical 
region, with the highest prevalence (>5%) in sub-Saharan Africa, East Asia, some 
a The term chronic hepatitis B  (CHB) has been used throughout the guidelines to denote chronic hepatitis B infection.
 11
parts of the Balkan regions, the Pacific Islands and the Amazon Basin of South 
America. Prevalence below 2% is seen in regions such as Central Latin America, 
North America and Western Europe (Figure 3.2) (9). Overall, almost half of the global 
population lives in areas of high endemicity. Updated WHO estimates of the burden 
of CHB will be available in 2015. Infection with HBV may present as either hepatitis 
B “e-antigen” (HBeAg)-positive or -negative disease. The prevalence of HBeAg-
negative disease has been increasing over the past decade as a result of ageing of 
the HBV-infected population, and accounts for the majority of cases in some regions, 
including Europe (10).
Worldwide, it is estimated that around 650 000 people die each year from the 
complications of CHB (11). Overall, HBV accounts for around 45% of cases of HCC 
and 30% of cirrhosis, with much higher proportions in LMICs (11,12). HCC is ranked 
among the top three causes of death in males, especially in South-East Asia (13). In 
Asia and most other regions, the incidence of HCC and cirrhosis is low before the age 
of 35–40 years but then rises exponentially (12). However, in Africa (13), rural western 
Alaska and the Amazon, the incidence of HCC is also high in infected children and 
young male adults (12,13). HBV infection also causes a significant economic burden 
in terms of years of life lost from liver disease in high-income settings as well as 
LMICs, and accounts for 5–10% of liver transplants (4,5).
Many countries in the world administer hepatitis B vaccine starting at birth or in early 
childhood (15). Although this strategy has been effective in reducing the incidence 
and prevalence of hepatitis B in most endemic regions over the past few decades 
(9,12), it will not have a large impact on the rates of end-stage liver disease or HCC 
for 20–40 years after the introduction of universal infant immunization.
FIGURE 3.1 Outcome of hepatitis B infection by age at infection
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Age at infection
Chronic infection (%)
Symptomatic infection (%)
Birth
1–6 months
7–12 months
1–4 years
Older 
children and 
adults
Symptomatic infections
Chronic infections
 12
FIGURE 3.2 Geographical distribution of hepatitis B infection worldwide (9)
Prevalence of hepatitis B infection, children 5–9 years, 2005
Prevalence of hepatitis B infection, adults 19–49 years, 2005
<2%   - Low
2-4%  - Low intermediate
5-7%  - High intermediate
≥8%   - High
Not applicable
<2%   - Low
2-4%  - Low intermediate
5-7%  - High intermediate
≥8%   - High
Not applicable
 13
3.2. Virology 
HBV is one of the smallest viruses known to infect humans, and belongs to the 
hepadnavirus family. It is a hepatotropic virus, and liver injury occurs through 
immune-mediated killing of infected liver cells. HBV is also a recognized 
oncogenic virus that confers a higher risk of developing HCC. The genome 
encodes HBsAg, HBcAg, the viral polymerase and the HBx protein (16). The virus 
circulates in serum as a 42-nm, double-shelled particle, with an outer envelope 
component of HBsAg and an inner nucleocapsid component of hepatitis B core 
antigen (HBcAg). HBV DNA can be detected in serum and is used to monitor 
viral replication. HBeAg, unlike HBsAg and HBcAg, is not particulate, but rather 
is detectable as a soluble protein in serum. 
Worldwide, at least nine genotypes of HBV (A through I) have been identified 
on the basis of more than 8% difference in their genome sequences (16–18). 
Higher rates of HCC have been found in persons infected with genotypes C 
and F (compared with genotypes B or D), and in those infected with certain 
subtypes of genotype A found in southern Africa, although aflatoxin exposure 
may play a role in sub-Saharan Africa. Antiviral therapy is equally effective, and 
the HBV vaccine protective against all HBV genotypes. A number of naturally 
occurring mutations in the pre-core region (pre-core mutants), which prevent 
HBeAg synthesis, have been identified in HBeAg-negative persons with CHB 
(19). The HBV genotype influences the prevalence of pre-core mutations, but 
the functional role of this mutation in liver disease is unclear.
3.3. Transmission 
HBV is spread predominantly by percutaneous or mucosal exposure to infected 
blood and various body fluids, including saliva, menstrual, vaginal, and seminal 
fluids, which have all been implicated as vehicles of human transmission (20). 
Sexual transmission of hepatitis B may occur, particularly in unvaccinated men 
who have sex with men and heterosexual persons with multiple sex partners or 
contact with sex workers. Infection in adulthood leads to chronic hepatitis in 
less than 5% of cases. Transmission of the virus may also result from accidental 
inoculation of minute amounts of blood or fluid during medical, surgical and 
dental procedures, or from razors and similar objects contaminated with infected 
blood; use of inadequately sterilized syringes and needles; intravenous and 
percutaneous drug abuse; tattooing; body piercing; and acupuncture.  
Perinatal transmission: Perinatal transmission is the major route of HBV 
transmission in many parts of the world, and an important factor in maintaining 
the reservoir of the infection in some regions, particularly in China and South-
East Asia. In the absence of prophylaxis, a large proportion of viraemic mothers, 
especially those who are seropositive for HBeAg, transmit the infection to their 
 14
infants at the time of, or shortly after birth (21). The risk of perinatal infection is 
also increased if the mother has acute hepatitis B in the second or third trimester 
of pregnancy or within two months of delivery. Although HBV can infect the fetus in 
utero, this appears to be uncommon and is generally associated with antepartum 
haemorrhage and placental tears. The risk of developing chronic infection is 90% 
following perinatal infection (up to 6 months of age) but decreases to 20–60% 
between the ages of 6 months and 5 years (21,22) (Figure 3.1).  
Horizontal transmission, including household, intrafamilial and especially child-
to-child, is also important. At least 50% of infections in children cannot be 
accounted for by mother-to-infant transmission and, in many endemic regions, 
prior to the introduction of neonatal vaccination, the prevalence peaked in 
children 7–14 years of age (23).
3.4. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B 
The natural history of CHB is dynamic and complex, and progresses non-
linearly through several recognizable phases (Table 3.1). The terms “immune-
tolerant”, “immune-active”, “immune-control” and “immune-escape” have 
been commonly used to describe these different phases, but it is increasingly 
recognized that these descriptions are not fully supported by immunological data 
(24). The phases are of variable duration, are not necessarily sequential, and do 
not always relate directly to criteria and indications for antiviral therapy.
 15
TABLE 3.1 Phases of chronic hepatitis B 
Phase
HBeAg 
serological 
status
Pattern
Indications 
for treatment
1. “Immune 
tolerant”
HBeAg 
positive
• Stage seen in many HBeAg-positive children 
and young adults, particularly among those 
infected at birth
• High levels of HBV replication (HBV DNA 
levels >200 000 IU/mL))
• Persistently normal ALT
• Minimal histological disease
Treatment 
not generally 
indicated, 
but 
monitoring 
required
2. “Immune 
active”
(HBeAg-positivea 
chronic hepatitis)
HBeAg 
positive; 
may 
develop 
anti-HBe
• Abnormal or intermittently abnormal ALT
• High or fluctuating levels of HBV replication 
(HBV DNA levels >2000 IU/mL) 
• Histological necroinflammatory activity 
present 
• HBeAg to anti-HBe seroconversion possible, 
with normalization of ALT leading to “immune-
control” phase
Treatment 
may be 
indicated
3. Inactive 
chronic hepatitis 
“Immune control”
(previously called 
inactive carrier)
HBeAg 
negative, 
anti-HBe 
positive
• Persistently normal ALT
• Low or undetectable HBV DNA ( HBV DNA 
levels <2000 IU/mL)
• Risk of cirrhosis and HCC reduced
• May develop HBeAg-negative disease
Treatment 
not generally 
indicated, 
but 
monitoring 
required for 
reactivation 
and HCC
4. “Immune 
escape”
(HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis)
HBeAg 
negative, 
with or 
without 
being 
anti-HBe 
positive
• HBeAg negative and anti-HBe positive
• Abnormal ALT (persistent or intermittently 
abnormal)
• Moderate to high levels of HBV replication 
(HBV DNA levels >20 000 IU/mL)
• Older persons especially at risk for progressive 
disease (fibrosis/cirrhosis)
Treatment 
may be 
indicated
5.“Reactivation” 
or “acute-on-
chronic hepatitis”
HBeAg 
positive or 
negative
• Can occur spontaneously or be precipitated 
by immunosuppression from chemo– or 
immunosuppressive therapy, HIV infection 
or transplantation, development of antiviral 
resistance, or withdrawal of antiviral therapy 
• Abnormal ALT 
• Moderate to high levels of HBV replication 
• Seroreversion to HBeAg positivity can occur if 
HBeAg negative
• High risk of decompensation in presence of 
cirrhosis
Treatment 
indicated
ALT alanine aminotransferase, anti-HBe antibody to hepatitis e antigen, HBeAg hepatitis B e antigen, HCC 
hepatocellular carcinoma
a Not all persons after HBeAg seroconversion enter the inactive phase. Up to 20% may progress directly from HBeAg 
immune active to anti-HBe immune escape phase
 16
Phases of chronic hepatitis B (3–7)
1. The immune-tolerant phase occurs most commonly in HBsAg-positive 
children and young adults infected in the perinatal or early childhood period. 
It usually persists into young adulthood and may last 10–30 years after 
perinatal infection. Typically, serum HBeAg is detectable, HBV DNA levels 
are high (usually more than 200 000 IU/mL), and alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) levels may be normal or only minimally raised. There is minimal liver 
inflammation, no or slow progression to fibrosis, and low spontaneous 
HBeAg loss.
2. 
This is usually followed by an HBeAg-positive immune-active phase of active 
inflammatory disease. Serum ALT may be abnormal or fluctuate and is 
accompanied by variable decreases in HBV DNA levels. Symptoms of hepatitis 
may be present and there is more severe, histologically evident hepatitis and 
fibrosis. This phase may last from several weeks to years, and may result 
in successful seroconversion from an HBeAg-positive to an anti-HBe state. 
Seroconversion rates are higher in those with raised serum aminotransferases 
and those infected with genotypes D, A, F and (in Asia) B.
3. The non-replicative or inactive immune-control phase (previously called the 
inactive carrier phase) follows successful seroconversion from an HBeAg-
positive to anti-HBe state, which occurs in approximately 10–15% of 
HBeAg-positive persons per year. Once HBeAg is cleared, the disease may 
remit, with minimal progression of fibrosis, and serum ALT levels revert to 
normal with low or undetectable levels of HBV DNA (less than 2000 IU/
mL). HBeAg seroconversion at a young age, prior to the onset of significant 
liver disease, confers a good prognosis, with a substantially reduced risk of 
cirrhosis and liver cancer. However, active viral replication can reappear in 
a proportion of persons. 
4. In addition to HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis, HBeAg-negative (“immune 
escape-mutant”) active chronic hepatitis occurs in approximately 5–15% 
of HBeAg-negative, anti-HBe-positive persons in the inactive carrier state 
(8,25,26). HBeAg is undetectable (and anti-HBe detectable) in these 
persons because mutations in the pre-core or basal core promoter region 
of the viral genome result in HBV variants that do not express HBeAg. This 
represents a later phase of disease, generally in older persons, and has a 
variable course, with abnormal or fluctuating levels of serum ALT and HBV 
DNA, necroinflammatory changes, and more rapid progression to cirrhosis 
(annual rate of 8–20%). 
5. HBV reactivation may occur spontaneously or may be triggered by 
cancer chemotherapy and other immunosuppressive therapy, and may 
lead to fatal acute-on-chronic hepatitis, and pre-emptive nucleos(t)ide 
 17
analogue (NA) therapy is therefore used. Occult HBV infection (defined 
as persistence of HBV DNA in the liver in persons in whom HBsAg is 
not detectable in the blood) may also be reactivated through prolonged 
chemo- or immunosuppressive therapy. Subjects with occult infection may 
also represent an important source of new infections in blood transfusion 
services in HBV-endemic LMICs where HBsAg is used as the sole marker 
of infection in donor populations. Persons who have cleared HBsAg and 
who are negative for HBV DNA but anti-HBc positive may reactivate if given 
potent immunosuppressive drugs.
3.5. Diagnosis and staging
Routine assessment of HBsAg-positive persons is needed to guide management 
and indicate the need for treatment (27,28). This generally includes assessment 
of: additional serological markers of HBV infection (HBeAg); measuring 
aminotransferase levels to help determine liver inflammation; quantification of 
HBV DNA levels; and stage of liver fibrosis by non-invasive tests (NITs) such 
as aspartate aminotransferase (AST)-to-platelet ratio index (APRI), transient 
elastography (FibroScan) or FibroTest.
HBV serological markers  
Previous HBV infection is characterized by the presence of antibodies (anti-HBs 
and anti-HBc). Immunity to HBV infection after vaccination is characterized by 
the presence of only anti-HBs. CHB is defined as the persistence of HBsAg 
for more than 6 months. Recently, quantitative HBsAg level determination has 
been proposed to differentiate inactive HBsAg carriers from persons with active 
disease (29). 
HBeAg: It also needs to be established whether the person is in the HBeAg-
positive or HBeAg-negative phase of infection (Table 3.1), though both require 
lifelong monitoring, as the condition may change over time. In persons with 
CHB, a positive HBeAg result usually indicates the presence of active HBV 
replication and high infectivity. Spontaneous improvement may occur following 
HBeAg-positive seroconversion (anti-HBe), with a decline in HBV replication, 
and normalization of ALT levels. This confers a good prognosis and does not 
require treatment. HBeAg can also be used to monitor treatment response, as 
HBeAg  (anti-HBe) seroconversion in HBeAg-positive persons with a sustained 
undetectable HBV DNA viral load may be considered a potential stopping point of 
treatment. However, this is infrequent even with potent NA therapy. Some HBeAg-
negative persons have active HBV replication but are positive for anti-HBe and 
do not produce HBeAg due to the presence of HBV variants or pre-core mutants. 
 18
Virological evaluation of HBV infection
Serum HBV DNA concentrations quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) correlate with disease progression (27,28,30) and are used to differentiate 
active HBeAg-negative disease from inactive chronic infection, and for decisions to 
treat and subsequent monitoring. Serial measures over a few months or longer are 
preferable, but there remains a lack of consensus regarding the level below which 
HBV DNA concentrations are indicative of “inactive” disease, or the threshold 
above which treatment should be initiated (28). HBV DNA concentrations are 
also used for optimal monitoring of response to antiviral therapy, and a rise may 
indicate the emergence of resistant variants. WHO standards are now available for 
expression of HBV DNA concentrations (31,32). Serum HBV DNA levels should 
be expressed in IU/mL to ensure comparability; values given as copies/mL can 
be converted to IU/mL by dividing by a factor of 5 to approximate the conversion 
used in the most commonly used assays (i.e. 10 000 copies/mL = 2000 IU/mL; 
100 000 copies/mL = 20 000 IU/mL; 1 million copies/mL = 200 000 IU/mL). 
The same assay should be used in the same patient to evaluate the efficacy of 
antiviral therapy. Access to HBV DNA testing remains very poor in resource-limited 
settings. 
Assessment of the severity of liver disease
A full assessment includes clinical evaluation for features of cirrhosis and evidence 
of decompensation, and measurement of serum bilirubin, albumin, ALT, AST, 
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and prothrombin time; as well as full blood count, 
including platelet count. Other routine investigations include ultrasonography 
and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) measurement for periodic surveillance for HCC, and 
endoscopy for varices in persons with cirrhosis.   
Liver enzymes: Aminotransferase levels may fluctuate with time, and single 
measurements of ALT and AST do not indicate disease stage. Usually, the ALT 
concentrations are higher than those of AST, but with disease progression to 
cirrhosis, the AST/ALT ratio may be reversed. Tests of liver synthetic function 
and/or portal hypertension include serum albumin, bilirubin, platelet count 
and prothrombin time (27,28). A progressive decline in serum albumin 
concentrations, rise in bilirubin and prolongation of the prothrombin time are 
characteristically observed as decompensated cirrhosis develops. 
Liver biopsy: Liver biopsy has been used to ascertain the degree of 
necroinflammation and fibrosis, and to help guide the decision to treat. There 
are several established methods of scoring histology and measuring activity 
(necroinflammation) separately from stage (fibrosis). However, limitations of 
biopsy include sampling error, subjectivity in reporting, high costs, the risks 
of bleeding and pneumothorax, discomfort to the patient, and the need for 
training and infrastructure in LMICs. The pathological features of CHB on liver 
 19
biopsy depend upon the stage of the disease, host immune response and 
degree of virus replication. 
Non-invasive tests (NITs) (see also Chapter 4: Non-invasive assessment of 
stage of liver disease): Non-invasive methods for assessing the stage of liver 
disease are supplanting liver biopsy and have been validated in adults with 
CHB. Blood and serum markers for fibrosis, including APRI and FIB-4, as 
well as commercial markers such as FibroTest can be estimated, or transient 
elastography (FibroScan) performed to rule out advanced fibrosis (33–35).
3.6. Screening
Most international guidelines recommend that several high-risk groups be 
screened for HBsAg, and that those at risk and not immune should be offered 
hepatitis B vaccination. These include: household and sexual contacts of 
persons with CHB, HIV-infected persons, persons who inject drugs (PWID), men 
who have sex with men, sex workers, as well as other groups such as indigenous 
peoples, persons who are incarcerated, and persons of transgender. Blood 
and organ donors should also be screened for HBsAg and other bloodborne 
pathogens in accordance with WHO recommendations (36) to prevent HBV 
transmission, especially in LMICs. In the United States and Europe, population-
based screening is also recommended for migrants from endemic countries 
(37,38). There is currently limited guidance on screening for HBsAg in LMICs 
(39). WHO is developing consolidated guidelines on hepatitis B and C for 
publication in 2016, which will include testing algorithms and strategies on who 
to screen for hepatitis B and C infection.
3.7. Prevention through vaccination (see also Chapters 10.1 
Infant and neonatal hepatitis B vaccination and 10.2 Prevention of mother-to-
child HBV transmission using antiviral therapy) 
Recombinant DNA-derived vaccines against HBV have been available for more than 
two decades. The primary hepatitis B immunization series conventionally consists of 
three doses of vaccine. Vaccination of infants and, in particular, delivery of hepatitis 
B vaccine within 24 hours of birth is 90–95% effective in preventing infection with 
HBV as well as decreasing HBV transmission if followed by at least two other doses. 
WHO recommends universal hepatitis B vaccination for all infants, and that the first 
dose should be given as soon as possible after birth (15). This strategy has resulted 
in a dramatic decrease in the prevalence of CHB among young children in regions of 
the world where universal infant vaccination programmes have been implemented. 
A proportion of vaccinated children (5–10%) have a poor response to vaccination, 
and will remain susceptible as adults to acquisition of HBV infection.
 20
In countries with intermediate or low endemicity, a substantial disease burden may 
result from acute and chronic infection acquired by older children, adolescents 
and adults. Target groups for catch-up vaccination as well as other preventive 
strategies include young adolescents; household and sexual contacts of persons 
who are HBsAg-positive; and persons at risk of acquiring HBV infection, such 
as PWID, men who have sex with men, and persons with multiple sex partners. 
3.8. Antiviral therapy
Although HBV infection can be prevented by vaccination, it is important to treat 
persons with CHB at high risk of progression to reduce the considerable morbidity 
associated with CHB. Over the past three decades, treatment outcomes have 
improved, first with conventional and then pegylated (PEG) interferon (IFN) and, 
more recently, with the advent of NAs. Currently, seven antiviral agents (lamivudine, 
adefovir, entecavir, telbivudine, tenofovir, emtricitabine, standard and PEG-IFN) are 
approved for the treatment of CHB in high-income countries, and have been shown 
to delay the progression of cirrhosis, reduce the incidence of HCC and improve 
long-term survival (Table 3.2). Although all NAs act on HBV polymerase, their 
mechanism of action differs; adefovir inhibits the priming of reverse transcription; 
lamivudine, emtricitabine and tenofovir inhibit the synthesis of the viral (-) strand 
DNA; and entecavir inhibits three major stages of HBV replication. In addition to 
their variable mechanisms of action, their pharmacokinetics, inhibitory capacity 
and resistance patterns vary (40). Although NAs are effective inhibitors of HBV 
replication, they seldom result in cure, and clearance of HBsAg is rare. Therefore, 
at present, long-term (potentially lifelong) NA therapy is required in the majority.
The advantage of NA therapy over IFN includes few side-effects and a one-
pill-a-day oral administration. The main advantages of IFN over NAs are the 
absence of resistance, and achievement of higher rates of HBeAg and HBsAg 
loss. However, the disadvantages of IFN are that less than 50% of persons 
treated will respond, its high cost, administration by injection and common side-
effects, which precludes its use in many persons, particularly in resource-limited 
settings. A number of relative and absolute contraindications to IFN also exist, 
which include the presence of decompensated cirrhosis and hypersplenism, 
thyroid disease, autoimmune diseases, severe coronary artery disease, renal 
transplant disease, pregnancy, seizures and psychiatric illness, concomitant use 
of certain drugs, retinopathy, thrombocytopenia and leucopenia. IFN also cannot 
be used in infants less than 1 year and in pregnant women.
Several international organizations have developed guidelines for the treatment 
of CHB (39–41), but the optimal timing of treatment is still debated. In general, 
treatment is targeted at persons with CHB and moderate or severe liver 
inflammation, and/or fibrosis and high viral replication, who are at high risk of 
 21
disease progression to cirrhosis and HCC. The benefits of treatment for those 
with mild inflammation or fibrosis are less certain. If HBV replication can be 
suppressed, the accompanying reduction in chronic liver inflammation reduces 
the risk of cirrhosis and HCC, but generally lifelong treatment is required. 
Extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis B such as glomerulonephritis or 
polyarteritis nodosa may also respond to treatment. 
New treatment strategies: Tenofovir alafenamide fumarate (TAF) is an orally 
bioavailable prodrug of tenofovir that enables enhanced delivery of the 
parent nucleotide and its active diphosphate metabolite into lymphoid cells 
and hepatocytes, so that the dose of tenofovir can be reduced and toxicities 
minimized (42,43). TAF has been evaluated in recent and ongoing clinical trials 
(44). Research is also ongoing to develop and test new agents that can “cure” 
HBV by eliminating all replicative forms, including covalently closed circular 
DNA (cccDNA). Broadly curative antiviral strategies include agents that could 
directly target infected cells as well as novel immunotherapeutic strategies that 
boost HBV-specific adaptive immune responses or activate innate intrahepatic 
immunity. New molecules under investigation include entry inhibitors and short-
interfering RNAs (siRNAs), and capsid inhibitors (45). 
Planned consolidated guidelines on hepatitis care and management for 2016 will 
include recommendations for the management of advanced and decompensated 
liver disease in LMICs.
Antiviral agent
Potency against 
HBV
Resistance 
barrier
Activity against 
HIV
Cost
Interferons
Moderate
Not applicable
Moderate
High
Tenofovir
High
High
High
Low (high in 
Hong Kong and 
other Asian 
countries)
Entecavir
High
High
Weak
High
Emtricitabine
Moderate
Low
High
Low
Telbivudine
High
Low
Unclear
High
Lamivudine
Moderate–high
Low
High
Low
Adefovir
Low
Moderate
None 
(at 10 mg dose)
High
TABLE 3.2 Antiviral agents active against hepatitis B virus infection 
(in order of potency and barrier to developing resistance) 
 22
3.9. Special populations
Coinfection with HIV, HDV, HCV and TB (see also Chapter 11.1: Management 
considerations for specific populations: Coinfections)
HBV, HIV, HCV and HDV share similar transmission routes. In general, concurrent 
or sequential infection with these viruses usually results in more severe and 
progressive liver disease, and a higher incidence of cirrhosis, HCC and mortality. 
HBV/HIV coinfection (see also Chapter 11.1.1: HBV/HIV coinfection)
HIV coinfection has a profound impact on almost every aspect of the natural 
history of HBV infection based on data from Western cohorts. The consequences 
include higher rates of chronicity after acute HBV infection, higher level of HBV 
replication and rates of reactivation, less spontaneous clearance, higher rates 
of occult HBV (i.e. detectable HBV DNA positivity in the absence of HBsAg 
seropositivity), more rapid progression to cirrhosis and HCC, higher liver-related 
mortality, and decreased treatment response compared with persons without 
HIV coinfection (46–50). In Western cohorts, liver disease has emerged as a 
leading cause of death in HIV-infected persons coinfected with either hepatitis B 
or C, as mortality due to other HIV-related conditions has declined following the 
introduction of antiretroviral therapy (ART) (51–54). While earlier studies found 
no consistent evidence for a significant effect of HBV on HIV disease progression 
(55,56), recent longitudinal cohort studies have found that coinfection with HBV 
also can lead to increased progression to AIDS-related outcomes and all-cause 
mortality (57,58). 
It is estimated that between 5% and 15% of the 34 million HIV-infected persons 
worldwide are coinfected with CHB (59–62), and the burden of coinfection is 
greatest in LMICs, particularly in South-East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. In 
countries where HBV prevalence is high (>5%), as in Africa and Asia, infection 
is usually acquired perinatally or during early childhood, and precedes HIV 
infection in most cases. In these settings, the prevalence of CHB in HIV-infected 
persons is close to that observed in the general population. In contrast, in 
countries where HBV prevalence is low (<2%), as in Europe, the United States 
and Australia, HBV infection is acquired during adulthood mainly through sexual 
intercourse, injecting drug use and nosocomial exposure. 
HBV/HDV coinfection (see also Chapter 11.1.2: HBV/HDV coinfection)
Hepatitis D virus (HDV) is a small defective RNA virus that requires HBV for 
its transmission (63,64). The routes of HDV transmission are the same as for 
HBV but vertical transmission is rare. It is estimated that globally, 5% of HBsAg-
positive carriers, or approximately 15 million people, are coinfected with HDV 
and the distribution is worldwide (63,64). High-prevalence areas include the 
Mediterranean, Middle East (the Gulf States, Saudi Arabia and Turkey), Pakistan 
(65–67), Central and northern Asia, Japan, Taiwan, Greenland and parts of Africa 
 23
(mainly horn of Africa and West Africa), the Amazon Basin and certain areas of 
the Pacific. The prevalence is low in North America and northern Europe, South 
Africa and eastern Asia. Vaccination against HBV prevents acute HDV coinfection, 
and expansion of childhood hepatitis B immunization programmes has resulted 
in a decline in hepatitis D incidence worldwide. However, in some settings, an 
increase has been observed (68–71), attributed to infections among PWID, or as a 
result of migration from areas where HDV is endemic. Outbreaks of fulminant HDV 
hepatitis with a high mortality have also been reported in many countries. 
Severe or fulminant hepatitis is more frequently observed in HBV/HDV coinfection 
compared to HBV monoinfection (64,72–74). Two major types of HDV infection 
are seen. In acute coinfection, persons are infected simultaneously with both HBV 
and HDV, leading to a mild-to-severe or even fulminant hepatitis. Recovery is 
usually complete and chronic infection is rare (around 2%) (73). In superinfection, 
there may be HDV superinfection of a person who already has CHB, leading to a 
more severe disease course and accelerated progression to cirrhosis in all ages 
(74,75), including children (76,77), with occurrence of complications almost a 
decade earlier (78). 
HBV/HCV coinfection (see also Chapter 11.1.3: HBV/HCV coinfection)
Coinfection with HCV is commonly found in HBV-endemic countries in Asia, 
sub-Saharan Africa and South America. In some populations, especially PWID, 
up to 25% of HCV-infected persons may be coinfected with HBV (79–81). 
Persons with coinfection are at higher risk of developing HCC (82), both a more 
aggressive form and at a younger age (83,84). Management of HCV infection 
is discussed in detail in the 2014 WHO guidelines for the screening, care and 
treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection (85). 
HBV/tuberculosis coinfection (see Chapter 11.1.4: HBV/TB coinfection)
Children and adolescents (see also Chapter 11.5: Children and adolescents)
CHB is generally benign and asymptomatic in children, as they are usually in the 
immune-tolerant phase. Children with minimal histological disease have not usually 
been considered for treatment because of the relatively low immediate risk of 
progression, low response rates to treatment, and concerns over long-term safety and 
risks of drug resistance. However, children with severe ongoing necroinflammatory 
disease or cirrhosis may require antiviral therapy. Conventional IFN, lamivudine 
and adefovir have been evaluated for safety and efficacy in children, with similar 
response rates to that in adults (86–89). The US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has approved tenofovir as treatment for HBV in adolescents and children 
above the age of 12 years, and entecavir for children above 2 years of age. 
 24
Other populations (see also Chapter 11: Management considerations for specific 
populations)
These include pregnant women (see Chapter 11.6); persons who inject drugs (see 
Chapter 11.7); dialysis and renal transplant recipients (see Chapter 11.8); health-
care workers (see Chapter 11.9); and indigenous peoples (see Chapter 11.10).
 25
4. RECOMMENDATIONS: NON-
INVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF LIVER 
DISEASE STAGE AT BASELINE AND 
DURING FOLLOW UP
Recommendations
APRI (aspartate aminotransferase [AST]-to-platelet ratio index) is recommended as the 
preferred non-invasive test (NIT) to assess for the presence of cirrhosis (APRI score >2 in 
adults) in resource-limited settings. Transient elastography (e.g. FibroScan) or FibroTest may 
be the preferred NITs in settings where they are available and cost is not a major constraint. 
(Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
4.1. Background 
The spectrum of liver disease in persons with CHB ranges from minimal 
fibrosis to cirrhosis and HCC. Compensated cirrhosis may progress over time 
to decompensated cirrhosis, which is associated with the potentially life-
threatening complications of ascites and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, 
oesophageal varices and bleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, sepsis and renal 
failure. Persons with cirrhosis, including those with clinical decompensation, 
need antiviral therapy as a priority in order to prevent further disease progression. 
While the diagnosis of decompensated cirrhosis is based on clinically obvious 
features, this is not always the case for compensated cirrhosis. Identifying 
persons with cirrhosis or advanced CHB in need of treatment is generally based 
on a combined assessment of clinical features (including hepatomegaly and 
splenomegaly), the level and ratio of aminotransferases, and other relevant tests, 
such as albumin and platelet counts, HBV DNA viral load, the degree of fibrosis 
and/or necroinflammation on liver biopsy or NITs,  and liver imaging.
Liver biopsy: Liver biopsy is considered the gold standard method to stage liver 
disease and assess for the degree of fibrosis, but it is not widely used in resource-
limited settings because of its high cost, invasiveness, patient discomfort, risk 
of complications, sampling error, as well as the need for expert histological 
interpretation. Several liver biopsy scoring systems have been developed, of 
which the METAVIR system (Table 4.1), Knodell and Ishak scores (1) are the 
most widely used.
a This recommendation was formulated assuming that liver biopsy is not a feasible option.
 26
METAVIR 
stage
F0
F1
F2
F3
F4
Definition
No fibrosis
Portal fibrosis 
without septa
Portal fibrosis 
with septa
Numerous 
septa without 
cirrhosis
Cirrhosis
TABLE 4.1 METAVIR liver-biopsy scoring system
Non-invasive tests (NITs): Several non-invasive fibrosis tests based on blood or 
serum indices (APRI, FIB-4 and a commercial assay – FibroTest,) or ultrasound 
principles (transient elastography [e.g. FibroScan]) (Table 4.2) are now available 
and increasingly used for evaluating and staging liver fibrosis, which reduces the 
need for liver biopsy in persons with an established cause of liver disease. The use of 
accurate and validated NITs in resource-limited settings could help with the optimal 
selection of persons with CHB for antiviral therapy. 
Blood tests such as the APRI and FIB-4 scores consist of indirect markers of fibrosis 
such as ALT, AST and platelet count (Figure 4.1), which are more readily available 
in LMICs, are associated with lower costs, do not require particular expertise in their 
interpretation, and can be performed in an outpatient setting. Other serum tests such 
as FibroTest are patented and must be performed in laboratories that meet certain 
quality standards, and are therefore more expensive and less readily available. Not 
all of these tests can assess all stages of fibrosis/cirrhosis. For example, APRI has 
been validated for the diagnosis of both significant fibrosis and cirrhosis, while FIB-
4 has not been validated for the diagnosis of cirrhosis. These markers of fibrosis 
have a high specificity but low sensitivity for significant fibrosis and cirrhosis at their 
specific cut-off ranges and, therefore, many persons with advanced fibrosis and 
cirrhosis are missed.
More recently, new techniques that measure liver stiffness have been developed 
based on ultrasound technology. Of such tests, transient elastography performed 
with FibroScan (Echosens, Paris) has been the most widely evaluated (Figure 4.2). 
It is non-invasive, takes less than 10 minutes to perform, can be undertaken in 
outpatient or community settings, and health-care staff can be easily trained in its 
use. Factors that limit the use of transient elastography include the high cost of the 
equipment, the need for preventive and corrective maintenance (regular service/
recalibration) and trained operators, and the lack of extensively validated cut-off 
values for specific stages of fibrosis. Other elastography techniques include 2-D 
acoustic radiation force impulse imaging (ARFI) and shear-wave elastography. ARFI 
and shear-wave elastography are similar in principle to transient elastography, and 
have been incorporated into new ultrasound imaging machines. However, they 
require more operator training and expertise than FibroScan. 
 27
ALT alanine aminotransferase, APRI AST-to-platelet ratio index, AST aspartate aminotransferase
Test
Components
Fibrosis stages 
assessed
Requirements
Cost
APRI
AST, platelets
≥F2, F4 (cirrhosis)
Basic 
haematology and 
clinical chemistry 
+
FIB-4
Age, AST, ALT, 
platelets
≥F3
Basic 
haematology and 
clinical chemistry 
+
FibroTest
Gamma glutamyl 
transpeptidase 
(gGT), 
haptoglobin, 
bilirubin, A1 
apolipopotein, 
alpha2-
macroglobulin
≥F2, ≥F3, F4 
(cirrhosis)
Specialized tests. 
Requires testing 
at designated 
laboratories. 
Commercial 
assay
+ +
FibroScan
Transient 
elastography
≥F2, ≥F3, F4 
(cirrhosis)
Dedicated 
equipment
+ + +
TABLE 4.2 Selected non-invasive tests to assess for stage of liver fibrosis 
APRI = * (AST/ULN) x 100) / platelet count (109/L) 
FIB-4 = (age (yr) x AST (IU/L)) / (platelet count (109/L x [ALT (IU/L)1/2])
FIGURE 4.1 APRI and FIB-4 calculations
For APRI, ULN signifies the upper limit of normal for AST in the laboratory where these investigations were undertaken. 
For example, in a patient with an AST of 82 IU/L (where laboratory ULN for AST is 40 IU/L) and a platelet count of 
90x109/L, the APRI would be: (82/40)x100/90 = 2.28. This value is >2 and is consistent with the presence of cirrhosis.
Online calculators can be accessed for APRI at: 
http://www.hepatitisc.uw.edu/page/clinical-calculators/apri, and for FIB-4 at http://www.hepatitisc.uw.edu/page/
clinical-calculators/fib-4
 28
Source: http://www.myliverexam.com/en/lexamen-fibroscan.html
FIGURE 4.2 Operation of transient elastography (FibroScan)
4.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review (see Web appendix 2: SR4) was to 
compare the diagnostic accuracy and performance of different NITs (APRI, FIB-
4, FibroTest and transient elastography [e.g. FibroScan]) in diagnosing cirrhosis 
and significant liver fibrosis in persons with CHB compared to liver biopsy as the 
reference standard. Outcomes were the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and 
negative predictive values of NITs, using defined index test cut-off points for the 
detection of cirrhosis (stage F4) and significant fibrosis (stage ≥F2) based on the 
METAVIR staging system. As the presence of cirrhosis was considered a priority 
criterion for initiation of antiviral therapy, the primary outcome assessment in the 
review was for diagnosis of cirrhosis (F4).
NIT cut-off values for the detection of cirrhosis and significant fibrosis 
The optimal cut-off values for different NITs that correlate with specific stages of 
liver fibrosis have been derived and (in the case of APRI and FIB-4) also validated. 
APRI and FIB-4 use two cut-off points for diagnosing specific fibrosis stages, as 
the use of a single cut-off would result in suboptimal sensitivity and specificity. 
A high cut-off with high specificity (i.e. fewer false-positive results) is used to 
diagnose persons with fibrosis (i.e. greater than or equal to a particular stage [e.g. 
≥F2]), and a low cut-off with high sensitivity (i.e. fewer false-negative results) to 
rule out the presence of a particular stage of fibrosis. Some persons will fall in the 
indeterminate range of test results (i.e. their score will be between the low and the 
high cut-off) and will need future re-testing and evaluation. Transient elastography 
(FibroScan) has a range of values between 0 and 75 kPa, and although there are 
no uniformly established and validated cut-offs for specific stages of fibrosis, it 
uses a single cut-off. Table 4.3 shows the established high and low cut-off values 
 29
of APRI, FIB-4, FibroTest, and a range of the most commonly reported cut-offs 
for transient elastography (FibroScan) for diagnosing cirrhosis (F4) and significant 
fibrosis (≥F2).
APRI (low 
cut-off)
APRI (high 
cut-off)
FIB-4
Fibrotest
Transient elastography
(FibroScan)a
Cirrhosis
(METAVIR F4)
1.0
2.0
--
0.32–0.48
>11–14 kPa
Significant 
fibrosis
(METAVIR ≥F2)
0.5
1.5
1.45 
(low)
3.25 
(high)
0.58–0.75
>7–8.5 kPa
TABLE 4.3 Cut-off values of non-invasive tests for the detection of significant 
fibrosis and cirrhosis 
kPa kilopascal
a There are no validated exact cut-offs for specific stages of fibrosis with FibroScan. This table presents the range of 
the most commonly used cut-offs for F4 and ≥F2 stages of fibrosis in CHB. A mean cut-off of 12.5 kPa may be used 
to diagnose cirrhosis and guide treatment decisions, after taking into account key limitations.
Separate meta-analyses were performed to evaluate the diagnostic performance of 
low and high cut-offs of different NITs (APRI, FIB-4, FibroTest and FibroScan) and 
for each METAVIR stage (F2–F4). There were data from 79 studies (2–80), which 
included 38 studies from South-East Asia, two from sub-Saharan Africa and the 
remainder from various countries and geographical regions (see Web appendix 
2: SR4). There were two studies in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons (44,80), one in 
children (61) but none in adolescents or pregnant women. Overall, the quality of 
evidence was rated as low, because of bias due to the absence of predetermined 
index test cut-offs, and selection bias in study populations.
Diagnostic accuracy and performance of NITs 
Table 4.4 presents the summary sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative 
predictive values for the detection of cirrhosis (F4 stage) and significant fibrosis 
(≥F2 stage) for APRI, FibroTest and transient elastography (FibroScan). Additional 
data on all NITs, including FIB-4 (not used for diagnosing F4) and FibroTest are 
available in Web appendix 2: SR4.  For the diagnosis of cirrhosis (F4), FibroScan 
had similar sensitivity (86%) to FibroTest (88%), but significantly better sensitivity 
than the APRI low or high cut-offs (65% and 35%, respectively). FibroScan had 
similar specificity (87%) to the APRI high cut-off (89%), but significantly better 
specificity than the FibroTest (73%).
The positive and negative predictive value, number of true-positive, false-positive, 
true-negative and false-negative results of NITs for the diagnosis of cirrhosis (F4) 
were also assessed (Tables 4.4 and 4.5). For this analysis, APRI and FibroScan 
 30
only were selected, as FIB-4 is not used for diagnosing cirrhosis, and FibroTest is 
less accurate than FibroScan for diagnosing cirrhosis. The prevalence of cirrhosis 
and fibrosis in the population under evaluation is a major determinant of the 
predictive value of these tests in practice. The median prevalence (interquartile 
range) of fibrosis stages F2–F4 in included studies was: for F4 17% (12–25%) 
and ≥F2 49% (34–62%), but this was based on a highly selected population 
who had liver biopsy because of various clinical and laboratory indications. 
The true prevalence in a clinic setting or at a community level will be lower. 
Table 4.5 presents the number of true- and false-positive and true- and false-
negative results, using APRI (low, high or combined cut-offs) and FibroScan for 
the detection of cirrhosis (F4) in 1000 persons, assuming a prevalence of 10%.
The positive predictive value (PPV) was low (less than 50%) for all NITs, but 
FibroScan had a higher PPV (42%) than APRI using either a high or low cut-
off (26% and 22%) (Table 4.4). Although using a low APRI cut-off has a much 
higher sensitivity than the high cut-off, it results in many more false-positive 
results compared to the high cut-off (225 versus 99 in 1000 persons tested) 
(Table 4.5). Overall, there would be no significant difference in the number of 
false-positive and false-negative results between persons tested with FibroScan 
and those tested using the combined cut-offs of APRI. 
Other fibrosis stages
For the diagnosis of fibrosis stages ≥F2, the summary sensitivities of APRI (low 
cut-off), FibroTest and transient elastography (FibroScan) were 78%, 68% 
and 76%, respectively, while the summary specificities of APRI (high cut-off), 
FibroTest and FibroScan were 92%, 92% and 82%, respectively. There were no 
significant differences between the accuracy of FibroScan and FibroTest in the 
diagnosis of stages ≥F2 and ≥F3. For the diagnosis of stages ≥F2, the APRI low 
cut-off had a similar sensitivity and APRI high cut-off had a significantly better 
specificity than FibroScan.
Overall, there were also no differences in the diagnostic accuracy of the evaluated 
NITs in relation to ethnicity (South-East Asia versus other ethnicities), but only 
one study was conducted in sub-Saharan Africa and none in Latin America.
 31
APRI (low 
cut-off)
APRI (high 
cut-off)
FibroTest
Transient 
elastography
(FibroScan)
Cirrhosis
(METAVIR F4)
Sensitivity (%)
(95% CI)
65 (55–73)
35 (22–49)
88 (78–94)
86 (81–90)
Specificity (%)
(95% CI)
75 (70–80)
89 (81–94)
73 (66–79)
87 (83–90)
Positive predictive 
value (%) (95% CI)
22 (18–28)
26 (19–34)
27 (22–32)
42 (35-49)
Negative predictive 
value (%) (95% CI)
95 (93–97)
92 (91–94)
98 (97–99)
98 (97-99)
Significant 
fibrosis
(METAVIR 
≥F2)
Sensitivity (%)
(95% CI)
78 (71–84)
36 (28–45)
68 (59–76)
76 (71–80)
Specificity (%)
(95% CI)
60 (50–69)
92 (90–95)
84 (75–90)
82 (75–87)
Positive predictive 
value (%) (95% CI)
57 (52–61)
75 (68–81)
74 (69–78)
74 (69–78)
Negative predictive 
value (%) (95% CI)
80 (76–84)
68 (65–72)
80 (76–83)
84 (80–87)
TABLE 4.4 Summary of sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of 
APRI, FibroTest and transient elastography (FibroScan) for the detection of cirrhosis (F4) and 
significant fibrosis (≥F2)
Positive and negative predictive values are calculated based on a 10% prevalence of F4 and 49% of ≥F2 stages.
APRI (low cut-
off)
≤1 and >1
APRI (high 
cut-off)
≤2 and >2
APRI 
combined 
cut-off
>2 and ≤1
Transient
elastography 
(FibroScan)
True positive (TP)
65
35
35
86
False positive (FP)
225
99
99
117
False negative (FN)
35
65
35
14
True negative (TN)
675
801
675
783
Indeterminate results
NA
NA
156
NA
TABLE 4.5 Number of true- and false- positive and -negative results, and indeterminate results 
using APRI (low, high or combined cut-offs) and transient elastography (FibroScan) for the detec-
tion of cirrhosis (F4) in 1000 persons, assuming a prevalence of 10%
 32
4.3. Rationale for the recommendations
Balance of benefits and harms
The Guidelines Development Group recommended the use of NITs to assist in the 
assessment of stage of liver disease and diagnosis of cirrhosis, to help prioritize those 
at greatest risk of morbidity and mortality for antiviral therapy. This avoids the use of 
liver biopsy, which is an expensive and invasive procedure associated with patient 
discomfort, carries a small risk of serious bleeding and requires specialist histological 
interpretation for accurate staging. Based on evidence from the systematic review, the 
Guidelines Development Group considered that transient elastography (FibroScan) 
(where resources permit) and APRI were the most useful tests for the assessment of 
cirrhosis in LMICs. However, the recommendation was conditional because the PPV 
for detection of cirrhosis was low for all NITs, and in particular for APRI (detecting 
only one third of persons with cirrhosis), and there has been very limited evaluation of 
their use in sub-Saharan Africa. FIB-4 was not considered or recommended because 
it has been developed and validated for the detection of fibrosis stages ≥F3 and not 
cirrhosis. FibroTest is a commercial assay and less accurate than transient elastography 
(FibroScan) for diagnosing cirrhosis. Standard ultrasound was also not considered as it 
only detects advanced cirrhosis, and therefore its use would result in an unacceptably 
high number of false-negative results. 
Potential harms from the use of NITs include treatment decisions based on either false-
positive or false-negative APRI test results. A false-positive test result may lead to a patient 
being treated unnecessarily or prematurely, which would expose them to the inconvenience 
of long-term treatment, potential drug resistance as well as a small risk of drug toxicities. 
Conversely, a false-negative result means that a person with cirrhosis would not be identified 
by NITs, and may therefore not receive prompt antiviral therapy, which might prevent 
progression to decompensation or decrease the risk of developing HCC. 
APRI is based on two indirect markers of fibrosis (AST and platelet count), which are readily 
available in resource-limited settings. An approach that combined a high and a low cut-off 
value of APRI would be optimal (a high cut-off with high specificity [i.e. fewer false-positive 
results] and a low cut-off with high sensitivity [i.e. fewer false-negative results]). However, 
the Guidelines Development Group recommended the use of a single high cut-off >2 for 
identifying adults with cirrhosis (F4) and in need of antiviral therapy, and those ≤2 without 
cirrhosis for several reasons.
1. 
Although in adults an APRI score of >2 would detect only one third of persons with 
cirrhosis, this high cut-off of >2 was used, because the low cut-off would result in an 
unacceptibly high number of false-positive test results (approximately one quarter of 
those tested).
2. 
It is also likely that adults with cirrhosis not detected using an APRI score >2 would be 
identified as being in need of antiviral therapy because of other eligibility criteria (such 
 33
as persistently abnormal ALT levelsa as well as evidence of ongoing HBV replication 
(HBV DNA >20 000 IU/mL) (see also Chapter 5: Who to treat and not to treat).
3. 
It is also simpler and more feasible to use a single cut-off in resource-limited settings. 
Clinical evidence of cirrhosis or an APRI score >2 are recommended in these guidelines 
as key criteria for prioritizing initiation of antiviral therapy among adults in resource-limited 
settings. Conversely, treatment can be deferred in those without clinical features of cirrhosis 
(or based on APRI score ≤2), who also have persistently normal ALT concentrations and 
low levels of HBV replication (HBV DNA <2000 IU/mL), and who can be re-evaluated at 
subsequent visits. For those with an APRI score ≤2, a proportion will fulfil other criteria 
for treatment such as persistently abnormal ALT or raised HBV DNA levels. Adults with 
indeterminate APRI scores (i.e. between 1 and 2 based on the combined APRI cut-off) in 
particular would need retesting and evaluation every one or two years.
Caveats in the use of NITs: Overall, the Guidelines Development Group considered that 
the benefits of using NITs outweighed these potential harms. The benefits included 
the potential increase in treatment availability resulting from access to non-invasive 
monitoring, and reduced risk of adverse events from liver biopsy.
However, a number of very important caveats were noted in the use of NITs. Overall, 
the PPV of all NITs for the diagnosis of cirrhosis was low, especially for APRI, and 
many cases of cirrhosis will be missed using NITs alone. It is therefore important that 
NITs are used alongside clinical criteria and other laboratory criteria (ALT and HBV 
DNA levels) to identify those in need of treatment. Second, the results of NITs may be 
impacted by intercurrent diseases that may falsely increase or decrease the scores. 
For example, heavy alcohol intake (due to AST elevation from alcoholic hepatitis), 
and conditions such as malaria or HIV (due to a decrease in platelet count), or use 
of drugs and traditional herbal medicines may also cause falsely high APRI scores. 
Hepatitis flares or acute hepatitis, congestive heart failure or a recent meal may 
also cause a high liver stiffness measurement on elastography (81). The impact of 
different comorbidities on the diagnostic accuracy of the APRI score has not been 
fully evaluated and, in particular, there has been no evaluation of NITs, particularly 
APRI in people from sub-Saharan Africa or among children.
Limitations with transient elastography (FibroScan) include the following: it uses a 
single cut-off and therefore reported sensitivities and specificities of FibroScan may be 
overestimated across fibrosis stages; there are no uniformly established and validated 
cut-offs for specific stages of fibrosis; accuracy is diminished in obese persons, in the 
presence of moderate/severe necroinflammation, right-sided heart failure, and food 
intake. Examination is not feasible in the presence of ascites and is contraindicated 
a ALT levels fluctuate in persons with chronic hepatitis B and require longitudinal monitoring to determine the 
trend. Upper limits for normal ALT have been defined as below 30 U/L for men and 19 U/L for women, although 
local laboratory normal ranges should be applied. Persistently abnormal or normal may be defined as three ALT 
determinations  above or below the upper limit of normal, made at unspecified intervals during a 6–12-month period 
or predefined intervals during a 12-month period.
 34
in pregnant women. Data on its use in children are limited, and special probes are 
required.
Although the data on HBV/HIV coinfection were limited, the performance of NITs in 
such persons is unlikely to be significantly different from that in HBV-monoinfected 
persons.
Values and preferences
From a patient’s perspective, the Guidelines Development Group felt that the APRI test 
would be acceptable, as it requires only phlebotomy, is routinely available and can be 
undertaken by untrained staff. Similarly, transient elastography (FibroScan) is non-
invasive, takes less than 10 minutes to perform, can be undertaken in outpatient or 
community settings, and health-care staff can be easily trained in its use. Factors that 
limit the use of transient elastography include the high cost of the equipment, the need for 
preventive and corrective maintenance, regular service/recalibration, trained operators, 
and the lack of extensively validated cut-off values for specific stages of fibrosis. 
Resource use
The lower cost of the blood-based NITs compared to transient elastography was a key 
factor in the recommendation for the use of APRI as the preferred NIT. The blood tests 
that are needed to calculate APRI score are routinely available at most health-care 
facilities, even in LMICs, and are inexpensive (less than a few dollars each). The results 
of APRI using a high cut-off of >2 in adults to diagnose cirrhosis are also relatively 
straightforward to interpret. Cost considerations were a concern with the FibroTest. It 
is a patented test that is costly (approximately US$ 73/test) and requires a certified 
laboratory or the processing of specimens at a centralized laboratory in France. 
In contrast to APRI, the cost of acquiring, running and maintaining (requires regular 
service/recalibration) a transient elastography machine such as the FibroScan is high; 
the machine costs US$ 50 000 (or US$ 34 000 for the portable machine), and yearly 
maintenance is US$ 8500/year. However, consumable costs are minimal for FibroScan, 
and the cost per test could be less than US$ 10 in some settings. FibroScan also 
requires a trained operator, and the interpretation of the results needs an understanding 
of the indications and limitations of the method, especially given the lack of well-
validated cut-off values for specific stages of fibrosis. However, the training process is 
relatively straightforward and the inter- and intra-observer variability of the test is low 
(81). FibroScan in children requires a specially designed probe and a different specific 
probe for those with a body mass index (BMI) >30 kg/m2. For these reasons, the use of 
transient elastography and FibroTest was considered to be less feasible in most LMICs. 
 35
Research gaps
• 
Conduct comparative assessments of NITs for use in high-prevalence 
resource-limited settings, i.e. APRI, FIB-4, transient elastography, as well as 
other elastography techniques (e.g. ARFI) to identify persons with cirrhosis 
and advanced fibrosis (requiring treatment) as well as those with minimal 
disease (not requiring treatment). 
• 
Evaluate the performance of NITs, especially in populations from sub-
Saharan Africa and Latin America, and in other underresearched 
populations, including persons with HBV/HIV coinfection, HBV/HDV 
coinfection, pregnant women, children and adolescents, and those with 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Conduct studies on the cost–effectiveness 
of NITs in the context of LMICs.
• 
Evaluate the impact of hepatitis flares and other factors on the diagnostic 
accuracy and performance of the APRI score. 
• 
Establish and validate FIB-4 cut-offs for the diagnosis of cirrhosis and 
advanced fibrosis. 
 36
5. RECOMMENDATIONS: WHO TO 
TREAT AND WHO NOT TO TREAT IN 
PERSONS WITH CHRONIC HEPATITIS B
Recommendations
Who to treat
• 
As a priority, all adults, adolescents and children with CHBa and clinical evidence of 
compensated or decompensated cirrhosisb (or cirrhosis based on APRI score >2 in 
adults) should be treated, regardless of ALT levels, HBeAg status or HBV DNA levels. 
(Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
• 
Treatment is recommended for adults with CHBa who do not have clinical evidence 
of cirrhosis (or based on APRI score ≤2 in adults), but are aged more than 30 yearsc 
(in particular), and have persistently abnormal ALT levelsd,e and evidence of high-level 
HBV replication (HBV DNA >20 000 IU/mLf), regardless of HBeAg status. (Strong 
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
› Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment may be considered based on 
persistently abnormal ALT levels alonee, regardless of HBeAg status. 
(Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence) 
Existing recommendation for HBV/HIV-coinfected persons1: 
• 
In HBV/HIV-coinfected individuals, ART should be initiated in all those with evidence 
of severe chronic liver diseaseb, regardless of CD4 count; and in all those with a CD4 
count ≤500 cells/mm3, regardless of stage of liver disease. (Strong recommendation, 
low quality of evidence)
1  Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations 
for a public health approach. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2013. These guidelines will be 
updated in 2015.
Who not to treat but continue to monitor 
• 
Antiviral therapy is not recommended and can be deferred in persons without clinical 
evidence of cirrhosisb (or based on APRI score ≤2 in adults), and with persistently 
normal ALT levelsd,e and low levels of HBV replication (HBV DNA <2000 IU/mLf), 
regardless of HBeAg status or age. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence) 
› Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment can be deferred in HBeAg-
positive persons aged 30 years or less and persistently normal ALT levels.
(Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
• 
Continued monitoring is necessary in all persons with CHB, but in particular those who 
do not currently meet the above-recommended criteria for who to treat or not treat, to 
determine if antiviral therapy may be indicated in the future to prevent progressive liver 
disease. These include: 
 
-
persons without cirrhosis aged 30 years or less, with HBV DNA levels >20 000 IU/
mLe but persistently normal ALT; 
 37
 
-
HBeAg-negative persons without cirrhosis aged 30 years or less, with HBV DNA 
levels that fluctuate between 2000 and 20 000 IU/mL, or who have intermittently 
abnormal ALT levelsd,e;
› Where HBV DNA measurement is not available: Persons without cirrhosis aged 
30 years or less, with persistently normal or ALT levels, regardless of HBeAg status.
a Defined as persistence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) for six months or more 
b Clinical features of decompensated cirrhosis: portal hypertension (ascites, variceal haemorrhage and hepatic 
encephalopathy), coagulopathy, or liver insufficiency (jaundice). Other clinical features of advanced liver disease/
cirrhosis may include: hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pruritus, fatigue, arthralgia, palmar erythema, and oedema.
c The age cut-off of >30 years is not absolute, and some persons with CHB aged less than 30 years may also meet 
criteria for antiviral treatment.
d ALT levels fluctuate in persons with chronic hepatitis B and require longitudinal monitoring to determine the trend. 
Upper limits for normal ALT have been defined as below 30 U/L for men and 19 U/L for women (based on greater 
sensitivity observed in hepatitis C for histological disease in the liver), though local laboratory normal ranges should be 
applied (1). Persistently normal/abnormal may be defined as three ALT determinations below or above the upper limit 
of normal, made at unspecified intervals during a 6–12- month period or predefined intervals during 12-month period. 
e Where HBV DNA testing is not available, other common causes of persistently raised ALT levels such as impaired 
glucose tolerance, dyslipidaemia and fatty liver should be excluded. 
f WHO has defined an international standard for expression of HBV DNA concentrations. Serum HBV DNA levels 
should be expressed in IU/mL to ensure comparability; the same assay should be used in the same patient to evaluate 
antiviral efficacy. All HBV DNA values in the recommendations are reported in IU/mL; values given as copies/mL were 
converted to IU/mL after dividing by a factor of 5. (10 000 copies/mL = 2000 IU/mL; 100 000 copies/mL = 20 000 
IU/mL; 1 million copies/mL =200 000 IU/mL) (2). 
Occasionally, extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis B, including glomerulonephritis or vasculitis, may be indications 
for treatment.
 38
BOX 5.1  Key points in the initial assessment of persons with CHB prior to therapy
Assessment of the severity of liver disease should include a history, physical 
examination, including for the presence of hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, and 
measurement of ALT, AST, ALP and total bilirubin; full blood count, including platelet 
count and white cell count. ALT and platelet count measurements allow calculation of 
APRI for staging of liver disease. The synthetic function of the liver should be assessed 
with serum albumin and prothrombin time or international normalized ratio (INR). 
Patients should also be questioned about the presence of liver-related symptomsa, 
although it is recognized that even advanced disease may be asymptomatic.
Assessment of the level of viral replication: using quantification of serum HBV DNA (where 
HBV DNA testing is available) and HBeAg and anti-HBe serostatus.
Assessment for the presence of comorbidities: evaluation for the presence of other 
comorbidities, including coinfection with HIV, HCV or HDV, impaired glucose tolerance, 
dyslipidaemia, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver disease, iron overload and 
drug/toxin-induced injury. All persons with cirrhosis should be screened for the presence of 
HCC. A review of family history of HCC and medication history are also required.
Preventive measures: HBsAg screening with HBV vaccination of non-immune family 
members and sexual contacts, and other general measures to reduce HBV transmission 
(see also Chapter 10.3: Prevention of hepatitis B transmission).
Counselling on lifestyle: assessment of alcohol consumption, and advice on lifestyle, 
including alcohol reduction (WHO ASSIST package (3) [Alcohol, Smoking and Substance 
Involvement Screening Test]), diet and physical activity. Consider also hepatitis A vaccination 
(see also Chapter 10.3: Measures to reduce disease progression in persons with chronic 
hepatitis B).
Preparation for starting treatment: patients should be counselled about indications for 
treatment, including likely benefits and side-effects, the need for and willingness to commit 
to long-term treatment, and follow-up monitoring both on and off therapy; the importance of 
full adherence for treatment to be both effective and reduce the risk of drug resistance (and 
that abrupt cessation of treatment may precipitate acute liver failure); and cost implications. 
Measurement of baseline renal functionb and assessment of baseline risk for renal 
dysfunctionc should be considered in all persons prior to initiation of antiviral therapy (see 
also Chapter 9.2: Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity).
a Clinical features of decompensated cirrhosis: Portal hypertension (ascites, variceal haemorrhage and hepatic encephalopathy), coagulopathy, 
or liver insufficiency (jaundice). Other clinical features of advanced liver disease/cirrhosis may include: hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pruritus, 
fatigue, arthralgia, palmar erythema, and oedema.
b Measurement of baseline renal function includes: serum creatinine levels, and calculation of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 
using the Cockcroft–Gault (CG) or modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD) formulas. An online calculator is available at http://nephron.
com/cgi-bin/CGSI.cgi. For children, the Schwartz or similar formula can be used: http://nephron.com/bedsidepedsnic.cgi. 
CG formula: eGFR = (140 – age) x (wt in kg) x 0.85 (if female)/(72 x Cr in mg%) 
MDRD formula: eGFR = 175 x serum Cr–1.154 x age–0.203 x 1.212 (if patient is Black) x 0.742 (if female)
Estimation of GFR based on these formulas may underestimate the degree of renal dysfunction if muscle mass is lower than the age and sex 
standards, as is frequently the case in HIV-infected individuals (1).
cFactors associated with a higher risk of renal dysfunction include: decompensated cirrhosis, CrCl <50 mL/min, older age, body mass index 
(BMI) <18.5 kg/m2 (or body weight <50 kg), poorly controlled hypertension, proteinuria, uncontrolled diabetes, active glomerulonephritis, 
concomitant use of nephrotoxic drugs or a boosted protease inhibitor (PI) for HIV, and solid organ transplantation.
 39
5.1. Background 
The natural history of chronic HBV infection is dynamic and complex, and 
progresses non-linearly through several recognizable phases that are of variable 
duration and not necessarily sequential (see also Chapter 3.4, Natural history 
of CHB and Table 3.1). The spectrum of disease with CHB is diverse. In 
some people, CHB is inactive and does not lead to significant liver disease. 
In others (approximately 10–30%), it may cause progressive liver fibrosis, 
leading to cirrhosis with end-stage liver disease, and a markedly increased risk 
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), usually many years after initial infection. 
Understanding the natural history and phases of chronic infection is important 
to inform decisions about who requires antiviral therapy, and when treatment 
can be deferred.
The objective of treatment is to prevent the adverse outcomes of CHB. The decision 
to initiate antiviral therapy is usually based on a combined assessment of the 
stage of liver disease (from clinical features, liver histology [where available], and 
increasingly on blood or ultrasound-based NITs), together with levels of serum 
ALT and HBV DNA. The decision to treat is usually clear in persons who present 
with life-threatening or advanced liver disease, such as acute liver failure, and 
compensated or decompensated cirrhosis and acute-on-chronic liver failure. In 
persons who have not yet progressed to cirrhosis, decisions are also based on 
ALT and HBV DNA levels. However, not all persons will have elevated ALT and 
HBV DNA levels. For example, during the immune-tolerant phase of disease, 
there will be high levels of HBV DNA but low or normal levels of ALT, and little 
liver inflammation or progression of fibrosis. Later on, during the immune-active 
phase, HBV DNA levels will be low, but ALT levels raised, with a much higher 
risk of progression of fibrosis. It is important that antiviral therapy is targeted to 
the active phases of CHB when the risks of disease progression (fibrosis) are 
greatest and, conversely, that persons with minimal fibrosis and low risk of CHB 
progression are identified, as they do not require antiviral therapy. Prospective 
studies have identified several predictors of progression of HBV-related liver 
disease, including the risk of cirrhosis and HCC, and likelihood of exacerbations 
of CHB. These include age, gender, serum ALT levels, viral factors (including 
ongoing HBV replication measured by serum HBV DNA level, HBV genotype 
and HBV pre-core and core promoter variants), a family history of HCC, as well 
as cofactors such as alcohol use, HIV infection and diabetes.
5.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review was twofold: (i) to determine 
what factors/tests among HBsAg-positive persons best identify individuals at 
the highest risk of progression, as well as those at very low risk of progression; 
 40
and (ii) to determine what factors/tests best identify individuals with the greatest 
and least benefit from treatment, in those with and without access to HBV DNA 
testing. Potential baseline prognostic factors and stratification included: age 
(>40 or >30 vs <40 or <30 years); cirrhosis (compensated or decompensated)/
fibrosis (METAVIR stages 1–3) vs no cirrhosis or fibrosis; ALT level (>2x or >5x 
ULN or >ULN) vs normal): and HBV DNA level (any positive or >2000 IU/mL or 
>20 000 IU/mL vs undetectable). Key outcomes were liver-related mortality and 
morbidity (fibrosis, cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, HCC), and progression of 
liver disease (see Web appendix 2: SRs5a and 5b).
Identifying individuals at highest and very low risk of progression 
We reviewed a comprehensive body of evidence, including a systematic review 
(see Web appendix 2: SR5a), which incorporated data from one previous 
systematic review (4) and 22 observational studies (four large population-based 
prospective cohort studies (5–14), 11 prospective cohort studies (15–25), seven 
retrospective cohort studies (26–32)). Of the 22 included primary studies, the 
majority were performed in Asia (6–9,11,17–19,22,24,32–37), four in Europe 
(23,26,28,29), two in North America (5,14) and one in the Middle/Near East 
(21). The populations analysed in these studies include HBeAg-positive, HBeAg-
negative; and HIV-coinfected persons (see Web appendix 2: SRs5a and 5b). A 
further systematic review (see Web appendix 2: SR5b) of observational studies 
(17,18,20–23,35,39–43) identified thresholds of HBV DNA and ALT levels and 
age predictive of hepatitis reactivation among persons in different phases of 
CHB: HBeAg positive (immune-tolerant and immune-active) or HBeAg negative 
immune-escape.
Population-based studies and the REVEAL-HBV cohort 
The Guidelines Development Group considered that the data from four large 
population-based prospective cohort studies conducted in Taiwan, China, Korea, 
and Alaska (5–7,37) provided the highest quality of evidence on predictors of 
progression (5–7,10,12,14). The REVEAL-HBV cohort, in particular – a large 
population-based prospective observational study of 23 820 participants, aged 
from 30 to 65 years, enrolled between 1991 and 1992 from seven townships in 
Taiwan provides the most comprehensive evidence based on high-quality data on 
patient-important outcomes of HCC, liver cirrhosis and liver-related deaths, and 
their association with gender, age, HBV DNA and ALT levels and thresholds, HBeAg 
positivity, family history, and combinations of these variables (8–10,12,13,15).
For the outcome of HCC, the REVEAL-HBV cohort provides consistent evidence of a 
significantly increased risk of HCC associated with the following factors: male gender, 
age above 40 years, baseline HBV DNA more than 10 000 copies/mL (>2000 IU/
mL), baseline ALT more than 45 U/L, HBeAg positivity, family history of HCC, as 
well as combinations of these factors (Table 5.1). A consistent and linear increase in 
 41
the incidence of HCC with baseline HBV DNA >10 000 copies/mL (>2000 IU/mL) 
is also seen in HBeAg-negative persons, irrespective of the presence of cirrhosis or 
whether ALT levels were normal or abnormal (8,12). Five of the 11 other prospective 
cohort studies provided additional data on patient-important outcomes (16,21,23–
25) and showed a consistently increased risk of liver-related outcomes with male 
gender, increasing age, and raised HBV DNA and ALT levels.
Outcome of cirrhosis/advanced fibrosis: HBV DNA levels not exceeding 20 000 IU/
mL (i.e. 100 000 copies/mL) in persons with persistently normal serum ALT levels 
were associated with a low probability of advanced fibrosis in population-based 
prospective studies from Alaska (5,14) and Europe (44). Conversely, an HBV DNA 
level of >200 000 IU/mL (i.e. 1 million copies/mL) was significantly associated 
with histologically more advanced liver disease compared with <2000 IU/mL. The 
thresholds of 2000–20 000 and 20 000–200 000 IU/mL were not significantly 
associated with severe fibrosis (44). A cohort study from Taiwan (24) also showed 
that persistently normal ALT levels were associated with good long-term prognosis, 
and conversely, abnormal ALT levels of at least twice the ULN during follow up with 
an increased risk of cirrhosis. 
Based on the systematic review (see Web appendix 2: SR5b) of persons in 
different phases of CHB: Among HBeAg-positive personsa: age above 40 years, 
and ALT levels above 5 times ULN (compared to less than 2 times ULN) were 
significant independent predictors of future reactivation (in those who had 
undergone seroconversion from an HBeAg-positive to anti-HBe status) in one 
study (17). Among HBeAg-negative inactive carriersb (18,20–23,25): HBV DNA 
levels above a threshold ranging from 4200 to 20 000 IU/L were significant 
independent predictors of future active hepatitis; and an HBV DNA level 
above 20 000 IU/mL was predictive of current fibrosis among HBeAg-negative 
persons in the “immune-escape”c  phase (23,38–40). There was conflicting or 
inconsistent evidence on thresholds for ALT and age.
a High replicative phase of infection seen in the early stage among people infected at birth or in early childhood
b Low replicative phase of chronic hepatitis B characterized by HBeAg negativity, anti-HBe positivity, normal ALT and 
HBV DNA concentrations below 2000 IU/mL
c HBeAg-negative but anti-HBe-positive disease with variable levels of HBV replication and liver injury 
 42
Participant characteristic
Incidence rate of HCC
(x 100 000 person-years)
Adjusted RR (95%CI)
Sex
Female
178
Reference
Male 
530
3.0 (2.0–4.5)
Age (years)
30–39
111
Reference
40–49
399
3.6 (2.0–6.4)
50–59
566
5.1 (2.0–8.9)
>60
901
8.3 (4.6–15.0)
Baseline HBV DNA (copies/mL) a 
<300
108
Reference b
300–9999
111
NS
10 000–99 999
297
2.7 (1.3–5.6)
100 000–999 999
962
8.9 (4.6–17.5)
>1 million
1152
10.7 (5.7–20.1)
Baseline ALT (U/L)
<45
337
Reference
>45
1342
4.1 (2.8–6.0)
HBeAg serostatus
HBeAg-negative 
264
Reference
HBeAg-positive
1130
4.3 (3.2–5.9)
TABLE 5.1 REVEAL-HBV cohort: incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) at 11.4 years 
according to HBV DNA level, HBeAg status and ALT level at study enrolment (8) 
RR relative risk, CI confidence interval
a 1 IU/mL = 5.3 copies/mL; 2000 IU/mL = 10 000 copies/mL; 20 000 IU/mL = 100 000 copies/mL; 200 000 IU/mL 
= 1 000 000 copies/mL
b Cumulative per cent incidence of HCC at 11.4 years according to HBV DNA level: <300 copies/mL (undetectable) 
1.3%; 300–9999 copies/mL 1.37%; 10 000–99 999 copies/mL 3.57%;100 000–999 999 copies/mL 12.17%; >1 
million copies/mL 14.89%.
 43
Overall, the evidence from the population-based studies was rated as moderate 
to high quality for the outcomes of mortality and HCC, and low quality for liver 
cirrhosis or fibrosis (mainly due to imprecision as a result of a small number of 
events, and use of clinical criteria and/or ultrasound only without liver biopsy, 
which have a high specificity and low sensitivity for detecting cirrhosis). The quality 
of evidence from other studies ranged from low to moderate. There are caveats 
to the generalizability of the evidence. There were no data from cohorts in sub-
Saharan Africa or Latin America, and the data from the REVEAL study may not 
apply to those with adult-acquired HBV infection, those aged <30 or >65 years, 
and those infected with HBV genotypes non-B or C. There were also no studies in 
pregnant women, children or adolescents with CHB.
HBV/HIV coinfection
There are limited outcome data on HBV/HIV-coinfected persons based on one 
retrospective cohort study (45), and the majority were receiving ART. A baseline 
CD4+ cell count below 200 cells/mm3, an ALT elevation at baseline or during 
follow up, and cumulative time with detectable HIV RNA were associated with an 
increased risk of advanced liver disease. The evidence was rated as low quality, 
mainly due to the retrospective study design.
Treatment benefit in persons with advanced liver disease 
A further systematic review (see Web appendix 2:SR5c) considered four studies 
that examined the impact of treatment in persons with advanced liver disease 
(compensated and decompensated cirrhosis and different degrees of fibrosis) 
(46–49). There was a 55% reduction in the incidence of hepatic decompensation 
and risk of HCC with continuous lamivudine therapy (46). In an observational 
cohort study, entecavir-treated patients had a 50–70% reduced risk of all clinical 
outcomes, including HCC, liver-related and all-cause mortality, when compared 
with an historical cohort of untreated persons with cirrhosis (48). In the open-label 
extension of a tenofovir trial, there was a marked increase from baseline to year 5 
in both the proportion with mild or no necroinflammation (8% to 80%) and with 
no or mild fibrosis (39% to 63%) among those who had a biopsy at baseline and 
five years (47). Overall, there is moderate- to low-quality evidence of a benefit of 
antiviral therapy in those with compensated or decompensated cirrhosis. 
 44
5.3. Rationale for the recommendations
Balance of benefits and harms
The Guidelines Development Group assessed the overall benefits and harms of initiating 
antiviral therapy at different stages of hepatitis B liver disease, balancing potential benefits 
on clinical outcomes with the requirement for long-term adherence to NA therapy, and the 
potential risks for developing drug resistance and toxicities. The Guidelines Development 
Group prioritized urgent initiation of antiviral therapy for those with life-threatening liver 
disease (decompensated cirrhosis) and compensated cirrhosis, identified either clinically or 
using NITs (APRI score based on the single high cut-off >2 for cirrhosis in adults), regardless 
of ALT or HBV DNA levels. There were several reasons for this recommendation.
1. 
These persons are at a much higher risk of developing life-threatening complications 
of liver disease (death, acute liver failure, flares [i.e. ALT flare with jaundice and/or 
coagulopathy]/reactivation and HCC) than persons without cirrhosis, and so should be 
treated to prevent further clinical events and stabilize disease, even if the HBV DNA level 
is low or undetectable.
2. 
There is evidence that antiviral therapy can halve disease progression (including hepatic 
decompensation, HCC or liver-related death), and may also lead to regression of fibrosis 
and cirrhosis over the long term. Therefore, targeting treatment to persons with cirrhosis 
would also be an effective use of resources.
3. 
NA therapy can be safely administered even to those with decompensated cirrhosis.
4. 
In settings where liver transplantation is an option, suppression of HBV DNA will also 
decrease the risk of recurrence of hepatitis B post-liver transplantation. 
Selection of thresholds of HBV DNA, ALT and age: In persons who have not progressed 
to cirrhosis (APRI score ≤2 in adults), the Guidelines Development Group recommended 
targeting treatment in this group to those at highest risk of disease progression based on the 
detection of persistently abnormal ALT and HBV DNA levels >20 000 IU/mL, especially in 
those aged more than 30 years, regardless of HBeAg status. The recommended thresholds 
were derived from consistent evidence from large population-based cohort studies, which 
showed that those aged above 30 years, with persistently abnormal ALT levelsa and evidence 
of ongoing HBV replication (based on HBV DNA level over 20 000 IU/mL) are at an increased 
risk of HCC and liver cirrhosis. However, the Guidelines Development Group recognized that 
there were uncertainties in the specific thresholds of age, HBV DNA and serum ALT levels for 
identifying significant fibrosis and/or necroinflammation. The ALT level considered abnormal 
or normal will also vary according to local laboratory reference ranges, but the cut-off criteria 
for normal serum ALT levels have been lowered (<30 U/L for males and <19 U/L for females), 
a ALT levels fluctuate in persons with chronic hepatitis B and require longitudinal monitoring to determine the 
trend. Upper limits for normal ALT have been defined as below 30 U/L for men and 19 U/L for women, although 
local laboratory normal ranges should be applied. Persistently abnormal or normal may be defined as three ALT 
determinations above or below the upper limit of normal, made at unspecified intervals during a 6–12– month period 
or predefined intervals during a 12-month period. 
 45
based on studies that showed persons with CHB and fibrosis and inflammation on liver 
biopsy had ALT levels within the normal range (1). The evidence for age as a predictor of 
disease progression was also inconsistent. The threshold of >30 years was used as this takes 
into account that most reported evidence (supporting a higher age threshold of >40 years) 
was derived from populations in Asia and Europe, and there is a risk of HCC at a younger 
age in sub-Saharan African where there is a significant burden of CHB. The age threshold 
of 30 years is not categorical, and some persons with CHB aged 30 years or less will meet 
the criteria for antiviral therapy with persistently abnormal ALT and HBV DNA >20 000 IU/
mL. Occasionally, extrahepatic manifestations of hepatitis B, including glomerulonephritis or 
vasculitis, may be indications for treatment.
Treatment was not recommended in persons with minimal liver disease or fibrosis, and at low 
risk of progression to cirrhosis and HCC on the basis of persistently normal ALT levels and 
low levels of HBV replication (<2000 IU/mL), and an APRI score ≤2, as the potential harms 
of long-term antiviral therapy outweigh the benefits. Long-term monitoring of these persons 
is important and is discussed further in Chapter 9.1.
In settings where HBV DNA testing is not available: The Guidelines Development Group 
recognized that it is difficult to identify cirrhosis or moderate fibrosis in persons who do not 
have clinically obvious stigmata of chronic liver disease and its complications. The very 
limited access to measurement of HBV DNA levels or ability to diagnose fibrosis in LMICs 
means that decisions to start therapy will be based on clinical features, use of NITs and 
serum ALT levels alone. In these settings, treatment decisions will be imprecise and may lead 
to either delayed initiation in persons with advanced liver disease, with possible worsening of 
disease, or premature treatment initiation in others. It is recognized that NITs, including APRI 
and transient elastography, have a low PPV for identifying persons with cirrhosis and identify 
less than 50% of those with cirrhosis. The Guidelines Development Group recognized that in 
settings where HBV DNA is not available, there is a need for simple criteria to guide who to 
treat and who not to treat in those without evidence of cirrhosis (based on clinical criteria or 
APRI score >2 in adults).
Overall, there was a very limited evidence base to guide recommendations in the absence of 
HBV DNA levels, and therefore two conditional recommendations were made based mainly 
on expert opinion. First, treatment should be initiated in persons with persistently abnormal 
ALT levels  (regardless of HBeAg status), but where other common causes of persistently 
abnormal ALT such as impaired glucose tolerance, dyslipidaemia and fatty liver have been 
excluded. Conversely, treatment was not recommended in HBeAg-negative persons without 
cirrhosis aged below 30 years with persistently normal ALT levels. It was recognized that there 
are several other categories of persons with CHB who do not meet the criteria for initiating or 
not initiating treatment, who would also require continued monitoring and observation. No 
specific recommendations were made for treatment indications in children, and the APRI 
score has not been evaluated in children.
These recommendations are consistent with existing guidance on the management of HBV/
HIV-coinfected persons in the WHO 2013 consolidated ARV guidelines (50): to provide ART 
 46
to all persons with evidence of severe liver disease, regardless of CD4 cell count; and initiate 
ART in all those with a CD4 count less than <500 cells/mm3 regardless of stage of liver 
disease. These guidelines will be updated in 2015.
Values and preferences
Antiviral therapy can be administered safely to persons with cirrhosis or advanced stages 
of liver disease, and is effective and generally safe. Baseline assessment and ongoing 
monitoring for renal dysfunction in persons on antivirals (tenofovir or entecavir) is discussed 
in Chapter 9.2.
Resource considerations
The targeting of antiviral therapy to persons with cirrhosis or at highest risk of developing 
cirrhosis is the most cost–effective use of resources. Initial evaluation should include an 
assessment of the stage of liver disease based on NITs such as APRI, and the degree of 
liver necroinflammation based on liver enzymes and measurements of HBV DNA, as well as 
the presence of coinfection with HDV, HCV or HIV. The ability to assess all these predictors 
of disease progression, and especially HBV DNA levels, is severely constrained in LMICs. 
The measurements that are generally available in resource-limited settings are AST and 
platelet count (for calculation of APRI score). HBeAg serostatus and HBV DNA levels are 
much less readily available. It is also recognized that NITs, including APRI and transient 
elastography, have a low PPV for identifying persons with cirrhosis, and do not measure 
important necroinflammatory changes. 
In general, the annual costs of treatment with generic tenofovir are relatively low, although 
a range of prices exists in LMICs (see Chapter 12: Implementation considerations for 
programme managers). Long-term treatment with tenofovir (or entecavir) also requires 
clinical and laboratory infrastructure for monitoring the response to treatment with ALT and, 
where possible, HBV DNA levels, as well as renal toxicity. Access to HBV DNA testing is 
currently very limited in most LMICs, and is a major impediment to the effective management 
of CHB in these settings. (See also Chapters 9.1: Monitoring for disease progression and 9.2: 
Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity)
Research gaps
• 
Conduct longitudinal cohort studies especially in sub-Saharan Africa, but also in underresearched 
populations, such as children, young adults, and pregnant women with CHB to determine 
prognostic criteria and indications for initiating or deferring treatment. 
• 
Conduct longitudinal studies to further evaluate different cut-offs for abnormal ALT in a range of 
settings and populations, as well as determine the prognostic significance of persistently normal 
ALT despite high HBV DNA levels in persons with CHB in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia.
• 
Conduct comparative trials to assess the absolute and relative benefit of antiviral therapy for 
persons with different baseline HBV DNA levels in cohort studies with long-term follow up. 
• 
Assess long-term outcomes (morbidity and mortality) in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons, and 
impact of ART initiation at different CD4 cell count levels.
 47
6. RECOMMENDATIONS: FIRST-LINE ANTIVIRAL 
THERAPIES FOR CHRONIC HEPATITIS B 
Recommendations
• 
In all adults, adolescents and children aged 12 years or older in whom antiviral therapy 
is indicated, the nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs) which have a high barrier to drug 
resistance (tenofovir or entecavir) are recommended. Entecavir is recommended in 
children aged 2–11 years. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
• 
NAs with a low barrier to resistance (lamivudine, adefovir or telbivudine) can lead to 
drug resistance and are not recommended. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality 
of evidence)
Existing recommendation for HBV/HIV coinfected persons1:
• 
In HBV/HIV-coinfected adults, adolescents and children aged 3 years or older, tenofovir 
+ lamivudine (or emtricitabine) + efavirenz as a fixed-dose combination is recommended 
as the preferred option to initiate ART. (Strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence)
1 Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations 
for a public health approach. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2013. These guidelines will be updated 
in 2015.
BOX 6.1  Key points in counselling and preparing the patient prior to initiation of therapy
See also Chapter 5, Box 5.1: Key points in the initial assessment of persons with CHB prior 
to therapy.
Preparing to start treatment: Patients should be counselled about the indications for 
treatment, including the likely benefits and side-effects, willingness to commit to long-
term treatment, and need to attend for follow-up monitoring both on and off therapy; 
the importance of full adherence for treatment to be both effective and reduce the risk 
of drug resistance; and cost implications. 
Note: HBV genotyping and resistance testing are not required to guide therapy when using nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs) with 
a high barrier to resistance.
Measurement of baseline renal functiona and assessment of baseline risk for renal 
dysfunctionb should be considered in all persons prior to initiation of antiviral therapy 
(see Chapter 9.2: Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity). 
a Measurement of baseline renal function includes: serum creatinine levels, and calculation of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) using the 
Cockcroft–Gault (CG) or modification of diet in renal disease (MDRD) formulas. An online calculator is available at http://nephron.com/cgi-bin/CGSI.cgi. 
For children, the Schwartz or similar formula can be used: http://nephron.com/bedsidepedsnic.cgi.
CG formula: eGFR = (140 – age) x (wt in kg) x 0.85 (if female) / (72 x  Cr in mg%)
MDRD formula = eGFR = 175 x serum Cr–1.154 x age–0.203 x 1.212 (if patient is Black) x 0.742 (if female).
Estimation of GFR based on these formulas may underestimate the degree of renal dysfunction if muscle mass is lower than the age and sex standards, 
as is frequently the case in HIV-infected individuals (1).
bFactors associated with a higher risk of renal dysfunction include: decompensated cirrhosis, CrCl <50 mL/min, older age, body mass index (BMI) 
<18.5 kg/m2 (or body weight <50 kg), poorly controlled hypertension, proteinuria, uncontrolled diabetes, active glomerulonephritis, concomitant use of 
nephrotoxic drugs or a boosted protease inhibitor (PI) for HIV, and solid organ transplantation.
 48
6.1. Background
Over the past three decades, treatment outcomes for CHB have improved, first 
with IFN-alpha and now NAs (2) (see Chapter 3.8: Antiviral therapy and Table 
3.2). Currently, seven antiviral agents (six NAs – lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, 
telbivudine, tenofovir, emtricitabine, as well as standard and two formulations of 
PEG-IFN) are approved and widely licensed for the treatment of CHB. Although all 
NAs act on HBV polymerase, their mechanism of action differs, in addition to their 
pharmacokinetics, inhibitory capacity and resistance patterns. The widespread 
use of NAs with a low genetic barrier to resistance, such as lamivudine, has led to 
high rates of resistance in those who have received treatment for CHB. 
The goal of antiviral therapy for CHB is to reduce (or reverse) necroinflammatory 
change and hepatic fibrosis leading to progressive liver disease, cirrhosis, 
decompensated cirrhosis and liver failure, HCC and death. However, there is still 
limited evidence from clinical trials of the effect of antiviral therapy on these clinical 
outcomes. Therefore, surrogate measures of long-term treatment outcomes are 
used to assess efficacy. These include biochemical measures: normalization of 
serum ALT as a surrogate measure for the resolution of necroinflammation in the 
liver; and virological markers: a reduction in HBV DNA to undetectable levels by 
PCR, and HBeAg loss or seroconversion to anti-HBe status or rarely, HBsAg loss 
and seroconversion to anti-HBs status.
Although NAs are potent inhibitors of HBV DNA replication, they do not result in 
cure, because antiviral therapy cannot eliminate the cccDNA form in the nucleus, 
which is the template for transcription of viral RNA. Therefore, at present, long-term 
(potentially lifelong) NA therapy is required in the majority of persons. Although 
there are some advantages of IFN therapy, such as a finite duration of therapy, 
and possibly a higher rate of HBsAg loss, it is less feasible for use in resource-
limited settings as it requires administration by injection, is expensive, inconvenient 
to use, less well tolerated, and requires careful monitoring. IFN was therefore not 
considered a treatment option in these guidelines. IFN also cannot be used in 
infants less than 1 year and in pregnant women.
6.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review (see Web appendix 2: SRs6a, 6b, 
6c and 6d) was to assess the effectiveness of treatment with potent NAs with a 
high barrier to resistance (tenofovir, entecavir) versus those with lower barriers to 
resistance (lamivudine, telbivudine and adefovir), among nucleoside-naive HBeAg-
positive and HBeAg-negative adults with CHB. Key outcomes were rates of ALT 
normalization, sustained undetectable HBV DNA levels, HBeAg seroconversion, 
HBsAg loss, reversion of fibrosis stage, reduction in mortality and severe adverse 
effects, and development of antiviral resistance. 
 49
IFN and PEG-IFN were excluded from consideration in these guidelines, as they 
are less feasible for use in resource-limited settings. In addition, IFN cannot 
be used in persons with decompensated cirrhosis, pregnancy, thyroid disease, 
those with psychiatric conditions, those receiving immunosuppressive therapy for 
coexisting conditions, or in infants less than 1 year of age. 
Systematic reviews and network meta-analysis
The evidence review included seven systematic reviews (see Web appendix 2: 
SRs6a and 6c) based on 47 trials and 21 cohort studies, and two additional 
randomized trials, which compared either: entecavir versus adefovir (3); entecavir 
versus lamivudine (4); entecavir versus lamivudine plus adefovir (5); and tenofovir 
versus adefovir (6). There were also two systematic reviews of trials in patients 
with decompensated cirrhosis of entecavir vs lamivudine (7) or versus lamivudine 
plus adefovir (8), as well as 12 studies on the long-term effectiveness and safety of 
either entecavir or tenofovir (9–19). There was one systematic review of 23 studies 
of tenofovir use in persons with HBV/HIV coinfection (20), and one published trial 
conducted in children and/or adolescents (21). 
As tenofovir and entecavir have not been compared directly in an RCT, a network 
meta-analysis (NMA) (Web appendix 2: SR6b) was also undertaken to enable a 
direct comparison and estimation of the relative efficacy and ranking of different 
antiviral therapies, based on another systematic review of all RCT and other relevant 
data (both indirect and direct treatment comparisons of single and combination 
therapy) (6,22–54) used in the development of the UK National Institute of Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE) chronic hepatitis B guidelines (55).
Entecavir and tenofovir comparative trials (entecavir versus adefovir, or lamivudine, or 
lamivudine + adefovir; tenofovir versus adefovir): A systematic review of the efficacy 
of entecavir versus adefovir (3) , and entecavir versus lamivudine (4)  showed that a 
higher percentage of entecavir-treated individuals attained undetectable HBV DNA 
levels, improvement in liver histology (moderate quality of evidence) and normalized 
serum ALT levels (low quality of evidence) at 48 and 72 weeks of follow up. A 
further systematic review (5) comparing entecavir versus lamivudine plus adefovir 
showed no differences in these outcomes at 96 weeks, but entecavir increased the 
likelihood of HBeAg loss and seroconversion to anti-HBe (RR 2.83; 95% CI 1.27–
6.33). One trial in HBeAg-positive persons (6) showed a significant effect of tenofovir 
(compared with adefovir) on HBV DNA suppression (<400 copies/mL) (RR 5.71; 
95% CI 3.35–9.73 [73.8% vs 12.8%]) and normalization of ALT levels (RR 1.25; 
95% CI 1.01–1.55) at 48 weeks. In an open-label follow up of this trial, and in those 
who had a biopsy at baseline and 5 years, there was regression of fibrosis in 51%, 
and 76% of persons with cirrhosis at baseline no longer had cirrhosis. 
Network meta-analysis: For the network meta-analysis (NMA) (see Web appendix 
2:SR6c), a total of 21 pair-wise comparison RCTs comprising 5073 HBeAg-
 50
positive nucleoside-naive persons, and 16 trials comprising 2604 HBeAg-negative 
nucleoside-naive persons were included. Based on the available RCT evidence, 
the NMA showed that persons treated with tenofovir monotherapy had the highest 
probability of achieving undetectable HBV DNA at the end of 1 year of treatment. 
This result was observed in both HBeAg-positive (94.1%, 95% CI: 74.7–98.9%) 
and HBeAg-negative (97.6%; 95% CI: 56.7–99.9%) persons. For entecavir-
treated persons, it was 64.5% (95% CI: 49.1–80.5%) in HBeAg-positive and 
91.9%  (95% CI: 87.3–95.1%) in HBeAg-negative persons, respectively. All the 
other antiviral therapies were found to have a very low probability of achieving this 
outcome. The quality of the direct evidence was rated from high to very low, based 
on the NICE Technical Unit checklist for assessing NMA. 
Impact in decompensated liver disease (see Web appendix 2: SR6c): The 
effectiveness of entecavir has also been demonstrated in adult nucleoside-
naive persons with decompensated cirrhosis based on a systematic review of 
13 trials of entecavir compared to lamivudine (7), and seven trials of entecavir 
versus lamivudine and adefovir (8). Entecavir significantly improved advanced 
liver disease scores in both reviews (7,8) as well as other outcomes, including 
undetectability of HBV DNA, HBeAg seroconversion and drug resistance (RR 0.10; 
95% CI 0.04–0.24) when compared with lamivudine (7), but not when compared 
with lamivudine plus adefovir (8). There were no demonstrable differences in 
mortality. The quality of evidence for these studies ranged from low to moderate. 
The evidence for tenofovir is awaited.
Long-term effectiveness of entecavir and tenofovir: Evaluation of the long-term 
(after 3 and/or 5 years) effectiveness of entecavir and tenofovir in adult nucleoside-
naive persons was based on seven studies with entecavir (10–15,56,57), and 
five studies with tenofovir (9,16–20), which included data from three long-term 
follow-up studies of an open-label extension of a trial (6) comparing tenofovir 
with adefovir (18,19). After 3 and 5 years of treatment with entecavir or tenofovir, 
there were low cumulative rates of mortality (entecavir: 3% and 3.8%; tenofovir: 
0.7% and 1.4%, respectively), HCC (entecavir: 3.9% and 6.6%; tenofovir: 1.4% 
and 2.4%, respectively), and genotypic resistance to entecavir at 5 years of 
treatment (0.8–1.2%) (11–13,15). Results from three prospective studies on 
tenofovir were similar, but the majority of participants in these studies did not 
have cirrhosis. Long-term follow-up data of entecavir-treated patients found a 
reduced risk of all clinical outcomes (HCC, liver-related and all cause mortality) 
when compared with untreated persons, but especially in those with cirrhosis 
(57,58). The quality of evidence for all outcomes was generally rated as low.
 51
Other populations
Tenofovir in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons: A systematic review of 23 prospective 
and retrospective studies (including six RCTs) of tenofovir in persons with HBV and 
HIV coinfection (20) showed an increase in the proportion with suppressed HBV 
DNA over time (1 year, 57.4% [95% CI: 53.0–61.7%]; 3 years, 85.6% [95% CI: 
79.2–90.7%]), which was higher in HBeAg-negative compared to HBeAg-positive 
persons (20). This review was also supplemented with existing reviews conducted 
for the 2013 WHO consolidated ARV guidelines (59) (see Chapter 7.2: What ART 
regimen to start with, which showed that a once-daily combination of tenofovir + 
lamivudine (or emtricitabine) + efavirenz had a better virological and treatment 
response compared with five other once- or twice-daily regimens.
Studies in children and adolescents: A smaller body of evidence is available from 
two trials. This includes a placebo-controlled RCT of tenofovir in adolescents, 
which showed a high virological response (89%) and normalization of serum ALT 
at 72 weeks of treatment, and no observed resistance (21). Another placebo-
controlled trial of entecavir in children is still ongoing (AI463189 trial), but 
based on data submitted for a new drug application to the US FDA, entecavir is 
superior to placebo at reducing HBV DNA levels to <50 IU/mL, inducing HBeAg 
seroconversion (24% vs 2%) and normalizing serum ALT levels (67% vs 27%) 
at week 48.
6.3. Rationale for the recommendations
Balance of benefits and harms for use of tenofovir or entecavir
The goal of antiviral therapy for CHB is to reduce morbidity and mortality due to 
progressive liver disease. The Guidelines Development Group strongly recommended 
the use of antiviral drugs with a high barrier to resistance (either tenofovir or entecavir) 
as the preferred first-line treatments to avoid the deleterious effects of drug resistance 
(Table 6.1a) for several reasons:
1. Tenofovir and entecavir are both potent inhibitors of HBV replication, and based 
on data from both the systematic reviews and NMA, are the most effective antiviral 
therapies to achieve undetectable HBV DNA levels and normalization of ALT levels 
in nucleos(t)ide-naive HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-negative persons with CHB (and 
in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons) (when compared to lamivudine or adefovir). 
2. Histological improvement in hepatic fibrosis has also been documented. Although 
these short-term outcomes have not yet translated into differences in mortality 
in clinical trials, the Guidelines Development Group considered that effective 
and durable suppression of HBV DNA replication can be regarded as a primary 
end-point and surrogate marker of treatment response (see Chapter 8: When to 
stop treatment). In addition, although HBeAg seroconversion (in HBeAg-positive 
 52
persons) occurs in the minority (10–15% per year), and HBsAg loss is infrequent 
even with potent inhibitors of HBV replication, prolonged HBV DNA suppression 
may reduce disease progression, although the magnitude of this effect remains 
uncertain. NAs may also improve clinical outcomes in persons with decompensated 
liver disease.
3. These drugs have a high genetic barrier to resistance, and very low observed rates 
of drug resistance over long-term (5-year) follow up (in contrast to high rates with 
lamivudine and other drugs with a low barrier to resistance). However, resistance to 
entecavir occurs frequently in persons with lamivudine resistance. 
4. 
The major concern of long-term NA therapy is the selection of drug-resistant 
mutations, particularly with lamivudine, adefovir and telbivudine – NAs that have 
a low genetic barrier to resistance. The accumulation of several mutations reduces 
drug efficacy leading to cross-resistance, which limits future options for treatment. 
Lamivudine results in the highest rate of drug-resistant mutations of up to 70–80%, 
with an annual incidence of approximately 20% (44,60,61). Multidrug-resistant 
hepatitis B may follow sequential monotherapy, i.e. the sequential use of lamivudine, 
adefovir and entecavir. Amino acid substitutions in the HBV DNA polymerase 
associated with resistance have not yet been definitively reported for tenofovir, and 
breakthroughs have been attributed to non-adherence. As a result, very low rates of 
resistance have been reported with tenofovir and entecavir use. However, resistance 
to entecavir occurs frequently in persons with lamivudine resistance, which will limit 
its use in Asian settings where lamivudine use has been widespread.
5. The convenience of administration (once-daily oral), low rates of side-effects and 
minimal requirement for toxicity monitoring of tenofovir and entecavir favour their 
acceptability in LMICs (see also Chapter 9.2: Monitoring for tenfovir and entecavir 
toxicity). HBV resistance testing is not required to guide therapy when using NAs 
with a high barrier to resistance.
6. Both tenofovir and entecavir have been shown to be effective in children, although 
antiviral treatment will be indicated in only a small proportion of children. Tenofovir 
is licensed for use in children aged 12 years or older and entecavir in children older 
than 2 years (see Table 6.1b).
7. 
The use of tenofovir also offers good potential for harmonizing treatment across different 
populations, as tenofovir + lamivudine (or emtricitabine) is the preferred nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) backbone for persons coinfected with HIV and 
HBV, and can also be used among persons with TB, and pregnant women.
Among HBV/HIV-infected persons (see also Chapter 11.2: Management considerations 
for specific populations): In the 2013 WHO ARV consolidated guidelines (59), the 
simplified regimen of tenofovir + lamivudine (or emtricitabine) + efavirenz was 
recommended as the preferred regimen in all HIV-infected adults, including pregnant 
women and adults with tuberculosis (TB) and HBV coinfection, for the following reasons.
 53
 
–
It has a better virological response compared with other once- or twice-daily 
regimens.
 
–
There is no increased risk of birth defects with efavirenz compared with other 
ARV drugs used during the first trimester of pregnancy. 
 
–
It can be taken as a simple one pill once a day as a fixed-dose combination. 
 
–
The regimen also offers good potential for harmonizing treatment across 
different populations, as tenofovir + lamivudine (or emtricitabine) are the 
preferred nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) backbone for 
persons coinfected with HIV and HBV, and can also be used among persons 
with TB, and pregnant women. Efavirenz is the preferred non-nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) with HBV/ HIV coinfection as it has 
less risk of hepatic toxicity compared to nevirapine.
Balance of benefits and harms for the use of NAs versus IFN
The main advantages of NAs over IFN (which has not been considered in these 
guidelines) are the convenience of dosage (once-daily oral administration), tolerability 
and affordability. The disadvantages of NAs are that they require lifelong therapy in 
the majority, which is associated with high cumulative costs (see also Chapter 12: 
Implementation considerations for programme managers) and a risk of drug resistance. 
The Guidelines Development Group recognized that there may be very specific 
circumstances when the use of IFN may be considered, for example, when HBV DNA 
viral load and genotyping are available, IFN is available and affordable, or coinfection 
with HDV is present, as this offers the opportunity for a finite, short course of treatment. 
However, this needs to take account of several absolute and relative contraindications 
to IFN, which include the presence of decompensated cirrhosis and hypersplenism, 
thyroid disease, autoimmune diseases, severe coronary artery disease, renal transplant 
disease, pregnancy, seizures and psychiatric illness, concomitant use of certain drugs, 
retinopathy, thrombocytopenia or leucopenia. IFN also cannot be used in infants less 
than 1 year of age.
Values and preferences
The side-effect profile, convenience (once-daily oral administration) and minimal 
requirement for toxicity monitoring of tenofovir and entecavir favour their widespread 
acceptability to individuals and health-care workers in most countries, particularly in 
LMICs. The requirement for prolonged (lifelong) treatment in the majority of persons 
(see Chapter 8: Second-line regimens for the management of treatment failure; and 
Chapter 9.2: Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity) represents a challenge 
to long-term adherence among patients and for ongoing monitoring to health-care 
providers, especially in the absence of a clear benefit on clinical outcomes and survival. 
However, tenofovir effectively suppresses HBV replication to <15 IU/mL in the majority 
of HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-negative persons, including those with high HBV DNA 
viral loads, which minimizes the need for regular HBV DNA monitoring in resource-
limited settings.
 54
Resource considerations
In general, generic tenofovir is widely available at low cost in many LMICs, particularly 
as part of national ART programmes, although the annual cost per person may range 
from US$ 50 to US$ 350 per annum, and as much as US$ 500 in some parts of Asia. 
The costs are currently higher for entecavir, but it has the potential to be manufactured 
at a much lower cost, as it is both off-patent and the daily dose is low (see Chapter 12: 
Implementation considerations for programme managers). The higher cost of tenofovir 
and entecavir in many settings is the reason that other drugs such as lamivudine continue 
to be widely used, despite the additional costs incurred due to the development of drug 
resistance. The Guidelines Development Group also expressed concern regarding the 
more limited access to tenofovir of persons without HIV coinfection outside of ART 
programmes in many countries. Tenofovir has the potential to be more widely available 
and affordable in LMICs through access to reduced prices via a range of mechanisms, 
including license agreements negotiated with the Medicines Patent Pool for use in HIV 
(but also available for HBV).
In persons on potent NAs with a high barrier to resistance, few side-effects and which 
are administered as a single tablet a day, the requirements for monitoring and input 
of caregivers can be minimized. However, measuring HBV DNA viral load is costly 
(between US$ 100 and US$ 400) and, even in countries where HBV DNA testing is not 
routine, there is uncertainty as to the minimal monitoring requirements for treatment 
response and renal toxicity.
 55
Drug
Dose
Tenofovir
300 mga once daily 
Tenofovir plus emtricitabine
Tenofovir 245 mg; emtricitabine 200 mg
Entecavir (adult with compensated liver disease 
and lamivudine naive)
0.5 mg once daily 
Entecavir (adult with decompensated liver 
disease) 
1 mg once daily 
TABLE 6.1.a Recommended drugs for the treatment of CHB and their doses in adults (see 
also Table 9.1: Recommended dosage in adults with renal impairment)
a Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) 300 mg is equivalent to tenofovir disoproxil 245 mg or tenofovir 136 mg.
Tenofovir alafenamide fumarate (TAF) is an orally bioavailable prodrug of tenofovir with reduced renal and bone 
toxicities compared to tenofovir.
Drug
Dose
Tenofovir (in children 12 years of age and older, 
and weighing at least 35 kg) 
300 mg once daily 
Entecavir (in children 2 years of age or older and 
weighing at least 10 kg. The oral solution should be 
given to children with a body weight up to 30 kg)
Recommended once-daily dose of oral solution (mL)
Body weight (kg)
Treatment-naive
personsa
10 to 11 
>11 to 14 
>14 to 17 
>17 to 20 
>20 to 23 
>23 to 26
>26 to 30 
>30 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
TABLE 6.1.b Recommended drugs for the treatment of CHB and their doses in children (see 
also Table 9.1: Recommended dosage in adults with renal impairment)
a Children with body weight more than 30 kg should receive 10 mL (0.5 mg) of oral solution or one 0.5 mg tablet 
once daily.
Drug
Dose
Telbivudine 
600 mg once daily
Lamivudine 
300 mg once daily
Adefovir
10 mg once daily
Pegylated interferon alpha-2a b
180 µg once per weeka
Pegylated interferon alpha-2b b
0.5 or 1.0 µg per kg per week
TABLE 6.2 Other drugs used for the treatment of CHB and their doses in adults
a Reduced to 135 µg if creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min
b A number of relative and absolute contraindications to IFN also exist, which include the presence of decompensated 
cirrhosis and hypersplenism, thyroid disease, autoimmune diseases, severe coronary artery disease, renal transplant 
disease, pregnancy, seizures and psychiatric illness, concomitant use of some drugs, retinopathy, thrombocytopenia 
or leucopenia. IFN also cannot be used in infants less than 1 year.
 56
BOX 6.2  Assessment prior to initiation of antiviral therapy
A thorough assessment and counselling of the patient is crucial for successful antiviral therapy.
Box 5.1, Chapter 5 summarizes the key points in counselling and preparation prior 
to initiation of antiviral therapy. These include: assessment of severity of liver disease; 
level of viral replication; presence of comorbidities; preventive measures to reduce HBV 
transmission to others; counselling on lifestyle; specific counselling and preparation for 
starting treatment; assessment of risk factors for renal dysfunction and measurement 
of baseline renal function.
BOX 6.3  Monitoring adherence to antiviral therapy
Objective monitoring of adherence to antiviral therapy is essential for effective long-term 
management of CHB. Each clinic visit is an opportunity for assessing and supporting 
treatment adherence, and may require a combination of approaches, depending on 
the local context. 
Self-report: Asking people or their caregivers how many doses of medication they have 
missed within a specified number of days in the past, or since their last visit can help 
to estimate non-adherence. However, although this method is commonly used, people 
may not remember missed doses accurately or may not report missed doses. Regular 
counselling on the importance of remembering and/or documenting doses of antiviral 
medicines as well as creating a clinic environment that promotes honest reporting of 
non-adherence are critical for effective routine monitoring of adherence.
Viral load monitoring: Although access to HBV DNA viral load monitoring is the optimal 
way to diagnose and confirm treatment failure, treatment failure is often caused by lapses 
in adherence to antiviral therapy, as well as from other factors (such as drug stock-outs 
or malabsorption). Viral load monitoring provides an opportunity for care providers to 
monitor non-adherence in real time, and therefore needs to be complemented with 
other approaches.
Pharmacy refill records: Pharmacy refill records provide information on when people 
on antiviral therapy collected their drugs. When people obtain pharmacy refills at 
irregular intervals, this may indicate non-adherence; however, in many routine care 
settings, people may pick up their medications when receiving care, irrespective of 
their adherence level. Health-care providers may therefore overestimate adherence on 
the sole basis of pharmacy refill records, and so should combine this with other tools.
Patients on long-term tenofovir and entecavir therapy will require ongoing monitoring 
for treatment response and renal toxicity. See Chapter 9.2: Monitoring for tenofovir and 
entecavir toxicity.
 57
Research gaps
• 
Assess the impact of antiviral therapy on CHB liver-associated and all-cause 
morbidity and mortality, especially in LMICs.
• 
Conduct treatment and cost–effectiveness studies on the use of tenofovir 
and entecavir in persons with CHB, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, and 
also among children in whom antiviral treatment is indicated.
• 
Develop and evaluate broadly curative antiviral strategies to achieve persistent 
clearance (cure) of HBV infection and allow discontinuation of therapy. 
This may include agents that directly target infected cells, as well as novel 
immunotherapeutic strategies that boost HBV-specific adaptive immune 
responses or activate innate intrahepatic immunity.
 58
7. RECOMMENDATIONS: SECOND-LINE 
ANTIVIRAL THERAPIES FOR MANAGEMENT 
OF TREATMENT FAILURE
Recommendations
• 
In persons with confirmed or suspected antiviral resistancea,b,c (i.e. history of prior 
exposure or primary non-response) to lamivudine, entecavir, adefovird or telbivudine, a 
switch to tenofovire is recommended. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
a Treatment failure: May be primary or secondary.
In settings with access to HBV DNA testing: Primary antiviral therapy failure may be defined as failure of a drug 
to reduce HBV DNA levels by ≥1 x log10 IU/mL within 3 months following initiation of therapy. Secondary antiviral 
treatment failure may be defined as a rebound of HBV DNA levels of ≥1 x log10 IU/mL from the nadir in persons with 
an initial antiviral treatment effect (≥1 x log10 IU/mL decrease in serum HBV DNA). 
In settings without access to HBV DNA testing: Treatment failure and drug resistance may be suspected based on the 
following features: receiving antiviral drugs with a low barrier to resistance together with documented or suspected 
poor adherence, laboratory measures such as an increase in serum aminotransferases, and/or evidence of progressive 
liver disease. Note: Elevation in ALT level tends to occur late and is a relatively poor predictive marker of resistance. 
Confirmation of antiviral drug failure can be established by sequencing the HBV DNA polymerase and identifying 
specific genetic markers of antiviral drug resistance.
b Treatment adherence should be reinforced in all persons with confirmed or suspected antiviral resistance. See also 
Chapter 6, Box 6.2, Monitoring adherence to antiviral therapy.
c Some countries and health-care providers may consider switching persons to tenofovir from existing antiviral 
regimens with a low barrier to resistance before evidence of treatment failure, but no formal recommendation has 
been made in these guidelines.
d For adefovir resistance, a switch to either tenofovir or entecavir can be considered. 
e To date, there has been no reported resistance with tenofovir. If there is primary non-response, then treatment 
adherence should be reinforced and monitored. At present, there is therefore no indication to switch to an alternative 
drug regimen. 
7.1. Background
A major concern with long-term NA therapy is the selection of drug-resistance 
mutations. HBV has a high rate of replication with up to 1010–12 mutations generated 
every day. Higher rates of resistance are observed in persons with high baseline 
HBV DNA levels, longer duration of treatment, and a slower treatment-related 
decline in HBV DNA levels (1,2). Several drug-resistance mutations in the HBV 
polymerase reduce efficacy to more than one NA, resulting in cross-resistance to 
several agents, which limits future options for treatment. This is a particular risk in 
persons treated sequentially with NAs with a low barrier to resistance (lamivudine, 
adefovir and telbivudine) as monotherapy (3–8). Once drug-resistance mutations 
have developed, they are archived within the virus population and are rapidly 
selected if the same, or a cross-reacting antiviral agent, is reintroduced. The 
 59
emergence of antiviral resistance usually leads to an increase in HBV DNA levels 
or viral rebound after initial response during therapy, which is likely to be followed 
by biochemical breakthrough with a rise in the ALT levels and, in some cases, 
hepatitis flares and progression to hepatic decompensation (6). In general, the 
management of such persons previously treated with lamivudine, adefovir or 
telbivudine is based on the established in vitro and in vivo efficacy of the potent 
NAs tenofovir and entecavir, and knowledge of the patterns of cross-resistance 
across different NAs (1,7,8). 
Of the six approved NAs (lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, telbivudine, tenofovir, 
emtricitabine), lamivudine is associated with the highest rate of drug resistance, 
entecavir with very low rates of resistance (except in persons previously exposed to 
lamivudine and adefovir), and currently none with tenofovir. The widespread use of 
lamivudine for persons with CHB and high HBV DNA levels in some countries has 
led to a high burden of lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B. Lamivudine resistance is 
of particular importance in the Asia–Pacific region where the prevalence of HBV 
infection is high, the infection is mainly acquired perinatally or in early childhood, 
and lamivudine and adefovir have been widely used without access to appropriate 
second-line regimens (1,2,9–15).
7.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review was to assess the most effective 
treatment regimen for the management of treatment failure due to resistance 
in persons previously treated with single agents with a low barrier to resistance 
(lamivudine, telbivudine or adefovir) (see Web appendix 2:SRs7, 6b and 6d). 
The interventions analysed include switching to treatment with agents with a high 
barrier to resistance (tenofovir or entecavir) compared to adding in a second agent 
(combination therapy), or continuing regimens with a low barrier to resistance 
(lamivudine, telbivudine or adefovir). Key outcomes were rates of ALT normalization, 
undetectable HBV DNA, HBeAg seroconversion, HBsAg loss, reversion of fibrosis 
stage, mortality, severe adverse effects and antiviral resistance.
Systematic review and network meta-analysis
The systematic review (see Web appendix 2: SR7) was based on data from one 
existing systematic review (16), comprising five RCTs and three non-randomized 
studies in China and South Korea, together with several randomized trials in 
persons with lamivudine resistance or a partial response to lamivudine (17–23). 
Included studies compared the effects of entecavir with either continuation of 
lamivudine, or a combination of lamivudine plus adefovir, or use of lamivudine 
plus adefovir versus continuation of lamivudine plus adefovir.
A switch to entecavir (compared with continuation of lamivudine) significantly 
improved virological and biochemical outcomes over 96 weeks  (17–20). However, 
 60
high rates of entecavir resistance were observed at 5 years. The quality of evidence 
for these outcomes was moderate due to imprecision. In the systematic review 
comparing entecavir with lamivudine plus adefovir, there were no differences in 
any of the assessed outcomes (undetectable HBV DNA, ALT normalization, and 
HBeAg seroconversion) after 48 weeks (16). The quality of evidence for these 
outcomes was low or very low.
Network meta-analysis: As tenofovir and entecavir have not been compared 
directly in an RCT, an NMA (see Web appendix 2: SR6b) was also undertaken to 
enable a direct comparison and estimation of the relative efficacy and ranking of 
different antiviral therapies, based on another systematic review of all the relevant 
RCT data (both indirect and direct treatment comparisons of single, combination 
and sequential therapy) (18,24–32) used in the development of the UK NICE 
CHB guidelines (33). The treatments evaluated were a switch to an NA with a 
high barrier to resistance or continuation with or add-on therapy, and included 
the following agents: tenofovir, entecavir, adefovir, lamivudine, telbivudine and 
emtricitabine (in combination with tenofovir).
Seven RCTs of pair-wise comparisons based on 919 HBeAg-positive, lamivudine-
resistant persons were included for the outcome of undetectable HBV DNA (<300 
copies/mL [i.e. 60 IU/mL]), and six studies based on 771 persons for the outcome 
of HBeAg seroconversion (33). Tenofovir followed by entecavir plus adefovir 
combination therapy had the highest probability of achieving undetectable HBV 
DNA (66.2% and 33.8%, respectively) and HBeAg seroconversion (39.8% and 
31.2%, respectively) at the end of 1 year of treatment among all the evaluated 
treatments. After 1 year of tenofovir treatment, 89% (95% CI: 51.8–98.2%) of 
lamivudine-resistant persons would be expected to achieve undetectable HBV 
DNA and 17.6% (95% CI: 1.4–74.9%) HBeAg seroconversion. No NMA was 
conducted for lamivudine-resistant, HBeAg-negative persons. The quality of the 
direct evidence (pair-wise comparisons) was rated as moderate to very low.
7.3. Rationale for the recommendations
Balance of benefits and harms
The Guidelines Development Group recognized that, in some countries, the widespread use 
of lamivudine and other NAs with a low barrier to resistance as first-line therapy for CHB has 
led to a high burden of resistant CHB. Overall, the Guidelines Development Group endorsed 
the principle that the most potent agent, and one which does not share cross-resistance, 
should be used to treat resistant CHB. 
 61
The Guidelines Development Group therefore recommended switching to tenofovir 
monotherapy as the most effective antiviral therapy for persons with confirmed or suspected 
lamivudine resistance for several reasons, which are listed below.
1. 
Despite the lack of direct evidence from RCTs on evaluation of tenofovir in persons with 
HBV drug resistance, evidence from the NMA showed that of all the antivirals considered, 
tenofovir is associated with the highest probability at 1 year of achieving low or undetectable 
HBV DNA levels in persons with lamivudine-resistant HBV. The Guidelines Development 
Group considered that the same tenofovir switch strategy would also apply to HBeAg-
negative persons, although no NMA was available for this group. This would have a 
beneficial effect on disease progression and also reduce possible transmission of resistance. 
2. 
There are deleterious consequences of continuing treatment with an ineffective antiviral 
agent, and ongoing HBV replication confers an increased risk of disease progression to 
cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease and HCC.
3. 
The use of tenofovir, which does not share cross-resistance, would  avoid the selection 
of further compensatory mutations and development of drug resistance, with reservoirs 
of resistant HBV mutants. Clinical and molecular evidence indicates that resistance to 
lamivudine (L180M + M204V/I) confers cross-resistance to telbivudine and entecavir, but 
not tenofovir. In addition, although treatment failure and development of resistance occurs 
rarely in naive persons treated with entecavir, resistance to entecavir is more common 
in persons with lamivudine resistance. The Guidelines Development Group therefore 
recommended that entecavir not be used as salvage therapy in persons with known or 
suspected lamivudine resistance (34). 
4. 
Primary non-response (defined as less than 1 log decrease in HBV DNA level after 3 
months of treatment, in settings where HBV DNA testing is available) is rare in persons 
initiating and adherent to entecavir or tenofovir treatment, but can occur in persons 
treated with lamivudine, adefovir or telbivudine. Sequential treatment of persons with 
lamivudine-resistant CHB with adefovir or telbivudine or entecavir can lead to the 
selection of multidrug-resistant hepatitis B and should be avoided.
5. A switch to tenofovir monotherapy in persons who have developed resistance to 
lamivudine, adefovir, telbivudine or entecavir simplifies clinical management and 
drug procurement. 
6. 
There was little evidence from the systematic review for an advantage of adding NAs or 
combined use of NAs conferring a benefit in cases of lamivudine resistance.  
7. 
Tenofovir has the potential to be more widely available and affordable in LMICs through 
access to reduced prices via a range of mechanisms including license agreements 
negotiated with the Medicines Patent Pool for use in HIV infection (but also available 
for HBV infection).
 62
8. 
 The Guidelines Development Group also recognized that the most common reason for 
virological breakthrough is poor adherence, and therefore regular counselling should 
be offered on the importance of treatment adherence, especially in persons with 
evidence of virological breakthrough. 
The Group also recognized that the most effective strategy to minimize the future burden of 
lamivudine resistance was the wider use of NAs with a high barrier to resistance in first-line 
therapy. The Guidelines Development Group considered that some countries and physicians 
may consider switching persons to tenofovir from existing antiviral regimens with a low barrier 
to resistance before evidence of treatment failure, but no formal recommendation was made.
Resource considerations
Drug costs: see Chapter 6: First-line antiviral therapies: resource considerations. 
Diagnosis of treatment failure: Measurement of HBV DNA levels and testing for drug 
resistance are fundamental to confirming treatment failure and genotypic HBV resistance, 
but there is extremely limited access to these in LMICs. In these settings, ascertainment 
of the development of resistance will largely be based on clinical suspicion and, in some 
instances, by an increase in serum aminotransferases. However, elevation in ALT tends to 
occur late and has been shown to be a relatively poor predictive marker of resistance (35). 
In countries where resistance testing is not available, a change to tenofovir would not incur 
added costs, although this may not be applicable in Asia.
BOX 7.1  Diagnosing treatment failure
Objective monitoring of adherence to antiviral therapy is essential for effective long-term 
management of CHB. Each clinic visit is an opportunity for assessing and supporting 
treatment adherence, and may require a combination of approaches, depending on the 
local context.
Treatment adherence should be reinforced in all persons with confirmed or suspected 
antiviral resistance. See also Chapter 6, Box 6.2, Monitoring adherence to antiviral therapy. 
Definition of treatment failure
In settings where HBV DNA testing is available: Primary antiviral treatment failure may be 
defined as failure of an antiviral drug to reduce HBV DNA levels by ≥1 x log10 IU/mL within 
3 months. Secondary antiviral treatment failure may be defined as a rebound of HBV DNA 
levels of ≥1 x log10 IU/mL from the nadir in persons with an initial antiviral treatment effect (≥1 
x log10 IU/mL decrease in serum HBV DNA). 
In settings where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment failure and drug resistance 
may be suspected based on the following features: receiving antiviral drugs with a low 
barrier to resistance together with documented or suspected poor adherence, and laboratory 
measures such as an increase in serum aminotransferases, and/or evidence of progressive 
liver disease. 
Note: Elevation in ALT level tends to occur late and is a relatively poor predictive marker of resistance. 
Confirmation of antiviral drug failure can be established by sequencing the HBV DNA polymerase and identifying specific genetic 
markers of antiviral drug resistance.
 63
Research gaps
• 
Evaluate further the utility and predictive value of monitoring ALT levels 
and other markers to identify the development of genotypic or phenotypic 
resistance.
• 
Evaluate the impact of treatment with NAs with a high genetic barrier 
to resistance in persons with treatment failure, and on other important 
outcomes, such as histological improvement, development of further drug 
resistance and adverse events.
 64
8. RECOMMENDATIONS: WHEN TO 
STOP TREATMENT
See also Chapter 9: Monitoring and Chapter 6: Box 6.2. Monitoring adherence 
to antiviral therapy
a Clinical features of decompensated cirrhosis: portal hypertension (ascites, variceal haemorrhage and hepatic 
encephalopathy), coagulopathy, or liver insufficiency (jaundice). Other clinical features of advanced liver disease/
cirrhosis may include: hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pruritus, fatigue, arthralgia, palmar erythema, and oedema.
b ALT levels fluctuate in persons with CHB and require longitudinal monitoring to determine the trend. Upper limits 
for normal ALT have been defined as below 30 U/L for men and 19 U/L for women (based on greater sensitivity 
observed in hepatitis C for histological disease in the liver), though local laboratory normal ranges should be applied 
(1). Persistently normal/abnormal may be defined as three ALT determinations below or above the upper limit of 
normal, made at unspecified intervals during a 6–12-month period or predefined intervals during a 12-month period. 
c See Chapter 9.1: Monitoring in persons prior to, during and post-treatment. Although the evidence base is limited, 
ALT and HBV DNA can be measured monthly for the first 3 months, then every three months during the first year to 
detect severe exacerbations.
Recommendations
Lifelong NA therapy
• 
All persons with cirrhosisa based on clinical evidence (or APRI score >2 in 
adults) require lifelong treatment with nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs), and should 
not discontinue antiviral therapy because of the risk of reactivation, which can 
cause severe acute-on-chronic liver injury. (Strong recommendation, low quality 
of evidence)
Discontinuation
• 
Discontinuation of NA therapy may be considered exceptionally in:
 
-
persons without clinical evidence of cirrhosisa (or based on APRI score ≤2 
in adults); 
 
-
and who can be followed carefully long term for reactivation; 
 
-
and if there is evidence of HBeAg loss and seroconversion to anti-HBe (in 
persons initially HBeAg-positive) and after completion of at least one additional 
year of treatment;
 
-
and in association with persistently normal ALT levelsb and persistently 
undetectable HBV DNA levels (where testing is available). 
› Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Discontinuation of NA therapy may 
be considered in persons who have evidence of persistent HBsAg loss and 
after completion of at least one additional year of treatment, regardless of prior 
HBeAg status. (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Retreatment
• 
Relapse may occur after stopping therapy with NAs. Retreatment is recommended 
if there are consistent signs of reactivation (HBsAg or HBeAg becomes positive, 
ALT levels increase, or HBV DNA becomes detectable again) (where HBV DNA 
testing is availablec) (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
 65
8.1. Background
The main goals of antiviral therapy in CHB are to improve survival and quality of 
life by preventing progression to severe liver disease (decompensated cirrhosis 
and liver failure), HCC and death. This can be achieved by suppressing HBV DNA 
to undetectable levels. HBsAg loss and/or seroconversion is considered to be the 
optimal goal of antiviral therapy, and a marker of sustained treatment response 
in both HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-negative persons, but is achieved in only a 
minority of HBeAg-positive persons (10–15% after 5 years), and rarely in those 
who are HBeAg negative. HBeAg seroconversion in HBeAg-positive persons may 
also be considered as a potential stopping point to guide treatment cessation, but 
again is infrequent even with potent NAs.
Although NAs are potent inhibitors of HBV DNA replication, they do not result in 
cure, because NA therapy does not eliminate the replicative template cccDNA in 
the nucleus or integrated viral genome. Therefore, although there are considerable 
advantages of finite NA therapy, both for patients and policy-makers particularly 
in LMICs, long-term maintenance suppressive therapy is generally required. A 
finite duration of treatment may be possible in some HBeAg-positive persons who 
achieve anti-HBe seroconversion and a sustained undetectable HBV DNA viral 
load. However, in resource-limited settings where there is limited access to HBV 
DNA monitoring, it remains unclear how long therapy should continue, and when 
and under what conditions NA therapy may be stopped, 
8.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review was to assess what criteria should 
be used to stop treatment (see Web appendix 2: SRs8a and 8b). The review 
examined evidence for the durability of treatment response after cessation of 
antiviral therapy in both HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-negative persons, and factors 
that predict a durable response. The outcomes were HBeAg seroconversion, 
HBsAg loss, undetectable HBV DNA levels, liver-related morbidity (fibrosis, 
cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, HCC), progression of liver disease, reversion of 
fibrosis stage and mortality, severe adverse effects and antiviral resistance. 
There were no systematic reviews or RCTs that directly compared the durations 
of different antiviral therapies (i.e. treatment cessation at defined time points 
versus treatment continuation). Instead, the search identified 26 prospective and 
retrospective observational studies and one RCT, which reported relapse rates 
after cessation of different antiviral agents – lamivudine (2–19), adefovir (20–22), 
entecavir (23,24), and multiple different antivirals (25–28), following varying 
treatment durations and responses. The heterogeneity of treatment duration, and 
varying follow up after treatment cessation, criteria for treatment discontinuation 
and assessment of relapse precluded pooled analyses of outcomes. 
 66
In general, virological responses were not durable, and relapse rates after treatment 
discontinuation (with different definitions) at 1 year ranged from 40% to 95% 
(2–20,25–27) if the duration of consolidated treatment was less than 1 year. After 
discontinuation of lamivudine, relapse rates increased with the duration of follow up 
(1 year: 16–66%; 3 years: 26–52%; 5 years: 30–56%) and appeared to stabilize 
from 12 to 24 months onward. In a further study of discontinuation after HBeAg 
seroconversion, 90% had recurrent viraemia and 38% had ALT flares compared 
to those who continued therapy (28). Relapse rates also appear to be high based 
on the few studies that have examined relapse rates after cessation of NAs with a 
higher barrier to resistance (three with entecavir but none with tenofovir). Only 3% 
of HBeAg-negative virological responders treated with entecavir for approximately 
1 year had a sustained response (HBV DNA level <300 copies/mL) 6 months after 
cessation (24). In a further prospective study, the 1-year relapse rate (rise in HBV 
DNA and ALT levels) was 53% and 29%, respectively (23). Most relapses occurred 
more than 6 months after treatment cessation. 
Independent factors associated with an increased probability of relapse after 
treatment cessation included the presence of cirrhosis, older age, shorter NA 
therapy duration, and higher pretreatment HBV DNA levels (29–32). The overall 
quality of evidence on relapse rates and risk factors after stopping antiviral therapy 
from these studies was rated as very low.  
8.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
Balance of benefits and harms
The Guidelines Development Group considered the overall benefits and risks of 
discontinuation of antiviral therapy. The advantages of stopping NA therapy are a finite 
duration of treatment, with improved adherence and retention in care, reduced costs, and 
minimization of renal and bone toxicity. The disadvantages are the risk of reactivation of 
suppressed disease with discontinuation of therapy, resulting in an unpredictable worsening 
of disease and possible development of fulminant hepatitis and acute-on-chronic liver 
failure, as well as the risk of developing resistance with “stop–start” therapy. Persons who 
discontinue therapy will also require careful long-term follow up for early detection of relapse. 
The Guidelines Development Group noted that the evidence base for stopping rules was 
limited. (See also Chapter 9.1: Monitoring in persons prior to, during and post-treatment.)
The Guidelines Development Group strongly recommended that persons with cirrhosis 
should never discontinue antiviral therapy. They are at high risk for reactivation and also as 
they have much less hepatic reserve, for life-threatening hepatic decompensation after an 
exacerbation. In this group of persons, the Guidelines Development Group considered that 
the risks of stopping therapy (and benefits of continued therapy) outweighed any advantage 
of finite therapy. HBV/HIV-coinfected persons initiated on therapy should also remain on 
long-term HBV suppressive therapy.
 67
The Guidelines Development Group considered whether there were any criteria or patient 
subgroup in whom therapy may exceptionally be stopped, in particular, HBeAg-positive 
persons who achieve HBeAg seroconversion or HBsAg loss, which are the optimal goals 
of treatment and surrogate markers of sustained antiviral response. Overall, the evidence 
shows that treatment even with potent NAs (entecavir or tenofovir) infrequently leads to 
HBeAg seroconversion and loss of HBsAg in HBeAg-positive persons, and (even more 
rarely) HBsAg loss or anti-HBs seroconversion in HBeAg-negative persons. In addition, 
relapse occurs in a substantial proportion after discontinuation of treatment, even with the 
potent NAs, and following HBeAg seroconversion. There is also no clear evidence that 
relapse rates after discontinuation are lower with tenofovir compared to entecavir. 
Given the limited access to monitoring of HBV DNA levels, as well as regular monitoring 
of HBsAg or HBeAg serology in resource-limited settings, the Guidelines Development 
Group considered that long-term antiviral suppressive therapy will be necessary for the 
majority, and recommended a very conservative approach to stopping therapy – only in a 
small proportion of carefully selected HBeAg-positive or HBeAg-negative persons without 
cirrhosis. Discontinuation of therapy can be considered exceptionally in those persons with 
evidence of sustained HBsAg loss, or in HBeAg-positive persons who seroconvert to anti-
HBe after at least 1 year of treatment consolidation, and have undetectable HBV DNA 
levels (where testing is available) and normal ALT levels. An additional requirement was 
that these persons should be closely monitored with serum ALT and preferably HBV DNA 
levels immediately after and for 1 year after stopping therapy because of the high early risk 
of relapse (defined as a rise in HBV DNA and serum ALT concentrations, or seroreversion 
to HBeAg-positivity), and the need to reinstitute treatment for active disease. The Guidelines 
Development Group recognized that uncontrolled HBV replication could be detrimental to 
patients, and stopping therapy could prove a poor alternative to uninterrupted treatment. 
Chapter 9.1 summarizes the recommendations and rationale for a minimum frequency of 
monitoring after stopping treatment. Although there is a limited evidence base, ALT and 
HBV DNA could be measured monthly for the first 3 months then every 3 months during 
the first year to avoid severe exacerbations.
Values and preferences
Finite treatment is preferable to indefinite or long-term treatment for patients, health-
care workers, and national policy-makers. However, initial treatment success may be 
reversed in persons who have reactivation of disease and relapse after cessation of 
treatment. Given the more limited access to monitoring in LMICs, both patients and 
caregivers require a durable off-treatment response to minimize the risk of further 
progression after treatment cessation. Patients who do stop therapy (in addition to those 
who continue therapy) after HBeAg seroconversion or suppression of HBV DNA but 
remain HBsAg-positive require continued long-term follow up and careful monitoring. 
(See Chapter 9.1: Monitoring in persons prior to, during and post-treatment.)
Resource considerations
The ability to monitor for resumption of HBV replication in all persons after stopping therapy 
requires HBV DNA monitoring. HBV DNA testing is relatively costly and is not available in most 
 68
LMICs. The evidence base for monitoring with liver enzymes alone, which is less expensive, is 
limited, and cannot be recommended currently for disease relapse. HBV resistance testing is 
not required to guide therapy when using NAs with a high barrier to resistance.
There are also cost implications to long-term tenofovir or entecavir therapy. Although generic 
tenfovir is widely available at low cost in many LMICs, particularly as part of national ART 
programmes, the annual cost per person may range from US$ 50 for generic tenfovir to US$ 
350, and as high as US$ 500 in parts of Asia. The costs are currently higher for entecavir, 
but it has the potential to be manufactured at a much lower cost, as it is both off-patent 
and the daily dose is low. (See Chapter 12: Implementation considerations for programme 
managers.)
Research gaps
• 
Conduct randomized comparative trials of different treatment continuation/
discontinuation strategies with tenofovir and entecavir following HBeAg 
serconversion, to inform stopping rules and monitoring requirements. These 
should include studies in adolescents and children.
• 
Conduct longitudinal studies to identify subgroups of HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-
negative persons at low (and high) risk of ongoing reactivation, seroreversion or 
conversion to anti-HBe-positive active disease after treatment with tenofovir or 
entecavir, to better identify candidates for earlier discontinuation of NA therapy.
• 
Evaluate lower cost and point-of-care assays for HBV DNA and HBsAg 
quantification as potential markers to determine stopping rules for therapy, 
and to monitor for relapse. 
 69
9. RECOMMENDATIONS: MONITORING
Recommendations
• 
It is recommended that the following be monitored at least annually:
 
-
ALT levels (and AST for APRI), HBsAga, HBeAgb, and HBV DNA levels (where 
HBV DNA testing is available)
 
-
Non-invasive tests (APRI score or FibroScan) to assess for the presence of 
cirrhosis, in those without cirrhosis at baseline;
 
-
If on treatment, adherence should be monitored regularly and at each visitc. 
(Strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence)
More frequent monitoring
• 
In persons who do not yet meet the criteria for antiviral therapy: More frequent 
monitoring for disease progression may be indicated in: persons who have intermittently 
abnormal ALT levelsd or HBV DNA levels that fluctuate between 2000 IU/mL and 20 
000 IU/mLe (where HBV DNA testing is available) and in HIV-coinfected personsf. 
(Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
• 
In persons on treatment or following treatment discontinuation: More frequent on-
treatment monitoring (at least every 3 months for the first year) is indicated in: persons 
with more advanced disease (compensated or decompensated cirrhosisg); during the 
first year of treatment to assess treatment response and adherence; where treatment 
adherence is a concern; in HIV-coinfected personsf; and in persons after discontinuation 
of treatment. (Conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
a In persons on treatment, monitor for HBsAg loss (although this occurs rarely), and for seroreversion to HBsAg positivity after discontinuation of treatment. 
b Monitoring of HBeAg/anti-HBe mainly applies to those who are initially HBeAg positive. However, those who have already achieved HBeAg seroconversion 
and are HBeAg negative and anti-HBe positive may serorevert. 
c See Chapter 6: Box 6.2. Monitoring adherence to antiviral therapy. 
d ALT levels fluctuate in persons with CHB and require longitudinal monitoring to determine the trend. Upper limits for normal ALT have been defined as below 
30 U/L for men and 19 U/L for women, though local laboratory normal ranges should be applied (1). Persistently abnormal or normal may be defined as 
three ALT determinations above or below the upper limit of normal, made at unspecified intervals during a 6–12- month period or predefined intervals during 
a 12-month period. 
e See Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not to treat. 
f Monitoring response to ART and the diagnosis of treatment failure (Chapter 7.3). In: Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and 
preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. These guidelines will be updated in 2015.
g Decompensated cirrhosis is defined by the development of portal hypertension (ascites, variceal haemorrhage and hepatic encephalopathy), coagulopathy, or 
liver insufficiency (jaundice). Other clinical features of advanced liver disease/cirrhosis may include: hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pruritus, fatigue, arthralgia, 
palmar erythema, and oedema. 
9.1. Monitoring for disease progression and treatment response in persons with CHB 
prior to, during and post-treatment 
9.2. Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity 
9.3. Monitoring for hepatocellular carcinoma
9.1. Monitoring for disease progression and treatment 
response in persons with CHB prior to, during and 
post-treatment 
 70
9.1.1. Background
Chronic hepatitis B is a dynamic disease, and persons with CHB need follow up 
and monitoring before, during and after discontinuation of antiviral therapy for 
disease progression and development of HCC, treatment response and toxicities. 
Prior to treatment, the goal of monitoring is to identify the changing patterns and 
progression of disease and when to initiate therapy. This can be ascertained by 
longitudinal monitoring of ALT and, where available, HBeAg and HBV DNA levels. 
Fluctuations or persistently abnormal serum ALT and HBV DNA levels >20 000 
IU/mL can indicate progressive disease and the need for treatment. Conversely, 
spontaneous improvement may occur with a decline in HBV replication, with 
normalization of ALT levels and seroconversion from HBeAg-positive to anti-HBe. 
This confers a good prognosis and does not require treatment. Similarly, persons 
with inactive disease, who are HBeAg-negative with normal ALT levels and low 
HBV DNA levels (previously called inactive HBsAg carriers), require regular 
monitoring of HBV DNA and ALT levels to ensure that they remain inactive carriers 
or, to determine the timing of treatment, any increase in ALT or HBV DNA levels, 
or evidence of progression to cirrhosis. Continued monitoring during treatment 
and after treatment discontinuation is required to evaluate the effectiveness of 
treatment response, treatment adherence and potential adverse effects, identify 
potential stopping points, and  reactivation early on after treatment discontinuation 
(2). Persons with CHB also require monitoring for the development of HCC (see 
Chapter 9.3: Monitoring for HCC). 
The optimal timing and frequency of monitoring of serological markers (HBeAg 
and anti-HBe, serum ALT and HBV DNA) to ascertain alterations in disease 
patterns prior to treatment, as well as assess treatment response are not well 
established, as the evidence base is limited (2).The tests that need to be used and 
the frequency of testing will depend on the patient’s serological profile (HBeAg-
positive or -negative), and HBV DNA viral levels.  
BOX 9.1  Goals of monitoring
In persons who do not yet meet the criteria for antiviral therapy: The aim of monitoring 
is to identify a change in clinical status (i.e. development of clinical features of cirrhosis) 
or APRI score >2 in adults, development of HCC, or a rise in ALT or HBV DNA levels, 
which may indicate progression to active disease requiring treatment.
In persons on treatment or following treatment discontinuation: The aim of monitoring 
during and after treatment is to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment response, 
treatment adherence, adverse effects of treatment, progression of liver disease and 
development of HCC, the potential for treatment discontinuation, and to identify 
reactivation early on after treatment discontinuation.
(See also Chapter 6: Box 6.2. Monitoring adherence to antiviral therapy.)
 71
9.1.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review was to determine the optimal timing 
and frequency of monitoring for disease progression in persons not yet on antiviral 
therapy; for treatment response in those on treatment; and to detect relapse 
following treatment discontinuation (see Web appendix 2: SRs5a and 9a). No 
studies were identified that had directly compared different monitoring approaches 
and frequency of monitoring to assess for disease progression or treatment 
response. The evidence summary was therefore based on indirect evidence from 
cohort studies that had examined disease progression and predictors of future 
reactivation among persons not yet on treatment, or the different phases of CHB 
(3,4). In addition, four systematic reviews (5–8), two clinical trials (9,10), and three 
retrospective observational studies (11–13) assessed outcomes at different time 
points before or during the course of antiviral therapy. A full review of baseline 
prognostic factors for key liver-related outcomes is available in Chapter 6: Who to 
treat and who not to treat.
Monitoring prior to treatment (see Web appendix 2: SR5a and chapter 5.2: 
Summary of evidence – Identifying individuals at highest and very low risk of 
progression) 
Persistently normal serum ALT and HBV DNA levels that never exceed 20 000 
IU/mL are associated with lower levels of hepatic necroinflammation and fibrosis 
in large population-based prospective cohorts (14–16), while a threshold of HBV 
DNA of 200 000 IU/mL was significantly associated with histologically significant 
liver disease compared with a level of less than 2000 IU/mL. The thresholds of 
2000–20 000, and 20 000–200 000 IU/mL were not significantly associated with 
severe fibrosis. A cohort study from Taiwan also showed that, among HBeAg-
negative persons, persistently normal ALT was associated with good long-term 
prognosis, whereas an ALT level of at least twice the ULN during follow up was 
associated with a higher risk of cirrhosis (17). 
Inactive carriers (HBeAg-negative and normal ALT): Studies to investigate 
monitoring of ALT levels to predict future ALT flares or elevation (18) suggest that a 
minimum period of monitoring of 3 months would identify about 90% of people with 
flares, but the evidence did not take into account persons lost to follow up. Less than 
3% of those with an HBV DNA level of 2000 IU/mL had elevated ALT at 6 months 
or 1 year. The observational studies provided very limited evidence on the frequency 
of monitoring for reactivation, and so evidence was rated as low or very low quality 
because of both indirectness (no study directly investigated different frequencies of 
monitoring) and imprecision due to few events or risk of bias.
Monitoring during treatment (see Web appendix 2: SR9a): Four systematic 
reviews (5–8), two clinical trials (9,10), and three retrospective observational 
 72
studies (11–13)  assessed outcomes at different time points during the course of 
antiviral therapy. These data showed that the majority (around 80%) of HBeAg-
positive persons (and 50–70% of HBeAg-negative persons) achieved a treatment 
response (both undetectable levels of HBV DNA and normalized ALT levels) 
with potent NAs (entecavir and tenofovir) by week 48 of treatment (5–8), even 
in patients with decompensated cirrhosis (8). It was noted that the findings were 
based on monitoring regimens during phase 3 trials, and may not reflect clinical 
practice or feasibility in LMICs.
9.1.3. Rationale for the recommendations
Balance of benefits and harms
Monitoring prior to treatment: In persons who do not yet meet the criteria for antiviral 
therapy according to these guidelinesa (see Chapter 5: Recommendations on who to treat 
and not to treat among persons with chronic hepatitis B), the aim of periodic monitoring is 
to allow ongoing assessment of disease stability, or to identify progression to active disease 
requiring treatment. Lack of monitoring may result in undetected progression to end-stage 
liver disease and associated complications that might have been preventable with early 
detection of progressive disease, and timely antiviral therapy. The Guidelines Development 
Group recognized that the evidence base to guide the optimal frequency of monitoring to 
track alterations in disease patterns is limited. The frequency of monitoring needs to be 
appropriate to the stage of disease (and rate of progression), and often enough to detect 
evidence of significant progression and any transient flares in ALT requiring treatment, and 
avoid loss to follow up, but not result in overinterpretation of fluctuations in serum ALT, 
especially in the absence of concomitant measurement of HBV DNA levels, which may be 
rising or falling. Monitoring of HBeAg is helpful for several reasons: it indicates the presence 
of active HBV replication and high infectivity, and spontaneous improvement may occur 
following HBeAg-positive seroconversion (anti-HBe), with a decline in HBV replication, and 
normalization of ALT levels, which confers a good prognosis and does not require treatment.
The Guidelines Development Group therefore recommended at least annual monitoring 
of HBeAg and serum ALT and HBV DNA levels to determine any persistent abnormality 
in ALT or in HBV DNA levels (based on the thresholds of raised HBV DNA and ALT 
levels for subsequent risk of disease progression), as well as for progression to cirrhosis, 
based on clinical features or on NITs (APRI >2 in adults), which would be an indication 
for antiviral therapy (see Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not to treat among persons 
with chronic hepatitis B). Repeat NITs can also be performed to assess for progressive 
a See Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not to treat among persons with chronic hepatitis B. Antiviral therapy is not 
recommended and can be deferred in persons without clinical or other evidence of cirrhosis (or based on APRI 
score ≤2), and with persistently normal ALT levels and low levels of HBV DNA replication (HBV DNA <2000 IU/mL), 
regardless of HBeAg status or age. (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence)
Where HBV DNA testing is not available: Treatment can be deferred in HBeAg-positive persons aged 30 years or less 
and persistently normal ALT levels). (Conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence)
 73
changes in APRI and FibroScan scores that could indicate progression to cirrhosis – an 
indication for treatment, regardless of the HBV DNA or ALT levels. 
More frequent monitoring was recommended conditionally based on limited evidence 
in those who already have fluctuating elevated ALT or HBV DNA levels (between 2000 
IU/mL and 20 000 IU/mL) as they are at higher risk of progression to active hepatitis 
and require treatment. Monitoring for persons with HBV/HIV coinfection should be 
done every 6 to 12 months in accordance with the WHO ARV guidelines (19). These 
guidelines will be updated in 2015.
Monitoring on treatment and after treatment discontinuation: Monitoring while on 
treatment is required to assess adherence, evaluate whether viral suppression is 
sustained (where HBV DNA can be measured), check for evidence of progression of 
liver disease, indications for stopping treatment and need to restart. Data from multiple 
clinical trials show that potent NAs with a high barrier to resistance (i.e. tenofovir and 
entecavir) suppress HBV DNA replication to low or undetectable levels in the majority 
of persons by 24–48 weeks of treatment, with low rates of resistance (but with limited 
success in achieving durable end-points, particularly loss of HBeAg in HBeAg-positive 
persons or loss of HBsAg). Although the minimum and optimal frequency for monitoring 
treatment response during therapy has not been directly evaluated in clinical trials, 
these data suggest that if good adherence can be confirmed, monitoring can be 
relatively infrequent. The Guidelines Development Group therefore recommended at 
least annual monitoring of ALT, HBeAg (for seroconversion [to anti-HBe]) and HBV DNA 
levels (where testing is available), and also NITs such as APRI to assess for progression 
to cirrhosis. HBV genotyping and resistance testing are not required to guide therapy.
More frequent and careful monitoring was recommended conditionally based on limited 
evidence in the following groups: those with more advanced disease (compensated or 
decompensated cirrhosis) because the risk of HCC is reduced but not eliminated with 
treatment, and their higher risk of adverse events; during the first year of treatment 
to assess treatment response; where adherence to therapy is a concern; and after 
stopping therapy. The Guidelines Development Group noted that if monitoring is 
too infrequent, there is a risk of loss to follow up, treatment interruption or, in some 
persons, unnecessary prolongation of treatment. Monitoring of adherence is particularly 
important in resource-limited settings, where HBV DNA levels cannot be measured 
during treatment (see Chapter 6: Box 6.2. Monitoring adherence to antiviral therapy). 
Approaches to monitoring side-effects during treatment are summarized in Chapter 9.2. 
After stopping treatment, long-term monitoring is required (see Chapter 8: When to 
stop treatment). Although the evidence base is very limited, ALT and HBV DNA can be 
measured monthly for the first 3 months, then every three months during the first year 
to detect severe exacerbations. Retreatment is recommended if there are consistent 
signs of reactivation (HBsAg or HBeAg becomes positive, ALT levels increase, or HBV 
DNA becomes detectable again).
 74
Resource considerations
There are cost implications to regular ALT and DNA monitoring. Where there is limited 
access to HBV DNA assays, such as in LMICs (particularly rural areas), monitoring will 
require, at a minimum, serum ALT levels to establish the risk of progression. However, 
interpretation of disease stage and exacerbations of disease in HBeAg-positive and 
HBeAg-negative persons requires not only serum ALT testing but also concomitant 
measurement of HBV DNA concentrations. NITs (such as APRI) can also be used for 
ongoing assessment of liver disease stage and evidence of progression, but should be 
used alongside clinical criteria and other laboratory criteria (ALT and HBV DNA levels) 
to identify those in need of treatment, as their PPV for identifying those with cirrhosis 
is low. Additional benefits of integrating routine monitoring for HCC alongside routine 
monitoring for disease progression are that it provides a further opportunity to detect the 
development of cirrhosis and initiate antiviral therapy to prevent progression to HCC or 
liver failure (see Chapter 9.3: Monitoring for hepatocellular carcinoma).
There is the potential for community care and nurse-led clinics for persons with inactive 
disease and stable persons on treatment, with specialist care reserved for persons with 
advanced disease, cirrhosis, uncertain progression or in those in whom indications for 
treatment are uncertain. Additional training of health-care workers will be required for 
interpreting the laboratory results if care and follow up are provided by non-physicians.
9.2. Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity 
Recommendations
• 
Measurement of baseline renal functiona and assessment of baseline risk for renal 
dysfunctionb should be considered in all persons prior to initiation of antiviral therapy. 
• 
Renal function should be monitored annually in persons on long-term tenofovir 
or entecavir therapy, and growth monitored carefully in children. (Conditional 
recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
a Measurement of baseline renal function includes: serum creatinine levels, and calculation of creatinine clearance 
(CrCl)/estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) using the Cockcroft–Gault (CG) or modification of diet in renal 
disease (MDRD) formulas. An online calculator is available at http://nephron.com/cgi-bin/CGSI.cgi. For children, the 
Schwartz or similar formula can be used: http://nephron.com/bedsidepedsnic.cgi.
CG formula: eGFR = (140 – age) x (wt in kg) x 0.85 (if female) / (72xCr in mg%) 
MDRD formula: eGFR = 175 x serum Cr–1.154 x age–0.203 x 1.212 (if patient is Black) x 0.742 (if female).
Estimation of GFR based on these formulas may underestimate the degree of renal dysfunction if muscle mass is 
lower than the age and sex standards, as is frequently the case in HIV-infected individuals (1).
b Factors associated with a higher risk of renal dysfunction include: decompensated cirrhosis, CrCl <50 mL/min, 
older age, body mass index (BMI) <18.5 kg/m2 (or body weight <50 kg), poorly controlled hypertension, proteinuria, 
uncontrolled diabetes, active glomerulonephritis, concomitant use of nephrotoxic drugs or a boosted protease 
inhibitor (PI) for HIV, and solid organ transplantation.
 75
BOX 9.2  Assessment and monitoring of renal function
1. At baseline, consider either avoidance of tenofovir and use of entecavir instead, 
or dose reduction of tenofovir (guided by Table 9.1), if the estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR) is <50 mL/min, or in those with risk factors for renal 
dysfunction, including long-term diabetes, uncontrolled hypertension or severe 
osteopenia/osteoporosis. The use of tenofovir is not recommended in children 
aged 2–12 years, or in any child with renal impairment. 
2. Use of tenofovir should be avoided with concurrent/recent use of adefovir or other 
nephrotoxic drugs (e.g. aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, foscarnet, ganciclovir, 
vancomycin, cidofovir) due to the increased risk of renal adverse reactions. 
3. During treatment, consider adjusting the dosing interval of tenofovir or interrupting 
therapy (guided by Table 9.1) and closely monitoring renal function if the creatinine 
clearance (CrCl) falls below 50 mL/min, or in case of progressive decline of renal 
function when no other cause has been identified.
4. If therapy is discontinued, liver function should be monitored closely, as severe 
acute exacerbations of hepatitis have been reported on discontinuation of therapy, 
and resumption of antiviral therapy may be required. 
5. Monitoring during NA therapy may include: urine dipsticks for proteinuria and 
glycosuria (in the absence of diabetes or where blood glucose is well controlled), 
serum creatinine, estimated eGFR decline, serum phosphate, urine protein-to-
creatinine ratio (or fractional excretion of phosphate, if available), as well as growth 
in children on tenofovir. For individuals with normal renal function, a minimum 
monitoring package could include annual urine dipstick testing and creatinine 
measurement for eGFR where possible.
6. 
Frequency of monitoring during NA therapy depends on the presence of risk 
factors for renal dysfunction and should be more frequent in persons at higher risk.
a. Persons at high risk of renal toxicity: every 6 months, unless there is
    evidence of worsening. Closer renal monitoring is required in persons
    with CrCl <50 mL/min.  
b. Persons at low risk of renal toxicity: either no routine monitoring of renal
    function, or every 12 months unless there is evidence of worsening. 
7. If low bone mineral density is detected or suspected because of a fracture, then 
appropriate consultation should be obtained. 
 76
Recommended dose reduction or dosing interval
Drug
CrCl (mL/min)c 
≥50  
30–49 
10–29  
<10, Haemodialysis 
or CAPD
Tenofovir a,b
One 300 mg tablet 
every 24 hours
(7.5 scoops of 
powder every 24 
hours)
One 300 mg 
tablet every
48 hours (or 160 
mg [3 scoops] of 
powder every 24 
hours)
One 300 mg 
tablet every 
72–96 hours
(or 60 mg 
[1.5 scoops] 
of powder 
every 24 
hours)
Every 7 days or 
one 300 mg tablet 
following completion 
of   approximately 
every 12 hours of 
dialysis (or 20 mg 
[0.5 scoops] of 
powder following 
completion of   
approximately every 
 
12 hours of dialysis)
Entecavir 
0.5 mg once dailyd
0.25 mg once daily
OR
0.5 mg every 48 
hours
0.15 mg once 
daily
OR
0.5 mg every 
72 hours
0.05 mg once daily 
OR
0.5 mg every 7 days
Entecavir 
(decompensated 
liver disease)
1 mg once daily
0.5 mg once daily
OR
1 mg every 48 
hours
0.3 mg once 
daily
OR
1 mg every 
72 hours
0.1 mg once daily
OR
1 mg every 7 days
TABLE 9.1. Recommended dosage in adults with renal impairment
CAPD continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis CrCl creatinine clearance 
a Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) 300 mg is equivalent to tenofovir disoproxil 245 mg or tenofovir 136 mg.
b Tenofovir is also available in a granule formulation (33 mg/g in 60 g pack) for ease of swallowing. Dosing is the same 
for oral granules and tablets. 
c Calculated using lean body weight
d For doses less than 0.5 mg, oral solution is recommended. Entecavir is not recommended for those with lamivudine 
resistance.
 77
9.2.1. Background 
Tenofovir is principally eliminated via the kidney and has a side-effect profile 
characterized by proximal tubular cell dysfunction. The range of severity is from 
mild renal tubular dysfunction and hypophosphataemia with subclinical decline 
in renal function to classical Fanconi syndrome and impaired glomerular filtration 
(1–4). Small decreases in bone mineral density with osteopenia or osteoporosis 
during the early phases of treatment have also been reported (5–8) and, more 
rarely, lactic acidosis or severe hepatomegaly with steatosis, which may be fatal. 
Known risk factors for the development of tenofovir-induced nephrotoxicity 
include underlying renal dysfunction, low CD4 count and low body weight (9–
11). The mechanisms underlying the renal toxicities are not fully understood, 
although tubular dysfunction is known to occur. Genetic variability within the 
MRP7 gene may influence renal tubular transport of tenofovir and contribute to 
the development of toxicity (12). Although tubular dysfunction is reversible in 
most cases after withdrawal of tenofovir, persistent renal dysfunction has been 
reported (13). Entecavir is also principally eliminated via the kidney, but proximal 
tubular dysfunction is less common. In addition to the effects of antiviral therapy, 
HBV infection may also impact on renal function (14,15).
9.2.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review (see Web appendix 2: SR9b) 
was to assess the optimal type and frequency of monitoring for toxicity in adults, 
adolescents and children on tenofovir or entecavir treatment for CHB. An initial 
search of the literature did not identify any trials or other studies that directly 
compared the outcomes of different toxicity monitoring strategies, and the review 
therefore focused on the long-term renal adverse effects related to tenofovir and 
entecavir in both nucleoside-naive and -experienced patients. This included 
eight studies of adults who had received tenofovir treatment, of which two were 
in HBV/HIV-coinfected patients; and four studies in those who had received 
entecavir (9,16–22,24,26–32). No studies were identified in children. As the 
data came from non-controlled observational studies, the quality of evidence 
was rated very low. 
No studies have compared monitoring strategies for people receiving tenofovir, 
such as routine toxicity monitoring versus no monitoring or targeted monitoring 
in case of perceived clinical need. The Development of AntiRetroviral Therapy 
in Africa (DART) clinical trial in HIV-infected adults compared laboratory with 
clinical monitoring, and showed that individuals receiving tenofovir had an 
increased risk of reduced eGFR but no increased risk of renal failure over a 
median 5 years of follow up (low-quality evidence) (23).
Several prospective studies have reported renal function at between 2 and 5 
years of tenofovir treatment (16–19,24). Overall, a higher percentage (8.9%) of 
 78
patients had an increase in serum creatinine (usually defined as >0.5 mg/dL) 
during the first year of treatment, but this was lower over longer periods of follow 
up: 0.8% in the second year, and 0% at three years. At 5 years of follow up, 1% 
or less of individuals had either a serum creatinine level above baseline values, 
or a decrease in CrCl or serum phosphate (19). In patients with decompensated 
liver disease, 9% of those treated with tenofovir for 48 weeks had an increase in 
serum creatinine concentrations, but treatment discontinuation was rare (20). 
Of the long-term (3–5 years) effectiveness studies of entecavir, there was limited 
reporting of adverse outcomes (25–31). In one RCT, 1.6% of patients receiving 
entecavir monotherapy had an increase in serum creatinine through 96 weeks 
(32).
In HBV/HIV coinfection: The incidence of tenofovir-related kidney dysfunction 
among HIV-infected persons is also low in the short- to medium term (9–11,14,22). 
This is despite a high burden of chronic kidney disease (up to 25% of those 
starting ART have decreased eGFRs), including HIV-associated nephropathy 
(33). Prospective cohort studies over 5 years of follow up show that around 3% 
of patients experienced an increase in serum creatinine levels, with a modest 
reduction in renal function (eGFR change of –9.8 mL/min/1.73 m2 at 4.5 years) 
as well as bone mineral density, but the clinical significance of these side-effects, 
especially with prolonged therapy, has not yet been established (9,20).  
Independent risk factors significantly associated with a decrease in GFR in HBV-
monoinfected and HBV/HIV-coinfected patients include increased age, non-
African origin, lower baseline eGFR, duration of tenofovir therapy, and HBV DNA 
level >2000 IU/mL (8–10).
In children and adolescents: Tenofovir-related decreases in bone mineral density 
have been observed in children, although it is unclear how reduced bone mineral 
density might impact future growth patterns or the risk of bone fracture. In an 
RCT of tenofovir among adolescents (12 to <18 years), no patient met the safety 
end-point of a 6% decrease in spine bone mineral density at week 72 (34). There 
is uncertainty as to how best to measure and monitor tenofovir-related bone 
toxicity among children. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry testing is not possible 
in most settings, and will not detect osteomalacia, but careful growth monitoring 
is recommended while children are receiving treatment with tenofovir. The safety 
profile of entecavir in children was consistent with that observed in adults, with 
no reported renal adverse events over 48 weeks in an ongoing entecavir trial 
reported in an FDA application (AI463289 trial). 
Assays to monitor nephrotoxicity: There are limited data on the optimal assay to 
monitor for tenofovir-related renal toxicity. Data suggest that some persons may 
have normal serum creatinine levels but impaired renal function, so overreliance 
on absolute serum creatinine values may lead to tenofovir administration in 
 79
persons with pre-existing kidney disease. A high frequency of glycosuria has 
also been found in people without diabetes who underwent a biopsy for tenofovir 
nephrotoxicity, with increased serum creatinine compared with tenofovir-treated 
people with a normal GFR, suggesting that dipstick testing for glycosuria may be 
a cost-effective screening test for serious tenofovir-induced kidney injury (35).
9.2.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
Balance of benefits and harms
Although tenofovir is associated with a risk of nephrotoxicity, hypophosphataemia, 
bone mineral loss and osteopenia, the evidence review showed a low risk of these 
adverse effects (ranging from 0.3% to 2% for nephrotoxicity) with long-term tenofovir 
or entecavir, even among HIV-infected persons, but particularly in the absence of risk 
factors. The Guidelines Development Group made a conditional recommendation for 
both baseline assessment of renal function and categorization of baseline risk of renal 
dysfunction in persons with HBV monoinfection; and for annual monitoring of renal 
function and growth monitoring in children, based on limited evidence.
Baseline assessment: The baseline assessment of renal function and categorization of 
baseline risk of renal dysfunction allows for both dose adjustment of tenofovir or use of 
the alternative entecavir in case of eGFR decrease, as well as better targeting of follow-
up monitoring to those at higher risk of renal impairment (i.e. with decompensated 
cirrhosis, underlying renal disease [CrCl <50 mL/min], low BMI and older age). 
The evidence for the differential renal toxicity of entecavir versus tenofovir was not 
considered in detail, but entecavir was considered the preferred option in persons with 
an eGFR <50 mL/min. Tenofovir alafenamide fumarate (TAF) is an orally bioavailable 
prodrug of tenofovir that may have less renal and bone toxicity. It was noted that in the 
2013 WHO ARV consolidated guidelines (36), a baseline measurement of creatinine is 
not a requirement for initiating ART with the preferred tenofovir-based regimen in HIV-
infected persons. These guidelines will be updated in 2015.
Monitoring: The incidence of progression to moderate or severe kidney dysfunction 
was low among tenofovir users, and there was limited comparative evidence of the 
benefits and cost–effectiveness of routine monitoring versus no or incidental monitoring 
in persons with hepatitis B. However, the Guidelines Development Group considered 
that monitoring of renal function to detect changes in eGFR after initiation of tenofovir 
therapy was important to prevent development or progression of kidney disease. This 
is particularly the case in LMICs where there is limited access to dialysis for those 
who progress to end-stage renal disease. In persons at low risk of renal toxicity, 
periodic monitoring of renal function every 12 months was recommended. More 
frequent monitoring (approximately every 6 months) was recommended in persons 
with impaired eGFR at baseline (<50 mL/min) and other groups at higher risk of renal 
toxicity (i.e. those who are older or have underlying renal disease, long-term diabetes or 
uncontrolled hypertension, or who are receiving concomitant therapy with boosted PIs 
 80
or nephrotoxic drugs), or in those with evidence of worsening of renal function during 
treatment. Most cases of tubular dysfunction are reversible, and so the risk of renal 
impairment can also be reduced if appropriate dose adjustments are made based on 
renal function monitoring.  
Assays: The Guidelines Development Group recognized the limited evidence available 
to guide what tests should be used to monitor for kidney disease, especially in resource-
limited settings. The renal toxicity of tenofovir is usually directed at the tubules; 
glomerular function tests do not adequately measure tubular dysfunction, and there are 
currently no other simple tests to detect renal tubular toxicity. In addition, some persons 
may have normal serum creatinine levels but impaired renal function, and reliance on 
absolute serum creatinine values may lead to tenofovir administration in persons with 
pre-existing kidney disease. Monitoring may include a range of tests, including serum 
creatinine and, where available, estimated GFR using the MDRD formula for estimation, 
serum phosphate, and urine dipsticks for proteinuria and glycosuria. Growth should be 
monitored in children and adolescents using tenofovir. 
Resource considerations
Measurement and long-term monitoring of serum creatinine and serum phosphate levels, 
and bone mineral density scanning increases costs of care and treatment. Access to 
testing for creatinine may be limited in some settings, and simple urine dipstick testing 
is a simpler and cheaper alternative in LMICs. There are also challenges in provision of 
appropriate laboratory infrastructure and human resources for lifelong therapy and follow 
up (see Chapter 12: Implementation considerations for national programmes).
Research gaps
• 
Evaluate the relative impact and cost–effectiveness of routine laboratory 
screening and monitoring of renal function in all persons on long-term 
tenofovir and entecavir or only in high-risk populations, such as those with 
hypertension or diabetes, or those using boosted PIs. 
• 
Develop and evaluate (including cost–effectiveness studies) simplified 
monitoring tools, such as a combination of serum creatinine-based GFR 
estimates and a urine dipstick, to identify persons at greatest risk of 
tenofovir-related toxicity.
• 
Establish the long-term safety, efficacy and toxicity of tenofovir alafenamide 
versus tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in HBV-monoinfected and HBV/HIV-
coinfected populations.
 81
9.3. Monitoring for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
Recommendations
• 
Routine surveillance for HCC with abdominal ultrasound and alpha-fetoprotein testing 
every six months is recommended for:  
 
-
persons with cirrhosis, regardless of age or other risk factors (Strong recommendation, 
low quality of evidence) 
 
-
persons with a family history of HCC (Strong recommendation, low quality of evidence) 
 
-
persons aged over 40 years (lower age may apply according to regional incidence of 
HCCa), without clinical evidence of cirrhosis (or based on APRI score ≤2), and with 
HBV DNA level >2000 IU/mL (where HBV DNA testing is available). (Conditional 
recommendation, low quality of evidence)
9.3.1. Background 
Chronic HBV infection leads to an increased risk of death from liver cirrhosis and 
liver cancer, with an estimated 650 000 annual deaths from HCC (1). In resource-
limited and high HBV-burden settings, persons are often diagnosed with HBV only 
when they present for the first time with HCC. While the majority of these (80–90%) 
have cirrhosis at the time of diagnosis of HCC, it may sometimes occur without the 
presence of cirrhosis; this is especially true for HCC due to HBV. A further major 
challenge with HCC is that it is rapidly progressive, and may be asymptomatic until 
it presents clinically at an advanced stage. Treatment options for advanced HCC are 
limited and overall survival is extremely poor. The prognosis of HCC is affected by 
the size and number of tumours, and the underlying liver function, and is improved 
if treatment can be commenced at an early stage of the disease, when the tumour 
is small. Surveillance is therefore required to detect HCC at an early stage (tumour 
size <3 cm in diameter) and increase the chances of effective treatment. Effective 
surveillance programmes require a means for implementing such treatment for 
small HCC in LMICs, recognizing that access to liver transplantation or resection 
remains limited, even in high-income settings. These treatments would include 
alcohol injection or radiofrequency ablation of small tumours. Current surveillance 
tools include ultrasound and/or alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) measurement, but there is 
no consensus on the best strategy or frequency of monitoring for HCC in persons 
with CHB, although existing evidence suggests that semi-annual surveillance 
detects HCC at an earlier stage and improves survival.
9.3.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review (see Web appendix 2: SR9c) was 
to identify the most effective surveillance strategy among those with CHB for early 
a The GLOBOCAN project of the International Agency on Cancer (IARC) (http://globocan.iarc.fr/ia/World/atlas.html) 
provides contemporary estimates of the incidence of, mortality and prevalence of major types of cancer, including HCC, 
at national level, for 184 countries of the world. The GLOBOCAN estimates are presented for 2012, separately for each 
sex. One-, three- and five-year prevalence data are available for the adult population only (ages 15 years and over).
 82
detection of small HCC. The interventions included the following methods or 
combinations of methods at different monitoring intervals: abdominal ultrasound 
scan and (USS) serum AFP, and were compared with either no intervention or one 
of these screening interventions. Outcomes included disease-specific or all-cause 
mortality; diagnosis of HCC; size and stage of HCC detected (<3 cm or ≥3 cm in 
diameter); and cost–effectiveness. Studies were included only if ≥50% of persons 
met the definition for CHB.
Eight studies were included in the review, of which five were clinical studies (two 
RCTs conducted in China (2,3) but reported in several different publications (2,4–
7); two in Korea (8,9); and one in Canada (10), and three economic evaluations 
(one each from the USA (11), Colombia (12), and the  UK (13)), with a Cochrane 
review conducted in 2012 (14). Each of the clinical studies examined a different 
screening comparison: AFP 6-monthly versus no intervention (3); USS and 
AFP 6-monthly versus AFP 6-monthly (10); USS and AFP 6-monthly versus no 
intervention (2); or USS and AFP ≤6-monthly versus USS and AFP >6-monthly (8). 
Overall, there were a limited number of studies for each screening comparison, and 
none that included children, pregnant women or HBV/HIV-coinfected individuals. 
The majority of study participants were male. The overall quality of evidence was 
rated as low or very low.
Approaches to screening for HCC: Overall, the data showed an impact on disease-
specific mortality of 6-monthly USS and AFP compared to no intervention (odds ratio 
[OR] 0.57, 95% CI: 0.37–0.89) or ≤6-monthly USS and AFP versus >6-monthly (OR 
0.63, 95% CI: 0.40–0.98), but not for 6-monthly AFP alone versus no intervention. In 
addition, 5-year survival favoured 6-monthly screening versus no intervention (31.4% 
vs 23.3%; P=0.026). Although there was no statistically significant difference in the 
number of new cases of HCC detected, there was significantly earlier detection of HCC 
in terms of stage and smaller lesion size (<3 cm or <5 cm in diameter) with either 
6-monthly USS and AFP screening (OR 11.2, 95% CI: 6.73–18.72) or >6-monthly 
screening (OR 2.13, 95% CI: 1.42–3.18), as well as with 6-monthly AFP alone, 
compared with no intervention. An observational study also found that 6-monthly 
AFP screening was effective in detecting most HCC tumours at a resectable stage 
and significantly prolonged survival rates (15) versus no intervention. A systematic 
review published after completion of this review (16) identified two additional relevant 
observational studies (17,18) – one that compared USS plus AFP versus no screening 
(17), and the other USS versus no screening (18). Both showed an overall survival 
benefit of screening when compared with no screening, consistent with the findings 
of the main review. Of the three economic evaluation studies (11–13), two found 
screening every 6 months using both AFP level and USS to be the most cost–effective 
strategy (12,13). The third study conducted in rural Alaska reported that restricting 
USS to persons with raised AFP levels was less costly and more cost–effective 
compared to USS alone every 6 months in all persons (11). 
 83
Who should be screened for HCC?  The key evidence for risk factors (or combinations 
of factors) specific for the development of HCC (see Chapter 5: Who to treat and 
who not to treat; Table 5.1) was derived from the large population-based REVEAL-
HBV cohort from Taiwan (19–23), as well as several other prospective (24–28) and 
retrospective cohort studies (29–31), studies in HBV/HIV-coinfected patients (32) 
and one systematic review (33). These longitudinal cohorts show that the most 
important risk factors for the development of HCC are the presence of cirrhosis, 
HBeAg positivity, persistently high HBV DNA levels, family history of HCC, age >40 
years (as a surrogate reflecting the duration of infection and extent of accumulated 
liver damage), ALT levels >45 U/L, and HIV and HCV coinfection. In the REVEAL 
cohort, compared to those aged <40 years, the RR for HCC was 3.6 (2.0–6.4) for 
those aged 40–49 years, 5.1 (2.0–8.9) for those 50–59 years, and 8.3 (4.6–15.0) 
for those >60 years; and for HBeAg positivity it was 4.3 (3.2–5.9) (see Chapter 
5, Table 5.1) (22). In addition, there is a consistent and linear increase in the 
incidence of HCC with baseline HBV DNA over 10 000 copies/mL (2000 IU/
mL) irrespective of the presence of cirrhosis. Those with a family history of HCC 
have a threefold higher risk, and this was greatest among those who were also 
HBeAg-positive (HR= 45.52; 95% CI: 22.9–90.6) (Table 9.1) (22). Other factors 
associated with an increased risk of developing HCC are ethnicity (risk of HCC is 
greater in people of African or Asian family origin), duration of infection (risk higher 
in those with neonatal/perinatal and childhood infection), those with genotype C 
and core promoter mutants, and those with a history of smoking, high alcohol 
intake and diabetes. 
Risk calculators have been developed, which provide an easy-to-use formula 
to predict the risk of HCC from models (34–36) that include age, sex, levels of 
albumin, bilirubin and ALT, HBeAg status, HBV DNA levels and presence of 
cirrhosis. These models were derived largely from longitudinal cohort data of Asian 
patients and have not been extensively validated in non-Asians. The evidence was 
rated as being of high-to-moderate quality (due to imprecision or limitations in the 
outcome assessment). More limited data were available in HBV/HIV-coinfected 
patients, but low CD4+ cell count and longer cumulated time with detectable HIV 
RNA were associated with an increased risk of developing HCC. 
 84
Cumulative incidence (%)
Adjusted HR (95%CI)
NO family history
7.5 
Reference
Family history of HCC
15.8 
2.46 (1.63–3.72)
NO family history
HBV DNA <10 000 copies/mL
2.5 
Reference
HBeAg positive
Family history of HCC
40 
45.52 (22.86–90.63)
HBeAg positive
NO family history
19.1 
13.91 (9.31–20.77)
HBeAg negative
Family history of HCC
HBV DNA >10 000 copies/mL
17.6 
9.90 (4.52–21.37)
HBeAg negative
NO family history 
HBV DNA >10 000 copies/mL
10.3 
4.43 (3.02–6.50)
HBeAg negative
Family history of HCC
HBV DNA <10 000 copies/mL
5.4 
NS
TABLE 9.4. Cumulative incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) according to family 
history of HCC, baseline HBV DNA level and HBeAg status (22) 
All data among HBsAg-positive persons with CHB
HR hazard ratio, CI confidence interval
9.3.3. Rationale for the recommendations 
Balance of benefits and harms
Screening approaches: Overall, the RCT and economic evaluation evidence favoured 
the combination of ultrasound and AFP monitoring at approximately 6-monthly intervals 
compared to no surveillance to detect HCC in the early stages and improve overall survival 
through earlier potentially effective therapies. The Guidelines Development Group also 
considered that the overall benefits of screening high-risk persons with CHB outweighed 
the potential harms. Affected individuals develop HCC in mid-to-late adulthood, and 
deaths from HCC drain health-care resources and productive capacity in LMICs where 
HBV infection is prevalent. HCC is generally silent until symptomatic (typically when large, 
i.e. >10 cm in size), and the prognosis is extremely poor in persons with advanced-
stage symptomatic tumours and underlying hepatic dysfunction. Additional benefits of 
integrating routine monitoring for HCC alongside routine monitoring for disease progression 
are that it provides a further opportunity to detect the development of cirrhosis and initiate 
antiviral therapy to prevent progression to HCC or liver failure (see Chapter 9.1: Monitoring 
in persons prior to, during and post-treatment). However, the Guidelines Development 
 85
Group recognized that surveillance would be effective in improving survival only if LMICs 
also plan for how to treat small HCC through, for example, ablation, alcohol injection, 
chemoembolization or resection, as well as the use of antiviral therapy, and manage 
complications of advanced liver disease. At present, there is very limited access to such 
interventions in these settings. Antiviral therapy reduces the risk of HCC (37), and has 
benefits even in persons with HCC, including decreased risk of recurrence following HCC 
treatment, decreased necroinflammation and reduced risk of hepatic decompensation.
Potential harms of screening include false-positive AFP and ultrasound detection of small 
lesions other than tumours, such as regenerative nodules in cirrhotic livers, which may 
not develop into malignant HCC, resulting in unnecessary and costly interventions, as well 
as the inconvenience of attending for screening visits. There is also a trade-off in duration 
of intervals between screenings. If the intervals are too long, this may delay the detection 
of HCC, particularly in non-cirrhotic persons. vIn contrast, if HCC surveillance is more 
frequently performed, there will be an associated increase in cost per diagnosis. 
Who to screen? Evidence from longitudinal studies shows that the most important risk 
factors for development of HCC (associated with an approximately fourfold increased 
risk) are the presence of cirrhosis, HBeAg positivity and a family history of HCC. The 
majority of persons (80–90%) also have cirrhosis at the time of diagnosis of HCC and 
therefore the Guidelines Development Group recommended that those with cirrhosis 
as well as those with a family history of HCC are the most important high-risk groups to 
target for screening. Although age >40 years is associated with an increased risk of HCC 
in Asian populations, the Guidelines Development Group considered that the optimal 
age at which surveillance for HCC should commence cannot yet be established with 
certainty, as the incidence of HCC varies with age according to region, and occurs at a 
younger mean age in Africans compared to Asians (see http://globocan.iarc.fr/ia/World/
atlas.html, IARC GLOBOCAN). Therefore, no specific age threshold for screening was 
recommended.
Resource use and implementation considerations
For surveillance to be effective in improving survival, there must be a means to treat 
small HCC. This includes access to expertise in ablation, chemoembolization or resection 
(and transplantation), as well as management of advanced liver disease, and provision 
of antiviral therapy to prevent the development of HCC or tumour recurrence following 
resection. Surveillance for HCC will need to be integrated into existing monitoring for 
disease progression, treatment response and toxicity in those on antiviral therapy. There 
will also be a need for additional training in the use and expert interpretation of ultrasound 
imaging for small HCC.
 86
Research gaps
• 
Determine risk factors (including age) and thresholds for HCC and natural 
history in African populations through longitudinal cohort studies in sub-
Saharan Africa.
• 
Conduct further RCTs of head-to-head comparisons between different HCC 
surveillance strategies, especially in sub-Saharan Africa.
• 
Evaluate low-cost treatment strategies, including alcohol injection for small 
HCC, in LMICs.
• 
Evaluate the impact of NA therapy on tumour-free survival after resection or 
ablation of small HCCs.
 87
10. RECOMMENDATIONS FROM 
EXISTING WHO GUIDANCE: 
PREVENTION
10.1. Infant and neonatal hepatitis B vaccination
Primary hepatitis B vaccination (source: Existing WHO position on hepatitis B 
vaccine [2009])(1)
The primary hepatitis B immunization series conventionally consists of three 
doses of vaccine (i.e. one monovalent birth dose followed by two monovalent or 
combined vaccine doses). However, four doses may be given for programmatic 
reasons (for example, one monovalent birth dose followed by three monovalent 
or combined vaccine doses), administered according to the schedules of national 
routine immunization programmes. For older children and adults, the primary 
series of three doses with appropriate intervals applies.
In countries where there is high disease endemicity and where HBV is mainly 
spread from mother to infant at birth or from child to child during early childhood, 
providing the first dose at birth is critical. In settings where a high proportion of 
HBsAg-positive mothers are also HBeAg positive, exclusion of the birth dose in 
the hepatitis B immunization schedule may result in a large proportion (up to 
90%) of infants born from these mothers already being chronically infected with 
HBV before the first scheduled dose of vaccination at 4–8 weeks of age. The birth 
dose should be followed by two or three doses to complete the primary series. In 
most cases, one of the following two options is considered appropriate: (i) a three-
dose schedule of hepatitis B vaccine, with the first dose (monovalent) being given 
at birth, and the second and third (monovalent or combined vaccine) given at 
the same time as the first and third doses of diphtheria–tetanus–pertussis (DTP) 
Recommendations
Existing recommendations in infants and neonates1 
• 
All infants should receive their first dose of hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after 
birth, preferably within 24 hoursa, followed by two or three doses. 
1 WHO. Hepatitis B vaccines. Wkly Epidemiol Rec. 2009;84:405–20.
a In countries where there is high disease endemicity and where HBV is mainly spread from mother to infant at birth 
or from child to child during early childhood, providing the first dose at birth is particularly important, but even in 
countries where there is intermediate or low endemicity, a substantial proportion of chronic infections are acquired 
through early transmission.
 88
vaccine; or (ii) four doses, where a monovalent birth dose is followed by three 
monovalent or combined vaccine doses, usually given with other routine infant 
vaccines. Combination vaccine products that include HBV are widely used in 
Expanded Programme on Immunization/national immunization programmes, 
but only monovalent HBV vaccine can be used at birth.
BOX 10.1  Programmatic measures to improve implementation of hepatitis B birth dose 
vaccination (within 24 hours of birth) (2,3)
1. Increasing the number of infants born in facilities or attended by trained health 
staff to improve birth dose coverage; 
2. Ensuring that there is coordination between immunization services and maternal 
health services so that the vaccine is available at the place of delivery or immediately 
after birth; 
3. Expanding vaccine management systems and innovative outreach to provide 
vaccine for home births so that hepatitis vaccine is available in settings where 
births take place; 
4. Development of new heat-stable and freeze-stable hepatitis B vaccine; 
5. Health promotion efforts aimed at parents, and training aimed at providers to 
increase awareness about the importance of administering hepatitis B vaccine 
within 24 hours of birth; 
6. Availability of hepatitis B vaccine not combined with other childhood immunizations 
so that HBV vaccines can be administered alone as a birth dose;
7. Delivery of hepatitis B vaccine within 24 hours of birth should be a performance 
indicator for all immunization programmes, and reporting and monitoring systems 
should be strengthened to improve the quality of data on the birth dose.
Passive immunization against hepatitis B with HBIG: Temporary immunity is 
conferred by administering HBIG for post-exposure prophylaxis. HBIG prophylaxis, 
in conjunction with HBV vaccination, may be of additional benefit for the following: 
newborn infants whose mothers are HBsAg-positive, particularly if they are also 
HBeAg-positive. In fullterm neonates born to mothers who are HBsAg-positive 
but HBeAg-negative, protection against perinatally acquired infection achieved 
by immediate vaccination against HBV (given within 24 hours) may not be 
significantly improved by the addition of HBIG.
 89
Catch-up hepatitis B vaccination strategies (source: Existing WHO position on 
hepatitis B vaccine [2009])(1)
In countries with intermediate or low endemicity, there may be a substantial 
disease burden from acute and chronic infection acquired by older children, 
adolescents and adults, many of whom may have been born prior to universal 
vaccination. In these countries, implementation of routine infant immunization 
will produce broad population-based immunity to HBV infection and eventually 
prevent transmission among all age groups. However, time-limited catch-up 
strategies targeted at unvaccinated people in the older age groups may be needed 
to hasten the development of population-based immunity and to decrease more 
rapidly the incidence of acute hepatitis B.
Possible target groups for catch-up immunization include age-specific cohorts 
(for example, young adolescents) and persons with risk factors for acquiring 
HBV infection. The establishment of surveillance for acute hepatitis B and the 
performance of HBsAg seroprevalence studies for CHB can assist in determining 
the groups at highest risk of acquiring infection (for example, health workers, 
travellers to areas where HBV infection is prevalent, PWID, men who have sex with 
men, and persons with multiple sex partners). Vaccination and other prevention 
efforts may be targeted at these groups.
10.2. Prevention of mother-to-child HBV transmission 
using antiviral therapy
See also Chapter 5: Who to treat and not to treat; Chapter 6: First-line antiviral 
therapies; and Chapter 11: Management considerations in special populations, 
including pregnant women.
Antiviral therapy
• 
In HBV-monoinfected pregnant women, the indications for treatment are the same as 
for other adultsa, and tenofovirb is recommended. No recommendation was made on 
the routine use of antiviral therapy to prevent mother-to-child HBV transmission. 
Existing recommendations in HIV-infected pregnant and breastfeeding women2
• 
In HIV-infected pregnant and breastfeeding women (including pregnant women in the 
first trimester of pregnancy and women of childbearing age), a once-daily fixed-dose 
combination of tenofovir + lamivudine (or emtricitabine) + efavirenz is recommended 
as first-line ART. This recommendation applies both to lifelong treatment and to ART 
initiated for PMTCT and then stopped. (Strong recommendation, low to moderate 
quality of evidence) 
2 Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: 
recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. These guidelines 
will be updated in 2015.
a See also Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not to treat.
b See also Chapter 6: First-line antiviral therapies for chronic hepatitis B.
 90
10.2.1. Background 
In highly endemic areas, HBV is most commonly spread from mother to child at 
birth from exposure to maternal blood and secretions at delivery, or from person to 
person in early childhood (5). In areas of low endemicity, perinatal or early childhood 
transmission of HBV may be responsible for over a third of chronic infections 
(6). Transmission early in life is also associated with a higher risk of (lifelong) 
chronic infection (7). It is therefore important that the most effective interventions 
to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HBV are identified and utilized. The 
currently recommended practice to reduce mother-to-child perinatal transmission 
or horizontal transmission relies on the administration of HBV vaccine and, in 
some countries, concurrent administration of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG), 
although screening practices and the resultant prophylaxis that infants receive vary 
from country to country (8) (see also Chapter 10.1: Infant and neonatal hepatitis B 
vaccination). Hepatitis B vaccination is considered safe and effective and prevents 
transmission in 80–95% of cases (9,10). In-utero transmission is relatively rare and 
is not the major means of transmission of HBV from mothers to infants, although it 
may occur if intrauterine placental leakage arises as a result of threatened preterm 
labour (11). A proportion of infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers acquire hepatitis 
B despite both HBV vaccination and/or HBIG prophylaxis. Estimates of the risk of 
transmission, despite HBV vaccination and HBIG, vary, but are related to levels of 
maternal HBV viraemia. Very high maternal concentrations of HBV DNA, typically 
observed in HBeAg-positive women, confer a 10% or more risk of transmission, 
despite HBIG and vaccine prophylaxis (11–14).
In HIV-infected pregnant women, the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV can 
be substantially reduced during pregnancy, labour and delivery, and breastfeeding 
to as little as 1–2% through the use of ART initiated during pregnancy (15). The 
WHO-recommended tenofovir-containing regimens are also highly effective against 
HBV infection. A small but growing body of data suggests that maternal treatment 
with NA therapy in the third trimester of pregnancy in addition to vaccine and HBIG 
for the infant may also reduce HBV transmission to the infant. This may help address 
the imperfect adherence to the neonatal vaccination schedule, and particularly 
to the administration of the initial birth dose of vaccine (with or without HBIG) in 
neonates born to highly viraemic mothers. However, although several countries have 
adopted a policy of treating highly viraemic pregnant mothers, especially in Asia, 
with lamivudine, telbivudine or tenofovir, the efficacy of adjuvant maternal treatment 
with antivirals in the third trimester of pregnancy is unclear. Such treatment would 
be for a limited period for the purpose of reducing the risk of infection to the baby. If 
a woman requires treatment based on her own clinical condition then that treatment 
would be continued through the pregnancy. Lamivudine is the most widely studied 
agent of those that are active against HIV and HBV; there is also a sizeable body of 
data in women who have received tenofovir as part of an ART regimen. 
 91
10.2.2. Summary of the evidence 
Question: The purpose of the evidence review (see Web appendix 2: SR10) was to 
assess the clinical and economic evidence for the effectiveness of antiviral therapy 
during the third trimester of pregnancy (defined as 27–40 weeks of gestation) 
to reduce maternal transmission of HBV infection, and to identify the most 
effective therapies (tenofovir, lamivudine, telbivudine, emtricitabine plus tenofovir/
tenofovir plus emtricitabine, entecavir, adefovir) compared to each other (either 
as monotherapy or combination therapy), placebo or no intervention (with or 
without use of the birth dose vaccine). Key outcomes were transmission of HBsAg, 
newborn and infant HBsAg- and HBeAg seropositivity (0–9 months and 9–15 
months); HBV DNA positivity; congenital abnormalities; adverse events (maternal 
or infant); antiviral resistance; cost–effectiveness. 
A total of 35 studies were identified (12,16–54). There were 12 RCTs, 19 
observational studies, and two systematic reviews (53,54); which evaluated 
either telbivudine or lamivudine versus no treatment, in addition to four economic 
evaluations (47–50). There were no studies  specific to persons with HIV 
coinfection. The majority of studies included the administration of both hepatitis B 
vaccine and HBIG to the infants. 
Overall, the results suggest that maternal treatment with either lamivudine or 
telbivudine during the third trimester of pregnancy may be clinically effective 
and cost–effective in reducing the vertical transmission of hepatitis B infection 
when compared with no treatment or placebo. However, there was only one 
outcome – newborn HBV DNA positivity (a less reliable measure of mother-to-child 
transmission than HBsAg seropositivity), where the GRADE quality score from 
analysis of the RCTs of lamivudine was rated as high to support this conclusion, 
with a statistically significant benefit in favour of treatment with lamivudine versus 
no intervention or placebo (OR 0.25, 95% CI: 0.16–0.37). The non-RCTs also 
supported this finding (OR 0.03, 95% CI: 0.00–0.46), based on a moderate GRADE 
score. Similar statistically significant findings were observed for telbivudine versus 
no intervention or placebo based on seven non-RCTs. Other outcomes associated 
with statistically significant differences in favour of lamivudine and telbivudine, 
but with low GRADE scores were: infant DNA positivity, and newborn and infant 
HBsAg positivity. Since the review, a further large trial has reported reduced HBV 
transmission and HBsAg-positivity in infants born to telbivudine or lamivudine-
treated HBsAg-positive mothers (2.2% (95% CI: 0.6–3.8%) vs 7.6% (95% CI: 
4.9–10.3%) in the untreated group at week 52 (55).
Cost–effectiveness: A total of four economic evaluations (three from the USA and 
one from Taiwan) evaluated lamivudine against no antiviral therapy, HBIG, and 
two other antiviral therapies (47–50). All the studies showed that a combination of 
maternal and neonatal prophylaxis is neither cost-saving nor cost–effective when 
 92
compared to neonatal prophylaxis alone in preventing vertical transmission of 
hepatitis B. 
Safety in pregnancy: Among the potential concerns about the safety of antivirals, 
including tenofovir, are adverse birth outcomes. A systematic review (56) assessed 
the toxicity of fetal exposure to tenofovir in pregnancy. A review of data from the 
Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry shows that the prevalence of overall birth defects 
with exposure to tenofovir in the first trimester was 2.4% of 1612 live births and did 
not differ from the background rate in the United States of America (57). A limited 
number of studies showed no difference in fetal growth between infants exposed 
or not exposed to tenofovir (58,59). Tenofovir has limited penetration in breast 
milk, which would limit potential toxicity for the breastfeeding infant. 
10.2.3. Rationale for conclusions
Balance of benefits and harms
The Guidelines Development Group recognized that the most important strategy to 
prevent mother-to-child HBV transmission is to deliver the first dose of hepatitis B 
vaccine as soon as possible after birth, preferably within 24 hours, in accordance with 
the existing recommendations of the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) 
(1). Hepatitis B vaccination is considered safe and effective, and prevents transmission 
in 80–95% of cases (1). National strategies to prevent perinatal transmission should 
include providing hepatitis B vaccine at birth and ensuring high coverage of the birth 
dose through a combination of strengthened maternal and infant care at birth with 
skilled health-care workers present to administer the vaccine, and innovative outreach 
to provide vaccine for children born at home (see also Box 10.1). In addition, making 
available HBV vaccine that is not combined with other infant vaccines in all countries is 
crucial to the strategy of administering the birth dose. HBIG prophylaxis in conjunction 
with HBV vaccination may be of additional benefit for newborn infants whose mothers 
are HBsAg-positive, particularly if they are also HBeAg-positive, but may not be feasible 
in most settings, due to concerns related to supply, safety and cost.
The Guidelines Development Group also recognized that a proportion of infants born 
to mothers with very high maternal concentrations of HBV DNA acquire hepatitis B, 
despite both HBV vaccination and/or HBIG prophylaxis, and considered the current 
evidence base for the additional benefit of antiviral therapy. The Guidelines Development 
Group did not make a formal recommendation as a result of the current limited and low-
quality evidence base with three ongoing (and one completed but unpublished) trials 
due to report in 2015–2016, limited evaluation of the potential harms of antiviral use in 
pregnancy, and the lack of consensus as to the programmatic implications of a policy of 
more widespread antiviral use in pregnancy, given the very limited access to HBV viral 
load assays. Overall, data were limited for comparisons of the different antivirals, and 
suitable data were identified only for three different antivirals: lamivudine, telbivudine 
 93
Research gaps
• 
Conduct high-quality, direct, head-to-head RCTs in pregnant women 
to establish the relative efficacy of different antiviral regimens together 
with HBIG to reduce mother-to-child HBV transmission, and the optimal 
threshold of HBV DNA for antiviral therapy.
• 
Determine the risk of exacerbation or post-partum flare in the mother after 
cessation of antiviral therapy, as well as establish the optimal duration of 
continuation of therapy post partum (4 weeks or 12 weeks).
• 
Establish the safety of exposure to different NA therapies during pregnancy 
and breastfeeding through additional surveillance programmes, especially 
in LMICs.
and tenofovir. The review showed that maternal treatment with either lamivudine or 
telbivudine during the third trimester of pregnancy may be clinically effective and cost–
effective in helping to further reduce the vertical transmission of hepatitis B infection 
when compared with no treatment or placebo, in addition to HBV vaccine and HBIG 
for the newborn. However, for lamivudine, there was only one outcome – newborn HBV 
DNA positivity with a high GRADE quality score, and all findings on the relative efficacy 
of telbivudine versus lamivudine were rated as low. In addition, although tenofovir 
would be considered the preferred antiviral because of its high potency, higher barrier 
to resistance, and evidence of safety in pregnancy (lower teratogenic risk), efficacy data 
were limited to one observational study, and the quality of the evidence was rated as 
very low. Studies are in progress and will be reported in 2015. 
Several potential harms of antiviral use in pregnancy need to be more fully evaluated. These 
include the risk of development of HIV and HBV drug resistance if less potent drugs, such 
as lamivudine, telbivudine or adefovir, are used in mothers with a high HBV DNA viral 
load, especially if the duration of therapy is insufficient to reduce viraemia to low levels, 
and risks of toxicity to the baby, including through breastfeeding. HBsAg can be detected 
in breast milk. No differences in the rates of HBV infection have been reported between 
breastfed versus formula-fed infants (60) and breastfeeding is not contraindicated in HBV-
positive mothers. However, little is known regarding the effects on the infant of exposure 
to NAs during breastfeeding (61,62). There is also a risk of exacerbation or postpartum 
flare in the mother after cessation of antiviral therapy. Cirrhosis is relatively uncommon in 
the younger age group of pregnant women with good liver function, but there is a small 
increased risk of flares in serum ALT during pregnancy and post partum. Fatal cases are 
fortunately rare (63,64). The Guidelines Development Group concluded that the principal 
indication to treat mothers throughout pregnancy should be the necessity for treatment of 
CHB in the mother (see Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not to treat among persons with 
CHB). For women already on therapy who become pregnant, treatment may not need to 
be discontinued.
 94
10.3. Prevention of transmission of hepatitis B and 
measures to reduce disease progression in persons with 
chronic hepatitis B 
BOX 10.2  Prevention of transmission of hepatitis B and measures to reduce disease 
progression in persons with chronic hepatitis B  
See also Chapter 5, Box 5.1: Key points for initial assessment of persons with CHB prior to therapy
Persons with CHB should receive counselling regarding cofactors likely to accelerate disease 
progression (such as alcohol), the risk and modes of onward transmission, and the need for 
long-term follow up.
1. General measures to reduce HBV transmission
Individuals who are HBsAg positive should: adopt correct and consistent condom use during 
sexual intercourse if the partner is neither HBV immune nor has been vaccinated; not share 
razors, toothbrushes, or other personal care items; not donate blood, organs or sperm; and 
follow standard universal precautions with open cuts or bleeding.
2. HBV vaccination of household and sexual contacts (source: Existing WHO position 
on hepatitis B vaccine [2009])(1) 
Household members and sexual partners of persons with CHB are at increased risk of 
HBV infection and should be vaccinated if they are negative for HBsAg, anti-HBs and 
IgG anti-HBc. Dosing schedules depend on the type of vaccine, age at administration, 
need for rapid immunization and previous non-response to HBV vaccination. Combined 
hepatitis A and B vaccines are also available. Though approximately 10% of healthy 
adults do not mount an anti-HBs response (≥10 mIU/mL) to the primary immunization 
schedule, post-vaccination testing for anti-HBs is not recommended in any guideline. 
However, in some groups, such as health-care workers or sexual contacts of HBsAg-
positive persons, post-immunization testing for anti-HBs is desirable and non-
responders should receive a repeat three-dose (1 month apart) course of vaccination. 
This gives rise to protective antibody levels in 44–100% of individuals. Individuals who 
do not develop protective HBs antibody levels 1–2 months after revaccination can be 
considered for repeat vaccination (0, 1 and 2 months with a 6-month booster) with 
double the standard dosage of vaccine (1).
3. Alcohol reduction to reduce disease progression (source: Existing WHO guidelines on 
care and treatment of persons with HCV infection [2014] (65)
Significant alcohol intake (>20 g/day in women and >30 g/day in men) can accelerate 
the progression of HBV- and HCV-related cirrhosis. In the 2014 WHO guidelines for 
the screening, care and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection (65), it was 
recommended that a brief alcohol intake assessment should be conducted in all persons 
with HCV infection, followed by the offer of a behavioural alcohol reduction intervention 
in persons with moderate-to-high alcohol intake. This was based on a systematic review 
of persons with hepatitis C but also included studies among those with CHB. Therefore, 
a similar approach would be applicable to those with CHB.
The WHO ASSIST (Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test) 
package was considered an appropriate framework to design alcohol screening 
and reduction interventions, because it is evidence based, proposes a standardized 
approach, and is aimed at the primary health-care level (66). The ASSIST package 
includes tools for carrying out an assessment of the level of intake of alcohol and other 
substances, and instructions on implementing a brief counselling intervention.
 95
10.4. Prevention of hepatitis B and C transmission in health-care 
settings (source: Existing WHO guidelines (67–69))
Recommendations
• 
hand hygiene: including surgical hand preparation, hand washing and use of gloves
• 
safe handling and disposal of sharps and waste
• 
safe cleaning of equipment
• 
testing of donated blood
• 
improved access to safe blood
• 
training of health personnel
TABLE 10.1. WHO recommendations on prevention of HBV infection in health-care settingsa 
a Additional general guidance on post-exposure prophylaxis following needlestick injury/sexual exposure/mucosal or 
percutaneous (bite) HBV exposure 
• 
Wounds should be washed with soap and water, and mucous membranes flushed with water.
• 
The source individual should be screened for HBsAg, HIV and HCV antibody. 
• 
HBsAg, anti-HBs and IgG anti-HBc should be checked in the exposed individual, to assess whether the 
individual is infected, immune or non-immune to hepatitis B.
• 
If the source individual is HBsAg positive or status is unknown, HBIG (0.06 mL/kg or 500 IU) is given 
intramuscularly and active vaccination commenced (0, 1 and 2 months) if the exposed individual is non-
immune. HBIG and vaccine should be given at different injection sites. HBIG is repeated at 1 month if the 
contact is HBeAg positive, has high HBV DNA levels or if this information is not known. If the exposed individual 
is a known non-responder to HBV vaccination, then two doses of HBIG should be given 1 month apart.
• 
Anti-HBs titres should be measured 1–2 months after vaccination.
Injection safety in health-care settings
Injection practices worldwide and especially in LMICs include multiple, avoidable 
unsafe practices that ultimately lead to large-scale transmission of bloodborne 
viruses among patients, health-care providers and the community at large. Unsafe 
practices include, but are not limited to, the following prevalent and high-risk 
practices: 
1. Reuse of injection equipment to administer injections to more than one 
person, including reintroduction of injection equipment into multidose vials, 
reuse of syringe barrels or of the whole syringe, informal cleaning and other 
practices;
2. Accidental needlestick injuries in health-care workers, which occur while 
giving an injection or after the injection, including recapping contaminated 
needles, and handling infected sharps before and after disposal; 
3. Overuse of injections for health conditions where oral formulations are 
available and recommended as the first-line treatment;
 96
4. Unsafe sharps waste management, putting health-care workers, waste 
management workers and the community at large at risk. Unsafe 
management of sharps waste includes incomplete incineration, disposal in 
open pits or dumping sites, leaving used injection equipment in hospital 
laundry, and other practices that fail to secure infected sharps waste. 
WHO guidelines in 2015 will provide recommendations on the use of safety-
engineered syringes for intramuscular, intradermal and subcutaneous 
therapeutic injections in health-care settings (www.who.int/injection_safety/en). 
This guidance will help prevent the reuse of syringes on patients and decrease 
the rate of needle-stick injuries in health-care workers related to injection 
procedures. It will complement existing WHO best practices and the toolkit for 
injections and related procedures, published by WHO in 2010 (69), which notes 
the importance of a sufficient supply of quality-assured syringes and matching 
quantities of safety boxes. 
10.5 Prevention of hepatitis B and C and sexual 
transmission in persons who inject drugs (source: Existing 
WHO guidelines (66,70,71) 
Transmission of HBV through the sharing of contaminated injecting equipment 
among PWID is an important route of HBV and HCV transmission in some 
countries. Therefore, reducing this risk of transmission is an essential component 
of care. Existing WHO guidance recommends a comprehensive package of 
harm reduction interventions, which comprise nine activities specifically for 
PWID (70) (see Tables 10.2 and 10.3). Screening and testing for comorbidities 
among people who use drugs is crucial for informing treatment plans (drug–drug 
interactions, potential hepatotoxicity, among others).
Table 10.4 summarizes WHO recommendations for preventing the sexual 
transmission of HBV infection.
 97
Recommendations
1. 
Needle and syringe programmes
2. 
Opioid substitution therapy and other drug dependence treatment
3. 
HIV testing and counselling
4. 
Antiretroviral therapy
5. 
Prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted infections
6. 
Condom programmes for people who inject drugs and their sexual partners
7. 
Targeted information, education and communication for people who inject drugs and their 
sexual partners
8. 
Vaccination, diagnosis and treatment of viral hepatitis
9. 
Prevention, diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis.
TABLE 10.2. WHO/UNODC/UNAIDS comprehensive package of interventions for HIV preven-
tion, treatment and care in people who inject drugs (70) 
Recommendations
• 
Offer people who inject drugs the rapid hepatitis B vaccination regimen.
• 
Offer people who inject drugs incentives to increase uptake and complete the hepatitis B 
vaccination schedule.
• 
Implement sterile needle and syringe programmes that also provide low dead-space syringes 
for distribution to people who inject drugs.
• 
Offer peer interventions to people who inject drugs to reduce the incidence of viral hepatitis.
• 
Offer opioid substitution therapy to treat opioid dependence; reduce HCV risk behaviour and 
transmission through injecting drug use; and increase adherence to HCV treatment.
• 
Integrate treatment of opioid dependence with medical services for hepatitis.
TABLE 10.3. WHO recommendations for prevention of HBV and HCV infection among people 
who inject drugs (71)
Recommendations
• 
Promotion of correct and consistent condom use
• 
Routine screening of sex workers in high-prevalence settings 
• 
Targeting sex workers for catch-up HBV immunization strategies in settings where infant 
immunization has not reached full coverage
• 
Integrated action to eliminate discrimination and gender violence, and to increase access to 
medical and social services for vulnerable persons.
TABLE 10.4. WHO recommendations on prevention of sexual transmission of HBV infection (72,73)
 98
11. MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS 
FOR SPECIFIC POPULATIONS
See also Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not to treat; and Chapter 6: First-line 
antiviral therapies
A comprehensive approach to management includes measures to prevent 
onward transmission of hepatitis B, screening for HIV, hepatitis C and D, provision 
of hepatitis B vaccination, and general care and treatment. Management 
also needs to address the additional needs of special populations with CHB, 
including persons coinfected with HIV, HDV or HCV; those with advanced or 
decompensated liver disease as well as extrahepatic manifestations, those with 
acute hepatitis B, and children and adolescents, pregnant women, and PWID. 
The following chapter provides a summary of key considerations in the treatment 
and care of these populations for implementing the recommendations covered 
in Chapters 4 to 10.
11.1 Coinfections
HBV, HIV, HCV and HDV share similar transmission routes. Concurrent infection 
with these viruses usually results in more severe and progressive liver disease, 
and a higher incidence of cirrhosis, HCC and mortality. Coinfected persons 
are therefore more likely to need treatment. In general, the dominant virus 
responsible for liver disease should be identified and initial treatment targeted 
toward this virus. For example, if HCV is dominant, treatment should first be 
given to achieve HCV clearance and cure, followed by determination of whether 
treatment for hepatitis B is warranted based on ALT and HBV DNA levels.
11.1.1. HBV/HIV coinfection 
See also: Chapter 3.9: Background – Special populations
Chapter 5.2: Who to treat and not to treat among persons with CHB – Summary 
of the evidence – HBV/HIV coinfection
Chapter 6.2: First-line antiviral therapies for CHB – Summary of the evidence – 
Other populations
Chapter 9.2.2: Monitoring for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity – Summary of the 
evidence and
Chapter 10.2: Prevention of mother-to-child HBV transmission using antiviral 
therapy – Background
HIV coinfection has been shown to have a profound impact on almost every 
 99
aspect of the natural history of HBV infection and includes more rapid 
progression to cirrhosis and HCC, higher liver-related mortality, and decreased 
treatment response compared with persons without HIV coinfection (1–7). Other 
challenges with coinfection include cross-resistance between HIV and HBV 
drugs (8,9) increased liver injury, either due to direct hepatotoxicity (10,11) 
or ART-related immune-reconstitution hepatitis, with elevation of ALT and 
even fulminant hepatitis if ART does not cover both HIV and HBV infections 
adequately (12–14).
HBV screening and vaccination: (see also Chapter 10.1: Catch-up hepatitis 
B vaccination strategies) The risk of HBV infection may be higher in HIV-
infected adults, and therefore all persons newly diagnosed with HIV should be 
screened for HBsAg and anti-HBs to identify those with CHB, and vaccinated 
if non-immune  (i.e. no marker of resolved HBV infection – HBsAg and anti-
HBs positivity). Response to HBV vaccine is lower in persons with HIV or with a 
low CD4 count, and a meta-analysis has shown that a schedule of four double 
(40 µg) doses of the vaccine provides a higher protective anti-HBs titre than 
the regular three 20 µg dose schedule (15). In 2015, there will be new WHO 
recommendations on screening strategies for hepatitis B and C, and updated 
HBV vaccination recommendations from SAGE.
When to initiate ART in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons: In the 2013 WHO ARV 
guidelines (16), the recommendations were for initiation of ART in all HIV-
infected adults with a CD4 cell count less than 500 cells/mm3 (regardless of 
stage of liver disease); in all pregnant or breastfeeding women regardless of CD4 
count; and in all children less than 5 years of age regardless of CD4 count. In 
persons with evidence of severe chronic liver disease who are at greatest risk of 
progression and mortality from liver disease, initiation of ART is recommended 
regardless of CD4 count. ART initiation in persons with cirrhosis may improve 
overall survival and is therefore strongly recommended.
There was insufficient evidence and/or favourable benefit–risk profile to support 
initiating ART in everyone coinfected with HIV and HBV with a CD4 count >500 
cells/mm3 or regardless of CD4 count or WHO clinical stage. Therefore, for 
those without evidence of severe chronic liver disease, ART initiation should 
follow the same principles and recommendations as for other adults (i.e. provide 
ART at a CD4 count <500 cells/mm3). The use of dual anti-HIV and anti-HBV 
therapy has simplified the recommendations for widening the use of tenofovir 
with emtricitabine or lamivudine in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons, regardless of 
immunological, virological or histological considerations.
Other considerations: An increase in ALT level in HIV-coinfected persons may 
be the result of HIV-related opportunistic infections, hepatotoxicity from ART or 
TB drugs, alcohol use, HBV clearance, immune reconstitution, emergence of 
 100
drug resistance, reactivation after withdrawal of therapy, or superinfection with 
HDV, HAV, HCV, or even HEV in endemic regions. With advanced liver disease, 
increased drug levels of efavirenz may occur, which increases the risk for central 
nervous system toxicity. In addition, certain ARVs such as tipranavir or nevirapine 
have an increased risk for hepatotoxicity, and should be avoided in persons with 
advanced liver disease. 
Recommendations
• 
As a priority, ART should be initiated in all individuals with severe or advanced HIV clinical 
disease (WHO clinical stage 3 or 4) and individuals with CD4 counts ≤350 cells/mm3. 
(Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)
• 
ART should be initiated in all individuals with HIV with a CD4 count ≤500 cells/mm3 
regardless of WHO clinical stage. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence)a
• 
ART should be initiated in all individuals with HIV regardless of WHO clinical stage or CD4 
count in the following situations:
 
-
Individuals with HIV and active TB disease (Strong recommendation, low-quality evidence)
 
-
Individuals coinfected with HIV and HBV with evidence of severe chronic liver diseasea 
(Strong recommendation, low-quality evidence)
 
-
Partners with HIV in serodiscordant couples should be offered ART to reduce HIV 
transmission to uninfected partners (Strong recommendation, high-quality evidence)
 
-
Pregnant and breastfeeding women with HIVb.
• 
All children infected with HIV below 5 years of age, regardless of CD4 count or WHO clinical 
stage:
 
-
Infants diagnosed in the first year of life (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality 
evidence)
 
-
Children infected with HIV between 1 and <5 years of age (Conditional recommendation, 
very low-quality evidence); severe or advanced symptomatic disease (WHO clinical stage 
3 or 4) regardless of age and CD4 count. (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality 
evidence)
TABLE 11.1. Summary of existing recommendations for when to initiate ART in adults and adole-
scents, including persons with HBV/HIV coinfection (16) 
a Severe chronic liver disease includes cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease, and is categorized into compensated and 
decompensated stages. Decompensated cirrhosis is defined by the development of clinically evident complications of 
portal hypertension (ascites, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, variceal haemorrhage and hepatic encephalopathy), 
sepsis or liver insufficiency (jaundice).
b All pregnant and breastfeeding women infected with HIV should initiate a triple ARV regimen, which should be 
maintained at least for the duration of risk of mother-to-child transmission. Women meeting treatment eligibility 
criteria should continue lifelong ART (Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
For programmatic and operational reasons, particularly in generalized epidemics, all pregnant and breastfeeding 
women infected with HIV should initiate ART as lifelong treatment (Conditional recommendation, low-quality 
evidence).
In some countries, for women who are not eligible for ART for their own health, consideration can be given to stopping 
the ARV regimen after the period of risk for mother-to-child transmission has ceased (Conditional recommendation, 
low-quality evidence).
 101
Choice of ART regimen: In 2013, WHO updated its recommendations on the 
use of ART in adults, adolescents, pregnant women and children (16), including 
those with HIV/HBV coinfection. These guidelines, which will be updated in 
2015, recommend that HIV/HBV-coinfected persons should be simultaneously 
treated for both HIV and HBV infection, and receive ART that is active against 
both viruses to reduce the risk of resistance. A tenofovir-based regimen is the 
recommended therapy, which should include tenofovir/lamivudine, or tenofovir/
emtricitabine (provided there is no contraindication to tenofovir), together with a 
third drug efavirenz, to prevent the selection of HIV-resistant mutants. Tenofovir 
is available co-formulated with lamivudine or emtricitabine and efavirenz. This 
treatment strategy has achieved high rates of HBV DNA suppression (90%), 
HBeAg loss (46%) and HBsAg loss (12%) in HBeAg-positive patients after 5 
years of treatment, without evidence of resistance, and reduced progression to 
cirrhosis (17), with no significant differences in response in those with or without 
HIV coinfection (18). To date, no viral resistance to tenofovir in vivo has been 
described, although resistant strains have been identified in vitro. Although the 
risk of developing cirrhosis is negligible in HBV/HIV-coinfected persons on long-
term tenofovir combined with emtricitabine or lamivudine therapy, the risk of 
HCC persists, but is low. 
Renal function (and possibly bone function) should be monitored at least annually 
because of the impact on renal and bone metabolism (see Chapter 9.2: Monitoring 
for tenofovir and entecavir toxicity, and Table 9.1: Recommended doses in adults 
with renal impairment). If tenofovir-associated renal toxicity occurs, the dose 
of tenofovir should be adjusted according to the renal clearance. If tenofovir is 
absolutely contraindicated, there are little data on the best alternative treatment. 
Entecavir may be an option, as part of an active ART regimen (and not alone 
because of its weak antiviral activity against HIV), in persons in whom tenofovir 
is contraindicated, and who have never been exposed to lamivudine (or do not 
have lamivudine-associated HBV polymerase resistance). 
Treatment of HIV without the use of tenofovir in the regimen may lead to 
flares of hepatitis B due to ART-associated immune reconstitution. Similarly, 
treatment discontinuation, especially of lamivudine, has been associated with 
HBV reactivation, ALT flares and, in rare cases, hepatic decompensation. If 
ARVs need to be changed because of HIV drug resistance or drug toxicity, then 
tenofovir and lamivudine or tenofovir/emtricitabine should be continued together 
with the new ARV drugs (16). 
Children: Additional management challenges in HBV/HIV-coinfected children 
include choice of ART regimen in children initiating ART for their HIV infection, 
but who do not require treatment for their HBV infection. In children under the age 
of 12 years, tenofovir cannot be used, and it would be logistically challenging to 
 102
use a lamivudine-free regimen. In these children, use of a standard ART regimen 
(that may include the use of lamivudine) may be advisable with subsequent 
modification to a tenofovir-based regimen when the child is 12 years of age.
First-line ART
Preferred first-line 
regimens
Alternative first-line regimensa,b
Adults and adolescents 
(including pregnant and 
breastfeeding women and 
adults with TB coinfection and 
HBV coinfection)
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + 
EFV as 
a fixed-dose combination
(Strong recommendation, 
moderate-quality 
evidence)
AZT + 3TC + EFV
AZT + 3TC + NVP
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + NVP
(Strong recommendation, 
moderate-quality evidence)
Children ≥3 years
ABC + 3TC + EFV
ABC + 3TC + NVP
AZT + 3TC + EFV
AZT + 3TC + NVP
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + EFV
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + NVP
Children <3 years
ABC (or AZT) + 3TC + 
LPV/r
ABC + 3TC + NVP
AZT + 3TC + NVP
TABLE 11.2. Summary of recommended first-line ART regimens for adults, adolescents, 
pregnant and breastfeeding women and children, including persons with HBV/HIV coinfection 
(16) 
3TC lamivudine; ABC abacavir; ATV atazanavir; AZT zidovudine; d4T stavudine; DRV darunavir; EFV efavirenz; FTC 
emtricitabine; LPV lopinavir; NVP nevirapine; r ritonavir; TDF tenofovir
a ABC or boosted PIs (ATV/r, DRV/r , LPV/r) can be used in special circumstances.
b Countries should discontinue d4T use in first-line regimens because of its well-recognized metabolic toxicities 
(Strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). For adults, using d4T as an option in first-line treatment should 
be discontinued and restricted to special cases in which other ARV drugs cannot be used and to the shortest time 
possible, with close monitoring. For children, d4T use should be restricted to situations in which there is suspected or 
confirmed toxicity to AZT and lack of access to ABC or TDF. The duration of therapy with this drug should be limited 
to the shortest time possible.
11.1.2. HBV/HDV coinfection (see also Chapter 3.9: Background: 
Special populations)
Two major types of HDV infection occur: acute coinfection (persons are infected 
simultaneously with both HBV and HDV, which can lead to a mild-to-severe or even 
fulminant hepatitis (19,20), but recovery is usually complete and development of 
chronic delta hepatitis is rare (21). In contrast, superinfection with HDV (in a person 
already chronically infected with HBV), accelerates the course of chronic disease 
in all age groups, which develops in 70–90% of persons with HDV superinfection 
(22–25). Active coinfection or chronic infection with HDV is diagnosed by high titres 
of IgG and IgM anti-HDV, and confirmed by detection of HDV RNA in serum (26,27). 
However, HDV diagnostics are not widely available, and there has also been limited 
standardization of HDV RNA assays (26,28), which may also be used for monitoring 
response to antiviral therapy. Prevention and control of HDV requires prevention of 
 103
HBV infection through hepatitis B immunization (29), although there is no protection 
against HDV for those already HBV infected. 
There are limited data to inform definitive guidance on the management of persons 
with HDV infection. Persistent HDV replication is the most important predictor of 
mortality and the need for antiviral therapy. PEG-IFN is the only drug effective against 
HDV (29–33); antiviral NAs have no or limited effect on HDV replication (33,34). The 
optimal duration of therapy is not well defined, nor how long patients need to be HDV 
RNA negative after the end of therapy to achieve a sustained virological response, but 
more than 1 year of therapy may be necessary. The overall rate of sustained virological 
response remains low, including in children (31,32), and most patients relapse after 
discontinuation of therapy (33). New therapeutic agents and strategies are needed, and 
novel drugs, such as prenylation or HBV entry inhibitors, have shown early promise.
11.1.3. HBV/HCV coinfection (see also Chapter 3.9: Background: 
Special populations)
In HBV-infected persons, HCV coinfection accelerates progression of liver disease and 
increases the risk of HCC (35–37). HBV DNA levels are usually low or undetectable 
and as HCV is responsible for the activity of chronic hepatitis in most persons, they 
should generally receive initial treatment for HCV infection. If there is no access to 
HCV and HBV viral load measurements, it may be difficult to determine which virus 
is responsible for abnormal aminotransferases, and treatment of both infections may 
be required. The optimal regimens are uncertain, and more treatment studies are 
required in coinfected persons. PEG-IFN and ribavirin can be effective (38–41), but 
the treatment of hepatitis B and C is now largely based on treatment with direct-
acting antivirals, and follow current WHO guidelines (42). HBV DNA monitoring is 
necessary as there is a potential risk of HBV reactivation during treatment or after 
clearance of HCV, which can be treated with NAs (37). 
11.1.4. HBV/Tuberculosis (see also Chapter 3.9: Background: Special 
populations)
Groups at increased risk of infection with HBV are also at risk of infection with TB, 
largely because they live in regions of the world that are endemic for both infections. 
This can pose a particular challenge for clinical management and warrants extra 
clinical vigilance (43). PWID and prisoners have a high risk of acquiring HBV and 
HCV, and are also at increased risk of coinfection with TB (43,44). Screening of 
HIV-positive patients is recommended using a four-symptom screening algorithm 
to rule out active TB. In the absence of a cough, weight loss, fever and night 
sweats, active TB can be confidently ruled out. Otherwise, further investigations 
for TB and other disease would be recommended (45–47). Drug-induced liver 
injury with elevation of aminotransferases is three- to sixfold higher in persons 
coinfected with HBV, HCV or HIV who are receiving antituberculosis drugs, due to 
hepatotoxicity with isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide (48).
 104
11.2. Decompensated cirrhosis and advanced liver disease
Consolidated hepatitis guidelines are planned for 2016, which will include 
recommendations on more detailed management of complications in advanced 
liver disease, including ascites, bacterial peritonitis, upper gastrointestinal 
haemorrhage from oesophageal varices, and encephalopathy (see Chapters 6 
and 7: First-line antiviral therapies for CHB and Second-line antiviral regimens 
for management of treatment failure). Older persons in particular may present 
with cirrhosis and complications of chronic liver disease and HCC. Liver failure 
and HCC are rarely seen less than 20 years after infection. Compensated cirrhosis 
may progress over time to decompensated cirrhosis with associated weight loss, 
weakness, wasting, oedema, dark urine, and jaundice, ascites, hepatomegaly, 
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, oesophageal varices or encephalopathy, and 
eventually to liver failure, renal failure and sepsis, all of which are life-threatening. 
With progressive disease and the development of cirrhosis, the laboratory tests 
become progressively more abnormal. There is generally an increase in the ratio of 
AST:ALT; a low platelet count (suggesting the development of portal hypertension); 
an increase in ALP and gGT, a fall in serum albumin, and prolongation of prothrombin 
time with worsening hepatocellular function. Hyperbilirubinaemia with depressed 
albumin and prolonged prothrombin time are poor prognostic findings in CHB, 
and associated with an increased risk of liver-related death. The exacerbations 
associated with either a decline in viral replication or reactivation of viral replication 
and recurrence of disease can be severe and life threatening. Indeed, the pattern 
of recurrent reactivation with multiple remissions and recurrences is a particularly 
severe form of CHB, frequently leading to cirrhosis and ultimately hepatic failure.
Regular clinical examination and monitoring (every 6–12 months) of serum 
bilirubin, albumin, international normalized ratio (INR) and liver ultrasound before 
and during treatment is an essential part of the ongoing care of persons with 
HBV-related cirrhosis in order to detect further disease progression, including 
decompensation and evidence of HCC. All persons with decompensated cirrhosis 
should be considered for urgent antiviral therapy with tenofovir or entecavir, even 
if the HBV DNA level is low or undetectable, in order to improve clinical outcomes, 
and to prevent flares/reactivation (see Chapters 6 and 7: First-line antiviral therapies 
for CHB and Second-line antiviral regimens for management of treatment failure). 
Suppression of HBV DNA will also decrease the risk of recurrence of hepatitis B 
post-liver transplantation. In unstable persons with deteriorating renal function, 
entecavir can be used at a recommended dosage of 1 mg daily and persons 
should be monitored for lactic acidosis. NA therapy should usually be continued 
indefinitely in persons with cirrhosis. The risk of developing HCC is high in these 
persons, even with effective NA therapy and therefore long-term HCC surveillance 
is mandatory. IFN therapy is generally contraindicated because of significant 
adverse effects due to serious bacterial infections and possible exacerbation of 
 105
liver disease even with low doses. Management of persons with complications of 
cirrhosis and advanced liver disease, such as assessment and management of 
oesophageal varices, and prophylaxis to prevent variceal bleeding and spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis will also require care by appropriately trained personnel. 
11.3. Extrahepatic manifestations
HBsAg-positive persons with HBV-related extrahepatic manifestations (skin 
manifestations, polyarteritis nodosa and glomerulonephritis) and active HBV 
replication may respond to NA antiviral therapy. Comparative trials of antiviral 
therapy are lacking, and the efficacy reported in case reports is variable. 
Lamivudine has been the most widely used, and entecavir and tenofovir would 
be expected to have enhanced efficacy in this group. PEG-IFN may worsen some 
immune-mediated extrahepatic manifestations and it is advisable to avoid its use.
11.4. Acute hepatitis B
Antiviral therapy is not necessary for uncomplicated symptomatic acute hepatitis 
B, as >95% of immunocompetent adults will spontaneously clear HBV infection 
(49). Persons with fulminant or severe acute hepatitis may benefit from NA therapy 
with entecavir or tenofovir, to improve survival and reduce the risk of recurrent 
hepatitis B (50–52). The duration of treatment is not established, but continuation 
of antiviral therapy for at least 3 months after seroconversion to anti-HBs or at least 
12 months after anti-HBe seroconversion without HBsAg loss is generally advised.
11.5. Children and adolescents (see also Chapter 3.9: Background: 
Special populations) 
CHB is usually benign and asymptomatic in children, as they are generally in the 
immune-tolerant phase. In addition, there are low curative response rates with 
both NAs (necessitating long-term therapy) and IFN treatment, and concerns over 
long-term safety and risks of drug resistance. For these reasons, a conservative 
approach to treatment is generally indicated, unless there are other criteria for 
treatment, such as cirrhosis or evidence of severe ongoing necroinflammatory 
disease on liver biopsy. Although the majority of children will not require antiviral 
therapy, early identification and monitoring of children at risk for progression of liver 
disease guided by liver histology and a family history of HCC remains important. 
The use of NITs and identification of appropriate cut-offs have not yet been 
defined in children. Only conventional IFN, lamivudine and adefovir have been 
evaluated for safety and efficacy, but children generally have a similar response as 
adults (53–56). IFN cannot be used in infants aged less than 1 year. The FDA has 
approved tenofovir for use in adolescents and children above the age of 12 years 
for HBV treatment (and 3 years or older for HIV treatment). In March 2014, the 
 106
FDA approved entecavir for children with CHB above 2 years of age. Therefore, 
treatment options for children below 12 years, and especially below 2 years, 
remain limited. Studies with NAs are ongoing to better define treatment strategies. 
11.6. Pregnant women (see also Chapter 5: Who to treat and who not 
to treat among persons with CHB, Chapter 6: First-line antiviral therapies for 
CHB and Chapter 10.2: Prevention of mother-to-child HBV transmission using 
antiviral therapy) 
Indications for treatment in adults with CHB also apply to pregnant women. 
Based on safety data from the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry in pregnant HIV-
positive women who have received tenofovir and/or lamivudine or emtricitabine 
(16), tenofovir is the preferred antiviral, because it has a better resistance profile 
and more extensive safety data in pregnant HBV-positive women. The safety of 
entecavir in pregnancy is not known, and IFN-based therapy is contraindicated. 
For prevention of mother-to-child HBV transmission, the most important strategy 
is to deliver the first dose of hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible after birth, 
preferably within 24 hours followed by at least two timely subsequent doses, 
in accordance with existing recommendation by the WHO Strategic Advisory 
Group of Experts (SAGE) (57). The Guidelines Development Group did not make 
a formal recommendation on the use of antiviral therapy to prevent mother-to-
child transmission, as key trials are still ongoing, and there is a lack of consensus 
as to the programmatic implications of a policy of more widespread antiviral 
use in pregnancy. If a pregnant woman remains untreated or anti-HBV therapy 
is discontinued during pregnancy or early after delivery for any reason, close 
monitoring is necessary, as there is a risk of hepatic flares, especially after delivery. 
11.7. Persons who inject drugs (PWID) (See also Chapter 10.5: 
Prevention of hepatitis transmission in persons who inject drugs)
Injecting drug use is prevalent in many countries around the world, affecting 
people in low-, middle- and high-income countries. PWID are at increased risk of 
acute and chronic HBV infection (in addition to HIV and HCV infection) and liver-
related disease, as well as all-cause morbidity and mortality, and therefore require 
additional care. When caring for PWID, the central tenets of respect and non-
discrimination should be followed, and additional adherence and psychological 
support provided as required.
11.8. Dialysis and renal transplant patients (see Table 9.1: 
Recommended dosages in adults with renal impairment)
HBV is prevalent in persons with end-stage renal disease, including renal transplant 
recipients, who should be screened for HBV infection, and HBV-seronegative 
 107
persons vaccinated. All NAs (lamivudine, tenofovir and entecavir) require dose 
adjustment and should be used with caution in persons with renal impairment or 
in renal transplant recipients. Renal function should be monitored during antiviral 
therapy. Unexpected deterioration of renal function during antiviral therapy may 
necessitate a change of treatment or further dose adjustment. IFN-based therapy 
is not recommended in renal transplant recipients because of the risk of graft 
rejection. All HBsAg-positive persons undergoing renal transplantation should 
receive prophylactic NA therapy to prevent HBV reactivation.
11.9. Health-care workers (See also Chapter 10.4: Prevention of 
hepatitis B and C transmission in health-care settings )
Health-care workers need special consideration for HBV screening and HBV 
vaccination; however, this is not widely implemented in LMICs. Those who are 
HBsAg positive and undertake exposure-prone procedures, such as surgeons, 
gynaecologists, nurses, phlebotomists, personal care attendants and dentists, 
should be considered for antiviral therapy to reduce direct transmission to persons. 
In accordance with 2013 ARV recommendations (16), they should receive a 
potent antiviral agent with a high barrier to resistance (i.e. entecavir or tenofovir) 
to reduce levels of HBV DNA ideally to undetectable or at least to <2000 IU/mL, 
before resuming exposure-prone procedures. Post-exposure prophylaxis should be 
considered following needlestick or other occupational exposures.
11.10. Indigenous peoples 
Indigenous peoples are a special population group consisting of persons who are 
native to a region, but who retain social, cultural, economic and political characteristics 
that are distinct from those of the dominant societies in which they live. Spread across 
the world from the Arctic to the South Pacific, they are the descendants – according 
to a common definition – of those who inhabited a country or a geographical region 
at the time when people of different cultures or ethnic origins arrived. They are also 
a group with a high prevalence of HBV infection in many parts of the world. This 
group includes peoples of the Arctic and the Americas, and Maori and aboriginal 
peoples of New Zealand and Australia (58–61). These populations also often are or 
feel excluded from health-care services and, as they may live in remote communities 
far from hospitals and well-equipped clinics, have poor access to care medical care. 
The needs of these communities must be considered as countries plan for hepatitis 
treatment programmes, and implement the management recommendations.
 108
12. IMPLEMENTATION 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR NATIONAL 
PROGRAMMES
12.1. Introduction
Successful implementation of the recommendations in these guidelines and 
establishment of affordable screening, treatment and care programmes in the 
public and private sectors for persons with chronic hepatitis B (and C) infections 
in LMICs will depend on a well-planned process of adaptation and integration into 
relevant regional and national strategies and guidelines. There are several key 
considerations for national stakeholders and decision-makers, and this chapter 
provides an assessment framework for use by planners at the national level in 
order to identify which inputs and systems are currently available, and which areas 
require additional investment. The six building blocks for health systems identified 
by WHO provides a useful foundation (1). Many of the same challenges have been 
addressed by TB and ART programmes, and similar approaches are likely to be 
relevant for hepatitis programmes. 
12.2. Key principles
Key principles to enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of hepatitis 
programmes include the following:
1. 
Considering national responses for hepatitis care and treatment within the 
broader health and development contexts, which include strengthening 
linkages with other health and non-health programmes (2);
2. 
Ensuring that human rights and ethical principles of fairness, equity and 
urgency guide the development of national treatment policies so that barriers 
in access to testing, prevention and treatment services, particularly among 
certain populations, are addressed; 
3. 
Defining programme needs based on a broad, inclusive and transparent 
consultative process;
4. 
Securing the necessary financial resources and political support required to 
implement these recommendations. 
 109
12.3. Key considerations to support country planning 
and decision-making
Decisions on how to adapt and implement these guidelines at country level 
should be based on a careful assessment of the country epidemiological 
situation, estimated costs, human resource and infrastructure requirements, 
including how these should be addressed. In addition, consideration should 
be given to affordable access at the patient level, supported through public 
funding from  the national government, insurance schemes, or other sources, 
and existing services or infrastructure for HBV care and treatment. Decisions 
regarding national adaptation of these guidelines should also be made through 
a transparent, open and informed process, with broad stakeholder engagement 
to ensure that national programmes are effective, acceptable and equitable, and 
address community needs. It is recognized that at present, many low-income 
countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, lack access to basic infrastructure, 
diagnostics and drugs to implement care and treatment for both chronic 
hepatitis B and C. Checklist 12.1 provides a list of key issues across the health 
system to help plan and estimate the resources needed for implementation of 
HBV management recommendations. 
The key programmatic components of service delivery for CHB care and treatment 
are adequate clinic infrastructure, human resources (doctors, nurses, trained 
persons to provide testing and counselling), a referral system, laboratory and 
diagnostic services, reliable drug supply, monitoring and evaluation, and civil 
society participation. 
Infrastructure, service delivery and human resources
The setting, infrastructure and operational implications of providing long-term 
antiviral therapy to all eligible adults, adolescents and children with CHB need 
to be first considered. Countries need to ensure that systems are in place so that 
those with the most advanced liver disease are given priority. For this, a phased 
approach with an early learning phase before full scale up of testing and treatment 
may be appropriate. Building on and integrating with other health programmes or 
existing testing and treatment services, such as those already established for HIV 
and TB, or for difficult-to-access populations such as PWID, is strongly encouraged 
to both improve treatment access and optimize resources. 
A high-income setting model of specialist hepatitis care with a high physician-to-
patient ratio and availability of laboratory monitoring of HBV DNA is not currently 
feasible in LMICs. Service delivery plans need to be adapted accordingly, 
including the adoption of a simplified public health approach to care that 
enabled successful expansion of care and treatment in persons infected with TB 
and HIV in many LMICs.
 110
Many health-care workers have had limited training and experience in assessing 
persons with chronic liver disease or in providing antiviral therapy for CHB. 
Nationally standardized training, mentoring and supervision for all health-care 
workers involved in HBV care will be needed to allow sites to successfully take on 
the responsibility of providing lifelong antiviral therapy for CHB. Strategies are also 
needed to monitor and support adherence and retention, and re-engagement in 
care for those lost to follow up to optimize long-term treatment outcomes.
Laboratory and diagnostic services
These guideline recommendations will require increased access to laboratory and 
diagnostic services. The following laboratory infrastructure and diagnostic capacity 
will be required: (i) training of staff in laboratory assays and good laboratory practices 
in handling clinical specimens and biohazardous waste; (ii) institution of national 
policies for the use of licensed in-vitro diagnostic devices (IVD) for all laboratory 
tests; (iii) participation in quality assurance programmes and inter-laboratory 
comparisons to ensure that testing services are accurate and reliable, with national 
accreditation, even if in-house assays are in use because of resource constraints.
Available assays: In addition to HBsAg testing, laboratories should have the 
capacity to test for HBeAg and anti-HBe. HBV DNA quantification is important 
for decisions on initiating antiviral therapy and monitoring individuals on antiviral 
therapy. However, HBV DNA viral load assays (and also antiviral drug resistance 
testing) may not be widely available in LMICs. Access could be facilitated by utilizing 
the same platforms in current wide use for HIV viral load monitoring and through 
access to point-of-care assays for HBV DNA. In those settings where HBV DNA viral 
load measurements are possible, reporting should be standardized to IU/mL (I IU/
mL ≈ 5.3 copies/mL).
Staging of liver disease: Capacity to accurately estimate AST and ALT levels and 
platelet counts is essential to calculate an APRI score, which is the recommended 
NIT in LMICs for identifying individuals at greatest risk of progression of chronic liver 
disease who will benefit most from antiviral therapy. These are easy to perform and 
their interpretation is simple. AST and ALT estimations will facilitate the estimation of 
FIB-4, an additional NIT. In settings where cost and resources are not constraints, 
the recommended NIT is transient elastography (FibroScan), but this requires 
regular service/recalibration of the equipment and trained operators. 
In order to monitor potential renal toxicities following the use of tenofovir or 
entecavir, laboratories need to have the capacity to estimate serum creatinine levels 
and calculate GFR. Urine dipsticks for testing for proteinuria and glycosuria can be 
used as point-of-care tests, and serum phosphate levels and bone mineral density 
scans are additional monitoring tools where cost is not a constraint. In order to 
facilitate surveillance for early detection of HCC lesions in CHB, alpha-fetoprotein 
measurements in combination with ultrasound imaging, must be available. 
 111
Drug supply and pharmacy issues
Robust procurement and supply management systems are needed to ensure 
the continued availability of the required diagnostics, medicines (tenofovir or 
entecavir) and other commodities across the various levels of the health system. 
Pooled or joint procurement can be used to secure lower costs through economies 
of scale, and careful demand forecasting is key to minimizing waste. WHO and 
collaborating organizations have developed a variety of tools to assist with ARV 
drug quantification and supply management, which can be adapted for use for 
antiviral drugs for CHB. Integrated supply systems should be promoted when 
planning for decentralization, building on what exists and strengthening capacity 
where required. Appropriate pharmacy and drug storage facilities should also be 
considered during planning.  
Costing and planning
A key barrier to HBV treatment in resource-limited settings is the cost of medicines 
(including taxes, import charges), as well as costs of diagnostic and monitoring 
facilities, and staff. Although generic tenofovir in combination with other ARVs (for 
HIV) is now widely available and affordable as first-line therapy in persons who 
are HBV/HIV coinfected through national ART programmes, there is currently no 
international public sector procurement programme for those with HBV infection 
alone. Several generic products based on tenofovir and lamivudine have been 
approved through the WHO quality assurance prequalification programme. The 
cost of generic tenofovir alone may range widely from around US$ 50 per year of 
treatment to US$ 350 (and as high as US$ 500 in some parts of Asia), and for 
generic lamivudine US$ 25 per year. Entecavir is off-patent, but availability and 
costs vary widely (these are generally higher than for tenofovir), ranging from US$ 
30 to US$ 70 per month in India to up to US$ 450 per month in South Africa. 
However, at a low daily dose at 0.5 mg with inexpensive raw material, there is 
the potential for much lower manufacturing and therefore treatment costs. The 
higher costs of tenofovir and entecavir in many settings is the reason that other 
drugs such as lamivudine continue to be widely used, despite the additional costs 
incurred due to the development of drug resistance. Tenofovir has the potential 
to be more widely available and affordable in LMICs through access to reduced 
prices via a range of mechanisms, including license agreements negotiated with 
the Medicines Patent Pool for use in HIV (but also available for HBV).
HBV DNA testing also remains costly (US$ 100–400 per test), and therefore 
inaccessible for resource-limited settings. There is a critical need for these 
diagnostics and drugs to be available at more affordable prices in LMICs through 
national government price negotiation and pooled procurement.
 112
BOX 12.1  Implementation checklist of key health system issues
1. Communication, leadership and advocacy
• 
Who will be responsible for developing or updating national guidelines or protocols 
for patient management and monitoring, and health-care worker training materials?
• 
How will recommendations be communicated to (1) health-care facilities, including 
public, not-for-profit and private institutions; (2) health-care workers; and (3) other 
relevant stakeholders, such as people living with CHB?
• 
Who will take overall responsibility for advocacy with stakeholders such as political 
leaders, health personnel and the mass media?
2. Staffing and human resources 
• 
How many additional health-care workers are needed to implement the 
recommendations? Which cadres of health-care workers (physicians, health officers, 
nurses, midwifes, community health workers and laboratory assistants) are needed 
and how can they be recruited?
• 
How can task-shifting/sharing be employed to optimize available human resources 
and expand service delivery? 
• 
What training, capacity-building and skills-building are needed and for whom? How 
will it be delivered and paid for?
• 
What strategies will be put in place to monitor and support lifelong adherence to 
therapy and retention in care, and re-engage those lost to follow up?
3. Drugs and supplies
• 
What systems are required for forecasting treatment needs and procuring recommended 
drugs (tenofovir and/or entecavir) and other commodities at the best possible prices?
• 
Has a transition plan been developed to phase out suboptimal medicines (such as 
lamivudine, telbivudine or adefovir) and introduce tenofovir and entecavir?
• 
Do supply management systems need to be strengthened to manage the increased 
demand for diagnostics and medicines?
• 
Is a regulatory process in place to approve and register these medicines and 
diagnostics in a timely manner? Who is responsible for managing it?
• 
Are laboratory quality control and external quality assurance systems in place and 
fully functional?
• 
Do national laws allow for the purchase and importation of all necessary commodities? 
Are there patent issues? 
4. System organization 
• 
Are linkages and referrals systems between testing and treatment services adequate?
• 
Do services need to be integrated and/or decentralized to support implementation of 
the recommendations?
• 
Have treatment access plans been developed in consultation with managers of other 
relevant programmes (ARV, TB, maternal and child health, and drug dependence 
services)?
• 
What strategies will be put in place at the policy and service delivery levels to ensure 
that possible disparities in access to care and treatment will be addressed?
• 
What systems will be in place to ensure that the sickest people are adequately given 
priority?
• 
What interventions will be implemented to promote and reinforce adherence and 
retention in care?
 113
BOX 12.1  Implementation checklist of key health system issues (continued)
5. Infrastructure
• 
What additional infrastructure (such as clinic space, laboratories, pharmacies, 
administration areas and equipment) is needed to support implementation? Is it 
available from existing ARV programmes or other health programmes, or does it 
require new investment?
• 
What additional transport infrastructure (such as vehicles) is needed?
• 
What additional communication infrastructure is needed, including that between 
health facilities, health-care workers, laboratories and patients?
• 
What training programmes and toolkits are needed to support HBV management 
programmes?
6. Costs 
• 
What is the estimated total annual investment of implementing new recommendations?
• 
What are the unit costs for
 
-
antiviral drugs
 
-
neonatal and infant HBV vaccination
 
-
hepatitis testing, staging and counselling
 
-
general hepatitis care, including management of advanced liver disease
 
-
clinical and laboratory monitoring
 
-
training, mentoring, quality assurance and monitoring
 
-
community-level services?
7. Funding
• 
Where will the funds come from, such as government budget, social security or 
health insurance, out-of-pocket expenditure, or private foundations? 
• 
What will be done to mobilize additional resources to meet estimated investment 
needs?
• 
What potential cost savings can be achieved through economies of scale or synergy 
with other interventions and programmes?
8. Monitoring and evaluation 
• 
What indicators are needed at the facility and programme levels to adequately 
monitor coverage and assess the impact of antiviral therapy and other interventions? 
What are the human resources, equipment and infrastructure requirements?
• 
Are monitoring and evaluation systems interoperable (between the local and national 
levels) to avoid duplication and ensure consistency?
• 
What quality control, quality assurance and quality improvement systems are in 
place to optimize service delivery?
9. Implementation plan
• 
Does the plan have time-bound targets or objectives?
• 
Does the plan contain specific outcomes?
• 
Does the plan clearly identify the roles and responsibilities of the various stakeholders 
(such as government at the central, provincial and local levels, nongovernmental 
organizations, technical partners, communities and persons with CHB) involved in 
the process of treatment expansion?
 114
REFERENCES
CHAPTER 1
1. 
Guidelines for the screening, care and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
2. 
WHO Global Hepatitis Progamme. Prevention and control of viral hepatitis infection: interim strategy for global action 2012–
2014. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 
3. 
WHO. Hepatitis B vaccines. Wkly Epidemiol Rec. 2009;84:405–20.
4. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 June.
5. 
Guidance on prevention of viral hepatitis B and C among people who inject drugs. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
6. 
Consolidated guidelines on HIV prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care for key populations. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014.
7. 
Prevention and treatment of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections for sex workers in low- and middle-income 
countries: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
8. 
Prevention and treatment of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections among men who have sex with men and 
transgender people. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.
9. 
WHO guidelines on hand hygiene in health care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
10. 
Universal access to safe blood transfusion. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
11. 
WHO guidelines on drawing blood: best practices in phlebotomy. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
12. 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Geneva: United Nations; 1948.
13. 
Gilks CF, Crowley S, Ekpini R, Gove S, Perriens J, Souteyrand Y, et al. The WHO public-health approach to antiretroviral 
treatment against HIV in resource-limited settings. Lancet. 2006;368:505–10.
CHAPTER 2
1. 
Handbook for guidelines development. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
2. 
Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, Kunz R, Vist G, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction–GRADE evidence profiles 
and summary of findings tables. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):383–94.
3. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Atkins D, Brozek J, Vist G, et al. GRADE guidelines: 2. Framing the question and deciding 
on important outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):395–400.
4. 
Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of 
evidence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):401–6.
5. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist G, Kunz R, Brozek J, Alonso-Coello, P, et al. GRADE guidelines. 4. Rating the quality of evidence 
– study limitations (risk of bias). J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64:407–15.
6. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Montori V, Vist G, Kunz R, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines. 5. Rating the quality of evidence – 
publication bias. J Clin Epidemiol.  2011;64:1277–82.
7. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Brozek J, Alonso-Coello P, Rind D, et al. GRADE guidelines. 6. Rating the quality of evidence 
– imprecision (random error). J Clin Epidemiol.  2011;64:1283–93.
8. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Woodcock J, Brozek J, Helfand M, et al. GRADE guidelines. 7. Rating the quality of evidence 
– inconsistency. J Clin Epidemiol.  2011;64:1294–302.
9. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Woodcock J, Brozek J, Helfand M, et al. GRADE guidelines. 8. Rating the quality of evidence 
– indirectness. J Clin Epidemiol.  2011;64:1303–10.
10. 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Sultan S, Glasziou P, Akl EA, Alonso-Coello P, et al. GRADE guidelines. 9. Rating up the quality of 
evidence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011:64:1311–16.
11. 
Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Alderson P, Dahm P, Falck-Ytter Y, et al. GRADE guidelines. 15. Going from evidence to 
recommendations: the significance and presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66:719–25.
CHAPTER 3
1. 
Lavanchy D. Hepatitis B virus epidemiology, disease burden, treatment, and current and emerging prevention and control 
measures. J Viral Hepat. 2004;11(2):97–107.
 115
2. 
McMahon BJ. The natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Semin Liver Dis. 2004;24 (Suppl 1):17–21.
3. 
Hoofnagle JH, Doo E, Liang TJ, Fleischer R, Lok AS. Management of hepatitis B: summary of a clinical research workshop. 
Hepatology. 2007;45(4):1056–75.
4. 
Lok AS, McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2007;45(2):507–39.
5. 
Ganem D, Prince AM. Hepatitis B virus infection—natural history and clinical consequences. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350(11):1118–29.
6. 
Fattovich G. Natural history and prognosis of hepatitis B. Semin Liver Dis. 2003;23(1):47–58.
7. 
Fattovich G, Stroffolini T, Zagni I, Donato F. Hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: incidence and risk factors. Gastroenterology. 
2004;127:S35–S50.
8. 
Hadziyannis SJ, Papatheodoridis GV. Hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B: natural history and treatment. 
Semin Liver Dis. 2006;26(2):130–41.
9. 
Ott JJ, Stevens GA, Groeger J, Wiersma ST. Global epidemiology of hepatitis B virus infection: new estimates of age-specific 
HBsAg seroprevalence and endemicity. Vaccine. 2012;30(12):2212–19.
10. 
Zarski JP, Marcellin P, Leroy V, Trepo C, Samuel D, Ganne-Carrie N, et al. Characteristics of patients with chronic hepatitis B 
in France: predominant frequency of HBe antigen negative cases. J Hepatol. 2006;45(3):355–60.
11. 
Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, Lim S, Shibuya K, Aboyans V, et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of 
death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 
2012;380(9859):2095–128.
12. 
Goldstein ST, Zhou F, Hadler SC, Bell BP, Mast EE, Margolis HS. A mathematical model to estimate global hepatitis B disease 
burden and vaccination impact. Int J Epidemiol. 2005;34(6):1329–39.
13. 
Perz JF, Armstrong GL, Farrington LA, Hutin YJ, Bell BP. The contributions of hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections 
to cirrhosis and primary liver cancer worldwide. J Hepatol. 2006;45(4):529–38.
14. 
Kew MC, Kramvis A, Yu MC, Arakawa K, Hodkinson J. Increased hepatocarcinogenic potential of hepatitis B virus genotype 
A in Bantu-speaking sub-saharan Africans. J Med Virol. 2005;75(4):513–21.
15. 
WHO. Hepatitis B vaccines. Wkly Epidemiol Rec. 2009;84:405–20.
16. 
Do EC, Ghany MG. Hepatitis B virology for clinicians. Med Clin North Am. 2010;14:397–408.
17. 
McMahon BJ. The influence of hepatitis B virus genotype and subgenotype on the natural history of chronic hepatitis B. 
Hepatol Int. 2009;3(2):334–42.
18. 
Kim BK, Revill PA, Ahn SH. HBV genotypes: relevance to natural history, pathogenesis and treatment of chronic hepatitis 
B. Antivir Ther. 2011;16(8):1169–86.
19. 
Alexopoulou A, Karayiannis P. HBeAg negative variants and their role in the natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus 
infection. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20(24):7644–52.
20. 
Mast EE, Alter MJ, Margolis HS. Strategies to prevent and control hepatitis B and C virus infections: a global perspective. 
Vaccine. 1999;17(13-14):1730–3.
21. 
Beasley RP, Hwang LY, Lee GC, Lan CC, Roan CH, Huang FY, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis B virus 
infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet. 1983;2(8359):1099–102.
22. 
McMahon BJ, Alward WL, Hall DB, Heyward WL, Bender TR, Francis DP, et al. Acute hepatitis B virus infection: relation of 
age to the clinical expression of disease and subsequent development of the carrier state. J Infect Dis. 1985;151(4):599–603.
23. 
Szmuness W. Recent advances in the study of the epidemiology of hepatitis B. Am J Pathol. 1975;81(3):629–50.
24. 
Bertoletti A, Kennedy PT. The immune tolerant phase of chronic HBV infection: new perspectives on an old concept. Cell 
Mol Immunol. 2014; Sep 1. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2014.79. [Epub ahead of print].
25. 
Hadziyannis SJ, Vassilopoulos D. Hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2001;34(4 Pt 1):617–24.
26. 
Brunetto MR, Oliveri F, Coco B, Leandro G, Colombatto P, Gorin JM, et al. Outcome of anti-HBe positive chronic hepatitis B 
in alpha-interferon treated and untreated patients: a long term cohort study. J Hepatol. 2002;36(2):263–70.
27. 
McMahon BJ. The natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology. 2009;49(5 Suppl):S45–55.
28. 
Lok AS, McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B: update 2009. Hepatology. 2009;50(3):661–2.
29. 
Brunetto MR, Oliveri F, Colombatto P, Moriconi F, Ciccorossi P, Coco B, et al. Hepatitis B surface antigen serum levels help 
to distinguish active from inactive hepatitis B virus genotype D carriers. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(2):483–90.
30. 
Chen CJ, Iloeje UH, Yang HI. Long-term outcomes in hepatitis B: the REVEAL-HBV study. Clin Liver Dis. 2007;11(4):797–816, viii.
31. 
Saldanha J, Gerlich W, Lelie N, Dawson P, Heermann K, Heath A, et al. An international collaborative study to establish a 
World Health Organization international standard for hepatitis B virus DNA nucleic acid amplification techniques. Vox Sang. 
2001;80(1):63–71.
32. 
Shyamala V, Cottrell J, Arcangel P, Madriaga D, Linnen J, Phelps B, et al. Detection and quantitation of HBV DNA in the 
WHO International Standard for HIV-1 RNA (NIBSC code: 97/656). J Virol Methods. 2004;118(1):69–72.
33. 
Castera L. Noninvasive methods to assess liver disease in patients with hepatitis B or C. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(6):1293–302.e4.
34. 
Park SH, Kim CH, Kim DJ, Suk KT, Cheong JY, Cho SW, et al. Usefulness of multiple biomarkers for the prediction of 
significant fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2011;45(4):361–5.
35. 
Zhang YG, Wang BE, Wang TL, Ou XJ. Assessment of hepatic fibrosis by transient elastography in patients with chronic 
hepatitis B. Pathol Int. 2010;60(4):284–90.
 116
36. 
Blood donor selection: guidelines on assessing donor suitability for blood donation Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
37. 
Screening for hepatitis during the domestic medical examination for newly arrived refugees. Atlanta, GA: Centres for Disease 
Control and Prevention; 2014.
38. 
Hepatitis B and C: ways to promote and offer testing to people at increased risk of infection London: National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence; 2012.
39. 
Liaw YF, Leung N, Kao JH, Piratvisuth T, Gane E, Han KH, et al. Asian-Pacific consensus statement on the management of 
chronic hepatitis B: a 2008 update. Hepatol Int. 2008;2(3):263–83.
40. 
European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines: management of chronic hepatitis B virus 
infection. J Hepatol. 2012;57:167–-185.
41. 
Lok AS, McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B: update 2009. AASLD Practice Guideline update. Hepatology. 2009:50(3):1–30.
42. 
Bam RA, Birkus G, Babusis D, Cihlar T, Yant SR. Metabolism and antiretroviral activity of tenofovir alafenamide in CD4(+) 
T-cells and macrophages from demographically diverse donors. Antivir Ther. 2014;19(7):669–77.
43. 
Bam RA, Yant SR, Cihlar T. Tenofovir alafenamide is not a substrate for renal organic anion transporters (OATs) and does not 
exhibit OAT-dependent cytotoxicity. Antivir Ther. 2014;19(7):687–92.
44. 
Sax PE, Zolopa A, Brar I, Elion R, Ortiz R, Post F, et al. Tenofovir alafenamide vs. tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in single tablet 
regimens for initial HIV-1 therapy: a randomized phase 2 study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2014;67(1):52–8.
45. 
Kapoor R, Kottilil S. Strategies to eliminate HBV infection. Future Virol. 2014;9(6):565–85.
46. 
Colin JF, Cazals-Hatem D, Loriot MA, Martinot-Peignoux M, Pham BN, Auperin A, et al. Influence of human immunodeficiency 
virus infection on chronic hepatitis B in homosexual men. Hepatology. 1999;29(4):1306–10.
47. 
Konopnicki D, Mocroft A, de Wit S, Antunes F, Ledergerber B, Katlama C, et al. Hepatitis B and HIV: prevalence, AIDS 
progression, response to highly active antiretroviral therapy and increased mortality in the EuroSIDA cohort. AIDS. 
2005;19(6):593–601.
48. 
Puoti M, Spinetti A, Ghezzi A, Donato F, Zaltron S, Putzolu V, et al. Mortality for liver disease in patients with HIV infection: a 
cohort study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2000;24(3):211–17.
49. 
Hawkins C, Christian B, Ye J, Nagu T, Aris E, Chalamilla G, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis B co-infection and response to 
antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected patients in Tanzania. AIDS. 2013;27(6):919–27.
50. 
Wandeler G, Gsponer T, Bihl F, Bernasconi E, Cavassini M, Kovari H, et al. Hepatitis B virus infection is associated with impaired 
immunological recovery during antiretroviral therapy in the Swiss HIV cohort study. J Infect Dis. 2013;208(9):1454–8.
51. 
Weber R, Sabin CA, Friis-Moller N, Reiss P, El-Sadr WM, Kirk O, et al. Liver-related deaths in persons infected with the 
human immunodeficiency virus: the D:A:D study. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(15):1632–41.
52. 
Salmon-Ceron D, Lewden C, Morlat P, Bevilacqua S, Jougla E, Bonnet F, et al. Liver disease as a major cause of death among 
HIV infected patients: role of hepatitis C and B viruses and alcohol. J Hepatol. 2005;42(6):799–805.
53. 
Joshi D, O’Grady J, Dieterich D, Gazzard B, Agarwal K. Increasing burden of liver disease in patients with HIV infection. 
Lancet. 2011;377(9772):1198–209.
54. 
Thio CL, Seaberg EC, Skolasky R, Phair J, Visscher B, Munoz A, et al. HIV-1, hepatitis B virus, and risk of liver-related 
mortality in the Multicenter Cohort Study (MACS). Lancet. 2002;360(9349):1921–6.
55. 
Scharschmidt BF, Held MJ, Hollander HH, Read AE, Lavine JE, Veereman G, et al. Hepatitis B in patients with HIV infection: 
relationship to AIDS and patient survival. Ann Intern Med. 1992;117(10):837–8.
56. 
Sinicco A, Raiteri R, Sciandra M, Bertone C, Lingua A, Salassa B, et al. Coinfection and superinfection of hepatitis B virus 
in patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus: no evidence of faster progression to AIDS. Scand J Infect Dis. 
1997;29(2):111–15.
57. 
Chun HM, Roediger MP, Hullsiek KH, Thio CL, Agan BK, Bradley WP, et al. Hepatitis B virus coinfection negatively impacts 
HIV outcomes in HIV seroconverters. J Infect Dis. 2012;205(2):185–93.
58. 
Nikolopoulos GK, Paraskevis D, Hatzitheodorou E, Moschidis Z, Sypsa V, Zavitsanos X, et al. Impact of hepatitis B virus 
infection on the progression of AIDS and mortality in HIV-infected individuals: a cohort study and meta-analysis. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2009;48(12):1763–71.
59. 
Alter MJ. Epidemiology of viral hepatitis and HIV co-infection. J Hepatol. 2006;44(1 Suppl):S6–9.
60. 
Hoffmann CJ, Thio CL. Clinical implications of HIV and hepatitis B co-infection in Asia and Africa. Lancet Infect Dis. 2007;7(6):402–9.
61. 
Modi AA, Feld JJ. Viral hepatitis and HIV in Africa. AIDS Rev. 2007;9(1):25–39.
62. 
Easterbrook P, Sands A, Harmanci H. Challenges and priorities in the management of HIV/HBV and HIV/HCV coinfection in 
resource-limited settings. Semin Liver Dis. 2012;32(2):147–57.
63. 
Rizzetto M, Canese MG, Arico S, Crivelli O, Trepo C, Bonino F, et al. Immunofluorescence detection of new antigen-antibody 
system (delta/anti-delta) associated to hepatitis B virus in liver and in serum of HBsAg carriers. Gut. 1977;18(12):997–1003.
64. 
Hughes SA, Wedemeyer H, Harrison PM. Hepatitis delta virus. Lancet. 2011;378(9785):73–85.
65. 
Mumtaz K, Hamid SS, Adil S, Afaq A, Islam M, Abid S, et al. Epidemiology and clinical pattern of hepatitis delta virus 
infection in Pakistan. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005;20(10):1503–7.
66. 
Zaidi G, Idrees M, Malik FA, Amin I, Shahid M, Younas S, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis delta virus infection among hepatitis 
B virus surface antigen positive patients circulating in the largest province of Pakistan. Virol J. 2010;7:283.
67. 
Khan AU, Waqar M, Akram M, Zaib M, Wasim M, Ahmad S, et al. True prevalence of twin HDV-HBV infection in Pakistan: 
a molecular approach. Virol J. 2011;8:420.
 117
68. 
Wedemeyer H, Heidrich B, Manns MP. Hepatitis D virus infection--not a vanishing disease in Europe! Hepatology. 
2007;45(5):1331–2; author reply 2–3.
69. 
Gaeta GB, Stroffolini T, Smedile A, Niro G, Mele A. Hepatitis delta in Europe: vanishing or refreshing? Hepatology. 
2007;46(4):1312–13.
70. 
Cross TJ, Rizzi P, Horner M, Jolly A, Hussain MJ, Smith HM, et al. The increasing prevalence of hepatitis delta virus (HDV) 
infection in South London. J Med Virol. 2008;80(2):277–82.
71. 
Torres JR. Hepatitis B and hepatitis delta virus infection in South America. Gut. 1996;38 (Suppl 2):S48–55.
72. 
Yurdaydin C, Idilman R, Bozkaya H, Bozdayi AM. Natural history and treatment of chronic delta hepatitis. J Viral Hepat. 
2010;17(11):749–56.
73. 
Caredda F, Antinori S, Pastecchia C, Coppin P, Palla M, Ponzetto A, et al. Incidence of hepatitis delta virus infection in acute 
HBsAg-negative hepatitis. J Infect Dis. 1989;159(5):977–9.
74. 
Smedile A, Farci P, Verme G, Caredda F, Cargnel A, Caporaso N, et al. Influence of delta infection on severity of hepatitis B. 
Lancet. 1982;2(8305):945–7.
75. 
Farci P, Smedile A, Lavarini C, Piantino P, Crivelli O, Caporaso N, et al. Delta hepatitis in inapparent carriers of hepatitis B 
surface antigen. A disease simulating acute hepatitis B progressive to chronicity. Gastroenterology. 1983;85(3):669–73.
76. 
Bortolotti F, Di Marco V, Vajro P, Crivellaro C, Zancan L, Nebbia G, et al. Long-term evolution of chronic delta hepatitis in 
children. J Pediatr. 1993;122(5 Pt 1):736–8.
77. 
Farci P, Barbera C, Navone C, Bortolotti F, Vajro P, Caporaso N, et al. Infection with the delta agent in children. Gut. 
1985;26(1):4–7.
78. 
Fattovich G, Giustina G, Christensen E, Pantalena M, Zagni I, Realdi G, et al. Influence of hepatitis delta virus infection on 
morbidity and mortality in compensated cirrhosis type B. The European Concerted Action on Viral Hepatitis (Eurohep). Gut. 
2000;46(3):420–6.
79. 
Pontisso P, Ruvoletto MG, Fattovich G, Chemello L, Gallorini A, Ruol A, et al. Clinical and virological profiles in patients with 
multiple hepatitis virus infections. Gastroenterology. 1993;105(5):1529–33.
80. 
Liu CJ, Liou JM, Chen DS, Chen PJ. Natural course and treatment of dual hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections. 
J Formos Med Assoc. 2005;104(11):783–91.
81. 
Potthoff A, Manns MP, Wedemeyer H. Treatment of HBV/HCV coinfection. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010;11(6):919–28.
82. 
Donato F, Boffetta P, Puoti M. A meta-analysis of epidemiological studies on the combined effect of hepatitis B and C virus 
infections in causing hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 1998;75(3):347–54.
83. 
Benvegnu L, Noventa F, Bernardinello E, Pontisso P, Gatta A, Alberti A. Evidence for an association between the aetiology of 
cirrhosis and pattern of hepatocellular carcinoma development. Gut. 2001;48(1):110–15.
84. 
Kew MC, Yu MC, Kedda MA, Coppin A, Sarkin A, Hodkinson J. The relative roles of hepatitis B and C viruses in the etiology 
of hepatocellular carcinoma in southern African blacks. Gastroenterology. 1997;112(1):184–7.
85. 
Guidelines for the screening, care and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
86. 
Jonas MM, Block JM, Haber BA, Karpen SJ, London WT, Murray KF, et al. Treatment of children with chronic hepatitis B 
virus infection in the United States: patient selection and therapeutic options. Hepatology. 2010;52(6):2192–205.
87. 
Jonas MM, Kelly D, Pollack H, Mizerski J, Sorbel J, Frederick D, et al. Safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of adefovir 
dipivoxil in children and adolescents (age 2 to <18 years) with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2008;47(6):1863–71.
88. 
Jonas MM, Little NR, Gardner SD, International Pediatric Lamivudine Investigator G. Long-term lamivudine treatment of 
children with chronic hepatitis B: durability of therapeutic responses and safety. J Viral Hepat. 2008;15(1):20–7.
89. 
Sokal EM, Kelly D, Wirth S, Mizerski J, Dhawan A, Frederick D. The pharmacokinetics and safety of adefovir dipivoxil in 
children and adolescents with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Clin Pharmacol. 2008;48(4):512–17.
CHAPTER 4
1. 
Goodman ZD. Grading and staging systems for inflammation and fibrosis in chronic liver diseases. J Hepatol. 
2007;47(4):598–607.
2. 
Basar O, Yimaz B, Ekiz F, Ginis Z, Altinbas A, Aktas B, et al. Non-invasive tests in prediction of liver fibrosis in chronic 
hepatitis B and comparison with post-antiviral treatment results. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2013;37(2):152–8.
3. 
Cardoso AC, Carvalho-Filho RJ, Stern C, Dipumpo A, Giuily N, Ripault MP, et al. Direct comparison of diagnostic performance 
of transient elastography in patients with chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis C. Liver Int. 2012;32(4):612–21.
4. 
Castera L, Bernard PH, Le Bail B, Foucher J, Trimoulet P, Merrouche W, et al. Transient elastography and biomarkers for 
liver fibrosis assessment and follow-up of inactive hepatitis B carriers. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2011;33(4):455–65.
5. 
Ceylan B, Mete B, Fincanci M, Aslan T, Akkoyunlu Y, Ozgunes N, et al. A new model using platelet indices to predict liver 
fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B infection. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2013;125(15-16):453–60.
6. 
Chan HLY, Wong GLH, Choi PCL, Chan AWH, Chim AML, Yiu KKL, et al. Alanine aminotransferase-based algorithms of 
liver stiffness measurement by transient elastography (Fibroscan) for liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. J Viral Hepat. 
2009;16(1):36–44.
7. 
Chen B, Ye B, Zhang J, Ying L, Chen Y. RDW to platelet ratio: a novel noninvasive index for predicting hepatic fibrosis and 
cirrhosis in chronic hepatitis B. PLoS One. 2013;8(7).
 118
8. 
Chen J, Liu C, Chen H, Liu Q, Yang B, Ou Q. Study on noninvasive laboratory tests for fibrosis in chronic HBV infection and 
their evaluation. J Clin Lab Anal. 2013;27(1):5–11.
9. 
Chen YP, Liang XE, Dai L, Zhang Q, Peng J, Zhu YF, et al. Improving transient elastography performance for detecting 
hepatitis B cirrhosis. Dig Liver Dis. 2012;44(1):61–6.
10. 
Chen YP, Liang XE, Zhang Q, Peng J, Zhu YF, Wen WQ, et al. Larger biopsies evaluation of transient elastography for detecting 
advanced fibrosis in patients with compensated chronic hepatitis B. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;27(7):1219–26.
11. 
Cho HJ, Seo YS, Lee KG, Hyun JJ, An H, Keum B, et al. Serum aminotransferase levels instead of etiology affects the 
accuracy of transient elastography in chronic viral hepatitis patients. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;26(3):492–500.
12. 
Chrysanthos NV, Papatheodoridis GV, Savvas S, Kafiri G, Petraki K, Manesis EK, et al. Aspartate aminotransferase to platelet 
ratio index for fibrosis evaluation in chronic viral hepatitis. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006;18(4):389–96.
13. 
Degos F, Perez P, Roche B, Mahmoudi A, Asselineau J, Voitot H, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of FibroScan and comparison 
to liver fibrosis biomarkers in chronic viral hepatitis: a multicenter prospective study (the FIBROSTIC study). J Hepatol. 
2010;53(6):1013–21.
14. 
Dogan U, Akin M. AST-platelet ratio index may be a useful marker in the exclusion of cirrhosis in patients with CHB. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;28:915.
15. 
Erdogan S, Dogan HO, Sezer S, Uysal S, Ozhamam E, Kayacetin S, et al. The diagnostic value of non-invasive tests for the 
evaluation of liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B patients. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2013;73(4):300–8.
16. 
Fraquelli M, Rigamonti C, Casazza G, Donato MF, Ronchi G, Conte D, et al. Etiology-related determinants of liver stiffness 
values in chronic viral hepatitis B or C. J Hepatol. 2011;54(4):621–8.
17. 
Fung J, Lai CL, Cheng C, Wu R, Wong DKH, Yuen MF. Mild-to-moderate elevation of alanine aminotransferase increases liver 
stiffness measurement by transient elastography in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Am J Gastroenterol. 2011;106(3):492–6.
18. 
Gaia S, Carenzi S, Barilli AL, Bugianesi E, Smedile A, Brunello F, et al. Reliability of transient elastography for the detection 
of fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and chronic viral hepatitis. J Hepatol. 2011;54(1):64–71.
19. 
Ganne-Carrie N, Ziol M, De Ledinghen V, Douvin C, Marcellin P, Castera L, et al. Accuracy of liver stiffness measurement for 
the diagnosis of cirrhosis in patients with chronic liver diseases. Hepatology. 2006;44(6):1511–17.
20. 
Goyal R, Mallick SR, Mahanta M, Kedia S, Shalimar, Dhingra R, et al. Fibroscan can avoid liver biopsy in Indian patients with 
chronic hepatitis B. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;28(11):1738–45.
21. 
Gui Hl, Gao CF, Wang H, Liu XE, Xie Q, Dewaele S, et al. Altered serum N-glycomics in chronic hepatitis B patients. Liver 
Int. 2010;30(2):259–67.
22. 
Gumusay O, Ozenirler S, Atak A, Sonmez C, Ozkan S, Tuncel AF, et al. Diagnostic potential of serum direct markers and 
non-invasive fibrosis models in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatol Res. 2013;43(3):228–37.
23. 
Guzelbulut F, Sezikli M, Akkan-Cetinkaya Z, Yasar B, Ozkara S, Kurdas-Ovunc AO. AST-platelet ratio index in the prediction 
of significant fibrosis and cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2012;23(4):353–8.
24. 
Hongbo L, Xiaohui L, Hong K, Wei W, Yong Z. Assessing routine and serum markers of liver fibrosis in CHB patients using 
parallel and serial interpretation. Clin Biochem. 2007;40(8):562–6.
25. 
Jia JD, Hou JL, Ding HG, Chen JM, Xie Q, Wang YM, et al. Liver stiffness measured by transient elastography can predict 
liver fibrosis in Chinese patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatol Int. 2010;4 (1):22.
26. 
Kim BK, Kim DY, Park JY, Ahn SH, Chon CY, Kim JK, et al. Validation of FIB-4 and comparison with other simple noninvasive 
indices for predicting liver fibrosis and cirrhosis in hepatitis B virus-infected patients. Liver Int. 2010;30(4):546–53.
27. 
Kim BK, Kim HS, Park JY, Kim do Y, Ahn SH, Chon CY, et al. Prospective validation of ELF test in comparison with Fibroscan 
and FibroTest to predict liver fibrosis in Asian subjects with chronic hepatitis B. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41964.
28. 
Kim BK, Kim SA, Park YN, Cheong JY, Kim HS, Park JY, et al. Noninvasive models to predict liver cirrhosis in patients with 
chronic hepatitis B. Liver Int. 2007;27(7):969–76.
29. 
Kim BK, Kim SU, Kim HS, Park JY, Ahn SH, Chon CY, et al. Prospective validation of Fibrotest in comparison with liver 
stiffness for predicting liver fibrosis in Asian subjects with chronic hepatitis B. PLoS One. 2012;7(4).
30. 
Kim DY, Kim SU, Ahn SH, Park JY, Lee JM, Park YN, et al. Usefulness of FibroScan for detection of early compensated liver 
cirrhosis in chronic hepatitis B. Dig Dis Sci. 2009;54(8):1758–63.
31. 
Kim SU, Ahn SH, Park JY, Kang W, Kim DY, Park YN, et al. Liver stiffness measurement in combination with noninvasive 
markers for the improved diagnosis of B-viral liver cirrhosis. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2009;43(3):267–71.
32. 
Kongtawelert P, Chanmee T, Pothacharoen P, Wisedopa N, Kranokpiruk P, Poovorawan K, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of liver 
stiffness measurement and serum hyaluronic acid for detecting liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B with respect to ALT levels. 
Asian Biomedicine. 2013;7(5):609–17.
33. 
Kumar M, Rastogi A, Singh T, Bihari C, Gupta E, Sharma P, et al. Analysis of discordance between transient elastography 
and liver biopsy for assessing liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatol Int. 2013;7(1):134–43.
34. 
Kwok R, Gonzalez-Arce V, Kim A, Ngu MC, Lee AU. Evaluation of hepatic fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B using transient 
elastography. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;24:A283.
35. 
Lee IC, Chan CC, Huang YH, Huo TI, Chu CJ, Lai CR, et al. Comparative analysis of noninvasive models to predict early liver 
fibrosis in hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2011;45(3):278–85.
36. 
Lemoine M, Shimakawa Y, Goldin R, Khalil M, Lloyd J, Suso P, et al. Validation and comparison of non-invasive markers of 
liver fibrosis in West-African patients with chronic hepatitis B living in the Gambia. J Hepatol. 2014;1:S414–S415.
 119
37. 
Lesmana CRA, Salim S, Hasan I, Sulaiman AS, Gani RA, Pakasi LS, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of transient elastography 
(FibroScan) versus the aspartate transaminase to platelet ratio index in assessing liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B: the role 
in primary care setting. J Clin Pathol. 2011;64(10):916–20.
38. 
Li J, Gordon SC, Rupp LB, Zhang T, Boscarino JA, Vijayadeva V, et al. The validity of serum markers for fibrosis staging in 
chronic hepatitis B and C. J Viral Hepat. 2014;21(12):930–7.
39. 
Lin CS, Chang CS, Yang SS, Yeh HZ, Lin CW. Retrospective evaluation of serum markers APRI and AST/ALT for assessing liver 
fibrosis and cirrhosis in chronic hepatitis B and C patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Intern Med. 2008;47(7):569–75.
40. 
Liu HB, Zhou JP, Zhang Y, Lv XH, Wang W. Prediction on liver fibrosis using different APRI thresholds when patient age is a 
categorical marker in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Clin Chim Acta. 2011;412(1–2):33–7.
41. 
Ma J, Jiang Y, Gong G. Evaluation of seven noninvasive models in staging liver fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B 
virus infection. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;25(4):428–34.
42. 
Mallet V, Dhalluin-Venier V, Roussin C, Bourliere M, Pettinelli ME, Giry C, et al. The accuracy of the FIB-4 index for the 
diagnosis of mild fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2009;29(4):409–15.
43. 
Marcellin P, Ziol M, Bedossa P, Douvin C, Poupon R, De Ledinghen V, et al. Non-invasive assessment of liver fibrosis by 
stiffness measurement in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Liver Int. 2009;29(2):242–7.
44. 
Miailhes P, Pradat P, Chevallier M, Lacombe K, Bailly F, Cotte L, et al. Proficiency of transient elastography compared to liver 
biopsy for the assessment of fibrosis in HIV/HBV-coinfected patients. J Viral Hepat. 2011;18(1):61–9.
45. 
Myers RP, Elkashab M, Ma M, Crotty P, Pomier-Layrargues G. Transient elastography for the noninvasive assessment of liver 
fibrosis: a multicentre Canadian study. Can J Gastroenterol. 2010;24(11):661–70.
46. 
Myers RP, Tainturier MH, Ratziu V, Piton A, Thibault V, Imbert-Bismut F, et al. Prediction of liver histological lesions with 
biochemical markers in patients with chronic hepatitis B. J Hepatol. 2003;39(2):222–30.
47. 
Ogawa E, Furusyo N, Murata M, Ohnishi H, Toyoda K, Taniai H, et al. Longitudinal assessment of liver stiffness by transient 
elastography for chronic hepatitis B patients treated with nucleoside analog. Hepatol Res. 2011;41(12):1178–88.
48. 
Osakabe K, Ichino N, Nishikawa T, Sugiyama H, Kato M, Kitahara S, et al. Reduction of liver stiffness by antiviral therapy in 
chronic hepatitis B. J Gastroenterol. 2011;46(11):1324–34.
49. 
Papalavrentios L, Sinakos E, Manolakopoulos S, Papatheodoridis GV, Papageorgiou MV, Papachrysos N, et al. Transient 
elastography (Fibroscan) in patients with chronic hepatitis B. J Gastroenterol Hepatol (Hong Kong). 2012;1(11):311–14.
50. 
Papatheodoridis GV, Manolakopoulos S, Margariti A, Papageorgiou MV, Kranidioti H, Katoglou A, et al. The usefulness of transient 
elastography in the assessment of patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Viral Hepat. 2014;21(7):517–24.
51. 
Poynard T, Ngo Y, Marcellin P, Hadziyannis S, Ratziu V, Benhamou Y. Impact of adefovir dipivoxil on liver fibrosis and 
activity assessed with biochemical markers (FibroTest-ActiTest) in patients infected by hepatitis B virus. J Viral Hepat. 
2009;16(3):203–13.
52. 
Raftopoulos SC, George J, Bourliere M, Rossi E, de Boer WB, Jeffrey GP, et al. Comparison of noninvasive models of fibrosis 
in chronic hepatitis B. Hepatol Int. 2012;6(2):457–67.
53. 
Sebastiani G, Halfon P, Castera L, Pol S, Thomas D, Mangia A, et al. The effect of prevalence of liver fibrosis stages in 
performance of noninvasive fibrosis biomarkers in chronic liver diseases (CLDS): results of an independent, international 
study. Dig Liver Dis. 2011;43:S141.
54. 
Sebastiani G, Vario A, Guido M, Alberti A. Sequential algorithms combining non-invasive markers and biopsy for the 
assessment of liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. World J Gastroenterol. 2007;13(4):525–31.
55. 
Seto WK, Lee CF, Lai CL, Ip PPC, Fong DYT, Fung J, et al. A new model using routinely available clinical parameters to 
predict significant liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23077.
56. 
Shin WG, Park SH, Jang MK, Hahn TH, Kim JB, Lee MS, et al. Aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio index (APRI) can 
predict liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. Dig Liver Dis. 2008;40(4):267–74.
57. 
Shoaei SD, Sali S, Karamipour M, Riahi E. Non-invasive histologic markers of liver disease in patients with chronic hepatitis 
B. Hepat Mon. 2014;14(2):e14228.
58. 
Shrivastava R, Sen S, Banerji D, Praharaj AK, Chopra GS, Gill SS. Assessment of non-invasive models for liver fibrosis in chronic 
hepatitis B virus related liver disease patients in resource-limited settings. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2013;56(3):196–9.
59. 
Sim SJ, Cheong JY, Cho SW, Kim JS, Lim TY, Shin DH, et al. [Efficacy of AST to platelet ratio in predicting severe hepatic 
fibrosis and cirrhosis in chronic hepatitis B infection]. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2005;45:340–7.
60. 
Sinakos E, Manolakopoulos S, Papatheodoridis G, Papalavrentios L, Papageorgiou MV, Papachrysos N, et al. Transient 
elastography (FibroScan) in patients with chronic hepatitis B in everyday clinical practice. J Hepatol. 2011;54:S140–S141.
61. 
Sokucu S, Gokce S, Gulluoglu M, Aydogan A, Celtik C, Durmaz O. The role of the non-invasive serum marker FibroTest-
ActiTest in the prediction of histological stage of fibrosis and activity in children with nave chronic hepatitis B infection. 
Scand J Infect Dis. 2010;42(9):699–703.
62. 
Sporea I, Sirli R, Deleanu A, Tudora A, Popescu A, Curescu M, et al. Liver stiffness measurements in patients with HBV vs 
HCV chronic hepatitis: a comparative study. World J Gastroenterol. 2010;16(38):4832–7.
63. 
Sporea I, Sirli R, Popescu A, Danila M. Acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI)—a new modality for the evaluation of liver 
fibrosis. Medicine. 2010;12(1):26–31.
64. 
Trembling PM, Lampertico P, Parkes J, Tanwar S, Vigano M, Facchetti F, et al. Performance of enhanced liver fibrosis test 
and comparison with transient elastography in the identification of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B infection. 
J Viral Hepat. 2014;21(6):430–8.
 120
65. 
Ucar F, Sezer S, Ginis Z, Ozturk G, Albayrak A, Basar O, et al. APRI, the FIB-4 score, and Forn’s index have noninvasive 
diagnostic value for liver fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;25(9):1076–81.
66. 
Uyar C, Akcam FZ, Ciris M, Kaya O, Kockar C, Isler M. Comparison of FibroTest-ActiTest with histopathology in demonstrating 
fibrosis and necroinflammatory activity in chronic hepatitis B and C. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2010;53(3):470–5.
67. 
Vigano M, Paggi S, Lampertico P, Fraquelli M, Massironi S, Ronchi G, et al. Dual cut-off transient elastography to assess 
liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B: a cohort study with internal validation. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2011;34(3):353–62.
68. 
Wang H, Xue L, Yan R, Zhou Y, Wang MS, Cheng MJ, et al. Comparison of FIB-4 and APRI in Chinese HBV-infected patients 
with persistently normal ALT and mildly elevated ALT. J Viral Hepat. 2013;20(4):e3–e10.
69. 
Wang Y, Xu MY, Zheng RD, Xian JC, Xu HT, Shi JP, et al. Prediction of significant fibrosis and cirrhosis in hepatitis B 
e-antigen negative patients with chronic hepatitis B using routine parameters. Hepatol Res. 2013;43(5):441–51.
70. 
Wong GLH, Wong VWS, Choi PCL, Chan AWH, Chan HLY. Development of a non-invasive algorithm with transient 
elastography (Fibroscan) and serum test formula for advanced liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis B. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2010;31(10):1095–103.
71. 
Wong GLH, Wong VWS, Choi PCL, Chan AWH, Chim AML, Yiu KKL, et al. Evaluation of alanine transaminase and hepatitis 
B Virus DNA to predict liver cirrhosis in hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B using transient elastography. Am 
J Gastroenterol. 2008;103(12):3071–81.
72. 
Wong GLH, Wong VWS, Choi PCL, Chan AWH, Chim AML, Yiu KKL, et al. On-treatment monitoring of liver fibrosis with 
transient elastography in chronic hepatitis B patients. Antiviral Ther. 2011;16(2):165–72.
73. 
Wu SD, Ni YJ, Liu LL, Li H, Lu LG, Wang JY. Establishment and validation of a simple noninvasive model to predict significant 
liver fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatol Int. 2012;6(1):360–8.
74. 
Zeng DW, Liu YR, Zhang JM, Zhu YY, Lin S, You J, et al. Serum ceruloplasmin levels correlate negatively with liver fibrosis 
in males with chronic hepatitis B: a new noninvasive model for predicting liver fibrosis in HBV-related liver disease. PLoS 
One. 2013;8(10).
75. 
Zhang YX, Wu WJ, Zhang YZ, Feng YL, Zhou XX, Pan Q. Noninvasive assessment of liver fibrosis with combined serum 
aminotransferase/platelet ratio index and hyaluronic acid in patients with chronic hepatitis B. World J Gastroenterol. 
2008;14(46):7117–21.
76. 
Zhou K, Gao CF, Zhao YP, Liu HL, Zheng RD, Xian JC, et al. Simpler score of routine laboratory tests predicts liver fibrosis in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(9):1569–77.
77. 
Zhu CL, Li WT, Li Y, Gao RT. Serum levels of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 are correlated with liver fibrosis in patients 
with chronic hepatitis B. J Dig Dis. 2012;13(11):558–63.
78. 
Zhu X, Wang LC, Chen EQ, Chen XB, Chen LY, Liu L, et al. Prospective evaluation of fibroscan for the diagnosis of hepatic 
fibrosis in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatol Int. 2011;5(1):306.
79. 
Bonnard P, Sombie R, Lescure FX, Bougouma A, Guiard-Schmid JB, Poynard T, et al. Comparison of elastography, serum 
marker scores, and histology for the assessment of liver fibrosis in hepatitis B virus (HBV)-infected patients in Burkina Faso. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010;82(3):454–8.
80. 
Bottero J, Lacombe K, Guechot J, Serfaty L, Miailhes P, Bonnard P, et al. Performance of 11 biomarkers for liver fibrosis 
assessment in HIV/HBV co-infected patients. J Hepatol. 2009;50(6):1074–83.
81. 
Fraquelli M, Rigamonti C, Casazza G, Conte D, Donato MF, Ronchi G, et al. Reproducibility of transient elastography in the 
evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease. Gut. 2007;56(7):968–73.
CHAPTER 5
1. 
Prati D, Taioli E, Zanella A, Della Torre E, Butelli S, Del Vecchio E, et al. Updated definitions of healthy ranges for serum 
alanine aminotransferase levels. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137(1):1–10.
2. 
Saldanha J, Gerlich W, Lelie N, Dawson P, Heermann K, Heath A. An international collaborative study to establish a World Health 
Organization international standard for hepatitis B virus DNA nucleic acid amplification techniques. Vox Sang. 2001;80:63–71.
3. 
The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST): manual for use in primary care. Geneva: World 
Health Organization.
4. 
Shimakawa Y, Yan HJ, Tsuchiya N, Bottomley C, Hall AJ. Association of early age at establishment of chronic hepatitis 
B infection with persistent viral replication, liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma: a systematic review. PLoS One. 
2013;8(7):e69430.
5. 
Tohme RA, Bulkow L, Homan CE, Negus S, McMahon BJ. Rates and risk factors for hepatitis B reactivation in a cohort of 
persons in the inactive phase of chronic hepatitis B - Alaska, 2001–2010. J Clin Virol. 2013;58(2):396–400.
6. 
Chen G, Lin W, Shen F, Iloeje UH, London WT, Evans AA. Chronic hepatitis B virus infection and mortality from non-liver 
causes: results from the Haimen City cohort study. Int J Epidemiol. 2005;34(1):132–7.
7. 
Oh JK, Shin HR, Lim MK, Cho H, Kim DI, Jee Y, et al. Multiplicative synergistic risk of hepatocellular carcinoma development 
among hepatitis B and C co-infected subjects in HBV endemic area: a community-based cohort study. BMC Cancer. 2012;12:452. 
8. 
Chen CJ, Yang HI, Su J, Jen CL, You SL, Lu SN, et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological gradient of serum 
hepatitis B virus DNA level. J Am Med Assoc. 2006;295(1):65–73.
9. 
Chen JD, Yang HI, Iloeje UH, You SL, Lu SN, Wang LY, et al. Carriers of inactive hepatitis B virus are still at risk for 
hepatocellular carcinoma and liver-related death. Gastroenterology. 2010;138(5):1747–54.
 121
10. 
Loomba R, Liu J, Yang HI, Lee MH, Lu SN, Wang LY, et al. Synergistic effects of family history of hepatocellular carcinoma and 
hepatitis B virus infection on risk for incident hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;11(12):1636–45.
11. 
Chen CF, Lee WC, Yang HI, Chang HC, Jen CL, Iloeje UH, et al. Changes in serum levels of HBV DNA and alanine 
aminotransferase determine risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(4):1240–8, 8.
12. 
Iloeje UH, Yang HI, Su J, Jen CL, You SL, Chen CJ. Predicting cirrhosis risk based on the level of circulating hepatitis B viral 
load. Gastroenterology. 2006;130(3):678–86.
13. 
Liu J, Yang HI, Lee MH, Lu SN, Jen CL, Wang LY, et al. Incidence and determinants of spontaneous hepatitis B surface 
antigen seroclearance: a community-based follow-up study. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(2):474–82.
14. 
McMahon BJ, Bulkow L, Simons B, Zhang Y, Negus S, Homan C, et al. Relationship between level of hepatitis B virus DNA 
and liver disease: a population-based study of hepatitis B e antigen-negative persons with hepatitis B. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2014;12(4):701–6.
15. 
Chen CJ, Yang HI. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B REVEALed. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;26(4):628–38.
16. 
Yuen MF, Yuan HJ, Wong DK, Yuen JC, Wong WM, Chan AO, et al. Prognostic determinants for chronic hepatitis B in Asians: 
therapeutic implications. Gut. 2005;54(11):1610–14.
17. 
Chu CM, Liaw YF. Predictive factors for reactivation of hepatitis B following hepatitis B e antigen seroconversion in chronic 
hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2007;133(5):1458–65.
18. 
Chu CM, Chen YC, Tai DI, Liaw YF. Level of hepatitis B virus DNA in inactive carriers with persistently normal levels of alanine 
aminotransferase. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;8(6):535–40.
19. 
Kim JH, Lee JH, Park SJ, Bae MH, Kim JH, Kim dY, et al. Factors associated with natural seroclearance of hepatitis B surface 
antigen and prognosis after seroclearance: a prospective follow-up study. Hepatogastroenterology. 2008;55(82-83):578–81.
20. 
Lin CL, Liao LY, Liu CJ, Yu MW, Chen PJ, Lai MY, et al. Hepatitis B viral factors in HBeAg-negative carriers with persistently 
normal serum alanine aminotransferase levels. Hepatology. 2007;45(5):1193–8.
21. 
Montazeri G, Rahban M, Mohamadnejad M, Zamani F, Hooshyar A, Fazlolahi A, et al. Liver histology and HBV DNA levels in 
chronically HBV infected patients with persistently normal alanine aminotransferase. Arch Iranian Med. 2010;13(3):193–202.
22. 
Nakazawa T, Shibuya A, Takeuchi A, Shibata Y, Hidaka H, Okuwaki Y, et al. Viral level is an indicator of long-term outcome 
of hepatitis B virus e antigen-negative carriers with persistently normal serum alanine aminotransferase levels. J Viral Hepat. 
2011;18(7):e191–e9.
23. 
Papatheodoridis GV, Chrysanthos N, Hadziyannis E, Cholongitas E, Manesis EK. Longitudinal changes in serum HBV DNA 
levels and predictors of progression during the natural course of HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Viral 
Hepat. 2008;15(6):434–41.
24. 
Tai DI, Lin SM, Sheen IS, Chu CM, Lin DY, Liaw YF. Long-term outcome of hepatitis B e antigen-negative hepatitis B surface 
antigen carriers in relation to changes of alanine aminotransferase levels over time. Hepatology. 2009;49(6):1859–67.
25. 
Wong GL, Wong VW. Risk prediction of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma in the era of antiviral therapy. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19(39):6515–22.
26. 
Ganne-Carrie N, Williams V, Kaddouri H, Trinchet JC, Dziri-Mendil S, Alloui C, et al. Significance of hepatitis B virus 
genotypes A to E in a cohort of patients with chronic hepatitis B in the Seine Saint Denis District of Paris (France). J Med 
Virol. 2006;78(3):335–40.
27. 
Hann HW, Fu X, Myers RE, Hann RS, Wan S, Kim SH, et al. Predictive value of alpha-fetoprotein in the long-term risk of 
developing hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with hepatitis B virus infection--results from a clinic-based longitudinal 
cohort. Eur J Cancer. 2012;48(15):2319–27.
28. 
Krarup H, Andersen S, Madsen PH, Christensen PB, Laursen AL, Bentzen-Petersen A, et al. HBeAg and not genotypes predicts 
viral load in patients with hepatitis B in Denmark: a nationwide cohort study. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2011;46(12):1484–91.
29. 
Ribes J, Cleries R, Rubio A, Hernandez JM, Mazzara R, Madoz P, et al. Cofactors associated with liver disease mortality in 
an HBsAg-positive Mediterranean cohort: 20 years of follow-up. Int J Cancer. 2006;119(3):687–94.
30. 
Seo SI, Choi HS, Choi BY, Kim HS, Kim HY, Jang MK. Coexistence of hepatitis B surface antigen and antibody to hepatitis B 
surface may increase the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis B virus infection: a retrospective cohort study. 
J Med Virol. 2014;86(1):124–30.
31. 
Tseng TC, Liu CJ, Yang WT, Chen CL, Yang HC, Su TH, et al. Hepatitis B surface antigen level complements viral load in 
predicting viral reactivation in spontaneous HBeAg seroconverters. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;29(6):1242–9.
32. 
Yang HI, Yuen MF, Chan HL, Han KH, Chen PJ, Kim DY, et al. Risk estimation for hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic 
hepatitis B (REACH-B): development and validation of a predictive score. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(6):568–74.
33. 
Chen YC, Chu CM, Liaw YF. Age-specific prognosis following spontaneous hepatitis B e antigen seroconversion in chronic 
hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2010;51(2):435–44.
34. 
Lin SM, Yu ML, Lee CM, Chien RN, Sheen IS, Chu CM, et al. Interferon therapy in HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis reduces 
progression to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol. 2007;46(1):45–52.
35. 
Seo Y, Yoon S, Truong BX, Kato H, Hamano K, Kato M, et al. Serum hepatitis B virus DNA levels differentiating inactive 
carriers from patients with chronic hepatitis B. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005;17(7):753–7.
36. 
Tseng KC, Cheng PN, Wu IC, Chang CK, Chou AL, Liu WC, et al. HBV DNA level as an important determinant of e antigen 
seroconversion of chronic hepatitis B during adefovir dipivoxil therapy. Hepatogastroenterology. 2009;56(91-92):813–18.
37. 
Chen CJ, Iloeje UH, Yang HI. Long-term outcomes in hepatitis B: the REVEAL-HBV study. Clin Liver Dis. 2007;11(4):797–816, viii.
 122
38. 
Manolakopoulos S, Bethanis S, Koutsounas S, Goulis J, Vlachogiannakos J, Christias E, et al. Long-term therapy with 
adefovir dipivoxil in hepatitis B e antigen-negative patients developing resistance to lamivudine. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
2008;27(3):266–73.
39. 
Park H, Lee JM, Seo JH, Kim HS, Ahn SH, Kim DY, et al. Predictive value of HBsAg quantification for determining the clinical 
course of genotype C HBeAg-negative carriers. Liver Int. 2012;32(5):796–802.
40. 
Kumar M, Sarin SK, Hissar S, Pande C, Sakhuja P, Sharma BC, et al. Virologic and histologic features of chronic hepatitis B 
virus-infected asymptomatic patients with persistently normal ALT. Gastroenterology. 2008;134(5):1376–84.
41. 
Lee IC, Huang YH, Chan CC, Huo TI, Chu CJ, Lai CR, et al. Impact of body mass index and viral load on liver histology in 
hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B. Clin Nutr. 2011;30(5):647–52.
42. 
Gobel T, Erhardt A, Herwig M, Poremba C, Baldus SE, Sagir A, et al. High prevalence of significant liver fibrosis and cirrhosis 
in chronic hepatitis B patients with normal ALT in central Europe. J Med Virol. 2011;83(6):968–73.
43. 
Zheng MH, Shi KQ, Fan YC, Liu WY, Lin XF, Li LF, et al. Upper limits of normal for serum alanine aminotransferase levels in 
Chinese Han population. PLoS One. 2012;7(9).
44. 
Papatheodoridis GV, Manolakopoulos S, Liaw YF, Lok A. Follow-up and indications for liver biopsy in HBeAg-negative chronic 
hepatitis B virus infection with persistently normal ALT: a systematic review. J Hepatol. 2012;57(1):196–202.
45. 
Yang R, Gui X, Xiong Y, Gao S, Zhang Y, Deng L, et al. Risk of liver-associated morbidity and mortality in a cohort of HIV and 
HBV coinfected Han Chinese. Infection. 2011;39(5):427–31.
46. 
Liaw YF, Sung JJ, Chow WC, Farrell G, Lee CZ, Yuen H, et al. Lamivudine for patients with chronic hepatitis B and advanced 
liver disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(15):1521–31.
47. 
Marcellin P, Gane E, Buti M, Afdhal N, Sievert W, Jacobson IM, et al. Regression of cirrhosis during treatment with tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate for chronic hepatitis B: a 5-year open-label follow-up study. Lancet. 2013;381(9865):468–75.
48. 
Wong GL, Chan HL, Mak CW, Lee SK, Ip ZM, Lam AT, et al. Entecavir treatment reduces hepatic events and deaths in 
chronic hepatitis B patients with liver cirrhosis. Hepatology. 2013;58(5):1537–47.
49. 
Hosaka T, Suzuki F, Kobayashi M, Seko Y, Kawamura Y, Sezaki H, et al. Long-term entecavir treatment reduces hepatocellular 
carcinoma incidence in patients with hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology. 2013;58(1):98–107.
50. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
CHAPTER 6
1. 
Rule AD. Understanding estimated glomerular filtration rate: implications for identifying chronic kidney disease. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens. 2007;16(3):242–9. 
2. 
Dusheiko G. Treatment of HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B: interferon or nucleoside analogues. Liver Int. 2013;33 (Suppl 1):137–50.
3. 
Zhao P, Liu W, Zhao J, Guan Q. Comparison of the 48-week efficacy between entecavir and adefovir in HBeAg-positive 
nucleos(t)ide-naive Asian patients with chronic hepatitis B: a meta-analysis. Virol J. 2011;8(1):75.
4. 
Liang J, Tang YF, Wu FS, Deng X. Entecavir versus lamivudine for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review. 
Pharmazie. 2012;67(11):883–90.
5. 
Zhang JC. [De novo combination therapy with lamivudine and adefovir dipivoxil versus entecavir monotherapy for naive 
chronic hepatitis B patients with high viral loads]. Zhong Hua Lin Chuang Gan Ran Bing Xue Za Zhi.142–4.
6. 
Marcellin P, Heathcote EJ, Buti M, Gane E, de Man RA, Krastev Z, et al. Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate versus adefovir 
dipivoxil for chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(23):2442–55.
7. 
Ye XG, Su QM. Effects of entecavir and lamivudine for hepatitis B decompensated cirrhosis: meta-analysis. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2013;19(39):6665–78.
8. 
Peng H, Liu J, Yang M, Tong S, Yin W, Tang H, et al. Efficacy of lamivudine combined with adefovir dipivoxil versus 
entecavir monotherapy in patients with hepatitis B-associated decompensated cirrhosis: a meta-analysis. J Clin Pharmacol. 
2014:52(2):189–200.
9. 
Snow-Lampart A, Chappell B, Curtis M, Zhu Y, Myrick F, Schawalder J, et al. No resistance to tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate detected after up to 144 weeks of therapy in patients monoinfected with chronic hepatitis B virus. Hepatology. 
2011;53(3):763–73.
10. 
Tenney DJ, Rose RE, Baldick CJ, Pokornowski KA, Eggers BJ, Fang J, et al. Long-term monitoring shows hepatitis B virus 
resistance to entecavir in nucleoside-naive patients is rare through 5 years of therapy. Hepatology. 2009;49(5):1503–14.
11. 
Chang TT, Lai CL, Kew YS, Lee SS, Coelho HS, Carrilho FJ, et al. Entecavir treatment for up to 5 years in patients with 
hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2010;51(2):422–30.
12. 
Yokosuka O, Takaguchi K, Fujioka S, Shindo M, Chayama K, Kobashi H, et al. Long-term use of entecavir in nucleoside-naive 
Japanese patients with chronic hepatitis B infection. J Hepatol. 2010;52(6):791–9.
13. 
Yuen MF, Seto WK, Fung J, Wong DK, Yuen JC, Lai CL. Three years of continuous entecavir therapy in treatment-naive chronic 
hepatitis B patients: Viral suppression, viral resistance, and clinical safety. Am J Gastroenterol. 2011;106(7):1264–71.
14. 
Hosaka T, Suzuki F, Kobayashi M, Seko Y, Kawamura Y, Sezaki H, et al. Long-term entecavir treatment reduces hepatocellular 
carcinoma incidence in patients with hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology. 2013;58(1):98–107.
15. 
Seto WK, Lam YF, Fung J, Wong DK, Huang FY, Hung IF, et al. Changes of HBsAg and HBV DNA levels in Chinese chronic 
hepatitis B patients after 5 years of entecavir treatment. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;29(5):1028–34.
 123
16. 
Heathcote EJ, Marcellin P, Buti M, Gane E, de Man RA, Krastev Z, et al. Three-year efficacy and safety of tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate treatment for chronic hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2011;140(1):132–43.
17. 
Marcellin P, Gane E, Buti M, Afdhal N, Sievert W, Jacobson IM, et al. Regression of cirrhosis during treatment with tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate for chronic hepatitis B: a 5-year open-label follow-up study. Lancet. 2013;381(9865):468–75.
18. 
Kitrinos KM, Corsa A, Liu Y, Flaherty J, Snow-Lampart A, Marcellin P, et al. No detectable resistance to tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate after 6 years of therapy in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2014;59(2):434–42.
19. 
de Vries-Sluijs TE, Reijnders JG, Hansen BE, Zaaijer HL, Prins JM, Pas SD, et al. Long-term therapy with tenofovir is effective 
for patients co-infected with human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(6):1934–41.
20. 
Price H, Dunn D, Pillay D, Bani-Sadr F, de Vries-Sluijs T, Jain MK, et al. Suppression of HBV by tenofovir in HBV/HIV 
coinfected patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2013;8(7):e68152.
21. 
Murray KF, Szenborn L, Wysocki J, Rossi S, Corsa AC, Dinh P, et al. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate in adolescents with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2012;56(6):2018–26.
22. 
Yao G, Chen C, Lu W, Ren H, Tan D, Wang Y, et al. Efficacy and safety of entecavir compared to lamivudine in nucleoside-
naive patients with chronic hepatitis B: a randomized double-blind trial in China. Hepatol Int. 2007;1(3):365–72.
23. 
Akarca US, Ersoz G, Gunsar F, Karasu Z, Saritas E, Yuce G, et al. Interferon-lamivudine combination is no better than 
lamivudine alone in anti-HBe-positive chronic hepatitis B. Antiviral Ther. 2004;9(3):325–34.
24. 
Barbaro G, Zechini F, Pellicelli AM, Francavilla R, Scotto G, Bacca D, et al. Long-term efficacy of interferon alpha-2b and 
lamivudine in combination compared to lamivudine monotherapy in patients with chronic hepatitis B. An Italian multicenter, 
randomized trial. J Hepatol. 2001;35(3):406–11.
25. 
Chan HL, Heathcote EJ, Marcellin P, Lai CL, Cho M, Moon YM, et al. Treatment of hepatitis B e antigen positive chronic 
hepatitis with telbivudine or adefovir: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147(11):745–54.
26. 
Chang TT, Gish RG, de Man R, Gadano A, Sollano J, Chao YC, et al. A comparison of entecavir and lamivudine for HBeAg-
positive chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(10):1001–10.
27. 
Dienstag JL, Schiff ER, Wright TL, Perrillo RP, Hann HW, Goodman Z, et al. Lamivudine as initial treatment for chronic 
hepatitis B in the United States. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(17):1256–63.
28. 
Dikici B, Bosnak M, Kara IH, Dogru O, Dagli A, Gurkan F, et al. Lamivudine and interferon-alpha combination treatment of 
childhood patients with chronic hepatitis B infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2001;20(10):988–92.
29. 
Dikici B, Bosnak M, Bosnak V, Dagli A, Ece A, Yagci RV, et al. Combination therapy for children with chronic hepatitis B virus 
infection. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2002;17(10):1087–91.
30. 
Dikici B, Ozgenc F, Kalayci AG, Targan S, Ozkan T, Selimoglu A, et al. Current therapeutic approaches in childhood chronic 
hepatitis B infection: a multicenter study. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004;19(2):127–33.
31. 
Kansu A, Doganci T, Akman SA, Artan R, Kuyucu N, Kalayci AG, et al. Comparison of two different regimens of combined 
interferon-alpha2a and lamivudine therapy in children with chronic hepatitis B infection. Antiviral Ther. 2006;11(2):255–61.
32. 
Fung J, Lai CL, Yuen J, Cheng C, Wu R, Wong DK, et al. Randomized trial of lamivudine versus entecavir in entecavir-treated 
patients with undetectable hepatitis B virus DNA: outcome at 2 years. Hepatology. 2011;53(4):1148–53.
33. 
Janssen HL, van Zonneveld M, Senturk H, Zeuzem S, Akarca US, Cakaloglu Y, et al. Pegylated interferon alfa-2b alone or 
in combination with lamivudine for HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;365(9454):123–9.
34. 
Jonas MM, Kelly DA, Mizerski J, Badia IBJ, Areias JA, Schwarz KB, et al. A double-blind placebo controlled study of 
lamivudine in children with chronic hepatitis B (CHB): overall efficacy and effect of YMDD variant. J Pediatr Gastroenterol 
Nutr. 2001;33(3):358–70.
35. 
Jonas MM, Kelley DA, Mizerski J, Badia IB, Areias JA, Schwarz KB, et al. Clinical trial of lamivudine in children with chronic 
hepatitis B. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(22):1706–13.
36. 
Jonas MM, Kelly D, Pollack H, Mizerski J, Sorbel J, Frederick D, et al. Safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of adefovir 
dipivoxil in children and adolescents (age 2 to <18 years) with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2008;47(6):1863–71.
37. 
Jonas MM, Little NR, Gardner SD, Alonso EM, Alvarez F, Areias J, et al. Long-term lamivudine treatment of children with 
chronic hepatitis B: durability of therapeutic responses and safety. J Viral Hepat. 2008;15(1):20–7.
38. 
Jonas MM, Block JM, Haber BA, Karpen SJ, London WT, Murray KF, et al. Treatment of children with chronic hepatitis B 
virus infection in the United States: patient selection and therapeutic options. Hepatology. 2010;52(6):2192–205.
39. 
Jonas MM, Kelly DA, Pollack H, Mizerski J, Sorbel J, Mondou E, et al. Prolonged therapy with adefovir dipivoxil in children 
with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2011;54:703A.
40. 
Jonas MM, Kelly D, Pollack H, Mizerski J, Sorbel J, Frederick D, et al. Efficacy and safety of long-term adefovir dipivoxil 
therapy in children with chronic hepatitis B infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2012;31(6):578–82.
41. 
Lai CL, Chien RN, Leung NW, Chang TT, Guan R, Tai DI, et al. A one-year trial of lamivudine for chronic hepatitis B. N Engl 
J Med. 1998;339(2):61–8.
42. 
Izzo F, Cremona F, Ruffolo F, Palaia R, Parisi V, Curley SA, et al. Outcome of 67 patients with hepatocellular cancer detected 
during screening of 1125 patients with chronic hepatitis. Ann Surg. 1998;227(4):513–18.
43. 
Lok AS, Trinh HN, Carosi G, U.S. A, Gadano A, Habersetzer F, et al. Entecavir (ETV) monotherapy for 96 weeks is comparable 
to combination therapy with ETV plus tenofovir (TDF) in nucleos(t)ide-naive patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB): the 
BELOW study. Hepatology. 2011;54:471A.
44. 
Liaw YF, Gane E, Leung N, Zeuzem S, Wang Y, Lai CL, et al. Two-year GLOBE trial results: telbivudine is superior to 
lamivudine in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2009;136(2):486–95.
 124
45. 
Marcellin P, Chang TT, Lim SG, Tong MJ, Sievert W, Shiffman ML, et al. Adefovir dipivoxil for the treatment of hepatitis B e 
antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(9):808–16.
46. 
Marcellin P, Chang T, Lim S, Sievert W, Tong M, Arterburn S, et al. Increasing serologic, virologic and biochemical response 
over time to adefovir dipivoxil (ADV) 10 mg in HBeAg+ chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients. J Hepatol. 2005;42 (Suppl 2):31–2.
47. 
Marcellin P, Lau GKK, Bonino F, Farci P, Hadziyannis S, Piratvisuth T, et al. Sustained response to peginterferon alfa-2a (40 
KDA) (Pegasys) in HBbeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B. One-year follow-up data from a large, randomised multinational 
study. J Hepatol. 2005;42 (Suppl 2):185–6.
48. 
Marcellin P, Chang TT, Lim SG, Sievert W, Tong M, Arterburn S, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of adefovir dipivoxil for 
the treatment of hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2008;48(3):750–8.
49. 
Marcellin P, Heathcote EJ, Buti M, Gane EJ, Krastev Z, de Man RA, et al. Four-year efficacy and safety of tenofovir df 
treatment in HBeAg-negative and HBeAg-positive patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB). Hepatol Int. 2011;5(1):128.
50. 
Marcellin P, Gane E, Buti M, Afdhal N, Sievert W, Jacobson IM, et al. Regression of cirrhosis during treatment with tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate for chronic hepatitis B: a 5-year open-label follow-up study. Lancet. 2013;381(9865):468–75.
51. 
Peters MG, Andersen J, Lynch P, Liu T, Alston-Smith B, Brosgart CL, et al. Randomized controlled study of tenofovir and 
adefovir in chronic hepatitis B virus and HIV infection: ACTG A5127. Hepatology. 2006;44(5):1110–16.
52. 
Rapti I, Dimou E, Mitsoula P, Hadziyannis SJ. Adding-on versus switching-to adefovir therapy in lamivudine-resistant 
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2007;45(2):307–13.
53. 
Suh DJ, Um SH, Herrmann E, Kim JH, Lee YS, Lee HJ, et al. Early viral kinetics of telbivudine and entecavir: results of a 12-
week randomized exploratory study with patients with HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2010;54(3):1242–7.
54. 
Zheng MH, Shi KQ, Dai ZJ, Ye C, Chen YP. A 24-week, parallel-group, open-label, randomized clinical trial comparing the 
early antiviral efficacy of telbivudine and entecavir in the treatment of hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B virus 
infection in adult Chinese patients. Clin Ther. 2010;32(4):649–58.
55. 
Hepatitis B (chronic): diagnosis and management of chronic hepatitis B in children, young people and adults [CG165]. 
London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; 2013.
56. 
Chang TT, Liaw YF, Wu SS, Schiff E, Han K, Lai CL, et al. Long-term entecavir therapy results in the reversal of fibrosis/
cirrhosis and continued histological improvement in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2010;52(3):886–93.
57. 
Wong GL, Chan HL, Mak CH, Lee SK, Ip ZM, Lam AT, et al. Entecavir treatment reduces hepatic events and deaths in 
chronic hepatitis B patients with liver cirrhosis. Hepatology. 2013;58(5):1537–47.
58. 
Hosaka T, Suzuki F, Seko Y, Kawamura Y, Sezaki H, Akuta N, et al. Long-term entecavir treatment reduces hepatocellular 
carcinoma incidence in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2013;58:98–107.
59. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach. Geneva: WHO; 2013.
60. 
Benhamou Y, Bochet M, Thibault V, Di Martino V, Caumes E, Bricaire F, et al. Long-term incidence of hepatitis B virus 
resistance to lamivudine in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients. Hepatology. 1999;30(5):1302–6.
61. 
Honkoop P, Niesters HG, de Man RA, Osterhaus AD, Schalm SW. Lamivudine resistance in immunocompetent chronic 
hepatitis B. Incidence and patterns. J Hepatol. 1997;26(6):139–5.
CHAPTER 7
1. 
Lok AS, Zoulim F, Locarnini S, Bartholomeusz A, Ghany MG, Pawlotsky JM, et al. Antiviral drug-resistant HBV: standardization 
of nomenclature and assays and recommendations for management. Hepatology. 2007;46(1):254–65.
2. 
Locarnini S. Primary resistance, multidrug resistance, and cross-resistance pathways in HBV as a consequence of treatment 
failure. Hepatol Int. 2008;2:147–51.
3. 
Fung SK, Chae HB, Fontana RJ, Conjeevaram H, Marrero J, Oberhelman K, et al. Virologic response and resistance to 
adefovir in patients with chronic hepatitis B. J Hepatol. 2006;44(2):283–90.
4. 
Yim HJ, Hussain M, Liu Y, Wong SN, Fung SK, Lok AS. Evolution of multi-drug resistant hepatitis B virus during sequential 
therapy. Hepatology. 2006;44(3):703–12.
5. 
Lee JM, Park JY, Kim do Y, Nguyen T, Hong SP, Kim SO, et al. Long-term adefovir dipivoxil monotherapy for up to 5 years in 
lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B. Antivir Ther. 2010;15(2):235–41.
6. 
Lok AS, Lai CL, Leung N, Yao GB, Cui ZY, Schiff ER, et al. Long-term safety of lamivudine treatment in patients with chronic 
hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2003;125(6):1714–22.
7. 
Allen MI, Deslauriers M, Andrews CW, Tipples GA, Walters KA, Tyrrell DL, et al. Identification and characterization of mutations 
in hepatitis B virus resistant to lamivudine. Lamivudine Clinical Investigation Group. Hepatology. 1998;27(6):1670–7.
8. 
Pallier C, Castera L, Soulier A, Hezode C, Nordmann P, Dhumeaux D, et al. Dynamics of hepatitis B virus resistance to 
lamivudine. J Virol. 2006;80(2):643–53.
9. 
Liaw YF, Leung N, Kao JH, Piratvisuth T, Gane E, Han KH, et al. Asian-Pacific consensus statement on the management of 
chronic hepatitis B: a 2008 update. Hepatol Int. 2008;2(3):263–83.
10. 
Leung N. Recent data on treatment of chronic hepatitis B with nucleos(t)ide analogues. Hepatol Int. 2008;2(2):163–78.
11. 
Chan HL, Wang H, Niu J, Chim AM, Sung JJ. Two-year lamivudine treatment for hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic 
hepatitis B: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Antivir Ther. 2007;12(3):345–53.
 125
12. 
Liaw YF, Sung JJ, Chow WC, Farrell G, Lee CZ, Yuen H, et al. Lamivudine for patients with chronic hepatitis B and advanced 
liver disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(15):1521–31.
13. 
Leung NW, Lai CL, Chang TT, Guan R, Lee CM, Ng KY, et al. Extended lamivudine treatment in patients with chronic hepatitis 
B enhances hepatitis B e antigen seroconversion rates: results after 3 years of therapy. Hepatology. 2001;33(6):1527–32.
14. 
Liaw YF, Chien RN, Yeh CT, Tsai SL, Chu CM. Acute exacerbation and hepatitis B virus clearance after emergence of YMDD 
motif mutation during lamivudine therapy. Hepatology. 1999;30(2):567–72.
15. 
Yeh CT, Chien RN, Chu CM, Liaw YF. Clearance of the original hepatitis B virus YMDD-motif mutants with emergence of 
distinct lamivudine-resistant mutants during prolonged lamivudine therapy. Hepatology. 2000;31(6):1318–26.
16. 
Huang ZB, Zhao SS, Huang Y, Dai XH, Zhou RR, Yi PP, et al. Comparison of the efficacy of lamivudine plus adefovir versus 
entecavir in the treatment of lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Ther. 
2013;35(12):1997–2006.
17. 
Lim Y-S, Lee J-Y, Lee D, Shim JH, Lee HC, Lee YS, et al. Entecavir plus adefovir in lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B 
patients who fail lamivudine plus adefovir. Hepatol Int. 2012;6(1):134.
18. 
Sherman M, Yurdaydin C, Sollano J, Silva M, Liaw YF, Cianciara J, et al. Entecavir for treatment of lamivudine-refractory, 
HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2006;130(7):2039–49.
19. 
Heo J, Park JY, Lee HJ, Tak WY, Um SH, Kim do Y, et al. A 96-week randomized trial of switching to entecavir in chronic 
hepatitis B patients with a partial virological response to lamivudine. Antiviral Ther. 2012;17:1563–70.
20. 
Sherman M, Yurdaydin C, Simsek H, Silva M, Liaw YF, Rustgi VK, et al. Entecavir therapy for lamivudine-refractory chronic 
hepatitis B: improved virologic, biochemical, and serology outcomes through 96 weeks. Hepatology. 2008;48(1):99–108.
21. 
Lim Y-S, Lee J-Y, Lee D, Shim JH, Lee HC, Lee YS, et al. Randomized trial of entecavir plus adefovir in patients with 
lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B who show suboptimal response to lamivudine plus adefovir. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2012;56(6):2941–7.
22. 
Huang ZB, Zhao SS, Huang Y, Dai XH, Zhou RR, Yi PP, et al. Comparison of the efficacy of lamivudine plus adefovir versus 
entecavir in the treatment of lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Ther. 
2013;35(12):1997–2006. 
23. 
Yim HJ, Seo YS, Yoon EL, Kim CW, Lee CD, Park SH, et al. Adding adefovir vs. switching to entecavir for lamivudine-resistant 
chronic hepatitis B (ACE study): a 2-year follow-up randomized controlled trial. Liver Int. 2013;33(2):244–54.
24. 
Aizawa M, Tsubota A, Fujise K, Sato K, Baba M, Takamatsu M, et al. Overlap/switch to adefovir monotherapy for lamivudine-
resistant patients who responded to combination therapy: a pilot controlled study. Intern Med. 2010; 49(12):1067–72.
25. 
Akyildiz M, Gunsar F, Ersoz G, Karasu Z, Ilter T, Batur Y, et al. Adefovir dipivoxil alone or in combination with lamivudine 
for three months in patients with lamivudine resistant compensated chronic hepatitis B. Dig Dis Sci. 2007; 52(12):3444–7.
26. 
Chang TT, Gish RG, Hadziyannis SJ, Cianciara J, Rizzetto M, Schiff ER, et al. A dose-ranging study of the efficacy and 
tolerability of entecavir in lamivudine-refractory chronic hepatitis B patients. Gastroenterology. 2005;129(4):1198–209.
27. 
Hann HW, Dunn SR, Ahn M, Park SY. Question of ALT flare during switch to adefovir from lamivudine: a single center open-
label, randomized, safety study. J Med Virol. 2010; 82(9):1489–93.
28. 
Lim Y-S, Lee J-Y, Lee D, Shim JH, Lee HC, Lee YS, et al. Randomized trial of entecavir plus adefovir in patients with 
lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B who show suboptimal response to lamivudine plus adefovir. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2012; 56(6):2941–7.
29. 
Perrillo R, Hann HW, Mutimer D, Willems B, Leung N, Lee WM, et al. Adefovir dipivoxil added to ongoing lamivudine in 
chronic hepatitis B with YMDD mutant hepatitis B virus. Gastroenterology. 2004;126(1):81–90.
30. 
Peters MG, Hann HH, Martin P, Heathcote EJ, Buggisch P, Rubin R, et al. Adefovir dipivoxil alone or in combination with 
lamivudine in patients with lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2004; 26(1):91–101.
31. 
Rapti I, Dimou E, Mitsoula P, Hadziyannis SJ. Adding-on versus switching-to adefovir therapy in lamivudine-resistant 
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2007;45(2):307–13.
32. 
Vassiliadis TG, Giouleme O, Koumerkeridis G, Koumaras H, Tziomalos K, Patsiaoura K, et al. Adefovir plus lamivudine 
are more effective than adefovir alone in lamivudine-resistant HBeAg- chronic hepatitis B patients: a 4-year study. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010; 25(1):54–60.
33. 
Hepatitis B (chronic): diagnosis and management of chronic hepatitis B in children, young people and adults [CG165]. 
London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; 2013.
34. 
Thibault V, Aubron-Olivier C, Agut H, Katlama C. Primary infection with a lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B virus. AIDS. 2002;16(1):131–3.
35. 
Lim LG, Aung MO, Seet BL, Tan C, Dan YY, Lee YM, et al. Alanine aminotransferase is an inadequate surrogate marker for 
detecting lamivudine resistance. World J Gastroenterol. 2010;16(37):4691–6.
CHAPTER 8
1. 
Prati D, Taioli E, Zanella A, Della Torre E, Butelli S, Del Vecchio E, et al. Updated definitions of healthy ranges for serum 
alanine aminotransferase levels. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137(1):1–10.
2. 
Byun KS, Kwon OS, Kim JH, Yim HJ, Chang YJ, Kim JY, et al. Factors related to post-treatment relapse in chronic hepatitis 
B patients who lost HBeAg after lamivudine therapy. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005;20(12):1838–42.
 126
3. 
Chien RN, Yeh CT, Tsai SL, Chu CM, Liaw YF. Determinants for sustained HBeAg response to lamivudine therapy. Hepatology. 
2003;38(5):1267–73.
4. 
Dienstag JL, Cianciara J, Karayalcin S, Kowdley KV, Willems B, Plisek S, et al. Durability of serologic response after lamivudine 
treatment of chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2003;37(4):748–55.
5. 
Fung J, Lai CL, Tanaka Y, Mizokami M, Yuen J, Wong DK, et al. The duration of lamivudine therapy for chronic hepatitis B: 
cessation vs. continuation of treatment after HBeAg seroconversion. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104(8):1940–6.
6. 
Fung SK, Wong F, Hussain M, Lok AS. Sustained response after a 2-year course of lamivudine treatment of hepatitis B e 
antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B. J Viral Hepat. 2004;11(5):432–8.
7. 
Jin YJ, Kim KM, Yoo DJ, Shim JH, Lee HC, Chung YH, et al. Clinical course of chronic hepatitis B patients who were off-
treated after lamivudine treatment: analysis of 138 consecutive patients. Virol J. 2012;9:239. 
8. 
Kim JH, Lee SJ, Joo MK, Kim CH, Choi JH, Jung YK, et al. Durability of antiviral response in HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis 
B patients who maintained virologic response for one year after lamivudine discontinuation. Dig Dis Sci. 2009;54(7):1572–7.
9. 
Kwon JH, Jang JW, Choi JY, Park CH, Yoo SH, Bae SH, et al. Should lamivudine monotherapy be stopped or continued in 
patients infected with hepatitis B with favorable responses after more than 5 years of treatment? J Med Virol. 2013;85(1):34–42.
10. 
Lee CM, Ong GY, Lu SN, Wang JH, Liao CA, Tung HD, et al. Durability of lamivudine-induced HBeAg seroconversion for 
chronic hepatitis B patients with acute exacerbation. J Hepatol. 2002;37(5):669–74.
11. 
Lee HW, Lee HJ, Hwang JS, Sohn JH, Jang JY, Han KJ, et al. Lamivudine maintenance beyond one year after HBeAg 
seroconversion is a major factor for sustained virologic response in HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 
2010;51(2):415–21.
12. 
Liang Y, Jiang J, Su M, Liu Z, Guo W, Huang X, et al. Predictors of relapse in chronic hepatitis B after discontinuation of 
anti-viral therapy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2011;34(3):344–52.
13. 
Paik YH, Kim JK, Kim dY, Park JY, Ahn SH, Han KH, et al. Clinical efficacy of a 24-months course of lamivudine therapy 
in patients with HBeAg negative chronic hepatitis B: a long-term prospective study. J Korean Med Sci. 2010;25(6):882–7.
14. 
Ryu SH, Chung YH, Choi MH, Kim JA, Shin JW, Jang MK, et al. Long-term additional lamivudine therapy enhances durability 
of lamivudine-induced HBeAg loss: a prospective study. J Hepatol. 2003;39(4):614–19.
15. 
Santantonio T, Mazzola M, Iacovazzi T, Miglietta A, Guastadisegni A, Pastore G. Long-term follow-up of patients with anti-
HBe/HBV DNA-positive chronic hepatitis B treated for 12 months with lamivudine. J Hepatol. 2000;32(2):300–6.
16. 
Song BC, Suh DJ, Lee HC, Chung YH, Lee YS. Hepatitis B e antigen seroconversion after lamivudine therapy is not durable 
in patients with chronic hepatitis B in Korea. Hepatology. 2000;32(4 Pt 1):803–6.
17. 
Wang L, Liu F, Liu YD, Li XY, Wang JB, Zhang ZH, et al. Stringent cessation criterion results in better durability of lamivudine 
treatment: a prospective clinical study in hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B patients. J Viral Hepat. 
2010;17(4):298–304.
18. 
Yoon SK, Jang JW, Kim CW, Bae SH, Choi JY, Choi SW, et al. Long-term results of lamivudine monotherapy in Korean 
patients with HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B: response and relapse rates, and factors related to durability of HBeAg 
seroconversion. Intervirology. 2005;48(6):341–9.
19. 
Liu F, Wang L, Li XY, Liu YD, Wang JB, Zhang ZH, et al. Poor durability of lamivudine effectiveness despite stringent 
cessation criteria: a prospective clinical study in hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B patients. J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2011;26(3):456–60.
20. 
Jung HW, Choi MS, Kim KH, Park SH, Yeon KK, Lee JH, et al. Virologic response to adefovir dipivoxil monotherapy is not 
durable in HBeAg-positive, lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B patients. Korean J Hepatol. 2009;15(1):52–8.
21. 
Jung YK, Yeon JE, Lee KG, Jung ES, Kim JH, Kim JH, et al. Virologic response is not durable after adefovir discontinuation 
in lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B patients. Korean J Hepatol. 2011;17(4):261–7.
22. 
Hadziyannis SJ, Sevastianos V, Rapti I, Vassilopoulos D, Hadziyannis E. Sustained responses and loss of HBsAg in HBeAg-
negative patients with chronic hepatitis B who stop long-term treatment with adefovir. Gastroenterology. 2012;143(3):629–36.
23. 
Jeng WJ, Sheen IS, Chen YC, Hsu CW, Chien RN, Chu CM, et al. Off-therapy durability of response to entecavir therapy in 
hepatitis B e antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B patients. Hepatology. 2013;58(6):1888–96.
24. 
Shouval D, Lai CL, Chang TT, Cheinquer H, Martin P, Carosi G, et al. Relapse of hepatitis B in HBeAg-negative chronic 
hepatitis B patients who discontinued successful entecavir treatment: the case for continuous antiviral therapy. J Hepatol. 
2009;50(2):289–95.
25. 
Kim YJ, Kim K, Hwang SH, Kim SS, Lee D, Cheong JY, et al. Durability after discontinuation of nucleos(t)ide therapy in 
chronic HBeAg negative hepatitis patients. Clin Mol Hepatol. 2013;19(3):300–4.
26. 
Reijnders JG, Perquin MJ, Zhang N, Hansen BE, Janssen HL. Nucleos(t)ide analogues only induce temporary hepatitis B e 
antigen seroconversion in most patients with chronic hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(2):491–8.
27. 
Song MJ, Song DS, Kim HY, Yoo SH, Bae SH, Choi JY, et al. Durability of viral response after off-treatment in HBeAg positive 
chronic hepatitis B. World J Gastroenterol. 2012;18(43):6277–83.
28. 
Chaung KT, Ha NB, Trinh HN, Garcia RT, Nguyen HA, Nguyen KK, et al. High frequency of recurrent viremia after hepatitis 
B e antigen seroconversion and consolidation therapy. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2012;46(10):865–70.
29. 
Fung SK, Andreone P, Han SH, Rajender Reddy K, Regev A, Keeffe EB, et al. Adefovir-resistant hepatitis B can be associated 
with viral rebound and hepatic decompensation. J Hepatol. 2005;43(6):937–43.
30. 
Fontana RJ, Hann HW, Perrillo RP, Vierling JM, Wright T, Rakela J, et al. Determinants of early mortality in patients with 
decompensated chronic hepatitis B treated with antiviral therapy. Gastroenterology. 2002;123(3):719–27.
 127
31. 
Chien RN, Lin CH, Liaw YF. The effect of lamivudine therapy in hepatic decompensation during acute exacerbation of 
chronic hepatitis B. J Hepatol. 2003;38(3):322–7.
32. 
Lim SG, Wai CT, Rajnakova A, Kajiji T, Guan R. Fatal hepatitis B reactivation following discontinuation of nucleoside 
analogues for chronic hepatitis B. Gut. 2002;51(4):597–9.
CHAPTER 9.1
1. 
Prati D, Taioli E, Zanella A, Della Torre E, Butelli S, Del Vecchio E, et al. Updated definitions of healthy ranges for serum 
alanine aminotransferase levels. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137(1):1–10.
2. 
Andersson KL, Chung RT. Monitoring during and after antiviral therapy for hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2009;49 (5 Suppl):S166–S173.
3. 
Chu CM, Liaw YF. Predictive factors for reactivation of hepatitis B following hepatitis B e antigen seroconversion in chronic 
hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2007;133(5):1458–65.
4. 
Brunetto MR, Oliveri F, Colombatto P, Moriconi F, Ciccorossi P, Coco B, et al. Hepatitis B surface antigen serum levels help 
to distinguish active from inactive hepatitis B virus genotype D carriers. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(2):483–90.
5. 
Liang J, Tang YF, Wu FS, Deng X. Entecavir versus lamivudine for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B: a systematic review. 
Pharmazie. 2012;67(11):883–90.
6. 
Liu H, Wang X, Wan G, Yang Z, Zeng H. Telbivudine versus entecavir for nucleos(t)ide-naive HBeAg-positive chronic 
hepatitis B: a meta-analysis. Am J Med Sci. 2014;347(2):131–8.
7. 
Su QM, Ye XG. Effects of telbivudine and entecavir for HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B: a meta-analysis. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2012;18(43):6290–301.
8. 
Ye XG, Su QM. Effects of entecavir and lamivudine for hepatitis B decompensated cirrhosis: meta-analysis. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2013;19(39):6665–78.
9. 
Heo J, Park JY, Lee HJ, Tak WY, Um SH, Kim DY, et al. A 96-week randomized trial of switching to entecavir in chronic 
hepatitis B patients with a partial virological response to lamivudine. Antivir Ther. 2012;17(8):1563–70.
10. 
Hyun JJ, Seo YS, Yoon E, Kim TH, Kim DJ, Kang HS, et al. Comparison of the efficacies of lamivudine versus entecavir in 
patients with hepatitis B virus-related decompensated cirrhosis. Liver Int. 2012;32(4):656–64.
11. 
Bang SJ, Kim BG, Shin JW, Ju HU, Park BR, Kim MH, et al. Clinical course of patients with insufficient viral suppression 
during entecavir therapy in genotype C chronic hepatitis B. Dig Liver Dis. 2013;45(7):600–5.
12. 
Hass HG, Bock T, Nehls O, Kaiser S. Rapid HBV DNA decrease (week 12) is an important prognostic factor for first-line 
treatment with adefovir dipivoxil for chronic hepatitis B. J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(8):871–7.
13. 
Reijnders JG, Leemans WF, Hansen BE, Pas SD, de Man RA, Schutten M, et al. On-treatment monitoring of adefovir therapy 
in chronic hepatitis B: virologic response can be assessed at 24 weeks. J Viral Hepat. 2009;16(2):113–20.
14. 
McMahon BJ, Bulkow L, Simons B, Zhang Y, Negus S, Homan C, et al. Relationship between level of hepatitis B virus DNA 
and liver disease: a population-based study of hepatitis B e antigen-negative persons with hepatitis B. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2014;12(4):701–6.
15. 
Tohme RA, Bulkow L, Homan CE, Negus S, McMahon BJ. Rates and risk factors for hepatitis B reactivation in a cohort of 
persons in the inactive phase of chronic hepatitis B - Alaska, 2001–2010. J Clin Virol. 2013;58(2):396–400.
16. 
Papatheodoridis GV, Manolakopoulos S, Liaw YF, Lok A. Follow-up and indications for liver biopsy in HBeAg-negative chronic 
hepatitis B virus infection with persistently normal ALT: a systematic review. J Hepatol. 2012;57(1):196–202.
17. 
Tai DI, Lin SM, Sheen IS, Chu CM, Lin DY, Liaw YF. Long-term outcome of hepatitis B e antigen-negative hepatitis B surface 
antigen carriers in relation to changes of alanine aminotransferase levels over time. Hepatology. 2009;49(6):1859–67.
18. 
Feld JJ, Ayers M, El-Ashry D, Mazzulli T, Tellier R, Heathcote EJ. Hepatitis B virus DNA prediction rules for hepatitis B e 
antigen-negative chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2007;46(4):1057–70.
19. 
Monitoring response to ART and the diagnosis of treatment failure (Section 7.3). In: Consolidated guidelines on the use of 
antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2013.
CHAPTER 9.2
1. 
Fernandez-Fernandez B, Montoya-Ferrer A, Sanz AB, Snachez-Nino M, Izquierdo M, Poveda J, et al. Tenofovir nephrotoxicity: 
2011 update. AIDS Res Treat. 2011; Article ID 354908:http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2011/354908.
2. 
Rule AD. Understanding estimated glomerular filtration rate: implications for identifying chronic kidney disease. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens. 2007;16(3):242–9.
3. 
Rodriguez-Novoa S, Alvarez E, Labarga P, Soriano V. Renal toxicity associated with tenofovir use. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 
2010;9(4):545–59.
4. 
Sax PE, Gallant JE, Klotman PE. Renal safety of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. AIDS Read. 2007;17(2):90–2, 9–104, C3.
5. 
Mateo L, Holgado S, Marinoso ML, Perez-Andres R, Bonjoch A, Romeu J, et al. Hypophosphatemic osteomalacia induced 
by tenofovir in HIV-infected patients. Clin Rheumatol. 2014;May 3. [Epub ahead of print]
6. 
Bedimo R, Maalouf NM, Zhang S, Drechsler H, Tebas P. Osteoporotic fracture risk associated with cumulative exposure to 
tenofovir and other antiretroviral agents. AIDS. 2012;26(7):825–31.
 128
7. 
Brown TT, McComsey GA, King MS, Qaqish RB, Bernstein BM, da Silva BA. Loss of bone mineral density after antiretroviral 
therapy initiation, independent of antiretroviral regimen. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2009;51(5):554–61.
8. 
Gallant JE, Staszewski S, Pozniak AL, DeJesus E, Suleiman JM, Miller MD, et al. Efficacy and safety of tenofovir DF vs stavudine 
in combination therapy in antiretroviral-naive patients: a 3-year randomized trial. J Am Med Assoc. 2004;292(2):191–201.
9. 
Pradat P, Le Pogam MA, Okon JB, Trolliet P, Miailhes P, Brochier C, et al. Evolution of glomerular filtration rate in HIV-infected, 
HIV-HBV-coinfected and HBV-infected patients receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. J Viral Hepat. 2013;20(9):650–7.
10. 
Scherzer R, Estrella M, Li Y, Choi AI, Deeks SG, Grunfeld C, et al. Association of tenofovir exposure with kidney disease risk 
in HIV infection. AIDS. 2012;26(7):867–75.
11. 
Tourret J, Deray G, Isnard-Bagnis C. Tenofovir effect on the kidneys of HIV-infected patients: a double-edged sword? J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2013;24(10):1519–27.
12. 
Pushpakom SP, Liptrott NJ, Rodriguez-Novoa S, Labarga P, Soriano V, Albalater M, et al. Genetic variants of ABCC10, a novel 
tenofovir transporter, are associated with kidney tubular dysfunction. J Infect Dis. 2011;204(1):145–53.
13. 
Yoshino M, Yagura H, Kushida H, Yonemoto H, Bando H, Ogawa Y, et al. Assessing recovery of renal function after tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate discontinuation. J Infect Chemother. 2012;18(2):169–74.
14. 
Mocroft A, Neuhaus J, Peters L, Ryom L, Bickel M, Grint D, et al. Hepatitis B and C co-infection are independent predictors 
of progressive kidney disease in HIV-positive, antiretroviral-treated adults. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40245.
15. 
Mweemba A, Zanolini A, Mulenga L, Emge D, Chi BH, Wandeler G, et al. Chronic hepatitis B virus coinfection is associated 
with renal impairment among Zambian HIV-Infected adults. Clin Infect Dis.  2014;59(12):1757–60.
16. 
Petersen J, Heyne R, Mauss S, Schlaak J, Schiffelholz W, Eisenbach C. Effectiveness of tenofovir for chronic hepatitis B 
in field practice – 2-year interim results from the prospective German Multicenter Non-Interventional Study (GEMINIS). J 
Hepatol. 2013(58):S313.
17. 
Heathcote EJ, Marcellin P, Buti M, Gane E, de Man RA, Krastev Z, et al. Three-year efficacy and safety of tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate treatment for chronic hepatitis B. Gastroenterology. 2011;140(1):132–43.
18. 
Lampertico P, Soffredini R, Viganò M, Yurdaydin C, Idilman R, Papatheodoridis GV. 2-year effectiveness and safety of 
tenofovir in 302 NUC-naive patients with chronic hepatitis B: a multicentre European study in clinical practice. Dig Liver 
Dis. 2012;44(Suppl 1):S16–S17.
19. 
Marcellin P, Gane E, Buti M, Afdhal N, Sievert W, Jacobson IM, et al. Regression of cirrhosis during treatment with tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate for chronic hepatitis B: a 5-year open-label follow-up study. Lancet. 2013;381(9865):468–75.
20. 
Liaw YF, Sheen IS, Lee CM, Akarca US, Papatheodoridis GV, Suet-Hing WF, et al. Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF), emtricitabine/
TDF, and entecavir in patients with decompensated chronic hepatitis B liver disease. Hepatology. 2011;53(1):62–72.
21. 
Pan CQ, Trinh H, Yao A, Bae H, Lou L, Chan S. Efficacy and safety of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in Asian-Americans with 
chronic hepatitis B in community settings. PLoS One. 2014;9(3):e89789.
22. 
de Vries-Sluijs TE, Reijnders JG, Hansen BE, Zaaijer HL, Prins JM, Pas SD, et al. Long-term therapy with tenofovir is effective 
for patients co-infected with human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(6):1934–41.
23. 
Stohr W, Reid A, Walker S, Ssali F, Munderi P, Mambule I, et al. Glomerular dysfunction and associated risk factors over 4–5 
years following antiretroviral therapy initiation in Africa. Antiviral Ther. 2011;16:1011–20.
24. 
Seto WK, Liu K, Wong DK, Fung J, Huang FY, Hung IF, et al. Patterns of hepatitis B surface antigen decline and HBV DNA 
suppression in Asian treatment-experienced chronic hepatitis B patients after three years of tenofovir treatment. J Hepatol. 
2013;59(4):709–16.
25. 
Chang TT, Liaw YF, Wu SS, Schiff E, Han K, Lai CL, et al. Long-term entecavir therapy results in the reversal of fibrosis/
cirrhosis and continued histological improvement in patients with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2010;52(3):886–93.
26. 
Tenney DJ, Rose RE, Baldick CJ, Pokornowski KA, Eggers BJ, Fang J, et al. Long-term monitoring shows hepatitis B virus 
resistance to entecavir in nucleoside-naive patients is rare through 5 years of therapy. Hepatology. 2009;49(5):1503–14.
27. 
Wong GL, Chan HL, Chan HY, Tse PC, Tse YK, Mak CW, et al. Accuracy of risk scores for patients with chronic hepatitis B 
receiving entecavir treatment. Gastroenterology. 2013;144(5):933–44.
28. 
Hosaka T, Suzuki F, Kobayashi M, Seko Y, Kawamura Y, Sezaki H, et al. Long-term entecavir treatment reduces hepatocellular 
carcinoma incidence in patients with hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology. 2013;58(1):98–107.
29. 
Yokosuka O, Takaguchi K, Fujioka S, Shindo M, Chayama K, Kobashi H, et al. Long-term use of entecavir in nucleoside-naive 
Japanese patients with chronic hepatitis B infection. J Hepatol. 2010;52(6):791–9.
30. 
Yuen MF, Seto WK, Fung J, Wong DK, Yuen JC, Lai CL. Three years of continuous entecavir therapy in treatment-naive chronic 
hepatitis B patients: viral suppression, viral resistance, and clinical safety. Am J Gastroenterol. 2011;106(7):1264–71.
31. 
Seto WK, Lam YF, Fung J, Wong DK, Huang FY, Hung IF, et al. Changes of HBsAg and HBV DNA levels in Chinese chronic 
hepatitis B patients after 5 years of entecavir treatment. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;29(5):1028–34.
32. 
Lok AS, Trinh HN, Carosi G, Akarca US, Gadano A, Habersetzer F, et al. Entecavir (ETV) monotherapy for 96 weeks is 
comparable to combination therapy with ETV plus tenofovir (TDF) in nucleos(t)ide-naive patients with chronic hepatitis B 
(CHB): the BELOW study. Hepatology. 2011;54:471A.
33. 
Naicker S. End-stage renal disease in sub-Saharan and South Africa. Kidney Int Suppl. 2003(83):S119–22.
34. 
Murray KF, Szenborn L, Wysocki J, Rossi S, Corsa AC, Dinh P, et al. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate in adolescents with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2012;56(6):2018–26.
35. 
Bonjoch A, Echeverria P
, Perez-Alvarez N, Puig J, Estany C, Ciotet B, et al. High rate of reversibility of renal damage in a cohort of 
HIV-infected patients receiving tenofovir-containing antiretroviral therapy. Antiviral Res. 2012;96(1):65–9.
 129
36. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
CHAPTER 9.3
1. 
Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, Lim S, Shibuya K, Aboyans V, et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of 
death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 
2012;380(9859):2095–128.
2. 
Zhang BH, Yang BH, Tang ZY. Randomized controlled trial of screening for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin 
Oncol. 2004;130(7):417–22.
3. 
Chen JG, Parkin DM, Chen QG, Lu JH, Shen QJ, Zhang BC, et al. Screening for liver cancer: results of a randomised 
controlled trial in Qidong, China. J Med Screen. 2003;10(4):204–9.
4. 
Yang B, Zhang B, Tang Z, Yang B, Zhang B, Tang Z. [Randomized controlled prospective study of secondary prevention for 
primary liver cancer]. [Chinese]. Chung-Hua i Hsueh Tsa Chih [Chinese Medical Journal]. 1999;79(12):887–9.
5. 
Yang B, Zhang B, Xu Y, Yang B, Zhang B, Xu Y. [A prospective study of early detection for primary liver cancer]. [Chinese]. 
Chung-Hua Chung Liu Tsa Chih [Chinese Journal of Oncology]. 1996;18(6):442–4.
6. 
Yang B, Zhang B, Xu Y, Wang W, Shen Y, Zhang A, et al. Prospective study of early detection for primary liver cancer. J 
Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1997;123(6):357–60.
7. 
Zhang B, Yang B. [Evaluation of surveillance for high-risk population of liver cancer in Shanghai]. Zhong Guo Zhong Liu. 2001;10:199–203.
8. 
Han KH, Kim DY, Park JY, Ahn SH, Kim J, Kim SU, et al. Survival of hepatocellular carcinoma patients may be improved 
in surveillance interval not more than 6 months compared with more than 6 months: a 15-year prospective study. J Clin 
Gastroenterol. 2013;47(6):538–44.
9. 
Kim DY HK, Ahn SH, Paik YH, Lee KS, Chon CY, Moon YM. Semiannual surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma improved 
patient survival compared to annual surveillance (Korean experience). Hepatology. 2007;46(1):403A.
10. 
Sherman M, Peltekian KM, Lee C, Sherman M, Peltekian KM, Lee C. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic 
carriers of hepatitis B virus: incidence and prevalence of hepatocellular carcinoma in a North American urban population. 
Hepatology. 1995;22(2):432–8.
11. 
Gounder BP. Comparing the cost of screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in persons with chronic hepatitis B virus 
infection by ultrasound alone versus a two-step approach using alpha-fetoprotein followed by ultrasound. Hepatology. 
2013;58 (Suppl.1):388A–9A.
12. 
Romero AM. Cost effectiveness analysis of a clinical pathway for the surveillance of hepatocarcinoma in Colombia. Value in 
Health. 2010;13:A40.
13. 
Coon JTR. Surveillance of cirrhosis for hepatocellular carcinoma: systematic review and economic analysis. Health Technol 
Assess. 2007;11:iii–135.
14. 
Aghoram R, Cai P, Dickinson JA, Aghoram R, Cai P, Dickinson JA. Alpha-foetoprotein and/or liver ultrasonography for 
screening of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis B. [Review][Update of Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2003;(2):CD002799; PMID: 12804438]. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD002799.
15. 
McMahon BJ, Bulkow L, Harpster A, Snowball M, Lanier A, Sacco F, et al. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in Alaska 
natives infected with chronic hepatitis B: a 16-year population-based study. Hepatology. 2000;32(4 Pt 1):842–6.
16. 
Kansagara D, Papak J, Pasha AS, O’Neil M, Freeman M, Relevo R, et al. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic 
liver disease: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(4):261–9.
17. 
Tong MJ, Sun HE, Hsien C, Lu DS. Surveillance for hepatocellular carcinoma improves survival in Asian-American patients 
with hepatitis B: results from a community-based clinic. Dig Dis Sci. 2010;55:826–35.
18. 
Yu EW, Chie WC, Chen TH. Does screening or surveillance for primary hepatocellular carcinoma with ultrasonography 
improve the prognosis of patients? Cancer J. 2004;10(5):317–25.
19. 
Chen JD, Yang HI, Iloeje UH, You SL, Lu SN, Wang LY, et al. Carriers of inactive hepatitis B virus are still at risk for 
hepatocellular carcinoma and liver-related death. Gastroenterology. 2010;138(5):1747–54.
20. 
Chen CF, Lee WC, Yang HI, Chang HC, Jen CL, Iloeje UH, et al. Changes in serum levels of HBV DNA and alanine 
aminotransferase determine risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(4):1240–8.
21. 
Chen CJ, Yang HI. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B REVEALed. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;26(4):628–38.
22. 
Chen CJ, Yang HI, Su J, Jen CL, You SL, Lu SN, et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological gradient of serum 
hepatitis B virus DNA level. J Am MedAssoc. 2006;295(1):65–73.
23. 
Loomba R, Liu J, Yang HI, Lee MH, Lu SN, Wang LY, et al. Synergistic effects of family history of hepatocellular carcinoma and 
hepatitis B virus infection on risk for incident hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;11(12):1636–45.
24. 
Nakazawa T, Shibuya A, Takeuchi A, Shibata Y, Hidaka H, Okuwaki Y, et al. Viral level is an indicator of long-term outcome 
of hepatitis B virus e antigen-negative carriers with persistently normal serum alanine aminotransferase levels. J Viral Hepat. 
2011;18(7):e191–e199.
25. 
Papatheodoridis GV, Chrysanthos N, Hadziyannis E, Cholongitas E, Manesis EK. Longitudinal changes in serum HBV DNA 
levels and predictors of progression during the natural course of HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Viral 
Hepat. 2008;15(6):434–41.
 130
26. 
Wong GL, Wong VW. Risk prediction of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma in the era of antiviral therapy. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19(39):6515–22.
27. 
Tai DI, Lin SM, Sheen IS, Chu CM, Lin DY, Liaw YF. Long-term outcome of hepatitis B e antigen-negative hepatitis B surface 
antigen carriers in relation to changes of alanine aminotransferase levels over time. Hepatology. 2009;49(6):1859–67.
28. 
Yuen MF, Yuan HJ, Wong DK, Yuen JC, Wong WM, Chan AO, et al. Prognostic determinants for chronic hepatitis B in Asians: 
therapeutic implications. Gut. 2005;54(11):1610–14.
29. 
Ribes J, Cleries R, Rubio A, Hernandez JM, Mazzara R, Madoz P, et al. Cofactors associated with liver disease mortality in 
an HBsAg-positive Mediterranean cohort: 20 years of follow-up. Int J Cancer. 2006;119(3):687–94.
30. 
Seo SI, Choi HS, Choi BY, Kim HS, Kim HY, Jang MK. Coexistence of hepatitis B surface antigen and antibody to hepatitis B 
surface may increase the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis B virus infection: a retrospective cohort study. 
J Med Virol. 2014;86(1):124–30.
31. 
Hann HW, Fu X, Myers RE, Hann RS, Wan S, Kim SH, et al. Predictive value of alpha-fetoprotein in the long-term risk of 
developing hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with hepatitis B virus infection--results from a clinic-based longitudinal 
cohort. Eur J Cancer. 2012;48(15):2319–27.
32. 
Yang R, Gui X, Xiong Y, Gao S, Zhang Y, Deng L, et al. Risk of liver-associated morbidity and mortality in a cohort of HIV and 
HBV coinfected Han Chinese. Infection. 2011;39(5):427–31.
33. 
Shimakawa Y, Yan HJ, Tsuchiya N, Bottomley C, Hall AJ. Association of early age at establishment of chronic hepatitis B infection 
with persistent viral replication, liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma: a systematic review. PLoS One. 2013;8(7):e69430.
34. 
Yang HI, Yuen MF, Chan HL, Han KH, Chen PJ, Kim DY, et al. Risk estimation for hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic 
hepatitis B (REACH-B): development and validation of a predictive score. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(6):568–74.
35. 
Yuen MF, Tanaka Y, Fong DY, Fung J, Wong DK, Yuen JC, et al. Independent risk factors and predictive score for the 
development of hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis B. J Hepatol. 2009;50(1):80–8.
36. 
Wong VW, Chan SL, Mo F, Chan TC, Loong HH, Wong GL, et al. Clinical scoring system to predict hepatocellular carcinoma 
in chronic hepatitis B carriers. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(10):1660–5.
37. 
Sherman M. Does hepatitis B treatment reduce the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma? Hepatology. 2013;58(1):18–20.
CHAPTER 10
1. 
WHO. Hepatitis B vaccines. Wkly Epidemiol Rec. 2009;84:405–20.
2. 
Dumolard L. Implementation of newborn hepatitis B vaccination - worldwide, 2006. MMWR Morbid  Mortal Wkly Rep. 2008;57:1249–52.
3. 
Levin CE, Nelson CM, Widjaya A, Moniaga V, Anwar C. The costs of home delivery of a birth dose of hepatitis B vaccine in a 
prefilled syringe in Indonesia. Bull World Health Organ. 2005;83(6):456–61.
4. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
5. 
Goldstein ST, Zhou F, Hadler SC, Bell BP, Mast EE, Margolis HS. A mathematical model to estimate global hepatitis B disease 
burden and vaccination impact. Int J Epidemiol. 2005;34(6):1329–39.
6. 
Margolis HS, Coleman PJ, Brown RE, Mast EE, Sheingold SH, Arevalo JA. Prevention of hepatitis B virus transmission by 
immunization. An economic analysis of current recommendations. J Am Med Assoc. 1995;274(15):1201–8.
7. 
Beasley RP, Hwang LY, Lee GC, Lan CC, Roan CH, Huang FY, et al. Prevention of perinatally transmitted hepatitis B virus 
infections with hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet. 1983;2(8359):1099–102.
8. 
Chen DS. Toward the elimination and eradication of hepatitis B virus infection. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;25(1):19–25.
9. 
Chen DS. Hepatitis B vaccination: the key towards elimination and eradication of hepatitis B. J Hepatol. 2009;50(4):805–16.
10. 
del Canho R, Grosheide PM, Mazel JA, Heijtink RA, Hop WC, Gerards LJ, et al. Ten-year neonatal hepatitis B vaccination 
program, The Netherlands, 1982–1992: protective efficacy and long-term immunogenicity. Vaccine. 1997;15(15):1624–30.
11. 
Xu DZ, Yan YP, Choi BC, Xu JQ, Men K, Zhang JX, et al. Risk factors and mechanism of transplacental transmission of 
hepatitis B virus: a case–control study. J Med Virol. 2002;67(1):20–6.
12. 
Li XM, Yang YB, Hou HY, Shi ZJ, Shen HM, Teng BQ, et al. Interruption of HBV intrauterine transmission: a clinical study. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2003;9(7):1501–3.
13. 
van Zonneveld M, van Nunen AB, Niesters HG. Lamivudine treatment during pregnancy to prevent perinatal transmission 
of hepatitis B virus infection. J Viral Hepat. 2003;10(4):294–7.
14. 
Burk RD, Hwang LY, Ho GY, Shafritz DA, Beasley RP. Outcome of perinatal hepatitis B virus exposure is dependent on 
maternal virus load. J Infect Dis. 1994;170(6):1418–23.
15. 
Mandelbrot L, Landreau-Mascaro A, Rekacewicz C, Berrebi A, Benifla JL, Burgard M, et al. Lamivudine–zidovudine 
combination for prevention of maternal-infant transmission of HIV-1. JAMA. 2001;285(16):2083–93.
16. 
Xu WM, Cui YT, Wang L, Yang H, Liang ZQ, Li XM, et al. Lamivudine in late pregnancy to prevent perinatal transmission of hepatitis 
B virus infection: a multicentre, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Viral Hepat. 2009;16(2):94–103.
17. 
Yang S, Liu M, Wang L. [Effect of high viral hepatitis B virus DNA loads on vertical transmission of hepatitis B virus in late-
pregnant women]. Zhonghua fu chan ke za zhi. 2008;43:329–31. 
18. 
Zhang YF. The clinical observation of effect of lamivudine on interrupting mother to infant transmission of chronic HBV on 
50 mothers. J Prat Obstet Gynecol. 2010;26:367–8.
 131
19. 
Shi ZJ, Li XM, Yang YB, Ma L, editors. Clinical research on the interruption of mother to child transmission of HBV– a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-control study. Unite for Site 6th Annual Global Health Conference, New Haven (CT): 
Yale University; 2009.
20. 
Guo YZ, Li SX, Ge SL, Wang JH. Effect of lamivudine treatment combined with active–passive immunization on interrupting 
mother to infant transmission of HBV. Clin Focus. 2008;23:1730–1.
21. 
Xiang GJ, Sun JW, Jiang SQ, Hu XB, Qu AL. Evaluation of therapeutic effect in HBV vertical transmission by lamivudine 
treatment combined with active–passive immunization for pregnant women. Chinese Prac Med. 2007;2:14–16.
22. 
Feng HF, Zhang SF. Effect on interruption of hepatitis B virus vertical transmission by lamivudine. J Appl Clin Pediatr. 
2007;22:1019–20.
23. 
Li WF, Jiang R, Wei Z, Li Y. Clinical effect and safety of lamivudine in interruption of chronic HBV maternal to infant 
transmission. Chin Hepatol. 2006;11:106–7.
24. 
Han ZH, Chen YH, Li LW, Sun XW, Sun YG, Zhao H, et al. Effect and safety of preventing HBV vertical transmission by 
lamivudine treatment. Chinese J Intern Med. 2005;44:378.
25. 
Shi MF, Li XM, He J, Yang YB, Hou HY, Zhuang YL, et al. Study of lamivudine in interruption of HBV intrauterine infection. 
Clin Med Chin. 2005;21:77–8.
26. 
Chen R, Liu SR, Zhang SY, Tao CJ, Chen R, Liu Sr, et al. [Efficacy of telbivudine in blocking the vertical transmission and the 
safety observation of discontinuing treatment time after delivery on mother infected with HBV]. [Chinese]. Chung Hua Kan 
Tsang Ping Tsa Chih. 2012;20(9):703–4.
27. 
Han GR, Cao MK, Zhao W, Jiang HX, Wang CM, Bai SF, et al. A prospective and open-label study for the efficacy and 
safety of telbivudine in pregnancy for the prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus infection. J Hepatol. 
2011;55(6):1215–21.
28. 
Han GR, Jiang HX, Wang GJ, Yue X, Wang CM, Kan NY, et al. [Efficacy and safety of telbivudine in pregnant women to 
prevent perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus]. [Chinese]. Chung Hua Kan Tsang Ping Tsa Chih. 2012;20(3):201–5.
29. 
Han G-RZ. A study of the efficacy and safety of telbivudine in pregnancy for the prevention of perinatal transmission of 
hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatol Intern. 2010;4 (Suppl. 1):58.
30. 
Jiang HX, Han GR, Wang CM, Ji Y. [Maternal–fetal outcomes of lamivudine treatment administered during late pregnancy to 
highly viremic mothers with HBeAg+ chronic hepatitis B]. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2012;20(12):888–91.
31. 
Liu YW. Early application of telbivudine to block pregnant mother with high viral load of chronic HBV to child transmission. 
Hepatology. 2013;58 (Suppl. 1):664A.
32. 
Pan CZ. Real world data on the efficacy and safety of telbivudine (LDT) or lamivudine (LAM) use in late pregnancy for the 
prevention of perinatal transmission (VT) of hepatitis B virus (HBV) to the infants. Hepatology. 2012;56 (Suppl. 1):345A.
33. 
Tan PKC. Lamivudine in pregnancy: impact on hepatitis B flares and HBeAg seroconversion post partum. Hepatology. 
2012;56 (Suppl. 1):335A.
34. 
Wu QS. Effective prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus infection using telbivudine in high viral load 
patients: a retrospective study. Hepatology. 2013;58 (Suppl. 1):660A–1A.
35. 
Xiaowen S, Meiming P, Shun T, Quanxin W, Guohong D, Yingzi T, et al. Efficacy and safety of telbivudine in HBeAg positive 
pregnant woman to prevent vertical transmission: a prospective and open-labeled study. Hepatology. 2011;54:1017A.
36. 
Yi WL. The efficacy of lamivudine use in the second vs. third trimester of pregnancy in preventing vertical transmission of 
HBV in highly viremic mothers. Hepatology. 2013;58 (Suppl. 1):614A. 
37. 
Yu M, Jiang Q, Ji Y, Jiang H, Wu K, Ju L, et al. The efficacy and safety of antiviral therapy with lamivudine to stop the vertical 
transmission of hepatitis B virus. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2012;31(9):2211–18.
38. 
Yuen LA. Short duration of lamivudine for prevention of HBV transmission in pregnancy: lack of potency and selection of 
resistance mutations. Hepatology. 2013;58 (Suppl. 1):699A.
39. 
Zhang LJ, Wang L. [Blocking intrauterine infection by telbivudine in pregnant chronic hepatitis B patients]. Zhonghua Gan 
Zang Bing Za Zhi [Chinese Journal of Hepatology]. 2009;17:561–3.
40. 
Zhou YJ, Zheng JL, Pan HJ, Jiang S. [Efficacy and safety of telbivudine in pregnant chronic hepatitis B patients]. Zhonghua 
Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi [Chinese Journal of Hepatology]. 2011;19:861–2.
41. 
Greenup AJ, Tan PK, Nguyen V, Glass A, Davison S, Chatterjee U, et al. Efficacy and safety of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 
in pregnancy to prevent perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus. J Hepatol. 2014;61(3):502–7.
42. 
Pan CQ, Han GR, Jiang HX, Zhao W, Cao MK, Wang CM, et al. Telbivudine prevents vertical transmission from HBeAg-
positive women with chronic hepatitis B. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;10(5):520–6.
43. 
Chen XQ, Yao ZC, Wu LP, Chen MC, Zhang YP, Wu Y. Clinical study on telbivudine in preventing mother-to-infant HBV 
transmission during the late pregnancy. J Clin Hepatol. 2011;27:1282–4.
44. 
Yao ZC, Chen MC, Liao YP, Wu Y, Li LY, Feng J. The efficacy and safety of telbivudine in blocking intrauterine hepatitis B viral 
transmission. J Clin Hepatol. 2011;4:259–61.
45. 
Cao MK, Han GR, Jiang HX, Sun M, Wang CM. Effect of telbivudine treatment on placenta HBV infection pregnant women 
with HBeAg+ HBV DNA high titer. Jiangsu Med J. 2011;37:419–21.
46. 
Zhang YF, Hu YH. [Efficacy and safety of telbivudine in preventing mother-to-infant HBV transmission]. ADRJ. 2010;12:157–9. 
47. 
Nayeri UA, Werner EF, Han CS, Pettker CM, Funai EF, Thung SF, et al. Antenatal lamivudine to reduce perinatal hepatitis B 
transmission: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2012;207(3):231–7.
 132
48. 
Tsai PJS. Cost effectiveness of antiviral therapies in the prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) in 
highly viremic women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014;210 (1 Suppl):S229–S230.
49. 
Hung HF, Chen HH. Cost-effectiveness analysis of prophylactic Lamivudine use in preventing vertical transmission of 
hepatitis B virus infection. Pharmacoeconomics. 2011;29(12):1063–73.
50. 
Unal ER, Lazenby GB, Lintzenich AE, Simpson KN, Newman R, Goetzl L. Cost-effectiveness of maternal treatment to 
prevent perinatal hepatitis B virus transmission. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118(3):655–62.
51. 
Xu WM, Cui YT, Wang L, Yang H, Liang Z-Q, Li M, et al. Efficacy and safety of lamivudine in late pregnancy for the prevention 
of mother-child transmission of hepatitis B: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Hepatology. 
2004;40 (4 Suppl 1):272A–273A.
52. 
Yu M, Jiang Q, Ji Y, Jiang H, Wu K, Ju L. A study of antiviral therapy with lamivudine beginning in the second or last trimester 
of pregnancy in preventing vertical transmission of hepatitis B virus. J Hepatol. 2011;54:S304–S305.
53. 
Han L, Zhang HW, Xie JX, Zhang Q, Wang HY, Cao GW. A meta-analysis of lamivudine for interruption of mother-to-child 
transmission of hepatitis B virus. World J Gastroenterol. 2011;17(38):4321–33.
54. 
Liu MH, Sheng YJ, Liu JY, Hu HD, Zhang QF, Ren H. Efficacy of telbivudine on interruption of hepatitis B virus vertical 
transmission: a meta-analysis. Ann Saudi Med. 2013;33(2):169–76.
55. 
Zhang H, Pan CQ, Pang Q, Tian R, Yan M, Liu X. Telbivudine or lamivudine use in late pregnancy safely reduces perinatal 
transmission of hepatitis B virus in real-life practice. Hepatology. 2014;60(2):468–76.
56. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach: web annexes. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. (http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/
arv2013/annexes/en/, accessed 13 February 2015).
57. 
Brown RS, Jr, Verna EC, Pereira MR, Tilson HH, Aguilar C, Leu CS, et al. Hepatitis B virus and human immunodeficiency 
virus drugs in pregnancy: findings from the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry. J Hepatol. 2012;57(5):953–9.
58. 
Siberry G, Williams PL, Mendez H, Seage GR 33rd, Jacobson DL, Hazra R, et al.; Pediatric HIV/AIDS Cohort Study 
(PHACS). Safety of tenofovir use during pregnancy: early growth outcomes in HIV-exposed uninfected infants. AIDS. 
2012;26(9):1151–9.
59. 
Vigano A, Mora S, Giacomet V, Stucchi S, Manfredini V, Gabiano C, et al. In utero exposure to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate does 
not impair growth and bone health in HIV-uninfected children born to HIV-infected mothers. Antivir Ther. 2011;16(8):1259–66.
60. 
Hill JB, Sheffield JS, Kim MJ, Alexander JM, Sercely B, Wendel GD. Risk of hepatitis B transmission in breast-fed infants of 
chronic hepatitis B carriers. Obstet Gynecol. 2002;99(6):1049–52.
61. 
Hill JB, Sheffield JS, Zeeman GG, Wendel GD, Jr. Hepatotoxicity with antiretroviral treatment of pregnant women. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2001;98(5 Pt 2):909–11.
62. 
Johnson MA, Moore KH, Yuen GJ, Bye A, Pakes GE. Clinical pharmacokinetics of lamivudine. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
1999;36(1):41–66.
63. 
Yang YB, Li XM, Shi ZJ, Ma L. Pregnant woman with fulminant hepatic failure caused by hepatitis B virus infection: a case 
report. World J Gastroenterol. 2004;10(15):2305–6.
64. 
Rawal BK, Parida S, Watkins RP, Ghosh P, Smith H. Symptomatic reactivation of hepatitis B in pregnancy. Lancet. 
1991;337(8737):364.
65. 
WHO guidelines for the screening, care and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2014.
66. 
The Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST): manual for use in primary care. Geneva: World 
Health Organization.
67. 
WHO guidelines on hand hygiene in health care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
68. 
Standard precautions in health care: Aide memoire. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2007.
69. 
WHO best practices for injections and related procedures toolkit. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
70. 
WHO, UNODC, UNAIDS. Technical guide for countries to set targets for universal access to HIV prevention, treatment and 
care for injecting drug users. 2012 Revision. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
71. 
Guidance on prevention of viral hepatitis B and C among people who inject drugs. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
72. 
Prevention and treatment of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections among men who have sex with men and 
transgender people. Geneva: World Health Organization, Department of HIV/AIDS; 2011.
73. 
Prevention and treatment of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections for sex workers in low- and middle-income 
countries: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
CHAPTER 11
1. 
Hoffmann CJ, Thio CL. Clinical implications of HIV and hepatitis B co-infection in Asia and Africa. Lancet Infect Dis. 
2007;7(6):402–9.
2. 
Easterbrook P, Sands A, Harmanci H. Challenges and priorities in the management of HIV/HBV and HIV/HCV coinfection in 
resource-limited settings. Semin Liver Dis. 2012;32(2):147–57.
3. 
Colin JF, Cazals-Hatem D, Loriot MA, Martinot-Peignoux M, Pham BN, Auperin A, et al. Influence of human immunodeficiency 
virus infection on chronic hepatitis B in homosexual men. Hepatology. 1999;29(4):1306–10.
 133
4. 
Konopnicki D, Mocroft A, de Wit S, Antunes F, Ledergerber B, Katlama C, et al. Hepatitis B and HIV: prevalence, AIDS 
progression, response to highly active antiretroviral therapy and increased mortality in the EuroSIDA cohort. AIDS. 
2005;19(6):593–601.
5. 
Puoti M, Spinetti A, Ghezzi A, Donato F, Zaltron S, Putzolu V, et al. Mortality for liver disease in patients with HIV infection: a 
cohort study. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2000;24(3):211–17.
6. 
Hawkins C, Christian B, Ye J, Nagu T, Aris E, Chalamilla G, et al. Prevalence of hepatitis B co-infection and response to 
antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected patients in Tanzania. AIDS. 2013;27(6):919–27.
7. 
Wandeler G, Gsponer T, Bihl F, Bernasconi E, Cavassini M, Kovari H, et al. Hepatitis B virus infection is associated with impaired 
immunological recovery during antiretroviral therapy in the Swiss HIV cohort study. J Infect Dis. 2013;208(9):1454–8.
8. 
Zollner B, Petersen J, Puchhammer-Stockl E, Kletzmayr J, Sterneck M, Fischer L, et al. Viral features of lamivudine resistant 
hepatitis B genotypes A and D. Hepatology. 2004;39(1):42–50.
9. 
Benhamou Y, Bochet M, Thibault V, Di Martino V, Caumes E, Bricaire F, et al. Long-term incidence of hepatitis B virus 
resistance to lamivudine in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients. Hepatology. 1999;30(5):1302–6.
10. 
Nunez M. Clinical syndromes and consequences of antiretroviral-related hepatotoxicity. Hepatology. 2010;52(3):1143–55.
11. 
Labarga P, Soriano V, Vispo ME, Pinilla J, Martin-Carbonero L, Castellares C, et al. Hepatotoxicity of antiretroviral drugs is 
reduced after successful treatment of chronic hepatitis C in HIV-infected patients. J Infect Dis. 2007;196(5):670–6.
12. 
DeSimone JA, Pomerantz RJ, Babinchak TJ. Inflammatory reactions in HIV-1-infected persons after initiation of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy. Ann Intern Med. 2000;133(6):447–54.
13. 
Shelburne SA, 3rd, Hamill RJ, Rodriguez-Barradas MC, Greenberg SB, Atmar RL, Musher DW, et al. Immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome: emergence of a unique syndrome during highly active antiretroviral therapy. Medicine. 
2002;81(3):213–27.
14. 
Lacombe K, Rockstroh J. HIV and viral hepatitis coinfections: advances and challenges. Gut. 2012;61:47–58.
15. 
Ni JD, Xiong YZ, Wang XJ, Xiu LC. Does increased hepatitis B vaccination dose lead to a better immune response in HIV-
infected patients than standard dose vaccination: a meta-analysis? Int J STD AIDS. 2013;24(2):117–22.
16. 
Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: recommendations for a 
public health approach. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 
17. 
deVries-Sluijs TE, Reijnders JG, Hansen BE, Zaaijer HL, Prins JM, Pas SD, et al. Long-term therapy with tenofovir is effective 
for patients co-infected with human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus. Gastroenterology. 2010;139(6):1934–41.
18. 
Plaza Z, Aguilera, A, Mena A, Vispo, E, Sierra-Enguita R, Tome S, et al. Influence of HIV infection on response to tenofovir 
in patients with chronic hepatitis B. AIDS. 2013;27(14):2219–24. 
19. 
Hughes SA, Wedemeyer H, Harrison PM. Hepatitis delta virus. Lancet. 2011;378(9785):73–85.
20. 
Yurdaydin C, Idilman R, Bozkaya H, Bozdayi AM. Natural history and treatment of chronic delta hepatitis. J Viral Hepat. 
2010;17(11):749–56.
21. 
Caredda F, Antinori S, Pastecchia C, Coppin P, Palla M, Ponzetto A, et al. Incidence of hepatitis delta virus infection in acute 
HBsAg-negative hepatitis. J Infect Dis. 1989;159(5):977–9.
22. 
Smedile A, Farci P, Verme G, Caredda F, Cargnel A, Caporaso N, et al. Influence of delta infection on severity of hepatitis B. 
Lancet. 1982;2(8305):945–7.
23. 
Farci P, Smedile A, Lavarini C, Piantino P, Crivelli O, Caporaso N, et al. Delta hepatitis in inapparent carriers of hepatitis B 
surface antigen. A disease simulating acute hepatitis B progressive to chronicity. Gastroenterology. 1983;85(3):669–73.
24. 
Bortolotti F, Di Marco V, Vajro P, Crivellaro C, Zancan L, Nebbia G, et al. Long-term evolution of chronic delta hepatitis in 
children. J Pediatr. 1993;122(5 Pt 1):736–8.
25. 
Farci P
, Barbera C, Navone C, Bortolotti F, Vajro P
, Caporaso N, et al. Infection with the delta agent in children. Gut. 1985;26(1):4–7.
26. 
Le Gal F, Gordien E, Affolabi D, Hanslik T, Alloui C, Deny P, et al. Quantification of hepatitis delta virus RNA in serum by 
consensus real-time PCR indicates different patterns of virological response to interferon therapy in chronically infected 
patients. J Clin Microbiol. 2005;43(5):2363–9.
27. 
Richmann DD WR, Hayden FG, Eds. Clinical virology: Hepatitis delta virus. Washington DC: ASM Press; 2002:1227–40.
28. 
Yamashiro T, Nagayama K, Enomoto N, Watanabe H, Miyagi T, Nakasone H, et al. Quantitation of the level of hepatitis 
delta virus RNA in serum, by real-time polymerase chain reaction--and its possible correlation with the clinical stage of liver 
disease. J Infect Dis. 2004;189(7):1151–7.
29. 
Farci P. Treatment of chronic hepatitis D: new advances, old challenges. Hepatology. 2006;44(3):536–9.
30. 
Niro GA, Rosina F, Rizzetto M. Treatment of hepatitis D. J Viral Hepat.. 2005;12(1):2-9.
31. 
Di Marco V, Giacchino R, Timitilli A, Bortolotti F, Crivellaro C, Calzia R, et al. Long-term interferon-alpha treatment of children 
with chronic hepatitis delta: a multicentre study. J Viral Hepat. 1996;3(3):123–8.
32. 
Dalekos GN, Galanakis E, Zervou E, Tzoufi M, Lapatsanis PD, Tsianos EV. Interferon-alpha treatment of children with chronic 
hepatitis D virus infection: the Greek experience. Hepatogastroenterology. 2000;47(34):1072–6.
33. 
Abbas Z, Khan MA, Salih M, Jafri W. Interferon alpha for chronic hepatitis D. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2011(12):CD006002.
34. 
Lau DT, Doo E, Park Y, Kleiner DE, Schmid P, Kuhns MC, et al. Lamivudine for chronic delta hepatitis. Hepatology. 
1999;30(2):546–9.
 134
35. 
Pontisso P, Ruvoletto MG, Fattovich G, Chemello L, Gallorini A, Ruol A, et al. Clinical and virological profiles in patients with 
multiple hepatitis virus infections. Gastroenterology. 1993;105(5):1529–33.
36. 
Liu CJ, Liou JM, Chen DS, Chen P J.Natural course and treatment of dual hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus infections. 
J Formos Med Assoc Taiwan. 2005;104(11):783–91.
37. 
Chu CJ, Lee SD. Hepatitis B virus/hepatitis C virus coinfection: epidemiology, clinical features, viral interactions and 
treatment. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008;23(4):512–20.
38. 
Potthoff A, Wedemeyer H, Boecher WO, Berg T, Zeuzem S, Arnold J, et al. The HEP-NET B/C co-infection trial: a prospective 
multicenter study to investigate the efficacy of pegylated interferon-alpha 2b and ribavirin in patients with HBV/HCV co-
infection. J Hepatol. 2008;49(5):688–94.
39. 
Liu CJ, Chen PJ, Lai MY, Kao JH, Jeng YM, Chen DS. Ribavirin and interferon is effective for hepatitis C virus clearance in 
hepatitis B and C dually infected patients. Hepatology. 2003;37(3):568–76.
40. 
Zhou J, Dore GJ, Zhang F, Lim PL, Chen YM; TREAT Asia HIV Observational Database. Hepatitis B and C virus coinfection 
in The TREAT Asia HIV Observational Database. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;22(9):1510–18.
41. 
Saitta C, Pontisso P, Brunetto MR, Fargion S, Gaeta GB, Niro GA, et al. Virological profiles in hepatitis B virus/hepatitis C virus 
coinfected patients under interferon plus ribavirin therapy. Antiviral Ther. 2006;11(7):931–4.
42. 
Guidelines for the screening, care and treatment of persons with hepatitis C infection. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
43. 
Getahun H, Gunneberg C, Sculier D, Verster A, Raviglione M. Tuberculosis and HIV in people who inject drugs: evidence for 
action for tuberculosis, HIV, prison and harm reduction services. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2012;7(4):345–53.
44. 
Getahun H, Baddeley A, Raviglione M. Managing tuberculosis in people who use and inject illicit drugs. Bull World Health 
Organ. 2013;91(2):154–6.
45. 
Blal CA, Passos SRL, Horn C, Georg I, Bonecini-Almeida MG, Rolla VC, et al. High prevalence of hepatitis B virus infection 
among tuberculosis patients with and without HIV in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2005;24:41–3. 
46. 
Patel PA, Voigt MD. Prevalence and interaction of hepatitis B and latent tuberculosis in Vietnamese immigrants to the United 
States. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002;97(5):1198–203.
47. 
Sirinak C, Kittikraisak W, Pinjeesekikul D, Charusuntonsri P, Luanloed P, Srisuwanvilai L, et al. Viral hepatitis and HIV-
associated tuberculosis: risk factors and TB treatment outcomes in Thailand. BMC Public Health. 2008;8:245.
48. 
Padmapriyadarsini C, Chandrabose J, Victor L, Hanna LE, Arunkumar N, Swaminathan S. Hepatitis B or hepatitis C co-
infection in individuals infected with human immunodeficiency virus and effect of anti-tuberculosis drugs on liver function. 
J Postgrad Med. 2006;52:92–6.
49. 
Tassopoulos NC, Papaevangelou GJ, Sjogren MH, Roumeliotou-Karayannis A, Gerin JL, Purcell RH. Natural history of acute 
hepatitis B surface antigen-positive hepatitis in Greek adults. Gastroenterology. 1987;92(6):1844–50.
50. 
Tillmann HL, Hadem J, Leifeld L, Zachou K, Canbay A, Eisenbach C, et al. Safety and efficacy of lamivudine in patients with 
severe acute or fulminant hepatitis B, a multicenter experience. J Viral Hepat. 2006;13(4):256–63.
51. 
Neumann H, Malfertheiner P, Csepregi A. Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in severe acute hepatitis B. Z Gastroenterol. 
2008;46:A74.
52. 
Tillmann HL, Zachou K, Dalekos GN. Management of severe acute to fulminant hepatitis B: to treat or not to treat or when 
to treat? Liver Int. 2012;32(4):544–53.
53. 
Jonas MM, Block JM, Haber BA, Karpen SJ, London WT, Murray KF, et al. Treatment of children with chronic hepatitis B 
virus infection in the United States: patient selection and therapeutic options. Hepatology. 2010;52(6):2192–205.
54. 
Jonas MM, Little NR, Gardner SD, International Pediatric Lamivudine Investigator G. Long-term lamivudine treatment of 
children with chronic hepatitis B: durability of therapeutic responses and safety. J Viral Hepat. 2008;15(1):20–7.
55. 
Jonas MM, Kelly D, Pollack H, Mizerski J, Sorbel J, Frederick D, et al. Safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of adefovir 
dipivoxil in children and adolescents (age 2 to <18 years) with chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 2008;47(6):1863–71.
56. 
Sokal EM, Kelly D, Wirth S, Mizerski J, Dhawan A, Frederick D. The pharmacokinetics and safety of adefovir dipivoxil in 
children and adolescents with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Clin Pharmacol. 2008;48(4):512–17.
57. 
Hepatitis B vaccines. Wkly Epidemiol Rec. 2009;84:405–20.
58. 
Graham S, Guy RJ, Cowie B, Wand HC, Donovan B, Akre SP, et al. Chronic hepatitis B prevalence among Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander Australians since universal vaccination: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis. 
2013;13:403.
59. 
Batham A. Systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence of hepatitis B in India. Indian Pediatr. 2007;44:663–74.
60. 
Scott JD. Chronic liver disease in aboriginal North Americans. World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14(29):4607–15.
61. 
McMahon BJ. Viral hepatitis in the Arctic. Int J Circumpolar Health. 2004;63(suppl 2):41–8.
CHAPTER 12
1. 
Monitoring the building blocks of health systems: a handbook of indicators and their measurement strategies. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2010.
2. 
A framework for national health policies, strategies and plans. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
  Global Hepatitis Programme  
Department of HIV/AIDS
20, avenue Appia 
1211 Geneva 27 
Switzerland
E-mail: hepatitis@who.int
http://www.who.int/hiv/topics/hepatitis/en/
978 92 4 154905 9
