 1
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Network Analysis of the 
Multidimensional symptom 
experience of oncology
Nikolaos papachristou1, payam Barnaghi1, Bruce Cooper2, Kord M. Kober2, Roma Maguire3, 
steven M. paul2, Marilyn Hammer4, Fay Wright5, Jo Armes1,10, eileen p. Furlong6, 
Lisa McCann3, Yvette p. Conley7, elisabeth patiraki8, stylianos Katsaragakis9, Jon D. Levine2 & 
Christine Miaskowski2
Oncology patients undergoing cancer treatment experience an average of fifteen unrelieved symptoms 
that are highly variable in both their severity and distress. Recent advances in Network Analysis (NA) 
provide a novel approach to gain insights into the complex nature of co-occurring symptoms and 
symptom clusters and identify core symptoms. We present findings from the first study that used NA 
to examine the relationships among 38 common symptoms in a large sample of oncology patients 
undergoing chemotherapy. Using two different models of Pairwise Markov Random Fields (PMRF), we 
examined the nature and structure of interactions for three different dimensions of patients’ symptom 
experience (i.e., occurrence, severity, distress). Findings from this study provide the first direct evidence 
that the connections between and among symptoms differ depending on the symptom dimension 
used to create the network. Based on an evaluation of the centrality indices, nausea appears to be a 
structurally important node in all three networks. Our findings can be used to guide the development 
of symptom management interventions based on the identification of core symptoms and symptom 
clusters within a network.
Oncology patients undergoing cancer treatment experience an average of fifteen unrelieved symptoms that are 
highly variable in both their severity and distress1–3. In order to advance symptom management science and gain 
a better understanding of oncology patients’ symptom experiences, research has focused on the evaluation of 
symptom clusters using techniques such as exploratory factor analysis or cluster analysis4–6. One of the underlying 
assumptions of this research is that symptoms that cluster together may share underlying mechanisms that are 
potential targets for therapeutic interventions. While progress is being made in symptom clusters research4, one 
of the major gaps in knowledge using standard statistical approaches is that the nature of the relationships among 
individual symptoms and symptom clusters have not been evaluated. This gap in knowledge prevents the iden-
tification of key symptom(s) that exert an influence on other co-occurring symptoms or symptom clusters that 
may be potential target(s) for therapeutic interventions. In this study, we investigate the application of Network 
Analysis (NA) methods to better understand and interpret the associations among co-occurring symptoms and 
symptom clusters in oncology patients receiving chemotherapy (CTX).
NA7–9 is a graph theory based methodology that is being used to gain new insights into systems biology10,11 
depression12,13, post-traumatic stress14, complex bereavement15, quality of life (QOL)16, and identifying high-risk 
cancer sub-population17. In terms of oncology patients, NA allows one to visualize and interpret quantitatively 
the relationships among various symptoms and symptom clusters that patients are experiencing. While NA is 
being used to understand the associations among psychiatric symptoms18–22 and substance abuse and dependence 
symptoms23, only one study was found that used NA to evaluate symptoms in oncology patients24. Using data on 
1centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. 2University of california, San 
francisco, USA. 3University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland. 4Department of nursing, Mount Sinai Medical center, 
new York, USA. 5School of nursing, Yale University, new Haven, USA. 6School of nursing, Midwifery and Health 
Systems, University college Dublin, Dublin, ireland. 7School of nursing, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA. 
8national and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 9faculty of nursing, University of Peloponnese, 
Sparti, Greece. 10School of Health Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. nikolaos Papachristou and Payam 
Barnaghi contributed equally. correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to n.P. (email: 
 
n.papachristou@surrey.ac.uk) or P.B. (email: p.barnaghi@surrey.ac.uk)
Received: 12 June 2018
Accepted: 22 November 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
opeN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
the occurrence of 18 symptoms in 665 oncology patients, a force directed layout algorithm was used to visualize 
a patient-symptom bipartite network. Then four quantitative methods were used to analyse the patterns of symp-
tom occurrence suggested by the network visualizations. The authors concluded that cancer symptoms occur in a 
nested pattern as opposed to distinct clusters24.
While a historic study24, the conclusions regarding the absence of distinct symptom clusters warrants addi-
tional exploration because of the limitations and associated implications of the NA methods that were used. For 
example, modularity optimization has a resolution limit that may prevent it from detecting clusters which are 
comparatively small with respect to the graph as a whole, even when they are well defined communities25. In addi-
tion, during unweighted or weighted one-mode projection, some information is lost and the final models do not 
hold the complete structural information of bipartite networks26. As mentioned by the authors24, their methods 
concealed how the groups of symptoms co-occurred, as well as their globally optimal co-occurrence frequencies. 
In the current study, we explore the complex organisation and interconnectedness of cancer symptoms and asso-
ciated clusters by using two different models of Pairwise Markov Random Fields (PMRF)27–29 on binary symptom 
occurrence and ordinal symptom severity and distress data.
As part of a symptom assessment, oncology patients are asked to rate not only the occurrence of the symptom, 
but its associated severity and distress30–33. Two of the unanswered questions in symptom clusters’ research is 
whether the number and types of symptom clusters differ based on the dimension used to create the cluster and 
how symptoms within and across clusters are related to each other4,5. Our study is the first to use NA to evaluate 
the relationships among symptoms and symptom clusters using ratings of symptom occurrence, severity, and dis-
tress, in a sample of oncology patients undergoing chemotherapy (CTX; n = 1328). We used NA to examine the 
relationships among 38 common symptoms and to explore if the network structures for occurrence, severity, and 
distress have different properties. Our analyses show the prevalence, importance, and influence of each symptom 
within each network and the overall connectivity of cancer symptoms within each symptom dimension network. 
In addition, the interrelationships among symptoms inside and outside of a symptom cluster are described.
Material and Methods
patients and settings. 
This secondary analysis is part of a longitudinal study of the symptom experience of 
oncology outpatients receiving CTX. The methods for this study are described in detail in our previous publica-
tions34–36. For this NA, enrollment assessment data from the parent, longitudinal study were analysed (n = 1328). 
Patients were eligible to participate if they: were ≥
18 years of age; had a diagnosis of breast, gastrointestinal (GI), 
gynecological (GYN), or lung cancer; had received CTX within the preceding four weeks; were scheduled to 
receive at least two additional cycles of CTX; were able to read, write, and understand English; and gave written 
informed consent. Patients were recruited from two Comprehensive Cancer Centers, one Veteran’s Affairs hos-
pital, and four community-based oncology programs. This study was approved by the Committee on Human 
Research at the University of California, San Francisco. All methods were performed in accordance with the 
relevant guidelines and regulations. A written informed consent was obtained from all patients.
Cancer symptom Dimensions. 
A modified version of the Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale (MSAS)33 
was used to evaluate the occurrence, severity, and distress of 38 symptoms commonly associated with cancer 
and its treatment. In addition to the original 32 MSAS symptoms, the following six symptoms were assessed: hot 
flashes, chest tightness, difficulty breathing, abdominal cramps, increased appetite, and weight gain. The MSAS is 
a self-report questionnaire designed to measure the multidimensional experience of symptoms. Using the MSAS, 
patients were asked to indicate whether or not they had experienced each symptom in the past week (i.e., symp-
tom occurrence). If they had experienced the symptom, they were asked to rate its severity and distress. Symptom 
severity was measured using a 4-point Likert scale (i.e., 1 = slight, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe, 4 = very severe). 
Symptom distress was measured using a 5-point Likert scale (i.e., 0 = not at all, 1 = a little bit, 2 = somewhat, 
3 = quite a bit, 4 = very much). The reliability and validity of the MSAS are well established in studies of oncology 
inpatients and outpatients33.
Network analysis. 
In general, networks are defined as a collection of interconnected components (i.e., 
in this paper, symptoms). These components are called nodes and their interaction links are called edges37. A 
Pairwise Markov Random Field (PMRF)29 is an undirected graphical model of a set of random variables having a 
Markov property, described by this undirected graph (or network). Its edges indicate the full conditional associ-
ation between two nodes after conditioning on all of the other nodes in the network. When a relationship exists 
between two nodes (i.e., symptoms) that cannot be explained by any other node in the network, these two nodes 
are connected. The absence of an edge between two nodes (i.e., symptoms) indicates that these nodes are condi-
tionally independent of each other given the other nodes in the network (Fig. 1).
When estimating a PMRF, the number of parameters that need to be estimated grows quickly with the size 
of the network38. In our 38-node networks, 741 parameters (i.e., 38 threshold parameters and 38 ×
 37/2 = 703 
pairwise association parameters) needed to be estimated38. To estimate this number of parameters in a reliable 
fashion, the number of observations in our sample needed to be at least equivalent, which it was given a sample 
size of 1328 patients.
To create the networks, we used the generalization of the Ising model presented in the IsingFit R-package39 
for the occurrence data and the polychoric correlation method28 for the severity and distress data, using the 
R-package qgraph40. Both approaches entailed the application of a statistical regularization technique, which 
provided an extra penalty for model complexity. The edges that were likely to be spurious or false positives were 
removed from the models, leading to networks that were more interpretable.
The model used in the IsingFit R-package39 is a binary equivalent of the Gaussian approximation method. Its 
variables can have only two states and interactions are considered pairwise. The aforementioned model contains 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
two node-specific parameters: the interaction parameter β
jk, representing the strength of the interaction between 
variable j and k, and the node parameter τ
j, which represents the autonomous disposition of the variable to take the 
value of one - “1” - regardless of neighboring variables. The IsingFit model estimates the aforementioned parame-
ters using logistic regression. Through repetition, every variable is regressed on all of the other variables. To obtain 
sparsity, an 1-penalty is imposed on the regression coefficients. The level of shrinkage depends on the penalty 
parameter of the lasso. In the IsingFit method, the Extended Bayesian Information Criterion (EBIC) is used to 
select the set of neighbor nodes that yield the lowest EBIC and in this way constructs the final “true” network.
By viewing Xj as the response variable and all the other variables X\j as the predictors, the EBIC is represented as:
γ
= −
Θ + | | ⋅
+
| | ⋅
−
γ
 ˆ
BIC j
J
n
J
p
( )
2 (
)
log( )
2
log(
1)
(1)
j
in which Θ
 ˆ
(
)
j  is the log likelihood of the conditional probability of Xj given its neighbours, Xne(j), |J| is the number 
of neighbours selected by logistic regression at a certain penalty parameter ρ
, n is the number of observations, p 
−
 1 is the number of covariates (predictors), and c is a hyperparameter, determining the strength of prior infor-
mation on the size of the model space. The model with the set of neighbours J that has the lowest EBIC is selected.
For severity and distress, we used the R-package qgraph40 and applied the polychoric correlation method in 
combination with the graphical “least absolute shrinkage and selection operator” (glasso) algorithm28,41,42. The 
glasso algorithm by inverting its input, which is the sample’s polychoric correlation matrix, returns a sparse net-
work model where only a relatively small number of edges are used to explain the covariance structure in the data. 
More precisely, the graphical lasso estimator is the Θ
ˆ  such that:
S
argmin
tr(
)
log det( )
(2)
j
k
jk
0
∑
λ
Θ =






Θ −
Θ +
|Θ |







Θ≥
≠
^
where S is the sample’s polychoric correlation matrix, and λ
 is a penalizing parameter. Glasso utilizes this penaliz-
ing parameter to control the degree to which regularization is applied. This penalising parameter can be selected 
by minimizing the EBIC. In general, graphical lasso controls the relationships between the variables in a network 
and gives partial correlations between variables, which increases the parsimony of the final network models28,42.
The above mentioned techniques allowed us to create and construct the networks using the symptom occur-
rence, severity, and distress data. However, it is crucial to establish robust methods to assess the stability and accu-
racy of the network. The next section discusses our approach to assess and evaluate the constructed networks.
Network Assessment. 
In network model representations, nodes (symptoms) are represented as circles and 
links between nodes (edges) are represented as lines (see Figs 2a, 3a and 4a). The size of each node (i.e., symp-
tom) is proportional to the occurrence rate, severity rating, or distress rating of each symptom. Each link in the 
network represents the interconnections between two symptoms after conditioning on all of the other symptoms 
in the network. Green lines indicate positive inter-connections. Red lines indicate negative inter-connections. 
Thicker lines indicate stronger inter-connections. Because the strength of the relationships between symptoms 
are taken into account, the networks are considered weighted. The layout of these networks is based on the 
Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm, which estimates the optimal layout so that nodes with stronger and/or more 
connections are placed closer to each other43.
In order to gain additional insights into the structural importance of each node (i.e., symptom) in each of the 
networks, three centrality indices (i.e., betweenness, closeness, strength) were estimated28,44. Nodes with high cen-
trality indices are considered core nodes in the network. Betweenness measures the number of times a node lies 
on the shortest path between two other nodes. This index indicates which nodes may act as bridges between other 
nodes in the network. Closeness summarizes the average distance of a node to all other nodes in the network. 
Closeness allows for the identification of nodes (i.e., symptoms) that are in a position to have a substantial influ-
ence on other node(s) (i.e., other symptom (s)) in the network. Strength indicates which node has the strongest 
Figure 1. A Pairwise Markov Random Field (PMRF) or an undirected graphical model with 6 nodes, A to F. 
The presence of edges between nodes indicates the conditional dependency between them.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
overall connections. It is calculated by summing the absolute edge weights that are connected to a specific node. 
Strength provides a measure for identifying the most connected node (i.e., symptom) inside a network.
Figures S1–S3 in the Appendix illustrate the distribution of each symptom within each dimension (i.e. occur-
rence, severity, distress). These data are presented to assess whether some of our findings could be due to floor or 
ceiling effects that affect the properties of our centrality indices45.
Network Accuracy and stability. 
Inherent in NA is the problem of obtaining network structures that are 
sensitive to a specific dataset, or to the specific variables included in a study, and/or the specific estimation meth-
ods used. As recommended in the literature38, we used bootstrap confidence regions to examine the certainty of 
the edges and tested for significance between edge weights with α
 = 0.05 based on 1000 bootstrap iterations. To 
estimate the stability of the order of the centrality indices, we used a case- and node-dropping sub-setting boot-
strap technique together with the correlation stability coefficient (Cs-coefficient), which is an index of the stability 
of the centrality indices. The Cs-coefficient quantifies the maximum proportion of cases or nodes, respectively, 
can be dropped at random to retain, with 95% certainty, a correlation of at least 0.7 with the centralities of the 
original network38. While no strict cut-off value exists for the CS-coefficient, its value should be at least 0.25 and 
preferably higher than 0.5.
Additionally to the aforementioned analyses, we tested the stability of the centrality indices on four equally 
divided and randomly assigned subsets. This analysis showed the stability of the identified networks as well as the 
repeatability of the NA approach on cancer symptoms’ dimensions.
In order to determine whether and how symptoms clustered together inside our networks, we used the 
Walktrap algorithm46,47. The Walktrap algorithm identifies communities (i.e., clusters) of nodes (i.e., symptoms) 
that are relatively highly connected with each other. Nodes in a community are more likely to connect to other 
nodes in the same community than to nodes in other communities. Each community corresponds to a connected 
subgraph. In Figs 2b, 3b and 4b, these communities (i.e., symptom clusters) are visualized with different colors.
Results
Sample Characteristics - Of the 1328 patients in this study, 77.7% were female and their mean age was 57.2 
(±12.4) years. The majority of the patients had breast (40.2%) or gastrointestinal (30.7%) cancer. These patients 
reported an average of 13.9 (±7.2) symptoms prior to their next dose of CTX. Additional sample characteristics 
are summarized in Table S1 in the Appendix.
Figure 2. The estimated networks of 38 cancer symptoms across the “occurrence” dimension (a) without 
the identified communities and (b) with the identified communities (walktrap algorithm). Nodes represent 
symptoms and edges represent pairwise dependencies between the symptoms, after controlling for all of the 
other correlations of a given node. The 38 cancer symptoms represented in the nodes above are coded in the 
following fashion: difcon: Difficulty Concentrating, pain: Pain, energy: Lack of Energy, cough: Cough, nervous: 
Feeling Nervous, hotflash: Hot Flashes, drymouth: Dry Mouth, nausea: Nausea, drowsy: Feeling Drowsy, 
numb: Numbness or Tingling in Hands or Feet, chest: Chest Tightness, difbreath: Difficulty Breathing, difsleep: 
Difficulty Sleeping, bloat: Feeling Bloated, urinate: Problems with Urination, vomit: Vomitting, sob: Shortness 
of Breath, diarrhea: Diarrhea, sad: Feeling Sad, sweats: Sweats, sexual: Problems with Sexual Interest or Activity, 
worry: Worrying, itch: Itching, appetite: Lack of Appetite, abdominal: Abdominal Cramps, increaseapp: 
Increased Appetite, wtgain: Weight Gain, dizzy: Dizziness, swallow: Difficulty Swallowing, irritable: Feeling 
Irritable, mouthsore: Mouth Sore, wtloss: Weight Loss, hairloss: Hair Loss, constipat: Constipation, swelling: 
Swelling, taste: Change in the Way Food Tastes, myself: I Do Not Look Like Myself, skin: Changes in Skin.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
Network Models of symptom occurrence, severity, and Distress. 
Occurrence. For the occur-
rence dimension, created using the IsingFit method (see Fig. 2a), we used a gamma value of 0.25 and the OR rule 
for the nodewise estimation. All of the symptoms were directly or indirectly associated with the network and 
the network had a medium density (i.e., 36.42% of the potential connections were observed in the network). All 
connections were positive except for weight gain (wtgain) and weight loss (wtloss).
Severity. For the severity dimension, created using the polychoric correlation method and the glasso algorithm 
(Fig. 3a), we used a tuning parameter of 0.25. All of the symptoms were directly or indirectly associated with the 
network and the network had a medium density (i.e., 54.48% of the potential connections were observed in the 
network). All of the connections were positive except for: increased appetite (increaseapp) and lack of appetite 
(appetite); hair loss (hairloss) and difficulty with urination (urinate); and diarrhea (diarrhea) and constipation 
(constipat).
Distress. For the distress dimension, created using the polychoric correlation method and the Glasso algorithm 
(Fig. 4a), we used a tuning parameter of 0.25. All of the symptoms were directly or indirectly associated with the 
network and the network had a medium density (i.e., 50.92% of the potential connections were observed in the 
network). All of the connections were positive except for: increased appetite (increaseapp) and lack of appetite 
(appetite); weight gain (wtgain) and weight loss (wtloss); diarrhea (diarrhea) and hot flashes (hotflash); and hot 
flashes and swelling of the arms and legs (swelling).
To inspect the statistical importance and possible role of each symptom inside each of the the networks, we 
calculated their centrality indices (Fig. 5). As shown in Supplemental Table S2 in the Appendix, for the symptom 
occurrence network, nausea and lack of appetite had the highest scores for all three centrality indices. For the 
severity network, lack of appetite had the highest scores for all three centrality indices and lack of energy had 
the highest scores across two centrality indices (betweenness and closeness). For the distress dimension, lack of 
appetite had the highest scores across all three centrality indices.
Network Accuracy and stability. 
Bootstrap confidence regions for the edges’ weights were mostly over-
lapping (shown in Appendix Fig. S4). The results of the case- and node-dropping bootstrap techniques that were 
used to estimate the stability of the centrality indices are shown in Appendix Fig. S5. Robustness analyses of the 
centrality indices showed the following CS-coefficients for each dimension: 1) Occurrence: 0.517 for strength, 
0.128 for closeness, and 0.128 for betweenness; 2) Severity: 0.361 for strength, 0.05 for closeness, and 0.284 for 
Figure 3. The estimated networks of 38 cancer symptoms across the “severity” dimension (a) without the 
identified communities and (b) with the identified communities (walktrap algorithm). Nodes represent 
symptoms and edges represent a partial correlation between the symptoms, after controlling for all of the 
other correlations of a given node. The 38 cancer symptoms represented in the nodes above are coded in the 
following fashion: difcon: Difficulty Concentrating, pain: Pain, energy: Lack of Energy, cough: Cough, nervous: 
Feeling Nervous, hotflash: Hot Flashes, drymouth: Dry Mouth, nausea: Nausea, drowsy: Feeling Drowsy, 
numb: Numbness or Tingling in Hands or Feet, chest: Chest Tightness, difbreath: Difficulty Breathing, difsleep: 
Difficulty Sleeping, bloat: Feeling Bloated, urinate: Problems with Urination, vomit: Vomitting, sob: Shortness 
of Breath, diarrhea: Diarrhea, sad: Feeling Sad, sweats: Sweats, sexual: Problems with Sexual Interest or Activity, 
worry: Worrying, itch: Itching, appetite: Lack of Appetite, abdominal: Abdominal Cramps, increaseapp: 
Increased Appetite, wtgain: Weight Gain, dizzy: Dizziness, swallow: Difficulty Swallowing, irritable: Feeling 
Irritable, mouthsore: Mouth Sore, wtloss: Weight Loss, hairloss: Hair Loss, constipat: Constipation, swelling: 
Swelling, taste: Change in the Way Food Tastes, myself: I Do Not Look Like Myself, skin: Changes in Skin.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
betweenness; and 3) Distress: 0.361 for strength, 0.205 for closeness, and 0.128 for betweenness. Across the three 
symptom dimensions, node strength was the most reliable centrality index.
We also obtained similar results for the node strength for the 4 equally divided and randomly assigned subsets 
of patients, for each symptom dimension (i.e. occurrence, severity, distress) (See Appendix Figs S6 and S7).
Communities Within each symptom Dimension Network. 
Occurrence. Using the walktrap algo-
rithm (Fig. 2b), the symptoms appear to group into six main clusters: psychological symptom cluster [shown in 
gold], hormonal symptom cluster [shown in blue], respiratory symptom cluster [shown in green], nutritional 
symptom cluster [shown in white, yellow, and brown], CTX-related symptom cluster [shown in red], and pain 
and abdominal symptom cluster [shown in purple].
Severity. Using the walktrap algorithm (Fig. 3b), the symptoms appear to group into five main clusters: psy-
chological symptom cluster [shown in gold], hormonal symptom cluster [shown in blue], respiratory symptom 
cluster [shown in green], nutritional symptom cluster [shown in white and brown], and CTX-related symptom 
cluster [shown in red].
Distress. Using the walktrap algorithm (Fig. 4b), the symptoms appear to group into seven main clusters: psy-
chological symptom cluster [shown in gold], hormonal symptom cluster [shown in blue], respiratory symptom 
cluster [shown in green], nutritional symptom cluster [shown in white and brown], CTX-related symptom cluster 
[shown in red], GI symptom cluster [shown in pink], and epithelial symptom cluster [shown in purple].
It should be noted, in the communities (i.e., symptom clusters) that were constructed using the walktrap algo-
rithm, while a number of the symptom clusters have the same names, the specific symptoms within each of these 
clusters vary across the three dimensions (Table 1).
Discussion
This study is the first to use NA methods to examine the relationships among 38 common symptoms in a large 
sample of oncology patients undergoing CTX using ratings of occurrence, severity, and distress. The use of NA 
to understand the symptom experience of oncology patients has the potential to increase our knowledge of the 
structural relationships among co-occurring symptoms and symptom clusters; the core symptoms driving asso-
ciations between and among symptoms, and how co-occurring symptoms and symptom clusters change based on 
the dimension of the symptom experience that is used to create the network.
Figure 4. The estimated networks of 38 cancer symptoms across the “distress” dimension (a) without the 
identified communities and (b) with the identified communities (walktrap algorithm). Nodes represent 
symptoms and edges represent a partial correlation between the symptoms, after controlling for all of the 
other correlations of a given node. The 38 cancer symptoms represented in the nodes above are coded in the 
following fashion: difcon: Difficulty Concentrating, pain: Pain, energy: Lack of Energy, cough: Cough, nervous: 
Feeling Nervous, hotflash: Hot Flashes, drymouth: Dry Mouth, nausea: Nausea, drowsy: Feeling Drowsy, 
numb: Numbness or Tingling in Hands or Feet, chest: Chest Tightness, difbreath: Difficulty Breathing, difsleep: 
Difficulty Sleeping, bloat: Feeling Bloated, urinate: Problems with Urination, vomit: Vomitting, sob: Shortness 
of Breath, diarrhea: Diarrhea, sad: Feeling Sad, sweats: Sweats, sexual: Problems with Sexual Interest or Activity, 
worry: Worrying, itch: Itching, appetite: Lack of Appetite, abdominal: Abdominal Cramps, increaseapp: 
Increased Appetite, wtgain: Weight Gain, dizzy: Dizziness, swallow: Difficulty Swallowing, irritable: Feeling 
Irritable, mouthsore: Mouth Sore, wtloss: Weight Loss, hairloss: Hair Loss, constipat: Constipation, swelling: 
Swelling, taste: Change in the Way Food Tastes, myself: I Do Not Look Like Myself, skin: Changes in Skin.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
Our hypothesis that the network structure for the distress dimension would differ from the occurrence and 
severity dimensions was partially supported based on visual inspection of the network structures and the larger 
number of symptom clusters identified in the distress network. For over four decades, emphasis has been placed 
on an evaluation of multiple dimensions of the symptom experience because each dimension provides distinct 
and useful information30–33,48,49. Occurrence data are used to identify the most common symptoms in oncology 
patients. Severity data are used to determine the magnitude of a specific symptom and to guide treatment deci-
sions. An evaluation of symptom distress provides information on “the physical or mental anguish or suffering” 
associated with a symptom48. While symptom theory50–53 and data from studies that used the MSAS suggest that 
these three dimensions are distinct32,33,54–56, findings from our study provide the first direct evidence that the 
connections between and among symptoms differ depending on the symptom dimension that was used to create 
the network.
Because oncology patients experience an average of fifteen unrelieved symptoms that are highly variable in 
their occurrence, severity, and distress1–3, an equally important question in symptom research is to determine 
which symptom or symptoms is driving the other symptoms. While our NA of cross-sectional data does not 
demonstrate causality, the centrality indices provide some insights into the structural importance of each of the 
symptoms within each of the networks. In terms of the occurrence network, nausea had the highest scores for all 
three centrality indices. In this sample, 47.48% of patients reported nausea prior to their next dose of CTX. While 
vomiting is well controlled with newer antiemetic regimens, nausea is a persistent symptom that compromises 
a patient’s nutritional status, results in significant psychological distress, has a negative impact on quality of life, 
and can result in the discontinuation of cancer treatment57–59. For both the severity and distress networks, lack 
of appetite had the highest scores for all three centrality indices and it was the symptom with the second highest 
centrality scores for the occurrence dimension. While this symptom was reported by 41.31% of the patients in 
this study, it is a symptom that is not routinely assessed in oncology patients undergoing cancer treatment. Based 
on network theory19,60–63, given their high centrality index scores, these symptoms may be targets for therapeutic 
interventions that if successful would reduce other symptoms in the network.
While a tremendous amount of research has focused on the evaluation of symptom clusters in oncology 
patients4,5, our study is the first to use NA to visualize how one symptom cluster is associated with other symptom 
clusters. To date, the majority of the work to create symptom clusters was done using cluster analysis or factor 
analysis. While these approaches identified some of the most common symptom clusters in oncology patients, 
these symptom clusters are created as independent “factors”
. Our NA represents a major breakthrough in symp-
tom cluster research. Within each dimension, our graphical representation allows us to visualize how the various 
symptom clusters within the network are inter-connected with other symptom clusters in the same network. 
Figure 5. Centrality indices for the estimated network of 38 cancer symptoms shown in Figs 2a to 4a.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
Symptom Cluster
Occurrence
Severity
Distress
Psychological Symptom 
Cluster
difficulty sleeping
difficulty sleeping
difficulty sleeping
worrying
worrying
worrying
feeling sad
feeling sad
feeling sad
feeling irritable
feeling irritable
feeling irritable
feeling nervous
feeling nervous
feeling nervous
difficulty concentrating
difficulty concentrating
difficulty concentrating
lack of energy
lack of energy
feeling drowsy
feeling drowsy
problems with sexual interest/
activity
problems with sexual interest/
activity
Hormonal Symptom Cluster
sweats
sweats
sweats
hot flashes
hot flashes
hot flashes
problems with sexual interest/
activity
Respiratory Symptom Cluster
shortness of breath
shortness of breath
shortness of breath
difficulty breathing
difficulty breathing
difficulty breathing
cough
cough
cough
chest tightness
chest tightness
chest tightness
Nutritional Symptom Cluster
weight gain
weight gain
weight gain
weight loss
weight loss
weight loss
increased appetite
increased appetite
increased appetite
nausea
nausea
vomiting
vomiting
lack of appetite
lack of appetite
change in way food tastes
Chemotherapy-related 
Symptom Cluster
itching
itching
hair loss
hair loss
changes in skin
changes in skin
I don’t look like myself
I don’t look like myself
change in way food tastes
change in way food tastes
lack of appetite
mouth sores
mouth sores
mouth sores
difficulty swallowing
difficulty swallowing
difficulty swallowing
dry mouth
dry mouth
dry mouth
vomiting
nausea
dizziness
dizziness
dizziness
constipation
constipation
swelling of arms or legs
swelling of arms or legs
problems with urination
problems with urination
diarrhea
abdominal cramps
numbness/tingling in hands/feet
numbness/tingling in hands/feet
pain
Pain
feeling bloated
lack of energy
feeling drowsy
Pain and Abdominal 
Symptom Cluster
diarrhea
Not identified
Not identified
abdominal cramps
feeling bloated
swelling of arms or legs
pain
numbness/tingling in hands/feet
problems with urination
Gastrointestinal Symptom 
Cluster
Not identified
Not identified
diarrhea
abdominal cramps
constipation
feeling bloated
Epithelial Symptom Cluster
Not identified
Not identified
hair loss
I don’t look like myself
itching
skin changes
Table 1. Symptom Clusters Derived From Network Analyses of Occurrence, Severity, and Distress.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
Based on network theory60,64,65, we can hypothesize that symptoms on the edges of each of the clusters may have 
an influence on that cluster. For example, in Fig. 2b, difficulty sleeping and hot flashes are on the edges of their 
respective symptom clusters. While we cannot demonstrate causality, it is known that the occurrence of hot 
flashes disrupts patients’ sleep66,67. If our findings are confirmed in an independent sample, future NAs can eval-
uate for causality and test interventions to reduce symptoms across clusters.
In terms of the specific symptom clusters identified for each of the symptom dimensions, our finding of a 
psychological symptom cluster across all three dimensions is consistent with findings from a recent review that 
noted that this cluster is one of the most common clusters identified in oncology patients4. The other four symp-
tom clusters that were common across all three symptom dimensions (i.e., hormonal, respiratory, nutrition, and 
CTX-related) were reported in previous symptom cluster studies68–72. The fact that two additional and unique 
symptom clusters were identified within the distress network provide additional support for the hypothesis that 
symptom distress is a distinct dimension of the oncology patients’ symptom experience. Future research will need 
to evaluate causality among symptoms within each of the dimension networks and whether common or distinct 
interventions are needed to decrease the severity and distress associated with a specific symptom.
Limitations and Future Directions. 
Several limitations warrant consideration. While our sample was 
rather large in comparison to the number of parameters estimated, the heterogeneity introduced by the specific 
demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients in this study may influence the stability of our estimated 
networks. Since this study is the first to use NA to examine the relationships among co-occurring symptoms and 
symptom clusters, our findings warrant replication in an independent sample of oncology patients undergoing 
CTX. In addition, this analysis of cross-sectional data does not allow for causal inferences on the role of each 
symptom within each of our networks. Finally, because no standards exist to interpret the significance and robust-
ness of networks and because the validity of the visual interpretation of complex networks is subjective, additional 
research is warranted to confirm our findings.
In terms of directions for future research, our findings warrant replication in an independent sample with 
similar demographic and clinical characteristics. In addition, comparisons of network structures need to be done 
among different cancer diagnoses, across different stages of disease, and among different cancer treatments. The 
impact of various demographic (e.g., age, gender) and clinical (e.g., comorbid conditions, functional status) char-
acteristics on the network structure of cancer symptoms warrants evaluation. Using longitudinal data, NA will 
allow us to explore the causal relationships among co-occurring symptoms and symptom clusters12.
Conclusion
In this study, we used NA to investigate the relationships among 38 common symptoms in oncology patients 
receiving CTX. As the first NA of cancer symptoms, our work provides new insights into the inter-relationships 
among co-occurring symptoms and symptom clusters. Findings from this study suggest that the connections 
between and among symptoms may differ depending on the symptom dimension used to create the network. Our 
findings suggest that distress may be a different dimension of a patient’s symptom experience. In addition, this 
study provides the first visualizations of the inter-relationships among symptom clusters across three dimensions 
of the patients’ symptom experience. While these findings warrant confirmation in an independent sample, we 
believe that NA has the potential to improve our understanding of the oncology patients’ symptom experience 
so that individualized and targeted interventions can be prescribed to reduce each patient’s symptom burden.
Data Availability
The data used in this study will be available upon request and subject to ethics approval. All data requests should 
be sent to Christine Miaskowski (chris.miaskowski@ucsf.edu).
References
 1. Papachristou, N. et al. Congruence between latent class and k-modes analyses in the identification of oncology patients with distinct 
symptom experiences. J Pain Symptom Manage. 55, 318–333 (2018).
 2. Miaskowski, C. et al. Latent class analysis reveals distinct subgroups of patients based on symptom occurrence and demographic and 
clinical characteristics. J Pain Symptom Manage. 50, 28–37 (2015).
 3. Esther Kim, J. E., Dodd, M. J., Aouizerat, B. E., Jahan, T. & Miaskowski, C. A review of the prevalence and impact of multiple 
symptoms in oncology patients. J Pain Symptom Manage. 37, 715–736 (2009).
 4. Miaskowski, C. et al. Advancing symptom science through symptom cluster research: Expert panel proceedings and 
recommendations. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 109 (2017).
 5. Miaskowski, C. Future directions in symptom cluster research. Semin Oncol Nurs. 32, 405–415 (2016).
 6. Barsevick, A. Defining the symptom cluster: How far have we come? Semin Oncol Nurs. 32, 334–350 (2016).
 7. Boccaletti, S., Latora, V., Moreno, Y., Chavez, M. & Hwang, D. Complex networks: Structure and dynamics. Phys. Reports 424, 
175–308 (2006).
 8. Albert, R. & Barabási, A. L. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of modern physics 74, 47 (2002).
 9. Strogatz, S. H. Exploring complex networks. Nature 410, 268 (2012).
 
10. Wang, R. S., Maron, B. A. & Loscalzo, J. Systems medicine: evolution of systems biology from bench to bedside. Wiley Interdiscip Rev 
Syst Biol Med 7, 141–161 (2015).
 
11. Loscalzo, J. & Barabasi, A. L. Systems biology and the future of medicine. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 3, 619–627 (2011).
 
12. Bringmann, L. F., Lemmens, L. H., Huibers, M. J., Borsboom, D. & Tuerlinckx, F. Revealing the dynamic network structure of the 
beck depression inventory-ii. Psychol. Med. 45, 747–757 (2015).
 
13. Fried, E. I., Epskamp, S., Nesse, R. M., Tuerlinckx, F. & Borsboom, D. What are ‘good’ depression symptoms? Comparing the 
centrality of dsm and non-dsm symptoms of depression in a network analysis. J. Affect Disord. 189, 314–320 (2016).
 
14. Frewen, P. A., Schmittmann, V. D., Bringmann, L. F. & Borsboom, D. Perceived causal relations between anxiety, posttraumatic stress 
and depression: extension to moderation, mediation, and network analysis. Eur J Psychotraumatol 4 (2013).
 
15. Robinaugh, D. J., LeBlanc, N. J., Vuletich, H. A. & McNally, R. J. Network analysis of persistent complex bereavement disorder in 
conjugally bereaved adults. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 123, 510–522 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
 
16. Kossakowski, J. J. et al. The application of a network approach to health-related quality of life (hrqol): introducing a new method for 
assessing hrqol in healthy adults and cancer patients. Qual. Life. Res. 25, 781–792 (2016).
 
17. Zou, J. & Wang, E. Etumorrisk, an algorithm predicts cancer risk based on co-mutated gene networks in an individual’s germline 
genome. bioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/393090 (2018).
 
18. McNally, R. J. Can network analysis transform psychopathology? Behav. Res. Ther. 86, 95–104 (2016).
 
19. Fried, E. I. et al. Mental disorders as networks of problems: a review of recent insights. Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol. 52, 1–10 
(2017).
 
20. Boschloo, L., van Borkulo, C. D., Borsboom, D. & Schoevers, R. A. A prospective study on how symptoms in a network predict the 
onset of depression. Psychother. Psychosom. 85, 183–184 (2016).
 
21. Boschloo, L. et al. The network structure of symptoms of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. PLoS One 10, 
e0137621 (2015).
 
22. Borsboom, D. & Cramer, A. O. Network analysis: an integrative approach to the structure of psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. 
Psychol. 9, 91–121 (2013).
 
23. Rhemtulla, M. et al. Network analysis of substance abuse and dependence symptoms. Drug Alcohol. Depend. 161, 230–237 (2016).
 
24. Bhavnani, S. K. et al. The nested structure of cancer symptoms. implications for analyzing co-occurrence and managing symptoms. 
Methods Inf. Med. 49, 581–591 (2010).
 
25. Fortunato, S. Community detection in graphs. Phys. Rep. 486, 75–174 (2010).
 
26. Qiao, J., Meng, Y. Y., Chen, H., Huang, H. Q. & Li, G. Y. Modeling one-mode projection of bipartite networks by tagging vertex 
information. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 457, 270–279 (2016).
 
27. Epskamp, S., Maris, G. K., Waldorp, L. J. & Borsboom, D. Network psychometrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02818 (2016).
 
28. Epskamp, S. & Fried, E. I. A tutorial on regularized partial correlation networks. Psychol Methods (2018).
 
29. Koller, D. & Friedman, N. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques (MIT press, 2009).
 
30. McCorkle, R. The measurement of symptom distress. Semin. Oncol. Nurs 3, 248–256 (1987).
 
31. McCorkle, R. & Young, K. Development of a symptom distress scale. Cancer Nurs 1, 373–378 (1978).
 
32. Portenoy, R. K. et al. Symptom prevalence, characteristics and distress in a cancer population. Qual. Life. Res. 3, 183–189 (1994).
 
33. Portenoy, R. K. et al. The Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale: an instrument for the evaluation of symptom prevalence, 
characteristics and distress. Eur. J. Cancer 30A, 1326–1336 (1994).
 
34. Miaskowski, C. et al. The symptom phenotype of oncology outpatients remains relatively stable from prior to through 1 week 
following chemotherapy. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl) 26 (2017).
 
35. Wright, F. et al. Inflammatory pathway genes associated with inter-individual variability in the trajectories of morning and evening 
fatigue in patients receiving chemotherapy. Cytokine 91, 187–210 (2017).
 
36. Kober, K. M. et al. Subgroups of chemotherapy patients with distinct morning and evening fatigue trajectories. Support. Care Cancer 
24, 1473–1485 (2016).
 
37. Barabási, A. L. & Pósfai, M. Network science (Cambridge university press, 2016).
 
38. Epskamp, S., Borsboom, D. & Fried, E. I. Estimating psychological networks and their accuracy: a tutorial paper. Behav. Res. 
Methods. 50, 195–212 (2018).
 
39. Van Borkulo, C. D. et al. A new method for constructing networks from binary data. Sci. Rep. 4, 5918 (2014).
 
40. Epskamp, S., Cramer, A. O., Waldorp, L., Schmittmann, V. & Borsboom, D. qgraph: Network visualizations of relationships in 
psychometric data. J. Stat. Softw. 48, 1–18 (2012).
 
41. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. glasso: Graphical lasso- estimation of gaussian graphical models, https://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/glasso/ (2014).
 
42. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics 9, 432–441 (2008).
 
43. Fruchterman, T. & Reingold, E. Graph drawing by force-directed placement. Software: Practice and experience 21, 1129–1164 (1991).
 
44. Opsahl, T., Agneessens, F. & Skvoretz, J. Node centrality in weighted networks: Generalizing degree and shortest paths. Soc. Networks 
32, 245–251 (2010).
 
45. Lewis-Beck, M., Bryman, A. & Liao, T. F. The Sage encyclopedia of social science research methods (Sage Publications, 2003).
 
46. Orman, G. & Labatut, V. A comparison of community detection algorithms on artificial networks. In International Conference on 
Discovery Science, 242–256 (2009).
 
47. Yang, Z., Algesheimer, R. & Tessone, C. J. A comparative analysis of community detection algorithms on artificial networks. Sci. Rep. 
6, 30750 (2016).
 
48. Rhodes, V. A., McDaniel, R. W., Homan, S. S., Johnson, M. & Madsen, R. An instrument to measure symptom experience. symptom 
occurrence and symptom distress. Cancer Nurs. 23, 49–54 (2000).
 
49. McClement, S. E., Woodgate, R. L. & Degner, L. Symptom distress in adult patients with cancer. Cancer Nurs. 20, 236–243 (1997).
 
50. Brant, J. M., Beck, S. & Miaskowski, C. Building dynamic models and theories to advance the science of symptom management 
research. J. Adv. Nurs. 66, 228–240 (2010).
 
51. Humphreys, J. et al. Middle range theory for nursing, chap. A middle range theory of symptom management, 141–164 (2014).
 
52. Lenz, E. R., Pugh, L. C., Milligan, R. A., Gift, A. & Suppe, F. The middle-range theory of unpleasant symptoms: an update. ANS Adv. 
Nurs. Sci. 19, 14–27 (1997).
 
53. Lenz, E. R., Suppe, F., Gift, A. G., Pugh, L. C. & Milligan, R. A. Collaborative development of middle-range nursing theories: toward 
a theory of unpleasant symptoms. ANS Adv. Nurs. Sci. 17, 1–13 (1995).
 
54. Tantoy, I. Y. et al. Differences in symptom occurrence, severity, and distress ratings between patients with gastrointestinal cancers 
who received chemotherapy alone or chemotherapy with targeted therapy. J. Gastrointest. Oncol. 8, 109–126 (2017).
 
55. Oksholm, T. et al. Does age influence the symptom experience of lung cancer patients prior to surgery? Lung Cancer 82, 156–161 
(2013).
 
56. Hofsø, K., Miaskowski, C., Bjordal, K., Cooper, B. A. & Rustøen, T. Previous chemotherapy influences the symptom experience and 
quality of life of women with breast cancer prior to radiation therapy. Cancer Nurs. 35, 167–177 (2012).
 
57. Farrell, C., Brearley, S. G., Pilling, M. & Molassiotis, A. The impact of chemotherapy-related nausea on patients’ nutritional status, 
psychological distress and quality of life. Support. Care Cancer 21, 59–66 (2013).
 
58. Molassiotis, A. et al. Validation and psychometric assessment of a short clinical scale to measure chemotherapy-induced nausea and 
vomiting: the mascc antiemesis tool. J. Pain Symptom Manage. 34, 148–159 (2007).
 
59. Molassiotis, A., Stricker, C. T., Eaby, B., Velders, L. & Coventry, P. A. Understanding the concept of chemotherapy-related nausea: 
the patient experience. Eur. J. Cancer Care (Engl.) 17, 444–453 (2008).
 
60. Borsboom, D. A network theory of mental disorders. World Psychiatry. 16, 5–13 (2017).
 
61. Borsboom, D., Epskamp, S., Kievit, R. A., Cramer, A. O. & Schmittmann, V. D. Transdiagnostic networks: Commentary on nolen-
hoeksema and watkins (2011). Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 6, 610–614 (2011).
 
62. Bringmann, L. F. et al. A network approach to psychopathology: new insights into clinical longitudinal data. PLoS One 8, e60188 
(2013).
 
63. Isvoranu, A. M., Borsboom, D., van Os, J. & Guloksuz, S. A network approach to environmental impact in psychotic disorder: Brief 
theoretical framework. Schizophr. Bull. 42, 870–873 (2016).
 
64. Liu, Y. Y., Slotine, J. J. & Barabasi, A. L. Controllability of complex networks. Nature 473, 167–173 (2011).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts |          (2019) 9:2258  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1
 
65. Cramer, A. O., Waldorp, L. J., van der Maas, H. L. & Borsboom, D. Comorbidity: a network perspective. Behav Brain Sci 33, 137–150 
(2010).
 
66. Gonzalez, B. D. et al. Sleep disturbance in men receiving androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: The role of hot flashes 
and nocturia. Cancer 124, 499–506 (2018).
 
67. Savard, M. H., Savard, J., Caplette-Gingras, A., Ivers, H. & Bastien, C. Relationship between objectively recorded hot flashes and 
sleep disturbances among breast cancer patients: investigating hot flash characteristics other than frequency. Menopause 20, 
997–1005 (2013).
 
68. Mazor, M. et al. Differences in symptom clusters before and twelve months after breast cancer surgery. Eur. J. Oncol. Nurs. 32, 63–72 
(2018).
 
69. Sullivan, C. W. et al. Stability of symptom clusters in patients with breast cancer receiving chemotherapy. J. Pain Symptom Manage. 
55, 39–55 (2018).
 
70. Wong, M. L. et al. Differences in symptom clusters identified using ratings of symptom occurrence vs. severity in lung cancer 
patients receiving chemotherapy. J. Pain Symptom Manage. 54, 194–203 (2017).
 
71. Huang, J. et al. Symptom clusters in ovarian cancer patients with chemotherapy after surgery: A longitudinal survey. Cancer Nurs. 
39, 106–116 (2016).
 
72. Hwang, K. H., Cho, O. H. & Yoo, Y. S. Symptom clusters of ovarian cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, and their emotional 
status and quality of life. Eur. J. Oncol. Nurs. 21, 215–222 (2016).
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Professor Anne Skeldon from the Department of Mathematics, University of Surrey for 
her suggestion to sub-divide our sample into 4 similar groups and cross-check the stability of their centrality 
indices. Part of this study was funded by the National Cancer Institute (CA134900). In addition, this project 
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation ACTIVAGE project under 
grant agreement No. 732679.
Author Contributions
Christine Miaskowski, Bruce Cooper, Yvette P. Conley, Marilyn Hammer, Kord M. Kober, Jon D. Levine, 
Steven M. Paul, and Fay Wright were responsible for the design and execution of the clinical study including 
patient recruitment and retention and data collection. Nikolaos Papachristou, Payam Barnaghi and Christine 
Miaskowski conceived the experiment. Nikolaos Papachristou and Payam Barnaghi conducted and analysed the 
results. Nikolaos Papachristou, Payam Barnaghi, Christine Miaskowski, Bruce Cooper, Roma Maguire, Yvette 
P. Conley, Marilyn Hammer, Stylianos Katsaragakis, Kord M. Kober, Jon D. Levine, Jo Armes, Lisa McCann, 
Elisabeth Patiraki, Eileen P. Furlong, Steven M. Paul and Fay Wright contributed to the interpretation of the study 
findings and participated in the editing and revision of the final version of the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-36973-1.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2019
