 Adrenal cryptococcosis in an immunosuppressed patient 
showing intensely increased metabolic activity on 18F-FDG 
PET/CT
Georgios Z. Papadakis, MDa, Steven M. Holland, MDb, Martha Quezado, MDc, and Nicholas 
J. Patronas, MDa
aRadiology and Imaging Sciences, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center (CC), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
bImmunopathogenesis Section, Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA
cDepartment of Pathology, National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Bethesda, MD, USA
Abstract
Disseminated cryptococcosis most commonly occurs in immunosuppressed patients and can rarely 
affect the adrenal glands. We report on a patient with biopsy proven bilateral adrenal 
cryptococcosis resulting in primary adrenal insufficiency, which was evaluated with whole-body 
PET/CT using 18F-FDG. Both enlarged adrenal glands presented intensely increased 18F-FDG 
activity in the periphery, while central necrotic regions were photopenic. Although diagnosis was 
established by adrenal-gland biopsy, 18F-FDG PET/CT can significantly contribute to the 
assessment of disease activity and monitoring of treatment response. Furthermore, fungal 
infections should always be considered when encountering hypermetabolic adrenal masses, 
especially in the setting of immune-deficient patients.
Keywords
18F-FDG PET/CT; adrenal cryptococcosis; primary adrenal insufficiency
A 41-year-old male with history of underlying idiopathic CD4 lymphocytopenia, negative 
HIV status and biopsy proven disseminated cryptococcal infection affecting meninges, lungs 
and bones presented with fatigue, weight loss, hypotension, somnolence, and progressive 
skin darkness. Biochemical work up revealed undetectable cortisol and greatly elevated 
ACTH (>2500 pg/ml with a normal range 0–46), while ACTH-stimulating test indicating 
primary adrenal insufficiency. The patient underwent imaging studies including whole-
Address for correspondence: Nicholas J. Patronas, MD, Chief of Neuroradiology Branch, Department of Radiology and Imaging 
Sciences, Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center (CC), National Institutes of Health (N.I.H.), Bethesda, MD, USA. Building 10 
Room 1C361X, 10 Center DR, Bethesda MD 20814, NPatronas@cc.nih.gov. 
Conflict of interest:
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Endocrine. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Endocrine. 2016 December ; 54(3): 834–836. doi:10.1007/s12020-016-1040-4.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 body 18F-FDG-PET/CT scan without contrast and post-contrast chest/abdomen/pelvis CT 
and MRI scans. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the adrenals showed bilateral non-enhancing 
enlarged (3.7cm for the right and 3.2cm for the left in length) and partially calcified adrenal 
glands (Fig 1A: axial post-contrast CT image of the adrenals; black arrows), with the right 
adrenal mass compressing the inferior vena cava (Fig 1A: yellow arrow). MRI-scan of the 
abdomen confirmed abnormally enlarged adrenal glands exhibiting low signal intensity on 
T2-weighted images (Fig 1B: coronal white arrows; left renal cyst: black arrow). 
Subsequently, 18F-FDG PET/CT scan showed intensely increased 18F-FDG uptake by the 
adrenal masses −SUVmax:12.4 and 11.1 for the right and left adrenal gland respectively- 
(Fig 1C: axial fused 18F-FDG PET/CT image of the abdomen) with central photopenia 
representing necrotic regions (Fig 1D: coronal fused 18F-FDG PET/CT image). Normal 
plasma metanephrines and norepinephrines and normal 24 hour urine catecholamines ruled 
out pheochromocytoma, while CT-guided percutaneous needle core biopsy of the right 
adrenal gland revealed fibrotic tissue with extensive necrosis containing numerous rounded 
fungal organisms. Hematoxylin and Eosin stained sections showed fungal elements in a 
necrotic background (Fig 1E: black arrows 600×), which are highlighted by GMS silver 
stain (Fig 1F: white arrows 600×) and mucicarmine (Fig 1G: black arrows 600×) consistent 
with cryptococcal infection.
Cryptococcosis is a severe and potentially fatal systemic fungal infection with a universal 
geographic distribution caused by encapsulated yeast of the genus Cryptococcus [1]. 
Inhalation of cryptococcal particles is the most common route of infection, while ingestion 
of the fungus or direct inoculation through the skin is less frequently encountered. 
Pulmonary and central nervous system cryptococcosis are the most common clinical 
manifestations of this fungal infection, while involvement of bones or adrenals rarely occurs 
[2].
Early diagnosis and efficient monitoring of disease activity can significantly contribute to 
optimal management of patients with fungal infections. Thus, modern hybrid imaging 
modalities (PET/CT, PET/MRI) which provide both functional and anatomical information, 
have high potential as valuable diagnostic tools in this clinical setting [3]. 18F-FDG is a 
radiolabeled glucose analog suitable for PET imaging which allows whole-body 
characterization of metabolic activity. Sites of infection accumulate 18F-FDG which is taken 
up by migratory inflammatory cells, microorganisms, and granulation tissue [3]. 18F-FDG 
PET/CT is not diagnostic of a fungal infection like cryptococcosis, but can significantly 
contribute to assessing disease extent, treatment response or disease recurrence. In the 
presented case of adrenal cryptococcosis 18F-FDG activity was intensely increased in the 
periphery of the adrenal masses, while central necrotic regions were photopenic. Since 18F-
FDG is a non-specific radiopharmaceutical, fungal infections should always be considered in 
the differential diagnosis of 18F-FDG-avid adrenal masses especially in immuno-deficient 
patients as indicated by the presented data.
References
1. Hung ZS, Lai YH, Hsu YH, Wang CH, Fang TC, Hsu BG. Disseminated cryptococcosis causes 
adrenal insufficiency in an immunocompetent individual. Intern. Med. 2010; 49(11):1023–1026. 
[PubMed: 20519820] 
Papadakis et al.
Page 2
Endocrine. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Negroni R. Cryptococcosis. Clin. Dermatol. 2012; 30(6):599–609. [PubMed: 23068147] 
3. Sharma P, Mukherjee A, Karunanithi S, Bal C, Kumar R. Potential role of 18F-FDG PET/CT in 
patients with fungal infections. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2014; 203(1):180–189. [PubMed: 24951213] 
Papadakis et al.
Page 3
Endocrine. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Papadakis et al.
Page 4
Endocrine. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
