 mRNA vaccines — a new era in vaccinology
Norbert Pardi1, Michael J. Hogan1, Frederick W. Porter2, and Drew Weissman1
1Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
2Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina 
27710, USA
Abstract
mRNA vaccines represent a promising alternative to conventional vaccine approaches because of 
their high potency, capacity for rapid development and potential for low-cost manufacture and safe 
administration. However, their application has until recently been restricted by the instability and 
inefficient in vivo delivery of mRNA. Recent technological advances have now largely overcome 
these issues, and multiple mRNA vaccine platforms against infectious diseases and several types 
of cancer have demonstrated encouraging results in both animal models and humans. This Review 
provides a detailed overview of mRNA vaccines and considers future directions and challenges in 
advancing this promising vaccine platform to widespread therapeutic use.
Vaccines prevent many millions of illnesses and save numerous lives every year1. As a result 
of widespread vaccine use, the smallpox virus has been completely eradicated and the 
incidence of polio, measles and other childhood diseases has been drastically reduced 
around the world2. Conventional vaccine approaches, such as live attenuated and inactivated 
pathogens and subunit vaccines, provide durable protection against a variety of dangerous 
diseases3. Despite this success, there remain major hurdles to vaccine development against a 
variety of infectious pathogens, especially those better able to evade the adaptive immune 
response4. Moreover, for most emerging virus vaccines, the main obstacle is not the 
effectiveness of conventional approaches but the need for more rapid development and large-
scale deployment. Finally, conventional vaccine approaches may not be applicable to non-
infectious diseases, such as cancer. The development of more potent and versatile vaccine 
platforms is therefore urgently needed.
Nucleic acid therapeutics have emerged as promising alternatives to conventional vaccine 
approaches. The first report of the successful use of in vitro transcribed (IVT) mRNA in 
animals was published in 1990, when reporter gene mRNAs were injected into mice and 
protein production was detected5. A subsequent study in 1992 demonstrated that 
administration of vasopressin-encoding mRNA in the hypothalamus could elicit a 
Correspondence to D.W. dreww@upenn.edu. 
Competing interests statement
The authors declare competing interests: see Web version for details.
FURTHER INFORMATION
ClinicalTrials.gov: https://clinicaltrials.gov/
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2018 April ; 17(4): 261–279. doi:10.1038/nrd.2017.243.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 physiological response in rats6. However, these early promising results did not lead to 
substantial investment in developing mRNA therapeutics, largely owing to concerns 
associated with mRNA instability, high innate immunogenicity and inefficient in vivo 
delivery. Instead, the field pursued DNA-based and protein-based therapeutic approaches7,8.
Over the past decade, major technological innovation and research investment have enabled 
mRNA to become a promising therapeutic tool in the fields of vaccine development and 
protein replacement therapy. The use of mRNA has several beneficial features over subunit, 
killed and live attenuated virus, as well as DNA-based vaccines. First, safety: as mRNA is a 
non-infectious, non-integrating platform, there is no potential risk of infection or insertional 
mutagenesis. Additionally, mRNA is degraded by normal cellular processes, and its in vivo 
half-life can be regulated through the use of various modifications and delivery methods9–12. 
The inherent immunogenicity of the mRNA can be down-modulated to further increase the 
safety profile9,12,13. Second, efficacy: various modifications make mRNA more stable and 
highly translatable9,12,13. Efficient in vivo delivery can be achieved by formulating mRNA 
into carrier molecules, allowing rapid uptake and expression in the cytoplasm (reviewed in 
REFS 10,11). mRNA is the minimal genetic vector; therefore, anti-vector immunity is 
avoided, and mRNA vaccines can be administered repeatedly. Third, production: mRNA 
vaccines have the potential for rapid, inexpensive and scalable manufacturing, mainly owing 
to the high yields of in vitro transcription reactions.
The mRNA vaccine field is developing extremely rapidly; a large body of preclinical data 
has accumulated over the past several years, and multiple human clinical trials have been 
initiated. In this Review, we discuss current mRNA vaccine approaches, summarize the 
latest findings, highlight challenges and recent successes, and offer perspectives on the 
future of mRNA vaccines. The data suggest that mRNA vaccines have the potential to solve 
many of the challenges in vaccine development for both infectious diseases and cancer.
Basic mRNA vaccine pharmacology
mRNA is the intermediate step between the translation of protein-encoding DNA and the 
production of proteins by ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Two major types of RNA are 
currently studied as vaccines: non-replicating mRNA and virally derived, self-amplifying 
RNA. Conventional mRNA-based vaccines encode the antigen of interest and contain 5′ 
and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs), whereas self-amplifying RNAs encode not only the 
antigen but also the viral replication machinery that enables intracellular RNA amplification 
and abundant protein expression.
The construction of optimally translated IVT mRNA suitable for therapeutic use has been 
reviewed previously14,15. Briefly, IVT mRNA is produced from a linear DNA template using 
a T7, a T3 or an Sp6 phage RNA polymerase16. The resulting product should optimally 
contain an open reading frame that encodes the protein of interest, flanking UTRs, a 5′ cap 
and a poly(A) tail. The mRNA is thus engineered to resemble fully processed mature mRNA 
molecules as they occur naturally in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells.
Pardi et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Complexing of mRNA for in vivo delivery has also been recently detailed10,11. Naked 
mRNA is quickly degraded by extracellular RNases17 and is not internalized efficiently. 
Thus, a great variety of in vitro and in vivo transfection reagents have been developed that 
facilitate cellular uptake of mRNA and protect it from degradation. Once the mRNA transits 
to the cytosol, the cellular translation machinery produces protein that undergoes post-
translational modifications, resulting in a properly folded, fully functional protein. This 
feature of mRNA pharmacology is particularly advantageous for vaccines and protein 
replacement therapies that require cytosolic or transmembrane proteins to be delivered to the 
correct cellular compartments for proper presentation or function. IVT mRNA is finally 
degraded by normal physiological processes, thus reducing the risk of metabolite toxicity.
Recent advances in mRNA vaccine technology
Various mRNA vaccine platforms have been developed in recent years and validated in 
studies of immunogenicity and efficacy18–20. Engineering of the RNA sequence has 
rendered synthetic mRNA more translatable than ever before. Highly efficient and non-toxic 
RNA carriers have been developed that in some cases21,22 allow prolonged antigen 
expression in vivo (TABLE 1). Some vaccine formulations contain novel adjuvants, while 
others elicit potent responses in the absence of known adjuvants. The following section 
summarizes the key advances in these areas of mRNA engineering and their impact on 
vaccine efficacy.
Optimization of mRNA translation and stability
This topic has been extensively discussed in previous reviews14,15; thus, we briefly 
summarize the key findings (BOX 1). The 5′ and 3′ UTR elements flanking the coding 
sequence profoundly influence the stability and translation of mRNA, both of which are 
critical concerns for vaccines. These regulatory sequences can be derived from viral or 
eukaryotic genes and greatly increase the half-life and expression of therapeutic 
mRNAs23,24. A 5′ cap structure is required for efficient protein production from mRNA25. 
Various versions of 5′ caps can be added during or after the transcription reaction using a 
vaccinia virus capping enzyme26 or by incorporating synthetic cap or anti-reverse cap 
analogues27,28. The poly(A) tail also plays an important regulatory role in mRNA translation 
and stability25; thus, an optimal length of poly(A)24 must be added to mRNA either directly 
from the encoding DNA template or by using poly(A) polymerase. The codon usage 
additionally has an impact on protein translation. Replacing rare codons with frequently 
used synonymous codons that have abundant cognate tRNA in the cytosol is a common 
practice to increase protein production from mRNA29, although the accuracy of this model 
has been questioned30. Enrichment of G:C content constitutes another form of sequence 
optimization that has been shown to increase steady-state mRNA levels in vitro31 and 
protein expression in vivo12.
Pardi et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1
Strategies for optimizing mRNA pharmacology
A number of technologies are currently used to improve the pharmacological aspects of 
mRNA. The various mRNA modifications used and their impact are summarized below.
•
Synthetic cap analogues and capping enzymes26,27 stabilize mRNA and 
increase protein translation via binding to eukaryotic translation initiation 
factor 4E (EIF4E)
•
Regulatory elements in the 5′-untranslated region (UTR) and the 3′-UTR23 
stabilize mRNA and increase protein translation
•
Poly(A) tail25 stabilizes mRNA and increases protein translation
•
Modified nucleosides9,48 decrease innate immune activation and increase 
translation
•
Separation and/or purification techniques: RNase III treatment (N.P. and 
D.W., unpublished observations) and fast protein liquid chromatography 
(FPLC) purification13 decrease immune activation and increase translation
•
Sequence and/or codon optimization29 increase translation
•
Modulation of target cells: co-delivery of translation initiation factors and 
other methods alters translation and immunogenicity
Although protein expression may be positively modulated by altering the codon composition 
or by introducing modified nucleosides (discussed below), it is also possible that these forms 
of sequence engineering could affect mRNA secondary structure32, the kinetics and 
accuracy of translation and simultaneous protein folding33,34, and the expression of cryptic 
T cell epitopes present in alternative reading frames30. All these factors could potentially 
influence the magnitude or specificity of the immune response.
Modulation of immunogenicity
Exogenous mRNA is inherently immunostimulatory, as it is recognized by a variety of cell 
surface, endosomal and cytosolic innate immune receptors (FIG. 1) (reviewed in REF. 35). 
Depending on the therapeutic application, this feature of mRNA could be beneficial or 
detrimental. It is potentially advantageous for vaccination because in some cases it may 
provide adjuvant activity to drive dendritic cell (DC) maturation and thus elicit robust T and 
B cell immune responses. However, innate immune sensing of mRNA has also been 
associated with the inhibition of antigen expression and may negatively affect the immune 
response9,13. Although the paradoxical effects of innate immune sensing on different 
formats of mRNA vaccines are incompletely understood, some progress has been made in 
recent years in elucidating these phenomena.
Studies over the past decade have shown that the immunostimulatory profile of mRNA can 
be shaped by the purification of IVT mRNA and the introduction of modified nucleosides as 
Pardi et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 well as by complexing the mRNA with various carrier molecules9,13,36,37. Enzymatically 
synthesized mRNA preparations contain double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) contaminants as 
aberrant products of the IVT reaction13. As a mimic of viral genomes and replication 
intermediates, dsRNA is a potent pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) that is 
sensed by pattern recognition receptors in multiple cellular compartments (FIG. 1). 
Recognition of IVT mRNA contaminated with dsRNA results in robust type I interferon 
production13, which upregulates the expression and activation of protein kinase R (PKR; 
also known as EIF2AK2) and 2′–5′-oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS), leading to the 
inhibition of translation38 and the degradation of cellular mRNA and ribosomal RNA39, 
respectively. Karikó and colleagues13 have demonstrated that contaminating dsRNA can be 
efficiently removed from IVT mRNA by chromatographic methods such as reverse-phase 
fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) or high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC). Strikingly, purification by FPLC has been shown to increase protein production 
from IVT mRNA by up to 1,000-fold in primary human DCs13. Thus, appropriate 
purification of IVT mRNA seems to be critical for maximizing protein (immunogen) 
production in DCs and for avoiding unwanted innate immune activation.
Besides dsRNA contaminants, single-stranded mRNA molecules are themselves a PAMP 
when delivered to cells exogenously. Single-stranded oligoribonucleotides and their 
degradative products are detected by the endosomal sensors Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and 
TLR8 (REFS 40,41), resulting in type I interferon production42. Crucially, it was discovered 
that the incorporation of naturally occurring chemically modified nucleosides, including but 
not limited to pseudouridine9,43,44 and 1-methylpseudouridine45, prevents activation of 
TLR7, TLR8 and other innate immune sensors46,47, thus reducing type I interferon 
signalling48. Nucleoside modification also partially suppresses the recognition of dsRNA 
species46–48. As a result, Karikó and others have shown that nucleoside-modified mRNA is 
translated more efficiently than unmodified mRNA in vitro9, particularly in primary DCs, 
and in vivo in mice45. Notably, the highest level of protein production in DCs was observed 
when mRNA was both FPLC-purified and nucleoside-modified13. These advances in 
understanding the sources of innate immune sensing and how to avoid their adverse effects 
have substantially contributed to the current interest in mRNA-based vaccines and protein 
replacement therapies.
In contrast to the findings described above, a study by Thess and colleagues found that 
sequence-optimized, HPLC-purified, unmodified mRNA produced higher levels of protein 
in HeLa cells and in mice than its nucleoside-modified counterpart12. Additionally, 
Kauffman and co-workers demonstrated that unmodified, non-HPLC-purified mRNA 
yielded more robust protein production in HeLa cells than nucleoside-modified mRNA, and 
resulted in similar levels of protein production in mice49. Although not fully clear, the 
discrepancies between the findings of Karikó9,13 and these authors12,49 may have arisen 
from variations in RNA sequence optimization, the stringency of mRNA purification to 
remove dsRNA contaminants and the level of innate immune sensing in the targeted cell 
types.
The immunostimulatory properties of mRNA can conversely be increased by the inclusion 
of an adjuvant to increase the potency of some mRNA vaccine formats. These include 
Pardi et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 traditional adjuvants as well as novel approaches that take advantage of the intrinsic 
immunogenicity of mRNA or its ability to encode immune-modulatory proteins. Self-
replicating RNA vaccines have displayed increased immunogenicity and effectiveness after 
formulating the RNA in a cationic nanoemulsion based on the licensed MF59 (Novartis) 
adjuvant50. Another effective adjuvant strategy is TriMix, a combination of mRNAs 
encoding three immune activator proteins: CD70, CD40 ligand (CD40L) and constitutively 
active TLR4. TriMix mRNA augmented the immunogenicity of naked, unmodified, 
unpurified mRNA in multiple cancer vaccine studies and was particularly associated with 
increased DC maturation and cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses (reviewed in REF. 
51). The type of mRNA carrier and the size of the mRNA–carrier complex have also been 
shown to modulate the cytokine profile induced by mRNA delivery. For example, the 
RNActive (CureVac AG) vaccine platform52,53 depends on its carrier to provide adjuvant 
activity. In this case, the antigen is expressed from a naked, unmodified, sequence-optimized 
mRNA, while the adjuvant activity is provided by co-delivered RNA complexed with 
protamine (a polycationic peptide), which acts via TLR7 signalling52,54. This vaccine format 
has elicited favourable immune responses in multiple preclinical animal studies for 
vaccination against cancer and infectious diseases18,36,55,56. A recent study provided 
mechanistic information on the adjuvanticity of RNActive vaccines in mice in vivo and 
human cells in vitro54. Potent activation of TLR7 (mouse and human) and TLR8 (human) 
and production of type I interferon, pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines after 
intradermal immunization was shown54. A similar adjuvant activity was also demonstrated 
in the context of non-mRNA-based vaccines using RNAdjuvant (CureVac AG), an 
unmodified, single-stranded RNA stabilized by a cationic carrier peptide57.
Progress in mRNA vaccine delivery
Efficient in vivo mRNA delivery is critical to achieving therapeutic relevance. Exogenous 
mRNA must penetrate the barrier of the lipid membrane in order to reach the cytoplasm to 
be translated to functional protein. mRNA uptake mechanisms seem to be cell type 
dependent, and the physicochemical properties of the mRNA complexes can profoundly 
influence cellular delivery and organ distribution. There are two basic approaches for the 
delivery of mRNA vaccines that have been described to date. First, loading of mRNA into 
DCs ex vivo, followed by re-infusion of the transfected cells58; and second, direct parenteral 
injection of mRNA with or without a carrier. Ex vivo DC loading allows precise control of 
the cellular target, transfection efficiency and other cellular conditions, but as a form of cell 
therapy, it is an expensive and labour-intensive approach to vaccination. Direct injection of 
mRNA is comparatively rapid and cost-effective, but it does not yet allow precise and 
efficient cell-type-specific delivery, although there has been recent progress in this regard59. 
Both of these approaches have been explored in a variety of forms (FIG. 2; TABLE 1).
Ex vivo loading of DCs—DCs are the most potent antigen-presenting cells of the 
immune system. They initiate the adaptive immune response by internalizing and 
proteolytically processing antigens and presenting them to CD8+ and CD4+ T cells on major 
histocompatibility complexes (MHCs), namely, MHC class I and MHC class II, respectively. 
Additionally, DCs may present intact antigen to B cells to provoke an antibody response60. 
Pardi et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DCs are also highly amenable to mRNA transfection. For these reasons, DCs represent an 
attractive target for transfection by mRNA vaccines, both in vivo and ex vivo.
Although DCs have been shown to internalize naked mRNA through a variety of endocytic 
pathways61–63, ex vivo transfection efficiency is commonly increased using electroporation; 
in this case, mRNA molecules pass through membrane pores formed by a high-voltage pulse 
and directly enter the cytoplasm (reviewed in REF. 64). This mRNA delivery approach has 
been favoured for its ability to generate high transfection efficiency without the need for a 
carrier molecule. DCs that are loaded with mRNA ex vivo are then re-infused into the 
autologous vaccine recipient to initiate the immune response. Most ex vivo-loaded DC 
vaccines elicit a predominantly cell-mediated immune response; thus, they have been used 
primarily to treat cancer (reviewed in REF. 58).
Injection of naked mRNA in vivo—Naked mRNA has been used successfully for in 
vivo immunizations, particularly in formats that preferentially target antigen-presenting 
cells, as in intradermal61,65 and intranodal injections66–68. Notably, a recent report showed 
that repeated intranodal immunizations with naked, unmodified mRNA encoding tumour-
associated neoantigens generated robust T cell responses and increased progression-free 
survival68 (discussed further in BOX 2).
Box 2
Personalized neoepitope cancer vaccines
Sahin and colleagues have pioneered the use of individualized neoepitope mRNA cancer 
vaccines121. They use high-throughput sequencing to identify every unique somatic 
mutation of an individual patient’s tumour sample, termed the mutanome. This enables 
the rational design of neoepitope cancer vaccines in a patient-specific manner, and has 
the advantage of targeting non-self antigen specificities that should not be eliminated by 
central tolerance mechanisms. Proof of concept has been recently provided: Kreiter and 
colleagues found that a substantial portion of non-synonymous cancer mutations were 
immunogenic when delivered by mRNA and were mainly recognized by CD4+ T 
cells176. On the basis of these data, they generated a computational method to predict 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-restricted neoepitopes that can be used 
as vaccine immunogens. mRNA vaccines encoding such neoepitopes have controlled 
tumour growth in B16-F10 melanoma and CT26 colon cancer mouse models. In a recent 
clinical trial, Sahin and colleagues developed personalized neoepitope-based mRNA 
vaccines for 13 patients with metastatic melanoma, a cancer known for its high frequency 
of somatic mutations and thus neoepitopes. They immunized against ten neoepitopes per 
individual by injecting naked mRNA intranodally. CD4+ T cell responses were detected 
against the majority of the neoepitopes, and a low frequency of metastatic disease was 
observed after several months of follow-up68. Interestingly, similar results were also 
obtained in a study of analogous design that used synthetic peptides as immunogens 
rather than mRNA177. Together, these recent trials suggest the potential utility of the 
personalized vaccine methodology.
Pardi et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Physical delivery methods in vivo—To increase the efficiency of mRNA uptake in 
vivo, physical methods have occasionally been used to penetrate the cell membrane. An 
early report showed that mRNA complexed with gold particles could be expressed in tissues 
using a gene gun, a microprojectile method69. The gene gun was shown to be an efficient 
RNA delivery and vaccination method in mouse models70–73, but no efficacy data in large 
animals or humans are available. In vivo electroporation has also been used to increase 
uptake of therapeutic RNA74–76; however, in one study, electroporation increased the 
immunogenicity of only a self-amplifying RNA and not a non-replicating mRNA-based 
vaccine74. Physical methods can be limited by increased cell death and restricted access to 
target cells or tissues. Recently, the field has instead favoured the use of lipid or polymer-
based nanoparticles as potent and versatile delivery vehicles.
Protamine—The cationic peptide protamine has been shown to protect mRNA from 
degradation by serum RNases77; however, protamine-complexed mRNA alone demonstrated 
limited protein expression and efficacy in a cancer vaccine model, possibly owing to an 
overly tight association between protamine and mRNA36,78. This issue was resolved by 
developing the RNActive vaccine platform, in which protamine-formulated RNA serves only 
as an immune activator and not as an expression vector52.
Cationic lipid and polymer-based delivery—Highly efficient mRNA transfection 
reagents based on cationic lipids or polymers, such as TransIT-mRNA (Mirus Bio LLC) or 
Lipofectamine (Invitrogen), are commercially available and work well in many primary cells 
and cancer cell lines9,13, but they often show limited in vivo efficacy or a high level of 
toxicity (N.P. and D.W., unpublished observations). Great progress has been made in 
developing similarly designed complexing reagents for safe and effective in vivo use, and 
these are discussed in detail in several recent reviews10,11,79,80. Cationic lipids and 
polymers, including dendrimers, have become widely used tools for mRNA administration 
in the past few years. The mRNA field has clearly benefited from the substantial investment 
in in vivo small interfering RNA (siRNA) administration, where these delivery vehicles have 
been used for over a decade. Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) have become one of the most 
appealing and commonly used mRNA delivery tools. LNPs often consist of four 
components: an ionizable cationic lipid, which promotes self-assembly into virus-sized 
(~100 nm) particles and allows endosomal release of mRNA to the cytoplasm; lipid-linked 
polyethylene glycol (PEG), which increases the half-life of formulations; cholesterol, a 
stabilizing agent; and naturally occurring phospholipids, which support lipid bilayer 
structure. Numerous studies have demonstrated efficient in vivo siRNA delivery by LNPs 
(reviewed in REF. 81), but it has only recently been shown that LNPs are potent tools for in 
vivo delivery of self-amplifying RNA19 and conventional, non-replicating mRNA21. 
Systemically delivered mRNA–LNP complexes mainly target the liver owing to binding of 
apolipoprotein E and subsequent receptor-mediated uptake by hepatocytes82, and 
intradermal, intramuscular and subcutaneous administration have been shown to produce 
prolonged protein expression at the site of the injection21,22. The mechanisms of mRNA 
escape into the cytoplasm are incompletely understood, not only for artificial liposomes but 
also for naturally occurring exosomes83. Further research into this area will likely be of great 
benefit to the field of therapeutic RNA delivery.
Pardi et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The magnitude and duration of in vivo protein production from mRNA–LNP vaccines can 
be controlled in part by varying the route of administration. Intramuscular and intradermal 
delivery of mRNA–LNPs has been shown to result in more persistent protein expression 
than systemic delivery routes: in one experiment, the half-life of mRNA-encoded firefly 
luciferase was roughly threefold longer after intradermal injection than after intravenous 
delivery21. These kinetics of mRNA–LNP expression may be favourable for inducing 
immune responses. A recent study demonstrated that sustained antigen availability during 
vaccination was a driver of high antibody titres and germinal centre (GC) B cell and T 
follicular helper (TFH) cell responses84. This process was potentially a contributing factor to 
the potency of recently described nucleoside-modified mRNA–LNP vaccines delivered by 
the intramuscular and intradermal routes20,22,85. Indeed, TFH cells have been identified as a 
critical population of immune cells that vaccines must activate in order to generate potent 
and long-lived neutralizing antibody responses, particularly against viruses that evade 
humoral immunity86. The dynamics of the GC reaction and the differentiation of TFH cells 
are incompletely understood, and progress in these areas would undoubtedly be fruitful for 
future vaccine design (BOX 3).
Box 3
The germinal centre and T follicular helper cells
The vast majority of potent antimicrobial vaccines elicit long-lived, protective antibody 
responses against the target pathogen. High-affinity antibodies are produced in 
specialized microanatomical sites within the B cell follicles of secondary lymphoid 
organs called germinal centres (GCs). B cell proliferation, somatic hypermutation and 
selection for high affinity mutants occur in the GCs, and efficient T cell help is required 
for these processes178. Characterization of the relationship between GC B and T cells has 
been actively studied in recent years. The follicular homing receptor CXC chemokine 
receptor 5 (CXCR5) was identified on GC B and T cells in the 1990s179,180, but the 
concept of a specific lineage of T follicular helper (TFH) cells was not proposed until 
2000 (REFS 181,182). The existence of the TFH lineage was confirmed in 2009 when the 
transcription factor specific for TFH cells, B cell lymphoma 6 protein (BCL-6), was 
identified183–185. TFH cells represent a specialized subset of CD4+ T cells that produce 
critical signals for B cell survival, proliferation and differentiation in addition to signals 
for isotype switching of antibodies and for the introduction of diversifying mutations into 
the immunoglobulin genes. The major cytokines produced by TFH cells are interleukin-4 
(IL-4) and IL-21, which play a key role in driving the GC reaction. Other important 
markers and functional ligands expressed by TFH cells include CD40 ligand (CD40L), 
Src homology domain 2 (SH2) domain-containing protein 1A (SH2D1A), programmed 
cell death protein 1 (PD1) and inducible T cell co stimulator (ICOS)186. The 
characterization of rare, broadly neutralizing antibodies to HIV-1 has revealed that 
unusually high rates of somatic hypermutation are a hallmark of protective antibody 
responses against HIV-1 (REF. 187). As TFH cells play a key role in driving this process 
in GC reactions, the development of new adjuvants or vaccine platforms that can potently 
activate this cell type is urgently needed.
Pardi et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mRNA vaccines against infectious diseases
Development of prophylactic or therapeutic vaccines against infectious pathogens is the 
most efficient means to contain and prevent epidemics. However, conventional vaccine 
approaches have largely failed to produce effective vaccines against challenging viruses that 
cause chronic or repeated infections, such as HIV-1, herpes simplex virus and respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV). Additionally, the slow pace of commercial vaccine development and 
approval is inadequate to respond to the rapid emergence of acute viral diseases, as 
illustrated by the 2014–2016 outbreaks of the Ebola and Zika viruses. Therefore, the 
development of more potent and versatile vaccine platforms is crucial.
Preclinical studies have created hope that mRNA vaccines will fulfil many aspects of an 
ideal clinical vaccine: they have shown a favourable safety profile in animals, are versatile 
and rapid to design for emerging infectious diseases, and are amenable to scalable good 
manufacturing practice (GMP) production (already under way by several companies). 
Unlike protein immunization, several formats of mRNA vaccines induce strong CD8+ T cell 
responses, likely owing to the efficient presentation of endogenously produced antigens on 
MHC class I molecules, in addition to potent CD4+ T cell responses56,87,88. Additionally, 
unlike DNA immunization, mRNA vaccines have shown the ability to generate potent 
neutralizing antibody responses in animals with only one or two low-dose 
immunizations20,22,85. As a result, mRNA vaccines have elicited protective immunity 
against a variety of infectious agents in animal models19,20,22,56,89,90 and have therefore 
generated substantial optimism. However, recently published results from two clinical trials 
of mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases were somewhat modest, leading to more cautious 
expectations about the translation of preclinical success to the clinic22,91 (discussed further 
below).
Two major types of RNA vaccine have been utilized against infectious pathogens: self-
amplifying or replicon RNA vaccines and non-replicating mRNA vaccines. Non-replicating 
mRNA vaccines can be further distinguished by their delivery method: ex vivo loading of 
DCs or direct in vivo injection into a variety of anatomical sites. As discussed below, a 
rapidly increasing number of preclinical studies in these areas have been published recently, 
and several have entered human clinical trials (TABLE 2).
Self-amplifying mRNA vaccines
Most currently used self-amplifying mRNA (SAM) vaccines are based on an alphavirus 
genome92, where the genes encoding the RNA replication machinery are intact but the genes 
encoding the structural proteins are replaced with the antigen of interest. The full-length 
RNA is ~9 kb long and can be easily produced by IVT from a DNA template. The SAM 
platform enables a large amount of antigen production from an extremely small dose of 
vaccine owing to intracellular replication of the antigen-encoding RNA. An early study 
reported that immunization with 10 μg of naked SAM vaccine encoding RSV fusion (F), 
influenza virus haemagglutinin (HA) or louping ill virus pre-membrane and envelope (prM-
E) proteins resulted in antibody responses and partial protection from lethal viral challenges 
in mice93. The development of RNA complexing agents brought remarkable improvement to 
the efficacy of SAM vaccines. As little as 100 ng of an RNA replicon vaccine encoding RSV 
Pardi et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 F, complexed to LNP, resulted in potent T and B cell immune responses in mice, and 1 μg 
elicited protective immune responses against RSV infection in a cotton rat intranasal 
challenge system19. SAM vaccines encoding influenza virus antigens in LNPs or an oil-in-
water cationic nanoemulsion induced potent immune responses in ferrets and conferred 
protection from homologous and heterologous viral challenge in mice94–96. Further studies 
demonstrated the immunogenicity of this vaccine platform against diverse viruses in 
multiple species, including human cytomegalovirus (CMV), hepatitis C virus and rabies 
virus in mice, HIV-1 in rabbits, and HIV-1 and human CMV in rhesus macaques50,87,97. 
Replicon RNA encoding influenza antigens, complexed with chitosan-containing LNPs or 
polyethylenimine (PEI), has elicited T and B cell immune responses in mice after 
subcutaneous delivery98,99. Chahal and colleagues developed a delivery platform consisting 
of a chemically modified, ionizable dendrimer complexed into LNPs89. Using this platform, 
they demonstrated that intramuscular delivery of RNA replicons encoding influenza virus, 
Ebola virus or Toxoplasma gondii antigens protected mice against lethal infection89. The 
same group recently demonstrated that vaccination with an RNA replicon encoding Zika 
virus prM-E formulated in the same manner elicited antigen-specific antibody and CD8+ T 
cell responses in mice88. Another recent study reported immunogenicity and moderate 
protective efficacy of SAM vaccines against bacterial pathogens, namely Streptococcus 
(groups A and B) spp., further demonstrating the versatility of this platform100.
One of the advantages of SAM vaccines is that they create their own adjuvants in the form of 
dsRNA structures, replication intermediates and other motifs that may contribute to their 
high potency. However, the intrinsic nature of these PAMPs may make it difficult to 
modulate the inflammatory profile or reactogenicity of SAM vaccines. Additionally, size 
constraints of the insert are greater for SAM vaccines than for mRNAs that do not encode 
replicon genes, and the immunogenicity of the replication proteins may theoretically limit 
repeated use.
Dendritic cell mRNA vaccines
As described above, ex vivo DC loading is a heavily pursued method to generate cell-
mediated immunity against cancer. Development of infectious disease vaccines using this 
approach has been mainly limited to a therapeutic vaccine for HIV-1: HIV-1-infected 
individuals on highly active antiretroviral therapy were treated with autologous DCs 
electroporated with mRNA encoding various HIV-1 antigens, and cellular immune responses 
were evaluated101–106. This intervention proved to be safe and elicited antigen-specific 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, but no clinical benefit was observed. Another study in 
humans evaluated a CMV pp65 mRNA-loaded DC vaccination in healthy human volunteers 
and allogeneic stem cell recipients and reported induction or expansion of CMV-specific 
cellular immune responses107.
Direct injection of non-replicating mRNA vaccines
Directly injectable, non-replicating mRNA vaccines are an appealing vaccine format owing 
to their simple and economical administration, particularly in resource-limited settings. 
Although an early report demonstrated that immunization with liposome-complexed mRNA 
encoding influenza virus nucleoproteins elicited CTL responses in mice108, the first 
Pardi et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 demonstration of protective immune responses by mRNA vaccines against infectious 
pathogens was published only a few years ago18. This seminal work demonstrated that 
intradermally administered uncomplexed mRNA encoding various influenza virus antigens 
combined with a protamine-complexed RNA adjuvant was immunogenic in multiple animal 
models and protected mice from lethal viral challenge.
Immunization with the protamine-based RNActive platform encoding rabies virus 
glycoprotein has also induced protective immunity against a lethal intracerebral virus 
challenge in mice and potent neutralizing antibody responses in pigs56. In a recently 
published seminal work, Alberer and colleagues evaluated the safety and immunogenicity of 
this vaccine in 101 healthy human volunteers91. Subjects received 80–640 μg of mRNA 
vaccine three times by needle-syringe or needle-free devices, either intradermally or 
intramuscularly. Seven days after vaccination, nearly all participants reported mild to 
moderate injection site reactions, and 78% experienced a systemic reaction (for example, 
fever, headache and chills). There was one serious adverse event that was possibly related to 
the vaccine: a transient and moderate case of Bell palsy. Surprisingly, the needle-syringe 
injections did not generate detectable neutralizing antibodies in 98% of recipients. By 
contrast, needle-free delivery induced variable levels of neutralizing antibodies, the majority 
of which peaked above the expected protective threshold but then largely waned after 1 year 
in subjects who were followed up long term. Elucidating the basis of the disparate 
immunogenicity between the animals and humans who received this vaccine and between 
the two routes of delivery will be informative for future vaccine design using this platform.
Other infectious disease vaccines have successfully utilized lipid- or polymer-based delivery 
systems. Cationic 1,2-dioleoyloxy-3-trimethylammoniumpropane (DOTAP) and 
dioleoylphosphatidylethanolamine (DOPE) lipid-complexed mRNA encoding HIV-1 gag 
generated antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses after subcutaneous delivery in 
mice109. Two other studies demonstrated that PEI-complexed mRNAs could be efficiently 
delivered to mice to induce HIV-1-specific immune responses: subcutaneously delivered 
mRNA encoding HIV-1 gag elicited CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, and intranasally 
administered mRNA encoding the HIV-1 envelope gp120 subunit crossed the nasal 
epithelium and generated antigen-specific immune responses in the nasal cavity110,111. 
Kranz and colleagues also performed intravenous immunizations in mice using lipid-
complexed mRNA encoding influenza virus HA and showed evidence of T cell activation 
after a single dose59.
Nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccines represent a new and highly efficacious category of 
mRNA vaccines. Owing to the novelty of this immunization platform, our knowledge of 
efficacy is limited to the results of four recent publications that demonstrated the potency of 
such vaccines in small and large animals. The first published report demonstrated that a 
single intradermal injection of LNP-formulated mRNA encoding Zika virus prM-E, 
modified with 1-methylpseudouridine and FPLC purification, elicited protective immune 
responses in mice and rhesus macaques with the use of as little as 50 μg (0.02 mg kg−1) of 
vaccine in macaques20. A subsequent study by a different group tested a similarly designed 
vaccine against Zika virus in mice and found that a single intramuscular immunization 
elicited moderate immune responses, and a booster vaccination resulted in potent and 
Pardi et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 protective immune responses85. This vaccine also incorporated the modified nucleoside 1-
methylpseudouridine, but FPLC purification or other methods of removing dsRNA 
contaminants were not reported. Notably, this report showed that antibody-dependent 
enhancement of secondary infection with a heterologous flavivirus, a major concern for 
dengue and Zika virus vaccines, could be diminished by removing a cross-reactive epitope in 
the E protein. A recent follow-up study evaluated the same vaccine in a model of maternal 
vaccination and fetal infection112. Two immunizations reduced Zika virus infection in fetal 
mice by several orders of magnitude and completely rescued a defect in fetal viability.
Another recent report evaluated the immunogenicity of LNP-complexed, nucleoside-
modified, non-FPLC-purified mRNA vaccines against influenza HA 10 neuraminidase 8 
(H10N8) and H7N9 influenza viruses in mice, ferrets, non-human primates and, for the first 
time, humans22. A single intradermal or intramuscular immunization with low doses (0.4–10 
μg) of LNP-complexed mRNA encoding influenza virus HA elicited protective immune 
responses against homologous influenza virus challenge in mice. Similar results were 
obtained in ferrets and cynomolgus monkeys after immunization with one or two doses of 
50–400 μg of a vaccine containing LNP-complexed mRNA encoding HA, corroborating that 
the potency of mRNA–LNP vaccines translates to larger animals, including non-human 
primates.
On the basis of encouraging preclinical data, two phase I clinical trials have recently been 
initiated to evaluate the immunogenicity and safety of nucleoside-modified mRNA–LNP 
vaccines in humans for the first time. The mRNA vaccine encoding H10N8 HA is currently 
undergoing clinical testing (NCT03076385), and interim findings for 23 vaccinated 
individuals have been reported22. Participants received a small amount (100 μg) of vaccine 
intramuscularly, and immunogenicity was measured 43 days after vaccination. The vaccine 
proved to be immunogenic in all subjects, as measured by haemagglutination inhibition and 
microneutralization antibody assays. Promisingly, antibody titres were above the expected 
protective threshold, but they were moderately lower than in the animal models. Similarly to 
the study by Alberer et al.91, most vaccinated subjects reported mild to moderate 
reactogenicity (injection site pain, myalgia, headache, fatigue and chills), and three subjects 
reported severe injection site reactions or a systemic common cold-like response. This level 
of reactogenicity appears to be similar to that of more traditional vaccine formats113,114. 
Finally, the Zika virus vaccine described by Richner et al.85,112 is also entering clinical 
evaluation in a combined phase I/II trial (NCT03014089). Future studies that apply 
nucleoside-modified mRNA–LNP vaccines against a greater diversity of antigens will reveal 
the extent to which this strategy is broadly applicable to infectious disease vaccines.
mRNA cancer vaccines
mRNA-based cancer vaccines have been recently and extensively reviewed115–119. Below, 
the most recent advances and directions are highlighted. Cancer vaccines and other 
immunotherapies represent promising alternative strategies to treat malignancies. Cancer 
vaccines can be designed to target tumour-associated antigens that are preferentially 
expressed in cancerous cells, for example, growth-associated factors, or antigens that are 
unique to malignant cells owing to somatic mutation120. These neoantigens, or the 
Pardi et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neoepitopes within them, have been deployed as mRNA vaccine targets in humans121 (BOX 
2). Most cancer vaccines are therapeutic, rather than prophylactic, and seek to stimulate cell-
mediated responses, such as those from CTLs, that are capable of clearing or reducing 
tumour burden122. The first proof-of-concept studies that not only proposed the idea of RNA 
cancer vaccines but also provided evidence of the feasibility of this approach were published 
more than two decades ago123,124. Since then, numerous preclinical and clinical studies have 
demonstrated the viability of mRNA vaccines to combat cancer (TABLE 3).
DC mRNA cancer vaccines
As DCs are central players in initiating antigen-specific immune responses, it seemed logical 
to utilize them for cancer immunotherapy. The first demonstration that DCs electroporated 
with mRNA could elicit potent immune responses against tumour antigens was reported by 
Boczkowski and colleagues in 1996 (REF. 124). In this study, DCs pulsed with ovalbumin 
(OVA)-encoding mRNA or tumour-derived RNAs elicited a tumour-reducing immune 
response in OVA-expressing and other melanoma models in mice. A variety of immune 
regulatory proteins have been identified in the form of mRNA-encoded adjuvants that can 
increase the potency of DC cancer vaccines. Several studies demonstrated that 
electroporation of DCs with mRNAs encoding co-stimulatory molecules such as CD83, 
tumour necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 4 (TNFRSF4; also known as OX40) 
and 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL) resulted in a substantial increase in the immune stimulatory 
activity of DCs125–128. DC functions can also be modulated through the use of mRNA-
encoded pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-12, or trafficking-associated 
molecules129–131. As introduced above, TriMix is a cocktail of mRNA-encoded adjuvants 
(CD70, CD40L and constitutively active TLR4) that can be electroporated in combination 
with antigen-encoding mRNA or mRNAs132. This formulation proved efficacious in 
multiple pre-clinical studies by increasing DC activation and shifting the CD4+ T cell 
phenotype from T regulatory cells to T helper 1 (TH1)-like cells132–136. Notably, the 
immunization of patients with stage III or stage IV melanoma using DCs loaded with mRNA 
encoding melanoma-associated antigens and TriMix adjuvant resulted in tumour regression 
in 27% of treated individuals137. Multiple clinical trials have now been conducted using DC 
vaccines targeting various cancer types, such as metastatic prostate cancer, metastatic lung 
cancer, renal cell carcinoma, brain cancers, melanoma, acute myeloid leukaemia, pancreatic 
cancer and others138,139 (reviewed in REFS 51,58).
A new line of research combines mRNA electroporation of DCs with traditional 
chemotherapy agents or immune checkpoint inhibitors. In one trial, patients with stage III or 
IV melanoma were treated with ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody against CTL antigen 4 
(CTLA4), and DCs loaded with mRNA encoding melanoma-associated antigens plus 
TriMix. This intervention resulted in durable tumour reduction in a proportion of individuals 
with recurrent or refractory melanoma140.
Direct injection of mRNA cancer vaccines
The route of administration and delivery format of mRNA vaccines can greatly influence 
outcomes. A variety of mRNA cancer vaccine formats have been developed using common 
Pardi et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 delivery routes (intradermal, intramuscular, subcutaneous or intranasal) and some 
unconventional routes of vaccination (intranodal, intravenous, intrasplenic or intratumoural).
Intranodal administration of naked mRNA is an unconventional but efficient means of 
vaccine delivery. Direct mRNA injection into secondary lymphoid tissue offers the 
advantage of targeted antigen delivery to antigen-presenting cells at the site of T cell 
activation, obviating the need for DC migration. Several studies have demonstrated that 
intranodally injected naked mRNA can be selectively taken up by DCs and can elicit potent 
prophylactic or therapeutic anti-tumour T cell responses62,66; an early study also 
demonstrated similar findings with intrasplenic delivery141. Coadministration of the DC-
activating protein FMS-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3L) was shown in some cases to 
further improve immune responses to intranodal mRNA vaccination142,143. Incorporation of 
the TriMix adjuvant into intranodal injections of mice with mRNAs encoding tumour-
associated antigens resulted in potent antigen-specific CTL responses and tumour control in 
multiple tumour models133. A more recent study demonstrated that intranodal injection of 
mRNA encoding the E7 protein of human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 with TriMix increased 
the number of tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells and inhibited the growth of an E7-expressing 
tumour model in mice67.
The success of preclinical studies has led to the initiation of clinical trials using intranodally 
injected naked mRNA encoding tumour-associated antigens into patients with advanced 
melanoma (NCT01684241) and patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (EudraCT: 
2012-005572-34). In one published trial, patients with metastatic melanoma were treated 
with intranodally administered DCs electroporated with mRNA encoding the melanoma-
associated antigens tyrosinase or gp100 and TriMix, which induced limited antitumour 
responses144.
Intranasal vaccine administration is a needle-free, noninvasive manner of delivery that 
enables rapid antigen uptake by DCs. Intranasally delivered mRNA complexed with 
Stemfect (Stemgent) LNPs resulted in delayed tumour onset and increased survival in 
prophylactic and therapeutic mouse tumour models using the OVA-expressing E.G7-OVA T 
lymphoblastic cell line145.
Intratumoural mRNA vaccination is a useful approach that offers the advantage of rapid and 
specific activation of tumour-resident T cells. Often, these vaccines do not introduce mRNAs 
encoding tumour-associated antigens but simply aim to activate tumour-specific immunity in 
situ using immune stimulatory molecules. An early study demonstrated that naked mRNA or 
protamine-stabilized mRNA encoding a non-tumour related gene (GLB1) impaired tumour 
growth and provided protection in a glioblastoma mouse model, taking advantage of the 
intrinsic immunogenic properties of mRNA146. A more recent study showed that 
intratumoural delivery of mRNA encoding an engineered cytokine based on interferon-β 
(IFNβ) fused to a transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) antagonist increased the cytolytic 
capacity of CD8+ T cells and modestly delayed tumour growth in OVA-expressing 
lymphoma or lung carcinoma mouse models147. It has also been shown that intratumoural 
administration of TriMix mRNA that does not encode tumour-associated antigens results in 
Pardi et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activation of CD8α+ DCs and tumour-specific T cells, leading to delayed tumour growth in 
various mouse models148.
Systemic administration of mRNA vaccines is not common owing to concerns about 
aggregation with serum proteins and rapid extracellular mRNA degradation; thus, 
formulating mRNAs into carrier molecules is essential. As discussed above, numerous 
delivery formulations have been developed to facilitate mRNA uptake, increase protein 
translation and protect mRNA from RNases10,11,79,80. Another important issue is the 
biodistribution of mRNA vaccines after systemic delivery. Certain cationic LNP-based 
complexing agents delivered intravenously traffic mainly to the liver21, which may not be 
ideal for DC activation. An effective strategy for DC targeting of mRNA vaccines after 
systemic delivery has recently been described59. An mRNA–lipoplex (mRNA–liposome 
complex) delivery platform was generated using cationic lipids and neutral helper lipids 
formulated with mRNA, and it was discovered that the lipid-to-mRNA ratio, and thus the net 
charge of the particles, has a profound impact on the biodistribution of the vaccine. While a 
positively charged lipid particle primarily targeted the lung, a negatively charged particle 
targeted DCs in secondary lymphoid tissues and bone marrow. The negatively charged 
particle induced potent immune responses against tumour-specific antigens that were 
associated with impressive tumour reduction in various mouse models59. As no toxic effects 
were observed in mice or non-human primates, clinical trials using this approach to treat 
patients with advanced melanoma or triple-negative breast cancer have been initiated 
(NCT02410733 and NCT02316457).
A variety of antigen-presenting cells reside in the skin149, making it an ideal site for 
immunogen delivery during vaccination (FIG. 3). Thus, the intradermal route of delivery has 
been widely used for mRNA cancer vaccines. An early seminal study demonstrated that 
intradermal administration of total tumour RNA delayed tumour growth in a fibrosarcoma 
mouse model65. Intradermal injection of mRNA encoding tumour antigens in the protamine-
based RNActive platform proved efficacious in various mouse models of cancer36 and in 
multiple prophylactic and therapeutic clinical settings (TABLE 3). One such study 
demonstrated that mRNAs encoding survivin and various melanoma tumour antigens 
resulted in increased numbers of antigen-specific T cells in a subset of patients with 
melanoma150. In humans with castration-resistant prostate cancer, an RNActive vaccine 
expressing multiple prostate cancer-associated proteins elicited antigen-specific T cell 
responses in the majority of recipients151. Lipid-based carriers have also contributed to the 
efficacy of intra-dermally delivered mRNA cancer vaccines. The delivery of OVA-encoding 
mRNA in DOTAP and/or DOPE liposomes resulted in antigen-specific CTL activity and 
inhibited growth of OVA-expressing tumours in mice152. In the same study, coadministration 
of mRNA encoding granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
improved OVA-specific cytolytic responses. Another report showed that subcutaneous 
delivery of LNP-formulated mRNA encoding two melanoma-associated antigens delayed 
tumour growth in mice, and co-delivery of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in LNPs increased both 
CTL and antitumour activity153. In general, mRNA cancer vaccines have proved 
immunogenic in humans, but further refinement of vaccination methods, as informed by 
basic immunological research, will likely be necessary to achieve greater clinical benefits.
Pardi et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The combination of mRNA vaccination with adjunctive therapies, such as traditional 
chemotherapy, radiotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors, has increased the beneficial 
outcome of vaccination in some preclinical studies154,155. For example, cisplatin treatment 
significantly increased the therapeutic effect of immunizing with mRNA encoding the 
HPV16 E7 oncoprotein and TriMix, leading to the complete rejection of female genital tract 
tumours in a mouse model67. Notably, it has also been suggested that treatment with 
antibodies against programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1) increased the efficacy of a 
neoepitope mRNA-based vaccine against metastatic melanoma in humans, but more data are 
required to explore this hypothesis68.
Therapeutic considerations and challenges
Good manufacturing practice production
mRNA is produced by in vitro reactions with recombinant enzymes, ribonucleotide 
triphosphates (NTPs) and a DNA template; thus, it is rapid and relatively simple to produce 
in comparison with traditional protein subunit and live or inactivated virus vaccine 
production platforms. Its reaction yield and simplicity make rapid mRNA production 
possible in a small GMP facility footprint. The manufacturing process is sequence-
independent and is primarily dictated by the length of the RNA, the nucleotide and capping 
chemistry and the purification of the product; however, it is possible that certain sequence 
properties such as extreme length may present difficulties (D.W., unpublished observations). 
According to current experience, the process can be standardized to produce nearly any 
encoded protein immunogen, making it particularly suitable for rapid response to emerging 
infectious diseases.
All enzymes and reaction components required for the GMP production of mRNA can be 
obtained from commercial suppliers as synthesized chemicals or bacterially expressed, 
animal component-free reagents, thereby avoiding safety concerns surrounding the 
adventitious agents that plague cell-culture-based vaccine manufacture. All the components, 
such as plasmid DNA, phage polymerases, capping enzymes and NTPs, are readily available 
as GMP-grade traceable components; however, some of these are currently available at only 
limited scale or high cost. As mRNA therapeutics move towards commercialization and the 
scale of production increases, more economical options may become accessible for GMP 
source materials.
GMP production of mRNA begins with DNA template production followed by enzymatic 
IVT and follows the same multistep protocol that is used for research scale synthesis, with 
added controls to ensure the safety and potency of the product16. Depending on the specific 
mRNA construct and chemistry, the protocol may be modified slightly from what is 
described here to accommodate modified nucleosides, capping strategies or template 
removal. To initiate the production process, template plasmid DNA produced in Escherichia 
coli is linearized using a restriction enzyme to allow synthesis of runoff transcripts with a 
poly(A) tract at the 3′ end. Next, the mRNA is synthesized from NTPs by a DNA-
dependent RNA polymerase from bacteriophage (such as T7, SP6, or T3). The template 
DNA is then degraded by incubation with DNase. Finally, the mRNA is enzymatically or 
chemically capped to enable efficient translation in vivo. mRNA synthesis is highly 
Pardi et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 productive, yielding in excess of 2 g l−1 of full-length mRNA in multi-gram scale reactions 
under optimized conditions.
Once the mRNA is synthesized, it is processed though several purification steps to remove 
reaction components, including enzymes, free nucleotides, residual DNA and truncated 
RNA fragments. While LiCl precipitation is routinely used for laboratory-scale preparation, 
purification at the clinical scale utilizes derivatized microbeads in batch or column formats, 
which are easier to utilize at large scale156,157. For some mRNA platforms, removal of 
dsRNA and other contaminants is critical for the potency of the final product, as it is a 
potent inducer of interferon-dependent translation inhibition. This has been accomplished by 
reverse-phase FPLC at the laboratory scale158, and scalable aqueous purification approaches 
are being investigated. After mRNA is purified, it is exchanged into a final storage buffer 
and sterile-filtered for subsequent filling into vials for clinical use. RNA is susceptible to 
degradation by both enzymatic and chemical pathways157. Formulation buffers are tested to 
ensure that they are free of contaminating RNases and may contain buffer components, such 
as antioxidants and chelators, which minimize the effects of reactive oxygen species and 
divalent metal ions that lead to mRNA instability159.
Pharmaceutical formulation of mRNAs is an active area of development. Although most 
products for early phase studies are stored frozen (−70 °C), efforts to develop formulations 
that are stable at higher temperatures more suitable for vaccine distribution are continuing. 
Published reports suggest that stable refrigerated or room temperature formulations can be 
made. The RNActive platform was reported to be active after lyophilization and storage at 
5–25 °C for 3 years and at 40 °C for 6 months91. Another report demonstrated that freeze-
dried naked mRNA is stable for at least 10 months under refrigerated conditions160. The 
stability of mRNA products might also be improved by packaging within nanoparticles or by 
co-formulation with RNase inhibitors161. For lipid-encapsulated mRNA, at least 6 months of 
stability has been observed (Arbutus Biopharma, personal communication), but longer-term 
storage of such mRNA–lipid complexes in an unfrozen form has not yet been reported.
Regulatory aspects
There is no specific guidance from the FDA or European Medicines Agency (EMA) for 
mRNA vaccine products. However, the increasing number of clinical trials conducted under 
EMA and FDA oversight indicate that regulators have accepted the approaches proposed by 
various organizations to demonstrate that products are safe and acceptable for testing in 
humans. Because mRNA falls into the broad vaccine category of genetic immunogens, many 
of the guiding principles that have been defined for DNA vaccines162 and gene therapy 
vectors163,164 can likely be applied to mRNA with some adaptations to reflect the unique 
features of mRNA. A detailed review of EMA regulations for RNA vaccines by Hinz and 
colleagues highlights the different regulatory paths stipulated for prophylactic infectious 
disease versus therapeutic applications165. Regardless of the specific classification within 
existing guidelines, some themes can be observed in what is stated in these guidance 
documents and in what has been reported for recently published clinical studies. In 
particular, the recent report of an mRNA vaccine against influenza virus highlights 
preclinical and clinical data demonstrating biodistribution and persistence in mice, disease 
Pardi et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 protection in a relevant animal model (ferrets), and immunogenicity, local reactogenicity and 
toxicity in humans22. As mRNA products become more prominent in the vaccine field, it is 
likely that specific guidance will be developed that will delineate requirements to produce 
and evaluate new mRNA vaccines.
Safety
The requirement for safety in modern prophylactic vaccines is extremely stringent because 
the vaccines are administered to healthy individuals. Because the manufacturing process for 
mRNA does not require toxic chemicals or cell cultures that could be contaminated with 
adventitious viruses, mRNA production avoids the common risks associated with other 
vaccine platforms, including live virus, viral vectors, inactivated virus and subunit protein 
vaccines. Furthermore, the short manufacturing time for mRNA presents few opportunities 
to introduce contaminating microorganisms. In vaccinated people, the theoretical risks of 
infection or integration of the vector into host cell DNA are not a concern for mRNA. For 
the above reasons, mRNA vaccines have been considered a relatively safe vaccine format.
Several different mRNA vaccines have now been tested from phase I to IIb clinical studies 
and have been shown to be safe and reasonably well tolerated (TABLES 2,3). However, 
recent human trials have demonstrated moderate and in rare cases severe injection site or 
systemic reactions for different mRNA platforms22,91. Potential safety concerns that are 
likely to be evaluated in future preclinical and clinical studies include local and systemic 
inflammation, the biodistribution and persistence of expressed immunogen, stimulation of 
auto-reactive antibodies and potential toxic effects of any non-native nucleotides and 
delivery system components. A possible concern could be that some mRNA-based vaccine 
platforms54,166 induce potent type I interferon responses, which have been associated not 
only with inflammation but also potentially with autoimmunity167,168. Thus, identification 
of individuals at an increased risk of autoimmune reactions before mRNA vaccination may 
allow reasonable precautions to be taken. Another potential safety issue could derive from 
the presence of extracellular RNA during mRNA vaccination. Extracellular naked RNA has 
been shown to increase the permeability of tightly packed endothelial cells and may thus 
contribute to oedema169. Another study showed that extracellular RNA promoted blood 
coagulation and pathological thrombus formation170. Safety will therefore need continued 
evaluation as different mRNA modalities and delivery systems are utilized for the first time 
in humans and are tested in larger patient populations.
Conclusions and future directions
Currently, mRNA vaccines are experiencing a burst in basic and clinical research. The past 2 
years alone have witnessed the publication of dozens of preclinical and clinical reports 
showing the efficacy of these platforms. Whereas the majority of early work in mRNA 
vaccines focused on cancer applications, a number of recent reports have demonstrated the 
potency and versatility of mRNA to protect against a wide variety of infectious pathogens, 
including influenza virus, Ebola virus, Zika virus, Streptococcus spp. and T. gondii 
(TABLES 1,2).
Pardi et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While preclinical studies have generated great optimism about the prospects and advantages 
of mRNA-based vaccines, two recent clinical reports have led to more tempered 
expectations22,91. In both trials, immunogenicity was more modest in humans than was 
expected based on animal models, a phenomenon also observed with DNA-based 
vaccines171, and the side effects were not trivial. We caution that these trials represent only 
two variations of mRNA vaccine platforms, and there may be substantial differences when 
the expression and immunostimulatory profiles of the vaccine are changed. Further research 
is needed to determine how different animal species respond to mRNA vaccine components 
and inflammatory signals and which pathways of immune signalling are most effective in 
humans.
Recent advances in understanding and reducing the innate immune sensing of mRNA have 
aided efforts not only in active vaccination but also in several applications of passive 
immunization or passive immunotherapy for infectious diseases and cancer (BOX 4). Direct 
comparisons between mRNA expression platforms should clarify which systems are most 
appropriate for both passive and active immunization. Given the large number of promising 
mRNA platforms, further head-to-head comparisons would be of utmost value to the vaccine 
field because this would allow investigators to focus resources on those best suited for each 
application.
Box 4
mRNA-based passive immunotherapy
Recombinant monoclonal antibodies are rapidly transforming the pharmaceutical market 
and have become one of the most successful therapeutic classes to treat autoimmune 
disorders, infectious diseases, osteoporosis, hypercholesterolemia and cancer188–192. 
However, the high cost of protein production and the need for frequent systemic 
administration pose a major limitation to widespread accessibility. Antibody-gene 
transfer technologies could potentially overcome these difficulties, as they administer 
nucleotide sequences encoding monoclonal antibodies to patients, enabling in vivo 
production of properly folded and modified protein therapeutics193. Multiple gene 
therapy vectors have been investigated (for example, viral vectors and plasmid DNA) that 
bear limitations such as pre-existing host immunity, acquired anti-vector immunity, high 
innate immunogenicity, difficulties with in vivo regulation of antibody production and 
toxic effects193,194. mRNA therapeutics combine safety with exquisite dose control and 
the potential for multiple administrations with no pre-existing or anti-vector immunity. 
Two early reports demonstrated that dendritic cells (DCs) electroporated with mRNAs 
encoding antibodies against immuno-inhibitory proteins secreted functional antibodies 
and improved immune responses in mice195,196. Three recent publications have described 
the use of injectable mRNA for in vivo production of therapeutic antibodies: Pardi and 
colleagues demonstrated that a single intravenous injection into mice with lipid 
nanoparticle (LNP)-encapsulated nucleoside-modified mRNAs encoding the heavy and 
light chains of the anti-HIV-1 neutralizing antibody VRC01 rapidly produced high levels 
of functional antibody in the serum and protected humanized mice from HIV-1 
infection197; Stadler and co-workers demonstrated that intravenous administration of low 
Pardi et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 doses of TransIT (Mirus Bio LLC)-complexed, nucleoside-modified mRNAs encoding 
various anticancer bispecific antibodies resulted in the elimination of large tumours in 
mouse models198; and Thran and colleagues199 utilized an unmodified mRNA–LNP 
delivery system12 to express three monoclonal antibodies at levels that protected from 
lethal challenges with rabies virus, botulinum toxin and a B cell lymphoma cell line. No 
toxic effects were observed in any of these studies. These observations suggest that 
mRNA offers a safe, simple and efficient alternative to therapeutic monoclonal antibody 
protein delivery, with potential application to any therapeutic protein.
The fast pace of progress in mRNA vaccines would not have been possible without major 
recent advances in the areas of innate immune sensing of RNA and in vivo delivery methods. 
Extensive basic research into RNA and lipid and polymer biochemistry has made it possible 
to translate mRNA vaccines into clinical trials and has led to an astonishing level of 
investment in mRNA vaccine companies (TABLE 4). Moderna Therapeutics, founded in 
2010, has raised almost US$2 billion in capital with a plan to commercialize mRNA-based 
vaccines and therapies172,173. The US Biomedical Advanced Research and Development 
Authority (BARDA) has committed support for Moderna’s clinical evaluation of a 
promising nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccine for Zika virus (NCT03014089). In Germany, 
CureVac AG has an expanding portfolio of therapeutic targets174, including both cancer and 
infectious diseases, and BioNTech is developing an innovative approach to personalized 
cancer medicine using mRNA vaccines121 (BOX 2). The translation of basic research into 
clinical testing is also made more expedient by the commercialization of custom GMP 
products by companies such as New England Biolabs and Aldevron175. Finally, the recent 
launch of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) provides great 
optimism for future responses to emerging viral epidemics. This multinational public and 
private partnership aims to raise $1 billion to develop platform-based vaccines, such as 
mRNA, to rapidly contain emerging outbreaks before they spread out of control.
The future of mRNA vaccines is therefore extremely bright, and the clinical data and 
resources provided by these companies and other institutions are likely to substantially build 
on and invigorate basic research into mRNA-based therapeutics.
Acknowledgments
D.W. was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) of the US National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) under award numbers CHAVI-ID UM1-AI100645, R01-AI050484, R01-AI124429 and 
R01-AI084860, by Gates Foundation Collaboration for AIDS Vaccine Discovery (CAVD) grant OPP1033102, by 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under grant HR0011-17-2-0069 and by the New Frontier Sciences 
division of Takeda Pharmaceuticals. F.W.P. was supported by the Center for HIV/AIDS Vaccine Immunology and 
Immunogen Discovery (CHAVI-ID) grant UM1-AI100645, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency grant 
HR0011-17-2-0069 and by Gates Foundation grant OPP1066832. The authors acknowledge K. Karikó for her 
profoundly helpful advice.
Glossary
Dendritic cell (DC)
Pardi et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A professional antigen-presenting cell that can potently activate CD4+ and CD8+ T cells by 
presenting peptide antigens on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II 
molecules, respectively, along with co-stimulatory molecules
Pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)
Conserved molecular structure produced by microorganisms and recognized as an 
inflammatory danger signal by various innate immune receptors
Type I interferon
A family of proteins, including but not limited to interferon-β (IFNβ) and multiple isoforms 
of IFNα, released by cells in response to viral infections and pathogen products. Type I IFN 
sensing results in the upregulation of interferon-stimulated genes and an antiviral cellular 
state
Fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC)
A form of liquid chromatography that can be used to purify proteins or nucleic acids. High-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a similar approach, which uses high pressure 
to purify materials
Nucleoside modification
The incorporation of chemically modified nucleosides, such as pseudouridine, 1-
methylpseudouridine, 5-methylcytidine and others, into mRNA transcripts, usually to 
suppress innate immune sensing and/or to improve translation
Adjuvant
An additive to vaccines that modulates and/or boosts the potency of the immune response, 
often allowing lower doses of antigen to be used effectively. Adjuvants may be based on 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or on other molecules that activate innate 
immune sensors
MHC class I
A polymorphic set of proteins expressed on the surface of all nucleated cells that present 
antigen to CD8+ (including cytotoxic) T cells in the form of proteolytically processed 
peptides, typically 8–11 amino acids in length
MHC class II
A polymorphic set of proteins expressed on professional antigen-presenting cells and certain 
other cell types, which present antigen to CD4+ (helper) T cells in the form of 
proteolytically processed peptides, typically 11–30 amino acids in length
Good manufacturing practice (GMP)
A collection of guidelines and practices designed to guarantee the production of consistently 
high-quality and safe pharmaceutical products. GMP-grade materials must be used for 
human clinical trials
Passive immunization or passive immunotherapy
In contrast to traditional (active) vaccines, these therapies do not generate de novo immune 
responses but can provide immune-mediated protection through the delivery of antibodies or 
Pardi et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 antibody-encoding genes. Passive vaccination offers the advantage of immediate action but 
at the disadvantage of high cost
References
1. World Health Organization. Immunization coverage. World Health Organization; 2017. http://
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs378/en
2. Younger DS, Younger AP, Guttmacher S. Childhood vaccination: implications for global and 
domestic public health. Neurol Clin. 2016; 34:1035–1047. [PubMed: 27719987] 
3. Plotkin SA. Vaccines: the fourth century. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2009; 16:1709–1719. [PubMed: 
19793898] 
4. Rodrigues CMC, Pinto MV, Sadarangani M, Plotkin SA. Whither vaccines? J Infect. 2017; 74(Suppl 
1):S2–S9. [PubMed: 28646957] 
5. Wolff JA, et al. Direct gene transfer into mouse muscle in vivo. Science. 1990; 247:1465–1468. This 
study demonstrates protein production from RNA administered in vivo. [PubMed: 1690918] 
6. Jirikowski GF, Sanna PP, Maciejewski-Lenoir D, Bloom FE. Reversal of diabetes insipidus in 
Brattleboro rats: intrahypothalamic injection of vasopressin mRNA. Science. 1992; 255:996–998. 
[PubMed: 1546298] 
7. Suschak JJ, Williams JA, Schmaljohn CS. Advancements in DNA vaccine vectors, non-mechanical 
delivery methods, and molecular adjuvants to increase immunogenicity. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 
2017; 13:2837–2848. [PubMed: 28604157] 
8. Tandrup Schmidt S, Foged C, Korsholm KS, Rades T, Christensen D. Liposome-based adjuvants for 
subunit vaccines: formulation strategies for subunit antigens and immunostimulators. 
Pharmaceutics. 2016; 8:E7. [PubMed: 26978390] 
9. Kariko K, et al. Incorporation of pseudouridine into mRNA yields superior nonimmunogenic vector 
with increased translational capacity and biological stability. Mol Ther. 2008; 16:1833–1840. 
[PubMed: 18797453] 
10. Kauffman KJ, Webber MJ, Anderson DG. Materials for non-viral intracellular delivery of 
messenger RNA therapeutics. J Control Release. 2016; 240:227–234. [PubMed: 26718856] 
11. Guan S, Rosenecker J. Nanotechnologies in delivery of mRNA therapeutics using nonviral vector-
based delivery systems. Gene Ther. 2017; 24:133–143. [PubMed: 28094775] 
12. Thess A, et al. Sequence-engineered mRNA without chemical nucleoside modifications enables an 
effective protein therapy in large animals. Mol Ther. 2015; 23:1456–1464. [PubMed: 26050989] 
13. Kariko K, Muramatsu H, Ludwig J, Weissman D. Generating the optimal mRNA for therapy: 
HPLC purification eliminates immune activation and improves translation of nucleoside-modified, 
protein-encoding mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:e142. This study demonstrates the 
importance of purification of IVT mRNA in achieving potent protein translation and in 
suppressing inflammatory responses. [PubMed: 21890902] 
14. Weissman D. mRNA transcript therapy. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2015; 14:265–281. [PubMed: 
25359562] 
15. Sahin U, Kariko K, Tureci O. mRNA-based therapeutics — developing a new class of drugs. Nat 
Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13:759–780. This is a useful Review covering vaccine and non-vaccine 
forms of mRNA therapeutics. [PubMed: 25233993] 
16. Pardi N, Muramatsu H, Weissman D, Kariko K. In vitro transcription of long RNA containing 
modified nucleosides. Methods Mol Biol. 2013; 969:29–42. [PubMed: 23296925] 
17. Tsui NB, Ng EK, Lo YM. Stability of endogenous and added RNA in blood specimens, serum, and 
plasma. Clin Chem. 2002; 48:1647–1653. [PubMed: 12324479] 
18. Petsch B, et al. Protective efficacy of in vitro synthesized, specific mRNA vaccines against 
influenza A virus infection. Nat Biotechnol. 2012; 30:1210–1216. This study demonstrates that 
directly injected, non-replicating mRNA can induce protective immune responses against an 
infectious pathogen. [PubMed: 23159882] 
19. Geall AJ, et al. Nonviral delivery of self-amplifying RNA vaccines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2012; 109:14604–14609. This important study demonstrates that the duration of in vivo protein 
Pardi et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 production from RNA replicons can be greatly improved by packaging them into lipid 
nanoparticles. [PubMed: 22908294] 
20. Pardi N, et al. Zika virus protection by a single low-dose nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccination. 
Nature. 2017; 543:248–251. [PubMed: 28151488] 
21. Pardi N, et al. Expression kinetics of nucleoside-modified mRNA delivered in lipid nanoparticles 
to mice by various routes. J Control Release. 2015; 217:345–351. [PubMed: 26264835] 
22. Bahl K, et al. Preclinical and clinical demonstration of immunogenicity by mRNA vaccines against 
H10N8 and H7N9 influenza viruses. Mol Ther. 2017; 25:1316–1327. This is a report of a clinical 
vaccine trial using directly injected, non-replicating, nucleoside-modified mRNA against an 
infectious pathogen. [PubMed: 28457665] 
23. Ross J, Sullivan TD. Half-lives of beta and gamma globin messenger RNAs and of protein 
synthetic capacity in cultured human reticulocytes. Blood. 1985; 66:1149–1154. [PubMed: 
4052630] 
24. Holtkamp S, et al. Modification of antigen-encoding RNA increases stability, translational efficacy, 
and T-cell stimulatory capacity of dendritic cells. Blood. 2006; 108:4009–4017. [PubMed: 
16940422] 
25. Gallie DR. The cap and poly(A) tail function synergistically to regulate mRNA translational 
efficiency. Genes Dev. 1991; 5:2108–2116. [PubMed: 1682219] 
26. Martin SA, Paoletti E, Moss B. Purification of mRNA guanylyltransferase and mRNA (guanine-7-) 
methyltransferase from vaccinia virions. J Biol Chem. 1975; 250:9322–9329. [PubMed: 1194286] 
27. Stepinski J, Waddell C, Stolarski R, Darzynkiewicz E, Rhoads RE. Synthesis and properties of 
mRNAs containing the novel “anti-reverse” cap analogs 7-methyl(3′-O-methyl)GpppG and 7-
methyl (3′-deoxy)GpppG. RNA. 2001; 7:1486–1495. [PubMed: 11680853] 
28. Malone RW, Felgner PL, Verma IM. Cationic liposome-mediated RNA transfection. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 1989; 86:6077–6081. [PubMed: 2762315] 
29. Gustafsson C, Govindarajan S, Minshull J. Codon bias and heterologous protein expression. Trends 
Biotechnol. 2004; 22:346–353. [PubMed: 15245907] 
30. Mauro VP, Chappell SA. A critical analysis of codon optimization in human therapeutics. Trends 
Mol Med. 2014; 20:604–613. [PubMed: 25263172] 
31. Kudla G, Lipinski L, Caffin F, Helwak A, Zylicz M. High guanine and cytosine content increases 
mRNA levels in mammalian cells. PLoS Biol. 2006; 4:e180. [PubMed: 16700628] 
32. Kudla G, Murray AW, Tollervey D, Plotkin JB. Coding-sequence determinants of gene expression 
in Escherichia coli. Science. 2009; 324:255–258. [PubMed: 19359587] 
33. Buhr F, et al. Synonymous codons direct cotranslational folding toward different protein 
conformations. Mol Cell. 2016; 61:341–351. [PubMed: 26849192] 
34. Yu CH, et al. Codon usage influences the local rate of translation elongation to regulate co-
translational protein folding. Mol Cell. 2015; 59:744–754. [PubMed: 26321254] 
35. Chen N, et al. RNA sensors of the innate immune system and their detection of pathogens. IUBMB 
Life. 2017; 69:297–304. [PubMed: 28374903] 
36. Fotin-Mleczek M, et al. Messenger RNA-based vaccines with dual activity induce balanced TLR-7 
dependent adaptive immune responses and provide antitumor activity. J Immunother. 2011; 34:1–
15. [PubMed: 21150709] 
37. Rettig L, et al. Particle size and activation threshold: a new dimension of danger signaling. Blood. 
2010; 115:4533–4541. [PubMed: 20304804] 
38. de Haro C, Mendez R, Santoyo J. The eIF-2α kinases and the control of protein synthesis. FASEB 
J. 1996; 10:1378–1387. [PubMed: 8903508] 
39. Liang SL, Quirk D, Zhou A. RNase L: its biological roles and regulation. IUBMB Life. 2006; 
58:508–514. [PubMed: 17002978] 
40. Zhang Z, et al. Structural analysis reveals that Toll-like receptor 7 is a dual receptor for guanosine 
and single-stranded RNA. Immunity. 2016; 45:737–748. [PubMed: 27742543] 
41. Tanji H, et al. Toll-like receptor 8 senses degradation products of single-stranded RNA. Nat Struct 
Mol Biol. 2015; 22:109–115. [PubMed: 25599397] 
Pardi et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 42. Isaacs A, Cox RA, Rotem Z. Foreign nucleic acids as the stimulus to make interferon. Lancet. 
1963; 2:113–116. [PubMed: 13956740] 
43. Schwartz S, et al. Transcriptome-wide mapping reveals widespread dynamic-regulated 
pseudouridylation of ncRNA and mRNA. Cell. 2014; 159:148–162. [PubMed: 25219674] 
44. Carlile TM, et al. Pseudouridine profiling reveals regulated mRNA pseudouridylation in yeast and 
human cells. Nature. 2014; 515:143–146. [PubMed: 25192136] 
45. Andries O, et al. N1-methylpseudouridine-incorporated mRNA outperforms pseudouridine-
incorporated mRNA by providing enhanced protein expression and reduced immunogenicity in 
mammalian cell lines and mice. J Control Release. 2015; 217:337–344. [PubMed: 26342664] 
46. Anderson BR, et al. Incorporation of pseudouridine into mRNA enhances translation by 
diminishing PKR activation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:5884–5892. [PubMed: 20457754] 
47. Anderson BR, et al. Nucleoside modifications in RNA limit activation of 2′–5′-oligoadenylate 
synthetase and increase resistance to cleavage by RNase L. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:9329–
9338. [PubMed: 21813458] 
48. Kariko K, Buckstein M, Ni H, Weissman D. Suppression of RNA recognition by Toll-like 
receptors: the impact of nucleoside modification and the evolutionary origin of RNA. Immunity. 
2005; 23:165–175. This report demonstrates that nucleoside modification of mRNA decreases 
inflammatory responses. [PubMed: 16111635] 
49. Kauffman KJ, et al. Efficacy and immunogenicity of unmodified and pseudouridine-modified 
mRNA delivered systemically with lipid nanoparticles in vivo. Biomaterials. 2016; 109:78–87. 
[PubMed: 27680591] 
50. Brito LA, et al. A cationic nanoemulsion for the delivery of next-generation RNA vaccines. Mol 
Ther. 2014; 22:2118–2129. [PubMed: 25027661] 
51. Van Lint S, et al. The ReNAissanCe of mRNA-based cancer therapy. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2015; 
14:235–251. [PubMed: 25263094] 
52. Kallen KJ, et al. A novel, disruptive vaccination technology: self-adjuvanted RNActive® vaccines. 
Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2013; 9:2263–2276. [PubMed: 23921513] 
53. Rauch S, Lutz J, Kowalczyk A, Schlake T, Heidenreich R. RNActive® technology: generation and 
testing of stable and immunogenic mRNA vaccines. Methods Mol Biol. 2017; 1499:89–107. 
[PubMed: 27987144] 
54. Edwards DK, et al. Adjuvant effects of a sequence-engineered mRNA vaccine: translational 
profiling demonstrates similar human and murine innate response. J Transl Med. 2017; 15:1. 
[PubMed: 28049494] 
55. Kowalczyk A, et al. Self-adjuvanted mRNA vaccines induce local innate immune responses that 
lead to a potent and boostable adaptive immunity. Vaccine. 2016; 34:3882–3893. [PubMed: 
27269061] 
56. Schnee M, et al. An mRNA vaccine encoding rabies virus glycoprotein induces protection against 
lethal infection in mice and correlates of protection in adult and newborn pigs. PLoS Negl Trop 
Dis. 2016; 10:e0004746. [PubMed: 27336830] 
57. Ziegler A, et al. A new RNA-based adjuvant enhances virus-specific vaccine responses by locally 
triggering TLR- and RLH-dependent effects. J Immunol. 2017; 198:1595–1605. [PubMed: 
28077601] 
58. Benteyn D, Heirman C, Bonehill A, Thielemans K, Breckpot K. mRNA-based dendritic cell 
vaccines. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2015; 14:161–176. [PubMed: 25196947] 
59. Kranz LM, et al. Systemic RNA delivery to dendritic cells exploits antiviral defence for cancer 
immunotherapy. Nature. 2016; 534:396–401. [PubMed: 27281205] 
60. Wykes M, Pombo A, Jenkins C, MacPherson GG. Dendritic cells interact directly with naive B 
lymphocytes to transfer antigen and initiate class switching in a primary T-dependent response. J 
Immunol. 1998; 161:1313–1319. [PubMed: 9686593] 
61. Selmi A, et al. Uptake of synthetic naked RNA by skin-resident dendritic cells via 
macropinocytosis allows antigen expression and induction of T-cell responses in mice. Cancer 
Immunol Immunother. 2016; 65:1075–1083. [PubMed: 27422115] 
Pardi et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 62. Diken M, et al. Selective uptake of naked vaccine RNA by dendritic cells is driven by 
macropinocytosis and abrogated upon DC maturation. Gene Ther. 2011; 18:702–708. [PubMed: 
21368901] 
63. Lorenz C, et al. Protein expression from exogenous mRNA: uptake by receptor-mediated 
endocytosis and trafficking via the lysosomal pathway. RNA Biol. 2011; 8:627–636. [PubMed: 
21654214] 
64. Gehl J. Electroporation: theory and methods, perspectives for drug delivery, gene therapy and 
research. Acta Physiol Scand. 2003; 177:437–447. [PubMed: 12648161] 
65. Granstein RD, Ding W, Ozawa H. Induction of anti-tumor immunity with epidermal cells pulsed 
with tumor-derived RNA or intradermal administration of RNA. J Invest Dermatol. 2000; 
114:632–636. [PubMed: 10733665] 
66. Kreiter S, et al. Intranodal vaccination with naked antigen-encoding RNA elicits potent 
prophylactic and therapeutic antitumoral immunity. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:9031–9040. [PubMed: 
21045153] 
67. Bialkowski L, et al. Intralymphatic mRNA vaccine induces CD8 T-cell responses that inhibit the 
growth of mucosally located tumours. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:22509. [PubMed: 26931556] 
68. Sahin U, et al. Personalized RNA mutanome vaccines mobilize poly-specific therapeutic immunity 
against cancer. Nature. 2017; 547:222–226. [PubMed: 28678784] 
69. Qiu P, Ziegelhoffer P, Sun J, Yang NS. Gene gun delivery of mRNA in situ results in efficient 
transgene expression and genetic immunization. Gene Ther. 1996; 3:262–268. [PubMed: 8646558] 
70. Steitz J, Britten CM, Wolfel T, Tuting T. Effective induction of anti-melanoma immunity following 
genetic vaccination with synthetic mRNA coding for the fusion protein EGFP. TRP2 Cancer 
Immunol Immunother. 2006; 55:246–253. [PubMed: 16133114] 
71. Abele JH, Abele SW, Keller RM, Mandy CW. Humoral and cellular immune response to RNA 
immunization with flavivirus replicons derived from tick-borne encephalitis virus. J Viral. 2005; 
79:15107–15113.
72. Keller RM, et al. Mimicking live flavivirus immunization with a noninfectious RNA vaccine. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004; 101:1951–1956. [PubMed: 14769933] 
73. Mandy CW, et al. In vitro-synthesized infectious RNA as an attenuated live vaccine in a flavivirus 
model. Nat Med. 1998; 4:1438–1440. [PubMed: 9846585] 
74. Johansson DX, Lounger K, Kakoulidou M, Liljestrom P. Intradermal electroporation of naked 
replicon RNA elicits strong immune responses. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e29732. [PubMed: 22238645] 
75. Piggott JM, Sheahan BJ, Soden DM, O’Sullivan GC, Atkins GJ. Electroporation of RNA 
stimulates immunity to an encoded reporter gene in mice. Mol Med Rep. 2009; 2:753–756. 
[PubMed: 21475897] 
76. Broderick KE, Humeau LM. Electroporation-enhanced delivery of nucleic acid vaccines. Expert 
Rev Vaccines. 2015; 14:195–204. [PubMed: 25487734] 
77. Hoerr I, Obst R, Rammensee HG, Jung G. In vivo application of RNA leads to induction of 
specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes and antibodies. Eur J Immunol. 2000; 30:1–7. [PubMed: 
10602021] 
78. Schlake T, Thess A, Fotin-Mleczek M, Kallen KJ. Developing mRNA-vaccine technologies. RNA 
Biol. 2012; 9:1319–1330. [PubMed: 23064118] 
79. Reichmuth AM, Oberli MA, Jeklenec A, Langer R, Blankschtein D. mRNA vaccine delivery using 
lipid nanoparticles. Ther Deliv. 2016; 7:319–334. [PubMed: 27075952] 
80. Midoux P, Pichon C. Lipid-based mRNA vaccine delivery systems. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2015; 
14:221–234. [PubMed: 25540984] 
81. Kanasty R, Dorkin JR, Vegas A, Anderson D. Delivery materials for siRNA therapeutics. Nat 
Mater. 2013; 12:967–977. [PubMed: 24150415] 
82. Akinc A, et al. Targeted delivery of RNAi therapeutics with endogenous and exogenous ligand-
based mechanisms. Mol Ther. 2010; 18:1357–1364. [PubMed: 20461061] 
83. Ratajczak MZ, Ratajczak J. Horizontal transfer of RNA and proteins between cells by extracellular 
microvesicles: 14 years later. Clin Transl Med. 2016; 5:7. [PubMed: 26943717] 
Pardi et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 84. Tam HH, et al. Sustained antigen availability during germinal center initiation enhances antibody 
responses to vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:E6639–E6648. [PubMed: 
27702895] 
85. Richner JM, et al. Modified mRNA Vaccines protect against Zika virus infection. Cell. 2017; 
168:1114–1125.e10. [PubMed: 28222903] 
86. Havenar-Daughton C, Lee JH, Crotty S. Tfh cells and HIV bnAbs, an immunodominance model of 
the HIV neutralizing antibody generation problem. Immunol Rev. 2017; 275:49–61. [PubMed: 
28133798] 
87. Brito LA, et al. Self-amplifying mRNA vaccines. Adv Genet. 2015; 89:179–233. [PubMed: 
25620012] 
88. Chahal JS, et al. An RNA nanoparticle vaccine against Zika virus elicits antibody and CD8+ T cell 
responses in a mouse model. Sci Rep. 2017; 7:252. [PubMed: 28325910] 
89. Chahal JS, et al. Dendrimer-RNA nanoparticles generate protective immunity against lethal Ebola, 
H1N1 influenza, and Toxoplasma gondii challenges with a single dose. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2016; 113:E4133–E4142. [PubMed: 27382155] 
90. Ulmer JB, Geall AJ. Recent innovations in mRNA vaccines. Curr Opin Immunol. 2016; 41:18–22. 
[PubMed: 27240054] 
91. Alberer M, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of a mRNA rabies vaccine in healthy adults: an open-
label, non-randomised, prospective, first-in-human phase 1 clinical trial. Lancet. 2017; 390:1511–
1520. This is a report of a clinical vaccine trial using directly injected, non-replicating, unmodified 
mRNA against an infectious pathogen. [PubMed: 28754494] 
92. Perri S, et al. An alphavirus replicon particle chimera derived from venezuelan equine encephalitis 
and sindbis viruses is a potent gene-based vaccine delivery vector. J Viral. 2003; 77:10394–10403.
93. Fleeton MN, et al. Self-replicative RNA vaccines elicit protection against influenza A virus, 
respiratory syncytial virus, and a tickborne encephalitis virus. J Infect Dis. 2001; 183:1395–1398. 
This is an early report of the protective efficacy that results from self-amplifying mRNA vaccines 
against infectious pathogens. [PubMed: 11294672] 
94. Magini D, et al. Self-amplifying mRNA vaccines expressing multiple conserved influenza antigens 
confer protection against homologous and heterosubtypic viral challenge. PLoS ONE. 2016; 
11:e0161193. [PubMed: 27525409] 
95. Hekele A, et al. Rapidly produced SAM® vaccine against H7N9 influenza is immunogenic in 
mice. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2013; 2:e52. [PubMed: 26038486] 
96. Brazzoli M, et al. Induction of broad-based immunity and protective efficacy by self-amplifying 
mRNA vaccines encoding influenza virus hemagglutinin. J Viral. 2015; 90:332–344.
97. Bogers WM, et al. Potent immune responses in rhesus macaques induced by nonviral delivery of a 
self-amplifying RNA vaccine expressing HIV type 1 envelope with a cationic nanoemulsion. J 
Infect Dis. 2015; 211:947–955. [PubMed: 25234719] 
98. McCullough KC, et al. Self-replicating replicon-RNA delivery to dendritic cells by chitosan-
nanoparticles for translation in vitro and in vivo. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2014; 3:e173. [PubMed: 
25004099] 
99. Demoulins T, et al. Polyethylenimine-based polyplex delivery of self-replicating RNA vaccines. 
Nanomedicine. 2016; 12:711–722. [PubMed: 26592962] 
100. Maruggi G, et al. Immunogenicity and protective efficacy induced by self-amplifying mRNA 
vaccines encoding bacterial antigens. Vaccine. 2017; 35:361–368. [PubMed: 27939014] 
101. Van Gulck E, et al. mRNA-based dendritic cell vaccination induces potent antiviral T-cell 
responses in HIV-1-infected patients. AIDS. 2012; 26:F1–F12. [PubMed: 22156965] 
102. Routy JP, et al. Immunologic activity and safety of autologous HIV RNA-electroporated dendritic 
cells in HIV-1 infected patients receiving antiretroviral therapy. Clin Immunol. 2010; 134:140–
147. [PubMed: 19889582] 
103. Allard SD, et al. A phase I/IIa immunotherapy trial of HIV-1-infected patients with Tat, Rev and 
Nef expressing dendritic cells followed by treatment interruption. Clin Immunol. 2012; 142:252–
268. [PubMed: 22177848] 
Pardi et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 104. Gandhi RT, et al. Immunization of HIV-1-infected persons with autologous dendritic cells 
transfected with mRNA encoding HIV-1 Gag and Nef: results of a randomized, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. J Acquir Immune Def Syndr. 2016; 71:246–253.
105. Jacobson JM, et al. Dendritic cell immunotherapy for HIV-1 infection using autologous HIV-1 
RNA: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Acquir Immune Def Syndr. 
2016; 72:31–38.
106. Gay, CL., et al. Immunogenicity of AGS-004 dendritic cell therapy in patients treated during 
acute HIV infection. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/aid.2017.0071
107. Van Craenenbroeck AH, et al. Induction of cytomegalovirus-specific T cell responses in healthy 
volunteers and allogeneic stem cell recipients using vaccination with messenger RNA-transfected 
dendritic cells. Transplantation. 2015; 99:120–127. [PubMed: 25050468] 
108. Martinon F, et al. Induction of virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in vivo by liposome-
entrapped mRNA. Eur J Immunol. 1993; 23:1719–1722. This early study demonstrates that 
liposome-encapsulated mRNA encoding a viral antigen induces T cell responses. [PubMed: 
8325342] 
109. Pollard C, et al. Type I IFN counteracts the induction of antigen-specific immune responses by 
lipid-based delivery of mRNA vaccines. Mol Ther. 2013; 21:251–259. [PubMed: 23011030] 
110. Zhao M, Li M, Zhang Z, Gong T, Sun X. Induction of HIV-1 gag specific immune responses by 
cationic micelles mediated delivery of gag mRNA. Drug Deliv. 2016; 23:2596–2607. [PubMed: 
26024387] 
111. Li M, et al. Enhanced intranasal delivery of mRNA vaccine by overcoming the nasal epithelial 
barrier via intra- and paracellular pathways. J Control Release. 2016; 228:9–19. [PubMed: 
26941035] 
112. Richner JM, et al. Vaccine mediated protection against Zika virus-induced congenital disease. 
Cell. 2017; 170:273–283.e12. [PubMed: 28708997] 
113. Roman F, Vaman T, Kafeja F, Hanon E, Van Damme P. AS03(A)-adjuvanted influenza A (H1N1) 
2009 vaccine for adults up to 85 years of age. Clin Infect Dis. 2010; 51:668–677. [PubMed: 
20687838] 
114. Zarei S, et al. Immunogenicity and reactogenicity of two diphtheria-tetanus-whole cell pertussis 
vaccines in Iranian pre-school children, a randomized controlled trial. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 
2013; 9:1316–1322. [PubMed: 23442608] 
115. Diken M, Kranz LM, Kreiter S, Sahin U. mRNA: a versatile molecule for cancer vaccines. Curr 
Issues Mol Biol. 2017; 22:113–128. [PubMed: 27801664] 
116. Fiedler K, Lazzaro S, Lutz J, Rauch S, Heidenreich R. mRNA cancer vaccines. Recent Results 
Cancer Res. 2016; 209:61–85. [PubMed: 28101688] 
117. Grunwitz C, Kranz LM. mRNA cancer vaccines-messages that prevail. Curr Top Microbiol 
Immunol. 2017; 405:145–164. [PubMed: 28401358] 
118. McNamara MA, Nair SK, Holl EK. RNA-Based Vaccines in Cancer Immunotherapy. J Immunol 
Res. 2015; 2015:794528. [PubMed: 26665011] 
119. Sullenger BA, Nair S. From the RNA world to the clinic. Science. 2016; 352:1417–1420. 
[PubMed: 27313039] 
120. Vigneron N. Human tumor antigens and cancer immunotherapy. Biomed Res Int. 2015; 
2015:948501. [PubMed: 26161423] 
121. Tureci O, et al. Targeting the heterogeneity of cancer with individualized neoepitope vaccines. 
Clin Cancer Res. 2016; 22:1885–1896. [PubMed: 27084742] 
122. Coulie PG, Van den Eynde BJ, van der Bruggen P, Boon T. Tumour antigens recognized by T 
lymphocytes: at the core of cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:135–146. 
[PubMed: 24457417] 
123. Conry RM, et al. Characterization of a messenger RNA polynucleotide vaccine vector. Cancer 
Res. 1995; 55:1397–1400. [PubMed: 7882341] 
124. Boczkowski D, Nair SK, Snyder D, Gilboa E. Dendritic cells pulsed with RNA are potent 
antigen-presenting cells in vitro and in vivo. J Exp Med. 1996; 184:465–472. This report 
demonstrates the efficacy of mRNA DC vaccines. [PubMed: 8760800] 
Pardi et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 125. De Keersmaecker B, et al. The combination of 4-1BBL and CD40L strongly enhances the 
capacity of dendritic cells to stimulate HIV-specific T cell responses. J Leukoc Biol. 2011; 
89:989–999. [PubMed: 21427207] 
126. Dannull J, et al. Enhancing the immunostimulatory function of dendritic cells by transfection with 
mRNA encoding OX40 ligand. Blood. 2005; 105:3206–3213. [PubMed: 15618466] 
127. Aerts-Toegaert C, et al. CD83 expression on dendritic cells and T cells: correlation with effective 
immune responses. Eur J Immunol. 2007; 37:686–695. [PubMed: 17301951] 
128. Grunebach F, et al. Cotransfection of dendritic cells with RNA coding for HER-2/neu and 
4-1BBL increases the induction of tumor antigen specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Cancer Gene 
Ther. 2005; 12:749–756. [PubMed: 15877082] 
129. Bontkes HJ, Kramer D, Ruizendaal JJ, Meijer CJ, Hooijberg E. Tumor associated antigen and 
interleukin-12 mRNA transfected dendritic cells enhance effector function of natural killer cells 
and antigen specific T-cells. Clin Immunol. 2008; 127:375–384. [PubMed: 18358784] 
130. Bontkes HJ, et al. Dendritic cells transfected with interleukin-12 and tumor-associated antigen 
messenger RNA induce high avidity cytotoxic T cells. Gene Ther. 2007; 14:366–375. [PubMed: 
17036057] 
131. Dorrie J, et al. Introduction of functional chimeric E/L-selectin by RNA electroporation to target 
dendritic cells from blood to lymph nodes. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2008; 57:467–477. 
[PubMed: 17768622] 
132. Bonehill A, et al. Enhancing the T-cell stimulatory capacity of human dendritic cells by co-
electroporation with CD40L, CD70 and constitutively active TLR4 encoding mRNA. Mol Ther. 
2008; 16:1170–1180. This is a description of the TriMix mRNA adjuvant cocktail. [PubMed: 
18431362] 
133. Van Lint S, et al. Preclinical evaluation of TriMix and antigen mRNA-based antitumor therapy. 
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:1661–1671. [PubMed: 22337996] 
134. Van Lint S, et al. Optimized dendritic cell-based immunotherapy for melanoma: the TriMix-
formula. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2014; 63:959–967. [PubMed: 24878889] 
135. Pen JJ, et al. Modulation of regulatory T cell function by monocyte-derived dendritic cells 
matured through electroporation with mRNA encoding CD40 ligand, constitutively active TLR4, 
and CD70. J Immunol. 2013; 191:1976–1983. [PubMed: 23842750] 
136. Wilgenhof S, et al. Therapeutic vaccination with an autologous mRNA electroporated dendritic 
cell vaccine in patients with advanced melanoma. J Immunother. 2011; 34:448–456. [PubMed: 
21577140] 
137. Wilgenhof S, et al. A phase IB study on intravenous synthetic mRNA electroporated dendritic cell 
immunotherapy in pretreated advanced melanoma patients. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:2686–2693. 
[PubMed: 23904461] 
138. Mitchell DA, et al. Tetanus toxoid and CCL3 improve dendritic cell vaccines in mice and 
glioblastoma patients. Nature. 2015; 519:366–369. [PubMed: 25762141] 
139. Batich KA, et al. Long-term survival in glioblastoma with cytomegalovirus pp65-targeted 
vaccination. Clin Cancer Res. 2017; 23:1898–1909. [PubMed: 28411277] 
140. Wilgenhof S, et al. Phase II study of autologous monocyte-derived mRNA electroporated 
dendritic cells (TriMixDC-MEL) plus ipilimumab in patients with pretreated advanced 
melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34:1330–1338. [PubMed: 26926680] 
141. Zhou WZ, et al. RNA melanoma vaccine: induction of antitumor immunity by human 
glycoprotein 100 mRNA immunization. Hum Gene Ther. 1999; 10:2719–2724. [PubMed: 
10566900] 
142. Kreiter S, et al. FLT3 ligand as a molecular adjuvant for naked RNA vaccines. Methods Mol Biol. 
2016; 1428:163–175. [PubMed: 27236799] 
143. Kreiter S, et al. FLT3 ligand enhances the cancer therapeutic potency of naked RNA vaccines. 
Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6132–6142. [PubMed: 21816907] 
144. Bol KF, et al. Intranodal vaccination with mRNA-optimized dendritic cells in metastatic 
melanoma patients. Oncoimmunology. 2015; 4:e1019197. [PubMed: 26405571] 
145. Phua KK, Staats HF, Leong KW, Nair SK. Intranasal mRNA nanoparticle vaccination induces 
prophylactic and therapeutic anti-tumor immunity. Sci Rep. 2014; 4:5128. [PubMed: 24894817] 
Pardi et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 146. Scheel B, et al. Therapeutic anti-tumor immunity triggered by injections of immunostimulating 
single-stranded RNA. Eur J Immunol. 2006; 36:2807–2816. [PubMed: 17013976] 
147. Van der Jeught K, et al. Intratumoral administration of mRNA encoding a fusokine consisting of 
IFN-β and the ectodomain of the TGF-β receptor II potentiates antitumor immunity. Oncotarget. 
2014; 5:10100–10113. [PubMed: 25338019] 
148. Van Lint S, et al. Intratumoral delivery of TriMix mRNA results in T-cell activation by cross-
presenting dendritic cells. Cancer Immunol Res. 2016; 4:146–156. [PubMed: 26659303] 
149. Clausen BE, Stoitzner P. Functional specialization of skin dendritic cell subsets in regulating T 
Cell responses. Front Immunol. 2015; 6:534. [PubMed: 26557117] 
150. Weide B, et al. Direct injection of protamine-protected mRNA: results of a phase 1/2 vaccination 
trial in metastatic melanoma patients. J Immunother. 2009; 32:498–507. [PubMed: 19609242] 
151. Kubler H, et al. Self-adjuvanted mRNA vaccination in advanced prostate cancer patients: a first-
in-man phase I/IIa study. J Immunother Cancer. 2015; 3:26. [PubMed: 26082837] 
152. Hess PR, Boczkowski D, Nair SK, Snyder D, Gilboa E. Vaccination with mRNAs encoding 
tumor-associated antigens and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor efficiently 
primes CTL responses, but is insufficient to overcome tolerance to a model tumor/self antigen. 
Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2006; 55:672–683. [PubMed: 16133108] 
153. Oberli MA, et al. Lipid nanoparticle assisted mRNA delivery for potent cancer immunotherapy. 
Nano Lett. 2017; 17:1326–1335. [PubMed: 28273716] 
154. Fotin-Mleczek M, et al. Highly potent mRNA based cancer vaccines represent an attractive 
platform for combination therapies supporting an improved therapeutic effect. J Gene Med. 2012; 
14:428–439. [PubMed: 22262664] 
155. Fotin-Mleczek M, et al. mRNA-based vaccines synergize with radiation therapy to eradicate 
established tumors. Radiat Oncol. 2014; 9:180. [PubMed: 25127546] 
156. Pascolo S. Messenger RNA-based vaccines. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2004; 4:1285–1294. 
[PubMed: 15268662] 
157. Geall AJ, Mandy CW, Ulmer JB. RNA: the new revolution in nucleic acid vaccines. Semin 
Immunol. 2013; 25:152–159. [PubMed: 23735226] 
158. Weissman D, Pardi N, Muramatsu H, Kariko K. HPLC purification of in vitro transcribed long 
RNA. Methods Mol Biol. 2013; 969:43–54. [PubMed: 23296926] 
159. Muralidhara BK, et al. Critical considerations for developing nucleic acid macromolecule based 
drug products. Drug Discov Today. 2016; 21:430–444. [PubMed: 26674130] 
160. Jones KL, Drane D, Gowans EJ. Long-term storage of DNA-free RNA for use in vaccine studies. 
Biotechniques. 2007; 43:675–681. [PubMed: 18072597] 
161. Probst J, et al. Characterization of the ribonuclease activity on the skin surface. Genet Vaccines 
Ther. 2006; 4:4. [PubMed: 16732888] 
162. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Considerations for plasmid DNA 
vaccines for infectious disease indications. U.S. Food & Drug Administration; 2007. https://
www.fda.gov/downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
Guidances/Vaccines/ucm091968.pdf
163. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Guidance for human somatic cell 
therapy and gene therapy. U.S. Food & Drug Administration; 1998. https://www.fda.gov/
downloads/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/
CellularandGeneTherapy/ucm081670.pdf
164. European Medicines Agency. Commission Directive 2009/120/EC. European Commission; 2009. 
https://ec.europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-1/dir_2009_120/
dir_2009_120_en.pdf
165. Hinz T, et al. The European regulatory environment of RNA-based vaccines. Methods Mol Biol. 
2017; 1499:203–222. [PubMed: 27987152] 
166. Pepini T, et al. Induction of an IFN-mediated antiviral response by a self-amplifying RNA 
vaccine: implications for vaccine design. J Immunol. 2017; 198:4012–4024. [PubMed: 
28416600] 
167. Theofilopoulos AN, Baccala R, Beutler B, Kono DH. Type I interferons (α/β) in immunity and 
autoimmunity. Annu Rev Immunol. 2005; 23:307–336. [PubMed: 15771573] 
Pardi et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 168. Nestle FO, et al. Plasmacytoid predendritic cells initiate psoriasis through interferon-α 
production. J Exp Med. 2005; 202:135–143. [PubMed: 15998792] 
169. Fischer S, et al. Extracellular RNA mediates endothelial-cell permeability via vascular endothelial 
growth factor. Blood. 2007; 110:2457–2465. [PubMed: 17576819] 
170. Kannemeier C, et al. Extracellular RNA constitutes a natural procoagulant cofactor in blood 
coagulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:6388–6393. [PubMed: 17405864] 
171. Liu MA, Ulmer JB. Human clinical trials of plasmid DNA vaccines. Adv Genet. 2005; 55:25–40. 
[PubMed: 16291211] 
172. DeFrancesco L. The ‘anti-hype’ vaccine. Nat Biotechnol. 2017; 35:193–197. [PubMed: 
28244993] 
173. Servick K. On message. Science. 2017; 355:446–450. [PubMed: 28154031] 
174. CureVac, AG. From science to patients — ideas become treatments at CureVac. CureVac. 2017. 
http://www.curevac.com/research-development
175. Aldevron. Aldevron expands North Dakota biomanufacturing facility. Aldevron; 2016. http://
www.aldevron.com/about-us/news/aldevron-expands-north-dakota-biomanufacturing-facility
176. Kreiter S, et al. Mutant MHC class II epitopes drive therapeutic immune responses to cancer. 
Nature. 2015; 520:692–696. [PubMed: 25901682] 
177. Ott PA, et al. An immunogenic personal neoantigen vaccine for patients with melanoma. Nature. 
2017; 547:217–221. [PubMed: 28678778] 
178. Jacobson EB, Caporale LH, Thorbecke GJ. Effect of thymus cell injections on germinal center 
formation in lymphoid tissues of nude (thymusless) mice. Cell Immunol. 1974; 13:416–430. 
[PubMed: 4217657] 
179. Forster R, Emrich T, Kremmer E, Lipp M. Expression of the G-protein-coupled receptor BLR1 
defines mature, recirculating B cells and a subset of T-helper memory cells. Blood. 1994; 
84:830–840. [PubMed: 7913842] 
180. Forster R, et al. A putative chemokine receptor, BLR1, directs B cell migration to defined 
lymphoid organs and specific anatomic compartments of the spleen. Cell. 1996; 87:1037–1047. 
[PubMed: 8978608] 
181. Breitfeld D, et al. Follicular B helper T cells express CXC chemokine receptor 5, localize to B 
cell follicles, and support immunoglobulin production. J Exp Med. 2000; 192:1545–1552. 
[PubMed: 11104797] 
182. Schaerli P, et al. CXC chemokine receptor 5 expression defines follicular homing T cells with B 
cell helper function. J Exp Med. 2000; 192:1553–1562. [PubMed: 11104798] 
183. Johnston RJ, et al. Bcl6 and Blimp-1 are reciprocal and antagonistic regulators of T follicular 
helper cell differentiation. Science. 2009; 325:1006–1010. [PubMed: 19608860] 
184. Nurieva RI, et al. Bcl6 mediates the development of T follicular helper cells. Science. 2009; 
325:1001–1005. [PubMed: 19628815] 
185. Yu D, et al. The transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 directs T follicular helper cell lineage 
commitment. Immunity. 2009; 31:457–468. [PubMed: 19631565] 
186. Crotty S. A brief history of T cell help to B cells. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015; 15:185–189. 
[PubMed: 25677493] 
187. Klein F, et al. Antibodies in HIV-1 vaccine development and therapy. Science. 2013; 341:1199–
1204. [PubMed: 24031012] 
188. Gils A, Bertolotto A, Mulleman D, Bejan-Angoulvant T, Declerck PJ. Biopharmaceuticals: 
reference products and biosimilars to treat inflammatory diseases. Ther Drug Monit. 2017; 
39:308–315. [PubMed: 28230618] 
189. Sparrow E, Friede M, Sheikh M, Torvaldsen S. Therapeutic antibodies for infectious diseases. 
Bull World Health Organ. 2017; 95:235–237. [PubMed: 28250538] 
190. Henricks LM, Schellens JH, Huitema AD, Beijnen JH. The use of combinations of monoclonal 
antibodies in clinical oncology. Cancer Treat Rev. 2015; 41:859–867. [PubMed: 26547132] 
191. Lewiecki EM. Treatment of osteoporosis with denosumab. Maturitas. 2010; 66:182–186. 
[PubMed: 20236778] 
Pardi et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 192. Paton DM. PCSK9 inhibitors: monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia. 
Drugs Today. 2016; 52:183–192. [PubMed: 27186592] 
193. Hollevoet K, Declerck PJ. State of play and clinical prospects of antibody gene transfer. J Transl 
Med. 2017; 15:131. [PubMed: 28592330] 
194. Fuchs SP, Desrosiers RC. Promise and problems associated with the use of recombinant AAV for 
the delivery of anti-HIV antibodies. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2016; 3:16068. [PubMed: 
28197421] 
195. Boczkowski D, Lee J, Pruitt S, Nair S. Dendritic cells engineered to secrete anti-GITR antibodies 
are effective adjuvants to dendritic cell-based immunotherapy. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009; 16:900–
911. [PubMed: 19498460] 
196. Pruitt SK, et al. Enhancement of anti-tumor immunity through local modulation of CTLA-4 and 
GITR by dendritic cells. Eur J Immunol. 2011; 41:3553–3563. [PubMed: 22028176] 
197. Pardi N, et al. Administration of nucleoside-modified mRNA encoding broadly neutralizing 
antibody protects humanized mice from HIV-1 challenge. Nat Commun. 2017; 8:14630. This is 
the first study to demonstrate that directly injected, non-replicating mRNA encoding a 
monoclonal antibody protects animals against an infectious pathogen. [PubMed: 28251988] 
198. Stadler CR, et al. Elimination of large tumors in mice by mRNA-encoded bispecific antibodies. 
Nat Med. 2017; 23:815–817. [PubMed: 28604701] 
199. Thran M, et al. mRNA mediates passive vaccination against infectious agents, toxins, and tumors. 
EMBO Mol Med. 2017; 9:1434–1447.
200. Sebastian M, et al. Phase Ib study evaluating a self-adjuvanted mRNA cancer vaccine 
(RNActive®) combined with local radiation as consolidation and maintenance treatment for 
patients with stage IV non-small cell lung cancer. BMC Cancer. 2014; 14:748. [PubMed: 
25288198] 
201. Wang Y, et al. Systemic delivery of modified mRNA encoding herpes simplex virus 1 thymidine 
kinase for targeted cancer gene therapy. Mol Ther. 2013; 21:358–367. [PubMed: 23229091] 
202. Perche F, et al. Enhancement of dendritic cells transfection in vivo and of vaccination against 
B16F10 melanoma with mannosylated histidylated lipopolyplexes loaded with tumor antigen 
messenger RNA. Nanomedicine. 2011; 7:445–453. [PubMed: 21220051] 
203. Mockey M, et al. mRNA-based cancer vaccine: prevention of B16 melanoma progression and 
metastasis by systemic injection of MART1 mRNA histidylated lipopolyplexes. Cancer Gene 
Ther. 2007; 14:802–814. [PubMed: 17589432] 
204. Uchida S, et al. Systemic delivery of messenger RNA for the treatment of pancreatic cancer using 
polyplex nanomicelles with a cholesterol moiety. Biomaterials. 2016; 82:221–228. [PubMed: 
26763736] 
205. Lazzaro S, et al. CD8 T-cell priming upon mRNA vaccination is restricted to bone-marrow-
derived antigen-presenting cells and may involve antigen transfer from myocytes. Immunology. 
2015; 146:312–326. [PubMed: 26173587] 
206. Van Driessche A, et al. Clinical-grade manufacturing of autologous mature mRNA-electroporated 
dendritic cells and safety testing in acute myeloid leukemia patients in a phase I dose-escalation 
clinical trial. Cytotherapy. 2009; 11:653–668. [PubMed: 19530029] 
207. Van Tendeloo VF, et al. Induction of complete and molecular remissions in acute myeloid 
leukemia by Wilms’ tumor 1 antigen-targeted dendritic cell vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2010; 107:13824–13829. [PubMed: 20631300] 
208. Berneman ZN, et al. Dendritic cell vaccination in malignant pleural mesothelioma: a phase I/II 
study [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32(Suppl):7583.
209. Amin A, et al. Survival with AGS-003, an autologous dendritic cell-based immunotherapy, in 
combination with sunitinib in unfavorable risk patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC): phase 2 study results. J Immunother Cancer. 2015; 3:14. [PubMed: 25901286] 
210. Khoury HJ, et al. Immune responses and long-term disease recurrence status after telomerase-
based dendritic cell immunotherapy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer. 2017; 
123:3061–3072. [PubMed: 28411378] 
211. Sebastian M, et al. Messenger RNA vaccination in NSCLC: findings from a phase I/IIa clinical 
trial [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29(Suppl):2584.
Pardi et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 212. Rausch S, Schwentner C, Stenzl A, Bedke J. mRNA vaccine CV9103 and CV9104 for the 
treatment of prostate cancer. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014; 10:3146–3152. [PubMed: 
25483661] 
213. Mitchell DA, et al. Monoclonal antibody blockade of IL-2 receptor α during lymphopenia 
selectively depletes regulatory T cells in mice and humans. Blood. 2011; 118:3003–3012. 
[PubMed: 21768296] 
214. Borch TH, et al. mRNA-transfected dendritic cell vaccine in combination with metronomic 
cyclophosphamide as treatment for patients with advanced malignant melanoma. 
Oncoimmunology. 2016; 5:e1207842. [PubMed: 27757300] 
215. Kongsted P, et al. Dendritic cell vaccination in combination with docetaxel for patients with 
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: a randomized phase II study. Cytotherapy. 2017; 
19:500–513. [PubMed: 28215654] 
216. Kyte JA, et al. Immune response and long-term clinical outcome in advanced melanoma patients 
vaccinated with tumor-mRNA-transfected dendritic cells. Oncoimmunology. 2016; 5:e1232237. 
[PubMed: 27999747] 
217. Vik-Mo EO, et al. Therapeutic vaccination against autologous cancer stem cells with mRNA-
transfected dendritic cells in patients with glioblastoma. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2013; 
62:1499–1509. [PubMed: 23817721] 
218. Lesterhuis WJ, et al. Immunogenicity of dendritic cells pulsed with CEA peptide or transfected 
with CEA mRNA for vaccination of colorectal cancer patients. Anticancer Res. 2010; 30:5091–
5097. [PubMed: 21187495] 
219. Aarntzen EH, et al. Vaccination with mRNA-electroporated dendritic cells induces robust tumor 
antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells responses in stage III and IV melanoma patients. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:5460–5470. [PubMed: 22896657] 
220. Bol KF, et al. Long overall survival after dendritic cell vaccination in metastatic uveal melanoma 
patients. Am J Ophthalmol. 2014; 158:939–947. [PubMed: 25038326] 
221. Bol KF, et al. Prophylactic vaccines are potent activators of monocyte-derived dendritic cells and 
drive effective anti-tumor responses in melanoma patients at the cost of toxicity. Cancer Immunol 
Immunother. 2016; 65:327–339. [PubMed: 26861670] 
222. Weide B, et al. Results of the first phase I/II clinical vaccination trial with direct injection of 
mRNA. J Immunother. 2008; 31:180–188. [PubMed: 18481387] 
Pardi et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Innate immune sensing of mRNA vaccines
Innate immune sensing of two types of mRNA vaccine by a dendritic cell (DC), with RNA 
sensors shown in yellow, antigen in red, DC maturation factors in green, and peptide–major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) complexes in light blue and red; an example lipid 
nanoparticle carrier is shown at the top right. A non-exhaustive list of the major known RNA 
sensors that contribute to the recognition of double-stranded and unmodified single-stranded 
RNAs is shown. Unmodified, unpurified (part a) and nucleoside-modified, fast protein liquid 
chromatography (FPLC)-purified (part b) mRNAs were selected for illustration of two 
formats of mRNA vaccines where known forms of mRNA sensing are present and absent, 
respectively. The dashed arrow represents reduced antigen expression. Ag, antigen; PKR, 
interferon-induced, double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase; MDA5, interferon-
induced helicase C domain-containing protein 1 (also known as IFIH1); IFN, interferon; 
m1Ψ, 1-methylpseudouridine; OAS, 2′–5′-oligoadenylate synthetase; TLR, Toll-like 
receptor.
Pardi et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Major delivery methods for mRNA vaccines
Commonly used delivery methods and carrier molecules for mRNA vaccines along with 
typical diameters for particulate complexes are shown: naked mRNA (part a); naked mRNA 
with in vivo electroporation (part b); protamine (cationic peptide)-complexed mRNA (part 
c); mRNA associated with a positively charged oil-in-water cationic nanoemulsion (part d); 
mRNA associated with a chemically modified dendrimer and complexed with polyethylene 
glycol (PEG)-lipid (part e); protamine-complexed mRNA in a PEG-lipid nanoparticle (part 
f); mRNA associated with a cationic polymer such as polyethylenimine (PEI) (part g); 
mRNA associated with a cationic polymer such as PEI and a lipid component (part h); 
Pardi et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mRNA associated with a polysaccharide (for example, chitosan) particle or gel (part i); 
mRNA in a cationic lipid nanoparticle (for example, 1,2-dioleoyloxy-3-
trimethylammoniumpropane (DOTAP) or dioleoylphosphatidylethanolamine (DOPE) lipids) 
(part j); mRNA complexed with cationic lipids and cholesterol (part k); and mRNA 
complexed with cationic lipids, cholesterol and PEG-lipid (part l).
Pardi et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Considerations for effectiveness of a directly injected mRNA vaccine
For an injected mRNA vaccine, major considerations for effectiveness include the following: 
the level of antigen expression in professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which is 
influenced by the efficiency of the carrier, by the presence of pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns (PAMPs) in the form of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or unmodified nucleosides 
and by the level of optimization of the RNA sequence (codon usage, G:C content, 5′ and 3′ 
untranslated regions (UTRs) and so on); dendritic cell (DC) maturation and migration to 
secondary lymphoid tissue, which is increased by PAMPs; and the ability of the vaccine to 
activate robust T follicular helper (TFH) cell and germinal centre (GC) B cell responses — 
an area that remains poorly understood. An intradermal injection is shown as an example. 
EC, extracellular.
Pardi et al.
Page 37
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pardi et al.
Page 38
Table 1
mRNA vaccine complexing strategies for in vivo use
Delivery system type
Route of delivery
Species
Target
Commercial transfection reagent
i.n.
Mouse
OVA145
Protamine
i.d.
Mouse, ferret, pig and 
human
Influenza virus18,52, melanoma150, non-small-cell lung 
cancer200, prostate cancer36,52,151, rabies virus56, 
OVA36,52,155 and Lewis lung cancer155
Protamine liposome
i.v.
Mouse
Lung cancer201
Polysaccharide particle
s.c.
Mouse and rabbit
Influenza virus98
Cationic nanoemulsion
i.m.
Mouse, rabbit, ferret 
and rhesus macaque
Influenza virus96, RSV50, HIV-1 (REFS 50,97), 
HCMV50, Streptococcus spp.100, HCV and rabies 
virus87
Cationic polymer
s.c. and i.n.
Mouse
Influenza virus99, andHIV-1 (REFS 110,111)
Cationic polymer liposome
i.v.
Mouse
Melanoma202,203, pancreatic cancer204
Cationic lipid nanoparticle
i.d., i.v. and s.c.
Mouse
HIV-1 (REF. 109) and OVA152
Cationic lipid, cholesterol 
nanoparticle
i.v., s.c. and i.s.
Mouse
Influenza virus59,108, melanoma59,141, Moloney murine 
leukaemia virus, OVA, HPV andc olon cancer59
Cationic lipid, cholesterol, PEG 
nanoparticle
i.d., i.m. and s.c.
Mouse, cotton rat and 
rhesus macaque
Zika virus20,85,112, influenza virus22,94,95,205, RSV19, 
HCMV, rabies virus87 and melanoma153
Dendrimer nanoparticle
i.m.
Mouse
Influenza virus, Ebola virus, Toxoplasma gondii89 and 
Zika virus88
HCMV, human cytomegalovirus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HPV, human papillomavirus; i.d., intradermal; i.m., intramuscular; i.n., intranasal; i.s., 
intrasplenic; i.v., intravenous; OVA, ovalbumin-expressing cancer models; PEG, polyethylene glycol; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; s.c., 
subcutaneous.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pardi et al.
Page 39
Table 2
Clinical trials with mRNA vaccines against infectious diseases
Sponsoring institution
Vaccine type (route of 
administration)
Targets
Trial numbers (phase)
Status
Argos Therapeutics
DC EP with autologous viral Ag 
and CD40L mRNAs (i.d.)
HIV-1
• NCT00672191 (II)
• NCT01069809 (II)
• NCT02042248 (I)
• Completed105
• Completed; 
results NA
• Completed; 
results NA
CureVac AG
RNActive viral Ag mRNA (i.m., 
i.d.)
Rabies virus
NCT02241135 (I)
Active56,91
Erasmus Medical Center
DC loaded with viral Ag mRNA 
with TriMix (i.nod.)
HIV-1
NCT02888756 (II)
Recruiting
Fundació Clínic per la Recerca 
Biomèdica
Viral Ag mRNA with TriMix (NA)
HIV-1
NCT02413645 (I)
Active
Massachusetts General Hospital
DC loaded with viral Ag mRNA 
(i.d.)
HIV-1
NCT00833781 (II)
Completed104
McGill University Health Centre
DC EP with autologous viral Ag 
and CD40L mRNAs (i.d.)
HIV-1
NCT00381212 (I/II)
Completed102
Moderna Therapeutics
Nucleoside-modified viral Ag 
mRNA (i.m.)
Zika virus
NCT03014089 (I/II)
Recruiting85
Influenza virus
NCT03076385 (I)
Ongoing22
The table summarizes the clinical trials registered at ClinicalTrials.gov as of 5 May 2017. Ag, antigen; CD40L, CD40 ligand; DC, dendritic cell; 
EP, electroporated; i.d., intradermal; i.m., intramuscular; i.nod., intranodal; NA, not available.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pardi et al.
Page 40
Table 3
Clinical trials with mRNA vaccines against cancer
Sponsoring institution
Vaccine type 
(route of 
administration)
Targets
Trial numbers (phase)
Status
Antwerp University Hospital
DC EP with 
TAA mRNA 
(i.d. or NA)
AML
• NCT00834002 (I)
• NCT01686334 (II)
• Completed206,207
• Recruiting
AML, CML, multiple myeloma
NCT00965224 (II)
Unknown
Multiple solid tumours
NCT01291420 (I/II)
Unknown208
Mesothelioma
NCT02649829 (I/II)
Recruiting
Glioblastoma
NCT02649582 (I/II)
Recruiting
Argos Therapeutics
DC EP with 
autologous 
tumour mRNA 
with or without 
CD40L mRNA 
(i.d. or NA)
Renal cell carcinoma
• NCT01482949 (II)
• NCT00678119 (II)
• NCT00272649 (I/II)
• NCT01582672 (III)
• NCT00087984 (I/II)
• Ongoing
• Completed209
• Completed; results 
NA
• Ongoing
• Completed; results 
NA
Pancreatic cancer
NCT00664482 (NA)
Completed; results NA
Asterias Biotherapeutics
DC loaded with 
TAA mRNA 
(NA)
AML
NCT00510133 (II)
Completed210
BioNTech RNA Pharmaceuticals GmbH
Naked TAA or 
neo-Ag mRNA 
(i.nod.)
Melanoma
• NCT01684241 (I)
• NCT02035956 (I)
• Completed; results 
NA
• Ongoing
Liposome-
complexed TAA 
mRNA (i.v.)
Melanoma
NCT02410733 (I)
Recruiting59
Liposome-
formulated TAA 
and neo-Ag 
mRNA (i.v.)
Breast cancer
NCT02316457 (I)
Recruiting
CureVac AG
RNActive TAA 
mRNA (i.d.)
Non-small-cell lung cancer
• NCT00923312 (I/II)
• NCT01915524 (I)
• Completed211
• Terminated200
Prostate cancer
• NCT02140138 (II)
• NCT00831467 (I/II)
• NCT01817738 (I/II)
• Terminated
• Completed151
• Terminated212
Duke University
DC loaded with 
CMV Ag 
mRNA (i.d. or 
ing.)
Glioblastoma, malignant glioma
• NCT00626483 (I)
• NCT00639639 (I)
• NCT02529072 (I)
• NCT02366728 (II)
• Ongoing213
• Ongoing138,139
• Recruiting
• Recruiting
DC loaded with 
autologous 
tumour mRNA 
(i.d.)
Glioblastoma
NCT00890032 (I)
Completed; results NA
DC, matured, 
loaded with 
TAA mRNA 
(i.nod.)
Melanoma
NCT01216436 (I)
Terminated
Guangdong 999 Brain Hospital
DC loaded with 
TAA mRNA 
(NA)
Glioblastoma
• NCT02808364 (I/II)
• NCT02709616 (I/II)
• Recruiting
• Recruiting
Brain metastases
NCT02808416 (I/II)
Recruiting
Herlev Hospital
DC loaded with 
TAA mRNA 
(i.d.)
Breast cancer, melanoma
NCT00978913 (I)
Completed214
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pardi et al.
Page 41
Sponsoring institution
Vaccine type 
(route of 
administration)
Targets
Trial numbers (phase)
Status
Prostate cancer
NCT01446731 (II)
Completed215
Life Research Technologies GmbH
DC, matured, 
loaded with 
TAA mRNA 
(NA)
Ovarian cancer
NCT01456065 (I)
Unknown
Ludwig-Maximilian-University of Munich
DC loaded with 
TAA and CMV 
Ag mRNA (i.d.)
AML
NCT01734304 (I/II)
Recruiting
MD Anderson Cancer Center
DC loaded with 
AML lysate and 
mRNA (NA)
AML
NCT00514189 (I)
Terminated
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
DC 
(Langerhans) 
EP with TAA 
mRNA (i.d.)
Melanoma
NCT01456104 (I)
Ongoing
Multiple myeloma
NCT01995708 (I)
Recruiting
Oslo University Hospital
DC loaded with 
autologous 
tumour or TAA 
mRNA (i.d. or 
NA)
Melanoma
• NCT00961844 (I/II)
• NCT01278940 (I/II)
• Terminated
• Completed216
Prostate cancer
• NCT01197625 (I/II)
• NCT01278914 (I/II)
• Recruiting
• Completed; results 
NA
Glioblastoma
NCT00846456 (I/II)
Completed217
Ovarian cancer
NCT01334047 (I/II)
Terminated
Radboud University
DC EP with 
TAA mRNA 
(i.d. and i.v. or 
i.nod)
Colorectal cancer
NCT00228189 (I/II)
Completed218
Melanoma
• NCT00929019 (I/II)
• NCT00243529 (I/II)
• NCT00940004 (I/II)
• NCT01530698 (I/II)
• NCT02285413 (II)
• Terminated
• Completed219,220
• Completed220,221
• Completed144,220,221
• Completed; results 
NA
Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel
DC EP with 
TAA and 
TriMix mRNA 
(i.d. and i.v.)
Melanoma
• NCT01066390 (I)
• NCT01302496 (II)
• NCT01676779 (II)
• Completed137
• Completed140
• Completed; results 
NA
University Hospital Erlangen
DC, matured, 
loaded with 
autologous 
tumour RNA 
(i.v.)
Melanoma
NCT01983748 (III)
Recruiting
University Hospital Tübingen
Autologous 
tumour mRNA 
with GM-CSF 
protein (i.d. and 
s.c.)
Melanoma
NCT00204516 (I/II)
Completed222
Protamine-
complexed TAA 
mRNA with 
GM-CSF 
protein (i.d. and 
s.c.)
Melanoma
NCT00204607 (I/II)
Completed150
University of Campinas, Brazil
DC loaded with 
TAA mRNA 
(NA)
AML, myelodysplastic syndromes
NCT03083054 (I/II)
Recruiting
University of Florida
RNActive* 
TAA mRNA 
(i.d.)
Prostate cancer
NCT00906243 (I/II)
Terminated
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pardi et al.
Page 42
Sponsoring institution
Vaccine type 
(route of 
administration)
Targets
Trial numbers (phase)
Status
DC loaded with 
CMV Ag 
mRNA with 
GM-CSF 
protein (i.d.)
Glioblastoma, malignant glioma
NCT02465268 (II)
Recruiting
The table summarizes the clinical trials registered at ClinicalTrials.gov as of 5 May 2017. Ag, antigen; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; CD40L, 
CD40 ligand; CML, chronic myeloid leukaemia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DC, dendritic cell; EP, electroporated; GM-CSF, granulocyte–
macrophage colony-stimulating factor; i.d., intradermal; ing., inguinal injection; i.nod., intranodal injection; i.v., intravenous; NA, not available; 
neo-Ag, personalized neoantigen; s.c., subcutaneous; TAA, tumour-associated antigen.
*Developed by CureVac AG.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pardi et al.
Page 43
Table 4
Leading mRNA vaccine developers: research focus, partners and therapeutic platforms
Institution
mRNA technology
Partners
Indication (disease target)
Argos Biotechnology
mRNA neoantigens (Arcelis platform)
NA
Individualized cancer vaccines, 
HIV-1
BioNTech RNA 
Pharmaceuticals GmbH
Nucleoside-modified mRNA (IVAC 
Mutanome, FixVAC)
Genentech/Roche
Individualized cancer vaccines
Bayer AG
Veterinary vaccines
CureVac AG
Sequence-optimized, purified mRNA 
(RNActive, RNArt, RNAdjuvant)
Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH
Cancer vaccines (lung cancer)
Johnson & Johnson
Viral vaccines
Sanofi Pasteur
Infectious disease vaccines
BMGF
Infectious disease vaccines
IAVI
HIV vaccines
eTheRNA Immunotherapies
Purified mRNA (TriMix)
NA
Cancer (melanoma, breast), viral 
vaccines (HBV and/or HPV)
GlaxoSmithKline/Novartis
Self-amplifying mRNA (SAM) 
(alphavirus replicon)
NA
Infectious disease vaccines
Moderna Therapeutics
Nucleoside-modified mRNA
Merck & Co.
Individualized cancer vaccines, 
viral vaccines
BMGF, DARPA, BARDA
Viral vaccines (influenza virus, 
CMV, HMPV, PIV, chikungunya 
virus, Zika virus)
University of Pennsylvania
Nucleoside-modified, purified mRNA
NA
Infectious disease vaccines
BARDA, Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority; BMGF, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; CMV, cytomegalovirus; 
DARPA, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HMPV, human metapneumovirus; HPV, human papillomavirus; 
IAVI, International AIDS Vaccine Initiative; NA, not available; PIV, parainfluenza virus.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 19.
