 Patient care standards for primary mitochondrial
disease: a consensus statement from the
Mitochondrial Medicine Society
Sumit Parikh, MD1, Amy Goldstein, MD2, Amel Karaa, MD3, Mary Kay Koenig, MD4,
Irina Anselm, MD5, Catherine Brunel-Guitton, MD, FRCPC6, John Christodoulou, MBBS, PhD7,
Bruce H. Cohen, MD8, David Dimmock, MD9, Gregory M. Enns, MB, ChB10, Marni J. Falk, MD11,
Annette Feigenbaum, MD12,13, Richard E. Frye, MD, PhD14, Jaya Ganesh, MD15,
David Griesemer, MD16, Richard Haas, MB BChir, MRCP17,18, Rita Horvath, MD, PhD19,
Mark Korson, MD20, Michael C. Kruer, MD21, Michelangelo Mancuso, MD, PhD22,
Shana McCormack, MD23, Marie Josee Raboisson, MD24, Tyler Reimschisel, MD, MHPE25,
Ramona Salvarinova, MD, FRCPC26, Russell P. Saneto, DO, PhD27, Fernando Scaglia, MD28,
John Shoffner, MD29, Peter W. Stacpoole, PhD, MD30, Carolyn M. Sue, MBBS, PhD31,
Mark Tarnopolsky, MD, PhD32, Clara Van Karnebeek, MD, PhD33,34, Lynne A. Wolfe, MS, CRNP35,
Zarazuela Zolkipli Cunningham, MBChB, MRCP36, Shamima Rahman, FRCP, PhD37 and
Patrick F. Chinnery, FRCP, FMedSci38
The purpose of this statement is to provide consensus-based
recommendations for optimal management and care for patients
with primary mitochondrial disease. This statement is intended for
physicians who are engaged in the diagnosis and management of
these patients. Working group members were appointed by the
Mitochondrial Medicine Society. The panel included members with
several different areas of expertise. The panel members utilized
surveys and the Delphi method to reach consensus. We anticipate
that this statement will need to be updated as the field continues to
evolve. Consensus-based recommendations are provided for the
routine care and management of patients with primary genetic
mitochondrial disease.
Genet Med advance online publication 27 July 2017
Key Words: care guidelines; consensus criteria; Delphi method;
mitochondrial disease; treatment
INTRODUCTION
Primary genetic mitochondrial disorders arise from defects in
either the mitochondrial or nuclear genome that impair mitochon-
drial function and structure. They are among the most common
inborn errors of metabolism, with a minimum incidence of 1:5,000.
Advances in genomics have allowed for improved diagnosis.
Multisystem disease manifestations often occur in mito-
chondrial patients leading to a need for comprehensive and
1Center for Child Neurology, Cleveland Clinic Children’s Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio, USA; 2Division of Child Neurology, Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA; 3Division of Genetics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 4Division of Child and Adolescent Neurology, University of Texas Medical School at
Houston, Houston, Texas, USA; 5Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; 6Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada; 7Neurodevelopmental Genomics Research Group, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, and Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne Medical School, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; 8Neurodevelopmental Science Center, Children’s Hospital Medical Center of Akron, Akron, Ohio, USA; 9Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic
Medicine, San Diego, California, USA; 10Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital, Palo Alto, California, USA;
11Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA; 12Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 13Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Diego and Rady Childrens Hospital, San Diego, California, USA; 14Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, Little Rock,
Arkansas, USA; 15Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, New Jersey, USA; 16Division of Neurology, Levine
Children’s Hospital, Charlotte, North Carolina, USA; 17Departments of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA; 18Department of
Neurosciences, Rady Children’s Hospital, San Diego, California, USA; 19Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; 20Genetic Metabolic Center
for Education, Salem, Massachusetts, USA; 21Department of Pediatric Neurology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona, USA; 22Department of Experimental
and Clinical Medicine, Neurological Clinic, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; 23Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA; 24Department of Cardiology, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 25Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA;
26Division of Biochemical Diseases, BC Children’s Hospital, British Columbia, Canada; 27Department of Neurology, Seattle Children’s Hospital/University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA; 28Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA; 29Neurology, Biochemical &
Molecular Genetics, Atlanta, Georgia, USA; 30Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, USA; 31Department of Neurology and Kolling
Institute, Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, Australia; 32Division of Neurology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; 33Department of Pediatrics, Academic
Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 34Department of Pediatrics, Centre for Molecular Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; 35Undiagnosed Diseases Network, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; 36Division of Neurology, The Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; 37Mitochondrial Research Group, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK; 38Department of Clinical
Neurosciences & MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence: Sumit Parikh (parikhs@ccf.org)
Submitted 1 March 2017; accepted 25 May 2017; advance online publication 27 July 2017. doi:10.1038/gim.2017.107
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
1
© American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
REVIEW
 multidisciplinary care. Mitochondrial specialty centers have
formed over the past decade to meet this need, allowing the
field of clinical mitochondrial medicine to develop. No
published recommendations exist to guide patient manage-
ment or clinical care decisions and standardize preventive
health maintenance. Practice patterns vary considerably from
center to center.1,2 The Mitochondrial Medicine Society
(MMS) developed consensus criteria to aid with the diagnosis
of mitochondrial disease.3 This prior publication addressed
select management topics but was primarily focused on
establishing diagnosis consensus guidelines.
An assessment completed by the MMS showed that 99%
of 207 clinicians worldwide seeing mitochondrial patients
(including neurologists, geneticists, and metabolic experts)
were interested in having additional guidelines available for
assisting in managing their care. More than half of these
respondents (51%) were aware of the Diagnostic Consensus
Criteria previously published by the MMS,3 with 97% finding
the guidelines useful and 82% stating that the recommenda-
tions directly impacted patient management.
This statement provides consensus-based recommendations
for standardized treatment and preventive health care of
patients with primary mitochondrial disease. For ease of
reference and use, the recommendations are organized with
respect to the various organ systems commonly involved in
mitochondrial disorders, with sections on general symptoms
and presentations. This new consensus statement expands
upon and is intended to complement, but does not supplant,
the 2015 consensus statement “Diagnosis and Management of
Mitochondrial Disease.”3 Importantly, our aim is not to
provide an inflexible treatment protocol; the aim is to provide
guidance based on an international consensus of experienced
mitochondrial disease physicians.
In the interest of brevity, limited background information
about the various mitochondrial disease manifestations and
their comorbidities is provided here. We direct the reader who
may be unfamiliar with these topics to review articles
referenced within individual sections.
METHODS
Working group members were appointed by the Mitochon-
drial Medicine Society’s Consensus Criteria Committee. An
international panel included 35 mitochondrial medicine
specialists—34 physicians and one nurse practitioner—from
Australia (2), Canada (5), Italy (1), Netherlands (1), the
United Kingdom (3), and the United States (23) with
specialization in biochemical genetics, cardiology, clinical
genetics, endocrinology, neurogenetics, or pediatric neurol-
ogy. Our aim was to capture current clinical practice in these
different countries and specialties.
Twenty organ- or system-specific clinician-led subgroups
were formed, each with at least two members, to review
relevant literature and create summaries on select symptoms
and comorbid conditions in mitochondrial disease. Some
members served on more than one subgroup when needed.
Literature summaries were created via a PubMed Medical
Subject Heading and keyword search of organ- or system-
specific manifestations in mitochondrial disease. Primary
literature and review articles were both reviewed for the
working group summaries.
The field of mitochondrial medicine is not at a point where
there is adequate high-level data to establish evidence-based
clinical practice protocols. Prior classification of the level of
evidence for treatment options in mitochondrial disease show
that most publications are retrospective reports, case series,
and nonblinded, nonrandomized trials.4,5 Thus, the panel
developed recommendations using the Delphi method, a
consensus method developed to utilize expert opinion to
make a knowledge-based decision when insufficient informa-
tion is available.6 This method is increasingly used to develop
consensus-based guidelines in medicine and rare diseases.
Expert
panelists
review
and
summarize
the
available
knowledge
and
answer
surveys
concerning
the
issues
in question. The survey is scored to determine the variation
in opinion; if consensus is not reached, these items are
returned to the panelists for a second round, this time with
the mean of responses from the first round available. If
needed, a meeting is then held to review areas of persistent
disagreement.
The survey instrument was a five-point bipolar Likert scale;
the range of potential responses included strongly disagree,
disagree, neutral, agree, or strongly agree. Each subgroup was
tasked with creating key clinical management recommenda-
tions to address within its focus area. Each response was
assigned a numerical score, such that strongly disagree was
scored as 1, disagree was scored as 2, neutral as 3, agree as 4,
and strongly agree as 5. The mean consensus score for each
item was then tallied. As per the Delphi criteria, items with a
mean consensus of 80% or more (score > 4 (Agree/Strongly
Agree) OR o2 (Disagree/Strongly Disagree)) were considered
to reach consensus. Items that met criteria as recommenda-
tions did not necessarily have unanimous consensus.
All data summaries were reviewed and 25 surveys were
completed by all authors; one for each set of organ-system
recommendations and additional surveys for added recom-
mendations by the working group and for those items that
lacked consensus. The summaries and initial survey scores are
available in the Supplementary Material online.
For items that did not meet consensus, a streamlined survey
was returned to the panelists for a second round, with items
marked with the group’s score so that each panelist was aware
of the group mean when they rescored the survey. Following
completion of all surveys, a decision was reached by the
working group to discard those recommendations that did not
meet consensus. Only items that met consensus as defined by
the Delphi process (scores > 4) are included in the formal
recommendations.
RECOMMENDATIONS
To orient the reader and contextualize recommendations,
brief content synopses of various disease manifestations
are provided. Recent published reviews on the topic are
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
2
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 referenced when available. Core topic areas are summarized
in Figure 1 and presented in alphabetical order. A summary
of recommended screening guidelines and specialist consul-
tations to consider are placed in Tables 1 and 2. Previously
published illness, anesthesia, and stroke management guide-
lines3 are summarized in Table 3. A list of medications that
need to be used with caution in mitochondrial patients is
summarized in Table 4.
Audiology
Hearing loss is a frequent manifestation of mitochondrial
disease though the prevalence is not yet known. A recent
comprehensive review article on the topic is not available
though some aspects were recently reviewed.7,8 Progressive
sensorineural hearing loss, typically of cochlear origin,9 is the
most common form, although congenital forms and auditory
neuropathy can occur. Sensorineural hearing loss is believed
to result mainly from reduced energy production within both
stria vascularis and hair cells and increased reactive oxygen
species leading to apoptosis. The health of both the auditory
nerve and central auditory system are impacted by mitochon-
drial disease as well, especially when there is central nervous
system (CNS) involvement. In addition, patients may have
hearing loss caused, precipitated, or exacerbated by amino-
glycosides, such as gentamicin. Sensorineural hearing loss
usually affects the higher frequencies first, then progresses to
involve the middle, and then lower frequencies.7,8
Recommendations
1. Formal audiology testing should be performed at time of
diagnosis and then every 1–2 years to monitor progres-
sion. A sensorineural or auditory neuropathy pattern of
hearing loss should be confirmed.
2. Patients should be counseled to avoid environmental and
other excessive noise exposure since this can exacerbate
hearing loss and even lead to a step-wise deterioration in
hearing ability. This exacerbation may or may not be
reversible.
Sensorineural hearing loss
Abnormal tone
Ataxia
Autonomic dysfunction
Brainstem dysfunction
Developmental disability
Epilepsy
Headaches
Mood disorder
Movement disorders
Spasticity
Strokes (metabolic)
Arrhythmia
Apnea
Fanconi syndrome
Recurrent infections
Myopathy
Contractures
Fractures
Scoliosis
Neuropathy
Tubulopathy
Glomerular dysfunction
Aspiration
Hypoventilation
Pulmonary hypertension
Sleep disorders
Cardiomyopathy
Conduction defects
Heart block
Cataracts
Ophthalmoplegia
Optic nerve atrophy
Ptosis
Retinopathy
Adrenal insufficiency
Diabetes mellitus
Growth hormone deficiency
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Osteopenia
Short stature
Constipation
Dysphagia
Dysmotility
Failure to thrive
Liver dysfunction
Pancreatic insufficiency
Pseudo-obstruction
Iron deficiency
Pancytopenia
Sideroblastic anemia
Gestational diabetes
Preeclampsia
Preterm labor
Exercise intolerance
Audiology
Central nervous system
Cardiology
Pulmonology
Nephrology
Immunology
Neuromuscular
Orthopedic
Ophthalmology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology
Hematology
Pregnancy
Systemic
Fatigue
Figure 1
Body systems affected by primary mitochondrial disease.
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
3
 Table 1 Screening guidelines
At diagnosis, if
not previously
obtained
At 1- to 2-year
intervals and
as needed
As needed depending
on symptoms or
disease type
Comments
Audiology
•
•
Cardiology
Blood pressure
•
•
Echocardiogram
•
•
Echocardiograms may be performed less frequently
in low-risk patients after several years of monitoring
Electrocardiogram
•
•
Holter
•
Holter recording depending on the underlying
diagnosis and risk of heart block; up to every
3–6 months for disorders associated with high risk
of arrhythmias, such as mtDNA deletion disorders
Cardiac MRI
•
Endocrinology
Endocrine screening strongly recommended in
those with mtDNA deletion disorders
Basic chemistries
•
•
Calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), and phosphate
•
•
Cortisol–ACTH–aldosterone–renin
•
Ca and phosphate, urine
•
•
Gonadotropins
•
Hemoglobin A1c
•
•
Parathyroid hormone
•
•
Thyroid-stimulating hormone and free thyroxine
•
•
Vitamin D
•
•
Dual X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA)
•
DXA especially if unexpected fractures
Gastroenterology
Amylase–lipase
•
Transaminases
•
•
Stool elastase
•
Swallow evaluation
•
Growth and anthropometric parameters
•
•
Recommended at each visit
Hematology
Obtained more routinely in those with high risk of
or symptomatic bone marrow dysfunction
Complete blood count with differential
•
•
Iron studies including ferritin
•
Immunology
•
With recurrent infections
Neurology
Developmental and cognitive assessments
•
•
Clinical appraisal or formal neuropsychological
tests; formal testing recommended with regression
Electroencephalogram
•
Ophthalmology
Exam
•
•
Electroretinogram
•
Optical coherence tomography
•
Psychiatry
•
•
Mood and anxiety disorder screening
Pulmonology
Pulmonary function
•
Especially with myopathy, if nonambulatory or with
brain stem dysfunction
Polysomnogram
•
Renal
CMP with Mg and phosphate
•
•
Albumin/creatine, urine
•
•
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CMP, comprehensive metabolic panel; DXA, dual-energy X-ray; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA.
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
4
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 3. Aminoglycosides may exacerbate or precipitate the
development of hearing loss and should be used with
caution.
4. Moderate to severe hearing loss should be treated with
digital hearing aids to improve function; when profound,
cochlear implantation should be considered.
Cardiology
The
cardiac
muscle
is
a
high-energy-dependent
tissue
and both cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias are frequently
encountered in mitochondrial diseases. A recent retrospective
study of more than 200 patients with genetically confirmed
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear DNA mutations
found cardiac involvement in 30%.10 Recent reviews of
cardiac manifestations in primary mitochondrial disease have
been published.11,12
The frequency of cardiomyopathy in patients with mito-
chondrial disease has been estimated to be 20–40% in older
studies though not all had genetically confirmed disease. More
recent work has reported cardiac anomalies such as impaired
left ventricular ejection fraction, left ventricular hypertrophy,
or late gadolinium enhancement in up to 53% of their cohort
of patients with mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis,
and stroke (MELAS); chronic progressive external ophthal-
moplegia; or Kearns–Sayre syndrome (KSS).13 While hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy seems to be more prevalent, dilated,
restrictive, left ventricular noncompaction and histiocytoid
cardiomypathies have been described.12
Cardiac conduction abnormalities with an unpredictable
course are also a frequent manifestation and arrhythmias are a
common cause of death, particularly in KSS and those with
the m.3243A > G mutation. Patients are at risk for sudden
death or major cardiac event. In some studies cardiac
conduction defects were reported in greater than 10% of
patients
with
mitochondrial
disease.10
Wolf–Parkinson–
White syndrome, incomplete bundle branch or atrioventri-
cular blocks, premature ventricular contractions, and pre-
excitation resulting in supraventricular arrhythmias have
all been noted.14 Intraventricular conduction block is a
significant independent risk factor for major adverse cardiac
events in patients with mitochondrial disease.10
Recommendations
1. Care at a tertiary center with cardiology expertise in
mitochondrial diseases is preferred.
2. Baseline assessments should include:
a. Standard 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) and echo-
cardiogram (with measurement of left ventricular
mass and systolic/diastolic function)
b. 24-hour ECG (Holter monitoring) in patients with
palpitations,
paroxysmal events,
or in high-risk
patients including patients with cardiomyopathy
c. Screening tests should include asymptomatic muta-
tion carriers at significant risk of developing cardiac
disease, especially those with maternally inherited
mtDNA mutations known to be associated with
cardiac disease
3. Follow-up evaluation should include clinical assessment,
blood pressure measurement, ECG, and echocardio-
graphy every 12 months for at least 3 years.
a. Earlier follow-up is suggested for those with new-
onset cardiac symptoms or those at higher risk.
b. Extension of this 12-month interval should be consi-
dered only after discussion with a clinician experi-
enced in the management of cardiac involvement;
however, if the patient is stable for 3 years, ECG
and echocardiography may be extended to every 2–3
years with return to yearly follow-up (or more
frequently) if ECG or echocardiography suggests
cardiac deterioration.
c. In asymptomatic mutation carriers, the interval
of follow-up should be according to their risk of
developing disease.
4. 24- to 48-hour ECG monitoring should be obtained
every 1–2 years for all patients at high risk of pre-
excitation
syndrome/conduction
disease,
patients
with severely impaired left ventricular systolic function
(left ventricular ejection-fraction o35%), patients with
paroxysmal symptoms suggestive of cardiac involvement
(palpitations), and patients with left ventricular systolic
or diastolic dysfunction.
Table 2 Other specialist consultations to consider at time of
diagnosis and at 1–2 year intervals as needed based on
symptoms
Audiology
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Ear, nose, and throat
Gastroenterology
Genetics
Hematology
Immunology
Nephrology
Neurology
Ophthalmology
Orthopedics
Palliative care
Physical medicine and rehab/physiatry
Psychiatry (for patient or family)
Psychology (including family counseling)
Pulmonology
Social work
Sleep medicine
Therapy services including physical therapy, occupational therapy, and
speech therapy
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
5
 a. More frequent monitoring is needed in patients with
large-scale mtDNA deletions due to the high risk of
heart block and either of two of the more common
pathogenic mtDNA mutations (m.3243A > G and
m.8344A > G) owing to the high risk of ventricular
pre-excitation.
b. Ablation should be considered in supraventricular
tachycardia, Wolf–Parkinson–White or any arrhyth-
mias potentially treatable by this technique.
c. A low threshold for pacemaker implantation is
needed to prevent cardiac death. Pacemakers can
be combined with implantable defibrillator if needed.
An implantable cardioverter defibrillator is needed
in patients at risk of sudden death, when the left
ventricle wall thickness is > 30 mm, and in patients
with ventricular tachycardia (sustained and non-
sustained).
5. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is needed for
patients with inconclusive echocardiographic images
to identify structural remodeling, to quantify abnormal-
ities more precisely prior to starting a treatment,
and when invasive therapies like septal myectomy are
considered.
Table 3 Illness, anesthesia, and stroke management
Illness management3
1. Specific decisions about patient management including hospitalization require clinical judgment and should be case-specific. Decisions should reflect
the individual patient’s presentation as well as an understanding of the etiology for the acute decompensation and the pathophysiology of the
underlying mitochondrial disorder.
2. Patients with a mitochondrial disease should carry an emergency care plan that details their underlying disorder and provides management
recommendations.
3. Patients with a mitochondrial disease should consider wearing a medical alert bracelet when appropriate depending on their clinical symptomology.
4. Mitochondrial patients should take precautions to prevent entering catabolism, especially when exposed to medical stressors, including avoiding
prolonged fasting and receiving dextrose-containing IV fluids before, during, and after procedures and surgeries. (Dextrose should not be provided or
provided in limited quantity as indicated by clinical status in suspected or confirmed disorders of pyruvate metabolism, if the patient is on a ketogenic
diet, or the patient has had a previous adverse response to high glucose delivery.)
5. Evaluation of a mitochondrial patient in the acute setting should include evaluation of routine chemistries, glucose, transaminases, and lactate; all
other testing is as clinically indicated, although one must keep in mind the potential for cardiac and neurologic decompensations in these patients.
6. Treatment during acute decompensation should include dextrose-containing IV fluids, stopping exposure to potentially toxic medications, and
correction of any metabolic derangements. (Note: dextrose should be provided only in limited in quantity or not at all, as indicated by clinical status in
suspected or confirmed disorders of pyruvate metabolism, if the patient is on a ketogenic diet, or the patient has had an adverse response to high
glucose delivery.) IV fluid rate should be based on the clinical situation. Outpatient mitochondrial therapies should be continued when possible.
7. Lipids can be used when needed in mitochondrial patients, even in the presence of secondary fatty acid oxidation dysfunction.
8. The following medications should be avoided in patients with mitochondrial disease when possible and, if given, they should be used with caution:
valproic acid; statins; metformin; high-dose acetaminophen; and selected antibiotics, including aminoglycosides, linezolid, tetracycline, azithromycin,
and erythromycin.
9. Repeat neuroimaging should be considered in any mitochondrial patient with an acute change in neurologic status.
Anesthesia and surgical management3
1. Patients with mitochondrial diseases are at an increased risk of anesthesia-related complications.
2. Preoperative preparation of patients with mitochondrial disease is crucial to their perioperative outcome. Patients should minimize preoperative
fasting and have glucose added to their perioperative IV fluids, unless they are on a ketogenic diet or have been demonstrated to have adverse reaction
to higher glucose intake.
3. Caution must be used with volatile anesthetics because mitochondrial patients may potentially be hypersensitive.
4. Caution must be used with muscle relaxants in those mitochondrial patients with a preexisting myopathy or decreased respiratory drive.
5. Mitochondrial patients may be at a higher risk for propofol infusion syndrome and propofol use should be avoided or limited to short procedures.
6. One should consider slow titration and adjustment of volatile and parenteral anesthetics to minimize hemodynamic changes in mitochondrial patients.
7. Local anesthetics are generally well tolerated in patients with mitochondrial defect.
8. There is no clear established link between malignant hyperthermia and mitochondrial disease.
Stroke management3,72
1. Strokelike episodes in primary mitochondrial disease typically have correlating visible magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities.
2. IV arginine hydrochloride should be administered urgently in the acute setting of a strokelike episode associated with the MELAS m.3243A > G
mutation in the MTTL1 gene and considered in a stroke-like episode associated with other primary mitochondrial cytopathies as other etiologies are
being excluded. Patients should be reassessed after 3 days of continuous IV therapy.
3. The use of daily oral arginine supplementation to prevent strokes should be considered in MELAS syndrome.
4. The role of monitoring plasma arginine and citrulline levels and oral citrulline supplementation in the treatment of MELAS requires further research.
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
6
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 6. Other comorbidities should be assessed, including high
blood pressure, diabetes, and dyslipidemias, and should
be treated accordingly.
7. Exercise testing and/or stress echocardiography should
be performed under close monitoring to assess func-
tional capacity, response to therapy and exercise-induced
dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. This
test should not be performed in all patients; the potential
health risks (exercise intolerance, metabolic decompen-
sation) should be weighed against the expected benefits
of such a test.
8. If physical activity is possible, the intensity of the
physical activity should be prescribed by the cardiology
team, according to the limitations of their cardiac
function.
9. In the setting of end-stage heart failure, transplantation
may be an option. Decisions to list a patient for
transplant should be taken in the light of other
comorbidities and the known natural history of the
specific mitochondrial disease.
Critical care
Patients with metabolic diseases, including mitochondrial
disease, are vulnerable to episodic decompensation and
worsening of symptoms during intercurrent illness. These
episodes of critical illness may be precipitated by catabolism
and increased systemic energy demands during times of
infection, fasting, anesthesia, and surgery. In some cases, no
acute precipitating events are apparent. Prompt intervention
is essential as many patients respond to timely intervention.
Initial triage stratification of critically ill mitochondrial
patients should include a systemic assessment of all body
systems since the disease is multisystemic and patients may
develop new organ system involvement during an acute
decompensation. Cardiopulmonary failure and acute cerebral
events have been described as the leading cause of mortality in
adult mitochondrial patients.15 Patients with mitochondrial
disease are more likely to have underlying myopathy,
immobility, dysphagia, chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
(CIPO), cardiomyopathy, and cardiac arrhythmias including
Wolf–Parkinson–White syndrome—all increasing their risk
of cardiorespiratory compromise during illness or medical
stress. Renal dysfunction with alterations in fluid and
electrolyte homeostasis and impairment of acid–base balance
is a potential cause of morbidity and mortality. Tubulointer-
stitial disease is the most common acute renal manifestation.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, steroid resistant nephro-
tic syndrome, and end-stage renal disease during acute illness
have also been described.16 Endocrinopathies can manifest
during critical illness in mitochondrial patients. Diabetes
mellitus due to insulin insufficiency secondary to islet cell
dysfunction
or
insulin
resistance,17–19
primary
adrenal
insufficiency, thyroid dysfunction, hypoparathyroidism, and
hypogonadism are also seen.20,21 Patients with mitochondrial
diseases may be chronically malnourished with deficiencies of
both macro- and micronutrients. Decreases in nutritional
intake due to poor oral or enteral tolerance, in the setting of
gastrointestinal (GI) dysmotility and paralytic ileus may
further compromise nutrition in ill states. A recent study has
shown a higher burden of strokes following acute worsening
of CIPO in MELAS patients.22
Recommendations
The recommendations below are in addition to routine
intensive-care management that might be undertaken for any
critically ill patient. They are in addition to routine illness
consensus guidelines published previously3 and summarized
in Table 3.
1. Patients should be provided a summary document
by their mitochondrial disease care center of clinical
symptoms, organ specific symptoms, baseline cardio-
respiratory function, special nutritional needs, medi-
cations, allergies, and contraindicated therapies. The
Table 4 Medication cautions
Medication
Common uses
Concern in mitochondrial disease
Acetaminophen
Analgesic, fever prevention, headaches
Chronic or frequent use may deplete glutathione and cause hepatopathy
Aminoglycosides
Antibiotic
Hearing loss
Antiretrovirals
HIV therapy
Impaired mtDNA replication and worsening peripheral neuropathy, liver
dysfunction, or myopathy
Botulinum toxin
Dystonia, spasticity
Worsening of weakness
Butterbur
Headache
May contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids (oxidants) and cause hepatopathy
Metformin
Diabetes
Lactic acidosis
Topiramate
Epilepsy, headache, intracranial hypertension
Lactic acidosis
Statins
Hypercholesterolemia
Worsening myopathy and elevated creatine kinase
Valproic acid
Epilepsy, headache, mood disorders, movement
disorders, tone abnormalities
Irreversible liver failure and onset of hepatoencephalopathy, especially in
POLG-related disorders; worsening of seizures
Vigabatrin
Epilepsy
Inhibition of the mitochondrial nucleoside salvage pathway and worsening of
mtDNA depletion disorders
mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA.
With the exception of valproic acid in POLG-related disorders, these medications are not contraindicated and may be used with caution.
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
7
 document should include anticipatory guidelines for
management during critical illness. The document must
be updated at each follow-up visit and be readily
available for review in an emergency.
2. Critically ill mitochondrial disease patients must be
carefully triaged at presentation and referred to a center
equipped to manage multisystem dysfunction when
necessary.
3. Ventilatory assessment should include evaluation for
aspiration, atelectasis, and infection, and account for
underlying issues of abnormal tone, as well as nerve
and muscle disease.
4. An echocardiogram should be obtained in instances
of hemodynamic dysfunction.
5. In
patients
with
pressor-refractory
hypotension,
empiric administration of stress-dose steroids should
be considered; blood levels of adrenocorticotropic
hormone and cortisol can be collected immediately
prior to facilitate the diagnostic evaluation but their
collection should not delay therapy.
6. Electrolyte assessment should include sodium, potas-
sium, calcium, magnesium, and phosphate. Recurrent
or persistent electrolyte imbalances should prompt an
evaluation of renal tubular and adrenal function.
7. Patients may acutely develop elevations in lactate or
pyruvate resulting in decompensated acidosis and
should be monitored closely particularly during intro-
duction of feeds or weaning from respiratory support.
8. Thyroid and adrenal function should be assessed
in patients at times of critical illness and reassessed
during a prolonged intensive care unit stay. Hypo- and
hyperglycemia can occur and regular blood glucose
monitoring is needed.
9. Any change in baseline neurological exam warrants
consideration for repeat neuroimaging.
10. MELAS
patients
with
pseudo-obstruction
should
receive closer neurologic follow-up as the symptom
may represent a harbinger of stroke.
11. Nutritional support must be provided with enteral feeds
if tolerated or with peripheral or central parenteral
nutrition that is calculated with the help of a trained
dietitian. Nutritional support should be started as
soon as it is medically safe to do so (preferably
within 48 hours of admission) to avoid a prolonged
catabolic state that may lead to further metabolic
decompensation.
12. Hypoglycemia,
hypoalbuminemia,
or
coagulopathy
must be excluded if liver dysfunction is suspected.
Importantly, hepatocerebral involvement is common in
infantile mitochondrial disease; the use of valproate for
seizure control must be avoided in these patients as
fulminant hepatic failure has been associated with this
medication.
13. In patients with marrow failure, transfusions with
packed red cells or platelets may be necessary. Granulo-
cyte colony-stimulating factor may be required in the
setting of severe neutropenia and/or infections. Addi-
tional studies and interventions may require the
services of a hematologist.
14. Supplements and cofactor therapy should be continued
when possible.
Endocrinology
Mitochondrial disease patients are at risk for a variety of
endocrine diseases. Recent reviews on the topic are avail-
able.20,21 Diabetes mellitus has long been a well-recognized
potential endocrine consequence of mitochondrial disease.23
Clinical presentations suggestive of either “typical” type I or II
diabetes mellitus can both be caused by primary mitochondrial
impairment (mitochondrial disease–associated diabetes melli-
tus). Mitochondrial-related diabetes mellitus may present
insidiously, clinically similar to more “typical” age- and
weight-related type 2 diabetes mellitus with both insulin
resistance and inadequate pancreatic beta-cell insulin produc-
tion. Children may present with more features of insulin
deficiency. Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common
findings in patients with the m.3243A> G mutation, typically
manifesting as maternally inherited diabetes and deafness.17–19
Both hypothyroidism and, to a far lesser extent, hyper-
thyroidism have been reported in patients with primary
mitochondrial
diseases
and
may
coexist
with
other
endocrinopathies.20,21 Short stature is common. There may
be failure of sufficient growth hormone (GH) production and
some children may benefit from GH supplementation.24
Hypoparathyroidism has been reported in some subtypes of
mitochondrial diseases, most notably KSS. Concurrent renal
tubulopathy in KSS can make both diagnosis and manage-
ment more challenging.25 Individuals with mitochondrial
disorders may also be at risk for poor bone health, particularly
if they are chronically ill, malnourished, and immobile.
Certain
medications,
such
as
antiepileptic
drugs,
may
compound the issue.
Adrenal insufficiency can also occur in primary mitochon-
drial diseases and consists mostly of either primary adreno-
cortical insufficiency, due to diminished cortisol secretion
(Addison disease), or to hyperaldosteronism. Most described
cases have been associated with Pearson or KSS, MELAS, and
POLG-related disease.20,21 Primary hypoglycemia is not a
common occurrence in mitochondrial disease and is usually
related to hepatic impairment. The presence of hypoglycemia
should prompt screening for reversible causes (e.g., adrenal
insufficiency, GH deficiency, hyperinsulinism). Primary or
hypergonadotropic
and
hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism
have been observed, particularly in POLG-related disease26
and
myopathies
presenting
with
progressive
external
ophthalmoplegia.21,27
Recommendations
1. An annual hemoglobin A1c (HgbA1c), thyroid-stimu-
lating hormone, free thyroxine level (FT4), vitamin D,
and screening for hypoparathyroidism (serum calcium,
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
8
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 magnesium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone, vitamin
D (25-OHD and 1,25-OHD); urine: creatinine, calcium,
and phosphate) can be considered in individuals with
mitochondrial diseases.
a. In those with mtDNA deletions, which are more
strongly associated with secondary endocrinopathies,
annual screening is recommended.
2. Biguanides such as metformin may need to be avoided or
used with caution in mitochondrial disease because they
may exacerbate lactic acidosis.
3. Multiagent therapy may be needed, including insulin, for
patients with mitochondrial diabetes as they may have
both insulin resistance and insulin deficiency.
4. Growth and maturation in children with mitochondrial
disorders should be measured consistently at routine
well-child primary care physician visits. If short stature
and/or suboptimal growth and weight gain occur, a
comprehensive evaluation should be undertaken, guided
by the history and physical examination, and with
attention to treatable causes, including GH deficiency.
a. Nutritional status should be assessed in all children
with decreased linear growth velocity.
b. In patients with GH deficiency, treatment with GH
should be considered.
c. Atypical patterns of sexual maturation should prompt
investigation for hypogonadism.
5. Adrenal insufficiency should be considered in mitochon-
drial patients with new onset of worsening fatigue or
symptoms typically associated with adrenal insufficiency.
6. Optimization of calcium and vitamin D status and
attention toward injury/fall prevention are reasonable
steps to prevent occult and/or atraumatic fracture. Bone
density testing should be considered in patients with
encephalopathy or immobility to assess for fracture
risks.
Gastroenterology
Mitochondrial diseases often feature GI system involvement
including intestinal dysmotility, constipation, poor weight
gain, obesity, swallowing dysfunction, and pancreatic and
hepatic dysfunction. A comprehensive review has recently
been published.28
GI dysmotility (including CIPO in severe cases) is a
relatively common feature of many mitochondrial diseases
and may present with early satiety, weight loss, nausea,
constipation, or overflow incontinence/diarrhea. Constipation
can also present without dysmotility due to underlying
myopathy, neuropathy, medication effects, dietary alterations,
decreased fluid intake, and decrease in patient mobility. CIPO
is characterized by more than 6 months of severe symptoms
of intestinal obstruction such as abdominal distention and
pain, nausea, and vomiting with clinical/radiographic evi-
dence of dilated bowel in the absence of mechanical obstruc-
tion.29 CIPO may be caused by neurologic or myopathic
defects or secondary to medications.30,31 A recent study has
shown a potential higher burden of strokes following acute
worsening of CIPO in MELAS patients.22
Any
combination
of
dysmotility,
constipation,
and/or
dysphagia can lead to chronic nausea, vomiting, poor appetite,
and exacerbate poor weight gain and ongoing malnutrition
seen as a metabolic consequence of mitochondrial disease.
Obesity is a less common feature of mitochondrial disease.
Patients with primary mitochondrial disease are also at risk of
aspiration pneumonia, due to oropharyngeal weakness or
dyscoordination,
compounded
by
gastroesophageal
reflux
disease. The use of a gastrostomy or gastrojejunal tube and
consideration for fundoplication can improve nutritional status
and decrease aspiration and gastroesophageal reflux disease–
related risks.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can occur, especially in
Pearson syndrome, KSS, and patients with the m.3243A > G
mutation.32,33
Patients with mitochondrial disease are at risk for liver
dysfunction and liver failure. While typically presenting with
multisystem manifestations, isolated liver disease is most
frequently caused by defects of mtDNA maintenance such
as mtDNA deletion and depletion, especially in those with
POLG, DGUOK, and MPV17 mutations.28 Patients with
mutations in POLG are at a higher risk of developing
valproate-induced liver failure. Antipyretic therapy and
induction of anabolism including glucose and parenteral
lipids may ameliorate the course of liver crises in certain
patients as has been noted in NBAS deficiency.34
Liver transplantation may be indicated in some cases and
has been performed in patients with mitochondrial disease.
Survival after liver transplantation in some mitochondrial
patients approaches that of transplanted patients without
mitochondrial disease, although some patients may fare worse
(POLG-related disease).35–37
Recommendations
1. Mitochondrial patients should be screened for symptoms
of upper and lower tract dysmotility including nausea,
early satiety, and constipation. Persistent symptoms or
physical examination or radiologic findings of impacted
stool should prompt referral.
2. Diarrhea is not a common symptom in mitochondrial
disease (outside of overflow incontinence from constipa-
tion) and should lead to an investigation as to the
etiology including pancreatic insufficiency.
3. Acute pseudo-obstructive presentations should be man-
aged aggressively. Water soluble contrast enemas may
relieve obstruction and allow for exclusion of alternate
etiologies such as volvulus. Patients should be nil-by-
mouth at these times; Intravenous (IV) hydration with
dextrose and electrolytes should be provided. Onset of
pseudo-obstruction
in
MELAS
patients
may
be
a
harbinger of neurologic decline including new strokes
and patients should be closely monitored at these times.
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
9
 4. Any cases with suspected aspiration or bulbar dysfunc-
tion should be evaluated with a swallow study and advise
on feeding strategies by a speech therapist.
5. Decisions regarding gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube
insertion should be made in close consultation with a
gastroenterologist and, in some cases, palliative care.
6. All patients with a mitochondrial disease diagnosis
should undergo surveillance for malnutrition, including
measurement of weight and weight for height, no less
often than every 6 months.
a. Mitochondrial patients with growth failure should be
screened for pancreatic insufficiency.
b. All patients identified on anthropometric examina-
tion as at risk for malnutrition should be seen
by a dietitian with experience in the management
of patients with neuromuscular or mitochondrial
disease.
c. Standard markers of nutritional status, vitamin levels,
and trace elements can help guide therapy in addition
to monitoring body mass.
d. Diet/exercise programs that promote lean muscle
mass should be promoted over simply increasing
body mass index.
e. If obesity is present, careful management is indicated
to ensure weight loss that may improve functional
ability
without
exacerbating
other
underlying
symptoms.
7. If patients have symptoms or laboratory values indica-
tive of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, referral to a
gastroenterologist is indicated.
8. Patients with mitochondrial disease should have an
annual
transaminase
level
assessed;
synthetic
liver
function should be evaluated if transaminases are
elevated or if the patient is symptomatic. Elevated liver
enzymes or laboratory markers of hepatic synthetic
deficiency should prompt referral to a hepatologist.
9. In the setting of acute or acute on chronic liver failure,
liver transplantation may be an option. Decisions to
list a patient for transplant should be taken in the
light of other comorbidities and the known natural
history of the specific mitochondrial disease. Additional
caution regarding liver transplantation may be needed in
patients with POLG mutations owing to the potential of
increased morbidity and mortality.
Hematology
Hematologic
disease
is
not
a
common
occurrence
in
mitochondrial patients although mild anemia is observed
relatively frequently. Sideroblastic anemia is a known classical
feature of several rare mitochondrial diseases, including
Pearson syndrome. Other types of anemia, leukopenia,
neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia have also
been described although these are not seen frequently.
A review on the topic is available.38 Anemia and/or iron
deficiency may also occur due to feeding or GI issues
potentially compounding symptoms of fatigue.
Recommendations
1. A complete blood count with differential should be
considered annually in patients with primary mito-
chondrial disease. Patients with mitochondrial diseases
at higher risk of anemia or bone marrow suppression
(such as Pearson syndrome) should have complete blood
count checked more frequently, with the interval based
on the patient’s clinical course.
2. Iron studies should be considered in patients at risk of
nutritional deficits and/or concomitant symptoms of
fatigue.
Immunology
The immune system and its interplay with mitochondria
remains poorly understood,39 although in vitro studies have
repeatedly demonstrated that mitochondria are crucial for
proper function of both the cellular and humoral immune
systems.40–42 Certain conditions such as pancytopenia or
neutropenia have been well described in disorders such as
Barth and Pearson syndromes.43,44 The most comprehensive
study investigating immune function and/or risk of infections
in patients with mitochondrial disease included a large cohort
without genetically confirmed disease.45 Patients in this
cohort seemed to be at a higher risk of recurrent infections
and sepsis and some showed abnormalities on immune
testing including hypogammaglobulinemia, low vaccine titers,
and low switched memory B-cell compartment.45
Specific studies have not investigated the safety of vaccine
administration
in
children
with
mitochondrial
disease,
although reviews of patient outcomes in other inherited
metabolic disorders show that vaccines are generally safe.46
The MMS recommends vaccination for all patients with
mitochondrial disease since risk of their mitochondrial disease
worsening from life-threatening infections is likely to be
greater than the theoretical risk of decompensation following
vaccination.47
Recommendations
1. Immune function should be evaluated early in any
mitochondrial disease patient experiencing recurrent or
severe infections.* Investigation should include quanti-
tative
immunoglobulin
levels,
vaccine-specific
IgG
titers, and lymphocyte subset levels (T cell, B cell,
switched memory B-cell compartment, natural killer
cells). Immune evaluation and management should be
conducted with the assistance of an immunologist
familiar with mitochondrial disease.
*Recurrent or severe infections are defined as those that
are complicated, in multiple locations, resistant to
treatment, caused by unusual organisms, or consisting
of > 10 upper respiratory infections a year.
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
10
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 2. Immune testing may be useful to identify patients that
may benefit from prophylactic treatment strategies inclu-
ding antibiotic prophylaxis, immunoglobulin replace-
ment therapy, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
3. Patients with mitochondrial diseases should be offered
age-appropriate vaccination including the influenza
vaccine as well as other relevant vaccines when there is
an underlying pulmonary pathology (i.e., pneumococcal
vaccine).
Nephrology
Kidneys contain a high density of mitochondria, particularly
in the cortical tubules, and all sections of the nephron
may be affected by mitochondrial disease. In general, renal
tubular dysfunction is more frequently seen in childhood-
onset mitochondrial disease, whilst glomerular disease is
more frequent in adults, although exceptions do occur. The
prevalence of renal dysfunction in mitochondrial disease is
not known, since the published literature consists largely of
single case reports and small case series. Recent reviews on the
topic are available.16,48
Mild tubular dysfunction is one of the most common
findings in a variety of mitochondrial disease patients,49
especially those with mtDNA deletion disorders. Fanconi-
type proximal tubulopathy with severe electrolyte losses,
tubulointerstitial
nephritis,
Bartter-like
syndrome,
renal
tubular acidosis, and a Gitelman-like hypomagnesemia have
all been described and are seen in a range of mitochondrial
diseases.16
Glomerular
dysfunction,
including
steroid-resistant
nephrotic syndrome, which may progress to focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis, may also occur in mitochondrial disease
and has been associated with a variety of mtDNA and nuclear
DNA defects. The common m.3243A > G pathogenic variant,
often associated with MELAS, has most commonly been
associated with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.16 Chronic
tubulointerstitial nephritis has also been noted in some.
Patients have at times needed dialysis and renal transplan-
tation. Most reported cases with mitochondrial disease
undergoing renal transplantation have fared well and survival
in mitochondrial patients matches national averages.36
Recommendations
1. All patients with suspected mitochondrial disease should
be screened for renal dysfunction at presentation, inclu-
ding blood urea, creatinine, sodium, potassium, calcium,
magnesium, phosphate, and urinary albumin/creatinine
ratios.
2. Patients with significant renal dysfunction should be
referred to a nephrologist, preferably with experience
of mitochondrial disease, who can guide measurement of
glomerular filtration rate and need for renal replacement
therapy.
3. Electrolyte replacement—large volumes of potassium,
calcium,
magnesium,
and/or
phosphate—may
be
needed, and consideration should be given to the early
placement of a gastrostomy tube if the patient struggles
to take these supplements orally.
4. Dialysis for end-stage renal disease should be considered
palliative, and patients receiving dialysis should ideally
also be considered for renal transplantation.
5. Renal transplantation should be offered after careful
multidisciplinary review and discussion with the affected
family and consideration of the full clinical picture.
Neurology
Developmental disability
Since mitochondrial diseases frequently cause neurologic
impairment as well as vision and/or hearing impairment,
patients with mitochondrial diseases are at risk for global
developmental disability and intellectual disability (ID).
Mitochondrial diseases can cause a variety of developmental
disabilities in isolation or in various combinations, including
ID, autism, cerebral palsy, or isolated learning disabilities.
Attention deficit disorder with or without hyperactivity can be
seen. Concomitant or isolated language or motor disability
can also be present. Mitochondrial diseases due to point
mutations in nuclear DNA or mtDNA, large-scale mtDNA
deletions, or mtDNA depletion can all present with isolated or
global developmental delay and/or ID. For a given disease
within the same family, the severity of intellectual and
developmental delays or disabilities can be quite broad. One
affected family member may have preserved cognition while
another affected individual in the same family may have
significant ID.
Many mitochondrial diseases can also cause loss of develop-
mental and cognitive skills, referred to a “neuroregression”
or “psychomotor regression.” Neuroregression is a semio-
logically distinct entity from global developmental disability/
ID. Regression can occur at any age and frequently leads to
life-limiting neurologic impairment. Such regression warrants
a thorough and expedited evaluation for a treatable etiology.
Recommendations.
1. As patients with mitochondrial disease are at risk of
developmental disabilities, every patient deserves a
formal neurodevelopmental screen appropriate for age.
2. Baseline neuropsychological testing should be considered
for mitochondrial patients with CNS disease. Testing
should be repeated for cognitive, behavioral, or person-
ality change and to allow for optimal tracking of their
function and development of personalized care plans.
3. If developmental disability/ID is confirmed, then one
should consider referrals to a developmental specialist
and appropriate therapist, and for community and
school support services. Anticipatory guidance should
be provided to parents, siblings, and family.
4. Concomitant symptoms such as autism, attention deficit
disorder with or without hyperactivity, and psychiatric
disease should be addressed and treated.
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
11
 5. Neurodevelopmental and cognitive status should be
closely monitored at each follow-up since mitochondrial
patients can be at risk of neurologic regression.
6. Developmental regression at any age warrants a thorough
evaluation for a potential treatable condition as well as an
assessment for disease progression; testing may need to
include repeat neuroimaging and an electroencephalogram.
Epilepsy
The prevalence of epilepsy in mitochondrial disease is not
accurately known although seizures may be a presenting or late
feature.50 Seizures are reported to occur in 35–60% of infants,
children, and adolescents with biochemically or genetically
confirmed disease.50–53 The prevalence in adults is potentially
lower with one study reporting a general prevalence of 23%;
certain genotypes such as the m.3243A> G and m.8344A> G
mutations may have a higher prevalence.54 Focal and general-
ized seizures, epilepsia partialis continua, myoclonus, and
infantile spasms have all been noted. Patients may also have
progressive myoclonic epilepsy or recurrent status epilepticus.
Electroencephalogram findings vary.55
Treatment of epilepsy is similar to non–mitochondrial
disease patients with seizures. However, valproic acid should
be avoided, especially in patients with POLG mutations, due
to the risk of fulminant hepatic failure and worsening of
neurologic symptoms, including seizures. Vigabatrin may also
need to be avoided in patients with mtDNA depletion because
it inhibits the conversion of deoxyribonucleoside diphosphate
to deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate in the mitochondrial
nucleoside salvage pathway and may worsen mtDNA deple-
tion.56 Topiramate may worsen acidosis.57 Epilepsy may be
refractory to treatment. No specific combination of medica-
tions has been shown to be more beneficial.
Recommendations.
1. In mitochondrial patients with recurrent stereotypical
spells, episodes of behavior arrest or alterations of
state from baseline there should be a low threshold to
obtain electroencephalogram monitoring, especially in
those with underlying cognitive disability or dementia.
2. Avoid the use of valproic acid, especially in patients with
POLG-related disease. Vigabatrin may need to be
avoided in patients with mtDNA depletion syndromes.
Topiramate may worsen acidosis.
3. Epilepsia partialis continua, when present, should raise
the concern of a metabolic stroke.
Headaches
Headaches are seen more frequently in several mitochondrial
diseases than in the general population and can represent a
manifesting feature of select mitochondrial diseases (MELAS,
myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers, Alpers–Huttenlo-
cher, and carriers of m.3243A > G).58–60
Severe headaches in MELAS patients have been associated
with strokelike episodes and seizures.58 There are no studies
looking at the treatment of headache in patients with
mitochondrial
disease. Most typical migraine therapies,
including triptans, can be used. There are some medications
that may need to be avoided or used with caution; butterbur
products contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which are strong
oxidants, and theoretically may induce liver damage.61 Long-
term acetaminophen use can reduce hepatic reduced gluta-
thione and potentiate oxidative hepatic damage. Topiramate
may worsen acidosis.57 Valproate should be avoided due to
the risk of liver failure, especially in POLG-related diseases.
Recommendations.
1. Sudden-onset or worsening severity of migraines in
mitochondrial disease may represent underlying strokes
or seizures, requiring further evaluation for these
conditions at that time.
2. Treatment for migraines in mitochondrial disease is
similar to that in patients without mitochondrial disease.
a. Caution may be needed with use of topiramate,
butterbur, and chronic acetaminophen for headache
management in mitochondrial disease patients. Val-
proic acid should be avoided; it is contraindicated in
patients with POLG mutations.
Movement disorders and altered tone
Patients with primary mitochondrial disease are vulnerable to
injury to the basal ganglia, cerebellum, cortex, or cortico-
spinal tracts, and are thus at risk of developing movement
disorders and abnormalities of tone. Patients can have a mixed
movement and tone disorder that includes hyper- and
hypokinetic or cerebellar types of movements, hypotonia,
spasticity, rigidity, and dystonia.62 Myoclonus, ataxia, gait
disturbance, Parkinsonism, and rigidity have also been noted.
Patients with POLG mutations or mtDNA depletion syn-
dromes are at a higher risk for Parkinsonian symptoms.59,62–66
Recommendations.
1. Routine neurologic assessment for disorders of move-
ment and tone is needed.
2. Sudden onset of a new disorder of movement or tone
should lead to an evaluation of disease worsening and
potential secondary causes; neuroimaging, electrophy-
siological testing, and baseline laboratory investigations
are recommended. Assays of cerebrospinal fluid neuro-
transmitter and folate levels should be considered and
treatable causes should be excluded.
3. Management of movement and tone disorders in
mitochondrial disease is similar to that in patients with
movement disorders of other causes. Medical, proce-
dural, and surgical treatments should be considered.
Treatment can improve quality of life.
a. Caution should be used with medications that alter
tone as they can selectively worsen cognitive status,
decrease muscle strength and secondarily respiratory
effort, and impact GI motility and urinary function.
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
12
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 b. Valproic acid should be avoided as a treatment,
especially in POLG disease.
c. Botulinum toxin should be used with caution in view
of potential systemic effects.
4. Physical medicine and therapy assessments are recom-
mended to maximize mobility, prevent contractures, and
alleviate discomfort and pain.
5. Deep brain stimulation should be considered when
appropriate
for
treatment
of
mitochondrial
move-
ment disorders, rigidity, and dystonia, considering the
patient’s long-term prognosis and level of morbidity.
Myopathy
Myopathy is a common manifestation of some mitochondrial
diseases and may include ophthalmoplegia and ptosis. Early-
onset myopathy may present with profound hypotonia in
infancy. Patients are at risk of associated dysphagia, respiratory
insufficiency, cardiomyopathy, exercise intolerance, myalgia,
fatigue, and infrequently rhabdomyolysis. Mitochondrial myo-
pathies do not typically lead to marked baseline elevations in
creatine kinase (CK) (with the exception of the myopathic form
of TK2-related mitochondrial disease).
Recommendations.
1. An initial evaluation of muscle function is routinely
needed including assessment of strength, CK measure-
ment, and consideration of an electromyogram.
2. Annual CK levels should be considered in patients with a
myopathy, especially with symptom worsening or a
decline in function.
3. Secondary causes of a myopathy should be considered
and assessed for, especially if CK levels are above 1,000
(other than in TK2-related disease) and include at least a
complete blood count, thyroid-stimulating hormone,
and toxicology screen when appropriate.
4. Management for recurrent rhabdomyolysis and myoglo-
binuria, at times triggered by exercise or illness, should
follow general treatment recommendations; acylcarnitine
and urine organic acid analysis may be needed to exclude
fatty acid oxidation defects in new cases.
5. Exercise may benefit patients with mitochondrial myo-
pathies (see prior exercise recommendations).3
6. Agents such as statins, corticosteroids, metformin, and
antiretrovirals should be used with caution since they
may exacerbate the underlying myopathy.
7. Riboflavin should be considered for myopathy associated
with ACAD9 deficiency; a combination of coenzyme Q10
and riboflavin should be considered for ETFDH-related
myopathy.
Neuropathy
Mitochondrial diseases can lead to primary neuropathy.
Large and small fiber, axonal, and demyelinating neuropathies
have all been described, often presenting subclinically.67–71
Peripheral neuropathy may be more common in POLG-,
TYMP-, MPV17-, and SURF1-related mitochondrial diseases
and in patients with the m.8993T > G and m.8993T > C
mtDNA mutations. Neuropathy can also occur secondarily as
a complication of mitochondrial diabetes, renal insufficiency,
or side effects from treatments.
Recommendations.
1. Mitochondrial disease patients should be screened for
peripheral neuropathy when clinical symptoms/signs
suggestive of peripheral nerve dysfunction are present. A
comprehensive electromyogram and nerve conduction
velocity study should be considered and should include
both upper and lower extremities with evaluation of both
sensory and motor nerves.
2. Screening for treatable causes of peripheral neuropathies
should be obtained, especially when the findings are
atypical for the underlying mitochondrial disease. As
diabetes may be more common in certain mitochondrial
diseases including MELAS and maternally inherited
diabetes and deafness, optimal glycemic control may
help a sensory polyneuropathy.
3. Treatment of mitochondrial neuropathies is sympto-
matic and follows guidelines established for the care of
nonmitochondrial neuropathies. Caution and close mon-
itoring is needed if medications causing mitochondrial
toxicity are used. Valproate should be avoided as a potential
treatment, especially in patients with POLG mutations.
Stroke
The data for the management of mitochondrial stroke were
previously reviewed with recommendations published by
the MMS.3,72 These recommendations are summarized in
Table 3.
Ophthalmology
The ophthalmologic involvement in mitochondrial disease is
diverse and may be the dominant feature, such as ophthal-
moplegia and ptosis in various chronic progressive external
ophthalmoplegia conditions; or specific for a syndrome, such
as optic nerve disease in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
(LHON). Alternatively, the ophthalmologic manifestations
may be nonspecific, such as cataracts, retinal disease,
nystagmus, strabismus, or decreased visual acuity. Involve-
ment of the iris and ciliary body, choroid, and uvea are rare in
mitochondrial disease, compared to involvement of the lens
(refractive errors and cataracts), retina (pigmentary retino-
pathy or macular degeneration), optic nerve (optic nerve
atrophy), extraocular muscles (ophthalmoplegia), and levator
palpebrae (ptosis). The reported frequency of ophthalmologic
manifestations in mitochondrial disease is variable ranging
from 35% to 81%73–75 and has been described in multiple
types of mitochondrial diseases.
LHON is mentioned separately owing to its relatively high
prevalence and several unique features of the disease. The
disorder is a common mitochondrial optic neuropathy
leading to an acute onset of painless, bilateral central vision
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
13
 loss, often developing in the young adult years. Heavy alcohol
and moderate nicotine/tobacco exposure increase the risk of
symptoms developing and avoidance of these environmental
triggers is recommended. Some patients with LHON appear
to develop addition neurologic symptoms or cardiac conduc-
tion defects.76 Idebenone is a potential treatment.77,78
Recommendations
1. A thorough clinical evaluation for eye disease should
include visual acuity, visual fields, eye motility exam,
documentation of ptosis, and fundoscopy regardless of
reported symptoms.
2. Patients should be referred to a neuro-ophthalmologist for
detection of visual, retinal, macular, and optic nerve changes
at the time of diagnosis, supported by optical coherence
tomography
and
electroretinography.
If
symptomatic,
an assessment of intraocular pressure is indicated. Annual
ophthalmology exams should be conducted thereafter.
3. Patients with visual impairment should be referred to a
low vision specialist.
4. Surgery may be beneficial for strabismus or cataracts.
Surgery for ptosis may be needed and should be
conducted by a surgeon experienced in treating patients
with mitochondrial disease.
5. Lubrication of the eyes may be needed due to inappro-
priate eyelid spread of tears in patients with ptosis or
after ptosis repair.
6. Heavy alcohol use and smoking should be avoided
among LHON carriers as these are strongly associated
with increased risk of visual loss.
7. LHON patients should receive periodic neurologic
evaluations and annual ECG.
Orthopedics
Orthopedic complications occur in mitochondrial disease
due to a variety of causes including underlying myopathy,
neuropathy, abnormalities of tone, strokes, and basal ganglia
or cerebellar disease. Orthopedic interventions may be
necessary for contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation, and limb
deformities. Regular orthopedic examination of patients with
mitochondrial diseases may be indicated. Treatment is
symptomatic and peer reviewed data is lacking for the
efficacy of specific orthopedic interventions in mitochondrial
diseases. Recommendations are based on those made for
similar issues for patients with nonmitochondrial diseases.
Recommendations
1. Patients should be examined annually for orthopedic
complications including scoliosis, contractures, disloca-
tions, and limb deformities, especially if the patient has
underlying abnormalities in tone, muscle strength, or
neurologic functioning.
2. Evaluation
and
care
by
a
rehabilitation
medicine
specialist and therapy are used to maintain safety,
mobility, and an active lifestyle.
3. Inpatient rehabilitation may improve function in some
patients and should be considered when needed.
4. Orthopedic interventions, both operative and nonopera-
tive, for scoliosis, dislocations, and limb deformities may
be beneficial to selected patients. As with all procedures,
life expectancy should be weighed against risks of
discomfort and recovery time when considering an
orthopedic procedure.
Pregnancy
There are mostly only single case reports published on the
clinical course of pregnancy in mitochondrial disease patients.
As
a
time
of
extreme
physiologic
change,
pregnancy
theoretically represents a period of potential risk in several
areas for the pregnant woman with mitochondrial disease and
her fetus. Mitochondrial patients are at risk of developing or
exacerbating comorbid systemic symptoms, increasing the
risk of complications during pregnancy.
Several prior case reports of women with MELAS or carriers
of MELAS-related mtDNA mutations showed a risk of
premature rupture of membranes, preterm labor, gestational
diabetes, preeclampsia, worsening acidosis, myopathy, neuro-
pathy, status epilepticus, and stroke.79–83 A recent retro-
spective analysis84 showed that obstetric complications did
occur more frequently in carriers of the common m.3243A >
G mutation associated with MELAS. Of 96 pregnancies
reviewed, 25% had a preterm delivery (5.5% extremely
premature), 12% had preeclampsia and 11% had gestational
diabetes. Thirteen percent of the children born had a birth
weight below the fifth percentile. Four fetal deaths were
reported.
Pregnancy in mitochondrial disease also elicits the concern
of transmission of a genetic disorder. Appropriate preconcep-
tion genetic counseling and discussion of options of prenatal
testing are needed. A fetus affected by mitochondrial disease
may also be at higher risk for prenatal morbidity. Finally,
premature ovarian failure is a feature of several mitochondrial
disorders and affected women should be referred for assisted
reproductive technologies if they wish to have children.21,85
Recommendations
1. Pregnant women with mitochondrial disease require
closer monitoring by their specialists.
2. Pregnancies should ideally be managed by an obstetri-
cian with expertise in the management of high-risk
pregnancies since affected women may be at higher risk
for preterm labor and preeclampsia.
3. Women with mitochondrial disease should be counseled
about a potential increased risk of gestational diabetes;
glucose tolerance testing should be obtained early and
later in the pregnancy.
4. Patients should be counseled about continuation or dose
changes of current medications (e.g., antiepileptics,
antihypertensives).
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
14
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 5. Women with or at risk of mitochondrial disease should
receive preconception genetic counseling and be offered
prenatal testing where this is feasible.
6. Closer fetal monitoring may be required for a prenatal
onset of symptoms when there is a concern of genetic
transmission of a mitochondrial disorder (especially in cases
of mtDNA-mediated or autosomal-dominant disease).
Psychiatry
There appears to be a potential higher prevalence of
psychiatric
disorders
in
individuals
with
mitochondrial
disease;86,87 however, all but one study used healthy controls
as a reference group. Thus, although it is important to screen
for psychiatric symptoms in individuals with mitochondrial
disease, more research is needed to understand whether
psychiatric symptoms are specifically related to mitochondrial
disease or to other factors that are common in chronic disease
conditions.
Mood disorders, especially major depression, appear to
be the most prevalent psychiatric disorder reported across
studies. The prevalence of anxiety disorders varies and
psychotic disorders are less common.86–88
Recommendation
1. A standardized screening tool for depression and anxiety
symptoms should be routinely used.
Pulmonology
The lungs are not usually directly involved in the clinical
manifestations of primary mitochondrial disease; however,
neuromuscular and CNS involvement may affect the lungs
and breathing in patients with primary mitochondrial disease.
Patients with mitochondrial disease can have either central
brain stem dysfunction and/or a myopathy, with or without
dysphagia. Respiratory insufficiency, aspiration, and infection
may also occur. Respiratory symptoms may include noisy
breathing, hoarseness, stridor, congestion, cough, abnormal
breathing, snoring, sleep disturbances, daytime hypersomno-
lence, and exercise intolerance. Case reports have outlined
worsening following respiratory tract infections.89,90 Respira-
tory hypoventilation may also occur.91 Pulmonary hyperten-
sion has been described.85 Anesthesia may worsen respiratory
symptoms and precipitate respiratory failure. Primary cardio-
myopathy may lead to congestive heart failure and associated
pulmonary edema, especially in the setting of respiratory
muscle weakness. Polysomnography may show findings
of central apnea, obstructive sleep apnea, and decreased
ventilatory drive in response to hypoxia and/or hypercapnia.92
Children with more severe diseases such as Leigh syndrome
tend to have more severe, early, and chronic respiratory
complications compared to later-onset mitochondrial diseases
where respiratory problems may only arise during acute
decompensations.
Hypersialorrhea is common in patients who have CNS
involvement affecting oropharyngeal strength or coordina-
tion, but it can also be caused by gastroesophageal reflux
disease, constipation, and side effects of medicines. Treatment
may be necessary to prevent aspiration pneumonia, improve
hygiene, and reduce social stigma.
Recommendations
1. Baseline evaluation of respiratory status to assess for
muscle weakness and other cardiopulmonary comorbid-
ities. The history should guide screening for additional
comorbidities including obstructive sleep apnea, bulbar
weakness, risks for aspiration, gastroesophageal reflux,
asthma, and chronic obstructive lung disease.
2. Initial and follow-up evaluation should include routine
pulse oximetry with vital signs.
3. Polysomnograms should be considered at baseline in every
patient at diagnosis to assess for sleep disturbances, central
or obstructive apnea, and nocturnal hypoventilation.
4. Patients
even
with
mild
abnormalities
should
be
referred to a pulmonary specialist for follow-up and
management.
a. Spirometry in both the supine and upright posi-
tions should be considered; if appropriate seal with a
mouthpiece cannot be achieved, a nasal clip or a face
mask needs to be used.
b. Additional testing may be required at the discretion
of a pulmonologist familiar with neuromuscular
diseases that can affect the pulmonary system.
c. If initial tests are normal, repeat testing should be
deferred until new symptoms arise or if there is a
suspicion of disease deterioration.
d. For patients with a well-characterized respiratory
involvement, testing should be repeated periodically
to
follow
progress
and
predict
the
pulmonary
function over time to guide management.
5. Neuromuscular weakness predisposes to respiratory
issues in the perioperative period due to poor airway
tone, clearance of secretions, and chronic aspiration.
a. Prior to surgery, pulmonary assessment should be
performed, with pulse oximetry as a minimum. If
SpO2 is o95% a blood gas should be obtained to
assess carbon dioxide levels.
b. For patients with neuromuscular weakness, preopera-
tive use of noninvasive positivepressure ventilation
should be considered, especially if there is a weak
cough, recurrent pneumonia, or low maximum
expiratory pressure.
c. Postoperatively, those with neuromuscular weakness
can be extubated to noninvasive positivepressure
ventilation to prevent prolonged intubation, with
weaning as tolerated since recovery may be prolonged.
d. Postoperative
atelectasis
may
require
aggressive
pulmonary toilet with cough assist, airway clearance,
and chest physiotherapy.
e. Pain management should limit use of narcotics, which
can further suppress adequate cough and recovery.
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
15
 6. Pulmonary testing should also be considered during
acute disease decompensations with exacerbated symp-
toms. If the disease is rapidly progressive and respiratory
weakness evident on testing, a pulmonary specialist
referral and more frequent monitoring is warranted.
a. Incentive spirometry is commonly used in hospitals
but manual compression, glossopharyngeal breathing,
and insufflations should also be attempted by a
respiratory therapist in hospital or at home during the
recovery period.
b. Chest X-ray and computed tomography are recom-
mended in the acute setting to identify diaphragm
abnormality, collapsed lungs, aspiration, and any
other pulmonary pathology.
Other considerations
Altitude
There is a theoretical concern that mitochondrial disease
patients may be at risk of deterioration with high-altitude
travel due to associated acute to subacute hypobaric hypoxia
and associated physiologic changes. Hypoxia brought on by
altitude changes is known to produce oxidative damage in
cells, increase generation of reactive oxygen species, inhibit
mtDNA transcription and translation, decrease mitochondrial
muscle fiber content, and downregulate the electron transport
chain and fatty acid oxidation capacity.93–95 It is known that
mtDNA variations may also play a role in the ability to
tolerate rapid changes to higher altitudes and that mitochon-
drial changes stabilize and decrease or resolve under chronic
high-altitude conditions. High-altitude sickness brings a risk
of associated cerebral edema, pulmonary hypertension, and
retinopathy, although there is no concrete evidence yet that
these conditions occur in a higher prevalence in mitochon-
drial disease patients exposed to altitude changes. Chronic
conditions, such as underlying pulmonary and cardiovascular
disease, can be exacerbated at high altitudes in any patient.
Recommendations.
1. Careful consideration and planning are needed for high-
altitude travel as patients may be susceptible to medical
worsening during these times. Rapid recognition and
treatment of complications is important.
2. Due to a lower pO2 during air travel, patients with
cardiomyopathy
or
respiratory
weakness
need
to
consider oxygen saturation monitoring en route and
potentially have access to supplemental oxygen.
Fatigue
Fatigue is a common complaint in mitochondrial patients. As
mitochondrial diseases can cause a combination of neuro-
muscular disease and systemic symptoms, there are often a
multitude of causes for fatigue and worsening of baseline
fatigue. The consensus recommendations for the evaluation of
fatigue due to a system-specific issue are outlined in several of
the individual sections above and summarized below.
Recommendations.
1. The evaluation of notable or worsening fatigue in
mitochondrial patients should include an evaluation for
treatable etiologies including consideration of cardiac
insufficiency, anemia, an endocrinopathy (specifically
thyroid and adrenal disease), worsening myopathy,
pulmonary insufficiency, sleep disorder, nutritional and
iron deficiencies, and deconditioning.
Care coordination
Mitochondrial diseases are complex and chronic. Multiple
physician visits and frequent hospitalizations are needed at
times in a patient’s disease course. The diagnosis carries an
emotional, psychosocial, and financial burden for the patient
and their family. Additional support and care coordination is
routinely needed.
Recommendations.
1. A social work consult should be considered for resource
and support planning and to assess for social risk factors
that may impact care.
SUMMARY
The practice of mitochondrial medicine remains challenging
due to a paucity of high-quality evidence to guide clinical
patient care and management. The MMS used the Delphi
method to generate consensus recommendations based on the
current knowledge to date, along with the experience of
mitochondrial
specialists
to
help
begin
the
process
of
standardization of care. We hope that these recommendations
also raise awareness of the complete spectrum of symptoms
and findings in mitochondrial disease and aid in the diagnosis,
management, and monitoring of comorbid conditions.
Consensus guidelines are not meant to apply to all cases or
conditions and require clinical judgment when used. Recom-
mendations should be adjusted with advances in the field,
data from clinical trials, and evidence from future studies.
Due to the rarity of each individual mitochondrial disease,
large-scale clinical trials may remain elusive. Networked
centers in the United States, through organizations such as the
MMS and the North American Mitochondrial Disease
Consortium, supported by patient advocacy groups, may
serve as an opportunity to allow for gathering of high-quality
evidence. Colleagues in other countries have already formed
such networks allowing for systematic phenotyping and
analysis of this very complex group of patients. The MMS
hopes to continue to foster these relationships to advance
education, research, and collaboration in the field.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the
paper at http://www.nature.com/gim
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
16
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to extend our gratitude to the Wellcome Trust
Centre for Mitochondrial Research at Newcastle University for
their original creation of Clinical Care Guidelines for select aspects
of Mitochondrial Disease (made available online at http://www.
newcastle-mitochondria.com).
These
were
reviewed
by
the
consensus group in preparation of their data summaries. We
also extend our thanks to Michio Hirano at Columbia for
preparing the hematology data summary.
DISCLOSURE
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
1.
Parikh
S,
Goldstein
A,
Koenig
MK,
et
al.
Practice
patterns
of
mitochondrial disease physicians in North America. Part 1: diagnostic
and clinical challenges. Mitochondrion 2014;14:26–33.
2.
Parikh S, Goldstein A, Koenig MK, et al. Practice patterns of mito-
chondrial disease physicians in North America. Part 2: treatment, care
and management. Mitochondrion 2013;13:681–687.
3.
Parikh S, Goldstein A, Koenig MK, et al. Diagnosis and management of
mitochondrial disease: a consensus statement from the Mitochondrial
Medicine Society. Genet Med 2015;17:689–701.
4.
Pfeffer G, Majamaa K, Turnbull DM, Thorburn D, Chinnery PF. Treatment
for mitochondrial disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012:CD004426.
5.
Pfeffer G, Horvath R, Klopstock T, et al. New treatments for mitochondrial
disease—no time to drop our standards. Nat Rev Neurol 2013;9:474–481.
6.
Turoff M, Linstone HA. The Delphi Method: Techniques and Applications.
Addison-Wesley: Reading, MA, 1975.
7.
Kullar PJ, Quail J, Lindsey P, et al. Both mitochondrial DNA and
mitonuclear gene mutations cause hearing loss through cochlear
dysfunction. Brain 2016;139:e33.
8.
Santarelli R, Cama E, Scimemi P, et al. Reply: both mitochondrial DNA
and mitonuclear gene mutations cause hearing loss through cochlear
dysfunction. Brain 2016;139:e34.
9.
Sue CM, Lipsett LJ, Crimmins DS, et al. Cochlear origin of hearing loss in
MELAS syndrome. Ann Neurol 1998;43:350–359.
10. Wahbi K, Bougouin W, Behin A, et al. Long-term cardiac prognosis and
risk stratification in 260 adults presenting with mitochondrial diseases.
Eur Heart J 2015;36:2886–2893.
11. Bates MG, Bourke JP, Giordano C, d’Amati G, Turnbull DM, Taylor RW.
Cardiac involvement in mitochondrial DNA disease: clinical spectrum,
diagnosis, and management. Eur Heart J 2012;33:3023–3033.
12. El-Hattab AW, Scaglia F. Mitochondrial cardiomyopathies. Front Cardi-
ovasc Med 2016;3:25.
13. Florian A, Ludwig A, Stubbe-Drager B, et al. Characteristic cardiac
phenotypes are detected by cardiovascular magnetic resonance in
patients with different clinical phenotypes and genotypes of mitochon-
drial myopathy. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 2015;17:40.
14. Brunel-Guitton C, Levtova A, Sasarman F. Mitochondrial diseases and
cardiomyopathies. Can J Cardiol 2015;31:1360–1376.
15. Barends M, Verschuren L, Morava E, Nesbitt V, Turnbull D, McFarland R.
Causes of death in adults with mitochondrial disease. JIMD Rep 2016;26:
103–113.
16. Rahman S, Hall AM. Mitochondrial disease—an important cause of end-
stage renal failure. Pediatr Nephrol 2013;28:357–361.
17. Karaa A, Goldstein A. The spectrum of clinical presentation, diagnosis,
and management of mitochondrial forms of diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes
2015;16:1–9.
18. El-Hattab AW, Emrick LT, Hsu JW, et al. Glucose metabolism derange-
ments in adults with the MELAS m.3243A > G mutation. Mitochondrion
2014;18:63–69.
19. Mazzaccara C, Iafusco D, Liguori R, et al. Mitochondrial diabetes in
children: seek and you will find it. PLoS One 2012;7:e34956.
20. Schaefer AM, Walker M, Turnbull DM, Taylor RW. Endocrine disorders in
mitochondrial disease. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2013;379:2–11.
21. Chow J, Rahman J, Achermann JC, Dattani MT, Rahman S. Mitochondrial
disease and endocrine dysfunction. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2017;13:92–104.
22. Ng YS, Feeney C, Schaefer AM, et al. Pseudo-obstruction, stroke, and mito-
chondrial dysfunction: a lethal combination. Ann Neurol 2016;80:686–692.
23. Kadowaki T, Kadowaki H, Mori Y, et al. A subtype of diabetes mellitus
associated with a mutation of mitochondrial DNA. N Engl J Med
1994;330:962–968.
24. Matsuzaki M, Izumi T, Shishikura K, Suzuki H, Hirayama Y. Hypothalamic
growth hormone deficiency and supplementary GH therapy in two
patients with mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis
and stroke-like episodes. Neuropediatrics 2002;33:271–273.
25. Wilichowski E, Gruters A, Kruse K, et al. Hypoparathyroidism and
deafness associated with pleioplasmic large scale rearrangements of
the mitochondrial DNA: a clinical and molecular genetic study of four
children with Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Pediatr Res 1997;41:193–200.
26. Cohen BH, Chinnery PF, Copeland WC. POLG-related disorders. In:
Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR, Stephens K (eds). GeneReviews. University
of Washington: Seattle, WA, 1993.
27. Quade A, Zierz S, Klingmuller D. Endocrine abnormalities in mitochondrial
myopathy with external ophthalmoplegia. Clin Investig 1992;70:396–402.
28. Rahman S. Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestations of mitochondrial
disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis 2013;36:659–673.
29. Rudolph CD, Hyman PE, Altschuler SM, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of
chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction in children: report of consensus
workshop. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1997;24:102–112.
30. Parsons T, Weimer L, Engelstad K, et al. Autonomic symptoms in carriers
of the m.3243A > G mitochondrial DNA mutation. Arch Neurol 2010;67:
976–979.
31. Sekino Y, Inamori M, Yamada E, et al. Characteristics of intestinal
pseudo-obstruction in patients with mitochondrial diseases. World J
Gastroenterol 2012;18:4557–4562.
32. Williams TB, Daniels M, Puthenveetil G, Chang R, Wang RY, Abdenur JE.
Pearson syndrome: unique endocrine manifestations including neonatal
diabetes and adrenal insufficiency. Mol Genet Metab 2012;106:104–107.
33. Verny C, Amati-Bonneau P, Letournel F, et al. Mitochondrial DNA A3243G
mutation involved in familial diabetes, chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
and recurrent pancreatitis. Diabetes Metab 2008;34:620–626.
34. Staufner C, Haack TB, Kopke MG, et al. Recurrent acute liver failure due
to NBAS deficiency: phenotypic spectrum, disease mechanisms, and
therapeutic concepts. J Inherit Metab Dis 2016;39:3–16.
35. Dimmock DP, Dunn JK, Feigenbaum A, et al. Abnormal neurological features
predict poor survival and should preclude liver transplantation in patients with
deoxyguanosine kinase deficiency. Liver Transpl 2008;14:1480–1485.
36. Parikh S, Karaa A, Goldstein A, et al. Solid organ transplantation in
primary mitochondrial disease: proceed with caution. Mol Genet Metab
2016;118:178–184.
37. McKiernan P, Ball S, Santra S, et al. Incidence of primary mitochondrial
disease in children younger than 2 years presenting with acute liver
failure. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2016;63:592–597.
38. Finsterer J. Hematological manifestations of primary mitochondrial
disorders. Acta Haematol 2007;118:88–98.
39. DiMauro S, Schon EA. Mitochondrial respiratory-chain diseases. N Engl J
Med 2003;348:2656–2668.
40. Beier UH, Angelin A, Akimova T, et al. Essential role of mitochondrial
energy metabolism in Foxp3(+) T-regulatory cell function and allograft
survival. FASEB J 2015;29:2315–2326.
41. MacIver
NJ,
Michalek
RD,
Rathmell
JC.
Metabolic
regulation
of
T lymphocytes. Annu Rev Immunol 2013;31:259–283.
42. Perl A, Gergely P Jr, Nagy G, Koncz A, Banki K. Mitochondrial hyper-
polarization: a checkpoint of T-cell life, death and autoimmunity. Trends
Immunol 2004;25:360–367.
43. Broomfield A, Sweeney MG, Woodward CE, et al. Paediatric single
mitochondrial DNA deletion disorders: an overlapping spectrum of
disease. J Inherit Metab Dis 2015;38:445–457.
44. Ferreira C, Thompson R, Vernon H. Barth syndrome. In: Pagon RA, Adam
MP, Ardinger HH, et al. (eds). GeneReviews. University of Washington:
Seattle, WA, 1993.
45. Walker MA, Slate N, Alejos A, et al. Predisposition to infection and SIRS in
mitochondrial disorders: 8 years’ experience in an academic center.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014;2:465–468, 468.e1.
46. Klein NP, Aukes L, Lee J, et al. Evaluation of immunization rates and
safety among children with inborn errors of metabolism. Pediatrics
2011;127:e1139–46.
47. Shahni R, Cale CM, Anderson G, et al. Signal transducer and activator
of transcription 2 deficiency is a novel disorder of mitochondrial fission.
Brain 2015;138:2834–2846.
48. Emma F, Bertini E, Salviati L, Montini G. Renal involvement in
mitochondrial cytopathies. Pediatr Nephrol 2012;27:539–550.
Mitochondrial disease patient care standards | PARIKH et al
REVIEW
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number | Month
17
 49. Martin-Hernandez E, Garcia-Silva MT, Vara J, et al. Renal pathology in
children with mitochondrial diseases. Pediatr Nephrol 2005;20:1299–1305.
50. Rahman S. Mitochondrial disease and epilepsy. Dev Med Child Neurol
2012;54:397–406.
51. Debray FG, Lambert M, Chevalier I, et al. Long-term outcome and clinical
spectrum of 73 pediatric patients with mitochondrial diseases. Pediatrics
2007;119:722–733.
52. Khurana DS, Salganicoff L, Melvin JJ, et al. Epilepsy and respiratory chain
defects in children with mitochondrial encephalopathies. Neuropediatrics
2008;39:8–13.
53. Lee HF, Chi CS, Tsai CR, Chen CH. Epileptic seizures in infants and
children with mitochondrial diseases. Pediatr Neurol 2011;45:169–174.
54. Whittaker RG, Devine HE, Gorman GS, et al. Epilepsy in adults with
mitochondrial disease: a cohort study. Ann Neurol 2015;78:949–957.
55. Bindoff LA, Engelsen BA. Mitochondrial diseases and epilepsy. Epilepsia
2012;53(suppl 4):92–97.
56. Besse A, Wu P, Bruni F, et al. The GABA transaminase, ABAT, is essential
for mitochondrial nucleoside metabolism. Cell Metab 2015;21:417–427.
57. Mirza NS, Alfirevic A, Jorgensen A, Marson AG, Pirmohamed M.
Metabolic acidosis with topiramate and zonisamide: an assessment of
its severity and predictors. Pharmacogenet Genomics 2011;21:297–302.
58. DiMauro S, Hirano M. MELAS. In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, et
al.(eds). GeneReviews. University of Washington: Seattle, WA, 1993.
59. El-Hattab AW, Adesina AM, Jones J, Scaglia F. MELAS syndrome: clinical
manifestations, pathogenesis, and treatment options. Mol Genet Metab
2015;116:4–12.
60. Altmann J, Buchner B, Nadaj-Pakleza A, et al. Expanded phenotypic
spectrum of the m.8344A > G “MERRF” mutation: data from the
German mitoNET registry. J Neurol 2016;263:961–972.
61. Seremet OC, Barbuceanu F, Ionica FE, et al. Oral toxicity study of certain
plant extracts containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Rom J Morphol Embryol
2016;57:1017–1023.
62. Martikainen MH, Ng YS, Gorman GS, et al. Clinical, genetic, and
radiological
features
of
extrapyramidal
movement
disorders
in
mitochondrial disease. JAMA Neurol 2016;73:668–674.
63. Tranchant C, Anheim M. Movement disorders in mitochondrial diseases.
Rev Neurol (Paris) 2016;172:524–529.
64. Quinzii CM, Hirano M. Coenzyme Q and mitochondrial disease. Dev
Disabil Res Rev 2010;16:183–188.
65. Davidzon
G,
Greene
P,
Mancuso
M,
et
al.
Early-onset
familial
parkinsonism due to POLG mutations. Ann Neurol 2006;59:859–862.
66. Hudson G, Chinnery PF. Mitochondrial DNA polymerase-gamma and
human disease. Hum Mol Genet 2006;15(spec no 2):R244–52.
67. Girlanda P, Toscano A, Nicolosi C, et al. Electrophysiological study of
neuromuscular system involvement in mitochondrial cytopathy. Clin
Neurophysiol 1999;110:1284–1289.
68. Mancuso M, Piazza S, Volpi L, et al. Nerve and muscle involvement in
mitochondrial
disorders:
an
electrophysiological
study.
Neurol
Sci
2012;33:449–452.
69. Luigetti M, Sauchelli D, Primiano G, et al. Mitochondrial neuropathy:
considerations on pathogenesis. Eur J Neurol 2016;23:e55.
70. Mancuso M, Orsucci D, Angelini C, et al. “Mitochondrial neuropathies”:
A survey from the large cohort of the Italian Network. Neuromuscul
Disord 2016;26:272–276.
71. Menezes MP, Rahman S, Bhattacharya K, et al. Neurophysiological profile
of peripheral neuropathy associated with childhood mitochondrial
disease. Mitochondrion 2016;30:162–167.
72. Koenig MK, Emrick L, Karaa A, et al. Recommendations for the management
of strokelike episodes in patients with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy,
lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes. JAMA Neurol 2016;73:591–594.
73. Sofou K, De Coo IF, Isohanni P, et al. A multicenter study on Leigh
syndrome: disease course and predictors of survival. Orphanet J Rare Dis
2014;9:52.
74. Gronlund MA, Honarvar AK, Andersson S, et al. Ophthalmological
findings
in
children
and
young
adults
with
genetically
verified
mitochondrial disease. Br J Ophthalmol 2010;94:121–127.
75. Zhu CC, Traboulsi EI, Parikh S. Ophthalmological findings in 74 patients
with mitochondrial disease. Ophthalmic Genet 2017;38:67–69.
76. Yu-Wai-Man P, Chinnery PF. Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. In: Pagon
RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, et al. (eds). GeneReviews. University of
Washington: Seattle, WA, 1993.
77. Klopstock T, Metz G, Yu-Wai-Man P, et al. Persistence of the treatment
effect of idebenone in Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Brain
2013;136:e230.
78. Klopstock T, Yu-Wai-Man P, Dimitriadis K, et al. A randomized placebo-
controlled trial of idebenone in Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Brain
2011;134:2677–2686.
79. Annaiah TK, Kodakkattil S, Sriemevan A. Pregnancy with mitochondrial
encephalopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS syn-
drome) leading to confusion in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.
J Obstet Gynaecol 2007;27:618–619.
80. Moriarty KT, McFarland R, Whittaker R, et al. Pre-eclampsia and
magnesium toxicity with therapeutic plasma level in a woman with
m.3243A > G MELAS mutation. J Obstet Gynaecol 2008;28:349.
81. Kokawa N, Ishii Y, Yamoto M, Nakano R. Pregnancy and delivery
complicated by mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis,
and stroke-like episodes. Obstet Gynecol 1998;91:865.
82. Yanagawa T, Sakaguchi H, Nakao T, et al. Mitochondrial myopathy,
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes with deteriora-
tion during pregnancy. Intern Med 1998;37:780–783.
83. Kovilam OP, Cahill W, Siddiqi TA. Pregnancy with mitochondrial
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes syndrome.
Obstet Gynecol 1999;93:853.
84. de Laat P, Fleuren LH, Bekker MN, Smeitink JA, Janssen MC. Obstetric
complications in carriers of the m.3243A > G mutation, a retrospective
cohort study on maternal and fetal outcome. Mitochondrion 2015;25:
98–103.
85. Riley LG, Rudinger-Thirion J, Schmitz-Abe K, et al. LARS2 variants
associated with hydrops, lactic acidosis, sideroblastic anemia, and
multisystem failure. JIMD Rep 2016;28:49–57.
86. Mancuso M, Orsucci D, Ienco EC, Pini E, Choub A, Siciliano G. Psychiatric
involvement in adult patients with mitochondrial disease. Neurol Sci
2013;34:71–74.
87. Fattal O, Link J, Quinn K, Cohen BH, Franco K. Psychiatric comorbidity in
36 adults with mitochondrial cytopathies. CNS Spectr 2007;12:429–438.
88. Inczedy-Farkas G, Remenyi V, Gal A, et al. Psychiatric symptoms of
patients with primary mitochondrial DNA disorders. Behav Brain Funct
2012;8:9.
89. Byrne E, Dennett X, Trounce I, Burdon J. Mitochondrial myoneuropathy
with respiratory failure and myoclonic epilepsy. A case report with
biochemical studies. J Neurol Sci 1985;71:273–281.
90. Cros D, Palliyath S, DiMauro S, Ramirez C, Shamsnia M, Wizer B.
Respiratory failure revealing mitochondrial myopathy in adults. Chest
1992;101:824–828.
91. Wolfe LF, Joyce NC, McDonald CM, Benditt JO, Finder J. Management of
pulmonary complications in neuromuscular disease. Phys Med Rehabil
Clin N Am 2012;23:829–853.
92. Ramezani RJ, Stacpoole PW. Sleep disorders associated with primary
mitochondrial diseases. J Clin Sleep Med 2014;10:1233–1239.
93. Luo Y, Yang X, Gao Y. Mitochondrial DNA response to high altitude:
a new perspective on high-altitude adaptation. Mitochondrial DNA
2013;24:313–319.
94. Hoppeler H, Vogt M, Weibel ER, Fluck M. Response of skeletal muscle
mitochondria to hypoxia. Exp Physiol 2003;88:109–119.
95. Murray AJ, Horscroft JA. Mitochondrial function at extreme high altitude.
J Physiol 2016;594:1137–1149.
REVIEW
PARIKH et al | Mitochondrial disease patient care standards
18
Volume 00 | Number | Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE
