 A P P L I ED S C I E N C E S A N D EN G I N E E R I N G
Copyright © 2018
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
originalU.S.Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Soft, smart contact lenses with integrations of wireless
circuits, glucose sensors, and displays
Jihun Park,1* Joohee Kim,1* So-Yun Kim,1* Woon Hyung Cheong,1 Jiuk Jang,1 Young-Geun Park,1
Kyungmin Na,2 Yun-Tae Kim,3 Jun Hyuk Heo,4 Chang Young Lee,3 Jung Heon Lee,4†
Franklin Bien,2† Jang-Ung Park1†
Recent advances in wearable electronics combined with wireless communications are essential to the realization of
medical applications through health monitoring technologies. For example, a smart contact lens, which is capable of
monitoring the physiological information of the eye and tear fluid, could provide real-time, noninvasive medical diag-
nostics. However, previous reports concerning the smart contact lens have indicated that opaque and brittle compo-
nents have been used to enable the operation of the electronic device, and this could block the user’s vision and
potentially damage the eye. In addition, the use of expensive and bulky equipment to measure signals from the con-
tact lens sensors could interfere with the user’s external activities. Thus, we report an unconventional approach for the
fabrication of a soft, smart contact lens in which glucose sensors, wireless power transfer circuits, and display pixels to
visualize sensing signals in real time are fully integrated using transparent and stretchable nanostructures. The inte-
gration of this display into the smart lens eliminates the need for additional, bulky measurement equipment. This soft,
smart contact lens can be transparent, providing a clear view by matching the refractive indices of its locally patterned
areas. The resulting soft, smart contact lens provides real-time, wireless operation, and there are in vivo tests to
monitor the glucose concentration in tears (suitable for determining the fasting glucose level in the tears of diabetic
patients) and, simultaneously, to provide sensing results through the contact lens display.
INTRODUCTION
Wearable electronic devices capable of real-time monitoring of the hu-
man body can provide new ways to manage the health status and
performance of individuals (1–7). Stretchable and skin-like electronics,
combined with wireless communications, enable noninvasive and com-
fortable physiological measurements by replacing the conventional
methods that use penetrating needles, rigid circuit boards, terminal con-
nections, and power supplies (8–12). Given this background, a smart
contact lens is a promising example of a wearable, health monitoring
device (13, 14). The reliability and stability of soft contact lenses have
been studied extensively, and significant advances have been made to
minimize irritation of the eye to maximize the user’s comfort. In addi-
tion, the user’s tears can be collected in the contact lens by completely
natural means, such as normal secretion and blinking, and used to
assess various biomarkers found in the blood, such as glucose, choles-
terol, sodium ions, and potassium ions (13). Thus, lens equipped with
sensors can provide noninvasive methods to continuously detect metab-
olites in tears. Among various biomarkers, noninvasive detection of glu-
cose levels for the diagnosis of diabetes has been studied in numerous
ways to replace conventional invasive diagnostic tests (for example,
finger pricking for drawing blood), as presented in table S1. By consid-
ering the correlation between the tear glucose level and blood glucose
level (15), a glucose sensor fitted on a contact lens can provide the non-
invasive monitoring of user’s glucose levels from tear fluids with a con-
sideration of the lag time between tear glucose level and blood glucose
level in the range of 10 to 20 min (13–16).
Although such a system provides many capabilities, there are some
crucial issues that must be addressed before practical uses of smart con-
tact lens can be realized. These issues include (i) the use of opaque
electronic materials for sensors, integrated circuit (IC) chips, metal
antennas, and interconnects that can block users’ vision (15, 17, 18);
(ii) the integration of the components of the electronic device on flat
and plastic substrates, resulting in buckled deformations when
transformed into the curved shape for lenses, thereby creating foreign
objects that can irritate users’ eyes and eyelids (19); (iii) the brittle and
rigid materials of the integrated electronic system, such as surface-
mounted IC chips and rigid interconnects, which could damage the
cornea or the eyelid (20–22); and (iv) the requirement for bulky and
expensive equipment for signal measurements, which limits the use of
smart contact lenses outside of research laboratories or clinical settings
by restricting users’ external activities (14, 15, 20, 23).
For all of the reasons stated above, we have introduced an un-
conventional approach for the fabrication of a soft, smart contact lens
where all of the electronic components are designed with normal usabil-
ity in mind. For example, the wearer’s view will not be obstructed be-
cause the contact lenses are made of transparent nanomaterials. In
addition, these lenses provide superb reliability because they can
undergo the mechanical deformations required to fit them into the soft
lens without damage. The planar, mesh-like structures of the compo-
nents of the device and their interconnects enable high stretchability
for the curved soft lens with no buckling. In addition, display pixels
integrated in the smart contact lens allow access to real-time sensing
data to eliminate the need for additional measurement equipment.
To achieve these goals, we used three strategies, as described as
follows: (i) For the design of soft contact lens, we formed soft contact
lenses with highly transparent and stress-tunable hybrid structures,
which are composed of mechanically reinforced islands to locate dis-
crete electronic devices (such as rectifying circuits and display pixels)
and elastic joints to locate a stretchable, transparent antenna and inter-
connect electrodes. The reinforced frames with small segments were
1School of Materials Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and
Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. 2School of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. 3School of Life Sciences,
School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea.
4School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University,
Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: jangung@unist.ac.kr (J.-U.P.); bien@unist.ac.kr (F.B.);
jhlee7@skku.edu (J.H.L.)
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
1 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 made of a photo-patternable polymer, and the elastic parts were formed
using a silicone elastomer, a conventional material for the soft contact
lens. This contact lens based on the hybrid substrate, in which the re-
inforced islands were embedded inside an elastic layer, can effectively
distribute the mechanical strain and protect ordinary electronics from
mechanical deformations of the soft lens. Although the concept of using
hybrid substrates for stretchable electronics has been reported previous-
ly, the use of hybrid substrates can degrade the optical properties of the
resulting films significantly, leaving them with low transparency and
high haze due to the difference in the refractive indices (n) of heteroge-
neous materials (24–29). Obviously, contact lenses should not obstruct
the wearer’s view, and they must have both high transparency and low
haze for optical clarity. Thus, our hybrid substrate is composed of het-
erogeneous materials with negligible deviations in the refractive indices
of the reinforced parts and the elastomer (Dn = ~0.003). This index-
matching approach can provide the wearer with a clear view, that is,
outstanding transparency (93% in the visible light regime) and low haze
(1.6% in the visible light regime). In addition, the elastic portion
(conventional soft contact lens material) was maximized (more than
96.7%) in the total area of the contact lens for high oxygen permeability
(Dk of 340.0 U). (ii) For the stretchable and transparent electrodes for
antenna and interconnects, the electrodes for these passive compo-
nents occupy relatively large areas of the final IC, so they must have
high transparency and stretchability to be shaped into soft lens
(14, 30–32). Thus, one-dimensional (1D), ultralong metal nanofibers
(mNFs) were directly electrospun as continuous networks to create
transparent and stretchable electrodes (33). Charge transport occurs
along these 1D metallic pathways, and their ultralong length facilitates
the reduction of sheet resistance (Rs) by minimizing the number of
junctions between the metal fibers. For example, random networks of
these electrospun mNFs can present the wide ranges of superior Rs and
transparency (~1.3 ohm/sq with the transmittance of 90% or ~0.3 ohm/sq
with the transmittance of 72% in the visible wavelength regime) by
modulating the area fraction of mNFs. In addition, they also exhibit
the outstanding stretchability (~30% in tensile strain), so they can be
suitable as electrodes for interconnects in soft, smart contact lenses.
In particular, their in-plane stretchability can prevent mechanical
buckling of devices on a soft lens to delay the irritation of the eye or
eyelid caused by feeling the presence of foreign objects. (iii) For wireless
display pixels to visualize glucose levels in real time, after a graphene
sensor detects the glucose concentration in the tears, the transparent
and stretchable antenna with a rectifier drives the pixels of the light-
emitting diode (LED) to display real-time sensing information wireless-
ly. For example, in this wireless circuit system, tear fluids with glucose
concentration above the threshold will turn off the LED pixel. It is the
first approach to apply the display pixel into a soft contact lens to visu-
alize glucose sensing, which can be used to screen for prediabetes and
monitor the glucose level daily, without the requirement of additional,
bulky, and expensive measurement equipment.
In addition, wireless operations of this smart contact lens can main-
tain the eye temperature stably without abrupt heating, ensuring the
safety of the wearer’s eyes. Furthermore, in vivo tests using a live rabbit
demonstrated its reliable operation without noticeable adverse effects.
Therefore, this soft, smart contact lens provides a platform for wireless,
continuous, and noninvasive monitoring of physiological conditions, as
well as the detection of biomarkers associated with ocular and other dis-
eases. In addition, it offers the potential for expanded applicability in
other areas, such as smart devices for drug delivery and augmented
reality.
RESULTS
Soft, smart contact lens system using stretchable and
transparent devices
Figure 1A shows the layouts on the soft, smart contact lens where the
glucose sensor, wireless power transfer circuit, and display pixel are fully
integrated using transparent and stretchable interconnects. The main
concept of this soft, smart contact lens system is the ability to monitor
the status of the wearer’s health wirelessly (that is, the glucose level in
tears) through the LED pixel. For wireless operations, the transparent
and stretchable inductive antenna and rectifier circuit were used in this
system as the power transfer circuit. This power transfer circuit can
wirelessly receive the power with ac signals using this antenna. The rec-
tifier, which is composed of Si diodes and a capacitor, is integrated with
the antenna to convert the ac signal into dc. More details about their
fabrication steps are provided in the Supplementary Materials and
Methods. The rectified dc power turns on the LED pixel and glucose
sensor. Stress-tunable hybrid structures of the substrate (with mechan-
ically reinforced islands and elastic joints) are used to protect these
electronic devices from mechanical deformations of the soft lens. The
rectifier circuit, glucose sensor, and LED pixel are located on the rein-
forced areas of this hybrid substrate. In addition, the stretchable antenna
and interconnects are formed on the elastic regions, which are com-
posed of a silicone elastomer, a commercial material for soft contact
lenses. After the full integration with the glucose sensor and LED pixel,
the transformation of the resulting sample with devices into the shape of
a lens completes the fabrication of the soft, smart contact lens. More de-
tails of this fabrication procedure are presented in Materials and
Methods and in movie S1.
Figure 1B shows the circuit diagram of the smart contact lens. In this
smart lens, the antenna receives radio frequency (RF) signals from a
transmitter (transmission distance, <9 mm), and the rectifier [combina-
tion of diode and capacitor (Cap.)] converts the ac signals into dc to turn
on the LED and operate the sensor. The main mechanism of this con-
tact lens to detect glucose levels is illustrated in Fig. 1C. Exposure to tear
fluid with a glucose concentration above the threshold induces a reduc-
tion in the sensor resistance. This reduction in the sensor resistance de-
creases the resistance of the parallel circuit of the LED and sensor,
whereas the resistance of other components (antenna and rectifier) in
the system is constant. The bias applied to the parallel circuit of the LED
and sensor reduces under the constantly applied voltage condition. This
difference in the bias applied to the LED pixel can turn it on or off.
Stretchable and transparent hybrid substrate
To use rigid electronic devices (for example, the LED pixel and rectifier
circuit with Si diodes and a capacitor) in a stretchable system, the
mechanical strain and fatigue applied on these devices should be re-
lieved. For this purpose, a substrate was formed with the hybrid struc-
ture in which the mechanically reinforced islands are embedded inside a
reversibly elastic layer. Figure 2A illustrates this hybrid substrate before
or after stretching. For the fabrication of this hybrid substrate, the me-
chanically reinforced islands (OP) of a photocurable optical polymer
(SPC-414; EOP = ~360 MPa) were photolithographically patterned with
micrometer sizes (thickness, ~50 mm) on an 800-nm-thick Cu sacrificial
layer. Then, the silicone elastomeric layer (LENS) of a soft contact lens
material (elastofilcon A; ELENS = ~0.09 MPa) was coated successively to
embed these reinforced parts with its thickness of ~100 mm. Eliminating
the Cu sacrificial layer completed the formation of the hybrid substrate.
More details about this fabrication procedure are provided in Materials
and Methods and in fig. S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
2 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 The capability to reduce the mechanical strain applied on these is-
lands was confirmed by the stretching test of this hybrid substrate (Fig.
2, B and C). Although this hybrid film was stretched up to 30% in tensile
strain, negligible strain (~0%) was applied on the reinforced islands, and
the elastic region was mainly stretched because of the significant
difference in Young’s modulus (24, 27, 28). In addition, Fig. 2B
shows that there were no gaps at the interfaces between these heter-
ogeneous regions even during the stretching states (30% in tensile
strain). Hence, these results indicate that our hybrid substrate system
can offer sufficient stretchability over the entire region, whereas the
brittle inorganic devices (LED, Si diode, and capacitor for the recti-
fier), which are located on the reinforced islands, can be protected
from the mechanical deformations.
Figure 2D and fig. S2 present the atomic force microscopy (AFM)
andscanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the hybrid substrate
with continuous interfaces between the reinforced and elastic areas. The
Fig. 1. Stretchable, transparent smart contact lens system. (A) Schematic illustration of the soft, smart contact lens. The soft, smart contact lens is composed of a hybrid
substrate, functional devices (rectifier, LED, and glucose sensor), and a transparent, stretchable conductor (for antenna and interconnects). (B) Circuit diagram of the smart contact
lens system. (C) Operation of this soft, smart contact lens. Electric power is wirelessly transmitted to the lens through the antenna. This power activates the LED pixel and the
glucose sensor. After detecting the glucose level in tear fluid above the threshold, this pixel turns off.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
3 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 2. Properties of a stretchable and transparent hybrid substrate. (A) Schematic image of the hybrid substrate where the reinforced islands are embedded in the elastic
substrate. (B) SEM images before (top) and during (bottom) 30% stretching. The arrow indicates the direction of stretching direction. Scale bars, 500 mm. (C) Effective strains on
each part along the stretching direction indicated in (B). (D) AFM image of the hybrid substrate. Black and blue arrows indicate the elastic region and the reinforced island,
respectively. Scale bar, 5 mm. (E) Photograph of the hybrid substrates molded into contact lens shape. Scale bar, 1 cm. (F) Optical transmittance (black) and haze (red) spectra of the
hybrid substrate. (G) Schematic diagram of the photographing method to identify the optical clarity of hybrid substrates. (H) Photographs taken by camera where the OP-LENS–
based hybrid substrate (left) and the SU8-LENS–based hybrid substrate (right) are located on the camera lens.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
4 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 root-mean-square (rms) surface roughness of the entire regime and the
height difference at this interface were measured and found to be less
than 3 and 5 nm, respectively. This nearly flat interface is advantageous
in reducing light scattering from the interfacial surface, and it is in close
contact with masks for photolithography. In addition, the optical char-
acteristics of this hybrid film, such as its transparency and haze, are also
important for its use as a contact lens. The difference in refractive indi-
ces of the reinforced islands and elastic parts can cause light scattering
and decrease optical transparency by increasing the haze, which will dis-
turb the wearer’s vision (34). Therefore, the refractive indices of the sil-
icone elastomer (n = 1.41) and the photocurable optical polymer for the
reinforced patterns (n = 1.407) are similarly matched. As an example,
Fig. 2E shows a photograph of a transparent contact lens produced
using this hybrid film. This film (thickness, 100 mm) comprised the
6 × 6 array of the reinforced patterns (the pair of right-angled triangle
shape, each of which measured 500 mm in length and 50 mm in thick-
ness) with elastic space of 200 mm, and the elastomer part occupied
~40% of the entire area of the film. Figure 2F shows that this hybrid
substrate exhibited superb optical transmittance (~93% at 550 nm)
and low haze (~1.6% at 550 nm). This low haze value of the hybrid
was similar to the case of a bare elastomer film with no heterogeneous
part (~1.3% at 550 nm; fig. S3). In addition, the hybrid substrate pre-
served its transmittance and haze against its mechanical stretching
(from 0 to 30% in tensile strain) (fig. S4).
To show the effect of refractive index on the wearer’s vision, two dif-
ferent kinds of hybrid films were formed using the same silicone elas-
tomer, that is, (i) one using OP as the reinforced parts and (ii) the other
using SU8 epoxy polymer as the reinforced parts (n = 1.595). Then, after
attaching these two different films onto the lens of a camera, photo-
graphs were made, as illustrated in Fig. 2G (an original photograph ta-
ken with no film is shown in fig. S5). Figure 2H demonstrates that the
OP-LENS hybrid film (Dn = 0.003) provides a clearer image with lower
haze than the SU8-LENS hybrid substrate (Dn = 0.185). This result
means that the hybrid substrate with the well-matched refractive indices
can prevent interference with the wearer’s field of view.
Characteristics of the wireless display on the
hybrid substrate
The electrical and mechanical properties of the wireless display fabri-
cated on a contact lens using the hybrid substrate were investigated,
as shown in Fig. 3. This wireless display was composed of three
electronic components (antenna, rectifier, and LED pixel), and these
three parts were integrated and fabricated on an 800-nm-thick Cu sac-
rificial layer deposited on the Si wafer. After coating a 500-nm-thick
parylene film on the Cu layer, the Si diodes and a SiO2-based capacitor
were connected in series as a rectifier circuit. Subsequently, the LED
pixel was bonded using a silver epoxy glue. After the formation of the
stretchable antenna and interconnects, the local patterns of the optical
polymer (thickness, ~50 mm) selectively covered only the integrated
form of the rectifier and LED and left the antenna and residual regions
uncovered. After casting the silicone elastic layer (thickness, ~100 mm),
removing the Cu sacrificiallayerusing wet etching, and flipping over the
resulting film, the formation of the wireless display on the hybrid sub-
strate was completed, where the rectifier and LED were embedded
inside the reinforced region (OP) and the antenna and interconnects
inside the elastic area (LENS), respectively. More details about the de-
sign and fabrication of the wireless circuit are described in figs. S6 and
S7 and in Materials and Methods. Figure 3A illustrates the schematic
layout of this wireless display.
Here, continuous networks of 1D, ultralong Ag nanofibers (AgNFs)
were used as stretchable and transparent electrodes for the antenna and
interconnects. A higher area fraction, which means higher density of
AgNFs, can be formed by electrospinning for a longer period of time,
and fig. S8A plots the Rs and optical transmittance of these AgNF
networks as a function of the area fraction. Both Rs and transmittance
decreased because their area fractions increased. AgNF networks with
an area fraction of 0.2 had a low Rs value of 0.3 ohm/sq (with transmit-
tance of 72%). In addition, the AgNF networks exhibited good
mechanical stretchability (with DR/R0 less than 10% under a tensile strain
of 30%), as plotted in fig. S8B. Thus, this sample showed superior
mechanical durability as a form of the antennas structure on curvilinear
surfaces such as contact lenses. The AgNF networks (maximum thick-
ness, 2 mm) were patterned for the antenna witha single-loopstructure
(diameter of antenna, 12 mm; width, 0.5 mm), as shown in Fig. 3A. This
single-loop antenna of the smart lens, which can be located outside the
pupilofa person’seye (diameterof pupil, ~6 mm),preventsinterference
with the wearer’s field of view. Figure S8C presents the power transfer
efficiency of this antenna measured at the distance of 5 mm from a
transmitting coil, and the antenna most effectively absorbed RF energy
at the frequency of 50 MHz, witha power transfer efficiency of 21.5%. In
addition, the antenna received sufficient voltage (more than 10 V) to turn
on LEDs wirelessly at 50 MHz (fig. S8D). Because of the outstanding
stretchability of AgNF networks, the antenna inside the elastic region
of the smart contact lens had a stable performance at 50 MHz with neg-
ligible degradation of power reception, even after mechanical stretching
up to 30% in tensile strain (Fig. 3B).
For the conversion of the wirelessly transmitted ac bias to dc, a rec-
tifier needs to be integrated into the antenna. The rectifier consisted of Si
nanomembrane diodes connected with a capacitor in series, and the
characteristics of the individual devices, with dimensions of 1.8 ×
0.8 mm, are described in fig. S9. This rectifier was embedded inside
the reinforced region of the lens and located outside the pupil where
it would not interfere with the wearer’s field of vision. Figure 3C shows
that the Si diodes in this rectifier had a negligible change in their elec-
trical performance even during the stretching state (30% in tensile
strain) due to the hybrid substrate. This result proves that the hybrid
substrate can protect ordinary electronics from mechanical fractures.
In addition, the rectifier converts the ac signal at 50 MHz into a dc bias
of 10 Vrms (Fig. 3D).
The fabricated wireless display system, including the antenna, recti-
fier, and LED, using the hybrid substrate is stretchable, but it is flat, as
shown in Fig. 3E. This flat and stretchable sample can be molded into a
contact lens shape, as shown in fig. S10 and movie S1. Figure 3F shows
the resulting soft contact lens (after molding) on an artificial eye. The
resulting smart contact lens can receive inductively coupled ac power
wirelessly from a transmitting coil (at 50 MHz) at the distance of
5 mm. Then, the transmitted ac signal can be rectified through the half-
wave rectifying circuit to dc power to turn on the LED pixel (Fig. 3F and
movie S2). Because the elastic area of the smart contact lens absorbs
most of the applied strain, the integrated devices can operate reliably
in the form of a soft contact lens.
Glucose sensing with integrated smart contact lens
The wireless display was subsequently integrated with a glucose sensor
to produce a soft, smart contact lens that can respond to the changes in
glucose level and simultaneously display the sensing information
through the LED pixel (Fig. 1C). The main mechanism of glucose
sensing in this system is that for the selective and sensitive glucose
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
5 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 detection, glucose oxidase (GOD; b-D-glucose from Aspergillus niger)
was immobilized on the graphene surface with a pyrene linker through
the p-p stacking interaction (35, 36). The part where GOD is linked to
the pyrene by the amide bond was generated through the nucleophilic
substitution reaction of N-hydroxysuccinimide (36). When glucose
passes through the graphene channel of this sensor, it can be oxidized
by GOD. After the oxidation, the reduced GOD can be oxidized again
by reacting with oxygen molecules, which results in the formation of
hydrogen peroxide as a by-product. This hydrogen peroxide is also
decomposed, producing oxygen, protons (H+ ion), and electrons
(14, 16, 37). The protons cause the positive charge transfer effect of
the graphene channel (p-type). The main reactions that occurred on
the graphene channel are presented in fig. S11. Because the major
carrier density is proportional to the glucose concentration, we can de-
tect the relative change in resistance (DR/R0) of the sensor as a function
of the glucose concentration generated from the above reaction pro-
cesses (14, 38). However, the continuous formation of H2O2 can de-
grade the enzymatic activity of GOD, lowering the sensitivity of this
glucose sensor. Therefore, to remove H2O2 immediately, catalase
(CAT), which can decompose H2O2 into H2O and O2, was coimmobi-
lized with GOD on the surface of the graphene channel (39). The use of
CAT improved the sensitivity of the sensor by increasing the enzymatic
activity of GOD (Fig. 4A). The average glucose levels of tears for normal
people are in the range of 0.2 to 0.6 mM, but this average can exceed
0.9 mM for people with diabetes (40), and this sensor can detect these
wide ranges (Fig. 4B). The relative change in resistance (DR/R0) of this
sensor decreased linearly with the glucose concentration, as shown in
the inset of Fig. 4B. The response time of the sensor is defined to be the
time required for the sensor to reach 90% of the response. Therefore, the
response time is measured as ~1.3 s, as shown in fig. S12. In addition,
the sensitivity is defined as the slope of calibration curve (the inset of
Fig. 4B), so the sensitivity is calculated as approximately −22.72%/mM.
The measured signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at 0.1 mM was 23.87, and the
minimum detectable concentration (for the case of an SNR of ~3) was
approximately estimated to be about 12.57 mM. Because human tears
contain various species besides glucose, the selectivity of this sensor to
glucose was tested using (i) a buffered solution and (ii) a solution of
artificial tears. After adding glucose at the desired concentrations to
Fig. 3. Wireless display circuit on the hybrid substrate. (A) Schematic image of the wireless display circuit. The rectifier and LED are in the reinforced regions. The transparent,
stretchable AgNF-based antenna and interconnects are in an elastic region. (B) Relative change in transmitted voltage by antenna as a function of applied strain. (C) Characteristics
of Si diode on the hybrid substrate by applying 0 and 30% in tensile strain. (D) Rectified properties of the fabricated rectifier. (E) Photograph of wireless display on the hybrid
substrate. Scale bar, 1 cm. (F) Photographs (left, off-state; right, on-state) of operating wireless display with lens shape located on the artificial eye. Scale bars, 1 cm.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
6 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 these two solutions, the response (DR/R0) of this sensor was compared
to these two cases. The deviation from the sensor response (DR/R0) was
not significant for the cases of buffered or tear solutions, as shown in
Fig. 4C, which indicates that other species in tears (besides glucose) had
a negligible interference with this glucose sensor. In addition, the glu-
cose sensor integrated on a soft contact lens was stretched, and its re-
sponse was measured during the stretching. Figure 4D shows that the
glucose sensor with the hybrid substrate has a negligible change in its
resistance for a tensile strain of up to 30%, unlike the glucose sensor on a
bare elastomeric film (with no use of the hybrid substrate). Despite the
use of the soft lens, the location of this sensor on the reinforced part of
the hybrid substrate prevents it from being damaged by mechanical de-
formations of the soft contact lens.
This glucose sensor was integrated with the wireless display (the
LED pixel, rectifying circuit, and antenna) using the hybrid substrate
as a fully functional smart contact lens. After fabricating the wireless
display on the hybrid substrate, the Cu sacrificial layer was etched away
to delaminate the sample. Subsequently, a parylene layer was partially
etched to passivate the entire device region, except the channel part of
the sensor to detect the glucose solution. The graphene channel was
transferred onto this IC. Subsequently, these integrated components
were embedded inside a soft contact lens using the molding process
(movie S1). During this molding step, the graphene channel was open
and locally uncovered by the lens material (silicone elastomer) for the
physical contact of the channel with tears. Finally, GOD and CAT were
immobilized on the surface of graphene to serve as a glucose sensor.
Figure 5 (A and B) shows a schematic illustration and a photograph
of the fully integrated contact lens, respectively. The AgNF-based elec-
trodes and devices in the resulting smart contact lens are passivated by
the parylene layer such that this passivation layer of parylene, as a dif-
fusional barrier, prevents the leakage of AgNFs and simultaneously en-
sures the protection of the AgNFs from tear fluid (41). As presented in
Fig. 5C, the resulting lens can prevent interference with the wearer’s
field of vision by placing the opaque components (LED and metal
patterns) outside the human pupil and by matching the refractive indi-
ces of the reinforced material and the silicone elastomer with negligible
deviation (Dn = 0.003). The long-term stability of this smart lens was
studied for repeatability during multiple usage by storing in an artificial
tear solution for up to 48 hours. There is negligible degradation of the
response even after 48 hours, which suggests that the enzymes maintain
their activity for at least 48 hours (fig. S13A). In addition, this lens also
showed nearly constant output voltages through the antenna-rectifier
even after 48 hours because they are passivated by the hybrid substrate
and parylene, which can act as a diffusional barrier (fig. S13B). Further-
more, its mechanical stability against the cyclic deformation was also
investigated. After 5000 cycles of stretching and releasing with the ten-
sile strain of 30%, the smart contact lens operated stably with negligible
degradation (fig. S13C). Because the average glucose level of tears for
fasting diabetic patients typically exceeds 0.9 mM and the concentration
for fasting people without diabetes is below 0.6 mM (39), a glucose
Fig. 4. Characterization of the glucose sensor. (A) Difference in response between glucose concentrations of 0.1 and 0.9 mM for the sensor with GOD functionalization (black)
and GOD-CAT functionalization (red). (B) Real-time continuous monitoring according to the glucose concentrations (inset, calibration curves of the glucose sensor). (C) Electrical
response for the sensors with different solutions (red, buffered solution; blue, solution of artificial tear). Each data point indicates the average for 10 samples, and error bars
represent the SD. (D) Relative changes in the resistance of glucose sensor as a function of tensile strain (red, sensor on the hybrid substrate; black, sensor on the elastomeric film
with no use of the hybrid substrate).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
7 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 concentration of 0.9 mM was chosen in our circuit as the threshold to
diagnose diabetes with the LED on/off indication. This threshold can be
tuned simply by changing the resistance of the sensor. As the glucose
concentration in tear fluid increases, the resistance of the sensor is re-
duced. This reduction in the sensor resistance decreases the resistance of
the parallel circuit of the LED and sensor (Fig. 1B). However, the
resistance of other components in this system is unchanged. This results
in the reduction of the bias applied to the parallel circuit of the LED and
sensor under the constantly applied voltage condition. Therefore, the
bias applied to the LED pixel and the luminance of the LED decrease
as the glucose concentration increases until the threshold (fig. S14).
When the glucose concentration is above 0.9 mM, this pixel turns off
because the bias applied to the LED becomes below than its turn-off
voltage. Figure 5D shows a live rabbit wearing this smart contact lens
for an in vivo test. After putting this soft lens onto the rabbit’s eye, we
were able to wirelessly monitor the increase of the glucose concentration
above the threshold by observing the LED on/off operation. For the glu-
cose concentration of more than 0.9 mM, the LED turned off, as shown
in right image of Fig. 5D and movie S3. The rabbit showed no signs of
abnormal behavior, and this smart lens remained stable during repeated
eye blinks. The stable status of the smart contact lens was proven by the
operations with higher power transfer (movie S3). The higher power in-
duces the increase of current in the LED to turn it on, although the
resistance of the sensor is reduced by glucose. Hence, the LED pixel
turned off because the glucose concentration was over the threshold,
not because of damage to the circuit. The design is such that the LED
Fig. 5. Soft, smart contact lens for detecting glucose. (A) Schematic image of the soft, smart contact lens. The rectifier, the LED, and the glucose sensor are located on the
reinforced regions. The transparent, stretchable AgNF-based antenna and interconnects are located on an elastic region. (B) Photograph of the fabricated soft, smart contact lens.
Scale bar, 1 cm. (C) Photograph of the smart contact lens on an eye of a mannequin. Scale bar, 1 cm. (D) Photographs of the in vivo test on a live rabbit using the soft, smartcontact
lens. Left: Turn-on state of the LED in the soft, smart contact lens mounted on the rabbit’s eye. Middle: Injection of tear fluids withthe glucose concentration of 0.9 mM. Right: Turn-
off state of the LED after detecting the increased glucose concentration. Scale bars, 1 cm. (E) Heat tests while a live rabbit is wearing the operating soft, smart contact lens. Scale
bars, 1 cm.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
8 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 turns off when the high glucose level is detected, which is counter-
intuitive. Therefore, a design improvement for a smart lens system that
provides an intuitive status to support usability represents a promising
area for future work (for example, monitoring the level of biomarkers
via a smartphone). Furthermore, the heat generation was monitored
using an infrared camera during the wireless operation of this lens
(Fig. 5E and movie S4). Although the rabbit was wearing the wirelessly
operating lens circuit, the temperature of this lens device was main-
tained at ~37°C without any significant generation of heat. Although
the wireless power transfer from the transmitting coil to the lens
increased the temperature of this transmitting coil to ~42°C, which
was slightly higher than the temperature of the surroundings, its wire-
less function prevented this coil from touching the rabbit’s eye or eyelid
with a gap of ~5 mm. Furthermore, according to simulation results for
specific absorption rate (SAR) for a person, the maximum SAR value of
our smart contact lens system was 1.399 W/kg (fig. S15), which is much
lower than the regulation value (10 W/kg) (42).
DISCUSSION
In conclusion, we developed a method to fabricate a soft, smart contact
lens that can monitor glucose levels in tears to indicate the diabetic con-
dition in real time through a display with wireless operations. For this
smart lens, electronic components (that is, the glucose sensor, LED pix-
el, rectifier circuit, and the stretchable, transparent antenna) were
integrated onto the mechanical stress-tunable hybrid substrate with
well-matched refractive indices for high optical transparency and low
haze. After molding this to the round shape of the soft contact lens,
theintegratedelectronic systemoperatedreliablyduringmechanicalde-
formations, including bending and stretching. This rapid molding ap-
proach, together with conventional processing steps (for example,
photolithography and metallization by evaporation), can represent its
potential for large-scale mass production. The in vivo tests using a live
rabbit, including the monitoring of the temperature change on the rab-
bit’s eye, provided the substantial promise of future smart contact lenses
for noninvasive health care monitoring using human eyes and tears.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of the hybrid substrates
For the hybrid substrate, an 800-nm-thick Cu film was evaporated as a
sacrificial layer on a Si wafer. Optical polymer (SPC-414, EFiRON) was
spin-coated (1500 rpm for 30 s) for the thickness of 50 mm and photo-
lithographically patterned as reinforced parts. Subsequently, an elastic
polymer (elastofilcon A, CooperVision) mixing base and a curing
agent with the ratio of 10:1 were also spin-coated (1000 rpm for
30 s) for the thickness of 100 mm and cured at 100°C for 1 hour. After
that, the Cu sacrificial layer was etched by the diluted etching solution of
FeCl3/HCl/H2O [1:1:20 (v/v)] to delaminate the hybrid substrate from
the Si wafer.
For the SU8-based hybrid substrate, SU8 3050 (MicroChem Corp.)
was spin-coated (3000 rpm for 30 s) to a thickness of 50 mm and pat-
terned as reinforced parts. The next steps were identical to the optical
fiber polymer-based hybrid substrate.
Embedding of the hybrid substrate or the IC in the
contact lens
For the embedded structures, the hybrid substrate or the fabricated cir-
cuit on the hybrid substrate was placed within the mold for the contact
lens. Subsequently, the contact lens material was fulfilled and thermally
cured in 100°C for 1 hour, with pressing at 313 kPa. After curing, the
hybrid substrate or IC embedded in the contact lens was detached from
the mold.
Fabrication of the wireless display on a smart contact lens
To assemble the stretchable and transparent antenna for wireless power
transition, the AgNFs were simultaneously electrospun on the sample
where the rectifier circuit was manufactured. Then, the electrospun
AgNFs were patterned by photolithography and a wet etching process.
After that, the LEDpixel wasbondedto the circuit by a silver epoxy glue.
Subsequently, the hybrid substrate was manufactured on the sample,
and then, the sacrificial layer was etched to delaminate the wireless
display. The molding process for the contact lens shape was identical
with the embedding of the hybrid substrate or the IC in the contact lens.
Fabrication of glucose sensor
Forthecharacterizationoftheglucosesensor,onaSiwaferwitha300-nm-
thick thermal oxide layer (for electrical measurements), Cr/Au (3:100 nm),
which served as source and drain, was evaporated and patterned by
photolithography.Subsequently, agraphenelayersynthesizedbychemical
vapor deposition (CVD) was transferred onto the sample and patterned
by photolithography to form the channel (width, 300 mm; length, 500 mm)
simultaneously. Then, the SU8 layer was patterned to open only channel
regions to functionalize the graphene channel. To immobilize GOD and
CAT on the graphene channel for the efficient detection of glucose, the
fabricated sensor was placed in 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl es-
ter (1 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) in methanol for 2 hours at room tempera-
ture, followed by cleaning with clean methanol. After that, the sensor
was placed in GOD (10 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) and CAT (2.0 mg/ml;
Sigma-Aldrich) in deionized (DI) water for 18 hours at room tempera-
ture, rinsed with clean DI water, and then dried with nitrogen gas.
For the integration of glucose sensor with wireless display, the wire-
less display for the smart contact lens was delaminated from handling
wafer by etching the Cu layer. Subsequently, the parylene layer was par-
tially etched to integrate the electrodes and graphene channel. After
that, the graphene channel was transferred to form the sensing channel,
and embedding this wireless display sensor in the contact lens was con-
ducted in the same manner as the embedding of the wireless display in
the contact lens after the graphene channel was covered by the silaned
polydimethylsiloxane mask. The immobilization procedure for the glu-
cose sensor was identical with the above process.
Rabbit experiments
All in vivo studies were conducted according to the guidelines of the
National Institutes of Health for care and use of laboratory animals
andwiththeapprovaloftheInstituteofAnimalCareandUseCommittee
of the Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
(UNISTIACUC-16-19). The Institute of Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee of UNIST was the ethics review committee. For the in vivo exper-
iments, a male New Zealand white rabbit was used.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/1/eaap9841/DC1
Supplementary Materials and Methods
fig. S1. Fabrication processing steps of the hybrid substrate.
fig. S2. AFM data analysis.
fig. S3. Optical transmittance (black) and haze (red) spectra of the silicone elastomeric film.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
9 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 fig. S4. The variation of optical properties against mechanical stretching of the hybrid
substrate (from 0 to 30% in tensile strain).
fig. S5. Original image for the photograph test to identify the clarity of hybrid substrate.
fig. S6. Wireless display circuit composed of an antenna, a rectifier, and an LED pixel.
fig. S7. Fabrication procedures of wireless display on the hybrid substrate.
fig. S8. Characteristics of the stretchable, transparent AgNF electrode as antenna.
fig. S9. Characteristics of the Si diode and SiO2 capacitor.
fig. S10. Sequential schematic images to transform to the lens shape.
fig. S11. Mechanism of glucose sensing on graphene channel.
fig. S12. The magnified real-time sensing result (at the first detection of glucose level) to verify
the response time.
fig. S13. Stability of the smart contact lens system.
fig. S14. The relationship between the glucose concentration and luminance of the LED.
fig. S15. SAR simulation result.
table S1. Comparison with other noninvasive glucose monitoring technologies.
movie S1. Embedding procedure of the hybrid substrate in the contact lens.
movie S2. Wireless operation of wireless display with lens shape.
movie S3. In vivo test of soft, smart contact lens for wireless operation.
movie S4. In vivo test of soft, smart contact lens for heat generation test.
References (43–45)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. T. Yokota, P. Zalar, M. Kaltenbrunner, H. Jinno, N. Matsuhisa, H. Kitanosako, Y. Tachibana,
W. Yukita, M. Koizumi, T. Someya, Ultraflexible organic photonic skin. Sci. Adv. 2,
e1501856 (2016).
2. B. C.-K. Tee, A. Chortos, A. Berndt, A. K. Nguyen, A. Tom, A. McGuire, Z. C. Lin,
K. Tien, W.-G. Bae, H. Wang, P. Mei, H.-H. Chou, B. Cui, K. Deisseroth, T. N. Ng, Z. Bao, A
skin-inspired organic digital mechanoreceptor. Science 350, 313–316 (2015).
3. J. Kim, G. A. Salvatore, H. Araki, A. M. Chiarelli, Z. Xie, A. Banks, X. Sheng, Y. Liu, J. W. Lee,
K.-I. Jang, S. Y. Heo, K. Cho, H. Luo, B. Zimmerman, J. Kim, L. Yan, X. Feng, S. Xu,
M. Fabiani, G. Gratton, Y. Huang, U. Paik, J. A. Rogers, Battery-free, stretchable optoelectronic
systems for wireless optical characterization of the skin. Sci. Adv. 2, e1600418 (2016).
4. S. I. Park, D. S. Brenner, G. Shin, C. D. Morgan, B. A. Copits, H. U. Chung, M. Y. Pullen,
K. N. Noh, S. Davidson, S. J. Oh, J. Yoon, K.-I. Jang, V. K. Samineni, M. Norman,
J. G. Grajales-Reyes, S. K. Vogt, S. S. Sundaram, K. M. Wilson, J. S. Ha, R. Xu, T. Pan, T.-i. Kim,
Y. Huang, M. C. Montana, J. P. Golden, M. R. Bruchas, R. W. Gereau IV, J. A. Rogers, Soft,
stretchable, fully implantable miniaturized optoelectronic systems for wireless
optogenetics. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 1280–1286 (2015).
5. C. Wang, D. Hwang, Z. Yu, K. Takei, J. Park, T. Chen, B. Ma, A. Javey, User-interactive
electronic skin for instantaneous pressure visualization. Nat. Mater. 12, 899–904 (2013).
6. D.-H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y.-S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis,
E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang,
M. R. Zakin, B. Litt, J. A. Rogers, Dissolvable films of silk fibroin for ultrathin conformal bio-
integrated electronics. Nat. Mater. 9, 511–517 (2010).
7. H. Chu, H. Jang, Y. Lee, Y. Chae, J.-H. Ahn, Conformal, graphene-based triboelectric
nanogenerator for self-powered wearable electronics. Nano Energy 27, 298–305 (2016).
8. D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao,
A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T.-i. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Xu, M. Li, H.-J. Chung, H. Keum,
M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y.-W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman, J. A. Rogers,
Epidermal electronics. Science 333, 838–843 (2011).
9. W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota,
H. Shiraki, D. Kiriya, D.-H. Lien, G. A. Brooks, R. W. Davis, A. Javey, Fully integrated wearable
sensor arrays for multiplexed in situ perspiration analysis. Nature 529, 509–514 (2016).
10. J. G. McCall, T.-i. Kim, G. Shin, X. Huang, Y. H. Jung, R. Al-Hasani, F. G. Omenetto,
M. R. Bruchas, J. A. Rogers, Fabrication and application of flexible, multimodal
light-emitting devices for wireless optogenetics. Nat. Protoc. 8, 2413–2428 (2013).
11. K.-I. Jang, S. Y. Han, S. Xu, K. E. Mathewson, Y. Zhang, J.-W. Jeong, G.-T. Kim, R. C. Webb,
J. W. Lee, T. J. Dawidczyk, R. H. Kim, Y. M. Song, W.-H. Yeo, S. Kim, H. Cheng, S. I. Rhee,
J. Chung, B. Kim, H. U. Chung, D. Lee, Y. Yang, M. Cho, J. G. Gaspar, R. Carbonari,
M. Fabiani, G. Gratton, Y. Huang, J. A. Rogers, Rugged and breathable forms of stretchable
electronics with adherent composite substrates for transcutaneous monitoring.
Nat. Commun. 5, 4779 (2014).
12. D. Kim, D. Kim, H. Lee, Y. R. Jeong, S.-J. Lee, G. Yang, H. Kim, G. Lee, S. Jeon, G. Zi, J. Kim,
J. S. Ha, Body-attachable and stretchable multisensors integrated with wirelessly
rechargeable energy storage devices. Adv. Mater. 28, 748–756 (2016).
13. N. M. Farandos, A. K. Yetisen, M. J. Monteiro, C. R. Lowe, S. H. Yun, Contact lens sensors in
ocular diagnostics. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 4, 792–810 (2015).
14. J. Kim, M. Kim, M.-S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Ji, Y.-T. Kim, J. Park, K. Na, K.-H. Bae, H. K. Kim, F. Bien,
C. Y. Lee, J.-U. Park, Wearable smart sensor systems integrated on soft contact lenses for
wireless ocular diagnostics. Nat. Commun. 8, 14997 (2017).
15. M. X. Chu, K. Miyajima, D. Takahashi, T. Arakawa, K. Sano, S.-i. Sawada, H. Kudo, Y. Iwasaki,
K. Akiyoshi, M. Mochizuki, K. Mitsubayashi, Soft contact lens biosensor for in situ
monitoring of tear glucose as non-invasive blood sugar assessment. Talanta 83, 960–965
(2011).
16. H. Yao, A. J. Shum, M. Cowan, I. Lähdesmäki, B. A. Parviz, A contact lens with embedded
sensor for monitoring tear glucose level. Biosens. Bioelectron. 26, 3290–3296 (2011).
17. A. R. Lingley, M. Ali, Y. Liao, R. Mirjalili, M. Klonner, M. Sopanen, S. Suihkonen, T. Shen,
B. P. Otis, H. Lipsanen, B. A. Parviz, A single-pixel wireless contact lens display.
J. Micromech. Microeng. 21, 125014 (2011).
18. G.-Z. Chen, I.-S. Chan, D. C. C. Lam, Capacitive contact lens sensor for continuous
non-invasive intraocular pressure monitoring. Sens. Actuators A Phys. 203, 112–118 (2013).
19. S. De Smedt, Noninvasive intraocular pressure monitoring: Current insights. Clin.
Ophthalmol. 9, 1385–1392 (2015).
20. Y.-T. Liao, H. Yao, A. Lingley, B. Parviz, B. P. Otis, A 3-mW CMOS glucose sensor for wireless
contact-lens tear glucose monitoring. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 47, 335–344 (2012).
21. D. Piso, P. Veiga-Crespo, E. Vecino, Modern monitoring intraocular pressure sensing
devices based on application specific integrated circuits. J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol. 3,
301–309 (2012).
22. J. Pandey, Y.-T. Liao, A. Lingley, R. Mirjalili, B. Parviz, B. P. Otis, A fully integrated
RF-powered contact lens with a single element display. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 4,
454–461 (2010).
23. M. Leonardi, P. Leuenberger, D. Bertrand, A. Bertsch, P. Renaud, First steps toward
noninvasive intraocular pressure monitoring with a sensing contact lens. Invest.
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 45, 3113–3117 (2004).
24. I. M. Graz, D. P. J. Cotton, A. Robinson, S. P. Lacour, Silicone substrate with in situ strain
relief for stretchable thin-film transistors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 124101 (2011).
25. R. M. Erb, K. H. Cherenack, R. E. Stahel, R. Libanori, T. Kinkeldei, N. Münzenrieder,
G. Tröster, A. R. Studart, Locally reinforced polymer-based composites for elastic
electronics. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 4, 2860–2864 (2012).
26. M. Kim, J. Park, S. Ji, S.-H. Shin, S.-Y. Kim, Y.-C. Kim, J.-Y. Kim, J.-U. Park, Fully-integrated,
bezel-less transistor arrays using reversibly foldable interconnects and stretchable
origami substrates. Nanoscale 8, 9504–9510 (2016).
27. A. Romeo, Q. Liu, Z. Suo, S. P. Lacour, Elastomeric substrates with embedded stiff
platforms for stretchable electronics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 131904 (2013).
28. S. Ji, B. G. Hyun, K. Kim, S. Y. Lee, S.-H. Kim, J.-Y. Kim, M. H. Song, J.-U. Park,
Photo-patternable and transparent films using cellulose nanofibers for stretchable
origami electronics. NPG Asia Mater. 8, e299 (2016).
29. R. Libanori, R. M. Erb, A. Reiser, H. Le Ferrand, M. J. Süess, R. Spolenak, A. R. Studart,
Stretchable heterogeneous composites with extreme mechanical gradients. Nat.
Commun. 3, 1265 (2012).
30. M.-S. Lee, K. Lee, S.-Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Park, K.-H. Choi, H.-K. Kim, D.-G. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, S. Nam,
J.-U. Park, High-performance, transparent, and stretchable electrodes using
graphene–metal nanowire hybrid structures. Nano Lett. 13, 2814–2821 (2013).
31. B. W. An, B. G. Hyun, S.-Y. Kim, M. Kim, M.-S. Lee, K. Lee, J. B. Koo, H. Y. Chu, B.-S. Bae,
J.-U. Park, Stretchable and transparent electrodes using hybrid structures of
graphene–metal nanotrough networks with high performances and ultimate uniformity.
Nano Lett. 14, 6322–6328 (2014).
32. J. Kim, M.-S. Lee, S. Jeon, M. Kim, S. Kim, K. Kim, F. Bien, S. Y. Hong, J.-U. Park, Highly
transparent and stretchable field-effect transistor sensors using graphene–nanowire
hybrid nanostructures. Adv. Mater. 27, 3292–3297 (2015).
33. J. Jang, B. G. Hyun, S. Ji, E. Cho, B. W. An, W. H. Cheong, J.-U. Park, Rapid production of
large-area, transparent and stretchable electrodes using metal nanofibers as wirelessly
operated wearable heaters. NPG Asia Mater. 9, e432 (2017).
34. H. G. Craighead, J. Cheng, S. Hackwood, New display based on electrically induced index-
matching in an inhomogeneous medium. Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 22–24 (1982).
35. K. Besteman, J.-O. Lee, F. G. M. Wiertz, H. A. Heering, C. Dekker, Enzyme-coated carbon
nanotubes as single-molecule biosensors. Nano Lett. 3, 727–730 (2003).
36. R. J. Chen, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, H. Dai, Noncovalent sidewall functionalization of
single-walled carbon nanotubes for protein immobilization. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123,
3838–3839 (2001).
37. J. Liu, M. Agarwal, K. Varahramyan, Glucose sensor based on organic thin film transistor
using glucose oxidase and conducting polymer. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 135, 195–199
(2008).
38. M. Ngoepe, Y. E. Choonara, C. Tyagi, L. K. Tomar, L. C. du Toit, P. Kumar, V. M. K. Ndesendo,
V. Pillay, Integration of biosensors and drug delivery technologies for early detection and
chronic management of illness. Sensors 13, 7680–7713 (2013).
39. S. Singh, M. McShane, Enhancing the longevity of microparticle-based glucose sensors
towards 1 month continuous operation. Biosens. Bioelectron. 25, 1075–1081 (2010).
40. D. K. Sen, G. S. Sarin, Tear glucose levels in normal people and in diabetic patients. Br. J.
Ophthalmol. 64, 693–695 (1980).
41. D. C. Rodger, J. D. Weiland, M. S. Humayun, Y.-C. Tai, Scalable high lead-count parylene
package for retinal prostheses. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 117, 107–114 (2006).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
10 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 42. IEEE, IEEE standard for safety levels with respect to human exposure to radio frequency
electromagnetic fields, 3 kHz to 300 GHz, in IEEE Std C951-2005 (Revision of IEEE Std
C951-1991) (IEEE, 2006), 238 pp.
43. H. Lee, T. K. Choi, Y. B. Lee, H. R. Cho, R. Ghaffari, L. Wang, H. J. Choi, T. D. Chung, N. Lu,
T. Hyeon, S. H. Choi, D.-H. Kim, A graphene-based electrochemical device with
thermoresponsive microneedles for diabetes monitoring and therapy. Nat. Nanotechnol.
11, 566–572 (2016).
44. A. Koh, D. Kang, Y. Xue, S. Lee, R. M. Pielak, J. Kim, T. Hwang, S. Min, A. Banks, P. Bastien,
M. C. Manco, L. Wang, K. R. Ammann, K.-I. Jang, P. Won, S. Han, R. Ghaffari, U. Paik,
M. J. Slepian, G. Balooch, Y. Huang, J. A. Rogers, A soft, wearable microfluidic device for the
capture, storage, and colorimetric sensing of sweat. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 366ra165 (2016).
45. T. Arakawa, Y. Kuroki, H. Nitta, P. Chouhan, K. Toma, S.-i. Sawada, S. Takeuchi, T. Sekita,
K. Akiyoshi, S. Minakuchi, K. Mitsubayashi, Mouthguard biosensor with telemetry
system for monitoring of saliva glucose: A novel cavitas sensor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 84,
106–111 (2016).
Acknowledgments
Funding: This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and ICT and the Ministry of
Trade, Industry and Energy of Korea through the National Research Foundation
(2016R1A2B3013592 and 2016R1A5A1009926), the Nano-Material Technology Development
Program (2015M3A7B4050308 and 2016M3A7B4910635), the Convergence Technology
Development Program for Bionic Arm (NRF-2017M3C1B2085316), the Industrial Technology
Innovation Program (10080577), and the Pioneer Research Center Program (NRF-
2014M3C1A3001208). Also, the authors thank CooperVision Awards and acknowledge
financial support by the Development Program (1.170009.01) funded by UNIST. Author
contributions: J.P., J.K., and S.-Y.K. carried out the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote
the manuscript. W.H.C., J.J., Y.-G.P., K.N., Y.-T.K., and J.H.H. performed the experiments.
C.Y.L. contributed to the project planning. J.H.L., F.B., and J.-U.P. oversaw all the research
phases and revised the manuscript. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript.
Competing interests: All authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data
and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are
present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper
may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 17 September 2017
Accepted 14 December 2017
Published 24 January 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aap9841
Citation: J. Park, J. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, W. H. Cheong, J. Jang, Y.-G. Park, K. Na, Y.-T. Kim, J. H. Heo,
C. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, F. Bien, J.-U. Park, Soft, smart contact lenses with integrations of wireless
circuits, glucose sensors, and displays. Sci. Adv. 4, eaap9841 (2018).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Park et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaap9841
24 January 2018
11 of 11
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 displays
Soft, smart contact lenses with integrations of wireless circuits, glucose sensors, and
Hyuk Heo, Chang Young Lee, Jung Heon Lee, Franklin Bien and Jang-Ung Park
Jihun Park, Joohee Kim, So-Yun Kim, Woon Hyung Cheong, Jiuk Jang, Young-Geun Park, Kyungmin Na, Yun-Tae Kim, Jun
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aap9841
 (1), eaap9841.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/1/eaap9841
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/01/22/4.1.eaap9841.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/1/eaap9841#BIBL
This article cites 44 articles, 7 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
