 ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 16, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2018
338
Mental Health Messages in Prominent Mental Health Apps
ABSTRACT
PURPOSE Many who seek primary health care advice about mental health may 
be using mobile applications (apps) claiming to improve well-being or relieve 
symptoms. We aimed to identify how prominent mental health apps frame men-
tal health, including who has problems and how they should be managed.
METHODS We conducted a qualitative content analysis of advertising material for 
mental health apps found online in the United States, the United Kingdom, Can-
ada, and Australia during late 2016. Apps were included if they explicitly refer-
enced mental health diagnoses or symptoms and offered diagnosis and guidance, 
or made health claims. Two independent coders analyzed app store descriptions 
and linked websites using a structured, open-ended instrument. We conducted 
interpretive analysis to identify key themes and the range of messages.
RESULTS We identified 61 mental health apps: 34 addressed predominantly 
anxiety, panic, and stress (56%), 16 addressed mood disorders (26%), and 11 
addressed well-being or other mental health issues (18%). Apps described men-
tal health problems as being psychological symptoms, a risk state, or lack of 
life achievements. Mental health problems were framed as present in everyone, 
but everyone was represented as employed, white, and in a family. Explana-
tions about mental health focused on abnormal responses to mild triggers, with 
minimal acknowledgment of external stressors. Therapeutic strategies included 
relaxation, cognitive guidance, and self-monitoring. Apps encouraged frequent 
use and promoted personal responsibility for improvement.
CONCLUSIONS Mental health apps may promote medicalization of normal men-
tal states and imply individual responsibility for mental well-being. Within the 
health care clinician-patient relationship, such messages should be challenged, 
where appropriate, to prevent overdiagnosis and ensure supportive health care 
where needed.
Ann Fam Med 2018;16:338-342. https://doi.org/10.1370/afm.2260.
INTRODUCTION
T
here are thousands of commercially available, mobile applications 
(apps) for mental health, which are hugely popular with the public.1 
When persons with mental distress seek assistance from health care 
practitioners, it is likely that many of them will already be using mental 
health apps.2,3
Mental health apps offer tools for self-diagnosis, monitoring, symp-
tom management, and treatment.4,5 A recent meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials of apps for depression found that app users experienced a 
decrease in their depressive symptoms,6 although others found that com-
puterized cognitive behavioral therapy offers no additional benefit beyond 
usual clinician care.7 Importantly, the few scientifically evaluated apps are 
often unavailable to the public, and evidence for efficacy other than for 
depression remains limited. Nevertheless, apps are likely to shape public 
perceptions about mental illnesses and symptom management.8-10
Given the enthusiasm for mental health apps shown by governments, 
health services, and the public,1,11-14 it seems timely to analyze app advertis-
ing critically to identify and evaluate the kinds of messages about mental 
health they contain. We conducted a qualitative content analysis of mental 
Lisa Parker, PhD, MBBS1
Lisa Bero, PhD1
Donna Gillies, PhD2
Melissa Raven, MPsych(Clin), 
MMedSci(ClinEpid), PhD3
Barbara Mintzes, PhD1
Jon Jureidini, PhD, MBBS, 
FRANZCP3
Quinn Grundy, PhD, RN1
1Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney School 
of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia
2Mental Health Services, Western Sydney 
Local Health District, Westmead, New 
South Wales, Australia 
3Critical and Ethical Mental Health 
research group, The University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Conflicts of interest: authors report none. 
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR
Lisa Parker, PhD, MBBS
Charles Perkins Centre
The University of Sydney
NSW, 2006, Australia
lisa.parker@sydney.edu.au
 MENTAL HEALTH APPS
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 16, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2018
339
health messages guided by the following research ques-
tions: (1) How do prominent mental health apps frame 
mental health and illness? (2) What does this framing 
suggest about the pattern and causation of mental 
health problems and how problems can be managed?
METHODS
We conducted a critical, interpretive qualitative con-
tent analysis of prominent mobile mental health apps 
in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and 
Australia to understand their social, cultural, and politi-
cal dimensions.10 The research team included mental 
health clinicians, qualitative researchers, and represen-
tatives of a consumer advocacy organization.5
Sampling
App stores differ by country; their search algorithms 
are proprietary, personalized, and localized; and the 
population of apps changes rapidly.15 We identified 
widely promoted mental health apps from August 18 
to September 9, 2016, using (1) an app store applica-
tion programing interface crawling program identify-
ing apps persisting in the top 100 of Health and Fitness 
and Medical store categories in the United States, 
United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia; and (2) gov-
ernment, health, or media endorsements (Supplemental 
Appendix, available at http://www.annfammed.org/
content/16/4/338/suppl/DC1/ ).
Figure 1 details the screening process. Two 
researchers independently screened 105 apps for inclu-
sion according to the following criteria: the apps (1) 
were designed for a mobile platform; (2) they were 
available in the United States, United Kingdom, 
Canada, or Australia; (3) and the advertising materials 
were in English describing mental health explicitly as it 
pertained to a mental health diagnosis (eg, depression), 
a mental health symptom (eg, suicidality), or behaviors 
related to mental health (eg, meditation, mindfulness), 
and provided diagnosis, guidance, or a recommen-
dation; allowed for monitoring or tracking of user-
generated data; or made a mental health claim. 
We excluded apps relating exclusively to addiction, 
although this topic is important for future study.
Data Collection
We collected data from apps’ advertising materials, 
including app store descriptors and linked websites. 
These materials have the same format and content for 
all prospective users, unlike downloaded app content, 
which is frequently personalized. We developed an 
open-ended data collection form based upon Lup-
ton’s critical approach to studying apps (Supplemental 
Table 1, available at http://www.annfammed.org/con-
tent/16/4/338/suppl/DC1/ ),10 focusing on messages and 
claims about mental health. Two researchers extracted 
data independently. All authors discussed and resolved 
any discrepancies within a team workshop.
Data Analysis
We inductively coded the open-ended responses using 
NVivo (QSR International Pty Ltd), wrote interpretive 
memos on each code, and generated 
a preliminary list of themes. The 
research team reviewed emerging 
themes.16,17 We used framing theory9 
to develop these themes into inter-
pretive memos.
RESULTS
We identified 61 mental health 
apps (Supplemental Table 2, avail-
able at http://www.annfammed.org/
content/16/4/338/suppl/DC1/): 40 
(66%) through the crawling program, 
and 23 (38%) from media reports 
and websites (2 apps were identified 
by both search strategies). The 61 
apps were published by 45 unique 
developers, 17 (38%) being private 
companies, and 23 (51%) based in 
North America. Of the 61 apps, 36 
(59%) were freely available, although 
48 (79%) offered in-app purchases. 
Figure 1. Mental health app screening and selection process.
App 
= 
mobile application. 
Reproduced with permission from: Grundy.5 
2,998 Apps identif
 ed through 
app store crawling program
3,032 Apps screened
105 Apps screened
61 Apps included
46 Excluded
 
21 Not mental health 
 
6 Duplicates
 
6 Unavailable in Australia 
 
5 Insomnia only
 
4 Addiction focus 
 
2 Not mobile
 
2 No health claim
2,927 Not mental health 
related or duplicate
34 Apps identif
 ed through 
media and websites
 MENTAL HEALTH APPS
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 16, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2018
340
Thirty-five apps (56%) claimed to reduce anxiety, 
panic, and stress, and 16 (26%) claimed to benefit those 
with mood disorders. The remaining 11 (18%) focused 
on well-being or other mental health issues (eg, anger 
management, eating disorders). Within the sampled 
apps’ advertising materials, we identified a range of 
messages about mental health.
Defining the Problem
Apps advertising materials framed mental health prob-
lems in 1 or more of 3 main ways (Table 1). The most 
dominant frame portrayed mental health problems 
conventionally in terms of psychological states.
Epidemiology of and Management of Mental 
Health Problems
App materials delivered a strong message that men-
tal health problems existed for everybody (Table 2). 
Screenshots and descriptions, however, tended to rep-
resent everyone as employed, white, and in a family. 
For example, Calm Down Now highlighted the “every-
day problems” of “jet lag,” “stress from work,” and “a 
baby that wakes up frequently at night.” A few apps 
targeted niche populations, such as military veterans or 
persons with diagnosed mental illnesses.
App materials attributed mental health problems 
to abnormal neurophysiology that could produce 
problems after a minor trigger or to unhelpful psy-
chological habits (Table 2). Only a few apps implied 
mental health symptoms might be a normal reaction 
to external stress.
The 61 apps offered 1 or more of 3 therapeutic 
modalities: 30 (49%) offered calming (eg, mindfulness), 
24 (39%) offered cognitive therapies (eg, cognitive 
behavioral therapy), and 13 (21%) offered track/share/
compare tools (eg, self-monitoring).
Many apps, 37 (61%), claimed vague scientific 
authority for their approach, such as “clinically proven” 
(Breathing Zone). Two apps mentioned formal studies 
of their own products, which were not cited.
App materials claimed their product could help 
quickly and easily, although some acknowledged that 
they might not cure. Many descriptors used moral lan-
guage to prompt use, such as, “if you are serious about 
managing your anxiety then you can do it yourself 
using the techniques in this app” (Self-help Anxiety 
Management). In contradiction to the message about 
ease of use, many apps required frequent user action to 
deliver results (Table 2).
Thirty apps (49%) provided disclaimers absolving 
themselves of responsibility. For example, “We give 
no representation or warranties about the accuracy, 
completeness, or suitability for any purpose [of our] 
advice” (Pacifica). Thus, app consumers were assigned 
responsibility not only for using an app, but also for 
knowing whether it was appropri-
ate for them.
DISCUSSION
We identified 2 dominant mes-
sages about mental health: (1) 
poor or fragile mental health is 
ubiquitous, and (2) individuals 
can easily manage their own men-
tal health problems with apps. 
Developers offered very limited 
scientific evidence for the apps’ 
claimed benefits.
These messages echo (but 
also potentially drive) a tendency 
toward medicalization, whereby 
normal life becomes under the 
purview of clinical care.18,19 The 
idea of mental health care for 
Table 1. Framing of Mental Health Problems 
in Advertising Material of Mental Health Apps
Apps’ framing materials claimed a mental health problem exists 
when…
One has a psychological issue, such as distressing symptoms (eg, 
anxiety, depression, panic, poor sleep) and/or lack of positive 
psychological states (eg, happiness, balance)
One is at risk of having a psychological issue that is due to a lack 
of mental fitness
One’s life lacks some external feature of success (eg, academic or 
relationship success)
App 
= 
mobile application.
Table 2. Dominant Messages About Epidemiology and Management 
of Mental Health Problems
Characteristic
Message and App
Population: everybody
“[A]ll kinds of people who, in certain situations, or in certain periods 
of life are: feeling stressed; need motivation and lack energy; 
people with mild mental distress, such as depressive disorders, 
anxiety, stress, and low self-esteem.” Mindfit
Causation
 
Pathophysiology
“The fight or flight response…can easily go into hyperdrive, making 
you feel uncomfortable and anxious even when you aren’t in any 
real danger.” Mindfulness: Brain-based
Psychological 
maladaptation
“[H]abits of thought and behaviors that are negatively impactful.” 
Mindfulness Daily
Apps and management
 
Easy, effective, no risk 
of harm
“All you have to do is LISTEN and your brain will do the rest!” Anxi-
ety Release based on EMDR
Importance of regular, 
ongoing use
“You can…fit several mini-sessions into your day.” Meditation Studio
Personal responsibility 
for improvement
“Take action to improve your life.” MoodKit – Mood Improvement 
Tools
App 
 
= 
 
mobile application; EMDR 
 
= 
 
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing.
 MENTAL HEALTH APPS
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 16, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2018
341
everyone might help reduce stigma, but arguably at 
the cost of overdiagnosis and overtreatment. Diagnos-
ing mild or temporary symptoms as illness, where that 
diagnosis brings no patient benefit, is problematic. It 
can lead to unnecessary treatment and divert resources 
from those who really need help.20,21 Further, the lack 
of diversity in representation of users and stressors 
may alienate persons with serious needs.
Apps enable people to attend to their own health, 
but at the same time they promote the idea that indi-
viduals should take personal responsibility for their 
own health. App-based treatments may suit many con-
sumers, but the ability of apps to enable frequent self-
monitoring and therapy may transform into a moral 
imperative that we should all be undertaking these 
activities.8,22 The associated silence around external 
factors constitutes a denial of the social determinants 
of health.23
Implications for Research and Practice
We encourage health care professionals to ask patients 
about app use and initiate discussions about the mes-
sages we have highlighted in this study. Patients may 
benefit from hearing alternative views about what 
constitutes normal psychological experiences, with 
specific attention toward counteracting medicaliza-
tion. Mental health apps may appear compelling, but 
the idea that we all need or should engage in frequent 
app use should not be taken too seriously. Importantly, 
apps may deliver time burdens or loss of privacy to 
the app user.14,24 In addition, patients may benefit from 
discussion about the limitations of app use and be 
encouraged to seek clinical attention for important or 
enduring psychological distress.
Limitations
Our content analysis was restricted to app advertising 
materials. Consumers access this information when 
choosing apps, however, so it constitutes a major 
source of mental health messages. Our qualitative con-
tent analysis relied upon a purposive sample of promi-
nent mental health apps and is not representative, but 
consumers are likely to encounter these targeted apps. 
The population of apps is highly dynamic, thus apps 
included in this study may no longer be available and 
their content may have been updated. Finally, con-
sumers do not necessarily use apps as directed, and 
some app users may be unaffected by the messages we 
describe here.
Apps are important vehicles of information about 
health that may reflect and shape societal views. Many 
apps medicalize normal mental states and present 
normative messages about personal responsibility for 
well-being. Physicians should counterbalance these 
messages where necessary to ensure that self-help 
is just one aspect of a supportive climate for mental 
health care.
To read or post commentaries in response to this article, see it 
online at http://www.AnnFamMed.org/content/16/4/338.
Key words: mobile health; mHealth; qualitative research; mental 
health; medicalization
Submitted October 27, 2017; submitted, revised, March 4, 2018; 
accepted March 27, 2018.
Funding support: This work was funded by a research grant from the 
Australian Communications Consumer Action Network (ACCAN). The 
operation of the Australian Communications Consumer Action Net-
work is made possible by funding provided by the Commonwealth of 
Australia under section 593 of the Telecommunications Act 1997. This 
funding is received from charges on telecommunications carriers. The 
project was encouraged and supported by ACCAN, who worked with 
the researchers throughout the design and dissemination of the study to 
facilitate research translation. 
Disclaimer: The researchers had full autonomy over study design, data 
collection, analysis, and publication.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Chris Klochek, MS, for 
developing the app store crawling programs.
 
Supplementary materials: Available at http://www.AnnFamMed.
org/content/16/4/338/suppl/DC1/.
References
 1. Donker T, Petrie K, Proudfoot J, Clarke J, Birch MR, Christensen H. 
Smartphones for smarter delivery of mental health programs: 
 a sys-
tematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2013; 
15(11): 
e247.
 2. Harding C, Ilves P, Wilson S. Digital mental health services in gen-
eral practice. Br J Gen Pract. 2015; 
65(631): 
58-59.
 3. Rubanovich CK, Mohr DC, Schueller SM. Health app use among 
individuals with symptoms of depression and anxiety: 
 a survey 
study with thematic coding. JMIR Ment Health. 2017; 
4(2): 
e22.
 4. Olla P, Shimskey C. mHealth taxonomy: 
 a literature survey of 
mobile health applications. Health Technol. 2015; 
4(4): 
299-308.
 5. Grundy Q, Parker L, Raven M, Gillies D, Mintzes B, Bero L. Finding 
Peace of Mind: 
 Navigating the Marketplace of Mental Health Apps. 
Sydney, Australia: 
 Australian Communications Consumer Action Net-
work; 2017.
 6. Firth J, Torous J, Nicholas J, et al. The efficacy of smartphone-based 
mental health interventions for depressive symptoms: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. World Psychiatry. 2017; 
16(3): 
287-298.
 7. Gilbody S, Littlewood E, Hewitt C, et al; 
 REEACT Team. Computer-
ised cognitive behaviour therapy (cCBT) as treatment for depression 
in primary care (REEACT trial): 
 large scale pragmatic randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ. 2015; 
351: 
h5627.
 8. Aronowitz R. Framing disease: 
 an underappreciated mechanism for 
the social patterning of health. Soc Sci Med. 2008; 
67(1): 
1-9.
 9. Entman RM. Framing: 
 towards clarification of a fractured paradigm. 
J Commun. 1993; 
43(4): 
51-58.
 10. Lupton D. Apps as artefacts: 
 towards a critical perspective on mobile 
health and medical apps. Societies (Basel). 2014; 
4(4): 
606-622.
 MENTAL HEALTH APPS
ANNALS OF FAMILY MEDICINE ✦ WWW.ANNFAMMED.ORG ✦ VOL. 16, NO. 4 ✦ JULY/AUGUST 2018
342
 11. World Health Organization (WHO). Mental health action plan 2013-
2020. Geneva, Switzlerland: 
 WHO; 
 2013.
 12. Australian Government. Australian Government response to Contribut-
ing Lives, Thriving Communities - Review of Mental Health Programmes 
and Services. Canberra, Australia: 
 Commonwealth of Australia; 
 2015.
 13. Christensen H, Petrie K. State of the e-mental health field in Austra-
lia: 
 where are we now? Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2013; 
47(2): 
117-120.
 14. Hollis C, Morriss R, Martin J, et al. Technological innovations in 
mental healthcare: harnessing the digital revolution. Br J Psychiatry. 
2015; 
206(4): 
263-265.
 15. Grundy QH, Wang Z, Bero LA. Challenges in assessing mobile 
health app quality: 
 a systematic review of prevalent and innovative 
methods. Am J Prev Med. 2016; 
51(6): 
1051-1059.
 16. Mason J. Qualitative Researching. 2nd ed. London, UK: 
 SAGE; 
 2002.
 17. Charmaz K. Constructing Grounded Theory: 
 A Practical Guide Through 
Qualitative Analysis. London, UK: 
 SAGE; 
 2006.
 18. White K. An Introduction to the Sociology of Health and Illness. 2nd 
ed. London, UK: 
 Sage; 2009.
 19. Horwitz AV, Wakefield JC. The Loss Of Sadness: 
 How Psychiatry 
Transformed Normal Sorrow Into Depressive Disorder. New York, NY: 
 
Oxford University Press; 
 2007.
 
20. Frances A. Saving Normal: 
 An Insider’s Revolt Against Out-Of-Control 
Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-5, Big Pharma, and the Medicalization of 
Ordinary Life. New York, NY: 
 William Morrow; 
 2013.
 21. Dowrick C, Frances A. Medicalising unhappiness: 
 new classification 
of depression risks more patients being put on drug treatment from 
which they will not benefit. BMJ. 2013; 
347: 
f7140.
 22. Lupton D. Femininity, responsibility, and the technological impera-
tive: 
 discourses on breast cancer in the Australian press. Int J Health 
Serv. 1994; 
24(1): 
73-89.
 23. Blaxter M. Why do the victims blame themselves? In: 
 Bury M, Gabe 
J, eds. The Sociology of Health and Illness - A Reader. London, UK: 
 
Routledge; 2004: 
36-46.
 24. Kaye K. FTC: 
 Fitness apps can help you shred calories - and privacy. 
Advert Age. http: 
//adage.com/article/privacy-and-regulation/ftc-signals-
focus-health-fitness-data-privacy/293080/. Published May 7, 2014.
CHANGE-OF-ADDRESS FORM
Please complete this form and mail to the following address or fax to Annals Circulation at 913-906-6080:
Annals of Family Medicine, Circulation Department, 11400 Tomahawk Creek Pkwy, Leawood, KS 66211-2680
Check if member of sponsoring organization:  ❏ AAFP  ❏ ABFM  ❏ STFM  ❏ ADFM  
 
❏ AFMRD  ❏ NAPCRG  ❏ CFPC
ID number from label on your journal cover    __  __  __  __  __  __  __
®
OLD Information (Please print.)
Name 
 
Company (if applicable) 
 
Address (Street plus Apt or Ste) 
 
City 
 
State
Country 
Postal Code (9-digit ZIP for US)
Telephone 
Fax
E-Mail
NEW Information (Please print.)
Name 
 
Company (if applicable) 
 
Address (Street plus Apt or Ste) 
 
City 
 
State
Country 
Postal Code (9-digit ZIP for US)
Telephone 
Fax
E-Mail
