 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Open Access
Clinical Exposure to Transgender Medicine Improves
Students’ Preparedness Above Levels Seen
with Didactic Teaching Alone:
A Key Addition to the Boston University Model
for Teaching Transgender Healthcare
Jason A. Park and Joshua D. Safer*
Abstract
Purpose: Transgender individuals are medically underserved in the United States and face many documented
disparities in care due to providers’ lack of education, training, and comfort. We have previously demonstrated
that specific transgender medicine content in a medical school curriculum increases students’ willingness to
treat transgender patients. However, we have also identified that those same students are less comfortable
with transgender care relative to care for lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients. We aimed to demonstrate that clin-
ical exposure to care for transgender patients would help close this gap.
Methods: At Boston University School of Medicine, we piloted a transgender medicine elective where students
rotate on services that provide clinical care for transgender individuals. Pre- and postsurveys were administered
to students who participated in the elective.
Results: After completing the elective, students who reported ‘‘high’’ comfort increased from 45% (9/20) to 80%
(16/20) ( p = 0.04), and students who reported ‘‘high’’ knowledge regarding management of transgender patients
increased from 0% (0/20) to 85% (17/20) ( p < 0.001).
Conclusion: Although integrating evidence-based, transgender-specific content into medical curricula im-
proves student knowledge and comfort with transgender medical care, gaps remain. Clinical exposure to trans-
gender medicine during clinical years can contribute to closing that gap and improving access to care for
transgender individuals.
Keywords: transgender health; transgender medical education; transgender medicine; transgender clinical care
Introduction
In the United States, transgender people make up an
estimated 0.5–0.6% of the population.1–3 Transgender
individuals have unique health needs; however, a ma-
jority of the members in the medical community are
not adequately trained to address those needs.4–11 Bar-
riers accessing appropriate and culturally competent
care play a significant role in the persistent health dis-
parities experienced by transgender individuals, such as
increased rates of certain cancers, substance abuse,
mental health concerns, infections, and chronic dis-
eases.10–17 There is a need for healthcare providers to
be comfortable treating transgender patients, as well
as being versed in the health needs of transgender pa-
tients. Physicians and medical students report having
knowledge gaps in transgender healthcare due to insuf-
ficient education and exposure.18–23
In recent years, public awareness in the press regard-
ing the health disparities within the transgender popu-
lation has been increasing. There has been a call to
Transgender Medicine Research Group, Boston University School of Medicine and Center for Transgender Medicine and Surgery, Boston Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts.
*Address correspondence to: Joshua D. Safer, MD, Transgender Medicine Research Group, Boston University School of Medicine, Room M-1016, 715 Albany Street, Boston,
MA 02118, E-mail: jsafer0115@gmail.com
ª Jason A. Park and Joshua D. Safer 2018; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Transgender Health
Volume 3.1, 2018
DOI: 10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
Transgender
Health
10
 arms by the Institute of Medicine for further research
on healthcare inequities among lesbian, gay, bisex-
ual, and transgender (LGBT) patients by specifically
addressing the shortage of LGBT medicine training.10
A study by White et al. found that among 176 allo-
pathic and osteopathic medical schools, a median of
5 h was dedicated to teaching content related to
LGBT health and 33% of medical schools reported
0 h of LGBT-related content being taught during clini-
cal years. In addition, fewer than 35% provided content
related to hormone therapy and gender-confirming
surgery.18
The Association of American Medical Colleges
(AAMC) suggested specific curricular content for
LGBT patients in general and transgender patients spe-
cifically.24 Over the past decade, individual medical
schools have made efforts to improve their LGBT health
curricula in efforts to meet the AAMC recommendation.
At Boston University School of Medicine (BUSM),
we supplemented the AAMC approach with evidence-
based, transgender-specific medical education that we
have longitudinally integrated throughout the medical
curriculum (Fig. 1). Beyond the AAMC suggested pro-
gram, first-year BUSM students in physiology learn
about the biologic evidence for gender identity.25 In
the following year, BUSM students are taught both
the classic treatment regimens and monitoring require-
ments for transgender hormone therapy as part of the
standard endocrinology curriculum.26 Following the
first 2 years, students reported a significant increase
in willingness to care for transgender patients and a
67% decrease in discomfort with providing care to
transgender patients.
Despite our program, we found that at BUSM, our
students reported comfort with transgender medical
care still lags behind that for lesbian, gay, and bisexual
(LGB) patients.19 We speculated that the disparity
related to direct personal exposure being greater for
LGB patients at our institution than it is for transgen-
der patients.
Other medical programs have reported that medical
trainees with greater clinical exposure to transgender
patients reported more comfort and greater knowledge
than students with no clinical exposure.27–29 In this
study, we hypothesized that in addition to integrating
evidence-based, transgender-specific content into the
medical curriculum, clinical exposure through the trans-
gender medicine elective would significantly improve
medical students’ attitudes and level of overall prepared-
ness in providing care for transgender patients.
Methods
Curriculum content
At BUSM, in addition to general LGBT coursework, bi-
ology of gender identity and transgender hormone
treatment management are integrated into the manda-
tory first and second-year curriculum frameworks, re-
spectively. The biology of gender identity content is
included within the normal first-year physiology
course. The evidence for the biological underpinnings
of gender identity is reviewed with key data, including
(1) the experience of intersex individuals in whom at-
tempts to manipulate gender identity were made, (2)
the increased incidence of being transgender among
identical twins of transgender individuals, (3) the
data for androgen impact on gender identity, and (4)
the brain anatomy data that correlate with gender iden-
tity rather than other biological features. The transgen-
der hormone management content is included during
teaching of reproductive hormones in the Endocrinology
section in the second year. In 2014, BUSM expanded its
transgender programming further to include an experi-
ential component with a clinical elective for fourth-year
medical students. The transgender medicine elective
FIG. 1.
The Boston University model for
teaching transgender medical care. Boston
University’s transgender education framework
follows AAMC recommendations and further
supplements them with own innovations. First-
and second-year medical students are taught
about the biologic evidence for gender identity
and the treatment strategies for transgender
hormone therapy, respectively. Fourth-year
students are offered clinical exposure through the
transgender medicine elective. AAMC,
Association of American Medical Colleges.
Park and Safer; Transgender Health 2018, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
11
 included direct patient care experiences with transgen-
der individuals in adult primary care, pediatrics, endo-
crinology, and surgery.
Study design
Over the 3-year period between January 1, 2014, and
December 31, 2016, pre- and postsurveys were admin-
istered to each of the medical students who participated
in the elective. The pre- and postsurveys were identical
and asked students to report their self-perceived level
of comfort and readiness to care for transgender pa-
tients. The presurvey was administered before beginning
the rotation, and the postsurvey was administered im-
mediately after the conclusion of the elective.
Students were asked to assess their own knowledge,
skills, and comfort caring for transgender patients
using a 7-point Likert scale from 0 (Very Low) to 6
(Very High) (Table 1). Responses of ‘‘0’’ and ‘‘1’’ were
grouped as ‘‘Low’’; ‘‘2,’’ ‘‘3,’’ and ‘‘4’’ were grouped as
‘‘Moderate’’; and ‘‘5’’ and ‘‘6’’ were grouped as ‘‘High.’’
The survey also prompted the students to answer ques-
tions regarding their attitudes toward transgender care
and transgender education by responding ‘‘Strongly
Disagree,’’ ‘‘Disagree,’’ ‘‘Neither Agree nor Disagree,’’
‘‘Agree,’’ or ‘‘Strongly Agree’’ (Table 2). For the anal-
ysis, ‘‘Strongly Disagree’’ and ‘‘Disagree’’ responses were
grouped as ‘‘Disagree’’; ‘‘Neither Agree nor Disagree’’
was labeled as ‘‘Neutral’’; and ‘‘Agree’’ and ‘‘Strongly
Agree’’ were grouped as ‘‘Agree.’’
Responses were all collected using a paper survey
and the study was approved by the Boston University
Institutional Review Board.
Statistical analyses
A chi-square test for independence was used to com-
pare the relative frequencies of the pre- and postsurvey
responses. All statistical analyses were conducted with
SAS software packaged version 9.3.30
Results
Students entered the elective with broadly positive
attitudes toward transgender care
All 20 students (100%) completed the pre- and post-
elective surveys. Students began the elective with a
high degree of support for transgender care. All the stu-
dents were interested in learning more about medical
interventions for transgender patients. Owing to a
high baseline, there was no significant change in stu-
dents’ attitudes toward transgender care and transgen-
der education after completing the fourth-year elective.
Before the survey, 79% (15/19) of students agreed
that it was important to ask all patients about their
gender identity. Ninety-five percent (18/19) agreed
that it was important to conduct health screenings
for gender minorities according to organs and tis-
sues present. Every student agreed that medications,
surgery, and mental health support for transgender
patients should be covered by medical insurance. Sev-
enteen students (85%) felt that patients who have gen-
ital reconstruction surgery would not have regrets
later in life and would have better well-being. In addi-
tion, no student believed that prescribing transgender
hormones would result in unacceptable consequences,
but 16 out of 20 students did believe withholding
transgender hormones would result in unacceptable
consequences.
Table 1. The Following Questions Were Used to Assess
the Students’ Knowledge, Skill, and Comfort When Caring
for Transgender Patients. Students Responded Using
a 7-Point Likert Scale from 0 (Very Low) to 6 (Very High)
Knowledge level
What is your level of knowledge regarding the management
of transgender persons?
What is your level of knowledge of guidelines regarding the
management of transgender persons?
Skill level
How would you assess your level of skill in inquiring about a patient’s
gender identity?
How would you assess your level of skill in providing general care
for transgender patients?
How would you assess your level of skill in providing hormone for
transgender patients?
Comfort level
What is your level of comfort with providing care to a transgender
patient?
Table 2. The Following Questions Were Used to Assess
the Students’ Attitude Toward Transgender Care. Students
Responded with ‘‘Strongly Disagree,’’ ‘‘Disagree,’’ ‘‘Neither
Agree nor Disagree,’ ‘‘Agree,’’ or ‘‘Strongly Agree’’
Attitude
I think it is important to ask all patients about their gender identity
I think it is important to conduct health screenings for gender
minorities according to their sex at birth
I am interested in learning more about medical interventions for
transgender patients
Medications for transgender patients should be covered by medical
insurance
Surgery for transgender patients should be covered by medical
insurance
Psychotherapy for transgender patients should be covered by
medical insurance
Prescribing cross-gender hormones will result in unacceptable side
effects
Withholding cross-gender hormones will result in unacceptable
consequences
Patients who have sex reassignment surgery will have regrets later
Patients who have sex reassignment surgery will have better well-being
Park and Safer; Transgender Health 2018, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
12
 Comfort with transgender care rose significantly
When asked about comfort before the elective, some
students reported comfort with providing medical
care to transgender individuals (Fig. 2). However,
after the elective, those who reported ‘‘high’’ level of
comfort providing care for transgender patients in-
creased from 45% (9/20) to 80% (16/20) ( p = 0.04). Stu-
dents unanimously reported that they believed that to
make high-quality gender minority care a reality, med-
ical schools and residency programs must provide
training in transgender health.
Clinical exposure resulted in a significant increase
in self-reported knowledge of transgender care
Before the elective, despite some comfort with trans-
gender medical knowledge and strongly positive atti-
tudes, students reported limited knowledge. Students
reported a substantial increase in their knowledge of
FIG. 2.
Percentage of fourth-year students self-assessing their comfort level caring for transgender patients.
p-Values were obtained using chi-square test for independence. *p < 0.05.
FIG. 3.
Percentage of fourth-year students self-assessing their knowledge of transgender care management.
p-Values were obtained using chi-square test for independence. *p < 0.05.
Park and Safer; Transgender Health 2018, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
13
 transgender medical care after clinical exposure to
transgender patients (Fig. 3). After completing the elec-
tive, the number of students who reported having
‘‘high’’ knowledge for the management of transgender
persons increased from 0% (0/20) to 85% (17/20)
( p < 0.001). Students also reported an increase in hav-
ing ‘‘high’’ knowledge for management guidelines of
transgender persons from 5% (1/20) to 80% (16/20)
( p < 0.001). There was a considerable increase in stu-
dent’s self-reported skills caring for transgender pa-
tients (Fig. 4). Only 10% of fourth-year students (2/
20) entering the elective reported they had ‘‘high’’ skills
inquiring about a patient’s gender identity compared
with 80% (16/20) after completing the elective ( p <
0.001). In addition, seven students (35%) reported
that they had ‘‘low’’ skills providing general care for
transgender patients before the elective, whereas no
student (0/20) felt this way after the elective ( p <
0.001). Before the elective, more than half of the stu-
dents (10/19) reported having ‘‘low’’ skills providing
hormone treatment for transgender patients, while
only one student (5%) reported that skills remained
‘‘low’’ after participating in the elective ( p < 0.001).
Discussion
This is the first study to demonstrate that clinical ex-
posure to transgender patients can improve medical
students’ level of comfort, confidence, skill, and knowl-
edge to deliver culturally competent care to transgender
patients above a baseline achieved by other modalities.
While the BUSM evidence-based approach to teach-
ing transgender medicine improved attitudes among
medical students above the baseline achieved with
AAMC modeled content alone,25,26 a gap remained in
student comfort relative to LGB patients.19 We propose
that the remaining gap might be addressed at least, in
part, with an experiential program that includes direct
medical care of transgender individuals (Fig. 1).
There were no significant changes in attitudes toward
transgender care and transgender education after com-
pleting the fourth-year elective. That finding appeared
to reflect the high bar among students who entered
the elective already exhibiting an overwhelming will-
ingness to care for transgender patients and recogni-
tion of the appropriateness of transgender hormone
therapy. We attribute the high starting point to the
existing transgender-specific content in the mandatory
first- and second-year curriculum.
However, despite the positive attitudes toward trans-
gender individuals, a majority of fourth-year medical
students did not feel comfortable caring for transgen-
der patients before beginning the elective. This suggests
that classroom lectures are not enough to adequately
prepare students to manage the care of transgender pa-
tients as future physicians. Even among students with
strongly positive attitudes toward transgender medi-
cine, comfort with needed clinical skills was low. By
providing students experiential opportunities such as
in the case for other medical topics, the fourth-year
elective provides a novel approach to close gaps in
transgender medical education.
FIG. 4.
Percentage of fourth-year students self-assessing their skill level of transgender care. p-Values were
obtained using chi-square test for independence. *p < 0.05.
Park and Safer; Transgender Health 2018, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
14
 One of the limitations to the study was that it was
conducted at a single institution. Therefore, the results
of our findings may not be generalizable to other med-
ical schools. There is also likely selection bias because
students who participated may have been more inclined
to work with transgender patients as the clinical rotation
was not mandatory. An opportunity to mandate trans-
gender clinical exposure may be superior. Still, the iden-
tification of a remediable gap in skills even among a
positively biased cohort is an important finding.
Due to the fact that these are self-reported data, there
is potential for response bias because students may be-
lieve they should be more prepared than they are in
their abilities to care for transgender patients after
completing a transgender elective. Furthermore, al-
though there was 100% response rate, the study was
further limited by the small number of students due
to the limited capacity of the elective.
Future research assessing medical students’ comfort
and knowledge regarding transgender care can be im-
proved by including students who did not take the
transgender elective as controls. This would not only
increase the sample size of the study but also produce
results that are more robust. In addition, future sur-
veys should include questions inquiring about which
specialty students are planning to pursue. This would
help elucidate potential areas of medicine attracting
students who are more or less prepared to work with
transgender patients. Finally, future studies should
test whether the medical education intervention could
have similar results among different medical schools.
Conclusion
We propose that the existing Boston University model,
which supplements what has been termed ‘‘cultural com-
petency’’ by some with evidence-based curricular content
on (1) the biology of gender identity and (2) current
strategies for transgender hormone therapy, is necessary
but not sufficient for optimal training for care of trans-
gender patients. We propose a need for a third compo-
nent to our model in the form of experiential activities
such as those that exist for other medical topics, with in-
creased clinical exposure to transgender patients.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
References
1. Conron KJ, Scott G, Stowell GS, et al. Transgender health in Massachu-
setts: results from a household probability sample of adults. Am J Public
Health. 2012;102:118–122.
2. Flores AR, Herman JL, Gates GJ, et al. How Many Adults Identify as Trans-
gender in the United States? Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute, 2016.
3. Crissman HP, Berger MB, Graham LF, et al. Transgender demographics:
a household probability sample of US adults. Am J Public Health. 2017;
107:213–215.
4. Safer JD, Tangpricha V. Out of the Shadows: it is time to mainstream
treatment for transgender patients. Endocr Pract. 2008;14:248–250.
5. Safer JD, Coleman E, Feldman J, et al. Barriers to healthcare for transgender
individuals. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2016;23:168–171.
6. Makadon HJ. Improving health care for the lesbian and gay communities.
N Engl J Med. 2006;354:895–897.
7. Mayer KH, Bradford JB, Makadon HJ, et al. Sexual and gender minority
health: what we know and what needs to be done. Am J Public Health.
2008;98:989–995.
8. Irwig MS. Transgender care by endocrinologists in the United States.
Endocr Pract. 2016;22:832–836.
9. Obedin-Maliver J, Goldsmith ES, Stewart L, et al. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender-related content in undergraduate medical education.
JAMA. 2011;306:971–977.
10. IOM (Institute of Medicine). The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2011. Available at:
www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13128 Accessed August 1, 2017.
11. Grant JM, Tanis J, Herman JL, et al. National Transgender Discrimination
Survey Report on Health and Health Care. Washington, DC: National
Center for Transgender Equality and the National Gay and Lesbian Task
Force, 2010.
12. Dean L, Meyer IH, Robinson K, et al. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender health: findings and concerns. J Gay Lesbian Med Assoc. 2000;4:
102–151.
13. Gay and Lesbian Medical Association and LGBT Health Experts. Healthy
People 2010 Companion Document for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender (LGBT) Health. San Francisco, CA: Gay and Lesbian Medical
Association, 2001. Available at: www.glma.org/_data/n_0001/resources/
live/HealthyCompanionDoc3.pdf Accessed August 19, 2014.
14. Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health Issues and
Research Gaps and Opportunities; Board on the Health of Select Popu-
lations; Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding.
Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, 2011. Available at: www.iom.edu/
Reports/2011/The-Health-of-Lesbian-Gay-Bisexual-and-Transgender-
People.aspx Accessed August 1, 2017.
15. Smith DM, Mathews WC. Physicians’ attitudes toward homosexuality and
HIV: survey of a California Medical Society-revisited (PATHH-II). J Homo-
sex. 2007;52:1–9.
16. Kosenko K, Rintamaki L, Raney S, et al. Transgender patient perceptions of
stigma in health care contexts. Med Care. 2013;51:819–822.
17. Stroumsa D. The state of transgender health care: policy, law, and medical
frameworks. Am J Public Health. 2014;104:31–38.
18. White W, Brenman S, Paradis E, et al. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender patient care: medical students’ preparedness and comfort. Teach
Learn Med. 2015;27:254–263.
19. Liang JJ, Gardner IH, Walker JA, et al. Observed deficiencies in medical
student knowledge of transgender and intersex health. Endocr Pract.
2017;23:897–906.
20. Khalili J, Leung LB, Diamant AL. Finding the perfect doctor: identifying
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender-competent physicians. Am J
Public Health. 2015;105:1114–1119.
21. Sequeira GM, Chakraborti C, Panunti BA. Integrating lesbian, gay, bisex-
ual, and transgender (LGBT) content into undergraduate medical school
curricula: a qualitative study. Ochsner J. 2012;12:379–382.
22. Chan B, Skocylas R, Safer JD. Gaps in transgender medicine content
identified among Canadian medical school curricula. Transgend Health.
2016;1:142–150.
23. Rondahl G. Students’ inadequate knowledge about lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender persons. Int J Nurs Educ Scholarsh. 2009;6:
Article 11.
24. Association of American Medical Colleges. Joint AAMC-GSA and AAMC-
OSR Recommendations Regarding Institutional Programs and Educa-
tional Activities to Address the Needs of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and
Transgender (GLBT) Students and Patients. Washington, DC: Association
of American Medical Colleges, 2007.
Park and Safer; Transgender Health 2018, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
15
 25. Eriksson SE, Safer JD. Evidence-based curricular content improves
student knowledge and changes attitudes towards transgender medi-
cine. Endocr Pract. 2016;22:837–841.
26. Safer JD, Pearce EN. A simple curriculum content change increased
medical student comfort with transgender medicine. Endocr Pract. 2013;
19:633–637.
27. Dy GW, Osbun NC, Morrison SD, et al. Exposure to and attitudes regarding
transgender education among urology residents. J Sex Med. 2016;13:
1466–1472.
28. Davidge-Pitts C, Nippoldt TB, Danoff A, et al. Transgender Health in
Endocrinology: Current Status of Endocrinology Fellowship Programs and
Practicing Clinicians. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:1286–1290.
29. Sanchez NF, Rabatin J, Sanchez JP, et al. Medical students’ ability to care
for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered patients. Fam Med. 2006;
38:21–27.
30. SAS Institute Inc. The SAS System for Windows: Version 9.3. Cary, NC: SAS
Institute Inc, 2011.
Cite this article as: Park JA, Safer JD (2018) Clinical exposure to
transgender medicine improves students’ preparedness above levels
seen with didactic teaching alone: a key addition to the Boston
University Model for teaching transgender healthcare, Transgender
Health 3:1, 10–16, DOI: 10.1089/trgh.2017.0047.
Abbreviations Used
AAMC ¼ Association of American Medical Colleges
BUSM ¼ Boston University School of Medicine
LGB ¼ lesbian, gay, and bisexual
LGBT ¼ lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
Publish in Transgender Health
-Immediate, unrestricted online access
-Rigorous peer review
-Compliance with open access mandates
-Authors retain copyright
-Highly indexed
-Targeted email marketing
liebertpub.com/trgh
Park and Safer; Transgender Health 2018, 3.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/trgh.2017.0047
16
