 July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
1
Protocols
published: 14 July 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2016.00132
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Erin Katherine Lipp, 
University of Georgia, USA
Reviewed by: 
Sofia Kottou, 
National and Kapodistrian University 
of Athens, Greece 
 
Edith Mariela Burbano-Rosero, 
Universidad de Nariño, Colombia
*Correspondence:
Michael H. Parsons 
 
parsons.hmichael@gmail.com
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Environmental Health, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Public Health
Received: 13 April 2016
Accepted: 10 June 2016
Published: 14 July 2016
Citation: 
Parsons MH, Sarno RJ and 
Deutsch MA (2016) A Detailed 
Protocol to Enable Safe-Handling, 
Preemptive Detection, and 
Systematic Surveillance of 
Rat-Vectored Pathogens in the Urban 
Environment. 
Front. Public Health 4:132. 
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2016.00132
A Detailed Protocol to Enable  
safe-Handling, Preemptive 
Detection, and systematic 
surveillance of rat-Vectored 
Pathogens in the Urban Environment
Michael H. Parsons1*, Ronald J. Sarno1 and Michael A. Deutsch2
1 
Department of Biology, Hofstra University, Hempstead, NY, USA, 2 
Medical Entomology, Arrow Exterminating Company, 
Lynbrook, NY, USA
We detail a five-stage protocol to address physical barriers and experimental limitations 
that have hindered routine pathogen monitoring of wild rats in urban settings. New York 
City potentially harbors from 2 to 32 million rats among its 8-million people. However, at 
a time, when people are most vulnerable to disease from over-crowdedness brought on 
by increased urbanization of society, the difficulty of studying wild rats has led to a paucity 
of ecological and epidemiological research. Challenges of safely handling animals and the 
difficulties of identifying individual animals and the emergence of their respective pathogen 
loads (timing of infection) have impeded progress. We previously reported a method using 
radio frequency identification paired with load cell and camera traps to enable the identifica-
tion of individual animals and subsequent monitoring of the animals’ weights (an indicator 
of health). However, efficient pathogen surveillance requires repeated captures of the same 
individual in order to isolate and document the emergence of new pathogens, or variations 
in pathogen load, over time. Most of these barriers are now addressed in our protocol, 
which is aided by the use of a mobile, outdoor laboratory, followed by incorporation of 
pheromone-based lures to attract individuals back to active sensors, within a camera 
trap. This approach allows for the assessment of individual animal health, behaviors under 
camera, and changing pathogen loads and weights in most urban environments (e.g., 
financial district, docks, sewers, and residential). Five phases are described and presented: 
(1) site selection and urban trapping, (2) anesthetization, (3) serological and ectoparasite 
collection, (4) microchip implantation, and (5) retrapping and luring animals back to active 
remote sensors. In order to fulfill the unmet call for preemptive pathogen surveillance, public 
health officials and researchers may wish to adapt, or modify, similar protocols to ensure 
early detection and monitoring of rat-borne zoonoses, before they become problematic.
Keywords: arthropod vectors, disease emergence, pathogen surveillance, Rattus norvegicus, over-crowdedness, 
rFID, rodentology, urban ecology
INtroDUctIoN
Seventy-five percent of the world’s human population is expected to live in urban settings by 2050. 
With the average rate of population growth in urban cities almost twice as high as the overall growth 
rate (1), people are becoming more densely crowded in smaller spaces where they are more vulner-
able to fires, diseases from fouled water and food supplies, and insects and other arthropods that 
 2
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
thrive in city spaces (2). The primary vector of many hazards that 
urban people encounter is directly, or indirectly, related to urban 
rodents. As urban commensal rats, rats are associated with human 
population density, sanitation, and hygiene, and as we grow in 
number and production of refuse, their numbers proliferate. These 
species cost the U.S. economy $19 billion per year from food loss, 
infrastructure damage, and disease (3). As urbanization contin-
ues, it is essential that ecological monitoring and preemptive dis-
ease–pathogen surveillance become routine, robust, and spatially 
replicated. Yet, the difficulties of studying rodents in the urban 
environment have thwarted ecologists and health professionals for 
decades (4), despite our density-dependent vulnerabilities (2) and 
strong calls for preemptive pathogen surveillance (5).
It would be inappropriate to address the physical barriers to 
research without first acknowledging the complex social issues 
that influence urban rat studies. Rats are associated with filth, dis-
ease, and poverty (6) and are often vilified in the popular culture. 
Infestation can lead to heavy fines, damaged reputations, and 
even the closing of commercial business by municipal authori-
ties. Conversely, homeowners and especially businesses may be 
less likely to share knowledge about their rat infestations with 
researchers who urgently need to gain access to these potential 
study sites in order to document the extent of infestation along 
with risks of infection and disease. The unique challenge of find-
ing accessible urban study sites has been depicted by the ironic, 
but familiar, phrase “in a city of 32 million rats, no one has any.”
Conversely, it has been suggested that in New York City, a 
population exceeding 8 million people, there are fewer than 10 
institutional researchers actively pursuing urban rat research 
(Corrigan, personal communication, New York City Department 
Health and Mental Hygiene). Therefore, the social constraints to 
studying wild city rats are even more daunting because they are 
magnified by several physical challenges.
Urban rodents are elusive, subterranean, and often go unseen, 
making knowledge about them prohibitively difficult to ascer-
tain. It is common knowledge that rats detected during daylight 
hours imply that unnaturally high populations already persist 
in the immediate environment. Yet, most perceptions about 
rats are based on a disproportionately few individuals that are 
detected in the daytime in public, leading to over-generalizations 
based on more gregarious animals or migrating individuals. 
The vast majority of rats are not seen by human eyes. The non-
independence of most observations leads to misinformation that 
is propagated by anecdotal accounts, hearsay, and the media. The 
primary means to combat this growing problem is to overcome 
the barriers necessary to study urban rats in situ, in their normal 
environment, replicated at the level of the individual animal.
Remote sensing with common tools, such as radio-telemetry 
or GPS, is often used to identify individual animals, and thus, 
ensure independence of a randomly selected sample size (7). 
Unfortunately, in order to affix remote sensors, rats need to be 
trapped, handled, and sedated. Wild rodents are heartier and more 
resilient than lab rats, often requiring higher doses of sedative 
for longer durations (Urshuula Dulakia, Institute Comparative 
Medicine, Columbia University). Additionally, these animals 
harbor a number of diseases, including blood-borne pathogens 
that can be transmitted via bites or scratches [Streptobacillus, rat 
bite fever (8)]. Researchers working with high densities of rodents 
may also come into contact with bacteria carried in urine and 
feces [Leptospira, Salmonella, or Toxoplasma (9)]. Rats also carry 
insect (fleas) and arachnid ectoparasites (ticks, mites) that vec-
tor other pathogens (10), such as Borrelia [Lyme disease (11)], 
Rickettsia [Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (2)], or Bartonella 
[Cat-scratch disease (2)]. These problems are compounded in 
the built environment where satellite link-ups and radio signal 
are blocked by infrastructure and cannot persist uninterrupted 
between transmitter and sensor. As a result of these challenges, 
extensive gaps pertaining to rat ecology and disease surveillance 
have accrued within the scientific literature (12, 13).
Feng and Himsworth (4), Banks and Hughes (13), and Parsons 
et al. (7) have recently identified a few of the most prominent 
knowledge gaps. These include behavioral and ecological studies 
that address the natural causes of rat mortality, how rats interact 
with specific features of the built environment, and importantly, 
how rodent ecology influences disease–vector potential to 
humans. According to Firth et al. (5), we have only scant indica-
tion of the specific organisms that rats harbor deep within our 
city (10), or how these organisms are vectored throughout the 
city, or when new diseases emerge. Because so little preemptive 
monitoring has been done, Firth et al. (5) identified 18 potential 
pathogens completely unknown to science when sampling only 
133 rats in New York City.
With public health on the line and humans only living more 
densely packed together in the coming decades, this begs the 
question as to how many more pathogens will be discovered once 
rodents are more regularly monitored? And what are the benefits of 
understanding pathogen toxicity and exposure prior to breakouts?
We have recently learned that rodent scents are effective (7) 
in recruiting microchipped animals back to active sensors that 
activate microchips in order to record individual identification 
on a connected data logger. Not only did animals returned to the 
location for additional observations under camera [some visited 
the sensor as often as 33 times in a single day (7)], additional 
recaptures allowed repeated measurements of the same individu-
als, where routine weight recordings and changes in pathogen 
load could be assessed.
We have provided a few solutions to some of the barriers 
prohibiting urban rat research. Thus, by offering our five-step 
protocol, our objectives are to encourage and enable research-
ers to more easily undertake systematic pathogen surveillance 
of rodent-borne pathogens in the built environment. We are 
now detailing this protocol along with an assay for ectoparasite 
removal, anticipated results based on the recent literature and 
consultation with local experts, and a brief discussion of the social 
and research-based implications inherent in these activities.
MAtErIAls AND EQUIPMENts
Mobile Workstation
Stainless steel lab cart (flat top required)
Lab bench liner
Digital scale
Chlorhexidene
 3
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
Betadine
Vetbond
Alcohol preps (200)
Calipers
Wahl cordless razor
Nalgene lab notebooks
Qwik Stop® syptic powder
Instruments
Sterile, razor-sharp surgical scissors
7.5″ utility scissors
Metal ectoparasite “nit” comb
Square grid Petri dishes
8″ Pyrex roasting pan
Dry ice
Heat bead sterilizer
Ear punch w/tags (optional)
Biohazard bags
Body fluid swabs (Swabs)
DNA collection tubes
DNA preservative
trapping
Safeguard® rear-release animal traps #52818 (18″ × 5″ × 5″)
Detex BLOX (non-toxic fluorescent) (optional)
Trap catch emitters (×12)
Hydrogel packs (box)
Dark, standard sized pillow cases (×4)
Anesthesia
30% Isoflurene (250 ml bottles) (×3)
USP-grade oxygen refillable e-cylinder w/regulator
Oxygen tank cart
Induction chamber
Matrix VIP 3000 (or similar) vaporizer
Flow meter
Scavenger system
Nose cone (rodent/feline mask)
Field Gear (rFID)
Reader/antenna/SCU/control block (×2)
12 mm chips (30) + retractors (×3)
Pheromones (pooled scents from lab rats)
camera traps
Cameras ScoutGuard SG550V (×6)
Batteries AA Panasonic (×3)
Memory SD (×12)
Security locks
Personal Protective Equipment
Hard hat/vests
N95 masks, or charcoal masks for organic agents
Disposable gloves
Kevlar gloves
Hand sanitizer
stEPWIsE ProcEDUrEs
site location, Prebaiting, and trapping
Study sites should be identified from a combination of city blocks, 
public park spaces, and/or residential areas. Researchers should 
be prepared to extensively search for appropriate research sites. 
The most usual site configuration includes moderate-to-high 
rat-infested areas (whether rats are observed during daylight 
hours) in potentially underserved and potentially dangerous 
areas of the city. Factors to include are the level of infestation, 
researcher safety, and ability to undertake research in highly 
populated areas, but without public knowledge of activities. This 
discretion will help ease the social anxiety of property owners 
and willingness to share their properties. This information 
can be determined by calling the local health department or 
by assessment of “look listen and learn” protocol, commonly 
used by pest-management professionals. See Figure S1 in 
Supplementary Material for a printable, distributable depiction 
of this information.
 
(1) Trapping. Common knowledge suggests rats should be 
trapped using local foods that rats have previously become 
accustomed to. However, foods do not often result in 
“retrapping of the same animal” that may learn to associate 
danger with a food item, and food baits alone could be biased 
toward males (14). Rats, however, are less likely to habituate 
to scents from conspecifics. Therefore, attract animals into 
traps baited with mixed, pooled scents from conspecifics. 
A sufficient mixture of a range of pheromones will equally 
attract males, females, and juveniles (7, 15).
 
(2) Rats often travel “blindly,” using their guard hairs and vibris-
sae in contact with one or more surfaces to guard them. A 
high-lumen flashlight with ultraviolet (365 nm) backlight 
(such as the Nitecore® P20UV) will help expose chemically 
marked areas where rats repeatedly touch their guard hairs 
to the wall, while navigating blindly. This leads to sebum 
pheromone trails and also microdroplets of urine. These 
marks glow blue–white if fresh or yellow–white if old (96 h 
or longer). Therefore, trap strategically. Place approximately 
five rear-door release, small mammal traps such as the 
Safeguard® 18 × 5 × 5 model #52818, spaced a minimum of 
1 m apart, close to the one or more edges of a wall, for every 
suspected colony assessed.
 
(3) Bait traps with fresh mixed scents obtained from soiled rat 
bedding, pooled from multiple male and female rats. It is 
common to use rats from a pet store or university-owned lab 
rats. Some care should be taken to minimize the age of the 
scent. To be safe, the scents should not be more than 48 h old 
when commencing the study.
 
(3.1) In order to minimize further aging of pheromones, 
store scents in an airtight bag under minimal headspa-
ce (minimal air-pocket), ensuring the bag is closed 
tightly and stored in a cool, dry place.
 FIGUrE 1 | (A–D) Clockwise from top-left panel. Mobile indoor/outdoor mobile laboratory. Vaporizor and surgical trap with a dual-circuit flow system. (B) Induction 
chamber. Modified 61 cm × 91 cm oversized Tupperware container. (c) Feline mask and surgical tray. Mask affixed to rat with a strong seal. (D) Microchip implant. 
Pinch skin between fingers to form a small tent. Insert needle bevel up and eject.
4
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
 
(3.2) Install alert-sensors (emitters) into the trap (widely 
available on the Internet) along with hydrogel (food 
and water packs), so that an alert will be transmitted 
by cell phone to the principal researchers, once an ani-
mal has been caught. Rats should never be left alone 
for longer than 8 h in a trap. Not only is this inhumane 
but a stressed animal will take longer to anesthetize 
and may develop infection, rendering it unlikely to 
survive long enough for data collection.
 
(4) Following captures, cover active traps with a dark pillowcase 
or neoprene cover to minimize the startle response when 
picked up and transported by humans.
Anesthetizing and safe-Handling rodents
Eliminate many of the hazards of rats by following a safe-handling 
protocol.
 
(1)  For ease of mobility across a wide range of urban environ-
ments, prepare a mobile indoor/outdoor lab that can be 
transported to multiple study sites. A stainless steel lab cart 
covered with lab bench liner (Figure 1A) will serve as stor-
age, workspace, and surgical table for microchip implants. 
The table should house an isoflurane vaporizer (such as the 
Midmark Matric VIP 3000) with dual procedure circuit to 
distribute 30% isoflurane, and a scavenger system to collect 
CO2 wastes. One end should be attached to an induction 
chamber (an oversized 61 cm × 91 cm Tupperware container 
can be modified by cutting holes into the side; Figure 1B), 
with the second end attached to a feline surgical mask, such 
as those provided by VetEquip (Pleasanton, CA, USA). The 
size of the induction chamber should be large enough to 
easily hold the 18 × 5 × 5 rat trap, while being small enough 
to minimize the amount of isofurane required to fill the 
interior.
 
(2) Pre-workup (5–10 min)
 
(2.1) At least two researchers will need personal protective 
equipment (PPE; masks, gauntlets), before beginning. 
One worker will be required to maintain hold on the 
animal, while the other adjusts the isoflurane flow, 
oxygen flow, and mask.
 
(2.2) Sterilize table, check hoses, and connections for iso-
flurane unit. Isoflurane unit is on, all tubes connected. 
Table is clean. Instruments, microchips, and collection 
tubes on table.
 
(2.3) Scan a selected microchip (Trovan® 12 mm chip is ap-
propriate) to provide initial data point.
 
(2.4) Place dry ice on two Pyrex 8″-roasting pans. One for 
ectorparasite collection and the other for body fluid 
collections. Anal swab (Swubes®) should be accessible.
 
(2.5) Update water-proof lab notebook hanging nearby.
 
(2.6) Initially, set isoflurane to 5% with an oxygen flow 
 5
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
rate of 2–3 ml O2/min to flow into the Tupperware 
 
induction chamber.
 
(3) Animal handling on surgical table (15–20 min)
 
(3.1) Make way to trapped animal carrying a dark pillow 
case that will be used to place over cage, ideally, prior 
to animal spotting human presence. Gently transport 
the covered cage to the modified Tupperware induc-
tion chamber, while minimizing any anthropogenic 
noise (Figure 1B).
 
(3.2) Dip entire locked cage into chamber for a minimum of 
15 min until animal shows signs of slowed movement 
(partly sedated).
 
(3.3) Open induction chamber with one researcher lifting 
the cage up at a 45° angle and released the rear release 
trap door gently freeing the animal onto the base on 
the chamber. The second researcher will use the toe-
pinch method to determine level of sedation.
 
(3.4) While the animal is mostly unconscious, use the claw 
method of a gloved hand (first two fingers over the 
shoulders, thumb and fourth finger gently constricting 
the diaphragm) and firmly lift the animal out of the 
cage and place onto the surgical area.
 
(4) Animal physical examination
 
(4.1) The feline/rodent mask should be immediately pla-
ced over the animal, completely covering the nostrils 
and mouth (Figure 1C), regularly checking to make 
sure a good seal has been obtained. Despite semicon-
sciousness, it is common at this stage for the animal to 
kick and dislodge the mask.
 
(4.2) The second researcher will reset the flow meter to the 
second part of the dual circuit (mask) and switch off
 
petcock to the induction chamber. Ether flow should 
be re-adjusted to 5% isoflurane and 2–3 ml/min O2.
 
(4.3) Within 2–5 min, the animal should now be completely 
sedated. The physical characterization may now com-
mence.
 
(4.4) At this stage, the first researcher can open the lab 
notebook and place microchip identification (usual-
ly a sticker) in the appropriate lab entry form. Re-
cord sex, length, weight, and notes on appearance: 
porphyrin stains around head area, mottled or greasy 
appearance of hair, evidence of wounds or fighting, 
and general health (any breaks) of guard hairs and 
vibrissae.
 
(4.5) With the mask still in place, the animal may be placed 
ventral side down, take sharp surgical scissors and snip 
2.5–5 mm from end of tail, add to a marked DNA col-
lection tube filled with preservative.
 
(4.6) Save marked tube for transportation back to  
laboratory.
serological and Ectoparasite collection
Body fluid and fecal samples for blood-borne and systemic 
bacterial and viral pathogens (5) can be collected, along with 
ectoparasites and their pathogens (10). The type and volume of 
fluid drawn will determine the variety of pathogens that may be 
assayed.
 
(1) Collect rectal swab, seal, and set aside to return to lab.
 
(2) Blood can be collected from the tail by squeezing/massaging 
the area around the DNA clipping into a capillary tube, or by 
cannulation of the lateral tail vain.
 
(3) Pressure and Kwik-stop styptic powder can be used to cau-
terize tail in case of bleeding.
 
(4) Ectoparasite collection
 
(4.1) Place animal ventral side down. Grasp animal by ab-
dominal and thoracic region. Forceps can be used to 
lift fur, while stainless steel nit/louse comb to brush 
animals’ hair both directions over square Petri dishes 
filled with dry ice (10).
 
(4.2) Ectoparasites can be sorted visually, stored on dry ice, 
and transferred to −80°C for storage, until further 
analyses can be performed.
 
(5) Animals are now ready for pathogen detection assays.
Serological and tissue-based analyses of bacteria and viruses 
common to rodents in Manhattan are well described (5). 
Targeted molecular analyses (PCR-based assays) can be used to 
detect known human pathogens with published primers, such 
as Campylobacter coli, Listeria monocytogenes, Rickettsia spp. 
Toxoplasma gondii, Vibrio vulnificus, or Yersinia pestis, along 
with viruses, such as hantaviruses. Unbiased high throughput 
sequencing (UHTS) can be used on blood and rectal swabs to 
detect novel viruses not yet known to cause human disease. Frye 
et al. (10) has documented the steps necessary for DNA extraction 
from ectoparasites using DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen 
Inc., Alameda, CA, USA), followed by PCR analyses.
Microchipping rodents
Most rats from 80 g and above can readily accommodate a 12-mm 
Trovan® passive chip, roughly the size of a grain of rice.
 
(1) With animal on the table, dorsal-side up, use a battery-
operated razor to shave 2 cm × 2 cm area of hair between the 
shoulder scapulae, making sure not to burn animal with the 
razor. Use alcohol or betadine and cotton swab with an inside 
out circling motion to sterilize shaved area.
 
(2) Pinch skin between fingers to form a tent. Insert needle bevel 
up, eject chip from retractor (Figure 1D), fingers in place to 
touch newly injected chip through outside of skin. Remove 
needle with a 180° twist to minimize bleeding.
 
(3) Check for bleeding, use gauze, firm pressure, and veterinary 
glue if necessary
 
(4) Remove mask and return animal to cage. Place cage near 
exact spot where it was trapped. Once the animal is moving 
again (usually 5–10 min, the animal is then ready for release), 
open door and let animal move out of cage.
rFID and Pheromone lures
The radio-frequency identification (RFID) system will be preas-
sembled in a place within 10 m of rat activity. We used the SA-148, 
SQID customizable PIT tag system (Seabird model; Figure 2) 
modified for this project by VANTRO systems, LLC. The unit was 
 FIGUrE 2 | rFID system. Sensor, data logger, system control unit.
6
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
modified with a battery eliminator so that it could be powered by 
240 V A/C mains. Data were captured by a data logger with a 2 GB 
memory capacity and USB connection. A load cell (38.64 ticks/g) 
was attached to the system control unit. Data were extracted 
from the system control unit through the use of Windows-based 
hyperterminal software. The system had an operating range of 
0–100°F and remained powered at all times, except otherwise 
noted. The extracted data were then processed using a macro-
enabled spreadsheet template (Microsoft Excel 2000) that was 
developed specifically for the RFID data. For the camera trap, 
we used a Wildgame Innovations®, Razor, 6.0-Megapixel Digital 
Trail Scouting mounted 2 m from the RFID reader and aimed 
ground-level at the antenna.
Used rat bedding can be collected from a pet store or univer-
sity housing for lab rats, making sure five or more adult males and 
females are represented.
 
(1) Ensure RFID unit is powered on and that camera trap is 
switched to video mode.
 
(2) Set 100 g of fresh rat bedding on sensors
Post-Workup (5–10 min)
 
(1) Check around all other traps for signs of rat activity (Figure 
S1 in Supplementary Material).
 
(2) Shut down mobile theater, wipe down table, remove instru-
ments (place scissors in bead sterilizer), replace lab bench 
lining.
 
(3) Update lab manual
 
(4) Re-bait stations with 100 g fresh pheromones (both stations 
and sensors will have pheromones).
 
(5) Transport labeled collection vials (DNA, plasma, parasites) 
on dry ice to −80°-freezer.
continued surveillance and site rotation
Rats are among the most sensitive animals to the smell of con-
specifics. Similar to many mammals, they approach scents in 
a process called “scent inspection,” whereby most scents (even 
repellents) causes the animal to approach scents closely to ascer-
tain their biological meaning (16). Thus, scents are the primary 
tool by which rats are repeatedly trapped, despite their proclivities 
to neophobia and habituation.
 
(1) Traps can be re-baited continually as long as their participa-
tion is required, in order to obtain adequate sample size and 
sufficient spatial replication.
statistics
Pairwise comparisons of visitation or dwell times can be per-
formed between different pheromone types × sex using PROC 
ANOVA with the Tukey option in SAS v. 9.4 (Cary, NC, USA). 
Scatter plot of number of visits per animal expressed as days 
elapsed since first capture. This graph can be generated using the 
PROC SCATTER. Points may be jittered on the y-axis to visually 
represent multiple visits per day.
ANtIcIPAtED rEsUlts
The downloads from RFID data loggers will indicate the time of 
day (time stamp), dwell times, frequency of visitation, weight, 
and all demographic factors for each individual animal over 
the duration of the study (Table 1; Figure 3). This information 
should then be linked to the emergence of any new pathogens, all 
rat recaptures (Figure 3), and any consequent changes in patho-
gen load (e.g., some species could become more or less prevalent; 
see example, data in representative Table 2). Information on 
individual behaviors will determine the association of sex, age, 
and other demographic factors on differing attractants such as 
specific types of pheromones (e.g., sebum, dander, urine, fecal, 
porphyrin, and saliva) (Table 3) or individual chemical constitu-
ents within pheromones. Females are demonstrated as visiting 
pheromones more frequently than males, but having similar 
dwell times.
DIscUssIoN
Rat research is becoming more important for increasingly 
urbanized, and thus vulnerable, human populations. However, 
new methods are required to overcome the physical and social 
barriers that impede progress. In 2015, Firth et al. studied a 
population of only 133 rats in New York City, and discovered 
18 pathogens previously unknown to science. Similarly, when 
the international Journal Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases 
broadcasted a call for research in a special issue rodent-vectored 
 tABlE 1 | representative physical characterization.
tag #
sex/
juvenile
site/location 
(a–g)
Weight begin  
(g)
length 
(mm)
Health 
(1–4)
Marks/wounds
Visits to sensor 
(#)
recaptures  
(#)
Weight 
change (g)
J876
M
b
448
25
3
Scarring/right flank
1032
3
20
M469
F
d
350
21
4
490
7
120
0B99
M
a
610
25
3
Mottled coat
1120
2
−10
9639
M
g
380
23
2
3.5 mm left dorsal
886
0
100
9DCA
M
g
224
22
2
Tail lost (8 mm remains)
429
0
275
B877
F
a
389
24
3
Porphyrin excess
0
2
111
7FAO
M/j
a
202
14
4
1420
1
340
657C6
F
d
490
20
3
Damaged vibrissae
630
7
−15
J764
F/j
c
96
15
4
553
3
156
A123
M
e
521
29
1
Left eye blind
632
4
5
Average
Male
6
398
23
3
122
Female
4
331
20
5
93
Example demographics and heath indicators of 10 wild, urban rats, Rattus norvegicus, monitored over 6 months. Target population should be 20 rats × 7 sites = 140 marked 
individuals. Sites should include financial district, public parks, and residential areas, where humans come into contact (directly or indirectly) with rodents.
FIGUrE 3 | scatterplot of recruitment for wild Norway rats, Rattus norvegicus to sensor by sex. Females represented by blue color, recaptures are 
indicated with vertical red line. Target population should be 20 animals × 7 sites = 140 marked individuals.
7
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
pathogens and influence on human health, there were no scien-
tific entries from North America (7). Clearly, new methodolo-
gies are required to address these significant barriers, and new 
detailed assays may help open the door for additional urban 
research.
We have shown that careful planning and following or 
modifying our protocol can yield a wealth of information 
regarding the ecology, time, and place of disease emergence 
and pathogenicity of wild rats in the urban environment. In 
a recent study (7), we used this protocol to determine what 
times animals were most active in winter, and segregated this 
information by sex and size/relative age, and assessed the health 
of individuals by noting how previously chipped-animals 
changed over time. This can be done by examining the body 
of recaptured animals (length of guard hairs, vibrissae, level of 
porphyrin), or by examining camera video or photographs for 
instances of new wounds and markings when the animal visits 
the sensor.
From an ethological perspective, we can deduce different 
behaviors between males and females, adults and juveniles, 
including dominant, subdominant behaviors, sexual receptiv-
ity, and peak activity times. Most importantly, the data will 
 tABlE 3 | recruitment by pheromone-type.
rat
sex/
juvenile
total visits
Pheromone type
Average visits/
day
sig (T; P)
Average dwell  
time ± (s)
sig (T; P)
By individual
J876
M
1072
Sebum
4.5
3.2
M469
F
983
Sebum
2.8
2.0
0B99
M
796
Sebum
1.1
1.6
9639
M
557
Sebum
0.4
2
9DCA
M
978
Sebum
2.5
0.5
B877
F
690
Sebum
3.8
2.3
7FAO
M/j
1235
Sebum
4.6
4.8
657C6
F
787
Sebum
7.5
6.25
By sex
Male
846
2.6
34.7; <0.05
3.5
0.98; 0.245
Female
1011
4.7
2.4
Example recruitment to RFID sensor for wild, Norway rats, Rattus norvegicus, based on pheromone-type placed at sensor and monitored over 6 months. Target population should 
be 20 animals × 7 sites = 140 marked individuals. Pairwise comparisons of visitation or dwell times can be performed between different pheromone types × sex.  
Bold values indicate significance at the 0.05 level.
tABlE 2 | Anticipated results.
tag #
sex/
juvenile
site captured 
(a–g)
Pathogens total 
(genus)
Ectoparasite vectored 
(genus)
Δ Winter
Δ spring
Δ summer
J876
M
b
Parvovirus; Bartonella; Borrelia
Bartonella; Borrelia
Parvovirus; Borrelia
Bartonella
M469
F
d
Y. enterocolitica; Bartonella
Bartonella
Y. enterocolitica
Bartonella
0B99
M
a
Orbivirus; Rickettsia
Orbivirus; Rickettsia
9639
M
g
Parvovirus; Bartonella; Borrelia
Bartonella; Borrelia
Bartonella
9DCA
M
g
Bartonella; Borrelia
Bartonella Borrelia
Bartonella
B877
F
a
Y. enterocolitica; Bartonella
Bartonella
Bartonella
Y. enterocolitica
7FAO
M/j
a
Bartonella
Bartonella
657C6
F
d
Parvovirus; Borrelia
Parvovirus; Borrelia
J764
F/j
c
S. enterica; Rickettsia
S. enterica
Rickettsia
A123
M
e
Orbivirus; Bartonella
Bartonella
Bartonella
Orbivirus
Hypothetical changes in pathogen load for each individual over time for 10 wild, urban rats, Rattus norvegicus, monitored over a minimum of 9 months to capture the widest 
possible range of temperature fluctuations. Target population should be 20 animals × 7 sites = 140 marked individuals. Δ, emergence of new pathogen. Incidence: Parvovirus 30%, 
Bartonella 70%, Borrelia 40%, Y. enterocolitica 20%, Orbivirus 20%, S. enterica 10%, Rickettsia 10%.
8
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
encode the individual identification of rodents that are assessed 
for pathogens, and importantly, of repeatedly captured indi-
viduals, so that changing pathogen loads can be monitored 
over time. For instance, we may find a higher incidence of 
arthropod-borne bacteria, such as Borrelia or Rickettsia, late 
in the season, whereas they may have been absent during the 
early spring. Additionally, some rodents may pickup additional 
pathogens as they seasonally migrate from public park spaces 
to the sewers in the winter before re-emerging and potential 
immigration (a process called “vertical migration,” Corrigan, 
personal communication).
While methodology such as this requires significant prepara-
tion and pre-planning of both laboratory and field gear, we note 
that the overall cost of our purchases was less than $15,000 USD; 
an insignificant cost considering the implications on our health 
and estimated $19 billion per annum that rats cost society (3). 
Potential modifications to our protocol might include use of a 
subset of chemicals in the mixed pooled scents, such as androgens 
to attract dominant males, or MUPs to attract adult females, 
potentially in the absence of males. The latter approach might be 
particularly relevant for the increased trapping of adult females 
into single-use, injectable immunocontraceptive traps. While we 
cannot fully overcome the social “taboo” nature of working with 
wild rats, open communications followed by new methodology 
and approaches may help reduce the physical barriers that are 
compounded by the social anxieties.
NotEs
The protocols we recommend are sufficient to provide serum 
and rectal fluids necessary for targeted molecular analysis and 
UHTS assays. However, we note that tissue distribution of viruses 
is not possible without sacrificing the animal. Thus, our assay 
is intended to enable the documentation of changes in known 
microbial diversity and distribution, as well as viral incidence, 
and not to determine the tissue-level sites of viral replication 
(within the animal).
EtHIcs stAtEMENt
All procedures are in accordance with the guidelines for ethical 
conduct in the care and use of non-human animals in research 
(Hofstra IACUC #0093).
 9
Parsons et al.
Protocol for Systematic Pathogen Surveillance
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
July 2016 | Volume 4 | Article 132
AUtHor coNtrIBUtIoNs
MP and MD conceived and designed the protocol. MP wrote the 
manuscript with editorial input from RS and MD.
AcKNoWlEDGMENts
Urshuula Dulakia and Beverly Shelton of Columbia University, 
Institute of Comparative Medicine (ICM), provided training 
on rodent handling and surgical procedures. The authors thank 
the late Wayne Culberth, along with Art Cameron of VANTRO 
Systems, LLC for assistance with the design, modifications, and 
support for the RFID system. The authors thank Lawrence Levy 
and the Center for Suburban Sustainability at Hofstra University 
rEFErENcEs
1. Cohen JE. Human population: the next half century. Science (2003) 302: 
1172–5. doi:10.1126/science.1088665 
2. Kandelaki G, Malania L, Bai Y, Chakvetadze N, Katsitadze G, Imnadze P, et al. 
Human lymphadenopathy caused by rat borne Bartonella, Tbilisi, Georgia. 
Emerg Infect Dis (2016) 22. doi:10.3201/eid2203.151823 
3. Pimentel D, Zuniga R, Morrison D. Update on the environmental and eco-
nomic costs associated with alien-invasive species in the United States. Ecol 
Econ (2005) 52:273–88. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.07.013 
4. Feng AY, Himsworth CG. The secret life of the city rat: a review of the ecology 
of urban Norway and black rats (Rattus norvegicus and Rattus rattus). Urban 
Ecosyst (2014) 17:149–62. doi:10.1007/s11252-013-0305-4 
5. Firth C, Bhat M, Firth MA, Williams SH, Frye MJ, Simmonds P, et al. 
Detection of zoonotic pathogens and characterization of novel viruses carried 
by commensal Rattus norvegicus in New York City. MBio (2014) 5:e01933–14. 
doi:10.1128/mBio.01933-14 
6. Himsworth CG, Parsons KL, Jardine C, Patrick DM. Rats, cities, people, and 
pathogens: a systematic review and narrative synthesis of literature regarding 
the ecology of rat-associated zoonoses in urban centers. Vector-Borne and 
Zoonotic Dis (2013) 13:349–59. doi:10.1089/vbz.2012.1195 
7. Parsons MH, Sarno R, Deutsch M. Jump-starting urban rat research: conspe-
cific pheromones recruit wild rats into a behavioral and pathogen-monitoring 
assay. Front Ecol Evol (2015) 3:146. doi:10.3389/fevo.2015.00146 
8. McKee G, Pewarchuk J. Rat-bite fever. Can Med Assoc J (2013) 185:1346–1346. 
doi:10.1503/cmaj.121704 
9. Backhans A, Fellström C. Rodents on pig and chicken farms-a potential threat 
to human and animal health. Infect Ecol Epidemiol (2012) 2. doi:10.3402/iee.
v2i0.17093 
10. Frye MJ, Firth C, Bhat M, Firth MA, Che X, Lee D, et al. Preliminary survey 
of ectoparasites and associated pathogens from Norway rats in New York City. 
J Med Entomol (2015) 52(2):253–9. doi:10.1093/jme/tjv014 
11. Ogden NH, Feil EJ, Leighton PA, Lindsay LR, Margos G, Mechai S, et al. 
Evolutionary aspects of emerging Lyme disease in Canada. Appl Environ 
Microbiol (2015) 81:7350–9. doi:10.1128/AEM.01671-15 
12. Karli P. The Norway rat’s killing response to the white mouse: an exper-
imental analysis 1. Behaviour (1956) 10:81–102. doi:10.1163/156853956 
X00110 
13. Banks PB, Hughes NK. A review of the evidence for potential impacts of black 
rats (Rattus rattus) on wildlife and humans in Australia. Wildl Res (2012) 
39:78–88. doi:10.1071/WR11086 
14. O’Farrell MJ, Clark WA, Emmerson FH, Juarez MS, Kay FR, O’Farrell TM, 
et al. Use of a mesh live trap for small mammals: are results from 
Sherman live traps deceptive? J Mammal (1994) 75:692–9. doi:10.2307/ 
1382517 
15. Volfová R, Stejskal V, Aulický R, Frynta D. Presence of conspecific odours 
enhances responses of commensal house mice (Mus musculus) to bait 
stations. Int J Pest Manag (2010) 57:35–40. doi:10.1080/09670874.2010.5
03285 
16. Fishman MA. Predator inspection: closer approach as a way to improve 
assessment of potential threats. J Theor Biol (1999) 196:225–35. doi:10.1006/
jtbi.1998.0834 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Parsons, Sarno and Deutsch. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License 
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original 
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
(CSS) for helpful support throughout the project. The authors 
also thank Robert Corrigan (Department Health and Mental 
Hygiene) for his ongoing support.
FUNDING
This project was self-funded and relied on in-kind donations 
from Vantro Systems, Inc., Arrow Pest Control (MD’s time) with 
logistic support from the ICM at Columbia University.
sUPPlEMENtArY MAtErIAl
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at 
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpubh.2016.00132
