 785
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 6, 2016
Sleep is essential for optimal health in children and adolescents. Members of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine developed consensus 
recommendations for the amount of sleep needed to promote optimal health in children and adolescents using a modified RAND Appropriateness Method. 
The recommendations are summarized here. A manuscript detailing the conference proceedings and the evidence supporting these recommendations will be 
published in the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine.
Keywords: pediatric, sleep duration, consensus
Citation: Paruthi S, Brooks LJ, D’Ambrosio C, Hall WA, Kotagal S, Lloyd RM, Malow BA, Maski K, Nichols C, Quan SF, Rosen CL, Troester MM, Wise 
MS. Recommended amount of sleep for pediatric populations: a consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med 
2016;12(6):785–786.
CONSENSUS RECOMMENDATIONS
• Infants* 4 months to 12 months should sleep 12 to 16 
hours per 24 hours (including naps) on a regular basis 
to promote optimal health.
• Children 1 to 2 years of age should sleep 11 to 14 hours 
per 24 hours (including naps) on a regular basis to 
promote optimal health.
• Children 3 to 5 years of age should sleep 10 to 13 hours 
per 24 hours (including naps) on a regular basis to 
promote optimal health.
• Children 6 to 12 years of age should sleep 9 to 12 hours 
per 24 hours on a regular basis to promote optimal 
health.
• Teenagers 13 to 18 years of age should sleep 8 to 10 
hours per 24 hours on a regular basis to promote 
optimal health.
 
◦ Sleeping the number of recommended hours on a 
regular basis is associated with better health outcomes 
including: improved attention, behavior, learning, 
memory, emotional regulation, quality of life, and 
mental and physical health.
 
◦ Regularly sleeping fewer than the number of 
recommended hours is associated with attention, 
behavior, and learning problems. Insufficient sleep also 
increases the risk of accidents, injuries, hypertension, 
obesity, diabetes, and depression. Insufficient sleep in 
CONSENSUS STATEMENT
Recommended Amount of Sleep for Pediatric Populations: 
A Consensus Statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine
Shalini Paruthi, MD1,*; Lee J. Brooks, MD2,3; Carolyn D’Ambrosio, MD4; Wendy A. Hall, PhD, RN5; Suresh Kotagal, MD6; Robin M. Lloyd, MD6;  
Beth A. Malow, MD, MS7; Kiran Maski, MD8; Cynthia Nichols, PhD9; Stuart F. Quan, MD10; Carol L. Rosen, MD11; Matthew M. Troester, DO12;  
Merrill S. Wise, MD13
1Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO; 2Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA; 3Liaison for the American Academy of Pediatrics, Elk Grove Village, IL; 4Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA; 5University of British Columbia School of Nursing, Vancouver, BC; 6Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; 7Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN; 8Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA; 9Munson Sleep Disorders Center, Traverse City, MI; 10Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; 11Rainbow Babies and Children’s Hospital, 
Cleveland, OH; 12Barrow Neurological Institute at Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ; 13Methodist Healthcare Sleep Disorders Center, Memphis, TN; *moderator of the 
Consensus Conference Panel
pii: jc-00158-16 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.5866
teenagers is associated with increased risk of self-harm, 
suicidal thoughts, and suicide attempts.
 
◦ Regularly sleeping more than the recommended hours 
may be associated with adverse health outcomes such 
as hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and mental health 
problems.
 
◦ Parents who are concerned that their child is sleeping 
too little or too much should consult their healthcare 
provider for evaluation of a possible sleep disorder.
* Recommendations for infants younger than 4 months are not 
included due to the wide range of normal variation in duration 
and patterns of sleep, and insufficient evidence for associa-
tions with health outcomes.
BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGY
Healthy sleep requires adequate duration, appropriate timing, 
good quality, regularity, and the absence of sleep disturbances 
or disorders. Sleep duration is a frequently investigated sleep 
measure in relation to health. A panel of 13 experts in sleep 
medicine and research used a modified RAND Appropriate-
ness Method1 to develop recommendations regarding the sleep 
duration range that promotes optimal health in children aged 
0–18 years. The expert panel reviewed published scientific evi-
dence addressing the relationship between sleep duration and 
 786
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 6, 2016
S Paruthi, LJ Brooks, C D’Ambrosio et al. Consensus Statement
health using a broad set of National Library of Medicine Medi-
cal Subject Headings (MeSH) terms and no date restrictions, 
which resulted in a total of 864 scientific articles. The process 
was further guided by the Oxford grading system.2 The panel 
focused on seven health categories with the best available evi-
dence in relation to sleep duration: general health, cardiovas-
cular health, metabolic health, mental health, immunologic 
function, developmental health, and human performance. 
Consistent with the RAND Appropriateness Method, mul-
tiple rounds of evidence review, discussion, and voting were 
conducted to arrive at the final recommendations. The pro-
cess to develop these recommendations was conducted over a 
10-month period and concluded with a meeting held February 
19–21, 2016 in Chicago, Illinois.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Current evidence supports the general recommendations for 
obtaining an adequate number of hours of sleep per 24 hours 
on a regular basis to promote optimal health among children 
aged 4 months to 18 years. Individual variability in sleep need 
is influenced by genetic, behavioral, medical, and environmen-
tal factors. A clearer understanding of the precise biological 
mechanisms underlying sleep need requires further scientific 
investigation. These recommendations create a foundation to 
raise awareness and improve understanding of sleep effects on 
health. The recommendations provide a basis for:
• Educating children, teenagers, families, school 
professionals, healthcare providers/trainees, and the 
general public on the importance of adequate sleep 
duration for health.
• Encouraging parents and caregivers to help children 
obtain adequate sleep duration.
• Initiating discussions of social, educational, and economic 
benefits of adequate sleep duration, thereby informing 
public policy.
• Promoting research on the role of sleep duration in health 
and well-being. Research that directly examines the 
effects of sleep duration on health may lead to revisions of 
these recommendations in the future.
These recommendations have been endorsed by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, the Sleep Research Society and the 
American Association of Sleep Technologists.
REFERENCES
1. Fitch K, Bernstein S, Aguilar M et al. The Rand/UCLA appropriateness method 
user’s manual. Santa Monica, CA: Rand, 2001.
2. OCEBM Levels of Evidence Working Group. The Oxford 2011 Levels of 
Evidence. [cited March 9 2016]. Available from: http://www.cebm.net/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/CEBM-Levels-of-Evidence-2.1.pdf.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The AASM acknowledges the following individuals for their participation and 
contributions: Non-Participating Observers: Michael Twery, PhD, National Health, 
Lung, Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD; and Joel Porquez, RST, RPSGT, CCSH, 
American Association of Sleep Technologists. Attendance by these individuals 
does not constitute endorsement of this statement by their affiliated institutions or 
organizations. American Academy of Sleep Medicine Staff: John Noel; Jonathan L. 
Heald, MA; and Sarah Hashmi, MBBS, MSc, MPH.
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication April, 2016
Accepted for publication April, 2016
Address correspondence to: Shalini Paruthi, MD, St. Luke’s Hospital, 232 S. Woods 
Mill Road, St. Louis, MO 63017; Email: research@aasmnet.org
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
Funding for this project was provided by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 
and supported by the cooperative agreement number 1U50DP004930-03 from 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Its contents are solely the 
responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the 
CDC. Dr. Maski has consulted for Medscape Inc. and has received research support 
from Jazz Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Rosen has consulted as a medical advisor for Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals. The other Consensus Conference Panel members have indicated 
no financial conflicts of interest.
