 PERSPECTIVE
OPEN
When scientific paradigms lead to tunnel vision: lessons from
the study of fear
Denis Paré1 and Gregory J. Quirk2
For the past 30 years, research on the amygdala has largely focused on the genesis of defensive behaviors as its main function. This
focus originated from early lesion studies and was supported by extensive anatomical, physiological, and pharmacological data.
Here we argue that while much data is consistent with the fear model of amygdala function, it has never been directly tested, in
part due to overreliance on the fear conditioning task. In support of the fear model, amygdala neurons appear to signal threats and/
or stimuli predictive of threats. However, recent studies in a natural threat setting show that amygdala activity does not correlate
with threats, but simply with the movement of the rat, independent of valence. This was true for both natural threats as well as
conditioned stimuli; indeed there was no evidence of threat signaling in amygdala neurons. Similar findings are emerging for
prefrontal neurons that modulate the amygdala. These recent developments lead us to propose a new conceptualization of
amygdala function whereby the amygdala inhibits behavioral engagement. Moreover, we propose that the goal of understanding
the amygdala will be best served by shifting away from fear conditioning toward naturalistic approach and avoidance paradigms
that involve decision-making and a larger repertoire of spontaneous and learned behaviors, all the while keeping an open mind.
npj Science of Learning  (2017) 2:6 ; doi:10.1038/s41539-017-0007-4
Shortly before the first report implicating the amygdala in
conditioned fear,1 the Handbook of Physiology published a
comprehensive review on the amygdala. Authored by Pierre
Gloor,2 this chapter critically summarized a now largely forgotten
body of stimulation, recording, and lesion studies, including the
well-known Kluver–Bucy syndrome.3 With respect to the latter,
Gloor commented that while changes in emotional behaviors are
consistently observed after amygdala lesions, most aspects of the
Kluver–Bucy syndrome (other than the visual agnosia) could also
be observed with lesions largely restricted to the amygdala. These
included the indiscriminate urge to attend and respond to all
environmental stimuli, to ingest non-food objects, or to seek
sexual gratification undiscerningly. He wrote: “Obviously, all these
behavioral mechanisms are intimately interlocked and the full
syndrome is more than the sum of individual deficits attributable
to individual anatomical structures” (see ref. 2, p. 1411).
Nevertheless, reinforced by a series of studies implicating the
amygdala in the genesis of innate and learned fear,1, 4, 5 the view
emerged that the emotional disturbances seen in the Kluver–Bucy
syndrome—the apparent loss of fear—resulted from amygdala
lesions, while the other anomalies depended on damage to
neighboring structures. This fateful simplification led amygdala
researchers to focus on fear, particularly learned fear, and
Pavlovian fear conditioning emerged as the dominant experi-
mental paradigm to study the amygdala.6–9
PAVLOVIAN FEAR LEARNING: PERSPECTIVES AND UNTESTED
ASSUMPTIONS
Early findings suggested that fear memory traces involve a simple
circuit, residing entirely in the amygdala: information about the
conditioned (CS) and unconditioned (US) stimuli converged onto
lateral amygdala (LA) neurons, leading to a potentiation of CS
inputs and the genesis of defensive behaviors via LA projections
to the
central
amygdala
(CeA).
This
arrangement
inspired
confidence that fear learning would be readily amenable to
experimental scrutiny, potentially leading to insights in the basic
mechanisms of memory and the causes of human anxiety
disorders. These factors, combined with major investments from
the
National Institutes
of
Health,
led
to an
explosion of
publications that continues to this day. As a result, major progress
has been made in characterizing the network, cellular, and
molecular mechanisms supporting the early formation and
subsequent consolidation of memory traces in the amygdala.
However, it has also become clear that fear learning involves a
more intricate circuit than initially envisioned. For instance, it was
found that the amygdala is not the only site of plasticity for
Pavlovian fear: other areas also display increases in CS respon-
siveness that are critical for fear learning. These include amygdala-
projecting auditory thalamic and cortical neurons10, 11 and, as
recently shown, midline thalamic neurons.12 Even within the
amygdala, it was found that multiple parallel inhibitory and
excitatory circuits are differentially involved13, 14 and regulated by
medial prefrontal neurons during the expression or extinction of
conditioned fear.15 In addition, the same neurons and circuits that
were thought to mediate learned fear have been shown to
respond to rewards16 and support the acquisition of responses
driven by positively valenced US.17, 18 Nevertheless, the study of
fear learning sustained the early notion that activity of neurons in
the amygdala serves to signal threat and in turn generates
defensive behaviors. Surprisingly, this foundational assumption
was not fully tested until recently.
Received: 31 August 2016 Revised: 7 February 2017 Accepted: 21 February 2017
1Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers State University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA and 2University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, San Juan, PR 00936-5067,
USA
Correspondence: Denis Paré (pare@andromeda.rutgers.edu)
www.nature.com/npjscilearn
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 PEERING OUTSIDE THE BOX
Prior to the widespread adoption of freezing as an index of
Pavlovian fear, other measures of defensive behaviors were
used19 and fear was often studied in semi-naturalistic foraging
settings.20, 21 After a long period of neglect, these ethological
approaches to the study of fear are experiencing a resurgence
(reviewed in ref. 22). For instance, Choi and Kim23 introduced a
task that reproduces natural foraging conditions. In this task,
hungry rats are confronted with a mechanical predator, called
Robogator, when they leave the safety of their nest to forage in an
elongated arena (Fig. 1a). The predator is threatening: when rats
come near, it surges forward and repeatedly snaps its jaws shut. In
control conditions, rats show many signs of apprehension in the
foraging task (Fig. 1b, c). Before initiating foraging, they wait for
~20 s at the edge of the foraging arena. Choi and Kim observed
that following amygdala inactivation, rats ignore the Robogator, as
if they have become fearless. On the surface, this result agrees
with the view emerging from fear conditioning studies: since the
amygdala contains neurons that signal threat and in turn generate
defensive behaviors, inhibiting the amygdala should abolish
defensive behaviors in the foraging task. However, subsequent
unit recordings from the basolateral (BL) nucleus of the amygdala
are not consistent with this explanation.
Recording BL neurons, Amir et al.24 distinguished two types of
projection cells in the foraging task, with the incidence of the first
(Type-1) being 10-fold higher than that of the second (Type-2) and
the two exhibiting inverse activity fluctuations in most conditions
(Fig. 1d). During the waiting period prior to foraging, the activity of
the prevalent Type-1 cells matched predictions of the threat-
coding model. That is, their firing rates (FRs) were higher when
rats seemed more apprehensive: i.e., when they decided to abort
rather than initiate foraging (Fig. 1e, blue) or in the presence of the
predator (Fig. 1f, blue). Yet, during foraging, the activity of Type-1
cells was opposite to that predicted by the threat-coding model:
their FRs were markedly reduced, becoming nearly silent near the
predator (Fig. 1d), even when they escaped. The activity of Type-2
cells was not related to threat either (Fig. 1e, f, red).
Some could argue that because rats were confronted with the
Robogator multiple times, they eventually stopped fearing it.
Arguing against this possibility however, the inhibition of Type-1
cells upon foraging initiation was also seen when the Robogator
was first introduced (Amir and Paré, unpublished observations).
Others might offer a different interpretation for these findings. For
instance, they might point out that when rats did not venture out
of their nest, they were afraid and thus BL neurons fired. And if
rats were so bold as to initiate foraging despite the proximity of
the predator, they were presumably not afraid at that instant and
BL activity decreased. While this account seems to fit the threat-
coding model, it cannot explain why BL cells were nearly silent
when rats actively escaped the predator. Surely, the predator must
be threatening since rats run away from it.
Furthermore, the threat-coding model cannot account for the
most surprising finding to emerge from the Amir et al. study24:
task-related variations in BL activity were not directly driven by
threats or rewards. Indeed, Amir and colleagues compared the
activity of basolateral complex of the amygdala (BLA) cells in the
foraging task and two control tasks devoid of explicit threats or
rewards (Fig. 1g). Unexpectedly, they found that across the three
tasks, neither threat proximity nor reward availability predicted BL
activity. Instead, Type-1 FRs varied with movement, generally
showing increased activity during periods where behavioral
output was suppressed and decreased activity during sponta-
neous exploration or food retrieval (Fig. 1g). Thus, the activity of
BL neurons across a variety of tasks is not consistent with the
dominant threat-coding model.
A NEW CONCEPTUALIZATION OF THE ROLE OF THE
AMYGDALA
In a largely overlooked study, Jacobs and McGinty25 proposed that
activity in the BLA promotes behavioral inhibition. Using unit
recordings in freely moving cats, they took advantage of a
spontaneous electroencephalographic rhythm at 12–16 Hz, the
somatomotor
rhythm
(SMR),
which
predominates
over
the
sensorimotor cortex and is associated with motor inhibition. They
paired spontaneous SMRs with reinforcing electrical stimulation of
the lateral hypothalamus to induce long periods of immobility
during which BLA activity was increased. While purely correla-
tional in nature, this observation led Jacobs and McGinty to
suggest that BLA activity may promote behavioral inhibition.
This proposal is consistent with the results of Amir et al.24 on BL
activity. However, the term “behavioral inhibition” is problematic
because it suggests that the amygdala promotes motor inhibition
when the available data suggest otherwise. Indeed, on foraging
trials where rats showed signs of hesitation, moving forward and
backward and forward again, Amir et al.24 observed that Type-1
FRs correlated negatively with the speed of forward movements
but increased during backward motion. Thus, it appears that BL
activity does not promote motor inhibition per se but regulates
something more general, which we refer to as behavioral
engagement. We believe this designation is preferable because
it accommodates the fact that in some cases disengaging from
a situation also requires a motor output. The Amir et al.24 study
therefore
suggests
the
amygdala
opposes
behavioral
engagement.
What do we mean by behavioral engagement? The term refers
to a basic process that governs transactions between mammals
and their environment: whether or not to engage with (or
disengage from) stimuli or situations. It is a process akin to
decision-making, although it is unclear whether it is deliberative in
all species and conditions. This process is particularly critical for
ethologically significant situations such as decisions related to
foraging, interactions with conspecifics or confrontations with
predators, in short problems the nervous system has evolved to
address.
Clearly, a variety of factors (motivational, contextual, mnemonic,
etc.) determine whether mammals engage with a situation and
the amygdala is only one of many nodes taking part in processing,
integrating, and weighting such factors.26 For instance, when
deciding whether to forage or not, animals likely consider how
hungry they are, the specific properties of the environment, the
palatability of the food they might find there, whether they detect
or previously encountered a predator in this environment, and so
on. We propose that besides providing a continuous signal
that regulates engagement, the amygdala allows the subject’s
prior experience to enter into the equation. For instance, many
studies have documented how inhibiting BLA activity reduces the
impact of changes in US or reinforcer value.27, 28 Also, BLA activity
enhances the consolidation of emotionally laden memories.29
Thus, activity-dependent plasticity in its own network or target
regions might allow the amygdala to regulate a subject’s choice
based on prior experience when deciding whether or not to
engage with a situation or not.
The notion that BLA activity opposes behavioral engagement
offers a new explanation for prior findings. For instance, the
drastic increase in risk taking Choi and Kim23 observed in the
foraging task after BLA inactivation may not be due to a reduction
in threat signaling, but rather to reproducing the state of Type-1
firing suppression required to initiate foraging. Also, some of the
unexplained consequences of amygdala lesions in monkeys, such
as the urge to attend to all sensory stimuli and ingest non-food
objects could be explained by a loss of engagement regulation by
the amygdala rather than a reduction in fear. Similarly, the
enhancement of social interactions seen in macaques with
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
2
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 a
Failed trial
Rat hesitates at door threshold
Foraging
Escape
Rat
Food pellet
Robogator
Robot
No Robot
c
25
50
75
100
125
150
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percent suuccessful trials (%)
Distance to food pellet (cm)
b
0
2
4
Starts waiting
Leaves the Nest
Escapes
Door Opens
d
Time (s)
-5
0
5
0
-5
0
-5
0
Time (s)
T
ime (s)
Time (s)
Robot
Robot
No
Time to food retrieval (sec)
0
10
20
30
0
0.1
0.2
-5
-3
-1
1
3
Shuttle vs. Foraging Tasks
Robot
No Robot
Shuttle
g
FR (Hz)
Type-1
Type-1
Foraging (F) vs.
Foraging aborted (A)
FR (% baseline)
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
F
A
F
A
Trial type
FR (% baseline)
0
1
2
0
2
4
NR R
NR R
Trial type
Robot (R) vs.
no robot (NR)
e
f
Time (s)
Type-1
Type-2
Type-1
Type-2
3
S
NS
S
S
Firing rate (Hz)
Trials
Starts
moving
Fig. 1
Foraging task. The foraging apparatus had two compartments divided by a door: a dimly lit nest and a much brighter foraging arena.
After training rats to retrieve sweetened food pellets in the absence of Robogator, alternating trial blocks were conducted with or without the
Robogator. Each trial started by opening the door. a Example of failed trial. b Time from door opening to food retrieval increases when the
robot is present. c Proportion of successful trials is lower when the robot is present. Red, robot present; blue robot absent. d Activity of
representative Type-1 cell during the foraging task. Only successful trials are shown. Top rasters (dots indicate spikes and each line is a trial).
Bottom average of all available trials ± SEM. e Normalized FR of Type-1 (blue) and Type-2 (red) cells during waiting periods preceding initiation
of foraging (F) or retreat into the nest (A). f Normalized FR of Type-1 and Type-2 cells during waiting periods in the presence (R) vs. absence
(NR) of the Robogator. g FR of Type-1 cell in three conditions: during shuttle task (black), or during foraging task with Robot present (red) or
absent (blue). Vertical dashed line indicates initiation of foraging. S significant, NS non-significant. Source: Ref. 24
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
3
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
 excitotoxic lesions of the amygdala30 might not be due to a loss of
fear, but to a loss of engagement regulation. Supporting this
interpretation, a recent study reported that muscimol infusions in
the BL amygdala enhanced social interactions even in monkeys
that were highly familiar with each other,31 ruling out the
possibility that a loss of fear accounted for the enhanced social
interactions.
CS RESPONSES OF AMYGDALA NEURONS: FROM SENSORY
INPUTS TO BEHAVIORAL OUTPUTS
In the 1990s, the model emerged that CS–US convergence in LA
led to the Hebbian strengthening of CS synapses such that
subsequent CS presentations excited LA cells more strongly,
allowing them to elicit conditioned responses (CRs) via their
projection to CeA.6–9 However, some aspects of this model were
inconsistent with evidence available at the time. First, it was
known that the most effective way to condition animals was to
offset the start of the CS and US by 10–30 s with the two co-
terminating, rather than presenting them simultaneously, as
would be expected for a Hebbian mechanism.32 However, despite
the persistence of the CS for tens of seconds, the CS responses of
LA neurons were known to be transient: a brief burst of short-
latency spikes followed by a return of FRs near baseline.33–35
Consistent with these observations, recent whole-cell recordings
of BLA neurons in vivo revealed that prolonged auditory stimuli
elicit synaptic potentials that rapidly become sub-threshold.36
Thus, by the time the US occurs, LA neurons are firing little, and
synaptic inputs carrying CS information are no longer active. Yet,
Hebbian plasticity should be contingent on N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor activity at the time of CS–US pairing. While the
susceptibility of classically conditioned fear to NMDA receptor
antagonists is consistent with this possibility,37–39 given the time
course of LA activity and afferent inputs during the CS, it seems
unlikely that NMDA receptors are engaged when the US is
presented 20–30 s after CS onset.
Furthermore, fear conditioning was known to potentiate only
the initial, short-lived response of LA neurons to the CS,33–35
raising the question of how such a transient CR could maintain
CRs for tens of seconds. Despite these discrepant observations, the
model lived on and it became natural to think of CS-triggered LA
firing as sensory responses that automatically drive CRs. Soon, this
tendency generalized to neurons in other amygdala nuclei and to
appetitive conditioning paradigms.40–45
Yet, in the amygdala nuclei that are downstream of LA, like BL
and CeA, CS-elicited firing parallels the time course of the
associated CRs much more closely than in LA.44, 46 This raises the
possibility that in between LA and its targets, there is a shift in the
nature of the representation, from a sensory code to a behavioral
response code. It seems to us that such a transformation is needed
to account for the behavioral flexibility displayed by mammals
when threatened. For instance, depending on threat proximity,
rats will display freezing, fleeing, or attack.47 Models of fear
learning solely based on the potentiated sensory responses of LA
neurons cannot account for such flexibility.
If indeed the CS representation shifts from a sensory code in LA
to a behavioral response code in downstream nuclei, given a
CS–US contingency determined by the investigator, firing during
the CS should be variable in targets of LA, depending on trial-to-
trial variations in the subject’s “decisions”, even though the CS–US
contingency is fixed. Lee et al.48 examined this question by
contrasting the activity of BL neurons when rats did, or did not,
produce the appropriate CR (Fig. 2). One tone (CS-R) predicted
reward delivery while another (CS-N) did not. As a result of
conditioning, a low proportion of projection cells (hereafter
termed R-neurons) exhibited increased FRs during the CS-R. Lee
et al.48 found that the CS-related firing of R-neurons varied
strongly with conditioned responding: it was present when they
emitted the conditioned approach behavior in response to the
CS-R (Fig. 2a, blue) but was absent when rats omitted it (Fig. 2a, red).
Furthermore, R-neurons responded to the CS-N when rats exhibited
(in error) the CR during the CS-N. Therefore, the activity of R-
neurons is only coincidentally related to the CSs’ sensory properties.
They actually encode behavioral output (Fig. 2b, c). Presumably,
amygdala nuclei downstream of LA contain multiple subsets of
neurons that drive different aversive or appetitive behaviors via
segregated projections to various subcortical sites.49–53
On the surface, the existence of BL cells that are preferentially
active during specific behaviors (like R-neurons) appears incon-
sistent with the notion that amygdala activity inhibits behavioral
engagement. A possible solution to this conundrum is that the
ability of BL to influence behavior not only depends on the
activation of a specific subset of behavior-coding neurons but also
on the suppression of all others. Consistent with this possibility, in
a mixed appetitive-aversive conditioning paradigm, only 7% of
principal cells increased their FRs when the appetitive CS was
presented; most (52%) were inhibited (S.C. Lee, A. Amir, D. Haufler,
D. Paré, unpublished observations). Although excitatory CS
responses tend to attract more attention, inhibitory responses
actually prevail, consistent with our model.
-20
0
20
Time (s)
40
CS-R
40
0
10
20
10
0
Firing rate (Hz)
Behavior
Spikes / sec
a
b
Move
-20
0
20
Time (s)
40
0
Spikes / sec
10
Spontaneous approach
-20
0
20
Time (s)
1
5
Instances
c
Move
Reward-seeking
No response
CR
No CR
Fig. 2
Activity of BL neurons during CSs varies depending on
behavior. Rats were presented with two CS, one of which predicted
reward delivery (CS-R) and the second (CS-N), a neutral outcome.
After rats learned to retrieve the liquid reward at the conclusion of
the CS-R, the two CSs were presented in random order while
recording BL neurons. a Activity of a principal BL cell during multiple
presentations of the CS-R. Activity is depicted as a color-coded raster
(top) and peri-CS histogram of neuronal discharges (bottom; solid
and dashed lines are averages and SEM, respectively). Trials are
grouped by behavior as indicated by the colored bar on the left of
the rasters (blue, approach of water-port; red, no approach). Rasters
and peristimulus histograms in b depict the activity of the same cell
as in a, but aligned to onset of water-port approach instead of CS
onset. Note higher variations in firing latency when activity is
referenced to onset of CS-R than to approach behavior. c Raster and
histogram show activity of the same cell when the rat sponta-
neously initiated approach of the water-port in the absence of CS.
White dots in raster indicate time when rats left the water-port.
Source: Ref. 48
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
4
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 So far, there were few opportunities to explore these questions
because investigators
have relied
heavily
on classical
fear
conditioning, where the range of possible behaviors is extremely
limited. Clarifying what amygdala neurons code for will require
behavioral paradigms that allow one to compare the activity of
the same neurons when animals express a larger repertoire of
spontaneous and learned behaviors under multiple reinforcement
contingencies. Parallel measurements of autonomic responses,
such as pupil dilation, gastric motility, as well as heart and
respiration rate, would also be useful.
GATEKEEPERS OF THE AMYGDALA
The above indicates that in between LA and downstream
amygdala nuclei is a fundamental shift from a primarily sensory
representation to a behavioral response code. How does this
transformation occur? The strong relation between BL activity and
behavior irrespective of CS identity48 suggests that the impact of
CS-related inputs from LA to BL can be overridden by other inputs
to BL neurons. Prime candidates for this gating role are the medial
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and associated cortical regions (Fig. 3).
Indeed, two mPFC areas, the prelimbic (PL) and infralimbic (IL)
regions, are reciprocally connected with BL.54–56 Moreover, like BL,
they form strong bidirectional connections with high-order
cortical regions like the rhinal cortices and hippocampal formation
(HF), directly54, 57–59 or via midline thalamic nuclei.60 Intriguingly
however, although they exert an inverse influence on CRs,15, 61
depending on the task, say drug-seeking vs. fear conditioning
paradigms, PL and IL, respectively, facilitate or inhibit appetitive
and aversive responses.62
There are a number of similarities between PL and BL. Similar to
BL neurons, the CRs of PL neurons are sustained throughout a 30 s
CS and correlate with levels of freezing.63 Similar to BL, the
expression of conditioned freezing is reduced by pharmacologi-
cal64–66 and optogenetic67 inactivation of PL. Moreover, fear
conditioning increases AMPA receptor function at PL synapses
onto BLA neurons, thereby augmenting the responses of BLA
neurons to the CS.68
While these findings have been interpreted as PL triggering
fear-induced freezing by exciting BL neurons,15 it is also possible
that PL activation of BL triggers behavioral disengagement.
Consistent with this, lesions or inactivation of BLA block active
avoidance responses in the shuttle avoidance paradigm, where
rats must move to an adjacent chamber to avoid being
shocked.69–71 Such avoidance responses resemble the backward
movements away from the Robogator which are correlated with
increased BL activity (see above), and can be seen as an example
of behavioral disengagement. In a platform-mediated avoidance
task
that
pits
shock
avoidance
against
retrieval
of
food,
pharmacological inactivation of PL reduces expression of avoid-
ance but has no effect on freezing.72 Furthermore, inactivation of
IL impairs extinction of this type of avoidance. Similar to the
Robogator task, but differing from shuttle avoidance, platform-
mediated avoidance
involves
opposite
response
tendencies
(avoiding vs. feeding). Consistent with the behavioral engagement
model, rats failing to extinguish platform-mediated avoidance
(remaining on the platform despite the absence of shock) show
elevated activity in BL as well as reduced activity in IL73 (see Fig. 4),
reflecting
persistent
disengagement
from
food-seeking.
PL
neurons show excitatory responses to tone onset and platform
mounting in this avoidance task (Diehl, Bravo-Rivera, and Quirk,
unpublished observations), consistent with a role of PL in
generating this type of avoidance. Surprisingly, however, naïve
control rats show similar excitation of PL neurons by tones and
platform mounting, suggesting that, similar to BL recordings
discussed above,24 PL neurons may be signaling more general
sensory and behavioral events rather than avoidance per se.
Herein
lies
the
challenge
of
studying
naturalistic
tasks.
Avoidance requires a decision by the animal to move away from
threat, as does movement toward (or away from) food in the
Robogator task. Movement-related correlates may or may not
reflect decision processes related to food and threats. This differs
markedly from the far simpler study of tone-evoked neuronal
activity followed by reflexive freezing. It is far more complex (and
interesting!) to characterize neuronal correlates of behaviors
generated by the animal, than neural correlates of tones
generated by the experimenter.
Perhaps
BL
contains
multiple
subsets
of
neurons,
each
regulating different behaviors. Presumably, in order for one of
PFC
HF
BL / BM
Striatum
BNST
VMH
CeA
Response
Selection
Network
Freezing
Escape
Approach
Fight
Reward-seeking
Freezing
Potentiation of CS 
responses in LA
CS
Shock US
BL
a
b
Potentiation of CS 
responses in LA
Arbitrary CS
Arbitrary US
Avoidance
CeA
Fig. 3
Schema of connections through the amygdala. a View based
on fear conditioning. Convergence of tone CS and shock US
potentiates tone responses of neurons in the LA, which then
activate BL amygdala neurons to drive freezing via the CeA. b
Beyond fear conditioning. Arbitrary CS–US pairings potentiate CS
inputs to LA neurons, which project to a network of interconnected
structures, including BL, basomedial nucleus (BM), mPFC, and HF.
This network selects an appropriate response from a variety of
possible alternatives. Responses are executed through descending
projections to CeA, striatum, ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), or
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST)
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
5
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
 these opposite response tendencies to be expressed, most BL
neurons must be inhibited and a specific subset activated.
Paradigms that restrict the range of behaviors animals can
express are inadequate to examine such a situation. So are
pharmacological
or
optogenetic
manipulations
that
non-
selectively inhibit all neurons. Only through observation of
neuronal activity during naturalistic behaviors will we be able to
address these questions.
LESSONS LEARNED
The above illustrates how a community of scientists, present
authors included, can be biased by relying on an attractive,
controlled laboratory paradigm. Amygdala researchers were
motivated by their interest in the mechanisms of associative
memory and emotional learning. They were understandably
concerned with the need to achieve rigorous control over key
experimental
variables
and
to
minimize
the
influence
of
confounding factors. This led to the adoption of a simple learning
paradigm that restricted the range of possible conditioned
behaviors. When a rat is presented with only one threatening
stimulus in a testing box that allows for a single reflexive
behavioral response, one is bound to find exactly what the
experimental situation allows: neuronal responses that appear
tightly linked to the CS and seem to obligatorily elicit the
conditioned behavior. Only when the experimental situation
allows for behavioral flexibility can one examine the nature of
the relation between CSs, neuronal activity, decisions, and CRs.
Here, we are reminded of O’Keefe and Nadel’s wise recom-
mendation that observational studies in naturalistic conditions
should
be
performed
prior
to
using
controlled
laboratory
paradigms: “When we first venture into the unknown, we need
not the incisive beam of the proud penetrating laser, but the
gentle diffuse illumination of the humble torch. There will be
plenty of time later for detailed investigation of the nooks and
crannies: first we must find the mountains” (see ref. 74, p. 194).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This material is based on work supported by NIMH grants R01 MH107239 to Denis
Paré and R37-MH058883 and P50-MH106435 to Gregory Quirk.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Kellicut, M. H. & Schwartzbaum, J. S. Formation of a conditioned emotional
response (CER) following lesions of the amygdaloid complex in rats. Psychol. Rev.
12, 351–358 (1963).
2. Gloor P. in Handbook of Physiology (ed Field J.) (American Physiological Society,
1960): 1395–1420.
3. Kluver, H. & Bucy, P. Preliminary analysis of functions of the temporal lobes in
monkeys. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat. 42, 979–1000 (1939).
4. Blanchard, D. C. & Blanchard, R. J. Innate and conditioned reactions to threat in
rats with amygdaloid lesions. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 81, 281–290 (1972).
5. Spevack, A. A., Campbell, C. T. & Drake, L. Effect of amygdalectomy on habituation
and CER in rats. Physiol. Behav. 15, 199–207 (1975).
6. LeDoux, J. E. Emotional memory: in search of systems and synapses. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 702, 149–157 (1993).
7. LeDoux, J. E. Emotions: clues from the brain. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 46, 209–235
(1995).
8. Maren, S. & Fanselow, M. S. The amygdala and fear conditioning: has the nut
been cracked? Neuron 16, 237–240 (1996).
9. Davis, M. Neurobiology of fear responses: the role of the amygdala. J. Neu-
ropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 9, 382–402 (1997).
10. Weinberger, N. M. The medial geniculate, not the amygdala, as the root of
auditory fear conditioning. Hear. Res. 274, 61–74 (2011).
11. Letzkus, J. J. et al. A disinhibitory microcircuit for associative fear learning in the
auditory cortex. Nature 480, 331–335 (2011).
Fig. 4
Platform-mediated avoidance task. a Food-deprived rats pressing a bar for food are exposed to a tone paired with a footshock. Over
several days of training, rats learn to avoid the shock by stepping onto a platform on the opposite side of the chamber far from the food bar
(conflict). As avoidance is acquired, freezing to the tone (fear) is reduced. Source: Ref. 72. b Following 2 days of extinction training (tones
without shocks), most rats cease avoiding and remain at the food bar when the tone is presented. However, some rats continue to avoid. The
immediate early gene cFos, an activity marker, reveals that rats continuing to avoid have elevated activity in BL and reduced activity in IL-PFC.
Similar to the Robogator task above, BL activity is associated with lack of movement toward food, perhaps due to a failure of inhibition by
inputs from IL. Source: Ref. 73
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
6
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 12. Do-Monte, F. H., Quiñones-Laracuente, K. & Quirk, G. J. A temporal shift in the
circuits mediating retrieval of fear memory. Nature 519, 460–463 (2015).
13. Ehrlich, I. et al. Amygdala inhibitory circuits and the control of fear memory.
Neuron 62, 757–771 (2009).
14. Duvarci, S. & Paré, D. Amygdala microcircuits controlling learned fear. Neuron 82,
966–980 (2014).
15. Sotres-Bayon, F. & Quirk, G. J. Prefrontal control of fear: more than just extinction.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 231–235 (2010).
16. Fuster, J. M. & Uyeda, A. A. Reactivity of limbic neurons of the monkey to
appetitive and aversive signals. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 30,
281–293 (1971).
17. Cador, M., Robbins, T. W. & Everitt, B. J. Involvement of the amygdala in stimulus-
reward associations: interaction with the ventral striatum. Neuroscience 30, 77–86
(1989).
18. Janak, P. H. & Tye, K. M. From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature 517,
284–292 (2015).
19. Estes, W. K. & Skinner, B. F. Some quantitative properties of anxiety. J. Exp. Psychol.
29, 390–400 (1941).
20. Fanselow, M. S., Lester, L. S. & Helmstetter, F. J. Changes in feeding and foraging
patterns as an antipredator defensive strategy: a laboratory simulation using
aversive stimulation in a closed economy. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 50, 361–374 (1988).
21. Blanchard, R. J. & Blanchard, D. C. Antipredator defensive behaviors in a visible
burrow system. J. Comp. Psychol. 103, 70–82 (1989).
22. Pellman, B. A. & Kim, J. J. What can ethobehavioral studies tell us about the
brain’s fear system? Trends Neurosci. 39, 420–431 (2016).
23. Choi, J. S. & Kim, J. J. Amygdala regulates risk of predation in rats foraging in a
dynamic fear environment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 21773–21777 (2010).
24. Amir, A., Lee, S. C., Headley, D. B., Herzallah, M. M. & Paré, D. Amygdala signaling
during foraging in a hazardous environment. J. Neurosci. 35, 12994–13005 (2015).
25. Jacobs, B. L. & McGinty, D. J. Participation of the amygdala in complex stimulus
recognition and behavioral inhibition: evidence from unit studies. Brain Res. 36,
431–436 (1972).
26. Pearson, J. M., Watson, K. K. & Platt, M. L. Decision making: the neuroethological
turn. Neuron 82, 950–965 (2014).
27. Balleine, B. W., Killcross, A. S. & Dickinson, A. The effect of lesions of the
basolateral amygdala on instrumental conditioning. J. Neurosci. 23, 666–675
(2003).
28. Holland, P. C. & Gallagher, M. Amygdala-frontal interactions and reward expec-
tancy. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14, 148–155 (2004).
29. McGaugh, J. L. The amygdala modulates the consolidation of memories of
emotionally arousing experiences. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 1–28 (2004).
30. Emery, N. J. et al. The effects of bilateral lesions of the amygdala on dyadic social
interactions in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Behav. Neurosci. 115, 515–544
(2001).
31. Wellman, L. L., Forcelli, P. A., Aguilar, B. L. & Malkova, L. Bidirectional control of
social behavior by activity within basolateral and central amygdala of primates. J.
Neurosci. 36, 8746–8756 (2016).
32. Gallistel C. R., Gibbon J. The Symbolic Foundations of Conditioned Behavior
(Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002).
33. Quirk, G. J., Repa, C. & LeDoux, J. E. Fear conditioning enhances short-latency
auditory responses of lateral amygdala neurons: parallel recordings in the freely
behaving rat. Neuron 15, 1029–1039 (1995).
34. Goosens, K. A., Hobin, J. A. & Maren, S. Auditory-evoked spike firing in the lateral
amygdala and Pavlovian fear conditioning: mnemonic code or fear bias? Neuron
40, 1013–1022 (2003).
35. Goosens, K. A. & Maren, S. NMDA receptors are essential for the acquisition, but
not expression, of conditional fear and associative spike firing in the lateral
amygdala. Eur. J. Neurosci. 20, 537–548 (2004).
36. Windels, F. et al. Auditory tones and foot-shock recapitulate spontaneous sub-
threshold activity in basolateral amygdala principal neurons and interneurons.
PLoS ONE 11, e0155192 (2016).
37. Fanselow, M. S. & Kim, J. J. Acquisition of contextual Pavlovian fear conditioning is
blocked by application of an NMDA receptor antagonist D,L-2-amino-5-phos-
phonovaleric acid to the basolateral amygdala. Behav. Neurosci. 108, 210–212
(1994).
38. Maren, S., Aharonov, G., Stote, D. L. & Fanselow, M. S. N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptors in the basolateral amygdala are required for both acquisition and
expression of conditional fear in rats. Behav. Neurosci. 110, 1365–1374 (1996).
39. Rodrigues, S. M., Schafe, G. E. & LeDoux, J. E. Intra-amygdala blockade of the NR2B
subunit of the NMDA receptor disrupts the acquisition but not the expression of
fear conditioning. J. Neurosci. 21, 6889–6896 (2001).
40. Rorick-Kehn, L. M. & Steinmetz, J. E. Amygdalar unit activity during three learning
tasks: eyeblink classical conditioning, Pavlovian fear conditioning, and signaled
avoidance conditioning. Behav. Neurosci. 119, 1254–1276 (2005).
41. Belova, M. A., Paton, J. J. & Salzman, C. D. Moment-to-moment tracking of state
value in the amygdala. J. Neurosci. 28, 10023–10030 (2008).
42. Herry, C. et al. Switching on and off fear by distinct neuronal circuits. Nature 454,
600–606 (2008).
43. Shabel, S. J. & Janak, P. H. Substantial similarity in amygdala neuronal activity
during conditioned appetitive and aversive emotional arousal. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 106, 15031–15036 (2009).
44. Amano, T., Duvarci, S., Popa, D. & Paré, D. The fear circuit revisited: contributions
of the basal amygdala nuclei to conditioned fear. J. Neurosci. 31, 15481–15489
(2011).
45. Sangha, S., Chadick, J. Z. & Janak, P. H. Safety encoding in the basal amygdala.
J. Neurosci. 33, 3744–3751 (2013).
46. Duvarci, S., Popa, D. & Paré, D. Central amygdala activity during fear conditioning.
J. Neurosci. 31, 289–294 (2011).
47. Perusini, J. N. & Fanselow, M. S. Neurobehavioral perspectives on the distinction
between fear and anxiety. Learn. Mem. 22, 417–425 (2015).
48. Lee, S. C., Amir, A., Headley, D. B., Haufler, D. & Paré, D. Basolateral amygdala
nucleus responses to appetitive conditioned stimuli correlate with variations in
behavior. Nat. Commun. 7, 12275 (2016).
49. Krettek, J. E. & Price, J. L. Amygdaloid projections to subcortical structures within
the basal forebrain and brainstem in the rat and cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 178,
225–254 (1978).
50. Kelley, A. E., Domesick, V. B. & Nauta, W. J. The amygdalostriatal projection in the
rat-an anatomical study by anterograde and retrograde tracing methods. Neu-
roscience 7, 615–630 (1982).
51. Kita, H. & Kitai, S. T. Amygdaloid projections to the frontal cortex and the striatum
in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 298, 40–49 (1990).
52. Dong, H. W., Petrovich, G. D. & Swanson, L. W. Topography of projections
from amygdala to bed nuclei of the stria terminalis. Brain Res. Rev. 38, 192–246
(2001).
53. Beyeler, A. et al. Divergent routing of positive and negative information from the
amygdala during memory retrieval. Neuron 90, 348–361 (2016).
54. McDonald, A. J. Cortical pathways to the mammalian amygdala. Prog. Neurobiol.
55, 257–332 (1998).
55. Vertes, R. P. Differential projections of the infralimbic and prelimbic cortex in the
rat. Synapse 5, 32–58 (2004).
56. Hoover, W. B. & Vertes, R. P. Anatomical analysis of afferent projections to
the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat. Brain Struct. Funct. 212, 149–179
(2007).
57. Krettek, J. E. & Price, J. L. Projections from the amygdaloid complex and adjacent
olfactory structures to the entorhinal cortex and to the subiculum in the rat and
cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 172, 723–752 (1977).
58. Krettek, J. E. & Price, J. L. Projections from the amygdaloid complex to the cerebral
cortex and thalamus in the rat and cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 172, 687–722 (1977).
59. Swanson, L. W. A direct projection from Ammon’s horn to prefrontal cortex in the
rat. Brain Res. 217, 150–154 (1981).
60. Vertes, R. P., Linley, S. B. & Hoover, W. B. Limbic circuitry of the midline thalamus.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 54, 89–107 (2015).
61. Giustino, T. F. & Maren, S. The role of the medial prefrontal cortex in the con-
ditioning and extinction of fear. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 9, 298 (2015).
62. Peters, J., Kalivas, P. W. & Quirk, G. J. Extinction circuits for fear and addiction
overlap in prefrontal cortex. Learn. Mem. 16, 279–288 (2009).
63. Burgos-Robles, A., Vidal-Gonzalez, I. & Quirk, G. J. Sustained conditioned
responses in prelimbic prefrontal neurons are correlated with fear expression and
extinction failure. J. Neurosci. 29, 8474–8482 (2009).
64. Corcoran, K. A. & Quirk, G. J. Activity in prelimbic cortex is necessary for the
expression of learned, but not innate, fears. J. Neurosci. 27, 840–844 (2007).
65. Laurent, V & Westbrook, R. F. Inactivation of the infralimbic but not the prelimbic
cortex impairs consolidation and retrieval of fear extinction. Learn. Mem. 16,
520–529 (2009).
66. Sierra-Mercado, D., Padilla-Coreano, N. & Quirk, G. J. Dissociable roles of prelimbic
and infralimbic cortices, ventral hippocampus, and basolateral amygdala in the
expression and extinction of conditioned fear. Neuropsychopharmacology 36,
529–538 (2011).
67. Do-Monte, F. H. et al. Revisiting the role of infralimbic cortex in fear extinction
with optogenetics. J. Neurosci. 35, 3607–3615 (2015).
68. Arruda-Carvalho, M. & Clem, R. L. Pathway-selective adjustment of prefrontal-
amygdala transmission during fear encoding. J. Neurosci. 34, 15601–15609 (2014).
69. Martinez, R. C. et al. Active vs. reactive threat responding is associated with
differential c-Fos expression in specific regions of amygdala and prefrontal cor-
tex. Learn. Mem. 20, 446–452 (2013).
70. Campese, V. D., Gonzaga, R., Moscarello, J. M. & LeDoux, J. E. Modulation of
instrumental responding by a conditioned threat stimulus requires lateral and
central amygdala. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 9, 293 (2015).
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
7
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
 71. Ramirez, F., Moscarello, J. M., LeDoux, J. E. & Sears, R. M. Active avoidance requires
a serial basal amygdala to nucleus accumbens shell circuit. J. Neurosci. 35,
3470–3477 (2015).
72. Bravo-Rivera, C., Roman-Ortiz, C., Brignoni-Perez, E., Sotres-Bayon, F. & Quirk, G. J.
Neural structures mediating expression and extinction of platform-mediated
avoidance. J. Neurosci. 34, 9736–9742 (2014).
73. Bravo-Rivera, C., Roman-Ortiz, C., Montesinos-Cartagena, M. & Quirk, G. J. Per-
sistent active avoidance correlates with activity in prelimbic cortex and ventral
striatum. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 9, 184 (2015).
74. O’Keefe J., Nadel L. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map (Clarendon Press, 1978).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
BLA activity during conditioning
D Paré and GJ Quirk
8
npj Science of Learning (2017)  6 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
