 The new engl and jour nal of medicine
n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
1
The authors’ full names, academic de‑
grees, and affiliations are listed in the Ap‑
pendix. Address reprint requests to Dr. 
Pasi at the Haemophilia Centre, Royal 
London Hospital, London E1 1BB, Unit‑
ed Kingdom, or at  
k 
. 
j 
. 
pasi@ 
qmul 
. 
ac 
. 
uk.
This article was published on July 10, 
2017, at NEJM.org.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1616569
Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society.
BACKGROUND
Current hemophilia treatment involves frequent intravenous infusions of clotting 
factors, which is associated with variable hemostatic protection, a high treatment 
burden, and a risk of the development of inhibitory alloantibodies. Fitusiran, an inves-
tigational RNA interference (RNAi) therapy that targets antithrombin (encoded by 
SERPINC1), is in development to address these and other limitations.
METHODS
In this phase 1 dose-escalation study, we enrolled 4 healthy volunteers and 25 par-
ticipants with moderate or severe hemophilia A or B who did not have inhibitory 
alloantibodies. Healthy volunteers received a single subcutaneous injection of fitu-
siran (at a dose of 0.03 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo. The partici-
pants with hemophilia received three injections of fitusiran administered either 
once weekly (at a dose of 0.015, 0.045, or 0.075 mg per kilogram) or once month-
ly (at a dose of 0.225, 0.45, 0.9, or 1.8 mg per kilogram or a fixed dose of 80 mg). 
The study objectives were to assess the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
characteristics and safety of fitusiran.
RESULTS
No thromboembolic events were observed during the study. The most common 
adverse events were mild injection-site reactions. Plasma levels of fitusiran in-
creased in a dose-dependent manner and showed no accumulation with repeated 
administration. The monthly regimen induced a dose-dependent mean maximum 
antithrombin reduction of 70 to 89% from baseline. A reduction in the antithrom-
bin level of more than 75% from baseline resulted in median peak thrombin values 
at the lower end of the range observed in healthy participants.
CONCLUSIONS
Once-monthly subcutaneous administration of fitusiran resulted in dose-dependent 
lowering of the antithrombin level and increased thrombin generation in partici-
pants with hemophilia A or B who did not have inhibitory alloantibodies. (Funded 
by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02035605.)
ABSTR ACT
Targeting of Antithrombin in Hemophilia A 
or B with RNAi Therapy
K.J. Pasi, S. Rangarajan, P. Georgiev, T. Mant, M.D. Creagh, T. Lissitchkov, 
D. Bevan, S. Austin, C.R. Hay, I. Hegemann, R. Kazmi, P. Chowdary, 
L. Gercheva‑Kyuchukova, V. Mamonov, M. Timofeeva, C.‑H. Soh, P. Garg, 
A. Vaishnaw, A. Akinc, B. Sørensen, and M.V. Ragni 
Original Article
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
2
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
H
emophilia A and B are inherited 
bleeding disorders arising from insuf-
ficient thrombin generation to prevent 
bleeding that is caused by deficiencies in coagu-
lation factors VIII and IX, respectively. Without 
effective treatment, patients have recurrent bleed-
ing, which can be life-threatening and lead to 
disability from chronic hemarthropathy.1
Current management is based on replacement 
therapy with concentrates of factor VIII or IX, 
administered either on demand or prophylacti-
cally.2 The benefits of prophylaxis therapy have 
been established,3-6 but such treatment poses a 
substantial treatment burden.7,8 Standard regimens 
require two or three intravenous infusions per 
week to maintain factor trough levels of more 
than 1 IU per deciliter, yet maintenance of higher 
levels may provide greater hemostatic protec-
tion.9-12 The development of a new generation of 
factor concentrates with an extended half-life13-15 
has reduced the frequency of administration, 
most notably for factor IX products.16-18 However, 
these products still require intravenous infusion. 
Finally, treatment with factor-replacement prod-
ucts can result in the development of inhibitory 
alloantibodies in up to 30% of patients with 
severe hemophilia A19 and in 5% of those with 
hemophilia B,20 which renders factor treatment 
ineffective.21 Thus, there remains a major unmet 
need for new therapeutic agents that can provide 
safe, effective, and consistent prevention of bleed-
ing, including in patients with inhibitory alloan-
tibodies, while avoiding the development of such 
antibodies and reducing the treatment burden.
Genetic studies have identified potential al-
ternative strategies to address insufficient throm-
bin generation in hemophilia. Evidence suggests 
that the coinheritance of deficiency in natural 
anticoagulants may ameliorate the hemophilia 
phenotype.22-26 Reduced antithrombin levels are 
hypothesized to improve thrombin generation 
and promote hemostasis in hemophilia.27 Thus, 
we are developing fitusiran (ALN-AT3SC), an 
investigational RNA interference (RNAi) therapy 
that specifically targets antithrombin messenger 
RNA (encoded by SERPINC1) to suppress the pro-
duction of antithrombin in the liver, for the 
treatment of hemophilia. Nonclinical studies of 
fitusiran have shown dose-dependent lowering of 
antithrombin levels in multiple species. In murine 
hemophilia models, antithrombin reduction was 
associated with increased thrombin generation 
and enhanced hemostasis, which suggests a po-
tential therapeutic benefit.27
In this study, we evaluated the pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic characteristics and 
safety of fitusiran in healthy volunteers and in 
participants with hemophilia A or B. In addition, 
we conducted a post hoc exploratory analysis to 
evaluate the effect of monthly fitusiran on bleed-
ing frequency.
Methods
Study Oversight
This was a multicenter, international, open-label, 
dose-escalation study involving healthy volun-
teers and participants with hemophilia A or B. 
The study was initiated in January 2014 and con-
ducted according to the principles of the Interna-
tional Conference on Harmonization for Good 
Clinical Practice, the World Health Organization 
Declaration of Helsinki, and the 1996 Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. All 
the participants provided written informed con-
sent. The study protocol (available with the full 
text of this article at NEJM.org) was developed 
by the sponsor, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, and 
was approved by the institutional review board 
or ethics committee at each participating center.
Two of the academic authors and authors 
employed by the sponsor were involved in the 
study design, and several authors who were not 
employed by the sponsor gathered the data. The 
first author and those employed by the sponsor 
analyzed the data. The first author and one au-
thor employed by the sponsor prepared the first 
draft of the manuscript with editorial assistance 
provided by Adelphi Communications, under con-
tract with the sponsor. All the authors who were 
not employed by Alnylam, as well as their insti-
tutions, were required to maintain the confiden-
tiality of the data until the completion of the 
study at all sites and the first publication of the 
results. All the authors made the decision to 
submit the manuscript for publication and as-
sume responsibility for the completeness and in-
tegrity of the data and for the fidelity of the study 
to the protocol.
Study Design and Participants
The study was conducted in three sequentially 
enrolled phases. In the first phase (Part A), 
healthy volunteers received a single dose of fitu-
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
3
RNAi Therapy Targeting Antithrombin in Hemophilia
siran or placebo in a randomized, single-blind 
study. In the next two open-label phases, partici-
pants with hemophilia A or B were assigned to 
receive one of several ascending doses of fitu-
siran on a once-weekly basis (in Part B) or once-
monthly basis (Part C).
In Part A, healthy men between the ages of 18 
and 40 years with no known thrombophilic dis-
order or history of venous thromboembolism were 
randomly assigned in a 3:1 ratio to receive a 
single subcutaneous injection of fitusiran (at a 
dose of 0.03 mg per kilogram of body weight) or 
placebo. Higher doses were not administered 
because per-protocol antithrombin lowering was 
limited to 40% (60% of the residual level, rela-
tive to baseline) in healthy volunteers. In Parts B 
and C, men between the ages of 18 and 65 years 
who had moderate or severe hemophilia A or B 
and who had received previous prophylaxis were 
eligible to participate in the study if the prophy-
lactic factor had been discontinued at least 5 days 
before the initiation of the study drug. Partici-
pants with a history of venous thromboembolism, 
a known coexisting thrombophilic disorder, liver 
dysfunction, or inhibitory alloantibodies were 
excluded. Full details regarding the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria are provided in the protocol.
In Part B, three cohorts of participants re-
ceived three once-weekly subcutaneous injec-
tions of fitusiran at doses of 0.015, 0.045, or 
0.075 mg per kilogram. In Part C, four cohorts 
of participants received three once-monthly sub-
cutaneous injections of fitusiran at doses of 
0.225, 0.45, 0.9, or 1.8 mg per kilogram, and a 
fifth cohort received three once-monthly subcu-
taneous injections of a fixed dose of 80 mg 
(which corresponded to a weight-based range of 
0.92 to 1.3 mg per kilogram). The participants 
were followed for 56 days in Part A, 70 days in 
Part B, and 112 days in Part C until they transi-
tioned to the open-label extension study or until 
antithrombin levels returned to more than 80% 
of the baseline value, whichever period was lon-
gest. Bleeding episodes were managed with fac-
tor VIII or IX replacement therapy.
Outcome Measures
Measurements of plasma antithrombin levels 
were determined by an activity-based chromogenic 
assay, and thrombin generation was determined by 
calibrated automated thrombogram assay.28 Non-
compartmental pharmacokinetic measurements 
were calculated from plasma samples with the 
use of Phoenix WinNonlin software, version 6.4 
or higher. The safety evaluation included the 
monitoring of adverse events, clinical laboratory 
assessments (e.g., hematologic, biochemical, and 
coagulation measurements), vital signs, and 12-lead 
electrocardiography. All adverse events were catego-
rized with the use of the Medical Dictionary for 
Regulatory Activities, version 16.0. The effect of 
fitusiran on the rate of bleeding was an explor-
atory end point.
Statistical Analysis
The sample size was not based on power calcu-
lations. The safety-analysis population included 
all the participants who had received at least a 
partial dose of fitusiran. The pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic populations included all 
the participants who had received at least one 
dose of fitusiran and had at least one plasma 
sample that could be evaluated. Statistical analy-
ses were primarily descriptive and performed 
with the use of SAS software, version 9.2 or higher. 
Descriptive statistics were presented for continu-
ous variables, and frequencies and percentages 
for categorical and ordinal variables. Percentag-
es were based on the number of nonmissing 
values.
Results
Study Population
A total of 4 healthy volunteers were enrolled in 
Part A, 12 participants with hemophilia in Part 
B, and 18 participants with hemophilia in Part C 
(Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix, avail-
able at NEJM.org). Five participants who com-
pleted Part B while enrollment was ongoing in 
Part C underwent additional screening and also 
participated in Part C (Table S1 in the Supple-
mentary Appendix). In Parts B and C, 18 par-
ticipants had hemophilia A and 7 had hemo-
philia B; the majority of the participants had 
severe disease. The baseline demographic and 
clinical characteristics are provided in Table 1; 
more detailed information according to dose co-
hort is provided in Table S2 in the Supplemen-
tary Appendix. The study population consisted 
of participants who had been receiving both on-
demand and prophylaxis treatment regimens, so 
there was a diverse range in the reported annu-
alized rates of bleeding before enrollment.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
4
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic 
Outcomes
After the administration of fitusiran at doses 
ranging from 0.015 to 1.8 mg per kilogram, the 
mean peak plasma levels of the drug were gener-
ally observed after 2 to 6 hours. Fitusiran levels 
decreased rapidly in plasma, with a mean elimi-
nation half-life that ranged from 2.6 to 5.3 hours. 
Plasma levels of fitusiran increased in an ap-
proximately dose-proportional manner (Fig. 1). 
Plasma exposures were similar after the first 
and last doses, which indicated that there was 
no accumulation of fitusiran after repeated ad-
ministration. Further pharmacokinetic details 
are provided in Table S3 in the Supplementary 
Appendix.
At baseline, the antithrombin levels were simi-
lar among the healthy volunteers (mean, 102.7%; 
range, 97.8 to 109.7%) and among the partici-
pants with hemophilia (mean, 103.3%; range, 
84.9 to 121.0%). In the healthy volunteers, a 
single subcutaneous dose of fitusiran at 0.03 mg 
per kilogram elicited a mean (±SE) maximum 
antithrombin lowering of 19±4.4% on day 21, 
with recovery toward baseline values by day 56 
(Fig. 2A). No further dose escalation was done 
in the healthy volunteers, and the study ad-
vanced to Part B.
In participants who received three once-
weekly subcutaneous injections of fitusiran, a 
dose-dependent lowering of the antithrombin 
level from baseline was observed, with a mean 
maximum lowering of 61±8% at the highest 
dose of 0.075 mg per kilogram (Fig. 2B). Simi-
larly, three once-monthly subcutaneous injections 
of fitusiran led to a dose-dependent mean maxi-
mum lowering of the antithrombin level, rang-
ing from 70±9% at 0.225 mg per kilogram to 
89±1% at 1.8 mg per kilogram (Fig. 2C). In the 
cohort of 6 participants who received a fixed 
Characteristic
Part A 
(N = 4)
Part B 
(N = 12)
Part C 
(N = 18)
Age (yr)
Mean
31.5
37.5
36.6
Range
21–38
19–61
20–61
Weight (kg)
Mean
86.5
79.3
75.8
Range
58.8–114.5
57.8–116.4
57.0–93.8
Type of hemophilia (no.)
A
NA
10
13
B
NA
2
5
Disease severity (no.)
Severe (<1% factor activity)
NA
12
15
Moderate (1–5% factor activity)
NA
0
3
Prestudy therapy (no.)
On demand
NA
8
9
Prophylaxis
NA
4
9
No. of bleeding episodes per year†
Median
NA
13
2
Range
NA
0–38
0–32
Previous hepatitis C virus infection (no.)
0
9
12
*  
Of the 25 participants who were enrolled in Parts B and C, 5 were enrolled in both cohorts, so these participants are 
listed twice in this table (i.e., data are for 30 participants). NA denotes not applicable because the volunteers in Part A 
did not have hemophilia.
†  
Each participant’s historical annualized rate of bleeding and occurrence of clinically significant bleeding was based on a 
6‑month history.
Table 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of the Participants at Baseline.*
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
5
RNAi Therapy Targeting Antithrombin in Hemophilia
dose of 80 mg of fitusiran, the mean maximum 
lowering of the antithrombin level was 87±1% 
(Fig. 2C). A summary of dose-dependent anti-
thrombin lowering according to dose cohort in 
Parts A, B, and C is shown in Figure S2 in the 
Supplementary Appendix. The minimum post-
dose antithrombin level that was observed during 
the study was 9.8% (in the 80-mg cohort). After 
the discontinuation of fitusiran, the rate of re-
covery in the antithrombin level had a mean 
slope of 10 to 15% per month (Fig. 2C).
The association between the antithrombin 
level and thrombin generation showed that a low-
ering of the antithrombin level led to increased 
thrombin generation in the participants with 
hemophilia (Fig. 3). This relationship was similar 
in participants with hemophilia A and in those 
with hemophilia B. A reduction in the anti-
thrombin level by more than 75% from baseline 
resulted in median peak thrombin values at the 
lower end of the range observed in healthy vol-
unteers (Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Appendix).
In a post hoc exploratory analysis to deter-
mine the effect of monthly fitusiran administra-
tion on bleeding rates, there were fewer bleeding 
episodes per month after treatment with fitu-
siran than before treatment, a finding that was 
consistent with the reduction in antithrombin 
levels (Table S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). 
All the bleeding episodes were successfully man-
aged with factor replacement (Table S5 in the 
Supplementary Appendix).
Safety Outcomes
Adverse events were graded as mild, moderate, 
or severe. An adverse event was further classified 
as a serious adverse event if it met prespecified 
criteria.
Three healthy volunteers received a single dose 
of fitusiran at 0.03 mg per kilogram (one received 
placebo), and a total of five mild adverse events 
were reported in two of the volunteers who re-
ceived fitusiran. Four of these events were con-
sidered by the investigators to be either not re-
lated or unlikely to be related to fitusiran, and 
one event (headache) was considered to be pos-
sibly related. All the adverse events resolved spon-
taneously. The adverse events that were reported 
in Part A are summarized in Table S6 in the 
Supplementary Appendix. There were no serious 
adverse events or discontinuations among the 
healthy volunteers.
In Parts B and C, 25 participants with hemo-
philia received fitusiran, and 19 participants 
(76%) reported having an adverse event during 
the study. Most of these events were mild to 
moderate in severity. (All the adverse events that 
occurred in at least 2 participants who received 
fitusiran are shown in Table 2, and in Table S7 
in the Supplementary Appendix.) Nine of 25 par-
ticipants (36%) in Parts B and C had adverse 
events that were considered to be related to fitu-
siran. Of these events, the most common were 
injection-site pain (in 6 participants [24%]), in-
jection-site erythema (in 4 participants [16%), 
and an increased alanine aminotransferase level 
(in 2 participants [8%]). More adverse events were 
reported in the cohort that received the 80-mg 
fixed dose than in the other cohorts, but this in-
creased rate appears to have been driven mainly 
by a higher reporting of injection-site reactions 
and potentially by a larger group size (6 partici-
pants), which led to a higher number of adverse 
events in a single participant. Participants who 
received the higher weight-based dose of 1.8 mg 
per kilogram had a lower frequency of adverse 
events, so no clear conclusion with respect to the 
relationship between dose and adverse events 
can be made.
Three participants in Part C had adverse events 
that were graded as severe during the study. One 
participant who was receiving 0.45 mg of fitu-
siran per kilogram had severe, nonserious hy-
pertriglyceridemia, tooth fracture, and toothache. 
Figure 1. Pharmacokinetic Characteristics of Fitusiran in Plasma  
after Subcutaneous Injection.
Shown are mean plasma levels of fitusiran over time after a single subcuta‑
neous injection, according to dose. The I bars represent standard errors, 
which were calculated only for cohorts with at least two participants.
0.03 mg/kg
0.045 mg/kg
0.075 mg/kg
1.8 mg/kg
80 mg
0.9 mg/kg
0.015 mg/kg
0.225 mg/kg
0.45 mg/kg
Mean Level of Fitusiran (ng/ml)
1000.0
100.0
1.0
10.0
0.1
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Hour
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
6
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
1.2
1.1
0.9
0.7
1.0
0.8
0.0
A Healthy Volunteers (Part A)
Mean Antithrombin Activity Relative
to Baseline
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Days since First Dose
Mean Antithrombin Activity Relative
to Baseline
1.2
1.1
0.3
0.1
1.0
0.2
0.0
0.7
0.5
0.6
0.9
0.8
0.4
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
150
165
180
195
210
225
Days since First Dose
B Participants with Hemophilia on Once-Weekly Regimen (Part B)
C Participants with Hemophilia on Once-Monthly Regimen (Part C)
Mean Antithrombin Activity Relative
to Baseline
1.2
1.1
0.3
0.1
1.0
0.2
0.0
0.7
0.5
0.6
0.9
0.8
0.4
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
Days since First Dose
 
Placebo (N=1)
Fitusiran, 0.03 mg/kg (N=3)
 
0.015 mg/kg (N=3)
0.045 mg/kg (N=6)
0.075 mg/kg (N=3)
0.45 mg/kg (N=3)
80 mg (N=6)
0.225 mg/kg (N=3)
1.8 mg/kg (N=3)
0.9 mg/kg (N=3)
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
7
RNAi Therapy Targeting Antithrombin in Hemophilia
A second participant, who was receiving 1.8 mg 
of fitusiran per kilogram, had a severe, serious 
event of viral pneumonia. A third participant 
who was receiving the fixed dose of 80 mg of 
fitusiran had a severe, nonserious event of non-
cardiac chest pain that was considered to be 
possibly drug-related on day 44 and which led to 
study discontinuation on day 45 (after the last 
dose of fitusiran had been received on day 28). 
The chest pain was accompanied by elevations in 
levels of C-reactive protein, alanine aminotrans-
ferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and d-dimer. 
Extensive evaluation did not reveal any substan-
tial medical abnormalities; pulmonary embolism, 
portal-vein thrombosis, and deep-vein thrombo-
sis were ruled out on repeated computed tomo-
graphic angiography and Doppler ultrasonogra-
phy of the liver and lower limbs. Serologic results 
for viral hepatitis were negative. Ultrasonography 
of the abdomen showed the presence of gall-
bladder sludge, but a definitive diagnosis was 
not made. The event resolved with the use of 
analgesics and antacids, and laboratory values 
normalized.
Of the 25 participants in Parts B and C, 2 
(8%) reported one serious adverse event each. 
One of these events was a reactivation of hepati-
tis C viral infection in a participant who had 
received 0.45 mg of fitusiran per kilogram (see 
the Supplementary Appendix for details), and the 
other was the above-mentioned viral pneumonia. 
Neither serious adverse event led to a discontinu-
ation of fitusiran.
There were no clinically significant changes 
on physical examination, in vital signs, or in elec-
trocardiographic measurements in any participant. 
Asymptomatic, transient elevations in the alanine 
aminotransferase level (>1.5 times the upper 
limit of the normal range or >1.5 times the base-
line value [in participants with a baseline value 
that was above the upper limit of the normal 
range]) were observed in 9 of 25 participants 
(36%), but no events were associated with an 
increased bilirubin level or led to treatment dis-
continuation (Figs. S4 and S5 in the Supplemen-
tary Appendix). Of these 9 participants, 8 had 
peak elevations that were less than 3 times the 
upper limit of the normal range; 1 participant 
had an increase of more than 3 times the upper 
limit of the normal range in association with the 
above-mentioned chest pain. The 9 participants 
with elevated alanine aminotransferase levels were 
distributed across the dose cohorts, and no clear 
dose−response relationship could be determined 
(Table S8 in the Supplementary Appendix). Eight 
of the participants with an increased alanine 
aminotransferase level had a medical history of 
hepatitis C infection and had not received cura-
tive treatment. Elevations in the d-dimer level were 
observed in some participants; however, we were 
unable to identify any dose−response relation-
ships or consistent trends related to fitusiran treat-
ment (Fig. S6 in the Supplementary Appendix). 
Furthermore, the changes in d-dimer levels were 
Figure 3. Relationship between Antithrombin Level and Thrombin Generation.
Shown are paired antithrombin levels and peak values for thrombin genera‑
tion in all the participants with hemophilia A or B and in healthy volunteers 
for whom data were available. The dashed line shows the median baseline 
values for the participants with hemophilia A or B. Antithrombin levels 
were determined relative to a standard human plasma reagent with a de‑
fined antithrombin activity level calibrated against a World Health Organi‑
zation reference.
Peak Thrombin Level (nM)
250
150
200
0
50
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Antithrombin Level (%)
Healthy volunteers
Hemophilia A
Hemophilia B
Hemophilia A and B at
baseline (median)
Figure 2 (facing page). Pharmacodynamic  
Characteristics of Fitusiran.
Shown are the mean plasma antithrombin levels 
among the study participants, normalized to the activ‑
ity level at baseline, after a single injection of fitusiran 
in healthy volunteers (Panel A) and in participants 
with hemophilia after three once‑weekly injections 
(Panel B) and after three once‑monthly injections 
(Panel C). The arrows below the graph indicate the 
timing of the injections. The I bars represent standard 
errors, which were calculated only for cohorts with at 
least two participants.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
8
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
not accompanied by clinically significant altera-
tions in coagulation markers, such as fibrinogen, 
prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplas-
tin time, and platelets (Figs. S7 through S10 in 
the Supplementary Appendix).
Antibodies to fitusiran did not develop in any 
of the participants during the study. One par-
ticipant had positive antidrug-antibody results 
before the administration of fitusiran and through-
out the study.
Discussion
Single-dose and weekly administration of fitu-
siran showed that the antithrombin-lowering effect 
could support a regimen with an interval beyond 
once-weekly doses. This observation led us to 
explore repeated administration of fitusiran in a 
once-monthly regimen. Monthly doses of 0.225 
to 1.8 mg of fitusiran per kilogram resulted in a 
clear, nonlinear, dose-dependent lowering of anti-
thrombin levels from baseline of 70±9% and 
89±1%, respectively. Higher monthly weight-based 
doses of fitusiran led to incrementally lower levels 
of antithrombin, which prompted the exploration 
of a fixed 80-mg dose. The 80-mg fixed dose 
resulted in robust and predictable antithrombin 
lowering of 87±1%. After the onset of the effect, 
we observed minimal variation in antithrombin 
lowering during the monthly interval, which po-
tentially allowed for more constant hemostatic 
protection between doses.
A relationship between reduced levels of anti-
thrombin and increased thrombin generation was 
observed in the participants regardless of the 
type of hemophilia. Thrombin-generation values 
that were associated with the greatest lowering 
in antithrombin levels (>75% from baseline) 
were consistent with those reported for mild 
hemophilia,29 which suggests that long-term fi-
tusiran treatment may allow for the functional 
conversion of severe hemophilia to a milder clini-
cal phenotype. An exploratory assessment of the 
effect of fitusiran on bleeding frequency re-
vealed an apparent lower rate of bleeding epi-
sodes than before study enrollment. However, 
our study was not designed to assess efficacy, 
and larger studies of a longer duration of treat-
ment are required to draw conclusions about the 
efficacy of fitusiran.
We observed no thromboembolic events dur-
ing the study. One participant reported severe 
chest pain, and although thrombosis was ruled 
out, this event led to treatment discontinuation. 
No antidrug antibodies developed in healthy 
volunteers or in the participants with hemo-
philia during the study. The largest class of ad-
verse events was injection-site reactions, which 
were mild in intensity; none required treatment 
or led to the discontinuation of fitusiran. We 
observed transient increases in liver aminotrans-
ferase values in 9 of 25 participants (36%). Because 
fitusiran is a liver-targeted agent, these increases 
may be drug-related; however, the small sample 
size and presence of other potential confounders 
precluded a clear determination of causality or 
dose relationship. Of note, a medical history of 
hepatitis C viral infection was reported in 16 of 25 
participants (64%) in the study and in 8 of 9 par-
ticipants (89%) with increased aminotransfer-
ase values. Therefore, it is possible that in some 
participants, the observed aminotransferase 
Event
All Participants 
(N = 28)
no. (%)
Any adverse event
27 (96)
Serious adverse event
2 (7)
Reactivation of hepatitis C virus infection
1 (4)
Viral pneumonia
1 (4)
Adverse event leading to study‑drug discon‑
tinuation
1 (4)
Most common adverse events†
Injection‑site pain
6 (21)
Injection‑site erythema
4 (14)
Arthralgia
4 (14)
Upper respiratory tract infection
Any
3 (11)
Viral
2 (7)
Increase in alanine aminotransferase
2 (7)
Headache
2 (7)
Decrease in joint range of motion
2 (7)
Osteoarthritis
2 (7)
Pain in limb
2 (7)
*  
Listed are the data for all the participants who received fitusiran in Parts A, B, 
and C. Of these participants, data for the 5 who were enrolled in both Part B 
and Part C are listed only once in this table.
†  
All the listed events were reported during the study period in at least 2 partici‑
pants.
Table 2. Adverse Events among the Participants Who Received Fitusiran.*
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 
 nejm.org 
9
RNAi Therapy Targeting Antithrombin in Hemophilia
changes may have been due to chronic hepatitis 
C infection or to liver fibrosis caused by viral 
hepatitis.30-32
The study limitations include its open-label de-
sign, short duration, small number of participants 
who may not represent the overall population of 
those with hemophilia, and (with the exception of 
Part A) its lack of randomization and concurrent 
control group. Therefore, these results must be 
regarded as preliminary and require confirma-
tion in larger clinical studies of longer duration. 
An extension study (ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT02554773) is currently ongoing to allow lon-
ger-term assessment of the safety and efficacy of 
fitusiran. Although the mechanism of action of 
fitusiran is expected to be equally applicable to 
all patients with hemophilia regardless of the 
presence or absence of inhibitory alloantibodies, 
the presence of such antibodies was an exclusion 
criterion for Parts B and C of our study. To ad-
dress this limitation, we have amended the study 
to include a Part D to enroll patients with such 
antibodies. Finally, the study does not address the 
use of fitusiran in high-risk settings such as sur-
gery or trauma. Additional clinical data will need 
to be generated with fitusiran in such settings.
In conclusion, we found that the subcutane-
ous injection of fitusiran lowered antithrombin 
levels and increased thrombin generation in 
participants with hemophilia A or hemophilia B. 
In addition, the study provided information on 
the side-effect profile of this investigative agent.
Supported by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 
the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
We thank all the study participants and their family mem-
bers; investigators Sarah Mangles, Catherine Bagot, and Brigitte 
Brand-Staufer and Alnylam employees Kate Madigan, Huy Van 
Nguyen, Amy Simon, Lauren Melton, Chris Lynam, Joseph Vo-
gel, Ashley Gosnell, Prasoon Chaturvedi, Ali Seddighzadeh, Al-
fica Sehgal, Zakaria Khondker, and Jihong Chen for their contri-
butions to the study; and Amy Monpara and Angela Partisano of 
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals for their assistance in the preparation 
of an earlier version of the manuscript.
Appendix
The authors’ full names and academic degrees are as follows: K. John Pasi, M.B., Ch.B., Ph.D., Savita Rangarajan, M.B., B.S., Pencho 
Georgiev, M.D., Tim Mant, M.B., Michael D. Creagh, M.D., Toshko Lissitchkov, M.D., Ph.D., D.Med.Sc., David Bevan, M.B., Steve 
Austin, M.D., Charles R. Hay, M.B., Ch.B., M.D., Inga Hegemann, M.D., Rashid Kazmi, M.D., Pratima Chowdary, M.B., B.S., Liana 
Gercheva-Kyuchukova, Ph.D., Vasily Mamonov, M.D., Margarita Timofeeva, M.D., Chang-Heok Soh, Ph.D., Pushkal Garg, M.D., Ak-
shay Vaishnaw, M.D., Ph.D., Akin Akinc, Ph.D., Benny Sørensen, M.D., Ph.D., and Margaret V. Ragni, M.D., M.P.H.
The authors’ affiliations are as follows: the Royal London Haemophilia Centre, Barts and the London School of Medicine and Den-
tistry (K.J.P.), National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre (T.M.), Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Founda-
tion Trust, King’s College London (D.B.), St. George’s Healthcare NHS Trust Haemophilia Centre (S.A.), and Royal Free Hospital 
London (P.C.), London, the Haemophilia, Haemostasis and Thrombosis Centre, Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Basing-
stoke (S.R.), Quintiles IMS, Reading (T.M.), Royal Cornwall Hospitals NHS Trust, Truro (M.D.C.), Manchester Royal Infirmary, Man-
chester (C.R.H.), and University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton (R.K.) — all in the United Kingdom; 
University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment Sveti Georgi and Medical University Plovdiv, Plovdiv (P. Georgiev), University 
Hospital for Hematology, Sofia (T.L.), and the Department of Hematology, University Hospital of St. Marina, Varna (L.G.-K.) — all in 
Bulgaria; University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland (I.H.); National Research Center for Hematology, Moscow (V.M.), and 
Research Institution of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Kirov (M.T.) — both in Russia; Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge (C.-
H.S., P. Garg, A.V., A.A., B.S.), and Codiak Biosciences, Woburn (B.S.) — both in Massachusetts; and the University of Pittsburgh and 
Hemophilia Center of Western Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh (M.V.R.).
References
1. Bolton-Maggs PH, Pasi KJ. Haemo-
philias A and B. Lancet 2003; 
361: 
1801-9.
2. Berntorp E, Shapiro AD. Modern hae-
mophilia care. Lancet 2012; 
379: 
1447-56.
3. Löfqvist T, Nilsson IM, Berntorp E, 
Pettersson H. Haemophilia prophylaxis in 
young patients — a long-term follow-up. 
 
J Intern Med 1997; 
241: 
395-400.
4. Nilsson IM, Berntorp E, Löfqvist T, 
Pettersson H. Twenty-five years’ experi-
ence of prophylactic treatment in severe 
haemophilia A and B. J Intern Med 1992; 
232: 
25-32.
5. Gringeri A, Lundin B, von Mack-
ensen S, Mantovani L, Mannucci PM. A 
randomized clinical trial of prophylaxis 
in children with hemophilia A (the ESPRIT 
Study). J Thromb Haemost 2011; 
9: 
700-
10.
6. Manco-Johnson MJ, Abshire TC, Sha-
piro AD, et al. Prophylaxis versus episodic 
treatment to prevent joint disease in boys 
with severe hemophilia. N Engl J Med 
2007; 
357: 
535-44.
7. Srivastava A, Brewer AK, Mauser-Bun-
schoten EP, et al. Guidelines for the man-
agement of hemophilia. Haemophilia 
2013; 
19(1): 
e1-e47.
8. Berntorp E, Astermark J, Björkman S, 
et al. Consensus perspectives on prophy-
lactic therapy for haemophilia: summary 
statement. Haemophilia 2003; 
9: 
Suppl 1: 
1-4.
9. Negrier C, Young G, Abdul Karim F, 
 
et al. Recombinant long-acting glyco-
PEGylated factor IX (nonacog beta pegol) 
in haemophilia B: assessment of target 
joints in multinational phase 3 clinical 
trials. Haemophilia 2016; 
22: 
507-13.
10. Young G, Collins PW, Colberg T, et al. 
Nonacog beta pegol (N9-GP) in haemo-
philia B: a multinational phase III safety 
and efficacy extension trial (Paradigm 4). 
Thromb Res 2016; 
141: 
69-76.
11. den Uijl IE, Fischer K, Van Der Bom 
JG, Grobbee DE, Rosendaal FR, Plug I. 
Analysis of low frequency bleeding data: 
the association of joint bleeds according 
to baseline FVIII activity levels. Haemo-
philia 2011; 
17: 
41-4.
12. Skinner MW. WFH: closing the global 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med nejm.org 
10
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
gap — achieving optimal care. Haemo-
philia 2012; 
18: 
Suppl 4: 
1-12.
13. Peters RT, Toby G, Lu Q, et al. Bio-
chemical and functional characterization 
of a recombinant monomeric factor VIII-
Fc fusion protein. J Thromb Haemost 
2013; 
11: 
132-41.
14. Ryan SM, Mantovani G, Wang X, Had-
dleton DM, Brayden DJ. Advances in 
 
PEGylation of important biotech mole-
cules: delivery aspects. Expert Opin Drug 
Deliv 2008; 
5: 
371-83.
15. Kratz F. Albumin as a drug carrier: 
design of prodrugs, drug conjugates and 
nanoparticles. J Control Release 2008; 
132: 
171-83.
16. Mahdi AJ, Obaji SG, Collins PW. Role 
of enhanced half-life factor VIII and IX in 
the treatment of haemophilia. Br J Hae-
matol 2015; 
169: 
768-76.
17. Peyvandi F, Garagiola I, Biguzzi E. 
Advances in the treatment of bleeding 
disorders. J Thromb Haemost 2016; 
14: 
2095-106.
18. Young G, Mahlangu JN. Extended 
half-life clotting factor concentrates: re-
sults from published clinical trials. Hae-
mophilia 2016; 
22: 
Suppl 5: 
25-30.
19. Peyvandi F, Garagiola I, Young G. The 
past and future of haemophilia: diagno-
sis, treatments, and its complications. 
Lancet 2016; 
388: 
187-97.
20. DiMichele D. Inhibitor development 
in haemophilia B: an orphan disease in 
need of attention. Br J Haematol 2007; 
138: 
305-15.
21. Gouw SC, van den Berg HM, Fischer 
K, et al. Intensity of factor VIII treatment 
and inhibitor development in children 
with severe hemophilia A: the RODIN 
study. Blood 2013; 
121: 
4046-55.
22. Shetty S, Vora S, Kulkarni B, et al. 
Contribution of natural anticoagulant 
and fibrinolytic factors in modulating the 
clinical severity of haemophilia patients. 
Br J Haematol 2007; 
138: 
541-4.
23. Ghosh K, Shetty S, Mohanty D. Milder 
clinical presentation of haemophilia A 
with severe deficiency of factor VIII as 
measured by one-stage assay. Haemophil-
ia 2001; 
7: 
9-12.
24. Franchini M, Montagnana M, Targher 
G, et al. Interpatient phenotypic inconsis-
tency in severe congenital hemophilia: a 
systematic review of the role of inherited 
thrombophilia. Semin Thromb Hemost 
2009; 
35: 
307-12.
25. Negrier C, Berruyer M, Durin A, 
Philippe N, Dechavanne M. Increased 
thrombin generation in a child with a 
combined factor IX and protein C defi-
ciency. Blood 1993; 
81: 
690-5.
26. Bolliger D, Szlam F, Suzuki N, Matsu-
shita T, Tanaka KA. Heterozygous anti-
thrombin deficiency improves in vivo hae-
mostasis in factor VIII-deficient mice. 
Thromb Haemost 2010; 
103: 
1233-8.
27. Sehgal A, Barros S, Ivanciu L, et al. An 
RNAi therapeutic targeting antithrombin 
to rebalance the coagulation system and 
promote hemostasis in hemophilia. Nat 
Med 2015; 
21: 
492-7.
28. Hemker HC, Al Dieri R, De Smedt E, 
Béguin S. Thrombin generation, a func-
tion test of the haemostatic-thrombotic 
system. Thromb Haemost 2006; 
96: 
553-
61.
29. Dargaud Y, Béguin S, Lienhart A, et 
al. Evaluation of thrombin generating ca-
pacity in plasma from patients with hae-
mophilia A and B. Thromb Haemost 
2005; 
93: 
475-80.
30. Giannini EG, Testa R, Savarino V. 
Liver enzyme alteration: a guide for clini-
cians. CMAJ 2005; 
172: 
367-79.
31. Inglesby TV, Rai R, Astemborski J, et 
al. A prospective, community-based eval-
uation of liver enzymes in individuals 
with hepatitis C after drug use. Hepatol-
ogy 1999; 
29: 
590-6.
32. Oh RC, Hustead TR. Causes and eval-
uation of mildly elevated liver transami-
nase levels. Am Fam Physician 2011; 
84: 
1003-8.
Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
