 https://doi.org/10.1177/0269216318757622
Palliative Medicine
2018, Vol. 32(6) 1078 
–1090
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269216318757622
journals.sagepub.com/home/pmj
A framework for complexity in palliative 
care: A qualitative study with patients, 
family carers and professionals
Sophie Pask1, Cathryn Pinto1, Katherine Bristowe1,  
Liesbeth van Vliet1, Caroline Nicholson2, Catherine J Evans1,3,  
Rob George4, Katharine Bailey1, Joanna M Davies1, Ping Guo1, 
Barbara A Daveson1, Irene J Higginson1
 and Fliss EM Murtagh1,5
Abstract
Background: Palliative care patients are often described as complex but evidence on complexity is limited. We need to understand 
complexity, including at individual patient-level, to define specialist palliative care, characterise palliative care populations and 
meaningfully compare interventions/outcomes.
Aim: To explore palliative care stakeholders’ views on what makes a patient more or less complex and insights on capturing 
complexity at patient-level.
Design: In-depth qualitative interviews, analysed using Framework analysis.
Participants/setting: Semi-structured interviews across six UK centres with patients, family, professionals, managers and senior 
leads, purposively sampled by experience, background, location and setting (hospital, hospice and community).
Results: 65 participants provided an understanding of complexity, which extended far beyond the commonly used physical, psychological, 
social and spiritual domains. Complexity included how patients interact with family/professionals, how services’ respond to needs and 
societal perspectives on care. ‘Pre-existing’, ‘cumulative’ and ‘invisible’ complexity are further important dimensions to delivering 
effective palliative and end-of-life care. The dynamic nature of illness and needs over time was also profoundly influential. Adapting 
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Systems Theory, we categorised findings into the microsystem (person, needs and characteristics), 
chronosystem (dynamic influences of time), mesosystem (interactions with family/health professionals), exosystem (palliative care 
services/systems) and macrosystem (societal influences). Stakeholders found it acceptable to capture complexity at the patient-level, 
with perceived benefits for improving palliative care resource allocation.
Conclusion: Our conceptual framework encompasses additional elements beyond physical, psychological, social and spiritual domains 
and advances systematic understanding of complexity within the context of palliative care. This framework helps capture patient-level 
complexity and target resource provision in specialist palliative care.
Keywords
Complexity, palliative care, human development, classification, qualitative research
What is already known about the topic?
•
•
Palliative care patients are often characterised as complex but no standardised definition or conceptual framework for 
complexity exists in palliative care.
1 
Cicely Saunders Institute of Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, 
King’s College London, London, UK
2 
Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery & Palliative Care, 
King’s College London, London, UK
3Sussex Community NHS Foundation Trust, Brighton, UK
4 
St Christopher’s Hospice, London, UK
5 
Wolfson Palliative Care Research Centre, Hull York Medical School, 
University of Hull, Hull, UK
Corresponding author:
Sophie Pask, Cicely Saunders Institute of Palliative Care, Policy & 
Rehabilitation, King’s College London, Bessemer Road, London SE5 9PJ, 
UK. 
Email: sophie.pask@kcl.ac.uk
757622 PMJ0010.1177/0269216318757622Palliative MedicinePask et al.
research-article2018
Original Article
 Pask et al. 
1079
•
•
Healthcare systems are using casemix classifications increasingly to allocate resources and ensure maximum value and 
efficiency.
•
•
Casemix classifications require the complexity of patients’ needs to be captured at an individual patient-level, but this is 
poorly standardised in specialist palliative care.
What this paper adds?
•
•
This article presents a conceptual framework to understand complexity in specialist palliative care, developed from 
patient, family and professional perspectives.
•
•
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Systems Theory has been adapted to provide a novel framework for understanding com-
plexity in specialist palliative care.
•
•
Number, severity, range and temporality of needs should be considered in the development of a meaningful casemix 
classification for specialist palliative care, along with additional aspects such as ‘pre-existing’, ‘cumulative’ and ‘invisible’ 
complexity.
Implications for practice, theory or policy
•
•
This framework identifies and conceptualises the sources of complexity in palliative care and provides a comprehensive 
understanding of complexity for palliative care providers.
•
•
This has implications for how services themselves recognise and respond to needs; improving understanding of complex-
ity will support more integrated and targeted care.
•
•
A casemix classification for specialist palliative care in the United Kingdom could reflect patient-level complexity as 
described by this framework and be feasible in practice.
Background
Populations are ageing and more people are living with 
chronic conditions and comorbidities.1–4 People with 
advanced progressive illness have a range of complex 
needs and symptoms,5–7 and their care is increasingly mul-
tifaceted. Specialist palliative care resources should be tar-
geted to those with the most complex needs.8–12 However, 
current evidence demonstrates that access to palliative 
care is determined not by level of complexity of need but 
more often by diagnosis, physical symptoms, age, ethnic-
ity, socioeconomic factors and geography.2,8,13–15 Referral 
may also be delayed because of the absence of standard 
definitions of what constitutes a palliative care patient or 
reasons for referral are not widely accepted.8,14–17
Palliative care patients seen are generally character-
ised as complex, with multiple symptoms, psychological, 
existential and social concerns,6,18–21 but no standardised 
definition of complexity exists and research is limited. In 
palliative care, complexity is commonly characterised as 
the number, severity and interaction of domains in the 
Holistic Common Assessment, a widely used framework 
for comprehensive palliative care assessment.22 Studies 
considering complexity have largely been in decision-
making, multiple chronic conditions, paediatric care or 
general healthcare and have described complexity more 
broadly (beyond the individual).23–31 Fernández-López 
et al.20 defined four levels of complexity for people near-
ing end-of-life (no complexity, low, medium and high), 
which establish intervention criteria for resource alloca-
tion, but without further validation. A recent study has 
also explored a predictive model of complexity (also 
adopting tiered levels) in palliative care, but only explores 
intervention and patient-level complexity in advanced 
cancer patients.32
Understanding complexity matters for several reasons. 
First, improved understanding of complexity in the last 
year of life is needed for more effective and integrated 
care, to ensure the different elements of care are brought 
together to manage patient needs12,33 Second, understand-
ing and ranking levels of complexity would help distin-
guish between generalist and specialist palliative care.8,17 
Third, in healthcare, there is increasing use of casemix 
classifications. These are classifications based on patient-
level criteria, which allow the grouping of patients in terms 
of the resources needed to meet their needs.34 Casemix cri-
teria can effectively characterise which cases are more or 
less complex.35 Such casemix classifications were pio-
neered in the United States with ‘diagnosis related groups’ 
(DRGs)36,37 and have been used in many countries since to 
develop prospective payment systems, mainly for hospital 
financing.38,39 Healthcare Resource Groups (HRGs) under-
pin the main casemix classification adopted in England.34 
HRGs are patient classes derived from information about 
diagnosis and procedures, aiming to deliver fair and equi-
table reimbursement for healthcare services.34
Although casemix classifications have been widely 
used to manage resources across healthcare, they have 
rarely been applied to palliative care. Other classifications 
have been used to group and analyse cost, but have only 
 1080 
Palliative Medicine 32(6)
been applied to breast cancer.35 Existing classifications 
(such as DRGs and HRGs) are based on diagnoses and 
procedures, but for patients receiving palliative care, the 
goal is to enhance quality of life and maintain or maximise 
current health and functional status, in the context of 
advanced incurable illness.40 Hence, we need different 
classifications for palliative care.41–43 Only in Australia has 
such a casemix classification for palliative care been 
developed.43 Criteria such as diagnosis and procedure 
were found to be ineffective in classifying whether those 
with palliative care needs were either more or less com-
plex.41 Instead, ‘phase of illness’ and ‘problem severity’ 
were found to be the better indicators of complexity and 
corresponding resource use.41,44 However, it is not clear 
whether these patient-level criteria are applicable interna-
tionally, acceptable to stakeholders and best reflect com-
plexity in palliative care.
The aim of this study is, therefore, to explore what 
makes a palliative care patient more or less complex, to 
develop a conceptual understanding of complexity and to 
consider how complexity might best be captured at patient-
level in specialist palliative care.
Method
Study design
Qualitative study using in-depth interviews, reported in 
accordance with the consolidated criteria for reporting 
qualitative research (COREQ) guidelines.45
Participants and setting
Participants were sampled purposively, to achieve maxi-
mum variation, by personal and/or professional back-
ground, geographical location and experiences of settings 
of care (hospital, hospice and community).46 Purposive 
criteria were selected from existing evidence by the 
research team, the Programme Steering Committee and the 
Patient and Public Involvement (PPI) advisory group. 
Participants from the eight participating sites were 
approached and subsequently interviewed if willing to par-
ticipate. The sample comprised patients and family carers, 
healthcare professionals (i.e. doctors, nurses and allied 
professionals), managers and senior leads (including 
national leads) in palliative care. Recruitment took place 
between October 2014 and June 2015 in six UK centres 
(North London, South London, Sussex, Cambridge, Dorset 
and Yorkshire).
Data collection
Face-to-face, semi-structured interviews were conducted 
by four researchers (C.P., K.Ba, L.V. and S.P.) in the par-
ticipant’s preferred setting. A topic guide was developed 
from a review of evidence on complexity, potential criteria 
for casemix, existing casemix classifications in palliative 
care and predictors of resource use in the last year of life. 
It was refined by our PPI advisory group, the research 
team and the Programme Steering Committee (See Online 
Appendix 1). Written informed consent was obtained prior 
to interview.
The interview began with a discussion of complexity in 
palliative care and how it could be characterised. Two 
vignettes, giving examples of low and high complexity, 
were then used to help focus on concrete examples and 
elicit further discussion. These were developed with our 
PPI advisory group (see Online Appendix 2). Interviews 
then explored how complexity might be measured at an 
individual patient-level.
To increase the credibility of the data, interviewers 
summarised the interview back at the end to allow the par-
ticipant to verify and clarify any misconceptions or add 
additional information. Data collection continued until 
data saturation was reached. All interviews were digitally 
audio recorded, anonymised and transcribed verbatim to 
ensure confidentiality. A distress protocol was developed 
and implemented to minimise risk of potential harm to 
participants.
Analysis
Interviews were analysed (by C.P. and S.P.) using the five 
analytical steps of Framework analysis: (1) familiarisa-
tion, (2) identifying a thematic framework, (3) indexing, 
(4) charting and (5) mapping and interpretation.47–49 
Framework was considered the optimal approach to allow 
both an inductive and deductive approach, to facilitate 
comparison across stakeholder groups and to support the 
service delivery and policy focus of this research.47,48,50 
Emerging themes were discussed between three research-
ers (C.P., K.B. and S.P.) to improve the confirmability and 
dependability of the findings. Charts were created for each 
theme, grouped by stakeholder type, and used to explore 
stakeholder assonance and dissonance among perspectives 
on each theme and subtheme. The COREQ guidelines 
were used throughout the study design, data collection and 
analysis process to enhance trustworthiness and methodo-
logical rigour.45 Analysis was managed using NVivo soft-
ware (Version 10).
Ethical approval
Approved by the King’s College London Research Ethics 
Committee (BDM/14/15-2).
Results
65 participants (of 69 approached) were recruited (94%); 
four people declined or were unable participate. Interviews 
ranged from 28 to 118 min with a median of 52 min. 
Participant characteristics are outlined in Table 1.
 Pask et al. 
1081
We found that participants identified components of 
complexity relating to (1) the person; (2) changing and 
dynamic aspects of illness and needs; (3) the person’s 
interactions with family, health professionals and imme-
diate settings; (4) palliative care services/systems; and 
(5) societal influences. We explored a range of existing 
theories in psychology, education and sociology, which 
were relevant to these emergent findings.51–53 We recog-
nised strong parallels between our emergent findings 
and the dimensions proposed by Bronfenbrenner’s 
Ecological Systems Theory54 (i.e. the world of the child 
as influenced by their social network and interactions, 
services and systems, and society, as well as changes 
over time because of dynamic interactions within and 
between these proposed ‘levels’). Therefore, we adapted 
Bronfenbrenner’s theory to underpin our data mapping 
and interpretation (see Figure 1). Findings are presented 
utilising the five systems of Bronfenbrenner’s theory: 
microsystem (the individual and their social network), 
chronosystem (changes over time), mesosystem (inter-
actions between the individual and their social network), 
exosystem (systems and services) and macrosystem 
(societal attitudes and culture)54 and how these apply to 
palliative care.
The microsystem: the person’s needs 
and characteristics
The microsystem consists of the person’s needs and char-
acteristics, which directly influence whether they are more 
or less complex.
The person’s needs
Participants – patients, family members and professionals – 
discussed complexity in terms of physical, psychological, 
social and spiritual domains. Participants emphasised commu-
nication and social needs as important in determining com-
plexity, these included information needs, social responsibilities 
(e.g. caring for children) and communication (e.g. English not 
a first language or understanding of medical information):
… we have a lot of people who don’t speak English as their 
first language so we have to use interpreters or we have to use 
Table 1. Participant characteristics.
Participant characteristics (n 
= 
65)
Patient and family 
carers (n 
= 
10)
Health professionals 
(n 
= 
38)
Managers and senior 
leads (n 
= 
17)
Age (years)
 <40
0
5
2
 40–49
0
16
8
 50–59
2
13
7
 60+
8
4
0
Gender
 Male
3
13
3
 Female
7
25
14
Ethnicity
 White British
6
33
12
 Other
4
5
5
Geographical location
 North London
1
3
5
 South London
6
13
1
 Sussex
0
7
1
 Cambridgeshire
0
1
0
 Dorset
0
4
1
 Yorkshire
3
10
1
 National
0
0
8
Professional background
 Senior Doctor
–
11
 
 Junior Doctor
–
3
 
 Senior Nurse
–
11
 
 Junior Nurse
–
6
 
 Senior Pharmacist
–
1
 
 Manager
–
9
 Senior Lead
–
8
 Social Work and Welfare
–
3
 
 Spiritual Care Provider
–
3
 
 1082 
Palliative Medicine 32(6)
other family members. That adds to the complexity. (1058, 
Social Worker)
I think it can work in both, in terms of education around their 
illness, you can sometimes have people who look into things 
in so much depth and actually have read everything on the 
internet, and come to you with all the, ‘And I would like a 
third opinion from somebody in [country name]’, and so that 
in itself is complex because you have to manage that with the 
health resources that you have. (1028, Senior Clinician)
The person’s characteristics
A few participants discussed how demographic and clini-
cal characteristics – such as age and diagnosis – influenced 
complexity. For instance, acceptance of advancing illness 
and deterioration was influenced by age, and in this way, 
could reduce complexity:
I think the age of the patient is a big factor too because I do 
feel that when someone’s coming towards the end of their life, 
it’s easier to accept what’s happening in general … (1015, 
Senior Clinician)
Some participants drew on personal characteristics 
beyond needs and highlighted how these affected a per-
son’s understanding of their illness, decision-making, nav-
igation of the healthcare system and experiences of care. 
These included the following: health literacy; confidence; 
coping and resilience; mental capacity; cultural context; 
and preferences and priorities. They emphasised the 
impact of illness on these characteristics and how these 
aspects influenced presentation, and hence complexity:
People are afraid to complain very often in a hospital setting (…) 
It’s very easy to be bullied by somebody when you’re immobile 
and you’re emotionally fragile … (1031, Family Carer)
Pre-existing complexity
Some participants discussed how a patient’s life can have 
qualities of complexity before they receive palliative care, 
such as long-standing difficulties with finances and/or 
housing, dependents, bereavements, mental health needs, 
homelessness, substance misuse, relationships and life-
style. For example, the demands of being a single mother 
adds to complexity of life:
… she has to look after her kids, so she hasn’t got her husband 
with her any longer. So, forget about the complexity of her 
illness, the complexity of just normal life is much higher 
(1004, Patient)
Cumulative complexity
Most felt that both the number of problems a person expe-
riences and whether problems were experienced across 
several or all domains strongly influenced complexity and 
were ‘cumulative’. The likelihood of each problem 
exacerbating other domains was recognised, as in the con-
cept of ‘total pain’ described by Cicely Saunders.55,56
Participants were also cautious about considering things 
in isolation, yet provided examples where single aspects, 
such as severe pain or having dependents, affected all 
areas cumulatively and could impact on a patient’s entire 
experience. A few participants illustrated how one severe 
problem could sometimes lead to highly complex needs:
… the reality is that somebody who has multiple issues or 
multiple problems may not present as complex as someone 
who has one problem, which may cause the multi-professional 
team a lot more thought and work … (1054, Spiritual Lead)
The chronosystem: changing 
complexity over time
The chronosystem refers to changes in a patient’s needs, 
circumstances and environment over time. In palliative 
care, this often reflects the prevailing uncertainty related to 
disease trajectory and care. However, other aspects of time 
were also seen to influence complexity, such as long-term 
caregiving burden, late referral in non-cancer or shorter 
disease trajectory.
Most participants emphasised how quickly changes can 
occur. They described patients’ needs as fluctuating, 
dynamic and sometimes rapidly changing. There are 
related issues of uncertainty when changes occur and how 
to manage problems that suddenly arise:
… a patient could be high complex and then you sort lots of 
things out, you get symptoms under control, you put 
equipment in, you put some support in, and so it changes. And 
then something else happens, so it’s that undulation, it’s that 
toing and froing, that in and out of complexity (...) patients 
don’t stay the same for very long periods of time, and there’s 
ebbs and flows. (1012, Senior Clinician)
Participants – especially professionals in palliative 
care – spoke of how immediate needs influence complex-
ity and require timeliness of care, prioritisation and rapid 
caseload decisions:
Yes, some things may be because of the speed that [name] is 
dying, do need to be sorted out. If she has got no other support 
then social care will really need to come in and give her the 
options of what is going to happen with her children. It is very 
difficult. (1034, Manager/Senior Lead)
Participants in all groups felt that complexity was not 
usefully captured as a snapshot and needed regular review 
to ensure that services are responsive and flexible to needs 
as they change:
… within palliative and end-of-life care, means things change 
so rapidly, so you need a really responsive service, and if you 
haven’t got that then you can’t match the service to the 
person’s needs. (1014, Senior Clinician)
 Pask et al. 
1083
Some participants also highlighted duration of needs 
as important in caregiver burden and its effect on 
complexity:
… duration has a part to play because people need stamina to 
manage really long-term conditions. And it’s not only the patient 
themselves; their families and their carers need to be able to 
deliver sustained input and I think that’s really hard when it’s 
over prolonged periods. (1017, Manager/Senior Lead)
The mesosystem: the interactions 
between the person, their family and 
health professionals
The mesosystem represents the interactions that occur 
between the person, the main people (e.g. family or 
healthcare professionals) and settings of care (e.g. hos-
pice, hospital and community). Complexity here was 
largely expressed in terms of the interactions between the 
patient and their healthcare providers, and between the 
patient and their family as well as friends, spiritual net-
works and other support groups. Complexity can be 
reduced by strong supportive links or exacerbated by lim-
ited support.
Dissonance between patients, families and 
health professionals
Participants spoke of dissonance between patients, fami-
lies and health professionals as pertinent. Some high-
lighted the difficulties that could arise from differences in 
how patients and professionals would prefer to manage 
their care:
… you may have a couple of things wrong with you, and as a 
patient you may prefer one thing to be done. Meanwhile, as a 
professional you may actually think the other thing needs to 
be done first [laughs]. So, I mean, it will bring possible 
conflict. (1004, Patient)
So, I think what’s the patient’s agenda and how they want to 
handle life is much less tidy than the healthcare professionals 
would like it to be. And there’s a great danger that we tell 
people how they should handle their final period of life. 
(1023, Senior Clinician)
Similarly, participants reported challenges when 
patient’s and professional’s beliefs differ and how this 
could affect experience of care. For instance, dissonance in 
spiritual perspectives may lead to misinterpretation of 
emotional well-being:
When the family then says, ‘Right, I don’t want you to tell 
him’, or, ‘I don’t want you to give him the morphine’, as a 
profession we’re thinking you’re not the patient, I need to 
listen to the patient, thank you very much. Then you alienate 
the family and the family says I don’t want you coming in 
then because if you’re going to come in here and upset my 
loved one, I don’t want you here. To me, as a professional, a 
big part of our job is understanding people’s culture (…) Then 
I need to walk with the family, understand what is important 
and then manage the symptoms in accordance with that. That, 
to me, is complex. (1049, Manager/Senior Lead)
Others referred to the way dissonance between patients 
and family wishes, increased complexity:
You can have families who are warring or arguing, different 
perspectives on what should happen to their loved one and 
that can pull everybody in different directions. (1034, 
Manager/Senior Lead)
Engagement, prejudice and ‘invisible’ complexity
Health professionals drew attention to examples where 
patients may choose not to engage with services and how 
this can increase complexity. This includes patients 
declining opportunities to talk about care at the end-of-
life and some groups (e.g. substance or alcohol misus-
ers) that struggle at times to interact with healthcare 
services:
I suppose drug and alcoholic abuse, in terms of a specific 
group of people, just because, again, these patients don’t tend 
to engage as well. They tend to have more erratic lifestyles. 
Therefore, asking them to come in or be in at a certain time to 
go and visit them is harder. (1057, Junior Clinician)
Perceptions and prejudice were also thought to influ-
ence care and complexity. Participants described how 
some diseases are stigmatised, which triggers a different 
set of social responses from family and professionals, and 
impede a patient’s freedom to disclose information:
I do think there are some diseases that make it more socially 
complex, or potentially more socially complex. So (…) liver 
cancer being associated with hepatitis B, which was more 
associated with intravenous drug users, triggers a different 
reaction in their social set. You know, in the family, in the 
friends, in the professionals sometimes even, which makes 
the whole situation more complex to manage. (1019, Manager/
Senior Lead)
Several participants highlighted the issue of ‘invisible’ or 
hidden complexity when people do not engage with health-
care services, for example, those with long-standing depres-
sion or older people who may not seek help so readily:
I’ve just left a gentleman on the ward. He is very depressed 
(…) He’s not taking up anybody’s time because he’s feeling 
very helpless and hopeless. So, the complexity is there but 
he’s not engaging with any of it (…) Actually, a nurse on the 
ward could think he’s really easy to look after but actually his 
needs are really complex. (1013, Senior Clinician)
I think there is an impact with age on the traditions of how 
they interact with services – so you do find people in all 
 1084 
Palliative Medicine 32(6)
spheres who are a bit more elderly but who wouldn’t dream of 
contacting somebody in the middle of the night. So, how they 
interact with their health services might be more traditional 
and lead to them avoiding that (1028, Senior Clinician)
The exosystem: service- and system-
level factors
The exosystem comprises services and systems that the per-
son is not directly part of, yet, which influence the care they 
receive. This refers, for instance, to how multidisciplinary 
teams work/are structured (including provision or absence 
of staff training), how services coordinate care (e.g. elec-
tronic palliative care coordinating systems/electronic 
records) and local service governance and commissioning.
Multidisciplinary team meetings and 
coordination of care
Participants – especially professionals – emphasised how 
effective multidisciplinary team meetings can lessen com-
plexity by responding efficiently and well to complex 
needs; multidisciplinary teams may be essential for more 
complex patients:
The whole purpose of having a multidisciplinary approach to 
palliative care is to handle complexity (…) No one profession 
has all the skills that dying people and their families need. 
(1016, Senior Clinician)
However, many highlighted concerns that ineffective 
multiprofessional involvement could increase complexity 
through problems with planning and disjointed care:
… she’s got breast cancer with the chemo, the pain and the 
depression, if they’re all being managed by one team that’s 
fine, but if she’s seeing different teams it could be very 
disjointed. (1002, Patient and Family Carer)
The majority saw good communication within and 
between teams/services as key to delivering effective 
patient and family care and managing complexity well.
Service availability and capacity
Most participants felt resource constraints may be a factor 
in complexity as needs are not effectively addressed:
… someone’s quite complex and actually would benefit from 
a social worker and regular nurse visits to their home or being 
admitted for respite care or whatever. But actually, if you don’t 
have the resources for them to access that then it doesn’t matter 
that they’re more complex, but you’re still not going to meet 
the need that you’ve identified because you’re constrained by 
the resources available. (1020, Manager/Senior Lead)
Some participants spoke of how care may become more 
complex if staff lack the necessary skills or experience, as 
they may not have the expertise to address and respond to 
needs, thereby increasing apparent patient complexity.
… complexity [sometimes] arises because the professional 
makes it complex, because of their perception of the issue or 
perception of it as a problem (…) So for some people advance 
care planning could be seen as a complex issue, for others it 
wouldn’t be. (1048, Manager/Senior Lead)
Participants from all groups discussed the importance 
of training as a service factor influencing complexity. In 
particular, professionals highlighted that specific training 
is required for certain groups (e.g. homeless people, those 
with learning disabilities or dementia):
So those with say learning disability or homeless people who 
might have needs and that access a service. (…) And there, with 
that, there may be greater complexity from lack of experience 
in seeing these patients that there may be additional factors that 
aren’t immediately apparent. (1005, Senior Clinician)
The macrosystem: population and 
society
The macrosystem refers to the wider societal and cultural 
context, within which the other systems are embedded. 
Although most ‘distant’ from the person, the findings sug-
gest this has profound influence over complexity. Within 
palliative care, the macrosystem includes: the system-wide 
structure of palliative care (e.g. services, funding and 
resources), the structure and organisation of health and 
social care systems, end-of-life care policies and values in 
society (e.g. cultural values, stigmas and beliefs).
Wealth and deprivation can also influence complexity 
with deprived areas receiving limited resources and being 
more ‘neglected’ (e.g. less access to hospices):
I think areas of poverty, areas of wealth have a huge impact. I 
think the multiplicity of all the different providers in the area 
has another impact. Some things you’re able to get in some 
areas, some things you’re not able to access in other areas, so 
there’s lots of inequity in that sense. (1038, Senior Clinician)
Some participants discussed professional and societal 
cultures’ failure to recognise deteriorating health and 
dying, and its impact on complexity:
There is a whole issue about failure of the health service or 
social care to recognise either that somebody is dying or to 
provide services. There might be good and easy solutions to 
reduce complexity but if they are not available or people don’t 
know how to access them then that increases complexity. 
(1034, Manager/Senior Lead)
 Pask et al. 
1085
Capturing complexity at individual 
patient-level
Interview findings illustrated diverse views on capturing 
complexity using individual patient-level criteria (see 
Online Appendix 3). The main themes have been summa-
rised below. For more details regarding the coding frame, 
see Online Appendix 3.
Acceptability of capturing and classifying 
complexity
In general, participants stated that assessing complexity at 
individual patient-level was important. Some stated that 
having a quantifiable measure of complexity was crucial 
to ensure appropriate services and the fairest possible 
resource allocation. Participants had mixed views about 
whether it was acceptable to classify people’s individual 
needs into specific groups from high to low complexity. 
Most felt this was acceptable, but a few had concerns 
about possible negative associations of using broad 
categories that may detract from the uniqueness of the 
individual:
I think, in some ways, it has to be possible, really, because I 
think otherwise it’s very hard to allocate resources and 
allocate yourself and your time, really. Yes, I do think it’s 
possible and I do think it’s very difficult, and I think there are 
lots of different variables to take into account. (1038, Senior 
Clinician)
Ways to capture complexity at individual 
patient-level
Participants suggested various ways to measure or capture 
complexity: some focused on the key components to be 
included, others suggested techniques to compute or strat-
ify complexity. The four palliative care domains (physical, 
psychological, social and spiritual) were seen as the core 
components, and both patient/family participants and pro-
fessionals reported needs as additive or cumulative. 
Participants suggested various means of scoring or 
Figure 1. A framework of complexity in the palliative care context.
 1086 
Palliative Medicine 32(6)
classifying complexity. Proposed techniques included 
composite scores, hierarchies, graphs, algorithms or math-
ematical models. However, some participants suggested it 
may be too complicated to try and reflect complexity 
beyond a fairly simple classification; and that referrals 
might be helpful to elucidate complexity:
… somehow you have to try and then relate each one, the 
economic to the physical, and then to the emotional (…) so 
therefore you’ve got the complexity of the illness, complexity 
of the finance, complexity of the social and it’s trying to work 
out some sort of matrix which will then, say the overall 
complexity score for this person is … (1004, Patient)
… you’re one point for every person that you’re referring 
them onto. So, if you refer them onto an OT, that’s one point, 
if you refer them to the Social Worker, that’s another one (…) 
if you’re having to get the GP to go and see them pretty soon 
afterwards … (1007, Senior Clinician)
Some healthcare professionals shared views that certain 
elements may be missed when capturing complexity at an 
individual patient-level (e.g. dependence and mental health). 
Existing resilience and support networks were also seen as 
major influences on how complexity manifested in any one 
individual and how hard it is to capture systematically:
We’ve got a couple of [patients], they ring up virtually every 
day for advice. That is time-consuming, but, once again, are 
we missing something? Is it their mental health that is the 
issue and we’re just addressing the physical symptoms? Have 
they no support mechanisms and there are no carers, and 
we’re being phoned because we’re there? I wouldn’t class 
those as complex. (1062, Senior Clinician)
Potential benefits of classifying complexity
The benefits of measuring and classifying complexity at 
individual patient-level were described most often by the 
managers and senior leads, and least frequently by the 
patient and carer stakeholder group. A standardised way to 
classify complexity was recognised by most professional 
participants as providing a ‘common language’ and shared 
understanding to improve communication across different 
service providers. Some participants discussed how clas-
sifying complexity might help determine when specialist 
or generalist palliative care input was needed:
I think it’s essential that you have a sort of a consistent 
standardised framework for measuring complexity (…) so it 
gives you that common language (…) to compare different 
patient cohorts and casemix across different populations, 
across different providers and to facilitate communication 
between providers and commissioners and the like. (1025, 
Manager/Senior lead)
More participants – including patient participants – 
viewed a classification of an individual’s complexity as an 
efficient and fair way to tailor resource provision. In contrast, 
a few participants, from the patient and caregiver stakeholder 
group, believed that all patients and families should be 
offered the same palliative care resources regardless of their 
level of complexity:
… we just say, ‘Everybody gets all of this. Everybody’. So, 
we almost pour a bucket of water over everyone, so everybody 
gets wet. What we want to do is to have a bucket of water 
which has a spout on it, so we can pour the water on the ones 
who need it at the time. (1054, Spiritual Lead)
I think Arthur has – we’re – on the surface we’re saying his 
complexity is a lower level, but actually the – this – everything 
that is offered to him – he needs to have the same offering but 
he maybe doesn’t take advantage of it. (1002, Patient and 
Family Carer)
Potential challenges of classifying complexity
Some participants described challenges that need to be 
overcome for this approach to be meaningful and workable 
for specialist palliative care. Complexity groupings should 
be responsive and reflect the changing needs of palliative 
care patients. Some were concerned that if the complexity 
groupings were not sensitive to these changing needs, then 
the patient would not be able to access the necessary 
resources should their status change:
… one just has to make sure that each case is reviewed and there 
is not too much officialdom (…) I think, that make sure that 
people are not just given one category and even when it’s 
changed, you know, nobody is listening … (1003, Family Carer)
Participants reported that some elements of patient 
complexity may not be easily captured by objective meas-
urements; exploration of issues in a personal clinical 
encounter will always be needed. Participants also had 
concerns about the logistics and resource intensiveness of 
data collection about patient complexity – how often 
would data need to be collected, are the measures appro-
priate, is the right infrastructure in place (e.g. information 
technology) and does it run alongside clinical data collec-
tion? Staff training was also felt to be important:
I don’t know quite how detailed that’s going to be and how 
everyone’s got the resources to keep on measuring, monitoring 
and reporting back on that kind of thing, so I quite don’t know 
how that would [work] … (1015, Senior Clinician)
Discussion
This study provides a comprehensive conceptual framework 
of complexity based on empirical evidence derived from 
patients, family carers and professionals. It adapts 
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Systems Theory.54 His original 
theory explained how a child – at the centre of the 
 Pask et al. 
1087
framework – developed in response to their context and 
environment. We apply this theory to palliative care, adapt-
ing the framework to be patient-centred, and explain how a 
patient interacts with their context and environment when 
living with an advanced illness. While palliative care has 
long recognised physical, psychological, social and spiritual 
holistic domains, we found complexity to go far beyond 
these four domains. This research reveals that we need to 
consider pre-existing and cumulative complexity, the 
dynamic aspects of complexity, invisible complexity, ser-
vice-/system-level factors and societal influences to consider 
and meet patients’ needs comprehensively and effectively.
Characterising complexity in terms of Bronfenbrenner’s 
microsystem, mesosystem, exosystem, macrosystem and 
chronosystem levels is supported by existing literature in 
multimorbidity, chronic conditions and general health-
care,26,27,30 which demonstrate that complexity goes 
beyond the individual, includes contextual drivers, and 
derives from multiple sources (e.g. system-level and ser-
vice-level aspects).9,26,30,57 This article provides a more 
comprehensive understanding of complexity as applied to 
palliative care. The findings have resonance with the 
cumulative complexity model of Shippee et al.,27 which 
emphasises the progressive and cumulative nature of com-
plexity, and how this shapes access to and experiences of 
healthcare. Prior evidence also indicates relationships 
between components of complexity as neither final nor 
static.26,27,30 Our framework presented here emphasises the 
dynamic interactions in palliative care. In addition, the 
concept of cumulative complexity presented in this model 
has particular significance for palliative care – comparable 
to the concept of ‘total pain’.55,56 This addresses the need 
to palliate the person as a whole, considering relationships 
between components and systems.
We have drawn on a range of stakeholders’ perspec-
tives (including patient and family carers) to identify 
characteristics of complexity which are not usually 
reported. The Holistic Common Assessment,22 commonly 
used in assessing patient needs in palliative care, includes 
some of these aspects (cultural context, mental capacity, 
preferences and priorities). Our interviews uncovered 
additional aspects that could be included in this assess-
ment, such as health literacy,58 coping and resilience59 and 
empowerment.60,61 These aspects have been described 
independently in other research studies. This framework 
also emphasises how dissonance between patient, family 
and/or professionals, as well as the level of engagement 
with healthcare, may strongly influence complexity. Such 
dissonance substantially increases the amount of time 
professionals need to spend to deliver care effectively. 
Invisible complexity – unrecognised by healthcare pro-
viders – is new and requires further study. As Safford 
et al.26 highlight, congruence between patients, profes-
sionals and healthcare systems emerged as crucial for 
effective and patient-centred care. It is well-established 
that patients’ and healthcare professionals’ perspectives 
on symptoms62 and quality of life63 do not always overlap; 
other areas of dissonance – such as contradictory or unex-
pected preferences – also influence complexity.
Limitations
Our sample consisted mainly of senior clinicians and par-
ticipants largely from London, this imbalance may influ-
ence the transferability of findings. However, this study 
expanded on previous literature20 by incorporating experi-
ences from patients and family carers in addition to profes-
sionals from multiple disciplines to form unique data 
examining complexity in palliative care. We made con-
scious efforts to ensure that the data presented were repre-
sentative of the views from all stakeholder groups. We 
recognise that there were a limited number of patients and 
family carers involved as participants, compared to other 
stakeholder groups. There were certain challenges in 
accessing these particular participant groups through par-
ticipating sites, as well as considerations specific to 
patients living with advanced illness and their carers (e.g. 
fatigue and caring commitments) outlined by previous 
research.64 Findings were, therefore, presented and dis-
cussed with the PPI advisory group to aid interpretation. 
The framework would need to be explored further with 
this population.
As the main focus of this article was to present a frame-
work of complexity, the authors were only able to high-
light and briefly describe where assonance and dissonance 
were present between stakeholder groups.
Due to staff change over in the project and volume of 
interviews collected, four researchers conducted the inter-
views. Some joint interviews were conducted to ensure 
that interviewing styles were similar and were assisted by 
the topic guide. Researchers would also meet to discuss 
the interview progress and emergent themes.
Applying the framework in practice
Our framework provides a structured and comprehensive 
way of considering complexity in palliative care. This 
understanding of complexity will allow us to prioritise and 
target care better and helps move towards more effective 
and integrated care.12,33 Participants highlighted the impor-
tance of having a shared understanding of complexity 
across different specialist palliative care providers and set-
tings. There is still confusion among generalists regarding 
the timing of integrating specialist palliative care.65 
Frameworks that accurately capture patient-level com-
plexity allow us to communicate the specialist role more 
clearly and target limited resources more effectively to 
meet patients’ needs.
This study also indicates that complexity can be cap-
tured at the individual patient-level. A casemix 
 1088 
Palliative Medicine 32(6)
classification needs to measure holistic needs (physical, 
psychological, social and spiritual) of patients and families, 
but we also demonstrate that other aspects of complexity 
are also important, such as information about patients’ per-
sonal characteristics, resources (e.g. coping/resilience, vul-
nerability and dependence), their existing support networks 
and the transparency (or otherwise) of their degree of com-
plexity. This is important practice: the Australian casemix 
classification, for instance, takes this into account by 
including data on the number and severity of problems 
alongside ‘Phase of Illness’66 and functional status.41,67
Our proposed framework also incorporates factors in 
the macrosystem that have not been identified in other 
models of complexity.20,26,27,30 This provides insights to 
address current challenges, such as who accesses palliative 
care, how people access palliative care and the best way to 
use limited resources.8–10,13,33 Our framework and consid-
erations of how to measure complexity at an individual-
level together give us the means to consider and address 
complexity systematically to advance both theory and 
practice in palliative care.
In particular, services should seek out ‘invisible com-
plexity’, the patient who cannot advocate for themselves 
and may be overlooked in highly-pressured health and 
social care services. Clinical and senior leads, chief execu-
tives and commissioners also need to consider the quality of 
interactions between professionals and patients/families, 
how responsive and flexible their services are and the extent 
to which ‘the system’ increases complexity by inflexibility 
or inability to respond to rapidly changing needs.
Future research
Future research needs to assess how complexity can be 
measured and reported in a standardised way. We also 
need to explore further how this understanding of com-
plexity can be applied practically and how it might apply 
to individual patients in particular. Further research is also 
needed to develop our understanding of aspects of com-
plexity within the exosystem (services/systems) and mac-
rosystem (societal influences), and to explore further the 
notion of ‘cumulative’ and ‘invisible’ complexity within 
palliative care.
Conclusion
This conceptual framework reflects the reality of patients’ 
and families’ lives as they face advanced illness, as per-
ceived by patients, families and professionals in palliative 
care. It emphasises that considering physical, psychologi-
cal, social and spiritual domains is not enough to character-
ise complexity. ‘Pre-existing’, ‘cumulative’ and ‘invisible’ 
complexity are also important, as is the way professionals 
and services interact with people and their families. 
Services need to be flexible in how they respond to 
individuals and to adapt to dynamic and changing levels of 
complexity, if they are to meet needs effectively.
It is acceptable to measure complexity at the individual 
patient-level, but this needs to incorporate key components 
of complexity. Any implementation of a casemix classifi-
cation in palliative care will need to be tempered with the 
feasibility of collecting complexity data in clinical 
practice.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the study participants and the 
C-CHANGE team for their input and support. S.P. and C.P. are 
joint first authors.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: 
This article presents independent research funded by the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) under the Programme 
Grants for Applied Research programme (RP-PG-1210-12015–
C-CHANGE: Delivering high-quality and cost-effective care 
across the range of complexity for those with advanced condi-
tions in the last year of life). The views and opinions expressed 
by authors in this publication are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the National Health Service, the 
National Institute of Health Research, Medical Research Council, 
Central Commissioning Facility, NIHR Evaluation, Trials and 
Studies Coordinating Centre, the National Institute of Health 
Research Programme Grants for Applied Research or the 
Department of Health. Individual funding: C.J.E. was provided 
HEE/NIHR Senior Clinical Lectureship, and I.J.H. is a Emeritus 
NIHR Senior Investigator.
ORCID iD
Irene J Higginson 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1426-4923
References
 1. Marie Curie Cancer Care. Triggers for palliative care. 
London: Marie Curie Cancer Care, 2015.
 2. Dixon J, King D, Matosevic T, et al. Equity in the provision 
of palliative care in the UK: review of evidence. London: 
Personal Social Services Research Unit, London School of 
Economics and Political Science, 2015.
 3. Effiong A and Effiong AI. Palliative care for the manage-
ment of chronic illness: a systematic review study protocol. 
BMJ Open 2012; 2: e000899.
 4. O’Brien T. The impact of an aging population on palliative 
care. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2013; 27: 389–391.
 5. Cancer Action Team. Holistic common assessment of sup-
portive and palliative care needs for adults with cancer: 
assessment guidance. London: Cancer Action Team, 2007.
 Pask et al. 
1089
 6. Fitch MI. Needs of patients living with advanced disease. 
Can Oncol Nurs J 2005; 15: 230–242.
 7. Langton JM, Reeve R, Srasuebkul P, et al. Health service use 
and costs in the last 6 months of life in elderly decedents with 
a history of cancer: a comprehensive analysis from a health 
payer perspective. Br J Cancer 2016; 114: 1293–1302.
 8. Grande G. Access to palliative care. In: Cohen J and Deliens 
L (eds) A public health perspective on end of life care. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012, pp. 86–97.
 9. Luckett T, Phillips J, Agar M, et al. Elements of effective 
palliative care models: a rapid review. BMC Health Serv 
Res 2014; 14: 136.
 
10. Walshe C, Todd C, Caress A, et al. Patterns of access to 
community palliative care services: a literature review. J 
Pain Symptom Manage 2009; 37: 884–912.
 
11. Wasson K and George R. Specialist palliative care for non-
cancer patients: the ethical arguments. In: Addington-Hall J 
and Higginson IJ (eds) Palliative care for non-cancer patients. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001, pp. 239–250.
 
12. Care Quality Commission (CQC). A different ending: end 
of life care review, http://www.healthwatchharingey.org.
uk/news/different-ending-end-life-care-review-cqc (2016, 
accessed 21 May 2016).
 
13. Hughes-Hallett T, Craft A, Davies C, et al. Palliative care 
funding review: funding the right care and support for eve-
ryone. London: United Kingdom Palliative Care Funding 
Review Team, 2011.
 
14. Bestall JC, Ahmed N, Ahmedzai SH, et al. Access and refer-
ral to specialist palliative care: patients’ and professionals’ 
experiences. Int J Palliat Nurs 2004; 10: 381–389.
 
15. Mitchell H, Noble S, Finlay I, et al. Defining the pallia-
tive care patient: its challenges and implications for service 
delivery. BMJ Support Palliat Care 2015; 5: 46–52.
 
16. Murray SA and McLoughlin P. Illness trajectories and palli-
ative care: implications for holistic service provision for all 
in the last year of life. In: Sallnow L, Kumar S and Kellehear 
A (eds) International perspectives in public health and pal-
liative care. Oxford: Routledge, 2012, pp. 30–51.
 
17. Farquhar M, Grande G, Todd C, et al. Defining patients as 
palliative: hospital doctors’ versus general practitioners’ 
perceptions. Palliat Med 2002; 16: 247–250.
 
18. Arnold BL. Mapping hospice patients’ perception and ver-
bal communication of end-of-life needs: an exploratory 
mixed methods inquiry. BMC Palliat Care 2011; 10: 1.
 
19. Higginson IJ, Hart S, Koffman J, et al. Needs assessments 
in palliative care: an appraisal of definitions and approaches 
used. J Pain Symptom Manage 2007; 33: 500–505.
 
20. Fernández-López A, Sanz-Amores R, Cía-Ramos R, et al. 
Criteria and complexity levels in palliative care. Med 
Paliativa 2008; 15: 287–292.
 
21. Higginson IJ and Evans CJ. What is the evidence that pal-
liative care teams improve outcomes for cancer patients and 
their families? Cancer J 2010; 16: 423–435.
 
22. National Cancer Action Team and NHS Improving Quality. 
Holistic common assessment of supportive and palliative care 
needs for adults requiring end of life care, 2010, http://www.
gmecscn.nhs.uk/attachments/article/99/HCA_guide.pdf
 
23. Grant RW, Ashburner JM, Hong CS, et al. Defining patient 
complexity from the primary care physician’s perspective: a 
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2011; 155: 797–804.
 
24. Kannampallil TG, Schauer GF, Cohen T, et al. Considering 
complexity in healthcare systems. J Biomed Inform 2011; 
44: 943–947.
 
25. Levula AV, Chung KSK, Young J, et al. Envisioning com-
plexity in healthcare systems through social networks. In: 
Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM international conference on 
advances in social networks analysis and mining, Niagara 
Falls, ON, Canada, 25–28 August 2013, pp. 931–936. New 
York: ACM.
 
26. Safford MM, Allison JJ and Kiefe CI. Patient complexity: 
more than comorbidity. The vector model of complexity. J 
Gen Intern Med 2007; 22: 382–390.
 
27. Shippee ND, Shah ND, May CR, et al. Cumulative com-
plexity: a functional, patient-centered model of patient com-
plexity can improve research and practice. J Clin Epidemiol 
2012; 65: 1041–1051.
 
28. Simon TD, Cawthon ML, Stanford S, et al. Pediatric medi-
cal complexity algorithm: a new method to stratify children 
by medical complexity. Pediatrics 2014; 133: e1647–e1654.
 
29. Weinberger H, Cohen J, Tadmor B, et al. Towards a frame-
work for untangling complexity: the interprofessional deci-
sion-making model for the complex patient. J Assoc Inf Sci 
Tech 2015; 66: 392–407.
 
30. Zullig LL, Whitson HE, Hastings SN, et al. A systematic review 
of conceptual frameworks of medical complexity and new 
model development. J Gen Intern Med 2016; 31: 329–337.
 
31. Zulman DM, Asch SM, Martins SB, et al. Quality of care 
for patients with multiple chronic conditions: the role of 
comorbidity interrelatedness. J Gen Intern Med 2014; 29: 
529–537.
 
32. Tuca A, Gomez-Martinez M and Prat A. Predictive model 
of complexity in early palliative care: a cohort of advanced 
cancer patients (PALCOM study). Support Care Cancer 
2017; 26: 241–249.
 
33. National Audit Office (NAO). End of life care. London: The 
Stationery Office, 2008.
 
34. National Casemix Office and Health and Social Care 
Information Centre. Casemix companion. London: Health 
and Social Care Information Centre, 2016.
 
35. Jay N, Nuemi G, Gadreau M, et al. A data mining approach 
for grouping and analyzing trajectories of care using claim 
data: the example of breast cancer. BMC Med Inform Decis 
Mak 2013; 13: 130.
 
36. Averill RF, Muldoon JH, Vertrees JC, et al. The evolution 
of casemix measurement using diagnosis related groups 
(drgs). Wallingford: 3M Health Information Systems, 1998.
 
37. Fetter RB. Casemix classification systems. Aust Health Rev 
1999; 22: 16–34.
 
38. France FH. Case mix use in 25 countries: a migration suc-
cess but international comparisons failure. Int J Med Inform 
2003; 70: 215–219.
 
39. Schmid A, Cacace M, Götze R, et al. Explaining health 
care system change: problem pressure and the emergence 
of ‘hybrid’ health care systems. J Health Polit Policy Law 
2010; 35: 455–486.
 
40. Lee LA, Eagar KM and Smith MG. Subacute and non-acute 
casemix in Australia. Med J Aust 1998; 169: S22–S25.
 
41. Eagar K, Cromwell D, Kennedy C, et al. Classifying sub-
acute and non-acute patients: results of the New South Wales 
Casemix area network study. Aust Health Rev 1997; 20: 26–42.
 1090 
Palliative Medicine 32(6)
 
42. Turner-Stokes L, Sutch S, Dredge R, et al. International 
casemix and funding models: lessons for rehabilitation. Clin 
Rehabil 2012; 26: 195–208.
 
43. Eagar K, Gordon R, Green J, et al. An Australian casemix 
classification for palliative care: lessons and policy 
implications of a national study. Palliat Med 2004; 18: 
 
227–233.
 
44. Mather H, Guo P, Firth A, et al. Phase of Illness in pal-
liative care: cross-sectional analysis of clinical data 
from community, hospital and hospice patients. Palliat 
Med. Epub ahead of print 1 August 2017. DOI: 10.1177/ 
0269216317727157.
 
45. Tong A, Sainsbury P and Craig J. Consolidated criteria for 
reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item check-
list for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health C 
2007; 19: 349–357.
 
46. Robinson OC. Sampling in interview-based qualitative 
research: a theoretical and practical guide. Qual Res Psychol 
2014; 11: 25–41.
 
47. Huberman AM and Miles MB. The qualitative researcher’s 
companion. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2002.
 
48. Ritchie J and Lewis J. Qualitative research practice: a 
guide for social science students and researchers. London: 
SAGE, 2003.
 
49. Gale NK, Heath G, Cameron E, et al. Using the framework 
method for the analysis of qualitative data in multi-discipli-
nary health research. BMC Med Res Methodol 2013; 13: 117.
 
50. NatCen. The framework approach to qualitative data analy-
sis. London: NatCen, 2012.
 
51. Department of Health. NHS Patient experience framework. 
London: Department of Health, 2012.
 
52. National Research Council. Dynamic social network 
modeling and analysis: workshop summary and papers. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003.
 
53. World Health Organization (WHO). Framework on inte-
grated people-centred health services, http://www.who.
int/servicedeliverysafety/areas/people-centred-care/frame-
work/en/ (accessed 12 November 2017).
 
54. Bronfenbrenner U. Ecological models of human develop-
ment. In: Gauvain M and Cole M (eds) Readings on the 
development of children. 2nd ed. New York: W. H. Freeman 
and Company, 1994, pp. 37–43.
 
55. Saunders C. Care of patients suffering from terminal illness 
at St Joseph’s Hospice, Hackney, London. Nursing Times, 
February 1964, pp. 1031–1032.
 
56. Saunders C. The symptomatic treatment of incurable malig-
nant disease. Prescribers J 1964; 4: 68–73.
 
57. World Health Organization (WHO). The global burden of 
disease: 2004 update. Geneva: World Health Organization, 
2004.
 
58. Wen-ying SC, Anna G and Alexander P. Health literacy 
and communication in palliative care. In: Wittenberg E, 
Ferrell BR, Goldsmith J, et al. (eds) Textbook of pal-
liative care communication. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2015.
 
59. Monroe B and Oliviere D. Resilience in palliative care: 
achievement in adversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2007.
 
60. Ellershaw J and Ward C. Care of the dying patient: the last 
hours or days of life. Br Med J 2003; 326: 30–34.
 
61. McCorkle R, Ercolano E, Lazenby M, et al. Self-management: 
enabling and empowering patients living with cancer as a 
chronic illness. CA Cancer J Clin 2011; 61: 50–62.
 
62. Strömgren AS, Groenvold M, Pedersen L, et al. Does the 
medical record cover the symptoms experienced by can-
cer patients receiving palliative care? A comparison of the 
record and patient self-rating. J Pain Symptom Manage 
2001; 21: 189–196.
 
63. Janse AJ, Gemke RJ, Uiterwaal CS, et al. Quality of life: 
patients and doctors don’t always agree: a meta-analysis. J 
Clin Epidemiol 2004; 57: 653–661.
 
64. Addington-Hall J. Research sensitivities to palliative care 
patients. Eur J Cancer Care 2002; 11: 220–224.
 
65. Firn J, Preston N and Walshe C. What are the views of hos-
pital-based generalist palliative care professionals on what 
facilitates or hinders collaboration with in-patient specialist 
palliative care teams? A systematically constructed narra-
tive synthesis. Palliat Med 2016; 30: 240–256.
 
66. Masso M, Allingham SF, Banfield M, et al. Palliative care 
phase: inter-rater reliability and acceptability in a national 
study. Palliat Med 2015; 29: 22–30.
 
67. Eagar K. The Australian national sub-acute and non-acute 
patient casemix classification. Aust Health Rev 1999; 22: 
180–196.
