 Identification of essential genes for cancer immunotherapy
Shashank J. Patel1,2,†,*, Neville E. Sanjana3,4,†,*, Rigel J. Kishton1, Arash Eidizadeh1, 
Suman K. Vodnala1, Maggie Cam1, Jared J. Gartner1, Li Jia1, Seth M. Steinberg1, Tori N. 
Yamamoto1,5, Anand S. Merchant1, Gautam U. Mehta1, Anna Chichura1, Ophir Shalem6, 
Eric Tran1, Robert Eil1, Madhusudhanan Sukumar1, Eva Perez Guijarro1, Chi-Ping Day1, 
Paul Robbins1, Steve Feldman1, Glenn Merlino1, Feng Zhang7,8, and Nicholas P. Restifo1,9,†
1National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
2NIH-Georgetown University Graduate Partnership Program, Georgetown University Medical 
School, Washington, DC 20057, USA
3New York Genome Center, New York, NY 10013, USA
4Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10012, USA
5Immunology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
6Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, PA 
19104, USA
7Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
8McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
02139, USA
9Center for Cell-based Therapy, Center for Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
Abstract
Somatic gene mutations can alter the vulnerability of cancer cells to T cell-based 
immunotherapies. To mimic loss-of-function mutations involved in resistance to these therapies, 
we perturbed genes in tumour cells using a genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 library comprising 
~123,000 single guide RNAs, and profiled genes whose loss in tumour cells impaired the effector 
†Corresponding authors: S.J.P. (patelsj@mail.nih.gov), N.E.S. (nsanjana@nygenome.org) and N.P.R. (restifon@mail.nih.gov).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.J.P. (patelsj@mail.nih.gov) or N.E.S. (nsanjana@nygenome.org) 
or N.P.R. (restifon@mail.nih.gov).
Author contributions
S.J.P. and N.P.R. designed the study. S.J.P., N.E.S., and N.P.R. wrote the manuscript. S.J.P. carried out CRISPR screens and validation 
experiments. N.E.S analysed CRISPR screen data and human mutation datasets from immunotherapy cohorts. T.Y., G.U.M., A.C., 
M.S and S.F. assisted in generation of TCR-engineered T cells and CRISPR-edited cells. R.E., A.E., T.Y., S.V., G.U.M., A.C. and M.S. 
edited the manuscript. S.J.P, A.E. and S.V. carried out murine experiments. G.M., E.G. and C.D. developed B2905 murine model for 
anti-CTLA4 experiments. S.V. and L.J. analysed RNA-seq data. M.C. and A.M. analysed TCGA datasets. J.G. performed indel 
analyses. S.S. analysed clinical data. R.K. performed Western blots and immunoprecipitation experiments. F.Z., E.T. and P.R. 
contributed reagents. N.P.R. supervised the study.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 August 31; 548(7669): 537–542. doi:10.1038/nature23477.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 function of CD8+ T cells (EFT). We correlated these genes with cytolytic activity in ~11,000 
patient tumours from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Among the genes validated using different 
cancer cell lines and antigens, we identified multiple loss-of-function mutations in APLNR, 
encoding Apelin receptor, in patient tumours refractory to immunotherapy. We show that APLNR 
interacts with JAK1, modulating interferon-gamma responses in tumours, and its functional loss 
reduces the efficacy of adoptive cell transfer and checkpoint blockade immunotherapies in murine 
models. Collectively, our study links the loss of essential genes for EFT with the resistance or non-
responsiveness of cancer to immunotherapies.
Genetic aberrations are generated in most cancers as a product of their neoplastic evolution1. 
Somatic mutations can give rise to neoantigens that are capable of eliciting potent T cell 
responses driven by current immunotherapies2–7. However, mutations can also induce 
resistance to immunotherapies. For example, loss-of-function mutations in beta-2-
microglobulin (B2M) and Janus kinases (JAK1 and JAK2) have been reported in patients 
unresponsive to immunotherapies8,9. Nevertheless, the identity of functionally essential 
genes in cancer cells that facilitate immune selection by immunotherapies remains unknown. 
To systematically catalogue genes in tumours whose loss can enable immune escape from T 
cell-mediated cytolysis, we used a genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis screen in 
human melanoma cells.
CRISPR-Cas9 screens have been used to identify genes critical for proliferation10,11, drug 
resistance12,13, and metastasis14 of cancer cells. To identify the genes essential in tumours 
for the ‘effector function of T cells’ (EFT), we developed a ‘two cell-type’ (2CT) CRISPR 
assay consisting of human T cells as effectors and melanoma cells as targets. We sought to 
understand how genetic manipulations in one cell type can affect a complex interaction with 
another cell type. In addition, the 2CT assay enabled us to perform pooled screens with 
higher library representation than can be achieved in vivo.
Here, we report several previously undescribed genes and microRNAs that play a role in 
facilitating tumour destruction by T cells. We examined the correlation of expression of 
these candidate genes with measures of cytolytic activity in ~11,000 human tumours from 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and also reported how the loss of a novel candidate 
gene can mediate resistance to T cell-based immunotherapies in human and murine tumours.
A 2CT-CRISPR assay system
To identify cell-types and genes related to the anti-tumour function of immune cells that 
might be necessary for immunotherapy, we performed correlation analysis on gene 
expression data from melanoma patients treated with the anti-CTLA4 antibody, 
ipilimumab3. Consistent with previous reports15,16, we found that intratumoral cytolytic 
activity (CYT, computed as the geometric mean of perforin PRF1 and granzyme GZMA 
expression) was strongly correlated with CD8+ T cell infiltration in the tumours (Extended 
Fig. 1a; r = 0.96, P < 1 × 10−15) and with the expression of genes involved in the MHC class 
I antigen processing/presentation pathway (Extended Fig. 1b; r > 0.54, P < 0.001 for each 
gene), but weakly correlated with interferon-gamma (IFNγ) signalling genes (Extended Fig. 
1c). We observed that the reduction in the overall survival of these patients was significantly 
Patel et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associated with loss of expression of B2M and TAP1 in tumours biopsied prior to 
ipilimumab treatment (Fig. 1a–c, Extended Fig. 1d–g). Given these associations, we chose to 
use CD8+ T cells and MHC class I genes to develop the 2CT-CRISPR assay system.
The 2CT-CRISPR assay employs a gene-engineered CD8+ T cell to specifically target an 
antigen expressed in an HLA class I-restricted fashion (Extended Fig. 2a–d). We utilized 
primary human T cells transduced with a recombinant TCR specific for NY-ESO-1 antigen 
(NY-ESO-1:157–165 epitope) presented in an HLA-A*02–restricted fashion (ESO T cells) 
that we previously reported to mediate tumour regression in patients with melanomas and 
synovial cell sarcomas (Fig. 1d–e, Extended Fig. 2a–c)17–19. We optimized the 2CT assay to 
control the selection pressure, alloreactivity and bystander killing20 exerted by T cells by 
modulating the effector to target (E:T) ratio and length of co-incubation (Extended Fig. 2e–
i). To test whether the loss of antigen presentation genes can directly compromise T cell-
mediated cell lysis of human cancer cells using our 2CT CRISPR assay, we targeted TAP2 
and B2M with three unique single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) cloned into the lentiCRISPRv2 
lentiviral vector in NY-ESO-1+ Mel624 melanoma cells. FACS analysis confirmed that 
B2M-targeting lentiviral CRISPRs achieved ~95% protein knock-out (Extended Fig. 3a). 
Significant resistance was detected in cells transduced with B2M sgRNAs (72 ± 5%) and 
with TAP2 sgRNAs (13 ± 2%) upon co-culture of the gene-modified NY-ESO-1+ Mel624 
cells with ESO T cells (Fig. 1f, Extended Fig. 3b–c). These results show that loss of key 
MHC class I genes promotes evasion of T cell-mediated tumour killing in the optimized 
2CT-CRISPR assay.
Genome-wide 2CT-CRISPR screen for EFT
To identify the tumour intrinsic genes essential for EFT on a genome-scale, we transduced 
Mel624 cells with the Genome-Scale CRISPR Knock-Out (GeCKOv2) library at an MOI < 
0.3 (Fig. 2a). The GeCKOv2 library is comprised of 123,411 sgRNAs that target 19,050 
protein-coding genes (6 sgRNAs per gene) and 1,864 microRNAs (4 sgRNAs per 
microRNA), and also includes ~1,000 ‘non-targeting’ control sgRNAs21. We exposed 
transduced tumour cells to ESO T cells at effector to target (E:T) ratios of 0.3 and 0.5 for 12 
h in independent screens that resulted in ~76% and ~90% tumour cell lysis, respectively. 
Using deep sequencing, we examined the sgRNA library representation in tumour cells 
before and after T cell co-incubation (Extended Fig. 4a–b). We observed that the distribution 
of the sgRNA reads in T cell-treated samples versus controls was significantly altered in 
screens with the higher number of T cells, E:T of 0.5 (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, P = 7.5 × 
10−5), and not with an E:T of 0.3 (Extended Fig. 4b, P = 0.07), indicating that the efficiency 
of this 2CT-CRISPR assay was dependent on the selection pressure applied by T cells.
We quantified consistent enrichment of candidate genes by multiple methods: 1) ranking 
genes by their second most enriched sgRNA (Fig. 2b); 2) the RNAi Gene Enrichment 
Ranking (RIGER) metric22 (Fig. 2c); and 3) the number of sgRNAs for each gene enriched 
in the top 5% of all sgRNAs in the library (Fig. 2d). All three methods showed a high degree 
of overlap (Fig. 2b–d, Extended Fig. 4c, Supplementary Table 1). Despite the disparity in the 
enriched sgRNA distributions between screens with E:T of 0.3 and 0.5, several highly-
ranked genes and microRNAs are shared between the screens (Extended Fig. 4d–f). Based 
Patel et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 on our initial optimization of the 2CT-CRISPR assay, we expected that genes directly 
associated with MHC class I antigen processing and presentation would be enriched in our 
screens, and found that HLA-A, B2M, TAP1, TAP2 and TAPBP were among the most 
highly-enriched genes in our screen (Fig 2d–e). In addition, many genes without an 
established connection to the EFT were ranked amongst the top 20 enriched genes in this 
genome scale analysis, such as SOX10, CD58, MLANA, PSMB5, RPL23 and APLNR (Fig. 
2c–d).
Biological role of putative essential genes for the EFT
We sought to assess the clinical and biological significance of the most enriched 2CT-
CRISPR candidates (554 genes at false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1%) by comparing the 
candidates with publicly available cancer genome sequencing and querying association with 
known cancer/immune pathways (Fig. 3a). As a part of their effector mechanism, T cells 
induce transcriptional changes in the tumour microenvironment via secretion of cytokines 
such as IFNγ and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) to enhance recognition and lysis of 
cancer cells15,23–25. To assess whether any of these genes induced by effector cytokines are 
likely to have a functional role in modulation of the EFT, we intersected the gene expression 
profiles of cytokine-induced genes23–25 with the candidate genes. We found that 13 IFNγ-
induced genes and 3 TNFα-induced genes were captured in our 554 top candidates 
(Extended Fig. 5a) bolstering the functional relevance of these cytokine-induced genes in 
tumour cells for EFT.
Using Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway analyses, we found that in addition to antigen 
presentation and IFNγ signalling, 2CT-enriched genes function in EIF2 signalling, 
endoplasmic reticulum stress, apoptosis, assembly of RNA polymerase II, TNF receptor 
signalling and protein ubiquitination pathways (F-test, Bonferroni corrected P < 0.05; Fig. 
3b, Supplementary Tables 2–3). These data reveal previously unrecognized signalling 
circuitry in tumours whose loss can dampen EFT, warranting further investigation.
To assess whether loss of candidate genes identified in the 2CT-CRISPR screen was 
associated with decreased cytolytic activity in patient tumours, we obtained gene expression 
profiles of 11,409 human tumours spanning 36 tumour-types from the TCGA database and 
measured the correlation between candidate genes and CYT in these datasets (Fig. 3c–d, 
Extended Fig. 5b–c). With this approach, we generated a list of genes that associate with 
CYT for each TCGA cancer type and are also enriched in our 2CT screens (Supplementary 
Table 4, web-resource https://bioinformatics.cancer.gov/publications/restifo). Using 
hierarchical clustering, we identified a set of 19 genes that are correlated with CYT across 
most of the 36 cancer types (Fig. 3d, Extended Fig. 5d, Supplementary Table 5–6). Ten of 
these 19 genes were inducible by IFNγ, indicating that these genes may be upregulated in 
cancers due to an increased infiltration of T cells. Loss of expression of these 19 genes 
within tumours could diminish or extinguish the presentation of tumour antigens (including 
HLA-A, HLA-F, B2M, TAP1, TAP2); T cell co-stimulation (ICAM1, CLECL1, LILRA1, 
LILRA3); or cytokine production and signalling (JAK2, STAT1) in the tumour 
microenvironment that drive infiltration and activation of T cells, and thus serve as principal 
mechanism in immune evasion.
Patel et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We interrogated mutation frequency of the top enriched genes in different tumour types in 
the TCGA datasets (Extended Fig. 5d–e, Supplementary Fig. 1). We found COL17A1, B2M, 
HLA-A, TAF3, DEFB134, ABR, QSER1 and DHX9 each to be mutated in >100 patient 
tumours across different malignancies, demonstrating that mutations in these candidates 
naturally occur in human cancers.
Validation and generalizability of top candidates
We elected to independently validate 17 genes based on two criteria: the gene should be 
ranked among the top 20 candidates in either screen, and the gene should not be previously 
described in anti-tumour function of T cells. We included CTAG1B (encoding tumour 
antigen, NY-ESO-1) and TAPBP (encoding Tapasin involved in class I antigen processing) 
as positive controls.
We targeted each gene in NY-ESO-1+ melanoma cells, Mel624 and A375, with four sgRNAs 
(Supplementary Table 7) and individually measured resistance against ESO-T cells (Fig. 4a). 
Fifteen genes showed significant resistance to T cell-mediated cytolysis with at least 1 
sgRNA in these cells (Fig. 4b, Extended Fig. 6a, Student’s t-test, P < 0.05 compared to 
control sgRNA, n = 3 biological replicates). To mitigate concerns of off-target activity, we 
considered a candidate to be a critical gene for the EFT if loss-of-function resulted in a 
resistance phenotype with at least 2 distinct sgRNAs. Using these criteria, we validated 9 
candidates in both Mel624 and A375 cells (Fig. 4c). The transcription factor SOX10, whose 
expression is elevated ~16-fold in melanoma over other cancers (Supplementary Fig. 2) and 
targets other top 2CT screen hits (e.g. MITF), was validated only in Mel624 cells (Fig. 4d), 
which may be due to its higher expression (~1.8-fold higher) in these cells compared to 
A375 cells26.
To test if these validated genes generalize to an unrelated T cell receptor antigen MART-1, 
we introduced sgRNAs targeting several of these genes into MART-1/MLANA+ Mel624 
cells and then co-cultured them with MART-1 TCR-transduced primary human T cells 
(MART1-T cells; Extended Fig. 2d, 6b)18. MART-1 T cells are highly potent against tumour 
cells due to their high avidity TCRs and bystander destruction of cancer cells18,20. Tumour 
cells transduced with control non-targeting sgRNAs were completely eradicated upon co-
culture with MART1-T cells, whereas ESO T cells only induced cytolysis of ~60% of 
tumour cells with the same incubation (Supplementary Fig. 3). MART-1+ Mel624 cells with 
sgRNAs targeting each of the 9 candidate genes showed increased resistance against these T 
cells (Extended Fig. 6b, P < 0.05). We confirmed on-target gene disruption efficiency of 
sgRNAs by performing deep sequencing analysis at the target Cas9 cut-sites in these 
melanoma cells (Extended Fig. 6c–e,7). The genes that we validated across different 
melanoma cell lines and different antigen-TCR combinations include cellular cytoskeleton 
genes, COL17A1 (collagen type XVII alpha 1) and TWF1 (twinfilin-1), microRNA gene 
(hsa-mir-101-2) and 60S ribosomal protein (RPL23, Supplementary discussion). These 
findings underscore the role of these biological processes in tumour cells in modulation of 
EFT.
Patel et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Next, we tested if immune resistance due to the loss of the cellular signalling-related genes 
APLNR, encoding a G-protein coupled Apelin receptor, and BBS1, encoding Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome 1 protein, and the adhesion related gene CD58 can be generalized to other cancer-
types. To this end, we overexpressed NY-ESO-1 (CTAG1B) in a patient derived HLA-A*02+ 
renal cell carcinoma (2245R) cells using retroviral vector and targeted each gene with four 
sgRNAs. For each gene, APLNR, BBS1 and CD58, we found that at least two sgRNAs 
exhibited >50% resistance to ESO T cell-mediated lysis (Fig. 4d, P < 0.05). Thus, we 
validated key genes found in our CRISPR screen using multiple cell lines, target antigens 
and tumour cell types. To test the heuristic power of a gene previously unknown to play a 
role in EFT, we focused on APLNR, which was validated across different cell lines and 
antigens.
In vivo relevance of APLNR
APLNR is one of the G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) that is mutated in several 
cancers27. To determine whether loss-of-function mutations in APLNR are present in patient 
tumours treated with T cell-based immunotherapies, we mined available whole exome 
sequencing datasets3,5,28,29 from metastatic melanoma and lung cancer patients treated with 
checkpoint blockade therapies including anti-CTLA4 (ipilimumab) and anti-PD1 
(pembrolizumab or nivolumab) antibodies. From these datasets, we identified 7 non-
synonymous mutations in APLNR, one of which is a nonsense mutation (W261X) resulting 
in deletion of the seventh transmembrane helix and cytoplasmic C-terminal tail of the 
receptor (Fig. 5a, Extended Fig. 8a). The C-terminus of APLNR contains residues critical 
for membrane association, receptor internalization, receptor dimerization, and interaction 
with cytosolic proteins30, and thus its loss is likely to be deleterious to protein function. We 
also conducted whole exome sequencing analysis on a metastatic lung lesion resected from a 
patient SB-4044 with melanoma resistant to both anti-CTLA4 (ipilimumab) and anti-PD1 
(nivolumab) immunotherapies. We found two non-synonymous mutations, T44S and C181S, 
in APLNR (Fig. 5a, Extended Fig. 8a) within this melanoma lesion.
We selected 4 non-synonymous mutations (T44S, C181S, P292L, G349E) from the Van 
Allen et al. cohort and SB-4044 to determine if these mutations can limit EFT. In APLNR-
KO A375 cells, we re-introduced mutated or wild-type (WT) APLNR using lentivirus 
(Extended Fig. 8b). While re-introduction of WT, C181S or P292L mutations rescued the 
sensitivity of APLNR-KO cells to T-cell mediated cytolysis, T44S and G349E mutations 
only resulted in partial rescue indicating that these mutations in APLNR reduce EFT (Fig. 
5b). The presence of these loss-of-function mutations in non-responding tumour lesions 
suggests that the functional loss of APLNR in tumours could be associated with 
immunosuppression in vivo.
To investigate potential mechanisms by which APLNR regulates EFT, we analysed 
transcriptome of APLNR-KO cells using RNA-seq. We did not find any substantial 
differences in mRNA transcript levels of genes involved in antigen presentation, T cell 
inhibition or co-stimulation (Supplementary Fig. 4). We thus examined whether APLNR 
regulates EFT by modulating protein signalling. APLNR has been reported to interact with 
96 different intracellular proteins (BioGRID interaction database31), and in genome-scale 
Patel et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CRISPR screens, targeting multiple genes in the same pathway can result in similar 
phenotypes. Of these 96 previously reported binding partners of APLNR, JAK1 was the 
most enriched in our screen (enriched in the top 0.5% of all genes, Fig. 5c). Using 
immunoprecipitation pull-down, we confirmed that APLNR binds to JAK1 in A375 and 
HEK293T cells (Fig. 5d, Extended Fig. 9a). Retroviral overexpression of APLNR coincided 
with an increase in JAK1 protein levels (Extended Fig. 9b). In addition, this overexpression 
of APLNR significantly increased the sensitivity of tumour cells to EFT (Extended Fig. 9c, 
increase in cytolysis from 71.7 ± 1% to 81.1 ± 0.9%).
IFNγ-driven phosphorylation of JAK1 stimulates the JAK-STAT signalling cascade to 
augment antigen processing and presentation in tumours, which in turn enhances recognition 
and cytolysis by T cells32. First, we determined whether Apelin treatment of tumour cells 
can directly induce phosphorylation of JAK1. We did not observe any changes in JAK1 
phosphorylation with Apelin treatments (Extended Fig. 9d). We also tested whether 
activation of APLNR using peptide ligands (Pyr-Apelin 13, Apelin 17 and Apelin 36) or a 
chemical agonist (ML233) on tumour cells alters EFT. We did not observe any significant 
effect of these treatments suggesting that APLNR may regulate EFT independent of its 
canonical GPCR signalling. Next, we tested whether loss of APLNR alters the 
responsiveness of tumour cells to IFNγ treatment. We found that APLNR-KO cells 
exhibited reduced induction of JAK-STAT signalling upon IFNγ treatment as measured by 
the phosphorylation status of JAK1 and STAT1 (Extended Fig. 9d–e), and induction of 
specific IFNγ-gamma response gene transcripts (Fig. 5e, Extended Fig. 9f). Upon co-culture 
with ESO T cells for 6 h, APLNR-KO cells induced less β2M expression on the cell surface 
compared to unedited cells (Fig. 5f, Extended Fig. 9g). In agreement with the reduced 
sensitivity of APLNR-KO cells to IFNγ-mediated upregulation of antigen processing and 
presentation genes, we noted a significant decrease in the recognition of APLNR-KO tumour 
cells by ESO T cells (Fig. 5g, Extended Fig. 9h, Supplementary Fig. 5). Taken together, 
these data suggest that APLNR augments EFT by modulating IFNγ signalling in tumour 
cells.
Finally, to test the relevance of APLNR for immunotherapy in an in vivo setting, we targeted 
Aplnr in murine B16 melanoma tumours with multiple sgRNAs (Fig. 5h). We also included 
B2m-targeting sgRNAs as a positive control. For each target gene, we performed Western 
blot analysis on the cells to select the sgRNAs with the highest protein reduction 
(Supplementary Fig. 6). Upon subcutaneous implantation of these cells in 
immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice, we did not observe any significant changes in tumour 
growth kinetics between untreated control cells and CRISPR-modified cells (Fig. 5i). 
However, after treatment of these tumours with adoptive transfer of tumour-specific Pmel-1 
TCR transgenic T cells (which target melanoma antigen gp100)33, B2m knock-out in these 
tumours significantly diminished the efficacy of adoptive cell transfer (ACT) treatment as 
measured by tumour growth (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P = 0.0002, Fig. 5i) and host survival 
(log-rank test, P < 0.0001, Fig. 5j). Similarly, for Aplnr knock-out tumour cells, we observed 
a significant reduction in the tumour clearance (P = 0.0042, Fig. 5i) and host survival (P < 
0.019, Fig, 5j) after ACT. As an orthogonal method to our genome-edited B16 tumours, we 
confirmed that shRNA-mediated Aplnr knockdown in B16 using two independent hairpins 
also reduced ACT efficacy (Extended Fig. 10). In addition, we found that Aplnr KO in 
Patel et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 B2905 mouse melanoma reduced the efficiency of anti-CTLA4 blockade in vivo with 0 out 
of 10 mice experiencing a complete regression with sg-Aplnr-transduced cells versus 5 out 
of 10 mice with sg-Control-transduced cells (Supplementary Fig. 7). Taken together, these 
data demonstrate that APLNR loss reduces the effectiveness of T cell-based cancer therapies 
including immune checkpoint blockade and ACT.
Discussion
To capture the genes necessary for a complex phenomenon such as the EFT in cancer 
immunotherapy, we developed a 2CT-CRISPR screening system and used it to identify 
several genes capable of modulating melanoma growth when targeted by T cells. Given the 
association of these genes with intratumoral CYT in pan-cancer TCGA datasets, this 
resource provides a rich trove of new targets to investigate resistance to T cell-based 
therapies. Reverting or bypassing the functional loss of such genes in tumours using drugs 
such as epigenetic modulators34,35 may allow development of new combinatorial treatment 
strategies to improve clinical responses with immunotherapies.
Our data reveals a novel role of APLNR in regulating the anti-tumour response of T cells via 
modulation of the JAK-STAT signalling in target cells. It has been shown that Angiotensin 
receptor, a closely related GPCR to APLNR, also directly regulate the JAK-STAT 
pathway36. A recent study has shown that T cell effector cytokines IFNγ and TNFα exerts 
an anti-tumour effect by altering endothelial cells of blood vessels (where APLNR is highly 
expressed37) to induce ischemia in the tumour stroma38. Given our finding that APLNR 
interacts with JAK1 to augment IFNγ response, APLNR can further increase the sensitivity 
of tumour blood vessels to IFNγ and thus improve anti-tumour efficacy of T cells. Hence, 
we speculate that APLNR might have a role beyond direct tumour cell recognition in vivo, 
and its expression on tumour blood vessels and stromal cells should be investigated in future 
studies.
In summary, we have utilized a two cell-type CRISPR screen to discover both well-
established and novel genes in cancer cells that regulate EFT. Our findings have direct 
clinical implications as these data may serve as a functional blueprint to study the emergence 
of tumour resistance to T cell-based cancer therapies. Recent clinical trials have raised the 
question of why most patients fail to experience complete regressions of their cancers7. Our 
study provides a comprehensive list of genes that can contribute to resistance of human 
tumours to immunotherapy and have also identified loss-of-function mutations shared with 
those observed in patients that fail to respond to immunotherapy (Supplementary 
Discussion, Supplementary Fig. 8). A careful evaluation and validation of mutations in these 
genes on a personalized basis in immunotherapy-resistant patients may allow identification 
of novel mechanisms of immune escape and speed the development of a new category of 
drugs that circumvent these escape mechanisms.
Patel et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 METHODS
Human Specimen
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from healthy donors and tumour 
samples were isolated from patients with melanoma. All human specimens were collected 
with informed consent and procedures approved by the institutional-review board (IRB) of 
the National Cancer Institute (NCI).
Mice
Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of 
the NCI and performed in accordance with NIH guidelines. C57BL/6J were purchased from 
The Jackson Laboratory. Female mice aged 6–8 weeks were used for tumour implantation 
experiments.
Cell culture
The melanoma cell lines HLA-A*02+/MART-1+ / NY-ESO-1+(Mel624.38, Mel1300), HLA-
A*02− (Mel938) and HLA-A*02+ / NY-ESO-1− (Mel526) were isolated from surgically 
resected metastases as previously described17, and were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen) 
medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone, Logan, UT). The A375 
(HLA-A*02+/NY-ESO-1+) cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture 
Collection (Manassas, VA). The SK23 cell line transduced with retrovirus containing NY-
ESO-1 expressing vector (SK23 NY-ESO-1+) and HLA-A*02+ renal cell carcinoma (2245R) 
cells was obtained from Ken-ichi Hanada (Surgery Branch, NCI) and cultured in RPMI 1640 
medium supplemented with 10% FBS. A375 cells were cultured in D10 medium containing 
DMEM supplemented 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Life 
Technologies). Cell lines were confirmed mycoplasma negative using Mycoplasma detection 
kit (Biotool #B3903). All PBMCs and lymphocytes used for transduction and as feeder cells 
were obtained from aphereses of NCI Surgery Branch patients on IRB-approved protocols. 
They were cultured in T cell medium, which is: AIM-V medium (Invitrogen) supplemented 
with 5% human AB serum (Valley Biomedical, Winchester, VA), 100 U/ml penicillin and 
100 μg/ml streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine and 12.5 mM HEPES (Life Technologies).
Retroviral Vectors and Transduction of Human T cells
Retroviral vectors for TCRs recognizing the HLA-A*02–restricted melanoma antigens NY-
ESO-1 (NY-ESO-1:157–165 epitope) and MART-1 (MART-1:27–35 epitope, DMF5) were 
generated as previously described17,18. Clinical grade cGMP-quality retroviral supernatants 
were produced by the National Gene Vector Laboratories at Indiana University. For 
transduction, peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) (2 × 106 cell/mL) were stimulated with 
IL-2 (300 IU/mL) and anti-CD3 antibody OKT3 (300 IU/ mL) on Day 0. Non-tissue culture 
treated six-well plates were coated with 2 mL/well of 10 μg/mL RetroNectin (Takara Bio, 
Otsu, Japan) on day 1 and stored overnight at 4 °C. Vector supernatant (4 mL/well, diluted 
with D10 media) were applied to plates on day 2 followed by centrifugation at 2000×g for 
2h at 32°C. Half the volume was aspirated and PBLs were added (0.25–0.5 × 106 cell/mL, 4 
mL/well), centrifuged for 10 min at 1000×g, and incubated at 37 °C / 5% CO2. A second 
Patel et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transduction on day 3 was performed as described above. Cells were maintained in culture at 
0.7–1.0 × 106 cell/mL. After harvest, cells underwent a rapid expansion protocol (REP) in 
the presence of soluble OKT3 (300 IU/mL), IL-2 (6000 IU/mL) and irradiated feeders as 
previously described18. After day 5 of the REP, cells were frozen down for co-culture later.
Lentivirus Production and Purification
To generate lentivirus, HEK293FT cells (Invitrogen) were cultured in D10 medium. One day 
prior to transfection, HEK293FT cells were seeded in T-225 flasks at 60% confluency. One 
to two hours before transfection, DMEM media was replaced with 13 mL of pre-warmed 
serum-free OptiMEM media (Invitrogen). Cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 
and Plus reagent (Invitrogen). For each flask, 4 mL of OptiMEM was mixed with 200 μL of 
Plus reagent, 20 μg of lentiCRISPRv2 plasmid or pooled plasmid human GeCKOv2 
(Genome-scale CRISPR Knock-Out) library, 15 μg psPAX2 (Addgene, Cambridge, MA) 
and 10 μg pMD2.G (Addgene). 100 μl Lipofectamine 2000 was diluted with 4 mL of 
OptiMEM and was combined to the mixture of plasmids and Plus reagent. This transfection 
mixture was incubated for 20 minutes and then added dropwise to the cells. 6–8 h post 
transfection, the media was replaced to 20 mL of DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 
1% BSA (Sigma). Virus containing media was harvested 48 h post-transfection. Viral titer 
was assayed with Lenti-X GoStix (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). Cell debris were 
removed by centrifugation of media at 3,000 rcf and 4 ˚C for 10 minutes followed by 
filtration of the supernatant through a 0.45 μm low-protein binding membrane (Millipore 
Steriflip HV/PVDF). For individual lentiCRISPRv2 plasmids, viral supernatants were frozen 
in aliquots at −80 °C. For pooled library plasmids, viral supernatants were concentrated by 
centrifugation at 4,000 rcf and 4 ˚C for 35 min in Amicon Ultra-15 filters (Millipore 
Ultracel-100K). Concentrated viral supernatants were stored in aliquots at −80 °C.
Two Cell-type (2CT) T cell and Tumour Cell Co-culture Assay
NY-ESO-1 and MART-1 T cells were used for co-culture assays. Two days prior to co-
culture, cells were thawed in T cell media containing 3 U/mL DNAse (Genentech Inc., 
South San Francisco, CA) overnight. Tumour cells were seeded at specific density on this 
day in the same media as the T cells. T cells were then cultured in T cell media containing 
300 IU/mL interleukin-2 (IL2) for 24 hours. T cells were co-cultured with tumour cells at 
various Effector: Target (E:T ratios) for varying time periods. To reduce T cell killing 
activity and enrich for resistant tumour cells during the recovery phase, T cells were 
removed by careful 2x phosphate buffered saline (PBS) washes following the addition of 
D10 media without IL2. At the end of recovery phase of co-culture, tumour cells were 
detached using trypsin (Invitrogen) and washed twice with PBS. Tumour cells were then 
stained with fixable Live/Dead dye (Invitrogen) followed by human anti-CD3 antibody 
(clone SK7, BD) in FACS staining buffer (PBS + 0.2% BSA). Cell counts were measured 
using CountBright Absolute Counting Beads (Invitrogen) by FACS.
2CT GeCKOv2 Screens and Genomic DNA Extractions
Cell-cell interaction genome-wide screens were performed using Mel624 cells transduced 
independently with both A and B GeCKOv2 libraries21. For one screen, we split two groups 
of 5 × 107 transduced Mel624 cells. One group was co-cultured with 1.67 ×107 patient-
Patel et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 derived NY-ESO-1 T cells (Effector to target [E:T] ratio of 1:3 or 0.3) for each library. A 
second (control) group were cultured under the same density and conditions but without T 
cells. The co-culture phase was maintained for 12 hours after which the T cells were 
removed as described above. The recovery phase was maintained for another 48 hours. In 
this initial screen, NY-ESO-1 T cells lysed ~76% of tumour cells, and the surviving cells 
were frozen to evaluate sgRNA enrichment later. For a second screen, we similarly 
transduced Mel624 cells with the GeCKOv2 library and split them into two groups of 5 × 
107 transduced cells. For one group, we increased the E:T ratio to 0.5 by co-culture of 2.5 × 
107 NY-ESO-1 T cells with 5 × 107 transduced Mel624 cells for each library while keeping 
all other conditions similar. As before, the second group of Mel624 cells were used as 
controls, which were cultured under the same density and conditions, but without T cells. By 
increasing the selection pressure, we observed that T cells killed ~90% of library transduced 
Mel624 cells.
To evaluate sgRNA enrichment, cells with and without T cell co-culture (along with an early 
time point collected after puromycin selection) were harvested and frozen. For gDNA 
extraction from harvested tumour cells, we used our previously optimized ammonium 
acetate and alcohol precipitation procedure to isolate gDNA14 but substituted AL buffer 
(Qiagen) for the initial cell lysis step.
2CT-CRISPR Pooled Screen Readout and Data Analysis
To determine sgRNA abundance as the readout of library screens, two-step PCR 
amplification were performed on gDNA using Takara Ex-Taq polymerase (Clontech). The 
first PCR step (PCR1) included amplification of the region containing sgRNA cassette using 
v2Adaptor_F and v2Adaptor_R primers, and the second step PCR (PCR2) included 
amplification using uniquely barcoded P7 and P5 adaptor-containing primers to allow 
multiplexing of samples in a single HiSeq run12. All PCR1 and PCR2 primer sequences, 
including full barcodes, are listed on the GeCKO website (http://genome-engineering.org/
gecko/). Assuming 6.6 pg of gDNA per cell, 150 μg of gDNA was used per sample (~350-
fold sgRNA representation), in 15 PCR1 reactions. For each PCR1 reaction, 10 μg gDNA 
were used in a 100 μl reaction performed under cycling conditions: 95 °C for 5 min, 18 
cycles of (95 °C for 30 s, 62 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 30 s), and 72 °C for 3 min. PCR1 
products for each sample were pooled and used for amplification with barcoded second step 
PCR primers. For each sample, we performed 7 PCR2 reactions using 5 μL of the pooled 
PCR1 product per PCR2 reaction. PCR2 products were pooled and then normalized within 
each biological sample before combining uniquely-barcoded separate biological samples. 
The pooled product was then gel-purified from a 2% E-gel EX (Life Technologies) using the 
QiaQuick gel extraction kit (Qiagen). The purified, pooled library was then quantified with 
Tapestation 4200 (Agilent Technologies). Diluted libraries with 5%–20% PhiX were 
sequenced on a HiSeq 2000.
Demultiplexed reads were trimmed by cutadapt using 12 bp flanking sequences around the 
20 bp guide sequence39. Trimmed reads were aligned using Bowtie40 to the GeCKOv2 
indexes created from library CSV files downloaded from the GeCKO website (http://
genome-engineering.org/gecko/?page_id=15). Read alignment was performed with 
Patel et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 parameters -m 1 -v 1 -norc, which allows up to 1 mismatch and discards any reads that do 
not align in the forward orientation or that have multiple possible alignments. Aligned 
counts of library sgRNAs were imported into R/RStudio. Counts were normalized by the 
total reads for each sample and then log-transformed. A gene ranking was computed using 
the second most enriched sgRNA for each gene (Second most enriched sgRNA score) and 
the RIGER weighted-sum method22.
Gene Pathway Enrichment Analysis
For pathway analysis, we constructed a set of enriched candidate genes by taking advantage 
of the 1,000 control (non-targeting) sgRNAs embedded in our pooled library with at least 
one sgRNA enriched above the most enriched non-targeting control (Fig. 3a, FDR < 0.1%, 
second most enriched sgRNA score > 0.5). This yielded a list of 554 genes. In this list, we 
looked for gene category over-representation using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN 
Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity). The analysis criteria were set as follows: 1) 
querying for molecules with Ingenuity Knowledge Base as a reference set; 2) restricted to 
human species; and 3) experimentally observed findings as a confidence level. Fisher’s 
Exact Test (P < 0.05) was used to compute significance for over-representation of genes in a 
particular pathway or biological process.
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Correlation and Mutation Analysis
TCGA RNA-seq data in form of normalized RNA-Seq by Expectation-Maximization 
(RSEM) values from multiple cancer data sets was downloaded from the Firehose Broad 
GDAC (http://gdac.broadinstitute.org/, DOI for data release: 10.7908/C11G0KM9) using the 
TCGA2STAT package for R41, and used to find overlap between TCGA gene expression 
indicative of cytolytic activity and genes from our pooled screen where loss-of-function 
confers resistance to T cell killing. We first identified the genes correlated with a previously 
identified cytolytic activity signature (CYT), namely the geometric mean of granzyme A 
(GZMA) and perforin 1 (PRF1) expression15. To identify these genes in the TCGA data, we 
calculated the geometric mean of GZMA and PRF1 in each data set and searched for any 
genes with a positive correlation to this quantity across patients (Pearson’s r > 0, P < 0.05). 
We then examined the intersection between genes whose expression was correlated with 
cytolytic activity (TCGA datasets) and the enriched genes found in the CRISPR screen (554 
genes). Individual heatmaps for the two sets of clustered genes were regenerated for each 
cancer type and can be found at https://bioinformatics.cancer.gov/publications/restifo.
For the top 20 ranked gene candidates from any of the screens, we obtained patient mutation 
data from the TCGA database using cBioPortal42,43. For mutation frequency counts, 
tumours containing likely loss-of-function genetic aberrations (defined as homozygous 
deletion, missense, nonsense, frame-shift, truncated or splice-site mutations) were included 
in the analysis.
Arrayed Validation of 2CT-CRISPR Screen Genes
Individual lentiCRISPRs were produced as above except that viral supernatants were not 
concentrated. For each gene, we used 3–4 sgRNA guide sequences as listed in 
Supplementary Table 7, where 2 sgRNAs sequences were designed de novo and the other 2 
Patel et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sgRNAs were from GeCKOv2 library. We cloned these sgRNAs into the lentiCRISPRv2 
vector (Addgene) as previously described21. To produce virus in a high-throughput format, 
HEK293FT cells were seeded and transfected in 6-well plates where each well received a 
different lentiCRISPR plasmid. The lentiviral production protocol was the same as the one 
described above for GeCKOv2 library lentivirus production (scaled to 6-well format). 
Mel624 and A375 cells with unique gene perturbations were generated by transduction with 
these viral supernatants. Typically, we used 500 μl of lentiCRISPRv2 virus per 5 × 104 cells 
for Mel624 and A375. Puromycin selection (1 ug/ml) was applied to these cells for 5–7 
days. Over this period, untransduced cells were killed completely by puromycin.
After taking a subset of cells for analysis of insertion-deletion (indel) mutations, the 
remainder were normalized to seed 1 × 104 cells/well in 96-well plates. During the arrayed 
screen, each cell line was co-cultured with appropriate T cells (either NY-ESO-1 or 
MART-1) in a 96-well plate format at an E:T ratio of 1:3 for 12 hours in T cell media. As in 
the pooled screen, we performed gentle 2x PBS washes to remove the T cells. Mel624 or 
A375 cells were collected after a recovery phase culture of 48 hours for high-throughput 
FACS analysis. Tumour cell counts were measured using a FACS-based CountBright bead 
method (Life Technologies). We noticed variability in proliferation and survival rates across 
cells depending on the sgRNA received. To account for this variability, we calculated a 
relative percent change for each sgRNA: (%Δ, 2CT vs noT) in tumour cells co-cultured with 
T cells (2CT) compared to tumour cell counts without T cells (noT). The normalized cell 
survival was calculated by the following formula:
For co-culture with MART-1 T cells, all parameters were the same, except that the co-culture 
period duration was 24 hours with the same recovery period as with NY-ESO-1 experiments.
Indel Mutation Detection for Array 2CT Validation
Genomic DNA from thawed cell pellets was purified using the Blood & Cell Culture kit 
(Qiagen). SgRNA target site PCR amplifications were performed for each genomic loci 
using conditions as described previously14, pooled together and then sequenced in a single 
Illumina MiSeq run. All primer sequences for indel detection can be found in 
Supplementary Table 8.
To analyze the data from the MiSeq run, paired-end reads were trimmed for quality using 
trimmomatic with parameters SLIDINGWINDOW:5:2544. Reads with surviving mate pairs 
were then aligned to their targeted amplicon sequence using Bowtie245. To determine indel 
sizes, we calculated the size difference between observed reads and predicted read size 
based on the genomic reference sequence. If observed read size was equal to the predicted 
size, these reads were scored as no indels. The size difference was used to detect insertions 
or deletions.
Patel et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Flow Cytometry and Immunoassays
Tumour cells or T cells suspended in FACS staining buffer were stained with fluorochrome-
conjugated antibodies against combinations of the following surface human antigens: CD4 
(RPA-T4, BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ), CD8 (SK1, BD), CD3e (SK7, BD), HLA-A*02/
MART-1:27–35 tetramer (DMF5, Beckman Coulter Immunotech, Monrovia, CA); NY-
ESO-1 tetramer (NIH Tetramer Core Facility); PD1-L1 (MIH1, eBiosciences, San Diego, 
CA); PD1-L2 (24F.10C12, Biolegend, San Diego, CA); IFNγ (25723.11, BD), CD58 (1C3, 
BD) and β2M (2M2, Biolegend). Cell viability was determined using propidium iodide 
exclusion or a fixable live/dead kit (Invitrogen). Intracellular staining assay (ICS) on ESO T 
cells after 5–6 hours of co-culture with A375 cells, where T cells were pre-treated with 
monensin (512092KZ, BD) and brefeldin A (512301KZ, BD), was performed using 
manufacturer’s instructions for BD Flow cytometry ICS. Flow cytometric data were 
acquired using either a FACSCanto II or LSRII Fortessa cytometer (BD), and data were 
analysed with FlowJo version 7.5 software (FlowJo LLC, Ashland, OR).
The amount of IFNγ release by T cells after co-culture with tumour cells was measured by 
Sandwich ELISA assay using anti-IFNγ (Thermo Scientific #M700A) coated 96-well 
plates, biotin-labeled anti-IFNγ (M701B), HRP-conjugated streptavidin (N100) and TMB 
substrate solution (N301).
Quantitative PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from cells using RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen). Gene expression 
was quantified using TaqMan RNA-to-Ct 1-Step Kit (Thermo Fisher) and Taqman assay 
probes (Invitrogen): Aplnr (Mm00442191_s1), Actb (Mm00607939_s1), APLN 
(Hs00936329), ACTB (Hs01060665_g1), IRF1 (Hs00971965_m1), IFI30 
(Hs00173838_m1), TAP1 (Hs00388675_m1), TAP2 (Hs00241060_m1), TAPBP 
(Hs00917451_g1) and JAK1 (Hs01026983_m1). Relative mRNA expression was 
determined via the ΔΔCt method.
Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot Analysis
For immunoprecipitation, cells were lysed on ice in IP lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher #87787) 
supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher #88668) for 15 min. 
Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000g for 10 min at 4 °C and supernatants were 
incubated with indicated antibodies for 24 h at 4 °C. Following incubation, cells were added 
to pre-washed Dynabeads coupled to protein G or protein A (Life Technologies) and 
incubated for 3 h at 4 °C. Immune complexes were purified on magnets with extensive 
washing with lysis buffer. Purified complexes were mixed with sample buffer and assayed 
by western blot. Antibodies used included: anti-Jak1 (BD #610231), anti-Jak2 (Cell 
Signaling #3230), anti-FLAG (Cell Signaling #8146). In some cases, immune complexes 
were isolated with sepharose conjugated antibodies specific for IgG (Cell Signaling #3420) 
or FLAG (Cell Signaling #5750).
For immunoblots, total protein was extracted with 1X RIPA lysis buffer (Millipore, Billerica, 
MA) with 1X protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Protein concentration was 
determined using the BCA assay (Thermo/Pierce). Cell lysates were resolved on 4–20% 
Patel et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tris-Glycine gels (Invitrogen), transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore), and incubated 
overnight at 4 °C with the appropriate primary antibodies: Anti-Aplnr (Abcam #ab214369), 
Anti-β2M (Abcam #ab75853) and Anti-β Actin (Abcam #ab8227) for mouse tumour cells; 
Anti-APLNR (Abcam #ab97452), Anti-phospho-JAK1 (Cell Signaling #3331) and Anti-
phospho-STAT1 (Cell Signaling #7649). Signals were detected using HRP-conjugated 
secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and SuperSignal West Femto 
Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo/Pierce). Images were captured using ChemiDoc 
Touch imaging system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).
Whole Exome sequencing and Transcriptomics analysis
Whole exome sequencing of patient tumour was performed as previously described46. To 
measure genome-scale transcriptomic analysis on APLNR-KO cells, total RNA was 
extracted using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen). The quality and quantity of extracted 
total RNA was assessed using TapeStation 2200 (Agilent). All RNA-Seq analyses were 
performed using three biological replicates. 200 ng of total RNA was used to prepare RNA-
Seq library using the TruSeq RNA sample prep kit (Illumina). Paired-end RNA sequencing 
was performed on a HiSeq 2000 (Illumina). Sequenced reads were aligned to the human 
genome (hg19) with Tophat 2.0.1147 and the mapped data was then processed by Cufflinks. 
Gene expression values were normalized to obtain RPKM (reads per kilobase exon model 
per million mapped reads) values using CuffDiff48. To define differentially expressed genes, 
we used a 2-fold change and P < 0.05 difference between groups.
Characterization of APLNR patient mutations using 2CT assay
APLNR was perturbed in A375 cells using LentiCRISPRv2 encoding APLNR_sg1 
(Supplementary Table 7). Cells were selected with puromycin for 5–7 days. For rescue 
experiments, cells were transduced with a lentiviral (blasticidin-selectable) plasmid 
encoding codon-shuffled APLNR sequences (either wild-type or with specific patient 
mutations). APLNR sequences were re-coded to ensure that APLNR_sg1 cannot introduce 
Cas9-mediated breaks in the APLNR transgene. Transduced A375 cells were selected with 
10 μg/ml blasticidin for 5 days. Expression of these constructs in cells was verified by 
Western analysis. Cells were subject to 2CT-assay with ESO T cells as described above.
Adoptive Cell Transfer (ACT) and Tumour Immunotherapy
For immunotherapy experiments, we used murine-human chimeric gp100 antigen 
overexpressing B16 melanoma (mhgp100-B16) cells that are responsive to adoptive transfer 
of Pmel-1 TCR transgenic CD8+ T cells in an in vivo setting. We generated gene-deleted 
mhgp100-B16 cells using lentiviruses encoding sgRNAs targeting Aplnr (5′-
GATCTTGGTGCCATTTTCCG-3′) or B2m (5′-GAAATCCAAATGCTGAAGAA-3′) loci 
as described above. C57BL/6 mice were subcutaneously implanted with 5 × 105 mhgp100-
B16 cells. After 10 days of tumour implantation, mice (n = 10 for treatment groups) were 
sub-lethally irradiated (600 cGy), and injected intravenously with 1 × 106 Pmel-1 CD8+ T 
cells and received intraperitoneal injections of IL-2 in PBS (6 × 104 IU per 0.5 ml) once 
daily for consecutive 3 days. All tumour measurements were blinded. Tumour size was 
measured in a blinded fashion approximately every two days after transfer and tumour area 
was calculated as length × width of the tumour. Mice with tumours greater than 400 mm2 
Patel et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were euthanized. The products of the perpendicular tumour diameters are presented as mean 
± s.e.m. at the indicated times after ACT. In another experimental setting, we also used 
RNA-interference-mediated knock-down of Aplnr in mhgp100-B16 cells to perform 
adoptive transfer as above. Lentiviral particles encoding shRNAs (Dharmacon, shRNA1-
V2LMM_36640; shRNA2-V3LMM_517943) were used to knock-down expression of Aplnr 
in mhgp100-B16 cells. qPCR analysis was performed on these cells to confirm knock-down 
efficiencies of these constructs.
B2905 is a melanoma cell line derived from spontaneous tumour induced by UV irradiation 
of C57BL/6-HGF transgenic mice49. We generated gene-deleted B2905 cells using 
lentiCRISPR encoding Aplnr sgRNA as above. We implanted 1 × 106 tumour cells 
subcutaneously on C57BL/6 mice. Intraperitoneal injections of 250 μg of anti-CTLA4 
monoclonal antibody (Bio X cell, BE0131) or IgG control antibody were given on days 10, 
13, 16 and 19 post implantations. Tumour size was measured in a blinded fashion 
approximately every 10 days and tumour area was calculated as length × width of the 
tumour. Due to large intra-individual differences in tumour growth rates (Supplementary 
Fig. 7a), the significance of resistance to anti-CTLA4 treatment was determined by Fisher’s 
exact test comparison of sg-Ctrl versus sg-Aplnr groups using the number of progressing 
tumours and completely regressed tumours in each group.
Statistical Analysis
Data between two groups were compared using a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test or the 
Mann-Whitney test as appropriate for the type of data (depending on normality of the 
distribution). Unless otherwise indicated, a P-value less than or equal to 0.05 was considered 
statistically significant for all analyses, and not corrected for multiple comparisons. To 
compare multiple groups, we used an analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the Bonferroni 
correction. All group results are represented as mean ± s.e.m, if not stated otherwise. Prism 
(GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA) was used for these analyses.
Data Availability
Data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.
Patel et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Intratumoral expression of antigen presentation genes, B2M, TAP1 and 
TAP2 informs long-term survival of melanoma patients treated with anti-CTLA4 (ipilimumab) 
immunotherapy
a, Pearson correlation matrix of intratumoral cytolytic activity (CYT, expression of perforin 
and granzyme A15) with tumour infiltrating effector cell markers for natural killer (NK, 
expression of NCAM1 and NCR1), regulatory T (Treg, expression of FOXP3 and IL2RA), 
CD4+ T (expression of CD3E and CD4) and CD8+ T cells (expression of CD3E and CD8A). 
b, Pearson correlation matrix of CYT with the expression of MHC class I antigen 
presentation genes. c, Pearson correlation matrix of CYT with the expression of IFNγ 
signalling genes. d–g, Kaplan-Meier survival plots of patient overall survival with the 
expression of antigen presentation genes after ipilimumab immunotherapy (Van allen et al. 
Patel et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cohort3). Data were divided into quartiles based on RPKM values of each individual gene 
and the four groups were evaluated for their association with survival. The global P-values 
shown indicate the overall association of the quartiles of gene expression levels with 
survival. n = 42 patients (a–g).
Extended Data Figure 2. Optimization of selection pressure and duration of co-culture for 2CT-
CRISPR assay system
a, FACS plots showing percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in three different patient 
PBMCs after transduction with a retroviral plasmid encoding NY-ESO-1 TCR and 
expansion for 7 days. b, Transduction efficiency of T cells transduced with a retroviral 
Patel et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 plasmid encoding NY-ESO-1 TCR as determined by FACS. T cells were obtained from the 
peripheral blood of patients with metastatic melanoma. c, Transduction efficiency of T cells 
transduced with a retroviral plasmid encoding NY-ESO-1 TCR as determined by FACS. T 
cells were obtained from the peripheral blood of healthy donors. d, Transduction efficiency 
of T cells transduced with a retroviral plasmid encoding MART-1 TCR as determined by 
FACS. T cells were obtained from the peripheral blood of healthy donors. e, Representative 
plots of FACS-based determination of live, PI− (propidium iodine) CD3− tumour cell counts 
after co-culture of patient ESO T cells with Mel624 cells at an E:T ratio of 100 for 24 h. f, 
Barplot quantifies the cytolytic efficiency of T cells for data shown in (e). n = 3 biological 
replicates. g, Optimization of selection pressure exerted by ESO T cells on Mel624 cells at 
variable timings of co-culture and E:T ratios. Numbers in the grid represent average tumour 
cell survival (%) after co-culture. Data pooled from 3 independent experiments. n = 3 culture 
replicates. h, Upregulation of β2M expression at 0, 6 or 12 hours after co-culture of Mel624 
cells with ESO T cells at an E:T ratio of 0.5. Left panel: Representative FACS plot showing 
distribution of β2M expressing tumour cells. Right panel: Bar plot depicts mean 
fluorescence intensities of n = 3 co-culture replicates. i, Specific reactivity of ESO T cells 
against NY-ESO-1 antigen assessed in tumour lines by IFNγ secretion (pg/ml) after 
overnight co-culture. n = 3 co-culture replicates. Values in f and h are mean ± s.e.m. ***P < 
0.001 as determined by two-tailed Student’s t-test.
Extended Data Figure 3. Optimization of 2CT-CRISPR assay system for genome-scale screening
a, Representative FACS plot of B2M expression in Mel624 cells on day 5 after transduction 
with lentiCRISPRv2 lentivirus containing a pool of three sgRNAs targeting B2M. b–c, Cas9 
disruption of MHC Class I antigen presentation/processing pathway genes reduces efficacy 
of T cell-mediated cytolysis. Timeline shows 12 hours of co-culture of ESO T cells with 
individual gene edited Mel624 cells at E:T ratio of 0.5. Live cell survival (%) was calculated 
from control cells unexposed to T cell selection. Each dot in the plot represents independent 
gene-specific CRISPR lentivirus infection replicate (n = 3). Improvement in CRISPR edited 
cell yields at 60 h timepoint compared to 36 h after 2CT assay as shown in (c). All values 
are mean ± s.e.m. Data is representative of two independent experiments.
Patel et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Genome-scale 2CT-CRISPR mutagenesis identifies genes in tumour 
cells essential for the effector function of T cells
a, Scatterplot of sgRNA representation in the plasmid pool and Mel624 cells at Day 7 after 
transduction with the GeCKOv2 library for 2CT-CRISPR screens with E:T of 0.5 and 0.3. b, 
Scatterplot showing the effect of T cell selection pressure on the global distribution of 
sgRNAs after co-culture at E:T of 0.5 and 0.3. c, Agreement between top ranked genes 
enriched via two different metrics-second most enriched sgRNA and RIGER P-value 
analyses in 2CT-CRISPR screens performed at E:T of 0.5. d, Scatterplot showing the 
enrichment of the most versus the second most enriched sgRNAs for top 100 genes after T 
cell-based selection at E:T 0.3. Data pooled from 2 independent screens with libraries A and 
B. e, Overlap of genes and miRs enriched after T cell-based selection at E:T of 0.5 (high 
selection) and 0.3 (low selection). Venn diagrams depicts shared and unique most enriched 
candidates in top 5% of the second most enriched sgRNA. f, Common enriched genes across 
all screens within the top 500 genes ranked by the second most enriched sgRNA.
Patel et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Association of candidate essential genes with CYT and mutation 
spectrum
a, Top candidate genes are categorized based on their inducibility by effector cytokines 
IFNγ (light blue) or TNFα (orange), using publicly available gene expression profiles 
GSE3920, GSE5542, GSE2638. b, Genes whose expression are positively correlated (P < 
0.05) with cytolytic activity (defined as the geometric mean of PRF1 and GZMA expression) 
in TCGA datasets for 36 human cancers. c, Overlap (Jaccard coefficient) between genes 
correlated with cytolytic activity (from panel b) with top 2.5% of CRISPR screen gene hits 
(with second best sgRNA enrichment > 0.5). d, Bubble plot depicting the number of 
overlapping genes from (b) correlated across multiple cancers. Previously known genes 
Patel et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 B2M, CASP7 and CASP8, and novel validated genes from CRISPR screen are highlighted 
(in bold) according to their correlation to the cytolytic activity in the number of different 
cancer-types. The size of each bubble represents the number of genes in each dataset. d–e, 
Pan-cancer mutational heterogeneity of top candidate genes from CRISPR screens with T 
cell based selection at E:T of 0.5 (d) and 0.3 (e). Patient tumour data containing genetic 
aberrations including missense, nonsense, non-start, frameshift, truncation or splice-site 
mutations, or homozygous deletions was retrieved from TCGA database.
Extended Data Figure 6. Validation of top ranked candidate genes using Mel624 cells and two 
different T cell receptors
a–b, Survival of Mel624 cells edited with individual sgRNAs (2–4 per gene) after co-culture 
with ESO T cells (a) and MART-1 T cells (b) at E:T ratio of 0.5 in 2CT assay. P-value 
calculated for positively enriched gene-targeting sgRNAs compared to control sgRNA by 
Student’s t-test. Data representative of at least two independent experiments. n = 3 replicates 
per sgRNA. c. Representative histogram of deep sequencing analysis of on-target insertion-
deletion (indel) mutations by individual lentiCRISPR. d–e, Deep sequencing analysis of 
indels generated by CRISPR-Cas9 at each exonic target site for the genes validated in 
Mel624 cells at day 20 post-transduction.
Patel et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Gene perturbation efficiency and indel mutations after CRISPR-Cas9 
targeted disruption in A375
Deep sequencing analysis of indels generated by CRISPR-Cas9 at each exonic target site for 
validated in A375 cells at day 5 post-transduction. Average values are mean. Error bars 
denotes s.e.m.
Patel et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Characterization of non-synonymous mutations in APLNR identified in 
patient tumours resistant to immunotherapy
a, List of all somatic mutations in APLNR from 4 published immunotherapy studies3,5,28,29 
and 1 unpublished patient tumor from NCI Surgery Branch (SB). b, Schematic of the re-
introduction of WT or mutated APLNR in APLNR-edited cells to functionally verify the 
point mutations from the SB and Van Allen et al. cohorts. Blasticidin selects for cells that 
received the WT/mutated APLNR rescue construct.
Patel et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. APLNR modulates IFNγ signaling via physical interaction with JAK1
a, Pull-down of JAK1 and APLNR in the extracts from HEK 293T cells transiently 
transfected with APLNR-FLAG plasmid. b, Immunoblot showing the upregulation of JAK1 
protein expression in APLNR overexpressing A375 cells (APLNR OE). EV: Empty vector 
control. c, Effect of overexpression of APLNR in tumour cells on T cell-mediated cytolysis. 
n = 4 biological replicates. d, Immunoblot showing that addition of 100 μM Apelin ligand 
does not induce phosphorylation of JAK1 in tumour cells. e, Immunoblot showing the 
phosphorylation levels of JAK1 at Tyr1022/1023 residues and STAT1 at Tyr701 residue 
upon 100 ng/ml IFNγ treatment for 30 min in APLNR-edited cells versus cells receiving a 
control sgRNA. f, Quantitative PCR analysis of JAK1-STAT1 pathway-induced genes in 
APLNR-edited cells post 4, 8 and 24 h of treatment with 1 μg/ml IFNγ. n = 3 biological 
replicates. g, Induction of surface expression of β2M on APLNR-edited cells upon co-
culture with ESO T cells for 6 h as measured by FACS. h, Intracellular staining assay 
Patel et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed on CD8+ T cells to measure IFNγ production post co-culture with A375 cells as 
target for 5–6 hr. n = 3 biological replicates. All data are representative of at least two 
independent experiments. Error bars represent mean ± s.e.m. of replicate measurements. 
**** P < 0.0001, *** P < 0.001 **P < 0.01, *P < 0.05.
Extended Data Figure 10. APLNR knock-down decreases the efficiency of in vivo adoptive cell 
transfer immunotherapy
Subcutaneous tumour growth in mice receiving ACT of Pmel T cells. Tumour area (a) and 
overall survival (b) are shown. Significance for tumour growth kinetics were calculated by 
Wilcoxon rank sum test. Survival significance was assessed by a log-rank Mantel-Cox test. n 
= 5 mice per ‘Untreated’ groups. n = 10 mice per ‘Pmel ACT treated’ groups. All values are 
mean ± s.e.m. ****P < 0.0001, **P < 0.01, *P < 0.05. Data are representative of two 
independent experiments.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NCI, and by the Cancer Moonshot program 
for the Center for Cell-based Therapy at the NCI, NIH. The work was also supported by the Milstein Family 
Foundation. We thank S. A. Rosenberg, K. Hanada, A. Wellstein, C. Hurley and L. M. Weiner for their valuable 
discussions and intellectual input, M. Kruhlak, Z. Yu, C. Subramaniam, C. Kariya, A. J. Leonardi, N. Ha, H. Xu, M. 
A. Black and H. Chinnasamy for technical assistance in this project. This work utilized the computational resources 
of the NIH HPC Biowulf cluster (http://hpc.nih.gov). The results here are in part based upon data generated by the 
TCGA Research Network: http://cancergenome.nih.gov/. This study was done in partial fulfilment of a PhD in 
Tumor Biology to S.J.P. N.E.S. is supported by the NIH through NHGRI (R00-HG008171) and a Sidney Kimmel 
Scholar Award.
References
1. Lawrence MS, et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated 
genes. Nature. 2013; 499:214–218. [PubMed: 23770567] 
Patel et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Chan TA, Wolchok JD, Snyder A. Genetic basis for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in 
melanoma. New England Journal of Medicine. 2015; 373:1984–1984. [PubMed: 26559592] 
3. Van Allen EM, et al. Genomic correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic melanoma. 
Science. 2015; 350:207–211. [PubMed: 26359337] 
4. Hugo W, et al. Genomic and transcriptomic features of response to anti-PD-1 therapy in metastatic 
melanoma. Cell. 2016; 165:35–44. [PubMed: 26997480] 
5. Rizvi NA, et al. Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in non–small cell 
lung cancer. Science. 2015; 348:124–128. [PubMed: 25765070] 
6. Tran E, et al. Immunogenicity of somatic mutations in human gastrointestinal cancers. Science. 
2015; 350:1387–1390. [PubMed: 26516200] 
7. Le DT, et al. Mismatch-repair deficiency predicts response of solid tumors to PD-1 blockade. 
Science. 2017:aan6733.
8. Restifo NP, et al. Loss of functional beta2-microglobulin in metastatic melanomas from five patients 
receiving immunotherapy. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1996; 88:100–108. [PubMed: 
8537970] 
9. Zaretsky JM, et al. Mutations associated with acquired resistance to PD-1 blockade in melanoma. 
New England Journal of Medicine. 2016; 375:819–829. [PubMed: 27433843] 
10. Wang T, et al. Identification and characterization of essential genes in the human genome. Science. 
2015; 350:1096–1101. [PubMed: 26472758] 
11. Hart T, et al. High-resolution CRISPR screens reveal fitness genes and genotype-specific cancer 
liabilities. Cell. 2015; 163:1515–1526. [PubMed: 26627737] 
12. Shalem O, et al. Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening in human cells. Science. 2014; 
343:84–87. [PubMed: 24336571] 
13. Wang T, Wei JJ, Sabatini DM, Lander ES. Genetic screens in human cells using the CRISPR-Cas9 
system. Science. 2014; 343:80–84. [PubMed: 24336569] 
14. Chen S, et al. Genome-wide CRISPR screen in a mouse model of tumor growth and metastasis. 
Cell. 2015; 160:1246–1260. [PubMed: 25748654] 
15. Rooney MS, Shukla SA, Wu CJ, Getz G, Hacohen N. Molecular and genetic properties of tumors 
associated with local immune cytolytic activity. Cell. 2015; 160:48–61. [PubMed: 25594174] 
16. Kvistborg P, et al. Anti–CTLA-4 therapy broadens the melanoma-reactive CD8+ T cell response. 
Science Translational Medicine. 2014; 6:254ra128.
17. Robbins PF, et al. Single and dual amino acid substitutions in TCR CDRs can enhance antigen-
specific T cell functions. The Journal of Immunology. 2008; 180:6116–6131. [PubMed: 
18424733] 
18. Johnson LA, et al. Gene transfer of tumor-reactive TCR confers both high avidity and tumor 
reactivity to nonreactive peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. 
The Journal of Immunology. 2006; 177:6548–6559. [PubMed: 17056587] 
19. Robbins PF, et al. A pilot trial using lymphocytes genetically engineered with an NY-ESO-1–
reactive T-cell receptor: long-term follow-up and correlates with response. Clinical Cancer 
Research. 2015; 21:1019–1027. [PubMed: 25538264] 
20. Spiotto MT, Rowley DA, Schreiber H. Bystander elimination of antigen loss variants in established 
tumors. Nature medicine. 2004; 10:294–298.
21. Sanjana NE, Shalem O, Zhang F. Improved vectors and genome-wide libraries for CRISPR 
screening. Nat Meth. 2014; 11:783–784.
22. Luo B, et al. Highly parallel identification of essential genes in cancer cells. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences. 2008; 105:20380–20385.
23. Indraccolo S, et al. Identification of genes selectively regulated by IFNs in endothelial cells. The 
Journal of Immunology. 2007; 178:1122–1135. [PubMed: 17202376] 
24. Sanda C, et al. Differential gene induction by type I and type II interferons and their combination. 
Journal of Interferon & Cytokine Research. 2006; 26:462–472. [PubMed: 16800785] 
25. Viemann D, et al. TNF induces distinct gene expression programs in microvascular and 
macrovascular human endothelial cells. Journal of Leukocyte Biology. 2006; 80:174–185. 
[PubMed: 16617158] 
Patel et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. Klijn C, et al. A comprehensive transcriptional portrait of human cancer cell lines. Nat Biotech. 
2015; 33:306–312.
27. Kan Z, et al. Diverse somatic mutation patterns and pathway alterations in human cancers. Nature. 
2010; 466:869–873. [PubMed: 20668451] 
28. Roh W, et al. Integrated molecular analysis of tumor biopsies on sequential CTLA-4 and PD-1 
blockade reveals markers of response and resistance. Science Translational Medicine. 2017; 
9:aah3560.
29. Nathanson T, et al. Somatic mutations and neoepitope homology in melanomas treated with 
CTLA-4 blockade. Cancer immunology research. 2017; 5:84–91. [PubMed: 27956380] 
30. O’Carroll AM, Lolait SJ, Harris LE, Pope GR. The apelin receptor APJ: journey from an orphan to 
a multifaceted regulator of homeostasis. Journal of Endocrinology. 2013; 219:R13–R35. [PubMed: 
23943882] 
31. Stark C, et al. BioGRID: a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Research. 
2006; 34:D535–D539. [PubMed: 16381927] 
32. Dunn GP, Koebel CM, Schreiber RD. Interferons, immunity and cancer immunoediting. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2006; 6:836–848. [PubMed: 17063185] 
33. Overwijk WW, et al. Tumor regression and autoimmunity after reversal of a functionally tolerant 
state of self-reactive CD8+ T Cells. The Journal of Experimental Medicine. 2003; 198:569–580. 
[PubMed: 12925674] 
34. Wang LX, et al. Low dose decitabine treatment induces CD80 expression in cancer cells and 
stimulates tumor specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e62924. 
[PubMed: 23671644] 
35. Wrangle J, et al. Alterations of immune response of non-small cell lung cancer with Azacytidine. 
Oncotarget. 2013; 4:2067–2079. [PubMed: 24162015] 
36. Marrero MB, et al. Direct stimulation of Jak/STAT pathway by the angiotensin II AT1 receptor. 
Nature. 1995; 375:247–250. [PubMed: 7746328] 
37. Kidoya H, et al. The apelin/APJ system induces maturation of the tumor vasculature and improves 
the efficiency of immune therapy. Oncogene. 2012; 31:3254–3264. [PubMed: 22037214] 
38. Kammertoens T, et al. Tumour ischaemia by interferon-γ resembles physiological blood vessel 
regression. Nature. 2017; 545:98–102. [PubMed: 28445461] 
39. Martin M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing reads. 2011; 
17:10–12.
40. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short 
DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biology. 2009; 10:1–10.
41. Wan YW, Allen GI, Liu Z. TCGA2STAT: simple TCGA data access for integrated statistical 
analysis in R. Bioinformatics. 2016; 32:952–954. [PubMed: 26568634] 
42. Gao J, et al. Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the 
cBioPortal. Science Signaling. 2013; 6:pl1-pl1. [PubMed: 23550210] 
43. Cerami E, et al. The cBio Cancer Genomics Portal: An open platform for exploring 
multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer Discovery. 2012; 2:401–404. [PubMed: 
22588877] 
44. Bolger AM, Lohse M, Usadel B. Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. 
Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:2114–20. [PubMed: 24695404] 
45. Langmead B, Salzberg SL. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Meth. 2012; 9:357–
359.
46. Robbins PF, et al. Mining exomic sequencing data to identify mutated antigens recognized by 
adoptively transferred tumor-reactive T cells. Nature medicine. 2013; 19:747–752.
47. Kim D, et al. TopHat2: accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of insertions, deletions 
and gene fusions. Genome Biology. 2013; 14:R36–R36. [PubMed: 23618408] 
48. Trapnell C, et al. Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments with 
TopHat and Cufflinks. Nature Protocols. 2012; 7:562–578. [PubMed: 22383036] 
49. Noonan FP, et al. Melanoma induction by ultraviolet A but not ultraviolet B radiation requires 
melanin pigment. Nature Communications. 2012; 3:884.
Patel et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 2CT-CRISPR assay system confirms functional essentiality of antigen presentation 
genes for immunotherapy
a–c, Kaplan-Meier survival plots of patient overall survival with the expression of antigen 
presentation genes B2M (a), TAP1 (b) and TAP2 (c) after ipilimumab immunotherapy. 
Patients were categorized into ‘High’ and ‘Low’ groups according to the highest and the 
lowest quartiles of each individual gene expression (RPKM). Reported P-values have been 
penalized by multiplying the unadjusted P-value by 3 to account for the comparison of the 
two extreme quartiles. Hazard ratio (HR) was calculated using Mantel-Haenszel test; with 
HR ranges: B2M (0.02–0.31), TAP1 (0.04–0.52) and TAP2 (0.12–1.07). Data is derived 
from 42 melanoma patients from the Van-Allen et al. cohort3. d, Schematic of the 2CT-
CRISPR assay to identify essential genes for EFT. e, NY-ESO-1 antigen specific lysis of 
melanoma cells after 24 h of co-culture of ESO T cells with NY-ESO-1− SK23, NY-ESO-1+ 
SK23 and NY-ESO-1+ Mel624 cells (n = 3 biological replicates) at E:T ratio of 1. f, Survival 
of Mel624 cells modified through lentiviral CRISPR targeting of MHC class I antigen 
presentation/processing genes after introduction of ESO T cells. CRISPR-modified Mel624 
cells were co-cultured with ESO T cells at E:T ratio of 0.5 for 12 h. Live cell survival (%) 
was calculated from control cells unexposed to T cell selection. Data is from 3 independent 
infection replicates. All values are mean ± s.e.m. ***P < 0.001 as determined by Student’s t-
test.
Patel et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Genome-wide CRISPR mutagenesis reveals essential genes for the effector function of 
T cells in a target cell
a, Design of the genome-wide 2CT-CRISPR assay to identify loss-of-function genes 
conferring resistance to T cell-mediated cytolysis. b, Scatterplot of the normalized 
enrichment of the most-enriched sgRNA versus the second-most-enriched sgRNAs for all 
genes after T cell-based selection (inset). The top 100 genes by second-most-enriched 
sgRNA rank are displayed in the enlarged region. c, Identification of top enriched genes 
using the RIGER analysis. d, Consistency of multiple sgRNA enrichment for the top 20 
ranked genes by second-most enriched sgRNA score. The number of sgRNAs targeting each 
gene that are found in the top 5% of most enriched sgRNAs overall is plotted. e, Schematic 
of MHC class I antigen processing pathway with candidate genes scoring in the top 0.1% of 
all genes in the library highlighted.
Patel et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Categorization of candidate essential genes for EFT using available knowledge 
database
a, Candidate genes based on FDR cut-off of 0.1% (n = 554 genes) were functionally 
categorized by multiple methods to understand the biological significance for EFT. b, Most 
significant pathways by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (P < 0.05) from top 2CT-CRISPR 
candidates. c–d, Association of top 554 candidate genes with intratumoral cytolytic activity 
(CYT, expression of perforin and granzyme) using TCGA datasets. c, RNA-sequencing data 
for 36 human cancers were obtained from the TCGA database and genes positively 
correlated with CYT (P < 0.05, Pearson correlation) were intersected with 2CT-CRISPR 
candidates to quantify number of overlapping genes in each cancer subtype. d, Heatmap 
showing the partitioning of the clusters of genes based on Pearson correlation coefficient 
values of CRISPR screen hits with CYT using pan-cancer TCGA data. Individual cancer and 
pathway heatmaps are available at https://bioinformatics.cancer.gov/publications/restifo.
Patel et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Validation of top candidate genes across cancers
a, Schematic of the array validation strategy for top candidates from the pooled 2CT-
CRISPR screen to test generalization across melanomas, MHC class I antigens and other 
(non-melanoma) cancer. b, Survival of HLA-A*02+ NY-ESO-1+ A375 cells edited with 
individual sgRNAs (2–4 per gene) after co-culture with ESO T cells at E:T ratio of 0.5. n = 3 
biological replicates per sgRNA. c, Shared and unique genes essential for EFT in Mel624 
and A375 melanoma cells. d, Survival of HLA-A*02+ NY-ESO-1+ renal cell carcinoma 
2245R cells edited with individual sgRNAs (4 per gene) after co-culture with ESO T cells at 
E:T ratio of 0.5 in 2CT assay. n = 4 biological replicates per sgRNA. b–d, P-value calculated 
for positively enriched gene-targeting sgRNAs compared to control sgRNA by Student’s t-
test. Data representative of at least two independent experiments.
Patel et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Functional loss of APLNR reduces efficacy of cancer immunotherapy
a, Non-synonymous mutations detected in APLNR in human melanoma tumours refractory 
to indicated immunotherapies. Ipi, ipilimumab; Nivo, nivolumab; Pembro, pembrolizumab; 
EC, extracellular domain; CS, cytoplasmic signalling domain. b, Mutations encoding G349E 
and T44S in APLNR resist the restoration of T-cell mediated cytolysis in APLNR-perturbed 
tumour cells. n = 3 biological replicates. c, Second most enriched sgRNA score in CRISPR 
screens for 96 APLNR-interacting proteins from the BioGrid database31. d, Western blot 
probed for APLNR after immunoprecipitation pull-down of JAK1 from A375 cell lysates. 
Results were similar in an independent replicate experiment (not shown). e, Quantitative 
PCR analysis of JAK1-STAT1 pathway induced genes in wild-type and APLNR-edited cells 
at 0, 8 and 24 h post treatment with 1 μg/ml IFNγ. n = 3 biological replicates. f, Induction of 
surface expression of β2M on APLNR-edited cells upon co-culture with ESO T cells as 
measured by FACS. n = 3 biological replicates. g, IFNγ secretion from ESO T cells after 
overnight co-culture with CRISPR edited A375 cells determined using ELISA. n = 3 
biological replicates. h, Schematic of in vivo experiments to test the response of B2m and 
Patel et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Aplnr knock-out tumours to ACT in immunocompetent mice. i, j, Subcutaneous tumour 
growth in mice receiving ACT of Pmel-1 T cells. Tumour area (i) and overall survival (j) are 
shown. Significance for tumour growth kinetics were calculated by Wilcoxon rank sum test. 
Survival significance was assessed by a log-rank Mantel-Cox test. n = 5 mice per ‘No 
treatment’ groups. For ‘Pmel ACT’ groups, n = 9 mice in control group, n = 10 mice per 
B2m-sg and Aplnr-sg groups. All values are mean ± s.e.m. ****P < 0.0001, **P < 0.01, *P 
< 0.05. Data are representative of two independent experiments.
Patel et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
