  
1 
The Effect of Spending Cuts on Teen Pregnancy 
This is the version of the paper accepted for publication in the Journal of Health 
Economics prior to copyediting: 
 
Paton, D and L Wright (2017), ‘The effect of spending cuts on teen pregnancy’, Journal of Health 
Economics, 54 (July): 135-46, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.05.002 
 
April 2017 
 
 
David Paton* 
Nottingham University Business School 
Jubilee Campus 
Wollaton Road 
Nottingham 
NG8 1BB 
United Kingdom 
 
Tel: + 00 44 115 846 6601 
Email: David.Paton@nottingham.ac.uk 
 
 
Liam Wright 
School of Health and Related Research 
University of Sheffield 
Regent Court 
Sheffield 
S1 4DA 
United Kingdom 
 
Tel: + 00 44 114 225 9130 
Email: Liam.Wright@sheffield.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
*Corresponding author 
 
 
 
Keywords: spending cuts; teen pregnancy; conceptions; abortion. 
JEL Classifications: H72, I18, J13. 
 
 
  
2 
 
 
The Effect of Spending Cuts on Teen Pregnancy 
Abstract: In recent years, English local authorities have been forced to make significant cuts 
to devolved expenditure.  In this paper, we examine the impact of reductions in local 
expenditure on one particular public health target: reducing rates of teen pregnancy.  Contrary 
to predictions made at the time of the cuts, panel data estimates provide no evidence that 
areas which reduced expenditure the most have experienced relative increases in teenage 
pregnancy rates.  Rather, expenditure cuts are associated with small reductions in teen 
pregnancy rates, a result which is robust to a number of alternative specifications and tests for 
causality.  Underlying socio-economic factors such as education outcomes and alcohol 
consumption are found to be significant predictors of teen pregnancy. 
Keywords: spending cuts; teen pregnancy; conceptions; abortion. 
JEL Classifications: H72, I18, J13. 
 
 
  
3 
The Effect of Spending Cuts on Teen Pregnancy 
1. Introduction 
The global financial crisis in 2008 led many countries to introduce fiscal tightening in an 
attempt to reduce public expenditure and borrowing.  In England and Wales, a major source 
of expenditure cuts has been through reductions of grants disbursed by central government to 
local authorities.  Given heavy restrictions on local tax-raising powers, this has forced public 
sector managers to implement significant cuts in discretionary expenditures at a local level 
(Hood and Dixon, 2013).  As budget changes are potentially exogenous, the recent 
programme of cuts provides useful opportunities to evaluate the effectiveness of local 
authority spending.  In this paper, we examine the impact of cuts to expenditure on a discrete 
area of targeted policy - reducing rates of teen pregnancies. 
 
High teen pregnancy rates have long been seen as a significant public health concern 
in many countries.  This is particularly the case in the U.K. which has historically had one of 
the highest teen pregnancy rates in the world.  To tackle the problem, in 1999, the U.K. 
Government launched the Teenage Pregnancy Strategy, a major programme aimed at halving 
the under-18 conception rate in England by the year 2010 (Social Exclusion Unit, 1999).1  
The cornerstones of the Strategy were expanding access to sexual and relationships education 
(SRE) and contraception for young people. 
On the face of it these measures might be expected to lower pregnancy rates.  Teenage 
pregnancy services have been a significant victim of recent local government expenditure 
cuts (Billingsley, 2011) and it has been suggested that this would have an adverse effect on 
teenage pregnancy rates.  However, the empirical and theoretical literature suggests a more 
ambiguous prognosis.  For instance, increased contraceptive use has been argued to increase 
sexual-risk taking (Akerlof et al, 1996; Paton, 2002) while a recent Cochrane review of trials 
of school-based SRE concluded that “there was no apparent effect on the number of young 
women who were pregnant” (Mason-Jones et al, 2016, p.24).  Our aim in this paper is to 
assess what effect cuts to Teenage Pregnancy Strategy-related services have actually had on 
teenage pregnancy rates. 
 
In the next section, we provide some background for our analysis.  In section 3, we 
describe our empirical methodology.  In section 4, we introduce and describe the data.  In 
section 5, we report results of formal panel-data regressions which seek to identify the 
statistical relationship between expenditure cuts and changes in teenage pregnancy rates.  In 
                                                          
 
1 Responsibility for public health is devolved to the home nations in the U.K. 
  
4 
the final section we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of our approach and the 
implications of our findings for policy. 
 
 
2. Background 
During the 1980s and 1990s, teenage pregnancy rates in the U.K. were double those typical in 
western Europe (Social Exclusion Unit, 1999).  This problem drew attention from 
commentators and policy makers and led to several policy interventions, culminating in the 
1999 English Teenage Pregnancy Strategy.  Although the Strategy involved some co-
ordination and expenditure at a national level (e.g. an awareness campaign carried out in 
national media), delivery of the programme was largely devolved to Tier One local 
authorities.  Central government allocated substantial sums of money to local authorities in 
the form of annual Local Implementation Grants (LIGs), the size of which was determined 
mainly by the number of female teenagers in each area, local costs and pre-existing under-18 
conception rates.2  Public health managers within local authorities were given considerable 
discretion as to how these grants were spent, though guidance was provided by a central 
Teenage Pregnancy Unit.  Local authorities also had the ability to supplement the LIGs with 
funds from other sources, if they so wished. 
Strategy measures focussed on increasing young people’s access both to sex and 
relationships education (SRE) and to contraception, though specific activity varied 
considerably across local authorities.  Typical projects included employing local teenage 
pregnancy co-ordinators, opening sexual health clinics aimed at young people (often based in 
schools), and increasing SRE provision within schools.  In some cases, local authorities also 
provided emergency contraception to young people without prescription, free of charge at 
pharmacies (Girma and Paton, 2014).  Legal rights to reproductive health services were not 
affected by the Strategy.  For example, abortions continued to be available free of charge to 
teenagers via the National Health Service (NHS). 
Local Implementation Grants were initially ring-fenced for teenage-pregnancy related 
expenditure, but in 2008-09 this restriction was removed completely.3  LIGs were last 
disbursed in 2010-11, and after this point, funding for public health projects was included in a 
general grant from central government.  These changes coincided with the financial crash of 
                                                          
 
2 The size of the grants did not always change year-on-year. For instance, the amounts given to each 
local authority were the same from 2004/5 to 2010/11. 
3 Ring-fencing was removed somewhat earlier for a sub-set of high-performing local authorities. 
  
5 
2008 and with the fiscal tightening which followed.  Post-crash, total grants to local 
authorities from central Government were reduced significantly, forcing areas to review and 
cut expenditure.  As a result, most local authorities implemented cuts to teenage pregnancy-
related projects, but there was considerable heterogeneity in timing and extent.  For example, 
in 2011, the Guardian newspaper reported that many local areas (e.g. Walsall and Tameside) 
had removed their teenage pregnancy co-ordinators whilst others (e.g. Liverpool and Enfield) 
had retained them.4  The newspaper also highlighted that many areas were cutting sexual 
health advice services (including no-cost contraception) amongst other projects.  Typically, 
this has meant fewer places where teenagers can access contraception, reduced opening 
hours, less advertising of services, less training for sex education in schools, and so on. 
Politicians (Education Select Committee, 2010) and organisations working in the field 
(Billingsley, 2011) put out strong warnings that these cuts would put at risk the reductions in 
teenage pregnancy rates that had already been observed.  The argument was that cuts to 
services would increase the barriers to teens accessing birth control which would 
consequently increase the number of teenage pregnancies. 
Despite these warnings, there are arguments to suggest that the impact on teenage 
pregnancy may not be as bad as feared and, indeed, that spending on projects relating to 
teenage pregnancy may even be counterproductive.  Wiggins et al. (2009) evaluate a 
comprehensive intervention given to at-risk youths (including SRE and access to family 
planning services) which is typical of measures recommended by the Teenage Pregnancy 
Unit.  They find significantly higher rates of teenage pregnancy among the intervention 
group, as well as increases in a number of other adverse outcomes.  This adds to a large body 
of research showing that teenage pregnancy initiatives may have unintended effects on risky 
sexual behaviour which could counteract or even outweigh positive effects on teenage 
pregnancy.  For example, a number of authors have found that access to birth control has only 
limited effects on most measures of fertility (Raymond, Trussell and Polis, 2007; Girma and 
Paton, 2006; 2011; 2014; Paton, 2002). 
Akerlof et al. (1996) provide a theoretical basis for these outcomes: easier access to 
birth control may induce increases in sexual activity amongst teens.  As methods of birth 
control are not fail-safe (particularly so amongst teenagers [Kost et al, 2008]), the net impact 
on pregnancy rates is ambiguous.  Put simply, birth control will reduce the risk of pregnancy 
for sex acts which would have occurred anyway but may increase the risk amongst teenagers 
                                                          
 
4 www.theguardian.com/society/2011/aug/09/cuts-undo-progress-teenage-pregnancies 
  
6 
who are induced by easier access to birth control either to start having sex or to have sex 
more frequently.  This has been tested empirically by numerous authors using data on 
sexually transmitted infections (infections should rise if risk-taking is greater).  Girma and 
Paton (2011), Durrance (2013) and Mulligan (2016) all find that greater access to emergency 
birth control can induce an increase in sexual risk taking.  Similarly, Klick and Stratmann 
(2007; 2003) and Klick, Neelson and Stratmann (2012) find that access to abortion is 
associated with an increase in risk taking behaviour, although Coleman, Dee and Joyce 
(2013) argue that these effects are partly due to misreporting of data. 
Depending on the extent to which unintended consequences occur in practice, it is 
possible that spending by local public sector managers aimed at reducing teenage pregnancy 
will not achieve the desired outcome.  Further, enforced spending cuts may provide managers 
with the opportunity to exercise more discretion to fund only those projects which have a 
stronger evidence base.  Thus it is possible that, at the margin, spending cuts do not have the 
effect of increasing teenage pregnancy rates and, if unintended behavioural effects are very 
strong, could even lead to decreases in rates. 
Research on the links between general expenditure (rather than specific measures) and 
teenage pregnancy outcomes is very limited.  Wilkinson et al. (2006) find that local authority 
expenditure in the early years of the Teenage Pregnancy Strategy was significantly correlated 
with reductions in conception rates, although improvements in specific measures such as 
contraception services and sex education were not found to have reduced conception rates at 
a local level.  Blackman (2013) finds that local “dedicated planning to tackle high teenage 
conception rates appears to make things worse” (p.69), though does not use data on monetary 
expenditure. 
More recently, Wellings et al. (2016) find that the total amount received in LIGs over 
the Teenage Pregnancy Strategy is associated with overall reductions in conceptions rates 
over that period.  However, inferring a causal relationship from this is difficult.  In the first 
place, LIGs were largely determined by pre-existing teenage pregnancy rates and, given the 
very limited of variation over time in LIGs, it is impossible to separate out a causal effect of 
funding from other contemporaneous changes.  Second, the size of the grant received does 
not equate to actual expenditure, particularly in the latter period of the Strategy when grants 
were no longer ring-fenced.  A key advantage of the approach in this paper is the use of local 
data on actual spending related to teenage pregnancy.  Differences in the level and timing of 
cuts to this expenditure provides a key source of identification of a causal effect of spending 
on pregnancy rates. 
  
7 
Figure 1 illustrates annual LIG allocations and, from 2009, local expenditure on 
teenage pregnancy initiatives, as well as annual rates of under-18 conceptions and abortions 
from 1998 until 2014.  From a peak in 2004, local expenditure decreased steadily until 2011 
and more dramatically thereafter.  Between 1999, when the Teenage Pregnancy Strategy was 
announced, and 2007 (just before the financial crash) there was very little change in 
conception or abortion rates.  From 2008, both series show a rapid downward trend, one that 
has continued even as expenditure has also decreased. 
Table 1a provides some more information on the local expenditure series available 
between 2009 and 2014.  Comparing the 2012-2014 period with 2009-11, 10% of authorities 
reported increased spending on teenage pregnancy projects.  The rest all reported decreased 
spending, many by a very significant amount.  For example, over 30% of authorities reported 
cuts to expenditure in excess of 80%. 
The absence of any obvious correlation at an aggregate level does not necessarily 
mean that cuts in expenditure had no impact on pregnancy rates.  It is well-established that 
socio-economic factors such as poverty, economic welfare and education are significant 
determinants of teen conception rates and changes in such factors may be obscuring the 
impact of expenditure cuts at an aggregate level.  For example, Girma and Paton (2014) 
demonstrate that improvements in school education played a significant role in the fall in 
conception rates up to 2012, whilst Blackman (2013) highlights the important role of race.  
For this reason, the question we address in this paper is whether those local authorities which 
made bigger cuts to expenditure on sexual health services have experienced bigger or smaller 
reductions in conception rates.  To this end, the main focus of the paper is an empirical 
analysis of the effect of cuts in local teenage pregnancy expenditure on teenage pregnancy 
rates.  By using annual data across a range of local authorities, we are able to control for 
factors which are time-specific and for factors which are specific to local authorities.  We are 
also able to control for a range of other factors, such as education and race, which may 
obscure the relationship between expenditure and conceptions. 
 
3. Empirical Methodology 
The basic empirical approach we adopt is to estimate a fixed effects panel data regression 
model.  Our starting point is the following equation: 
𝑌
𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐸𝑋𝑃
𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾𝑋𝑖𝑡 + 𝐷𝑡 + 𝜇𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡                      (1) 
  
8 
where 𝑖 and 𝑡 represent an index of local authorities and years, respectively. In 
equation (1), 𝑌
𝑖𝑡 is under-18 conception (or abortion or birth) rate, 𝐸𝑋𝑃
𝑖𝑡 is the annual 
expenditure per 15-17 year old female spent by the local authority on teenage pregnancy 
services,  𝑋𝑖𝑡 is a vector of socioeconomic control variables, 𝐷𝑡 is a vector of year dummies, 
𝑢𝑖 is a vector of local authority specific dummies, and 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is the residual error term.  We 
estimate standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity, to contemporaneous cross-sectional 
correlation and to first order serial correlation. 
The incorporation of year and area dummies controls for average unobservable effects 
on conception rates which are specific to particular years and to particular local authorities, 
respectively.  This approach helps to get around two problems which might induce a spurious 
correlation between expenditure and pregnancy rates.  First, we may observe ‘policy 
endogeneity’ in that areas with high conception rates are precisely those in which expenditure 
on teenage pregnancy are also likely to be higher.  Second, both expenditure and pregnancy 
rates may move in the same direction due to other, unobservable factors.  In the fixed effects 
model presented in equation (1), a negative value for β1 would indicate that local authorities 
which cut expenditure more (less) than average saw smaller (bigger) decreases in teenage 
pregnancy than average. 
Even in the fixed effects model, we need to be careful before attributing causality to 
any significant correlation found between expenditure and conception rates.  In the first 
place, there may be unobservable trends over time which are correlated with both variables 
and which induce spurious correlation.  To deal with this possibility, we estimate models 
using conceptions (and births and abortions) to older women as a control.  We estimate the 
effect of expenditure on under-18 conceptions, relative to any effect on the older group.  If 
expenditure has a causal effect on conceptions, we would expect to observe a significant 
effect for under-18s but not for older women.  We use women aged over 24 as our control 
group to avoid contamination from any teenage pregnancy services which are also open to 
young people over the age of 18.5  To estimate the relative effects, we run regressions on 
pooled data with under-18 and older conception rates for each local authority.  These 
regressions include fixed effects for year/age group and authority/age group combinations.  
Each variable is included along with an interaction effect with a dummy variable for under-
                                                          
 
5 Although all local authorities had the under-18 conception rate as a key target, the age limit for 
accessing services aimed at young people varies considerably across (and sometimes within) areas.  For 
example, Brook, who run many projects funded under the Teenage Pregnancy Strategy, advertise their services 
to any young person under the age of 25. 
  
9 
18s.  The coefficients on the interaction terms provide us with the relative effects for each 
variable. 
Next, we consider the possibility of policy endogeneity in which decisions over 
funding cuts are correlated with factors which also affect changes in teenage conceptions.  
Decisions over the extent and timing of cuts to teenage pregnancy services are likely to have 
been affected by the level of overall cuts imposed by central Government (which varied by 
local authority), the perceived effectiveness of such expenditure and the political will of local 
elected representatives who eventually sign off on expenditure.  For any effect of expenditure 
to be causal, these factors must have been largely exogenous to conception rates.  We 
conduct a number of experiments to explore this. 
Taking first the influence of party politics, Labour and Liberal Democrat controlled 
authorities are generally thought less likely to target teen contraceptive services for cuts than 
Conservative controlled authorities. 6  If the former are areas which for other reasons are less 
likely to experience cuts in conception rates, then this could induce a spurious correlation 
between spending and conceptions.  We allow for this firstly by including dummy variables 
for political control in our set of control variables.  More substantively, we also test whether 
the coefficient on expenditure varies according the controlling party. 
The perceived effectiveness of spending is likely to be influenced by recent trends in 
conception rates.  For example, it may be harder to defend against cuts to teen pregnancy 
projects in areas in which conception rates have already decreased significantly.  If 
conception rates were in fact decreasing due to some unconnected but ongoing trend (related 
to, say, demographic change), we might observe a relatively big cut in spending but also 
continued decreases in conception rates.  To control for this, we test whether the expenditure 
coefficient varies for areas with relatively big recent decreases in conception rates.  We also 
test whether the effect of expenditure varies for authorities whose LIG budgets were released 
from the ring-fence only from the start of our sample on the grounds that the ring-fence may 
have caused a differential pattern of spending cuts. 
More formally, we also estimate an instrumental variable regression in which Exp is 
treated as endogenous and instrumented by a number of potential instruments, including total 
budget size. 
                                                          
 
6 However, it should be noted that ideological differences between political parties in the U.K. on 
policies relating to sex education and abortion are much less significant than, for example, in the U.S. 
  
10 
A further issue with equation (1) is the possibility of teenagers accessing services 
across local authority borders.  Our estimates implicitly assume that the effect of teenage 
pregnancy service expenditures is confined to pregnancy rates within the local authority.  
This is unlikely if the cost of travel between local authorities is low. As a result, cuts in one 
local authority may appear to have little effect on pregnancy rates if young people can avail 
themselves of teenage pregnancy services in neighbouring authorities (Girma and Paton, 
2014).  We consider several experiments aimed at dealing with this issue. 
We also undertake a series of additional robustness checks including: using dynamic 
panel data estimates which include the lagged dependent variable (suitably instrumented 
using the Arellano and Bond, 1991, approach) to control for the possibility that expenditure 
decisions are affected by previous years’ conception rates; including area- or region-specific 
trends; allowing for multi-way clustering as suggested by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller 
(2010); using a log-linear specification; and using the random effects estimator which utilises 
variation across local authorities to identify results and, hence, may be better able to pick up 
effects of co-variates which have limited ‘within’ variation. 
 
4. Data 
Our units of observation are 149 higher tier local authorities in England.  The primary 
outcome used in our empirical work is the under-18 conception rate among residents in each 
upper tier local authority (U18CR).  Pregnancy data in England are of high quality relative to 
many other countries as there are legal requirements for the reporting of live births and 
abortions.  The Office of National Statistics (ONS) provides estimates of the time of 
conception in order to generate annual conception rates for each local authority in the country 
by age at conception.  The ONS also break down the data into conceptions ending in abortion 
and those ending in live births.7 
The data are available by calendar year.  Conceptions rates are calculated as the 
number of pregnancies ending in live birth, stillbirth or induced abortion occurring to any 
woman aged under-18 at conception per 1,000 women aged 15-17 and resident in each local 
authority.  As there is an interval between a conception and its recorded outcome, data on 
                                                          
 
7 The number of unrecorded illegal abortions can be assumed to be negligible as abortions are provided 
confidentially and for free to under-18s in England.  However, one limitation with the data is that miscarriages 
are excluded and there is some evidence that economic conditions can affect the rate of miscarriages (Bejenariu 
and Mitrut, 2013).  We rely on our socio-economic measures such as unemployment to control for such effects. 
  
11 
conception rates are only released about fourteen months after the end of a calendar year.  
This means that our sample ends in 2014.  Given this, we have 894 observations. 
We also estimate models using under-18 abortion and birth rates as the outcome 
variables (U18AR and U18BR).  As Paton (2002) notes, abortion rates can be considered a 
good proxy for the overall rate of unintended pregnancies as it is assumed that the majority of 
planned teenage pregnancies will lead to birth.  Given a major focus of the Teenage 
Pregnancy Strategy was on reducing the likelihood of accidental pregnancy through 
advocating better contraceptive use, it is thus interesting to see the effect teenage pregnancy 
expenditures had on abortion rates.  Data for under-18 abortion and birth rates are available 
from the ONS, again based on estimated age and year at conception. 
Data on teenage pregnancy service-related expenditure (Exp) are provided by the 
Department for Education from the Outturn data series of local authority expenditure.  These 
are available from 2008-09 (the first year the Local Implementation Grant was non-ring 
fenced for all authorities).  We measure expenditure as a rate per thousand female residents 
aged 13-17 and deflate using the ONS’s Consumer Price Index (2014=100).8  Unlike 
conception and abortion data, teenage pregnancy expenditures are only recorded by financial 
year which runs from 1 April to 31 March.  It is likely that the full effect of expenditure on 
conceptions will not be immediate.  For instance, providing long acting reversible 
contraceptives may prevent pregnancies that would have only occurred over the medium-
term.  Hence, we allocate expenditure to the second year in which it is reported – i.e. 
expenditure in 2008-09 is coded as 2009.  Our results are robust to using alternative lag 
specifications such as including both current and lagged expenditure figures, using weighted 
averages to estimate calendar year expenditure and including a lagged dependent variable. 
A particular issue with the expenditure data is the presence of a significant number of 
zero entries.  Although the Department for Education confirm that zeros represent true 
reported values9, we do not exclude the possibility that some instances represent accounting 
errors.  For this reason, we include in our robustness checks alternative ways of dealing with 
zero values. The first is to omit any observations in which expenditure is recorded as zero in 
one year but followed by a positive value in a subsequent year.  The rationale for this 
approach is that spending cuts over time mean zero reported values in later years are much 
more likely to indicate true zero expenditure rather than accounting errors.  The second 
                                                          
 
8 The results below are robust to using alternative deflators, e.g. 15-17 or 15-19 year olds. 
9 Personal correspondence, 4 April 2015. 
  
12 
approach is to omit local authorities with any zero expenditure values over the period. It is 
possible that re-coding true zeros to missing will bias the results in a different way to 
including zeros which are actually reporting errors.  Reassuringly, however, the key results 
are robust to these alternative approaches. 
To control for possible confounding trends, we add a number of variables as controls 
in the econometric models.  In the first place, we include local authority expenditure on all 
services aimed at young people (Exp young) and also specifically on alcohol and drug 
prevention services for young people (Exp alcohol).  The former will help to control for, 
amongst other things, access to youth workers and recreational services which have been 
found to be correlated with teenage pregnancy (Akers, Muhammed and Corbie-Smith, 2011).  
The latter represents another area of public health which has also been targeted for cuts over 
the period under study.  Including these measures may control for any spurious correlation 
between teenage pregnancy expenditure and conceptions which is, in reality, due to more 
general cuts caused by the economic downturn. 
Trends in education, ethnic change, and alcohol consumption may explain changes in 
pregnancy rates.  We measure education using a three-year rolling average of the percentage 
of students in the final year at state-funded secondary schools who attain five GCSEs at grade 
A*-C including English and Mathematics (GCSE).  This is one of the main indicators of 
performance at the standard school leaving age in England.  We use three-year rolling 
averages to minimise random fluctuation and better represent attainment by 17 year olds, who 
make up approximately 50% of all under-18 pregnancies. 
As census-based data on race or ethnicity are not available on any consistent basis, we 
measure the ethnic make-up in a local authority using the percentage of final year pupils at 
state-funded secondary schools who are classified as non-white (Non-White). 
Although alcohol is known to be a significant factor affecting adolescent decision-
making, there is little or no data available at the local authority level which directly measures 
alcohol consumption by teenagers.  Here we include data from Public Health England on the 
rate of under-18s admitted to hospital with alcohol-specific conditions per 100,000 of the 
resident population (Alcohol).  This should act as a proxy for types of alcohol consumption – 
in particular, binge drinking – that are particularly associated with reduced inhibitions and 
myopic behaviour and which are likely to be behind any association between alcohol and 
teenage pregnancy (Rashad and Kaestner 2004). 
In line with findings from other papers studying the determinants of teenage 
pregnancy, we also include in the econometric models controls for the level of deprivation, 
  
13 
unemployment rate and the level of family breakdown.10  We measure unemployment as the 
proportion of 16-24-year old females who claim joblessness-related benefits (Fem Unem).  
We measure family breakdown as the annual proportion of children of each age group in 
local authority care (Care).  To measure deprivation we use the percentage of children in a 
Local Authority who live in workless households (Workless).  Children placed in care are 
known to be at an enhanced risk of adverse outcomes in a range of areas including low 
educational attainment, substance abuse, early sexual activity and teenage pregnancy (Social 
Exclusion Unit, 1999).  High levels of youth unemployment and deprivation imply fewer 
workplace and other opportunities and, consequently, a lower opportunity cost of early 
pregnancy.  As a result, we expect all three measures to be positively related to teenage 
pregnancy rates. 
Our key results are robust to the inclusion or omission of the various control 
variables.  Summary statistics for each variable are presented in Table 1b.  Full descriptions 
and sources are in the Appendix. 
 
5. Empirical Results 
5.1 Baseline Estimates 
The baseline panel fixed effects data results are reported in Table 2.  In the first half of the 
table, we report estimates of the effect of expenditure on each of conception, abortion and 
birth rates for under-18s.  The coefficients on expenditure are positive and statistically 
significant.  In other words, controlling for a range of other factors including unobservable 
area and time effects, areas which have put in place relatively large cuts to teenage pregnancy 
expenditure have seen significantly bigger reductions in teenage conception, abortion and 
birth rates.  The estimated effects are fairly small.  Evaluated at the mean of the variables, a 
10% reduction in expenditure is associated with a decrease of about 0.25% in the under-18 
conception rate, 0.19% in the abortion rate and 0.32% in the birth rate.11 
Looking at the control variables, better school performance is associated with 
significantly lower conception, birth and abortion rates amongst teens.  In contrast to local 
authority spending, the estimated impact is large: a 10% improvement in GCSE results (again 
                                                          
 
10 For evidence on all three factors on teenage pregnancy rates see Imamura et al. (2007).  Due to a lack 
of local authority level data, we are unable to add a number of other controls which may have been significant or 
related to teenage pregnancy expenditures.  For instance, it would also have been useful to control for media 
consumption patterns (see Collins et al. 2004) and, more speculatively, internet usage (Girma and Paton 2014). 
11 This is calculated as follows.  A 10% reduction spending at the mean is £1.956 per capita.  Using the 
marginal effect of 0.039 gives an estimated increase in the conception rate of 0.0752 (= 0.039*1.956).  In turn 
this represents an increase of 0.25% from the mean conception rate of 30.93 per thousand girls. 
  
14 
estimated at the mean) is associated with a reduction in the under-18 conception rate of over 
10%.  As expected, higher alcohol use is generally associated with higher conception rates.  
Regarding political control, Labour controlled authorities appear to have (conditionally) 
lower conception and abortion rates than authorities controlled by other parties, although this 
result is not especially robust to some of the alternative specifications. 
In the second half of the table, we report the effect on conception, abortion and birth 
rates for under-18s relative to older women (over-24).  This specification helps to controls for 
unobservable trends which may lead to a spurious correlation between expenditure and 
teenage pregnancy.  There are changes in statistical significance of some of the control 
variables (e.g. GCSE).  However, the estimated effects on conceptions, abortions and births 
continue to be strongly statistically significant and, indeed, a little larger in magnitude than in 
the baseline model. 
 
 
5.2 Robustness Checks 
We go on to consider a series of alternative specifications to the fixed effects model to 
explore how robust are the estimates of the effect of expenditure cuts.  For reasons of space, 
we only report the results for conceptions and for the under-18s only model.  In general, the 
results of the robustness checks are very similar for abortions and births and for the pooled 
model.12 
In Table 3, we report on attempts to control for policy endogeneity as discussed in 
section 3 above.  In column (1), we include interaction terms between expenditure and the 
political party in control of the local authority.  In column (2), we allow for a differential 
effect between areas which have seen relatively large and small decreases in conception rates 
(compared with the median) in the years prior to the start of our sample.  In column (3), we 
allow for different effects for those areas where teenage pregnancy spending was ring-fenced 
until 2008-9.  In each experiment, the baseline effect of expenditure on conception rates holds 
up well.  Expenditure has a positive effect on conceptions whichever political party is in 
control.  The effect is strongly significant for Conservatives, Liberal Democrat and Labour 
controlled authorities.  The effect is estimated to be insignificant for authorities with no 
overall control, though we should note this estimate is based on relatively few such cases.  
                                                          
 
12 In a few cases, the effect of expenditures in the specifications for abortion or births alone are reduced 
in significance.  The full results are available from the authors on request. 
 
 
  
15 
We find no significant difference in the effect of expenditure for areas which have seen a 
relatively large prior decrease in under-18 conceptions or for those areas whose expenditure 
was ring-fenced up to 2007-8. 
 
In the final column (4) of Table 3, we report instrumental variable GMM estimates in 
which expenditure is treated as endogenous to conceptions.  We use as instruments previous 
changes in conception rates, total expenditure on all services by the local authority and the 
proportion in the population aged over-65.  The rationale for using previous changes in 
conceptions is that areas which have already achieved large reductions in teenage pregnancy 
may be more prepared subsequently to cut expenditure.  The proportion of older people in the 
population is included as a significant proportion of statutory local authority spending is 
related to care of the elderly.  Relative increases in the elderly population are likely to put 
additional pressure on discretionary areas of expenditure such as on teenage pregnancy.  
Similarly, total expenditure identifies local authorities with bigger external constraints 
(typically imposed by central government) on all spending and, as such, is likely to be an 
exogenous determinant of teenage pregnancy expenditure. 
In this regression, the coefficient on expenditure remains positive and strongly 
statistically significant.  Diagnostic tests suggest that the model is identified and the 
instruments valid, albeit somewhat weak.  The Anderson-Rubin test, which is robust to the 
presence of weak instruments, continues to indicate that the coefficient on expenditure is 
statistically significant.13 
In Table 4, we further explore the influence of unobserved trend effects on our key 
relationship.  We do this in two ways.  In column (1), we include separate linear trends for 
each local authority.  This approach controls for changes in other factors over time which are 
specific to a local authority but which could help to explain changes in conception rates.  An 
example might be a trend for inward migration by particular groups characterised with higher 
or lower teenage pregnancy rates and which affects some areas more than others.  With this 
specification, the coefficient on expenditure, although still positive, is only significant at the 
10% level.  The implied magnitude of the effect is also lower than in the baseline, with a 10% 
reduction expenditure now estimated to cut conception rates by only 0.09%. 
Because this approach involves including 149 different trend terms, it is very 
demanding of the data and tests may suffer from low statistical power.  For this reason, in 
                                                          
 
13 The effect on expenditure is robust to using different specifications, for example using the political 
control dummies as instruments rather than independent co-variates.  However, the diagnostic tests suggest that 
weak instrumentation is even more of a problem. 
  
16 
column (2) we report a less-demanding approach which includes region-specific trends.  
Another way of controlling for pre-existing trends is to include lagged changes in conception 
rates as an additional regressor and we report this approach in column (3).  The variable 
measuring lagged changes (Pre-trend) is defined as the three-year moving average of lagged 
growth rates in teen conceptions where the most recent period (t-1) is given a weight of 1/2 
with periods t-2 and t-3 having weights of 1/3 and 1/6 respectively.  In each of these 
alternative specifications the coefficient on expenditure is very similar to that in the baseline 
model. 
In column (4), we report dynamic panel data estimates which incorporate a lagged 
dependent variable to control for dynamic effects of variables on pregnancy rates.  We 
employ the Arellano and Bond (1991) estimator which treats the lagged dependent variable 
as endogenous.  The size of the estimated effect of expenditure on pregnancy rates is very 
similar to that in the baseline models and still strongly significant. 
We further explore dynamics by including both the lag and lead of expenditure.  
These results are reported in column (5) of Table 4.  All three coefficients are positive but 
only the coefficient on current expenditure is statistically significant. 
In the final column of Table 4, we use standard errors which allow for multiway 
clustering (in this case, by both year and area) as suggested by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller 
(2010).  The results are very similar to the baseline, although the statistical significance of the 
expenditure variable is somewhat reduced. 
Further robustness checks are reported in Table 5.  The first two columns report 
results with alternative approaches to dealing with authorities reporting zero expenditure as 
discussed above.  The estimated effect of expenditure in these specifications is stronger than 
in the baseline, although the implied size of the effects continues to be relatively small.  For 
example, when we only include authorities reporting no zero expenditures, a 10% reduction 
in expenditure is associated with a cut in the under-18 conception rate of 0.52%. 
An important possibility to consider is that adolescents resident in one local authority 
may be accessing services in a neighbouring borough.  In this case, the impact of cuts on 
residents is likely to be muted.  We can think of this as a measurement error problem for our 
expenditure variable and, if the problem is significant, our estimates may be biased.  We 
explore the importance of this issue in two ways.  First (Table 5, column (3)), we adjust the 
expenditure variable using the number of young people in each area attending secondary 
  
17 
schools in another authority to control for ease of access to cross-border services.14  Second 
(Table 5, column (4)), we exploit new data which reports the percentage of teenage family 
planning clinic users in each local authority who are not residents of that area.  We exclude 
any local authority in which this percentage is greater than 30%.  In each case, the coefficient 
on expenditure is somewhat larger than in the baseline model and still strongly significant. 
In Table 5, column (5), we report a log-linear specification which produces very 
similar results to the linear model.  Finally, in column (6) we report random effects estimates.  
The lack of statistical significance for some of the socio-economic variables in the fixed 
effects models is not surprising given the limited variation within local authorities over time 
reported in Table 1b.  Using the random effects estimator allows variation in factors across 
local authorities to identify the estimates.  As a result, statistical tests are likely to be more 
powerful (in the sense of being more likely to pick up true effects as significant), albeit at the 
risk of inducing bias into the estimates due to not controlling for unobservable local 
authority-fixed effects.  More of the co-variates now have coefficients which are statistically 
significant and of the expected signs, whilst the coefficient on expenditure is still positive and 
strongly significant.15  Hence, the random effects results give us some reassurance that the 
model is reasonably specified. 
Taken together, the various experiments suggest that the baseline results are robust to 
a range of different samples, econometric approaches and specifications.  In every case, 
reductions in expenditure on teenage pregnancy services are associated with reductions in 
teenage pregnancies.  In the vast majority of specifications, the estimated effect is strongly 
statistically significant. 
 
6. Discussion and concluding remarks 
The results in this paper suggest that, in contrast to predictions by politicians and 
organisations working in the field, local areas which imposed bigger cuts to projects aimed at 
                                                          
 
14 Specifically, we set expenditure on residents of a given local authority equal to the sum of 
expenditure by each local authority weighted by the proportion of pupils they comprise in each local authority 
(i.e. proportion of pupils in local authority B from local authority A).  This should proxy well for cross-border 
access of services as many Teenage Pregnancy Strategy projects were delivered in schools and catchment areas 
for secondary schools in England can cross local authority boundaries. 
15 One apparent anomaly is that female unemployment is estimated to have a negative (albeit 
insignificant) impact in the fixed effects model but significantly positive one in the random effects model.  The 
difference can be reconciled by noting that the fixed effects model is driven by changes in unemployment over 
time whilst the random effect model is driven also by average differences in unemployment across local 
authorities.  So the latter result reflects the fact that more deprived areas tend to have relatively high teenage 
pregnancy rates whilst the former reflects that, a marginal increase in the unemployment rate in any area reduces 
the resources available to spend on children and, hence, reduces the number of births. 
  
18 
reducing teenage pregnancy have, on average, experienced faster decreases in teenage 
pregnancy rates. 
These findings need to be interpreted cautiously.  In the first place, although the 
effects are statistically significant, the estimated magnitude of the impact on conception rates 
is small.  Further, it should be noted that our empirical approach estimates the marginal effect 
of changes in funding to services which are co-ordinated and targeted at teenagers.  If funding 
cuts are implemented in an efficient manner, then the least effective projects should be cut 
first.  It may still be the case, for example, that if all funding for sexual health services were 
cut, this would cause teen pregnancy rates to increase.  Moreover, our analysis does not 
directly test the effect of cuts to more general services (e.g. those provided by General 
Practitioners) which are also available to teenagers. 
That said, the results here are consistent with previous work suggesting that changes 
to service access can induce behaviour change amongst at least some teens.  To the extent 
that more difficult access to contraception caused a reduction in sexual risk taking, this may 
have alleviated any adverse effects of spending cuts.  Another, perhaps complementary 
explanation is that reduced public subsidies for adolescent services may have led to a switch 
to alternative services, whether publicly or privately funded.16  In any case, our results 
suggest that public sector managers facing budgetary pressures need to consider the 
possibility that behavioural consequences induced by budget cuts have the potential to 
ameliorate some or all of the direct negative consequences of the cuts. 
The panel data approach used in this research has several benefits.  Most importantly 
it allows us to control for time-specific and area-specific effects.  An area which is 
characterised by relatively high rates of teenage pregnancy may wish to spend more money in 
trying to alleviate the problem.  In this event, a cross-sectional analysis would be likely to 
report a spurious positive correlation between spending and pregnancy rates.  By controlling 
for area-specific effects, we focus specifically on whether relatively large cuts in expenditure 
are associated with smaller or larger decreases in pregnancy rates.  However, this does not 
entirely solve potential problems of endogeneity.  For example, areas in which pregnancy 
rates are already decreasing, may be more likely to choose to re-allocate spending to other 
projects.  Similarly, decisions over funding cuts might be determined by factors such as 
                                                          
 
16 Ideally, we would test this directly using sexual transmitted infection data in a similar way to Klick, 
Neelson and Stratmann (2012) who assess whether results for changes in abortions and infections are of 
consistent sign and magnitude following abortion policy changes.  Unfortunately, suitable data on sexually 
transmitted infections at a local authority level are not available in England. 
  
19 
political control which also effect pregnancy rates.  The fact that our results are robust to 
alternative specifications which control for political control, for pre-existing trends in 
pregnancy rates and which treat spending outcomes as endogenous gives some reassurance 
on these points and suggests that, at the margin, local expenditure cuts may have contributed 
to the continued fall in teenage pregnancy rates.  At the very least, our results provide no 
evidence that cuts in expenditure to date have led to increases in teenage pregnancy rates. 
Another caveat to our results is that the dynamics of the effects of spending cuts are 
difficult to model and that adverse effects of cuts may only be felt in the longer term.  
However, against this, Arcidiacono et al. (2012) find evidence that contraceptive access is 
less likely to reduce unwanted pregnancy rates in the long run than the short run due to the 
differential impact on those who are already in a sexual relationships (who are more likely to 
carry on engaging in sexual activity but without using contraception) compared to those who 
are not yet in sexual relationships and who are less likely to make a future transition to sexual 
activity when contraceptive access is more difficult.  A fuller analysis of the long run effects 
of cuts on teenage pregnancy will be an important task for future research as more data 
become available. 
It is also unclear to what extent the finding that cuts in public expenditure can be 
achieved without adversely affecting measures of social wellbeing can be generalised.  
Contrasting evidence is found by Loopstra et al. (2016) who conclude that cuts to local 
authority expenditure have contributed to an increase in homelessness.  The beneficial effects 
of cuts revealed in our paper may be due to the particular circumstances and decision-making 
process surrounding teenage fertility.  Exploring whether there are more general lessons to be 
learnt will be a useful exercise for future research. 
 
References 
Akerlof GA, JL Yellen, ML Katz (1996), ‘An analysis of out-of-wedlock childbearing in the 
United States’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (2, May): 277-317. 
Akers AY, MR Muhammed and G Corbie-Smith (2011), ‘When you got nothing to do, you 
do somebody’: a community’s perceptions of neighborhood effects on adolescent 
sexual behaviors, Social Science and Medicine, 72(1, Jan): 91-9. 
Arcidiacono, P, A Khwaja and Ouyang, L. (2012), ‘Habit persistence and teen sex: could 
increased access to contraception have unintended consequences for teen 
pregnancies?’ Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 30 (2, April): 312-325. 
  
20 
Arellano M and S Bond (1991), ‘Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo 
Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations’ Review of Economic Studies, 
58(2): 277-97. 
Bejenariu S and A Mitrut (2013), ‘Save some lose some: biological consequences of an 
unexpected wage cut’, RES Conference 2013, 
www.webmeets.com/RES/2013/prog/viewpaper.asp?pid=481 
Billingsley M (2011), ‘Cuts threaten to undermine progress in reducing teenage pregnancies, 
charities claim’, BMJ, 342: 1264. 
Blackman, T. (2013). Exploring explanations for local reductions in teenage pregnancy rates 
in England: an approach using qualitative comparative analysis. Social Policy and 
Society, 12 (1): 61-72. 
Colman S, T Dee and T Joyce (2013), ‘Do parental involvement laws deter risky teen sex?’ 
Journal of Health Economics, 32: 873–880. 
Collins R, MN Elliott, SH Berry et al. (2004), ‘Watching Sex on Television Predicts 
Adolescent Initiation of Sexual Behavior’, Pediatrics, 114(3, Sept): e280-9. 
Durrance, C (2013), ‘The effects of increased access to emergency contraception on sexually 
transmitted disease and abortion rates’, Economic Inquiry, 51 (3): 1682-95. 
Education Select Committee (2010), Services for Young People 
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmeduc/744/74408.htm 
downloaded 25th March 2014. 
Girma S and D Paton (2006), ‘Matching Estimates of the Impact of Over-the-Counter 
Emergency Birth Control on Teenage Pregnancy’, Health Economics, 15(Sept): 1021- 
32. 
Girma, S and Paton, D (2011) ‘The impact of emergency birth control on teen pregnancy and 
STIs’, Journal of Health Economics, 30: 373-80. 
Girma, S and Paton, D (2014) ‘Is Education the Best Contraception? The Case of Declining 
Teenage Pregnancy in England’, Social Science and Medicine, 131 (C, April): 1-9. 
Hood C and R Dixon (2013), ‘A model of cost-cutting in government? The great 
management revolution in UK central Government reconsidered’ Public 
Administration, 91(1): 114-34. 
  
21 
Imamura I, J Tucker, P Hannaford et al. (2007). ‘Factors associated with teenage pregnancy 
in the European Union countries: a systematic review’, The European Journal of 
Public Health, 17(6): 630-6. 
Klick J, Neelsen S, and T Stratmann (2012), ‘The relationship between abortion liberalization 
and sexual behavior: international evidence’, American Law and Economics Review, 
14(2), 457-487. 
Klick J and T Stratmann (2003), ‘The effect of abortion legalization on sexual behavior: 
evidence from sexually transmitted diseases’, Journal of Legal Studies, 32: 407–433. 
Klick J and T Stratmann (2007), ‘Abortion access and risky sex among teens: parental 
involvement laws and sexually transmitted diseases’, Journal of Law, Economics, and 
Organization 24: 2–21. 
Kost, K, S Singh, B Vaughan, J Trussell and A Bankole (2008), ‘Estimates of contraceptive 
failure from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth’, Contraception, 77: 10-21. 
Loopstra, R, A Reeves, B Barr, D Taylor-Robinson, M McKee and D Stuckler (2016), ‘The 
impact of economic downturns and budget cuts on homelessness claim rates across 
323 local authorities in England, 2004–12, Journal of Public Health, 38 (3, Sept): 
417-25. 
Mason-Jones A.J., D Sinclair, C Mathews, A Kagee, A Hillman and C Lombard (2016), 
‘School-based interventions for preventing HIV, sexually transmitted infections, and 
pregnancy in adolescents.’ The Cochrane Library. 
Mulligan, K (2016), ‘Access to Emergency Contraception and its Impact on Fertility and 
Sexual Behavior’, Health Economics, 25 (4, April): 455-69. 
Paton D (2002), ‘The economics of abortion, family planning and underage conceptions’, 
Journal of Health Economics, 21(2): 27-45. 
Rashad I, and R Kaestner (2004), ‘Teenage sex, drugs and alcohol use: problems identifying 
the cause of risky behaviors’, Journal of Health Economics, 23: 493-503. 
Raymond EG, J Trussell and CB Polis (2007), ‘Population effect of increased access to 
emergency contraceptive pills: a systematic review’, Obstetrics & Gynecology, 109(1, 
Jan): 181-8. 
Social Exclusion Unit (1999), Teenage Pregnancy, London: HMSO CM4342. 
Wellings K, Palmer MJ, Geary RS et al. (2016), ‘Changes in conceptions in women younger 
than 18 years and the circumstances of young mothers in England in 2000–12: an 
observational study’. Lancet, 388 (Aug.): 586-595. 
Wiggins M, C Bonell, M Sawtell et al. (2009) ‘Health outcomes of youth development 
  
22 
programme in England: prospective matched comparison study’, BMJ, 339 (July) 
b2534. 
Wilkinson P, R French, R Kane et al. (2006), ‘Teenage conceptions, abortions and births in 
England: 19894-2003, and the national teenage pregnancy strategy’ Lancet, 368 
(Nov): 1879-86. 
 
 
  
23 
 
 
Figure 1: Trends in U18 conception and abortion rates and local budget/spend 
 
 
Notes: 
(i) Local Teenage Pregnancy Strategy (TPS) budget/spend is derived from two series.  Up to 2008, it is based on 
the Local Implementation Grant (LIG) allocated to local authorities.  From 2009 on, it is the reported actual 
expenditure by local authorities.  Both series are adjusted for the ONS consumer price index (2014 = 100).  The 
LIG series is adjusted based on the values for both series which are held for 2009.  (The dashed vertical line 
indicates the point where the two series are spliced together.)  Budgets/spends are allocated to the calendar year 
in the second half of the financial year for which figures are reported. 
(ii) The solid lines indicate the start and end of the Teenage Pregnancy Strategy (TPS) 
(ii) Conception and abortion rates are numbers of girls aged under 18 (based on estimated age at conception) per 
thousand females aged 15-17. 
 
 
TPS
starts
TPS
ends
0
10
20
30
40
50
£m
0
10
20
30
40
50
rates
1998
2000
2005
2010
2014
year
U18 conception rate
U18 abortion rate
Local TPS budget/spend £m (RHS axis)
  
24 
Table 1a: Summary statistics: per capita teenage pregnancy expenditure by local authority 
 
Annual expenditure 
 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Mean 29.28 
27.03 
25.35 
15.15 
12.59 
7.96 
SD 26.83 
24.99 
21.62 
17.04 
18.11 
11.80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change 2009-11 to 2002-14 
Local 
authorities: 
Increase 
cut ≤ 20% 
20 < cut ≤ 
40% 
40 < cut ≤  
60% 
60 < cut ≤ 
80% 
80 < cut ≤ 
100% 
Number 15 
7 
21 
34 
25 
47 
Percentage 10.7% 
5.4% 
14.1% 
22.8% 
16.8% 
31.5% 
 
Notes: 
(i) Figures are the expenditure (in £) on teenage pregnancy initiatives reported by 149 local authorities per 
female aged 13-17.  Means and standard deviations are unweighted by population. 
(ii) Expenditure is adjusted for the ONS consumer price index (2014 = 100). 
 
  
25 
Table 1b: Summary statistics 
 
 
Standard Deviation 
 
Variable 
Mean Overall 
Between 
Within N 
U18CR 
30.93 
10.30 
8.19 
6.27 894 
U18AR 
15.48 
4.75 
3.48 
3.25 894 
U18BR 
15.45 
6.99 
6.00 
3.61 894 
Exp 
19.56 
22.14 
16.38 
14.95 894 
Exp (no early zeros) 
21.17 
22.28 
16.57 
14.73 826 
Exp (only authorities with no zeros) 
24.37 
21.29 
17.41 
12.39 438 
GCSE 
56.51 
6.47 
5.62 
3.24 894 
Fem Unem 
3.56 
1.46 
1.31 
0.66 894 
Workless 
16.11 
7.00 
6.24 
3.20 894 
Non-white 
22.35 
22.23 
22.23 
1.65 894 
Alcohol 
626.36 
286.38 
264.35 
111.91 894 
Care 
44.01 
16.97 
16.39 
4.57 894 
Conservative 
0.38 
0.49 
0.44 
0.20 894 
Labour 
0.38 
0.49 
0.41 
0.26 894 
Lib Dem 
0.03 
0.17 
0.14 
0.11 894 
Exp young 
2975.1 
1250.8 
1145.0 
510.8 894 
Exp alcohol 
14.99 
19.94 
14.79 
13.42 894 
Notes: 
(i) Variable definitions are in Table A1 in the Appendix 
(ii) Statistics are calculated for 149 local authorities over 2009-2014.  Variations in sample size reflect missing 
observations. 
(iii) “Between” indicates the standard deviation across local authorities whilst “Within” indicates standard 
deviation within each local authority. 
 
 
 
  
26 
Table 2: Determinants of teen conception & abortion rates, 2009-2014 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Under-18s 
Under-18s vs older women 
Outcome: 
Conceptions 
Abortions 
Births 
Conceptions 
Abortions 
Births 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exp 
0.0390*** 
0.0148*** 
0.0250*** 
0.0540*** 
0.0133** 
0.0412*** 
 
(0.00853) 
(0.00527) 
(0.00728) 
(0.0142) 
(0.00639) 
(0.0104) 
GCSE 
-0.476*** 
-0.250*** 
-0.235*** 
-0.172 
-0.185*** 
0.00688 
 
(0.0974) 
(0.0477) 
(0.0518) 
(0.111) 
(0.0487) 
(0.0731) 
Fem Unem 
-0.494 
-0.0838 
-0.419 
-0.356 
0.0355 
-0.437 
 
(0.461) 
(0.264) 
(0.324) 
(0.683) 
(0.181) 
(0.591) 
Workless 
0.0461 
0.0277 
0.0193 
0.0338 
0.0119 
0.0221 
 
(0.0412) 
(0.0252) 
(0.0236) 
(0.0322) 
(0.0185) 
(0.0273) 
Non-White 
-0.130 
-0.0325 
-0.103* 
-0.285** 
-0.0673 
-0.231** 
 
(0.0928) 
(0.0608) 
(0.0548) 
(0.133) 
(0.0571) 
(0.0996) 
Alcohol 
0.00196** 
-0.000541 
0.00248*** 
0.00746*** 
0.00105 
0.00640*** 
 
(0.000764) 
(0.000491) 
(0.000736) 
(0.00229) 
(0.000849) 
(0.00193) 
Care 
-0.00229 
0.0329** 
-0.0349** 
-0.0283 
0.0208 
-0.0504** 
 
(0.0260) 
(0.0137) 
(0.0174) 
(0.0357) 
(0.0163) 
(0.0217) 
Conservative 
0.368 
0.243 
0.168 
0.822 
0.373 
0.495 
 
(0.436) 
(0.312) 
(0.252) 
(0.630) 
(0.345) 
(0.458) 
Labour 
-0.695** 
-0.693*** 
0.0147 
-0.822* 
-0.597** 
-0.219 
 
(0.282) 
(0.214) 
(0.253) 
(0.485) 
(0.299) 
(0.402) 
Lib Dem 
0.357 
0.421 
-0.0250 
1.450 
0.350 
1.160 
 
(1.187) 
(0.689) 
(0.708) 
(1.447) 
(0.669) 
(0.974) 
Exp young 
-0.000265 
1.15e-05 
-0.000312 
-0.000767** 
-0.000116 
-0.000666** 
 
(0.000417) 
(0.000225) 
(0.000271) 
(0.000365) 
(0.000209) 
(0.000290) 
Exp alcohol 
-0.00272 
0.00147 
-0.00420 
-0.0172 
-0.000748 
-0.0175 
 
(0.00714) 
(0.00379) 
(0.00615) 
(0.0126) 
(0.00452) 
(0.0111) 
Area effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
area-age 
area-age 
area-age 
Year effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
year-age 
year-age 
year-age 
Area trends 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Outcome mean 
30.93 
15.48 
15.45 
30.93 
15.48 
15.45 
N 
894 
894 
894 
1,788 
1,788 
1,788 
N Authorities 
149 
149 
149 
149 
149 
149 
 
Notes: 
(i) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 
(ii) Dependent variables are conception, abortion and birth rates for under-18s (based on estimated age at 
conception) per thousand females aged 15-17. 
(iii) Standard errors (in brackets) are robust to panel-level heteroscedasticity, to contemporaneous cross-
sectional correlation and to first order auto-correlation. 
(iv) In (4)-(6) the coefficients are the relative effect for under-18s compared to the effect on women aged over 
24.  Specifically, they are the interaction effect between each variable and a dummy for under-18s in regressions 
which pool under-18s and over-24 conception rates and which include fixed effects for each year/age group and 
each authority/age group combination.  So the relative effect is the difference between the coefficient on Exp for 
under-18s and that for over-24s. 
 
 
  
27 
Table 3: Determinants of U18 conception rates, 2009-2014: robustness (1) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
 
Spending by 
political party 
Big decrease 
1998-2008 
Ring-fenced 
IV-GMM 
Exp 
 
0.0463*** 
0.0418*** 
0.315*** 
 
 
(0.0126) 
(0.00981) 
(0.1000) 
GCSE 
-0.477*** 
-0.480*** 
-0.478*** 
-0.324** 
 
(0.0963) 
(0.0964) 
(0.0985) 
(0.130) 
Fem Unem 
-0.475 
-0.483 
-0.492 
-0.132 
 
(0.440) 
(0.465) 
(0.462) 
(0.582) 
Workless 
0.0441 
0.0475 
0.0468 
0.000160 
 
(0.0421) 
(0.0420) 
(0.0414) 
(0.0598) 
Non-White 
-0.129 
-0.130 
-0.130 
0.0470 
 
(0.0952) 
(0.0923) 
(0.0926) 
(0.151) 
Alcohol 
0.00181** 
0.00187** 
0.00200*** 
0.000146 
 
(0.000791) 
(0.000791) 
(0.000748) 
(0.00256) 
Care 
-0.00300 
-0.000125 
-0.00143 
0.100* 
 
(0.0261) 
(0.0254) 
(0.0254) 
(0.0597) 
Conservative 
0.318 
0.352 
0.358 
0.327 
 
(0.419) 
(0.434) 
(0.429) 
(0.654) 
Labour 
-0.918* 
-0.713** 
-0.727** 
0.242 
 
(0.525) 
(0.282) 
(0.292) 
(0.782) 
Lib Dem 
-1.091 
0.319 
0.387 
-1.933 
 
(1.132) 
(1.175) 
(1.172) 
(2.129) 
Exp young 
-0.000286 
-0.000276 
-0.000267 
-0.00144* 
 
(0.000414) 
(0.000413) 
(0.000416) 
(0.000858) 
Exp alcohol 
-0.00220 
-0.00238 
-0.00329 
-0.0278 
 
(0.00738) 
(0.00708) 
(0.00750) 
(0.0240) 
Exp*Conservative 
0.0336*** 
 
 
 
 
(0.0121) 
 
 
 
Exp*Labour 
0.0416*** 
 
 
 
 
(0.0140) 
 
 
 
Exp*Lib Dem 
0.0676*** 
 
 
 
 
(0.0161) 
 
 
 
Exp*NOC 
0.0294 
 
 
 
 
(0.0191) 
 
 
 
Exp*big decrease 
 
-0.0128 
 
 
 
 
(0.0144) 
 
 
Exp*ring-fenced 
 
 
-0.00831 
 
 
 
 
(0.0177) 
 
Area effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Year effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Area trends 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Outcome mean 
30.93 
30.93 
30.93 
30.93 
N 
894 
894 
894 
894 
Authorities 
149 
149 
149 
149 
Notes: 
(i) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 
(ii) Dependent variable is the under-18 conception rate (based on age at conception) per thousand females aged 15-17. 
(iii) Standard errors (in brackets) in (1)-(3) are robust to panel-level heteroscedasticity, contemporaneous cross-sectional 
correlation and first order auto-correlation.  Standard errors in (4) are robust to heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation. 
(iv) The specification in (2) includes an interaction term between expenditure and those authorities with a (relative) decrease 
in under-18 conceptions bigger than the median.  In (3) the interaction term is between expenditure and those authorities for 
which expenditure was ring-fenced up until 2008/9. 
(v) Instruments for Exp in (4) are percentage of population over age 65, changes in U18 conceptions between 1999 and 1997 
and total budget for all services for each council per 1000 total population, adjusted for the ONS consumer price index. 
  
28 
Table 4: Determinants of U18 conception rates, 2009-2014: robustness (2) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
Area trends 
Regional 
trends 
Lagged trends 
DPD model 
Lag/lead 
expenditure 
CGM standard 
errors 
Exp  
0.0142* 
0.0364*** 
0.0395*** 
0.0325** 
0.0429*** 
0.0390** 
 
(0.00735) 
(0.00840) 
(0.00856) 
(0.0141) 
(0.00777) 
(0.0163) 
Exp (t-1) 
 
 
 
 
0.00898 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.00548) 
 
Exp (t+1) 
 
 
 
 
0.00539 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0128) 
 
GCSE 
-0.0966* 
-0.465*** 
-0.482*** 
-0.407** 
-0.457*** 
-0.476*** 
 
(0.0512) 
(0.101) 
(0.0939) 
(0.162) 
(0.115) 
(0.141) 
Fem Unem 
-0.682** 
-0.132 
-0.486 
-0.506 
0.00650 
-0.494 
 
(0.316) 
(0.422) 
(0.449) 
(0.571) 
(0.453) 
(0.688) 
Workless 
0.00207 
0.0369 
0.0484 
0.0529 
0.0268 
0.0461 
 
(0.0267) 
(0.0448) 
(0.0415) 
(0.0605) 
(0.0341) 
(0.0640) 
Non-White 
-0.0741 
-0.0939 
-0.139 
-0.167 
0.0337 
-0.130 
 
(0.0960) 
(0.0953) 
(0.0945) 
(0.151) 
(0.0927) 
(0.204) 
Alcohol 
-0.00276* 
-0.00370*** 
0.00199*** 
0.00187 
0.00155** 
0.00196 
 
(0.00151) 
(0.00119) 
(0.000758) 
(0.00236) 
(0.000773) 
(0.00219) 
Care 
0.115*** 
0.00279 
-0.000830 
-0.0533 
-0.0157 
-0.00227 
 
(0.0269) 
(0.0231) 
(0.0248) 
(0.0654) 
(0.0223) 
(0.0441) 
Conservative 
0.523 
0.552 
0.314 
-0.814 
0.308 
0.369 
 
(0.476) 
(0.424) 
(0.406) 
(0.988) 
(0.451) 
(0.464) 
Labour 
-0.221 
-0.330 
-0.806*** 
-0.400 
-0.555 
-0.695 
 
(0.315) 
(0.238) 
(0.281) 
(0.989) 
(0.375) 
(0.516) 
Lib Dem 
1.837* 
0.00287 
0.278 
-0.458 
2.066* 
0.358 
 
(0.997) 
(1.191) 
(1.149) 
(0.884) 
(1.236) 
(1.355) 
Exp young 
0.000169 
-9.07e-05 
-0.000307 
0.000124 
-0.000172 
-0.000266 
 
(0.000339) 
(0.000343) 
(0.000420) 
(0.000465) 
(0.000417) 
(0.000487) 
Exp alcohol 
-0.00962 
-0.00785 
-0.00116 
0.00287 
-0.000681 
-0.00272 
 
(0.00984) 
(0.00772) 
(0.00748) 
(0.0278) 
(0.00758) 
(0.0124) 
Pre-trend 
 
 
6.609 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(8.474) 
 
 
 
U18CR (t-1) 
 
 
 
0.326*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.0531) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Area effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Year effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Area trends 
YES 
REGIONAL 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Outcome mean 
30.93 
30.93 
30.93 
29.30 
29.30 
30.93 
N 
894 
894 
894 
745 
745 
894 
Authorities 
149 
149 
149 
149 
149 
149 
Notes: 
(i) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 
(ii) Dependent variable is the under-18 conception rate (based on estimated age at conception) per thousand 
females aged 15-17. 
(iii) Standard errors (in brackets) in (1)-(3) & (5) are robust to panel-level heteroscedasticity, to 
contemporaneous cross-sectional correlation and to first order auto-correlation.  In (4), standard errors are robust 
to heteroscedasticity.  In (6), standard errors allow for multi-way clustering by year and local authority 
following Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2010). 
(iv) (4) uses the Arellano-Bond dynamic panel data estimator with the lagged dependent variable treated as 
endogenous. 
 
  
29 
Table 5: Determinants U18 conception rates, 2009-2014: robustness (3) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
 
No early zero 
expenditure 
No authorities 
with zero 
expenditure 
Exp cross-
border 
Low cross-
border 
Log-linear 
model 
Random 
Effects 
 
0.0557*** 
0.0659*** 
 
 
 
 
Exp 
(0.00983) 
(0.0143) 
 
0.0517*** 
0.000473*** 
0.0448*** 
 
 
 
 
(0.00983) 
(0.000176) 
(0.00904) 
Exp Cross 
 
 
0.0426*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0.00961) 
 
 
 
GCSE 
-0.461*** 
-0.487*** 
-0.470*** 
-0.395*** 
-0.00624*** 
-0.491*** 
 
(0.0714) 
(0.0957) 
(0.0966) 
(0.102) 
(0.00219) 
(0.0530) 
Fem Unem 
-0.143 
-0.367 
-0.495 
-0.611 
-0.00350 
1.487*** 
 
(0.321) 
(0.610) 
(0.457) 
(0.454) 
(0.0106) 
(0.232) 
Workless 
0.0166 
-0.0306 
0.0466 
0.0620 
0.000269 
0.122*** 
 
(0.0341) 
(0.0437) 
(0.0413) 
(0.0435) 
(0.00117) 
(0.0385) 
Non-White 
-0.0627 
-0.206* 
-0.128 
-0.110 
0.00168 
-0.0467*** 
 
(0.0874) 
(0.124) 
(0.0926) 
(0.111) 
(0.00250) 
(0.0171) 
Alcohol 
0.00271* 
0.00406*** 
0.00202*** 
0.00482*** 
-0.000103*** 0.00359*** 
 
(0.00159) 
(0.00103) 
(0.000762) 
(0.00160) 
(2.25e-05) 
(0.00110) 
Care 
-0.0338 
-0.0248 
-0.00140 
0.0141 
0.00132** 
0.0791*** 
 
(0.0254) 
(0.0310) 
(0.0261) 
(0.0221) 
(0.000608) 
(0.0209) 
Conservative 
0.384 
0.419 
0.365 
0.197 
0.0147 
-0.565 
 
(0.426) 
(0.546) 
(0.437) 
(0.470) 
(0.0136) 
(0.563) 
Labour 
-0.910* 
-1.236*** 
-0.687** 
-0.702** 
-0.000417 
0.344 
 
(0.477) 
(0.358) 
(0.283) 
(0.325) 
(0.00736) 
(0.518) 
Lib Dem 
0.212 
1.090 
0.338 
0.807 
0.0159 
0.952 
 
(0.953) 
(1.375) 
(1.192) 
(1.225) 
(0.0267) 
(1.076) 
Exp young 
-0.000417 
-0.000793 
-0.000278 
-0.000545 
1.52e-06 
0.000360 
 
(0.000374) 
(0.000597) 
(0.000416) 
(0.000437) 
(1.02e-05) 
(0.000283) 
Exp alcohol 
0.00194 
-0.00278 
-0.00322 
-0.00833 
-4.37e-05 
-0.0116 
 
(0.00909) 
(0.0107) 
(0.00705) 
(0.00951) 
(0.000194) 
(0.00896) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Area effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
Year effects 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
Area trends 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Outcome mean 
30.68 
30.97 
30.93 
30.46 
30.93 
30.93 
N 
826 
438 
894 
720 
894 
894 
Authorities 
149 
73 
149 
120 
149 
149 
Notes: 
(i) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. 
(ii) In (1)-(4) & (6) the dependent variable is the under-18 conception rate (based on estimated age at 
conception) per thousand females aged 15-17.  In (5) the dependent variable is the log of conceptions. 
(iii) Standard errors (in brackets) in (1)-(5) are robust to panel-level heteroscedasticity, to contemporaneous 
cross-sectional correlation and to first order auto-correlation.  In (6) they are robust to heteroscedasticity and 
first order autocorrelation. 
(iv) In (1), observations with zero expenditure followed by non-zero in subsequent years are recoded to missing 
and dropped from the sample.  In (2) the sample is restricted to those authorities with no missing or zero values 
over the full period.  In (3), Exp is adjusted for cross-border pupil movement.  In (4) the sample is restricted to 
those authorities for which the % of family planning services access cross-border is less than 30%. 
 
  
30 
Appendix 
 
Table A1: Variable descriptions and sources 
Variable 
Definition 
Source 
U18CR 
Rate of conceptions ending in maternities or abortion 
to girls estimated to be aged under-18 at conception 
and resident in each local authority per 1000 girls aged 
15-17.  Miscarriages are excluded.  Age and year at 
conception is estimated by the Office of National 
Statistics (ONS).  
ONS 
U18AR 
Rate of conceptions ending in abortion to girls 
estimated to be aged under-18 at conception and 
resident in each local authority per 1000 girls aged 15-
17.  Miscarriages are excluded.  Age and year at 
conception is estimated by the Office of National 
Statistics (ONS). 
ONS 
U18BR 
Rate of conceptions ending in birth to girls estimated 
to be aged under-18 at conception and resident in each 
local authority per 1000 girls aged 15-17.  
Miscarriages are excluded.  Age and year at conception 
is estimated by the Office of National Statistics (ONS). 
ONS 
Exp 
Expenditure on Teenage Pregnancy Services per 
female aged 13-17 by each local authority as reported 
in the S251 Outturn statistics, deflated by the CPI 
(2014 = 100). 
Department for 
Education 
Exp Cross 
Expenditure adjusted for 2015 proportion of young 
people attending schools in a local authority but 
resident in another local authority.  
Department for 
Education 
GCSE 
Three-year moving average of the annual percentage of 
pupils in each local authority gaining 5 A*-C GCSEs. 
Department for 
Education 
Fem Unem 
% of women aged 16-24 claiming jobless-related 
benefits. 
ONS 
Workless 
% of children resident in the local authority living with 
no adult who is in employment. 
ONS 
Non-White 
Percentage of population of secondary school age that 
are non-white 
Department of 
Education 
Alcohol 
Rate of under-18s admitted to hospital with alcohol-
specific conditions per 100,000 population. 
Public Health 
England. 
Care 
Rate of all children aged 15-17 under local authority 
care per 10,000. 
Department of 
Health 
Conservative 
Dummy variable = 1 if the Conservative Party has a 
majority on the local authority council; = 0 otherwise. 
The Elections 
Centre, Plymouth 
University 
Labour 
Dummy variable = 1 if the Labour Party has a majority 
on the local authority council; = 0 otherwise 
The Elections 
Centre, Plymouth 
University 
Lib Dem 
Dummy variable = 1 if the Liberal Democrat Party has 
a majority on the local authority council; = 0 otherwise 
The Elections 
Centre, Plymouth 
University 
Exp young 
Expenditure per 1000 population aged 13-17 on all 
children-related services by each local authority as 
reported in the S251 Outturn statistics, deflated by the 
CPI (2015 = 100) 
Department for 
Education 
  
31 
Exp alcohol 
Expenditure per 1000 population aged 13-17 on 
alcohol and drug prevention services by each local 
authority as reported in the S251 Outturn statistics, 
deflated by the CPI (2015 = 100) 
Department for 
Education 
 
 
