    635
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Implementation of the 2017 Berlin Concussion in 
Sport Group Consensus Statement in contact and 
collision sports: a joint position statement from 11 
national and international sports organisations
Jon S Patricios,1,2 Clare L Ardern,3,4 Michael David Hislop,5 Mark Aubry,6 
Paul Bloomfield,7 Carolyn Broderick,7 Patrick Clifton,8,9 Ruben J Echemendia,10,11,12 
Richard G Ellenbogen,13,14 Éanna Cian Falvey,15 Gordon Ward Fuller,16 Julie Grand,10 
Dallas Hack,17 Peter Rex Harcourt,8 David Hughes,8,9 Nathan McGuirk,7 
Willem Meeuwisse,10 Jeffrey Miller,13 John T Parsons,17 Simona Richiger,6 
Allen Sills,13,18 Kevin B Moran,19 Jenny Shute,20 Martin Raftery5 
Consensus statement
To cite: Patricios JS, 
Ardern CL, Hislop MD, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2018;52:635–641.
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Jon S Patricios, Section of 
Sports Medicine, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria 2121, South 
Africa;  
jpat@ 
mweb. 
co. 
za
Accepted 7 February 2018
Published Online First 
2 March 2018
AbsTrACT
The 2017 Berlin Concussion in Sport Group Consensus 
Statement provides a global summary of best practice 
in concussion prevention, diagnosis and management, 
underpinned by systematic reviews and expert 
consensus. Due to their different settings and rules, 
individual sports need to adapt concussion guidelines 
according to their specific regulatory environment. 
At the same time, consistent application of the Berlin 
Consensus Statement’s themes across sporting codes 
is likely to facilitate superior and uniform diagnosis 
and management, improve concussion education and 
highlight collaborative research opportunities. This 
document summarises the approaches discussed by 
medical representatives from the governing bodies 
of 10 different contact and collision sports in Dublin, 
Ireland in July 2017. Those sports are: American football, 
Australian football, basketball, cricket, equestrian sports, 
football/soccer, ice hockey, rugby league, rugby union 
and skiing. This document had been endorsed by 11 
sport governing bodies/national federations at the time 
of being published.
InTroduCTIon
The Fifth International Conference on Concus-
sion in Sport was held in Berlin, October 2016. 
The subsequent 2017 Concussion in Sport Group 
Consensus Statement1 (underpinned by 12 system-
atic reviews2–13), and accompanying sports concus-
sion tools14–16 were intended to assist the clinician 
in the diagnosis and management of sport-related 
concussion. One important message from the 
Conference on Concussion in Sport was that other 
meetings would be needed to examine, develop and 
implement practical, sport-specific strategies for 
diagnosing and managing concussion across varying 
ages and levels of participation.
Representatives from 10 sports (American foot-
ball, Australian football, basketball, cricket, eques-
trian sports, football/soccer, ice hockey, rugby 
league, rugby union and skiing) and 11 sport 
governing bodies/federations (Australian Foot-
ball League (AFL), Gaelic Athletics Association, 
International Ice Hockey Federation, International 
Ski Federation, National Hockey League (NHL), 
Hockey Canada, National College Athletics Asso-
ciation, National Football League (NFL), National 
Rugby League (NRL), World Rugby (WR) and the 
English Football Association) met in Dublin, Ireland 
from 20 to 22 July 2017. Cricket (represented by 
the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) and the 
International Cricket Association) and the Interna-
tional Basketball Federation attended as observers.
Despite the common ‘collision element’, each 
sport is governed by different laws and interchange 
rules. Some codes/sports have free-interchange, 
while others have stricter substitution laws, which 
can affect concussion management. The purpose of 
the Dublin meeting was to harmonise interpretation 
of the Berlin Concussion in Sport Group Consensus 
Statement 
recommendations, 
discuss 
impedi-
ments to implementation, exchange information 
on current practice and identify areas for collabo-
ration among team collision sports. This position 
statement is a summary of the key discussion points, 
specific to team collision sports, and aims to clarify 
issues in implementation that are specific to the 
sports represented at the Dublin meeting. Many of 
the points covered apply to all contact sports while, 
where issues are sport-specific, these are framed in 
the context of the particular sport.
The following eight sections, and accompanying 
boxes represent the key themes discussed at the 
Dublin meeting, and highlight key clinical implica-
tions for collision sports.
defining and diagnosing concussion in sport
The fundamental starting point for the clinician is 
to make the diagnosis of concussion. Accurate and 
timely diagnosis may help facilitate earlier recovery, 
reduce the risk of early complications and avoid 
further head and musculoskeletal injuries. Making 
an accurate diagnosis is both important and chal-
lenging because of concussion’s varied and some-
times subtle presentation. Symptoms overlap with 
other musculoskeletal, psychological and neurolog-
ical diagnoses and a lack of definitive investigations 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 636
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Consensus statement
or diagnostic markers raises challenges. Because of these issues, 
concussion remains a clinical diagnosis.
The first step in diagnosing concussion is to identify the 
potential injury, and evaluate the athlete. At all playing levels 
of all collision sports, a concussion evaluation is triggered when 
an athlete is identified as having experienced a forceful impact 
directly or indirectly transmitted to the head that was associated 
with:
 
►
Symptom(s) reported by the athlete;
 
►
Visible signs;
 
►
Any clinical suspicion by medical staff.
Match officials may also report possible concussion to team 
clinicians. Some sports have implemented education programmes 
aimed at training match officials to recognise possible concus-
sion and act by stopping the game and notifying the appropriate 
team clinicians.
In community-level sport, there may not be adequately trained 
medical staff present. In this situation, any suspicion by a match 
official, coach, athletic trainer, first aider or dedicated observer 
should result in removal of the athlete from the field of play.
Signs of concussion and expected actions
A number of sporting codes refer to mandatory or discretionary 
visible signs of concussion, which may guide the immediate 
course of action (tables 1 and 2). The signs defined as manda-
tory and discretionary may differ, as may the course of action. 
In some sports (AFL, NFL, NRL, rugby), mandatory signs indi-
cate immediate removal from the field of play. In other sports 
(NHL), mandatory signs are indications for a mandatory off-field 
evaluation.
A mandatory or discretionary sign in combination with a mech-
anism of injury involving head contact significantly increases the 
likelihood of a diagnosis of concussion.17
It is possible to diagnose concussion immediately. However, 
due to delayed presentation, excluding a diagnosis of concus-
sion may take up to 48 
hours following head contact. During 
this period – whether the athlete continues to play, or not – 
serial evaluations, as described in the Berlin Consensus State-
ment, should be completed by a medical practitioner. The Sports 
Concussion Assessment Tool (SCAT5)14 (either complete or in 
part) and Concussion Recognition Tool (CRT5)15 should be used 
to trigger or when conducting initial evaluations. The SCAT5 
should be used for serial evaluations (described in the 'Manage-
ment  on and around the field of play' section).
The ‘stunned’ athlete, who has very short-lived, temporary 
signs or symptoms that fall within the current definition of 
concussion, could have a pathological process or injury type that 
may in the future be proven to be transient and not necessarily 
reflect a concussion. In these instances, some codes have imple-
mented temporary removal for an evaluation and, no matter 
what the outcome, this should be followed by further serial 
assessments. If doubt exists, the athlete should not return to the 
field of play that day.
Sport-specific challenges for diagnosis and management of 
concussion
In sports that do not have a replacement policy (eg, football/
soccer), there may be additional challenges contributing to 
increased pressure on athletes to under-report symptoms. Clini-
cians are at a significant disadvantage when required to make 
‘on-the-run’ and ‘on-the-field’ decisions with insufficient time 
for an appropriate evaluation. Sports in which the laws do not 
facilitate the recommended 10 
min off-field assessment should 
look to policymakers to make law changes rather than expecting 
clinicians to compromise the concussion evaluation and, possibly, 
athlete safety.
using video to identify a concussion
Video might be used to trigger a concussion evaluation, or to 
help the clinician diagnose concussion. At the professional level, 
AFL, NFL, NHL, NRL and rugby union use video to identify 
possible concussion events, differentiate between mandatory 
and discretionary concussion signs and, in select cases, assist 
with return to sport decisions. Video-review improves the sensi-
tivity of concussion identification and accurate identification of 
the mechanism(s) of injury.18 Clinicians can view (with replay, 
slow-motion and multiple viewing angles) the incident, often 
from perspectives that are not observable on the sideline.
Video has three important functions:
1. Identification: video can help the clinician identify suspicious 
events, and evaluate the athlete’s response immediately 
following the event.
2. Confirmation: video can support the confirmation of manda-
tory versus discretionary signs.
3. Management: video can support return to sport decisions if 
the off-field concussion screening is normal.
Considerations for getting the most out of video technology
Based on the experience of collision sports using video tech-
nology, there are eight suggestions that should be considered 
for optimising video technology to support team clinicians with 
concussion diagnosis and management:
Table 1 Mandatory signs of concussion and appropriate action
signs
Action
Loss of consciousness
Lying motionless for >5 s*
Confusion/disorientation
Amnesia
Vacant look
Motor incoordination
Tonic posturing
Impact seizure
Ataxia
Remove the athlete from the field of play
In some codes (eg, AFL, NRL, NFL, WR), the athlete 
may not return to the game once removed for 
a mandatory sign (referred to as ‘no-go’ criteria 
in the NFL). In other codes, a mandatory sign 
results in a mandatory assessment conducted 
in a distraction-free environment to determine 
whether to allow the player to return to the field 
of play.
*NRL and AFL use >1 s as a discretionary sign for an off-field assessment.
AFL, Australian Football League; NFL, National Football League; NRL,  National 
Rugby League; WR, World Rugby. 
Table 2 Discretionary signs of concussion and appropriate action
signs
Action
Clutching the head*
Being slow to get up*
Suspected facial fracture
Possible ataxia
Behaviour change†
Other clinical suspicion
Further evaluation is required.
The athlete should (1) be removed from the 
arena, (2) undergo an evaluation in a distraction-
free environment and (3) only return to sport if 
the signs are determined to have been from a 
cause other than concussion (ie, the diagnosis of 
concussion is ruled out).
*NHL discretionary signs slow to get up or clutching the head do not require 
removal from play. The clinician should exercise his or her medical judgement 
regarding whether to remove the player for an acute evaluation.
†Some codes such as NRL, AFL and WR consider this a definitive removal criterion.
AFL,  Australian Football League;  NHL,  National Hockey League;  NRL,  National 
Rugby League;  WR,  World Rugby. 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 637
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Consensus statement
1. Use a live television feed plus dedicated multiangle camera 
systems;
2. Use several camera views (although too many angles may 
delay clinical decision-making);
3. Employ trained ‘spotters’/video 
review analysts who have 
injury expertise (eg, athletic trainers);
4. Competency is as important as qualification. Develop the 
competency (including using dedicated video training) of 
spotters and clinicians, irrespective of background training 
(ie, medical or non-medically trained);
5. Include video clips in the athlete’s medical record;
6. Provide regular (eg, weekly) follow-up and feedback to spot-
ters and clinicians, and review of collisions following each 
match to improve consistency;
7. When possible encourage camera operators to remain 
focused on a player for a fixed period of time (eg, 2 
min) 
after a head impact;
8. Use a central, off-site broadcast ‘bunker’ with several 
monitors (instead of ‘in-arena’ monitoring).
It is acknowledged that not all criteria are always attainable 
and that broadcasters often dictate camera operation.
Tips for the team clinician using video to identify 
concussion
Video is useful for triggering a concussion evaluation, and may 
be one of the tools available to the clinician (one approach is 
outlined in box 1). However, video is not the sole criterion 
for concussion diagnosis. Take care when interpreting player 
responses to head impact events using the ‘ultra-slo-mo’ video 
capture. This is because ultra-slo-mo may exaggerate aspects 
such as the duration of eye closure.
Management on and around the field of play
In most sports, an initial on-field or pitch-side screen is conducted 
by an athletic trainer or team physician. The Maddocks’ ques-
tions19 or similar sports-specific questions are often part of the 
on-field assessment. Depending on the sport’s protocols, this 
process may also be initiated by a video spotter, independent 
match doctor or match official.
Immediate concussion management in recreational sport (where 
specialist support may be absent)
At community level, across all codes, CRT5 should be used to 
identify situations where athletes should be removed from sport 
because of possible concussion.15 Any suspicion of concussion 
should result in the athlete being removed from the playing 
arena. The athlete should not return to sport until an appropriate 
medical evaluation has been completed by an appropriately 
qualified healthcare professional. As per standard head-and-
neck injury protocol, attention is also focused on appropriate 
management of potential cervical spine, maxillofacial and airway 
injuries.
Immediate concussion management in elite athletes (where 
specialist support is present)
If the brief on-field or pitch-side screen is suggestive of concus-
sion, a more thorough off-field assessment in a distraction-free, 
private area should follow. This evaluation should be based on 
the SCAT514 and performed by an accredited medical practi-
tioner or trained healthcare professional. The rules of contact 
and collision sports should allow for a minimum of 10 
min 
for this off-field evaluation,16 which may include video review 
(see below). Sport-specific modifications to the SCAT5 (eg, 
performing balance assessments with ice skates on) may be 
necessary to more closely replicate the typical conditions of the 
sport. Making the SCAT5 (or similar tool) available as a special-
ised software application on electronic devices can also provide 
immediate comparison to baseline scores. Consideration (as in 
the NRL) should be given for an extra 10 
min if a second head 
injury evaluation (for another player) is required within 10 
min 
of a concussion evaluation, and additional medical personnel are 
not available to evaluate both players.
Field of play management is facilitated more easily in inter-
change sports. In substitution sports without free interchange, a 
minimum period of 10 
min allows for a SCAT5-type evaluation. 
Permitting longer periods of time for off-field head injury assess-
ment may have the potential to contribute to an increased risk 
for game manipulation (‘gaming’) by uninjured players. In sports 
without free substitution for concussion, clinical evaluation and 
management may be compromised as both athletes and medical 
staff may feel pressure to keep athletes on the field. This could 
mean that athletes and clinicians may not allow sufficient time 
for the clinical features of the injury (eg, symptoms) to become 
evident. Where sporting codes do not facilitate an appropriate 
process for concussion evaluation, a change in the laws/rules of 
the sport should be encouraged to enhance athlete health and 
safety. This has been achieved in several codes (AFL, NFL, NRL, 
WR) by initiating dialogue between medical commissions and 
governing bodies that resulted in changes that support consensus 
guidelines and best practice.
return to sport recommendations
The timing of return to sport is often the most important issue 
for athletes, coaches and parents. Clinicians face the challenge of 
box 1 six key video-review steps for the team clinician
1. Look for the suspected head impact event.
2. Look for the immediate response of the injured athlete 
(0–2 s): does the athlete fall to the ground? If the athlete 
falls, is there loss of head and neck control? Does the athlete 
protect himself/herself when falling? If the athlete remains 
upright, is he/she steady on his/her feet?
3. Look for the subsequent response (2–5 s): if the athlete 
falls, does he/she move spontaneously? Is there evidence 
of purposeful voluntary movement (ie, placing the ball or 
completing a tackle)? Is there evidence of a concussive 
convulsion or tonic posturing? How does the athlete respond 
to the attending medical staff (this phase may extend for 
substantially longer than 5 s, particularly if in-line cervical 
immobilisation is required)? If the athlete remains standing, 
the distinction between the subsequent and late responses 
may be unclear.
4. Watch for the athlete’s late response when returning to his/
her feet (if the athlete has fallen): is the athlete unsteady 
when attempting to get to his/her feet and return to sport? 
Does the athlete need help from others to stand up? Are the 
athlete’s movements fluid and coordinated? Does the athlete 
fall to the ground?
5. Watch the athlete’s behaviour on return to sport. Are his/her 
actions appropriate or not? Does he/she move immediately to 
the correct position on the field of play?
6. Observe the responses of other athletes and match officials.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 638
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Consensus statement
helping the athlete return at the appropriate time that does not 
compromise the athlete’s health or performance.
At all participation levels (professional, elite, community/
recreational), an athlete who is diagnosed with concussion 
should not be permitted to return to sport on the day the concus-
sion is sustained. All athletes diagnosed with concussion should 
undergo serial clinical evaluations in the days following the 
injury.
Athletes participating at the elite level, who are removed from 
the playing arena with a suspected head injury, but are not diag-
nosed with concussion following a multifaceted, SCAT5-based 
assessment performed by an experienced clinician, may return 
to the game.
Even if no diagnosis of concussion has been made, athletes 
removed from sport with suspected concussion should undergo 
serial re-evaluations for up to 48 
hours because of the possibility 
of delayed symptom onset. For the athlete who is diagnosed with 
concussion, monitoring should continue at regular intervals until 
the athlete is cleared to return to sport (box 2).
Athletes should follow a graded return to sport protocol 
before returning to unrestricted sport. This process typically 
takes 7 days, although there is variability in this time due to 
athlete-specific factors (eg, history, initial symptom severity, 
age) and this time interval is not evidenced-based. Expert 
consensus is that professional athletes supported by advanced 
care settings (as outlined below) may return on a slightly faster 
timeline than non-professional athletes, in cases where initial 
symptoms rapidly resolve, and a thorough medical and neuro-
psychological evaluation can be carried out by experienced 
providers. The athlete must have been exposed to high-inten-
sity exercise before being cleared to participate in unrestricted 
sport.
Advanced care setting
This is an enhanced, well-resourced, clinical environment where 
individualised management of athletes can occur. An advanced 
care setting should be in place when contemplating a faster 
return to sport, and is the most appropriate environment for 
managing more complicated cases.
Key characteristics of an advanced care setting are access to:
 
►
A medical doctor experienced in concussion management 
(sport medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, 
neurology or neurosurgery specialisations);
 
►
Computerised and/or formal neuropsychological evaluation;
 
►
Oculomotor 
and 
cervicovestibular 
evaluation 
and 
rehabilitation.
Where advanced care settings are not available, some sports 
advise compulsory, age-specific stand-down periods, where 
physical activity is limited to below the symptom threshold.
Specialist testing that may characterise advanced care settings
Neuropsychological testing is a useful adjunct to medical evalu-
ation of concussion.
Formal neuropsychological testing conducted by a neuropsy-
chologist is the gold standard:
 
►
Where an accelerated return to sport (<7 days) is planned;
 
►
In cases of delayed recovery (>1 
month);
 
►
In complex cases (eg, athletes with a history of multiple 
concussions);
 
►
For 
athletes 
with 
pre-existing 
comorbidities 
(eg, 
psychological/psychiatric);
 
►
In decisions regarding athlete retirement for the season or 
career.
If a specialist neuropsychologist is not available, supervised 
computerised testing batteries and additional expert clinical 
opinion should be employed for concussed athletes who return 
to sport in fewer than 7 days.
Important considerations for return to sport
A multidisciplinary, collaborative concussion management 
approach is encouraged, but the final return to sport deci-
sion should be made by the team clinician or an appropriately 
licensed healthcare professional.
Although evidence is limited, return to sport in child athletes, 
whose brains are still developing, should follow a more conser-
vative approach than adults. A more conservative approach to 
return to sport should be taken with the paediatric population: 
children should not be permitted to return to unrestricted sport 
in fewer than 7 
days, with several organisations mandating 
longer periods of time for this group.
On-line symptom and cognitive self-evaluation for readiness 
to return to sport by athletes is strongly discouraged. Athletes 
should not be taking medication to treat concussion-related 
symptoms when performing cognitive tests or returning to sport. 
Computerised neurocognitive test batteries (eg, CogState Sport, 
ImPACT) have cost implications, especially at community level, 
and should not take precedence over programmes to provide 
clinical care. Computerised batteries should not be used as the 
sole criterion for return to sport decision-making. Neurocogni-
tive test batteries need to be interpreted as part of a compre-
hensive clinical evaluation—preferably by a neuropsychologist, 
when available.
Independence in the concussion management process
Many factors can complicate presentation, diagnosis and recovery 
from concussion, making additional medical opinions valuable 
in concussion management. In addition, television coverage and 
commentary of injuries in collision sport and the high profile of 
concussion as a public health issue, has placed medical manage-
ment and return to sport decisions under increased scrutiny. 
Because of this, auditing of concussion diagnoses and manage-
ment may be useful for quality assurance, training and medico-
legal purposes.
Auditing strategies currently used in different collision sports 
include:
 
►
Independent, unaffiliated neurological consultants who may 
assist with recognition of mechanisms of injury associated 
with potential concussion (live or on video), assist sideline 
concussion evaluation and follow-up on confirmed cases. 
The independent, unaffiliated consultant is often a neurosur-
geon, neurologist, emergency medicine physician or reha-
bilitation medicine physician with expertise in managing 
traumatic brain injury.
box 2 Criteria for return to sport after concussion in 
team collision sport
Athletes who have been diagnosed with concussion, may only 
return to sport after:
1. Concussion-related symptom scores, at rest and with match-
intensity exercise, have returned to baseline levels.
2. Neurological examination (including balance testing) is 
normal.
3. Cognitive testing (computerised and/or pencil-and-paper) has 
returned to baseline or age-appropriate norms.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 639
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Consensus statement
 
►
Peer review of team doctor decisions, case-by-case follow-up 
and referral to an expert panel for difficult cases.
 
►
An independent concussion consultant to evaluate players in 
the days following injury.
 
►
Using match officials in the community game who, when 
suspecting a possible concussion, may indicate removal from 
sport and direct the injured athlete to enter a process of 
formal medical evaluation and stand-down (eg, Blue Card 
system in rugby union).
Where independent medical personnel are used at the game, 
they may override team clinician’s decisions and immediately 
and permanently remove a player from the field (eg, in rugby 
union). In other sports (eg, NFL), the independent unaffiliated 
neurological consultant is a second opinion, and the team clini-
cian takes responsibility for final decisions regarding diagnosis 
and removal from sport. The team clinician is recognised as the 
person most knowledgeable about the athlete’s baseline status. 
Team clinicians may also be in a more favourable position to 
recognise subtle signs of concussion such as a change in athlete 
behaviour or attitude that may not be detected by independent 
neurological consultants. The NFL recognises that on every 
medical team, one expert must make a final decision regarding 
athlete care—in the case of concussion, the team clinician is 
the expert. Team clinicians’ decisions regarding return to sport 
should not be interfered with or challenged by non-medical 
personnel.
At the professional/elite levels, team clinicians typically have 
the final say in return to sport after concussion but may choose 
to avail themselves of consultant support for shared deci-
sion-making. In all settings (even where, theoretically, the inde-
pendent clinician’s opinion may be overriding), communication 
and collaboration among clinicians is strongly encouraged, and 
can be a benefit of the consultant system.
Practical implementation and translation of concussion 
management protocols
The updated (version 5) sports concussion tools published after 
The Fifth International Conference on Concussion in Sport 
provide the basis for clinical concussion screening and manage-
ment. Prudent use of additional clinical evaluation and tech-
nology may improve accuracy, and validated translations of the 
tools are required to promote global application.
In community sport, the CRT5 is the most appropriate tool for 
identification and removal from sport of athletes suspected of 
possible concussion or more serious brain injury since the CRT5 
highlights key symptoms, signs and ‘red flags’ indicating such 
potential injuries. The SCAT5 is the most appropriate instru-
ment for use by healthcare professionals in the evaluation of the 
athlete who is suspected of having sustained a possible concus-
sion. The benefits of these tools are that they are freely available 
and easy to use. The downside is that the CRT5 and the SCAT5 
are relatively insensitive and non-specific instruments. Serial 
evaluation, further clinical assessments and a multidisciplinary 
approach improve diagnostic accuracy and decision making.
In professional sport, most collision sport codes perform 
baseline SCAT5 assessments and computerised cognitive base-
line tests, allowing for comparison of post head-impact event 
testing with preinjury values. Simulating identical conditions for 
box 3 six features of successful programmes across team 
collision sports
1. Providing community resources such as websites, online 
learning modules and access to concussion recognition tools. 
Examples include the CDC concussion courses and World 
Rugby’s Player Welfare sites.
2. Training for medical personnel via online modules and 
courses, posters, booklets and smartphone applications.
3. Training for medical personnel, independent consultants, 
trainers and spotters through national workshops.
4. Education of match officials.
5. Education of television commentators.
6. Leadership from well-known players involved in public 
awareness campaigns.
box 4 Current areas of concussion research focus in team 
collision sports
Injury prevention
 
► Implementation and evaluation of the effectiveness of rule 
changes
 
► Risk factors for concussion
 
► Genetic studies—apolipoprotein E, glial cell-derived 
neurotrophic factor, catechol-O-methyltransferase
 
► Energy absorbing artificial turf
 
► Energy absorbing helmet technology
 
► The role of tackling technique in reducing concussion risk
Screening and diagnosis
 
► Effectiveness of video assessment
 
► Sports Concussion Assessment Tool normative data
 
► Cross-cultural approaches to concussion assessment
 
► Effectiveness of baseline testing for improving diagnostic 
accuracy
 
► Sensitivity of the modified Balance Error Scoring System and 
tandem gait tests
 
► Additional assessment modalities, eg, reaction times, 
oculomotor, computerised and pencil-and-paper cognitive 
tests
 
► Role and accuracy of impact sensors
 
► Visual scanning assessment in the detection of concussion
 
► Diagnosis via visual-evoked potentials
 
► Blood biomarkers
 
► Imaging biomarkers
 
► Acute concussion triage using portable electroencephalogram
 
► New neurophysiology investigation tools
 
► The role of advanced imaging in concussion assessment
Treatment and management
 
► Active concussion rehabilitation
 
► Indications for targeted cervicovestibular and oculomotor 
rehabilitation
 
► Role of visual scanning assessment in return to sport
 
► Role of advanced imaging in monitoring concussion recovery
 
► Evaluation of return to sport assessments to determine 
readiness to compete following acute concussion
Mental and neurological health
 
► Relationships among mental health variables such as 
depression and post-traumatic stress (current and retired 
athletes) and concussion diagnosis, recovery from concussion 
and development of postconcussion syndrome
 
► Neurodegenerative diseases, vascular-related illnesses and 
mental health in former professional athletes
 
► Neuroimaging with retired athletes
 
► Brain bank projects
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 640
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Consensus statement
postinjury and baseline tests is important, including consider-
ation for the test environment and athlete footwear.
The five-word recall lists form an important part of the assess-
ment of verbal learning and memory. However, these lists are 
dated, familiar to many players and have a low ceiling effect.20 
Random rotation of the word lists and increasing the list to 10 
words is recommended. The use of smartphone applications may 
improve efficiency and accuracy (eg, by randomising word lists 
and building in a 5 
min time delay for word recall). Language 
barriers may limit the effectiveness of the word recall aspects of 
the SCAT5 as a global tool and appropriate, validated cultural 
adaptations of word lists is needed. Direct translation of the 
English words to other languages is inadequate, and will not 
reflect consistent assessment of verbal learning and memory 
across cultures. This is an area where co-operation between 
sports may be beneficial to increase the number of batteries of 
validated word lists in different languages.
Balance testing incorporates both the Balance Error Scoring 
System and tandem gait across most sporting codes. These tests 
may need to be adapted to suit the particular context of the sport 
(eg, testing the player while he or she is wearing ice skates or foot-
ball boots). Additional sideline tools such as the King-Devick test21 
or Visual Oculomotor Screen22 and others may increase diagnostic 
sensitivity, and are being researched in many sport codes.
Concussion awareness and education
Many concussions occur without a healthcare professional 
present. This makes public, athlete, parent and coach awareness 
an important aspect in initiating care. Concussion awareness and 
education efforts in collision sports can also influence policy 
development and cultural change in sports.
The USA pioneered the use of legislation23 in all 50 states to 
enact concussion laws that protected youth sports activities. The 
three components of the state laws are (a) concussion educa-
tion of the athletes and parents, (b) removal from sport in all 
suspected cases of concussion and no return to practice/training 
or competition until (c) a requisite clearance by a licensed health-
care provider with expertise in concussion.
There are universal challenges in reaching communities in 
remote areas and those with limited resources. Incorporating 
concussion guidelines into coaching material is a practice that has 
been successfully implemented in rugby union. Paramedics and 
clinicians who work in sporting communities should be familiar 
with the CRT5 and the SCAT5. Other healthcare providers, 
especially primary care and emergency care physicians, may 
need additional education and training.
In rural/remote areas, and communities with reduced access 
to medical support, sporting codes should be more directive in 
terms of concussion management. This may include mandating 
specific absolute and relative rest times, and graduated return 
to sport timeframes. Similarly, standardised management criteria 
should be more conservative and directive for younger athletes, 
and in situations where access to appropriately trained health-
care professionals is limited. Additionally, efforts to train medical 
professionals ranging from nurses, physician assistants and emer-
gency medical technicians become more critical in these environ-
ments with a paucity of concussion experts.
Examples of where collision sports have successfully improved 
concussion education and awareness are shown in box 3 and 
box 4.
Current and future research
Concussion in team collision sports is an area of firm research 
focus. Research is currently being conducted in concussion injury 
prevention, diagnosis, treatment and management, and mental 
health (box 4). Implementing research projects and data sharing 
is of common interest. To foster game-changing research, there is 
a need for co-operation among sporting codes, universities and 
government agencies. Providing feedback on research outcomes 
to athletes is also a priority.
suMMAry
Due to the concussion rates associated with collision sports, 
each of these sports at all participation levels should strive for 
as comprehensive a clinical support system as possible, within 
resource and location constraints. Where concussion expertise 
is limited, management guidelines should be more rigid, and 
return to sport timeframes more conservative. Training addi-
tional ancillary medical personnel is also an urgent priority in 
these contexts. Where clinical support meets advanced care 
setting standards, concussion management and return to sport 
may become more individualised.
The CRT5 and SCAT5 form the basis of concussion identi-
fication and assessment in all sports. Widespread use could be 
improved by professional sports leading in the development of 
multiple language versions of these tools. Sports without inter-
change or temporary substitution rules may be compromising 
player care and should consider instituting rule changes rather 
than adapting player evaluation to a limited on-field assessment. 
At least 10 
min should be allocated for an off-field evaluation in 
a distraction-free environment.
Ongoing awareness, education and training is essential for 
successful implementation of concussion management protocols. 
Athletes, coaches, officials, medical and paramedical personnel 
should receive ongoing hands-on and remote training using a 
range of written materials and ‘on-line’ modules. Extending 
concussion care knowledge to healthcare professionals such as 
nurses, emergency medical technicians, primary care and emer-
gency medicine physicians is a priority.
Professional and elite sports organisations must continue to 
share information and collaborate to implement new protocols. 
Communication and collaboration is paramount for protecting 
our patients, our athletes.
Author affiliations
1University of Pretoria, Section of Sports Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
2Department of Emergency Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
3Department of Physiotherapy, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
4School of Allied Health, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
5World Rugby, Dublin, Ireland
6International Ice Hockey Federation, Zurich, Switzerland
7National Rugby League, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
8Australian Football League, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
9Australian Institute of Sport, Canberra, Australia
10National Hockey League, New York, USA
11University Orthopedic Center, Concussion Care Clinic, State College, Pennsylvania, 
USA
12University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA
13National Football League, New York, USA
14Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA
15Irish Rugby Football Union, Dublin, Ireland
16Centre for Urgent and Emergency Care Research, School of Health and Related 
Research, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
17National Collegiate Athletic Association, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
18Fédération Equestre Internationale, Lausanne, Switzerland
19Gaelic Athletic Association, Dublin, Ireland
20Fédération Internationale de Ski, Oberhofen and Thunersee, Switzerland
Contributors MR conceived the idea for and arranged the meeting. JP summarised 
all the attendees’ contributions, drafted the paper, proofread and edited. MDH 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 641
Patricios JS, et al. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:635–641. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079
Consensus statement
and CLA documented each delegates’ input at the meeting. CLA formatted and 
proofread the paper. All other authors presented and spoke on behalf of their codes 
at the meeting, submitted written contributions to the paper and assisted with 
editing.
Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the 
public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 McCrory P, Meeuwisse W, Dvorak J, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in 
sport—the th 5 international conference on concussion in sport held in Berlin, 
October 2016. Br J Sports Med 2016;2017:838–47.
 2 McCrory P, Feddermann-Demont N, Dvořák J, et al. What is the definition of sports-
related concussion: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:877–87.
 3 Patricios J, Fuller GW, Ellenbogen R, et al. What are the critical elements of sideline 
screening that can be used to establish the diagnosis of concussion? A systematic 
review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:bjsports-2016-097441–894.
 4 Echemendia RJ, Broglio SP, Davis GA, et al. What tests and measures should be 
added to the SCAT3 and related tests to improve their reliability, sensitivity and/
or specificity in sideline concussion diagnosis? A systematic review. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:895–901.
 5 Feddermann-Demont N, Echemendia RJ, Schneider KJ, et al. What domains of clinical 
function should be assessed after sport-related concussion? A systematic review. Br J 
Sports Med 2017;51:903–18.
 6 McCrea M, Meier T, Huber D, et al. Role of advanced neuroimaging, fluid biomarkers 
and genetic testing in the assessment of sport-related concussion: a systematic 
review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:919–29.
 7 Schneider KJ, Leddy JJ, Guskiewicz KM, et al. Rest and treatment/rehabilitation 
following sport-related concussion: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:930–4.
 8 Emery CA, Black AM, Kolstad A, et al. What strategies can be used to effectively 
reduce the risk of concussion in sport? A systematic review. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:978–84.
 9 Kamins J, Bigler E, Covassin T, et al. What is the physiological time to recovery after 
concussion? A systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:935–40.
 
10 Iverson GL, Gardner AJ, Terry DP, et al. Predictors of clinical recovery from concussion: 
a systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:941–8.
 
11 Davis GA, Anderson V, Babl FE, et al. What is the difference in concussion 
management in children as compared with adults? A systematic review. Br J Sports 
Med 2017;51:949–57.
 
12 Makdissi M, Schneider KJ, Feddermann-Demont N, et al. Approach to investigation 
and treatment of persistent symptoms following sport-related concussion: a 
systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:958–68.
 
13 Manley G, Gardner AJ, Schneider KJ, et al. A systematic review of potential long-term 
effects of sport-related concussion. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:969–77.
 
14 Echemendia RJ, Meeuwisse W, McCrory P, et al. Sport concussion assessment tool - 
5th edition. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:bjsports-2017-097506–8.
 
15 Davis GA, Purcell L, Schneider KJ, et al. The Child Sport Concussion Assessment 
Tool 5th Edition (Child SCAT5): background and rationale. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:859–61.
 
16 Echemendia RJ, Meeuwisse W, McCrory P, et al. The Concussion Recognition Tool 5th 
Edition (CRT5): Background and rationale. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:870–1.
 
17 Bruce JM, Echemendia RJ, Meeuwisse W, et al. Development of a risk prediction 
model among professional hockey players with visible signs of concussion. Br J Sports 
Med 2017. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2016-097091. [Epub ahead of print].
 
18 Fuller GW, Kemp SP, Raftery M. The accuracy and reproducibility of video assessment 
in the pitch-side management of concussion in elite rugby. J Sci Med Sport 
2017;20:246–9.
 
19 Maddocks DL, Dicker GD, Saling MM. The assessment of orientation following 
concussion in athletes. Clin J Sport Med 1995;5:32–5.
 
20 Echemendia RJ, Broglio SP, Davis GA, et al. What tests and measures should be added 
to the SCAT3 and related tests to improve their reliability, sensitivity and/or specificity 
in sideline diagnosis? A systematic review. Br J Sports Med 2017.
 
21 Galetta KM, Brandes LE, Maki K, et al. The King-Devick test and sports-related 
concussion: study of a rapid visual screening tool in a collegiate cohort. J Neurol Sci 
2011;309:34–9.
 
22 Galetta KM, Morganroth J, Moehringer N, et al. Adding vision to concussion 
testing: a prospective study of sideline testing in youth and collegiate athletes. J 
Neuroophthalmol 2015;35:235–41.
 
23 The Lystedt law: a concussion survivor’s journey. https://www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
media/ 
subtopic/ 
matte/ 
pdf/ 
031210- 
Zack- 
story. 
pdf (accessed 18 Oct 2017).
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Br J Sports Med: first published as 10.1136/bjsports-2018-099079 on 2 March 2018. Downloaded from 
