 Clinical Infectious Diseases
I D S A G U I D E L I N E
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of
Aspergillosis: 2016 Update by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America
Thomas F. Patterson,1,a George R. Thompson III,2 David W. Denning,3 Jay A. Fishman,4 Susan Hadley,5 Raoul Herbrecht,6 Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis,7
Kieren A. Marr,8 Vicki A. Morrison,9 M. Hong Nguyen,10 Brahm H. Segal,11 William J. Steinbach,12 David A. Stevens,13 Thomas J. Walsh,14 John R. Wingard,15
Jo-Anne H. Young,16 and John E. Bennett17,a
1University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio and South Texas Veterans Health Care System; 2University of California, Davis; 3National Aspergillosis Centre, University Hospital of South
Manchester, University of Manchester, United Kingdom; 4Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and 5Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 6University of Strasbourg,
France; 7University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston; 8Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland;
9Hennepin County Medical Center and University of Minnesota, Minneapolis; 10University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 11University at Buffalo Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, and
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, New York; 12Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; 13California Institute for Medical Research, San Jose; 14New York–Presbyterian Hospital/Weill
Cornell Medical Center, New York; 15University of Florida, Gainesville; 16University of Minnesota, Minneapolis; 17Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among patients. They are not intended to sup-
plant physician judgment with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. IDSA considers adherence to these guidelines
to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by the physician in the light of each patient’s
individual circumstances.
Keywords.
aspergillosis; invasive aspergillosis; allergic aspergillosis; chronic aspergillosis; fungal diagnostics; azoles; echniocan-
dins; amphotericin.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
Aspergillus species continue to be an important cause of life-
threatening infection in immunocompromised patients. This
at-risk population is comprised of patients with prolonged neu-
tropenia, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT),
solid organ transplant (SOT), inherited or acquired immunode-
ficiencies, corticosteroid use, and others. This document consti-
tutes the guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) for treatment of aspergillosis and replaces
the practice guidelines for Aspergillus published in 2008. Since
that publication, clinical studies evaluating new and existing
therapies including combination therapy for the management
of Aspergillus infection have been conducted and the data on
use of non-culture-based biomarkers for diagnosing infection
have been expanded. The objective of these guidelines is to sum-
marize the current evidence for treatment of different forms of
aspergillosis. This document reviews guidelines for management
of the 3 major forms of aspergillosis: invasive aspergillosis (IA);
chronic (and saprophytic) forms of aspergillosis; and allergic
forms of aspergillosis. Given the clinical importance of IA, em-
phasis is placed upon the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention
of the different forms of IA, including invasive pulmonary asper-
gillosis (IPA), Aspergillus sinusitis, disseminated aspergillosis, and
several types of single-organ IA.
Summarized below are the 2016 recommendations for the
management of aspergillosis. Due to the guidelines’ relevance
to pediatrics, the guideline has been reviewed and endorsed by
the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS). The panel
followed a guideline development process that has been adopt-
ed by IDSA, which includes use of the Grading of Recommen-
dations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE)
system, a systematic method of grading both the strength of
the recommendation (weak or strong) and the quality of evi-
dence (very low, low, moderate, and high) (Figure 1). The
guidelines are not intended to replace clinical judgment in
the management of individual patients. A detailed description
of the methods, background, and evidence summaries that
support each recommendation can be found in the full text
of the guideline.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS FOR
INFECTION
I. How Can the Most Susceptible Patients Be Protected From
Aspergillosis, and Which Patients Are Most Susceptible?
What Are Sources of Exposure to Aspergillus, and How Can
Exposure Be Decreased? Is Environmental Surveillance Useful?
Received 7 May 2016; accepted 11 May 2016; published online 29 June 2016.
aT. F. P. and J. E. B. served as co-chairs for the IDSA Aspergillus Guidelines Committee.
Correspondence: T. F. Patterson, Division of Infectious Diseases, San Antonio Center for Med-
ical Mycology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl
Drive–MSC 7881, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900 (patterson@uthscsa.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®
2016;63(4):e1–60
Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of America 2016. This
work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw326
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Recommendations.
1. Hospitalized allogeneic HSCT recipients should be placed in
a protected environment to reduce mold exposure (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
2. These precautions can be reasonably applied to other
highly immunocompromised patients at increased risk for IA,
such as patients receiving induction/reinduction regimens for
acute leukemia (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
3. In hospitals in which a protected environment is not avail-
able, we recommend admission to a private room, no con-
nection to construction sites, and not allowing plants or
cut flowers to be brought into the patient’s room (strong rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
4. We recommend reasonable precautions to reduce mold ex-
posure among outpatients at high risk for IA, including
avoidance of gardening, spreading mulch (compost), or
close exposure to construction or renovation (strong recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence).
5.
Leukemia
and
transplant
centers
should
perform
regular surveillance of cases of invasive mold infection. An
increase in incidence over baseline or the occurrence of inva-
sive mold infections in patients who are not at high risk for
such infections should prompt evaluation for a hospital
source (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
DIAGNOSIS OF ASPERGILLOSIS
II. How Can a Diagnosis of Invasive Aspergillosis Be Established?
How Should Aspergillus Be Identified, and How Does This
Influence Management?
Recommendation.
6. Until molecular tools are more widely used in clinical labo-
ratories, we recommend that tissue and fluid specimens be
submitted in adequate quantities for simultaneous histopath-
ologic/cytologic and culture examination. In the case of iso-
lates with atypical growth or concerns for resistance, species
Figure 1.
Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development,
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology (unrestricted use of the figure granted by the US GRADE Network) [1].
e2 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 identification by molecular methods should be employed
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
What Is the Diagnostic Value of Nucleic Acid Testing in Clinical
Specimens?
Recommendations.
7. There was debate among the committee members regarding
the clinical utility of blood-based polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) in diagnosing IA, and experts were not in agreement.
One group favored recommendations for PCR testing, based
on publications validating its role when used in conjunction
with other tests such as antigen detection assays to diagnose
IA and/or reduce preemptive antifungal usage. The other
group thought that PCR assays are promising but could not
be recommended for routine use in clinical practice at present
due to the lack of conclusive validation for commercially avail-
able assays, the variety of methodologies in the literature, and
questions about the extent to which results assisted diagnosis.
8. As research in the area continues, we recommend that clinicians
choosing to use PCR assays employ them carefully in the man-
agement of individual patients on a case-by-case basis. Clini-
cians should be aware of the methodologies and performance
characteristics of the specific assay used, and interpret results ac-
cordingly. When PCR assays are used, results should be consid-
ered in conjunction with other diagnostic tests and the clinical
context (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
How Should Galactomannan and (1 ! 3)-β-D-Glucan Be Used for
the Diagnosis of Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
9. Serum and BAL galactomannan (GM) is recommended as
an accurate marker for the diagnosis of IA in adult and pe-
diatric patients when used in certain patient subpopulations
(hematologic malignancy, HSCT) (strong recommendation;
high-quality evidence).
10. GM is not recommended for routine blood screening in pa-
tients receiving mold-active antifungal therapy or prophylaxis,
but can be applied to bronchoscopy specimens from those pa-
tients (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
11. GM is not recommended for screening in SOT recipients or
patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) (strong
recommendation; high-quality evidence).
12. Serum assays for (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan are recommended
for diagnosing IA in high-risk patients (hematologic malig-
nancy, allogeneic HSCT), but are not specific for Aspergillus
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
What Is the Approach to the Radiographic Diagnosis of Invasive
Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
13. We recommend performing a chest computed tomograph-
ic (CT) scan whenever there is a clinical suspicion for IPA
regardless of chest radiograph results (strong recommenda-
tion; high-quality evidence).
14. Routine use of contrast during a chest CT scan for a sus-
picion of IPA is not recommended (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence). Contrast is recommended when
a nodule or a mass is close to a large vessel (strong recommen-
dation; moderate-quality evidence).
15. We suggest a follow-up chest CT scan to assess the response
of IPA to treatment after a minimum of 2 weeks of treatment;
earlier assessment is indicated if the patient clinically deterio-
rates (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence). When a
nodule is close to a large vessel, more frequent monitoring
may be required (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Role of Bronchoscopy in the Diagnosis of Invasive
Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
16. We recommend performing a bronchoscopy with bron-
choalveolar lavage (BAL) in patients with a suspicion of IPA
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Signifi-
cant comorbidities such as severe hypoxemia, bleeding, and
platelet transfusion-refractory thrombocytopenia may pre-
clude BAL. The yield of BAL is low for peripheral nodular le-
sions, so percutaneous or endobronchial lung biopsy should
be considered. We recommend the use of a standardized
BAL procedure and sending the BAL sample for routine cul-
ture and cytology as well as non-culture-based methods (eg,
GM) (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
III. What Antifungal Agents Are Available for the Treatment and
Prophylaxis of Invasive Aspergillosis, Including Pharmacologic
Considerations, and What Is the Role for Susceptibility Testing?
Amphotericin B
Recommendations.
17. Amphotericin B (AmB) deoxycholate and its lipid deriva-
tives are appropriate options for initial and salvage therapy
of Aspergillus infections when voriconazole cannot be admin-
istered. However, AmB deoxycholate should be reserved for
use in resource-limited settings in which no alternative agents
are available. Lipid formulations of AmB should be considered
in settings in which azoles are contraindicated or not tolerated
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
18. Aerosolized formulations of AmB may be considered as pro-
phylaxis in patients with prolonged neutropenia (patients re-
ceiving induction/reinduction therapy for acute leukemia and
allogeneic HSCT recipients following conditioning or during
treatment of graft-vs-host disease [GVHD]) and in lung trans-
plant recipients (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Echinocandins
Recommendation.
19. Echinocandins are effective in salvage therapy (either
alone or in combination) against IA, but we do not
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 recommend their routine use as monotherapy for the pri-
mary treatment of IA (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
Triazoles
Recommendations.
20. Triazoles are preferred agents for treatment and prevention
of IA in most patients (strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence).
21. For patients receiving triazole-based therapy for IA, pro-
longed azole prophylaxis, or other therapies for which drug
interactions with azoles are anticipated, the committee rec-
ommends therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) once the
steady state has been reached. A moderate amount of data
for itraconazole, voriconazole, and posaconazole suspension
suggests this approach may be valuable in enhancing thera-
peutic efficacy, in evaluating therapeutic failures attributable
to suboptimal drug exposures, and to minimize toxicities po-
tentially attributable to the azoles (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence). Further studies are needed to ad-
dress whether TDM is helpful or necessary with the extended-
release or intravenous formulations of posaconazole or for
isavuconazole.
22. Clinicians should obtain serum trough drug levels for azole
antifungal agents (itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole,
and possibly isavuconazole) and for potentially interacting
drugs such as cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and sirolimus (and
other CYP3A4 substrates such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors)
to optimize therapeutic efficacy and to avoid potential toxi-
cities of both groups of agents (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Preclinical and Laboratory Assessment of Combination Antifungal
Therapy
23. Combinations of polyenes or azoles with echinocandins
suggest additive or synergistic effects in some preclinical
studies. However, variable test designs and conflicting results
of preclinical and in vitro testing have led to uncertainty as to
how to interpret the findings (weak recommendation; low-
quality evidence).
When Should Antifungal Susceptibility Testing Be Performed,
and How Should Results Be Interpreted and Affect
Management?
Recommendation.
24. Routine antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) of isolates
recovered during initial infection is not recommended. AFST
of Aspergillus isolates using a reference method is reserved
for patients suspected to have an azole-resistant isolate or
who are unresponsive to antifungal agents, or for epidemio-
logical purposes (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
INVASIVE SYNDROMES OF ASPERGILLUS
IV. What Are the Recommended Treatment Regimens and Adjunctive
Treatment Measures for the Various Clinical Presentation of Invasive
Aspergillosis?
How Should IPA Be Treated?
Recommendations.
25. We recommend primary treatment with voriconazole
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
26. Early initiation of antifungal therapy in patients with strongly
suspected IPA is warranted while a diagnostic evaluation is con-
ducted (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
27. Alternative therapies include liposomal AmB (strong rec-
ommendation; moderate-quality evidence), isavuconazole
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence), or
other lipid formulations of AmB (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
28. Combination antifungal therapy with voriconazole and an
echinocandin may be considered in select patients with docu-
mented IPA (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
29. Primary therapy with an echinocandin is not recommend-
ed (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Echinocandins (micafungin or caspofungin) can be used in
settings in which azole and polyene antifungals are contrain-
dicated (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
30. We recommend that treatment of IPA be continued for a
minimum of 6–12 weeks, largely dependent on the degree
and duration of immunosuppression, site of disease, and ev-
idence of disease improvement (strong recommendation; low-
quality evidence).
31. For patients with successfully treated IPA who require sub-
sequent immunosuppression, secondary prophylaxis should
be initiated to prevent recurrence (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Adjunctive Measures and Immunomodulation: When Should
Withdrawal of Immunosuppressive Agents, or Addition of Colony-
Stimulating Factors or Granulocyte Transfusions, Be Considered in
the Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
32. Reducing doses of, or eliminating altogether, immunosup-
pressive agents, when feasible, is advised as a component of
anti-Aspergillus therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
33. Colony-stimulating factors may be considered in neutropenic
patients with diagnosed or suspected IA (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence). There is insufficient evidence regarding
the value of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor vs granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in this setting.
34. Granulocyte transfusions can be considered for neutrope-
nic patients with IA that is refractory or unlikely to respond
to standard therapy, and for an anticipated duration of more
than one week (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
e4 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 35. Recombinant interferon-γ is recommended as prophylaxis
in CGD patients (strong recommendation; high-quality evi-
dence). Its benefit as adjunctive therapy for IA is unknown.
36. Surgery for aspergillosis should be considered for localized
disease that is easily accessible to debridement (eg, invasive
fungal sinusitis or localized cutaneous disease) (strong rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence). The benefit for IA in
other settings such as in the treatment of endocarditis, oste-
omyelitis, or focal central nervous system (CNS) disease ap-
pears rational. Other indications are less clear and require
consideration of the patient’s immune status, comorbidities,
confirmation of a single focus, and the risks of surgery.
When Is It Safe to Proceed With Chemotherapy or Transplantation
in a Patient With Invasive Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
37. IA is not an absolute contraindication to additional che-
motherapy or HSCT (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
38. Decisions about when to proceed with additional chemo-
therapy or HSCT following the diagnosis of aspergillosis
should involve both infectious diseases specialists and hema-
tologists/oncologists. These decisions must consider the risk of
progressive aspergillosis during periods of subsequent anti-
neoplastic treatment vs the risk of death from the underlying
malignancy if this treatment is delayed (strong recommenda-
tion; low-quality evidence).
What Approaches Are Needed for Refractory or Progressive
Aspergillosis (Salvage Therapy)?
Recommendations.
39. We recommend an individualized approach that takes into
consideration the rapidity, severity, and extent of infection, pa-
tient comorbidities, and to exclude the emergence of a new
pathogen (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
The general strategies for salvage therapy typically include
(i) changing the class of antifungal, (ii) tapering or reversal
of underlying immunosuppression when feasible, and (iii)
surgical resection of necrotic lesions in selected cases.
40. In the context of salvage therapy, an additional antifungal
agent may be added to current therapy, or combination
antifungal drugs from different classes other than those in
the initial regimen may be used (weak recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
41. In patients currently receiving an antifungal and exhibiting
an adverse event attributable to this agent, we recommend
changing to an alternative class of antifungal, or the use of
an alternative agent with a nonoverlapping side-effect profile
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
42. For salvage therapy, agents include lipid formulations of
AmB, micafungin, caspofungin, posaconazole, or itracona-
zole. The use of a triazole as salvage therapy should take
into account prior antifungal therapy, host factors, pharma-
cokinetic considerations, and possible antifungal resistance
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
How Can Biomarkers Be Used to Assess Patient Response to Therapy?
Recommendations.
43. Serial monitoring of serum GM can be used in the appro-
priate patient subpopulations (hematologic malignancy,
HSCT) who have an elevated GM at baseline to monitor dis-
ease progression and therapeutic response, and predict out-
come (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
44. (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan has not been extensively studied in IA
to predict outcome (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
What Are the Recommended Treatments for Pediatric Patients
With Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
45. Treatment of aspergillosis in children uses the same recom-
mended therapies as in adult patients; however, the dosing is
different and for some antifungals is unknown (strong recom-
mendation; high-quality evidence).
What Are Treatment Options for Aspergillosis of the Airways in
Transplant and Nontransplant Recipients, and How Does It Differ
From Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
46. Saprophytic forms of tracheobronchial aspergillosis (TBA)
do not require antifungal treatment except for symptomatic
or immunosuppressed patients. Treatment includes broncho-
scopic removal of mucoid impaction. Mold-active triazole
agents are recommended for immunocompromised patients
in whom the possibility of invasive disease cannot be eliminat-
ed (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
47. Bronchocentric granulomatosis is treated in the same fash-
ion as allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
48. Invasive forms of TBA are treated with a mold-active triazole
or intravenous lipid formulations of AmB (strong recom-
mendation; moderate-quality evidence). We also recommend
minimization or reversal of underlying immunosuppression
when feasible, and bronchoscopic debridement of airway le-
sions in selected cases (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
49. In lung transplant recipients, we recommend treatment
with a systemic antimold antifungal for TBA, including sap-
rophytic forms. We also recommend adjunctive inhaled
AmB in the setting of TBA associated with anastomotic en-
dobronchial ischemia or ischemic reperfusion injury due to
airway ischemia associated with lung transplant (strong rec-
ommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Duration of anti-
fungal therapy is at least 3 months or until TBA is completely
resolved, whichever is longer.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 MANAGEMENT OF EXTRAPULMONARY
ASPERGILLOSIS
What Are the Treatment Considerations for Central Nervous
System Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
50. We recommend voriconazole as primary therapy for CNS
aspergillosis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence). Lipid formulations of AmB are reserved for
those intolerant or refractory to voriconazole (strong recom-
mendation; moderate-quality evidence).
How Is Aspergillus Endophthalmitis Treated?
Recommendation.
51. We recommend that Aspergillus endophthalmitis be treat-
ed with systemic oral or intravenous voriconazole plus intra-
vitreal voriconazole or intravitreal AmB deoxycholate (strong
recommendation; weak-quality evidence).
What Is the Role of Surgery in Aspergillosis of the Paranasal
Sinuses?
Recommendation.
52. We recommend that both surgery and either systemic vor-
iconazole or a lipid formulation of AmB be used in invasive
Aspergillus fungal sinusitis but that surgical removal alone
can be used to treat Aspergillus fungal ball of the paranasal
sinus. Enlargement of the sinus ostomy may be needed to
improve drainage and prevent recurrence (strong recommen-
dation; moderate-quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Endocarditis, Pericarditis, and Myocarditis?
Recommendation.
53. In Aspergillus endocarditis, we recommend early surgical
intervention combined with antifungal therapy in attempts
to prevent embolic complications and valvular decompensa-
tion (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Voriconazole or a lipid formulation of AmB is recommended
as initial therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality evi-
dence). Following surgical replacement of an infected valve,
lifelong antifungal therapy should be considered (strong rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Osteomyelitis and Septic Arthritis?
Recommendation.
54. Surgical intervention is recommended, where feasible, for
management of Aspergillus osteomyelitis and arthritis, com-
bined with voriconazole (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Cutaneous
Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
55. As cutaneous lesions may reflect disseminated infection,
we recommend treatment with voriconazole in addition to
evaluation for a primary focus of infection (strong recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence).
56. In cases of aspergillosis in burns or massive soft tissue
wounds, surgical debridement is recommended, in addition
to antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Peritonitis?
Recommendation.
57. We recommend prompt peritoneal dialysis catheter re-
moval accompanied by systemic antifungal therapy with vor-
iconazole (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Esophageal,
Gastrointestinal, and Hepatic Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
58. We suggest voriconazole and surgical consultation in
attempts to prevent complications of hemorrhage, perfora-
tion, obstruction, or infarction (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
59. We suggest antifungal therapy with voriconazole or a lipid
formulation of AmB as initial therapy for hepatic aspergillo-
sis. For extrahepatic or perihepatic biliary obstruction, or lo-
calized lesions that are refractory to medical therapy, surgical
intervention should be considered (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Renal
Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
60. We suggest a combined approach of medical and urologic
management for renal aspergillosis. Obstruction of one or
both ureters should be managed with decompression if possi-
ble and local instillation of AmB deoxycholate. Parenchymal
disease is best treated with voriconazole (weak recommenda-
tion; low-quality evidence).
What Are the Treatment Regimens for Aspergillus Ear Infections?
Recommendations.
61. Noninvasive Aspergillus otitis externa, also called otomy-
cosis, is treated by thorough mechanical cleansing of the
external auditory canal followed by topical antifungals or
boric acid (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
62. We recommend that clinicians treat IA of the ear with a
prolonged course of systemic voriconazole, usually combined
with surgery (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
e6 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Keratitis?
Recommendation.
63. We recommend that clinicians treat Aspergillus keratitis
with topical natamycin 5% ophthalmic suspension or topical
voriconazole (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
How Should Aspergillus Bronchitis Be Diagnosed and Treated
in the Nontransplant Population?
Recommendations.
64. We suggest the diagnosis of Aspergillus bronchitis in non-
transplant patients be confirmed by detection of Aspergillus
spp in respiratory secretions, usually sputum, with both PCR
and GM on respiratory samples being much more sensitive
than culture (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
65. We suggest treatment with oral itraconazole or voriconazole
with TDM (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
PROPHYLAXIS OF INVASIVE ASPERGILLOSIS
V. What Are the Recommended Prophylactic Regimens, Who Should
Receive Them, and How Should Breakthrough Infection Be Managed?
In Which Patients Should Antifungal Prophylaxis Against
Aspergillosis Be Used?
Recommendation.
66. We recommend prophylaxis with posaconazole (strong rec-
ommendation; high-quality evidence), voriconazole (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence), and/or mica-
fungin (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence) during
prolonged neutropenia for those who are at high risk for IA
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence). Prophylaxis
with caspofungin is also probably effective (weak recommen-
dation; low-quality evidence). Prophylaxis with itraconazole
is effective, but therapy may be limited by absorption and tol-
erability (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evi-
dence). Triazoles should not be coadministered with other
agents known to have potentially toxic levels with concurrent
triazole coadministration (eg, vinca alkaloids, and others)
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
What Are the Recommended Prophylactic Regimens for Patients
With Graft-Versus-Host Disease?
Recommendations.
67. We recommend prophylaxis with posaconazole for allo-
geneic HSCT recipients with GVHD who are at high risk
for IA (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Prophylaxis with other mold-active azoles is also effective.
Voriconazole is commonly used for prophylaxis against IA
in high-risk patients but did not show improved survival in
clinical trials (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence). Prophylaxis with itraconazole is limited by
tolerability and absorption (strong recommendation; high-
quality evidence).
68. We recommend continuation of antifungal prophylaxis
throughout the duration of immunosuppression in patients
with chronic immunosuppression associated with GVHD
(corticosteroid equivalent of >1 mg/kg/day of prednisone
for >2 weeks and/or the use of other anti-GVHD therapies,
such as lymphocyte-depleting agents, or tumor necrosis fac-
tor α (TNF-α) inhibition, for refractory GVHD) (strong rec-
ommendation; high-quality evidence).
What Are the Recommendations for Antifungal Prophylaxis in
Lung Transplant Patients?
Recommendations.
69. We recommend antifungal prophylaxis with either a sys-
temic triazole such as voriconazole or itraconazole or an in-
haled AmB product for 3 to 4 months after lung transplant
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
70. Systemic voriconazole or itraconazole is suggested over in-
haled AmB for lung transplant recipients with mold coloni-
zation pre- or post–lung transplant, mold infections found in
explanted lungs, fungal infections of the sinus, and single-
lung transplant recipients (weak recommendation; low-qual-
ity evidence).
71. We recommend reinitiating antifungal prophylaxis for
lung transplant recipients receiving immunosuppression
augmentation with either thymoglobulin, alemtuzumab, or
high-dose corticosteroids (strong recommendation; moder-
ate-quality evidence).
What Are the Recommendations for Antifungal Prophylaxis in
Nonlung Solid Organ Transplant Recipients?
Recommendation.
72. We recommend prophylactic strategies in SOT recipients
based on the institutional epidemiology of infection and
assessment of individual risk factors (strong recommenda-
tion; low-quality evidence). Prospective trials are lacking to
address the need for routine anti-Aspergillus prophylaxis
other than for lung transplant recipients. Individual risk
factors have been identified in cardiac (pretransplant colo-
nization, reoperation, cytomegalovirus [CMV] infection,
renal dysfunction, institutional outbreak), liver (fulminant
hepatic failure, reoperation, retransplantation, or renal fail-
ure), and others with institutional outbreaks or prolonged
or high-dose corticosteroid use. In such patients, the opti-
mal duration of prophylaxis is not known.
MANAGEMENT OF BREAKTHROUGH INFECTION
How Should Breakthrough Aspergillosis Be Managed?
Recommendation.
73. We suggest an individualized approach that takes into con-
sideration the rapidity and severity of infection and local
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 epidemiology. As principles, we recommend an aggressive
and prompt attempt to establish a specific diagnosis with
bronchoscopy and/or CT-guided biopsy for peripheral lung
lesions. Documentation of serum azole levels should be ver-
ified if TDM is available for patients receiving mold-active
triazoles. Antifungal therapy should be empirically changed
to an alternative class of antifungal with Aspergillus activity.
Other considerations include reduction of underlying im-
munosuppression if feasible, and susceptibility testing of
any Aspergillus isolates recovered from the patient (weak
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
VI. When Should Patients Be Treated Empirically?
What Strategies Are Recommended for Empiric and Preemptive
Strategies in Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant
Recipients and Patients Treated for Acute Myelogenous Leukemia?
Recommendations.
74. Empiric antifungal therapy is recommended for high-risk
patients with prolonged neutropenia who remain persistently
febrile despite broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Antifungal
options include a lipid formulation of AmB (strong recommen-
dation; high-quality evidence), an echinocandin (caspofungin
or micafungin) (strong recommendation; high-quality evi-
dence), or voriconazole (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
75. Empiric antifungal therapy is not recommended for
patients who are anticipated to have short durations
of neutropenia (duration of neutropenia <10 days),
unless other findings indicate a suspected invasive fungal
infection (IFI) (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
76. The use of serum or BAL fungal biomarkers such as GM or
(1 → 3)-β-D-glucan to guide antifungal therapy in asymp-
tomatic or febrile high-risk patients (often referred to as pre-
emptive or biomarker-driven antifungal therapy) can reduce
unnecessary antifungal therapy. The preemptive approach
can result in more documented cases of IA without compro-
mise in survival and can be used as an alternative to empiric
antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
77. Early initiation of antifungal therapy in patients with
strongly suspected IPA is warranted while a diagnostic
evaluation is conducted (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
78. Management of suspected or documented breakthrough
IPA in the context of mold-active azole prophylaxis or em-
piric suppressive therapy is not defined by clinical trial
data, but a switch to another drug class is suggested (weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
How Do Lung Transplant Recipients Differ From Other
Immunosuppressed Patients in Management of Suspected Invasive
Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
79. In lung transplant recipients not on antimold prophyl-
axis, we suggest preemptive therapy with an antimold
antifungal for asymptomatic patients with Aspergillus col-
onization of the airways within 6 months of lung transplant
or within 3 months of receiving immunosuppression aug-
mentation for rejection (weak recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
80. Six months after lung transplant and in the absence of recent
immunosuppression augmentation for rejection, it may be pru-
dent to withhold antifungal therapy for Aspergillus airway col-
onization (ie, Aspergillus respiratory cultures in the absence of
clinical features that suggest disease, such as compatible symp-
toms, or bronchoscopic, histopathologic, and/or radiographic
findings) (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
CHRONIC AND SAPROPHYTIC SYNDROMES OF
ASPERGILLUS
VII. How Should Chronic Aspergillosis, Allergic Syndromes, or
Noninvasive Syndromes Be Managed?
How Can Chronic Cavitary Pulmonary Aspergillosis Be Diagnosed
and Treated?
Recommendations.
81. The diagnosis of chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis
(CCPA) requires: (i) 3 months of chronic pulmonary symp-
toms or chronic illness or progressive radiographic abnor-
malities, with cavitation, pleural thickening, pericavitary
infiltrates, and sometimes a fungal ball; (ii) Aspergillus IgG
antibody elevated or other microbiological data; and (iii)
no or minimal immunocompromise, usually with one or
more underlying pulmonary disorders. The Aspergillus IgG
antibody test is the most sensitive microbiological test (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Sputum Asper-
gillus PCR testing is more sensitive than culture (weak recom-
mendation; moderate-quality evidence).
82. Patients with CCPA without pulmonary symptoms, weight
loss, or significant fatigue, and those without major impairment
of pulmonary function or gradual loss of pulmonary function
may be observed without antifungal therapy and followed every
3–6 months (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
83. Patients with CCPA and either pulmonary or general
symptoms or progressive loss of lung function or radiograph-
ic progression should be treated with a minimum of 6
months of antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; low-
quality evidence).
84. Oral itraconazole and voriconazole are the preferred oral
antifungal agents (strong recommendation; high-quality evi-
dence); posaconazole is a useful third-line agent for those
with adverse events or clinical failure (strong recommenda-
tion; moderate-quality evidence).
85. Hemoptysis may be managed with oral tranexamic acid
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence), bronchial
e8 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 artery embolization (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence), or antifungal therapy to prevent recurrence
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence). Patients
failing these measures may require surgical resection (weak
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
86. In those who fail therapy, develop triazole resistance, and/
or have adverse events, intravenous micafungin (weak recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence), caspofungin (weak recom-
mendation;
low-quality
evidence),
or
AmB
(weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence) yield some responses.
Treatment may need to be prolonged.
87. Surgical resection is an option for some patients with local-
ized disease, unresponsive to medical therapy, including
those with pan-azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus infec-
tion or persistent hemoptysis despite bronchial artery embo-
lization (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
The outcomes from surgery are less favorable than those with
single aspergilloma, and a careful risk assessment prior to
surgical intervention is required.
88. In those with progressive disease, long-term, even lifelong
antifungal therapy may be required to control disease (weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence), with continual mon-
itoring for toxicity and resistance.
What Are the Management Options for an Aspergillus Fungal Ball
of the Lung (Aspergilloma)?
Recommendations.
89. Asymptomatic patients with a single aspergilloma and no
progression of the cavity size over 6–24 months should con-
tinue to be observed (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
90. Patients with symptoms, especially significant hemoptysis,
with a single aspergilloma, should have it resected, assuming
that there are no contraindications (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
91. Peri-/postoperative antifungal therapy is not routinely re-
quired, but if the risk of surgical spillage of the aspergilloma
is moderate (related to location and morphology of the
cavity), antifungal therapy with voriconazole (or another
mold-active azole) or an echinocandin is suggested to prevent
Aspergillus empyema (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
ALLERGIC SYNDROMES OF ASPERGILLUS
How Is Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis Identified and
Managed in Patients With Asthma and Cystic Fibrosis?
Recommendations.
92. Elevated Aspergillus immunoglobulin E (IgE) and total IgE
are recommended to establish the diagnosis and are useful
for screening (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
93. We suggest treating symptomatic asthmatic patients
with bronchiectasis or mucoid impaction, despite oral or
inhaled corticosteroid therapy, with oral itraconazole
therapy with TDM (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
94. In CF patients with frequent exacerbations and/or falling
forced expiratory volume 1 (FEV1), we suggest treating
with oral itraconazole to minimize corticosteroid use
with TDM, and consideration of other mold-active azole
therapy if therapeutic levels cannot be achieved (weak rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Medical Management of Allergic Fungal
Rhinosinusitis Caused by Aspergillus Species?
Recommendations.
95. We recommend establishing the diagnosis of allergic fun-
gal rhinosinusitis in patients with nasal polyposis and thick
eosinophilic mucin by visualizing hyphae in mucus, which is
supported by a positive anti-Aspergillus IgE serum antibody
assay or skin-prick test (where available) (strong recommen-
dation; moderate-quality evidence).
96. We recommend polypectomy and sinus washout as the
optimal means of symptom control and inducing remis-
sion; however, relapse is frequent (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
97. We recommend the use of topical nasal steroids to reduce
symptoms and increase time to relapse, especially if given
after surgery (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
98. We suggest oral antifungal therapy using mold-active tria-
zoles for refractory infection and/or rapidly relapsing disease,
although this approach is only partially effective (weak rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
INTRODUCTION
IA remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality in high-
risk immunocompromised patients. Additionally, chronic and
allergic syndromes due to Aspergillus are recognized to affect
an even greater number of additional patients. In recent years,
the clinical evidence for the diagnosis and management of pa-
tients with Aspergillus syndromes has vastly increased. New
agents and formulations along with studies for the use of
older agents are available for treating patients with these infec-
tions, and new diagnostic tools have increased the ability to di-
agnose these infections in a timely manner. This document
constitutes the guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) for treatment of aspergillosis. These guidelines
replace the practice guidelines for Aspergillus published in 2008
[1] and incorporate new clinical evidence in the recommenda-
tions. The objective of these guidelines is to summarize the cur-
rent evidence for treatment of different forms of aspergillosis
and treatment recommendations are summarized in Table 1.
The panel followed the GRADE framework as adopted by the
IDSA.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 1.
Summary of Recommendations for the Treatment of Aspergillosis
Therapy
Comments
Condition
Primary
Alternative
Invasive syndromes of Aspergillus
IPA
Voriconazole (6 mg/kg IV every 12 h for 1 d, followed by 4 mg/kg
IV every 12 h; oral therapy can be used at
200–300 mg every 12 h or weight based dosing on a mg/kg
basis); see text for pediatric dosing
Primary: Liposomal AmB (3–5 mg/kg/day IV), isavuconazole 200
mg every 8 h for 6 doses, then 200 mg daily
Salvage: ABLC (5 mg/kg/day IV), caspofungin (70 mg/day IV × 1,
then 50 mg/day IV thereafter), micafungin (100–150 mg/day IV),
posaconazole (oral suspension: 200 mg TID; tablet: 300 mg BID
on day 1, then 300 mg daily, IV: 300 mg BID on day 1, then 300
mg daily, itraconazole suspension (200 mg PO every 12 h)
Primary combination therapy is not routinely recommended;
addition of another agent or switch to another drug class for
salvage therapy may be considered in individual patients; dosage
in pediatric patients for voriconazole and for caspofungin is
different than that of adults; limited clinical experience is reported
with anidulafungin; dosage of posaconazole in pediatric patients
has not been defined
Invasive sinus aspergillosis
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Surgical debridement as an adjunct to medical therapy
Tracheobronchial
aspergillosis
Similar to IPA
Adjunctive inhaled AmB may be useful
Similar to IPA
Aspergillosis of the CNS
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Surgical resection may be beneficial in selected cases
This infection is associated with the highest mortality among all of
the different patterns of IA; drug interactions with anticonvulsant
therapy
Aspergillus infections of the
heart (endocarditis,
pericarditis, and
myocarditis)
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Endocardial lesions caused by Aspergillus species require surgical
resection; Aspergillus pericarditis usually requires
pericardiectomy
Aspergillus osteomyelitis and
septic arthritis
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Surgical resection of devitalized bone and cartilage is important for
curative intent
Aspergillus infections of the
eye (endophthalmitis and
keratitis)
Systemic IV or oral voriconazole plus intravitreal AmB or
voriconazole indicated with partial vitrectomy
Similar to invasive pulmonary aspergillosis; limited data with
echinocandins and poor ocular penetration by this class
Systemic therapy may be beneficial in management of Aspergillus
endophthalmitis; ophthalmologic intervention and management
is recommended for all forms of ocular infection; topical therapy
for keratitis is indicated
Cutaneous aspergillosis
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Surgical resection is indicated where feasible
Aspergillus peritonitis
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Removal of peritoneal dialysis catheter is essential
Empiric and preemptive
antifungal therapy
For empiric antifungal therapy, Liposomal AmB (3 mg/kg/day IV),
caspofungin (70 mg day 1 IV and 50 mg/day IV thereafter),
micafungin (100 mg day), voriconazole (6 mg/kg IV every 12 h
for 1 day, followed by 4 mg/kg IV every 12 h; oral therapy can
be used at 200–300 mg every 12 h or 3–4 mg/kg q 12 h)
Preemptive therapy is a logical extension of empiric antifungal
therapy in defining a high-risk population with evidence of
invasive fungal infection (eg, pulmonary infiltrate or positive GM
assay result)
Prophylaxis against IA
Posaconazole:
Oral suspension: 200 mg TID
Tablet: 300 mg BID on day 1, then 300 mg daily
IV: 300 mg BID on day 1, then 300 mg daily
Voriconazole (200 mg PO BID), itraconazole suspension (200 mg
PO every 12 h); micafungin (50–100 mg/day), caspofungin (50
mg/day)
Efficacy of posaconazole prophylaxis demonstrated in high-risk
patients (patients with GVHD and neutropenic patients with AML
or MDS)
Saprophytic or colonizing syndromes of Aspergillus
Aspergilloma
No therapy or surgical resection
Itraconazole or voriconazole; similar to IPA
The role of medical therapy in the treatment of aspergilloma is
uncertain; penetration into preexisting cavities may be minimal
for AmB
Chronic cavitary pulmonary
aspergillosis
Similar to IPA
Similar to IPA
Innate immune defects demonstrated in most of these patients;
long-term therapy may be needed; surgical resection may lead to
significant complications; anecdotal response to IFN-γ.
Tranexamic acid may be helpful in management of hemoptysis
Allergic syndromes of
Aspergillosis
ABPA
Itraconazole
Oral voriconazole (200 mg PO every 12 h) or posaconazole
(dosage depends on formulation)
Corticosteroids are a cornerstone of therapy for exacerbations;
itraconazole has a demonstrable corticosteroid-sparing effect
Allergic rhinosinusitis caused
by Aspergillus
Polypectomy and sinus washout with intranasal corticosteroids
Antifungal therapy reserved for refractory or relapsing cases
Abbreviations: ABLC, amphotericin B lipid complex; ABPA, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; AmB, amphotericin B; AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; BID twice daily; CNS, central nervous system; GM, galactomannan; GVHD, graft-vs-host disease;
IA, invasive aspergillosis; IFN-γ, interferon gamma; IPA, invasive pulmonary aspergillosis; IV, intravenous; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; PO, oral; TID, 3 times daily.
e10 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 In the recommendation section that follows, the panel an-
swered a series of broad questions for managing syndromes of
aspergillosis, and the background and evidence for the recom-
mendations are presented:
I. How can the most susceptible patients be protected from as-
pergillosis, and which patients are most susceptible?
II. How can a diagnosis of IA be established?
III. What antifungal agents are available for the treatment and
prophylaxis of IA, including pharmacologic considerations,
and what is the role for susceptibility testing?
IV. What are the recommended treatment regimens and ad-
junctive treatment measures for the various clinical presenta-
tions of IA?
V. What are the recommended prophylactic regimens, who
should receive them, and how should breakthrough infection
be managed?
VI. When should patients be treated empirically?
VII. How should chronic aspergillosis, allergic syndromes, or
noninvasive syndromes be managed?
METHODOLOGY
Panel Composition
The most recent version of the IDSA guidelines on the manage-
ment of patients with aspergillosis was published in 2008 [2].
For this update, the IDSA Standards and Practice Guideline
Committee (SPGC) convened a multidisciplinary panel of 17
experts in the management of patients with aspergillosis. The
panel consisted of 17 members of the IDSA, and included 16
adult infectious diseases physicians and 1 pediatric infectious
diseases physician. All panel members were selected on the
basis of their expertise in clinical and/or laboratory mycology
with a focus on aspergillosis.
Evidence Review: The GRADE Method
GRADE is a systematic approach to guideline development that
has been described in detail elsewhere [3, 4]. The IDSA/HIV
Medicine Association adopted GRADE in 2008. In the
GRADE system, the guideline panel assigns each recommenda-
tion with separate ratings for the underlying quality of evidence
supporting the recommendation and for the strength with
which the recommendation is made (Figure 1) [1]. Data from
randomized controlled trials begin as “high” quality, and data
from observational studies begin as “low” quality. However,
the panel may judge that specific features of the data warrant
decreasing or increasing the quality of evidence rating, and
GRADE provides guidance on how such factors should be
weighed [4]. The strength assigned to a recommendation re-
flects the panel’s confidence that the benefits of following the
recommendation are likely to outweigh potential harms.
While the quality of evidence is an important factor in choosing
recommendation strength, it is not prescriptive.
Process Overview
Panel members were each assigned to review the recent literature
for at least one topic, evaluate the evidence, determine the strength
of recommendations, and develop written evidence in support of
these recommendations. The panel met face-to-face once and con-
ducted a series of conference calls over a 10-month period. The
panel reviewed and discussed all recommendations, their strength,
and the quality of evidence. Discrepancies were discussed and re-
solved, and all final recommendations represent a consensus opin-
ion of the entire panel. For the final version of these guidelines, the
panel as a group reviewed all individual sections.
Panel subgroups generated a list of keywords that were used
by librarians at the Health Sciences Library, University of
Pittsburg (with grateful acknowledgement to Michele Klein-
Fedyshin and Charles B. Wessel), to develop PICO (population,
intervention, comparison, outcomes) search strings for use in
PubMed, and results were returned to each primary author
and the chairs for review. Searches were restricted to English-
language publications and covered the period of January 2008
(when the last guideline was published) through December
2014. Abstracts presented at international conferences within
the past 2 years were also reviewed for inclusion. Systematic re-
views of relevant topics were identified using PubMed and the
Cochrane library. Each primary topic author was responsible
for reviewing the literature relevant to their section and for
drafting recommendations and evidence summaries for review
and discussion by the full panel.
Conflicts of Interests
The expert panel complied with the IDSA policy on conflicts of
interest, which requires disclosure of any financial or other in-
terest that may be construed as constituting an actual, potential,
or apparent conflict. Panel members were provided IDSA’s con-
flicts of interest disclosure statement and were asked to identify
ties to companies developing products that may be affected by
promulgation of the guideline. Information was requested re-
garding employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honorar-
ia, research funding, expert testimony, and membership on
company advisory committees. Decisions were made on a
case-by-case basis as to whether an individual’s role should be
limited as a result of a conflict. Potential conflicts of interest are
listed in the Notes section.
Review and Approval Process
The panel obtained feedback from 2 external peer reviewers.
The guidelines were reviewed and endorsed by the PIDS.
The guideline was reviewed and approved by the IDSA Stan-
dards and Practice Guidelines Committee and the IDSA Board
of Directors prior to dissemination.
Future Guideline Revisions
At annual intervals, the panel chairs will be asked for their input
on the need to update the guideline based on an examination of
the current literature. The SPGC of the IDSA will consider this
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e11
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 input and determine the necessity and timing of an update. If war-
ranted, the entire panel or a subset thereof will be convened to
discuss potential changes.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS FOR
INFECTION
I. How Can the Most Susceptible Patients Be Protected From
Aspergillosis, and Which Patients Are Most Susceptible?
What Are Sources of Exposure to Aspergillus, and How Can
Exposure Be Decreased? Is Environmental Surveillance Useful?
Recommendations.
1. Hospitalized allogeneic HSCT recipients should be placed in
a protected environment to reduce mold exposure (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
2. These precautions can be reasonably applied to other highly
immunocompromised patients at increased risk for IA, such
as patients receiving induction/reinduction regimens for
acute leukemia (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
3. In hospitals in which a protected environment is not avail-
able, we recommend admission to a private room, no con-
nection to construction sites, and not allowing plants or
cut flowers to be brought into the patient’s room (strong rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
4. We recommend reasonable precautions to reduce mold ex-
posure among outpatients at high risk for IA, including
avoidance of gardening, spreading mulch (compost), or
close exposure to construction or renovation (strong recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence).
5. Leukemia and transplant centers should perform regular
surveillance of cases of invasive mold infection. An increase
in incidence over baseline or the occurrence of invasive mold
infections in patients who are not at high risk for such infec-
tions should prompt evaluation for a hospital source (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Aspergillus species and other filamen-
tous fungi are ubiquitous in the environment. The risks of expo-
sure vary both temporally and geographically and are dependent
on precipitation patterns, humidity, temperature, and wind condi-
tions [5].Inhalation of fungal spores is the most common portal of
entry, with sinopulmonary disease the most frequent clinical man-
ifestation. Mold exposure also may occur following the consump-
tion or inhalation of products contaminated with fungal spores [6,
7]. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis has been reported in patients
with a breach in the normal protective barrier of the skin, such
as in burn victims and near vascular sites in neonates [8–11].Con-
tamination of water systems has also been considered a source of
nosocomial aspergillosis and other mold infections [12–17].
Because there are numerous sources of mold in the environment,
reasonable efforts should be made to decrease exposure to fungal
spores in highly immunocompromised patients. Detailed guide-
lines have been published regarding hospital room design and
ventilation to reduce mold exposure among allogeneic HSCT recip-
ients [18]. A “protected environment” is recommended, which in-
cludes high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration (and/or
laminar airflow), maintenance of positive pressure rooms, and a
minimum number of air exchanges per hour. Other at-risk groups
such as SOT recipients and burn patients are often also placed in
HEPA-filtered rooms. Additional guidelines are provided to mini-
mize mold exposure during hospital construction, renovation, and
building [19]. These guidelines can reasonably be applied to other
highly immunocompromised patients, such as those receiving in-
duction/reinduction chemotherapy for acute leukemia. We are in
agreement with these guidelines, but note that they are consensus
criteria based rather than evidence based.
We recognize that highly immunocompromised patients may
be admitted to hospitals that lack the engineering standards
providing for a “protected environment.” In these settings, rea-
sonable standards include admission to a private room without
connection to construction sites, and not allowing plants/cut
flowers to be brought into the patient’s room.
Patients at risk for mold infections are commonly managed as
outpatients where engineering standards are not comparable to
the “protected” environment of inpatients. We advise reasonable
precautions to reduce mold exposure, including the avoidance of
gardening, spreading mulch, or close exposure to construction or
renovation. The effectiveness of masks (surgical or N95) to protect
againstmoldinfectionsassociatedwiththeseexposuresisunknown.
The majority of cases of invasive mold infections are sporadic,
although outbreaks are well recognized [20–23].Cases of invasive
mold disease with onset of symptoms ≥7 days after hospital ad-
mission are more likely to be nosocomial [24]. In the absence of
an outbreak with an identified environmental source (eg, a con-
taminated air vent) or molecular analysis that demonstrates clus-
tering of fungal isolates, it is not possible to reliably distinguish
community-acquired from nosocomial aspergillosis. As a quality
control measure, leukemia and transplant centers should per-
form regular surveillance (eg, every 3 months) documenting
the number of invasive mold infections within their institution.
Due to the paucity of culture-confirmed cases of IA and lack of
autopsy data in most medical centers, surveillance using case def-
initions for molds including GM and radiographic evidence of
infection such as the revised European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG)
criteria is reasonable. An increase in incidence over baseline or
the occurrence of invasive mold infections in patients who are
not considered high-risk for such infections should prompt eval-
uation for a hospital source.
Environmental sampling can provide important insight
about sources of aspergillosis, including the spread of azole-re-
sistant strains [17, 25], although there is debate whether such
surveillance is of value for routine patient care [26, 27]. In the
absence of an outbreak, there is insufficient evidence that envi-
ronmental sampling of fungal spores is of value. In the setting of
e12 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 a documented or suspected nosocomial outbreak, a number of
measures should be undertaken, including evaluation of the
ventilation system to ensure adequate filtration, air flow, main-
tenance of positive pressure, and consideration of environmen-
tal sampling (eg, air vents and water system).
What Acquired or Inherited Defects in Host Immunity Increase the
Risk of Aspergillosis?
Patients at risk for IA include those with prolonged neutropenia, al-
logeneic HSCT recipients, SOT recipients, patients receiving corti-
costeroids, those with advanced AIDS, and those with CGD. In
patients with hematologic malignancies, myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS), and other diseases associated with marrow failure (eg, aplas-
tic anemia), the intensity and duration of neutropenia predict the
risk of IA [28, 29]. Patients with refractory or relapsed acute leuke-
mia treated with reinduction regimens are at particularly high risk
for IA and other mold infections.
Allogeneic HSCT recipients have a significantly higher risk of
IA and other opportunistic infections compared with autologous
HSCT recipients [30].In allogeneic HSCT recipients, 3 periods of
risk for invasive mold disease occur: (1) neutropenia following
the conditioning regimen; (2) exogenous immunosuppression
for treatment of acute GVHD; and (3) exogenous immunosup-
pression for treatment of chronic GVHD (after day 100 of trans-
plant). The level of allogeneic donor and recipient human
leukocyte antigen disparity is the major determinant for
GVHD severity and intensity of immunosuppression to control
GVHD, which, in turn, is the major predisposing factor for op-
portunistic fungal infections [30–32]. T cell–depleted or CD34-
selected stem cell products can also increase the risk of IA [32,
33]. Among allogeneic HSCT recipients, polymorphisms in spe-
cific host defense genes of the donor or recipient can also influ-
ence the risk of aspergillosis [34–37].
In SOT recipients, the intensity of immunosuppression to pre-
vent or treat allograft rejection, colonization, and coinfection with
CMV drive the risk of IA. As in allogeneic HSCT recipients, poly-
morphisms in specific host defense genes in SOT recipients can
also influence the risk of aspergillosis [38, 39]. Lung transplant
recipients have the highest risk of IA [40–42]. In a multicenter
surveillance study, approximately one-half of cases of IA in
lung transplant recipients were late-onset, occurring 1 year or
more after transplantation [41]. CMV infection is a risk factor
for aspergillosis, notably in heart and lung transplant recipients
[43]. Pretransplant Aspergillus airway colonization is frequent
among cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, and increases the risk of
post–lung transplant IA [44]. IA in patients with autoimmune
diseases is uncommon. Prolonged use of corticosteroids and
other immunosuppressive agents and possibly preexisting lung
disease are risk factors [45]. In the era of highly active antiretro-
viral therapy, IA is a rare complication of human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) infection. AIDS-associated aspergillosis is
most frequently associated with advanced AIDS and additional
risk factors, such as neutropenia, corticosteroid use, and concur-
rent opportunistic infections [46,47].CGD, an inherited disorder
of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase, is characterized by recurrent
bacterial and fungal infections including IA, and other molds,
which can be life-threatening [48–51].
Several agents that target immune cell populations and signaling
pathways, including malignancies and autoimmune disorders,
have also been identified as risk factors for IA. For example, alem-
tuzumab (anti-CD52) can lead to neutropenia and prolonged sup-
pression of cell-mediated immunity, potentially CMV reactivation
[52],and subsequent IA [53,54].TNF-α inhibitors are widely used
for autoimmune diseases and have been associated with an in-
creased risk of infections and cancer [55]. An analysis of nonviral
opportunistic infections in patients with autoimmune diseases
documented that the overall risk was greater in patients receiving
TNF-α antagonists compared with nonbiological disease-modify-
ing antirheumatic drugs; however, IA was only observed in 1 of
>30 000 patients receiving a TNF-α antagonist [56]. By contrast,
the use of infliximab for severe GVHD is associated with high
risk for the development of IA [57]. Therefore, in assessing the
risk for aspergillosis from a specific drug or antibody, one must
consider all relevant factors, including the underlying disease
being treated, comorbidities (eg, preexisting lung disease), neutro-
penia, and the use of concurrent immunosuppressive agents.
IA has also been recognized in critically ill patients without
traditional risk factors. The exact proportion of critically ill pa-
tients with IA in the absence of other risk factors is difficult to
determine. In a retrospective analysis, Meersseman et al [58]
identified 127 patients out of 1850 intensive care unit admissions
(6.9%) with microbiological or histopathologic evidence of As-
pergillus infection; however, only 5 of these patients had proven
IA without predisposing host factors. Trials that evaluate clinical
approaches to diagnose IA in critically ill patients include a sub-
stantial proportion with classic risk factors for IA and other risk
factors including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
and cirrhosis [59, 60]. IA has been observed in critically ill pa-
tients following other major infections, including influenza [61,
62]. Because critically ill patients are heterogeneous with regard
to the underlying disease, comorbidities, and level of immuno-
compromise [63], it is difficult to delineate the specific role of
nonclassic risk factors (eg, multiple organ failure, prolonged me-
chanical ventilation, bacterial and viral infections including influ-
enza) in driving the risk for IA.
DIAGNOSIS OF ASPERGILLOSIS
II. How Can a Diagnosis of Invasive Aspergillosis Be Established?
How Should Aspergillus Be Identified, and How Does This
Influence Management?
Recommendation.
6. Until molecular tools are more widely used in clinical labo-
ratories, we recommend that tissue and fluid specimens be
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e13
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 submitted in adequate quantities for simultaneous histopath-
ologic/cytologic and culture examination. In the case of iso-
lates with atypical growth or concerns for resistance, species
identification by molecular methods should be employed
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
The EORTC/MSG revised criteria for
defining IFIs, including IA, require a microbiologic and/or his-
topathologic diagnosis to define proven infection [64].However,
specimen acquisition is challenging in many patients. Histo-
pathologic evidence of fungi is crucial to determine the signifi-
cance of Aspergillus growing in culture, yet diagnostic accuracy
of histopathology is suboptimal [65–67].Moreover, these meth-
ods are time-consuming and insensitive. The most common
specimens obtained are lung tissue by transthoracic percutane-
ous needle aspiration or video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy,
and bronchial lavage/wash specimens. These specimens should
be submitted in adequate quantities for both histopathologic/
cytologic testing and culture with a brief clinical history to aid
the pathologist and microbiologist in interpretation of findings
[68–72]. Methods to optimize yield should be employed includ-
ing adequate quantity of specimens, timely delivery of fresh
specimen to the laboratory or refrigeration if delay is anticipated
(although refrigeration may reduce the recovery of some organ-
isms, eg, Mucorales), incubation of cultures for at least 5 days
(and up to 3 weeks for other fungal pathogens), and communi-
cation of suspicion for fungal infection with pathology and mi-
crobiology laboratory personnel [73]. In the pathology
laboratory, standard and special fungal stains on fluid or tissue
should be performed simultaneously when a fungal infection is
suspected and may reveal the characteristic acute angle branch-
ing septate hyphae of Aspergillus spp. Molecular assays targeting
ribosomal DNA sequences can also be used for detection of As-
pergillus in tissues, although these methods have not been stan-
dardized nor cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for clinical use. The optical brightener methods, Calco-
fluor or Blankophor, are rapid stains utilized for direct exami-
nation and have a high sensitivity and specificity for detecting
Aspergillus-like features [74, 75]. Special stains on fixed tissue in-
clude Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) stain (also referred to
as Grocott-Gomori) and periodic acid-Schiff stains. However, no
histopathologic finding can definitively diagnose the pathogen,
and confirmation by culture or nonculture technique is necessary
to distinguish Aspergillus from other filamentous fungi such as
Fusarium spp and Scedosporium spp. Additionally, atypical ap-
pearances of the organism may be seen in tissue, particularly
in patients receiving antifungal therapy. Increasingly, DNA se-
quencing is being used in reference laboratories to identify “cryp-
tic” species that are misidentified by microscopic appearance or
only identified to the complex level. Some of these species are
more resistant to azole antifungal agents. Aspergillus spp grow
well on most media at 37°C at 2–5 days, and methods should
include fungal-specific media. Despite this, culture yield is low
and a negative culture does not exclude the diagnosis of IA
[76]. This low yield notwithstanding, culture is critical for species
complex identification and susceptibility testing where feasible
until molecular methods are more routinely performed in clinical
laboratories.
What Is the Diagnostic Value of Nucleic Acid Testing in Clinical
Specimens?
Recommendations.
7. There was debate among the committee members regarding
the clinical utility of blood-based PCR in diagnosing IA, and
experts were not in agreement. One group favored recommen-
dations for PCR testing, based on publications validating its
role when used in conjunction with other tests such as antigen
detection assays to diagnose IA and/or reduce preemptive an-
tifungal usage. The other group thought that PCR assays are
promising but could not be recommended for routine use in
clinical practice at present due to the lack of conclusive valida-
tion for commercially available assays, the variety of method-
ologies in the literature, and questions about the extent to
which results assisted diagnosis.
8. As research in the area continues, we recommend that clini-
cians choosing to use PCR assays employ them carefully in
the management of individual patients on a case-by-case
basis. Clinicians should be aware of the methodologies and
performance characteristics of the specific assay used, and
interpret results accordingly. When PCR assays are used,
results should be considered in conjunction with other diag-
nostic tests and the clinical context (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Since the last IDSA guidelines, there
have been numerous publications assessing the performance of
Aspergillus PCR in clinical samples. Overall, direct comparison
studies have shown Aspergillus PCR to be substantially more
sensitive than culture in blood and respiratory fluids. In a
meta-analysis of clinical trials evaluating the accuracy of serum
or whole-blood PCR assays for IA, sensitivity and specificity
were 84% and 76%, respectively [77].These values are promising,
but PCR of blood or serum is unable on its own to confirm or
exclude suspected IA in high-risk patients. The sensitivity of As-
pergillus PCR on BAL fluid was higher than within blood, but in
many instances its specificity was lower [78, 79]. In a systematic
review of 9 studies using reference IA definitions strictly adherent
to the EORTC/MSG criteria, the sensitivity and specificity of
PCR of BAL were 77% and 94%, respectively [78].Data included
large 95% confidence intervals (CIs) that were attributed to the
use of different PCR assays and inclusion of heterogeneous pa-
tient populations [78, 79]. The lower specificity in BAL has
been attributed to the fact that lungs are often colonized by As-
pergillus (particularly in many high-risk populations, such as
lung transplant recipients), and that PCR is not able to
e14 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 differentiate colonization from disease or to distinguish different
Aspergillus spp. The high negative predictive value of BAL PCR
(usually ≥95%) suggests a role in ruling out IPA. To date, data
suggest that the diagnostic performance of blood or BAL PCR
is comparable to that of serum and BAL GM index (GMI; ratio
of the optical density [OD] of the patient samples to the mean
OD of control samples) of ≥0.5, respectively, and that sensitivity
for both tests is affected by antifungal use. Using both PCR and
GM in serum resulted in improved sensitivity with no sacrifice of
specificity [78].
Clinical trials incorporating biomarkers into the manage-
ment of adults with hematologic malignancies or allogeneic
HSCT have shown that combined GM and PCR reduced use
of antifungal treatment [80], and was associated with an earlier
diagnosis and lower incidence of IA [81].
There have been fewer PCR studies using nonblood and non-
BAL samples. In several studies, PCR is superior to culture in
detecting Aspergillus spp in sputum specimens from patients
with CF and allergic or chronic pulmonary aspergillosis
[82–86]. Small studies of Aspergillus PCR on nonblood and
extrapulmonary body fluids (pleural fluid, cerebrospinal fluid,
etc) and paraffin-preserved and fresh tissues (lung, skin,
sinus, lymph node) demonstrate sensitivity of 86% and specif-
icity of 100% [87–89].
Despite these promising results, Aspergillus PCR cannot yet
be recommended for routine use in clinical practice because
few assays have been standardized and validated, and the role
of PCR testing in patient management is not established. Initia-
tives such as the European Aspergillus PCR Initiative have made
significant progress in developing a consensus standard proto-
col for blood-based Aspergillus PCR. PCR assays are commer-
cially available outside the United States (MycAssay Aspergillus
[Microgen Bioproducts Ltd], Septifast [Roche], MycoReal As-
pergillus [Ingenetix GmbH], Affigene Aspergillus tracer [Ce-
pheid], Aspergillus spp Q-PCR Alert [Nanogen], RenDx
multiplex Aspergillus spp and Candida spp [whole blood, plas-
ma, and serum], AsperGenius [Pathonostics], Mycogenie
[Ademtech], and others) as is centralization of PCR testing at
a reference laboratory in the United States (ViraCor-IBT Labo-
ratories). These provide standardization of the assays, but none
have been cleared by the FDA for clinical use in the United
States. These efforts now permit multicenter validation of
assay performance and studies of clinical utility. Until such
studies are completed, however, no specific recommendation
about the role of Aspergillus PCR in clinical practice in the Unit-
ed States can be made.
How Should Galactomannan and (1 ! 3)-β-D-Glucan Be Used for
the Diagnosis of Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
9. Serum and BAL GM is recommended as an accurate marker
for the diagnosis of IA in adult and pediatric patients when
used in certain patient subpopulations (hematologic malignan-
cy, HSCT) (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
10. GM is not recommended for routine blood screening in pa-
tients receiving mold-active antifungal therapy or prophylaxis,
but can be applied to bronchoscopy specimens from those pa-
tients (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
11. GM is not recommended for screening in SOT recipients
or patients with CGD (strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence).
12. Serum assays for (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan are recommended
for diagnosing IA in high-risk patients (hematologic malig-
nancy, allogeneic HSCT), but are not specific for Aspergillus
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
The Platelia GM enzyme immunoas-
say is a relatively Aspergillus-specific, noninvasive diagnostic
assay, and several studies have demonstrated good sensitivity
(approximately 70%) in serum of patients with hematological
malignancy or allogeneic HSCT [90–95]. A GM-based diagnos-
tic strategy can also result in less empiric antifungal therapy
usage [80, 96]. However, the specific patient population tested
is critical to optimizing GM usefulness. GM sensitivity in non-
neutropenic patients appears to be lower than in other sub-
groups [97], and decreases to approximately 20% in SOT
recipients [98–100].The GM assay has been repeatedly negative
in patients with CGD and IA [101,102],potentially due to a lack
of angioinvasion or immune complex formation with high lev-
els of Aspergillus antibodies. Similarly, serum GM has also been
reported to be higher in patients with angioinvasive IA vs non-
invasive airway IA [103]. While earlier reports suggested that
GM was not reliable in pediatric patients due to a high false-
positive rate, several subsequent studies have shown its useful-
ness in children and similar operating characteristics to adult
patients [104–111]. Serum GM was not sensitive (38%) in pa-
tients with aspergilloma, but improved in those with hemopty-
sis [112], and was also not sensitive (23%) in patients with
chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA) [113] or COPD [114].
GM in patients with CF colonized with Aspergillus species
was consistently negative [115].
Several variables, including concurrent mold-active antifun-
gal therapy or prophylaxis, significantly reduce levels of circu-
lating GM [91, 94]. The GMI may be increased in the setting of
neutropenia and decreases in response to antifungal agents. In
one study, the GMI in patients with absolute neutrophil count
(ANC) <100 cells/µL and not receiving antifungal therapy was
statistically higher than those patients with an ANC >100 cells/
µL; however, the GMI in patients with an ANC <100 cells/µL
and receiving antifungal therapy was not statistically different
than those patients with an ANC >100 cells/µL. Laboratory
data and clinical observations indicate that this effect may be
due to a higher fungal burden in neutropenic patients, or a
more robust inflammatory process in nonneutropenic patients
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e15
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 with a corresponding decrease in the burden of disease, rate of
dissemination, and GM release [116, 117].
False-positive results have been reported in several contexts,
including in patients who have received certain antibiotics (his-
torically most notably piperacillin-tazobactam, which appears
now to no longer be cross-reactive [118], and amoxicillin-
clavulanate), neonatal colonization with Bifidobacterium,
when Plasmalyte is used in BAL fluids, and in patients with
other invasive mycoses (including penicilliosis, fusariosis, histo-
plasmosis, and blastomycosis) [119–122]. Despite these limita-
tions, this assay is a useful adjunctive test to establish an early
diagnosis, particularly when used in serial screening of patients
at high risk of infection who are not receiving antimold prophy-
laxis. The optimal rationale for diagnosis in neutropenic pa-
tients may be a combined approach guided by clinical,
radiographic, and biweekly screening of GM in serum [123],
possibly combined with other biomarkers. In patients receiving
mold-active antifungal prophylaxis, the use of serum GM as a
screening tool results in a very poor predictive value, with most
positive tests being false positive in this setting [124].The detec-
tion of GM in BAL fluid has been shown to have a sensitivity
that exceeds 70% in most studies and provides additional sensi-
tivity compared with culture even in the setting of mold-active
antifungal therapy as discussed below [125–128].
Other potential circulating markers for detection of aspergil-
losis include (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan detected by the Tachypleus or
Limulus assay [129,130].The Tachypleus or Limulus assay used
to detect the presence of (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan is a variation of
the limulus assay used to detect endotoxin. The presence of
(1 → 3)-β-D-glucan in serum signifies the presence of fungal in-
vasion but is not specific for Aspergillus species; other fungal
diseases, including candidiasis, fusariosis, and Pneumocystis
jirovecii pneumonia can result in a positive test. False-positive
results can occur in a variety of contexts, such as through glu-
can-contaminated blood collection tubes, gauze, depth-type
membrane filters for blood processing, and various drugs (eg,
antibiotics including some cephalosporins, carbapenems, and
ampicillin-sulbactam, and possibly chemotherapeutics such as
pegylated asparaginase) [131]. The Fungitell assay (Associates
of Cape Cod) for detection of (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan is cleared
by the FDA for the diagnosis of invasive mycoses, including as-
pergillosis, and has been evaluated in high-risk patients with he-
matological malignancy and allogeneic HSCT [129, 132].
Comparative studies have shown that the Fungitell assay can
be slightly more sensitive than GM for IA, but is limited by its
poor specificity [133], while others have found that Fungitell is
not as helpful for IA [111]. However, another study in a large
cancer center that compared GM and (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan as-
says prospectively over a 3-year period in 82 patients, each for
12 weeks, found that the (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan assay was more
sensitive than the GM assays for detection of IA and other
mold infections in patients with hematological malignancy
[134]. One meta-analysis of (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan assays revealed
limitations [130], while another found similar deficiencies yet
improvement in diagnostic capabilities with the combination
of both biomarkers [135]. Other organizations have recom-
mended the GM over Fungitell for specifically diagnosing
IA [136].
What Is the Approach to the Radiographic Diagnosis of Invasive
Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
13. We recommend performing a chest CT scan whenever there
is a clinical suspicion for invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
(IPA) regardless of chest radiograph results (strong recommen-
dation; high-quality evidence).
14. Routine use of contrast during a chest CT scan for a sus-
picion of IPA is not recommended (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence). Contrast is recommended when
a nodule or a mass is close to a large vessel (strong recommen-
dation; moderate-quality evidence).
15. We suggest a follow-up chest CT scan to assess the response
of IPA to treatment after a minimum of 2 weeks of treatment;
earlier assessment is indicated if the patient clinically deterio-
rates (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence). When a
nodule is close to a large vessel, more frequent monitoring
may be required (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
As clinical signs and symptoms are
not specific for the diagnosis of IPA, radiographic imaging is
critical. The role of imaging is to identify the site of infection,
to assess the type, number and size of lesions, and local exten-
sion. Imaging also helps to direct diagnostic procedures (eg,
BAL or CT-guided biopsy) to the most appropriate area [137].
CT scan is more sensitive than chest radiograph to identify
lesions of IPA, especially at their early stage [138], and high-
resolution computed tomography (also called thin-section CT
scanning with a thin collimation of 0.25–1 mm) is the preferred
method. CT angiography may be a useful test pending further
evaluation [139]. Chest CT scan performed early after onset of
fever helps to identify the cause of fever, may be informative be-
fore Aspergillus GM is positive, and has been associated with an
increased survival in febrile neutropenic patients who have re-
ceived intensive chemotherapy for a hematologic malignancy
[140–142].
Typical features of IPA on CT imaging include nodules, con-
solidative lesions, and wedge-shaped infarcts. Particularly in
neutropenic patients, a halo sign, defined as a nodule (>1 cm
in diameter) surrounded by a perimeter of ground-glass opacity
reflecting hemorrhage, may be observed [143–147]. Pleural ef-
fusions are occasionally observed. Appearance of an air crescent
or a cavity in a mass, nodule, or consolidation is also suggestive
of invasive mold disease but is usually a later sign, often associ-
ated with recovery from neutropenia [145, 146]. The reverse
e16 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 halo sign is more frequently associated with pulmonary mucor-
mycosis than with IPA [148, 149]. Similar to the halo sign, the
reverse halo sign can also present in various other pulmonary
conditions including tuberculosis and noninfectious diseases
[150, 151].
The presence of nodules and a halo sign are characteristic of
angioinvasion, and this form of aspergillosis typically occurs in
severely neutropenic patients. IPA can also affect the airways
with bronchiolar wall destruction, presence of centrilobular mi-
cronodules, and tree-in-bud opacities [152]. Airway disease and
angioinvasive lesions can be present in the same patient.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has no additional value
compared to CT scanning for early diagnosis of IPA [153], but
is the preferred imaging modality to identify and characterize
osseous, paranasal sinus lesions, or CNS disease [154–158].
In neutropenic patients, pulmonary lesions usually increase
in size during the first week following initiation of therapy
and while the patient recovers from neutropenia [159]. The
size of lesions can increase up to 4-fold during the first week
and then remain stable for another week. Repetition of a CT
scan before 2 weeks after the start of treatment is not usually
recommended unless the patient experiences clinical deteriora-
tion. An exception is the presence of a nodule close to a large
vessel because of the risk for massive hemoptysis if lesions con-
tinue to increase in size.
What Is the Role of Bronchoscopy in the Diagnosis of Invasive
Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
16. We recommend performing a bronchoscopy with BAL in
patients with a suspicion of IPA (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence). Significant comorbidities such
as severe hypoxemia, bleeding, and platelet transfusion-
refractory thrombocytopenia may preclude BAL. The yield
of BAL is low for peripheral nodular lesions, so percutaneous
or endobronchial lung biopsy should be considered. We rec-
ommend the use of a standardized BAL procedure and send-
ing the BAL sample for routine culture and cytology as well
as non-culture-based methods (eg, GM) (strong recommen-
dation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Flexible bronchoscopy with BAL
remains the cornerstone for microbiological identification in
diffuse interstitial or alveolar lung infiltrates, infiltrates in im-
munosuppressed patients, nosocomial pneumonia, or pneumo-
nia with treatment failure [160–163]. As radiographic signs and
symptoms of IPA are nonspecific, BAL increases the likelihood
of a diagnosis by direct or indirect identification of mold.
BAL fluid analysis is based on gross observation (hemor-
rhage, alveolar proteinosis), cell count, and differential
count (macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes
and subpopulation, erythrocytes, malignant cells), and on
microbiologic tests (stains and immunohistochemistry, cul-
tures, antigen or nucleic acid detection). Importantly, BAL al-
lows in the same procedure a search for bacterial, parasitic,
viral, and fungal pathogens as well as noninfectious causes of
the pulmonary lesions.
There is no uniform agreement on the best timing for bron-
choscopy. In a survey of infectious diseases specialists, pulmo-
nologists, and hematologists/oncologists, there was consensus
that HSCT recipients who are nonneutropenic and do not
have cavitary infiltrates on chest CT scan should receive
bronchoscopy only after a failure of empiric antimicrobial ther-
apy. However, there was no agreement between the groups on
when neutropenic patients or those with cavitary lesions should
undergo bronchoscopy [164].
BAL is an invasive procedure that requires instruction and
consent from the patient, sufficient respiratory capacity of the
patient, and no major bleeding diathesis. The British Thoracic
Society has established guidelines on diagnostic flexible bron-
choscopy [165], and specific recommendations for the lavage
procedure are also available [166, 167].
Sampsonas et al evaluated a standardized procedure for BAL
in 284 consecutive cancer patients with new pulmonary infiltrates
[160]. The majority of patients had a hematological malignancy.
Thrombocytopenia was not considered a contraindication to
bronchoscopy or BAL, but platelet transfusions were adminis-
tered in patients who had platelet counts <20 000 platelets/µL.
Only 10 BAL-related complications were observed, and only
one was serious but not fatal. In large series, major broncho-
scopy-related complications rates range between 0.08% and
0.5%, with mortality rates of 0%–0.04%.
Lavage is usually performed in the segmental or subsegmental
bronchus of the most affected area of the lung based on a recent
CT scan [160]. Saline is the most often used fluid. False-positive
Aspergillus GM detection tests were reported when Plasmalyte
was used as fluid for BAL [168]. There is considerable variation
between practitioners in the volume instilled and the methods of
lavage fluid collection, and no consensus has been reached. The
instilled volume in nonpediatric patients should be at least 100
mL (most commonly 100–150 mL in aliquots of 20–50 mL, with
the initial aliquot likely representing airway sampling) [169].BAL
samples should be sent for cytologic assessment, Gram staining,
fungal staining (eg, Calcofluor white or GMS stain), culture,
and GM. GM testing from BAL samples provides additional sen-
sitivity compared to culture and exceeds 70% in most studies
[125–128]. The optimal threshold for GM positivity has not
been determined; an OD of 1.0 has been cleared by the FDA
for clinical testing, although some experts consider positivity at
OD > 0.5. A higher threshold OD index results in a lower sensi-
tivity but a higher specificity [128].
The diagnostic yield of BAL also varies by the type of radio-
graphic lesion [170]. In this study there was no difference in
the diagnostic yield between focal and diffuse infiltrates
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e17
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 (54% vs 52%). In consolidations and tree-in-bud–type abnor-
malities, the yield is close to 70%, whereas in ground-glass,
reticular, or nodular lesions the diagnostic yield falls to ap-
proximately 50%.
Transbronchial biopsies are not generally recommended due
to their low yield and frequent patient comorbidities (eg,
thrombocytopenia) that preclude this diagnostic approach.
A percutaneous needle biopsy may be more sensitive than
BAL for small peripheral pulmonary lesions.
III. What Antifungal Agents Are Available for the Treatment and
Prophylaxis of Invasive Aspergillosis, Including Pharmacologic
Considerations, and What Is the Role for Susceptibility Testing?
Amphotericin B
Recommendations.
17. AmB deoxycholate and its lipid derivatives are appropriate
options for initial and salvage therapy of Aspergillus infec-
tions when voriconazole cannot be administered. However,
AmB deoxycholate should be reserved for use in resource-
limited settings in which no alternative agents are available.
Lipid formulations of AmB should be considered in settings
in which azoles are contraindicated or not tolerated (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
18. Aerosolized formulations of AmB may be considered as
prophylaxis in patients with prolonged neutropenia (patients
receiving induction/reinduction therapy for acute leukemia
and allogeneic HSCT recipients following conditioning or
during treatment of GVHD) and in lung transplant recipi-
ents (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
AmB is a polyene with poor oral ab-
sorption and is thus solubilized with deoxycholate for intrave-
nous administration. Alternative routes of administration are
intraperitoneal, intravitreal, intrathecal, bladder irrigation, and
aerosolization. The primary mechanism of action of AmB has
historically been considered due to the formation of ion chan-
nels in the fungal cell membrane, but recent evidence suggests
that amphotericin forms large extramembranous aggregates
that extract ergosterol from lipid bilayers, resulting in cell
death [171]. Binding to cholesterol in mammalian cell mem-
branes results in end organ dysfunction. A second mechanism
of action involves oxidative cell membrane damage. AmB is
highly protein bound (95%) before distribution predominantly
into reticuloendothelial tissues and kidney. Peak serum concen-
trations of 1–2 µg/mL are achieved following infusion of 30–50 mg.
Penetration into intact and inflamed meninges is poor. No me-
tabolites have been identified. Drug elimination is biphasic
with a terminal half-life for AmB deoxycholate of up to
15 days, and the primary route of elimination is not known.
Serum levels are not influenced by hepatic or renal dysfunc-
tion, and it is poorly dialyzed. Doses of deoxycholate AmB
range from 0.1 to 1.5 mg/kg daily. With drug-related renal
dysfunction, 50% dose reduction or alternate-day dosing
may be considered. Adverse events include acute infusion
reactions (nausea, chills, and rigors), administration-site
phlebitis, and nephrotoxicity (azotemia, urinary potassium/
magnesium wasting, renal tubular acidosis). Azotemia is exac-
erbated by concomitant administration of nephrotoxic agents,
underlying renal impairment, and diabetes. Volume expan-
sion with a salt load immediately prior to AmB dosing, and
monitoring of potassium and magnesium, with repletion as
needed, are warranted to prevent renal toxicity. Utility of 24-
hour infusions is limited. AmB is active against most, but not
all, Aspergillus species.
Lipid-based formulations of AmB were developed to reduce
AmB-related nephrotoxicity. Available formulations are AmB
lipid complex (ABLC; Abelcet), AmB colloidal dispersion
(ABCD; Amphocil, Amphotec), and liposomal AmB (AmBi-
some). Their pharmacokinetic profiles differ from AmB deoxy-
cholate, as well as between each formulation. All preferentially
distribute to reticuloendothelial tissue. Infusion reactions of
fever and chills occur commonly with ABLC. A characteristic
infusion-related reaction syndrome of dyspnea, chest pain,
back pain, and hypoxia also may occur, particularly with lipo-
somal AmB [172].In addition to hypokalemia and hypomagne-
semia, mild bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase elevations may
occur. Idiosyncratic reactions to one preparation do not pre-
clude use of other formulations [173]. Approved dosages for as-
pergillosis therapy are: 5 mg/kg/day, 3–6 mg/kg/day, and 3–5
mg/kg/day for ABLC, ABCD, and liposomal AmB, respectively
[174]. Higher dose-response relationships have not been well
studied, although no improvement in efficacy has been demon-
strated to date [175].
Aerosolized formulations of AmB have been used as prophy-
laxis. Lipid formulations of AmB are generally better tolerated
than those involving AmB deoxycholate. Serum drug levels are
negligible. These formulations have been utilized as prophylaxis
in patients with prolonged neutropenia (patients receiving in-
duction/reinduction therapy for acute leukemia and allogeneic
HSCT recipients following conditioning) and in lung (with or
without heart) transplant recipients, and therapeutically in re-
calcitrant fungal lung infections [176–184].
Echinocandins
Recommendations.
19. Echinocandins are effective in salvage therapy (either alone
or in combination) against IA, but we do not recommend
their routine use as monotherapy for the primary treatment
of IA (strong recommendation: moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Echinocandins are semisynthetic am-
phiphilic lipopeptide antifungal agents. Each of these large mol-
ecules is composed of a cyclic hexapeptide core linked to a
variably configured N-linked fatty acyl side chain [185]. The
e18 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 echinocandins act by noncompetitive inhibition of the synthesis
of (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan, a polysaccharide in the cell wall of many
pathogenic fungi. Together with chitin, these rope-like glucan
fibrils are responsible for the cell wall’s strength and shape.
They are important in maintaining the osmotic integrity of
the fungal cell and play a key role in cell division and cell
growth.
Each echinocandin has a half-life of >10 hours, which allows
for once-daily dosing. They exhibit dose-proportional plasma
pharmacokinetics. Echinocandins are highly (>95%) protein
bound and distribute well into all major organ sites except for
the eye, uninfected spinal fluid where concentrations are lower
than other body tissues, and in urine where concentrations are
also low. They are available for parenteral administration only.
Anidulafungin undergoes spontaneous chemical degradation,
with fragment elimination in bile. Caspofungin is metabolized
by the liver with some additional spontaneous chemical degra-
dation, with a recommendation for a dose reduction in cases of
markedly reduced hepatic function. Micafungin is metabolized
by the catechol-O-methyltransferase pathway.
Echinocandins are generally well tolerated, with few side ef-
fects and few drug interactions. Caspofungin administration in
children and adolescents provides exposure that is comparable
to that obtained in adults [186]. There is an inverse relationship
between micafungin clearance and age [187], as well as between
clearance and weight [188], so micafungin dosing is individual-
ized in patients aged ≤8 years, and in extremely obese patients
[187, 188]. Both caspofungin and micafungin maintain linear
pharmacokinetics when dose-escalated in adult patients with
IA [189, 190]. Among the 3 compounds, caspofungin has
more extensive hepatic metabolism, leading to some interac-
tions with other medications. For example, caspofungin can re-
duce the area under the curve of tacrolimus by approximately
20%, but has no effect on cyclosporine levels. In contrast, cyclo-
sporine increases the area under the curve of caspofungin by ap-
proximately 35%. Inducers of drug clearance and/or mixed
inducer/inhibitors, namely efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine,
phenytoin, rifampin, dexamethasone, and carbamazepine,
may reduce caspofungin concentrations.
All 3 agents have activity against Aspergillus species. Data are
limited regarding their use for primary treatment of invasive in-
fections, due to low accrual in clinical trials. Use of caspofungin
to treat 24 allogeneic HSCT recipients with 12 weeks of therapy
led to a 42% complete or partial infection response, with a
12-week survival of 50% [191]. However, in a second stratum
of that study, primary therapy with caspofungin was successful
in only 20 of 61 (33%) patients with hematological malignancy.
Based on this limited database, echinocandin monotherapy is
not routinely recommended as primary treatment for IA
[192]. Use of micafungin to treat 50 patients with CPA led to
a 60% treatment response [193]. As a result of the difficulty in
enrolling patients at the point of needing primary treatment for
aspergillosis, patients with Aspergillus infections were more fre-
quently studied once their infections became refractory to or in-
tolerant of other approved therapies (ie, salvage therapy) [194–
196]. In a study where 326 patients were treated with micafun-
gin as salvage therapy, there was a 44% survival rate by the end
of 6 weeks of follow-up, with 59% of deaths attributable to the
Aspergillus infection [194]. Among 83 patients who received
caspofungin for salvage therapy, favorable response rates were
seen for 45%, compared with 16% among historical controls
[195].Although anidulafungin has been studied in combination
therapy, it has not been evaluated in monotherapy as primary or
salvage therapy for IA. Because of their distinct mechanism of
action, the echinocandins have the potential for use in combi-
nation regimens with antifungal agents of differing mechanisms
of action [194, 196–198]. When patients are treated with com-
bination therapy, the impact of the echinocandin agent is diffi-
cult to specifically define.
Triazoles
Recommendations.
20. Triazoles are preferred agents for treatment and prevention
of IA in most patients (strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence).
Evidence Summary.
TRIAZOLE PHARMACOLOGY
Itraconazole
Itraconazole is formulated as capsules and an oral solution in
hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HPCD), and aparenteral solu-
tion, which is no longer sold in the United States, that also
uses HPCD as solubilizing agent. Accumulation of the cyclo-
dextrin molecule in the intravenous preparation occurs with
renal impairment, although the toxicity of accumulated cyclo-
dextrin in humans is uncertain. Systemic absorption of oral cy-
clodextrin is minimal, thus the use of the oral solution is not
impacted by renal insufficiency. Itraconazole is highly protein
bound (>99%) and is extensively metabolized by the liver (cy-
tochrome P450 [CYP] 3A4) and undergoes enterohepatic circu-
lation. The hydroxyitraconazole metabolite has approximately
equivalent antifungal activity but with variable plasma concen-
tration as native drug. Both must be measured to assess drug
bioavailability. Itraconazole is an inhibitor and substrate for
CYP3A4 and inhibitor of the permeability glycoprotein
(p-gp) membrane transporter. The metabolites are excreted in
the urine (40%) and bile (55%) [199, 200]. Significant pharma-
cokinetic variation exists between patients in absorption and
distribution [201–203].
Most observed reactions to itraconazole are transient and in-
clude nausea and vomiting, hypertriglyceridemia, hypokalemia,
and elevated hepatic aminotransferase enzyme levels. Gastroin-
testinal intolerance appears to be more frequent with oral
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e19
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 HPCD itraconazole solution. Peripheral neuropathy associated
with itraconazole has been reported, in particular with pro-
longed therapy and excessive serum concentrations [204]. Neg-
ative inotropic effects have been observed uncommonly but
may be important in patients with ventricular dysfunction. Itra-
conazole is a substrate of CYP3A4 but also interacts with the
heme moiety of CYP3A4, resulting in noncompetitive inhibi-
tion of oxidative metabolism of many CYP3A4 substrates. Seri-
ous interactions with some chemotherapeutic agents (eg,
cyclophosphamide and vincristine) may require additional
monitoring to avoid toxicity [205] as well as other agents that
prolong the QTc interval. Because of these limitations, itracona-
zole is rarely recommended in patients with acute IPA, with its
use reserved for patients with less severe or less invasive disease
presentations.
Voriconazole
Voriconazole is formulated as tablets, an oral suspension, and a
sulfobutyl-ether cyclodextrin solution for intravenous administra-
tion. Sulfobutyl-ether cyclodextrin and voriconazole dissociate in
plasma and the cyclodextrin molecule is renally cleared. Accumu-
lation of the vehicle occurs with renal insufficiency. Renal toxicity
of hydroxypropyl β-cyclodextrin after parenteral administration
has been demonstrated in animal models, although no deleterious
effects on renal function have been observed in humans [206,
207]; for this reason, the consequences of cyclodextrin plasma ac-
cumulation are unclear. The relative benefits and uncertain risks
of intravenous administration of voriconazole in the context of IA
and renal failure should be determined on an individual patient
basis. This concern does not apply to orally administered vorico-
nazole. The oral formulation has good bioavailability in the fed or
fasted state.
Voriconazole is hepatically metabolized, with only 5% of the
drug appearing unchanged in the urine. This agent exhibits nonlin-
ear pharmacokinetics in adults, with the maximum concentration
in plasma and area under the curve increasing disproportionally
with increasing dose. Voriconazole is both a substrate and an inhib-
itor of CYP2C19 primarily, as well as of CYP3A4 [208–210].Allelic
polymorphisms in CYP2C19 may result phenotypically in rapid or
slow metabolism of voriconazole, possibly resulting in significant
variation in plasma concentrations [211]. Single-nucleotide poly-
morphisms contributing to slow metabolism are represented in
higher frequencies among non-Indian Asian populations than
among other populations.
Factors affecting voriconazole pharmacokinetics include pa-
tient age, liver function, CYP2C19- and CYP3A-interacting med-
ications, diet and antacids, proton pump inhibitors, and patient
weight, as well as the drug dose and formulation [212]. Reduced
voriconazole levels may be observed with oral administration of
the drug (vs intravenous), and coadministration with rifampin or
phenytoin [213, 214]. Measurement of serum levels is useful in
the majority of patients, both to evaluate for potential toxicity
or to document adequate drug exposure, especially in progressive
infection [213–226]. Toxicity is more common with higher drug
levels but is not predictable based solely on this criterion [216,
220, 227]. The profile of adverse reactions to voriconazole in-
cludes transient visual disturbances (characterized principally
by photopsia); hepatotoxicity, which may be dose limiting (man-
ifested by elevated serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and he-
patic aminotransferase enzyme levels); skin rash, erythroderma,
photosensitivity, and perioral excoriations; nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea; visual or auditory hallucinations; and cardiovascu-
lar events including tachyarrhythmias and QT interval prolonga-
tions on electrocardiography [209,211,213,228].There have also
been rare cases of arrhythmia (including ventricular arrhythmias
such as torsade de pointes and bradycardia), cardiac arrest, and
sudden death in patients taking voriconazole. These cases usually
involve patients with multiple confounding risk factors, such as
history of cardiotoxic chemotherapy, cardiomyopathy, hypokale-
mia, and concomitant medications (eg, quinolones) that may be
contributory. Visual side effects or photopsia are self-limited, re-
versible, and not clearly associated with absolute drug levels [227,
229]. Mild hepatotoxicity is common as for all azoles and related
to drug concentration [227,230,231].Severe hepatotoxicity is un-
common. Reversible central and peripheral neurologic symptoms
and hallucinations may be observed in association with higher
drug concentrations but with significant variability; these may
be confused with other etiologies of CNS dysfunction including
posterior reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome or calcineur-
in inhibitor toxicity [217, 224, 227, 232, 233]. Voriconazole con-
centrations may be a predictor of CNS neurotoxicity, which is
reversible [214]. The use of prolonged voriconazole therapy (as
for osteomyelitis or meningitis) or prophylaxis has revealed
newer toxicities including periostitis with severe pain in bones
or joints in association with elevated serum fluoride levels
[234–240]. The risk for squamous cell skin cancer or melanoma
in sun-exposed areas is enhanced by concomitant immunosup-
pression and chronic voriconazole use, especially in fair-skinned
persons [241–243].
Posaconazole
Posaconazole, which is structurally similar to itraconazole, is
available as an oral suspension, delayed-release tablet, and intra-
venous formulation but has been studied for the treatment and
prophylaxis of IA only in the oral suspension in efficacy studies.
Posaconazole exhibits not only linear kinetics but also saturable
absorption of the suspension; thus, oral loading doses are not
possible. Steady-state levels may not be achieved for up to a
week with posaconazole therapy, which impacts use in primary
therapy. The newer delayed-release tablet formulation has im-
proved bioavailability and is given once daily [244–246], as is
the intravenous formulation in β-cyclodextrin. Bioavailability
of the new tablet is not affected by food or gastric acid,
but the oral suspension requires a fed state to maximize
e20 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 bioavailability. Posaconazole undergoes hepatic metabolism via
glucuronidation and also has the capacity for drug–drug inter-
actions through inhibition of CYP3A4 isoenzymes [247]. Posa-
conazole pharmacokinetics are variable between patients and
TDM seems useful, although the posaconazole exposure in plas-
ma from the oral solution appears to underestimate the clinical
response to therapy [248–252].Toxicities are generally mild, in-
cluding diarrhea and nausea, and do not appear to be related to
drug concentrations [253] but may be increased with the higher
serum levels attained with the delayed-release tablets. Other tox-
icities including prolonged QTc interval have been reported with
the increased drug levels associated with the extended-release
tablets. TDM is recommended based on both preclinical and
clinical trials with the oral solution, which documented variable
absorption and the relationship of levels to efficacy [254–256],
and is likely indicated with the extended-release tablets that
may achieve high drug concentrations and be associated with in-
creased toxicities.
Isavuconazole
Isavuconazonium sulfate (referred to in these guidelines as isa-
vuconazole) is a prodrug containing the active antifungal agent
isavuconazole, a broad-spectrum triazole agent with a 5-day
half-life [257]. The intravenous formulation does not contain
cyclodextrin as do other triazoles. Isavuconazole requires a
loading dose. The toxicity profile is similar to that of other tri-
azoles, with a similar rate of gastrointestinal disorders, but
based on limited experience, a lower rate of photosensitivity,
skin disorders, and hepatobiliary and visual disturbances com-
pared with voriconazole [258,259]. Significant interactions with
drugs metabolized by CYP are expected to occur, especially with
substrates and inducers of the CYP3A4 enzyme, although pre-
clinical studies suggest that these drug interactions are less se-
vere than with voriconazole. Coadministration of methotrexate
with isavuconazole increases exposure to 7-OH methotrexate, a
potentially toxic metabolite. Tacrolimus and sirolimus levels are
likely to be increased by coadministration of isavuconazole,
whereas interactions with cyclosporine and glucocorticoids ap-
pear modest. Interestingly, in contrast to other triazoles, isavuco-
nazole could shorten the QTc interval; the clinical significance of
this is unclear. There is no effect of the polymorphisms of
CYP2C19, which contributes to considerable interpatient vari-
ability in serum concentrations of voriconazole.
Triazole Drug Interactions and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Recommendations.
21. For patients receiving triazole-based therapy for IA, pro-
longed azole prophylaxis, or other therapies for which drug
interactions with azoles are anticipated, the committee rec-
ommends TDM once the steady state has been reached. A
moderate amount of data for itraconazole, voriconazole,
and posaconazole suspension suggests this approach may
be valuable in enhancing therapeutic efficacy, in evaluating
therapeutic failures attributable to suboptimal drug expo-
sures, and to minimize toxicities potentially attributable to
the azoles (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evi-
dence). Further studies are needed to address whether
TDM is helpful or necessary with the extended-release or in-
travenous formulations of posaconazole or for isavuconazole.
22. Clinicians should obtain serum trough drug levels for azole
antifungal agents (itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole,
and possibly isavuconazole) and for potentially interacting
drugs such as cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and sirolimus (and
other CYP3A4 substrates such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors)
to optimize therapeutic efficacy and to avoid potential
toxicities of both groups of agents (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Despite a lack of definitive data from
large clinical studies, TDM is increasingly recognized as a useful
tool for optimizing the safety and efficacy of azole antifungals.
Generally, an antifungal agent must meet 3 general criteria for
antifungal TDM to be clinically useful. First, a sensitive assay
must be available locally or in a reference laboratory that will
report results back in a timely fashion (within days), otherwise
the impact of monitoring on clinical decision making will be
limited. Second, the antifungal must have an established thera-
peutic range, such that treatment success can be improved or
toxicity potentially reduced if patients are dosed to maintain con-
centrations within this therapeutic window. Finally, the drug
must have significant intra- or interpatient pharmacokinetic var-
iability, such that variations in serum levels may jeopardize the
effectiveness of therapy with standard dosing guidelines.
Triazole antifungal agents contribute to various important tox-
icities and drug–drug interactionsthat may limit therapy (Table 2).
Many of the drug interactions are class-related while common
toxicities are often specific to the dose or duration of therapy
with individual agents [260,261].The triazoles are metabolic sub-
strates for, and inhibitors of, several CYP enzymes and inhibitors
of the p-gp membrane transporter [262]. Polymorphisms are
common in the genes encoding these CYP isoenzymes, particu-
larly CYP2C19, and others with less prominent roles in triazole
pharmacokinetics [263]. The polymorphisms of CYP3A4 are
not considered to contribute significantly to differences in
human metabolism of antifungal triazoles [264]. The polymor-
phisms of CYP2C19 are a common cause for substantial interpa-
tient variability in drug levels in patients receiving voriconazole.
The triazole antifungal agents demonstrate significant drug–
drug interactions that may adversely affect patient outcomes
[261]. Each patient’s current medications should be reviewed
for potentially deleterious drug interactions. As a class, these in-
clude altered serum levels of the azoles and of coadministered
agents including calcineurin inhibitors and mammalian target
of rapamycin inhibitor immunosuppressive agents, anticoagu-
lants, psychiatric and neurotropic medications, barbiturates,
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e21
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 glucocorticoids, digoxin, vinca alkaloids (eg, vincristine) and
cyclophosphamide, and antiretroviral agents [260, 265–280].
All of the azoles have important interactions via the CYP en-
zymes, notably CYP3A4, which can interact with a large num-
ber of concomitant medications including tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, macrolides, and antiarrhythmics, among others. Active
transporters including the p-gp and the breast cancer resistance
protein regulate access of the azoles to the drug-metabolizing en-
zymes of enterocytes and the liver; the clinical importance of the
transporters remains to be further defined [260, 281, 282].
Currently, 3 triazoles (itraconazole, voriconazole, and posa-
conazole) are considered to meet these criteria and have estab-
lished indications for TDM in IA [283, 284]. There is general
agreement that documentation of adequate (and in the case of
voriconazole, nontoxic) serum levels in the first 4–7 days after
starting therapy (when a patient is at a pharmacokinetic steady
state) is preferable for any patient with suspected or document-
ed aspergillosis. Less agreement exists whether TDM is neces-
sary during primary triazole prophylaxis, but low plasma
levels of itraconazole and posaconazole suspension have been
associated with higher probability of breakthrough infection,
and limited data suggest that high levels of posaconazole may
be associated with toxicity [285].
The need for continued or repeat monitoring is a patient-
specific decision influenced by the clinical status of the host
(eg, specific organ function, comorbidities, and receipt of con-
comitant medications), severity of infection, concerns regarding
nonadherence, cost, TDM assay availability, possibly the dura-
tion of therapy [286], and the overall treatment plan. Determi-
nation of a plasma drug level, in conjunction with other
measures of clinical assessment, can help define factors that
may have led to therapeutic failure with oral triazoles and re-
open prospects for use of the same oral drug in the future pro-
vided pharmacokinetic issues are corrected.
Overviews of clinical scenarios that frequently justify TDM
are presented in Table 3. The therapeutic range for voriconazole
and posaconazole have been primarily defined from single-
center, retrospective studies and can only be considered a gene-
ral guide for dosing [284].
Itraconazole
Itraconazole capsules require low gastric pH for dissolution, and
are therefore poorly absorbed in many patient populations with
relative achlorhydria associated with their underlying disease or
pharmacotherapy. Itraconazole suspension is better absorbed,
but is associated with higher gastrointestinal adverse effects,
which are especially problematic in populations who already
have nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Although a variable rate
of breakthrough IA has been reported in patients on itracona-
zole prophylaxis, relatively few studies have examined the
Table 2.
Commonly Encountered Drug–Drug Interactions During Treatment of Aspergillosis
Agent/Class
Interaction
Comment
CNI and mTOR inhibitor immunosuppressive agents
Significant increase in CNI levels by azole
CNI and mTOR agents should be reduced
(approximately 30%–50% for CNI and greater for
rapamycin) at the time of initiating azole therapy
and serum levels for both agents monitored until
steady state is reached. Stopping of CNI or mTOR
may provoke graft rejection.
Corticosteroids
Levels are increased by azoles
May exacerbate immunosuppression favorable for
fungal growth. Prolonged coadministration may
elicit signs of excessive steroid exposure.
Antiretroviral agents for HIV
Variable effects
Frequently used in combination with other classes of
agents; monitoring of azole levels recommended,
and bidirectional drug–drug interactions common.
Rifampin/rifabutin
Decreased levels of azole agents while rifampin/
rifabutin levels are increased
Combined use of voriconazole, posaconazole,
isavuconazole, or itraconazole with rifampin/
rifabutin should generally be avoided. Some
combinations are considered contraindicated;
others may be managed by TDM and dose
adjustment.
Agents that cause QTc interval prolongation
(fluoroquinolone and macrolide antimicrobials,
quinine, quinidine, digoxin, amiodarone and other
antiarrhythmic drugs, calcium channel blockers,
psychiatric drugs, antihistamines, and other
agents)
QT interval prolongation, torsades de pointes, and
other cardiac arrhythmias have been observed
with azoles in combination with other agents or
preexisting conditions that have these effects
Assess risk benefit and administer with caution to
patients with cardiac disorders that increase the
risk of arrhythmias.
Vincristine and other vinca alkaloid agents
Neurotoxicity including peripheral neuropathy and
seizures in combination with azoles; azole
levels also increased
Given the potential for serious toxicity, vincristine and
other vinca alkaloids should generally not be
coadministered with mold-active azoles.
Alternative antifungal therapy (eg, amphotericin B
formulation or echinocandin) should be used.
Cyclophosphamide
Increased levels with coadministration of some
azoles
Increased renal, hepatic, or genitourinary dysfunction
Abbreviations: CNI, calcineurin inhibitor; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; TDM, therapeutic drug monitoring.
e22 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 relationship of itraconazole plasma concentrations and treatment
efficacy for aspergillosis. Based primarily on prophylaxis data, most
experts recommend dosing itraconazole to achieve trough concen-
trations >0.5–1 µg/mL (combined itraconazole/hydroxyitracona-
zole troughs >1.5 µg/mL). There are limited data suggesting that
higher trough concentrations of itraconazole (>3 µg/mL) may be
associated with increased toxicity [287].
Voriconazole
Various target concentrations associated with voriconazole effi-
cacy have been reported, mostly from single-institution retro-
spective studies [214, 283]. Most experts would aim for dosing
to achieve a voriconazole trough of >1–1.5 µg/mL for efficacy
but <5–6 µg/mL to minimize toxicity, primarily CNS toxicity. Vi-
sual changes can be related to elevated voriconazole concentra-
tion but generally resolve spontaneously and without long-term
sequelae. Although voriconazole trough concentrations can be el-
evated in patients with hepatic dysfunction, available data do not
support the concept of a threshold level that could adequately
discriminate who will be at higher risk for hepatotoxicity [229].
In a prospective, randomized blinded single-center trial of
TDM during voriconazole therapy in 100 patients, the propor-
tion of voriconazole discontinuation due to adverse events was
significantly lower in the TDM group than in the non-TDM
group (4% vs 17%; P = 0.02) [288]. More importantly, higher
rates of complete or partial response were observed in patients
managed with TDM (81% vs those without TDM 57%;
P = 0.04). This study and several others suggest that antifungal
TDM may reduce drug discontinuation due to adverse events
and improve the likelihood of a therapeutic response. There
are no widely validated algorithms on how to dose voriconazole.
Weight-based dosing is recommended to rapidly achieve thera-
peutic range, with incremental increases and monitoring
(ie, 50% increase in daily dose) for the patient who has trough
levels <1 µg/mL. Voriconazole concentrations often increase
disproportionately to administered doses due to saturable me-
tabolism in adults. For patients with very low voriconazole lev-
els, coadministering omeprazole (a CYP2C19 inhibitor) has
been reported to “boost” voriconazole area under the curve by
41% [289]. Fundamental pharmacokinetics of voriconazole are
different in children (linear) than in adults (nonlinear) [290].
In pediatric patients weighing <50 kg, higher voriconazole
doses are needed [291] and drug monitoring is paramount
(see specific evidence discussion following Recommendation
45 below).
Posaconazole
Increasing evidence supports an exposure–response relation-
ship for plasma posaconazole concentrations for prophylaxis
and treatment of IFIs [250]. This, in conjunction with the fact
that posaconazole levels (using the suspension formulation) are
commonly low (<0.7 µg/mL) in patients with documented IA
receiving salvage treatment [1], makes prudent a strategy of
monitoring posaconazole serum concentrations in patients
with IA who are on chronic posaconazole suspension. On the
other hand, a clear relationship has not been identified between
posaconazole concentrations and the risk of breakthrough IA in
the pivotal posaconazole registration trials [254, 292] in which
the event rate (breakthrough IA) was low. Therefore, TDM dur-
ing posaconazole prophylaxis may be best used in evaluating
potential breakthrough infections. There is limited evidence
to suggest that peak or trough posaconazole concentrations
are predictive of subsequent hepatic or other toxicities, although
higher rates of toxicity have been anecdotally observed in some
patients with high serum levels (>1.5 µg/mL) achieved with the
delayed-release tablet formulation.
The introduction of posaconazole extended-release tablets
and the intravenous formulation of posaconazole more easily
achieve increased posaconazole serum drug levels, even in pa-
tients with risk factors for posaconazole malabsorption [244,
Table 3.
Clinical Scenarios Where Therapeutic Drug Monitoring Is Useful in Treatment of Aspergillosis
Clinical Scenarios Where Antifungal Therapeutic Drug
Monitoring Is Useful
Examples, Comment
Populations with increased pharmacokinetic
variability
Impaired gastrointestinal function; hepatic (voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole); pediatric patients,
elderly patients, obese patients, critically ill patients
Changing pharmacokinetics
Intravenous-to-oral switch, changing GI function, changing hepatic or renal function, physiological instability
Interacting medications
Patient receiving medication that induces CYP3A4, antacids, proton pump inhibitors (itraconazole capsules,
posaconazole suspension), antiretroviral medications
Possibly corticosteroids (voriconazole)
Severe disease
Extensive infection, lesions contiguous with critical structures, CNS infection, multifocal or disseminated
infection
Compliance
Important issue with longer-term consolidation therapy or secondary prophylaxis
Suspected breakthrough infection
TDM can help to establish whether fungal disease progression occurred in the setting of inadequate
antifungal exposure
Suspected drug toxicity, especially neurotoxicity
(voriconazole)
Although exposure-response relationships are described for other toxicities (eg, hepatotoxicity, bone
disease), the utility of TDM to prevent their occurrence is less well established
Table developed from Andes et al [283]; Ashbee et al [284]. Additional studies are needed to assess role of TDM for isavuconazole and for posaconazole extended-release tablet and intravenous
formulations.
Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CYP, cytochrome P450; GI, gastrointestinal; TDM, therapeutic drug monitoring.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e23
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 293, 294]. Further studies are needed to address whether higher
posaconazole levels are associated with toxicity and whether
TDM is helpful or necessary with the extended-release or intra-
venous formulations. The value of TDM to guide therapy and
to avoid toxicity for isavuconazole, a once-daily extended-
spectrum triazole with anti-Aspergillus activity with good ab-
sorption kinetics, similarly remains to be assessed [258].
Preclinical and Laboratory Assessment of Combination Antifungal
Therapy
23. Combinations of polyenes or azoles with echinocandins
suggest additive or synergistic effects in some preclinical
studies. However, variable test designs and conflicting results
of preclinical and in vitro testing have led to uncertainty as to
how to interpret the findings (weak recommendation; low-
quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
The rationale for combination therapy is
to maximize treatment by targeting multiple targets or metabol-
ic pathways or different points in the same pathway to improve
efficacy through achieving an additive or synergistic effect.
Other potential benefits include lowering the risk for emergence
of drug resistance and the potential for shorter courses of ther-
apy or lower doses of therapy in an attempt to reduce toxicity.
Antifungal drug combinations have been evaluated in multi-
ple in vitro studies and studied in animal models. Combinations
of polyenes or azoles with echinocandins have been most stud-
ied, and additive or synergistic effects have been noted in the
majority of (but not all) studies when compared to monother-
apy (especially echinocandins alone) [295–299]. Unfortunately,
there are no standardized or validated protocols for in vitro syn-
ergy testing, and there are substantive differences in study de-
sign, laboratory assay conditions, definitions of endpoints,
species and strains tested, animal models, drug choice and con-
centrations/doses, drug monotherapy comparator, inoculation
size, and portal of pathogen administration. Furthermore, cor-
relations between in vitro findings and in vivo observations have
not always been consistent, and differences in drug metabolism
between animals and humans make comparisons difficult. Also
of importance is the order of administration. Some studies have
suggested that prior azole administration subsequently reduces
polyene activity [300–307].
Antagonism during the use of combination therapy has also
been suggested by some studies, especially between polyenes
and certain azoles [308].By comparison, the combination of tri-
azole and echinocandin agents exhibit synergistic to additive in-
teractions in the same systems [309]. However, a murine model
demonstrated possible antagonism between itraconazole and
micafungin [310]. In vitro studies demonstrate that the combi-
nation of triazole and polyene may be antagonistic [310] or that
there may be synergy or antagonism depending on the dose
used [309, 311]. In addition to reduced antifungal activity,
other potential harmful effects may include increased risk for
resistance, additive toxicity, cost, and deleterious drug interac-
tions. Although the preclinical studies have been generally fa-
vorable to consideration of combinations of mold-active
azoles or polyenes with echinocandins, the variable test designs
and conflicting results of preclinical testing have led to uncer-
tainty as to the applicability to clinical practice.
When Should Antifungal Susceptibility Testing Be Performed, and
How Should Results Be Interpreted and Affect Management?
Recommendation.
24. Routine AFST of isolates recovered during initial infection
is not recommended. AFST of Aspergillus isolates using a ref-
erence method is reserved for patients suspected to have an
azole-resistant isolate or who are unresponsive to antifungal
agents, or for epidemiological purposes (strong recommenda-
tion; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
The goal of AFST is to detect resistant
isolates that are more likely to fail therapy [312, 313]. Consider-
able progress since the previous guideline has occurred toward
achieving this goal. The European Committee on Antibiotic
Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) and the Clinical and Labora-
tory Standards Institute (CLSI) have published standardized but
different AFST methodologies in recent years [314, 315]. Asper-
gillus minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) utilizing EU-
CAST and CLSI methodologies from more recent clinical
studies and large surveys have been determined. Although clin-
ical breakpoints are not yet defined by CLSI, epidemiological
cutoff values—the upper limit of wild-type MIC distributions
which aid in the determining the likelihood of resistance in As-
pergillus spp—have been proposed by CLSI [316–319]. Estab-
lishing epidemiological cutoff values for azoles and Aspergillus
fumigatus, utilizing in vitro pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynam-
ic studies, in vivo correlation of mutations and failure, and clin-
ical experience aided derivation of proposed azole clinical
breakpoints by EUCAST [312, 320–324]. Taken together,
these advances resulted in the recommendation by some experts
in Europe to perform routine voriconazole AFST [323].
The advances of molecular techniques have led to important
changes to Aspergillus taxonomy contributed to by the phyloge-
netic species recognition concept [325]. This method, based on
sequencing of several targets for species recognition analysis,
has identified new cryptic species, some of which are more resis-
tant to current antifungal drugs [326]. Azole resistance in fila-
mentous fungi primarily involves mutations in the CYP51A
target enzyme or promoter that lead to specific or pan-azole re-
sistance, and is described more frequently in A. fumigatus com-
plex than other species [327–333]. Other azole resistance
mechanisms are also described [334–339].Resistance to the echi-
nocandins is uncommon, as is resistance to AmB apart from As-
pergillus terreus, Aspergillus nidulans, and Aspergillus lentulus
e24 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 [340, 341]. While azole resistance in the United States and the
Americas appears to be low (<3%), there are multiple reports
of resistant strains in some European countries and across the
world attributed to prior antifungal exposure and to environmen-
tal use of antifungal-containing pesticides [85, 324, 342–345].
These reports notwithstanding, there are few studies determining
the impact of resistance detected by AFST on clinical outcomes
[346, 347].
At this time, AFST is not routinely performed in most clin-
ical laboratories in the United States. Molecular methods to
identify azole and echinocandin resistance in filamentous
fungi are under investigation but not yet standardized or val-
idated and require further study [341]. However, in the case of
isolates with atypical growth or concerns for resistance when
molecular methods are not available, AFST should be em-
ployed. In conclusion, AFST advances in the past decade are
significant; however, worldwide Aspergillus resistance remains
low, and routine AFST for clinical management is not recom-
mended at this time.
INVASIVE SYNDROMES OF ASPERGILLUS
IV. What Are the Recommended Treatment Regimens and Adjunctive
Treatment Measures for the Various Clinical Presentations of Invasive
Aspergillosis?
How Should IPA Be Treated?
Recommendations.
25. We recommend primary treatment with voriconazole
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
26. Early initiation of antifungal therapy in patients with strongly
suspected IPA is warranted while a diagnostic evaluation is con-
ducted (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
27. Alternative therapies include liposomal AmB (strong rec-
ommendation; moderate-quality evidence), isavuconazole
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence), or
other lipid formulations of AmB (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
28. Combination antifungal therapy with voriconazole and an
echinocandin may be considered in select patients with docu-
mented IPA (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
29. Primary therapy with an echinocandin is not recommend-
ed (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Echinocandins (micafungin or caspofungin) can be used in
settings in which azole and polyene antifungals are contrain-
dicated (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
30. We recommend that treatment of IPA be continued for a
minimum of 6–12 weeks, largely dependent on the degree
and duration of immunosuppression, site of disease, and ev-
idence of disease improvement (strong recommendation; low-
quality evidence).
31. For patients with successfully treated IPA who require sub-
sequent immunosuppression, secondary prophylaxis should
be initiated to prevent recurrence (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Early initiation of antifungal therapy
in patients with strongly suspected IPA is warranted while a di-
agnostic evaluation is conducted, both because early therapy has
been shown to limit progression of disease and because the per-
formance of diagnostic testing remains limited [145, 175]. Avail-
ability of drugs that have differential activity for molds that cause
similar syndromes, specifically, the lack of voriconazole activity
against mucormycosis, emphasizes the importance of a specific
microbiologic diagnosis and antimicrobial susceptibility testing.
Evidence supporting appropriate primary therapy of IPA has
been generated in a series of randomized controlled trials
(Table 1).
The first pivotal treatment trial performed for IA demonstrated
better survival in patients who received voriconazole compared
with AmB deoxycholate [348], justifying a recommendation
against AmB deoxycholate therapy. Since that original random-
ized trial, multiple cohort studies subsequently published support
this recommendation with approximately 15% improved survival
at 12 weeks in all patient types with voriconazole compared with
other intravenous therapies. Thus, for primary treatment of IPA
in adults, intravenous or oral voriconazole is recommended for
most patients. For seriously ill patients, the parenteral formulation
is recommended. A switch to oral therapy, with dosing maxi-
mized to achieve recommended target serum levels, can be con-
sidered in patients who are able to tolerate oral therapy.
A randomized trial compared voriconazole with isavuconazole,
which demonstrated noninferiority in treatment of IPA [349].
This study showed noninferiority in terms of clinical efficacy,
measured by survival and composite clinical responses in the in-
tent-to-treat population of patients with possible, probable, and
proven aspergillosis. There were fewer drug-related adverse effects
in people who received isavuconazole. Based on these data, isavu-
conazole was approved by the FDA for first-line therapy of IA and
is recommended as an alternative primary therapy for IPA.
Another alternative for primary therapy of IA is liposomal
AmB. Although no randomized trial has been performed to eval-
uate effectiveness of this drug compared to voriconazole for pri-
mary therapy, a series of randomized trials suggest effectiveness in
therapy. Randomized trials of variable quality evaluating primary
treatment of IA using lipid formulations of AmB have been re-
ported to generally favor outcomes with lipid formulations, espe-
cially with regard to minimizing toxicities. The most compelling
effectiveness data have been generated from randomized trials
evaluating liposomal AmB. Cornely et al [175] compared an ini-
tial dosage of liposomal AmB of 10 mg/kg/day for 2 weeks with a
dosage of 3 mg/kg/day. In that study, among 201 patients, overall
outcomes in the 2 arms were similar (46% in the high-dose arm vs
50% in the low-dose arm), but there was more toxicity (32% vs
20%) in the high-dose arm, suggesting that higher doses were
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e25
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 not beneficial. These results suggest that liposomal AmB be con-
sidered as alternative primary therapy in some patients, especially
in situations in which hepatic toxicities or drug interactions war-
rant nonazole alternatives, and when voriconazole-resistant molds
(eg, mucormycosis) remain of concern.
Another lipid AmB alternative is ABLC (5 mg/kg/day),
which has not been studied in randomized trials for IA, but
has been reported to be effective in observational studies, par-
ticularly in the setting of salvage therapy, and is generally well
tolerated compared with AmB deoxycholate [350–353].
Finally, ABCD was compared to AmB deoxycholate in a ran-
domized trial of 174 patients. Although therapeutic responses
were similar (52% vs 51%), infusion-related reactions were more
common in ABCD. Renal toxicity occurred less frequently with
ABCD [174], but due to an increase in serious drug reactions, prin-
cipally fever, chills, and hypoxia, use of ABCD is not recommended.
Combination therapy in the treatment of IPA has been sup-
ported by generally favorable in vitro and in vivo preclinical
data in support of combinations of polyenes or mold-active
azoles with echinocandins. Nonrandomized clinical trial data
suggest the benefit of some forms of combination therapy against
IA, usually an azole (most commonly voriconazole) with an echi-
nocandin in aspergillosis [197,198,296,299,304,354–360].There
are limited prospective randomized first-line combination thera-
py trials [361, 362]. In a pilot trial [361], 30 hematologic malig-
nancy patients with proven or probable IA were randomized to
either a standard dose of liposomal AmB (3 mg/kg/day) plus cas-
pofungin or high-dose liposomal AmB alone (10 mg/kg/day).
Responses were better at the end of therapy with combination
therapy but overall survival was similar. A more recent random-
ized trial compared outcomes of voriconazole monotherapy to
combination therapy with voriconazole plus anidulafungin
[362].The trial enrolled 454 patients with hematologic malignan-
cy to evaluate hypothesized superiority in 6-week survival in
combination therapy recipients. Mortality at 6 weeks was
19.3% for combination recipients and 27.5% for monotherapy re-
cipients (P = .087; 95% CI, −19 to 1.5). Secondary mortality ben-
efits favored combination therapy. In post hoc analyses of the
dominant subgroup of patients who were diagnosed as having
“probable” aspergillosis based on radiographic abnormalities
and positive GM assays, the difference in mortality was most no-
table (15.7% combination vs 27.3% monotherapy; P = .037; 95%
CI, −22.7 to −.4). Global clinical responses at 6 weeks were lower
in the combination group (33% vs 43%), which was attributed to
more patients in the combination group being unevaluable for
this secondary endpoint due to missing data. There were no tox-
icity differences. This study adds to prior preclinical and obser-
vational clinical studies that suggest potential benefits for
combination therapy with voriconazole and an echinocandin
[198,356,363]. For this reason, the committee suggests consider-
ation for an echinocandin with voriconazole for primary therapy
in the setting of severe disease, especially in patients with
hematologic malignancy and those with profound and persistent
neutropenia.
While caspofungin has been reported to have efficacy in sev-
eral small noncomparative studies of drug administered for
both primary and “salvage” therapy, the committee does not
support use of this agent as monotherapy based on lack of ro-
bustly powered comparative trials in which outcomes were not
favorable compared to historical data [190–192, 195, 364–366].
Duration of antifungal therapy for IPA is not well defined.
We generally recommend that treatment of IPA be continued
for a minimum of 6–12 weeks, depending on the severity and
continuation of immunosuppression, as well as the extent of
resolution of clinical disease. Therapeutic monitoring of IPA in-
cludes serial clinical evaluation of all symptoms and signs, as
well as performance of radiographic imaging, usually with
CT, at regular intervals. The frequency with which CT should
be performed cannot be universally defined and should be in-
dividualized on the basis of the rapidity of evolution of pulmo-
nary infiltrates and the acuity of illness in the individual patient.
The volume of pulmonary infiltrates may increase for the first
7–10 days of therapy, especially in the context of granulocyte
recovery [159]. The use of serial serum GM assays for therapeu-
tic monitoring is promising but remains investigational. Pro-
gressive increases in Aspergillus antigen levels over time
signify a poor prognosis. However, resolution of GM antigene-
mia to a normal level is not sufficient as a sole criterion for dis-
continuation of antifungal therapy. Long-term therapy of IA is
facilitated by the availability of oral azole drugs in stable pa-
tients. For patients with successfully treated IA who will require
subsequent immunosuppression, resumption of antifungal
therapy can prevent recurrent infection [367, 368].
Surgical resection of Aspergillus-infected tissue may be useful
in patients who have lesions that are contiguous with the great
vessels or other critical organs, lesions causing recalcitrant
hemoptysis from a single focus, and in lesions eroding into
bone. This decision should be mindful of the probability
of structural adhesion eliciting spillage of organism into the
pleural space.
As discussed in Section II, increasing evidence suggests that
attention should be placed on antifungal drug resistance, either
that innate to the infecting Aspergillus species (such as A. ter-
reus, A. flavus, or “cryptic” Aspergillus spp such as A. lentulus)
or that acquired by a typically susceptible species.
Adjunctive Measures and Immunomodulation: When Should
Withdrawal of Immunosuppressive Agents, or Addition of Colony-
Stimulating Factors or Granulocyte Transfusions, Be Considered in
the Treatment of Invasive Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
32. Reducing doses of, or eliminating altogether, immunosuppres-
sive agents, when feasible, is advised as a component of anti-
Aspergillus therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
e26 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 33. Colony-stimulating factors may be considered in neutrope-
nic patients with diagnosed or suspected IA (weak recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence). There is insufficient
evidence regarding the value of granulocyte colony-stimulat-
ing factor (G-CSF) vs GM-CSF in this setting.
34. Granulocyte transfusions can be considered for neutrope-
nic patients with IA that is refractory or unlikely to respond
to standard therapy, and for an anticipated duration of more
than one week (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
35. Recombinant interferon-γ is recommended as prophylaxis
in CGD patients (strong recommendation; high-quality evi-
dence). Its benefit as adjunctive therapy for IA is unknown.
36. Surgery for aspergillosis should be considered for localized
disease that is easily accessible to debridement (eg, invasive
fungal sinusitis or localized cutaneous disease) (strong rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence). The benefit for IA in
other settings such as in the treatment of endocarditis, oste-
omyelitis, or focal CNS disease appears rational. Other indi-
cations are less clear and require consideration of the
patient’s immune status, comorbidities, confirmation of a
single focus, and the risks of surgery.
Evidence Summary.
Because immune reconstitution is an
important factor in survival from IA, immunosuppressive
agents should be tapered or removed, when possible. However,
it is frequently not feasible to do so, for example, in patients
with severe GVHD or in SOT recipients with allograft rejection.
Clinical judgment is required in these cases.
Colony-stimulating factors: Colony-stimulating factors ad-
ministered prophylactically (prior to the onset of neutropenia)
are commonly used to shorten the duration of neutropenia
in patients receiving cytotoxic regimens. G-CSF influences
survival, proliferation, and differentiation of all cells in the
neutrophil lineage and augments the function of mature
neutrophils. G-CSF also stimulates neutrophil recovery and
various neutrophil effector functions and is a potent activator
of monocytes and macrophages. Pegfilgrastim, a pegylated
formulation of G-CSF with a long half-life, is used to reduce
the duration of neutropenia in patients with nonmyeloid
cancers.
A meta-analysis of prophylactic G-CSF showed a reduction
in the incidence of neutropenic fever and early deaths, including
infection-related mortality [369]. Another meta-analysis
showed a survival benefit of prophylactic G-CSF in patients
with MDS and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) [370]. Au-
thoritative guidelines have been published regarding the appro-
priate use of colony-stimulating factors in patients with cancer,
with the main goal of reducing neutropenic fever [371,372].The
value of adjunctive (as opposed to prophylactic) colony-stimu-
lating factors for the treatment of major infections is unclear.
Studies in vitro and in murine aspergillosis suggest that
G-CSF and GM-CSF can enhance antifungal host defense
[373–376]. If not initiated in the prophylactic setting, use of
colony-stimulating factors should be considered in neutropenic
patients with diagnosed or suspected IA. Although colony-
stimulating factors can augment phagocyte function in addition
to cell numbers, there are insufficient data to recommend their
use in patients who are not neutropenic.
Granulocyte transfusions: The rationale for granulocyte
transfusions is to increase the number of circulating neutrophils
until neutrophil recovery occurs and is usually recommended as
an adjunctive measure if granulocyte recovery is anticipated.
Granulocyte transfusions have been used for decades as adjunc-
tive treatment for severe infections in patients with neutropenia.
The impetus to reevaluate granulocyte transfusions stems large-
ly from improvements made in donor mobilization methods
using therapy with G-CSF and corticosteroids [377]. In addi-
tion, the use of unrelated community donors for granulocyto-
pheresis was shown to be feasible, thus increasing the pool of
potential donors [378, 379]. A randomized trial evaluating the
safety and effectiveness of granulocyte transfusions in patients
with neutropenia and severe bacterial and fungal infections
has recently been published (NCT00627393). Those who re-
ceived an average dose per transfusion of >0.6 × 109 granulo-
cytes/kg tended to have better outcomes than those receiving
a lower dose [380].
The overall benefit vs risk of granulocyte transfusions is cur-
rently unknown. Granulocyte transfusions were of benefit in ex-
perimental pulmonary aspergillosis in neutropenic mice [381].
Granulocyte transfusions can be considered for neutropenic pa-
tients with severe infections, including IA and other mold infec-
tions, which have failed or are unlikely to respond to standard
therapy. Acute lung injury is the major risk of granulocyte
transfusions. AmB may increase lung injury associated with
granulocyte transfusions [382]; therefore, separating AmB and
granulocyte infusions by several hours is advised. Alloimmuni-
zation leading to graft failure after allogeneic HSCT is another
potential risk of granulocyte transfusions. In allogeneic
transplants in which the donor and recipient are seronegative
for CMV, use of CMV-seronegative granulocyte donors is
recommended.
Recombinant interferon gamma (IFN-γ): IFN-γ augments the
antifungal activity of macrophages and neutrophils ex vivo
against a variety of fungal pathogens, including Aspergillus spe-
cies. A high proportion of patients with CPA are poor produc-
ers of IFN-γ [383]. In addition, a high ratio of ex vivo T-cell
production of IFN-γ/interleukin 10 is associated with improved
responses to antifungal therapy in patients with IA [384].
Recombinant IFN-γ (rIFN-γ) is licensed as a prophylactic
agent for patients with CGD on the basis of a randomized
trial in which rIFN-γ reduced the number and severity of infec-
tions (mostly bacterial) in patients with CGD by approximately
70% [385]. Its use as adjunctive therapy for patients with IA is
limited to case reports and small series. One concern related to
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e27
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 rIFN-γ use in allogeneic HSCT recipients is the potential to
worsen GVHD. A single-center retrospective analysis suggested
that rIFN-γ was safe in allogeneic HSCT recipients [386]. Cur-
rently, the data supporting the efficacy of adjunctive rIFN-γ for
aspergillosis are weak; it can be considered in patients with se-
vere or refractory aspergillosis.
Surgery: In general, surgical treatment of aspergillosis should
be considered for localized disease that is accessible to debride-
ment. Emergent debridement of sinus aspergillosis can be life-
saving and limit extension to the orbit and brain. Localized cuta-
neous aspergillosis should also be debrided. CNS aspergillosis is a
devastating complication; neurosurgical removal combined with
antifungal therapy may be life-saving, although the expected
postsurgical neurologic outcome should also be considered dur-
ing the decision process. Surgical resection of pulmonary lesions
due to Aspergillus species can provide a definitive diagnosis and
can potentially completely eradicate a localized infection.
Surgical therapy may be useful in patients with lesions
that are contiguous with the great vessels or the pericardium,
uncontrolled bleeding, or invasion of the pleural space
and chest wall. Intervention should also be considered for
localized pulmonary aspergillosis refractory to antifungal ther-
apy [387].
Another consideration for surgery is the resection of a single
pulmonary lesion prior to intensive chemotherapy or HSCT.
However, the favorable experience of HSCT in patients with
prior IA suggests that antifungal therapy alone may be effective
[367, 388–391]. An acceptable approach in patients with pre-
transplant aspergillosis is close CT monitoring without surgical
resection in the absence of additional complications, such as
uncontrolled bleeding or chest wall extension. Decisions con-
cerning surgical therapy should be individualized to account
for a number of variables, including the degree of resection
(eg, wedge resection vs pneumonectomy), potential impact of
delays in chemotherapy, comorbidities, performance status,
the goal of antineoplastic therapy (eg, curative vs palliative),
and unilateral vs bilateral lesions.
When Is It Safe to Proceed With Chemotherapy or Transplantation
in a Patient With Invasive Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
37. IA is not an absolute contraindication to additional che-
motherapy or HSCT (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
38. Decisions about when to proceed with additional chemo-
therapy or HSCT following the diagnosis of aspergillosis
should involve both infectious diseases specialists and hema-
tologists/oncologists. These decisions must consider the risk of
progressive aspergillosis during periods of subsequent anti-
neoplastic treatment vs the risk of death from the underlying
malignancy if this treatment is delayed (strong recommenda-
tion; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Patients with malignancy and IA fre-
quently require additional antineoplastic therapy and/or HSCT.
The major concern is that aspergillosis will progress during sub-
sequent periods of immunosuppression. Several studies have
shown that IA is not a contraindication for additional treatment,
including HSCT [367, 388–391]. It is important to administer
mold-active antifungal treatment during subsequent periods of
immunosuppression (referred to as secondary prophylaxis) to
avoid recurrence or progression. In a multicenter retrospective
survey of patients with pretransplant aspergillosis, 27 of 129 pa-
tients developed progressive fungal disease following allogeneic
HSCT. The variables that increased the 2-year cumulative inci-
dence of aspergillosis progression were longer duration of neutro-
penia after transplantation, refractory malignancy, and <6 weeks
from start of antifungal therapy and HSCT [389]. In a prospec-
tive, multicenter trial of voriconazole as secondary prophylaxis in
patients with pretransplant IFIs (the majority were aspergillosis),
the one-year cumulative incidence of invasive fungal disease was
7% following allogeneic HSCT [367].
Decisions about when to proceed with additional chemothera-
py or HSCT following the diagnosis of aspergillosis must consider
the risks of progressive aspergillosis and the risks of delaying treat-
ment of the underlying malignancy. These decisions require ex-
pertise from infectious diseases specialists and oncologists. From
the infectious disease standpoint, a period of several weeks of an-
tifungal treatment and clear evidence of response to therapy is
ideal before administering additional chemotherapy or HSCT.
However, there are situations when this approach is not feasible,
for example, in patients with refractory or relapsed acute leukemia
who require urgent reinduction therapy.
What Approaches Are Needed for Refractory or Progressive
Aspergillosis (Salvage Therapy)?
Recommendations.
39. We recommend an individualized approach that takes into
consideration the rapidity, severity, and extent of infection, pa-
tient comorbidities, and to exclude the emergence of a new
pathogen (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
The general strategies for salvage therapy typically include
(i) changing the class of antifungal, (ii) tapering or reversal
of underlying immunosuppression when feasible, and (iii)
surgical resection of necrotic lesions in selected cases.
40. In the context of salvage therapy, an additional antifungal
agent may be added to current therapy, or combination an-
tifungal drugs from different classes other than those in the
initial regimen may be used (weak recommendation; moder-
ate-quality evidence).
41. In patients currently receiving an antifungal and exhibiting
an adverse event attributable to this agent, we recommend
changing to an alternative class of antifungal, or the use of
an alternative agent with a nonoverlapping side-effect profile
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
e28 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 42. For salvage therapy, agents include lipid formulations of
AmB, micafungin, caspofungin, posaconazole or itracona-
zole. The use of a triazole as salvage therapy should take
into account prior antifungal therapy, host factors, pharma-
cokinetic considerations, and possible antifungal resistance
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Many issues confound the interpreta-
tion of current published evidence for salvage therapy for IA in-
cluding publication bias, inadequate statistical power, and
heterogeneity of studies. In salvage therapy studies, differentiating
Aspergillus-attributable mortality vs the impact of underlying dis-
ease or coinfections is not possible [392, 393]. It is also unclear
whether different therapeutic approaches are needed when break-
through infection is detected by GM alone vs culture, the latter
likely representing a more advanced stage of disease.
Studies in the area of salvage therapy for aspergillosis also
lack uniform criteria of what constitutes a “response.” For ex-
ample, the volume of lesions on chest CT increase during the
first 7–10 days on therapy, and neutrophil recovery may lead
to immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) that
presents as transitory clinical worsening [159]. Salvage therapy
trials that enroll patients after only 7 days of antifungal therapy
may not adequately account for this phenomenon. Antifungal
therapy initiated at the time of neutrophil recovery is also biased
by the salutatory effects of immune recovery.
In addition, there is confusion in some studies between se-
quential vs true salvage therapy as the action of the failing
drug may interact with the action of the salvage drug. The
first drug may inflict damage to Aspergillus that enhances the
action of the second drug, or there may be neutral or possibly
even antagonistic effect. Another issue relates to antifungal
agents with prolonged half-lives such as AmB formulations
[394]. Thus, in patients receiving AmB-based initial therapy,
the combined action of both AmB and the “salvage” antifungal
agent will be present for several days to a week after cessation of
AmB therapy. Finally, most salvage studies do not provide a ro-
bust explanation for the lack of response (eg, failure due to drug
resistance or coinfection, disadvantageous pharmacokinetics/
pharmacodynamics, intolerance to a study drug, or lack of re-
covery from immunosuppression).
The principal antifungal agents considered for salvage thera-
py include lipid formulations of AmB, posaconazole, itracona-
zole, and the echinocandins, caspofungin and micafungin,
which have both been evaluated in salvage settings [255, 356,
395–398]. Voriconazole can also be considered as a salvage
agent if not used in primary therapy, as could presumably isa-
vuconazole, although isavuconazole has limited evaluation in
the salvage setting. In patients who fail initial triazole therapy,
a change in class to an AmB formulation (usually liposomal
AmB), with or without an echinocandin, should be considered.
Azole-specific pharmacokinetic problems must also be
considered, including TDM. Most of the prospective studies
of second-line therapy have been conducted by replacing the
compound to which the patient is intolerant or against which
the infection is progressing. Whether both drugs should be ad-
ministered simultaneously has seldom been prospectively stud-
ied [194]. The addition of a second antifungal agent to a first
agent that is failing is usually practiced out of understandable
lack of therapeutic options.
Other drug combinations have not been extensively studied
[297]. Additional questions of optimal drug combinations, op-
timal drug dosing, pharmacokinetic interactions, potential toxic
interactions, and cost–benefit ratios of primary combination
antifungal therapy require further investigation.
The need for surgical resection should be evaluated in cases
of pulmonary lesions contiguous with the heart or great vessels,
invasion of the chest wall, massive hemoptysis, and other spe-
cial circumstances. Restoration of or improvement in impaired
host defenses is critical for improved outcome of IA. Correction
of comorbidities using various adjunctive strategies (eg, correc-
tion of hyperglycemia, recovery from neutropenia, or reduction
of immunosuppressive medication dosages) is expected to im-
prove outcomes in progressive IA but may also be associated
with IRIS.
How Can Biomarkers Be Used to Assess Patient Response to
Therapy?
Recommendations.
43. Serial monitoring of serum GM can be used in the appro-
priate patient subpopulations (hematologic malignancy,
HSCT) who have an elevated GM at baseline to monitor dis-
ease progression and therapeutic response, and predict out-
come (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
44. (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan has not been extensively studied in IA
to predict outcome (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Multiple studies have evaluated serial
serum GM for both therapeutic monitoring as well as predicting
prognosis and found excellent correlations between GMI and
outcomes. A review of 27 published studies, including both
adult and pediatric allogeneic or autologous HSCT recipients,
found an excellent correlation between GMI and survival,
including autopsy findings [399]. A prospective study of 70
patients with prolonged neutropenia found good GMI concor-
dance with clinical outcome at 6 weeks and excellent correlation
at 12 weeks, including perfect concordance with autopsy find-
ings and significantly better survival in patients who became
GM negative by 12 weeks [400]. Another retrospective study
found similar results, including significantly better survival in
patients whose GMI normalized compared to patients with per-
sistently positive GM, regardless of resolution of neutropenia
[401]. In one study, an adjusted hazard ratio (HR) for
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e29
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 respiratory or all-cause mortality increased from 2.25 with a
serum GMI ≥ 0.5 to a HR of 4.9 with a serum GMI ≥ 2.0
[402]. GMI-based assessment can also predict outcome sooner
[403].
Several studies have compared the initial GMI and subsequent
rate of daily decay of GM, defined as the change from the initial
GMI divided by the number of days since that initial value. Both
initial GMI and rate of decrease of GM in response to therapy at
one week after initiation of therapy have been predictive of mor-
tality [404].The adjusted HR for initial GM for time to mortality
was 1.25 per unit increase in GMI, as well as an HR of 0.78 per
unit decrease for survival [405]. GMI is also predictive of out-
come in nonneutropenic patients [406–408].
A retrospective evaluation of the global aspergillosis clinical
trial comparing voriconazole to AmB deoxycholate followed by
other licensed therapy [348] found that GMI at week 1 was sig-
nificantly lower than baseline GM in the eventual 12-week re-
sponders compared with nonresponders. A GMI reduction of
>35% between baseline and week 1 predicted a probability of
a satisfactory clinical response, whereas during antifungal treat-
ment every 0.1-unit increase in GMI between baseline and week
2 increased the likelihood of a poor response by 21.6% [409].
A different analysis of the same trial found that those patients
who received voriconazole and had a successful week 12 re-
sponse showed earlier decreases in GMI at week 1 and week 2
as compared to those who eventually failed treatment. However,
for patients randomized to initially receive AmB deoxycholate,
this early difference trend between week 12 responders and
nonresponders was not evident until week 4 [410].
There have been fewer studies with BAL GMI and out-
come. A retrospective study of 145 patients found a BAL
GMI ≥ 2.0 was significantly associated with a higher 60-day
mortality compared with a BAL GMI < 0.5 [411]. However,
another retrospective study of 100 allogeneic HSCT recipi-
ents found that serum GMI positivity and magnitude, but
not BAL GMI, correlated with both 6-week and 6-month
mortality [402].
In a single-center retrospective study, initial (1 → 3)-β-D-
glucan value and early kinetics of (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan were
not predictive of 6- or 12-week clinical outcome or mortality
in IA [412].
What Are the Recommended Treatments for Pediatric Patients
With Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
45. Treatment of aspergillosis in children uses the same recom-
mended therapies as in adult patients; however, the dosing is
different and for some antifungals is unknown (strong recom-
mendation; high-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Treatment in children follows the rec-
ommendations used for adults, yet antifungal dosing in children
is often significantly different. Underdosing in children is a
common etiology of insufficient drug levels and possibly clinical
failures. Voriconazole, while only FDA approved for children 12
years and older, is the mainstay of pediatric aspergillosis treat-
ment in all ages due to substantial pharmacokinetic data and
experience. Fundamental pharmacokinetics of voriconazole
are different in children (linear) than in adults (nonlinear)
[290]. While voriconazole in adults is loaded at 6 mg/kg/dose
twice daily, followed by 4 mg/kg/dose twice daily, the preferred
pediatric dosing is substantially higher. Population pharmaco-
kinetic analyses of voriconazole reveal that children should be
given an intravenous 9 mg/kg loading dose twice daily to be
comparable to a 6 mg/kg/dose in adults [413]. Maintenance in-
travenous dosing in children at 8 mg/kg/dose was comparable
to a 4 mg/kg/dose in adults, and the oral dosing of 9 mg/kg/
dose was similar to adults receiving 200 mg oral voriconazole
twice daily. The majority of adolescents can be dosed as adults,
but in younger adolescents (ages 12–14), body weight is more
important than age in predicting voriconazole pharmacokinet-
ics. Therefore, younger adolescents should be dosed as children
if their weight is <50 kg and as adults if their weight is ≥50 kg
[413]. Additionally, the oral bioavailability of voriconazole,
thought to be >95% in adults, is lower in children at approxi-
mately 50%–65% [414, 415]. As in adult patients, there are
still suggestions of the need for higher voriconazole doses
[291], and drug monitoring is paramount.
Posaconazole is FDA approved for children 13 years and
older for both the oral suspension and tablet, and for 18 years
and older for the intravenous formulation. As such, pediatric
dosing has not yet been fully defined. Caspofungin is FDA ap-
proved for children 3 months and older and dosing is based on
body surface area, with a loading dose of 70 mg/m2, followed by
daily maintenance dosing of 50 mg/m2, not to exceed 70 mg
[186]. Micafungin is FDA approved for children 4 months
and older and clearance increases in younger age groups.
Doses in children are 2–3 mg/kg/day, with higher doses for
younger children, and patients >40 kg use the adult dose
(100 mg) [187]. Anidulafungin is not FDA approved for chil-
dren, and a single pharmacokinetic study in children suggested
a loading dose of 1.5–3 mg/kg and maintenance dose of 0.75–
1.5 mg/kg [416]. Dosing of lipid formulations of AmB does not
differ in children.
What Are Treatment Options for Aspergillosis of the Airways in
Transplant and Nontransplant Recipients, and How Does It Differ
From Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
46. Saprophytic forms of TBA do not require antifungal treat-
ment except for symptomatic or immunosuppressed patients.
Treatment includes bronchoscopic removal of mucoid impac-
tion. Mold-active triazole agents are recommended for immu-
nocompromised patients in whom the possibility of invasive
e30 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 disease cannot be eliminated (strong recommendation; moder-
ate-quality evidence).
47. Bronchocentric granulomatosis is treated in the same fash-
ion as ABPA (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
48. Invasive forms of TBA are treated with a mold-active tria-
zole or intravenous lipid formulations of AmB (strong recom-
mendation; moderate-quality evidence). We also recommend
minimization or reversal of underlying immunosuppression
when feasible, and bronchoscopic debridement of airway le-
sions in selected cases (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
49. In lung transplant recipients, we recommend treatment
with a systemic antimold antifungal for TBA, including sap-
rophytic forms. We also recommend adjunctive inhaled
AmB in the setting of TBA associated with anastomotic en-
dobronchial ischemia or ischemic reperfusion injury due to
airway ischemia associated with lung transplant (strong rec-
ommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Duration of anti-
fungal therapy is at least 3 months or until TBA is completely
resolved, whichever is longer.
Evidence Summary.
Airway aspergillosis (or TBA) is sim-
ilar to pulmonary aspergillosis in that it can occur in sapro-
phytic, allergic (ABPA), or invasive forms. There is also an
emerging entity of Aspergillus bronchitis among patients with
CF, and others with bronchiectasis. The diagnosis of TBA is
suggested by bronchoscopic findings and confirmed by culture
and histopathology. Due to the limited number of studies, op-
timal evidence-based therapy is not clear, and recommenda-
tions are extrapolated from experience in treating invasive
lung parenchymal aspergillosis and TBA case series.
Saprophytic forms of TBA include obstructing bronchial as-
pergillosis, endobronchial aspergillosis, and mucoid impaction.
Obstructing bronchial aspergillosis is characterized by thick
mucous plugs with minimal or no airway inflammation [417,
418]. Patients commonly present with the subacute onset of
cough, dyspnea, chest pain, hemoptysis, and expectoration of
fungal casts. Management typically consists of bronchoscopic
clearance usually followed by oral antifungal therapy.
Endobronchial aspergillosis is generally found among patients
with lesions such as broncholiths, cancer, or granulation tissue or
suture material at the anastomotic site after lung resection. It is
manifested as endobronchial lesions or mucous plugs in or
around the bronchial stumps or sutures. In general, these sapro-
phytic forms do not require systemic antifungal therapy unless pa-
tients are immunocompromised and locally invasive disease
cannot be ruled out [418]. In symptomatic patients, local debride-
ment or suture removal can be performed. There is no consistent
evidence that systemic, inhaled, or local injection with an antifun-
gal agent is effective in treating these forms of disease.
Mucoid impaction is a clinical-radiographic syndrome charac-
terized by inspissated mucus filling of the bronchi [417,418].Fin-
ger-in-glove sign, referring to branching tubular opacities that
extend peripherally, is the classic chest radiograph finding.
Patients can be asymptomatic, or present with cough and expec-
toration of mucous plugs. Mucoid impaction is commonly asso-
ciated with inflammatory conditions of the airways (such as
bronchiectasis and ABPA), benign processes (such as broncholi-
thiasis, foreign body aspiration, endobronchial lipoma, hamarto-
ma, or papilloma), and malignant processes (such as carcinoid
tumor or lung malignancies) causing obstruction of large airways.
Mucous plugging that may appear hyperattenuated on computed
tomography seems to be a particularly distinctive feature of
ABPA, probably more common in India, with a high propensity
for early relapse and corticosteroid dependence. Mucoid impac-
tion associated with bronchiectasis is treated with maneuvers to
promote airway clearance (chest physiotherapy, positive expirato-
ry pressure and vibration devices, mucolytics, nebulized hyper-
tonic saline) and treatment of airway infection (antimicrobial
agents). Mucoid impaction associated with features of asthma
and hypersensitization to Aspergillus is treated as for ABPA [417].
Bronchocentric granulomatosis is a form of ABPA that is
characterized histopathologically by necrotizing granulomas
with airway obstruction that destroy the bronchioles, but
there is no tissue invasion by Aspergillus. Bronchoscopic find-
ings include impaction of airway lumen by mucin and cellular
debris. Treatment is similar to that of ABPA (see Recommenda-
tions 92–94 below) [419].
Invasive TBA is an uncommon disease that originates in the
airway but may invade more deeply [417, 420]. It has been de-
scribed most commonly in immunosuppressed patients (patients
with hematologic malignancies, lung transplant or HSCT recipi-
ents, and patients on high-dose steroids). However, invasive TBA
among patients with no known immunosuppression or following
influenza infection has also been described [421, 422]. Invasive
TBA consists of 2 forms: ulcerative and pseudomembranous
[417, 423]. These 2 forms may represent different states of the
same disease process that involves Aspergillus invasion of the tra-
cheal or bronchial mucosa, which can extend into the cartilage.
The ulcerative form is characterized by discrete ulcerative or pla-
que-like lesions in the bronchial wall. This form is most common-
ly observed in lung transplant recipients or patients with AIDS
[417, 423]. The pseudomembranous form is characterized by ex-
tensive membranes overlying the tracheal or bronchial mucosal
surface. It is most commonly reported in severely immunocom-
promised patients with hematologic malignancies or those HSCT
recipients with GVHD. Rarely, it has been linked to postinfluenza
syndrome. In general, the ulcerative form carries a better progno-
sis than the pseudomembranous form. Treatment includes sys-
temic antifungal therapy with a mold-active triazole agent or a
lipid formulation of AmB. Follow-up bronchoscopy might be nec-
essary to follow progression. Repeated bronchoscopies might be
indicated for clearance of pseudomembranes and/or mucous
plugs. The procedure might be complicated by bleeding, especially
in the setting of necrotizing pseudomembranes with extension
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e31
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 into pulmonary vessels, and should be performed by experienced
interventional bronchoscopists.
TBA is most commonly described in lung transplant recipi-
ents, affecting 4%–6% of patients [423, 424]. Potential underly-
ing factors include the high rate of Aspergillus colonization both
pre- and post–lung transplant, the direct exposure of the allo-
graft lung to the environment, reduced mucociliary clearance,
pulmonary denervation, and higher degree of immunosuppres-
sion than other organ transplant [425]. TBA typically occurs
within 3–6 months of lung transplant, presumably as a result
of airway ischemia due to disruption of bronchial vasculature
during the transplant procedure. Furthermore, ischemic reper-
fusion injury might lead to airway stricture and other abnormal-
ities that predispose to Aspergillus colonization and disease.
Most lesions are asymptomatic and diagnosed by surveillance
bronchoscopy; they manifest as pseudomembranes, ulceration,
black eschar, or plaques. Rare cases of obstructing bronchial as-
pergillosis and TBA with bronchopleural fistulae have also been
described. These lesions can develop despite systemic antifungal
prophylaxis. Although TBA can progress to involve the lungs
and disseminate, the overall outcome is better than that of IPA.
Improved outcomes might result from early diagnosis based on
surveillance bronchoscopy that is routinely performed in lung
transplant. We recommend a mold-active triazole or intravenous
lipid formulation of AmB based on case series. If the lesion devel-
ops while the patient is on antifungal prophylaxis, optimization of
antifungal dosing with TDM is indicated. We also recommend
adjunctive aerosolized AmB because the anastomotic site is devas-
cularized, making it difficult for parenteral therapies to achieve
therapeutic concentrations. Pseudomembranous TBA might be
adjunctively treated with bronchoscopic debridement. Airway
stenosis resulting from TBA might require balloon dilation,
laser treatment, or stent placement. Endobronchial TBA with
anastomotic dehiscence might need stent placement or surgical
repair [426]. Duration of therapy for TBA is not well studied,
but we recommend at least 3 months of systemic antifungal ther-
apy with or without aerosolized AmB or until TBA is completely
resolved, whichever is longer.
MANAGEMENT OF EXTRAPULMONARY
ASPERGILLOSIS
What Are the Treatment Considerations for Central Nervous
System Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
50. We recommend voriconazole as primary therapy for CNS
aspergillosis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence). Lipid formulations of AmB are reserved for
those intolerant or refractory to voriconazole (strong recom-
mendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
CNS aspergillosis is a devastating
complication with a poor prognosis in the vast majority of
affected patients [427]. Tenets of management include attempts
to establish an early diagnosis, administration of an appropriate
antifungal agent, assessment of the need for surgical interven-
tion, and attempts to mitigate immunologic impairment(s) that
led to CNS aspergillosis [428].
Diagnosis is suggested by the presence of focal neurologic
deficits or seizures in the immunocompromised host, while
meningeal signs are uncommon. CT and MRI are essential
for the detection of infection and monitoring response to ther-
apy. The radiographic pattern is dependent on the source of in-
fection with direct extension from the sinuses, eye, or middle
ear often causing only a single abscess within the frontal or
temporal lobe, and those developing from hematogenous dis-
semination causing solitary or multiple small abscesses most
frequently at the gray-white junction. Vascular invasion may
occur and rupture with the development of a hemorrhagic or
ischemic stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or empyema forma-
tion. Definitive diagnosis is dependent on recovery of the organ-
ism, or examination of biopsy findings. Biopsy of lesions within
the CNS is not always practical and infection of the CNS is com-
monly inferred by recovery of Aspergillus spp from a pulmonary
or sinus source coincident with a characteristic brain lesion. The
value of screening patients with IPA for asymptomatic CNS dis-
ease has not been determined.
Detection of GM [429] or (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan from the cere-
brospinal fluid [430] is helpful in the diagnosis of CNS aspergil-
losis; however, other fungal pathogens also have positive results
with these assays (eg, Fusarium spp) [431]. PCR assays have
been examined for CNS aspergillosis, but these have not been
standardized for widespread use [87].
Surgical intervention is frequently discussed during the care
of patients with CNS aspergillosis as resection of infected tissue
or abscesses eliminates areas containing viable fungi. A mortal-
ity benefit of surgery for the management of cerebral lesions, in
combination with antifungal therapy with voriconazole, has
been shown in a retrospective study of 81 patients [432]. Al-
though this study was subject to selection bias for those patients
who were ultimately able to undergo surgical intervention, a
benefit of voriconazole followed by surgical intervention was
suggested (HR, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.1–3.9; P = .2). Surgical interven-
tion is also a useful adjunct in the management of CNS asper-
gillosis with contiguous infections of the paranasal sinuses or
vertebral bodies and should be pursued in these circumstances
when feasible.
The reversal or reduction of immunosuppression is essential
in attempts to improve outcomes and should be managed in the
same fashion as discussed elsewhere in this document.
Recommendations for the treatment of CNS aspergillosis
with voriconazole are based primarily on open-label studies.
In a direct comparative trial between AmB deoxycholate and
voriconazole, a trend toward improvement of CNS aspergillosis
in patients was noted in those who were treated with
e32 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 voriconazole [348]. The open-label studies of voriconazole in
adult and pediatric patients also demonstrate activity of vorico-
nazole in the treatment of CNS aspergillosis [216, 432]. It
should be noted that voriconazole interacts with some antisei-
zure medications (phenytoin, phenobarbital) that may be coad-
ministered in patients with CNS mass lesions, likely resulting in
subtherapeutic concentrations.
Lipid formulations of AmB have demonstrated favorable re-
sponses in animal models and patients with CNS aspergillosis.
Among lipid formulations of AmB formulations, favorable re-
sponses have been achieved in case reports with liposomal
AmB, ABLC, and ABCD [433–435]. Itraconazole and posaco-
nazole have also been successfully used in treatment of CNS as-
pergillosis [255, 436, 437], and case reports describe the efficacy
of caspofungin and micafungin in the treatment of CNS asper-
gillosis [398, 438]. Combination therapy for CNS disease is ini-
tiated by some practitioners out of understandable lack of
therapeutic options given the mortality associated with this
form of dissemination, and a favorable response has been ob-
served in animal models and some patients [197], yet there
are no data suggesting better outcomes with this approach.
Progressive neurologic deficits have led to the use of cortico-
steroid therapy in patients with evolving CNS disease; however,
this practice is deleterious and should be avoided. Intrathecal or
intralesional antifungal therapy is also not recommended for
the treatment of CNS aspergillosis due to a failure of AmB de-
livered intrathecally to penetrate beyond the pia mater. Delivery
via this method also has the potential for AmB-induced chem-
ical meningitis, arachnoiditis, seizures, headache, or altered
mental status [439].
Epidural aspergillosis is an unusual manifestation of CNS as-
pergillosis that most often arises from extension into the epidu-
ral space from vertebral abscess [440]. Systemic antifungal
therapy and surgical drainage are considered to be standards
of practice for management of epidural aspergillosis; however,
most of the experience in managing epidural aspergillosis is
based on individual case reports and brief case series.
How Is Aspergillus Endophthalmitis Treated?
Recommendation.
51. We recommend that Aspergillus endophthalmitis be treat-
ed with systemic oral or intravenous voriconazole plus intra-
vitreal voriconazole or intravitreal AmB deoxycholate (strong
recommendation: weak-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Hematogenous endophthalmitis pre-
sents in immunocompromised and noncompromised patients
as sudden loss of vision, usually in one eye, beginning with sub-
retinal lesions that cause retinal necrosis and rapidly extend into
the vitreous humor [441].A dense vitritis forms over a few days.
A vitreal aspirate or vitrectomy specimen yields Aspergillus,
usually A. fumigatus, on culture and smear [442]. Visual loss
is usually permanent and enucleation often required for pain re-
lief. Intravitreal voriconazole 100 µg or intravitreal AmB deox-
ycholate 5–10 µg appear to be essential in treatment, combined
with systemic voriconazole [443].Local concentration of drug is
lower if intravitreal drug is injected at the end of a pars plana
vitrectomy, lessening concern about retinal toxicity of AmB
deoxycholate when that drug is used. Although intracameral
injection (injection into the anterior chamber) has no role in
aspergillosis of the posterior chamber, it has been reported
that intracameral injection of voriconazole 100 µg was
useful for extension of Aspergillus keratitis into the anterior
chamber [444].
What Is the Role of Surgery in Aspergillosis of the Paranasal
Sinuses?
Recommendation.
52. We recommend that both surgery and either systemic vor-
iconazole or a lipid formulation of AmB formulation be used
in invasive Aspergillus fungal sinusitis but that surgical re-
moval alone can be used to treat Aspergillus fungal ball of
the paranasal sinus. Enlargement of the sinus ostomy may
be needed to improve drainage and prevent recurrence
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
In an uncomplicated Aspergillus fun-
gal ball of the sinus, >90% being in the maxillary sinus, clini-
cians should remove the fungal ball, preferably using
endoscopic techniques as this is usually curative. A wide maxil-
lary antrostomy is done to improve sinus drainage, and a biopsy
of the sinus wall is sometimes done to rule out mucosal invasion
[445–447]. Local or systemic antifungals have no role in the
treatment of a maxillary sinus fungal ball. Aspergillus fungal
balls of the sphenoid sinus differ in that invasion into the cav-
ernous sinus can occur from fungal invasion or excessive surgi-
cal debridement [448]. Systemic antifungal therapy may be
advisable if there is a question of mucosal involvement, mucosal
breach of the sphenoid sinus, or spread into the cavernous
sinus. Local irrigation of the paranasal sinuses with AmB is
not considered useful because topical AmB does not penetrate
into tissues.
In granulomatous or chronic invasive and granulomatous as-
pergillosis of the paranasal sinus in immunocompetent patients,
often diagnosed because of proptosis or extension to the brain
or orbit, and in acute invasive paranasal sinusitis of severely im-
munocompromised patients, surgical debridement and system-
ic antifungal therapy is recommended. Sometimes multiple
surgical procedures are required, and extensive debridement is
best done once thrombocytopenia has resolved, to reduce the
risk of postoperative hemorrhage. Voriconazole is the preferred
therapy, or a lipid formulation of AmB; morbidity and mortality
is high [158, 449, 450]. Allergic fungal rhinosinusitis (AFRS) is
discussed elsewhere.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e33
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Endocarditis, Pericarditis, and Myocarditis?
Recommendation.
53. In Aspergillus endocarditis, we recommend early surgical
intervention combined with antifungal therapy in attempts
to prevent embolic complications and valvular decompensa-
tion (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Voriconazole or a lipid formulation of AmB is recommended
as initial therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality evi-
dence). Following surgical replacement of an infected valve,
lifelong antifungal therapy should be considered (strong rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
The diagnosis of Aspergillus endocar-
ditis is often difficult and almost always delayed with the diag-
nosis made postmortem in up to one-third of cases [451].Fever,
the presence of a new murmur, and stigmata of peripheral em-
boli such as new neurologic deficits, heart failure, or dyspnea are
the most commonly encountered clinical features and no differ-
ent from those observed in bacterial endocarditis. Blood cul-
tures are almost always negative, and examination of resected
valvular tissue or emboli is the most common means of con-
firming the diagnosis. The converse is not true; positive blood
cultures are more likely to be contaminants than indicating en-
docarditis. Noninvasive markers such as GM may be positive,
but are not specific for the site of disease [452].
The aortic and mitral valves are those most frequently infect-
ed. Prior valvular abnormalities and/or prior valvular surgery
predisposes to infection, although intravenous drug use and
other cardiac procedures have also been presented as predispos-
ing factors. Vegetations secondary to Aspergillus spp are often
large and/or penduculated and therefore embolic complications
are common, particularly to large arteries. For this reason, im-
aging of the brain is prudent at the time of diagnosis in attempts
to define the full spectrum of disease. Mortality rates are high
(50%–96%). The mean survival period for Aspergillus endocar-
ditis was 11 days in one study, further illustrating the rapid and
frequently lethal course of this infection [453].
Combined medical therapy and valve replacement are essential
in attempts to improve outcomes as neither alone has a signifi-
cant influence on patient outcomes [419, 454], and attempts to
manage patients with antifungal agents alone are rarely success-
ful. Voriconazole or liposomal AmB (3–5 mg/kg/day) are recom-
mended as first-line agents. Comparative data are not available;
however, case reports [455], case series [451],and animal models
[456] have suggested the efficacy of these agents in Aspergillus in-
fective endocarditis (IE). Combination therapy may also be used,
but no evidence regarding the superiority of this approach has
been presented.
The overall poor survival of IE secondary to Aspergillus spp
limits the available data on recurrence rates. In other causes of
fungal endocarditis, recurrence may occur late and even years
after the initial diagnosis. For this reason, long durations of
therapy (>2 years) and consideration of lifelong therapy should
be considered concomitant with frequent clinical and echocar-
diographic assessment for possible recurrence [451].
Aspergillus pericarditis arises as the result of direct extension
from: a contiguous focus of IPA, from a myocardial lesion, or
intraoperative contamination [457, 458]. Pericardial tamponade
may rapidly ensue, leading to hemodynamic deterioration and
cardiac arrest. Diagnosis is suggested by pericardiocentesis
(with positive culture or antigen testing), pericardiectomy, or
pericardial biopsy. A combined medical and surgical approach,
with pericardial resection or drainage, is necessary in attempts
to optimize outcomes [458].
Aspergillus myocarditis may manifest as myocardial infarc-
tion, cardiac dysrhythmias, or myoepicarditis [457]. This infec-
tion generally occurs in the context of disseminated disease and
requires systemic antifungal therapy. An intracardiac abscess
may be seen on echocardiography, although in other cases no
echocardiographic lesions are observed [459].
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Osteomyelitis and Septic Arthritis?
Recommendation.
54. Surgical intervention is recommended, where feasible, for
management of Aspergillus osteomyelitis and arthritis, com-
bined with voriconazole (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Aspergillus osteomyelitis occurs by one
of 3 mechanisms: (1) direct inoculation secondary to trauma,
surgery, or epidural injection; (2) contiguous spread from pleuro-
pulmonary disease; or (3) hematogenous spread from either co-
existent pulmonary infection or intravenous injection [460, 461].
Most patients have traditional risk factors for IA; however, up to
34% of patients have no obvious predisposing factor or immuno-
suppression [462]. Vertebral osteomyelitis with or without disci-
tis is the most common form, and the predominance of cases
involve the lumbar vertebrae. Back pain is the most common
clinical manifestation, with neurologic deficits secondary to
cord compromise, or kyphosis also observed. Diagnostic imaging
with CT and/or MRI is essential for staging disease and for pro-
viding a guide for orthopedic and/or neurosurgical intervention.
Diagnosis can be confirmed by isolation of the organism from
bone specimens or an aspirate of an adjacent fluid collection.
In cases without significant instability or neural compression
and no evidence of disease progression, antifungal treatment
alone may be sufficient provided the underlying immunologic
deficit can be corrected; however, it should be noted that favor-
able outcomes more frequently occur in those receiving com-
bined medical and surgical therapy [460]. In cases with spinal
instability or symptoms consistent with spinal cord or radicular
compression or abscess formation, surgical decompression in
e34 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 combination with antifungal therapy is recommended [462].
The type and extent of surgery should be individualized.
Voriconazole has been successfully used as salvage and pri-
mary therapy, either alone or in combination with surgical de-
bridement [463, 464], and has been shown to be superior to
AmB in cases of disseminated aspergillosis [348]. Historical ex-
perience has shown the efficacy of AmB formulations. Itracona-
zole has been used subsequent to a course of AmB. There is little
reported experience in the use of posaconazole or echinocan-
dins in the treatment of Aspergillus osteomyelitis [465].Therapy
should be continued for a minimum of 8 weeks, with longer
courses (>6 months) frequently necessary [460, 461].
Aspergillus arthritis may develop from hematogenous dis-
semination in immunocompromised patients, via injection, or
by direct traumatic inoculation in immunocompetent hosts
[466]. In many cases, Aspergillus arthritis arises as an extension
from a contiguous focus of Aspergillus osteomyelitis [466].Most
of the successfully treated cases of Aspergillus arthritis have re-
sponded to combined medical therapy and drainage of the joint
and/or synovectomy [467]. Historically, AmB formulations
have demonstrated efficacy in cases of arthritis [466], although
more recent data have shown an improvement in response rates
when voriconazole is administered, which is the recommended
antifungal agent in this setting [468].
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Cutaneous
Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
55. As cutaneous lesions may reflect disseminated infection,
we recommend treatment with voriconazole in addition to
evaluation for a primary focus of infection (strong recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence).
56. In cases of aspergillosis in burns or massive soft tissue
wounds, surgical debridement is recommended, in addition
to antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Cutaneous aspergillosis may develop
in the context of hematogenous dissemination in the immuno-
compromised host or can occur in the context of traumatic or
nosocomial device-related infection or in burn victims, and rep-
resents a heterogeneous disease [11,469,470].The initial lesions
of cutaneous aspergillosis may appear as macules, papules, nod-
ules, or plaques. Pustules or lesions with purulent discharge
generally occur in neonates [9].Unlike IPA, which requires tho-
racic surgery or thoracoscopy to remove foci of infection, the
eradication of cutaneous aspergillosis may be accomplished
with considerably less risk [471]. Therefore, surgical interven-
tion, for primary cutaneous infection, may be a useful adjunct
to antifungal therapy. Biopsy for confirmation of mycological
diagnosis is essential to distinguish aspergillosis from other po-
tential pathogens (eg, fusariosis, mucormycosis) [472]. Skin bi-
opsy should be taken from the center of the lesion and reach the
subcutaneous fat to visualize hyphae invading blood vessels of
the dermis and subcutaneous tissues [9].
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Peritonitis?
Recommendation.
57. We recommend prompt peritoneal dialysis catheter re-
moval accompanied by systemic antifungal therapy with vor-
iconazole (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Aspergillus peritonitis may occur as a
complication of chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis [473].
Although Candida species are the most common cause of fun-
gal peritonitis complicating chronic ambulatory peritoneal di-
alysis and fungal peritonitis typically occurs following an
episode of bacterial peritonitis, Aspergillus species are an addi-
tional and well-established cause of this infection [474]. The
diagnosis can be suggested by detection of (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan
and GM in the peritoneal fluid, or confirmed by culture of
peritoneal fluid [475]. In rare cases, peritoneal biopsy is re-
quired, although this is typically accomplished concurrently
with peritoneal dialysis catheter removal [476].
Removal of the dialysis catheter is essential in cases of fungal
peritonitis and has been associated with improved survival. In
cases where the catheter cannot be promptly removed, some
practitioners use intraperitoneal AmB in conjunction with vor-
iconazole, but it should be recognized that intraperitoneal AmB
administration may cause a chemical peritonitis and is not rec-
ommended by this panel [477]. In most cases the catheter
should be immediately removed.
Following catheter removal, systemic antifungal therapy is re-
quired. Intravenous AmB formulations result in suboptimal and,
in many cases, undetectable peritoneal drug concentrations [478,
479]. Systemic therapy with voriconazole for 6–8 weeks is thus
recommended based on successful reports and adequate perito-
neal concentrations in conjunction with catheter removal [480,
481].Posaconazole and the echinocandins have been successfully
used in fungal peritonitis from other causes and may have utility
as salvage therapy in Aspergillus peritonitis [482]. Following
treatment, a minority of patients may successfully return to peri-
toneal dialysis.
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Esophageal,
Gastrointestinal, and Hepatic Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
58. We suggest voriconazole and surgical consultation in at-
tempts to prevent complications of hemorrhage, perforation,
obstruction, or infarction (weak recommendation; low-qual-
ity evidence).
59. We suggest antifungal therapy with voriconazole or a lipid
formulation of AmB as initial therapy for hepatic aspergillo-
sis. For extrahepatic or perihepatic biliary obstruction, or
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e35
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 localized lesions that are refractory to medical therapy, surgi-
cal intervention should be considered (weak recommenda-
tion; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Aspergillosis of the esophagus and
gastrointestinal tract is relatively common in advanced cases
of disseminated IA [483]. In fact, in autopsy studies, esophageal
and gastrointestinal tract involvement is the third most common
site of infection [483].Disease may occur through hematogenous
dissemination or ingestion, and some authors have suggested the
gastrointestinal tract as a potential portal of entry for Aspergillus
spp [484], although this has not been definitively demonstrated.
The few well-documented cases have been associated with high
morbidity and mortality and the diagnosis is infrequently made
antemortem [485]. Because of the paucity of data for esophageal
and gastrointestinal aspergillosis, there is no clear indication of
optimal therapy, and a rational approach is to combine both
medical and surgical therapy [486].
Hepatic aspergillosis may occur as single or multiple hepatic le-
sions. Dissemination to the liver is thought to occur via the portal
venous system from the gastrointestinal tract, or as a component of
general and widespread systemic dissemination [487]. Cholangitis
secondary to Aspergillus spp is exceedingly uncommon, but has
been described following biliary surgery [488]. Reports of therapeu-
tic interventions are limited. Medical therapy for hepatic abscesses
may be effective and preclude the need for surgical resection.
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Renal
Aspergillosis?
Recommendation.
60. We suggest a combined approach of medical and urologic
management for renal aspergillosis. Obstruction of one or
both ureters should be managed with decompression if possi-
ble and local instillation of AmB deoxycholate. Parenchymal
disease is best treated with voriconazole (weak recommenda-
tion; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Renal aspergillosis may develop as
single or multiple parenchymal abscesses, usually as a result
of hematogenous dissemination, or may present as a fungal
ball in the pelvis of the kidney [489, 490]. This form of asper-
gillosis may cause hematuria, ureteropelvic obstruction from a
fungal ball, perinephric abscess with extension into surround-
ing tissues, or passing of fungal elements into the urine.
Reports of management are limited to individual cases. Med-
ical management alone may be successful if abscesses are relative-
ly small. Management of larger abscesses may require surgical
drainage. Microwave ablation has been successfully used as an
adjunct to antifungal therapy in a single patient deemed a poor
surgical candidate [491].Nephrectomy should be performed only
as a last option. Voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole, AmB
formulations, and the echinocandins all exhibit poor urinary
concentrations [492]. Irrigation via a nephrostomy tube with
AmB deoxycholate allows high local concentrations and when
given by this route is not absorbed and is not nephrotoxic. It
thus may be useful in aspergillosis of the renal pelvis, but has
no role in the treatment of parenchymal disease [493].
What Are the Treatment Regimens for Aspergillus Ear Infections?
Recommendations.
61. Noninvasive Aspergillus otitis externa, also called otomyco-
sis, is treated by thorough mechanical cleansing of the exter-
nal auditory canal followed by topical antifungals or boric
acid (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
62. We recommend that clinicians treat IA of the ear with a
prolonged course of systemic voriconazole, usually combined
with surgery (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
It is important to distinguish otomy-
cosis, a common entity in healthy persons, from IA of the ear,
which is rare and occurs in immunosuppressed persons and di-
abetic individuals. In otomycosis, Aspergillus species, often As-
pergillus niger, grows on cerumen and desquamated cells in an
external auditory canal but does not invade the lining [494,
495]. IA can involve the external auditory canal, middle ear,
mastoid, or petrous portion of the temporal bone. When inva-
sion begins in the external auditory canal, infection has been
called malignant otitis externa. Tissue-invasive Aspergillus otitis
should be treated with prolonged systemic antifungals [448],
preferably with voriconazole, usually preceded by surgical de-
bridement [496–499]. Colonization of the middle ear and mas-
toid by Candida, Aspergillus, or other molds can occur in
patients with chronic otitis media in the presence of a perforat-
ed tympanic membrane, usually following multiple surgical
procedures and many courses of antibacterial agents. In the ab-
sence of evidence of tissue invasion, we do not recommend that
colonization should be treated [500].
What Are the Treatment Recommendations for Aspergillus
Keratitis?
Recommendation.
63. We recommend that clinicians treat Aspergillus keratitis
with topical natamycin 5% ophthalmic suspension or topical
voriconazole (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Clinicians should treat Aspergillus ker-
atitis with topical natamycin 5% ophthalmic suspension. In case
series and randomized clinical trials of fungal keratitis, topical
voriconazole 1% was inferior to natamycin, but Fusarium kerati-
tis appeared to account for most of the difference [501–504].Vor-
iconazole for infusion, reconstituted with water to 1%, is a
reasonable alternative for Aspergillus keratitis. Diagnosis should
be confirmed by smear and culture of corneal scrapings [505].
Confocal microscopy and anterior segment coherence tomogra-
phy are useful to monitor therapeutic response [505].
e36 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Ophthalmologists should consider penetrating keratoplasty for
patients who do not respond to topical therapy, though patients
with lesions extending to the corneal limbus, with corneal perfo-
ration or hypopyon, are at high risk of recurrence [506].
How Should Aspergillus Bronchitis Be Diagnosed and Treated in
the Nontransplant Population?
Recommendations.
64. We suggest the diagnosis of aspergillus bronchitis in non-
transplant patients be confirmed by detection of Aspergillus
spp in respiratory secretions, usually sputum, with both PCR
and GM on respiratory samples being much more sensitive
than culture (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
65. We suggest treatment with oral itraconazole or voriconazole
with TDM (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Aspergillus is a cause of acute or
chronic bronchitis usually seen as a complication of CF or bron-
chiectasis [83,507,508].Its clinical features are not distinctive in
CF, but include a more rapid decline in FEV1 than those with-
out ABPA or Aspergillus sensitization. It affects up to approxi-
mately 30% of adults with CF [509]. Patients present with
recurrent, frequently relapsing acute bronchitis with thick spu-
tum plugging and shortness of breath. Occasional patients de-
velop mucoid impaction, or so-called “plastic bronchitis,”
requiring urgent bronchial toilet. Identification of Aspergillus
in airway secretions with culture, PCR, or GM is essential for
the diagnosis, and elevated Aspergillus IgG serology is suppor-
tive of the diagnosis [507, 508]. Several Aspergillus species may
be implicated.
It is likely that antifungal therapy is helpful in both CF and
bronchiectasis by reducing the burden of organisms and thus
reducing the inflammatory immune response [508, 510], but
this has not been systematically studied. Itraconazole or vorico-
nazole are first-line agents. Patients who fail one azole agent
may respond to a different azole. Relapse after improvement
during antifungal therapy is common; long-term suppressive
therapy may be necessary for symptom control. Triazole anti-
fungal resistance has been documented, and so susceptibility
testing is valuable. The role of inhaled antifungal therapy is
uncertain.
PROPHYLAXIS OF INVASIVE ASPERGILLOSIS
V. What Are the Recommended Prophylactic Regimens, Who Should
Receive Them, and How Should Breakthrough Infection Be Managed?
In Which Patients Should Antifungal Prophylaxis Against
Aspergillosis Be Used?
Recommendation.
66. We recommend prophylaxis with posaconazole (strong rec-
ommendation; high-quality evidence), voriconazole (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence), and/or mica-
fungin (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence) during
prolonged neutropenia for those who are at high risk for IA
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence). Prophylaxis
with caspofungin is also probably effective (weak recommen-
dation; low-quality evidence). Prophylaxis with itraconazole
is effective, but therapy may be limited by absorption and tol-
erability (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evi-
dence). Triazoles should not be coadministered with other
agents known to have potentially toxic levels with concurrent
triazole coadministration (eg, vinca alkaloids and others)
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Hematologic disorders with poorly
functioning neutrophils (eg, aplastic anemia and variants there-
of, MDS), acute leukemia with repeated and/or prolonged neu-
tropenia, [511], or a history of IA prior to transplantation [512]
have been identified as significant risk factors for IA.
A 2007 large randomized clinical trial of oral posaconazole sol-
ution demonstrated its superiority vs fluconazole or itraconazole
in the prevention of IA among patients with AML and MDS un-
dergoing chemotherapy [292]. This study demonstrated higher
survival for patients in the posaconazole arm, although there
was greater toxicity among recipients of posaconazole, compared
with the fluconazole/itraconazole arm. With the approval of an
extended-release tablet form of posaconazole, as well as an intra-
venous form, dosing will be different compared to the random-
ized prophylaxis trials, which used a solution formulation, and
needs further evaluation in HSCT patients.
A previous trial compared voriconazole or fluconazole pro-
phylaxis in allogeneic HSCT recipients; both arms were moni-
tored with GM measurements [513]. Aspergillus infections were
less frequent with voriconazole than with fluconazole prophy-
laxis, but the 180-day fungal-free survival and overall survival
were not different [513]. In another trial, voriconazole was
used as prophylaxis for leukemia patients with about 3 weeks
of neutropenia during a construction risk period; less aspergil-
losis was noted among patients receiving prophylaxis (P = .04)
[514]. Voriconazole has also been used among children as pro-
phylaxis, although children require different dosing [515]. Vor-
iconazole requires careful monitoring in children [516].Patients
receiving voriconazole prophylaxis remain at risk for both As-
pergillus and non-Aspergillus fungal pathogens that are intrinsi-
cally resistant to this agent [517, 518].
A 2004 large, randomized prophylaxis trial comparing mica-
fungin or fluconazole prophylaxis found that the composite
endpoint of treatment success was significantly better among
those receiving micafungin prophylaxis (P = .03), as there was
less empiric AmB treatment during neutropenia (15.1% vs
21.4%), fewer breakthrough fungal infections (1.6% vs 2.4%),
and less yeast colonization among those receiving micafungin
prophylaxis (P = .03) [519]. There was a trend toward reduced
breakthrough aspergillosis infections (0.2% vs 1.5%; P = .07),
but micafungin was not approved by the FDA for prophylaxis
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e37
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 of aspergillosis [519]. In clinical practice, the requirement for
daily intravenous therapy with echinocandins may lead to a
change to oral azole therapy at a time not studied in clinical tri-
als, but these agents may be useful for prophylaxis when drugs
that are contraindicated with triazoles (such as cyclophospha-
mide or vincristine) are required.
Caspofungin has been studied in smaller settings. The effica-
cy and safety of caspofungin was similar to other prophylactic
regimens, in the setting of a low incidence of IFI [520–523].
Itraconazole may be effective, but the conclusions of several
prospective trials regarding efficacy are limited, because study de-
signs did not include patients at significant risk for aspergillosis
[523–527]. Itraconazole oral capsules have erratic bioavailability
[528].Because there was an increase in transplant-related mortal-
ity when itraconazole was used together with cyclophosphamide
during the conditioning regimen for HSCT, azole dosing is now
delayed until after the stem cell product infusion [529].
Earlier studies of antifungal prophylaxis in hematologic ma-
lignancies are summarized in several large meta-analyses [524,
530, 531]. Among the studies that investigated parenterally ad-
ministered AmB deoxycholate or liposomal formulations of
AmB for prophylaxis, most have been historically controlled,
and some have suggested a reduction in IA. Several prospective,
randomized trials using polyene therapy have demonstrated a
reduction in the number of IFIs, but none have demonstrated
a significant reduction of IA in a prospective, randomized
study [532–534]. Aerosolized AmB formulations have been
shown to reduce the incidence of IPA, notably in lung trans-
plant recipients [177].
What Are the Recommended Prophylactic Regimens for Patients
With Graft-Versus-Host Disease?
Recommendations.
67. We recommend prophylaxis with posaconazole for alloge-
neic HSCT recipients with GVHD who are at high risk for IA
(strong recommendation; high-quality evidence). Prophylaxis
with other mold-active azoles is also effective. Voriconazole
is commonly used for prophylaxis against IA in high-risk pa-
tients but did not show improved survival in clinical trials
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Pro-
phylaxis with itraconazole is limited by tolerability and ab-
sorption (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
68. We recommend continuation of antifungal prophylaxis
throughout the duration of immunosuppression in patients
with chronic immunosuppression associated with GVHD (cor-
ticosteroid equivalent of >1 mg/kg/day of prednisone for >2
weeks and/or the use of other anti-GVHD therapies, such as
lymphocyte-depleting agents, or TNF-α inhibition, for refracto-
ry GVHD) (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
A randomized clinical trial of posaco-
nazole prophylaxis during GVHD in HSCT recipients found a
significant reduction in proven and probable IFIs and similar
toxicity in posaconazole recipients, compared with those receiv-
ing fluconazole, which has no mold activity [254]. Since this
time, posaconazole extended-release tablets have become avail-
able and have replaced the use of oral solution at many centers
and may further improve serum posaconazole levels without
clinically relevant hepatotoxicity [244].
A 2010 large, randomized clinical trial of voriconazole pro-
phylaxis following allogeneic transplant continued the antifun-
gal prophylaxis to day 180 for higher-risk patients such as those
with GVHD [513]. Aspergillus infections were less frequent
with voriconazole than with fluconazole, but fungal-free surviv-
al and overall survival were no different [513]. Voriconazole
provided effective prophylaxis when added specifically during
corticosteroid therapy for GVHD [535]. Voriconazole has also
been assessed among children as prophylaxis starting from the
time of transplant, and then continued for those patients with
acute GVHD [515]. Acute GVHD is a risk factor for hepatotox-
icity attributable to voriconazole that requires careful monitor-
ing in this setting [536]. The use of itraconazole for prophylaxis
against Aspergillus during GVHD as in other populations is
complicated by erratic bioavailability and drug toxicity [528,
537].Patients receiving voriconazole or itraconazole prophylax-
is remain at risk for both Aspergillus and non-Aspergillus fungal
pathogens that are intrinsically resistant to this agent [517,518].
What Are the Recommendations for Antifungal Prophylaxis in
Lung Transplant Patients?
Recommendations.
69. We recommend antifungal prophylaxis with either a sys-
temic triazole such as voriconazole or itraconazole or an in-
haled AmB product for 3 to 4 months after lung transplant
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
70. Systemic voriconazole or itraconazole is suggested over in-
haled AmB for lung transplant recipients with mold coloniza-
tion pre- or post–lung transplant, mold infections found in
explanted lungs, fungal infections of the sinus, and single-
lung transplant recipients (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
71. We recommend reinitiating antifungal prophylaxis for
lung transplant recipients receiving immunosuppression
augmentation with either thymoglobulin, alemtuzumab, or
high-dose corticosteroids (strong recommendation; moder-
ate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Antifungal prophylaxis for lung trans-
plant recipients is commonplace at many centers but is not em-
ployed universally [538]. Furthermore, the types of prophylaxis
(inhaled or systemic), antifungal agents used, and duration of pro-
phylaxis also vary [538,539].To date, there have been no prospec-
tive comparative trials evaluating the long-term benefit of
antifungal prophylaxis among lung transplant recipients. Retro-
spective and observational studies with historical controls showed
lower rates of IFIs among patients receiving antifungal
e38 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 prophylaxis [540–543].Given these data, the presence of damaged
airways early after transplant (see TBA above), high levels of im-
munosuppression following lung transplant, and poor outcomes
of IFIs, it is reasonable to consider antifungal prophylaxis in the
early posttransplant period.
Aerosolized AmB formulations have been shown to protect
lung transplant recipients from pulmonary fungal infections
[540]. There is no evidence that one formulation of AmB is supe-
rior to others, but AmB deoxycholate is associated with more side
effects than other formulations, including cough, bronchospasm,
taste disturbance, and nausea as well as difficulty in administering
the drug [176, 182, 183, 540, 544–546]. The longer tissue half-life
of the lipid formulations of AmB also permits less frequent ad-
ministration [183]. An advantage of inhaled AmB is the lack of
systemic adverse effects and/or drug–drug interactions; a disad-
vantage is its inability to prevent extrapulmonary fungal infec-
tions. Systemic voriconazole and itraconazole are also effective
in preventing IFI [425, 542]. To date, there is no evidence that
one agent is superior to the other. Azole prophylaxis is complicat-
ed by drug interactions with the calcineurin inhibitors, as well as
liver toxicity. It should be noted that antifungal prophylaxis might
only delay the onset of IFI [547], as the allograft is exposed to the
environment, and patients are maintained on relatively high doses
of immunosuppression lifelong.
In the absence of a head-to-head comparative trial of inhaled
AmB vs a systemic mold-active antifungal, we suggest that sys-
temic voriconazole or itraconazole be considered for (1) pa-
tients colonized with Aspergillus or other pathogenic molds
pre- or post–lung transplant [548, 549]; (2) patients with evi-
dence of mold infections found in explanted lungs [550];(3) pa-
tients with evidence of fungal infections in the sinus; and (4)
single-lung transplant recipients [551]. For the remaining pa-
tients, inhaled AmB or systemic voriconazole or itraconazole
might be equally effective. Posaconazole solution may not be
ideal for prophylaxis in the early period after lung transplant,
as many patients have gastrointestinal or nutritional issues
and are taking a proton pump inhibitor as routine posttransplant
prophylaxis for gastroesophageal reflux. There are no data on the
efficacy and safety of the intravenous or tablet formulations of
posaconazole for prophylaxis early after transplant.
A benefit to continuing antifungal prophylaxis beyond 3–4
months after lung transplant has not been established. Beyond
this period of high risk, we suggest antifungal prophylaxis only
in the setting of severe rejection requiring thymoglobulin or alem-
tuzumab, or high-dose and prolonged use of corticosteroids.
What Are the Recommendations for Antifungal Prophylaxis in
Nonlung Solid Organ Transplant Recipients?
Recommendation.
72. We recommend prophylactic strategies in SOT recipients
based on the institutional epidemiology of infection and as-
sessment of individual risk factors (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence). Prospective trials are lacking to address
the need for routine anti-Aspergillus prophylaxis other than for
lung transplant recipients. Individual risk factors have been
identified in cardiac (pretransplant colonization, reoperation,
CMV infection, renal dysfunction, institutional outbreak),
liver (fulminant hepatic failure, reoperation, retransplantation
or renal failure), and others with institutional outbreaks or
prolonged or high-dose corticosteroid use. In such patients,
the optimal duration of prophylaxis is not known.
Evidence Summary.
Invasive Aspergillus infection occurs
in up to 19% of all SOT recipients (estimated 0.65% per year),
with recent mortality estimates of approximately 22% [40, 43,
552–554]. The incidence of infection varies with the organ
transplanted, including recipients of liver (1%–9.2%) [553,
555–557], heart (1%–14%) [558, 559], kidney (0.7%–4%) [553,
556,560,561],and pancreas 3.4% [40,560,562].The risks for IFI
in general, and for Aspergillus infections in particular, are in-
creased by patient-specific factors including the need for
organ retransplantation (liver), posttransplant renal or hepatic
failure with renal replacement therapy (liver and kidney), reex-
ploration (liver and heart), pretransplant colonization with As-
pergillus spp (heart), concurrent CMV infection (liver and
heart), hepatitis C infection (liver), and steroid-based regimens
[43, 556, 563–566]. The overall intensity of immunosuppression
and the chronicity of systemic illness (malnutrition, hypogam-
maglobulinemia, and leukopenia) in the organ recipient is a ge-
neral risk for IFI [40, 562]. Pulse-dosed corticosteroid therapy
with lymphocyte depletion is a notable risk in the Aspergillus-
colonized individual [562]. Infections tend to occur both early
after transplantation (first month) and late (mean approximate-
ly 184 days) [40, 43]. Targeted antifungal prophylaxis varies
with the immunosuppressive regimen and local epidemiology
of infections [567–570].
MANAGEMENT OF BREAKTHROUGH INFECTION
How Should Breakthrough Aspergillosis Be Managed?
Recommendation.
73. We suggest an individualized approach that takes into con-
sideration the rapidity and severity of infection and local ep-
idemiology. As principles, we recommend an aggressive and
prompt attempt to establish a specific diagnosis with bron-
choscopy and/or CT-guided biopsy for peripheral lung le-
sions. Documentation of serum azole levels should be
verified if TDM is available for patients receiving mold-active
triazoles. Antifungal therapy should be empirically changed
to an alternative class of antifungal with Aspergillus activity.
Other considerations include reduction of underlying immu-
nosuppression if feasible, and susceptibility testing of any Asper-
gillus isolates recovered from the patient (weak recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e39
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Evidence Summary.
Breakthrough aspergillosis typically
occurs in the setting of antifungal prophylaxis. There is a pau-
city of organized experience on the best way to manage these
patients [571]. Documented breakthrough aspergillosis occurs
infrequently, in no more than 3% of patients in modern “real
life” series of patients receiving mold-active prophylaxis [285].
If the patient develops breakthrough aspergillosis in the setting
of non-mold-active prophylaxis (eg, fluconazole), we recom-
mend the same approach for treatment of IA in the absence
of prophylaxis. In a patient who develops breakthrough asper-
gillosis in the setting of mold-active prophylaxis (posaconazole,
voriconazole, itraconazole, echinocandins), a “salvage” treat-
ment plan individualized to patient circumstances and comor-
bidities is required. A typical approach would be to administer
broad-spectrum antifungal therapy until the diagnosis is estab-
lished and a response to treatment can be documented. For
patients with apparent breakthrough aspergillosis on prior vor-
iconazole, a lipid formulation of AmB (3–5 mg/kg/day) is rec-
ommended, especially in centers where mucormycosis is seen
[572]. Knowledge of local epidemiology is essential for the se-
lection of antifungal regimens for breakthrough aspergillosis.
In patients with breakthrough aspergillosis while on vorico-
nazole prophylaxis, there are limited data suggesting that
posaconazole retains its activity [573]. In patients with break-
through aspergillosis while on posaconazole prophylaxis,
some data support the use of an alternative triazole as salvage
therapy, such as voriconazole or isavuconazole [256]. The
benefits of combination antifungal therapy for breakthrough
aspergillosis are unknown. If a decision is made to use combi-
nation therapy, we favor the initial use of a combination of
antifungal agents from different classes than the antifungal
the patient was initially receiving when the breakthrough asper-
gillosis was diagnosed.
Documentation of serum trough antifungal levels, especially for
triazole antifungals, which may be prone to wide pharmacokinetic
variability, can aid in the evaluation of patients with breakthrough
aspergillosis. Several case series have reported that breakthrough
aspergillosis in the setting of “therapeutically adequate” voricona-
zole exposures (recent trough >1 µg/mL) may favor the diagnosis
of breakthrough mucormycosis over aspergillosis [218]. In some
countries, breakthrough aspergillosis with multitriazole-resistant
Aspergillus species has been described, but the prevalence of
these strains in many centers in the United States is unknown
[574]. The replacement of posaconazole solution with intravenous
and extended-release tablets may reduce the frequency of ex-
tremely low serum concentrations. Further studies are needed to
address whether TDM is helpful or necessary with the extended-
release or intravenous formulations of posaconazole or for
isavuconazole.
Diagnosis requires the early use of chest/sinus CT and
Aspergillus GM, although CT can show atypical lesions
[143] and serum GM is frequently negative or “low positive”
in patients receiving mold-active agents preexposure.
Although the yield of bronchoscopy in these patients might
be low, it is recommended, as coinfections simulating break-
through aspergillosis are not uncommon [575]. Furthermore,
recent data indicate that the yield of GM in BAL is not
affected by the presence of a mold-active agent [576]. In
case there is growth of Aspergillus in a patient with break-
through Aspergillus pneumonia, it would be prudent to docu-
ment the susceptibility of the cultured isolate (using a
reference method) because the patient will need secondary
prophylaxis with a triazole antifungal after the initial treat-
ment phase is completed.
VI. When Should Patients Be Treated Empirically?
What Strategies Are Recommended for Empiric and Preemptive
Strategies in Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant
Recipients and Patients Treated for Acute Myelogenous Leukemia?
Recommendations.
74. Empiric antifungal therapy is recommended for high-risk
patients with prolonged neutropenia who remain persistently
febrile despite broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Antifungal
options include a lipid formulation of AmB (strong recommen-
dation; high-quality evidence), an echinocandin (caspofungin
or micafungin) (strong recommendation; high-quality evi-
dence), or voriconazole (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
75. Empiric antifungal therapy is not recommended for pa-
tients who are anticipated to have short durations of neutro-
penia (duration of neutropenia <10 days), unless other
findings indicate a suspected IFI (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
76. The use of serum or BAL fungal biomarkers such as GM or
(1 → 3)-β-D-glucan to guide antifungal therapy in asymp-
tomatic or febrile high-risk patients (often referred to as pre-
emptive or biomarker-driven antifungal therapy) can reduce
unnecessary antifungal therapy. The preemptive approach
can result in more documented cases of IPA without
compromise in survival and can be used as an alternative
to empiric antifungal therapy (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
77. Early initiation of antifungal therapy in patients with
strongly suspected IPA is warranted while a diagnostic evalua-
tion is conducted (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
78. Management of suspected or documented breakthrough
IPA in the context of mold-active azole prophylaxis or em-
piric suppressive therapy is not defined by clinical trial
data, but a switch to another drug class is suggested (weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
This area has been reviewed in a relat-
ed 2010 guideline from the IDSA [577]. Early reports from the
National Cancer Institute and the EORTC underscored the
e40 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 importance of early initiation of therapy for treatment of IA and
other IFIs [145, 175, 577–579]. These small randomized, nonpla-
cebo, open-label trials demonstrated that high-risk neutropenic
patients with persistent fever despite broad-spectrum antibacteri-
al therapy have an increased risk of developing an overt IFI and
empiric antifungal therapy reduced the frequency of overt IFIs.
Although all AmB formulations are efficacious, nephrotoxicity
and infusion reactions occur and the risk varies by formulation,
with the greatest risk with AmB deoxycholate and the least risk
with liposomal AmB. Liposomal AmB and itraconazole were as
efficacious as and less toxic than AmB deoxycholate, and caspo-
fungin was as efficacious as liposomal AmB in randomized trials
[580–582]. Although the other echinocandins have been less well
studied for this indication, the committee regards all the echino-
candins as therapeutically equivalent. A randomized trial of vor-
iconazole vs liposomal AmB did not fulfill criteria for
noninferiority for the overall population but was comparable to
liposomal AmB in the high-risk neutropenic population, with a
significant reduction in the rate of emergent IA [583].
Empiric antifungal therapy appears to be most beneficial in
patients with prolonged neutropenia (duration of neutropenia
>10 days) in contrast to low-risk neutropenic patients [584].
One randomized trial [585] compared antifungal therapy initi-
ated at the onset of first neutropenic fever with that initiated
after 96 hours of fever in leukemic and allogeneic HSCT pa-
tients; there was no difference in rates of IFI. The initiation of
antifungal therapy is generally recommended for persistent un-
explained fever after 4–7 days with a broad-spectrum antibiotic
regimen. In one trial, initiation at 4 days was associated with a
trend to higher response rates and shorter time to defervescence
than initiation at 8 days [586]. The use of empiric antifungal
therapy still warrants a comprehensive approach to establishing
a microbiological diagnosis where feasible.
Persistent fever has poor specificity for the diagnosis of an
IFI, and empiric antifungal therapy may thus expose patients
where antifungal treatment is not indicated. The use of nonin-
vasive diagnostics to detect incipient IFIs either in asymptom-
atic at-risk patients or in patients with unexplained neutropenic
fever is sometimes known as preemptive or biomarker-driven
antifungal therapy; the latter is a logical alternative to empiric
antifungal therapy, in that it targets a high-risk subpopulation
on the basis of a surrogate marker of infection, such as abnor-
mal CT findings or a positive result for GM antigen, (1 → 3)-β-
D-glucan, or Aspergillus PCR where available commercially or
as a research tool. Biomarkers have been evaluated in 2 ways:
serial screening of asymptomatic high-risk patients [96, 587,
588]and guiding targeted antifungal therapy for a subset of per-
sistently febrile patients [589, 590]. Because approximately 40%
of patients receiving empiric antifungal therapy have pulmo-
nary infiltrates, there is considerable overlap between the ap-
proaches of empiric and biomarker-targeted therapy. In a
feasibility study, Maertens et al used serum GM and chest CT
to detect IPA in patients with leukemia who received flucona-
zole prophylaxis [96]. This strategy reduced the use of empiric
antifungal therapy and successfully treated cases of IPA, in
which treatment often was initiated early, before onset of fever.
Randomized trials have compared biomarker-driven strategies
using serum GM [589,590],Aspergillus PCR, or both [80]to trig-
ger antifungal therapy vs symptom-driven empiric antifungal
therapy in leukemia and HSCT. Different design issues such as
the lack of standardization of antiyeast prophylaxis [80,589],tim-
ing of biomarker screening (asymptomatic vs febrile patients),
types of patients studied, duration of study, and inadequate sam-
ple size [588, 590] hamper generalizations. However, in general,
these studies suggest that biomarker-driven strategies are associ-
ated with less unnecessary antifungal use without a compromise
in overall survival. As would be expected by more intensive test-
ing, more IFIs were generally seen, but without an increase in
fungal-related mortality, presumably due to early initiation of an-
tifungal therapy made possible by the intensive screening. One
concern with the use of PCR assays for screening patients is
the lack of commercial assays and technical challenges of differ-
ent methodologies [591, 592]. Although some experts believe
there is sufficient evidence to support the use of PCR assays
[593], the committee does not recommend routine use of PCR
assays outside the context of clinical trials or clinical research
at this time. These various studies suggest that biomarker-driven
antifungal therapy is an acceptable alternative to fever-driven em-
piric antifungal therapy in patients who are receiving antiyeast
prophylaxis. Further study is needed to clarify which biomarker
or combination of biomarkers is optimal, which risk group
should be given antimold prophylaxis vs biomarker screening,
and if routine screening in asymptomatic patients is preferable
to screening only febrile patients. Data on biomarkers to guide
preemptive therapy are limited for pediatric patients.
For persistently febrile neutropenic patients who may be re-
ceiving anti-Aspergillus prophylaxis, the causes of persistent
fever are less likely to be of a fungal origin [594]. Careful eval-
uation for nonfungal causes, as well as the possibility of break-
through IFIs that are resistant to the prophylactic regimen,
should be considered in this patient population. Thus, routine
initiation of empiric antifungal therapy in this context merits
reevaluation.
Management of breakthrough IPA in the context of mold-ac-
tive azole prophylaxis is not defined by clinical trial data. The ap-
proach to such patients should be individualized on the basis of
clinical criteria, including host immunosuppression, underlying
disease, and site of infection, as well as consideration of antifungal
dosing, therapeutic monitoring of drug levels, a switch to intrave-
nous therapy, and/or a switch to another drug class.
There are other high-risk patients, such as those with refrac-
tory leukemia, those with solid tumors, other SOT recipients,
those receiving corticosteroid therapy, those with liver failure,
those with COPD with progressive infiltrates despite antibiotics,
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e41
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 and critically ill patients in whom empiric therapy may be war-
ranted on a case-by-case basis.
How Do Lung Transplant Recipients Differ From Other
Immunosuppressed Patients in Management of Suspected Invasive
Pulmonary Aspergillosis?
Recommendations.
79. In lung transplant recipients not on antimold prophylaxis,
we suggest preemptive therapy with an antimold antifungal
for asymptomatic patients with Aspergillus colonization of
the airways within 6 months of lung transplant or within 3
months of receiving immunosuppression augmentation for
rejection (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
80. Six months after lung transplant and in the absence of recent
immunosuppression augmentation for rejection, it may be pru-
dent to withhold antifungal therapy for Aspergillus airway col-
onization (ie, Aspergillus respiratory cultures in the absence of
clinical features that suggest disease, such as compatible symp-
toms, or bronchoscopic, histopathologic, and/or radiographic
findings) (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Many lung transplant centers rou-
tinely perform scheduled bronchoscopies with transbronchial
biopsies and BAL. These surveillance bronchoscopies allow in-
spection for airway complications, rejection monitoring, and
detection of microbial colonization (bacteria, fungi, and/or vi-
ruses) before the onset of overt infection. Between 20% and 46%
of lung transplant recipients are colonized in the airway with
Aspergillus spp at some point after transplant [595, 596]. The
risk of IA is increased 11-fold in patients with Aspergillus colo-
nization of the airways, and mortality rates are high [595]. Fur-
thermore, Aspergillus-colonized patients have an increased risk
of chronic lung allograft dysfunction due to bronchiolitis oblit-
erans and death [596, 597]. At present, it is not known whether
asymptomatic patients with Aspergillus colonization should be
treated with antifungal agents. Given the high rate of Aspergillus
disease among colonized patients, we suggest a course of anti-
fungal azole therapy within 6 months of transplant. Preemptive
antifungal therapy based on culture has been successfully used
in clearing Aspergillus from the airway [598–600]. In asymp-
tomatic patients who are colonized with Aspergillus after 6
months, we suggest a thorough physical exam, to rule out
signs of disseminated aspergillosis, and a chest CT. We also sug-
gest a sinus CT for patients with signs or symptoms of sinus dis-
ease. If screening is negative, clinicians should consider factors
such as immunosuppression augmentation for rejection within
the previous 3–4 months (especially with alemtuzumab, thymo-
globulin, or high-dose and prolonged duration of corticoste-
roids), the presence of recent CMV disease or uncontrolled
CMV infection, and the presence of an airway stent or airway
abnormalities at the time of positive culture. If physical findings
or imaging abnormalities are suggestive of aspergillosis, or any
of the aforementioned factors are present, we suggest a course
of 1–3 months of preemptive antifungal therapy and conversely,
if negative, a watchful waiting approach without antifungal therapy.
CHRONIC AND SAPROPHYTIC SYNDROMES OF
ASPERGILLUS
VII. How Should Chronic Aspergillosis, Allergic Syndromes, or
Noninvasive Syndromes Be Managed?
How Can Chronic Cavitary Pulmonary Aspergillosis Be Diagnosed
and Treated?
Recommendations.
81. The diagnosis of CCPA requires: (i) 3 months of chronic pul-
monary symptoms or chronic illness or progressive radiologic
radiographic abnormalities, with cavitation, pleural thickening,
pericavitary infiltrates, and sometimes a fungal ball; (ii) Asper-
gillus IgG antibody elevated or other microbiological data; and
(iii) no or minimal immunocompromise, usually with one or
more underlying pulmonary disorders. The Aspergillus IgG an-
tibody test is the most sensitive microbiological test (strong rec-
ommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Sputum Aspergillus
PCR testing is more sensitive than culture (weak recommenda-
tion; moderate-quality evidence).
82. Patients with CCPA without pulmonary symptoms, weight
loss, or significant fatigue, and those without major impairment
of pulmonary function or gradual loss of pulmonary function
may be observed without antifungal therapy and followed every
3–6 months (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
83. Patients with CCPA and either pulmonary or general
symptoms or progressive loss of lung function or radiograph-
ic progression should be treated with a minimum of 6
months of antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; low-
quality evidence).
84. Oral itraconazole and voriconazole are the preferred oral
antifungal agents (strong recommendation; high-quality evi-
dence); posaconazole is a useful third-line agent for those
with adverse events or clinical failure (strong recommenda-
tion; moderate-quality evidence).
85. Hemoptysis may be managed with oral tranexamic acid
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence), bronchial ar-
tery embolization (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence), or antifungal therapy to prevent recurrence (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence). Patients failing these
measures may require surgical resection (weak recommenda-
tion; moderate-quality evidence).
86. In those who fail therapy, develop triazole resistance, and/
or have adverse events, intravenous micafungin (weak recom-
mendation; low-quality evidence), caspofungin (weak recommen-
dation; low-quality evidence), or AmB (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence) yield some responses. Treatment may
need to be prolonged.
87. Surgical resection is an option for some patients with local-
ized disease, unresponsive to medical therapy, including
e42 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 those with pan-azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus infec-
tion or persistent hemoptysis despite bronchial artery embo-
lization (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
The outcomes from surgery are less favorable than those with
single aspergilloma, and a careful risk assessment prior to
surgical intervention is required.
88. In those with progressive disease, long-term, even lifelong
antifungal therapy may be required to control disease (weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence), with continual mon-
itoring for toxicity and resistance.
Evidence Summary.
Chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergil-
losis is defined as one or more pulmonary cavities that may or
may not contain solid or liquid material or a fungal ball, with a
positive Aspergillus IgG antibody test or microbiological evi-
dence implicating Aspergillus spp with significant pulmonary
or systemic symptoms and overt radiographic progression
(new cavities, increasing pericavity infiltrates, or increasing
pleural thickening) over at least 3 months [601, 602]. It is one
manifestation of CPA [603,604],single aspergilloma and Asper-
gillus nodule being others, and chronic fibrosing pulmonary as-
pergillosis (CFPA) an end-stage complication of CCPA [601].
CCPA complicates other pulmonary diseases, including tu-
berculosis, nontuberculous mycobacterial infection (both of
which may occur concurrently, although are usually anteced-
ent), fibrocystic sarcoidosis, ABPA, asthma, prior pneumonia,
pneumothorax or lobectomy, COPD, ankylosing spondylitis
and rheumatoid arthritis, hyper IgE syndrome, and congenital
bullous disease [603]. Patients with mild or moderate immuno-
suppression may develop what was termed chronic necrotizing
pulmonary aspergillosis, but is better considered subacute IPA
[602, 605]. Patients with CCPA and CFPA have numerous un-
derlying immunological defects, probably mostly genetic [606,
607]. As these defects and their pulmonary damage from prior
disease are irreversible, long-term suppressive antifungal thera-
py is the default mode of treatment, although patients with mild
cases may be able to stop therapy, and others may be forced to
stop if medication intolerance or side effects develop.
Patients present with primarily pulmonary or general symp-
toms, or both. Response to therapy should be assessed against
each person’s symptom complex. Hemoptysis, shortness of
breath, and productive cough are usual, whereas fever and
chest pain are uncommon. Weight loss and fatigue are the
most common general symptoms and may be profound [581].
Patients are often mistakenly thought to have tuberculosis.
If a fungal ball is present on chest imaging, the diagnosis is
almost certainly CPA, either a single aspergilloma or CCPA.
Confirmation is with Aspergillus IgG testing [608, 609], and
the distinction between these 2 entities is made on the basis
of symptomology and radiologic appearance. However, the ma-
jority of CCPA patients do not have a fungal ball but either mul-
tiple empty cavities, or cavities with an irregular (bumpy)
internal wall with associated pleural thickening, and pericavi-
tary infiltrates. Mats of hyphae within the cavity become dis-
lodged and eventually coalesce to form a fungal ball [610].
Diagnosis of CCPA is with Aspergillus IgG testing, excluding
coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and paracoccidioidomyco-
sis. Occasionally patients present with mycobacterial infection
at the same time as CCPA. Rarely, a necrotizing lung cancer
can be infected with Aspergillus, giving rise to a similar radio-
graphic appearance. Multiple sputa (expectorated or induced)
increase the probability of positive microscopy or fungal culture
providing mycological support for the diagnosis. A majority of
patients have negative sputum cultures; Aspergillus PCR is more
sensitive [85]. If culture is positive and the patient has been re-
ceiving an azole, the isolate should be submitted for susceptibil-
ity testing. Hyphae may be seen on microscopy, and the culture
is negative. Biopsy of the wall of a cavity in CCPA yields chronic
inflammatory cells and fibrosis, sometimes with granulomata;
hyphae consistent with Aspergillus spp are usually seen adjacent
to the cavity wall, but are not truly invasive. Percutaneous aspi-
ration of a cavity with a positive Aspergillus culture is an alter-
native means of establishing the diagnosis. More than 50% of
patients have an increased total and Aspergillus-specific IgE
titer; eosinophilia may be present [581].
The objectives of therapy of CCPA are to (1) improve symp-
toms; (2) reduce hemoptysis; (3) reduce progressive lung fibrosis,
in particular preventing CFPA, which can occur rapidly; and (4)
prolong survival. Oral therapy with itraconazole or voriconazole
is a first-line therapy, depending on tolerance and affordability
[602, 611–614]. Resistance to itraconazole during therapy has
been reported more frequently than with voriconazole, so in pa-
tients with a large fungal load, voriconazole may be preferable,
although clinical evidence to support this approach is lacking.
Posaconazole is currently third-line therapy, because of the gene-
ral lack of data and cost over long periods [615]. Treatment
should be continued for a minimum of 6 months, and if well tol-
erated with a good response, may be continued for years [616].
Monitoring of therapy is critical and should be undertaken by
physicians experienced with antifungal therapy. Toxicity may de-
velop with long-term triazole therapy as previously discussed.
Occasional patients have a marked increase in shortness of
breath shortly after starting antifungal therapy, which may re-
spond to a short course of corticosteroids. Otherwise, all steroids
should be avoided in CCPA, unless the patient is receiving ade-
quate antifungal therapy and/or requires them for underlying
disease, such as those with rheumatoid arthritis. Inhaled cortico-
steroids should be stopped in those with COPD and reduced in
those with asthma, if possible.
Hemoptysis can usually be controlled with oral tranexamic
acid [617,618].If hemoptysis is significant, bronchial artery em-
bolization is recommended, and should be performed by an ex-
perienced interventional radiologist [619–622]. It may be
necessary to embolize abnormal vessels arising from the
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e43
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 internal mammary, subclavian, and lateral thoracic arteries as
well. Abnormal vessels arising close to the origin of both spinal
and vertebral arteries should not be embolized. Recurrence of
hemoptysis is common if antifungal therapy is not given and
optimized, and may be a sign of antifungal failure.
Standard monitoring includes assessing radiographic change
(every 3–12 months), preferably with low-dose CT without con-
trast or chest radiograph, inflammatory markers, Aspergillus
IgG titers, and annual pulmonary function tests. Failure of ther-
apy can be difficult to determine, but is based on a deteriorating
clinical status, especially a new productive cough and/or weight
loss, new or continuing hemoptysis, radiographic progression,
or worsening respiratory function. Other causes of weight loss
should be excluded, including celiac disease. Concurrent infec-
tion, including nontuberculous mycobacterial infection, is im-
portant to exclude, usually with multiple sputum cultures and
occasionally bronchoscopy. Antifungal blood concentrations
should be checked. Azole resistance should be sought.
On therapy, azole resistance may occur. Susceptibility testing
of isolates obtained in patients on therapy may be extremely
useful to guide therapeutic choices, and it is recommended
that clinical laboratories not discard A. fumigatus isolates for
3 months, to allow clinicians to determine if patients are failing
at their next outpatient appointment. Some isolates are only re-
sistant to itraconazole or voriconazole, some to itraconazole and
posaconazole, and others pan-azole resistant.
In patients who fail, are intolerant, or develop azole resistance
or a combination of these circumstances, the clinician may need
to resort to intravenous therapy. In addition, acutely ill patients
may require an initial course of intravenous antifungal therapy.
Both AmB deoxycholate and liposomal AmB and micafungin
have been extensively used for CCPA, with modest response
rates [193, 601, 623, 624]. In addition to its anti-Aspergillus ac-
tivity, liposomal AmB has many TH1 upregulating effects,
which are generally deficient in patients with CPA, and may
contribute to a clinical response. It is better tolerated than
AmB deoxycholate, but both may result in treatment-limiting
renal dysfunction. Micafungin has been examined in the treat-
ment of CCPA and found to be effective [193]. There are few
data for caspofungin and none for ABLC, ABCD, anidulafun-
gin, or isavuconazole [625].
A common cause of death in CCPA, and possibly a trigger for
additional lung fibrosis, is intercurrent bacterial infection. Com-
mon infections include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophi-
lus influenzae, and occasionally Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphylococcus aureus. Pneumococcal and Haemophilus immu-
nization may reduce infections. Some CCPA patients have overt
hypogammaglobulinemia. Pseudomonas aeruginosa eradication
or control with high-dose oral ciprofloxacin, intravenous thera-
py, or inhaled colistin or tobramycin is also recommended for
these patients. Minimizing bacterial infections allows simpler
decision making if patients deteriorate on antifungal therapy.
Occasionally surgical resection is necessary for CCPA, typically
for intractable hemoptysis, destroyed lung (CFPA) with poor
quality of life, or azole resistance. Patients need to be fit enough
(see section on simple aspergilloma for considerations, recom-
mendations 89–91 below). A conventional lobectomy [626–
629],video-assisted thoracic surgical procedure [630–632],or cav-
ernostomy with space reduction using a limited thoracoplasty
may be required. The outcomes from surgery are acceptable,
but both the risk of death and complications such as pleural
space infection is higher in CCPA than for single aspergilloma.
Relapse rates up to 25% are documented [633], which makes de-
cision making difficult, especially in the knowledge that subtle im-
mune deficits will persist after surgery. All CCPA patients
undergoing resection surgery require active follow-up.
What Are the Management Options for an Aspergillus Fungal Ball
of the Lung (Aspergilloma)?
Recommendations.
89. Asymptomatic patients with a single aspergilloma and no
progression of the cavity size over 6–24 months should con-
tinue to be observed (strong recommendation; moderate-
quality evidence).
90. Patients with symptoms, especially significant hemoptysis,
with a single aspergilloma, should have it resected, assuming
that there are no contraindications (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
91. Peri-/postoperative antifungal therapy is not routinely re-
quired, but if the risk of surgical spillage of the aspergilloma
is moderate (related to location and morphology of the cavity),
antifungal therapy with voriconazole (or another mold-active
azole) or an echinocandin is suggested to prevent Aspergillus
empyema (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
Single aspergilloma, previously often
referred to as simple aspergilloma, may occur with CPA so that
the evidence supporting management of a fungal ball due to As-
pergillus should be considered in the context of CPA in that sit-
uation. These patients may be asymptomatic, present with
hemoptysis, shortness of breath, or cough. “Single uncomplicated
aspergilloma” is defined as a single pulmonary cavity containing
a fungal ball in a nonimmunocompromised patient with micro-
biological or serological evidence of Aspergillus spp with minimal
or no symptoms and no radiographic progression over at least 3
months [603]. An aspergilloma is described radiographically as
an approximately spherical shadow with surrounding air, also
called a fungal ball, in a pulmonary cavity, with evidence that As-
pergillus spp is present in the material. Aspergillus fumigatus is
the usual cause. Fungal balls of the lung may rarely be caused
by other fungi, such as A. flavus, or other molds like Scedospo-
rium spp. Single aspergilloma represents a manifestion of CPA
with a favorable prognosis, and is usually not rapidly progressive
so that management decisions are not usually acute, unless severe
hemoptysis has occurred.
e44 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 The optimal management of a single aspergilloma is surgical re-
section, either by conventional lobectomy [626–629] or a video-
assisted thoracic surgical procedure [630–632]. However, surgical
planning requires the following considerations [633]: Respiratory
reserve should be adequate, as based on FEV1 and especially exer-
cise tolerance; patients who are taking antithrombotic medication
should be able to have their medication suspended for at least 4
days, and preferably longer; and preoperative bronchial artery em-
bolization allows more time for surgical assessment and planning,
but has little impact on postoperative bleeding [634].
An evaluation of risk of spillage at surgery needs to be made
based on the difficulty of separating the cavity containing the fun-
gal ball from the chest wall [633]. Extrapleural dissection over the
apex may be required but may be followed by bleeding from col-
lateral arterial vessels crossing the pleura from the chest wall. If it
is likely or possible that the cavity will be opened during the sur-
gical procedure, leading to pleural contamination, then antifungal
therapy with voriconazole (or another mold-active azole) or mi-
cafungin (or another echinocandin) should be given, starting pre-
operatively with voriconazole or perioperatively for micafungin.
Use of voriconazole may alter the preferred anesthetic approach,
as prolongation of benzodiazepine sedation is problematic with
voriconazole. If no spillage occurs during surgery, antifungal ther-
apy can be stopped. If spillage does occur, some clinicians advise
washing out the pleural space with AmB or antifungal topical dis-
infectant such as taurolodine 2%, although evidence to support
either approach is minimal. Antifungal therapy should be contin-
ued postoperatively and an infectious diseases physician involved
in care to monitor therapy and determine the length of treatment.
If there is no evidence of infection following spillage during sur-
gery, a minimum of 4 weeks of therapy is typically recommended.
Patients with 2 separate aspergillomas [635] may be consid-
ered for bilobar resections or pneumonectomy depending on
locations and their respiratory reserve. If respiratory reserve
does not allow resection, then medical therapy alone can be of-
fered to minimize recurrent hemoptysis.
Relapse following resection does occur; 25% of patients in one
CPA series had relapse of infection including some aspergilloma
cases [633]. Most surgical series do not provide long-term follow-
up. For patients with spillage, active follow-up (typically at 4- to
6-month intervals) assessing radiographic change, inflammatory
markers, and Aspergillus IgG titers for 3 years is advised. If spill-
age has not occurred, then active follow-up is not advised, unless
there is ongoing active pulmonary disease.
ALLERGIC SYNDROMES OF ASPERGILLUS
How Is Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis Identified and
Managed in Patients With Asthma and Cystic Fibrosis?
Recommendations.
92. Elevated Aspergillus IgE and total IgE are recommended to
establish the diagnosis and are useful for screening (strong
recommendation; high-quality evidence).
93. We suggest treating symptomatic asthmatic patients with
bronchiectasis or mucoid impaction, despite oral or inhaled
corticosteroid therapy, with oral itraconazole therapy with
TDM (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
94. In CF patients with frequent exacerbations and/or falling
FEV1, we suggest treating with oral itraconazole to minimize
corticosteroid use with TDM, and consideration of other
mold-active azole therapy if therapeutic levels cannot be
achieved (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
ABPA complicates asthma and CF
[83, 509, 636, 637]. In asthmatic patients it presents as poorly
controlled asthma, “pneumonia” that represents mucoid impac-
tion, persistent eosinophilia, and bronchiectasis or with CPA
and lung fibrosis, the latter both late complications. Some pa-
tients are asymptomatic. In CF, it tends to present with diffi-
cult-to-control exacerbations, responsive to corticosteroids,
although mucoid impaction is described.
The key criterion for diagnosis is an elevated Aspergillus-spe-
cific IgE, supported by an elevated total IgE, detectable Aspergil-
lus-specific IgG, eosinophilia, and positive skin prick tests
for Aspergillus (where available) [83, 637, 638]. Uncommonly,
other fungi can produce a similar clinical picture. Patients
with severe asthma, not fulfilling the criteria for ABPA, may
have severe asthma with fungal sensitization, also responsive
to antifungal therapy [636,639]. There are some areas of overlap
with these syndromes, and some experts consider all patients
with these diagnoses under the term “fungal asthma.”
Screening for ABPA in patients with asthma and CF, proba-
bly on an annual basis, is recommended, particularly if patients
are symptomatic with frequent asthma exacerbations. Asth-
matics admitted to hospital, including intensive care, should
be evaluated for fungal asthma [640].
The optimal management of ABPA in both asthma and CF
depends on patient response, severity of disease and exacerbation
frequency, drug adverse effects, and the emergence of antifungal
resistance [637, 639, 641]. Treatment involves a 2-pronged ap-
proach: controlling the immune response (which is what makes
the patient symptomatic), and decreasing the burden of organ-
isms so that there is less of an immune response.
Oral corticosteroids reduce the inflammatory response in acute
exacerbations of ABPA, but are associated with many adverse ef-
fects, some short-term, others long-term, such as diabetes in CF.
Relapse is frequent after discontinuation. Inhaled corticosteroids
control asthma in some patients. Anti-IgE (omalizumab) therapy
might be helpful, but data are scant [642]. Cough and sputum
production may be reduced by azithromycin or antifungal ther-
apy or both. Nebulized hypertonic saline helps some patients
clear sputum [643]. Prevention of exacerbations may be affected
by pneumococcal and/or Haemophilus vaccination. Avoidance of
substantial fungal exposures, as in composting, farming, and
house renovation may also prevent exacerbations.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e45
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Antifungal therapy is helpful for many patients [639, 641,
644, 645]. Itraconazole is currently the first-line agent for symp-
tomatic patients, CF patients with low FEV1, or those with com-
plications such as bronchiectasis, mucoid impaction, or CPA.
Itraconazole solution is preferred in CF patients because of
poor absorption of capsules. Patients who fail itraconazole, or
are intolerant to itraconazole, may respond to voriconazole,
posaconazole, or inhaled AmB [646]. Relapse after improve-
ment during antifungal therapy is common; long-term suppres-
sive therapy may be necessary. Interactions of itraconazole with
some inhaled corticosteroids can precipitate Cushing’s syn-
drome, so that reduction in inhaled steroid dose or a switch
to ciclesonide may be useful for those patients. Triazole antifun-
gal resistance has been documented in some geographic regions,
so susceptibility testing may be valuable in areas where epidemi-
ologic data indicate environmental resistance or isolates are cul-
tured from patients on antifungal therapy.
What Is the Medical Management of Allergic Fungal
Rhinosinusitis Caused by Aspergillus Species?
Recommendations.
95. We recommend establishing the diagnosis of AFRS in pa-
tients with nasal polyposis and thick eosinophilic mucin by
visualizing hyphae in mucus, which is supported by a posi-
tive Aspergillus IgE serum assay or skin-prick test (where
available)
(strong
recommendation;
moderate-quality
evidence).
96. We recommend polypectomy and sinus washout as the op-
timal means of symptom control and inducing remission;
however, relapse is frequent (strong recommendation; moder-
ate-quality evidence).
97. We recommend the use of topical nasal steroids to reduce
symptoms and increase time to relapse, especially if given
after surgery (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
98. We suggest oral antifungal therapy using mold-active tria-
zoles for refractory infection and/or rapidly relapsing disease,
although this approach is only partially effective (weak rec-
ommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary.
AFRS is a small subset (<10%) of
chronic rhinosinusitis occurring in adults and children [647].
AFRS is characterized by eosinophilic mucin and fungal hyphae
in the paranasal sinuses, often associated with immediate hy-
persensitivity to various fungi. Fungal culture of nasal secretions
is usually unhelpful as it reflects airborne fungi, so clarity about
the specific fungus involved is usually inferential or unclear.
The disease is commonly associated with nasal polyposis, and
sometimes with ABPA [648]. Local complications of AFRS in-
clude ophthalmic involvement with oculomotor palsy, bony
erosion, and cavernous venous thrombosis [649]. The disease
course is long, with many patients having extended periods of
remission with exacerbations often following viral and/or
bacterial infections. Short courses of modest doses of oral cor-
ticosteroids may shrink polyps and allow drainage, but relapse is
common, and not usually prevented by topical steroids. Surgical
removal of polyps and mucus is the most important aspect of
management, with postoperative systemic or topical nasal ste-
roids recommended to reduce the time to relapse [650, 651].Sa-
line washes are often helpful. Omaluzimab has been reported to
be helpful in studies of severe asthma with associated chronic
rhinitis [652]. Oral antifungal therapy for AFRS, usually itraco-
nazole, is helpful for refractory disease and to prevent relapse in
patients with frequent recurrences [653–655].
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There are many unanswered and unresolved epidemiological,
laboratory, and clinical questions that need to be addressed
and understood in the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
aspergillosis. Better diagnostic tests and improved understand-
ing of the optimal use of current methods are needed both to
facilitate more accurate identification of patients with IA and
to permit earlier initiation of therapy. The availability of more
active and better tolerated antifungal agents has significantly
improved therapy of patients at risk for serious Aspergillus
infections, but even with optimal antifungal therapy the mortal-
ity rate remains high; therefore, further development of new an-
tifungal agents is greatly needed. Critical gaps in knowledge
remain regarding management of these infections including
the optimal utility of combination therapy, tools for early detec-
tion of these infections, evaluation of response, therapy for
patients with breakthrough or refractory infection, and the pop-
ulation of patients for whom prophylaxis would be most
beneficial.
Notes
Dedication.
The panel dedicates these guidelines to the memory of our
dear friend Susan Hadley, MD, a core member of the Mycoses Study Group,
caring physician, and wonderful colleague.
Acknowledgments.
The Expert Panel expresses its gratitude for
thoughtful reviews of an earlier version by Sanjay Revankar and Samuel
Lee. The Panel also greatly appreciates the work of Charles B. Wessels
and Michele Klein Fedyshin of the Health Sciences Library System of the
University of Pittsburgh for the development and execution of the system-
atic literature searches for this guideline. We give special thanks to Genet
Demisashi of the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) staff for
her support in the development of this guideline.
Financial support.
Support for this guideline was provided by the
IDSA.
Potential conflicts of interest.
The following list is a reflection of what
has been reported to IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, IDSA re-
quires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the guide-
line topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conflicts of interest
(COI) is determined by a review process that includes assessment by the
Standards and Practice Guideline Committee (SPGC) Chair, the SPGC liai-
son to the development panel, the Board of Directors liaison to the SPGC,
and, if necessary, the COI Task Force of the Board. This assessment of
disclosed relationships for possible COI will be based on the relative weight
of the financial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the relevance of
the relationship (ie, the degree to which an association might reasonably
be interpreted by an independent observer as related to the topic or
e46 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 recommendation of consideration). The reader of these guidelines should be
mindful of this when the list of disclosures is reviewed. For activities outside
the submitted work, T. F. P. received research grant support to the Univer-
sity of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio from Astellas, Merck, and
Revolution Medicines and has been a consultant for or served on advisory
boards to Amplyx, Astellas, Durata, Cidara Therapeutics, Gilead, Merck,
Pfizer, Revolution Medicines, Scynexis, Toyama, Vical, and Viamet. For
activities outside of the submitted work, G. R. T. received research support
to the University of California, Davis from Astellas, Merck, Pfizer, and Scy-
nexis, and has been a consultant for Astellas. For activities outside the
submitted work, D. W. D. holds Founder shares in F2G Ltd, a University
of Manchester spin-out antifungal discovery company and in Novocyt,
which markets the Myconostica real-time molecular assays; has current
grant support from the National Institute of Health Research, Medical Re-
search Council, Global Action Fund for Fungal Infections, and the Fungal
Infection Trust; serves as a consultant to Astellas, Sigma Tau, Basilea, and
Pulmocide; and has received honoraria from Astellas, Dynamiker, Gilead,
Merck, and Pfizer. For activities outside the submitted work, J. A. F. served
on scientific advisory boards for Revolution Medicines. For activities outside
the submitted work, S. H. served as a consultant to Merck. For activities
outside the submitted work, R. H. served on advisory boards for Astellas,
Basilea, Gilead, and Pfizer and received research grants from Alsace contre
le Cancer and Pfizer. For activities outside the submitted work, D. P. K.
served as a consultant to Astellas, Merck, and Pfizer; received research sup-
port from Astellas, Merck, Pfizer, and T2 Biosystems; and received honorar-
ia from Astellas, Merck, Pfizer, T2 Biosystems, Gilead, and F2G, Inc. For
activities outside the submitted work, K. A. M. received honoraria from Am-
plyx, Astellas, Cidara, F2G, Merck, Pfizer, Revolutions Medicine, and Vical,
and has a patent US No. 13/511 264 licensed. For activities outside the sub-
mitted work, V. A. M. served as a consultant for Celgene, Amgen, GSK,
Merck, and Astellas, and served on the speaker’s bureaus for Genentech
and Celgene. For activities outside the submitted work, M. H. N. received
research grants from Astellas, Pfizer, Merck, ViraCor, and the National In-
stitutes of Health (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases). For
activities outside the submitted work, B. H. S. served on advisory boards for
Merck and Astellas, and has contracts for laboratory research from Astellas
and Assembly Biosciences. For activities outside the submitted work, W. J. S.
served on scientific advisory boards from Merck and received research
grants to Duke University from Merck and Astellas. For activities outside
the submitted work, T. J. W. served as a consultant or scientific advisor
for Astellas, Novartis, Pfizer, and Methlygene and received research grants
to Weill Cornell Medical Center from Astellas, Merck, and Novartis. For activ-
ities outside the submitted work, J. R. W. served as consultant/scientific advisor
for Gilead, Astellas, Pfizer, Merck, and Vical. For activities outside the submit-
ted work, J. H. Y. received research support to the University of Minnesota
from Astellas, Merck, and Pfizer. All other authors report no potential con-
flicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content
of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. US GRADE Network. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evi-
dence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE methodology. Avail-
able at: http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/. Accessed 1 April 2016.
2. Walsh TJ, Anaissie EJ, Denning DW, et al. Treatment of aspergillosis: clinical
practice guidelines of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect
Dis 2008; 46:327–60.
3. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rat-
ing quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
4. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Schunemann HJ, Tugwell P, Knottnerus A. GRADE
guidelines: a new series of articles in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. J
Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64:380–2.
5. Panackal AA, Li H, Kontoyiannis DP, et al. Geoclimatic influences on invasive
aspergillosis after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Clin Infect Dis
2010; 50:1588–97.
6. Oliver MR, Van Voorhis WC, Boeckh M, Mattson D, Bowden RA. Hepatic mu-
cormycosis in a bone marrow transplant recipient who ingested naturopathic
medicine. Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22:521–4.
7. Thompson GR 3rd, Tuscano JM. Adverse health effects of marijuana use. N Engl
J Med 2014; 371:878–9.
8. Papouli M, Roilides E, Bibashi E, Andreou A. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis in
neonates: case report and review. Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22:1102–4.
9. van Burik JA, Colven R, Spach DH. Cutaneous aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol
1998; 36:3115–21.
10. Etienne KA, Subudhi CP, Chadwick PR, et al. Investigation of a cluster of cutane-
ous aspergillosis in a neonatal intensive care unit. J Hosp Infect 2011; 79:344–8.
11. Bryce EA, Walker M, Scharf S, et al. An outbreak of cutaneous aspergillosis in a
tertiary-care hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996; 17:170–2.
12. Anaissie EJ, Stratton SL, Dignani MC, et al. Cleaning patient shower facilities: a
novel approach to reducing patient exposure to aerosolized Aspergillus species
and other opportunistic molds. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 35:E86–8.
13. Anaissie EJ, Stratton SL, Dignani MC, et al. Pathogenic Aspergillus species recov-
ered from a hospital water system: a 3-year prospective study. Clin Infect Dis
2002; 34:780–9.
14. Anaissie EJ, Stratton SL, Dignani MC, et al. Pathogenic molds (including Asper-
gillus species) in hospital water distribution systems: a 3-year prospective study
and clinical implications for patients with hematologic malignancies. Blood
2003; 101:2542–6.
15. Anaissie EJ, Kuchar RT, Rex JH, et al. Fusariosis associated with pathogenic fu-
sarium species colonization of a hospital water system: a new paradigm for the
epidemiology of opportunistic mold infections. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:1871–8.
16. Mesquita-Rocha S, Godoy-Martinez PC, Goncalves SS, et al. The water supply
system as a potential source of fungal infection in paediatric haematopoietic
stem cell units. BMC Infect Dis 2013; 13:289.
17. Warris A, Klaassen CH, Meis JF, et al. Molecular epidemiology of Aspergillus fu-
migatus isolates recovered from water, air, and patients shows two clusters of ge-
netically distinct strains. J Clin Microbiol 2003; 41:4101–6.
18. Tomblyn M, Chiller T, Einsele H, et al. Guidelines for preventing infectious com-
plications among hematopoietic cell transplantation recipients: a global perspec-
tive. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2009; 15:1143–238.
19. Partridge-Hinckley K, Liddell GM, Almyroudis NG, Segal BH. Infection control
measures to prevent invasive mould diseases in hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plant recipients. Mycopathologia 2009; 168:329–37.
20. Thio CL, Smith D, Merz WG, et al. Refinements of environmental assessment
during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis in a leukemia and
bone marrow transplant unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000; 21:18–23.
21. Hahn T, Cummings KM, Michalek AM, Lipman BJ, Segal BH, McCarthy PL Jr.
Efficacy of high-efficiency particulate air filtration in preventing aspergillosis in
immunocompromised patients with hematologic malignancies. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2002; 23:525–31.
22. Raviv Y, Kramer MR, Amital A, Rubinovitch B, Bishara J, Shitrit D. Outbreak of
aspergillosis infections among lung transplant recipients. Transpl Int 2007;
20:135–40.
23. Pelaez T, Munoz P, Guinea J, et al. Outbreak of invasive aspergillosis after major
heart surgery caused by spores in the air of the intensive care unit. Clin Infect Dis
2012; 54:e24–31.
24. Yokoe D, Casper C, Dubberke E, et al. Infection prevention and control in health-
care facilities in which hematopoietic cell transplant recipients are treated. Bone
Marrow Transplant 2009; 44:495–507.
25. van der Linden JW, Camps SM, Kampinga GA, et al. Aspergillosis due to vori-
conazole highly resistant Aspergillus fumigatus and recovery of genetically related
resistant isolates from domiciles. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:513–20.
26. Gangneux JP, Bretagne S, Cordonnier C, et al. Prevention of nosocomial fungal
infection: the French approach. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 35:343–6.
27. Hajjeh RA, Warnock DW. Counterpoint: invasive aspergillosis and the environ-
ment–rethinking our approach to prevention. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:1549–52.
28. Weinberger M, Elattar I, Marshall D, et al. Patterns of infection in patients with
aplastic anemia and the emergence of Aspergillus as a major cause of death. Med-
icine (Baltimore) 1992; 71:24–43.
29. Gerson SL, Talbot GH, Hurwitz S, Strom BL, Lusk EJ, Cassileth PA. Prolonged
granulocytopenia: the major risk factor for invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in
patients with acute leukemia. Ann Intern Med 1984; 100:345–51.
30. Kontoyiannis DP, Marr KA, Park BJ, et al. Prospective surveillance for invasive
fungal infections in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, 2001–2006:
overview of the Transplant-Associated Infection Surveillance Network (TRANS-
NET) Database. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 50:1091–100.
31. Jantunen E, Ruutu P, Niskanen L, et al. Incidence and risk factors for invasive
fungal infections in allogeneic BMT recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1997;
19:801–8.
32. Marr KA, Carter RA, Boeckh M, Martin P, Corey L. Invasive aspergillosis in al-
logeneic stem cell transplant recipients: changes in epidemiology and risk factors.
Blood 2002; 100:4358–66.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e47
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 33. van Burik JA, Carter SL, Freifeld AG, et al. Higher risk of cytomegalovirus and
aspergillus infections in recipients of T cell-depleted unrelated bone marrow:
analysis of infectious complications in patients treated with T cell depletion ver-
sus immunosuppressive therapy to prevent graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood
Marrow Transplant 2007; 13:1487–98.
34. Bochud PY, Chien JW, Marr KA, et al. Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms and
aspergillosis in stem-cell transplantation. N Engl J Med 2008; 359:1766–77.
35. Zaas AK, Liao G, Chien JW, et al. Plasminogen alleles influence susceptibility to
invasive aspergillosis. PLoS Genet 2008; 4:e1000101.
36. Cunha C, Aversa F, Lacerda JF, et al. Genetic PTX3 deficiency and aspergillosis in
stem-cell transplantation. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:421–32.
37. Cunha C, Di Ianni M, Bozza S, et al. Dectin-1 Y238X polymorphism associates
with susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis in hematopoietic transplantation
through impairment of both recipient- and donor-dependent mechanisms of an-
tifungal immunity. Blood 2010; 116:5394–402.
38. Wojtowicz A, Lecompte TD, Bibert S, et al. PTX3 polymorphisms and invasive
mold infections after solid organ transplant. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:619–22.
39. Wojtowicz A, Gresnigt MS, Lecompte T, et al. IL1B and DEFB1 polymorphisms
increase susceptibility to invasive mold infection after solid-organ transplanta-
tion. J Infect Dis 2015; 211:1646–57.
40. Pappas PG, Alexander BD, Andes DR, et al. Invasive fungal infections among
organ transplant recipients: results of the Transplant-Associated Infection Sur-
veillance Network (TRANSNET). Clin Infect Dis 2010; 50:1101–11.
41. Doligalski CT, Benedict K, Cleveland AA, et al. Epidemiology of invasive mold
infections in lung transplant recipients. Am J Transplant 2014; 14:1328–33.
42. Neofytos D, Fishman JA, Horn D, et al. Epidemiology and outcome of invasive
fungal infections in solid organ transplant recipients. Transpl Infect Dis 2010;
12:220–9.
43. Singh N, Husain S; AST Infectious Diseases Community of Practice. Aspergillosis
in solid organ transplantation. Am J Transplant 2013; 13(suppl 4):228–41.
44. Luong ML, Chaparro C, Stephenson A, et al. Pretransplant Aspergillus coloniza-
tion of cystic fibrosis patients and the incidence of post-lung transplant invasive
aspergillosis. Transplantation 2014; 97:351–7.
45. Su T, Li HC, Chen M, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody associated vasculitis. J Clin Rheumatol
2009; 15:380–2.
46. Mylonakis E, Barlam TF, Flanigan T, Rich JD. Pulmonary aspergillosis and inva-
sive disease in AIDS: review of 342 cases. Chest 1998; 114:251–62.
47. Wallace JM, Lim R, Browdy BL, et al. Risk factors and outcomes associated with
identification of Aspergillus in respiratory specimens from persons with HIV dis-
ease. Pulmonary Complications of HIV Infection Study Group. Chest 1998;
114:131–7.
48. van den Berg JM, van Koppen E, Ahlin A, et al. Chronic granulomatous disease:
the European experience. PLoS One 2009; 4:e5234.
49. Winkelstein JA, Marino MC, Johnston RB Jr, et al. Chronic granulomatous dis-
ease. Report on a national registry of 368 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 2000;
79:155–69.
50. Segal BH, DeCarlo ES, Kwon-Chung KJ, Malech HL, Gallin JI, Holland SM. As-
pergillus nidulans infection in chronic granulomatous disease. Medicine (Balti-
more) 1998; 77:345–54.
51. Segal BH, Barnhart LA, Anderson VL, Walsh TJ, Malech HL, Holland SM. Pos-
aconazole as salvage therapy in patients with chronic granulomatous disease with
invasive filamentous fungal infection. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:1684–8.
52. Skoetz N, Bauer K, Elter T, et al. Alemtuzumab for patients with chronic lympho-
cytic leukaemia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 2:CD008078.
53. Lundin J, Hagberg H, Repp R, et al. Phase 2 study of alemtuzumab (anti-CD52
monoclonal antibody) in patients with advanced mycosis fungoides/Sezary syn-
drome. Blood 2003; 101:4267–72.
54. Gallamini A, Zaja F, Patti C, et al. Alemtuzumab (Campath-1H) and CHOP che-
motherapy as first-line treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphoma: results of a
GITIL (Gruppo Italiano Terapie Innovative nei Linfomi) prospective multicenter
trial. Blood 2007; 110:2316–23.
55. Bongartz T, Sutton AJ, Sweeting MJ, Buchan I, Matteson EL, Montori V. Anti-
TNF antibody therapy in rheumatoid arthritis and the risk of serious infections
and malignancies: systematic review and meta-analysis of rare harmful effects in
randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2006; 295:2275–85.
56. Baddley JW, Winthrop KL, Chen L, et al. Non-viral opportunistic infections in
new users of tumour necrosis factor inhibitor therapy: results of the SAfety As-
sessment of Biologic ThERapy (SABER) Study. Ann Rheum Dis 2014;
73:1942–8.
57. Marty FM, Lee SJ, Fahey MM, et al. Infliximab use in patients with severe graft-
versus-host disease and other emerging risk factors of non-Candida invasive fun-
gal infections in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients: a cohort
study. Blood 2003; 102:2768–76.
58. Meersseman W, Vandecasteele SJ, Wilmer A, Verbeken E, Peetermans WE, Van
Wijngaerden E. Invasive aspergillosis in critically ill patients without malignancy.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 170:621–5.
59. Blot SI, Taccone FS, Van den Abeele AM, et al. A clinical algorithm to diagnose
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in critically ill patients. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2012; 186:56–64.
60. Meersseman W, Lagrou K, Maertens J, et al. Galactomannan in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid: a tool for diagnosing aspergillosis in intensive care unit patients. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 177:27–34.
61. Wauters J, Baar I, Meersseman P, et al. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis is a fre-
quent complication of critically ill H1N1 patients: a retrospective study. Intensive
Care Med 2012; 38:1761–8.
62. Lat A, Bhadelia N, Miko B, Furuya EY, Thompson GR 3rd. Invasive aspergillosis
after pandemic (H1N1) 2009. Emerg Infect Dis 2010; 16:971–3.
63. Baddley JW, Stephens JM, Ji X, Gao X, Schlamm HT, Tarallo M. Aspergillosis in
intensive care unit (ICU) patients: epidemiology and economic outcomes. BMC
Infect Dis 2013; 13:29.
64. De Pauw B, Walsh TJ, Donnelly JP, et al. Revised definitions of invasive fungal
disease from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/
Invasive Fungal Infections Cooperative Group and the National Institute of Al-
lergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) Consensus
Group. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:1813–21.
65. Sangoi AR, Rogers WM, Longacre TA, Montoya JG, Baron EJ, Banaei N. Chal-
lenges and pitfalls of morphologic identification of fungal infections in histologic
and cytologic specimens: a ten-year retrospective review at a single institution.
Am J Clin Pathol 2009; 131:364–75.
66. Shah AA, Hazen KC. Diagnostic accuracy of histopathologic and cytopathologic
examination of Aspergillus species. Am J Clin Pathol 2013; 139:55–61.
67. Tarrand JJ, Lichterfeld M, Warraich I, et al. Diagnosis of invasive septate mold
infections. A correlation of microbiological culture and histologic or cytologic ex-
amination. Am J Clin Pathol 2003; 119:854–8.
68. Guarner J, Brandt ME. Histopathologic diagnosis of fungal infections in the 21st
century. Clin Microbiol Rev 2011; 24:247–80.
69. Vyzantiadis TA, Johnson EM, Kibbler CC. From the patient to the clinical my-
cology laboratory: how can we optimise microscopy and culture methods for
mould identification? J Clin Pathol 2012; 65:475–83.
70. Hope WW, Walsh TJ, Denning DW. Laboratory diagnosis of invasive aspergil-
losis. Lancet Infect Dis 2005; 5:609–22.
71. Denning DW, Kibbler CC, Barnes RA; British Society for Medical Mycology.
British Society for Medical Mycology proposed standards of care for patients
with invasive fungal infections. Lancet Infect Dis 2003; 3:230–40.
72. Barton RC. Laboratory diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis: from diagnosis to pre-
diction of outcome. Scientifica 2013; 2013:459405.
73. Labarca JA, Wagar EA, Grasmick AE, Kokkinos HM, Bruckner DA. Critical eval-
uation of 4-week incubation for fungal cultures: is the fourth week useful? J Clin
Microbiol 1998; 36:3683–5.
74. Andreas S, Heindl S, Wattky C, Moller K, Ruchel R. Diagnosis of pulmonary as-
pergillosis using optical brighteners. Eur Respir J 2000; 15:407–11.
75. Chander J, Chakrabarti A, Sharma A, Saini JS, Panigarhi D. Evaluation of Cal-
cofluor staining in the diagnosis of fungal corneal ulcer. Mycoses 1993;
36:243–5.
76. Mortensen KL, Johansen HK, Fuursted K, et al. A prospective survey of Aspergil-
lus spp. in respiratory tract samples: prevalence, clinical impact and antifungal
susceptibility. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2011; 30:1355–63.
77. Arvanitis M, Ziakas PD, Zacharioudakis IM, Zervou FN, Caliendo AM, Mylona-
kis E. PCR in diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis: a meta-analysis of diagnostic
performance. J Clin Microbiol 2014; 52:3731–42.
78. Avni T, Levy I, Sprecher H, Yahav D, Leibovici L, Paul M. Diagnostic accuracy of
PCR alone compared to galactomannan in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid for diag-
nosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: a systematic review. J Clin Microbiol
2012; 50:3652–8.
79. Heng SC, Morrissey O, Chen SC, et al. Utility of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid gal-
actomannan alone or in combination with PCR for the diagnosis of invasive as-
pergillosis in adult hematology patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Crit Rev Microbiol 2015; 41:124–34.
80. Morrissey CO, Chen SC, Sorrell TC, et al. Galactomannan and PCR versus cul-
ture and histology for directing use of antifungal treatment for invasive aspergil-
losis in high-risk haematology patients: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Infect Dis 2013; 13:519–28.
81. Aguado JM, Vazquez L, Fernandez-Ruiz M, et al. Serum galactomannan versus
a combination of galactomannan and polymerase chain reaction-based
Aspergillus DNA detection for early therapy of invasive aspergillosis in high-
risk hematological patients: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis
2015; 60:405–14.
e48 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 82. Fraczek MG, Kirwan MB, Moore CB, Morris J, Denning DW, Richardson MD.
Volume dependency for culture of fungi from respiratory secretions and in-
creased sensitivity of Aspergillus quantitative PCR. Mycoses 2014; 57:69–78.
83. Baxter CG, Dunn G, Jones AM, et al. Novel immunologic classification of asper-
gillosis in adult cystic fibrosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013; 132:560–6. e10.
84. Baxter CG, Rautemaa R, Jones AM, et al. Intravenous antibiotics reduce the pres-
ence of Aspergillus in adult cystic fibrosis sputum. Thorax 2013; 68:652–7.
85. Denning DW, Park S, Lass-Florl C, et al. High-frequency triazole resistance
found In nonculturable Aspergillus fumigatus from lungs of patients with chronic
fungal disease. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:1123–9.
86. Baxter CG, Jones AM, Webb K, Denning DW. Homogenisation of cystic fibrosis
sputum by sonication—an essential step for Aspergillus PCR. J Microbiol Meth-
ods 2011; 85:75–81.
87. Reinwald M, Buchheidt D, Hummel M, et al. Diagnostic performance of an As-
pergillus-specific nested PCR assay in cerebrospinal fluid samples of immuno-
compromised patients for detection of central nervous system aspergillosis.
PLoS One 2013; 8:e56706.
88. Reinwald M, Spiess B, Heinz WJ, et al. Aspergillus PCR-based investigation of
fresh tissue and effusion samples in patients with suspected invasive aspergillosis
enhances diagnostic capabilities. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:4178–85.
89. Buitrago MJ, Aguado JM, Ballen A, et al. Efficacy of DNA amplification in tissue
biopsy samples to improve the detection of invasive fungal disease. Clin Micro-
biol Infect 2013; 19:E271–7.
90. Herbrecht R, Letscher-Bru V, Oprea C, et al. Aspergillus galactomannan detection
in the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 2002;
7:1898–906.
91. Marr KA, Balajee SA, McLaughlin L, Tabouret M, Bentsen C, Walsh TJ. Detec-
tion of galactomannan antigenemia by enzyme immunoassay for the diagnosis of
invasive aspergillosis: variables that affect performance. J Infect Dis 2004;
190:641–9.
92. Maertens J, Glasmacher A, Selleslag D, et al. Evaluation of serum sandwich en-
zyme-linked immunosorbent assay for circulating galactomannan during caspo-
fungin therapy: results from the caspofungin invasive aspergillosis study. Clin
Infect Dis 2005; 41:e9–14.
93. Maertens J, Van Eldere J, Verhaegen J, Verbeken E, Verschakelen J, Boogaerts
M. Use of circulating galactomannan screening for early diagnosis of invasive
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients. J Infect Dis 2002;
186:1297–306.
94. Maertens JA, Klont R, Masson C, et al. Optimization of the cutoff value for the
Aspergillus double-sandwich enzyme immunoassay. Clin Infect Dis 2007;
44:1329–36.
95. Pfeiffer CD, Fine JP, Safdar N. Diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis using a galac-
tomannan assay: a meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 42:1417–27.
96. Maertens J, Theunissen K, Verhoef G, et al. Galactomannan and computed to-
mography-based preemptive antifungal therapy in neutropenic patients at high
risk for invasive fungal infection: a prospective feasibility study. Clin Infect Dis
2005; 41:1242–50.
97. Ku NS, Han SH, Choi JY, et al. Diagnostic value of the serum galactomannan
assay for invasive aspergillosis: it is less useful in non-haematological patients.
Scand J Infect Dis 2012; 44:600–4.
98. Fortun J, Martin-Davila P, Alvarez ME, et al. False-positive results of Aspergillus
galactomannan antigenemia in liver transplant recipients. Transplantation 2009;
87:256–60.
99. Kwak EJ, Husain S, Obman A, et al. Efficacy of galactomannan antigen in the
Platelia Aspergillus enzyme immunoassay for diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis
in liver transplant recipients. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:435–8.
100. Husain S, Kwak EJ, Obman A, et al. Prospective assessment of Platelia Aspergillus
galactomannan antigen for the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in lung trans-
plant recipients. Am J Transplant 2004; 4:796–802.
101. Verweij PE, Weemaes CM, Curfs JHAJ, Bretagne S, Meis JFGM. Failure to detect
circulating Aspergillus markers in a patient with chronic granulomatous disease
and invasve aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol 2000; 38:3900–1.
102. Mortensen KL, Knudsen JB, Jensen-Fangel S, Stausbol-Gron B, Arendrup MC,
Petersen E. Successful management of invasive aspergillosis presenting as peri-
carditis in an adult patient with chronic granulomatous disease. Mycoses 2011;
54:e233–6.
103. Hidalgo A, Parody R, Martino R, et al. Correlation between high-resolution com-
puted tomography and galactomannan antigenemia in adult hematologic pa-
tients at risk for invasive aspergillosis. Eur J Radiol 2009; 71:55–60.
104. Steinbach WJ, Addison RM, McLaughlin L, et al. Prospective Aspergillus galacto-
mannan antigen testing in pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipi-
ents. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2007; 26:558–64.
105. Hayden R, Pounds S, Knapp K, et al. Galactomannan antigenemia in pediatric
oncology patients with invasive aspergillosis. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2008; 27:815–9.
106. Castagnola E, Furfaro E, Caviglia I, et al. Performance of the galactomannan an-
tigen detection test in the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in children with can-
cer or undergoing haemopoietic stem cell transplantation. Clin Microbiol Infect
2010; 16:1197–203.
107. Fisher BT, Zaoutis TE, Park JR, et al. Galactomannan antigen testing for diagno-
sis of invasive aspergillosis in pediatric hematology patients. J Pediatric Infect Dis
Soc 2012; 1:103–11.
108. Dinand V, Anjan M, Oberoi JK, et al. Threshold of galactomannan antigenemia
positivity for early diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in neutropenic children. J
Microbiol Immunol Infect 2016; 49:66–73.
109. Choi SH, Kang ES, Eo H, et al. Aspergillus galactomannan antigen assay and in-
vasive aspergillosis in pediatric cancer patients and hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plant recipients. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2013; 60:316–22.
110. Jha AK, Bansal D, Chakrabarti A, Shivaprakash MR, Trehan A, Marwaha RK.
Serum galactomannan assay for the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in children
with haematological malignancies. Mycoses 2013; 56:442–8.
111. Badiee P, Alborzi A, Karimi M, et al. Diagnostic potential of nested PCR, galac-
tomannan EIA, and beta-D-glucan for invasive aspergillosis in pediatric patients.
J Infect Dev Ctries 2012; 6:352–7.
112. Park SY, Lee SO, Choi SH, et al. Serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid galac-
tomannan assays in patients with pulmonary aspergilloma. Clin Infect Dis 2011;
52:e149–52.
113. Shin B, Koh WJ, Jeong BH, et al. Serum galactomannan antigen test for the di-
agnosis of chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. J Infect 2014; 68:494–9.
114. Aquino VR, Nagel F, Andreolla HF, et al. The performance of real-time PCR, gal-
actomannan, and fungal culture in the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in ven-
tilated patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Mycopathologia 2012; 174:163–9.
115. Warren TA, Yau Y, Ratjen F, Tullis E, Waters V. Serum galactomannan in cystic
fibrosis patients colonized with Aspergillus species. Med Mycol 2012; 50:658–60.
116. Cordonnier C, Botterel F, Ben Amor R, et al. Correlation between galactomannan
antigen levels in serum and neutrophil counts in haematological patients with
invasive aspergillosis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2009; 15:81–6.
117. Petraitiene R, Petraitis V, Bacher JD, Finkelman MA, Walsh TJ. Effects of host
response and antifungal therapy on serum and BAL levels of galactomannan
and (1–>3)-beta-D-glucan in experimental invasive pulmonary aspergillosis.
Med Mycol 2015; 53:558–68.
118. Vergidis P, Razonable RR, Wheat LJ, et al. Reduction in false-positive Asper-
gillus serum galactomannan enzyme immunoassay results associated with use
of piperacillin-tazobactam in the United States. J Clin Microbiol 2014;
52:2199–201.
119. Mennink-Kersten MA, Ruegebrink D, Klont RR, et al. Bifidobacterial lipoglycan
as a new cause for false-positive platelia Aspergillus enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assay reactivity. J Clin Microbiol 2005; 43:3925–31.
120. Sulahian A, Touratier S, Ribaud P. False positive test for aspergillus antigenemia
related to concomitant administration of piperacillin and tazobactam. N Engl J
Med 2003; 349:2366–7.
121. Mennink-Kersten MA, Donnelly JP, Verweij PE. Detection of circulating galac-
tomannan for the diagnosis and management of invasive aspergillosis. Lancet In-
fect Dis 2004; 4:349–57.
122. Mennink-Kersten MA, Klont RR, Warris A, Op den Camp HJ, Verweij PE. Bi-
fidobacterium lipoteichoic acid and false ELISA reactivity in Aspergillus antigen
detection. Lancet 2004; 363:325–7.
123. Schwarzinger M, Sagaon-Teyssier L, Cabaret O, Bretagne S, Cordonnier C. Per-
formance of serum biomarkers for the early detection of invasive aspergillosis in
febrile, neutropenic patients: a multi-state model. PLoS One 2013; 8:e65776.
124. Duarte RF, Sanchez-Ortega I, Cuesta I, et al. Serum galactomannan-based early
detection of invasive aspergillosis in hematology patients receiving effective anti-
mold prophylaxis. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:1696–702.
125. Husain S, Clancy CJ, Nguyen MH, et al. Performance characteristics of the pla-
telia Aspergillus enzyme immunoassay for detection of Aspergillus galacto-
mannan antigen in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2008;
15:1760–3.
126. Musher B, Fredricks D, Leisenring W, Balajee SA, Smith C, Marr KA. Aspergillus
galactomannan enzyme immunoassay and quantitative PCR for diagnosis of in-
vasive aspergillosis with bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. J Clin Microbiol 2004;
42:5517–22.
127. Maertens J, Maertens V, Theunissen K, et al. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid galac-
tomannan for the diagnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with
hematologic diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49:1688–93.
128. D’Haese J, Theunissen K, Vermeulen E, et al. Detection of galactomannan
in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples of patients at risk for invasive pulmo-
nary aspergillosis: analytical and clinical validity. J Clin Microbiol 2012;
50:1258–63.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e49
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 129. Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Alexander BD, Kett DH, et al. Multicenter clinical evalua-
tion of the (1–>3) beta-D-glucan assay as an aid to diagnosis of fungal infections
in humans. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:654–9.
130. Lamoth F, Cruciani M, Mengoli C, et al. β-Glucan antigenemia assay for the di-
agnosis of invasive fungal infections in patients with hematological malignancies:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies from the Third European
Conference on Infections in Leukemia (ECIL-3). Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:633–43.
131. Marty FM, Lowry CM, Lempitski SJ, Kubiak DW, Finkelman MA, Baden LR. Re-
activity of (1–>3)-beta-D-glucan assay with commonly used intravenous antimi-
crobials. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006; 50:3450–3.
132. Odabasi Z, Mattiuzzi G, Estey E, et al. Beta-D-glucan as a diagnostic adjunct for
invasive fungal infections: validation, cutoff development, and performance in
patients with acute myelogenous leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. Clin
Infect Dis 2004; 39:199–205.
133. Sulahian A, Porcher R, Bergeron A, et al. Use and limits of (1–3)-beta-D-glucan
assay (Fungitell), compared to galactomannan determination (Platelia Aspergil-
lus), for diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol 2014; 52:2328–33.
134. Hachem RY, Kontoyiannis DP, Chemaly RF, Jiang Y, Reitzel R, Raad I. Utility of
galactomannan enzyme immunoassay and (1,3) beta-D-glucan in diagnosis of
invasive fungal infections: low sensitivity for Aspergillus fumigatus infection in
hematologic malignancy patients. J Clin Microbiol 2009; 47:129–33.
135. Pazos C, Ponton J, Del Palacio A. Contribution of (1->3)-beta-D-glucan chromo-
genic assay to diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring of invasive aspergillosis in
neutropenic adult patients: a comparison with serial screening for circulating gal-
actomannan. J Clin Microbiol 2005; 43:299–305.
136. Marchetti O, Lamoth F, Mikulska M, et al. ECIL recommendations for the use of
biological markers for the diagnosis of invasive fungal diseases in leukemic pa-
tients and hematopoietic SCT recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 2012;
47:846–54.
137. Becker MJ, Lugtenburg EJ, Cornelissen JJ, Van Der Schee C, Hoogsteden HC, De
Marie S. Galactomannan detection in computerized tomography-based broncho-
alveolar lavage fluid and serum in haematological patients at risk for invasive pul-
monary aspergillosis. Br J Haematol 2003; 121:448–57.
138. Hauggaard A, Ellis M, Ekelund L. Early chest radiography and CT in the diag-
nosis, management and outcome of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Acta Ra-
diol 2002; 43:292–8.
139. Stanzani M, Sassi C, Lewis RE, et al. High resolution computed tomography an-
giography improves the radiographic diagnosis of invasive mold disease in pa-
tients with hematological malignancies. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 60:1603–10.
140. Busca A, Locatelli F, Barbui A, et al. Usefulness of sequential Aspergillus galacto-
mannan antigen detection combined with early radiologic evaluation for diagno-
sis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients undergoing allogeneic stem cell
transplantation. Transplant Proc 2006; 38:1610–3.
141. Weisser M, Rausch C, Droll A, et al. Galactomannan does not precede major
signs on a pulmonary computerized tomographic scan suggestive of invasive as-
pergillosis in patients with hematological malignancies. Clin Infect Dis 2005;
41:1143–9.
142. Caillot D, Casasnovas O, Bernard A, et al. Improved management of invasive pul-
monary aspergillosis in neutropenic patients using early thoracic computed to-
mographic scan and surgery. J Clin Oncol 1997; 15:139–47.
143. Nucci M, Nouer SA, Grazziutti M, Kumar NS, Barlogie B, Anaissie E. Probable
invasive aspergillosis without prespecified radiologic findings: proposal for inclu-
sion of a new category of aspergillosis and implications for studying novel ther-
apies. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51:1273–80.
144. Li XS, Zhu HX, Fan HX, Zhu L, Wang HX, Song YL. Pulmonary fungal infections
after bone marrow transplantation: the value of high-resolution computed to-
mography in predicting their etiology. Chin Med J (Engl) 2011; 124:3249–54.
145. Greene RE, Schlamm HT, Oestmann JW, et al. Imaging findings in acute invasive
pulmonary aspergillosis: clinical significance of the halo sign. Clin Infect Dis
2007; 44:373–9.
146. Bruno C, Minniti S, Vassanelli A, Pozzi-Mucelli R. Comparison of CT features of
Aspergillus and bacterial pneumonia in severely neutropenic patients. J Thorac
Imaging 2007; 22:160–5.
147. Brook O, Guralnik L, Hardak E, et al. Radiological findings of early invasive pul-
monary aspergillosis in immune-compromised patients. Hematol Oncol 2009;
27:102–6.
148. Legouge C, Caillot D, Chretien ML, et al. The reversed halo sign: pathognomonic
pattern of pulmonary mucormycosis in leukemic patients with neutropenia? Clin
Infect Dis 2014; 58:672–8.
149. Wahba H, Truong MT, Lei X, Kontoyiannis DP, Marom EM. Reversed halo sign
in invasive pulmonary fungal infections. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:1733–7.
150. Georgiadou SP, Sipsas NV, Marom EM, Kontoyiannis DP. The diagnostic value
of halo and reversed halo signs for invasive mold infections in compromised
hosts. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:1144–55.
151. Maturu VN, Agarwal R. Reversed halo sign: a systematic review. Respir Care
2014; 59:1440–9.
152. Bergeron A, Porcher R, Sulahian A, et al. The strategy for the diagnosis of inva-
sive pulmonary aspergillosis should depend on both the underlying condition
and the leukocyte count of patients with hematologic malignancies. Blood
2012; 119:1831–7.
153. Blum U, Windfuhr M, Buitrago-Tellez C, Sigmund G, Herbst EW, Langer M. In-
vasive pulmonary aspergillosis. MRI, CT, and plain radiographic findings and
their contribution for early diagnosis. Chest 1994; 106:1156–61.
154. Gabelmann A, Klein S, Kern W, et al. Relevant imaging findings of cerebral as-
pergillosis on MRI: a retrospective case-based study in immunocompromised pa-
tients. Eur J Neurol 2007; 14:548–55.
155. Starkey J, Moritani T, Kirby P. MRI of CNS fungal infections: review of aspergil-
losis to histoplasmosis and everything in between. Clin Neuroradiol 2014;
24:217–30.
156. Yamada K, Shrier DA, Rubio A, et al. Imaging findings in intracranial aspergil-
losis. Acad Radiol 2002; 9:163–71.
157. Kourkoumpetis TK, Desalermos A, Muhammed M, Mylonakis E. Central ner-
vous system aspergillosis: a series of 14 cases from a general hospital and review
of 123 cases from the literature. Medicine 2012; 91:328–36.
158. Siddiqui AA, Bashir SH, Ali Shah A, et al. Diagnostic MR imaging features of
craniocerebral aspergillosis of sino-nasal origin in immunocompetent patients.
Acta Neurochir (Wien) 2006; 148:155–66.
159. Caillot D, Couaillier JF, Bernard A, et al. Increasing volume and changing char-
acteristics of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis on sequential thoracic computed
tomography scans in patients with neutropenia. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19:253–9.
160. Sampsonas F, Kontoyiannis DP, Dickey BF, Evans SE. Performance of a stan-
dardized bronchoalveolar lavage protocol in a comprehensive cancer center: a
prospective 2-year study. Cancer 2011; 117:3424–33.
161. Maschmeyer G, Beinert T, Buchheidt D, et al. Diagnosis and antimicrobial ther-
apy of lung infiltrates in febrile neutropenic patients: guidelines of the infectious
diseases working party of the German Society of Haematology and Oncology. Eur
J Cancer 2009; 45:2462–72.
162. Pereira Gomes JC, Pedreira WL Jr, Araujo EM, et al. Impact of BAL in the man-
agement of pneumonia with treatment failure: positivity of BAL culture under
antibiotic therapy. Chest 2000; 118:1739–46.
163. Velez L, Correa LT, Maya MA, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of bronchoalveolar la-
vage samples in immunosuppressed patients with suspected pneumonia: analysis
of a protocol. Respir Med 2007; 101:2160–7.
164. Wahla AS, Chatterjee A, Khan II, Conforti JF, Haponik E. Survey of academic
pulmonologists, oncologists, and infectious disease physicians on the role of
bronchoscopy in managing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation patients
with pulmonary infiltrates. J Bronchology Interv Pulmonol 2014; 21:32–9.
165. Du Rand IA, Barber PV, Goldring J, et al. British Thoracic Society guideline for
advanced diagnostic and therapeutic flexible bronchoscopy in adults. Thorax
2011; 66(suppl 3):1–21.
166. Haslam PL, Baughman RP. Report of ERS Task Force: guidelines for measure-
ment of acellular components and standardization of BAL. Eur Respir J 1999;
14:245–8.
167. Meyer KC, Raghu G, Baughman RP, et al. An official American Thoracic Society
clinical practice guideline: the clinical utility of bronchoalveolar lavage cellular
analysis in interstitial lung disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 185:1004–14.
168. Hage CA, Reynolds JM, Durkin M, Wheat LJ, Knox KS. Plasmalyte as a cause of
false-positive results for Aspergillus galactomannan in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid. J Clin Microbiol 2007; 45:676–7.
169. Baughman RP. Technical aspects of bronchoalveolar lavage: recommendations
for a standard procedure. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 28:475–85.
170. Brownback KR, Simpson SQ. Association of bronchoalveolar lavage yield with
chest computed tomography findings and symptoms in immunocompromised
patients. Ann Thorac Med 2013; 8:153–9.
171. Anderson TM, Clay MC, Cioffi AG, et al. Amphotericin forms an extramembra-
nous and fungicidal sterol sponge. Nat Chem Biol 2014; 10:400–6.
172. Roden MM, Nelson LD, Knudsen TA, et al. Triad of acute infusion-related reac-
tions associated with liposomal amphotericin B: analysis of clinical and epidemi-
ological characteristics. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:1213–20.
173. Farmakiotis D, Tverdek FP, Kontoyiannis DP. The safety of amphotericin B lipid
complex in patients with prior severe intolerance to liposomal amphotericin B.
Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:701–3.
174. Bowden R, Chandrasekar P, White MH, et al. A double-blind, randomized, con-
trolled trial of amphotericin B colloidal dispersion versus amphotericin B for
treatment of invasive aspergillosis in immunocompromised patients. Clin Infect
Dis 2002; 35:359–66.
175. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Bresnik M, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B as initial
therapy for invasive mold infection: a randomized trial comparing a high-loading
e50 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 dose regimen with standard dosing (AmBiLoad trial). Clin Infect Dis 2007;
44:1289–97.
176. Borro JM, Sole A, de la Torre M, et al. Efficiency and safety of inhaled ampho-
tericin B lipid complex (Abelcet) in the prophylaxis of invasive fungal infections
following lung transplantation. Transplant Proc 2008; 40:3090–3.
177. Rijnders BJ, Cornelissen JJ, Slobbe L, et al. Aerosolized liposomal amphotericin B
for the prevention of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis during prolonged neutro-
penia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:1401–8.
178. Sehgal IS, Agarwal R. Role of inhaled amphotericin in allergic bronchopulmo-
nary aspergillosis. J Postgrad Med 2014; 60:41–5.
179. Safdar A, Rodriguez GH. Aerosolized amphotericin B lipid complex as adjunctive
treatment for fungal lung infection in patients with cancer-related immunosup-
pression and recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Pharmaco-
therapy 2013; 33:1035–43.
180. Nihtinen A, Anttila VJ, Ruutu T, Juvonen E, Volin L. Low incidence of invasive
aspergillosis in allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients receiving amphotericin
B inhalation prophylaxis. Transpl Infect Dis 2012; 14:24–32.
181. Morello E, Pagani L, Coser P, et al. Addition of aerosolized deoxycholate ampho-
tericin B to systemic prophylaxis to prevent airways invasive fungal infections in
allogeneic hematopoietic SCT: a single-center retrospective study. Bone Marrow
Transplant 2011; 46:132–6.
182. Monforte V, Ussetti P, Lopez R, et al. Nebulized liposomal amphotericin B pro-
phylaxis for Aspergillus infection in lung transplantation: pharmacokinetics and
safety. J Heart Lung Transplant 2009; 28:170–5.
183. Monforte V, Ussetti P, Gavalda J, et al. Feasibility, tolerability, and outcomes of
nebulized liposomal amphotericin B for Aspergillus infection prevention in lung
transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 2010; 29:523–30.
184. Sole A. Invasive fungal infections in lung transplantation: role of aerosolised am-
photericin B. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2008; 32(suppl 2):S161–5.
185. Denning DW. Echinocandin antifungal drugs. Lancet 2003; 362:1142–51.
186. Walsh TJ, Adamson PC, Seibel NL, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerabil-
ity of caspofungin in children and adolescents. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2005; 49:4536–45.
187. Seibel NL, Schwartz C, Arrieta A, et al. Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics
of micafungin (FK463) in febrile neutropenic pediatric patients. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2005; 49:3317–24.
188. Hall RG, Swancutt MA, Gumbo T. Fractal geometry and the pharmacometrics of
micafungin in overweight, obese, and extremely obese people. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2011; 55:5107–12.
189. Wurthwein G, Cornely OA, Trame MN, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of
escalating doses of caspofungin in a phase II study of patients with invasive as-
pergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013; 57:1664–71.
190. Cornely OA, Vehreschild JJ, Vehreschild MJ, et al. Phase II dose escalation study
of caspofungin for invasive aspergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011;
55:5798–803.
191. Herbrecht R, Maertens J, Baila L, et al. Caspofungin first-line therapy for invasive
aspergillosis in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients: an Euro-
pean Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Study. Bone Marrow
Transplant 2010; 45:1227–33.
192. Viscoli C, Herbrecht R, Akan H, et al. An EORTC phase II study of caspofungin
as first-line therapy of invasive aspergillosis in haematological patients. J Antimi-
crob Chemother 2009; 64:1274–81.
193. Kohno S, Izumikawa K, Ogawa K, et al. Intravenous micafungin versus voricona-
zole for chronic pulmonary aspergillosis: a multicenter trial in Japan. J Infect
2010; 61:410–8.
194. Denning DW, Marr KA, Lau WM, et al. Micafungin (FK463), alone or in com-
bination with other systemic antifungal agents, for the treatment of acute invasive
aspergillosis. J Infect 2006; 53:337–49.
195. Hiemenz JW, Raad II, Maertens JA, et al. Efficacy of caspofungin as salvage ther-
apy for invasive aspergillosis compared to standard therapy in a historical cohort.
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2010; 29:1387–94.
196. Kontoyiannis DP, Ratanatharathorn V, Young JA, et al. Micafungin alone or in
combination with other systemic antifungal therapies in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients with invasive aspergillosis. Transpl Infect Dis 2009;
11:89–93.
197. Maertens J, Glasmacher A, Herbrecht R, et al. Multicenter, noncomparative study
of caspofungin in combination with other antifungals as salvage therapy in adults
with invasive aspergillosis. Cancer 2006; 107:2888–97.
198. Singh N, Limaye AP, Forrest G, et al. Combination of voriconazole and caspofun-
gin as primary therapy for invasive aspergillosis in solid organ transplant recip-
ients: a prospective, multicenter, observational study. Transplantation 2006;
81:320–6.
199. Slain D, Rogers PD, Cleary JD, Chapman SW. Intravenous itraconazole. Ann
Pharmacother 2001; 35:720–9.
200. Willems L, van der Geest R, de Beule K. Itraconazole oral solution and intrave-
nous formulations: a review of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. J Clin
Pharm Ther 2001; 26:159–69.
201. Lazo de la Vega S, Volkow P, Yeates RA, Pfaff G. Administration of the antimy-
cotic agents fluconazole and itraconazole to leukaemia patients: a comparative
pharmacokinetic study. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1994; 20:69–75.
202. Hardin TC, Graybill JR, Fetchick R, Woestenborghs R, Rinaldi MG, Kuhn JG.
Pharmacokinetics of itraconazole following oral administration to normal volun-
teers. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1988; 32:1310–3.
203. Kim JS, Cheong JW, Kim YK, et al. The relationship between the success rate of
empirical antifungal therapy with intravenous itraconazole and clinical parame-
ters, including plasma levels of itraconazole, in immunocompromised patients
receiving itraconazole oral solution as prophylaxis: a multicenter, prospective,
open-label, observational study in Korea. Ann Hematol 2014; 93:33–42.
204. Baxter CG, Marshall A, Roberts M, Felton TW, Denning DW. Peripheral neurop-
athy in patients on long-term triazole antifungal therapy. J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2011; 66:2136–9.
205. Marr KA, Leisenring W, Crippa F, et al. Cyclophosphamide metabolism is affect-
ed by azole antifungals. Blood 2004; 103:1557–9.
206. Frank DW, Gray JE, Weaver RN. Cyclodextrin nephrosis in the rat. Am J Pathol
1976; 83:367–82.
207. Luke DR, Tomaszewski K, Damle B, Schlamm HT. Review of the basic and clin-
ical pharmacology of sulfobutylether-beta-cyclodextrin (SBECD). J Pharm Sci
2010; 99:3291–301.
208. Hyland R, Jones BC, Smith DA. Identification of the cytochrome P450 enzymes
involved in the N-oxidation of voriconazole. Drug Metab Dispos 2003; 31:540–7.
209. Boucher HW, Groll AH, Chiou CC, Walsh TJ. Newer systemic antifungal agents:
pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy. Drugs 2004; 64:1997–2020.
210. Kim SH, Lee DG, Kwon JC, et al. Clinical impact of cytochrome P450 2C19 geno-
type on the treatment of invasive aspergillosis under routine therapeutic drug mon-
itoring of voriconazole in a Korean population. Infect Chemother 2013; 45:406–14.
211. Zonios D, Yamazaki H, Murayama N, et al. Voriconazole metabolism, toxicity,
and the effect of cytochrome P450 2C19 genotype. J Infect Dis 2014; 209:1941–8.
212. Mikus G, Scholz IM, Weiss J. Pharmacogenomics of the triazole antifungal agent
voriconazole. Pharmacogenomics 2011; 12:861–72.
213. Dolton MJ, McLachlan AJ. Voriconazole pharmacokinetics and exposure-re-
sponse relationships: assessing the links between exposure, efficacy and toxicity.
Int J Antimicrob Agents 2014; 44:183–93.
214. Dolton MJ, Ray JE, Chen SC, Ng K, Pont LG, McLachlan AJ. Multicenter study of
voriconazole pharmacokinetics and therapeutic drug monitoring. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2012; 56:4793–9.
215. Smith J, Safdar N, Knasinski V, et al. Voriconazole therapeutic drug monitoring.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006; 50:1570–2.
216. Denning DW, Ribaud P, Milpied N, et al. Efficacy and safety of voriconazole in
the treatment of acute invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 34:563–71.
217. Pascual A, Calandra T, Bolay S, Buclin T, Bille J, Marchetti O. Voriconazole ther-
apeutic drug monitoring in patients with invasive mycoses improves efficacy and
safety outcomes. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:201–11.
218. Trifilio S, Singhal S, Williams S, et al. Breakthrough fungal infections after allo-
geneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients on prophylactic vori-
conazole. Bone Marrow Transplant 2007; 40:451–6.
219. Dolton MJ, Mikus G, Weiss J, Ray JE, McLachlan AJ. Understanding variability
with voriconazole using a population pharmacokinetic approach: implications
for optimal dosing. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:1633–41.
220. Mitsani D, Nguyen MH, Shields RK, et al. Prospective, observational study of
voriconazole therapeutic drug monitoring among lung transplant recipients re-
ceiving prophylaxis: factors impacting levels of and associations between serum
troughs, efficacy, and toxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:2371–7.
221. Hamada Y, Seto Y, Yago K, Kuroyama M. Investigation and threshold of opti-
mum blood concentration of voriconazole: a descriptive statistical meta-analysis.
J Infect Chemother 2012; 18:501–7.
222. Miyakis S, van Hal SJ, Ray J, Marriott D. Voriconazole concentrations and out-
come of invasive fungal infections. Clin Microbiol Infect 2010; 16:927–33.
223. Theuretzbacher U, Ihle F, Derendorf H. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
profile of voriconazole. Clin Pharmacokinet 2006; 45:649–63.
224. Imhof A, Schaer DJ, Schanz U, Schwarz U. Neurological adverse events to vor-
iconazole: evidence for therapeutic drug monitoring. Swiss Med Wkly 2006;
136:739–42.
225. Lazarus HM, Blumer JL, Yanovich S, Schlamm H, Romero A. Safety and phar-
macokinetics of oral voriconazole in patients at risk of fungal infection: a dose
escalation study. J Clin Pharmacol 2002; 42:395–402.
226. Geist MJ, Egerer G, Burhenne J, Riedel KD, Weiss J, Mikus G. Steady-state phar-
macokinetics and metabolism of voriconazole in patients. J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2013; 68:2592–9.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e51
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 227. Boyd AE, Modi S, Howard SJ, Moore CB, Keevil BG, Denning DW. Adverse re-
actions to voriconazole. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:1241–4.
228. Eiden C, Peyriere H, Cociglio M, et al. Adverse effects of voriconazole: analysis of
the French Pharmacovigilance Database. Ann Pharmacother 2007; 41:755–63.
229. Tan K, Brayshaw N, Tomaszewski K, Troke P, Wood N. Investigation of the po-
tential relationships between plasma voriconazole concentrations and visual ad-
verse events or liver function test abnormalities. J Clin Pharmacol 2006;
46:235–43.
230. den Hollander JG, van Arkel C, Rijnders BJ, Lugtenburg PJ, de Marie S, Levin
MD. Incidence of voriconazole hepatotoxicity during intravenous and oral treat-
ment for invasive fungal infections. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 57:1248–50.
231. Luong ML, Hosseini-Moghaddam SM, Singer LG, et al. Risk factors for vorico-
nazole hepatotoxicity at 12 weeks in lung transplant recipients. Am J Transplant
2012; 12:1929–35.
232. Wu Q, Marescaux C, Wolff V, et al. Tacrolimus-associated posterior reversible
encephalopathy syndrome after solid organ transplantation. Eur Neurol 2010;
64:169–77.
233. Kuypers DR. Immunotherapy in elderly transplant recipients: a guide to clinical-
ly significant drug interactions. Drugs Aging 2009; 26:715–37.
234. Bucknor MD, Gross AJ, Link TM. Voriconazole-induced periostitis in two post-
transplant patients. J Radiol Case Rep 2013; 7:10–7.
235. Lustenberger DP, Granata JD, Scharschmidt TJ. Periostitis secondary to pro-
longed voriconazole therapy in a lung transplant recipient. Orthopedics 2011;
34:e793–6.
236. Moon WJ, Scheller EL, Suneja A, et al. Plasma fluoride level as a predictor of vor-
iconazole-induced periostitis in patients with skeletal pain. Clin Infect Dis 2014;
59:1237–45.
237. Wang TF, Wang T, Altman R, et al. Periostitis secondary to prolonged voricona-
zole therapy in lung transplant recipients. Am J Transplant 2009; 9:2845–50.
238. Wermers RA, Cooper K, Razonable RR, et al. Fluoride excess and periostitis in
transplant patients receiving long-term voriconazole therapy. Clin Infect Dis
2011; 52:604–11.
239. Gerber B, Guggenberger R, Fasler D, et al. Reversible skeletal disease and high
fluoride serum levels in hematologic patients receiving voriconazole. Blood
2012; 120:2390–4.
240. Thompson GR 3rd, Bays D, Cohen SH, Pappagianis D. Fluoride excess in coccid-
ioidomycosis patients receiving long-term antifungal therapy: an assessment of
currently available triazoles. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:563–4.
241. McLaughlin JM, Equils O, Somerville KT, et al. Risk-adjusted relationship be-
tween voriconazole utilization and non-melanoma skin cancer among lung
and heart/lung transplant patients. Transpl Infect Dis 2013; 15:329–43.
242. Zwald FO, Brown M. Skin cancer in solid organ transplant recipients: advances in
therapy and management: part I. Epidemiology of skin cancer in solid organ
transplant recipients. J Am Acad Dermatol 2011; 65:253–61; quiz 62.
243. Zwald FO, Spratt M, Lemos BD, et al. Duration of voriconazole exposure: an in-
dependent risk factor for skin cancer after lung transplantation. Dermatol Surg
2012; 38:1369–74.
244. Jung DS, Tverdek FP, Kontoyiannis DP. Switching from posaconazole suspen-
sion to tablets increased serum levels in leukemia patients without clinically rel-
evant hepatotoxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014; 58:6993–5.
245. Miceli MH, Perissinotti AJ, Kauffman CA, Couriel DR. Serum posaconazole lev-
els among haematological cancer patients taking extended release tablets is affect-
ed by body weight and diarrhoea: single centre retrospective analysis. Mycoses
2015; 58:432–6.
246. Cumpston A, Caddell R, Shillingburg A, et al. Superior serum concentrations
with posaconazole delayed-release tablets compared to suspension formula-
tion in hematological malignancies. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2015;
59:4424–8.
247. Sanchez-Ortega I, Vazquez L, Montes C, et al. Effect of posaconazole on cyclo-
sporine blood levels and dose adjustment in allogeneic blood and marrow trans-
plant recipients. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:6422–4.
248. Gubbins PO, Krishna G, Sansone-Parsons A, et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety
of oral posaconazole in neutropenic stem cell transplant recipients. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2006; 50:1993–9.
249. Ullmann AJ, Cornely OA, Burchardt A, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and effi-
cacy of posaconazole in patients with persistent febrile neutropenia or refractory
invasive fungal infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006; 50:658–66.
250. Dolton MJ, Ray JE, Marriott D, McLachlan AJ. Posaconazole exposure-response
relationship: evaluating the utility of therapeutic drug monitoring. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2012; 56:2806–13.
251. Bryant AM, Slain D, Cumpston A, Craig M. A post-marketing evaluation of pos-
aconazole plasma concentrations in neutropenic patients with haematological
malignancy receiving posaconazole prophylaxis. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2011;
37:266–9.
252. Lignell A, Lowdin E, Cars O, Chryssanthou E, Sjolin J. Posaconazole in human
serum: a greater pharmacodynamic effect than predicted by the non-protein-
bound serum concentration. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011; 55:3099–104.
253. Lebeaux D, Lanternier F, Elie C, et al. Therapeutic drug monitoring of posacona-
zole: a monocentric study with 54 adults. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009;
53:5224–9.
254. Ullmann AJ, Lipton JH, Vesole DH, et al. Posaconazole or fluconazole for pro-
phylaxis in severe graft-versus-host disease. N Engl J Med 2007; 356:335–47.
255. Walsh TJ, Raad I, Patterson TF, et al. Treatment of invasive aspergillosis with
posaconazole in patients who are refractory to or intolerant of conventional ther-
apy: an externally controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:2–12.
256. Dolton MJ, Ray JE, Chen SC, Ng K, Pont L, McLachlan AJ. Multicenter study of
posaconazole therapeutic drug monitoring: exposure-response relationship and
factors affecting concentration. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012;
56:5503–10.
257. Miceli MH, Kauffman CA. Isavuconazole: a new broad-spectrum triazole anti-
fungal agent. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:1558–65.
258. Falci DR, Pasqualotto AC. Profile of isavuconazole and its potential in the treat-
ment of severe invasive fungal infections. Infect Drug Resist 2013; 6:163–74.
259. Livermore J, Hope W. Evaluation of the pharmacokinetics and clinical utility of
isavuconazole for treatment of invasive fungal infections. Expert Opin Drug
Metab Toxicol 2012; 8:759–65.
260. Bruggemann RJ, Alffenaar JW, Blijlevens NM, et al. Clinical relevance of the
pharmacokinetic interactions of azole antifungal drugs with other coadminis-
tered agents. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1441–58.
261. Gubbins PO. Triazole antifungal agents drug-drug interactions involving hepatic
cytochrome P450. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2011; 7:1411–29.
262. Ashbee HR, Gilleece MH. Has the era of individualised medicine arrived for an-
tifungals? A review of antifungal pharmacogenomics. Bone Marrow Transplant
2012; 47:881–94.
263. Dvorak Z. Drug-drug interactions by azole antifungals: beyond a dogma of
CYP3A4 enzyme activity inhibition. Toxicol Lett 2011; 202:129–32.
264. Meletiadis J, Chanock S, Walsh TJ. Human pharmacogenomic variations
and their implications for antifungal efficacy. Clin Microbiol Rev 2006;
19:763–87.
265. Albengres E, Le Louet H, Tillement JP. Systemic antifungal agents. Drug interac-
tions of clinical significance. Drug Saf 1998; 18:83–97.
266. Baciewicz AM, Chrisman CR, Finch CK, Self TH. Update on rifampin, rifabutin,
and rifapentine drug interactions. Curr Med Res Opin 2013; 29:1–12.
267. Bates DW, Yu DT. Clinical impact of drug-drug interactions with systemic azole
antifungals. Drugs Today (Barc) 2003; 39:801–13.
268. Chan JD. Pharmacokinetic drug interactions of vinca alkaloids: summary of case
reports. Pharmacotherapy 1998; 18:1304–7.
269. Crane JK, Shih HT. Syncope and cardiac arrhythmia due to an interaction be-
tween itraconazole and terfenadine. Am J Med 1993; 95:445–6.
270. Dannaoui E, Schwarz P, Lortholary O. In vitro interactions between antifungals
and immunosuppressive drugs against zygomycetes. Antimicrob Agents Chemo-
ther 2009; 53:3549–51.
271. Depont F, Vargas F, Dutronc H, et al. Drug-drug interactions with systemic an-
tifungals in clinical practice. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2007; 16:1227–33.
272. Eiden C, Peyriere H, Tichit R, et al. Inherited long QT syndrome revealed by an-
tifungals drug-drug interaction. J Clin Pharm Ther 2007; 32:321–4.
273. Feldstein AC, Smith DH, Perrin N, et al. Reducing warfarin medication interac-
tions: an interrupted time series evaluation. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:1009–15.
274. Gubbins PO. Mould-active azoles: pharmacokinetics, drug interactions in neu-
tropenic patients. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2007; 20:579–86.
275. Kramer MR, Amital A, Fuks L, Shitrit D. Voriconazole and itraconazole in lung
transplant recipients receiving tacrolimus (FK 506): efficacy and drug interaction.
Clin Transplant 2011; 25:E163–7.
276. Narreddy S, Manavathu E, Chandrasekar PH, Alangaden GJ, Revankar SG. In
vitro interaction of posaconazole with calcineurin inhibitors and sirolimus
against zygomycetes. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010; 65:701–3.
277. Nivoix Y, Ubeaud-Sequier G, Engel P, Leveque D, Herbrecht R. Drug-drug inter-
actions of triazole antifungal agents in multimorbid patients and implications for
patient care. Curr Drug Metab 2009; 10:395–409.
278. Sathiapalan RK, El-Solh H. Enhanced vincristine neurotoxicity from drug inter-
actions: case report and review of literature. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2001;
18:543–6.
279. Steinbach WJ, Schell WA, Blankenship JR, Onyewu C, Heitman J, Perfect JR. In
vitro interactions between antifungals and immunosuppressants against Aspergil-
lus fumigatus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:1664–9.
280. Purkins L, Wood N, Kleinermans D, Nichols D. Voriconazole potentiates
warfarin-induced prothrombin time prolongation. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2003;
56(suppl 1):24–9.
e52 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 281. Wang EJ, Lew K, Casciano CN, Clement RP, Johnson WW. Interaction of com-
mon azole antifungals with P glycoprotein. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002;
46:160–5.
282. Venkatakrishnan K, von Moltke LL, Greenblatt DJ. Effects of the antifungal
agents on oxidative drug metabolism: clinical relevance. Clin Pharmacokinet
2000; 38:111–80.
283. Andes D, Pascual A, Marchetti O. Antifungal therapeutic drug monitoring: es-
tablished and emerging indications. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009;
53:24–34.
284. Ashbee HR, Barnes RA, Johnson EM, Richardson MD, Gorton R, Hope WW.
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of antifungal agents: guidelines from the
British Society for Medical Mycology. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014;
69:1162–76.
285. Lerolle N, Raffoux E, Socie G, et al. Breakthrough invasive fungal disease in pa-
tients receiving posaconazole primary prophylaxis: a 4-year study. Clin Microbiol
Infect 2014; 20:O952–9.
286. Mulanovich V, Lewis RE, Raad II, Kontoyiannis DP. Random plasma concentra-
tions of voriconazole decline over time. J Infect 2007; 55:e129–30.
287. Lestner JM, Roberts SA, Moore CB, Howard SJ, Denning DW, Hope WW. Tox-
icodynamics of itraconazole: implications for therapeutic drug monitoring. Clin
Infect Dis 2009; 49:928–30.
288. Park WB, Kim NH, Kim KH, et al. The effect of therapeutic drug monitoring on
safety and efficacy of voriconazole in invasive fungal infections: a randomized
controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:1080–7.
289. Boyd NK, Zoellner CL, Swancutt MA, Bhavan KP. Utilization of omeprazole to
augment subtherapeutic voriconazole concentrations for treatment of Aspergillus
infections. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:6001–2.
290. Walsh TJ, Karlsson MO, Driscoll T, et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety of intra-
venous voriconazole in children after single- or multiple-dose administration.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:2166–72.
291. Pascual A, Csajka C, Buclin T, et al. Challenging recommended oral and intrave-
nous voriconazole doses for improved efficacy and safety: population pharmaco-
kinetics-based analysis of adult patients with invasive fungal infections. Clin
Infect Dis 2012; 55:381–90.
292. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Winston DJ, et al. Posaconazole vs. fluconazole or itra-
conazole prophylaxis in patients with neutropenia. N Engl J Med 2007;
356:348–59.
293. Duarte RF, Lopez-Jimenez J, Cornely OA, et al. Phase 1b study of new posacona-
zole tablet for prevention of invasive fungal infections in high-risk patients with
neutropenia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014; 58:5758–65.
294. Krishna G, Ma L, Martinho M, Preston RA, O’Mara E. A new solid oral tablet
formulation of posaconazole: a randomized clinical trial to investigate rising sin-
gle- and multiple-dose pharmacokinetics and safety in healthy volunteers. J Anti-
microb Chemother 2012; 67:2725–30.
295. Mukherjee PK, Sheehan DJ, Hitchcock CA, Ghannoum MA. Combination treat-
ment of invasive fungal infections. Clin Microbiol Rev 2005; 18:163–94.
296. Wirk B, Wingard JR. Combination antifungal therapy: from bench to bedside.
Curr Infect Dis Rep 2008; 10:466–72.
297. Steinbach WJ, Juvvadi PR, Fortwendel JR, Rogg LE. Newer combination anti-
fungal therapies for invasive aspergillosis. Med Mycol 2011; 49(suppl 1):
S77–81.
298. Zhang M, Sun WK, Wu T, et al. Efficacy of combination therapy of triazole and
echinocandin in treatment of invasive aspergillosis: a systematic review of animal
and human studies. J Thorac Dis 2014; 6:99–108.
299. Martin-Pena A, Aguilar-Guisado M, Espigado I, Cisneros JM. Antifungal com-
bination therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:1437–45.
300. Schaffner A, Frick PG. The effect of ketoconazole on amphotericin B in a model
of disseminated aspergillosis. J Infect Dis 1985; 151:902–10.
301. Schaffner A, Bohler A. Amphotericin B refractory aspergillosis after itraconazole:
evidence for significant antagonism. Mycoses 1993; 36:421–4.
302. Maesaki S, Kawamura S, Miyazaki Y, Tomono K, Tashiro T, Kohno S. Effect of
sequential combination of amphotericin B and azole antifungal agents against
Aspergillus fumigatus. J Infect Chemother 1999; 5:125–9.
303. Lewis RE, Prince RA, Chi J, Kontoyiannis DP. Itraconazole preexposure attenu-
ates the efficacy of subsequent amphotericin B therapy in a murine model of
acute invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002;
46:3208–14.
304. Steinbach WJ, Stevens DA, Denning DW. Combination and sequential antifun-
gal therapy for invasive aspergillosis: review of published in vitro and in vivo in-
teractions and 6281 clinical cases from 1966 to 2001. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37
(suppl 3):S188–224.
305. Johnson MD, MacDougall C, Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Perfect JR, Rex JH.
Combination antifungal therapy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004;
48:693–715.
306. Kirkpatrick WR, Coco BJ, Patterson TF. Sequential or combination antifungal
therapy with voriconazole and liposomal amphotericin B in a guinea pig
model of invasive aspergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006; 50:1567–9.
307. Meletiadis J, te Dorsthorst DT, Verweij PE. The concentration-dependent nature
of in vitro amphotericin B-itraconazole interaction against Aspergillus fumigatus:
isobolographic and response surface analysis of complex pharmacodynamic in-
teractions. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006; 28:439–49.
308. Meletiadis J, Petraitis V, Petraitiene R, et al. Triazole-polyene antagonism in ex-
perimental invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: in vitro and in vivo correlation. J
Infect Dis 2006; 194:1008–18.
309. Petraitis V, Petraitiene R, Hope WW, et al. Combination therapy in treatment of
experimental pulmonary aspergillosis: in vitro and in vivo correlations of the
concentration- and dose- dependent interactions between anidulafungin and
voriconazole by Bliss independence drug interaction analysis. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2009; 53:2382–91.
310. Clemons KV, Stevens DA. Efficacy of micafungin alone or in combination against
experimental pulmonary aspergillosis. Med Mycol 2006; 44:69–73.
311. Wiederhold NP. Paradoxical echinocandin activity: a limited in vitro phenome-
non? Med Mycol 2009; 47(suppl 1):S369–75.
312. Verweij PE, Howard SJ, Melchers WJ, Denning DW. Azole-resistance in Aspergil-
lus: proposed nomenclature and breakpoints. Drug Resist Updat 2009; 12:141–7.
313. Eschenauer GA, Carver PL. The evolving role of antifungal susceptibility testing.
Pharmacotherapy 2013; 33:465–75.
314. Subcommittee on Antifungal Susceptibility Testing of the ESCMID European
Committee for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing. EUCAST technical note
on the method for the determination of broth dilution minimum inhibitory con-
centrations of antifungal agents for conidia-forming moulds. Clin Microbiol In-
fect 2008; 14:982–4.
315. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Reference method for broth dilution
antifungal susceptibility testing for filamentous fungi. 2nd ed. CLSI standard,
M38. Wayne, PA: CLSI, 2008.
316. Cuenca-Estrella M, Moore CB, Barchiesi F, et al. Multicenter evaluation of the
reproducibility of the proposed antifungal susceptibility testing method for fer-
mentative yeasts of the Antifungal Susceptibility Testing Subcommittee of the
European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (AFST-EUCAST).
Clin Microbiol Infect 2003; 9:467–74.
317. Espinel-Ingroff A, Diekema DJ, Fothergill A, et al. Wild-type MIC distributions
and epidemiological cutoff values for the triazoles and six Aspergillus spp. for the
CLSI broth microdilution method (M38-A2 document). J Clin Microbiol 2010;
48:3251–7.
318. Rodriguez-Tudela JL, Alcazar-Fuoli L, Mellado E, Alastruey-Izquierdo A, Monzon
ACuenca-Estrella M. Epidemiological cutoffs and cross-resistance to azole drugs in
Aspergillus fumigatus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008; 52:2468–72.
319. Pfaller M, Boyken L, Hollis R, et al. Use of epidemiological cutoff values to ex-
amine 9-year trends in susceptibility of Aspergillus species to the triazoles. J Clin
Microbiol 2011; 49:586–90.
320. Georgiadou SP, Kontoyiannis DP. The impact of azole resistance on aspergillosis
guidelines. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2012; 1272:15–22.
321. Rodriguez-Tudela JL, Arendrup MC, Cuenca-Estrella M, Donnelly JP, Lass-Florl
C. EUCAST breakpoints for antifungals. Drug News Perspect 2010; 23:93–7.
322. Siopi M, Mavridou E, Mouton JW, Verweij PE, Zerva L, Meletiadis J. Suscepti-
bility breakpoints and target values for therapeutic drug monitoring of voricona-
zole and Aspergillus fumigatus in an in vitro pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
model. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:1611–9.
323. Arendrup MC, Cuenca-Estrella M, Lass-Florl C, Hope WW. Breakpoints for
antifungal agents: an update from EUCAST focussing on echinocandins against
Candida spp. and triazoles against Aspergillus spp. Drug Resist Updat 2013;
16:81–95.
324. Pfaller MA, Messer SA, Woosley LN, Jones RN, Castanheira M. Echinocandin
and triazole antifungal susceptibility profiles for clinical opportunistic yeast
and mold isolates collected from 2010 to 2011: application of new CLSI clinical
breakpoints and epidemiological cutoff values for characterization of geographic
and temporal trends of antifungal resistance. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:2571–81.
325. Taylor JW, Jacobson DJ, Kroken S, et al. Phylogenetic species recognition and
species concepts in fungi. Fungal Genet Biol 2000; 31:21–32.
326. Alastruey-Izquierdo A, Alcazar-Fuoli L, Cuenca-Estrella M. Antifungal suscept-
ibility profile of cryptic species of Aspergillus. Mycopathologia 2014; 178:427–33.
327. Chen J, Li H, Li R, Bu D, Wan Z. Mutations in the cyp51A gene and susceptibility
to itraconazole in Aspergillus fumigatus serially isolated from a patient with lung
aspergilloma. J Antimicrob Chemother 2005; 55:31–7.
328. Diaz-Guerra TM, Mellado E, Cuenca-Estrella M, Rodriguez-Tudela JL. A point
mutation in the 14alpha-sterol demethylase gene cyp51A contributes to itracona-
zole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003;
47:1120–4.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e53
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 329. Howard SJ, Webster I, Moore CB, et al. Multi-azole resistance in Aspergillus fu-
migatus. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006; 28:450–3.
330. Mellado E, Garcia-Effron G, Alcazar-Fuoli L, Cuenca-Estrella M, Rodriguez-Tu-
dela JL. Substitutions at methionine 220 in the 14alpha-sterol demethylase
(Cyp51A) of Aspergillus fumigatus are responsible for resistance in vitro to
azole antifungal drugs. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:2747–50.
331. Mellado E, Garcia-Effron G, Alcazar-Fuoli L, et al. A new Aspergillus fumigatus
resistance mechanism conferring in vitro cross-resistance to azole antifungals in-
volves a combination of cyp51A alterations. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2007; 51:1897–904.
332. Nascimento AM, Goldman GH, Park S, et al. Multiple resistance mechanisms
among Aspergillus fumigatus mutants with high-level resistance to itraconazole.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:1719–26.
333. Verweij PE, Mellado E, Melchers WJ. Multiple-triazole-resistant aspergillosis. N
Engl J Med 2007; 356:1481–3.
334. Albarrag AM, Anderson MJ, Howard SJ, et al. Interrogation of related clinical
pan-azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus strains: G138C, Y431C, and G434C sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphisms in cyp51A, upregulation of cyp51A, and integra-
tion and activation of transposon Atf1 in the cyp51A promoter. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2011; 55:5113–21.
335. Camps SM, Dutilh BE, Arendrup MC, et al. Discovery of a HapE mutation that
causes azole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus through whole genome sequenc-
ing and sexual crossing. PLoS One 2012; 7:e50034.
336. Howard SJ, Arendrup MC. Acquired antifungal drug resistance in Aspergillus fu-
migatus: epidemiology and detection. Med Mycol 2011; 49(suppl 1):S90–5.
337. Natesan SK, Lamichchane AK, Swaminathan S, Wu W. Differential expression of
ATP-binding cassette and/or major facilitator superfamily class efflux pumps
contributes to voriconazole resistance in Aspergillus flavus. Diagn Microbiol In-
fect Dis 2013; 76:458–63.
338. Rajendran R, Mowat E, McCulloch E, et al. Azole resistance of Aspergillus fumi-
gatus biofilms is partly associated with efflux pump activity. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2011; 55:2092–7.
339. Slaven JW, Anderson MJ, Sanglard D, et al. Increased expression of a novel As-
pergillus fumigatus ABC transporter gene, atrF, in the presence of itraconazole in
an itraconazole resistant clinical isolate. Fungal Genet Biol 2002; 36:199–206.
340. Arendrup MC. Update on antifungal resistance in Aspergillus and Candida. Clin
Microbiol Infect 2014; 20(suppl 6):42–8.
341. Cuenca-Estrella M. Antifungal drug resistance mechanisms in pathogenic fungi:
from bench to bedside. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014; 20(suppl 6):54–9.
342. Alastruey-Izquierdo A, Mellado E, Pelaez T, et al. Population-based survey of fil-
amentous fungi and antifungal resistance in Spain (FILPOP Study). Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2013; 57:3380–7.
343. Baddley JW, Marr KA, Andes DR, et al. Patterns of susceptibility of Aspergillus
isolates recovered from patients enrolled in the Transplant-Associated Infection
Surveillance Network. J Clin Microbiol 2009; 47:3271–5.
344. Mortensen KL, Mellado E, Lass-Florl C, Rodriguez-Tudela JL, Johansen HK, Are-
ndrup MC. Environmental study of azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus and
other aspergilli in Austria, Denmark, and Spain. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2010; 54:4545–9.
345. Snelders E, van der Lee HA, Kuijpers J, et al. Emergence of azole resistance in
Aspergillus fumigatus and spread of a single resistance mechanism. PLoS Med
2008; 5:e219.
346. Howard SJ, Cerar D, Anderson MJ, et al. Frequency and evolution of azole resis-
tance in Aspergillus fumigatus associated with treatment failure. Emerg Infect Dis
2009; 15:1068–76.
347. van der Linden JW, Snelders E, Kampinga GA, et al. Clinical implications of azole
resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus, The Netherlands, 2007–2009. Emerg Infect
Dis 2011; 17:1846–54.
348. Herbrecht R, Denning DW, Patterson TF, et al. Voriconazole versus amphotericin B
for primary therapy of invasive aspergillosis. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:408–15.
349. Maertens JA, Raad II, Marr KA, et al. Isavuconazole versus voriconazole for pri-
mary treatment of invasive mould disease caused by Aspergillus and other fila-
mentous fungi (SECURE): a phase 3, randomised-controlled, non-inferiority
trial. Lancet 2016; 387:760–9.
350. Hachem RY, Boktour MR, Hanna HA, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex ver-
sus liposomal amphotericin B monotherapy for invasive aspergillosis in patients
with hematologic malignancy. Cancer 2008; 112:1282–7.
351. Ito JI, Chandrasekar PH, Hooshmand-Rad R. Effectiveness of amphotericin B
lipid complex (ABLC) treatment in allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant
(HCT) recipients with invasive aspergillosis (IA). Bone Marrow Transplant
2005; 36:873–7.
352. Herbrecht R, Auvrignon A, Andres E, et al. Efficacy of amphotericin B lipid com-
plex in the treatment of invasive fungal infections in immunosuppressed paedi-
atric patients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2001; 20:77–82.
353. Linden P, Williams P, Chan KM. Efficacy and safety of amphotericin B lipid com-
plex injection (ABLC) in solid-organ transplant recipients with invasive fungal
infections. Clin Transplant 2000; 14:329–39.
354. Kontoyiannis DP, Hachem R, Lewis RE, et al. Efficacy and toxicity of caspofungin
in combination with liposomal amphotericin B as primary or salvage treatment
of invasive aspergillosis in patients with hematologic malignancies. Cancer 2003;
98:292–9.
355. Aliff TB, Maslak PG, Jurcic JG, et al. Refractory Aspergillus pneumonia in pa-
tients with acute leukemia: successful therapy with combination caspofungin
and liposomal amphotericin. Cancer 2003; 97:1025–32.
356. Marr KA, Boeckh M, Carter RA, Kim HW, Corey L. Combination antifungal
therapy for invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:797–802.
357. Kirkpatrick WR, Perea S, Coco BJ, Patterson TF. Efficacy of caspofungin alone
and in combination with voriconazole in a guinea pig model of invasive asper-
gillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2002; 46:2564–8.
358. Petraitis V, Petraitiene R, Sarafandi AA, et al. Combination therapy in treatment
of experimental pulmonary aspergillosis: synergistic interaction between an anti-
fungal triazole and an echinocandin. J Infect Dis 2003; 187:1834–43.
359. Garbati MA, Alasmari FA, Al-Tannir MA, Tleyjeh IM. The role of combination
antifungal therapy in the treatment of invasive aspergillosis: a systematic review.
Int J Infect Dis 2012; 16:e76–81.
360. Candoni A, Caira M, Cesaro S, et al. Multicentre surveillance study on feasibility,
safety and efficacy of antifungal combination therapy for proven or probable in-
vasive fungal diseases in haematological patients: the SEIFEM real-life combo
study. Mycoses 2014; 57:342–50.
361. Caillot D, Thiebaut A, Herbrecht R, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B in combi-
nation with caspofungin for invasive aspergillosis in patients with hematologic
malignancies: a randomized pilot study (Combistrat trial). Cancer 2007;
110:2740–6.
362. Marr KA, Schlamm HT, Herbrecht R, et al. Combination antifungal therapy for
invasive aspergillosis: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2015; 162:81–9.
363. Dowell JA, Schranz J, Baruch A, Foster G. Safety and pharmacokinetics of coad-
ministered voriconazole and anidulafungin. J Clin Pharmacol 2005; 45:1373–82.
364. Jarque I, Tormo M, Bello JL, et al. Caspofungin for the treatment of invasive
fungal disease in hematological patients (ProCAS Study). Med Mycol 2013;
51:150–4.
365. Egerer G, Reichert D, Pletz MW, Kaskel P, Krobot KJ, Maertens J. Caspofungin
for treatment of invasive aspergillosis in Germany: results of a pre-planned sub-
analysis of an international registry. Eur J Med Res 2012; 17:1–7.
366. Maertens J, Egerer G, Shin WS, et al. Caspofungin use in daily clinical practice for
treatment of invasive aspergillosis: results of a prospective observational registry.
BMC Infect Dis 2010; 10:182.
367. Cordonnier C, Rovira M, Maertens J, et al. Voriconazole for secondary prophy-
laxis of invasive fungal infections in allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients: re-
sults of the VOSIFI study. Haematologica 2010; 95:1762–8.
368. Liu Q, Lin R, Sun J, et al. Antifungal agents for secondary prophylaxis based on
response to initial antifungal therapy in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell trans-
plant recipients with prior pulmonary aspergillosis. Biol Blood Marrow Trans-
plant 2014; 20:1198–203.
369. Kuderer NM, Dale DC, Crawford J, Lyman GH. Impact of primary prophylaxis
with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on febrile neutropenia and mortality
in adult cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: a systematic review. J Clin
Oncol 2007; 25:3158–67.
370. Lyman GH, Dale DC, Wolff DA, et al. Acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplas-
tic syndrome in randomized controlled clinical trials of cancer chemotherapy
with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol
2010; 28:2914–24.
371. Smith TJ, Khatcheressian J, Lyman GH, et al. 2006 update of recommendations
for the use of white blood cell growth factors: an evidence-based clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24:3187–205.
372. Crawford J, Armitage J, Balducci L, et al. Myeloid growth factors. J Natl Compr
Canc Netw 2013; 11:1266–90.
373. Brummer E, Maqbool A, Stevens DA. In vivo GM-CSF prevents dexamethasone
suppression of killing of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia by bronchoalveolar mac-
rophages. J Leukoc Biol 2001; 70:868–72.
374. Sionov E, Segal E. Polyene and cytokine treatment of experimental aspergillosis.
FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2003; 39:221–7.
375. Sionov E, Mendlovic S, Segal E. Experimental systemic murine aspergillosis:
treatment with polyene and caspofungin combination and G-CSF. J Antimicrob
Chemother 2005; 56:594–7.
376. Quezada G, Koshkina NV, Zweidler-McKay P, Zhou Z, Kontoyiannis DP, Klei-
nerman ES. Intranasal granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor reduc-
es the Aspergillus burden in an immunosuppressed murine model of pulmonary
aspergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008; 52:716–8.
e54 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 377. Bensinger WI, Price TH, Dale DC, et al. The effects of daily recombinant human
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor administration on normal granulocyte do-
nors undergoing leukapheresis. Blood 1993; 81:1883–8.
378. Hubel K, Carter RA, Liles WC, et al. Granulocyte transfusion therapy for infec-
tions in candidates and recipients of HPC transplantation: a comparative analysis
of feasibility and outcome for community donors versus related donors. Trans-
fusion 2002; 42:1414–21.
379. Price TH, Bowden RA, Boeckh M, et al. Phase I/II trial of neutrophil transfusions
from donors stimulated with G-CSF and dexamethasone for treatment of patients
with infections in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Blood 2000; 95:3302–9.
380. Price TH, Boeckh M, Harrison RW, et al. Efficacy of transfusion with granulo-
cytes from G-CSF/dexamethasone treated donors in neutropenic patients with
infection. Blood 2015; 126:2153–61.
381. Martinez M, Chen V, Tong AJ, Hamilton K, Clemons KV, Stevens DA. Experi-
mental evidence that granulocyte transfusions are efficacious in treatment of neu-
tropenic hosts with pulmonary aspergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2013; 57:1882–7.
382. Wright DG, Robichaud KJ, Pizzo PA, Deisseroth AB. Lethal pulmonary reactions
associated with the combined use of amphotericin B and leukocyte transfusions.
N Engl J Med 1981; 304:1185–9.
383. Smith NL, Denning DW. Clinical implications of interferon gamma genetic and
epigenetic variants. Immunology 2014; 143:499–511.
384. Hebart H, Bollinger C, Fisch P, et al. Analysis of T-cell responses to Aspergillus
fumigatus antigens in healthy individuals and patients with hematologic malig-
nancies. Blood 2002; 100:4521–8.
385. A controlled trial of interferon gamma to prevent infection in chronic granulo-
matous disease. The International Chronic Granulomatous Disease Cooperative
Study Group. N Engl J Med 1991; 324:509–16.
386. Safdar A, Rodriguez G, Ohmagari N, et al. The safety of interferon-gamma-1b
therapy for invasive fungal infections after hematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion. Cancer 2005; 103:731–9.
387. Didier M, Guedin P, Staub F, et al. Pulmonary arterial mycotic pseudoaneurysms
in a patient with invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Successful occlusion by coils.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 190:112–3.
388. Offner F, Cordonnier C, Ljungman P, et al. Impact of previous aspergillosis on
the outcome of bone marrow transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 26:1098–103.
389. Martino R, Parody R, Fukuda T, et al. Impact of the intensity of the pretransplan-
tation conditioning regimen in patients with prior invasive aspergillosis under-
going allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a retrospective survey of
the Infectious Diseases Working Party of the European Group for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation. Blood 2006; 108:2928–36.
390. El-Cheikh J, Castagna L, Wang L, et al. Impact of prior invasive aspergillosis on
outcome in patients receiving reduced-intensity conditioning allogeneic hemato-
poietic stem cell transplant. Leuk Lymphoma 2010; 51:1705–10.
391. Cordonnier C, Maury S, Pautas C, et al. Secondary antifungal prophylaxis with
voriconazole to adhere to scheduled treatment in leukemic patients and stem cell
transplant recipients. Bone Marrow Transplant 2004; 33:943–8.
392. Almyroudis NG, Kontoyiannis DP, Sepkowitz KA, DePauw BE, Walsh TJ, Segal
BH. Issues related to the design and interpretation of clinical trials of salvage
therapy for invasive mold infection. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43:1449–55.
393. Bennett JE. Salvage therapy for aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41(suppl 6):
S387–8.
394. Kontoyiannis DP, Lewis RE. Toward more effective antifungal therapy: the pros-
pects of combination therapy. Br J Haematol 2004; 126:165–75.
395. Ng TT, Denning DW. Liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome) therapy in inva-
sive fungal infections. Evaluation of United Kingdom compassionate use data.
Arch Intern Med 1995; 155:1093–8.
396. Walsh TJ, Hiemenz JW, Seibel NL, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex for inva-
sive fungal infections: analysis of safety and efficacy in 556 cases. Clin Infect Dis
1998; 26:1383–96.
397. Perfect JR, Marr KA, Walsh TJ, et al. Voriconazole treatment for less-common,
emerging, or refractory fungal infections. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:1122–31.
398. Maertens J, Raad I, Petrikkos G, et al. Efficacy and safety of caspofungin for treat-
ment of invasive aspergillosis in patients refractory to or intolerant of conven-
tional antifungal therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:1563–71.
399. Miceli MH, Grazziutti ML, Woods G, et al. Strong correlation between serum asper-
gillus galactomannan index and outcome of aspergillosis in patients with hematolog-
ical cancer: clinical and research implications. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 46:1412–22.
400. Maertens J, Buve K, Theunissen K, et al. Galactomannan serves as a surrogate
endpoint for outcome of pulmonary invasive aspergillosis in neutropenic hema-
tology patients. Cancer 2009; 115:355–62.
401. Park SH, Choi SM, Lee DG, et al. Serum galactomannan strongly correlates with
outcome of invasive aspergillosis in acute leukaemia patients. Mycoses 2011;
54:523–30.
402. Fisher CE, Stevens AM, Leisenring W, Pergam SA, Boeckh M, Hohl TM.
The serum galactomannan index predicts mortality in hematopoietic stem
cell transplant recipients with invasive aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis 2013;
57:1001–4.
403. Nouer SA, Nucci M, Kumar NS, Grazziutti M, Barlogie B, Anaissie E. Earlier re-
sponse assessment in invasive aspergillosis based on the kinetics of serum Asper-
gillus galactomannan: proposal for a new definition. Clin Infect Dis 2011;
53:671–6.
404. Hadrich I, Makni F, Cheikhrouhou F, et al. Clinical utility and prognostic value of
galactomannan in neutropenic patients with invasive aspergillosis. Pathol Biol
(Paris) 2012; 60:357–61.
405. Koo S, Bryar JM, Baden LR, Marty FM. Prognostic features of galactomannan
antigenemia in galactomannan-positive invasive aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol
2010; 48:1255–60.
406. Russo A, Giuliano S, Vena A, et al. Predictors of mortality in non-neutropenic
patients with invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: does galactomannan have a
role? Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2014; 80:83–6.
407. He H, Ding L, Chang S, Li F, Zhan Q. Value of consecutive galactomannan de-
terminations for the diagnosis and prognosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
in critically ill chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Med Mycol 2011;
49:345–51.
408. He H, Li Q, Chang S, et al. Prognostic value of serum galactomannan index in
critically ill patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at risk of inva-
sive pulmonary aspergillosis. Chin Med J (Engl) 2014; 127:23–8.
409. Chai LY, Kullberg BJ, Johnson EM, et al. Early serum galactomannan trend as a
predictor of outcome of invasive aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol 2012; 50:2330–6.
410. Chai LY, Kullberg BJ, Earnest A, et al. Voriconazole or amphotericin B as primary
therapy yields distinct early serum galactomannan trends related to outcomes in
invasive aspergillosis. PLoS One 2014; 9:e90176.
411. Luong ML, Filion C, Labbe AC, et al. Clinical utility and prognostic value of bron-
choalveolar lavage galactomannan in patients with hematologic malignancies.
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2010; 68:132–9.
412. Koo S, Baden LR, Marty FM. Post-diagnostic kinetics of the (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan
assay in invasive aspergillosis, invasive candidiasis and Pneumocystis jirovecii
pneumonia. Clin Microbiol Infect 2012; 18:e122–7.
413. Friberg LE, Ravva P, Karlsson MO, Liu P. Integrated population pharmacokinetic
analysis of voriconazole in children, adolescents, and adults. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2012; 56:3032–42.
414. Walsh TJ, Driscoll T, Milligan PA, et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerability
of voriconazole in immunocompromised children. Antimicrob Agents Chemo-
ther 2010; 54:4116–23.
415. Karlsson MO, Lutsar I, Milligan PA. Population pharmacokinetic analysis of vor-
iconazole plasma concentration data from pediatric studies. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2009; 53:935–44.
416. Benjamin DKJ, Driscoll T, Seibel NL, et al. Safety and pharmacokinetics of intra-
venous anidulafungin in children with neutropenia at high risk for invasive fun-
gal infections. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006; 50:632–8.
417. Krenke R, Grabczak EM. Tracheobronchial manifestations of Aspergillus infec-
tions. ScientificWorldJournal 2011; 11:2310–29.
418. Soubani AO, Chandrasekar PH. The clinical spectrum of pulmonary aspergillo-
sis. Chest 2002; 121:1988–99.
419. Denning DW, Stevens DA. Antifungal and surgical treatment of invasive asper-
gillosis: review of 2,121 published cases. Rev Infect Dis 1990; 12:1147–201.
420. Kemper CA, Hostetler JS, Follansbee SE, et al. Ulcerative and plaque-like trache-
obronchitis due to infection with Aspergillus in patients with AIDS. Clin Infect
Dis 1993; 17:344–52.
421. Boots RJ, Paterson DL, Allworth AM, Faoagali JL. Successful treatment of post-
influenza pseudomembranous necrotising bronchial aspergillosis with liposomal
amphotericin, inhaled amphotericin B, gamma interferon and GM-CSF. Thorax
1999; 54:1047–9.
422. Adalja AA, Sappington PL, Harris SP, et al. Isolation of Aspergillus in three 2009
H1N1 influenza patients. Influenza Other Respir Viruses 2011; 5:225–9.
423. Fernandez-Ruiz M, Silva JT, San-Juan R, et al. Aspergillus tracheobronchitis: report
of 8 cases and review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 2012; 91:261–73.
424. Kramer MR, Denning DW, Marshall SE, et al. Ulcerative tracheobronchitis after
lung transplantation. A new form of invasive aspergillosis. Am Rev Respir Dis
1991; 144:552–6.
425. Husain S, Paterson DL, Studer S, et al. Voriconazole prophylaxis in lung trans-
plant recipients. Am J Transplant 2006; 6:3008–16.
426. Horvath J, Dummer S, Loyd J, Walker B, Merrill WH, Frist WH. Infection in the
transplanted and native lung after single lung transplantation. Chest 1993;
104:681–5.
427. Lin SJ, Schranz J, Teutsch SM. Aspergillosis case-fatality rate: systematic review of
the literature. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:358–66.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e55
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 428. McCarthy M, Rosengart A, Schuetz AN, Kontoyiannis DP, Walsh TJ. Mold in-
fections of the central nervous system. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:150–60.
429. Viscoli C, Machetti M, Gazzola P, et al. Aspergillus galactomannan antigen in the
cerebrospinal fluid of bone marrow transplant recipients with probable cerebral
aspergillosis. J Clin Microbiol 2002; 40:1496–9.
430. Mikulska M, Furfaro E, Del Bono V, et al. (1–3)-beta-D-glucan in cerebrospinal
fluid is useful for the diagnosis of central nervous system fungal infections. Clin
Infect Dis 2013; 56:1511–2.
431. Tortorano AM, Esposto MC, Prigitano A, et al. Cross-reactivity of Fusarium spp.
in the Aspergillus galactomannan enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. J Clin
Microbiol 2012; 50:1051–3.
432. Schwartz S, Ruhnke M, Ribaud P, et al. Improved outcome in central nervous
system aspergillosis, using voriconazole treatment. Blood 2005; 106:2641–5.
433. Ng A, Gadong N, Kelsey A, Denning DW, Leggate J, Eden OB. Successful treat-
ment of aspergillus brain abscess in a child with acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2000; 17:497–504.
434. Khoury H, Adkins D, Miller G, Goodnough L, Brown R, DiPersio J. Resolution of
invasive central nervous system aspergillosis in a transplant recipient. Bone Mar-
row Transplant 1997; 20:179–80.
435. Coleman JM, Hogg GG, Rosenfeld JV, Waters KD. Invasive central nervous sys-
tem aspergillosis: cure with liposomal amphotericin B, itraconazole, and radical
surgery—case report and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 1995; 36:858–63.
436. Pitisuttithum P, Negroni R, Graybill JR, et al. Activity of posaconazole in the
treatment of central nervous system fungal infections. J Antimicrob Chemother
2005; 56:745–55.
437. Imai T, Yamamoto T, Tanaka S, et al. Successful treatment of cerebral aspergil-
losis with a high oral dose of itraconazole after excisional surgery. Intern Med
1999; 38:829–32.
438. Okugawa S, Ota Y, Tatsuno K, Tsukada K, Kishino S, Koike K. A case of invasive
central nervous system aspergillosis treated with micafungin with monitoring of
micafungin concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid. Scand J Infect Dis 2007;
39:344–6.
439. Stevens DA, Shatsky SA. Intrathecal amphotericin in the management of cocci-
dioidal meningitis. Semin Respir Infect 2001; 16:263–9.
440. Dubbeld P, van Oostenbrugge RJ, Twinjstra A, Schouten HC. Spinal epidural ab-
scess due to Aspergillus infection of the vertebrae: report of 3 cases. Neth J Med
1996; 48:18–23.
441. Ng J, Ho S, Krishnan P, Teoh SC. Aspergillus terreus endogenous endophthalmi-
tis in a nonimmunocompromised patient with a history of bronchiectasis. Ocul
Immunol Inflamm 2013; 21:231–3.
442. Georgala A, Layeux B, Kwan J, et al. Inaugural bilateral Aspergillus endophthal-
mitis in a seriously immunocompromised patient. Mycoses 2011; 54:e631–3.
443. Hoenigl M, Krause R. Antifungal therapy of aspergillosis of the central nervous
system and Aspergillus endophthalmitis. Curr Pharm Des 2013; 19:3648–68.
444. Shen YC, Wang CY, Tsai HY, Lee HN. Intracameral voriconazole injection in the
treatment of fungal endophthalmitis resulting from keratitis. Am J Ophthalmol
2010; 149:916–21.
445. Grosjean P, Weber R. Fungus balls of the paranasal sinuses: a review. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol 2007; 264:461–70.
446. Popko M, Broglie MA, Holzmann D. Isolated fungus ball mimicking mucocele or
frontal sinus tumour: a diagnostic pitfall. J Laryngol Otol 2010; 124:1111–5.
447. Costa F, Polini F, Zerman N, Robiony M, Toro C, Politi M. Surgical treatment of
Aspergillus mycetomas of the maxillary sinus: review of the literature. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2007; 103:e23–9.
448. Karkas A, Rtail R, Reyt E, Timi N, Righini CA. Sphenoid sinus fungus ball. Eur
Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2013; 270:893–8.
449. Mody KH, Ali MJ, Vemuganti GK, Nalamada S, Naik MN, Honavar SG. Orbital
aspergillosis in immunocompetent patients. Br J Ophthalmol 2014; 98:1379–84.
450. Chen CY, Sheng WH, Cheng A, et al. Invasive fungal sinusitis in patients with
hematological malignancy: 15 years experience in a single university hospital in
Taiwan. BMC Infect Dis 2011; 11:250.
451. McCormack J, Pollard J. Aspergillus endocarditis 2003–2009. Med Mycol 2011;
49(suppl 1):S30–4.
452. Riviere S, Lortholary O, Michon J, et al. Aspergillus endocarditis in the era of new
antifungals: major role for antigen detection. J Infect 2013; 67:85–8.
453. Ellis ME, Al-Abdely H, Sandridge A, Greer W, Ventura W. Fungal endocarditis:
evidence in the world literature, 1965–1995. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:50–62.
454. Gumbo T, Taege AJ, Mawhorter S, et al. Aspergillus valve endocarditis in patients
without prior cardiac surgery. Medicine (Baltimore) 2000; 79:261–8.
455. Reis LJ, Barton TD, Pochettino A, et al. Successful treatment of Aspergillus pros-
thetic valve endocarditis with oral voriconazole. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:752–3.
456. Martin MV, Yates J, Hitchcock CA. Comparison of voriconazole (UK-109,496)
and itraconazole in prevention and treatment of Aspergillus fumigatus endocar-
ditis in guinea pigs. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1997; 41:13–6.
457. Walsh TJ, Bulkley BH. Aspergillus pericarditis: clinical and pathologic features in
the immunocompromised patient. Cancer 1982; 49:48–54.
458. Le Moing V, Lortholary O, Timsit JF, et al. Aspergillus pericarditis with tamponade:
report of a successfully treated case and review. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 26:451–60.
459. Rueter F, Hirsch HH, Kunz F, et al. Late Aspergillus fumigatus endomyocarditis
with brain abscess as a lethal complication after heart transplantation. J Heart
Lung Transplant 2002; 21:1242–5.
460. Studemeister A, Stevens DA. Aspergillus vertebral osteomyelitis in immunocom-
petent hosts: role of triazole antifungal therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:e1–6.
461. Gamaletsou MN, Rammaert B, Bueno MA, et al. Aspergillus osteomyelitis: epidemi-
ology, clinical manifestations, management, and outcome. J Infect 2014; 68:478–93.
462. Vinas FC, King PK, Diaz FG. Spinal Aspergillus osteomyelitis. Clin Infect Dis
1999; 28:1223–9.
463. Mouas H, Lutsar I, Dupont B, et al. Voriconazole for invasive bone aspergillosis:
a worldwide experience of 20 cases. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:1141–7.
464. Stratov I, Korman TM, Johnson PD. Management of Aspergillus osteomyelitis:
report of failure of liposomal amphotericin B and response to voriconazole in
an immunocompetent host and literature review. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect
Dis 2003; 22:277–83.
465. Hodiamont CJ, Dolman KM, Ten Berge IJ, Melchers WJ, Verweij PE, Pajkrt D.
Multiple-azole-resistant Aspergillus fumigatus osteomyelitis in a patient with
chronic granulomatous disease successfully treated with long-term oral posaco-
nazole and surgery. Med Mycol 2009; 47:217–20.
466. Kumashi PR, Safdar A, Chamilos G, Chemaly RF, Raad II, Kontoyiannis DP.
Fungal osteoarticular infections in patients treated at a comprehensive cancer
centre: a 10-year retrospective review. Clin Microbiol Infect 2006; 12:621–6.
467. Kirby A, Hassan I, Burnie J. Recommendations for managing Aspergillus osteomy-
elitis and joint infections based on a review of the literature. J Infect 2006; 52:405–14.
468. Koehler P, Tacke D, Cornely OA. Aspergillosis of bones and joints—a review
from 2002 until today. Mycoses 2014; 57:323–35.
469. McCarty JM, Flam MS, Pullen G, Jones R, Kassel SH. Outbreak of primary cuta-
neous aspergillosis related to intravenous arm boards. J Pediatr 1986; 108:721–4.
470. Bretagne S, Bart-Delabesse E, Wechsler J, Kuentz M, Dhedin N, Cordonnier C.
Fatal primary cutaneous aspergillosis in a bone marrow transplant recipient: nos-
ocomial acquisition in a laminar-air flow room. J Hosp Infect 1997; 36:235–9.
471. Walsh TJ. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis—an emerging infection among im-
munocompromised patients. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 27:453–7.
472. Eldridge ML, Chambers CJ, Sharon VR, Thompson GR 3rd. Fungal infections of
the skin and nail: new treatment options. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2014;
12:1389–405.
473. Nannini EC, Paphitou NI, Ostrosky-Zeichner L. Peritonitis due to Aspergillus
and zygomycetes in patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis: report of 2 cases
and review of the literature. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2003; 46:49–54.
474. Manzano-Gayosso P, Hernandez-Hernandez F, Mendez-Tovar LJ, Gonzalez-
Monroy J, Lopez-Martinez R. Fungal peritonitis in 15 patients on continuous
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). Mycoses 2003; 46:425–9.
475. Ates O, Metan G, Dundar T, et al. Diagnosis of Aspergillus niger peritonitis in a
peritoneal dialysis patient by peritoneal galactomannan and beta-D-glucan de-
tection. Perit Dial Int 2013; 33:216–8.
476. Indramohan P, Rohit A, Kanchanamala M, Mathew M, Abraham G. Culture-
negative Aspergillus peritonitis diagnosed by peritoneal biopsy. Perit Dial Int
2013; 33:464–5.
477. Matuszkiewicz-Rowinska J. Update on fungal peritonitis and its treatment. Perit
Dial Int 2009; 29(suppl 2):S161–5.
478. van der Voort PH, Boerma EC, Yska JP. Serum and intraperitoneal levels of am-
photericin B and flucytosine during intravenous treatment of critically ill patients
with Candida peritonitis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2007; 59:952–6.
479. Weiler S, Bellmann-Weiler R, Dunzendorfer S, Joannidis M, Bellmann R. Levels
of amphotericin B lipid formulations in ascites. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008;
62:1163–4.
480. Peng LW, Lien YH. Pharmacokinetics of single, oral-dose voriconazole in perito-
neal dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 45:162–6.
481. Ulusoy S, Ozkan G, Tosun I, et al. Peritonitis due to Aspergillus nidulans and its
effective treatment with voriconazole: the first case report. Perit Dial Int 2011;
31:212–3.
482. Li PK, Szeto CC, Piraino B, et al. Peritoneal dialysis-related infections recommen-
dations: 2010 update. Perit Dial Int 2010; 30:393–423.
483. Young RC, Bennett JE, Vogel CL, Carbone PP, DeVita VT. Aspergillosis. The
spectrum of the disease in 98 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 1970; 49:147–73.
484. Meyer RD, Young LS, Armstrong D, Yu B. Aspergillosis complicating neoplastic
disease. Am J Med 1973; 54:6–15.
485. Eggimann P, Chevrolet JC, Starobinski M, et al. Primary invasive aspergillosis of
the digestive tract: report of two cases and review of the literature. Infection 2006;
34:333–8.
e56 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 486. Kazan E, Maertens J, Herbrecht R, et al. A retrospective series of gut aspergillosis
in haematology patients. Clin Microbiol Infect 2011; 17:588–94.
487. van der Velden WJ, Blijlevens NM, Klont RR, Donnelly JP, Verweij PE. Primary
hepatic invasive aspergillosis with progression after rituximab therapy for a post
transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder. Ann Hematol 2006; 85:621–3.
488. Erdman SH, Barber BJ, Barton LL. Aspergillus cholangitis: a late complication
after Kasai portoenterostomy. J Pediatr Surg 2002; 37:923–5.
489. Lisson SW, Hellinger WC, Parra RO. Primary bilateral parenchymal renal Asper-
gillus infection. Urology 2002; 60:345.
490. Khan ZU, Gopalakrishnan G, al-Awadi K, et al. Renal aspergilloma due to Asper-
gillus flavus. Clin Infect Dis 1995; 21:210–2.
491. Waller S, Raglow Z, Lemons S, et al. Microwave ablation of a large renal asper-
gilloma. Transpl Infect Dis 2014; 16:496–500.
492. Kauffman CA. Diagnosis and management of fungal urinary tract infection. In-
fect Dis Clin North Am 2014; 28:61–74.
493. Martinez-Pajares JD, Martinez-Ferriz MC, Moreno-Perez D, Garcia-Ramirez M,
Martin-Carballido S, Blanch-Iribarne P. Management of obstructive renal failure
caused by bilateral renal aspergilloma in an immunocompetent newborn. J Med
Microbiol 2010; 59:367–9.
494. Ho T, Vrabec JT, Yoo D, Coker NJ. Otomycosis: clinical features and treatment
implications. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2006; 135:787–91.
495. Munguia R, Daniel SJ. Ototopical antifungals and otomycosis: a review. Int J Pe-
diatr Otorhinolaryngol 2008; 72:453–9.
496. Bhatt YM, Pahade N, Nair B. Aspergillus petrous apicitis associated with cerebral
and peritubular abscesses in an immunocompetent man. J Laryngol Otol 2013;
127:404–7.
497. Gordon G, Giddings NA. Invasive otitis externa due to Aspergillus species: case
report and review. Clin Infect Dis 1994; 19:866–70.
498. Parize P, Chandesris MO, Lanternier F, et al. Antifungal therapy of Aspergillus
invasive otitis externa: efficacy of voriconazole and review. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2009; 53:1048–53.
499. Thurtell MJ, Chiu AL, Goold LA, et al. Neuro-ophthalmology of invasive fungal
sinusitis: 14 consecutive patients and a review of the literature. Clin Experiment
Ophthalmol 2013; 41:567–76.
500. Vennewald I, Klemm E. Otomycosis: diagnosis and treatment. Clin Dermatol
2010; 28:202–11.
501. Prajna VN, Lalitha PS, Mascarenhas J, et al. Natamycin and voriconazole in Fu-
sarium and Aspergillus keratitis: subgroup analysis of a randomised controlled
trial. Br J Ophthalmol 2012; 96:1440–1.
502. Prajna NV, Krishnan T, Mascarenhas J, et al. The mycotic ulcer treatment trial: a
randomized trial comparing natamycin vs voriconazole. JAMA Ophthalmol
2013; 131:422–9.
503. Arora R, Gupta D, Goyal J, Kaur R. Voriconazole versus natamycin as primary
treatment in fungal corneal ulcers. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 2011; 39:434–40.
504. Parchand S, Gupta A, Ram J, Gupta N, Chakrabarty A. Voriconazole for fungal
corneal ulcers. Ophthalmology 2012; 119:1083.
505. Thomas PA, Kaliamurthy J. Mycotic keratitis: epidemiology, diagnosis and man-
agement. Clin Microbiol Infect 2013; 19:210–20.
506. Shi W, Wang T, Xie L, et al. Risk factors, clinical features, and outcomes of recur-
rent fungal keratitis after corneal transplantation. Ophthalmology 2010; 117:890–6.
507. Karnak D, Avery RK, Gildea TR, Sahoo D, Mehta AC. Endobronchial fungal dis-
ease: an under-recognized entity. Respiration 2007; 74:88–104.
508. Chrdle A, Mustakim S, Bright-Thomas RJ, Baxter CG, Felton T, Denning DW.
Aspergillus bronchitis without significant immunocompromise. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 2012; 1272:73–85.
509. Armstead J, Morris J, Denning DW. Multi-country estimate of different manifes-
tations of aspergillosis in cystic fibrosis. PLoS One 2014; 9:e98502.
510. Shoseyov D, Brownlee KG, Conway SP, Kerem E. Aspergillus bronchitis in cystic
fibrosis. Chest 2006; 130:222–6.
511. Wald A, Leisenring W, van Burik JA, Bowden RA. Epidemiology of Aspergillus
infections in a large cohort of patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation.
J Infect Dis 1997; 175:1459–66.
512. Fukuda T, Boeckh M, Guthrie KA, et al. Invasive aspergillosis before allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: 10-year experience at a single transplant
center. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2004; 10:494–503.
513. Wingard JR, Carter SL, Walsh TJ, et al. Randomized, double-blind trial of flucon-
azole versus voriconazole for prevention of invasive fungal infection after alloge-
neic hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood 2010; 116:5111–8.
514. Chabrol A, Cuzin L, Huguet F, et al. Prophylaxis of invasive aspergillosis with
voriconazole or caspofungin during building work in patients with acute leuke-
mia. Haematologica 2010; 95:996–1003.
515. Molina JR, Serrano J, Sanchez-Garcia J, et al. Voriconazole as primary antifungal
prophylaxis in children undergoing allo-SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 2012;
47:562–7.
516. Peksa GD, Schultz K, Fung HC. Dosing algorithm for concomitant administra-
tion of sirolimus, tacrolimus, and an azole after allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. J Oncol Pharm Pract 2015; 21:409–15.
517. Siwek GT, Dodgson KJ, de Magalhaes-Silverman M, et al. Invasive zygomycosis
in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients receiving voriconazole prophy-
laxis. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:584–7.
518. Tong SY, Peleg AY, Yoong J, Handke R, Szer J, Slavin M. Breakthrough Scedo-
sporium prolificans infection while receiving voriconazole prophylaxis in an al-
logeneic stem cell transplant recipient. Transpl Infect Dis 2007; 9:241–3.
519. van Burik JA, Ratanatharathorn V, Stepan DE, et al. Micafungin versus flucona-
zole for prophylaxis against invasive fungal infections during neutropenia in pa-
tients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Clin Infect Dis 2004;
39:1407–16.
520. Cattaneo C, Monte S, Algarotti A, et al. A randomized comparison of caspofun-
gin versus antifungal prophylaxis according to investigator policy in acute leukae-
mia patients undergoing induction chemotherapy (PROFIL-C study). J
Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:2140–5.
521. Chou LS, Lewis RE, Ippoliti C, Champlin RE, Kontoyiannis DP. Caspofungin as
primary antifungal prophylaxis in stem cell transplant recipients. Pharmacother-
apy 2007; 27:1644–50.
522. de Fabritiis P, Spagnoli A, Di Bartolomeo P, et al. Efficacy of caspofungin as sec-
ondary prophylaxis in patients undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplantation
with prior pulmonary and/or systemic fungal infection. Bone Marrow Transplant
2007; 40:245–9.
523. Mattiuzzi GN, Alvarado G, Giles FJ, et al. Open-label, randomized comparison of
itraconazole versus caspofungin for prophylaxis in patients with hematologic ma-
lignancies. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006; 50:143–7.
524. Bow EJ, Laverdiere M, Lussier N, Rotstein C, Cheang MS, Ioannou S. Antifungal
prophylaxis for severely neutropenic chemotherapy recipients: a meta analysis of
randomized-controlled clinical trials. Cancer 2002; 94:3230–46.
525. Morgenstern GR, Prentice AG, Prentice HG, Ropner JE, Schey SA, Warnock DW.
A randomized controlled trial of itraconazole versus fluconazole for the pre-
vention of fungal infections in patients with haematological malignancies. U.K.
Multicentre Antifungal Prophylaxis Study Group. Br J Haematol 1999;
105:901–11.
526. Harousseau JL, Dekker AW, Stamatoullas-Bastard A, et al. Itraconazole oral sol-
ution for primary prophylaxis of fungal infections in patients with hematological
malignancy and profound neutropenia: a randomized, double-blind, double-pla-
cebo, multicenter trial comparing itraconazole and amphotericin B. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2000; 44:1887–93.
527. Nucci M, Biasoli I, Akiti T, et al. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of itraconazole capsules as antifungal prophylaxis for neutropenic patients.
Clin Infect Dis 2000; 30:300–5.
528. Winston DJ, Maziarz RT, Chandrasekar PH, et al. Intravenous and oral itracona-
zole versus intravenous and oral fluconazole for long-term antifungal prophylaxis
in allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplant recipients. A multicenter, ran-
domized trial. Ann Intern Med 2003; 138:705–13.
529. Marr KA, Crippa F, Leisenring W, et al. Itraconazole versus fluconazole for pre-
vention of fungal infections in patients receiving allogeneic stem cell transplants.
Blood 2004; 103:1527–33.
530. Vardakas KZ, Michalopoulos A, Falagas ME. Fluconazole versus itraconazole for
antifungal prophylaxis in neutropenic patients with haematological malignan-
cies: a meta-analysis of randomised-controlled trials. Br J Haematol 2005;
131:22–8.
531. Glasmacher A, Prentice A, Gorschluter M, et al. Itraconazole prevents invasive
fungal infections in neutropenic patients treated for hematologic malignancies:
evidence from a meta-analysis of 3,597 patients. J Clin Oncol 2003; 21:4615–26.
532. Rousey SR, Russler S, Gottlieb M, Ash RC. Low-dose amphotericin B prophylaxis
against invasive Aspergillus infections in allogeneic marrow transplantation. Am J
Med 1991; 91:484–92.
533. De Laurenzi A, Matteocci A, Lanti A, Pescador L, Blandino F, Papetti C. Ampho-
tericin B prophylaxis against invasive fungal infections in neutropenic patients: a
single center experience from 1980 to 1995. Infection 1996; 24:361–6.
534. Perfect JR, Klotman ME, Gilbert CC, et al. Prophylactic intravenous amphoter-
icin B in neutropenic autologous bone marrow transplant recipients. J Infect Dis
1992; 165:891–7.
535. Gergis U, Markey K, Greene J, et al. Voriconazole provides effective prophylaxis
for invasive fungal infection in patients receiving glucocorticoid therapy for
GVHD. Bone Marrow Transplant 2010; 45:662–7.
536. Amigues I, Cohen N, Chung D, et al. Hepatic safety of voriconazole after alloge-
neic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant
2010; 16:46–52.
537. Grigg AP, Brown M, Roberts AW, Szer J, Slavin MA. A pilot study of targeted
itraconazole prophylaxis in patients with graft-versus-host disease at high risk
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e57
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 of invasive mould infections following allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Bone
Marrow Transplant 2004; 34:447–53.
538. Neoh CF, Snell GI, Kotsimbos T, et al. Antifungal prophylaxis in lung transplan-
tation—a world-wide survey. Am J Transplant 2011; 11:361–6.
539. Schaenman JM. Is universal antifungal prophylaxis mandatory in lung transplant
patients? Curr Opin Infect Dis 2013; 26:317–25.
540. Drew RH, Dodds Ashley E, Benjamin DK Jr, Duane Davis R, Palmer SM, Perfect
JR. Comparative safety of amphotericin B lipid complex and amphotericin B de-
oxycholate as aerosolized antifungal prophylaxis in lung-transplant recipients.
Transplantation 2004; 77:232–7.
541. Shitrit D, Ollech JE, Ollech A, et al. Itraconazole prophylaxis in lung transplant
recipients receiving tacrolimus (FK 506): efficacy and drug interaction. J Heart
Lung Transplant 2005; 24:2148–52.
542. Cadena J, Levine DJ, Angel LF, et al. Antifungal prophylaxis with voriconazole or
itraconazole in lung transplant recipients: hepatotoxicity and effectiveness. Am J
Transplant 2009; 9:2085–91.
543. Bhaskaran A, Mumtaz K, Husain S. Anti-Aspergillus prophylaxis in lung trans-
plantation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2013;
15:514–25.
544. Palmer SM, Drew RH, Whitehouse JD, et al. Safety of aerosolized amphotericin B
lipid complex in lung transplant recipients. Transplantation 2001; 72:545–8.
545. Lowry CM, Marty FM, Vargas SO, et al. Safety of aerosolized liposomal versus
deoxycholate amphotericin B formulations for prevention of invasive fungal in-
fections following lung transplantation: a retrospective study. Transpl Infect Dis
2007; 9:121–5.
546. Monforte V, Lopez-Sanchez A, Zurbano F, et al. Prophylaxis with nebulized li-
posomal amphotericin B for Aspergillus infection in lung transplant patients does
not cause changes in the lipid content of pulmonary surfactant. J Heart Lung
Transplant 2013; 32:313–9.
547. Hosseini-Moghaddam SM, Husain S. Fungi and molds following lung transplan-
tation. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 31:222–33.
548. Helmi M, Love RB, Welter D, Cornwell RD, Meyer KC. Aspergillus infection in
lung transplant recipients with cystic fibrosis: risk factors and outcomes compar-
ison to other types of transplant recipients. Chest 2003; 123:800–8.
549. Nunley DR, Ohori P, Grgurich WF, et al. Pulmonary aspergillosis in cystic fibro-
sis lung transplant recipients. Chest 1998; 114:1321–9.
550. Vadnerkar A, Clancy CJ, Celik U, et al. Impact of mold infections in explanted
lungs on outcomes of lung transplantation. Transplantation 2010; 89:253–60.
551. Singh N, Husain S. Aspergillus infections after lung transplantation: clinical dif-
ferences in type of transplant and implications for management. J Heart Lung
Transplant 2003; 22:258–66.
552. Steinbach WJ, Marr KA, Anaissie EJ, et al. Clinical epidemiology of 960 patients
with invasive aspergillosis from the PATH Alliance registry. J Infect 2012;
65:453–64.
553. Paterson DL, Singh N. Invasive aspergillosis in transplant recipients. Medicine
1999; 78:123–38.
554. Gavalda J, Len O, San Juan R, et al. Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis in solid-
organ transplant recipients: a case-control study. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:52–9.
555. Singh N, Arnow PM, Bonham A, et al. Invasive aspergillosis in liver transplant
recipients in the 1990s. Transplantation 1997; 64:716–20.
556. Brown RS Jr, Lake JR, Katzman BA, et al. Incidence and significance of Aspergil-
lus cultures following liver and kidney transplantation. Transplantation 1996;
61:666–9.
557. Singh N, Paterson DL. Aspergillus infections in transplant recipients. Clin Micro-
biol Rev 2005; 18:44–69.
558. Hayes D Jr, Ball AM, Mansour HM, Martin CA, Flynn JD. Fungal infection in
heart-lung transplant recipients receiving single-agent prophylaxis with itracona-
zole. Exp Clin Transplant 2011; 9:399–404.
559. Munoz P, Rodriguez C, Bouza E, et al. Risk factors of invasive aspergillosis after
heart transplantation: protective role of oral itraconazole prophylaxis. Am J
Transplant 2004; 4:636–43.
560. Cofan F, Ricart MJ, Oppenheimer F, et al. Study of kidney rejection following si-
multaneous kidney-pancreas transplantation. Nephron 1996; 74:58–63.
561. Weiland D, Ferguson RM, Peterson PK, Snover DC, Simmons RL, Najarian JS.
Aspergillosis in 25 renal transplant patients. Epidemiology, clinical presentation,
diagnosis, and management. Ann Surg 1983; 198:622–9.
562. Fishman JA, Gonzalez RG, Branda JA. Case records of the Massachusetts General
Hospital. Case 11-2008. A 45-year-old man with changes in mental status after
liver transplantation. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:1604–13.
563. Collins LA, Samore MH, Roberts MS, et al. Risk factors for invasive fungal infec-
tions complicating orthotopic liver transplantation. J Infect Dis 1994; 170:644–52.
564. Karchmer AW, Samore MH, Hadley S, Collins LA, Jenkins RL, Lewis WD. Fungal
infections complicating orthotopic liver transplantation. Trans Am Clin Climatol
Assoc 1995; 106:38–47; discussion 48.
565. George MJ, Snydman DR, Werner BG, et al. The independent role of cytomeg-
alovirus as a risk factor for invasive fungal disease in orthotopic liver transplant
recipients. Boston Center for Liver Transplantation CMVIG-Study Group. Cyto-
gam, MedImmune, Inc. Gaithersburg, Maryland. Am J Med 1997; 103:106–13.
566. Briegel J, Forst H, Spill B, et al. Risk factors for systemic fungal infections in liver
transplant recipients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1995; 14:375–82.
567. Playford EG, Webster AC, Sorell TC, Craig JC. Antifungal agents for preventing
fungal infections in solid organ transplant recipients. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2004; CD004291.
568. Playford EG, Webster AC, Sorrell TC, Craig JC. Systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of antifungal agents for preventing fungal infections in liver transplant recip-
ients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2006; 25:549–61.
569. Giannella M, Ercolani G, Cristini F, et al. High-dose weekly liposomal amphoter-
icin b antifungal prophylaxis in patients undergoing liver transplantation: a pro-
spective phase II trial. Transplantation 2015; 99:848–54.
570. Sun HY, Cacciarelli TV, Singh N. Micafungin versus amphotericin B lipid com-
plex for the prevention of invasive fungal infections in high-risk liver transplant
recipients. Transplantation 2013; 96:573–8.
571. Sipsas NV, Kontoyiannis DP. Clinical issues regarding relapsing aspergillosis and
the efficacy of secondary antifungal prophylaxis in patients with hematological
malignancies. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 42:1584–91.
572. Chamilos G, Marom EM, Lewis RE, Lionakis MS, Kontoyiannis DP. Predictors of
pulmonary zygomycosis versus invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with
cancer. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:60–6.
573. Heinz WJ, Egerer G, Lellek H, Boehme A, Greiner J. Posaconazole after previous
antifungal therapy with voriconazole for therapy of invasive Aspergillus disease, a
retrospective analysis. Mycoses 2013; 56:304–10.
574. Warris A, Weemaes CM, Verweij PE. Multidrug resistance in Aspergillus fumi-
gatus. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:2173–4.
575. Georgiadou SP, Kontoyiannis DP. Concurrent lung infections in patients with
hematological malignancies and invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: how firm is
the Aspergillus diagnosis? J Infect 2012; 65:262–8.
576. Fisher CE, Stevens AM, Leisenring W, Pergam SA, Boeckh M, Hohl TM. Indepen-
dent contribution of bronchoalveolar lavage and serum galactomannan in the di-
agnosis of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Transpl Infect Dis 2014; 16:505–10.
577. Freifeld AG, Bow EJ, Sepkowitz KA, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the use of
antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with cancer: 2010 update by the In-
fectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:e56–93.
578. Pizzo PA, Robichaud KJ, Gill FA, Witebsky FG. Empiric antibiotic and antifungal
therapy for cancer patients with prolonged fever and granulocytopenia. Am J
Med 1982; 72:101–11.
579. Empiric antifungal therapy in febrile granulocytopenic patients. EORTC Interna-
tional Antimicrobial Therapy Cooperative Group. Am J Med 1989; 86:668–72.
580. Walsh TJ, Finberg RW, Arndt C, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B for empirical
therapy in patients with persistent fever and neutropenia. National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999;
340:764–71.
581. Boogaerts M, Winston DJ, Bow EJ, et al. Intravenous and oral itraconazole versus
intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate as empirical antifungal therapy for
persistent fever in neutropenic patients with cancer who are receiving broad-
spectrum antibacterial therapy. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern
Med 2001; 135:412–22.
582. Walsh TJ, Teppler H, Donowitz GR, et al. Caspofungin versus liposomal ampho-
tericin B for empirical antifungal therapy in patients with persistent fever and
neutropenia. N Engl J Med 2004; 351:1391–402.
583. Walsh TJ, Pappas P, Winston DJ, et al. Voriconazole compared with liposomal
amphotericin B for empirical antifungal therapy in patients with neutropenia and
persistent fever. N Engl J Med 2002; 346:225–34.
584. Caselli D, Cesaro S, Ziino O, et al. A prospective, randomized study of empirical
antifungal therapy for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced febrile neutrope-
nia in children. Br J Haematol 2012; 158:249–55.
585. Maschmeyer G, Heinz WJ, Hertenstein B, et al. Immediate versus deferred em-
pirical antifungal (IDEA) therapy in high-risk patients with febrile neutropenia: a
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter study. Eur J Clin Mi-
crobiol Infect Dis 2013; 32:679–89.
586. Malhotra P, Makkar A, Guru Murthy GS, Varma N, Varma S, Chakrabarti A.
Empirical amphotericin B therapy on day 4 or day 8 of febrile neutropenia. My-
coses 2014; 57:110–5.
587. Hebart H, Klingspor L, Klingebiel T, et al. A prospective randomized controlled
trial comparing PCR-based and empirical treatment with liposomal amphoteri-
cin B in patients after allo-SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 2009; 43:553–61.
588. Blennow O, Remberger M, Klingspor L, et al. Randomized PCR-based therapy
and risk factors for invasive fungal infection following reduced-intensity condi-
tioning and hematopoietic SCT. Bone Marrow Transplant 2010; 45:1710–8.
e58 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 589. Cordonnier C, Pautas C, Maury S, et al. Empirical versus preemptive antifungal
therapy for high-risk, febrile, neutropenic patients: a randomized, controlled
trial. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1042–51.
590. Tan BH, Low JG, Chlebicka NL, et al. Galactomannan-guided preemptive vs. em-
pirical antifungals in the persistently febrile neutropenic patient: a prospective
randomized study. Int J Infect Dis 2011; 15:e350–6.
591. White PL, Mengoli C, Bretagne S, et al. Evaluation of Aspergillus PCR protocols
for testing serum specimens. J Clin Microbiol 2011; 49:3842–8.
592. Loeffler J, Barnes R, Donnelly JP; European Aspergillus PCR Initiative. Standard-
ization of Aspergillus PCR diagnosis. Bone Marrow Transplant 2012; 47:299–300.
593. White PL, Wingard JR, Bretagne S, et al. Aspergillus polymerase chain reaction:
systematic review of evidence for clinical use in comparison with antigen testing.
Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:1293–303.
594. Segal BH, Almyroudis NG, Battiwalla M, et al. Prevention and early treatment of
invasive fungal infection in patients with cancer and neutropenia and in stem cell
transplant recipients in the era of newer broad-spectrum antifungal agents and
diagnostic adjuncts. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:402–9.
595. Cahill BC, Hibbs JR, Savik K, et al. Aspergillus airway colonization and invasive
disease after lung transplantation. Chest 1997; 112:1160–4.
596. Iversen M, Burton CM, Vand S, et al. Aspergillus infection in lung transplant pa-
tients: incidence and prognosis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2007; 26:879–86.
597. Weigt SS, Copeland CA, Derhovanessian A, et al. Colonization with small conidia
Aspergillus species is associated with bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome: a two-
center validation study. Am J Transplant 2013; 13:919–27.
598. Neoh CF, Snell GI, Levvey B, et al. Preemptive treatment with voriconazole in
lung transplant recipients. Transpl Infect Dis 2013; 15:344–53.
599. Westney GE, Kesten S, De Hoyos A, Chapparro C, Winton T, Maurer JR. Asper-
gillus infection in single and double lung transplant recipients. Transplantation
1996; 61:915–9.
600. Hosseini-Moghaddam SM, Chaparro C, Luong ML, et al. The effectiveness of
culture-directed preemptive anti-Aspergillus treatment in lung transplant recipi-
ents at one year after transplant. Transplantation 2015; 99:2387–93.
601. Denning DW, Riniotis K, Dobrashian R, Sambatakou H. Chronic cavitary and
fibrosing pulmonary and pleural aspergillosis: case series, proposed nomencla-
ture change, and review. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37(suppl 3):S265–80.
602. Cadranel J, Philippe B, Hennequin C, et al. Voriconazole for chronic pulmonary
aspergillosis: a prospective multicenter trial. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2012;
31:3231–9.
603. Smith NL, Denning DW. Underlying conditions in chronic pulmonary aspergil-
losis including simple aspergilloma. Eur Respir J 2011; 37:865–72.
604. Denning DW, Cadranel J, Beigelman-Aubry C, et al. Chronic pulmonary asper-
gillosis: rationale and clinical guidelines for diagnosis and management. Eur Re-
spir J 2016; 47:45–68.
605. Hope WW, Walsh TJ, Denning DW. The invasive and saprophytic syndromes
due to Aspergillus spp. Med Mycol 2005; 43(suppl 1):S207–38.
606. Smith NL, Hankinson J, Simpson A, Bowyer P, Denning DW. A prominent role
for the IL1 pathway and IL15 in susceptibility to chronic cavitary pulmonary as-
pergillosis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014; 20:O480–8.
607. Smith NL, Hankinson J, Simpson A, Denning DW, Bowyer P. Reduced expres-
sion of TLR3, TLR10 and TREM1 by human macrophages in chronic cavitary
pulmonary aspergillosis, and novel associations of VEGFA, DENND1B and
PLAT. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014; 20:O960–8.
608. Baxter CG, Denning DW, Jones AM, Todd A, Moore CB, Richardson MD. Per-
formance of two Aspergillus IgG EIA assays compared with the precipitin test in
chronic and allergic aspergillosis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2013; 19:E197–204.
609. Page ID, Richardson M, Denning DW. Antibody testing in aspergillosis—quo
vadis? Med Mycol 2015; 53:417–39.
610. Roberts CM, Citron KM, Strickland B. Intrathoracic aspergilloma: role of CT in
diagnosis and treatment. Radiology 1987; 165:123–8.
611. Agarwal R, Vishwanath G, Aggarwal AN, Garg M, Gupta D, Chakrabarti A. Itra-
conazole in chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis: a randomised controlled
trial and systematic review of literature. Mycoses 2013; 56:559–70.
612. Camuset J, Nunes H, Dombret MC, et al. Treatment of chronic pulmonary asper-
gillosis by voriconazole in nonimmunocompromised patients. Chest 2007;
131:1435–41.
613. Jain LR, Denning DW. The efficacy and tolerability of voriconazole in the treat-
ment of chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis. J Infect 2006; 52:e133–7.
614. Al-shair K, Atherton GT, Kennedy D, Powell G, Denning DW, Caress A. Validity
and reliability of the St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire in assessing
health status in patients with chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. Chest 2013;
144:623–31.
615. Felton TW, Baxter C, Moore CB, Roberts SA, Hope WW, Denning DW. Efficacy
and safety of posaconazole for chronic pulmonary aspergillosis. Clin Infect Dis
2010; 51:1383–91.
616. Koyama K, Ohshima N, Suzuki J, et al. Recurrence of chronic pulmonary asper-
gillosis after discontinuation of maintenance treatment by antifungal triazoles. J
Infect Chemother 2014; 20:375–9.
617. Prutsky G, Domecq JP, Salazar CA, Accinelli R. Antifibrinolytic therapy to reduce
haemoptysis from any cause. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 4:CD008711.
618. Moen CA, Burrell A, Dunning J. Does tranexamic acid stop haemoptysis? Inter-
act Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2013; 17:991–4.
619. Jardin M, Remy J. Control of hemoptysis: systemic angiography and anastomoses
of the internal mammary artery. Radiology 1988; 168:377–83.
620. Swanson KL, Johnson CM, Prakash UB, McKusick MA, Andrews JC, Stanson
AW. Bronchial artery embolization: experience with 54 patients. Chest 2002;
121:789–95.
621. Corr P. Management of severe hemoptysis from pulmonary aspergilloma using
endovascular embolization. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2006; 29:807–10.
622. Serasli E, Kalpakidis V, Iatrou K, Tsara V, Siopi D, Christaki P. Percutaneous
bronchial artery embolization in the management of massive hemoptysis in
chronic lung diseases. Immediate and long-term outcomes. Int Angiol 2008;
27:319–28.
623. Kohno S, Izumikawa K, Yoshida M, et al. A double-blind comparative study of
the safety and efficacy of caspofungin versus micafungin in the treatment of can-
didiasis and aspergillosis. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2013; 32:387–97.
624. Nam HS, Jeon K, Um SW, et al. Clinical characteristics and treatment outcomes
of chronic necrotizing pulmonary aspergillosis: a review of 43 cases. Int J Infect
Dis 2010; 14:e479–82.
625. Keir GJ, Garfield B, Hansell DM, et al. Cyclical caspofungin for chronic pulmo-
nary aspergillosis in sarcoidosis. Thorax 2014; 69:287–8.
626. Lejay A, Falcoz PE, Santelmo N, et al. Surgery for aspergilloma: time trend to-
wards improved results? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2011; 13:392–5.
627. Chen QK, Jiang GN, Ding JA. Surgical treatment for pulmonary aspergilloma: a
35-year experience in the Chinese population. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg
2012; 15:77–80.
628. Lee JG, Lee CY, Park IK, et al. Pulmonary aspergilloma: analysis of prognosis in
relation to symptoms and treatment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2009; 138:820–5.
629. Demir A, Gunluoglu MZ, Turna A, Kara HV, Dincer SI. Analysis of surgical
treatment for pulmonary aspergilloma. Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann 2006;
14:407–11.
630. Muniappan A, Tapias LF, Butala P, et al. Surgical therapy of pulmonary aspergil-
lomas: a 30-year North American experience. Ann Thorac Surg 2014; 97:432–8.
631. Chen QK, Chen C, Chen XF, Jiang GN. Video-assisted thoracic surgery for pul-
monary aspergilloma: a safe and effective procedure. Ann Thorac Surg 2014;
97:218–23.
632. Ichinose J, Kohno T, Fujimori S. Video-assisted thoracic surgery for pulmonary
aspergilloma. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2010; 10:927–30.
633. Farid S, Mohamed S, Devbhandari M, et al. Results of surgery for chronic pul-
monary Aspergillosis, optimal antifungal therapy and proposed high risk factors
for recurrence—a National Centre’s experience. J Cardiothorac Surg 2013; 8:180.
634. Alexander GR. A retrospective review comparing the treatment outcomes of
emergency lung resection for massive haemoptysis with and without preopera-
tive bronchial artery embolization. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2014; 45:251–5.
635. Pendleton M, Denning DW. Multifocal pulmonary aspergillomas: case series and
review. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2012; 1272:58–67.
636. Knutsen AP, Bush RK, Demain JG, et al. Fungi and allergic lower respiratory tract
diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012; 129:280–91; quiz 92–3.
637. Agarwal R, Chakrabarti A, Shah A, et al. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillo-
sis: review of literature and proposal of new diagnostic and classification criteria.
Clin Exp Allergy 2013; 43:850–73.
638. Agarwal R, Aggarwal AN, Garg M, Saikia B, Chakrabarti A. Cut-off values of
serum IgE (total and A. fumigatus-specific) and eosinophil count in differentiat-
ing allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis from asthma. Mycoses 2014;
57:659–63.
639. Moss RB. Treatment options in severe fungal asthma and allergic bronchopulmo-
nary aspergillosis. Eur Respir J 2014; 43:1487–500.
640. Agarwal R, Nath A, Aggarwal AN, Gupta D, Chakrabarti A. Aspergillus hyper-
sensitivity and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis in patients with acute se-
vere asthma in a respiratory intensive care unit in north India. Mycoses 2010;
53:138–43.
641. Denning DW, Pashley C, Hartl D, et al. Fungal allergy in asthma—state of the art
and research needs. Clin Transl Allergy 2014; 4:14.
642. Tanou K, Zintzaras E, Kaditis AG. Omalizumab therapy for allergic bronchopul-
monary aspergillosis in children with cystic fibrosis: a synthesis of published ev-
idence. Pediatr Pulmonol 2014; 49:503–7.
643. Kellett F, Redfern J, Niven RM. Evaluation of nebulised hypertonic saline (7%) as
an adjunct to physiotherapy in patients with stable bronchiectasis. Respir Med
2005; 99:27–31.
Practice Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Aspergillosis • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • e59
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
 644. Moreira AS, Silva D, Ferreira AR, Delgado L. Antifungal treatment in allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis with and without cystic fibrosis: a systematic re-
view. Clin Exp Allergy 2014; 44:1210–27.
645. Stevens DA, Schwartz HJ, Lee JY, et al. A randomized trial of itraconazole in al-
lergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:756–62.
646. Chishimba L, Langridge P, Powell G, Niven RM, Denning DW. Efficacy and safe-
ty of nebulised amphotericin B (NAB) in severe asthma with fungal sensitisation
(SAFS) and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA). J Asthma 2015;
52:289–95.
647. Chang C, Gershwin ME, Thompson GR 3rd. Fungal disease of the nose and si-
nuses: an updated overview. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2013; 13:152–61.
648. Thompson GR 3rd, Patterson TF. Fungal disease of the nose and paranasal sinus-
es. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012; 129:321–6.
649. Bozeman S, deShazo R, Stringer S, Wright L. Complications of allergic fungal si-
nusitis. Am J Med 2011; 124:359–68.
650. Howard BE, Lal D. Oral steroid therapy in chronic rhinosinusitis with and with-
out nasal polyposis. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2013; 13:236–43.
651. Gan EC, Thamboo A, Rudmik L, Hwang PH, Ferguson BJ, Javer AR. Medical man-
agement of allergic fungal rhinosinusitis following endoscopic sinus surgery: an evi-
dence-based review and recommendations. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol 2014; 4:702–15.
652. Tsabouri S, Tseretopoulou X, Priftis K, Ntzani EE. Omalizumab for the treatment
of inadequately controlled allergic rhinitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized clinical trials. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2014; 2:332–40. e1.
653. Chan KO, Genoway KA, Javer AR. Effectiveness of itraconazole in the manage-
ment of refractory allergic fungal rhinosinusitis. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2008; 37:870–4.
654. Seiberling K, Wormald PJ. The role of itraconazole in recalcitrant fungal sinusitis.
Am J Rhinol Allergy 2009; 23:303–6.
655. Thanasumpun T, Batra PS. Oral antifungal therapy for chronic rhinosinusitis and
its subtypes: a systematic review. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol 2011; 1:382–9.
e60 • CID 2016:63 (15 August) • Patterson et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/4/e1/2595039 by guest on 02 June 2019
