 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
American Journal of Ophthalmology Case Reports
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ajoc
Case report
Preretinal hemorrhages following chiropractor neck manipulation
Yannis M. Paulusa,∗, Nicholas Belillb
a Kellogg Eye Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
b Belill Eye Care, Clio, MI, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Chiropractor
Neck manipulation
Preretinal hemorrhage
Complementary and alternative medicine
CAM
A B S T R A C T
Purpose: To report a case of a new complication following complementary and alternative medicine chiropractor
neck manipulation with multiple preretinal hemorrhages.
Observations: A 59-year-old Caucasian female presented with the acute, painless constant appearance of 3 spots
in her vision immediately after a chiropractor performed cervical spinal manipulation using the high-velocity,
low-amplitude technique. Examination multiple unilateral preretinal hemorrhages with no retinal tears. The
preretinal hemorrhages were self-limited and resolved by 2 months later.
Conclusions: Chiropractor neck manipulation has previously been reported leading to complications related to
the carotid artery and arterial plaques. This presents the first case of multiple unilateral preretinal hemorrhages
immediately following chiropractic neck manipulation. This suggests that chiropractor spinal adjustment can not
only affect the carotid artery, but also could lead to preretinal hemorrhages.
1. Introduction
There is an increasing utilization throughout the world of com-
plementary and alternative medicine (CAM), particularly chiropractic
manipulation and massage, to treat a host of medical conditions.1 In
fact, Americans are estimated to make more visits to CAM practitioners
than primary care physicians.1 In addition, 72% of those patients using
CAM did not report this to their physicians.1 With the increasing uti-
lization of CAM, it is critical that we understand the ophthalmic man-
ifestations and complications of CAM use.
Upper spinal manipulation with chiropractors has been associated
with a host of ophthalmic events, primarily from effects on the carotid
artery and arterial plaques. Stroke,2,3 carotid dissection,4 central retinal
artery occlusion,5,6 nystagmus,7 Wallenberg syndrome,8 ophthalmo-
plegia,9 Horner syndrome,10 loss of vision,11,12 diplopia,13 and ptosis14
have all been reported following chiropractic manipulation. We present
the first case of unilateral, multiple preretinal hemorrhages im-
mediately following upper spinal chiropractic manipulation.
2. Case report
A 59-year-old Caucasian female presented with the acute, painless
constant appearance of 3 spots in her vision. She described the spots as
“tadpoles” that were constantly present in her vision. She noted the first
spot while driving home immediately following a chiropractor neck
adjustment, and became more aware that there were 2 additional spots
the following day. She received cervical spinal manipulation using the
high-velocity, low-amplitude (HVLA) technique on the posterior neck.
She also received twisting of the neck that day where it was twisted
both to the left and to the right. She had a history of headaches,
psoriasis, and restless leg syndrome for which she takes Topamax (to-
piramate), Stelara (ustekinumab), and Flexeril (cyclobenzaprine), re-
spectively, but denied any further medical history. She denied recent
trauma or surgeries.
Visual acuity was 20/20 OU with minimal refractive error, full ex-
traocular movements, and no ptosis. Neurologic examination was un-
remarkable. Blood pressure was 123/79, and work-up was negative for
diabetes or blood dyscrasia. Slit lamp examination of the right eye
demonstrated multiple unilateral preretinal hemorrhages with 3 pre-
sent inferiorly along with a hemorrhage over the optic nerve (Fig. 1A)
and a shallow, incomplete posterior vitreous detachment. Optical Co-
herence Tomography (OCT) demonstrated the pre-retinal location of
the hemorrhage (Fig. 1B). Dilated fundus examination was otherwise
unremarkable with normal vasculature including no plaques noted in
the vessels, no nonperfusion, and no neovascularization. Scleral de-
pression demonstrated no retinal tears, breaks, or detachments. The left
eye was unremarkable (Fig. 1C). The patient's symptoms improved ra-
pidly over 2 weeks. When seen for follow-up 2 months later, the he-
morrhages were self-limited and there was resolution of the preretinal
hemorrhages with no interval retinal tears (Fig. 2).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2018.04.017
Received 19 October 2017; Received in revised form 20 March 2018; Accepted 17 April 2018
∗ Corresponding author. Kellogg Eye Center, University of Michigan, 1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA.
E-mail address: ypaulus@med.umich.edu (Y.M. Paulus).
American Journal of Ophthalmology Case Reports 11 (2018) 181–183
Available online 19 April 2018
2451-9936/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
T
 3. Discussion
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is being increas-
ingly utilized by patients for a host of medical conditions, often without
informing physicians.1 Chiropractic manipulation has been associated
with numerous eye conditions, primarily due to the carotid artery being
adjacent to the region of adjustment and manipulation, which in rare
cases can lead to carotid dissection. Approximately 100 cases of stroke
have been reported following chiropractic manipulation.2,3 Chir-
opractor adverse effects on the eyes have also been reviewed and are
thought to be related to arterial wall dissection,4 including central
retinal artery occlusion,5,6 nystagmus,7 Wallenberg syndrome,8 oph-
thalmoplegia,9 Horner syndrome,10 loss of vision,11 hemianopsia (likely
from stroke),12 diplopia,13 and ptosis.14
Upper spinal manipulation with the HVLA technique involves high
velocity, low-amplitude thrusts on the cervical spine administered
posteriorly. No other etiology of the preretinal hemorrhages was found
on work-up (no leukemic retinopathy, hypertension, diabetes, or retinal
tear). The temporal association immediately while driving home from
the chiropractic procedure makes other causes less likely, although we
cannot exclude Valsalva retinopathy or progressive posterior vitreous
detachment. Given the lack of any retinal vessel abnormalities or pla-
ques along with the temporal association, we postulate that the chir-
opractor neck manipulation itself induced vitreo-retinal traction that
likely led to preretinal hemorrhages which were self-limited. It is also
possible that the HVLA technique could have mechanically assisted
with induction of a posterior vitreous detachment.
The ophthalmic manifestations of chiropractor neck manipulation
has primarily been viewed previously from its effect on the carotid
artery and subsequent central retinal artery along with adjacent neu-
rons, but this case demonstrates that it can also lead to multiple
preretinal hemorrhages.
4. Conclusions
Chiropractor neck manipulation has previously been reported
leading to complications related to the carotid artery (eg, dissection)
and arterial plaques. This presents the first case of multiple acute,
unilateral
preretinal
hemorrhages
immediately
following cervical
spinal manipulation using the high-velocity, low-amplitude technique
on the posterior spine that spontaneously resolved.
Patient consent
The patient consented to the submission and publication of this case
report with documentation on file.
Acknowledgements and disclosures
Funding
Funding was provided in part by the National Eye Institute
Michigan
Vision
Clinician-Scientist
Development
Program
4K12EY022299 (YMP).
Conflicts of interest
None of the authors has a conflict of interest with the submission.
Authorship
All authors attest that they meet the current ICMJE criteria for au-
thorship.
Acknowledgements
None.
All research was performed in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki and all local, regional, and national law.
References
1. Eisenberg DM, Kessler RC, Foster C, Norlock FE, Calkins DR, Delbanco TL.
Unconventional medicine in the United States. Prevalence, costs, and patterns of use.
N Engl J Med. 1993;328(4):246–252.
2. Sédat J, Dib M, Mahagne MH, Lonjon M, Paquis P. Stroke after chiropractic ma-
nipulation as a result of extracranial postero-inferior cerebellar artery dissection. J
Manip Physiol Ther. 2002;25(9):588–590.
3. Rothwell DM, Bondy SJ, Williams JI. Chiropractic manipulation and stroke: a po-
pulation-based case-control study. Stroke. 2001;32(5):1054–1060.
4. Ernst E. Ophthalmological adverse effects of (chiropractic) upper spinal manipula-
tion: evidence from recent case reports. Acta Ophthalmol Scand. 2005;83(5):581–585.
Fig. 1. Imaging on presentation demonstrating preretinal hemorrhages right eye. A. Optos ultra-widefield scanning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO) image
(Daytona, Optos, Dunfernline, Scotland, UK) of the right eye on presentation demonstrating preretinal boat-shaped hemorrhage in the inferior macula, inferonasal to
the optic nerve, over the optic nerve head, and inferiorly in the vitreous cavity in a comma shape with no vascular abnormality. B. Optovue spectral domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT, Optovue Inc, Fremont, CA, USA) image demonstrating the preretinal hyperreflective hemorrhage on the top right with shadowing
behind. C. Optos SLO image of the left eye on presentation demonstrating no hemorrhage or vascular abnormality.
Fig. 2. Imaging 2 months later. Optos scanning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO)
image right eye 2 months after presentation with interval resolution of all
preretinal hemorrhage and normal fundus appearance.
Y.M. Paulus, N. Belill
American Journal of Ophthalmology Case Reports 11 (2018) 181–183
182
 5. Jang YJ, Chun JW, Lee SW, Kim HC. A case of central retinal artery occlusion after
chiropractic manipulation of the neck. Kor J Ophthalmol. 2012;26(2):132–134.
6. Jumper JM, Horton JC. Central retinal artery occlusion after manipulation of the
neck by a chiropractor. Am J Ophthalmol. 1996;121(3):321–322.
7. Wang JL, Lin JJ, Lin JC, Lie CC, Shih TP, Tsao WL. Vertebral artery dissection
complicated by cervical manipulation: a case report. Zhonghua Yixue Zazhi.
1995;55(6):496–500.
8. Alimi Y, Tonolli I, Di Mauro P, et al. Manipulations of cervical vertebrae and trauma
of the vertebral artery. Report of two cases. J Mal Vasc. 1996;21(5):320–323.
9. Simnad VI. Acute onset of painful ophthalmoplegia following chiropractic manip-
ulation of the neck. Initial sign of intracranial aneurysm. West J Med.
1997;166(3):207–210.
10. Parwar BL, Fawzi AA, Arnold AC, Schwartz SD. Horner's syndrome and dissection of
the internal carotid artery after chiropractic manipulation of the neck. Am J
Ophthalmol. 2001;131(4):523–524.
11. Tsuboi K, Tsuboi K. Retinal and cerebral artery embolism after “shiatsu” on the neck.
Stroke. 2001;32(10):2441.
12. Donzis PB, Factor JS. Visual field loss resulting from cervical chiropractic manip-
ulation. Am J Ophthalmol. 1997;123(6):851–852.
13. Jones MR, Waggoner R, Hoyt WF. Cerebral polyopia with extrastriate quad-
rantanopia: report of a case with magnetic resonance documentation of V2/V3
cortical infarction. J Neuro Ophthalmol. 1999;19(1):1–6.
14. Nadgir RN, Loevner LA, Ahmed T, et al. Simultaneous bilateral internal carotid and
vertebral artery dissection following chiropractic manipulation: case report and re-
view of the literature. Neuroradiology. 2003;45(5):311–314.
Y.M. Paulus, N. Belill
American Journal of Ophthalmology Case Reports 11 (2018) 181–183
183
