 nutrients
Review
Effects of Probiotics, Prebiotics, and Synbiotics on
Human Health
Paulina Markowiak * and Katarzyna ´
Sli˙
zewska *
Institute of Fermentation Technology and Microbiology, Department of Biotechnology and Food Sciences,
Lodz University of Technology, 90-924 Łód´
z, Poland
* Correspondence: paulina.markowiak@dokt.p.lodz.pl (P.M.); katarzyna.slizewska@p.lodz.pl (K.´
S.);
Tel.: +48-42-6313-481 (P.M. & K.´
S.)
Received: 24 July 2017; Accepted: 12 September 2017; Published: 15 September 2017
Abstract: The human gastrointestinal tract is colonised by a complex ecosystem of microorganisms.
Intestinal bacteria are not only commensal, but they also undergo a synbiotic co-evolution along
with their host. Beneficial intestinal bacteria have numerous and important functions, e.g., they
produce various nutrients for their host, prevent infections caused by intestinal pathogens, and
modulate a normal immunological response. Therefore, modification of the intestinal microbiota
in order to achieve, restore, and maintain favourable balance in the ecosystem, and the activity of
microorganisms present in the gastrointestinal tract is necessary for the improved health condition of
the host. The introduction of probiotics, prebiotics, or synbiotics into human diet is favourable for
the intestinal microbiota. They may be consumed in the form of raw vegetables and fruit, fermented
pickles, or dairy products. Another source may be pharmaceutical formulas and functional food.
This paper provides a review of available information and summarises the current knowledge on the
effects of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics on human health. The mechanism of beneficial action
of those substances is discussed, and verified study results proving their efficacy in human nutrition
are presented.
Keywords: probiotic bacteria; prebiotics; synbiotics; human health; gut microbiota
1. Introduction
Nowadays, besides the basic role of nutrition consisting in the supply of necessary nutrients
for growth and development of the organism, some additional aspects are becoming increasingly
important, including the maintenance of health and counteracting diseases. In the world of highly
processed food, particular attention is drawn to the composition and safety of consumed products.
The quality of food is very important because of, i.e., the problem of food poisoning, obesity, allergy,
cardiovascular diseases, and cancer—the plague of the 21st century. Scientific reports point to the
health benefits of using probiotics and prebiotics in human nutrition. The word “probiotic” comes
from Greek, and it means “for life”. Most probably, it was Ferdinand Vergin who invented the
term “probiotic” in 1954, in his article entitled “Anti-und Probiotika” comparing the harmful effects
of antibiotics and other antibacterial agents on the intestinal microbiota with the beneficial effects
(“probiotika”) of some useful bacteria [1]. Some time after that, in 1965, Lilly and Stillwell described
probiotics as microorganisms stimulating the growth of other microorganisms [2]. The definition
of probiotics has been modified and changed many times. To emphasise their microbial origin,
Fuller (1989) stated that probiotics must be viable microorganisms and must exert a beneficial effect
on their host [3]. On the other hand, Guarner and Schaafsma (1998) indicated the necessary use of
an appropriate dose of probiotic organisms required to achieve the expected effect [4]. The current
definition, formulated in 2002 by FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations)
and WHO (World Health Organization) working group experts, states that probiotics are “live strains
Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021; doi:10.3390/nu9091021
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
2 of 30
of strictly selected microorganisms which, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health
benefit on the host” [5]. The definition was maintained by the International Scientific Association for
Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) in 2013 [6].
Results of clinical studies confirm the positive effect of probiotics on gastrointestinal diseases
(e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, gastrointestinal disorders, elimination of Helicobacter, inflammatory
bowel disease, diarrhoeas) and allergic diseases (e.g., atopic dermatitis).
Many clinical studies
have proven the effectiveness of probiotics for treatment of diseases such as obesity, insulin
resistance syndrome, type 2 diabetes, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Furthermore, the positive
effects of probiotics on human health have been demonstrated by increasing the body’s immunity
(immunomodulation). Scientific reports also show the benefits of the prophylactic use of probiotics in
different types of cancer and side effects associated with cancer. Many clinical studies have proven
the effectiveness of probiotics, and recommended doses of probiotics are those that have been used
in a particular case. Keep in mind that how probiotics work may depend on the strain, dose, and
components used to produce a given probiotic product.
In 1995, prebiotics were defined by Gibson and Roberfroid as non-digested food components
that, through the stimulation of growth and/or activity of a single type or a limited amount of
microorganisms residing in the gastrointestinal tract, improve the health condition of a host [7].
In 2004, the definition was updated and prebiotics were defined as selectively fermented components
allowing specific changes in the composition and/or activity of microorganisms in the gastrointestinal
tract, beneficial for host’s health and wellbeing [8]. Finally, in 2007, FAO/WHO experts described
prebiotics as a nonviable food component that confers a health benefit on the host associated with
modulation of the microbiota [9].
Prebiotics may be used as an alternative to probiotics or as an additional support for them.
However different prebiotics will stimulate the growth of different indigenous gut bacteria. Prebiotics
have enormous potential for modifying the gut microbiota, but these modifications occur at the level
of individual strains and species and are not easily predicted a priori. There are many reports on the
beneficial effects of prebiotics on human health.
High potential is attributed to the simultaneous use of probiotics and prebiotics. In 1995, Gibson
and Roberfroid introduced the term “synbiotic” to describe a combination of synergistically acting
probiotics and prebiotics [7]. A selected component introduced to the gastrointestinal tract should
selectively stimulate growth and/or activate the metabolism of a physiological intestinal microbiota,
thus conferring beneficial effect to the host’s health [10]. As the word “synbiotic” implies synergy,
the term should be reserved for those products in which a prebiotic component selectively favours a
probiotic microorganism [11]. The principal purpose of that type of combination is the improvement
of survival of probiotic microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract.
Synbiotics have both probiotic and prebiotic properties and were created in order to overcome
some possible difficulties in the survival of probiotics in the gastrointestinal tract [12]. Therefore,
an appropriate combination of both components in a single product should ensure a superior effect,
compared to the activity of the probiotic or prebiotic alone [13,14].
The aim of the review was to discuss the mechanisms of action of probiotics, prebiotics, and
synbiotics, as well as the current insight into their effect on human health. The selection of probiotic
strains, prebiotics, and their respective dosages is crucial in obtaining a therapeutic effect, so separate
sections are dedicated to this topic. Further research into the acquisition of new probiotic strains,
the selection of probiotics and prebiotics for synbiotics, dose setting, safety of use, and clinical trials
documenting the desired health effects is necessary. Effects should be confirmed in properly scheduled
clinical trials conducted by independent research centres.
2. Probiotics
The knowledge of the beneficial effects of lactic acid fermentation on human health dates back to
ancient times. The Bible mentions sour milk several times. Ancient Romans and Greeks knew various
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
3 of 30
recipes for fermented milk. A specific type of sour milk, called “leben raib”, prepared from buffalo,
cow, or goat milk, was consumed in ancient Egypt. A similar “jahurt” was also commonly consumed
by people inhabiting the Balkans. In India, fermented milk drinks were known already 800–300 years
B.C., and in Turkey in the 8th century. A milk drink called “ajran” was consumed in Central Russia in
the 12th century, and “tarho” was consumed in Hungary in the 14th century [15].
A particular interest in lactic acid fermentation was expressed in the beginning of the 20th century
by the Russian scientist and immunologist working for the Pasteur Institute in Paris, awarded with
the Nobel Prize in medicine for his work on immunology (in 1907), Ilia Miecznikow. Here is a quote
from his book “Studies on Optimism”: “with various foods undergoing lactic acid fermentation and
consumed raw (sour milk, kefir, sauerkraut, pickles) humans introduced huge amounts of proliferating
lactic acid bacteria to their alimentary tracts” [16].
2.1. Selection Criteria and Requirements for Probiotic Strains
According to the suggestions of the WHO, FAO, and EFSA (the European Food Safety Authority),
in their selection process, probiotic strains must meet both safety and functionality criteria, as well as
those related to their technological usefulness (Table 1). Probiotic characteristics are not associated
with the genus or species of a microorganism, but with few and specially selected strains of a
particular species [6]. The safety of a strain is defined by its origin, the absence of association with
pathogenic cultures, and the antibiotic resistance profile. Functional aspects define their survival
in the gastrointestinal tract and their immunomodulatory effect. Probiotic strains have to meet the
requirements associated with the technology of their production, which means they have to be able
to survive and maintain their properties throughout the storage and distribution processes [17].
Probiotics should also have documented pro-health effects consistent with the characteristics of the
strain present in a marketed product. Review papers and scientific studies on one strain may not be
used for the promotion of other strains as probiotics. It has to be considered, as well, that the studies
documenting probiotic properties of a particular strain at a tested dose do not constitute evidence of
similar properties of a different dose of the same strain. Also, the type of carrier/matrix is important,
as it may reduce the viability of a particular strain, thus changing the properties of a product [18,19].
Table 1. Selection criteria of probiotic strains [5,20].
Criterion
Required Properties
Safety
•
Human or animal origin.
•
Isolated from the gastrointestinal tract of healthy individuals.
•
History of safe use.
•
Precise diagnostic identification (phenotype and genotype traits).
•
Absence of data regarding an association with infective disease.
•
Absence of the ability to cleave bile acid salts.
•
No adverse effects.
•
Absence of genes responsible for antibiotic resistance localised in non-stable elements.
Functionality
•
Competitiveness with respect to the microbiota inhabiting the intestinal ecosystem.
•
Ability to survive and maintain the metabolic activity, and to grow in the target site.
•
Resistance to bile salts and enzymes.
•
Resistance to low pH in the stomach.
•
Competitiveness with respect to microbial species inhabiting the intestinal ecosystem
(including closely related species).
•
Antagonistic activity towards pathogens (e.g., H. pylori, Salmonella sp., Listeria monocytogenes,
Clostridium difficile).
•
Resistance to bacteriocins and acids produced by the endogenic intestinal microbiota.
•
Adherence and ability to colonise some particular sites within the host organism, and an appropriate
survival rate in the gastrointestinal system.
Technological
usability
•
Easy production of high biomass amounts and high productivity of cultures.
•
Viability and stability of the desired properties of probiotic bacteria during the fixing process
(freezing, freeze-drying), preparation, and distribution of probiotic products.
•
High storage survival rate in finished products (in aerobic and micro-aerophilic conditions).
•
Guarantee of desired sensory properties of finished products (in the case of the food industry).
•
Genetic stability.
•
Resistance to bacteriophages.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
4 of 30
2.2. Probiotic Microorganisms
Probiotic products may contain one or more selected microbial strains.
Human probiotic
microorganisms belong mostly to the following geni: Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Lactococus,
Streptococcus, Enterococcus. Moreover, strains of Gram-positive bacteria belonging to the genus Bacillus and
some yeast strains belonging to the genus Saccharomyces are commonly used in probiotic products [21].
Probiotics are subject to regulations contained in the general food law, according to which they
should be safe for human and animal health. In the USA, microorganisms used for consumption
purposes should have the GRAS (Generally Regarded As Safe) status, regulated by the FDA (Food and
Drug Administration). In Europe, EFSA introduced the term of QPS (Qualified Presumption of Safety).
The QPS concept involves some additional criteria of the safety assessment of bacterial supplements,
including the history of safe usage and absence of the risk of acquired resistance to antibiotics [22,23].
Table 2 presents probiotic microorganisms contained in pharmaceutical products and as food additives.
Table 2. Probiotic microorganisms used in human nutrition [24–26].
Type Lactobacillus
Type Bifidobacterium
Other Lactic Acid Bacteria
Other Microorganisms
L. acidophilus (a),*
L. amylovorus (b),*
L. casei (a),(b),*
L. gasseri (a),*
L. helveticus (a),*
L. johnsonii (b),*
L. pentosus (b),*
L. plantarum (b),*
L. reuteri (a),*
L. rhamnosus (a),(b),*
B. adolescentis (a)
B. animalis (a),*
B. bifidum (a)
B. breve (b)
B. infantis (a)
B. longum (a),*
Enterococcus faecium (a)
Lactococcus lactis (b),*
Streptococcus thermophilus (a),*
Bacillus clausii (a),*
Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (a)
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(boulardi) (a),*
(a) Mostly as pharmaceutical products; (b) mostly as food additives; * QPS (Qualified Presumption of Safety) microorganisms.
2.3. Mechanism of Action of Probiotics
A significant progress has been observed lately in the field of studies on probiotics, mostly in
terms of the selection and characteristics of individual probiotic cultures, their possible use, and their
effect on health.
Probiotics have numerous advantageous functions in human organisms. Their main advantage
is the effect on the development of the microbiota inhabiting the organism in the way ensuring
proper balance between pathogens and the bacteria that are necessary for a normal function of the
organism [27,28]. Live microorganisms meeting the applicable criteria are used in the production
of functional food and in the preservation of food products. Their positive effect is used for the
restoration of natural microbiota after antibiotic therapy [29,30]. Another function is counteracting
the activity of pathogenic intestinal microbiota, introduced from contaminated food and environment.
Therefore, probiotics may effectively inhibit the development of pathogenic bacteria, such as
Clostridium perfringens [31], Campylobacter jejuni [32], Salmonella Enteritidis [33], Escherichia coli [34],
various species of Shigella [35], Staphylococcus [36], and Yersinia [37], thus preventing food poisoning.
A positive effect of probiotics on digestion processes, treatment of food allergies [38,39], candidoses [40],
and dental caries [41] has been confirmed. Probiotic microorganisms such as Lactobacillus plantarum [42],
Lactobacillus reuteri [43], Bifidobacterium adolescentis, and Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum [44] are
natural producers of B group vitamins (B1, B2, B3, B6, B8, B9, B12). They also increase the efficiency of
the immunological system, enhance the absorption of vitamins and mineral compounds, and stimulate
the generation of organic acids and amino acids [18,45–47]. Probiotic microorganisms may also be able
to produce enzymes, such as esterase, lipase, and co-enzymes A, Q, NAD, and NADP. Some products of
probiotics’ metabolism may also show antibiotic (acidophiline, bacitracin, lactacin), anti-cancerogenic,
and immunosuppressive properties [45,48–50].
Molecular and genetic studies allowed the determination of the basics of the beneficial effect of
probiotics, involving four mechanisms:
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
5 of 30
(1)
Antagonism through the production of antimicrobial substances [51];
(2)
Competition with pathogens for adhesion to the epithelium and for nutrients [52];
(3)
Immunomodulation of the host [53];
(4)
Inhibition of bacterial toxin production [54].
The first two mechanisms are directly associated with their effect on other microorganisms.
Those mechanisms are important in prophylaxis and treatment of infections, and in the maintenance
of balance of the host’s intestinal microbiota. The ability of probiotic strains to co-aggregate, as one of
their mechanisms of action, may lead to the formation of a protective barrier preventing pathogenic
bacteria from the colonisation of the epithelium [27]. Probiotic bacteria may be able to adhere to
epithelial cells, thus blocking pathogens. That mechanism exerts an important effect on the host’s
health condition. Moreover, the adhesion of probiotic microorganisms to epithelial cells may trigger a
signalling cascade, leading to immunological modulation. Alternatively, the release of some soluble
components may cause a direct or indirect (through epithelial cells) activation of immunological cells.
This effect plays an important role in the prevention and treatment of contagious diseases, as well as in
chronic inflammation of the alimentary tract or of a part thereof [28]. There are also suggestions of a
possible role of probiotics in the elimination of cancer cells [55].
Results of in vitro studies indicate the role of low-molecular-weight substances produced
by probiotic microorganisms (e.g., hydroperoxide and short-chain fatty acids) in inhibiting the
replication of pathogens [28]. For example, Lactobacillus genus bacteria may be able to produce
bacteriocins, including low-molecular-weight substances (LMWB—antibacterial peptides), as well
as high-molecular-weight ones (class III bacteriocins), and some antibiotics.
Probiotic bacteria
(e.g., Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium) may produce the so-called de-conjugated bile acids (derivatives
of bile acids), demonstrating stronger antibacterial effect than the bile salts produced by their
host [28,56]. Further studies are necessary to explain the mechanism of acquiring resistance to
their own metabolites by Lactobacillus genus bacteria. The nutrient essential for nearly all bacteria,
except for lactic acid bacteria, is iron. It turns out that Lactobacillus bacteria do not need iron in
their natural environment, which may be their crucial advantage over other microorganisms [57].
Lactobacillus delbrueckii affects the function of other microbes by binding iron hydroxide to its cellular
surface, thus making it unavailable to other microbes [58].
The immunomodulatory effect of the intestinal microbiota, including probiotic bacteria, is based
on three, seemingly contradictory phenomena [53,59]:
(1)
Induction and maintenance of the state of immunological tolerance to environmental antigens
(nutritional and inhalatory);
(2)
Induction and control of immunological reactions against pathogens of bacterial and viral origin;
(3)
Inhibition of auto-aggressive and allergic reactions.
Probiotic-induced immunological stimulation is also manifested by the increased production of
immunoglobulins, enhanced activity of macrophages and lymphocytes, and stimulation of γ-interferon
production. Probiotics may influence the congenital and acquired immunological system through
metabolites, components of the cellular wall, and DNA, recognised by specialised cells of the host
(e.g., those equipped with receptors) [28]. The principal host cells that are important in the context of
the immune response are intestinal epithelial cells and intestinal immune cells. Components of the
cellular wall of lactic acid bacteria stimulate the activity of macrophages. Those, in turn, are able to
destroy microbes rapidly by the increased production of free oxygen radicals and lysosomal enzymes.
Probiotic bacteria are also able to stimulate the production of cytokines by immunocompetent cells
of the gastrointestinal tract [60]. On the other hand, the immunological activity of yeast is associated
with the presence of glucans in their cellular wall. Those compounds stimulate the response of the
reticuloendothelial system [61].
The last of the abovementioned probiotic effects—inhibition of the production of bacterial
toxins—is based on actions leading to toxin inactivation and help with the removal of toxins from
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
6 of 30
the body. Help in detoxification from the body can take place by adsorption (some strains can bind
toxins to their cell wall and reduce the intestinal absorption of toxins), but can also result from the
metabolism of mycotoxins (e.g., aflatoxin) by microorganisms [62–64]. However, not all probiotics
exhibit detoxifying properties, as it is a strain-related characteristic. Studies should therefore be
conducted to select strains with such characteristics. The effectiveness of some probiotics in combating
diarrhoea is probably associated with their ability to protect the host from toxins. The reduction
of metabolic reactions leading to the production of toxins is also associated with the stimulation of
pathways leading to the production of native enzymes, vitamins, and antimicrobial substances [28].
Gut microbiota play a significant role in host metabolic processes (e.g., the regulation of cholesterol
absorption, blood pressure (BP), and glucose metabolism), and recent metagenomic surveys have
revealed that they are involved in host immune modulation and that they influence host development
and physiology (organ development) [65–67]. Nutritional programming to manipulate the composition
of the intestinal microbiota through the administration of probiotics continues to receive much attention
for the prevention or attenuation of the symptoms of metabolic-related diseases. Currently, studies are
exploring the potential for expanded uses of probiotics for improving health conditions in metabolic
disorders that increase the risk of developing cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension. Further
investigations are required to evaluate the targeted and effective use of the wide variety of probiotic
strains in various metabolic disorders to improve the overall health status of the host [65].
In order to confirm the beneficial role of probiotics in improving cardiovascular health and in the
reduction of BP, more extensive studies are needed to understand the mechanisms underlying probiotic
action. Most probably, all of the abovementioned mechanisms of probiotic action have an effect on the
protection against infections, cancer, and the stabilization of balance of the host’s intestinal microbiota.
However, it seems unlikely that each of the probiotic microorganisms has properties of all four aspects
simultaneously and constitutes a universal remedy to multiple diseases. An important role in the action
of probiotics is played by species- and strain-specific traits, such as: cellular structure, cell surface,
size, metabolic properties, and substances secreted by microorganisms. The use of a combination of
probiotics demonstrating various mechanisms of action may provide enhanced protection offered by a
bio-therapeutic product [68]. Figure 1 summarises the mechanisms and effects of action of probiotics.
Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021 
7 of 28 
 
 
Figure 1. Mechanisms of action of synbiotics and their effects.  
2.4. Probiotics for Humans 
In the face of widespread diseases and ageing societies, the use of knowledge on microbiocenosis 
of the gastrointestinal tract and on the beneficial effect of probiotic bacteria is becoming increasingly 
important. The consumption of pre-processed food (fast food), often containing excessive amounts 
of fat and insufficient amounts of vegetables, is another factor of harmful modification of human 
intestinal microbiota. There is currently no doubt about the fact that the system of intestinal 
microorganisms and its desirable modification with probiotic formulas and products may protect 
people against enteral problems, and influence the overall improvement of health.  
Probiotics may be helpful in the treatment of inflammatory enteral conditions, including 
ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and non-specific ileitis. The aetiology of those diseases is not 
completely understood, but it is evident that they are associated with chronic and recurrent infections 
or inflammations of the intestine. Clinical studies have demonstrated that probiotics lead to the 
remission of ulcerative colitis, but no positive effect on Crohn’s disease has been observed [69,70]. 
Numerous studies assessed the use of probiotics in the treatment of lactose intolerance [71,72], 
irritable bowel syndrome, and the prevention of colorectal cancer [73] and peptic ulcers [74].  
Considering their role in the inhibition of some bacterial enzymes, probiotics may reduce the 
risk of colorectal carcinoma in animals. However, the same effect in humans has not been confirmed 
in clinical trials [75]. On the other hand, a positive effect on the urogenital system (prevention and 
treatment of Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs) and bacterial vaginitis) constitutes an excellent example 
of the benefits associated with the use of probiotics [76–78]. There were attempts to apply probiotics 
to pregnant women and neonates in order to prevent allergic diseases such as atopic dermatitis. 
However, the scope of action is controversial in this kind of case [79]. There is evidence that the 
consumption of probiotics-containing dairy products results in the reduction of blood cholesterol, 
which may be helpful in the prevention of obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and cerebral 
stroke [80]. The reduction of cholesterol level achieved due to probiotics is less pronounced compared 
to the effect of pharmaceutical agents, but leads to a significant minimisation of side effects [80]. Other 
studies confirmed the effect of the probiotic formula VSL#3 and of the Oxalobacter formigenes bacterial 
Figure 1. Mechanisms of action of synbiotics and their effects.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
7 of 30
2.4. Probiotics for Humans
In the face of widespread diseases and ageing societies, the use of knowledge on microbiocenosis
of the gastrointestinal tract and on the beneficial effect of probiotic bacteria is becoming increasingly
important. The consumption of pre-processed food (fast food), often containing excessive amounts of
fat and insufficient amounts of vegetables, is another factor of harmful modification of human intestinal
microbiota. There is currently no doubt about the fact that the system of intestinal microorganisms and
its desirable modification with probiotic formulas and products may protect people against enteral
problems, and influence the overall improvement of health.
Probiotics may be helpful in the treatment of inflammatory enteral conditions, including ulcerative
colitis, Crohn’s disease, and non-specific ileitis. The aetiology of those diseases is not completely
understood, but it is evident that they are associated with chronic and recurrent infections or
inflammations of the intestine. Clinical studies have demonstrated that probiotics lead to the remission
of ulcerative colitis, but no positive effect on Crohn’s disease has been observed [69,70]. Numerous
studies assessed the use of probiotics in the treatment of lactose intolerance [71,72], irritable bowel
syndrome, and the prevention of colorectal cancer [73] and peptic ulcers [74].
Considering their role in the inhibition of some bacterial enzymes, probiotics may reduce the
risk of colorectal carcinoma in animals. However, the same effect in humans has not been confirmed
in clinical trials [75]. On the other hand, a positive effect on the urogenital system (prevention and
treatment of Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs) and bacterial vaginitis) constitutes an excellent example
of the benefits associated with the use of probiotics [76–78]. There were attempts to apply probiotics
to pregnant women and neonates in order to prevent allergic diseases such as atopic dermatitis.
However, the scope of action is controversial in this kind of case [79]. There is evidence that the
consumption of probiotics-containing dairy products results in the reduction of blood cholesterol,
which may be helpful in the prevention of obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and cerebral
stroke [80]. The reduction of cholesterol level achieved due to probiotics is less pronounced compared
to the effect of pharmaceutical agents, but leads to a significant minimisation of side effects [80].
Other studies confirmed the effect of the probiotic formula VSL#3 and of the Oxalobacter formigenes
bacterial strain on the elimination of oxalates with urine, which may potentially reduce the risk of
urolithiasis [81]. Studies on animals demonstrated that orally administered Lactobacillus acidophilus
induces expression of µ-opioid and cannabinoid receptors in intestinal cells and mediate analgesic
functions in the intestine, and that the observed effect is comparable to the effect of morphine [82].
However, the effect has not been demonstrated in humans.
There are many reports on the application of probiotics in the treatment of diarrhoea.
The application of Saccharomyces boulardii yeast to patients with acute, watery diarrhoea resulted in the
cure and reduced frequency of that type of complaints in two subsequent months [83]. The efficacy
of probiotic strains in the therapy of nosocomial, non-nosocomial, and viral diarrhoeas has also been
documented. It turns out that probiotics may increase the amount of IgA antibodies, which leads to
the arrest of a viral infection [84].
Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (AAD) is a common complication of most antibiotics and
Clostridium difficile disease (CDD), which also is incited by antibiotics, and is a leading cause of
nosocomial outbreaks of diarrhoea and colitis. The use of probiotics for these two related diseases
remains controversial. A variety of different types of probiotics show promise as effective therapies
for these two diseases.
Using meta-analyses, three types of probiotics (Saccharomyces boulardii,
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, and probiotic mixtures) significantly reduced the development of
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. Only S. boulardii was effective for CDD [85].
Studies performed in a foster home in Helsinki (Finland) demonstrated that the regular use of
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in the form of a probiotic resulted in a reduced number of respiratory
tract infections [86]. Other studies demonstrated that the application of a diet depleted of fermented
foods caused a reduction of congenital immunological response, as well as a significant reduction of
stool Lactobacillus count and of the stool amount of short-chain fatty acids. Moreover, the reduction
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
8 of 30
of phagocytic activity of leukocytes was observed after two weeks of the diet, which could have a
negative impact on the organism’s ability to protect against infections [87]. The effect of a fermented
product containing Lactobacillus gasseri CECT5714 and Lactobacillus coryniformis CECT5711 strains on
blood and stool parameters was studied in a randomised, double-blind trial on 30 healthy volunteers.
No negative effects were observed in the group of subjects receiving the probiotic strains. Some positive
effects were observed, including: the production of short-chain fatty acids, humidity, frequency and
volume of stools, and subjective improvement of intestinal function [88]. Studies by Alvaro et al. (2007)
demonstrated a significant reduction of Enterobacteriaceae count and increased galactosidase activity in
the alimentary tract of yoghurt consumers, compared to those who did not eat yoghurt [89]. Table 3
lists the results of studies focusing on the effect of probiotics on human health. There are examples of
clinical trials during which the probiotics group received the probiotic prophylactically or in addition
to the standard therapy.
Table 3. Examples of clinical trials regarding the effect of probiotics on human health.
References
Subjects
Microorganism
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Obesity
[90]
50 obese
adolescents
L. salivarius Ls-33
12 weeks
Increase in the ratios of Bacteroides, Prevotellae,
and Porphyromonas.
[91]
50 adolescents
with obesity
L. salivarius Ls-33
12 weeks
No effect.
[92]
87 subjects with
high BMI
L. gasseri SBT2055
12 weeks
Reduction in BMI, waist, abdominal VFA, and
hip circumference.
[93]
210 adults with
large VFA
L. gasseri SBT2055
12 weeks
Reduction in BMI and arterial BP values.
[94]
40 adults with
obesity
L. plantarum
3 weeks
Reduction in BMI and arterial BP values.
[95–97]
75 subjects with
high BMI
L. acidophilus La5,
B. lactis Bb12, L.
casei DN001
8 weeks
Changes in gene expression in PBMCs as well as BMI,
fat percentage, and leptin levels.
[98]
70 overweight and
obese subjects
E. faecium and 2, S.
thermophilus strains
8 weeks
Reduction in body weight, systolic BP, LDL-C, and
increase in fibrinogen levels.
[99]
60 overweight
subjects
Bifidobacterium,
Lactobacillus, S.
thermophilus
6 weeks
Improvement in lipid profile, insulin sensitivity, and
decrease in CRP.
[100]
58 obese PM
women
L. paracasei N19
6 weeks
No effect.
[101]
156 overweight
adults
L. acidophilus La5,
B. animalis subsp.
lactis Bb12
6 weeks
Reduction in fasting glucose concentration and increase
in HOMA-IR.
Insulin resistance syndrome
[102]
28 patients
with IRS
L. casei Shirota
12 weeks
No effect.
[103]
30 patients
with IRS
L. casei Shirota
12 weeks
Significant reduction in the VCAM-1 level.
[104]
24 PM women
with IRS
L. plantarum
12 weeks
Glucose and homocysteine levels were
significantly reduced.
Type 2 diabetes
[105]
40 patients
with T2D
L. planatarum A7
8 weeks
Decreased methylation process, SOD, and 8-OHDG.
[106]
45 patients
with T2D
L. acidophilus La-5,
B. animalis subsp.
lactis BB-12
6 weeks
Significant difference between groups concerning mean
changes of HbA1c, TC, and LDL-C.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
9 of 30
Table 3. Cont.
References
Subjects
Microorganism
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
[107]
44 patients
with T2D
L. acidophilus La-5,
B. animalis subsp.
lactis BB-12
8 weeks
Increased HDL-C levels and decreased
LDL-C/HDL-C ratio.
[108]
64 patients
with T2D
L. acidophilus La5,
B. lactis Bb12
6 weeks
Reduced fasting blood glucose and antioxidant status.
[109]
60 patients
with T2D
L. acidophilus La5,
B. lactis Bb12
6 weeks
TC and LDL-C improvement.
[110]
45 males with T2D
L. acidophilus
NCFM
4 weeks
No effect.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
[111]
20 obese children
with NAFLD
L. rhamnosus GG
8 weeks
Decreased ALT and PG-PS IgAg antibodies.
[112]
28 adult
individuals with
NAFLD
L. bulgaris, S.
thermophilus
12 weeks
Decreased ALT and γ-GTP levels.
[113]
72 patients with
NAFLD
L.acidophilus La5, B.
breve subsp. lactis
Bb12
8 weeks
Reduced serum levels of ALT, ASP, TC, and LDL-C.
[114]
44 obese children
with NAFLD
Bifidobacterium,
Lactobacillus, S.
thermophilus
16 weeks
Improved fatty liver severity, decreased BMI, and
increased GLP1/aGLP1.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), gastrointestinal disorders, elimination of Helicobacter, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), diarrhoeas
[115]
59 adults infected
with H. pylori
L. acidophilus La5,
B. lactis Bb12
6 weeks
Inhibitory effect against Helicobacter pylori.
[116]
16 patients infected
with H. pylori
L. casei Shirota
6 weeks
Inhibited growth of Helicobacter pylori (by 64% in the
probiotic group, and by 33% in the control).
[117]
269 children with
otitis media and/or
respiratory tract
infections
S. cerevisiae
(boulardii)
No data
Diarrhoea was less common in children receiving
probiotic yeast (7.5%) compared to those receiving
placebo (23%). No negative side effects were observed.
[118]
77 patients with
ulcerative colitis
Probiotic VSL#3
12 weeks
Remission in 42.9% of patients in the probiotic group,
and in 15.7% of patients in the placebo group.
[119]
90 breastfed
neonates with
intestinal colic
L. reuteri ATCC
55730
6 months
Elimination of pain and symptoms associated with
intestinal colic already after one week of the use of
the probiotic.
Atopic dermatitis
[120]
512 pregnant
women and 474
their newborn
infants
L. rhamnosus
HN001
women—from
35 weeks gestation
until 6 months if
breastfeeding,
infants—from birth
to 2 years
Substantially reduced the cumulative prevalence of
eczema in infants.
[121]
53 children with
moderate of severe
atopic dermatitis
L. fermentum VRI
033 PCCTM
8 weeks
Reduction in SCORAD.
[122]
156 mothers of
high-risk children
(i.e., positive family
history of allergic
disease) and their
offspring
B. bifidum, B. lactis,
L. lactis
Mothers—the last 6
weeks of
pregnancy,
offspring—12
months
Significantly reduction eczema in high-risk for a
minimum of 2 years provided that the probiotic was
administered to the infant within 3 months of birth.
[123]
50 children
with AD
B. animalis subsp
lactis
8 weeks
Significant reduction in the severity of AD with an
improved ration of IFN-γ and IL-10.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
10 of 30
Table 3. Cont.
References
Subjects
Microorganism
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Alleviation of lactose intolerance
[124]
15 healthy,
free-living adults
with lactose
maldigestion
S. lactis,
L. plantarum,
S. cremoris, L. casei,
S. diacetylactis,
S. florentinus,
L. cremoris
1 day
Improved lactose digestion and tolerance.
[125]
44 patients
B. animalis subsp.
animalis IM386
(DSM 26137),
L. plantarum
MP2026
(DSM 26329)
6 weeks
A significant lowering effect on diarrhoea and flatulence.
Different types of cancer and side effects associated with cancer
[126]
100 patients with
colorectal
carcinoma
L. plantarum
CGMMCC No
1258, L. acidophilus
LA-11, B. longum
BL-88
16 days
Improvement in the integrity of gut mucosal barrier and
decrease in infections complications.
[127]
63 patients with
diarrhoea during
radiotherapy in
cervical cancer
L. acidophilus,
B. bifidum
7 weeks
Reduction in incidence of diarrhoea and better
stool consistency.
[128]
150 patients
diagnosed with
colorectal cancer
L. rhamnosus 573
24 weeks
Patients had less grade 4 or 4 diarrhoea, less abdominal
discomfort, needed less hospital care, and had fewer
chemo dose reductions due to bowel toxicity.
Abbreviations: AD—atopic dermatitis; ALT—alanine amino transferase; ASP—aspartate amino transferase;
BMI—body mass index; BP—blood pressure; CRP—C-reactive protein; γ-GTP—γ-glutamyltranspeptidase;
GLP1—glucagon-like peptide 1;
HDL-C—high-density lipoprotein cholesterol;
HOMA-IR—homeostasis
model
assessment
of
insulin
resistance;
IL-10—interleukin
10;
LDL-C—low-density
lipoprotein
cholesterol;
NAFLD—non-alcoholic
fatty
liver
disease;
PBMC—peripheral
blood
mononuclear
cell;
PM—postmenopausal; SCORAD—SCORing Atopic Dermatitis; SOD—superoxide dismutase, sVCAM-1—soluble
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; TC—total cholesterol; T2D—type 2 diabetes; VFA—visceral fat area;
8-OHDG—8-hydroxy-2�-deoxyguanosine.
3. Prebiotics
Different prebiotics will stimulate the growth of different indigenous gut bacteria. Prebiotics have
enormous potential for modifying the gut microbiota, but these modifications occur at the level of
individual strains and species and are not easily predicted a priori. Furthermore, the gut environment,
especially pH, plays a key role in determining the outcome of interspecies competition. Both for
reasons of efficacy and of safety, the development of prebiotics intended to benefit human health has
to take account of the highly individual species profiles that may result [129].
Fruit, vegetables, cereals, and other edible plants are sources of carbohydrates constituting
potential prebiotics.
The following may be mentioned as such potential souces:
tomatoes,
artichokes, bananas, asparagus, berries, garlic, onions, chicory, green vegetables, legumes, as well
as oats, linseed, barley, and wheat [130]. Some artificially produced prebiotics are, among others:
lactulose, galactooligosaccharides, fructooligosaccharides, maltooligosaccharides, cyclodextrins, and
lactosaccharose. Lactulose constitutes a significant part of produced oligosaccharides (as much as 40%).
Fructans, such as inulin and oligofructose, are believed to be the most used and effective in relation to
many species of probiotics [131].
3.1. Prebiotic Selection Criteria
According to Wang (2009), there are five basic criteria for the classification of food components
such as prebiotics (Figure 2) [132]. The first criterion assumes that prebiotics are not digested (or just
partially digested) in the upper segments of the alimentary tract. As a consequence, they reach the
colon, where they are selectively fermented by potentially beneficial bacteria (a requirement of the
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
11 of 30
second criterion) [133]. The fermentation may lead to the increased production or a change in the
relative abundance of different short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), increased stool mass, a moderate
reduction of colonic pH, reduction of nitrous end products and faecal enzymes, and an improvement
of the immunological system [134], which is beneficial for the host (the requirement of the third
criterion).
Selective stimulation of growth and/or activity of the intestinal bacteria potentially
associated with health protection and wellbeing is considered another criterion [8]. The last criterion
of the classification assumes that a prebiotic must be able to withstand food processing conditions and
remained unchanged, non-degraded, or chemically unaltered and available for bacterial metabolism
in the intestine [132]. Huebner et al. (2008) tested several commercially available prebiotics using
various processing conditions. They found no significant changes of the prebiotic activity of the tested
substances in various processing conditions [135]. Meanwhile, Ze et al. (2012) showed that it was
possible to alter the ability of gut bacteria by utilising starch in vitro [136]. The structure of prebiotics
should be appropriately documented, and components used as pharmaceutical formulas, food, or feed
additives should be relatively easy to obtain at an industrial scale [137].
Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021 
11 of 28 
 
colon, where they are selectively fermented by potentially beneficial bacteria (a requirement of the 
second criterion) [133]. The fermentation may lead to the increased production or a change in the 
relative abundance of different short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), increased stool mass, a moderate 
reduction of colonic pH, reduction of nitrous end products and faecal enzymes, and an improvement 
of the immunological system [134], which is beneficial for the host (the requirement of the third 
criterion). Selective stimulation of growth and/or activity of the intestinal bacteria potentially 
associated with health protection and wellbeing is considered another criterion [8]. The last criterion 
of the classification assumes that a prebiotic must be able to withstand food processing conditions 
and remained unchanged, non-degraded, or chemically unaltered and available for bacterial 
metabolism in the intestine [132]. Huebner et al. (2008) tested several commercially available 
prebiotics using various processing conditions. They found no significant changes of the prebiotic 
activity of the tested substances in various processing conditions [135]. Meanwhile, Ze et al. (2012) 
showed that it was possible to alter the ability of gut bacteria by utilising starch in vitro [136]. The 
structure of prebiotics should be appropriately documented, and components used as 
pharmaceutical formulas, food, or feed additives should be relatively easy to obtain at an industrial 
scale [137]. 
 
Figure 2. Requirements for potential prebiotics [132,138]. 
Prebiotics may be used as an alternative to probiotics or as an additional support for them. Long-
term stability during the shelf-life of food, drinks, and feed, resistance to processing, and physical 
and chemical properties that exhibit a positive effect on the flavour and consistence of products may 
promote prebiotics as a competition to probiotics. Additionally, resistance to acids, proteases, and 
bile salts present in the gastrointestinal tract may be considered as other favourable properties of 
prebiotics. Prebiotic substances selectively stimulate microorganisms present in the host’s intestinal 
ecosystem, thus eliminating the need for competition with bacteria. Stimulation of the intestinal 
microbiota by prebiotics determines their fermentation activity, simultaneously influencing the SCFA 
level, which confers a health benefit on the host [139,140]. Moreover, prebiotics cause a reduction of 
intestinal pH and maintain the osmotic retention of water in the bowel [134]. However, it should be 
considered that an overdose of prebiotics may lead to flatulence and diarrhoea—these effects are 
absent in the case of excessive consumption of probiotics. Prebiotics may be consumed on a long-
term basis and for prophylactic purposes. Moreover, when used at correct doses, they do not 
stimulate any adverse effects, such as diarrhoea, susceptibility to UV light, or hepatic injuries caused 
by antibiotics. Prebiotic substances are not allergenic and do not proliferate the abundance of 
antibiotic-resistance genes. Of course, the effect of the elimination of selected pathogens achieved by 
the use of prebiotics may be inferior to antibiotics, but the properties mentioned above make them  
a natural substitute for antibiotics [134]. 
3.2. Prebiotic Substances 
The majority of identified prebiotics are carbohydrates of various molecular structures, naturally 
occurring in human and animal diets. The physiological properties of potential prebiotics determine 
their beneficial effect on the host’s health. Prebiotics may be classified according to those properties 
as [134]:  
 
not digested (or only partially digested); 
Prebiotic selection criteria
Resistance to 
digestion in the upper 
sections of the 
alimentary tract.
Fermentation by 
intestinal microbiota.
Beneficial effect on 
host's health.
Selective stimulation 
of growth of 
probiotics.
Stability in various 
food/feed processing 
conditions.
Figure 2. Requirements for potential prebiotics [132,138].
Prebiotics may be used as an alternative to probiotics or as an additional support for them.
Long-term stability during the shelf-life of food, drinks, and feed, resistance to processing, and physical
and chemical properties that exhibit a positive effect on the flavour and consistence of products may
promote prebiotics as a competition to probiotics. Additionally, resistance to acids, proteases, and
bile salts present in the gastrointestinal tract may be considered as other favourable properties of
prebiotics. Prebiotic substances selectively stimulate microorganisms present in the host’s intestinal
ecosystem, thus eliminating the need for competition with bacteria. Stimulation of the intestinal
microbiota by prebiotics determines their fermentation activity, simultaneously influencing the SCFA
level, which confers a health benefit on the host [139,140]. Moreover, prebiotics cause a reduction
of intestinal pH and maintain the osmotic retention of water in the bowel [134]. However, it should
be considered that an overdose of prebiotics may lead to flatulence and diarrhoea—these effects are
absent in the case of excessive consumption of probiotics. Prebiotics may be consumed on a long-term
basis and for prophylactic purposes. Moreover, when used at correct doses, they do not stimulate any
adverse effects, such as diarrhoea, susceptibility to UV light, or hepatic injuries caused by antibiotics.
Prebiotic substances are not allergenic and do not proliferate the abundance of antibiotic-resistance
genes. Of course, the effect of the elimination of selected pathogens achieved by the use of prebiotics
may be inferior to antibiotics, but the properties mentioned above make them a natural substitute for
antibiotics [134].
3.2. Prebiotic Substances
The majority of identified prebiotics are carbohydrates of various molecular structures, naturally
occurring in human and animal diets. The physiological properties of potential prebiotics determine
their beneficial effect on the host’s health. Prebiotics may be classified according to those properties
as [134]:
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
12 of 30
•
not digested (or only partially digested);
•
not absorbed in the small intestine;
•
poorly fermented by bacteria in the oral cavity;
•
well fermented by seemingly beneficial intestinal bacteria;
•
poorly fermented by potential pathogens in the bowel.
Carbohydrates, such as dietary fibre, are potential prebiotics. Prebiotic and dietary fibre are
terms used alternatively for food components that are not digested in the gastrointestinal tract.
A significant difference between those two terms is that prebiotics are fermented by strictly defined
groups of microorganisms, and dietary fibre is used by the majority of colonic microorganisms [141].
Therefore, considering one of the basic classification criteria, it turns out that using those terms
alternatively is not always correct. Prebiotics may be a dietary fibre, but dietary fibre is not always
a prebiotic [138].
The following non-starch polysaccharides are considered to be dietary fibre:
cellulose, hemicellulose, pectins, gums, substances obtained from marine algae, as well as lactulose,
soy oligosaccharides, inulins, fructooligosaccharides, galactooligosaccharides, xylooligosaccharides,
and isomaltooligosaccharides.
Based on the number of monomers bound together, prebiotics
may be classified as:
disaccharides, oligosaccharides (3–10 monomers), and polysaccharides.
The most promising and fulfilling criteria for the classification of prebiotic substances, as evidenced
by in vitro and in vivo studies, are oligosaccharides, including [142,143]: fructooligosaccharides
(FOS), galactooligosaccharides (GOS), isomaltooligosaccharides (IMO), xylooligosaccharides (XOS),
transgalactooligosaccharides (TOS), and soybean oligosaccharides (SBOS).
Also, polysaccharides such as inulin, reflux starch, cellulose, hemicellulose, or pectin may
potentially be prebiotics.
Examples of prebiotics that are most commonly used in human
nutrition are presented in Table 4.
The use of glucooligosaccharides, glicooligosaccharides,
lactitol, izomaltooligosaccharides, stachyose, raffinose, and saccharose as prebiotics requires further
studies [144].
Table 4. Examples of prebiotics and synbiotics used in human nutrition [134,145,146].
Human Nutrition
Prebiotics
Synbiotics
FOS
GOS
Inulin
XOS
Lactitol
Lactosucrose
Lactulose
Soy oligosaccharides
TOS
Lactobacillus genus bacteria + inulin
Lactobacillus, Streptococcus and Bifidobacterium genus bacteria + FOS
Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus genus bacteria + FOS
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium genus bacteria + oligofructose
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium genus bacteria + inulin
Abbreviations: FOS—fructooligosaccharides; GOS—galactooligosaccharides; TOS—transgalactooligosaccharides;
XOS—xylooligosaccharides.
3.3. Mechanism of Action of Prebiotics
Prebiotics are present in natural products, but they may also be added to food. The purpose
of these additions is to improve their nutritional and health value. Some examples are: inulin,
fructooligosaccharides, lactulose, and derivatives of galactose and β-glucans. Those substances may
serve as a medium for probiotics. They stimulate their growth, and contain no microorganisms.
Figure 2 presents the principal mechanisms of prebiotic action and some of their effects on the
host’s health. Prebiotics are not digested by host enzymes and reach the colon in a practically unaltered
form, where they are fermented by saccharolytic bacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium genus). The consumption
of prebiotics largely affects the composition of the intestinal microbiota and its metabolic activity [147].
This is due to the modulation of lipid metabolism, enhanced absorbability of calcium, effect on
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
13 of 30
the immunological system, and modification of the bowel function [147]. It is highly probable that
providing an energy source that only specific species in the microbiota can utilize has a greater impact
on microbiota composition and metabolism than these other factors. The molecular structure of
prebiotics determines their physiological effects and the types of microorganisms that are able to use
them as a source of carbon and energy in the bowel [134]. It was demonstrated that, despite the variety
of carbohydrates that exhibit the prebiotic activity, the effect of their administration is an increased
count of beneficial bacteria, mostly of the Bifidobacterium genus [148,149].
The mechanism of a beneficial effect of prebiotics on immunological functions remains unclear.
Several possible models have been proposed [150]:
(1)
Prebiotics are able to regulate the action of hepatic lipogenic enzymes by influencing the increased
production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as propionic acid.
(2)
The production of SCFAs (especially of butyric acid) as a result of fermentation was identified
as a modulator of histone acetylation, thus increasing the availability of numerous genes for
transcription factors.
(3)
The modulation of mucin production.
(4)
It was demonstrated that FOS and several other prebiotics cause an increased count of lymphocytes
and/or leukocytes in gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALTs) and in peripheral blood.
(5)
The increased secretion of IgA by GALTs may stimulate the phagocytic function of
intra-inflammatory macrophages.
The main aim of prebiotics is to stimulate the growth and activity of beneficial bacteria in the
gastrointestinal tract, which confers a health benefit on the host. Through mechanisms including
antagonism (the production of antimicrobial substances) and competition for epithelial adhesion
and for nutrients, the intestinal microbiota acts as a barrier for pathogens.
Final products of
carbohydrate metabolism are mostly SCFAs, namely: acetic acid, butyric acid, and propionic acid,
which are subsequently used by the host as a source of energy [151]. As a result of the fermentation
of carbohydrates, Bifidobacterium or Lactobacillus may produce some compounds inhibiting the
development of gastrointestinal pathogens, as well as cause a reduction in the intestinal pH [152].
Moreover, Bifidobacterium genus bacteria demonstrate tolerance to the produced SCFAs and reduced
pH. Therefore, due to their favourable effect on the development of beneficial intestinal bacteria,
the administration of prebiotics may participate in the inhibition of the development of pathogens.
There are very few documented study results regarding the inhibition of the development of pathogens
by prebiotics. In 1997 and 2003, Bovee-Oudenhoven et al. studied the use of lactulose in the prevention
of Salmonella Enteritidis infections on a rat model. Their results indicated that the acidification of
the intestine occurring as a result of lactulose fermentation caused the reduced development of
pathogens and increased translocation of pathogens from the bowel [153]. It was also demonstrated
that the administration of prebiotics increases the absorption of minerals, mostly of magnesium and
calcium [154,155].
3.4. Prebiotics for Humans
The presence of prebiotics in the diet may lead to numerous health benefits. Studies on colorectal
carcinoma demonstrated that the disease occurs less commonly in people who often eat vegetables
and fruit. This effect is attributed mostly to inulin and oligofructose [156]. Among the advantages
of those prebiotics, one may also mention the reduction of the blood LDL (low-density lipoprotein)
level, stimulation of the immunological system, increased absorbability of calcium, maintenance
of correct intestinal pH value, low caloric value, and alleviation of symptoms of peptic ulcers and
vaginal mycosis [157]. Other effects of inulin and oligofructose on human health are: the prevention of
carcinogenesis, as well as the support of lactose intolerance or dental caries treatment [131]. Rat studies
demonstrated that administration of inulin for five weeks caused a significant reduction of blood
triacylglycerol levels [156]. Human studies demonstrated that the daily use of 12 g of inulin for one
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
14 of 30
month led to the reduction of blood VLDL (very low-density lipoprotein) levels (the reduction of
triacylglycerols by 27%, and of cholesterol by 5%). This effect is associated with the effect of the prebiotic
on hepatic metabolism and the inhibition of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and of glukose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase. It is also supposed that oligofructose accelerates lipid catabolism [157].
Asahara et al. (2001) demonstrated a protective effect of galactooligosaccharides (GOS) in
the prevention of Salmonella Typhimurium infections in a murine model [158]. Buddington et al.
(2002) confirmed a positive effect of fructooligosaccharides (FOS) on protection against Salmonella
Typhimurium and Listeria monocytogenes infections [159].
Moreover, prebiotics are helpful in
combating pathogenic microorganisms, such as Salmonella Enteritidis and Escherichia coli, and reduce
odour compounds [160]. There are many reports regarding the positive effect of prebiotics on the
carcinogenesis process. Results of rat studies proved that a prebiotic-enriched diet leads to significantly
reduced indexes of carcinogenesis. Scientific research demonstrated that butyric acid may be a
chemopreventive factor in carcinogenesis [161], or an agent protecting against the development of
colorectal carcinoma through the promotion of cell differentiation [162]. Besides butyric acid, propionic
acid also may possess anti-inflammatory properties in relation to colorectal carcinoma cells. In vitro
studies on human L97 and HT29 cell lines (representing early and late stages of colorectal carcinoma)
demonstrated that inulin fractions in plasma supernatant caused a significant inhibition of growth
and induction of apoptosis in human colorectal carcinoma [163]. According to scientific reports, the
administration of inulin and oligofructose to rats caused the inhibition of azoxymethane-induced
colorectal carcinoma at the growth stage [164]. The supplementation of inulin and oligofructose at the
dose of 5%–15% had also an effect on reduced occurrence of breast cancer in rats and of metastases to
lungs [165]. However, those results have to be confirmed in humans. Table 5 lists the results of studies
focusing on the effect of prebiotics on human health. There are examples of clinical trials during which
the prebiotics group received the prebiotic prophylactically or in addition to the standard therapy.
Table 5. Examples of clinical trials regarding the effect of prebiotics on human health.
References
Subjects
Prebiotic
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Obesity
[166]
48 healthy adults
with a body mass
index (in kg/m2)
>25
OFS
12 weeks
There was a reduction in body weight of 1.03 ± 0.43 kg with
oligofructose supplementation, whereas the control group
experienced an increase in body weight of 0.45 ± 0.31 kg over
12 weeks (p = 0.01). Glucose decreased in the oligofructose
group and increased in the control group between the initial
and final tests (p ≤ 0.05). Insulin concentrations mirrored this
pattern (p ≤ 0.05). Oligofructose supplementation did not
affect plasma active glucagon-like peptide 1 secretion.
According to a visual analogue scale designed to assess side
effects, oligofructose was well tolerated.
Insulin resistance syndrome
[167]
10 patients with
type 2 diabetes
FOS
4 weeks (double
repetition)
The plasma glucose response to a fixed exogenous insulin
bolus did not differ at the end of the two periods. FOS had no
effect on glucose and lipid metabolism in type 2 diabetics.
Type 2 diabetes
[168]
15 subjects with
type 2 diabetes
AX
5 weeks (double
repetition)
A supplement of 15 g/day of AX-rich fibre can significantly
improve glycaemic control in people with type 2 diabetes.
[169]
11 patients with
impaired glucose
tolerance
AX
6 weeks
No effects of arabinoxylan were observed for insulin,
adiponectin, leptin, or resistin as well as for apolipoprotein B,
and unesterified fatty acids. In conclusion, the consumption
of AX in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance improved
fasting serum glucose and triglycerides. However, this
beneficial effect was not accompanied by changes in fasting
adipokine concentrations.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
[170]
7 patients with
non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis
OFS
8 weeks
Compared to placebo, OFS significantly decreased serum
aminotransferases, aspartate aminotransferase after 8 weeks,
and insulin level after 4 weeks, but this could not be related to
a significant effect on plasma lipids.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
15 of 30
Table 5. Cont.
References
Subjects
Prebiotic
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), gastrointestinal disorders, elimination of Helicobacter, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), diarrhoeas
[171]
281 healthy infants
(15 to 120 days)
GOS, FOS
12 months
Fewer episodes of acute diarrhoea, fewer upper respiratory
tract infections.
[172]
160 healthy
bottle-fed infants
within 0–14 days
after birth
GOS, FOS
3 months
Prebiotic formula well tolerated, normal growth trend toward
a higher percentage of Bifidobacterium and a lower percentage
of E. coli in stool, suppresses Clostridium in stool.
[173]
215 healthy infants
GOS, FOS
27 weeks
The concentration of secretory IgA was higher in the prebiotic
group than the control; also, Bifidobacterium percentage was
higher than the control and Clostridium was lower.
[174]
24 patients with
chronic pouchitis
inulin
3 weeks
Inulin treatment resulted in decreased endoscopic and
histological inflammation. This effect was associated with
increased intestinal butyrate, lowered pH, and significantly
decreased numbers of Bacteroides fragilis.
[175]
10 Crohn’s
disease patients
FOS
3 weeks
Reduced disease activity index.
Atopic dermatitis
[176]
259 infants at risk
for atopy
GOS, FOS
6 months
Significant reduction of frequency of AD.
[177]
259 healthy term
infants with a
parental history
of atopy
GOS, FOS
6 months
Prebiotic group had significantly lower allergic
symptoms—AD, wheezing, urticaria, and fewer upper
respiratory infections than controls during the first 2 years.
Alleviation of lactose intolerance
[178]
85 lactose
intolerant
participants
GOS
36 days
71% of subjects reported improvements in at least one
symptom (pain, bloating, diarrhoea, cramping, or flatulence).
Also on day 36, populations of bifidobacteria significantly
increased by 90% in 27 of the 30 non-lactose tolerant
participants who took GOS. Lactose fermenting
Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium, and Lactobacillus were all
significantly increased.
Different types of cancer and side effects associated with cancer
[163]
Human L97 and
HT29 cell lines
(representing early
and late stages of
colorectal
carcinoma)
inulin
No data
Growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis in human
colorectal carcinoma.
Abbreviations: AD—atopic dermatitis; AX—arabinoxylan; FOS—fructooligosaccharides; GOS—galactooligosaccharides;
IgA—immunoglobulin A; OFS—oligofructose.
4. Synbiotics
Synbiotics are used not only for the improved survival of beneficial microorganisms added to food
or feed, but also for the stimulation of the proliferation of specific native bacterial strains present in the
gastrointestinal tract [179]. The effect of synbiotics on metabolic health remains unclear. It should be
mentioned that the health effect of synbiotics is probably associated with the individual combination of
a probiotic and prebiotic [180]. Considering a huge number of possible combinations, the application
of synbiotics for the modulation of intestinal microbiota in humans seems promising [181].
4.1. Synbiotic Selection Criteria
The first aspect to be taken into account when composing a synbiotic formula should be a selection
of an appropriate probiotic and prebiotic, exerting a positive effect on the host’s health when used
separately. The determination of specific properties to be possessed by a prebiotic to have a favourable
effect on the probiotic seems to be the most appropriate approach. A prebiotic should selectively
stimulate the growth of microorganisms, having a beneficial effect on health, with simultaneous absent
(or limited) stimulation of other microorganisms.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
16 of 30
4.2. Synbiotics in Use
Previous sections discussed probiotic microorganisms and prebiotic substances most commonly
used in human nutrition. A combination of Bifidobacterium or Lactobacillus genus bacteria with
fructooligosaccharides in synbiotic products seems to be the most popular. Table 4 presents the
most commonly used combinations of probiotics and prebiotics.
4.3. Mechanism of Action of Synbiotics
Considering the fact that a probiotic is essentially active in the small and large intestine, and the
effect of a prebiotic is observed mainly in the large intestine, the combination of the two may have a
synergistic effect [182]. Prebiotics are used mostly as a selective medium for the growth of a probiotic
strain, fermentation, and intestinal passage. There are indications in the literature that, due to the
use of prebiotics, probiotic microorganisms acquire higher tolerance to environmental conditions,
including: oxygenation, pH, and temperature in the intestine of a particular organism [183]. However,
the mechanism of action of an extra energy source that provides higher tolerance to these factors is not
sufficiently explained. That combination of components leads to the creation of viable microbiological
dietary supplements, and ensuring an appropriate environment allows a positive impact on the host’s
health. Two modes of synbiotic action are known [184]:
(1)
Action through the improved viability of probiotic microorganisms;
(2)
Action through the provision of specific health effects.
The stimulation of probiotics with prebiotics results in the modulation of the metabolic activity in
the intestine with the maintenance of the intestinal biostructure, development of beneficial microbiota,
and inhibition of potential pathogens present in the gastrointestinal tract [180]. Synbiotics result in
reduced concentrations of undesirable metabolites, as well as the inactivation of nitrosamines and
cancerogenic substances. Their use leads to a significant increase of levels of short-chain fatty acids,
ketones, carbon disulphides, and methyl acetates, which potentially results in a positive effect on the
host’s health [184]. As for their therapeutic efficacy, the desirable properties of synbiotics include
antibacterial, anticancerogenic, and anti-allergic effects. They also counteract decay processes in the
intestine and prevent constipation and diarrhoea. It turns out that synbiotics may be highly efficient in
the prevention of osteoporosis, reduction of blood fat and sugar levels, regulation of the immunological
system, and treatment of brain disorders associated with abnormal hepatic function [185]. The concept
of mechanisms of synbiotic action, based on the modification of intestinal microbiota with probiotic
microorganisms and appropriately selected prebiotics as their substrates, is presented in Figure 1.
4.4. Synbiotics for Humans
Synbiotics have the following beneficial effects on humans [186]:
(1)
Increased Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium genus count and maintenance of balance of the
intestinal microbiota;
(2)
Improved hepatic function in patients suffering from cirrhosis;
(3)
Improved immunomodulative abilities;
(4)
Prevention of bacterial translocation and reduced incidence of nosocomial infections in patients’
post-surgical procedures and similar interventions.
The translocation of bacterial metabolism products, such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), ethanol,
and short-chain fatty acids (SFCAs), leads to their penetration of the liver. SCFAs also stimulate the
synthesis and storage of hepatic triacylglycerols. Those processes may intensify the mechanisms
of hepatic detoxication, which may result in hepatic storage of triacylglycerol (IHTG), and
intensify steatosis of the organ.
A randomised trial on the use of a synbiotic containing five
probiotics (Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus delbrueckii spp. bulgaricus, Lactobacillus acidophilus,
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
17 of 30
Lactobacillus rhamnosus, Bifidobacterium bifidum) and inulin as a prebiotic in adult subjects with
NASH (non-alcoholic steatohepatisis) demonstrated a significant reduction of IHTG (intrahepatic
triacylglycerol) within six months [187]. It is also known that LPSs induce proinflammatory cytokines,
such as the tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), playing a crucial role in insulin resistance and
inflammatory cell uptake in NAFLD (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease). In the study on the effect of
the synbiotic product containing a blend of probiotics (Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus rhamnosus,
Streptococcus thermophilus, Bifidobacterium breve, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium longum,
Lactobacillus bulgaricus) and fructooligosccharides, 52 adults participated for 28 weeks. It was found
that supplementation with the synbiotic resulted in the inhibition of NF-κB (nuclear factor κB) and
reduced production of TNF-α (tumour necrosis factor α) [188].
In rat studies, an increased level of intestinal IgA was found, following the introduction of
the synbiotic product containing Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium lactis, and inulin and
oligofructose as prebiotics to the diet. Synbiotics lead to reduced blood cholesterol levels and lower
blood pressure [157]. Moreover, synbiotics are used in the treatment of hepatic conditions [189] and
improve the absorption of calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus [190].
Danq et al. (2013), in a meta-analysis, evaluated published studies on pro/prebiotics for eczema
prevention, investigating bacterial strain efficacy and changes to the allergy status of the children
involved. This meta-analysis found that probiotics or synbiotics may reduce the incidence of eczema in
infants aged <2 years. Systemic sensitization did not change following probiotic administration [191].
Studies carried out within the framework of the SYNCAN project funded by the European Union
verified the anti-carcinogenic properties of synbiotics. The effect of fructooligosaccharides (SYN1)
combined with two probiotic strains (Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Bifidobacterium animalis subsp.
lactis Bb12) on the health of patients at risk of colorectal cancer was studied. As a result, a change
of biomarkers (genotoxicity, labelling index, labelled cells/crypt, transepithelial resistance, necrosis,
interleukin 2, interferon γ) indicating the development of the disease in cancer patients, and in patients
post polyp excision, was observed [192]. It was concluded that the application of the studied synbiotic
may reduce the risk of colorectal carcinoma. A lower level of DNA damage was also observed, as well
as a lower colonocyte proliferation ratio [147]. Table 6 lists the results of studies focusing on the effect
of synbiotics on human health. There are examples of clinical trials during which the synbiotics group
received the synbiotic prophylactically or in addition to the standard therapy.
Table 6. Examples of clinical trials regarding the effect of synbiotics on human health.
References
Subjects
Composition of Synbiotic
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Obesity
[193]
153 obese men
and women
L. rhamnosus
CGMCC1.3724, inulin
36 weeks
Weight loss and reduction in leptin.
Increase in Lachnospiraceae.
[194]
70 children and
adolescents with
high BMI
L. casei, L. rhamnosus,
S. thermophilus, B. breve,
L. acidophilus, B. longum,
L. bulgaricus, FOS
8 weeks
Decrease in BMI z-score and
waist circumference.
[195]
77 obese children
L. acidophilus, L. rhamnosus,
B. bifidum, B. longum,
E. faecium, FOS
4 weeks
Changes in anthropometric
measurements. Decrease in TC,
LDL-C, and total oxidative stress
serum levels.
Insulin resistance syndrome
[196]
38 subjects with IRS
L. casei, L. rhamnosus,
S. thermophilus, B. breve,
L. acidophilus, B. longum,
L. bulgaricus, FOS
28 weeks
The levels of fasting blood sugar and
insulin resistance
improved significantly.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
18 of 30
Table 6. Cont.
References
Subjects
Composition of Synbiotic
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Type 2 diabetes
[197]
54 patients with T2D
L. acidophilus, L. casei,
L. rhamnosus, L. bulgaricus,
B. breve, B. longum,
S. thermophilus, FOS
8 weeks
Increased HOMA-IR and TGL plasma
level; reduced CRP in serum.
[198]
81 patients with T2D
L. sporogenes, inulin
8 weeks
Significant reduction in serum insulin
levels, HOMA-IR, and homeostatic
model assessment cell function.
[199]
78 patients with T2D
L. sporogenes, inulin
8 weeks
Decrease in serum lipid profile (TAG,
TC/HDL-C) and a significant increase
in serum HDL-C levels.
[200]
20 patients with T2D
L. acidophilus, B. bifidum,
oligofructose
2 weeks
Increased HDL-C and reduced
fasting glycaemia.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
[187]
20 individuals
with NASH
L. plantarum, L. delbrueckii spp.
bulgaricus, L. acidophilus,
L. rhamnosus, B. bifidum, inulin
26 weeks
Decreased IHTG content.
[188]
52 adult individuals
with NAFLD
L. casei, L. rhamnosus,
S. thermophilus, B. breve,
L. acidophilus, B. longum,
L. bulgaricus, FOS
30 weeks
Inhibition of NF-κB and reduction
of TNF-α.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), gastrointestinal disorders, elimination of Helicobacter, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), diarrhoeas
[201]
76 patients with IBS
L. acidophilus La-5®, B. animalis
ssp. lactis BB-12®, dietary
fibres (Beneo)
4 weeks
On average, an 18% improvement in
total IBS-QoL score was reported and
significant improvements in bloating
severity, satisfaction with bowel
movements, and the severity of IBS
symptoms’ interference with patients’
everyday life were observed.
However, there were no statistically
significant differences between the
synbiotic group and the
placebo group.
[202]
69 children aged 6–16
years who had biopsy
proven H. pylori
infection
B. lactis B94, inulin
14 days
From a total of 69 H. pylori-infected
children (female/male = 36/33; mean
± SD = 11.2 ± 3.0 years), eradication
was achieved in 20 out of 34
participants in the standard therapy
group and 27/35 participants in the
synbiotic group. There were no
significant differences in eradication
rates between the standard therapy
and the synbiotic groups.
[203]
40 patients with UC
B. longum, psyllium
4 weeks
Patients with UC on synbiotic therapy
experienced greater quality-of-life
changes than patients on probiotic or
prebiotic treatment.
Atopic dermatitis
[204]
90 infants with AD
B. breve M-16V, GOS and FOS
mixture (Immunofortis®)
12 weeks
This synbiotic mixture did not have a
beneficial effect on AD severity in
infants, although it did successfully
modulate their intestinal microbiota.
[205]
40 infants and children
aged 3 months to
6 years with AD
L. casei, L. rhamnosus, S.
thermophilus, B. breve,
L. acidophilus, B. infantis,
L. bulgaricus, FOS
8 weeks
A mixture of seven probiotic strains
and FOS may clinically improve the
severity of AD in young children.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
19 of 30
Table 6. Cont.
References
Subjects
Composition of Synbiotic
Time of
Administration
Main Outcome
Alleviation of lactose intolerance
[206]
20 females and males
Lactobacillus,
Bifidobacterium, FOS
5 weeks
Consumption of the probiotic mixture
improved the gastrointestinal
performance associated with lactose
load in subjects with LI. Symptoms
were additionally reduced by the
addition of prebiotics.
The supplementation was safe and
well tolerated, with no significant
adverse effect observed.
Different types of cancer and side effects associated with cancer
[192]
43 polypeptomized
and 37 colon
cancer patients
L. rhamnosus GG, B. lactis
Bb12, inulin
12 weeks
Increased L. rhamnosus and B. lactis in
faeces, reduction in C. perfringens,
prevents increased secretion of IL-2 in
polypectomized patients, increased
production of interferon-γ in
cancer patients.
Abbreviations:
BMI—body
mass
index;
CFU—colony-forming-unit;
CRP—C-reactive
protein;
FOS—fructo-oligossacharides; IBS-QoL—quality of life with IBS; HDL-C—high-density lipoprotein cholesterol;
HOMA-IR—homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance; IHTG—intrahepatic triacylglycerol; IRS—insulin
resistance syndrome; LDL-C—low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LI—lactose intolerance; NAFLD—non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease; NF-κB—nuclear factor κB; T2D—type 2 diabetes; TAG—triacylglycerols; TC—total cholesterol;
TGL—total glutathione levels; TNF-α—tumour necrosis factor α; UC—ulcerative colitis.
5. Summary
Probiotic organisms are crucial for the maintenance of balance of human intestinal microbiota.
Numerous scientific reports confirm their positive effect in the host’s health. Probiotic microorganisms
are attributed a high therapeutic potential in, e.g., obesity, insulin resistance syndrome, type 2 diabetes,
and non-alcohol hepatic steatosis [207]. It seems also that probiotics may be helpful in the treatment
of irritable bowel syndrome, enteritis, bacterial infections, and various gastrointestinal disorders and
diarrhoeas. Probiotic microorganisms are also effective in the alleviation of lactose intolerance and the
treatment of atopic dermatitis. A positive effect of probiotics in the course of various neoplastic diseases
and side effects associated with anti-cancer therapies is also worth noting. Prebiotics may be used as
an alternative to probiotics, or as an additional support for them. It turns out that the development of
bio-therapeutic formulas containing both appropriate microbial strains and synergistic prebiotics may
lead to the enhancement of the probiotic effect in the small intestine and the colon. Those “enhanced”
probiotic products may be even more effective, and their protective and stimulatory effect superior
to their components administered separately [208]. It seems that we will see further studies on
combinations of probiotics and prebiotics, and further development of synbiotics. Future studies
may explain the mechanisms of actions of those components, which may confer a beneficial effect on
human health.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank the National Centre for Research and Development for the financial
support of publication of this paper within the project PBS3/A8/32/2015 realized within the framework of the
Program of Applied Studies.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Vergin, F. Anti-und Probiotica. Hipokrates 1954, 25, 116–119.
2.
Lilly, D.M.; Stillwell, R.H. Probiotics: Growth promoting factors produced by microorganisms. Science 1965,
147, 747–748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Fuller, R. Probiotics in man and animals. J. Appl. Microbiol. 1989, 66, 365–378.
4.
Guarner, F.; Schaafsma, G.J. Probiotics. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 1998, 39, 237–238. [CrossRef]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
20 of 30
5.
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Guidelines for the Evaluation of Probiotics in Food; Report of a Joint
FAO/WHO Working Group on Drafting Guidelines for the Evaluation of Probiotics in Food; FAO: London,
ON, Canada, 30 April–1 May 2002.
6.
Hill, C.; Guarner, F.; Reid, G.; Gibson, G.R.; Merenstein, D.J.; Pot, B.; Morelli, L.; Canani, R.B.; Flint, H.J.;
Salminen, S.; et al. Expert consensus document: The International Scientific Association for Probiotics
and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nat. Rev.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2014, 11, 506–514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Gibson, R.G.; Roberfroid, M.B. Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota: Introducing the concept
of prebiotics. J. Nutr. 1995, 125, 1401–1412. [PubMed]
8.
Gibson, G.R.; Probert, H.M.; van Loo, J.; Rastall, R.A.; Roberfroid, M. Dietary modulation of the human
colonic microbiota: Updating the concept of the prebiotics. Nutr. Res. Rev. 2004, 17, 259–275. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
9.
Food and Agriculture Organization. FAO Technical Meeting on Prebiotics: Food Quality and Standards Service
(AGNS), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); FAO Technical Meeting Report; FAO:
Rome, Italy, 15–16 September 2007.
10.
Skalkam, M.L.; Wiese, M.; Nielsen, D.S.; van Zanten, G. In Vitro Screening and Evaluation of Synbiotics;
University of Copenhagen: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2016; Chapter 33; pp. 477–486.
11.
Cencic, A.; Chingwaru, W. The role of functional foods, nutraceuticals, and food supplements in intestinal
health. Nutrients 2010, 2, 611–625. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Rioux, K.P.; Madsen, K.L.; Fedorak, R.N. The role of enteric microflora in inflammatory bowel disease:
Human and animal studies with probiotics and prebiotics. Gastroenterol. Clin. N. Am. 2005, 34, 465–482.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Bengmark, S. Bioecological control of the gastrointestinal tract: The role of flora and supplemented probiotics
and synbiotics. Gastroenterol. Clin. N. Am. 2005, 34, 413–436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Panesar, P.S.; Kaur, G.; Panesar, R.; Bera, M.B. Synbiotics: Potential Dietary Supplements in Functional Foods;
IFIS: Berkshire, UK, 2009. [CrossRef]
15.
Hosono, A. Fermented milk in the orient. In Functions of Fermented Milk: Challengers for the Health Sciences;
Nakazawa, Y., Hosono, A., Eds.; Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd.: Barking, UK, 1992; pp. 61–78.
16.
Miecznikow, E. O naturze ludzkiej—Zarys Filozofii Optymistycznej; Translation F. Wermi´
nski; Wydawnictwo
Biblioteka Naukowa: Warszawa, Poland, 1907.
17.
Lee, Y.K. Selection and maintenance of probiotic microorganisms. In Handbook of Probiotics and Prebiotics;
Lee, Y.K., Salminen, S., Eds.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, Germany, 2009; pp. 177–187. [CrossRef]
18.
Sanders, M.E.; Gibson, G.; Harsharnjit, S.G.; Guarner, F. Probiotics: Their Potential to Impact Human Health;
CAST Issue Paper; CAST: Ames, IA, USA, 2007; Volume 36, pp. 1–20.
19.
Sanders, M.E.; Lenoir-Wijnkoop, I.; Salminen, S.; Merenstein, D.J.; Gibson, G.R.; Petschow, B.W.;
Nieuwdorp, M.; Tancredi, D.J.; Cifelli, C.J.; Jacques, P.; et al. Probiotics and prebiotics: Prospects for
public health and nutritional recommendations. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2014, 1309, 19–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Opinion of the Scientific Committee on a request from EFSA
related to a generic approach to the safety assessment by EFSA of microorganisms used in food/feed and
the production of food/feed additives. EFSA J. 2005, 226, 1–12.
21.
Simon, O. Micro-organisms as feed additives—Probiotics. Adv. Pork Prod. 2005, 16, 161–167.
22.
Anadón, A.; Martínez-Larra´
naga, M.R.; Martínez, M.A. Probiotics for animal nutrition in the European
Union. Regulation and safety assessment. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2006, 45, 91–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Gaggia, F.; Mattarelli, P.; Biavati, B. Probiotics and prebiotics in animal feeding for safe food production.
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2010, 141, S15–S28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). The European Union Summary report on trends and sources of
zoonoses, zoonotic agents and food-borne outbreaks in 2011. EFSA J. 2013, 3129, 1–250.
25.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Scientific opinion on the maintenance of the list of QPS biological
agents intentionally added to food and feed (2013 update). EFSA J. 2013, 15, 1–108.
26.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Scientific Opinion on the update of the list of QPS-recommended
biological agents intentionally added to food or feed as notified to EFSA (2017 update). EFSA J. 2017, 15,
1–177.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
21 of 30
27.
Schachtsiek, M.; Hammes, W.P.; Hertel, C. Characterization of Lactobacillus coryniformis DSM 20001T surface
protein CPF mediating coaggregation with and aggregation among pathogens. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
2004, 70, 7078–7085. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Oelschlaeger, T.A. Mechanisms of probiotic actions—A review. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 2010, 300, 57–62.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Cremonini, F.; di Caro, S.; Nista, E.C.; Bartolozzi, F.; Capelli, G.; Gasbarrini, G.; Gasbarrini, A. Meta-analysis:
The eqect of probiotic administration on antibiotic associateddiarrhoea. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2002, 16,
1461–1467. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Johnston, B.C.; Supina, A.L.; Vohra, S. Probiotics for pediatric antibiotic-associated diarrhea: A meta-analysis
of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 2006, 175, 377–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Schoster, A.; Kokotovic, B.; Permin, A.; Pedersen, P.D.; Dal Bello, F.; Guardabassi, L. In Vitro inhibition of
Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens by commercial probiotic strains. Anaerobe 2013, 20, 36–41.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
JimmySaint-Cyr, M.; Haddad, N.; Taminiau, B.; Poezevara, T.; Quesne, S.; Amelot, M.; Daube, G.;
Chemaly, M.; Dousset, X.; Guyard-Nicodème, M. Use of the potential probiotic strain Lactobacillus salivarius
SMXD51 to control Campylobacter jejuni in broilers. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2017, 247, 9–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Carter, A.; Adams, M.; La Ragione, R.M.; WoodWard, M.J. Colonisation of poultry by Salmonella Enteritidis
S1400 is reduced by combined administration of Lactobacillus salivarius 59 and Enterococcus faecium PXN-33.
Vet. Microbiol. 2017, 199, 100–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Chingwaru, W.; Vidmar, J. Potential of Zimbabwean commercial probiotic products and strains of
Lactobacillus plantarum as prophylaxis and therapy against diarrhoea caused by Escherichia coli in children.
Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med. 2017, 10, 57–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Hussain, S.A.; Patil, G.R.; Reddi, S.; Yadav, V.; Pothuraju, R.; Singh, R.R.B.; Kapila, S. Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis
Miller) supplemented probiotic lassi prevents Shigella infiltration from epithelial barrier into systemic blood
flow in mice model. Microb. Pathog. 2017, 102, 143–147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Sikorska, H.; Smoragiewicz, W. Role of probiotics in the prevention and treatment of ethicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infections. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 2013, 42, 475–481. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.
De Montijo-Prieto, S.; Moreno, E.; Bergillos-Meca, T.; Lasserrot, A.; Ruiz-López, M.; Ruiz-Bravo, A.;
Jimenez-Valera, M. A Lactobacillus plantarum strain isolated from kefir protects against intestinal infection
with Yersinia enterocolitica O9 and modulates immunity in mice. Res. Microbiol. 2015, 166, 626–632. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
38.
Thomas, D.W.; Greer, F. Probiotics and prebiotics in pediatrics. Pediatrics 2010, 126, 1217–1231. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
39.
Heczko, P.; Strus, M.; Jawie´
n, M.; Szyma´
nski, H. Medyczne zastosowanie probiotyków. Wiad. Lek. 2005, 58,
640–646. [PubMed]
40.
Kumar, S.; Bansal, A.; Chakrabarti, A.; Singhi, S. Evaluation of efficacy of probiotics in prevention of Candida
colonization in a PICU—A randomized controlled trial. Crit. Care Med. 2013, 41, 565–572. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
41.
Nase, L.; Hatakka, K.; Savilahti, E. Eqect of long-term consumption of Lactobacillus GG in milk on dental
caries and caries risk in children. Caries Res. 2001, 35, 412–420. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Li, P.; Gu, Q. Complete genome sequence of Lactobacillus plantarum LZ95, a potential probiotic strain
producing bacteriocins and B-group vitamin riboflavin. J. Biotechnol. 2016, 229, 1–2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Gu, Q.; Zhang, C.; Song, D.; Li, P.; Zhu, X. Enhancing vitamin B12 content in soy-yogurt by Lactobacillus reuteri.
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2015, 206, 56–59. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Pompei, A.; Cordisco, L.; Amaretti, A.; Zanoni, S.; Matteuzzi, D.; Rossi, M. Folate production by bifidobacteria
as a potential probiotic property. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2007, 73, 179–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Nova, E.; Warnberg, J.; Gomez-Martinez, S.; Diaz, L.E.; Romeo, J.; Marcos, A. Immunodulatory effects of
probiotics in different stages of life. Br. J. Nutr. 2007, 98, S90–S95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Mishra, C.; Lambert, J. Production of anti-microbial substances by probiotics. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 1996, 5,
20–24. [PubMed]
47.
Ouwehand, A.C.; Kirjavainen, P.V.; Shortt, C.; Salminen, S. Probiotics: Mechanisms and established effects.
Int. Dairy J. 1999, 9, 43–52. [CrossRef]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
22 of 30
48.
Reid, G.; McGroarty, J.A.; Angotti, R.; Cook, R.L. Lactobacillus inhibitor production against Escherichia coli
and coaggregation ability with uropathogens. Can. J. Microbiol. 1988, 34, 344–351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Schellenberg, J.; Smoragiewicz, W.; Karska-Wysocki, B. A rapid method combining immunofluorescence and
flow cytometry for improved understanding of competitive interactions between lactic acid bacteria (LAB)
and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) in mixed culture. J. Microbiol. Methods 2006, 65, 1–9. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
50.
Ishikawa, H.; Akedo, I.; Otani, T.; Suzuki, T.; Nakamura, T.; Takeyama, I.; Ishiguro, S.; Miyaoka, E.; Sobue, T.;
Kakizoe, T. Randomized trial of dietary fiber and Lactobacillus casei administration for prevention of colorectal
tumors. Int. J. Cancer 2005, 116, 762–767. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Vandenbergh, P.A. Lactic acid bacteria, their metabolic products and interference with microbial growth.
FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 1993, 12, 221–238. [CrossRef]
52.
Guillot, J.F. Probiotic feed additives. J. Vet. Pharmacol. Ther. 2003, 26, 52–55.
53.
Isolauri, E.; Sutas, Y.; Kankaanpaa, P.; Arvilommi, H.; Salminen, S. Probiotics: Effects on immunity. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2001, 73, 444–450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Brandao, R.L.; Castro, I.M.; Bambirra, E.A.; Amaral, S.C.; Fietto, L.G.; Tropia, M.J.M. Intracellular signal
triggered by cholera toxin in Saccharomyces boulardii and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Applied Environ. Microbiol.
1998, 64, 564–568. [PubMed]
55.
Collado, M.C.; Meriluoto, J.; Salminen, S. Interactions between pathogens and lactic acid bacteria:
Aggregation and coaggregation abilities. Eur. J. Food Res. Technol. 2007, 226, 1065–1073. [CrossRef]
56.
Begley, M.; Hill, C.; Gahan, C.G.M. Bile salt hydrolase activity in probiotics. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006,
72, 1729–1738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Weinberg, E.D. The Lactobacillus anomaly: Total iron abstinence. Perspect. Biol. Med. 1997, 40, 578–583.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Elli, M.; Zink, R.; Rytz, A.; Reniero, R.; Morelli, L. Iron requirement of Lactobacillus spp. in completely
chemically defined growth media. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2000, 88, 695–703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Borchers, A.T.; Selmi, C.; Meyers, F.J.; Keen, C.L.; Gershwin, M.E. Probiotics and immunity. J. Gastroenterol.
2009, 44, 26–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Gill, H.S.; Cross, M.L. Probiotics and immune function. In Nutrition and Immune Function; Calder, P.C.,
Field, C.J., Gill, H.S., Eds.; CABI Publishing: Wallingford, UK, 2002; pp. 251–272.
61.
Marteau, P.; Shanahan, F. Basic aspects and pharmacology of probiotics: An overview of pharmacokinetics,
mechanisms of action and side-effects. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol. 2003, 17, 725–740. [CrossRef]
62.
Schatzmayr, G.; Zehner, F.; Taubel, M.; Schatzmayr, D.; Klimitsch, A.; Loibner, A.P.; Binder, E.M.
Microbiologicals for deactivating mycotoxins. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2006, 50, 543–551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
McCormick, S.P. Microbial detoxification of mycotoxins. J. Chem. Ecol. 2013, 39, 907–918. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
64.
Nikbakht Nasrabadi, E.; Jamaluddin, R.; Abdul Mutalib, M.S.; Khaza’ai, H.; Khalesi, S.; Mohd Redzwan, S.
Reduction of aflatoxin level in aflatoxin-induced rats by the activity of probiotic Lactobacillus casei strain
Shirota. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2013, 114, 1507–1515. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Upadrasta, A.; Madempudi, R.S. Probiotics and blood pressure: Current insights. Integr. Blood Press. Control
2016, 9, 33–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Khalesi, S.; Sun, J.; Buys, N.; Jayasinghe, R. Effect of probiotics on blood pressure. A Systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Hypertension 2014, 70, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Ruan, Y.; Sun, J.; He, J.; Chen, F.; Chen, R.; Chen, H. Effect of probiotics on glycemic control: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0132121. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
68.
Lima-Filho, J.V.M.; Vieira, E.C.; Nicoli, J.R. Saccharomyces boulardii and Escherichia coli combinations against
experimential infections with Shigella flexneri and Salmonella enteritidis subsp. Typhimurium. J. Appl. Microbiol.
2000, 88, 365–370. [CrossRef]
69.
Bengmark, S. Bioecological control of inflammatory bowel disease. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 26, 169–181. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
70.
Geier, M.S.; Butler, R.N.; Howarth, G.S. Inflammatory bowel disease: Current insights into pathogenesis
and new therapeutic options; probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2007, 115, 1–11.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
23 of 30
71.
Montalto, M.; Curigliano, V.; Santoro, L.; Vastola, M.; Cammarota, G.; Manna, R.; Gasbarrini, A.; Gasbarrini, G.
Management and treatment of lactose malabsorption. World J. Gastroenterol. 2006, 12, 187. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
72.
Levri, K.M.; Ketvertis, K.; Deramo, M.; Merenstein, J.H.; D’Amico, F. Do probiotics reduce adult lactose
intolerance? J. Family Pract. 2005, 54, 613–620.
73.
Geier, M.S.; Butler, R.N.; Howarth, G.S. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics: A role in chemoprevention for
colorectal cancer? Cancer Biol. Ther. 2006, 5, 1265–1269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Lesbros-Pantoflickova, D.; Corthesy-Theulaz, I.; Blum, A.L. Helicobacter pylori and probiotics. J. Nutr. 2007,
137, 812S–818S. [PubMed]
75.
Guarner, F.; Khan, A.G.; Garisch, J.; Eliakim, R.; Gangl, A.; Thomson, A.; Krabshuis, J.; Lemair, T. Probiotics and
Prebiotics; World Gastroenterology Organisation Global Guidelines; World Gastroenterology Organisation:
Milwaukee, WI, USA, 2011; Volume 46, pp. 468–481.
76.
Falagas, M.E.; Betsi, G.I.; Tokas, T.; Athanasiou, S. Probiotics for prevention of recurrent urinary tract
infections in women: A review of the evidence from microbiological and clinical studies. Drugs 2006, 66,
1253–1261. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Anukam, K.C.; Osazuwa, E.; Osemene, G.I.; Ehigiagbe, F.; Bruce, A.W.; Reid, G. Clinical study comparing
probiotic Lactobacillus GR-1 and RC-14 with metronidazole vaginal gel to treat symptomatic bacterial
vaginosis. Microbes Infect. 2006, 8, 2772–2776. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Reid, G.; Bruce, A.W. Probiotics to prevent urinary tract infections: The rationale and evidence. World J. Urol.
2005, 24, 28–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Kukkonen, K.; Savilahti, E.; Haahtela, T.; Juntunen-Backman, K.; Korpela, R.; Poussa, T.; Tuure, T.;
Kuitunen, M. Probiotics and prebiotic galacto-oligosaccharides in the prevention of allergic diseases:
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2007, 119, 192–198. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
80.
Simons, L.A.; Amansec, S.G.; Conway, P. Effect of Lactobacillus fermentum on serum lipids in subjects with
elevated serum cholesterol. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2006, 16, 531–535. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Lieske, J.C.; Goldfarb, D.S.; de Simone, C.; Regnier, C. Use of a probiotic to decrease enteric hyperoxaluria.
Kidney Int. 2005, 68, 1244–1249. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Rousseaux, C.; Thuru, X.; Gelot, A.; Barnich, N.; Neut, C.; Dubuquoy, L.; Dubuquoy, C.; Merour, E.;
Geboes, K.; Chamaillard, M.; et al. Lactobacillus acidophilus modulates intestinal pain and induces opioid
and cannabinoid receptors. Nat. Med. 2006, 13, 35–37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Billoo, A.G.; Memon, M.A.; Khaskheli, S.A.; Murtaza, G.; Iqbal, K.; Saeed Shekhani, M.; Siddiqi, A.Q. Role of
a probiotic (Saccharomyces boulardii) in management and prevention of diarrhoea. World J. Gastroenterol. 2006,
12, 4557–4560. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Parvez, S.; Malik, K.A.; Ah Kang, S.; Kim, H.Y. Probiotics and their fermented food products are beneficial
for health. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2006, 100, 1171–1185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
McFarland, L.V. Meta-Analysis of probiotics for the prevention of antibiotic associated diarrhea and the
treatment of Clostridium difficile disease. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2006, 101, 812–822. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Hatakka, K.; Savilahti, E.; Pönkä, A.; Meurman, J.H.; Poussa, T.; Näse, L.; Saxelin, M.; Ko, R. Effect of long
term consumption of probiotic milk on infections in children attending day care centres: Double blind,
randomised trial. Br. Med. J. 2001, 322, 1327. [CrossRef]
87.
Olivares, M.; Diaz-Ropero, M.; Gomez, N.; Sierra, S.; Lara-Villoslada, F.; Martin, R.; Miguel Rodriguez, J.;
Xaus, J. Dietary deprivation of fermented foods causes a fall in innate immune response. Lactic acid bacteria
can counteract the immunological effect of this deprivation. J. Dairy Res. 2006, 73, 492–498. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
88.
Olivares, M.; Diaz-Ropero, M.A.; Gomez, N.; Lara-Villoslada, F.; Sierra, S.; Maldonado, J.A.; Martin, R.;
Lopez-Huertas, E.; Rodriguez, J.M.; Xaus, J. Oral administration of two probiotic strains, Lactobacillus gasseri
CECT5714 and Lactobacillus coryniformis CECT5711, enhances the intestinal function of healthy adults. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 2006, 107, 104–111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Alvaro, E.; Andrieux, C.; Rochet, V.; Rigottier-Gois, L.; Leprcq, P.; Sutren, M.; Galan, P.; Duval, Y.; Juste, C.;
Dore, J. Composition and metabolism of the intestinal microbiota in consumers and non-consumers of
yogurt. Br. J. Nutr. 2007, 97, 126–133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
24 of 30
90.
Larsen, N.; Vogensen, F.K.; Gøbel, R.J.; Michaelsen, K.F.; Forssten, S.D.; Lahtinen, S.J.; Jakobsen, M. Effect
of Lactobacillus salivarius Ls-33 on fecal microbiota in obese adolescents. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 32, 935–940.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Gøbel, R.J.; Larsen, N.; Jakobsen, M.; Mølgaard, C.; Michaelsen, K.F. Probiotics to adolescents with obesity:
Effects on inflammation and metabolic syndrome. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2012, 55, 673–678. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
92.
Kadooka, Y.; Sato, M.; Imaizumi, K.; Ogawa, A.; Ikuyama, K.; Akai, Y.; Okano, M.; Kagoshima, M.;
Tsuchida, T. Regulation of abdominal adiposity by probiotics (Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055) in adults with
obese tendencies in a randomized controlled trial. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 64, 636–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Kadooka, Y.; Sato, M.; Ogawa, A.; Miyoshi, M.; Uenishi, H.; Ogawa, H.; Ikuyama, K.; Kagoshima, M.;
Tsuchida, T. Effect of Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 in fermented milk on abdominal adiposity in adults in a
randomised controlled trial. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 110, 1696–1703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Sharafedtinov, K.K.; Plotnikova, O.A.; Alexeeva, R.I.; Sentsova, T.B.; Songisepp, E.; Stsepetova, J.; Smidt, I.;
Mikelsaar, M. Hypocaloric diet supplemented with probiotic cheese improves body mass index and blood
pressure indices of obese hypertensive patients—A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled pilot study.
Nutr. J. 2013, 12, 138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Zarrati, M.; Salehi, E.; Mofid, V.; Hossein Zadeh-Attar, M.J.; Nourijelyani, K.; Bidad, K.; Shidfar, F.
Relationship between probiotic consumption and IL-10 and IL-17 secreted by PBMCs in overweight and
obese people. Iran. J. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2013, 12, 404–406. [PubMed]
96.
Zarrati, M.; Salehi, E.; Nourijelyani, K.; Mofid, V.; Zadeh, M.J.; Najafi, F.; Ghaflati, Z.; Bidad, K.; Chamari, M.;
Karimi, M.; et al. Effects of probiotic yogurt on fat distribution and gene expression of proinflammatory
factors in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in overweight and obese people with or without weight-loss
diet. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2014, 33, 417–425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Zarrati, M.; Shidfar, F.; Nourijelyani, K.; Mofid, V.; Hossein zadeh-Attar, M.J.; Bidad, K.; Najafi, F.;
Gheflati, Z.; Chamari, M.; Salehi, E. Lactobacillus acidophilus La5, Bifidobacterium BB12, and Lactobacillus casei
DN001 modulate gene expression of subset specific transcription factors and cytokines in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of obese and overweight people. Biofactors 2013, 39, 633–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Agerholm-Larsen, L.; Raben, A.; Haulrik, N.; Hansen, A.S.; Manders, M.; Astrup, A. Effect of 8 week intake
of probiotic milk products on risk factors for cardiovascular diseases. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2000, 54, 288–297.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Rajkumar, H.; Mahmood, N.; Kumar, M.; Varikuti, S.R.; Challa, H.R.; Myakala, S.P. Effect of probiotic (VSL#3)
and W-3 on lipid profile, insulin sensitivity, inflammatory markers, and gut colonization in overweight
adults: A randomized, controlled trial. Mediat. Inflamm. 2014, 2014, 1–8.
100. Brahe, L.K.; Le Chatelier, E.; Prifti, E.; Pons, N.; Kennedy, S.; Blædel, T.; Håkansson, J.; Dalsgaard, T.K.;
Hansen, T.; Pedersen, O. Dietary modulation of the gut microbiota—A randomised controlled trial in obese
postmenopausal women. Br. J. Nutr. 2015, 114, 406–417. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Ivey, K.L.; Hodgson, J.M.; Kerr, D.A.; Thompson, P.L.; Stojceski, B.; Prince, R.L. The effect of yoghurt
and its probiotics on blood pressure and serum lipid profile; a randomised controlled trial. Nutr. Metab.
Cardiovasc. Dis. 2015, 25, 46–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Leber, B.; Tripolt, N.J.; Blattl, D.; Eder, M.; Wascher, T.C.; Pieber, T.R.; Stauber, R.; Sourij, H.; Oettl, K.;
Stadlbauer, V. The influence of probiotic supplementation on gut permeability in patients with metabolic
syndrome: An open label, randomized pilot study. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012, 66, 1110–1115. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. Tripolt, N.J.; Leber, B.; Blattl, D.; Eder, M.; Wonisch, W.; Scharnagl, H.; Stojakovic, T.; Obermayer-Pietsch, B.;
Wascher, T.C.; Pieber, T.R.; et al. Effect of supplementation with Lactobacillus casei Shirota on insulin
sensitivity, β-cell function, and markers of endothelial function and inflammation in subjects with metabolic
syndrome—A pilot study. J. Dairy Sci. 2013, 96, 89–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Barreto, F.M.; Colado Simão, A.N.; Morimoto, H.K.; Batisti Lozovoy, M.A.; Dichi, I.; da Silva Miglioranza, H.L.
Beneficial effects of Lactobacillus plantarum on glycemia and homocysteine levels in postmenopausal women
with metabolic syndrome. Nutrition 2014, 30, 939–942. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Hariri, M.; Salehi, R.; Feizi, A.; Mirlohi, M.; Ghiasvand, R.; Habibi, N. A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, clinical trial on probiotic soy milk and soy milk: Effects on epigenetics and oxidative
stress in patients with type II diabetes. Genes Nutr. 2015, 10, 52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
25 of 30
106. Tonucci, L.B.; Olbrich Dos Santos, K.M.; Licursi de Oliveira, L.; Rocha Ribeiro, S.M.; Duarte Martino, H.S.
Clinical application of probiotics in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 36, 85–92. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Mohamadshahi, M.; Veissi, M.; Haidari, F.; Javid, A.Z.; Mohammadi, F.; Shirbeigi, E. Effects of probiotic
yogurt consumption on lipid profile in type 2 diabetic patients: A randomized controlled clinical trial. J. Res.
Med. Sci. 2014, 19, 531–536. [PubMed]
108. Ejtahed, H.S.; Mohtadi-Nia, J.; Homayouni-Rad, A.; Niafar, M.; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M.; Mofid, V. Probiotic
yogurt improves antioxidant status in type 2 diabetic patients. Nutrition 2012, 28, 539–543. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
109. Ejtahed, H.S.; Mohtadi-Nia, J.; Homayouni-Rad, A.; Niafar, M.; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M.; Mofid, V.;
Akbarian-Moghari, A. Effect of probiotic yogurt containing Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium lactis
on lipid profile in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J. Dairy Sci. 2011, 94, 3288–3294. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
110. Andreasen, A.S.; Larsen, N.; Pedersen-Skovsgaard, T.; Berg, R.M.; Møller, K.; Svendsen, K.D.; Jakobsen, M.;
Pedersen, B.K. Effects of Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM on insulin sensitivity and the systemic inflammatory
response in human subjects. Br. J. Nutr. 2010, 104, 1831–1838. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Vajro, P.; Mandato, C.; Licenziati, M.R.; Franzese, A.; Vitale, D.F.; Lenta, S.; Caropreso, M.; Vallone, G.; Meli, R.
Effects of Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG in pediatric obesity-related liver disease. J. Gastroenterol. Nutr.
2011, 52, 740–743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Aller, R.; de Luis, D.A.; Izaola, O.; Conde, R.; Gonzalez Sagrado, M.; Primo, D.; de la Fuente, B.; Gonzalez, J.
Effect of a probiotic on liver aminotransferases in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease patients: A double blind
randomized clinical trial. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 2011, 15, 1090–1095. [PubMed]
113. Nabavi, S.; Rafraf, M.; Somi, M.H.; Homayouni-Rad, A.; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M. Effects of probiotic yogurt
consumption on metabolic factors in individuals with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J. Dairy Sci. 2014, 97,
7386–7393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Alisi, A.; Bedogni, G.; Baviera, G.; Giorgio, V.; Porro, E.; Paris, C.; Giammaria, P.; Reali, L.; Anania, F.;
Nobili, V. Randomised clinical trial: The beneficial effects of VLS_3 in obese children with non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2014, 39, 1276–1285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Wang, K.Y.; Li, S.N.; Liu, C.S.; Perng, D.S.; Su, Y.C.; Wu, D.C.; Jan, C.M.; Lai, C.H.; Wang, T.N.;
Wang, W.M. Effects of ingesting Lactobacillus- and Bifidobacterium-containing yogurt in subjects with colonized
Helicobacter pylori. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 81, 939–940.
116. Cats, A.; Kuipers, E.J.; Bosschaert, M.A.; Pot, R.G.; Vandenbroucke-Grauls, C.M.; Kusters, J.G. Effect of
frequent consumption of Lactobacillus casei—Containing milk drink in Helicobacter pylori-colonized subjects.
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2003, 17, 429–435. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Kotowska, M.; Albrecht, P.; Szajewska, H. Saccharomyces boulardii in the prevention of antibiotic-associated
diarrhoea in children: A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2005,
21, 583–590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Sood, A.; Midha, V.; Makharia, G.K.; Ahuja, V.; Singal, D.; Goswami, P.; Tandon, R.K. The probiotic
preparation, VSL#3 induces remission in patients with mild-to-moderately active ulcerative colitis.
Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2009, 7, 1202–1209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Niv, E.; Naftali, T.; Hallak, R.; Vaisman, N. The efficacy of Lactobacillus reuteri ATCC 55730 in the treatment of
patients with irritable bowel syndrome–A double blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study. Clin. Nutr.
2005, 24, 925–931. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Wickens, K.; Black, P.N.; Stanley, T.V.; Mitchell, E.; Fitzharris, P.; Tannock, G.W.; Purdie, G.; Crane, J.
A differential effect of 2 probiotics in the prevention of eczema and atopy: A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2008, 122, 788–794. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Weston, S.; Halbert, A.; Richmond, P.; Prescott, S.L. Effects of probiotics on atopic dermatitis: A randomised
controlled trial. Arch. Dis. Child. 2005, 90, 892–897. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Niers, L.; Martin, R.; Rijkers, G.; Sengers, F.; Timmerman, H.; van Uden, N.; Smidt, H.; Kimpen, J.;
Hoekstra, M. The effects of selected probiotic strains on the development of eczema (the PandA study).
Allergy 2009, 64, 1349–1358. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Gøbel, R.J.; Larsen, N.; Mølgaard, C.; Jakobsen, M.; Michaelsen, K.F. Probiotics to young children with atopic
dermatitis: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Int. J. Probiotics Prebiotics 2010, 5, 53–60.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
26 of 30
124. Hertzler, S.R.; Clancy, S.M. Kefir improves lactose digestion and tolerance in adults with lactose maldigestion.
J. Am. Dietetic Assoc. 2003, 103, 582–587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Roškar, I.; Švigelj, K.; Štempelj, M.; Volfand, J.; Štabuc, B.; Malovrh, Š.; Rogelj, I. Effects of a probiotic product
containing Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. animalis IM386 and Lactobacillus plantarum MP2026 in lactose
intolerant individuals: Randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J. Funct. Foods 2017, 35, 1–8. [CrossRef]
126. Liu, Z.; Qin, H.; Yang, Z.; Xia, Y.; Liu, W.; Yang, J.; Jiang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Wang, Y.; Zheng, Q. Randomized
clinical trial: The effects of perioperative probiotic treatment on barrier function and post-operative infectious
complications in colorectal cancer surgery—A double-blind study. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 2011, 33, 50–63.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Chitapanarux, I.; Chitapanarux, T.; Traisathit, P.; Kudumpee, S.; Tharavichitkul, E.; Lorvidhaya, V.
Randomized controlled trial of live Lactobacillus acidophilus plus Bifidobacterium bifidum in prophylaxis
of diarrhea during radiotherapy in cervical cancer patients. Radiat. Oncol. 2010, 5, 31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Österlund, P.; Ruotsalainen, T.; Korpela, R.; Saxelin, M.; Ollus, A.; Valta, P.; Kouri, M.; Elomaa, I.; Joensuu, H.
Lactobacillus supplementation for diarrhoea related to chemotherapy of colorectal cancer: A randomised
study. Br. J. Cancer 2007, 97, 1028–1034. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Chung, W.S.F.; Walker, A.W.; Louis, P.; Parkhill, J.; Vermeiren, J.; Bosscher, D.; Duncan, S.H.; Flint, H.J.
Modulation of the human gut microbiota by dietary fibres occurs at the species level. BMC Biol. 2016, 14,
1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
130. Crittenden, R.; Playne, M.J. Nutrition News. Facts and functions of prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics.
In Handbook of Probiotics and Prebiotics; Lee, Y.K., Salminen, S., Eds.; Wiley-Interscience, Kansas State
University: Hoboken, NJ, USA; Manhattan, KS, USA, 2008; pp. 535–582.
131. Jakubczyk, E.; Kosikowska, M. Nowa generacja mlecznych produktów fermentowanych z udziałem
probiotyków i prebiotyków, produkty synbiotyczne. Prz. Mlecz. 2000, 12, 397–400.
132. Wang, Y. Prebiotics: Present and future in food science and technology. Food Res. Int. 2009, 42, 8–12.
[CrossRef]
133. Maccfarlane, G.T.;
Steed, H.;
Maccfarlane, S. Bacterial metabolism and health-related effects of
galacto-oligosaccharides and other prebiotics. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2008, 104, 305–344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Crittenden, R.; Playne, M.J. Prebiotics. In Handbook of Probiotics and Prebiotics; Lee, Y.K., Salminen, S., Eds.;
John Wiley & Sons Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2009; pp. 535–561.
135. Huebner, J.; Wehling, R.L.; Parkhurst, A.; Hutkins, R.W. Effect of processing conditions on the prebiotic
activity of commercial prebiotics. Int. Dairy J. 2008, 18, 287–293. [CrossRef]
136. Ze, X.; Duncan, S.H.; Louis, P.; Flint, H.J. Ruminococcus bromii is a keystone species for the degradation of
resistant starch in the human colon. ISME J. 2012, 6, 1535–1543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Angelakis, E. Weight gain by gut microbiota manipulation in productive animals. Microb. Pathog. 2017, 106,
162–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
138. ´
Sli˙
zewska, K.; Nowak, A.; Barczy´
nska, R.; Libudzisz, Z. Prebiotyki—Definicja, wła´
sciwo´
sci i zastosowanie w
przemy´
sle. ˙
Zywno´
s´
c Nauka Technologia Jako´
s´
c 2013, 1, 5–20.
139. Sivieri, K.; Morales, M.L.V.; Saad, S.M.I.; Adorno, M.A.T.; Sakamoto, I.K.; Rossi, E.A. Prebiotic effect of
fructooligosaccharide in the simulator of the human intestinal microbial ecosystem (SHIME (R) Model).
J. Med. Food 2014, 17, 894–901. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Van Den Abbeele, P.; Venema, K.; van de Wiele, T.; Verstraete, W.; Possemiers, S. Different human gut
models reveal the distinct fermentation patterns of arabinoxylan versus inulin. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61,
9819–9827. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Ouwehand, A.; Derrien, M.; de Vos, W.; Tiihonen, K.; Rautonen, N. Prebiotics and other microbial substrates
for gut functionality. Curr. Biol. 2005, 16, 212–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Patterson, J.A.; Burkholder, K.M. Application of prebiotics and probiotics in poultry production. Poult. Sci.
2003, 82, 627–631. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Annison, G.; Illman, R.; Topping, D. Acetylated, propionylated or butyrylated starches raise large bowel
short-chain fatty acids preferentially when fed to rats. J. Nutr. 2003, 133, 3523–3528. [PubMed]
144. Baurhoo, B.; Letellier, A.; Zhao, X.; Ruiz-Feria, C.A. Cecal populations of Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria
and Escherichia coli after In Vivo Escherichia coli challenge in birds fed diets with purified lignin or
mannanoligo-saccharides. Poult. Sci. 2007, 86, 2509–2516. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
27 of 30
145. Olveira, G.; González-Molero, I. An update on probiotics, prebiotics and symbiotics in clinical nutrition.
Endocrinol. Nutr. 2016, 63, 482–494. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Sáez-Lara, M.J.; Robles-Sanchez, C.; Ruiz-Ojeda, F.J.; Plaza-Diaz, J.; Gil, A. Effects of probiotics and synbiotics
on obesity, insulin resistance syndrome, type 2 diabetes and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A review of
human clinical trails. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016, 17, 928. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Van Loo, J.; Clune, Y.; Bennett, M.; Collins, J.K. The SYNCAN project: Goals, set-up, first results and settings
of the human intervention study. Br. J. Nutr. 2005, 93, S91–S98. [PubMed]
148. Schiffrin, E.J.; Kumar, V.B.; Brown, C.; Hager, C.; Van’t Hof, M.A.; Morley, J.E.; Guigoz, Y. Systemic
inflammatory markers in older persons: The effect of oral nutritional supplementation with prebiotics.
J. Nutr. Health Aging 2007, 11, 475–479. [PubMed]
149. Vulevic, J.; Drakoularakou, A.; Yaqoob, P.; Tzortzis, G.; Gibson, G.R. Modulation of the fecal microflora
profile and immune function by a novel transgalactooligosaccharide mixture (B-GOS) in healthy elderly
volunteers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 88, 1438–1446. [PubMed]
150. Schley, P.D.; Field, C.J. The immune-enhancing effects of dietary fibres and prebiotics. Br. J. Nutr. 2002, 87,
S221–S230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Grajek, W.; Olejnik, A.; Sip, A. Probiotics, prebiotics and antioxidants as functional foods. Acta Biochim. Pol.
2005, 52, 665–671. [PubMed]
152. Gibson, G.R.; Wang, X. Regulatory effects of bifidobacteria on the growth of other colonic bacteria.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 1994, 77, 412–420. [CrossRef]
153. Bovee-Oudenhoven, I.M.J.; Termont, D.S.; Heidt, P.J.; van der Meer, R. Increasing the intestinal resistance of
rats to the invasive pathogen Salmonella enteritidis: Additive effects of dietary lactulose and calcium. Gut
1997, 40, 497–504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. De Preter, V.; Hamer, H.M.; Windey, K.; Verbeke, K. The impact of pre- and/or probiotics on human colonic
metabolism: Does it affect human health? Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2011, 55, 46–57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Demigné, C.; Jacobs, H.; Moundras, C.; Davicco, M.J.; Horcajada, M.N.; Bernalier, A.; Coxam, V. Comparison
of native or reformulated chicory fructans, or non-purified chicory, on rat cecal fermentation and mineral
metabolism. Eur. J. Nutr. 2008, 47, 366–374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Mojka, K. Probiotyki, prebiotyki i synbiotyki—Charakterystyka i funkcje. Probl. Hig. Epidemiol. 2014, 95,
541–549.
157. Socha, P.; Stolarczyk, M.; Socha, J. Wpływ probiotyków i prebiotyków na gospodark˛
e lipidow ˛
a.
Pediatr. Współcz. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. ˙
Zyw. Dziecka 2002, 4, 85–88.
158. Asahara, T.; Nomoto, K.; Shimizu, K.; Watanuki, M.; Tanaka, R. Increased resistance of mice to
Salmonella enteritica serovar Typhymurium infection by synbiotic administration of bifidobacteria and
transgalactosylated-oligosaccharides. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2001, 91, 985–996. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Buddington, K.K.; Danohoo, J.B.; Buddington, R.K. Dietary oligofructose and inulin protect mice from
enteric and systemic pathogens and tumour inducers. J. Nutr. 2002, 132, 472–477. [PubMed]
160. Cummings, J.H.; Macfarlane, G.T. Gastrointestinal effects of prebiotics. Br. J. Nutr. 2002, 87, 145–151.
[CrossRef]
161. Scheppach, W.; Weiler, F. The butyrate story: Old wine in new bottles? Butyrate appears to be essential
for a wide range of intestinal mucosal health benefits; however, the mechanisms behind this remain to be
determined. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2004, 7, 563–567. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Kim, Y.S.; Tsa, O.D.; Morita, A.; Bella, A. Effect of sodium butyrate and three human colorectal
adenocarcinoma cell lines in culture. Falk Symp. 1982, 31, 317–323.
163. Munjal, U.; Glei, M.; Pool-Zobel, B.L.; Scharlau, D. Fermentation products of inulin-type fructans reduce
proliferation and induce apoptosis in human colon tumour cells of different stages of carcinogenesis.
Br. J. Nutr. 2009, 27, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Verghese, M.; Rao, D.R.; Chawan, C.B.; Williams, L.L.; Shackelford, L. Dietary inulin suppresses
azoxymethane-induced aberrant crypt foci and colon tumors at the promotion stage in young Fisher
344 rats. J. Nutr. 2002, 132, 2809–2813. [PubMed]
165. Taper, H.S.; Roberfroid, M.B. Inulin/Oligofructose and anticancer therapy. Br. J. Nutr. 2002, 87, 283–286.
[CrossRef]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
28 of 30
166. Parnell, J.A.; Reimer, R.A. Weight loss during oligofructose supplementation is associated with decreased
ghrelin and increased peptide YY in overweight and obese adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2009, 89, 1751–1759.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. Luo, J.; van Yperselle, M.; Rizkalla, S.W.; Rossi, F.; Bornet, F.R.; Slama, G. Chronic consumption of short-chain
fructooligosaccharides does not affect basal hepatic glucose production or insulin resistance in type 2
diabetics. J. Nutr. 2000, 130, 1572–1577. [PubMed]
168. Lu, Z.X.; Walker, K.Z.; Muir, J.G.; O’Dea, K. Arabinoxylan fibre improves metabolic control in people with
type II diabetes. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004, 58, 621–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
169. Garcia, A.L.; Otto, B.; Reich, S.C. Arabinoxylan consumption decreases postprandial serum glucose, serum
insulin and plasma total ghrelin response in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr.
2007, 61, 334–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Daubioul, C.A.; Horsmans, Y.; Lambert, P.; Danse, E.; Delzenne, N.M. Effects of oligofructose on glucose and
lipid metabolism in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: Results of a pilot study. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr.
2005, 59, 723–726. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
171. Bruzzese, E.; Volpicelli, M.; Salvini, F.; Bisceglia, M.; Lionetti, P.; Cinquetti, M.; Iacono, G.; Guarino, A.
Early administration of GOS/FOS prevents intestinal and respiratory infections in infants. J. Pediatr.
Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2006, 42, E95.
172. Costalos, C.; Kapiki, A.; Apostolou, M.; Papathoma, E. The effect of a prebiotic supplemented formula on
growth and stool microbiology of term infants. Early Hum. Dev. 2008, 84, 45–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Scholtens, P.A.; Alliet, P.; Raes, M.; Alles, M.S.; Kroes, H.; Boehm, G.; Knippels, L.M.; Knol, J.; Vandenplas, Y.
Fecal secretory immunoglobulin A is increased in healthy infants who receive a formula with short-chain
galacto-oligosaccharides and long-chain fructo-oligosaccharides. J. Nutr. 2008, 138, 1141–1147. [PubMed]
174. Welters, C.F.; Heineman, E.; Thunnissen, F.B.; van den Bogaard, A.E.; Soeters, P.B.; Baeten, C.G. Effect of
dietary inulin supplementation on inflammation of pouch mucosa in patients with an ileal pouch-anal
anastomosis. Dis. Colon Rectum 2002, 45, 621–627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Lindsay, J.O.; Whelan, K.; Stagg, A.J.; Gobin, P.; Al-Hassi, H.O.; Rayment, N.; Forbes, A. Clinical,
microbiological, and immunological effects of fructo-oligosaccharide in patients with Crohn’s disease.
Gut 2006, 55, 348–355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
176. Moro, G.; Arslanoglu, S.; Stahl, B.; Jelinek, J.; Wahn, U.; Boehm, G. A mixture of prebiotic oligosaccharides
reduces the incidence of atopic dermatitis during the first six months of age. Arch. Dis. Child. 2006, 91,
814–819. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
177. Arslanoglu, S.; Moro, G.E.; Boehm, G. Early supplementation of prebiotic oligosaccharides protects
formula-fed infants against infections during the first 6 months of life. J. Nutr. 2007, 137, 2420–2424.
[PubMed]
178. Azcarate-Peril, M.A.; Ritter, A.J.; Savaiano, D.; Monteagudo-Mera, A.; Anderson, C.; Magness, S.T.;
Klaenhammer, T.R. Impact of short-chain galactooligosaccharides on the gut microbiome of lactose-intolerant
individuals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, E367–E375. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Gourbeyre, P.; Denery, S.; Bodinier, M. Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics: Impact on the gut immune
system and allergic reactions. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2011, 89, 685–695. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. De Vrese, M.; Schrezenmeir, J. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics. In Food Biotechnology, Advances in
Biochemical Engineering/Biotechnology; Stahl, U., Donalies, U.E.B., Nevoigt, E., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Germany,
2008; pp. 1–66. [CrossRef]
181. Scavuzzi, B.M.; Henrique, F.C.; Miglioranza, L.H.S.; Simão, A.N.C.; Dichi, I. Impact of prebiotics, probiotics
and synbiotics on components of the metabolic syndrome. Ann. Nutr. Disord. Ther. 2014, 1, 1009.
182. Hamasalim, H.J. Synbiotic as feed additives relating to animal health and performance. Adv. Microbiol. 2016,
6, 288–302. [CrossRef]
183. Sekhon, B.S.; Jairath, S. Prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics: An overview. J. Pharm. Educ. Res. 2010, 1, 13–36.
184. Manigandan, T.; Mangaiyarkarasi, S.P.; Hemaltha, R.; Hemaltha, V.T.; Murali, N.P. Probiotics, prebiotics and
synbiotics—A review. Biomed. Pharmacol. J. 2012, 5, 295–304. [CrossRef]
185. Pandey, K.R.; Naik, S.R.; Babu, V.V. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics—A review. J. Food. Sci. Technol.
2015, 52, 7577–7587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Zhang, M.M.; Cheng, J.Q.; Lu, Y.R.; Yi, Z.H.; Yang, P.; Wu, X.T. Use of pre-, pro-and synbiotics in patients
with acute pancreatitis: A meta-analysis. World J. Gastroenterol. 2010, 16, 3970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
29 of 30
187. Wong, V.W.; Won, G.L.; Chim, A.M.; Chu, W.C.; Yeung, D.K.; Li, K.C.; Chan, L. Treatment of nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis with probiotics. A proof-of-concept study. Ann. Hepatol. 2013, 12, 256–262. [PubMed]
188. Eslamparast, T.; Poustchi, H.; Zamani, F.; Sharafkhah, M.; Malekzadeh, R.; Hetmatdoost, A. Synbiotic
supplementation in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot
study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 535–542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Pathmakanthan, S.; Walsh, M.; Bengmark, S. Efficacy and Tolerability Treating Acute Distal Ulcerative Colitis with
Synbiotic Enemas: A Pilot Trial (Abstract); United European Gastroenterology Week: Geneva, Switzerland, 2002.
190. Pérez-Conesa, D.; López, G.; Abellán, P.; Ros, G. Bioavailability of calcium, magnesium and phosphorus in
rats fed probiotic, prebiotic and synbiotic powder follow-up infant formulas and their effect on physiological
and nutritional parameters. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2006, 86, 2327–2336. [CrossRef]
191. Danq, D.; Zhou, W.; Lun, Z.J.; Mu, X.; Wanq, D.X.; Wu, H. Meta-analysis of probiotics and/or prebiotics for
the prevention of eczema. J. Int. Med. Res. 2013, 41, 1426–1436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
192. Rafter, J.; Bennett, M.; Caderni, G.; Clune, I.; Hughes, R.; Karlsson, P.C.; Klinder, A.; O’Riordan, M.;
O’Sullivan, G.; Pool-Zobel, B.; et al. Dietary synbiotics reduce cancer risk factors in polypectomized and
colon cancer patients. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 85, 488–496. [PubMed]
193. Sanchez, M.; Darimont, C.; Drapeau, V.; Emady-Azar, S.; Lepage, M.; Rezzonico, E.; Ngom-Bru, C.; Berger, B.;
Philippe, L.; Ammon-Zuffrey, C.; et al. Effect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus CGMCC1.3724 supplementation
on weight loss and maintenance in obese men and women. Br. J. Nutr. 2014, 111, 1507–1519. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
194. Safavi, M.; Farajian, S.; Kelishadi, R.; Mirlohi, M.; Hashemipour, M. The effects of synbiotic supplementation
on some cardio metabolic risk factors in overweight and obese children: A randomized triple-masked
controlled trial. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 2013, 64, 687–693. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Ipar, N.; Aydogdu, S.D.; Yildirim, G.K.; Inal, M.; Gies, I.; Vandenplas, Y.; Dinleyici, E.C. Effects of symbiotic
on anthropometry, lipid profile and oxidative stress in obese children. Benef. Microbes 2015, 6, 775–781.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
196. Eslamparast, T.; Zamani, F.; Hekmatdoost, A.; Sharafkhah, M.; Eghtesad, S.; Malekzadeh, R.; Poustchi, H.
Effects of synbiotic supplementation on insulin resistance in subjects with the metabolic syndrome:
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. Br. J. Nutr. 2014, 112, 438–445. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
197. Asemi, Z.; Zohreh, Z.; Shakeri, H.; Sima-sadat Sabihi, S.S.; Esmaillzadeh, A. Effect of multispecies
probiotic supplements on metabolic profiles, hs-CRP, and oxidative stress in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2013, 63, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
198. Tajadadi-Ebrahimi, M.; Bahmani, F.; Shakeri, H.; Hadaegh, H.; Hijijafari, M.; Abedi, F.; Asemi, Z. Effects of
daily consumption of synbiotic bread on insulin metabolism and serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
among diabetic patients: A double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2014, 65,
34–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
199. Shakeri, H.; Hadaegh, H.; Abedi, F.; Tajabadi-Ebrahimi, M.; Mazroii, N.; Ghandi, Y.; Asemi, Z. Consumption
of synbiotic bread decreases triacylglycerol and VLDL levels while increasing HDL levels in serum from
patients with type-2 diabetes. Lipids 2014, 49, 695–701. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Moroti, C.; Souza Magri, L.F.; Rezende-Costa, M.; Cavallini, D.; Sivieri, K. Effect of the consumption of a
new symbiotic shake on glycemia and cholesterol levels in elderly people with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Lipids Health Dis. 2012, 11, 29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Šmid, A.; Strniša, L.; Bajc, K.; Vuji´
c-Podlipec, D.; Bogoviˇ
c Matijaši´
c, B.; Rogelj, I. Randomized clinical trial:
The effect of fermented milk with the probiotic cultures Lactobacillus acidophilus La-5® and Bifidobacterium
BB-12® and Beneo dietary fibres on health-related quality of life and the symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome in adults. J. Funct. Foods 2016, 24, 549–557. [CrossRef]
202. Ustundag, G.H.; Altuntas, H.; Soysal, Y.D.; Kokturk, F. The effects of synbiotic “Bifidobacterium lactis B94
plus Inulin” addition on standard triple therapy of Helicobacter pylori eradication in children. Can. J.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2017, 2017, 8130596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Fujimori, S.; Gudis, K.; Mitsui, K.; Seo, T.; Yonezawa, M.; Tanaka, S.; Tatsuguchi, A.; Sakamoto, C.
A randomized controlled trial on the efficacy of synbiotic versus probiotic or prebiotic treatment to improve
the quality of life in patients with ulcerative colitis. Nutrition 2009, 25, 520–525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 1021
30 of 30
204. Van der Aa, L.B.; Heymans, H.S.A.; van Aalderen, W.M.C.; Sillevis Smitt, J.H.; Knol, J.; Ben Amor, K.;
Goossens, D.A.; Sprikkelman, A.B. Effect of a new synbiotic mixture on atopic dermatitis in infants:
A randomized controlled trial. Clin. Exp. Allergy 2010, 40, 795–804. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
205. Farid, R.; Ahanchian, H.; Jabbari, F.; Moghiman, T. Effect of a new synbiotic mixture on atopic dermatitis in
children: A randomized-controlled trial. Iran. J. Pediatr. 2011, 21, 225–230. [PubMed]
206. Post, J. Acceptability and Feasibility of Probiotic and Prebiotic Supplementation in Alleviating Symptoms of Lactose
Maldigestion in Lactose Intolerant Subjects; Florida State University: Tallahassee, FL, USA, 2013.
207. Nowak, A.; ´
Sli˙
zewska, K.; Libudzisz, Z. Probiotyki—Historia i mechanizmy działania. ˙
Zywno´
s´
c Nauka
Technologia Jako´
s´
c 2010, 4, 5–19.
208. Bomba, A.; Nemcova, R.; Mudronova, D.; Guba, P. The possibilities of potentiating the efficacy of probiotics.
Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2002, 13, 121–126. [CrossRef]
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
