 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Diet-induced changes in maternal 
gut microbiota and metabolomic 
profiles influence programming of 
offspring obesity risk in rats
Heather A. Paul1, Marc R. Bomhof2, Hans J. Vogel1,3 & Raylene A. Reimer1,2
Maternal obesity and overnutrition during pregnancy and lactation can program an increased 
risk of obesity in offspring. In this context, improving maternal metabolism may help reduce the 
intergenerational transmission of obesity. Here we show that, in Sprague-Dawley rats, selectively 
altering obese maternal gut microbial composition with prebiotic treatment reduces maternal 
energy intake, decreases gestational weight gain, and prevents increased adiposity in dams and their 
offspring. Maternal serum metabolomics analysis, along with satiety hormone and gut microbiota 
analysis, identified maternal metabolic signatures that could be implicated in programming offspring 
obesity risk and highlighted the potential influence of maternal gut microbiota on maternal and 
offspring metabolism. In particular, the metabolomic signature of insulin resistance in obese rats 
normalized when dams consumed the prebiotic. In summary, prebiotic intake during pregnancy and 
lactation improves maternal metabolism in diet-induced obese rats in a manner that attenuates the 
detrimental nutritional programming of offspring associated with maternal obesity. Overall, these 
findings contribute to our understanding of the maternal mechanisms influencing the developmental 
programming of offspring obesity and provide compelling pre-clinical evidence for a potential strategy 
to improve maternal and offspring metabolic outcomes in human pregnancy.
Obesity is now considered a global epidemic1. Importantly, maternal factors have been increasingly implicated in 
offspring susceptibility to obesity development, highlighting the impact of maternal adiposity and metabolism on 
the inter-generational transmission of obesity2. While improving maternal metabolism, in the case of maternal 
obesity, may help curb the burden of disease in future generations3, the maternal mechanisms through which 
beneficial or detrimental outcomes are programmed in offspring remain to be elucidated. It has also become clear 
that the gut microbiota greatly affects host metabolism4, and there is growing evidence that a dysbiotic microbiota 
plays a central role in the development of obesity5,6. Furthermore, maternal gut microbiota is an important factor 
in the colonization of the offspring gut7, impacting long-term metabolic health8. Elucidating the factors that 
influence the interplay of maternal obesity and the gut microbiota, and its impact on offspring obesity risk, may 
provide valuable insight into the mechanisms involved in the propagation of obesity across generations.
Dietary prebiotic treatment represents one strategy to selectively alter the substrates available to the gut micro-
biota and as a result affect host metabolism and physiology9. Prebiotics are nondigestible food ingredients that 
pass into the lower gastrointestinal tract where they stimulate the selective growth of health-promoting bacte-
ria10,11. In the context of obesity, prebiotic intake is associated with reductions in body fat and energy intake11 and 
has been identified as a potential therapy for obesity management12. Furthermore, in diet-induced obese rats, 
prebiotics had a greater impact on body composition and gut microbial profiles than supplementation with a 
probiotic, a live microbial food ingredient11.
This study aimed to examine the metabolic and gut microbial effect of diet-induced maternal obesity in 
pregnant and lactating rats and the effect of supplementing a maternal high-fat/sucrose diet with the prebiotic 
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, 
AB, Canada, T2N 4N1. 2Faculty of Kinesiology, 2500 University Drive NW, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada, T2N 1N4. 3Department of Biological Sciences, Bio-NMR Center, 2500 University Drive NW, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, T2N 1N4. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
R.R. (email: reimer@ucalgary.ca)
Received: 22 October 2015
accepted: 11 January 2016
Published: 12 February 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
oligofructose on maternal gut microbiota, metabolism, and offspring health. As a novel approach to maternal 
programming research, we employed 1H NMR serum metabolomics analysis to gain insight into the effect of 
diet-induced obesity and prebiotic supplementation on maternal metabolism; to assess the potential impact of the 
gut microbiota on the maternal metabolome; and to identify putative maternal metabolic signatures that might 
contribute to the developmental programming of offspring obesity.
Here we show that maternal prebiotic intake, in the context of diet-induced obesity, reduces gestational weight 
gain and prevents increased adiposity in both dams and offspring at weaning. These effects are accompanied 
by increased circulating concentrations of satiety hormones and abundance of Bifidobacterium spp. in the gut. 
Importantly, we demonstrate that diet-associated changes in maternal serum metabolite signatures provide novel 
insight into metabolic players involved in developmental programming of offspring obesity risk.
Results
Metabolic dysfunction following obesity induction. 
Female Sprague-Dawley rats underwent a 10 
week obesity induction protocol using a high-fat/sucrose diet. By week 2 of obesity induction, high-fat/sucrose-
fed females were significantly heavier than the age-matched lean reference group and remained so until mating 
(Supplementary Fig. S1). Diet-induced obese dams also had higher blood glucose and plasma insulin concen-
trations compared to lean dams during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) that was performed following 
obesity induction (Supplementary Fig. S1). Obese dams displayed higher fasting plasma leptin, which is pro-
duced in proportion to fat mass, and lower peptide-YY (PYY), an appetite-reducing satiety hormone whose 
blood concentration is decreased in obesity in rats13 and humans12, compared to the lean reference group (lep-
tin: obese 1162.7 ± 
 67.9 pmol L−1, lean: 749.5 ± 
 92.8 pmol L−1, P = 
 0.002; PYY: obese 13.7 ± 
 0.8 pmol L−1, lean 
17.3 ± 
 1.1 pmol L−1, P = 
 0.028). Consistent with previous work14, diet-induced obesity altered gut microbiota 
composition, where obese dams had lower relative abundance of fecal Bifidobacterium spp. and higher relative 
abundance of Clostridium clusters XI and I as measured by real-time qPCR (Supplementary Table S1). Finally, 
whole-body metabolism of obese and lean dams was compared using 1H NMR serum metabolomics. Differences 
between metabolic profiles of obese and lean dams included variations in fatty acid oxidation (carnitine, o-ace-
tylcarnitine, 2-hydroxybutyrate, ketone bodies), amino acid metabolism, gut microbial metabolites (propionate, 
formate, acetate, methanol), and phospholipid metabolism (cytidine) (Supplementary Fig. S2).
Prebiotic normalizes gestational weight gain. 
To examine the effect of supplementing a maternal 
high-fat/sucrose diet with the prebiotic oligofructose, diet-induced obese dams were fed either a high-fat/sucrose 
diet ad libitum (obese control HFS group), the high-fat/sucrose diet supplemented with 10% wt/wt oligofruc-
tose ad libitum (OFS group), or a restricted amount of the high-fat/sucrose diet in order to match body weight 
to the OFS group (weight matched group, WM). The WM group was included so that the effect of oligofruc-
tose could be discerned independently from its known ability to lower body weight in the context of high-fat/
sucrose diet-induced obesity14. Pre-pregnancy body weight did not differ between the maternally obese groups 
(HFS: 447.4 ± 
 7.2 g; OFS: 446.0 ± 
 7.2 g, WM: 439.3 ± 
 7.3 g, P = 
 0.738). Of the 42 diet-induced obese female 
rats, 32 mated successfully. Maternal body weight over gestation and lactation was dependent on maternal diet 
(time × 
 diet interaction P = 
 0.001). HFS dams were heavier by their due date than both OFS and WM dams 
(Fig. 1a) and remained heavier than OFS dams until weaning, but were heavier than WM dams only on lactation 
days 7 and 14. As per experimental design, OFS and WM body weight did not differ throughout the study. To 
assess whether the disparity in maternal body weight between dietary groups was associated with differences in 
energy intake, food intake data was analyzed. Accordingly, HFS dams had the highest energy intake throughout 
pregnancy and lactation, while OFS and WM dams had similar energy intake (Fig. 1b). Body composition was 
measured using dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) at weaning, where HFS dams had higher fat mass and 
percent body fat compared to OFS and WM dams (Fig. 1c), indicating that the obese phenotype was maintained 
to a greater extent in HFS dams throughout pregnancy and lactation.
The effect of oligofructose on maternal glucose and insulin response was investigated on gestation day 14 
and lactation day 19 via OGTTs. During gestation, WM dams had the highest fasting glucose, HFS dams had the 
highest peak glucose, and OFS dams had higher blood glucose than HFS dams at 120 minutes (Fig. 1d). There 
was no main effect of diet on maternal blood glucose during either gestation (P = 
 0.842) or lactation (P = 
 0.076). 
There were no differences in plasma insulin concentration during either gestation or lactation (Fig. 1e). However, 
maternal glucose area under the curve (AUC) increased in all groups from gestation to lactation, while insulin 
AUC decreased (Fig. 1f).
Maternal prebiotic reduces offspring fat mass and glycemia. 
To determine the potential impact of a 
maternal high-fat/sucrose diet and oligofructose supplementation on offspring body weight and composition in 
early life, litters were weighed on postnatal days 1, 7, 14, and 21 (weaning), and body composition of, whenever 
possible, two male and two female offspring from each dam was measured via DXA scan at weaning. There was a 
significant interaction of offspring sex and body weight only at birth (P < 
 0.001), where male pups weighed more 
than female pups (males: 6.6 ± 
 0.1 g; females 6.2 ± 
 0.1 g, P = 
 0.001). HFS offspring weighed more than OFS and 
WM offspring by postnatal day 14 and remained heavier until weaning (Fig. 2a). HFS offspring had higher fat 
mass and percent body fat at weaning compared to OFS and WM offspring, which did not differ (Fig. 2b). These 
results were consistent with the increased plasma concentration of leptin in the HFS offspring (251.4 ± 
 17.8 pmol 
L−1) compared to both OFS offspring (113.3 ± 
 15.5 pmol L−1, P < 
 0.001) and WM offspring (133.3 ± 
 12.3 pmol 
L−1, P < 
 0.001). Fasting plasma glucose levels in HFS offspring (8.9 ± 
 0.3 mmol L−1) were significantly higher 
than both OFS (8.0 ± 
 0.2 mmol L−1, P = 
 0.013) and WM offspring (7.5 ± 
 0.1 mmol L−1, P < 
 0.001), which 
were not different. There were no differences in plasma insulin concentration among offspring (HFS offspring: 
52.7 ± 
 5.3 pmol L−1; OFS offspring: 45.5 ± 
 4.6 pmol L−1; WM offspring: 58.8 ± 
 4.8 pmol L−1; P = 
 0.176). Finally, 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
there was no difference in litter size between maternal groups throughout the study (HFS: 8.8 ± 
 0.4 pups; OFS: 
8.8 ± 
 0.3 pups; WM: 8.6 ± 
 0.4 pups, P = 
 0.674), thus controlling for the potential influence of small versus large 
litter size on the programming of obesity in offspring15.
Rapid changes in maternal gut microbiota. 
To assess the impact of pregnancy and lactation and mater-
nal diet on the composition of the maternal gut microbiota, we performed gut microbial profiling of mater-
nal fecal samples collected on gestation days 1, 14 and 21, and lactation days 1 and 19. Relative abundance of 
Bacteroides/Prevotella spp., Clostridium cluster XI, C. leptum, Enterobacteriaceae, and Methanobrevibacter spp., 
Figure 1. Effect of oligofructose supplementation on maternal body weight, energy intake, body 
composition, glycemia and insulinemia. During gestation and lactation, diet-induced obese dams were fed 
either a high-fat/sucrose diet (HFS obese control group), the high-fat/sucrose diet supplemented with 10% wt/
wt oligofructose (OFS group), or a restricted amount of the high-fat/sucrose diet in order to match body weight 
to the OFS dams (WM). A lean reference group was maintained on control AIN-93 G diet through pregnancy 
and lactation for body weight and body composition measurements but was not included in statistical analysis. 
Maternal glycemia and insulinemia was determined from blood collected during oral glucose tolerance tests 
(OGTTs) performed on gestation day 14 and lactation day 19. Dams were fasted overnight (12 h) and an OGTT 
was performed after gavage with glucose (2 g/kg body weight). Blood samples were collected at 0, 15, 30, 60, 
90 and 120 minutes during the OGTT. (a) Maternal body weight during gestation and lactation (HFS, n = 
 11; 
OFS, n = 
 12; WM, n = 
 9). (b) Maternal energy intake during gestation and lactation (HFS, n = 
 7; OFS, n = 
 12; 
WM, n = 
 9; Independent-Samples Kruskall-Wallis Test with adjusted significance where *P < 
 0.05 compared 
to all other groups). (c) Maternal fat mass and percent body fat at weaning (HFS, n = 
 10; OFS, n = 
 9; WM, 
n = 
 8). (d,e) Maternal glycemia and insulinemia (HFS, n = 
 7; OFS, n = 
 12; WM, n = 
 9). (f) Area under the 
curve (AUC) for glucose and insulin concentrations during the OGTTs (HFS, n = 
 7; OFS, n = 
 12; WM, n = 
 9; 
Student’s t-test). Graphs represent mean +/− SEM. Mean values without a common letter are significantly 
different using one-way ANOVA (P < 
 0.05). For body weight, glycemia, and insulinemia measurements, the 
data were analyzed using repeated measures one-way ANOVA, where the between subjects factor was maternal 
diet and the within-subjects factor was time. If a statistically significant interaction was observed, a one-way 
ANOVA between groups was performed.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
changed significantly over gestation and lactation (main effect of time P < 
 0.05, Fig. 3), and approached signif-
icance in Clostridium cluster I (P = 
 0.052). Relative abundance of Bacteroides/Prevotella spp., C. coccoides, C. 
leptum, Clostridium cluster XI, Methanobrevibacter spp., and Roseburia spp. was dependent on maternal diet 
(time × 
 diet interaction P < 
 0.05, Fig. 3). Across gestation and lactation, OFS dams had higher relative abundance 
of Bifidobacterium spp. and Bacteroides/Prevotella spp. (main effect of diet P < 
 0.05, Supplementary Table S2) 
 
compared to both HFS and WM dams. Notably, the increase in Bifidobacterium spp. in OFS dams was evident 
after 24 hours on the oligofructose supplemented diet (Fig. 3). Relative abundance of Clostridium cluster I dif-
fered only between HFS and OFS dams, while relative abundance of Roseburia spp. differed only between OFS 
and WM dams (Supplementary Table S2). The relative abundance of C. leptum, Clostridium cluster XI, and 
Methanobrevibacter spp. across gestation and lactation differed between all three maternal groups, although OFS 
dams had the lowest relative abundance. Finally, consistent with the fermentation of prebiotics by the gut micro-
biota, cecum weight was highest in OFS dams (OFS: 1.7 ± 
 0.2 g; HFS: 0.58 ± 
 0.04 g; WM: 0.67 ± 
 0.04 g; P < 
 0.001 
versus both HFS and WM dams).
Prebiotic offspring have distinct microbiota from HFS and WM. 
Maternal gut microbiota com-
position has been demonstrated to affect the colonization of offspring gut microbiota in early life, potentially 
affecting lifelong metabolic health7. Therefore, microbial profiling was also performed on cecal matter collected 
from offspring at weaning. Offspring sex affected the relative abundance of Roseburia spp. (P = 
 0.02) with males 
having higher relative abundance than females (males: 0.8 ± 
 0.3%; females: 0.15 ± 
 0.04%; P = 
 0.033). While 
maternal diet affected the relative abundance of 9 out of 11 microbial groups, in 4 out of 11 microbial groups 
(Bifidobacterium spp., C. coccoides, C. leptum, Enterobacteriaceae), HFS and WM offspring abundance were the 
same while OFS offspring differed (Table 1). WM offspring differed from both HFS and OFS offspring, which 
were the same, within Clostridium clusters I and XI, while HFS offspring differed from both OFS and WM off-
spring only within Bacteroidetes/Prevotella spp. As such, overall microbial profiles of OFS offspring were more 
distinct from HFS and WM offspring, which were more similar.
Finally, correlation analysis was used to assess the relationship between each measured maternal gut microbial 
group during the perinatal (gestation day 21 and lactation day 1) and weaning (lactation day 19) period with the 
corresponding offspring microbial abundance at weaning. Of the ten strongest correlations, seven were from the 
perinatal period (Table 2). Notably, the second strongest association was with Bifidobacterium spp. abundance 
from dams on lactation day 19. Overall, these data provide supporting evidence that maternal gut microbiota 
plays a role in the colonization of offspring gut microbial profiles in early life.
Prebiotic increases maternal and offspring gut hormones. 
The reduction in energy intake in the OFS 
dams led us to examine whether circulating levels of the satiety hormones peptide-YY (PYY) and glucagon-like 
peptide-1 (GLP-1), both of which are associated with a reduction in food intake16,17 and increase upon prebi-
otic feeding18, were elevated in OFS dams. Relative to their pre-pregnancy levels, plasma PYY AUC increased 
in OFS dams to a greater extent compared to HFS dams by gestation day 14, and both WM and HFS dams by 
lactation day 19 (Fig. 4a). Plasma GLP-1 AUC also increased most in OFS dams (Fig. 4b). The gut trophic hor-
mone glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2) is co-secreted with GLP-1 by intestinal L-cells, is associated with intestinal 
health, and its secretion is also increased in response to prebiotic intake19. Accordingly, at weaning, portal plasma 
GLP-1 and GLP-2 were highest in OFS dams (Fig. 4c,d), confirming the influence of oligofructose fermentation 
Figure 2. Effect of maternal oligofructose supplementation on offspring body weight and body 
composition. Pregnant and lactating diet-induced obese dams were fed either a high-fat/sucrose diet (HFS 
obese control group), the high-fat/sucrose diet supplemented with 10% wt/wt oligofructose (OFS group), or a 
restricted amount of the high-fat/sucrose diet in order to match body weight to the OFS dams (WM). Offspring 
body weight was measured weekly and body composition analyzed at weaning using DXA scan. Offspring body 
weight was calculated using litter averages as individual values. (a) Offspring body weight throughout lactation 
(HFS, n = 
 12; OFS, n = 
 12; WM, n = 
 9). (b) Offspring fat mass and percent body fat (HFS offspring, n = 
 31, 15 
males and 16 females; OFS offspring, n = 
 29, 13 males and 16 females; WM offspring, n = 
 30, 13 males and 16 
females). Values are mean ± 
 SEM. Mean values without a common letter are significantly different using one-
Way ANOVA (P < 
 0.05).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
on the secretion of glucagon-like peptides by the host. Finally, to test whether these satiety hormones were also 
increased in the offspring of OFS dams, we measured the concentration of PYY, GLP-1 and GLP-2 in cardiac 
plasma of offspring at weaning. Notably, plasma PYY, GLP-1, and GLP-2 were highest in OFS offspring compared 
to offspring of both HFS and WM dams (Table 3).
Maternal body fat correlates with offspring body fat. 
Following gut microbial and satiety hormone 
profiles in offspring, we sought to determine what factors might be contributing to the reduced percent body fat 
in offspring of OFS and WM dams. While nine offspring variables were significantly correlated with offspring 
Figure 3. Relative microbial abundance of fecal microbiota changes throughout pregnancy and lactation 
and is affected by diet. Abundance of fecal microbiota from pregnant and lactating dams fed either a high-fat/
sucrose diet (HFS obese control group), the high-fat/sucrose diet supplemented with 10% wt/wt oligofructose 
(OFS group), or a restricted amount of the high-fat/sucrose diet in order to match body weight to the OFS dams 
(WM) was determined using real-time qPCR. Microbial abundance was measured as 16 S rRNA gene copies per 
20 ng DNA, and reported here as the relative abundance (%) of bacterial taxa per total bacteria. Longitudinal 
analysis of maternal fecal relative abundance on gestation days 1, 14, and 21 (G1, G14, G21), and lactation days 
1 and 19 (L1, L19) was performed using repeated measures one-way ANOVA, where the between subjects factor 
was maternal diet and the within-subjects factor was timepoint (gestation days 1, 14 and 21 and lactation days 1 
and 19). Values are mean ± 
 SEM. Mean values without a common letter are significantly different using one-way 
ANOVA (P < 
 0.05) and indicate there was a significant interaction between time and maternal diet (P < 
 0.05). 
HFS, n = 
 11 except for A. muciniphila and C. coccoides where n = 
 10; OFS, n = 
 12; WM, n = 
 9.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
percent body fat, the variable that explained the largest amount of variance in offspring adiposity was maternal 
adiposity (R = 
 0.542, P < 
 0.01, Supplementary Table S3).
Distinct maternal metabolomics signatures. 
Finally, we tested whether we could detect differences 
in whole-body metabolism between maternal groups during gestation and lactation, and thus identify potential 
maternal mechanisms involved in nutritional programming of offspring obesity risk. We therefore examined 
the differences in metabolite profiles between maternal groups using 1H NMR serum metabolomics analysis. 
Analysis was performed on serum collected on gestation day 14 and lactation day 19. In order to maximize differ-
ences between groups, multivariate analysis was performed using orthogonal partial least-squares discriminant 
analysis (OPLS-DA), where samples were clustered according to maternal diet. The explained variance (R2Y), 
predictability (Q2Y), and details of each model are described in Supplementary Table S4.
Metabolomics analysis was able to clearly separate the maternal dietary groups during gestation (Fig. 5). 
Coinciding with the start point of the separation of body weight from HFS dams, metabolic profiles of OFS and 
WM dams were most similar, as indicated by the lowest R2Y and Q2Y (Supplementary Table S4). The strongest 
separation between maternal groups occurred between the HFS and the WM dams. HFS dams had increased 
levels of and precursors to ketone bodies (3-hydroxybutyrate, acetone, and acetoacetate, 2-oxoisocaproate) and 
metabolites involved in lipid metabolism (o-phosphocholine, cytidine). HFS dams also had elevated branched 
chain amino acids (isoleucine, leucine, valine) and decreased glucogenic amino acids (alanine, proline). OFS 
dams were characterized by altered levels of metabolites associated with changes in gut microbial composi-
tion, including short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (isobutyrate, propionate, formate, butyrate, acetate, ethanol) and 
higher myo-inositol levels, a marker of increased insulin sensitivity20. WM dams displayed mainly increased 
glutamine and gluconeogenic substrates, including propylene glycol21. While there were general changes in amino 
acid metabolism across all maternal groups, OFS dams in particular exhibited increased levels of metabolites 
involved in arginine metabolism (arginine, ornithine, citrulline, proline). Interestingly, differences in choline and 
Microbial Group
Offspring Relative Microbial Abundance (%)
HFS
OFS
WM
Akkermansia muciniphila
1.1 ± 
 0.3a
0.5 ± 
 0.2ab
0.22 ± 
 0.05b
Bacteroides/Prevotella spp.
27.6 ± 
 2.0b
36.9 ± 
 1.6a
34.2 ± 
 1.8a
Bifidobacterium spp.
0.010 ± 
 0.001b
0.4 ± 
 0.1a
0.015 ± 
 0.001b
Clostridium coccoides (cluster XIV)
4.9 ± 
 0.3b
8.5 ± 
 0.6a
6.0 ± 
 0.4b
Clostridium leptum (cluster IV)
1.3 ± 
 0.2a
0.24 ± 
 0.03b
1.4 ± 
 0.2a
Clostridium cluster I
0.14 ± 
 0.04b
0.08 ± 
 0.02b
0.45 ± 
 0.06a
Clostridium cluster XI
0.06 ± 
 0.02b
0.05 ± 
 0.01b
0.26 ± 
 0.04a
Enterobactericeae
0.6 ± 
 0.1b
1.6 ± 
 0.3a
0.47 ± 
 0.06b
Lactobacillus spp.
0.19 ± 
 0.04
0.3 2± 
 0.08
0.22 ± 
 0.02
Methanobrevibacter spp.
0.012 ± 
 0.001c
0.025 ± 
 0.002b
0.03 ± 
 0.002a
Roseburia spp.
0.5 ± 
 0.2
0.05 ± 
 0.02
0.8 ± 
 0.3
Table 1.  Relative abundance of cecal gut microbiota from offspring of maternally obese dams fed different 
diets during pregnancy and lactation. Values are mean ± 
 SEM expressed as the relative abundance (%) of 
bacterial taxa per total bacteria. Mean values without a common letter are significantly different (P < 
 0.05) and 
denote a main effect of maternal diet when analyzed by one-way ANOVA. HFS offspring, n = 
 29, 15 males and 
14 females; OFS offspring, n = 
 29, 13 males and 16 females; WM offspring, n = 
 29, 14 males and 15 females.
Microbial Group
Maternal Fecal 
Sample
R*
C. leptum
Gestation day 21
0.694
Bifidobacterium spp.
Lactation day 19
0.628
Bacteroidetes/Prevotella spp.
Gestation day 21
0.498
Roseburia spp.
Gestation day 21
0.441
Methanobrevibacter spp.
Gestation day 21
− 
0.431†
Bifidobacterium spp.
Gestation day 21
0.408
C. coccoides (cluster XIV)
Lactation day 19
0.381
Total Bacteria
Gestation day 21
0.364†
C. coccoides (cluster XIV)
Lactation day 1
0.355
Total Bacteria
Lactation day 19
0.343
Table 2.  Top ten correlations between microbial abundance of offspring cecal microbiota at weaning and 
maternal fecal microbiota during the perinatal and weaning period. *All correlations P < 
 0.01. † = 
 Pearson’s 
correlation value.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
methionine occurred only during gestation, both of which are methyl donors and implicated in prenatal epige-
netic histone methylation patterns in animal models22, potentially affecting the transgenerational transmission 
of obesity23.
Figure 6 shows the metabolic profiles of lactating dams. Similar to gestation profiles, OFS and WM metabolic 
profiles in lactation were most similar, while HFS and WM dams were most distinct, indicated by their respective 
R2Y and Q2Y values (Supplementary Table S4). The modeled predictability (Q2Y) increased from gestation to 
lactation in all analyses, suggesting a strong effect of pregnancy itself on maternal metabolism.
Figure 4. Oligofructose feeding increases circulating levels of peptide YY (PYY), glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1) and glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2). Blood samples for PYY and GLP-1 area under the curve were 
collected during the glucose tolerance tests performed pre-pregnancy, on gestation day 14, and lactation day 
19 from diet-induced obese dams fed either a high-fat/sucrose diet (HFS obese control group), the high-fat/
sucrose diet supplemented with 10% wt/wt oligofructose (OFS group), or a restricted amount of the high-fat/
sucrose diet in order to match body weight to the OFS dams (WM) during pregnancy and lactation. Portal 
blood samples for GLP-1 and GLP-2 measurement were collected at euthanasia of the dams. (a,b) Relative 
increase of PYY and GLP-1 area under the curve (AUC) on gestation day 14 and lactation day 19 compared 
to pre-pregnancy AUC (PYY: HFS, n = 
 11; OFS, n = 
 12; WM, n = 
 9; GLP-1: HFS, n = 
 11; OFS, n = 
 10; WM, 
n = 
 9). (c,d) Portal plasma GLP-1 and GLP-2 concentration (GLP-1: HFS, n = 
 10; OFS, n = 
 9; WM, n = 
 7, 
GLP-2: HFS, n = 
 10; OFS, n = 
 9; WM, n = 
 8). Means without a common letter are significantly different using 
one-way ANOVA (P < 
 0.05). For relative AUC measurements, the data were analyzed using repeated measures 
one-way ANOVA, where the between subjects factor was maternal diet and the within-subjects factor was 
timepoint (pre-pregnancy, gestation and lactation). If a statistically significant interaction was observed, one-
way ANOVAs between groups was performed. *P < 
 0.05 Independent-Samples Kruskall-Wallis Test with 
adjusted significance.
Maternal Diet
PYY (pmol L−1)
GLP-1 (pmol L−1)
GLP-2 (ng mL−1)
HFS
20.3 ± 
 1.2b
32.4 ± 
 5.2b
0.9 ± 
 0.1b
OFS
24.6 ± 
 1.5a
71.8 ± 
 5.6a
1.6 ± 
 0.1a
WM
19.4 ± 
 1.1b
51.2 ± 
 6.9b
1.1 ± 
 0.1b
Table 3.  Offspring gut and satiety hormone levels at weaning. Values are mean ± SEM. Mean values without 
a common letter are significantly different (P<0.05) using one-way ANOVA. HFS: n=31, 16 males and 15 
females, OFS: n=29, 13 males and 16 females; WM: n=30, 15 males and 15 females.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
In lactation, HFS dams continued to exhibit markers of increased ketone body synthesis, altered lipid metab-
olism, and a marker of impaired fasting glucose (3-methyl-2-oxovalerate)24. Finally, HFS dams had higher levels 
of threonine, an amino acid that may be elevated when the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle slows in the presence 
of excess hepatic fatty acids25. OFS dams continued to be characterized by altered levels of SCFAs and increased 
myo-inositol, while increased levels of o-acetylcarnitine suggests decreased transport of fatty acids into the 
mitochondria. Finally, WM metabolic profiles were dominated by gluconeogenic substrates (glycine, alanine, 
Figure 5. Metabolomic analysis of maternal serum collected during pregnancy. Comparison of maternal 
serum metabolites from dams fed a high-fat/sucrose diet (HFS obese control group), the high-fat/sucrose 
diet supplemented with 10% oligofructose (OFS group), or a restricted amount of the high-fat/sucrose diet to 
weight-match to the OFS group (WM) during gestation and lactation. (a–c) Pairwise OPLS-DA loadings plots 
comparing maternal serum metabolites from samples collected on gestation day 14. Metabolites included in 
the OPLS-DA modeling were selected following preliminary pairwise univariate analysis of the 57 metabolites 
identified and quantified by 1H NMR spectroscopy. Bold metabolites represent the variables that contributed 
most to the discrimination of dietary groups, which were identified using a combination of VIP > 
 1 and 
p(corr) > 
 0.4, with those contributing most to the separation located furthest from the center. The directions of 
the arrows indicate the maternal group corresponding to increased levels of those metabolites. HFS, n = 
 7; OFS, 
n = 
 12; WM n = 
 9.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
aspartate, arginine, asparagine, proline, glycerol), markers of increased protein catabolism (urocanate), oxida-
tive stress (2-aminobutyrate, pyroglutamate, taurine), de novo lipogenesis (malonate), and undernourishment 
(2-hydroxyisobutyrate).
Figure 6. Metabolomic analysis of maternal serum collected during lactation. Comparison of maternal 
serum metabolites from dams fed a high-fat/sucrose diet (HFS obese control group), the high-fat/sucrose 
diet supplemented with 10% oligofructose (OFS group), or a restricted amount of the high-fat/sucrose diet to 
weight-match to the OFS group (WM) during gestation and lactation. (a–c) Pairwise OPLS-DA loadings plots 
comparing maternal serum metabolites from samples collected on lactation day 19. Metabolites included in 
the OPLS-DA modeling were selected following preliminary pairwise univariate analysis of the 57 metabolites 
identified and quantified by 1H NMR spectroscopy. Bold metabolites represent the variables that contributed 
most to the discrimination of dietary groups, which were identified using a combination of VIP > 
 1 and 
p(corr) > 
 0.4, with those contributing most to the separation located furthest from the center. The directions 
of the arrows indicate the maternal group corresponding to increased levels of those metabolites. HFS, n = 
 10; 
OFS, n = 
 9; WM, n = 
 8.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
Taken together, these data indicate that despite similar food intake, gestational weight gain, and percent body 
fat in OFS and WM dams, their serum metabolomics profiles diverged considerably and represented unique 
metabolite signatures. The reduced adiposity observed in offspring of both OFS and WM dams therefore is 
likely the consequence of distinct maternal metabolic processes, the long-term impact of which remains to be 
elucidated.
Discussion
Early-life exposure of offspring to an adverse environment during critical periods in development, including 
the prenatal and suckling period, can increase the susceptibility to obesity later in life2. Improving maternal 
metabolism, however, may mitigate this malprogramming and thus decrease lifetime obesity risk. This study was 
designed to examine the potential benefit of supplementing diet-induced maternally obese dams with the prebi-
otic oligofructose and to determine whether this intervention could improve maternal metabolism in a manner 
that attenuates the detrimental metabolic programming of offspring due to maternal obesity. To our knowledge, 
this is the first study to examine the metabolomic impact of obesity in pregnant and lactating diet-induced obese 
Sprague-Dawley rats, especially in the context of prebiotic supplementation. Our main findings were that oligof-
ructose supplementation decreased gestational weight gain and reduced both maternal and offspring adiposity, 
potentially due to the influence of maternal microbiota composition on maternal satiety and metabolism. These 
changes were associated with altered gut microbial and hormone profiles in offspring, potentially impacting their 
life-long obesity risk.
In this study, maternal adiposity at weaning showed a strong positive correlation with offspring adiposity. In 
humans, maternal weight gain during pregnancy is an independent predictor of infant adiposity26, where excess 
gestational weight gain increases life-long obesity risk in offspring27. As such, distinct patterns of weight gain 
between maternal groups during pregnancy likely contributed to the increased post-partum weight retention in 
HFS dams and the decreased percent body fat found in both OFS and WM dams and offspring at weaning.
Using 1H NMR metabolomics, we identified elevated circulating ketone bodies and branched-chain amino 
acids (BCAA) in the pregnant HFS dams. A key characteristic and driver of insulin resistance is increased basal 
lipolysis in adipose tissue, releasing free fatty acids (FFA) into circulation28. Hepatic β 
-oxidation then increases, 
where the resulting acetyl-CoA is metabolized to ketone bodies29. Accordingly, pregnant women exhibit increased 
circulating FFA and ketones; this is even more pronounced in women with gestational diabetes30. Higher BCAAs 
in pregnant women has also been associated with increased insulin resistance31. Our results therefore suggest 
increased insulin resistance in HFS compared to OFS and WM dams. This phenotype was also present during 
lactation, where HFS dams also displayed markers of impaired fasting glucose and altered TCA cycle metabolism. 
We posit that, during pregnancy, the circulating ketogenic environment in HFS dams contributed to the increased 
percent body fat of HFS offspring. The placenta is highly permeable to ketone bodies, which can subsequently 
be used as lipogenic substrates by offspring, increasing adipose tissue accretion32. In humans, maternal FFAs are 
also transported through the placenta and preferentially used for lipogenesis32. Furthermore, studies in both 
humans and rats have demonstrated that gestational diabetes is associated with increased maternal-fetal transfer 
of lipids across the placenta32, and that insulin resistance-associated disturbances in maternal lipid metabolism 
are independent factors in the developmental programming of compromised offspring metabolism33. Thus, ele-
vated circulating FFA and resulting ketone bodies may play an important role in the early deposition of excess 
body fat in offspring.
Unexpectedly, gestational metabolic profiles of WM dams suggested both increased gluconeogenesis and 
mobilization of energy from muscle, rather than fat, a finding that is not consistent with healthy pregnancy34. 
This phenotype intensified during lactation, with the addition of markers of increased lipogenesis, stress, and 
undernourishment. This profile was in stark contrast to the OFS dams, despite similar daily energy intake. Rather, 
the metabolic profiles of the OFS dams were dominated by microbiota-associated SCFAs and, during lactation, 
markers of increased insulin sensitivity and decreased fatty acid import.
The SCFAs produced from the fermentation of oligofructose by gut bacteria ultimately enhances the secretion 
of the gut satiety hormones GLP-1 and PYY18. PYY binds to Y2 receptors on orexigenic NPY/AGRP neurons 
in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, inhibiting their effect, thus reducing hunger and food intake16. The 
incretin GLP-1 both suppresses appetite and improves glycemic response17. Here, PYY and GLP-1 levels are 
believed to have contributed to the reduced energy intake of OFS dams, thus reducing weight gain and improving 
insulin sensitivity. As a result, increased maternal satiety hormones in OFS dams may have played a role in reduc-
ing offspring adiposity. Notably, it may be the suppression of circulating satiety hormones PYY and GLP-1 in WM 
dams that played a role in the divergence of metabolic profiles observed in OFS and WM dams.
Diets high in sugar and fat, such as the high-fat/sucrose diet used in this study, activate food-reward and pleas-
ure pathways in the brain, increasing motivation to eat35. Furthermore, caloric restriction results in a compensa-
tory increase in appetite36, especially if preceded by obesity37. In contrast, bariatric surgery in humans increases 
GLP-1 and PYY, which is associated with decreased reward system activation and altered taste preference for 
palatable food38. Therefore, suppressed levels of GLP-1 and PYY in WM dams could perpetuate reward driven 
motivation for the high-fat/sucrose diet. However, due to their restricted food access, a perceived lack of adequate 
energy intake to meet the metabolic demands of pregnancy and lactation could trigger a shift in their metabo-
lism to reprioritize energy provision away from developing and suckling pups to the dam. Thus, the metabolic 
response identified in the WM dams might represent a stress-induced state, although this remains speculative. 
Finally, it has also been shown that caloric restriction in lactating dams lowers milk supply, resulting in reduced 
offspring body weight39. Altogether, these data suggest that the reduced adiposity observed in WM offspring may 
have been due to the favoring of maternal needs over those of the pups40 and decreased milk availability.
Arginine, ornithine, citrulline, and proline belong to interrelated metabolic pathways involving arginine 
metabolism, which is crucial to proper placental and fetal growth in rats41; elevated circulating levels of arginine 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
and its metabolites have been implicated in improved pregnancy outcomes in mammals and reduced adiposity 
in offspring42. It is possible that differences in maternal arginine metabolism played a role in decreasing adiposity 
in OFS offspring, especially as both overfed and underfed dams have demonstrated impaired placental transport 
of arginine and ornithine, compromising placental function43. While it is difficult to determine the reason for 
increased arginine in OFS dams during pregnancy, improved maternal gut health in OFS dams may have resulted 
in increased citrulline synthesis by intestinal epithelial cells, a potential marker of gut health, which can then be 
converted to arginine via renal metabolism44. This effect would be consistent with the increased secretion of the 
gut trophic hormone GLP-2 by intestinal cells, which is co-secreted with GLP-119 and was increased in the portal 
plasma of OFS dams at weaning.
Recently, Koren et al.45 demonstrated that the gut bacterial composition of pregnant women changes radically 
from the first to the third trimester, an effect driven by host-microbial interactions. These changes are purported 
to aid in the metabolic adaptations in insulin sensitivity and adiposity required for a healthy pregnancy. Similarly, 
we found that the abundance of maternal gut microbiota changed throughout pregnancy. Further, oligofructose 
supplementation induced shifts in the overall pattern of gut microbiota during pregnancy compared to HFS 
and WM dams, notably within the Bifidobacterium and Clostridium spp., a finding consistent with oligofructose 
intake in rats11. While the specific metabolic effects of other microbial groups investigated in this study remain 
unclear, the health benefits of bifidobacteria are well established17 as is their predominance in the infant gut46,47. 
Further, studies have indicated that there is intestinal transfer of bifidobacteria47,48 and other microbes45,49 from 
mother to infant during vaginal birth50. In the context of maternal diet, a recent metagenomic study in primates 
reported that a maternal high-fat diet induced persistent changes in offspring gut microbial composition, and 
that these changes likely influenced offspring metabolism up to one year of age51. Our correlation data supports 
this potential impact of maternal gut microbiota during the perinatal period on the colonization of the offspring 
gut. Further, studies in mice have linked maternal prebiotic intake with alterations in offspring microbiota52. 
Therefore, modifying the high-fat/sucrose-induced maternal gut microbiota composition with oligofructose may 
have helped establish a more healthful profile in OFS offspring. Here, offspring sex affected the relative abun-
dance of Roseburia spp. These results may have future relevance for the offspring as recent research suggests that 
sex-specific differences in the gut microbiome influence immune function and disease susceptibility53. Whether 
the differences observed in this study at weaning might affect long-term sex-specific susceptibility to obesity 
remains to be determined. Finally, there is a lack of research regarding the stability of the maternal gut microbiota 
during lactation. It is possible, though, that the changes in microbial abundance throughout lactation seen in this 
study were associated with the corresponding decrease in body weight and adiposity that occurred.
Evidence that the metabolic benefits in the OFS dams and their offspring were mediated via the gut microbiota 
is three-fold. First, OFS dams and their offspring showed marked differences in their gut microbial composition. 
Consistent with the bifidogenic effect of oligofructose17, bifidobacteria abundance was high only in the OFS dams 
and their offspring. Second, shifts in gut microbiota composition and activity affect the host serum metabo-
lome4,9, including circulating levels of SCFAs54, the metabolic end-products of oligofructose fermentation. As the 
metabolic profiles of OFS dams were dominated by shifts in multiple SCFAs, it is plausible that the OFS serum 
metabolome was greatly influenced by the gut microbiota. Notably, a recent human study found that circulating 
levels of maternal SCFAs during late pregnancy were associated with differences in maternal weight gain and 
newborn body weight54. Finally, SCFAs are believed to mediate the enhanced secretion of the satiety hormones 
PYY and GLP-111. Circulating levels of these satiety hormones not only increased in OFS dams as pregnancy and 
lactation progressed, but were also increased in their offspring.
Both oligofructose supplementation and the weight-matching protocol profoundly influenced the metabolic 
profiles of maternally obese dams with 1H NMR serum metabolic profiling playing a central role in defining 
the metabolic advantages of OFS supplementation compared to both ad-libitum and restricted high-fat/sucrose 
feeding. Likewise, metabolomics analysis identified a number of metabolite signatures potentially implicated 
in programming of offspring metabolism and demonstrates the potential of metabolomics to increase under-
standing of the molecular mechanisms involved in developmental programming of health and disease. Metabolic 
profiling also highlighted the potential for maternal gut microbiota to influence circulating metabolites. As such, 
it provides evidence that the influence of the maternal gut microbiota on offspring health is not limited to intes-
tinal colonization with microbiota, but also includes its impact on overall maternal metabolism, an effect that 
ultimately may alter offspring metabolic risk.
In conclusion, our data suggests that supplementing pregnant and lactating obese rats with oligofructose 
improved maternal metabolism in a manner that ultimately decreased adiposity in offspring. These benefits were 
likely mediated via prebiotic-induced changes in maternal gut microbiota composition. Whether these findings 
translate to the human condition, for example whether prebiotics may help women with obesity achieve healthy 
weight gain during pregnancy and reduce postpartum weight retention, remains to be determined. It is clear, 
however, that there exists a strong interplay between maternal satiety, energy intake, gut hormones, gut microbi-
ota, and circulating metabolites, which ultimately influences the developmental programming of offspring obesity 
risk. Further examination of these mechanisms, especially in humans, is warranted and may inform strategies to 
decrease the propagation of obesity across generations.
Methods
Animals and diets. 
The study protocol was approved by The University of Calgary Animal Care Committee 
and conformed to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. One hundred and four 12-week-old 
virgin female Sprague Dawley rats were obtained from Charles River (Charles River, St. Constant, QC) and 
housed on a 12 h light-dark cycle in a controlled environment. Rats (n = 
 90) were fed a high-fat/sucrose diet (Diet 
#102412, Dyets, Inc) ad libitum for 10 weeks to induce obesity. The 42 rats with the greatest weight gain were allo-
cated to one of three groups throughout gestation and lactation in a manner that ensured that the pre-pregnancy 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
body weight of each maternal group was not significantly different (n = 
 14 per group): 1) High-fat/sucrose ad 
libitum (obese control HFS group); 2) high-fat/sucrose + 
 10% wt/wt oligofructose (Orafti P95, BENEO-Orafti 
Inc.) ad libitum (OFS group); 3) weight matched to the OFS group with limited high-fat/sucrose diet provision 
(WM). The amount of high-fat/sucrose diet provided to the WM dams was based on a combination of repeated 
body weight measurements of both the WM and OFS dams and caloric intake measurements from the OFS dams. 
A fourth lean reference group (n = 
 14) was maintained on control AIN-93 diet throughout the study. Group 
size was selected using a power calculation based on expected differences between groups for oligofructose-in-
duced changes in gut hormones and anticipated maternal fecundity and pregnancy outcomes. Diet composition is 
described in Supplementary Table S5. Following obesity induction, females were bred with male Sprague-Dawley 
rats in wire-bottomed cages. The day a copulation plug was found was designated as gestation day 0, at which 
point the females were housed individually and provided their experimental diets. Within 24 hours of parturi-
tion, litters were culled to 10 pups with equal numbers of males and females; extra pups were cross-fostered to 
dams with less than 10 similar-aged pups when possible. Maternal and pup body weight was measured weekly 
and maternal food intake measured daily throughout pregnancy and lactation. At weaning, dams and, when pos-
sible, two male and two female pups per dam were lightly anaesthetized with isoflurane and body composition 
measured via dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan with software for small animals (Hologic ODR 4500; 
Hologic). Final tissue collection in the pups and dams occurred following the DXA scan. Animals were eutha-
nized with anesthetic overdose and aortic cut. Maternal fecal samples were collected pre-pregnancy, on gestation 
days 1, 14, and 21, and on lactation days 1 and 19.
Oral glucose tolerance tests/metabolomics sample collection. 
Maternal glycemia and insulinemia 
was assessed using oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs) as per our previous work11 on gestation day 14 and lac-
tation day 19. Prior to the OGTTs, following the overnight fast, blood was collected via saphenous vein puncture 
and the serum stored at -80°C for later metabolomics analysis.
Final plasma and tissue collection. 
Following an overnight fast, rats were anaesthetized with isoflurane 
and portal blood (dams) or cardiac blood (offspring) samples were collected into chilled tubes containing inhibi-
tors as per our previous work11. Rats were euthanized by overanesthetization and aortic cut. Dam liver and cecum 
were excised and weighed. Cecal matter from offspring was collected. All samples were stored at -80°C until 
analysis.
Plasma satiety hormones. 
Portal plasma GLP-1 and GLP-2 was measured using ELISA (Millipore, 
Billerica, MA). Insulin, leptin, ghrelin (active), GIP (total), PYY, and GLP-1 (active) were quantified using the 
Rat Gut Hormone Multiplex Kit (Millipore) from blood collected during the OGTTs. Offspring plasma glucose 
concentrations were determined using the Glucose Liquicolor assay (Stanbio Laboratory, Boerne, TX).
Gut microbiota profiling. 
Microbial profiling was performed using real-time qPCR according to our pre-
vious work55.
Preparation, analysis and profiling of maternal serum samples for 1H NMR. 
Samples were pre-
pared, analyzed, and profiled in a randomized order. Serum samples were thawed and 200 μ 
L filtered using 
pre-washed 3-kDa NanoSep microcentrifuge filters. The filtrate was transferred to a clean microcentrifuge tube, 
10uL of sodium azide (NaN3) and 80 μ 
L of phosphate buffer in D2O containing dimethyl silapentane sulfonate 
(DSS, final concentration 0.5 mmol L−1) were added, samples were adjusted to a pH of 7.0 ± 
 0.02, and then 
brought to a final volume of 400 μ 
L with D2O. Spectra were acquired using a standard pulse program (prnoesy1d) 
on a Bruker Advance 600 spectrometer (Bruker Biospin, Milton, Canada) operating at 600.22 MHz at 297 K 
(5 mm TXI Probe)56, individually processed using Chenomx NMR Suite 7.5 software (Chenomx Inc., Edmonton, 
Canada), and targeted profiling completed using the Chenomx NMR Suite profiling module57.
Metabolomics analysis. 
A total of 57 metabolites were quantified in each sample, followed by normali-
zation to the total sum of metabolite concentrations. Normalized values were subjected to preliminary pairwise 
univariate analysis and metabolites with a P < 
 0.3 were selected for multivariate analysis using SIMCA-P + 
 12.0.1 
software (Umetrics)58. Principal component analysis was used to detect and remove outliers. To cluster obser-
vations within dietary groups, pair-wise orthogonal partial least-squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was 
performed, with k-fold cross-validation where k ranged from 5 to 7 depending on the number of samples(n) so 
that n/k ≥ 
 3 (Supplementary Table S4). All models were generated using unit variance scaling. OPLS-DA analysis 
was performed using the normalized metabolite concentrations as the X matrix and the maternal dietary group 
as the Y predictors. OPLS-DA model fit and predictability was assessed using R2Y and Q2Y values, where an R2Y 
value of 1 indicates that the model explains 100% of the variation in metabolites between groups, and a Q2Y of 1 
indicates total reliability of the prediction during cross-validation58. All models were checked for over-fitting by 
ensuring that the difference between R2Y and Q2Y did not exceed 0.358. The metabolites that contributed most 
to the characterization of the dietary groups were chosen based on a combination of a variable importance to 
projection (VIP) value cut-off > 
 1 and a p(corr) > 
 0.459.
Statistical Analyses. 
Results are reported as mean ± 
 SEM. Maternal cross-sectional data was tested for 
normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. If normally distributed, differences between groups were evaluated using 
either Student’s t-test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post-hoc tests as appropriate. If nor-
mality was violated, data was subjected to non-parametric pairwise analysis with adjusted significance. Equality 
of variance was tested using Levene’s test. If homogeneity of variance was violated, the corresponding modified 
P value was used. Longitudinal and OGTT-derived data was assessed using repeated measures ANOVA. For 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
offspring, the effect of sex and maternal diet was evaluated using a two-way ANOVA. If there was no significant 
effect of sex, data for males and females were pooled. All cross-sectional offspring outcomes were analyzed using 
one-way ANOVA. For correlation analysis, Pearson’s correlation was used when comparing normally distributed 
data; otherwise Spearman’s correlation was used. Student’s t-tests or one-way ANOVAs were used to assess the 
main effect of diet in all gut microbial analysis. In all tests, P < 
 0.05 was considered significant. Statistical analyses 
were performed using SPSS version 20.0.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The lean reference group was 
not included in statistical analyses after the obesity induction period.
References
1. Malik, V. S., Willett, W. C. & Hu, F. B. Global obesity: trends, risk factors and policy implications. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 9, 13–27 
(2013).
2. Nicholas, L. M. et al. The early origins of obesity and insulin resistance: timing, programming and mechanisms. Int. J. Obes. Advance 
online publication (2015). doi: 10.1038/ijo.2015.178
3. Pantham, P., Aye, I. L. M. H. & Powell, T. L. Inflammation in maternal obesity and gestational diabetes mellitus. Placenta 36, 709–715 
(2015).
4. Greiner, T. U., Hyötyläinen, T., Knip, M., Bäckhed, F. & Orešič, M. The gut microbiota modulates glycaemic control and serum 
metabolite profiles in non-obese diabetic mice. PLoS One 9, (2014).
5. Bäckhed, F. et al. The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 
15718–15723 (2004).
6. Bäckhed, F. Programming of host metabolism by the gut microbiota. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 58, 44–52 (2011).
7. Bäckhed, F. et al. Dynamics and stabilization of the human gut microbiome during the first year of life. Cell Host Microbe 17, 
690–703 (2015).
8. Wopereis, H., Oozeer, R., Knipping, K., Belzer, C. & Knol, J. The first thousand days - intestinal microbiology of early life: 
Establishing a symbiosis. Pediatr. Allergy Immunol. 25, 428–438 (2014).
9. Wu, G. D. et al. Comparative metabolomics in vegans and omnivores reveal constraints on diet-dependent gut microbiota 
metabolite production. Gut 65, 63–72 (2016).
10. Bindels, L. B., Delzenne, N. M., Cani, P. D. & Walter, J. Towards a more comprehensive concept for prebiotics. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 12, 303–310 (2015).
11. Bomhof, M. R., Saha, D. C., Reid, D. T., Paul, H. A. & Reimer, R. A. Combined effects of oligofructose and Bifidobacterium animalis 
on gut microbiota and glycemia in obese rats. Obesity (Silver Spring) 22, 763–71 (2014).
12. Parnell, J. A. & Reimer, R. A. Weight loss during oligofructose supplementation is associated with decreased ghrelin and increased 
peptide YY in overweight and obese adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 89, 1751–1759 (2009).
13. Duca, F. A., Swartz, T. D., Sakar, Y. & Covasa, M. Decreased intestinal nutrient response in diet-induced obese rats: role of gut 
peptides and nutrient receptors. Int. J. Obes. 37, 375–381 (2012).
14. Cluny, N. L., Eller, L. K., Keenan, C. M., Reimer, R. A. & Sharkey, K. A. Interactive effects of oligofructose and obesity predisposition 
on gut hormones and microbiota in diet-induced obese rats. Obesity 23, 769–778 (2015).
15. McMillen, I. C. et al. The early origins of later obesity: pathways and mechanisms. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 646, 71–81 (2009).
16. Bell, C. G., Walley, A. J. & Froguel, P. The genetics of human obesity. Nat. Rev. Genet. 6, 221–234 (2005).
17. Roberfroid, M. et al. Prebiotic effects: metabolic and health benefits. Br. J. Nutr. 104(Suppl 2), S1–S63 (2010).
18. Parnell, J. A. & Reimer, R. A. Prebiotic fibres dose-dependently increase satiety hormones and alter Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes in 
lean and obese JCR:LA-cp rats. Br. J. Nutr. 107, 601–613 (2012).
19. Cani, P. D. et al. Changes in gut microbiota control inflammation in obese mice through a mechanism involving GLP-2-driven 
improvement of gut permeability. Gut 58, 1091–1103 (2009).
20. Croze, M. L. et al. Chronic treatment with myo-inositol reduces white adipose tissue accretion and improves insulin sensitivity in 
female mice. J. Nutr. Biochem. 24, 457–466 (2013).
21. Ippolito, J. E. et al. Linkage between cellular communications, energy utilization, and proliferation in metastatic neuroendocrine 
cancers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 12505–12510 (2006).
22. Davison, J. M., Mellott, T. J., Kovacheva, V. P. & Blusztajn, J. K. Gestational choline supply regulates methylation of histone H3, 
expression of histone methyltransferases G9a (Kmt1c) and Suv39h1 (Kmt1a), and DNA methylation of their genes in rat fetal liver 
and brain. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 1982–1989 (2009).
23. Waterland, R. A., Travisano, M., Tahiliani, K. G., Rached, M. T. & Mirza, S. Methyl donor supplementation prevents 
transgenerational amplification of obesity. Int. J. Obes. (Lond). 32, 1373–1379 (2008).
24. Menni, C. et al. Biomarkers for type 2 diabetes and impaired fasting glucose using a nontargeted metabolomics approach. Diabetes 
62, 4270–4276 (2013).
25. Bradford, B. U. et al. Metabolomic profiling of a modified alcohol liquid diet model for liver injury in the mouse uncovers new 
markers of disease. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 232, 236–243 (2008).
26. Dello Russo, M. et al. Gestational weight gain and adiposity, fat distribution, metabolic profile, and blood pressure in offspring: the 
IDEFICS project. Int. J. Obes. (Lond). 37, 914–919 (2013).
27. Ferraro, Z. M. et al. Excessive gestational weight gain predicts large for gestational age neonates independent of maternal body mass 
index. J. Matern. Neonatal Med. 25, 538–542 (2012).
28. Arner, P. & Langin, D. Lipolysis in lipid turnover, cancer cachexia, and obesity-induced insulin resistance. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 
25, 255–262 (2014).
29. McGarry, J. D. & Foster, D. W. Regulation of hepatic fatty-acid oxidation and ketone-body production. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 49, 
395–420 (1980).
30. Catalano, P. M. Obesity, insulin resistance, and pregnancy outcome. Reproduction 140, 365–371 (2010).
31. Scholtens, D. M. et al. Metabolomics reveals broad-scale metabolic perturbations in hyperglycemic mothers during pregnancy. 
Diabetes Care 37, 158–166 (2014).
32. Herrera, E. & Amusquivar, E. Lipid metabolism in the fetus and the newborn. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 16, 202–210 (2000).
33. Isganaitis, E. et al. Developmental programming by maternal insulin resistance: Hyperinsulinemia, glucose intolerance, and 
dysregulated lipid metabolism in male offspring of insulin-resistant mice. Diabetes 63, 688–700 (2014).
34. Kalhan, S. C. Protein metabolism in pregnancy. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 71(5 Suppl), 1249 S–55 S (2000).
35. Lutter, M. & Nestler, E. J. Homeostatic and hedonic signals interact in the regulation of food intake. J. Nutr. 139, 629–632 (2009).
36. Deighton, K., Batterham, R. L. & Stensel, D. J. Appetite and gut peptide responses to exercise and calorie restriction. The effect of 
modest energy deficits. Appetite 81, 52–59 (2014).
37. Maclean, P. S., Bergouignan, A., Cornier, M.-A. & Jackman, M. R. Biology’s response to dieting: the impetus for weight regain. Am. 
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 301, R581–R600 (2011).
38. Scholtz, S. et al. Obese patients after gastric bypass surgery have lower brain-hedonic responses to food than after gastric banding. 
Gut 63, 891–902 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20683 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20683
39. Palou, M. et al. Moderate caloric restriction in lactating rats protects offspring against obesity and insulin resistance in later life. 
Endocrinology 151, 1030–1041 (2010).
40. Reynolds, L. K., Ho, H. P. & Taper, L. J. Effect of caloric restriction during pregnancy on maternal and fetal body composition in the 
obese Sprague-Dawley rat. J. Nutr. 114, 2247–2255 (1984).
41. Zeng, X. et al. Dietary arginine supplementation during early pregnancy enhances embryonic survival in rats. J. Nutr. 138, 
1421–1425 (2008).
42. Wu, Z., Satterfield, M. C., Bazer, F. W. & Wu, G. Regulation of brown adipose tissue development and white fat reduction by 
L-arginine. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 15, 529–538 (2012).
43. Wu, G., Bazer, F. W., Cudd, T. A., Meininger, C. J. & Spencer, T. E. Maternal nutrition and fetal development. J. Nutr. 134, 2169–2172 
(2004).
44. Peters, J. H. C. et al. The citrulline generation test: Proposal for a new enterocyte function test. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 27, 
1300–1310 (2008).
45. Koren, O. et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during pregnancy. Cell 150, 470–480 (2012).
46. Turroni, F. et al. Bifidobacterium bifidum as an example of a specialized human gut commensal. Front. Microbiol. 5, 437 (2014).
47. Mikami, K. et al. Influence of maternal bifidobacteria on the establishment of bifidobacteria colonizing the gut in infants. Pediatr. 
Res. 65, 669–674 (2009).
48. Makino, H. et al. Mother-to-infant transmission of intestinal bifidobacterial strains has an impact on the early development of 
vaginally delivered infant’s microbiota. PLoS One 8, e78331 (2013).
49. Grönlund, M. M., Grzeskowiak, Ł., Isolauri, E. & Salminen, S. Influence of mother’s intestinal microbiota on gut colonization in the 
infant. Gut Microbes 2, 227–233 (2011).
50. Romano-Keeler, J. & Weitkamp, J.-H. Maternal influences on fetal microbial colonization and immune development. Pediatr. Res. 
77, 189–195 (2015).
51. Ma, J. et al. High-fat maternal diet during pregnancy persistently alters the offspring microbiome in a primate model. Nat. Commun. 
5, 3889 (2014).
52. Thum, C. et al. Can nutritional modulation of maternal intestinal microbiota influence the development of the infant gastrointestinal 
tract ? J. Nutr. 142, 1921–1928 (2012).
53. Markle, J. G. M. et al. Sex differences in the gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of autoimmunity. Science 339, 
1084–1088 (2013).
54. Priyadarshini, M. et al. Maternal short-chain fatty acids are associated with metabolic parameters in mothers and newborns. Transl. 
Res. 164, 153–157 (2014).
55. Collins, K. et al. Relationship between inflammation, the gut microbiota, and metabolic osteoarthritis development: studies in a rat 
model. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 23, 1989–1998 (2015).
56. Nicholson, J. K., Foxall, P. J., Spraul, M., Farrant, R. D. & Lindon, J. C. 750 MHz1 H and 1 H-13 C NMR spectroscopy of human blood 
plasma. Anal. Chem. 67, 793–811 (1995).
57. Weljie, A. M., Newton, J., Mercier, P., Carlson, E. & Slupsky, C. M. Targeted profiling: quantitative analysis of 1 H NMR metabolomics 
data. Anal. Chem. 78, 4430–4442 (2006).
58. Farshidfar, F. et al. Serum metabolomic profile as a means to distinguish stage of colorectal cancer. Genome Medicine 4, 42 (2012).
59. Wheelock, Å. M. & Wheelock, C. E. Trials and tribulations of ’omics data analysis: assessing quality of SIMCA-based multivariate 
models using examples from pulmonary medicine. Mol. Biosyst. 9, 2589–2596 (2013).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Kristine Lee, Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, for technical 
assistance, and Rustem Shaykhutdinov, Biological Sciences, Bio-NMR Center, University of Calgary, for technical 
assistance and NMR data collection. This work was supported by a research grant from the Canadian Institutes 
of Health Research (MOP 115076). HA Paul was supported by an NSERC Postgraduate Scholarship, Alberta 
Innovates Health Solutions Doctoral Scholarship and a Canadian Institutes of Health Research Doctoral 
Scholarship. MR Bomhof was supported by an NSERC Doctoral Scholarship, Alberta Innovates Health Solutions 
Doctoral Scholarship and an Honorary Walter Killam Doctoral Scholarship. HJ Vogel holds the Lance Armstrong 
Chair in Molecular Cancer Epidemiology Research.
Author Contributions
H.A.P. executed the study, collected data, analyzed and interpreted data, generated figures, and drafted and 
revised the manuscript. M.R.B. carried out experiments and revised the manuscript. H.J.V. revised the manuscript 
and was involved in the design of the study. R.A.R. designed the study, analyzed data, contributed to writing the 
manuscript, and had primary responsibility for final content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: HA Paul, MR Bomhof and HJ Vogel declare no conflicts of interest. RA Reimer 
previously held a research grant from Beneo-Orafti Inc., manufacturer of Raftilose P95 and Raftiline HP, for a 
project unrelated to the current work.
How to cite this article: Paul, H. A. et al. Diet-induced changes in maternal gut microbiota and metabolomic 
profiles influence programming of offspring obesity risk in rats. Sci. Rep. 6, 20683; doi: 10.1038/srep20683 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
