 Choking on a foreign body: a
physiological study of the
effectiveness of abdominal
thrust manoeuvres to increase
thoracic pressure
ABSTRACT The Heimlich manoeuvre is a
well-known intervention for the management
of choking due to foreign body airway
occlusion, but the evidence base for guidance
on this topic is limited and guidelines differ.
We measured pressures during abdominal
thrusts in healthy volunteers. The angle at
which thrusts were performed (upthrust vs
circumferential) did not affect intrathoracic
pressure. Self-administered abdominal thrusts
produced similar pressures to those performed
by another person. Chair thrusts, where the
subject pushed their upper abdomen against a
chair back, produced higher pressures than
other manoeuvres. Both approaches should be
included in basic life support teaching.
BACKGROUND
Foreign body airway obstruction (FBAO)
is a common cause of death, particularly
in
older people. The National
Safety
Council USA reports that FBAO is the
fourth
leading
cause
of
unintentional
injury death, with 4864 reported deaths
in 2013.1 The ‘Heimlich’ manoeuvre is a
technique for expelling an obstructing
food bolus where a first-aider places their
arms round the subject from behind and
delivers a sharp inward and upward thrust
to the abdomen below the rib cage.
Heimlich described 162 cases where life
was saved following successful administra-
tion of abdominal thrusts.2
European Resuscitation Council3 guid-
ance for treatment of FBAO in conscious
adults is a combination of back blows and
abdominal thrusts with no preference on
order. The Australian and New Zealand
Resuscitation Councils recommend back
blows and chest thrusts for the manage-
ment of FBAO in conscious adults, but
advise against abdominal thrusts, citing
concern about complications.4
External
pressure
on
the
abdomen
should be transmitted through the dia-
phragm regardless of where it is applied,
so there is no theoretical reason why force
needs to be directed upwards. Motivated
in part by three cases of near death from
choking involving UK chest physicians (see
online supplement), we describe experi-
ments to address these two questions.
METHODS
Detailed methods are available in the online
supplement.
Briefly
,
different
expulsive
manoeuvres (see box 1) were performed on
and by four consenting adult physiology
researchers median (range): age 56.5 (46,
74) years and body mass index (BMI) 25.9
(25, 26) kg/m2. Oesophageal and gastric
balloon catheters were placed to record
pressures generated. Detailed statistical ana-
lysis is available in the online supplement.
Box 1
Description of manoeuvres
Circumferential ‘horizontal’ abdominal thrust
The operator stands behind the participant, grasps their fists together and places thumb
side of the fist over the fleshy part of the abdomen above the navel. The operator pulls
sharply backwards starting with medium force and progressively increasing force, until
the maximum pressure that the subject feels is acceptable is achieved.
Heimlich manoeuvre
The same procedure but with an upward direction of force.
Auto ‘upthrust’ abdominal thrust
The participant positions their own hands in the standard position for the abdominal
manoeuvre and performs thrusts increasing to the maximal force they can tolerate.
Chair thrust
The participant positions themselves above a high backed chair, with the chair back
positioned below the upper half of the abdomen, below the ribcage. Using gravity,
bodyweight and arms for additional force, the participant allows the back of the chair to
thrust up into their abdomen (see figure 1).
Volitional maximal cough and sniff pressures
The participant performed repeated maximal volitional cough and sniff manoeuvres.
All manoeuvres were performed after exhalation to the end of a normal breath (at
functional residual capacity) with mouth and glottis closed and a nose clip in situ.
Figure 1
One of the authors (MH) performing a chair thrust on himself (see also online
supplementary video).
576
Thorax June 2017 Vol 72 No 6
Research letter
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209540 on 12 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 RESULTS
Maximum peak oesophageal (Poes) and
gastric (Pgas) pressures were similar for the
different abdominal thrusts when per-
formed by the experimenters or by the
subjects on themselves (see figure 2 and
online supplementary table E1). For the
upthrust Heimlich manoeuvre, Poes was
57±17 cm H2O and for the circumferen-
tial
abdominal
thrust
53±11 cm H2O
(p=0.7). The chair thrust generated a sig-
nificantly higher Poes than both; 115±
27 cm H2O
(p=0.008
compared
with
Heimlich).
In one participant, three further man-
oeuvres were performed. The Poes gener-
ated by back slaps (7 cm H2O) and chest
compressions
when
supine
(position
taken as for CPR) (42 cm H2O) were
lower than both the Heimlich manoeuvre
(64 cm H2O) and cough (179 cm H2O) in
that subject. Poes from supine abdominal
compressions was 86 cm H2O, compar-
able to abdominal thrusts when upright.
DISCUSSION
Abdominal thrusts caused a sharp rise in
abdominal and thoracic pressures, exceed-
ing or equal to those produced by these
and alternative manoeuvres in previous
studies.5–8
In 12 supine cadavers, mean airway
pressure was 40.8 cm H2O for chest and
26.4 cm H2O for abdominal thrusts.5 In
six anaesthetised and intubated healthy
adult male volunteers airway pressures
from abdominal thrusts, low-chest thrusts
and mid-chest thrusts in the horizontal
lateral and sitting positions were com-
pared.6 Low-chest thrusts in the horizon-
tal lateral position (34.0 cm H2O) and
mid-chest thrusts in the sitting position
(46.2 cm H2O) produced the highest pres-
sures. In eight intubated and anaesthetised
pigs, anterior chest thrusts and Heimlich
manoeuvres, both performed in a seated
position, produced airway pressures of 6.5
and 13.8 cm H2O, respectively, with lateral
chest thrusts in the side-lying position pro-
ducing 18.0 cm H2O.7 Day et al8 com-
pared alveolar pressure change for back
blows (17.7 cm H2O) and the Heimlich
manoeuvre (36.7 cm H2O).
An upward thrust may be more likely
to cause injury to the ribcage or other
organs and the person performing it may
be inhibited by this possibility. Given the
similar pressures generated by circumfer-
ential abdominal thrusts, we recommend
that the manoeuvre should be performed
by inward thrust over the fleshy part of
the abdomen, around the level of the
navel. This is important information for
first aid providers with mismatched height
to
victim;
a
smaller
individual
can
perform
the
circumferential
abdominal
thrust and produce the same intrathoracic
pressure as the Heimlich manoeuvre that
requires upthrust.
Australian and New Zealand ALS guid-
ance
does
not
recommend
abdominal
thrusts.4 Studies on pigs, cadavers or
anaesthetised subjects are unlikely to be
representative of the situation and lung
volumes in an upright, conscious choking
individual. In our study, manoeuvres were
all performed with the subjects at func-
tional residual capacity, which may be
more representative of the situation in an
emergency. Given our data, we suggest
that these guidelines should be amended.
Concern about possible risk needs to be
balanced against the almost certain risk of
death
if
obstruction
persists
and
the
further reduction in risk if a circumferen-
tial approach is used.
Self-administered
abdominal
thrusts
were as effective as operator-delivered
thrusts and indeed they had been used
successfully in two of our cases (online).
Repeated manoeuvres can be performed
quickly and effectively without relying on
an external operator. People choking may
be encouraged to try this before a rescuer
makes an attempt. Self-administering the
manoeuvre is also a clear signal to res-
cuers
(compared
with
clutching
one’s
throat, which might be misinterpreted as
distress due to another cause such as a
heart attack). A novel finding is that self-
administered thrusts over the back of a
chair
generated
greater
pressures than
operator-delivered
thrusts
or
self-
administered ones. Most food is con-
sumed seated, so there is likely to be a
chair available when choking occurs.
Obesity
No obese subjects were included in this
study, median BMI 25.9 (25–26) kg/m.2
Obesity
may
affect
abdominal
thrust
outcome
as
anatomical
landmarks
for
hand positioning may be variable and add
to the difficulty of performing the man-
oeuvre around an increased abdominal
circumference. A higher percentage of
abdominal adipose tissue may have a dissi-
pating effect on the force applied with
abdominal thrust manoeuvres and there-
fore lessen their effectiveness.
CONCLUSION
The key to diagnosing complete airway ob-
struction is a conscious subject, in the pro-
cess of eating, who is unable to breathe at
all, nor to speak. Autoadministered thrusts
appear as physiologically effective as first-
aider-administered ones to generate expul-
sive
intrathoracic
pressures,
and
chair
thrusts appear to be the most physiologic-
ally effective. W
e advise that everyone
with complete airway obstruction should,
in the first instance, either autoadminister
abdominal thrusts or perform a chair
thrust. The various manoeuvres should be
more widely taught in schools, first aid
courses, to staff in restaurants and publi-
cised as widely as possible. W
e would like
to see suitable notices in eating places.
Matthew J Pavitt, Laura L Swanton,
Matthew Hind, Michael Apps, Michael I Polkey,
Malcolm Green, Nicholas S Hopkinson
NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Royal
Brompton Hospital and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust
and Imperial College, London, UK
Figure 2
Oesophageal and gastric pressure responses to expulsive manoeuvres. All statistical
tests Mann-Whitney test. *Results are statistically significant (p<0.05). (A) Maximal oesophageal
pressures (Poes) achieved by expulsive manoeuvres. Pressure was significantly higher for chair
thrust (p=0.008) but did not differ between conventional upthrust Heimlich, circumferential
abdominal thrust or self-administered autoabdominal thrust. (B) Maximal gastric pressures were
significantly higher in chair thrust compared with Heimlich manoeuvres (p=0.004). The outlier
autoabdominal thrust data point in (B) corresponds to the participant (MH) who had performed
an abdominal thrust on himself described in case 2 (see online supplement).
577
Thorax June 2017 Vol 72 No 6
Research letter
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209540 on 12 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 Correspondence to Dr NS Hopkinson, Royal
Brompton Hospital, Fulham Rd, London SW3 6NP, UK;
n.hopkinson@ic.ac.uk
Twitter Follow Matthew Pavitt @DrMattPav; Nicholas
Hopkinson @COPDdoc
Acknowledgements The authors thank the
individual involved in case 1 for permission to include a
description account of his choking and John
Moore-Gillon for permission to include his own account
of his experience (case 3 online).
Contributors NSH, MG, MH and MIP conceived the
study. MG, MP, LS, MA and NSH performed
experiments and collected data. MP and LS analysed
the results and produced the first draft of the paper to
which all authors contributed, and all authors have
approved the final version.
Funding The study was supported by the NIHR
Respiratory BRU at Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS
Foundation Trust and Imperial College, London, who
part fund MIP’s salary.
Disclaimer The views expressed in this publication
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the NHS, the National Institute for Health Research
or the Department of Health. NSH affirms that the
manuscript is an honest, accurate and transparent
account of the study being reported; that no
important aspects of the study have been omitted;
and that any discrepancies from the study as
planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been
explained.
Competing interests None declared.
Ethics approval Imperial College Joint Research
Office and Health Research Authority.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned;
externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement Requests for anonymised
individual patient data can be made to the
corresponding author.
▸ Additional material is published online only. To view
please visit the journal online (http://dx.doi.org/10.
1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209540).
Open Access This is an Open Access article
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build
upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the
original work is properly cited and the use is non-
commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
National Safety Council. Choking prevention and
rescue tips. 2016. http://www.nsc.org/learn/
safety-knowledge/Pages/safety-at-home-choking.aspx
(accessed 6 Oct 2016).
2
Heimlich HJ, Hoffmann KA, Canestri FR. Food-choking
and drowning deaths prevented by external
subdiaphragmatic compression. Physiological basis.
Ann Thorac Surg 1975;20:188–95.
3
Perkins GD, Handley AJ, Koster RW, et al. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation
2015: Section 2. Adult basic life support and
automated external defibrillation. Resuscitation
2015;95:81–99.
4
Australian and New Zealand Resuscitation Councils.
ANZCOR Guideline 4—Airway. 2016. https://resus.
org.au/guidelines/ (accessed 6 Oct 2016).
5
Langhelle A, Sunde K, Wik L, et al. Airway pressure
with chest compressions versus Heimlich manoeuvre in
recently dead adults with complete airway obstruction.
Resuscitation 2000;44:105–8.
6
Guildner CW, Williams D, Subitch T. Airway obstructed
by foreign material: the Heimlich maneuver. JACEP
1976;5:675–7.
7
Lippmann J, Taylor DM, Slocombe R, et al. Lateral
versus anterior thoracic thrusts in the generation of
airway pressure in anaesthetised pigs. Resuscitation
2013;84:515–9.
8
Day RL, Crelin ES, DuBois AB. Choking: the Heimlich
abdominal thrust vs back blows: an approach to
measurement of inertial and aerodynamic forces.
Pediatrics 1982;70:113–19.
578 
Thorax June 2017 Vol 72 No 6
Research letter
To cite Pavitt MJ, Swanton LL, Hind M, et al. 
Thorax 2017;72:576–578.
Received 6 October 2016
Revised 27 October 2016
Accepted 7 November 2016
Thorax 2016;72:576–578.
doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209540
Published Online First 5 April 2017
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209540 on 12 April 2017. Downloaded from 
