 HAL Id: hal-01452985
https://hal-univ-rennes1.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01452985
Submitted on 2 Feb 2017
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The Neurobiology of Postpartum Anxiety and
Depression
Jodi Pawluski, Joseph Lonstein, Alison Fleming
To cite this version:
Jodi Pawluski, Joseph Lonstein, Alison Fleming. The Neurobiology of Postpartum Anxiety and De-
pression. Trends in Neurosciences, Elsevier, 2017, 40 (2), pp.106-120. ￿10.1016/j.tins.2016.11.009￿.
￿hal-01452985￿
 1 
 
 The Neurobiology of Postpartum Anxiety and Depression 
Jodi L. Pawluski1*, Joseph S. Lonstein2* & Alison S. Fleming3  
1Inserm U1085-IRSET, Université de Rennes 1, Campus Villejean, 35000 Rennes, France 
2Neuroscience Program & Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 
48824, USA 
3Psychology and Fraser Mustard Institute for Human Development, University of Toronto at 
Mississauga (UTM), Mississauga, Ontario L5L1C6, Canada 
*Address correspondence to: j.pawluski@gmail.com (J.L. Pawluski) or lonstein@msu.edu (J.S. 
Lonstein)  
Keywords: postpartum depression, perinatal depression, anxiety, maternal brain, mothering, 
maternal behavior 
Abstract  
Approximately 10-20% of postpartum women experience anxiety or depressive disorders, which can 
have extremely detrimental effects on the mother, child and family. Little is known about the neural 
correlates of these affective disorders when they occur in mothers, but they do have unique neural 
profiles during the postpartum period compared to when they occur at other times in a woman’s life. 
Because the neural systems affected by postpartum anxiety and depression overlap and interact with 
the systems involved in maternal caregiving behaviors, mother-infant interactions are highly 
susceptible to disruption. Thus, there is an intricate interplay among maternal mental health, the 
mother-infant relationship, and the neurobiological mechanisms mediating them that needs to be the 
focus of future study.  
                                          
 2 
 
I. Postpartum Anxiety and Depression Occur in at Least 1 in 10 women  
Early motherhood is often a time when women experience a unique sense of happiness, 
serenity and personal fulfillment. It is abundantly clear, however, that a significant number of 
recently parturient women cannot attain these positive states because they struggle with elevated 
anxiety and depression. Postpartum anxiety (Glossary) does not currently have unique diagnostic 
criteria, so its symptom profile is most often characterized by the same symptoms involved in 
anxiety disorders occurring outside the postpartum period. These include excessive concern or worry 
that cannot be controlled (when associated with generalized anxiety disorder - GAD) and intrusive 
thoughts, impulses or behaviors (when associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder - OCD). 
Motherhood-specific concerns about the infant’s vulnerability and safety also exist and peak after 
giving birth, but are rarely assessed. Such concerns are completely normal, and even beneficial for 
infant wellbeing, but at high levels they negatively contribute to maternal anxiety [1].  
The symptom profile of postpartum depression (PPD) (Glossary) includes sad mood, 
restlessness/agitation, and impaired concentration, thus resembling that of a major depressive 
disorder (MDD) experienced at other times in adulthood. PPD is often comorbid with anxiety [6, 7], 
and is strongly predicted by a prepartum history of either depression or anxiety [2-5] (Box 1).  While 
it is unclear whether PPD has any unique symptom characteristics [2, 3], both postpartum anxiety 
and depression are obviously unique in their timing, some of their physiological and psychosocial 
risk factors (Box 2), and their consequences for the mother-infant dyad if not the entire family unit 
[4-6]. Precise rates of postpartum anxiety and depressive disorders are very difficult to ascertain due 
to the heterogeneity of the disorders, differences among studies in their research populations, the 
many diagnostic tools and criteria used for their diagnosis, and an overall lack of screening for 
psychiatric symptoms in postpartum women [7-9]. Nevertheless, recent analyses indicate that at least 
~8-12% of the 4 million parturient women in the United States each year suffer from a postpartum 
anxiety disorder, with GAD and OCD being the most common; similar rates have been reported in 
 3 
 
Canada and Germany [10, 11]. Furthermore, at least ~10-15% of women in these and other 
industrialized countries are faced with PPD [7, 8, 12-14]. In developing countries, the rates of 
postpartum anxiety appear to be at least as high as those in industrialized nations [15-17] and 
postpartum depression can be 2 to 3 times higher than in industrialized countries [14, 18, 19]. When 
one additionally considers mothers with high, but subclinical, levels of anxiety and depressive 
symptoms the number of affected women and their children around the world is significant.   
 
Evidence for whether or not these rates mean that the postpartum period is a time of elevated 
risk for mental health concerns compared to other times in women’s lives is equivocal, but a number 
of compelling studies have reported higher rates of anxiety and depression in the first few weeks, 
months or year after parturition compared to beforehand or afterwards (e.g., [20-23]). Even if the 
postpartum period is not a time of elevated risk, there are few times in women’s lives when the 
stakes of having an anxiety or depressive disorder are as high. Indeed, a postpartum psychiatric 
admission is a greater mortality risk for women than almost all other single causes, including heavy 
smoking [24, 25]!  Postpartum anxiety and depression are also each associated with a host of other 
negative outcomes for mothers and infants including reduced breastfeeding, lack of maternal 
emotional and behavioral sensitivity to the infant, poor bonding, negative infant temperament, 
atypical neurodevelopment, and later emotional and behavioral problems for the children when they 
are older [26-29].  Despite its prevalence and pervasive costs for the mother and developing child, 
our understanding of the neural bases of postpartum emotional and mood disorders rely on only a 
few recent clinical studies [30] that point to a number of brain regions affected by postpartum 
depression at rest and in response to infant or non-infant emotional cues. Although postpartum 
anxiety is as equally prevalent, very few studies have investigated its neural correlates, and no work 
has investigated the neural basis of prepartum anxiety or depression. The latter point is particularly 
unfortunate for treatment and prevention because women who experience anxiety or depression 
during the postpartum period were often anxious or depressed during pregnancy: recent estimates 
 4 
 
show that at least 10% of pregnant women have an anxiety disorder and at least 7% of them a major 
depressive episode [10, 31].   Given the current state of the literature, here we examine what is 
known about the neural basis of anxiety and depression during the postpartum period, which may 
inform future studies exploring the neural basis of prepartum affective disorders. Furthermore, we 
aim to focus on the extent to which the neural bases of postpartum anxiety and depressive disorders 
appear to be similar to and different from the neural basis of these disorders experienced at other 
times in a woman’s life – that is, outside of pregnancy or the postpartum period.  
 
II. Neural Correlates of Postpartum Anxiety and Depression   
1) Findings from clinical studies   
 
 
  
Two general research strategies involving the safe and non-invasive functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) (Glossary) have been used to study the brain systems involved in affective disorders 
(or their symptoms in studies that do not use diagnostic criteria) in women during late pregnancy 
through 18 months postpartum.  The first strategy involves analyses of women’s brain resting state, 
or the ‘default mode’ brain activity that occurs without any specific external stimulation. These 
analyses focus on brain systems known to underlie the behavioral dysregulations that characterize 
depression, including those involved in self-awareness, emotional regulation and cognitive 
functioning in the absence of cues [32]. Although certainly best conceptualized as multiple 
interacting systems, core brain regions associated with resting state activation differences in 
depressed postpartum women can be found in individual brain sites and are often lateralized in their 
activation. For example, throughout the cortex (frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, posterior 
cingulate cortex) there is less resting-state activity in the left frontal lobe, but increased activity in the 
right, in postpartum depressed women compared to healthy postpartum women [33]. Other reports 
investigating specific neural structures show that, at rest, women with PPD (who also had 
significantly elevated anxiety) have decreased corticocortical and corticolimbic connectivity [34, 35]. 
 5 
 
More specifically, the women with PPD showed significantly weaker connectivity among the 
amygdala (AMG), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the 
hippocampus compared to non-depressed postpartum women [34, 35]. Unfortunately, resting-state 
imaging data have not been collected from women with postpartum anxiety alone. However, it is 
clear that with PPD there are significant changes in neural activity in brain regions important for self-
regulation, empathy and emotion. Such neural changes are often lateralized and exist even in the 
absence of specific cues being presented to the mothers. 
The second general strategy to study neural correlates of postpartum anxiety and depression 
involves using fMRI to investigate differences in mothers’ brain responses to infant and non-infant 
cues, with the goal of understanding both the fundamental neurobiology of PPD and postpartum 
anxiety as well as how they alter neurobiological correlates of maternal responding to infants. These 
investigations typically use an emotional cue (e.g., adult face, word, infant face or cry) and a non-
emotional cue (e.g., shape, word), with the infant cues often involving a comparison between cues 
from one’s own infant versus those from a non-familiar infant [36, 37]. Using this strategy, research 
to date has shown effects of depression, anxiety, and their postpartum timing on brain functional 
activity in affected compared to unaffected mothers [38]. Furthermore, neural activation between 
depressed and non-depressed mothers also differs in response to infant and non-infant related cues, 
such that activity in a specific brain region will increase in response to a non-infant emotional cue 
but decrease in response to an infant-related emotional cue (Table 1). For example, higher scores of 
either depression or anxiety during the postpartum period are associated with decreased activation of 
the AMG, particularly the right AMG, and particularly with negative non-infant cues [36, 37, 39-41].  
Furthermore, Wonch et al. (2016) recently showed that mothers with clinically determined PPD 
show an overall enhanced response in the right AMG to positive infant photos and positive non-
infant photos, but a decrease in functional connectivity between the AMG and right insular cortex 
 6 
 
[37]. This connectivity pattern is positively correlated with both depressive symptomology and trait 
anxiety.  
There are a number of additional cortical and subcortical areas of the brain in depressed 
mothers that show altered fMRI activity in response to infant and non-infant emotional cues (Table 
1; Figure 1) [37, 42-45]. Although, of course, virtually no brain area is responsible for one behavioral 
outcome, it is important to highlight that alterations in activation of brain areas during postpartum 
depression and/or anxiety likely alter key neural networks associated with women’s maternal care, 
empathy, stress, motivation, emotional reaction to stimulus valence, learned reward [46], and 
executive functioning (for reviews see [30, 47]).  
2) Findings from laboratory rodent models 
      
Our understanding of the neurobiology of anxiety and depression has been extensively 
informed by laboratory rodent models. Unfortunately, research using animal models of peripartum 
affective disorders to understand their underlying neurobiology is in its infancy. Laboratory rodent 
models of PPD often mimic single contributing biological or psycholosocial factors to PPD in 
women - by repeatedly applying stressors, administering exogenous glucocorticoids, administering 
exogenous ovarian hormones and abruptly withdrawing them, or separating mother from pups [48-
56] - to induce postpartum depressive-like behaviors.  In addition to often having effects on females’ 
depression-like behaviors, these animal models are beginning to show altered neuroplasticity in the 
maternal brain. Recent findings show modifications in synaptic plasticity, such as synaptic density 
and density of synaptic proteins, in areas of the prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, amygdala and 
hippocampus [49, 53, 54, 57-60]; all of these are areas showing altered fMRI activity in PPD 
mothers compared to healthy mothers.  Research in the hippocampus (a brain area that has received 
the most attention in animal models of PPD due to its relationship with depression and high degree 
of plasticity in adulthood) shows alterations in its neurogenesis and dendritic plasticity after stress in 
the peripartum period [54, 55, 57, 61].  In line with clinical work, animal models are also pointing to 
 7 
 
pivotal roles for central serotoninergic system and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system in 
postpartum depression [62, 63], although much more research is needed in this area.  
It may be surprising to hear that there has been much more research on the neuroscience of 
normal and aberrant postpartum anxiety in laboratory rodents than there has been in women.  This 
body of work in rodents has shown important roles of areas including the medial prefrontal cortex, 
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and midbrain periaqueductal gray in mothers’ anxiety [64-67]. 
The neurochemicals acting in these sites to modulate postpartum anxiety in postpartum laboratory 
rodents include norepinephrine, serotonin, and corticotropin releasing hormone [66, 68-70].  
Furthermore the inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, and the neuropeptide, oxytocin, may have an 
interactive, if not a synergistic, relationship to alter maternal anxiety [71]. All of these 
neurochemicals are also implicated in postpartum anxiety in women, supporting the face validity of 
rodent models [72-75]. It is also common to assume some role for steroids in postpartum anxiety, as 
neurosteroids, including allopregnanalone, are positive allosteric modulators of GABAA receptors 
and potently anxiolytic [76]. Indeed, neurosteroid fluctuations resulting from rapid withdrawal of 
exogenous ovarian steroids are anxiogenic in nulliparous female rodents [76]. However, this does not 
seem to be the case in naturally parturient female rats because inhibiting neurosteroid production or 
removing their major substrate source (the ovaries) has no effect on dams’ anxiety [77, 78]. There is 
also no clear evidence yet for neurosteroid influences on anxiety in reproductive women [79]. Thus, 
further work is needed in postpartum women and animal models to determine how measures of 
central neurosteroid levels, their temporal change, and their effects on GABAA receptors might or 
might not affect maternal anxiety.   
The following section will highlight how the neurobiology of postpartum depression and 
anxiety are similar, but also different, from that of MDD and GAD occurring outside the postpartum 
period (Figure 1). Understanding these similarities and differences will aid in our understanding of 
emotional and mood disorders occurring in the peripartum period.  
 8 
 
III. Is the Neurobiology of Postpartum Depression and Anxiety Different from Depression and 
Anxiety Outside This Period?  
In contrast to the paucity of studies on PPD, there are many studies using fMRI to explore the 
relationship between brain activation patterns and depression in non-postpartum individuals. As 
mentioned previously, depressed mothers often have hypoactive resting-state neural activity in both 
cortical (DLPFC, ACC) and subcortical limbic regions (AMG, hippocampus) when compared to 
healthy postpartum controls. However, resting state studies of non-recently parturient people (both 
males and females) with MDD typically find hypoactivity in more lateral cognitive regions (DLPFC, 
posterior cingulate and precuneus/cuneus) and hyperactivity in medial affective and subcortical 
limbic regions (the perigenual ACC, ventromedial PFC, dorsomedial thalamus, pulvinar, ventral 
pallidum/putamen, ventral tegmental area, substantia nigra, tectum and periaqueductal grey) [32, 80].  
Imaging studies also reveal functional abnormalities in the brains of non-parturient patients with 
MDD in response to emotional cues in regions involved in emotion, motivation, and stimulus 
salience and reinforcement. This primarily involves decreased neural activation of cortical areas 
(orbital frontal cortex, DLPFC and ACC), and increased activation of limbic regions (AMG, ventral 
striatum or nucleus accumbens) [81, 82]. This research is informative in the present context given 
that PPD and MDD share many symptom characteristics, with the exception of the infant/family 
focus and the perinatal timing of PPD, yet they have different neurobiological activation profiles 
(Figure 1). For example, individuals with PPD show decreased activation in the AMG and striatum 
in response to non-infant emotional cues, whereas individual with MDD show increased activation in 
the AMG and striatum in response to emotional cues [30, 36, 37, 81, 82]. Therefore, simply 
extrapolating conclusions from neuroimaging studies of MDD to PDD will overlook the role of brain 
regions (such as the AMG) known to be particularly relevant for mothering and perhaps uniquely 
affected by maternal mood.  PPD is likely not simply an extension of MDD as traditional diagnostic 
classification implies.  
 9 
 
Highlighting the differences in brain activity between populations suffering from non-
postpartum anxiety and those with postpartum anxiety is also informative. Although there are 
exceptions, a number of functional imaging studies on GAD outside the postpartum period show 
significant hypoactivity in prefrontal cortical areas (DLPFC, DMPFC, ACC) and hyperactivity in the 
AMG and insula in response to emotional cues [83]. GAD has further been associated with decreased 
connectivity between the AMG and prefrontal cortical areas, but increased connectivity between the 
AMG and insular cortex in response to emotional cues or an emotional task [84, 85]. In contrast, 
higher anxiety in postpartum subjects is associated with lower AMG response to emotional non-
infant cues and lower connectivity between the AMG and the insula [38, 41]. These results 
collectively suggest that affective disorders during the postpartum period, and potentially the 
peripartum period, are neurobiological distinct from these disorders at other times in one’s life.  
Additional findings of neurobiological differences for these disorders within and outside the 
postpartum period may spur a reevaluation of how they may differ symptomatically, as well how 
they should be treated psychosocially and pharmacologically. 
 
IV. Postpartum Depression, Anxiety, and the Maternal Caregiving Brain Network   
 
 
Depression during the postpartum period not only affects the mothers’ overall wellbeing, but 
it also affects how mothers interact with their offspring and thus how their offspring develop.  There 
is a substantial literature showing that depression in pregnant and postpartum women has an impact, 
not only on maternal sleep patterns and affective state; but also on mothers’ 'hedonic' responses to 
stimuli, executive function and cognition [47, 86]. Moreover, we know that executive function 
deficits have a clear impact on the quality of mothering behavior exhibited during the first 
postpartum year [47, 87, 88]. Depressed mothers tend to be more intrusive with and irritated by their 
infant (although many depressed mothers are instead detached and withdrawn), and respond less 
sensitively, less contingently, and more negatively to their infants compared with non-depressed 
 10 
 
mothers [4, 6, 89]. When observed later in the postpartum period, depressed mother-infant dyads 
exhibit reduced mutual attentiveness, vocal and visual communications, touching interactions and 
smiling compared with non-depressed dyads [6, 89]. Much of the same is true for anxious mothers 
and their infants [77, 90, 91]. How maternal depression and anxiety are expressed in the activation 
pattern of the maternal caregiving brain network (Glossary) is an area of recent study in clinical 
research and research using animal models.  
1) Postpartum depression and anxiety affects the maternal caregiving brain network   
Given an abundance of evidence of cross-species similarity in the neural control of maternal 
behavior [92, 93], the neuroanatomy of maternal behavior has largely been investigated in animal 
models. This research in animals has provided the bases of hypotheses regarding brain areas and 
systems that are activated in human mothers while viewing infant stimuli. In fact, animal work on the 
neurobiology of mothering provides one of the best examples in literature of the value of animal 
models in translational research. Numan and colleagues, as well as other researchers in the field, 
have provided us with an exquisite description and analysis of the functional neuroanatomy of 
maternal behavior in the rat [93]. Most work in the area has focused on the final common path for the 
expression of maternal behavior, which includes the medial preoptic area (MPOA) and its 
downstream projections to the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and periaqueductal gray. 
Interconnecting with this MPOA-to-midbrain system are multiple sensory, limbic, and cortical 
systems. The MPOA contains receptors for all steroid and peptide hormones that activate maternal 
behaviors [93]. Neurons projecting to and from the MPOA are involved in other behaviors relevant 
to postpartum caregiving, including mothers’ affect (projections from the AMG, bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis (BST), and ACC), processes associated with the salience and reinforcing properties 
of infant cues (projections from the ventral striatum), and attention (projections from ventral striatum 
and medial PFC (mPFC))[94]. Some of these sites (AMG, BST, mPFC, ACC) also contain hormone 
receptors and are susceptible to hormonal influences on mother’s behavior [93, 95, 96].  
 11 
 
Work on the neural bases of maternal behavior in humans is derived primarily from 20 fMRI 
studies where mothers, non-mothers, and sometimes fathers are presented with either pictures of 
their own or same-aged unfamiliar infants [97-99], recorded infant cries [43-45, 100], videotapes of 
infants [101] or emotional words [39].  All studies demonstrate that many of the same limbic and 
cortical sites important for emotional or social (face) processing [97, 98, 102], sites involved in 
dopamine-associated reward-processing [99] and regions regulating maternal behavior in other 
mammals [98, 102] respond to infant stimuli. In general, most of the regions of interest have focused 
on the emotion-regulation systems, including the AMG and cingulate cortex [36]. For example, 
Barrett and colleagues recently found greater activation in the AMG when mothers were viewing 
pictures of their own infant, consistent with previous research [36, 47]. They also found that level of 
AMG response was related to trait anxiety, where greater trait anxiety was related to lower AMG 
response. Furthermore, poorer quality of maternal experience and greater levels of distress during 
parenting are related to lower AMG response to own compared to unfamiliar infant faces and further 
changes in activation of cortical areas (right superior frontal gyrus, right lateral globus pallidus/AMG 
region) [44]. Additionally, increased response to infant cries in the right superior frontal gyrus and 
AMG at one month postpartum is associated with greater maternal sensitivity at 3–4 months 
postpartum [100]. These findings point to significant interplay, and overlap, between the neural 
regions involved in maternal anxiety or depressive disorders and mothering.   
Because of its relatively small size and ventral position in the brain, fewer studies have 
explored the role of the hypothalamus and adjacent sites, such as the MPOA. However, because 
nearly all of the brain regions in the maternal caregiving network are affected by postpartum 
depression and/or anxiety, effects on the hypothalamus would be expected. In a recent study 
investigating how maternal depression and sensitivity affect neural activation in response to positive 
infant stimuli, depressed women were found to be less sensitive, accepting, available, and 
cooperative with their infant. The relationship between depression (Non-PPD vs. PPD) and maternal 
 12 
 
sensitivity was related to the degree of connectivity between the AMG, known for its role in goal-
directed maternal behavior, and the insula, known for its role in interoceptive processing [37]. Thus, 
in human mothers, processing of infant-related cues can be affected not just by maternal depression 
and anxiety, but also by the quality of mothering and individual differences in the motivation to 
mother. 
3) Other factors influencing postpartum affect and mothering 
There are a number of physiological, social, and experiential factors that have the potential to 
alter the course of postpartum anxiety and depression through their effects on the maternal brain and 
the mother-infant dyad. Imaging data is showing that birthing mode (vaginal versus c-section) or 
breastfeeding, both linked to a host of physiological changes in the mother and infant, can 
significantly alter maternal brain activity. When listening to their own infant’s cry, mothers who give 
birth vaginally show increased blood oxygen level activity in areas such as the superior frontal gyrus, 
caudate, thalamus, and AMG compared to women who gave birth via caesarean section ([45], note 
that all women breastfed in this study). Breast-feeding mothers also show greater activation to their 
own infant’s cry in the superior frontal gyrus, insula, striatum, and AMG compared to formula-
feeding mothers within the first month postpartum [100]. Whether or not these factors play a role in 
the neurobiology of postpartum emotion and mood disorders have yet to be determined, but the 
scarce research suggests that mode of delivery may be a possible mediator of postpartum anxiety and 
depression [103, 104].  
 
 
V. Treatment Effects on the Neurobiology of Postpartum Anxiety and Depression 
 
1) Pharmacological  
The most common treatment for maternal affective disorders during the peripartum period is the 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor medications (SSRIs) [105-107]. This is despite the fact that 
postpartum anxiety and depression are associated with altered functioning of many neurotransmitter 
 13 
 
systems such as GABA, norepinephrine, serotonin, glutamate [35, 71, 108, 109], steroid and peptide 
hormones, and genetic variants of these and other systems (for review [110]). SSRI medication use 
by pregnant and postpartum women in industrialized countries (including, but not limited to, Canada, 
USA, Australia, Iceland, Denmark, Sweden, UK, Italy, The Netherlands, and France) are on the rise 
[105-107, 111, 112], with higher rates in Australia and the USA (5-13%) compared to Canada and 
Western Europe (2-7%) [106, 113]. These SSRI medications can help alleviate peripartum 
depression and anxiety in many women, and remain the recommended first-line treatment for 
postpartum affective disorders [114]. However, questions have been raised about their relative risk 
and benefits to the developing child as SSRIs can cross the placenta and are often evident in 
breastmilk [115-122]. It is also unclear how long the effects of SSRIs last or why some postpartum 
women do not benefit from them [123] 
Animal models of PPD show that SSRIs may act on the maternal brain to reverse the 
behavioral effects of repeated stress by increasing synaptic density in the prefrontal cortex and the 
nucleus accumbens, and by increasing the number of immature neurons, but not synaptic plasticity, 
in the hippocampus [57, 58, 60]. This suggests region-specific effects of SSRIs in the treatment of 
PPD. In fact, brain imaging studies on treatments for anxiety disorders and MDD show that both 
medications and some forms of psychotherapy can regulate neural activation of brain areas that play 
a key role in these disorders such as the PFC, the hippocampus and AMG [124, 125]. Thus, it may be 
that similar ‘regulatory’ effects may be seen after pharmacological and psychotherapy treatment of 
anxiety and depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period.  
 
2) Non-pharmacological 
Given the questions about the effectiveness of SSRIs to treat postpartum affective disorders it 
is advantageous to consider non-pharmacological therapies [126, 127]; such therapies include 
various forms of psychotherapy, parenting classes, dietary supplements, ‘alternative’ therapies and 
 14 
 
exercise [27, 128, 129]. It is also recommended that treatment for depression and anxiety during the 
postpartum period be individualized with treatment success often being evident after a combination 
of treatments (pharmacology, dietary, psychotherapy)[114]. It remains to be determined how any of 
these treatments alter the neurobiology of the maternal brain and improve maternal mental health.  
 
A particularly intriguing non-pharmacological approach that deserves more research for its 
effectiveness in preventing and/or ameliorate postpartum anxiety and depression is increased 
physical contact with one’s infant, regardless of breast-feeding. Mothers and infants spend much of 
their time together engaging in activities (e.g., feeding, holding, carrying, playing) that involve 
physical contact. Tactile inputs mothers receive from their infants regulate virtually all maternal 
behavioral and physiological processes [130], including anxiety and depression. Anxious or 
depressed mothers touch their infants less often and less affectionately compared to unaffected 
mothers [131, 132]. Anxious or depressed mothers are also less likely to continue breastfeeding, 
which precipitates a negative cycle because breastfeeding cessation in turn exacerbates women’s 
anxiety and depression [133-135].  Studies on laboratory rodents are consistent with these human 
findings: Separating mothers from their litters, or exposing dams to only pup distal sensory cues 
(sight, sound, smell) for as little as four hours before testing, increases dams’ anxiety behavior [92, 
136].  It is unclear if more prolonged or a permanent separation from pups produces long-lasting 
increases in dams’ anxiety [137-139], but such separations do increase dams’ depressive-like 
behaviors [137, 140]. 
The anxiolytic and anti-depressive effects of infant contact are often attributed to lactation, 
but a critical question is whether the effects are due to suckling and its hormonal consequences 
involved in lactation, or involve non-suckling tactile inputs such as infant probing and stroking of 
mother’s skin. These non-suckling inputs may be transmitted through unmyelinated sensory neurons 
containing the G-protein-coupled receptor, MRGPRB4, which strongly responds to massage-like 
stroking and conveys its rewarding effects [141, 142].  It would be fascinating if these receptors are 
 15 
 
upregulated postpartum to heighten maternal tactile sensitivity. Most studies of maternal mental 
health and breastfeeding do not control for the amount of time women are in contact with their 
infants, which is lower when bottlefeeding [143]. Massage has well-known positive consequences 
for human emotional state and mood [28], so it would not be surprising if non-suckling infant tactile 
cues improve maternal mental health.  In fact, women’s’ state anxiety is equally reduced after 
breastfeeding or simply holding the infant on the lap [144].  Maternal state anxiety is also reduced 
after stroking the infants [145].  Consistent with these findings in women, preventing rat mothers 
from lactating and/or receiving suckling inputs from their pups has no effect on dams’ anxiety, 
further emphasizing the importance of non-suckling touch for postpartum emotional state [92]. 
Touch interventions involving non-suckling “kangaroo care” potentially reduce anxiety and 
depressive symptoms in human mothers [146, 147], and all of these non-suckling offspring tactile 
effects presumably act by naturally optimizing maternal neurochemistry involved in her affective 
state.  
VI. Concluding Remarks and Future Directions  
At least 1 in every 10 postpartum women will suffer from anxiety or depression. The 
prevalence and pervasive effects of these disorders on the mother, child and family are significant 
and can affect subsequent generations [27, 148]: Yet, our knowledge of the neurobiology of these 
disorders is in its infancy. Research is pointing to an often distinct neurobiological pattern of these 
disorders when they occur during the peripartum period compared to at other times in a woman’s 
life, and these patterns are intricately tied to the maternal brain network and subsequently the 
mother-infant relationship. Although fMRI research can provide information on regional changes in 
activation in brain regions by detecting regional changes in blood flow, continued research is needed 
for both pre- and post-partum anxiety and depression, using a variety of approaches in clinical and 
preclinical research, to determine the mechanisms behind the neurobiological patterns of activation 
and deactivation, the physiological correlates of these changes, and the interplay between peripartum 
 16 
 
mood/emotion and mothering (see Outstanding Questions Box). Understanding the neurobiological 
correlates of maternal emotional and mood disorders will aid in developing effective and safe 
treatments for these disorders, thus improving the health and well-being of mother, child and family. 
                                            
 17 
 
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by a Brain and Behavior Foundation NARSAD 
Young investigator Grant to JLP, Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and Ontario Mental 
Health Foundation (OMHF) grants to ASF (P.I.), and NICHD grant RO1HD057962 to JSL.  We 
thank Maayan Harel (http://www.maayanillustration.com/) for the figure in this paper. 
 
  
Figure 1. Representation of similarities and differences in fMRI activation patterns in key 
brain areas associated with Postpartum Depression (PPD), Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), 
and Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD). Dots on the left panel (PPD) indicate change in 
activation in response to infant or non-infant cues (e.g. AMG activation is increased in response to 
emotional infant cues, but decreased in response to emotional non-infant cues). Dots on the right 
panel (MDD/GAD) indicate that the same brain area is activated in response to an emotional cue in 
both disorders (e.g. AMG activation is increased in both MDD and GAD). Brain areas highlighted 
play key roles in neural networks associated with stress regulation, reward, motivation, sensory 
processing, and executive functioning so have the capacity to affect a wide range of maternal 
18 
 
 19 
 
activities. For example, prefrontal cortical areas (DMPFC, DLPFC, OFC, IFG, SFG) play important 
roles in executive functioning and self regulation; the insular cortex (IC) is critical for emotional 
processing, cognition and perception; the limbic system (ACC, PCC, HPC, AMG) is well studied for 
stress regulation, emotion, cognition, motivation and social responding; the striatum (STR, NaCC, 
CN), VTA and SN are key for learned reinforcement processing; the PAG and THAL play key roles 
in sensory processing (for review see [30, 47, 149, 150]). ACC – anterior cingulate cortex, AMG – 
amygdala, CN – caudate nucleus, DLPFC – dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, DMPFC – dorsal medial 
prefrontal cortex, HPC – hippocampus, IC – insular cortex, IFG – inferior frontal gyrus, NaCC – 
nucleus accumbens, OFC – orbital frontal cortex, PAG – periaquaductal, grey, PCC – posterior 
cingulate cortex, SFG – superior frontal gyrus, SN – substantia nigra, STR – striatum, VTA – ventral 
tegmental area, THAL – thalamus. 
 20 
 
 
 Non‐infant Cues
Infant Cues
21 
 
 
Resting State
 
(n=3) 
Negative
(adult face, words) 
Positive 
(words)                  
Monetary Reward 
Negative 
(cry, infant face) 
Positive
(infant face)    
 
 
 
(n=4)
(n=1)
(n=2)
(n=6)
(n=4)
 
Cortical areas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[27] 
Dorsal Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[33, 38] 
Anterior Cingulate Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[26, 27, 36, 40] 
Posterior Cingulate Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[25, 36] 
Insula 
 
 
                   + 
 
 
 
                  + 
[29, 30, 32, 36, 38 
41] 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
                   + 
 
 
 
 
[30, 83] 
Superior Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[40] 
Medial and Middle Frontal Gyrus 
 
 
 
 
 
                  ^ 
 
[82] 
Orbital Frontal Cortex 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[32, 36] 
Superior Temporal  Gyrus  
 
 
 
 
 
                  ^ 
 
[82] 
Subcortical areas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amygdala  
 
 
                  + 
 
 
 
                  + 
[26‐29, 31‐33]  
Striatum 
  
 
 
 
~ 
 
 
[32, 34, 35, 38, 40] 
Thalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[38, 40] 
Hippocampus 
 
 
 
 
 
                  a 
 
[26, 27, 41] 
Substantia nigra/ VTA/ PAG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[38] 
 22 
 
Table 1. Brain area activation in depressed and/or anxious mothers postpartum. Data are results of fMRI studies. Note that not all studies 
investigated all brain areas or took into account postpartum anxiety. Arrow direction indicates general direction of activation.  + denotes effect 
also with postpartum anxiety [37, 38, 41]. ~ denotes altered [151]. ‘a’ denotes women with poorer interaction with their infants[44]. ‘^’ denotes 
with lower income-to-needs ratio[152]. All studies used either clinical perinatal depressed (PPD) postpartum women versus healthy postpartum 
women [33-35, 37, 40, 41, 151] or self-rated depressed/anxious postpartum women versus healthy postpartum women, unless otherwise stated.  
N=17 studies [33-44, 151-155]. 
 23 
 
 
 24 
 
Glossary 
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI): A neuroimaging procedure that measures neural 
activity by detecting changes associated with cerebral blood flow; primarily indicates blood-oxygen-
level dependent (BOLD) contrast. This technique relies on the fact that cerebral blood flow is most 
often correlated with neural activity. Thus, an increase in blood flow would indicate an increase in 
cellular activity within a specific brain area, and vice versa [156]. 
Maternal Caregiving Brain Network: Brain areas and neural systems activated or inhibited in 
response to offspring and important for maternal motivation and the expression of maternal 
behaviors. Includes areas such as the medial preoptic area, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, 
amygdala, nucleus accumbens, ventral tegmental area, midbrain periaqueductal gray and other 
sensory, limbic, and cortical systems that project to these sites [47, 157]. 
Postpartum Anxiety:  Elevated anxiety with a postpartum onset. At least 10% of women experience 
high postpartum anxiety. It occurs at higher rates than at other times in a women’s life, and in some 
populations at rates similar to rates of postpartum depression [158]. Generalized anxiety (GAD) and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are the most common types. The relatively recently published 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition (DSM-V) does not include a 
diagnosis of postpartum anxiety disorders outside the diagnoses for non-postpartum anxiety 
disorders. The DSM-V criteria for GAD at any time in life include the presence of excessive anxiety 
and worry about a variety of topics, events, or activities. This anxiety and worry is very difficult to 
control and occurs more often than not for at least 6 months and is clearly excessive. OCD at any 
time typically includes the persistent presence of obsessions and compulsions which significantly 
impact daily life.  
Postpartum Depression (PPD): Major depression with a postpartum onset. Major depression 
includes at least 5 of the following symptoms that last for 2 or more weeks: persistent depressed 
 25 
 
mood and sadness, diminished pleasure in nearly all activities, changes in sleep patterns, changes in 
weight, fatigue, restlessness, feelings of worthlessness, poor concentration, and reoccurring thoughts 
of death and suicide. Persistent depressed mood or loss of pleasure must be evident for a major 
depressive episode diagnosis. It should be noted that the DSM-V does not classify postpartum 
depression as a separate diagnosis, and it instead requires an episode of major (but not minor) 
depression with a peripartum onset occurring anywhere from the start of pregnancy through the first 
four weeks following delivery. This differs from the previous DSM-IV criteria, which involved the 
onset of a major depressive episode only within the 4 weeks after delivery. The broadened time 
frame for symptom onset can be expected to increase the rate of what is now termed “perinatal 
depression” [159, 160]. 
 26 
 
 
Box 1. Postpartum Anxiety: Overlooked Key Player in Postpartum Mental Health 
While moderate maternal anxiety can facilitate attraction to young, attention to their needs, 
and ability to protect them [1, 161, 162], anxiety disorders affect at least 8-10% of recently parturient 
women and many more suffer from high, subclinical levels of anxiety [8]. Postpartum anxiety is less 
well known, and less scientifically studied, than postpartum depression. Accurately detecting and 
diagnosing anxiety in the postpartum population is very low [163, 164] and, in fact, more postpartum 
women are probably affected by high anxiety than they are by depression [10, 22].  
Ignoring anxiety in reproductive women is a serious public health concern because a history 
of anxiety before or during pregnancy is one of the strongest predictors of later high postpartum 
anxiety or depression [9, 165-167]. Furthermore, postpartum depression is frequently comorbid with 
anxiety [11, 168-170], with the postpartum anxiety often preceding the onset of the depression [171, 
172].  Thus, detecting and treating anxiety before or soon after parturition could often help prevent 
postpartum depression. It is also a concern that the commonly used Edinburgh Postnatal Depression 
Scale (EPDS) has latent anxiety component accounting for much of the variance in its total scores 
[173, 174], resulting in a poor ability to dissociate depression from anxiety [175, 176]. Because many 
studies of postpartum anxiety or depression do not control for comorbid symptoms, it is difficult to 
determine the unique contributions of each to the negative effects on mothers and children.  This is 
also true for many of fMRI studies involving depressed and/or anxious mothers.    
 27 
 
 
Box 2. Risk Factors Contributing to Postpartum Anxiety and Depression 
Not all women are at equal risk for poor mental health during the postpartum period.  Some 
of the greatest psychosocial risk factors for postpartum depression include a history of depression or 
anxiety before or during pregnancy, numerous sources of psychosocial stress, a history of 
interpersonal violence, poor relationship quality with one’s partner, the lack of social support, low 
household income, and poor self-perceived maternal health [7, 8, 177-179]. Accordingly, 
psychosocial interventions can be quite effective in ameliorating postpartum depression [180]. 
Studies of the biological factors contributing to postpartum depression susceptibility have included 
(epi)genetically mediated hyper- or hypo- sensitivity to circulating ovarian or adrenal steroids, 
altered sensitivity to neurosteroids [177, 181], low oxytocin levels and receptor signaling [182, 183], 
as well as altered monoamine, neurotrophin, and immune system function [181].  
 
Psychosocial and biological risk factors for postpartum anxiety disorders are not particularly 
well studied, but similar to depression, a woman’s history of anxiety or depression is a very strong 
predictor [9, 22, 166]. Other psychosocial risk factors for high postpartum anxiety include early 
family history of abuse and neglect, low social support, history of trauma, current partner violence, 
previous miscarriage, negative childbirth experience, personality style, young maternal age, lack of 
education, and child temperament during the postpartum period [8, 164]. Biological correlates of 
high postpartum anxiety are mostly unknown, but the few studies in humans and many studies in 
laboratory animals suggest they include ovarian and adrenal steroids, oxytocin,  prolactin, 
norepinephrine and serotonin [71]; all of which act on brain areas implicated in maternal mood 
disorders. Compared to postpartum depression, fewer studies have examined interventions or 
treatments for postpartum anxiety [9, 184].   
 
Numerous barriers prevent affected postpartum women from seeking or obtaining help, 
including social stigma about mental health, low social support, and insufficient knowledge among 
 28 
 
health-care providers about postpartum mental health [185]. However, this landscape seems to be 
changing. The past 15 years has seen a seven-fold increase in the annual number of scientific articles 
indexed on Medline involving the keywords “postpartum” and “anxiety” (170 vs. 25) and a four-fold 
increase in articles involving the keywords “postpartum” and “depression” (525 vs. 126).  
Furthermore, based on a recent report by O’Connor and colleagues (2016), the United States 
Preventive Services Task Force expanded their previous recommendation to widely screen adults for 
depression to specifically include all pregnant and postpartum women [186, 187].  The American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2015) recently made a similar recommendation for both 
depression 
and 
anxiety.  
 29 
 
 
References 
1. Leckman, J.F. et al. (1999) Early parental preoccupations and behaviors and their possible 
relationship to the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl 396, 1-
26. 
2. Bloch, M. et al. (2003) Endocrine factors in the etiology of postpartum depression. Compr 
Psychiatry 44 (3), 234-46. 
3. Di Florio, A. and Meltzer-Brody, S. (2015) Is Postpartum Depression a Distinct Disorder? Curr 
Psychiatry Rep 17 (10), 76. 
4. Fleming, A.S. et al. (1988) Postpartum Adjustment in First-Time Mothers: Relations between 
Mood, Maternal Attitudes and Mother-Infant Interactions'. Developmental Psychobiology 24, 71-81. 
5. Horowitz, J.A. and Goodman, J. (2004) A longitudinal study of maternal postpartum depression 
symptoms. Res Theory Nurs Pract 18 (2-3), 149-63. 
6. Field, T. et al. (1990) Behavior-state matching and synchrony in mother-infant interactions of 
nondepressed versus depressed dyads. Developmental Psychobiology 26 (1), 7-14. 
7. O'Hara, M.W. and McCabe, J.E. (2013) Postpartum depression: current status and future 
directions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 9, 379-407. 
8. Goodman, J.H. et al. (2016) Anxiety disorders in postpartum women: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Affect Disord 203, 292-331. 
9. Matthey, S. et al. (2004) Routine psychosocial assessment of women in the antenatal period: 
frequency of risk factors and implications for clinical services. Arch Womens Ment Health 7 (4), 
223-9. 
10. Fairbrother, N. et al. (2016) Perinatal anxiety disorder prevalence and incidence. J Affect Disord 
200, 148-55. 
 30 
 
11. Reck, C. et al. (2008) Prevalence, onset and comorbidity of postpartum anxiety and depressive 
disorders. Acta Psychiatr Scand 118 (6), 459-68. 
12. Le Strat, Y. et al. (2011) Prevalence and correlates of major depressive episode in pregnant and 
postpartum women in the United States. J Affect Disord 135 (1-3), 128-38. 
13. Russell, E.J. et al. (2013) Risk of obsessive-compulsive disorder in pregnant and postpartum 
women: a meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry 74 (4), 377-85. 
14. Fisher, J.R. et al. (2009) Pregnancy, child birth and the postpartum period. In Mental health 
aspects of women's reproductive health; a global review of the literature, pp. 8-30, World Health 
Organization. 
15. Shrestha, S. et al. (2014) Factors associated with post-natal anxiety among primiparous mothers 
in Nepal. Int Nurs Rev 61 (3), 427-34. 
16. Tavares, D. et al. (2012) Prevalence of suicide risk and comorbidities in postpartum women in 
Pelotas. Rev Bras Psiquiatr 34 (3), 270-6. 
17. Adewuya, A.O. and Afolabi, O.T. (2005) The course of anxiety and depressive symptoms in 
Nigerian postpartum women. Arch Womens Ment Health 8 (4), 257-9. 
18. Fisher, J.R. et al. (2004) Prevalence, nature, severity and correlates of postpartum depressive 
symptoms in Vietnam. BJOG 111 (12), 1353-60. 
19. Cooper, P.A. (1999) Very-low-birth-weight infants in South Africa. S Afr Med J 89 (11), 1160-1. 
20. Dave, S. et al. (2010) Incidence of maternal and paternal depression in primary care: a cohort 
study using a primary care database. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 164 (11), 1038-44. 
21. O'Hara, M.W. et al. (1990) Controlled prospective study of postpartum mood disorders: 
comparison of childbearing and nonchildbearing women. J Abnorm Psychol 99 (1), 3-15. 
22. Britton, J.R. (2008) Maternal anxiety: course and antecedents during the early postpartum period. 
Depress Anxiety 25 (9), 793-800. 
 31 
 
23. Vesga-Lopez, O. et al. (2008) Psychiatric disorders in pregnant and postpartum women in the 
United States. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65 (7), 805-15. 
24. Appleby, L. et al. (1998) Suicide and other causes of mortality after post-partum psychiatric 
admission. Br J Psychiatry 173, 209-11. 
25. Chesney, E. et al. (2014) Risks of all-cause and suicide mortality in mental disorders: a meta-
review. World Psychiatry 13 (2), 153-60. 
26. Glasheen, C. et al. (2010) A systematic review of the effects of postnatal maternal anxiety on 
children. Arch Womens Ment Health 13 (1), 61-74. 
27. Stein, A. et al. (2014) Effects of perinatal mental disorders on the fetus and child. Lancet 384 
(9956), 1800-19. 
28. Field, T. (2010) Postpartum depression effects on early interactions, parenting, and safety 
practices: a review. Infant Behav Dev 33 (1), 1-6. 
29. Drury, S.S. et al. (2016) The Neurobiological Impact of Postpartum Maternal Depression: 
Prevention and Intervention Approaches. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 25 (2), 179-200. 
30. Moses-Kolko, E.L. et al. (2014) In search of neural endophenotypes of postpartum 
psychopathology and disrupted maternal caregiving. J Neuroendocrinol 26 (10), 665-84. 
31. Gavin, N.I. et al. (2005) Perinatal depression: a systematic review of prevalence and incidence. 
Obstet Gynecol 106 (5 Pt 1), 1071-83. 
32. Alcaro, A. et al. (2010) Is subcortical-cortical midline activity in depression mediated by 
glutamate and GABA? A cross-species translational approach. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34 (4), 592-
605. 
33. Wang, X.-j. et al. (2011) Increased Posterior Cingulate, Medial Frontal and Decreased Temporal 
Regional Homogeneity in Depressed Mothers. A Resting-State Functional Magnetic Resonance 
Study. Procedia Environmental Sciences 8 737 – 743 
 
 32 
 
34. Chase, H.W. et al. (2014) Disrupted posterior cingulate-amygdala connectivity in postpartum 
depressed women as measured with resting BOLD fMRI. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 9 (8), 1069-75. 
35. Deligiannidis, K.M. et al. (2013) GABAergic neuroactive steroids and resting-state functional 
connectivity in postpartum depression: a preliminary study. J Psychiatr Res 47 (6), 816-28. 
36. Barrett, J. et al. (2012) Maternal affect and quality of parenting experiences are related to 
amygdala response to infant faces. Soc Neurosci 7 (3), 252-68. 
37. Wonch, K.E. et al. (2016) Postpartum depression and brain response to infants: Differential 
amygdala response and connectivity. Soc Neurosci, 1-18. 
38. Gingnell, M. et al. (2015) Emotion Reactivity Is Increased 4-6 Weeks Postpartum in Healthy 
Women: A Longitudinal fMRI Study. PLoS One 10 (6), e0128964. 
39. Silverman, M.E. et al. (2011) The neural processing of negative emotion postpartum: a 
preliminary study of amygdala function in postpartum depression. Arch Womens Ment Health 14 
(4), 355-9. 
40. Silverman, M.E. et al. (2007) Neural dysfunction in postpartum depression: an fMRI pilot study. 
CNS Spectr 12 (11), 853-62. 
41. Moses-Kolko, E.L. et al. (2010) Abnormally reduced dorsomedial prefrontal cortical activity and 
effective connectivity with amygdala in response to negative emotional faces in postpartum 
depression. Am J Psychiatry 167 (11), 1373-80. 
42. Laurent, H.K. and Ablow, J.C. (2012) A cry in the dark: depressed mothers show reduced neural 
activation to their own infant's cry. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 7 (2), 125-34. 
43. Laurent, H.K. et al. (2011) Neural correlates of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal regulation of 
mothers with their infants. Biol Psychiatry 70 (9), 826-32. 
44. Musser, E.D. et al. (2012) The neural correlates of maternal sensitivity: an fMRI study. Dev 
Cogn Neurosci 2 (4), 428-36. 
 33 
 
45. Swain, J.E. et al. (2008) Maternal brain response to own baby-cry is affected by cesarean section 
delivery. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 49 (10), 1042-52. 
46. Robinson, M.J.F. and Berridge, K.C. (2015) Wanting versus needing. . In INternational 
Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (2nd edn) (Wright, J.D. ed), pp. 351-356, 
Elsevier. 
47. Barrett, J. and Fleming, A.S. (2011) Annual Research Review: All mothers are not created equal: 
neural and psychobiological perspectives on mothering and the importance of individual differences. 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 52 (4), 368-97. 
48. Smith, J.W. et al. (2004) Gestational stress induces post-partum depression-like behaviour and 
alters maternal care in rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology 29 (2), 227-44. 
49. Hillerer, K.M. et al. (2011) Exposure to chronic pregnancy stress reverses peripartum-associated 
adaptations: implications for postpartum anxiety and mood disorders. Endocrinology 152 (10), 3930-
40. 
50. Brummelte, S. and Galea, L.A. (2010) Chronic corticosterone during pregnancy and postpartum 
affects maternal care, cell proliferation and depressive-like behavior in the dam. Horm Behav 58 (8), 
769-779. 
51. Darnaudery, M. et al. (2004) Stress during gestation induces lasting effects on emotional 
reactivity of the dam rat. Behav Brain Res 153 (1), 211-6. 
52. O'Mahony, S.M. et al. (2006) Gestational stress leads to depressive-like behavioural and 
immunological changes in the rat. Neuroimmunomodulation 13 (2), 82-8. 
53. Leuner, B. et al. (2014) Chronic gestational stress leads to depressive-like behavior and 
compromises medial prefrontal cortex structure and function during the postpartum period. PLoS 
One 9 (3), e89912. 
54. Pawluski, J.L. et al. (2012) Pregnancy or stress decrease complexity of CA3 pyramidal neurons 
in the hippocampus of adult female rats. Neuroscience 227, 201-10. 
 34 
 
55. Pawluski, J.L. et al. (2011) Stress and the pregnant female: Impact on hippocampal cell 
proliferation, but not affective-like behaviors. Horm Behav 59 (4), 572-80. 
56. Brummelte, S. and Galea, L.A. (2016) Postpartum depression: Etiology, treatment and 
consequences for maternal care. Horm Behav 77, 153-66. 
57. Gemmel, M. et al. (2016) Gestational stress and fluoxetine treatment differentially affect 
plasticity, methylation and serotonin levels in the PFC and hippocampus of rat dams. Neuroscience 
327, 32-43. 
58. Pawluski, J.L. et al. (2012) Chronic fluoxetine treatment and maternal adversity differentially 
alter neurobehavioral outcomes in the rat dam. Behav Brain Res 228 (1), 159-68. 
59. Haim, A. et al. (2014) Gestational stress induces persistent depressive-like behavior and 
structural modifications within the postpartum nucleus accumbens. Eur J Neurosci 40 (12), 3766-73. 
60. Haim, A. et al. (2016) The effects of gestational stress and Selective Serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
antidepressant treatment on structural plasticity in the postpartum brain--A translational model for 
postpartum depression. Horm Behav 77, 124-31. 
61. Pawluski, J.L. et al. (2016) Neuroplasticity in the maternal hippocampus: Relation to cognition 
and effects of repeated stress. Horm Behav 77, 86-97. 
62. Gemmel, M. et al. (2016) Developmental fluoxetine and prenatal stress effects on serotonin, 
dopamine, and synaptophysin density in the PFC and hippocampus of offspring at weaning. Dev 
Psychobiol 58 (3), 315-27. 
63. Slattery, D.A. and Neumann, I.D. (2008) No stress please! Mechanisms of stress 
hyporesponsiveness of the maternal brain. J Physiol 586 (2), 377-85. 
64. Figueira, R.J. et al. (2008) Oxytocin receptor activity in the ventrocaudal periaqueductal gray 
modulates anxiety-related behavior in postpartum rats. Behav Neurosci 122 (3), 618-28. 
65. Sabihi, S. et al. (2014) Oxytocin in the medial prefrontal cortex regulates maternal care, maternal 
aggression and anxiety during the postpartum period. Front Behav Neurosci 8, 258. 
 35 
 
66. Smith, C.D. et al. (2013) Noradrenergic alpha-2 receptor modulators in the ventral bed nucleus of 
the stria terminalis: effects on anxiety behavior in postpartum and virgin female rats. Behav Neurosci 
127 (4), 582-97. 
67. Klampfl, S.M. et al. (2016) Brain CRF-binding protein modulates aspects of maternal behavior 
under stressful conditions and supports a hypo-anxious state in lactating rats. Horm Behav 84, 136-
44. 
68. Harding, K.M. and Lonstein, J.S. (2016) Extensive juvenile "babysitting" facilitates later adult 
maternal responsiveness, decreases anxiety, and increases dorsal raphe tryptophan hydroxylase-2 
expression in female laboratory rats. Dev Psychobiol 58 (4), 492-508. 
69. Klampfl, S.M. et al. (2014) Hypoactivation of CRF receptors, predominantly type 2, in the 
medial-posterior BNST is vital for adequate maternal behavior in lactating rats. J Neurosci 34 (29), 
9665-76. 
70. Toufexis, D.J. et al. (1999) Lactation-induced reduction in rats' acoustic startle is associated with 
changes in noradrenergic neurotransmission. Behav Neurosci 113 (1), 176-84. 
71. Lonstein, J.S. et al. (2014) Emotion and mood adaptations in the peripartum 
female:complementary contributions of GABA and oxytocin. J Neuroendocrinol 26 (10), 649-64. 
72. Costas, J. et al. (2010) Association study of 44 candidate genes with depressive and anxiety 
symptoms in post-partum women. J Psychiatr Res 44 (11), 717-24. 
73. Deligiannidis, K.M. et al. (2016) Peripartum neuroactive steroid and gamma-aminobutyric acid 
profiles in women at-risk for postpartum depression. Psychoneuroendocrinology 70, 98-107. 
74. Sekiyama, T. et al. (2013) Increased blood serotonin concentrations are correlated with reduced 
tension/anxiety in healthy postpartum lactating women. Psychiatry Res 209 (3), 560-5. 
75. Stuebe, A.M. et al. (2013) Association between maternal mood and oxytocin response to 
breastfeeding. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 22 (4), 352-61. 
 36 
 
76. Smith, S.S. et al. (2007) Neurosteroid regulation of GABA(A) receptors: Focus on the alpha4 and 
delta subunits. Pharmacol Ther 116 (1), 58-76. 
77. Lonstein, J.S. (2007) Regulation of anxiety during the postpartum period. Front Neuroendocrinol 
28 (2-3), 115-41. 
78. Kellogg, C.K. and Barrett, K.A. (1999) Reduced progesterone metabolites are not critical for 
plus-maze performance of lactating female rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 63 (3), 441-8. 
79. Hellgren, C. et al. (2014) Low serum allopregnanolone is associated with symptoms of 
depression in late pregnancy. Neuropsychobiology 69 (3), 147-53. 
80. Northoff, G. et al. (2011) The 'resting-state hypothesis' of major depressive disorder-a 
translational subcortical-cortical framework for a system disorder. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35 (9), 
1929-45. 
81. Phillips, M.L. et al. (2003) Neurobiology of emotion perception II: Implications for major 
psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry 54 (5), 515-28. 
82. Drevets, W.C. (2000) Functional anatomical abnormalities in limbic and prefrontal cortical 
structures in major depression. Prog Brain Res 126, 413-31. 
83. Etkin, A. and Wager, T.D. (2007) Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-analysis of 
emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. Am J Psychiatry 164 
(10), 1476-88. 
84. Makovac, E. et al. (2016) Amygdala functional connectivity as a longitudinal biomarker of 
symptom changes in generalized anxiety. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 
85. Mochcovitch, M.D. et al. (2014) A systematic review of fMRI studies in generalized anxiety 
disorder: evaluating its neural and cognitive basis. J Affect Disord 167, 336-42. 
86. Akbari, E. et al. (2015) Depressed Mothers Show Increased Anxiety and Negativity and 
Differential Salivary Cortisol in Response to Infant Cries. J Depress Anxiety (S3:005). 
 37 
 
87. Chico, E. et al. (2014) Executive function and mothering: challenges faced by teenage mothers. 
Dev Psychobiol 56 (5), 1027-35. 
88. Gonzalez, A. et al. (2012) Maternal early life experiences and parenting: the mediating role of 
cortisol and executive function. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 51 (7), 673-82. 
89. Field, T. (1995) Psychologically Depressed Parents. In Handbook of Parenting (Bornstein, M. 
ed), L. Erlbaum Associates. 
90. Nicol-Harper, R. et al. (2007) Interactions between mothers and infants: impact of maternal 
anxiety. Infant Behav Dev 30 (1), 161-7. 
91. Challacombe, F.L. et al. (2016) Parenting and mother-infant interactions in the context of 
maternal postpartum obsessive-compulsive disorder: Effects of obsessional symptoms and mood. 
Infant Behav Dev 44, 11-20. 
92. Lonstein, J.S. et al. (2015) Common and divergent psychobiological mechanisms underlying 
maternal behaviors in non-human and human mammals. Horm Behav 73, 156-85. 
93. Numan, M. and Insel, T. (2003) The Neurobiology of Parental Behavior, Springer-Verlag. 
94. Lovic, V. and Fleming, A.S. (2015) Propagation of maternal behavior across generations is 
associated with changes in non-maternal cognitive and behavioral processes. Behav Processes 117, 
42-7. 
95. Olazabal, D.E. et al. (2013) Flexibility and adaptation of the neural substrate that supports 
maternal behavior in mammals. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 37 (8), 1875-92. 
96. Pereira, M. and Ferreira, A. (2016) Neuroanatomical and neurochemical basis of parenting: 
Dynamic coordination of motivational, affective and cognitive processes. Horm Behav 77, 72-85. 
97. Leibenluft, E. et al. (2004) Mothers' neural activation in response to pictures of their children and 
other children. Biol Psychiatry 56 (4), 225-32. 
98. Bartels, A. and Zeki, S. (2004) The neural correlates of maternal and romantic love. Neuroimage 
21 (3), 1155-66. 
 38 
 
99. Strathearn, L. et al. (2008) What's in a smile? Maternal brain responses to infant facial cues. 
Pediatrics 122 (1), 40-51. 
100. Kim, P. et al. (2011) Breastfeeding, brain activation to own infant cry, and maternal sensitivity. 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 52 (8), 907-15. 
101. Noriuchi, M. et al. (2008) The functional neuroanatomy of maternal love: mother's response to 
infant's attachment behaviors. Biol Psychiatry 63 (4), 415-23. 
102. Ranote, S. et al. (2004) The neural basis of maternal responsiveness to infants: an fMRI study. 
Neuroreport 15 (11), 1825-9. 
103. Hayes, U.L. et al. (2010) Role of pelvic sensory signaling during delivery in postpartum mental 
health. J Reprod Infant Psychol 28 (3), 307-323. 
104. Clout, D. and Brown, R. (2015) Sociodemographic, pregnancy, obstetric, and postnatal 
predictors of postpartum stress, anxiety and depression in new mothers. J Affect Disord 188, 60-7. 
105. Oberlander, T.F. et al. (2006) Neonatal outcomes after prenatal exposure to selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor antidepressants and maternal depression using population-based linked health data. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 63 (8), 898-906. 
106. Cooper, W.O. et al. (2007) Increasing use of antidepressants in pregnancy. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 196 (6), 544 e1-5. 
107. Charlton, R.A. et al. (2015) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor prescribing before, during and 
after pregnancy: a population-based study in six European regions. BJOG 122 (7), 1010-20. 
108. Fiorelli, M. et al. (2015) Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies of Postpartum Depression: An 
Overview. Behav Neurol 2015, 913843. 
109. Moses-Kolko, E.L. et al. (2008) Serotonin 1A receptor reductions in postpartum depression: a 
positron emission tomography study. Fertil Steril 89 (3), 685-92. 
110. Couto, T.C. et al. (2015) Postpartum depression: A systematic review of the genetics involved. 
World J Psychiatry 5 (1), 103-11. 
 39 
 
111. Hayes, R.M. et al. (2012) Maternal antidepressant use and adverse outcomes: a cohort study of 
228,876 pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207 (1), 49 e1-9. 
112. Zoega, H. et al. (2015) Use of SSRI and SNRI Antidepressants during Pregnancy: A 
Population-Based Study from Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. PLoS One 10 (12), e0144474. 
113. Lupattelli, A. et al. (2014) Medication use in pregnancy: a cross-sectional, multinational web-
based study. BMJ Open 4 (2), e004365. 
114. Kim, D.R. et al. (2014) Pharmacotherapy of postpartum depression: an update. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother 15 (9), 1223-34. 
115. Pawluski, J.L. (2012) Perinatal selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor exposure: impact on brain 
development and neural plasticity. Neuroendocrinology 95 (1), 39-46. 
116. Olivier, J.D. et al. (2013) The effects of maternal depression and maternal selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor exposure on offspring. Front Cell Neurosci 7, 73. 
117. Oberlander, T.F. et al. (2009) Sustained neurobehavioral effects of exposure to SSRI 
antidepressants during development: molecular to clinical evidence. Clin Pharmacol Ther 86 (6), 
672-7. 
118. Pawluski, J.L. et al. (2015) Developmental fluoxetine exposure and neuroendocrine outcomes. 
In Fluoxetine: Pharmacology, mechanisms of action and potential side effects (Pinna, G. ed), Nova 
Publishers. 
119. Rayen, I. et al. (2011) Fluoxetine during development reverses the effects of prenatal stress on 
depressive-like behavior and hippocampal neurogenesis in adolescence. PLoS One 6 (9), e24003. 
120. Glover, M.E. and Clinton, S.M. (2016) Of rodents and humans: A comparative review of the 
neurobehavioral effects of early life SSRI exposure in preclinical and clinical research. Int J Dev 
Neurosci 51, 50-72. 
121. Gentile, S. (2011) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor exposure during early pregnancy and 
the risk of birth defects. Acta Psychiatr Scand 123 (4), 266-75. 
 40 
 
122. Malm, H. et al. (2016) Gestational Exposure to Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and 
Offspring Psychiatric Disorders: A National Register-Based Study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry 55 (5), 359-66. 
123. Molyneaux, E. et al. (2014) Antidepressant treatment for postnatal depression. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev (9), CD002018. 
124. Gyurak, A. et al. (2016) Frontoparietal Activation During Response Inhibition Predicts 
Remission to Antidepressants in Patients With Major Depression. Biol Psychiatry 79 (4), 274-81. 
125. Linden, D.E. (2006) How psychotherapy changes the brain--the contribution of functional 
neuroimaging. Mol Psychiatry 11 (6), 528-38. 
126. McDonagh, M.S. et al. (2014) Depression drug treatment outcomes in pregnancy and the 
postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 124 (3), 526-34. 
127. De Crescenzo, F. et al. (2014) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for post-partum 
depression (PPD): a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. J Affect Disord 152-154, 39-44. 
128. Muzik, M. et al. (2015) Mom Power: preliminary outcomes of a group intervention to improve 
mental health and parenting among high-risk mothers. Arch Womens Ment Health 18 (3), 507-21. 
129. Sockol, L.E. (2015) A systematic review of the efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for 
treating and preventing perinatal depression. J Affect Disord 177, 7-21. 
130. Stern, J.M. (1996) Somatosensation and Maternal Care in Norway Rats. In Parental Care: 
Evolution, Mechanisms, and Adaptive Significance (Rosenblatt, J.S. and Snowden, C.T. eds), pp. 
243-294, Academic Press. 
131. S.G., F. et al. (2008) The development of maternal touch across the first year of life. Early 
Human Development 84, 363-370. 
132. Herrera, E. et al. (2004) Maternal touch and maternal child-directed speech: effects of depressed 
mood in the postnatal period. J Affect Disord 81 (1), 29-39. 
 41 
 
133. Ystrom, E. (2012) Breastfeeding cessation and symptoms of anxiety and depression: a 
longitudinal cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 12, 36. 
134. Figueiredo, B. et al. (2014) Breastfeeding is negatively affected by prenatal depression and 
reduces postpartum depression. Psychol Med 44 (5), 927-36. 
135. Dias, C.C. and Figueiredo, B. (2015) Breastfeeding and depression: a systematic review of the 
literature. J Affect Disord 171, 142-54. 
136. Miller, S.M. et al. (2010) GABA(A) receptor antagonism in the ventrocaudal periaqueductal 
gray increases anxiety in the anxiety-resistant postpartum rat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 95 (4), 
457-65. 
137. Pawluski, J.L. et al. (2009) Offspring-exposure reduces depressive-like behaviour in the 
parturient female rat. Behav Brain Res 197 (1), 55-61. 
138. Maniam, J. and Morris, M.J. (2010) Palatable cafeteria diet ameliorates anxiety and depression-
like symptoms following an adverse early environment. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35 (5), 717-28. 
139. Eklund, M.B. et al. (2009) Differential effects of repeated long and brief maternal separation on 
behaviour and neuroendocrine parameters in Wistar dams. Behav Brain Res 203 (1), 69-75. 
140. Boccia, M.L. et al. (2007) Repeated long separations from pups produce depression-like 
behavior in rat mothers. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32 (1), 65-71. 
141. Liu, Q. et al. (2007) Molecular genetic visualization of a rare subset of unmyelinated sensory 
neurons that may detect gentle touch. Nat Neurosci 10 (8), 946-8. 
142. Vrontou, S. et al. (2013) Genetic identification of C fibres that detect massage-like stroking of 
hairy skin in vivo. Nature 493 (7434), 669-73. 
143. A.L., K. et al. (1990) Breastfeeding and mother-infant interactions. . Journal of Reproductive 
and Infant Psychology, 8, 185-194. 
144. Heinrichs, M. et al. (2001) Effects of suckling on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responses 
to psychosocial stress in postpartum lactating women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86 (10), 4798-804. 
 42 
 
145. Feijo, L. et al. (2006) Mothers' depressed mood and anxiety levels are reduced after massaging 
their preterm infants. Infant Behav Dev 29 (3), 476-80. 
146. Bigelow, A. et al. (2012) Effect of mother/infant skin-to-skin contact on postpartum depressive 
symptoms and maternal physiological stress. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 41 (3), 369-82. 
147. Shiau, S.-H. and Randomized controlled trial of kangaroo care with fullterm infants: effects on 
maternal anxiety, breastmilk maturation, breast engorgement, and breastfeeding status., Dissertation 
Abstr. International, 1998, p. 5332. 
148. Van den Bergh, B.R. et al. (2005) Antenatal maternal anxiety and stress and the 
neurobehavioural development of the fetus and child: links and possible mechanisms. A review. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 29 (2), 237-58. 
149. Feldman, R. (2015) Sensitive periods in human social development: New insights from research 
on oxytocin, synchrony, and high-risk parenting. Dev Psychopathol 27 (2), 369-95. 
150. Luo, L. et al. (2015) Neural systems and hormones mediating attraction to infant and child 
faces. Front Psychol 6, 970. 
151. Moses-Kolko, E.L. et al. (2011) Rapid habituation of ventral striatal response to reward receipt 
in postpartum depression. Biol Psychiatry 70 (4), 395-9. 
152. Kim, P. et al. (2016) Socioeconomic disadvantages and neural sensitivity to infant cry: role of 
maternal distress. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 
153. Moses-Kolko, E.L. et al. (2016) The influence of motherhood on neural systems for reward 
processing in low income, minority, young women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 66, 130-7. 
154. Laurent, H.K. and Ablow, J.C. (2013) A face a mother could love: depression-related maternal 
neural responses to infant emotion faces. Soc Neurosci 8 (3), 228-39. 
155. Swain, J.E. (2008) Baby stimuli and the parent brain: functional neuroimaging of the neural 
substrates of parent-infant attachment. Psychiatry (Edgmont) 5 (8), 28-36. 
 43 
 
156. Huettel, S.A. et al. (2009) Functional magnetic Resonance Imaging, 2nd edn., Sinauer 
Associates, Inc. 
157. Numan, M. et al. (2006) Maternal Behavior, Elsevier. 
158. Agrati, D. and Lonstein, J.S. (2016) Affective changes during the postpartum period: Influences 
of genetic and experiential factors. Horm Behav 77, 141-52. 
159. Association, A.P. (2013) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 5th edn. 
160. Association, A.P. (2000) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th edn. 
161. Ragan, C.M. and Lonstein, J.S. (2014) Differential postpartum sensitivity to the anxiety-
modulating effects of offspring contact is associated with innate anxiety and brainstem levels of 
dopamine beta-hydroxylase in female laboratory rats. Neuroscience 256, 433-44. 
162. Fleming, A.S. et al. (1997) Cortisol, hedonics, and maternal responsiveness in human mothers. 
Horm Behav 32 (2), 85-98. 
163. Coates, A.O. et al. (2004) Detection of postpartum depression and anxiety in a large health plan. 
J Behav Health Serv Res 31 (2), 117-33. 
164. Agrati, D. et al. (2015) Maternal anxiety from pregnancy to 2 years postpartum: transactional 
patterns of maternal early adversity and child temperament. Arch Womens Ment Health 18 (5), 693-
705. 
165. Heron, J. et al. (2004) The course of anxiety and depression through pregnancy and the 
postpartum in a community sample. J Affect Disord 80 (1), 65-73. 
166. Martini, J. et al. (2015) Risk factors and course patterns of anxiety and depressive disorders 
during pregnancy and after delivery: a prospective-longitudinal study. J Affect Disord 175, 385-95. 
167. Verreault, N. et al. (2014) Rates and risk factors associated with depressive symptoms during 
pregnancy and with postpartum onset. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol 35 (3), 84-91. 
168. Falah-Hassani, K. et al. (2016) Prevalence and risk factors for comorbid postpartum depressive 
symptomatology and anxiety. J Affect Disord 198, 142-7. 
 44 
 
169. Postpartum Depression: Action Towards, C. and Treatment, C. (2015) Heterogeneity of 
postpartum depression: a latent class analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 2 (1), 59-67. 
170. Grigoriadis, S. et al. (2011) Mood and anxiety disorders in a sample of Canadian perinatal 
women referred for psychiatric care. Arch Womens Ment Health 14 (4), 325-33. 
171. Skouteris, H. et al. (2009) Depression and anxiety through pregnancy and the early postpartum: 
an examination of prospective relationships. J Affect Disord 113 (3), 303-8. 
172. Prenoveau, J. et al. (2013) Postpartum GAD is a risk factor for postpartum MDD: the course 
and longitudinal relationships of postpartum GAD and MDD. Depress Anxiety 30 (6), 506-14. 
173. Ross, L.E. et al. (2003) Measurement issues in postpartum depression part 1: anxiety as a 
feature of postpartum depression. Arch Womens Ment Health 6 (1), 51-7. 
174. Teissedre, F. and Chabrol, H. (2004) [A study of the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale 
(EPDS) on 859 mothers: detection of mothers at risk for postpartum depression]. Encephale 30 (4), 
376-81. 
175. Brouwers, E.P. et al. (2001) Does the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale measure anxiety? J 
Psychosom Res 51 (5), 659-63. 
176. Rowe, H.J. et al. (2008) The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale detects but does not 
distinguish anxiety disorders from depression in mothers of infants. Arch Womens Ment Health 11 
(2), 103-8. 
177. Yim, I.S. et al. (2015) Biological and psychosocial predictors of postpartum depression: 
systematic review and call for integration. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 11, 99-137. 
178. Dennis, C.L. et al. (2012) Epidemiology of postpartum depressive symptoms among Canadian 
women: regional and national results from a cross-sectional survey. Can J Psychiatry 57 (9), 537-46. 
179. Milgrom, J. et al. (2008) Antenatal risk factors for postnatal depression: a large prospective 
study. J Affect Disord 108 (1-2), 147-57. 
 45 
 
180. Dennis, C.L. and Dowswell, T. (2013) Psychosocial and psychological interventions for 
preventing postpartum depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2), CD001134. 
181. Serati, M. et al. (2016) Perinatal Major Depression Biomarkers: A systematic review. J Affect 
Disord 193, 391-404. 
182. de Moura, A.C. et al. (2016) Global Histone H4 Acetylation in the Olfactory Bulb of Lactating 
Rats with Different Patterns of Maternal Behavior. Cell Mol Neurobiol 36 (7), 1209-13. 
183. Bell, A.F. et al. (2015) Interaction between oxytocin receptor DNA methylation and genotype is 
associated with risk of postpartum depression in women without depression in pregnancy. Front 
Genet 6, 243. 
184. Misri, S. et al. (2015) Perinatal Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Assessment and Treatment. J 
Womens Health (Larchmt) 24 (9), 762-70. 
185. Dennis, C.L. and Chung-Lee, L. (2006) Postpartum depression help-seeking barriers and 
maternal treatment preferences: a qualitative systematic review. Birth 33 (4), 323-31. 
186. O'Connor, E. et al. (2016) Primary Care Screening for and Treatment of Depression in Pregnant 
and Postpartum Women: Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services 
Task Force. JAMA 315 (4), 388-406. 
187. Siu, A.L. et al. (2016) Screening for Depression in Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force 
Recommendation Statement. JAMA 315 (4), 380-7. 
 
 
