 CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1115
ABSTRACT: Cardiac arrest in patients on mechanical support is a new 
phenomenon brought about by the increased use of this therapy in patients 
with end-stage heart failure. This American Heart Association scientific 
statement highlights the recognition and treatment of cardiovascular 
collapse or cardiopulmonary arrest in an adult or pediatric patient who 
has a ventricular assist device or total artificial heart. Specific, expert 
consensus recommendations are provided for the role of external chest 
compressions in such patients.
M
echanical circulatory support (MCS) has evolved from a rarely used therapy 
reserved for the most critically ill hospitalized patients to an accepted long-
term outpatient therapy for treating patients with advanced heart failure. This 
growth is attributable to improved technology, improved survival, reduced adverse 
event profiles, greater reliability and mechanical durability, and limited numbers of 
organs available for donation. With the number of patients supported by durable 
MCS systems increasing in the community, so too is the need for emergency care 
providers to receive specific guidance on how to assess and treat a patient with 
MCS who is unresponsive or hypotensive.
No evidence-based or consensus recommendations currently exist for the evalua-
tion and treatment of cardiovascular emergencies in patients with MCS. Because of 
the unique characteristics of mechanical support, these patients have physical find-
ings that cannot be interpreted the same as for patients without MCS. For example, 
stable patients supported by a durable, continuous-flow ventricular assist device 
(VAD) often do not have a palpable pulse. Unfortunately, different and sometimes 
conflicting instructions are given by hospital providers and emergency medical ser-
vices (EMS) directors to EMS and other healthcare personnel on core resuscitative 
practices such as the role of external chest compressions in such a patient who 
suddenly becomes or is found unresponsive.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this scientific statement is to describe the common types of 
MCS devices that emergency healthcare providers may encounter and to pres-
ent expert, consensus-based recommendations for the evaluation and resusci-
tation of adult and pediatric patients with MCS with suspected cardiovascular 
collapse or cardiac arrest. These recommendations focus initially on emergency 
first-response providers, whether outside or inside the hospital, with additional 
sections on advanced care that may be provided in the emergency department 
or in-hospital settings.
Mary Ann Peberdy, MD, 
FAHA, Co-Chair
Jason A. Gluck, DO, Co-Chair
Joseph P
. Ornato, MD, FAHA
Christian A. Bermudez, MD
Russell E. Griffin, LP
, FP-C
Vigneshwar Kasirajan, MD
Richard E. Kerber, MD, 
FAHA†
Eldrin F. Lewis, MD, MPH, 
FAHA
Mark S. Link, MD
Corinne Miller, RN
Jeffrey J. Teuteberg, MD
Ravi Thiagarajan, MD, MPH
Robert M. Weiss, MD
Brian O’Neil, MD
On behalf of the American 
Heart Association Emer-
gency Cardiovascular Care 
Committee; Council on 
Cardiopulmonary, Critical 
Care, Perioperative, and 
Resuscitation; Council on 
Cardiovascular Diseases 
in the Young; Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia; Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing; and Council on 
Clinical Cardiology
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation in Adults and 
Children With Mechanical Circulatory Support
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation ◼ emergency 
medicine ◼ heart arrest ◼ heart, 
artificial ◼ heart-assist devices
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
†Deceased.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1116
CONSENSUS PROCESS
The need for standardized recommendations for the 
emergency treatment of acutely unstable patients with 
MCS was identified during the 2014 meeting of the 
American Heart Association (AHA) Science Subcom-
mittee. A writing group was commissioned to review 
the current literature and to develop consensus-derived 
recommendations for the initial treatment of these 
patients. Members of the writing group were chosen 
for their combined expertise in MCS, cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR), emergency care, and circulatory 
support nursing. The writing group held a series of tele-
conferences and webinars from October 2014 to De-
cember 2015. An extensive literature search was per-
formed and reviewed on the initial phone conference, 
and a manuscript outline was developed. Sections of 
the outline were assigned to group members, and the 
first draft of each section was sent to the chair to be 
compiled into a working document. The document was 
available to all writing group members in Dropbox, and 
all authors had continuous access to the documents to 
provide input. Revised versions of the manuscript were 
sent to all writing group members until consensus was 
achieved.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The AHA has a strict conflict-of-interest policy for all 
writing groups; however, the organization understands 
that experts who have an actual or perceived conflict 
of interest can strengthen the process as long as these 
conflicts are transparent. Each writing group member 
is required to declare all relevant, current conflicts, 
and >50% of the writing group must be free of rel-
evant conflicts. The chair is not permitted to have any 
relevant industry-related conflicts. The writing group 
members must update an electronic file of conflict-of-
interest data from the beginning of the work until the 
article has been published, and each member is asked 
to report any new relevant conflicts at the beginning 
of each teleconference. See the Writing Group Disclo-
sures table for details on individual conflict-of-interest 
reporting.
INDICATIONS FOR MCS
Nearly all patients who receive MCS have end-stage sys-
tolic heart failure. Although there are only a limited num-
ber of approved devices, they differ in the indications for 
their placement, their configuration, and the means by 
which they pump blood. Long-term MCS devices suitable 
for nonhospitalized patients are placed largely for 1 of 
2 indications:
1. Bridge to transplantation refers to patients await-
ing heart transplantation whose heart failure 
progresses despite medical therapy. In such 
cases, MCS is used as a bridge until a donor 
organ becomes available.
2. Destination therapy refers to patients with 
advanced systolic heart failure who are not candi-
dates for transplantation because of factors such 
as comorbidities or advanced age. In this popu-
lation, MCS is the destination itself, as opposed 
to transplantation, and patients will typically live 
the remainder of their lives on mechanical sup-
port. This population is growing rapidly, with some 
patients being supported for many years.
These 2 designations are fluid. Patients can have 
their status changed from bridge to transplantation to 
destination therapy or vice versa on the basis of clinical 
changes.
MCS CONFIGURATION
MCS can support function of the left ventricle (LV) with 
a left VAD (LVAD), the right ventricle (RV) with a right 
VAD (RVAD), or both ventricles with a biventricular assist 
device. A total artificial heart (TAH) replaces the heart 
itself. Most patients who are discharged home with MCS 
currently have a durable LVAD. Thus, LVADs serve as the 
basis for most of these guidelines, although all current 
devices that may be encountered in the community are 
discussed.
Most devices are implanted inside the thoracic/ab-
dominal cavity (intracorporeal). These devices pump 
blood from the weakened ventricle back into the circu-
lation. With an LVAD, blood enters the device from the 
LV and is pumped to the central aortic circulation, “as-
sisting” the heart. The outflow cannula is typically anas-
tomosed to the ascending aorta, just above the aortic 
valve (Figure 1A).
With an RVAD, the inflow is the RV or atrium, and the 
outflow is the main pulmonary artery, just distal to the 
pulmonic valve (Figure 1B). When an LVAD and an RVAD 
are used in the same patient simultaneously, the patient 
is referred to as having biventricular support or a biven-
tricular assist device, indicating that both ventricles are 
supported mechanically (Figure 1C).
Intracorporeal devices are connected to a control-
ler that controls and powers the pump via a subcuta-
neously tunneled driveline that exits the skin, typically 
in the abdomen. The controller houses the electron-
ics that run the device and monitor its function. The 
controller is connected to rechargeable batteries that 
provide its power. The device can also receive power 
from a base unit, typically located at the patient’s 
home, or via adapters to other power sources such 
as a grounded electric outlet or car battery. These 
VAD components are depicted in Figure 2 for the most 
commonly placed VADs.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1117
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
LVADs can have 2 distinctly different mechanisms of 
blood flow; therefore, they are different physiologically. 
There are older and rarely used pulsatile-flow LVADs and 
the current generation of continuous-flow LVADs. Be-
cause palpable pulses are often absent in patients with 
continuous-flow LVADs, it is important to understand the 
differences in the physical examination and in methods 
that can help rescuers determine if an unresponsive or 
mentally altered patient is, in fact, in cardiac arrest or 
circulatory collapse.
Figure 1. Ventricular assist device (VAD) configurations.  
Cartoon illustrating graphically the support intended with a left VAD (A), right VAD (B), or biventricular assist device (C). LA indi-
cates left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; and RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 2. Intracorporeal pumps.  
Left figure is reproduced with permission from HeartWare. Right figure (HeartMate II LVAD External Equipment Pocket Control-
ler) is reproduced with permission of St. Jude Medical, copyright © 2016. All rights reserved. HeartMate, Pocket Controller, and 
St. Jude Medical are trademarks of St. Jude Medical, Inc or its related companies.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1118
PULSATILE-FLOW LVADS
Most early generations of LVADs had pulsatile pumps, 
which filled and emptied a volume-displacement cham-
ber sequentially, generating pulsatile flow similar to the 
native heart. Given the advantages of continuous-flow 
devices, intracorporeal pulsatile devices are no longer 
available commercially. However, paracorporeal (the 
pump sits outside of the patient’s body) pulsatile devices 
are still in use (Figure 3). Although not commonly used in 
adults, pulsatile LVADs remain the most commonly used 
LVAD in children but are typically not seen in the outpa-
tient setting in the United States.
The volume-displacement chamber in a paracorporeal 
device is a clear, thermoplastic polymer chamber divid-
ed by a flexible membrane. One side of the membrane 
is in contact with blood, and the other is in contact with 
air. The device is powered by compressed air, which is 
shuttled into and out of the air side of the air chamber, 
causing the flexible membrane to move back and forth. 
When air enters the air chamber, the membrane displac-
es the blood, emptying the blood-filled chamber. When 
air is withdrawn, the membrane shifts the opposite direc-
tion, allowing blood to fill the blood-filled chamber. The 
device sequentially fills, and unidirectional blood flow is 
maintained by mechanical valves on the inflow and out-
flow cannulas.
These pumps typically sense when the chamber is 
full, which then triggers ejection. The blood-filled cham-
ber fills and empties at a rate dependent on the pump 
preload. The pumps maintain decompression of the 
LV by pumping more quickly when preload increases 
and pumping less quickly when preload decreases. The 
native heart continues to contract in patients with a 
continuous-flow device, but the filling and emptying of 
the device is not synchronous with the heart. Because 
the flow from pulsatile-flow LVADs mimics that of the 
native heart, these patients have a detectable pulse on 
physical examination that reflects forward cardiac out-
put and perfusion. However, because a pulsatile-flow 
device fills and empties asynchronously with the native 
heart, the pulse generated by the device may be differ-
ent from the heart rate of the native heart obtained by 
electrocardiographic leads and can cause an irregular 
palpable pulse.
CONTINUOUS-FLOW LVADS
Continuous-flow devices account for the majority of dura-
ble LVADs implanted today.1 These devices contain a mo-
tor that turns an impeller rotating at high speed inside its 
housing. The impeller accelerates blood either forward 
with axial-flow pumps, in which the spin is in the same 
axis as blood flow (Figure 4A), or outward with centrifu-
gal pumps, in which the spin is perpendicular to outflow 
(Figure 4B).2 The ability of the pump to generate flow is 
directly dependent on its mechanics and pump speed, 
typically a fixed number of revolutions per minute that 
is adjusted and set by the VAD team before discharge, 
although some pumps might have patient variability op-
tions. Pump flow is heavily dependent on preload, native 
contractility, and afterload.
Conditions that alter preload in the heart affect the 
loading of the pump and can influence device flow. For 
example, hypovolemia, tension pneumothorax, or peri-
Figure 3. Paracorporeal pumps.  
BiVAD indicates biventricular assist device; and PVAD, percutaneous ventricular assist device. Left figure is reprinted with the 
permission of Thoratec Corporation. Right figure is reproduced with permission from Berlin Heart GmbH.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1119
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
cardial tamponade decreases preload and can cause 
circulatory failure. When the VAD is on the left side, its 
preload is also dependent on the filling from the RV. In 
such cases, RV contractility influences flow and can be 
impaired by RV failure or arrhythmia. An increase in pul-
monary vascular resistance by hypoxia, hypercarbia, or 
obstruction of pulmonary blood flow (ie, pulmonary em-
bolism) will decrease LV preload and LVAD flow.
Afterload in the clinical setting is essentially the 
blood pressure (BP). Pulmonary hypertension can result 
in right-sided heart failure, and systemic hypertension 
can affect left-sided pump function. Patients with VAD 
are typically not able to increase their cardiac output 
adequately when systemic vascular resistance is low in 
conditions such as vasodilatory septic shock, postseda-
tion, or anaphylaxis. This can result in inadequate tissue 
perfusion despite normal device function. VAD-support-
ed patients are at higher risk for complications during 
anesthesia and sedation.3–5
Continuous-flow LVADs result in an unconventional, 
unique physiological state of hemodynamically stable 
pulseless electric activity (PEA), which we refer to in 
this population as pseudo-PEA. Patients supported by 
continuous-flow MCS devices may not have a palpable 
pulse, and their normal heart sounds will be replaced 
with an audible “VAD hum.”1 Vital signs such as nonin-
vasive BP (NIBP) or oxygen saturation may be difficult 
to obtain. These factors can easily confuse healthcare 
providers rendering care to these patients. In a patient 
without MCS, cardiac arrest and resuscitation decision 
algorithms rely on the presence or absence of a pulse 
to identify complete cardiovascular collapse and car-
diac arrest. Lack of a pulse alone in a patient with a 
continuous-flow LVAD is common and cannot be used 
as a means to determine whether a patient is in cardiac 
arrest or a low-flow, low-perfusion state.
BP can be obtained noninvasively with a manual 
sphygmomanometer and a Doppler ultrasound probe.6 
Doppler BP measurements have excellent success rates 
of ≈95%, correlating accurately with invasively measured 
mean arterial pressure (MAP) and systolic arterial pres-
sure.6 One potential pitfall in using Doppler to assess BP 
in unresponsive patients with continuous-flow LVADs is 
that the urgency of the situation may lead providers to 
inadvertently exert too much pressure on the Doppler 
probe itself, leading to the erroneous conclusion that the 
BP is nondetectable.
Automated BP monitors are accurate, but their success 
rate in obtaining a BP is only ≈50% because of reduced 
pulse pressure in patients with a continuous-flow LVAD.6,7 
Unfortunately, most EMS systems currently lack Doppler 
equipment. In such cases, an NIBP can be used with the 
above limitations.7 Similarly, in patients with significantly re-
duced pulse pressure, pulse oximetry may be inaccurate.
Medical simulation can be used to teach emergency 
healthcare providers how to assess both normal and ab-
normal findings in patients with a VAD and allow them to 
safely practice interventions that might be needed in an 
emergency.8
COMMON COMPLICATIONS RESULTING IN 
INSTABILITY
The 2 most common causes of pump failure are discon-
nection of the power and failure of the driveline. There-
fore, the first step in assessing an unresponsive, mental-
ly altered, or hypotensive patient with a VAD is to ensure 
that all connections are secure and an adequate power 
source is connected. Although the current generation of 
continuous-flow LVADs is quite reliable and the incidence 
of pump dysfunction/stoppage is low, an interruption of 
power from the batteries or through the controller or a 
driveline malfunction may lead to pump stoppage.
Patients with a current LVAD system typically have 2 
batteries connected to power the device. If both batter-
ies are disconnected or completely drained of charge, 
pump dysfunction/stoppage can result (Figure 2). Con-
troller malfunction, damage, or disconnection can also 
lead to pump dysfunction/stoppage. All patients should 
have a backup controller with them, as well as backup 
batteries for emergency replacement in case of damage 
or malfunction. EMS providers must keep patients and 
Figure 4. Axial vs centrifugal-
flow pump design.  
A, Blood flow is parallel to spin 
axis. The image is reprinted with the 
permission of Thoratec Corporation. 
B, Blood flow is perpendicular to 
spin axis. The image is reprinted with 
permission from HeartWare.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1120
their backup equipment together at all times because 
replacement equipment may be limited or nonexistent 
at receiving hospitals, particularly at non-VAD centers. 
To reiterate, when a patient with MCS is transported by 
EMS, all of the patient’s VAD equipment must accom-
pany him or her to the hospital to ensure continued me-
chanical support.
The driveline that connects the controller to the de-
vice is a potentially vulnerable component and is subject 
to wear, damage, or kinking, which can result in device 
malfunction (Figure 2). Although driveline wiring has built-
in redundancy as a safety measure, driveline trauma can 
cause internal damage and lead to pump failure. Dam-
age can be acute such as a cutting or crush injury or 
the result of chronic stress/fatigue on the line. In these 
settings, there will often be alarms preceding or accom-
panying the pump stoppage, but alarms will cease once 
the batteries are drained.
There is a risk of de novo thrombus formation within 
the pump, which can cause hemolysis and a drop in flow. 
Blood clots can embolize from the LV or left atrial cavi-
ties, particularly if the patient develops atrial fibrillation. 
Pump thrombosis typically develops gradually and is 
accompanied by altered pump parameters and alarms. 
There is often physical and laboratory evidence of hemo-
lysis such as jaundice, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, 
low haptoglobin, and elevated plasma-free hemoglobin. 
Some patients may experience mild symptoms and be 
well enough to seek nonemergent medical attention, 
but others may have profound and acute cardiac insuf-
ficiency, leading to syncope, ventricular arrhythmias, or 
cardiovascular collapse/cardiac arrest. It is important to 
understand that continuous-flow LVADs display a cardiac 
output in liters per minute that can be easily seen by EMS 
and other first responders; however, this number is not 
an actual cardiac output. This “cardiac output” number 
is a calculation based on the speed and power consump-
tion of the unit and does not represent true flow. When 
the LVAD is functioning properly, this output can be used 
as a surrogate for flow. However, thrombus formation 
in the device actually decreases flow and can therefore 
cause hypotension, but because the device has to work 
harder to try to maintain the set flow, the cardiac output 
paradoxically reads high. Because of this risk of throm-
bus formation, all patients on MCS are anticoagulated. 
EMS and emergency department providers need to be 
cognizant of this and to consider bleeding, hemolysis, or 
anemia as the potential reason for hypotension or shock 
in these patients.
Additional causes of poor pump flow are RV dysfunc-
tion, suboptimal pump orientation, or compromise of the 
inflow/outflow cannula. As noted previously, LVADs are 
preload dependent and rely on RV function to provide 
adequate filling to maintain adequate flow. Factors that 
cause or exacerbate preexisting RV dysfunction can af-
fect pump performance and lead to decompensation 
despite normal pump function. Inotropes can be used to 
treat RV dysfunction when that is felt to be contributing 
to hemodynamic compromise.
Preexisting RV dysfunction is common before LVAD 
implantation because of the effect of the primary car-
diomyopathy, pulmonary hypertension, or both. RV dys-
function usually presents in the perioperative setting 
and, in some cases, requires prolonged inotropic sup-
port postoperatively. In contrast, some patients develop 
late RV dysfunction and require inotropic support. RV 
dysfunction typically affects functionality, quality of life, 
and symptoms. However, it can also affect LVAD flow 
and predispose to LVAD dysfunction. Conditions that de-
crease RV function (ie, right-sided ischemia, pulmonary 
embolism, tachyarrhythmias, profound dehydration) 
need to be considered when there is pump dysfunction 
and inadequate flow.
Although significant new ischemic events or pulmo-
nary emboli are rare in patients with an LVAD, tachyar-
rhythmias are common. Many tachyarrhythmias are tol-
erated well in patients with an LVAD, although they can 
affect RV filling. Atrial tachyarrhythmias such as atrial 
fibrillation usually do not affect RV function adversely 
except when preexisting RV function is truly marginal. 
However, ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fi-
brillation (VF) can be accompanied by a range of hemo-
dynamic presentations. Patients whose systemic flow 
is coming primarily from the LVAD may be surprisingly 
stable hemodynamically, whereas some may present 
with circulatory collapse, usually caused by acute com-
promise of RV function and decreased LV filling. Most 
patients have an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator or 
a cardiac resynchronization device with defibrillation ca-
pability implanted before LVAD placement, which can de-
liver antitachycardia pacing or cardioversion. However, 
in the setting of electrolyte abnormalities or acute isch-
emia, VT/VF may persist and compromise pump flow 
with subsequent clinical decompensation.
Not all patients with an LVAD who are in VT or VF will 
be unconscious. These devices may be able to provide 
enough forward flow despite the arrhythmia to maintain 
consciousness and, in some cases, even adequate per-
fusion. Similar to the decision made for patients with-
out VADs, the decision to cardiovert (either chemical or 
electric) or to defibrillate a patient with an LVAD with VT 
or VF is based on the adequacy of mental status and 
perfusion. Except for patients who have a TAH, cardio-
version and defibrillation should be performed for the 
same indications as used in the general population, with 
the understanding that perfusion in these patients does 
not equate to a palpable pulse.
Although LVADs provide near-complete support of the 
cardiac output, most patients still have residual native 
heart function. With LVAD pump dysfunction/stoppage, 
the native heart fills and may provide some forward flow 
to support the circulation for a period of time, the dura-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1121
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tion of which differs from patient to patient, depending 
on the severity of underlying cardiac dysfunction. Severe 
aortic insufficiency can further exacerbate LV failure and 
decrease the contribution of the native LV to forward 
flow. Occasionally, patients have their aortic valve over-
sewn during LVAD implantation because of underlying 
aortic insufficiency. These patients cannot generate any 
forward blood flow on their own and are completely de-
pendent on flow from the MCS device.
COMMON NONCARDIOVASCULAR PROBLEMS 
IN PATIENTS WITH MCS
The most common adverse events during long-term me-
chanical support are infection (particularly in the drive-
line), bleeding, and stroke. Meticulous care is needed 
to keep the driveline free of infection, but despite inten-
sive care, the rate of driveline infections is 7% to 18% 
in bridge-to-transplantation populations and up to 32% 
in destination-therapy populations.9,10 Device infection or 
other infectious sources may lead to sepsis. Pumps are 
afterload sensitive and will increase flow in the setting 
of reduced afterload up to a point, but patients can still 
develop septic shock once the ability of the pump to 
augment forward flow is overcome by the reduction in 
systemic vascular resistance. The immediate, prehospi-
tal treatment of suspected septic shock should be the 
same as for patients without an LVAD, with fluid resusci-
tation and vasopressors as needed to maintain an MAP 
of 65 to 80 mm 
Hg. With hypovolemia and diminished 
preload, pump flows are low, resulting in hypotension 
or shock. Figure 5 provides a general approach to the 
hypotensive patient with an LVAD.
Patients with MCS are usually anticoagulated with 
antiplatelet agents and warfarin. When these agents 
are combined with continuous-flow physiology, there 
is significant bleeding risk, particularly in mucosal sur-
faces such as the intestine. Continuous-flow MCS de-
vices are associated with an acquired von Willebrand 
syndrome, which also makes patients more likely to 
bleed spontaneously.11 Arteriovenous malformations in 
the gut are more likely to form in patients with contin-
uous-flow devices and reduced pulsations, and these 
are a common source of gastrointestinal bleeding. 
Rates of gastrointestinal bleeding with continuous-flow 
devices range from 9% to 22% in various series and 
are a common cause of non–pump-related hemody-
namic instability.11
There is still an increased risk of pump thrombosis, 
thromboembolism, and stroke despite therapeutic anti-
coagulation.12 The rate of both hemorrhagic and isch-
emic stroke is 4% to 7% per year with continuous-flow 
pumps.11 A significant neurological event may result in 
a patient being found unresponsive despite a normally 
functioning device. This scenario of an unconscious pa-
tient without a pulse is perhaps the most confusing to 
assess because stroke patients may be unconscious 
with completely adequate flow yet appear as though 
they are in cardiac arrest because they may have no 
palpable pulse.
Patients with a VAD can develop non–pump-related 
medical issues (eg, hypoglycemia, drug-overdose hy-
poxemia) similar to patients without a VAD, resulting in 
alterations in mental status and hemodynamics. The clin-
ical scenarios discussed above can either contribute to 
or mimic a cardiac arrest in a nonpulsatile patient. They 
can also be the inciting factor for hemodynamic collapse 
or altered mental status/coma.
For these reasons, these conditions should be con-
sidered, identified, and treated promptly in altered or 
hemodynamically compromised patients.
ASSESSMENT OF FLOW AND PERFUSION IN 
PATIENTS WITH AN LVAD
It is important to understand the difference between 
blood flow and perfusion when assessing any patient 
with suspected cardiovascular hemodynamic instability, 
especially patients with an LVAD, in whom the peripheral 
arterial pulse is not a reliable indicator. Flow represents 
the forward movement of blood through the systemic 
circulation. It can be either adequate or inadequate to 
provide sufficient oxygen delivery to sustain tissue per-
fusion. Assessment of adequate tissue perfusion is the 
most important factor in determining the need for circu-
latory assistance such as chest compressions.
In patients without an LVAD, an MAP >60 mm 
Hg will 
usually still provide adequate tissue perfusion. In the non-
invasive assessment of the BP of a patient with a contin-
uous-flow LVAD, use of a manual BP cuff and a Doppler is 
the recommended approach, with NIBP as a secondary 
option because of the limitations of NIBP assessment in 
this population. The lack of pulse or BP as obtained by a 
sphygmomanometer or automatic NIBP monitor is not a 
reliable indicator of either flow or perfusion in a patient 
with an LVAD.
Clinical findings such as skin color and capillary refill 
are reasonable predictors of the presence of adequate 
flow and perfusion, especially in MCS-supported pulse-
less patients.
Waveform capnography, which measures and displays 
the partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide (Petco2) in 
exhaled air, is used frequently to track respiration in pa-
tients undergoing mechanical ventilation, but it can also 
be used to track perfusion in patients in whom more com-
mon physical findings used to assess perfusion are not 
reliable. Ventilation in a healthy person with a normal car-
diac output and metabolism/body temperature and no 
significant ventilation-perfusion gradient typically results 
in a Petco2 of 35 to 40 mm 
Hg. During low-flow states 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1122
such as during shock or cardiac arrest with or without 
chest compressions, the Petco2 value reflects primarily 
systemic perfusion.13–16 Cardiac output and systemic 
venous return decrease substantially in very-low-flow 
states, causing CO2 to build up inside cells.13,14,17 With 
the decrease in systemic venous return, less CO2 returns 
to the lungs, causing the Petco2 to decrease. A Petco2 
level of 20 mm 
Hg corresponds to a cardiac output of 
≈1.5 L/min in animal models.15,18 Within seconds after 
return of spontaneous circulation, the improved cardiac 
output delivers large quantities of CO2-rich venous blood 
to the lungs, and the Petco2 climbs suddenly to normal 
or above-normal levels.13,14,17 The dramatic change from 
a low to a high Petco2 as a result of venous CO2 washout 
is often the first clinical indicator that return of spontane-
ous circulation has occurred.
The 2015 AHA guidelines update for CPR and emer-
gency cardiovascular care recommends the use of wave-
form capnography to confirm advanced airway placement 
and to track the quality of chest compressions during 
resuscitation.19 An increasing number of EMS providers 
and hospitals have upgraded or are upgrading their car-
diac monitors to include waveform capnography. The 
significance of this evolution in clinical care is that the 
Petco2 value can help rescuers determine whether pulse-
less patients with an LVAD are unconscious because their 
device has failed and their systemic perfusion is critically 
low or they are unconscious for an unrelated reason with 
a functioning LVAD. The former may benefit from chest 
compressions, whereas chest compressions would not 
be indicated in the latter group. A Petco2 value of <20 
mm 
Hg in an unresponsive, correctly intubated, pulseless 
patient with an LVAD would seem to be a reasonable in-
dicator of poor systemic perfusion and should prompt 
rescuers to initiate chest compressions. Conversely, a 
higher Petco2 in an unresponsive, correctly intubated, 
pulseless patient with an LVAD strongly suggests that the 
patient does not need chest compressions, and rescu-
ers should search for other noncardiovascular, non-LVAD 
reasons for the patient’s altered mental state.
Pulse oximetry can be used in patients with an LVAD; 
however, the results may not be accurate because of the 
lack of pulsatile flow. Peripheral pulse oximetry within 
normal limits is likely believable.
Conversely, a low oximetry reading may not represent 
true hypoxemia because of the diminished pulsations 
seen in patients with an LVAD.
EMS CONSIDERATIONS
The likelihood of a favorable outcome after cardiac ar-
rest increases substantially if the event is witnessed, the 
event occurs in a public place, bystanders call 9-1-1 and 
initiate chest compressions promptly, the initial rhythm 
is VF, an automated external defibrillator is applied and 
used, and there is a prompt EMS response. Bystander 
chest compressions are performed in only a third of cas-
es, but this can be doubled when 9-1-1 dispatchers issue 
“phone CPR” instructions that are carried out promptly 
and effectively.20 In addition, 9-1-1 dispatchers are 
trained to send fire department first responders to the 
scene of a suspected cardiac arrest so that they can ini-
Figure 5. HeartMate II troubleshooting chart.  
CVP indicates central venous pressure; JVP, jugular venous pressure; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; MAP, mean arterial 
pressure; PA, pulmonary artery; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; RV, right ventricular; and VAD, ventricular assist 
device. Reprinted from Feldman et al10a with permission from the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. Copy-
right © 2013, International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1123
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tiate CPR and defibrillate, if indicated, with an automated 
external defibrillator before EMS (ie, paramedic) arrival. 
Because there are usually more fire engine companies 
than ambulances in most US cities, fire department first 
responders arrive on scene before paramedics in ap-
proximately half of cases and arrive simultaneously with 
paramedics in another quarter of cases.
These emergency operations practices are highly 
relevant to the debate about the role of chest compres-
sions in an unconscious, pulseless patient with an LVAD. 
In most US locations, a bystander or a first responder 
will likely already be instructed to perform chest com-
pressions on such a patient before paramedic arrival. To 
the untrained person, an LVAD may be unrecognizable or 
incorrectly identified.
Therefore, it is the consensus recommendation that if 
an LVAD is definitively confirmed by a trained person and 
there are no signs of life, bystander CPR, including chest 
compressions, should be recommended by emergency 
medical dispatchers for cardiac arrest situations.
EMS providers should be mindful that most commu-
nity hospitals currently do not have VAD programs or 
equipment. Therefore, backup/spare equipment, which 
patients often carry on their person, should be brought 
with them to the hospital whenever possible. For exam-
ple, at the scene of a motor vehicle crash in which a 
driver/passenger is a patient with a VAD, it is prudent 
to spend a few minutes to retrieve all VAD backup equip-
ment that the patient is carrying in addition to the patient.
There is the very real dilemma of non–medical con-
trol interactions with VAD coordinators and physicians. 
Depending on state rules and regulations, often medical 
control physicians or nurses provide legally authorized 
medical direction and orders. LVAD coordinators/team 
members are often the first line of communication for 
EMS and family members when caring for patients with 
MCS in emergency situations. Consideration should be 
given for EMS to be directed by these specialized teams 
for this unique patient population, but this should be ex-
plicitly reviewed and authorized by each state’s office 
of EMS. Finally, patients with MCS, either VAD or TAH, 
should be transported to a VAD center whenever possi-
ble. If the patient is being transported to a non-VAD/non-
TAH center, immediate notification of a potential VAD/
TAH center should ensue for medical direction of care 
and potential prompt transfer when necessary. Many 
family members of patients with a VAD are trained in 
emergency procedures, and EMS should consider trans-
porting them in the same vehicle if feasible.
CONSENSUS-DERIVED GUIDANCE FOR EMS 
CLINICAL PRACTICE
Figure 6 outlines consensus-derived recommendations 
for first-responder assessment of a patient with an LVAD. 
Identifying the presence of MCS and code status is of 
initial importance. Some destination-therapy patients 
with an LVAD will have a legally executed, valid do-not-at-
tempt-resuscitation status and should be treated as any 
other patient with such a request. Information obtained 
from caregivers and medical alert identifications/wallet 
cards should be used to provide definitive identification. 
In some locations, patients with MCS are often told to 
keep their medical information (eg, code status infor-
mation) in the refrigerator. It seems reasonable for VAD 
centers to standardize their approach to patient identifi-
cation. Medical alert bracelets and necklaces can help 
to identify patients with a VAD and their code/intubation 
status, and they should be kept with the patient during 
transport to the hospital.
Signs of life and perfusion should be assessed by 
evaluation of mental status, breathing, skin color and 
temperature, and capillary refill. If it is unclear whether 
the patient has an LVAD, care should be established with 
standard basic cardiovascular life support and advanced 
cardiovascular life support (ACLS) protocols. Breathing 
should be supported as needed with supplemental oxy-
gen, airway adjuncts, and intubation as indicated.
Once a patient is identified as having an LVAD, EMS 
providers must recognize that their patient may be in a 
state of pseudo-PEA and not have a palpable pulse or 
recognizable BP yet have adequate perfusion. If there 
is adequate mental status, a provider should assess the 
VAD for function by auscultating for a VAD hum over the 
left chest/left upper abdominal quadrant, looking and lis-
tening for VAD alarms, ensuring secure connections to 
the VAD controller, and ensuring sufficient power for the 
VAD. Prompt notification of VAD center and its personnel 
(ie, VAD coordinator) is strongly recommended.
If there is inadequate perfusion, unresponsiveness, or 
other altered mental state, the VAD should be assessed 
for function by looking and listening for alarms, listening 
for a VAD hum over the left chest and left upper abdominal 
quadrant, ensuring secure connections to the controller, 
and ensuring adequate power for the VAD. If one checks 
all the above and the VAD is still not functioning, a sys-
tem controller change-out should be considered if there 
is a trained provider or family member available. Family 
members are trained to make this controller change, and 
EMS should request the assistance of a trained layperson 
on site. If the VAD is still not functioning after a controller 
change, especially if the Petco2 value remains <20 mm 
Hg 
in a correctly intubated patient, external chest compres-
sions should be initiated and standard ACLS protocols fol-
lowed with prompt notification of the VAD center.
If the VAD appears to be functioning, noted by a me-
chanical hum, BP should be checked. If available, a Dop-
pler BP (MAP) should be obtained. If unavailable, an NIBP 
may be attempted. However, as noted above, this may 
not be obtainable. If an obtained MAP is >50 mm 
Hg, 
ACLS protocols should be followed with the exception of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1124
chest compressions because the VAD is likely provid-
ing adequate forward flow. A detailed search for revers-
ible causes (5 Hs [hypovolemia, hypoxia, hydrogen ion 
(acidosis), hypo/hyperkalemia, hypothermia] and 5 Ts 
[toxins, tamponade, tension pneumothorax, thrombosis–
heart, thrombosis–lung]) should be undertaken.
If there is no detectable BP in a correctly intubated 
patient, Petco2 can be measured. If the Petco2 is ≥20 
mm 
Hg, similar to a patient with an MAP >50 mm 
Hg, 
chest compressions should be withheld, and standard 
ACLS protocols should be followed. If the Petco2 is <20 
mm 
Hg or not available, chest compressions should 
be initiated if there are no signs of life after standard 
ACLS protocols. Caution is advised in evaluating Petco2 
in nonintubated patients and when a supraglottic airway 
is used to ventilate, which may cause a falsely elevated 
reading because of the increased dead space in the su-
praglottic space.
When available, additional evaluation tools such as 
point-of-care echocardiography and Doppler blood flow 
can be considered. Assessment of flow in the carotid or 
femoral arteries via Doppler may represent an alterna-
tive method to check for blood flow in patients with MCS. 
If a Doppler signal is absent in these large arteries, the 
Figure 6. Algorithm showing response to a patient with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) with unrespon-
siveness or other altered mental status.  
ACLS indicates advanced cardiovascular life support; EMS, emergency medical services; ET, endotracheal tube; MAP, mean 
arterial pressure; Petco2, partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide; and VAD, ventricular assist device.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1125
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
absence of meaningful forward flow can be inferred, and 
chest compressions should be initiated.21 Acquisition of 
additional data should not delay application of appropri-
ate resuscitative measures in acutely ill/unresponsive 
patients with MCS devices.
It is reasonable to provide standard postarrest care, 
including mild therapeutic hypothermia and early per-
cutaneous coronary intervention when indicated, to 
patients with an LVAD who survive a cardiac arrest. It 
should be remembered that patients with an LVAD need 
adequate anticoagulation, which may be difficult to track 
accurately while a patient is hypothermic.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY IN THE EVALUATION OF 
AN ACUTELY ILL PATIENT WITH AN LVAD
Echocardiography is an invaluable noninvasive tool for 
the rapid, real-time evaluation of LVAD performance in a 
patient with an LVAD who is critically ill. Because few, if 
any, EMS services have an echocardiography device or 
are trained in its use, this evaluation is currently almost 
always performed in a dedicated echocardiography labo-
ratory, intensive care unit, or hospital emergency depart-
ment. We include this detailed section to assist hospital-
based providers who have real-time echocardiography 
availability in responding to acutely decompensating 
patients with an LVAD. We encourage the use of echo-
cardiography when available to assess unstable patients 
with an LVAD because it allows rapid assessment of sev-
eral parameters of pump function and hemodynamics. 
As point-of-care echocardiography with small handheld 
ultrasound devices becomes more widespread, the clini-
cal emergencies discussed in this section may poten-
tially be diagnosed and treated in the field by emergency 
personnel specially trained in echocardiographic diagno-
sis of cardiovascular emergencies.
The design and functionality of newer-generation 
LVADs differ importantly from earlier devices. Newer 
LVADs deliver systemic perfusion by means of an impel-
ler that operates at speeds of several thousand revo-
lutions per minute, resulting in axial aortic blood flow 
that is continuous. Because the newer rotary devices 
generate lower pressure gradients at the inlet cannula 
than earlier “pulsatile” LVADs, native cardiac function is 
an important determinant of rotary LVAD performance. 
Specifically, optimal LVAD function depends on the right 
side of the heart for delivery of blood to the LV and is 
influenced by the ability of the LV to augment LVAD filling.
Clinical emergencies in patients with an LVAD or LVAD 
alarms such as low flow, power spikes, suction events, 
and pulsatility alarms most often occur as a result of 
processes that are extrinsic to the LVAD itself. Events 
within the LVAD also occur but less frequently. By provid-
ing comprehensive assessment of cardiac anatomy and 
function, along with evaluation of LVAD function, echo-
cardiography can provide critical information for physi-
cians caring for patients with an LVAD who are acutely ill.
A systematic approach to such patients can be orga-
nized around the following 2 questions. 
Question 1: Are the Clinical Symptoms 
Attributable to an Acute Deterioration of Native 
Cardiac Function?
Is Cardiac Filling Adequate? 
Assessment of inferior vena cava diameter, and its 
change during inspiration, will provide an estimate of 
central venous pressure. Inadequate filling of the RV 
because of volume depletion, hemorrhage, sepsis, ar-
rhythmias, or cardiac tamponade will result in impaired 
delivery of blood to the LV, with consequent reduction in 
LVAD flow and/or suction events caused by abutment of 
the inflow cannula against the LV wall.
Has RV Systolic Function Worsened? 
Echocardiography can assess downward trends in right-
sided heart function by demonstrating increased right 
atrial pressure, as manifested by increased inferior vena 
cava diameter and decreased collapse (<50%) with inspi-
ration or even complete loss of respiratory variation in 
inferior vena cava diameter. Echocardiography can show 
progressive dilation of the RV or an interim decrease in 
RV systolic function as indicated by decreased RV frac-
tional area change and, in some cases, by changes in RV 
systolic pressure.
Acute decompensation of RV function may also re-
sult from an acute increase in pulmonary artery pressure 
caused by cor pulmonale, pulmonary embolus, or intrin-
sic pulmonary vascular disease.
Echocardiographic findings in such cases resemble 
those seen in patients with intrinsic RV failure, except 
that RV systolic pressure will be significantly elevated 
above baseline values for that patient.
Is There Significant Valve Dysfunction? 
Dysfunction of the tricuspid or pulmonic valves can oc-
cur secondary to changes in pulmonary artery pressure 
or RV function, can impair delivery of blood to the left 
side of the heart, and can cause suboptimal LVAD perfor-
mance. Aortic regurgitation can significantly impair the 
ability of the LVAD to deliver antegrade blood flow to the 
systemic circulation. Mitral regurgitation is less often a 
problem because the LVAD reduces LV size and filling 
pressure and improves mitral leaflet coaptation.
Question 2: Is the LVAD Itself Malfunctioning?
Is the LV Being Unloaded Effectively?
If the LVAD is functioning optimally, LV end-diastolic in-
ternal dimension (LVIDd) should decrease. Comparison 
of the parasternal long-axis 2-dimensional preoperative 
LVIDd with the postoperative LVIDd is the most important 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1126
clinical measure of the degree of LV unloading achieved 
by the LVAD.22 If endocardial definition is suboptimal, a 
microbubble contrast agent should be used for accurate 
LVIDd measurement. Impaired LVAD performance can be 
detected echocardiographically by noting an enlarged 
LVIDd compared with previous values obtained when the 
patient was stable.23
Does the Aortic Valve Open During Systole? 
Intermittent, often mild aortic valve opening is consid-
ered desirable after LVAD implantation. However, an aor-
tic valve that opens widely during every LV systole signi-
fies inadequate unloading of the LV by the LVAD. In some 
cases, this can be addressed by adjusting LVAD speed, 
the effectiveness of which can be confirmed by serial 
echocardiographic assessments of aortic valve opening, 
including M-mode measurements. When LVAD speed ad-
justments fail to improve LV unloading, as determined by 
serial echocardiography, a search for intrinsic causes of 
LVAD dysfunction is necessary.
Is There Obstruction to LVAD Inflow or Outflow? 
Inflow obstruction may occur as a result of thrombus, 
pannus, disruption of the submitral apparatus, or abut-
ment of the cannula against an LV wall. Although the 
metallic LVAD inflow cannula usually causes significant 
acoustic artifact, the presence of inflow obstruction can 
often be identified with a carefully targeted 2-dimen-
sional and color Doppler echocardiographic examina-
tion. If there is no LVAD inflow cannula obstruction, the 
color Doppler should demonstrate laminar, nonturbulent 
unidirectional flow from the LV into the inflow cannula. 
Three-dimensional echocardiography may be helpful. In 
cases when there is suspicion of LVAD inflow obstruc-
tion, transesophageal echocardiography can confirm the 
diagnosis with confidence.
Inflow obstruction by LV myocardium can develop 
from substantial changes in LV size and shape as the 
LV is unloaded by the LVAD. Because the LVAD cannula 
orifice is not surgically anchored, its spatial relationship 
with LV walls changes over time and indeed can change 
during the cardiac cycle. In such cases, LVAD inflow var-
ies more significantly over the cardiac cycle as the ob-
struction is relieved or exacerbated by LV wall motion. 
Changes in LVAD inflow over the cardiac cycle can be 
assessed with pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography. 
The degree of variation of instantaneous volumetric flow 
into the LVAD during the cardiac cycle can be estimated 
by calculating a pulsatility index23 during 1 cardiac cycle 
as follows: [(maximum LVAD inflow velocity−minimum 
LVAD inflow velocity)/mean LVAD inflow velocity]×10. A 
normal pulsatility index is <10. Higher values suggest 
the possibility of inflow obstruction.
Note that changes in Doppler-measured inflow kinet-
ics with this formula may not necessarily be reflected by 
the LVAD console because console-reported LVAD flow 
is derived empirically on the basis of internal character-
istics, including the driveline electric power required to 
maintain a constant impeller rotational rate.24 The LVAD 
outflow graft anastomosis to the ascending aorta can 
be visualized from a high-left parasternal long-axis view. 
If there is anastomotic site stenosis, the color Doppler 
signal may show flow turbulence, and pulsed- and con-
tinuous-wave Doppler may show abnormally high systolic 
velocity (>2 m/s).22
Is There Intrinsic LVAD Dysfunction?
Intrinsic LVAD dysfunction can occur as a result of 
thrombosis or pannus within the LVAD system, failure 
of LVAD bearings or rotor, or electric failure because of 
driveline malfunction. Because LVAD elements are es-
sentially all sono-opaque, the role of echocardiography 
in this setting is to exclude other causes in acutely ill pa-
tients with signs and symptoms of inadequate cardiac 
output. Thus, when echocardiography does not show 
evidence of intravascular volume depletion, progres-
sion of native heart disease, or LVAD inflow obstruc-
tion and when there is echocardiographic evidence of 
inadequate unloading of the LV as previously discussed, 
the findings should direct caregivers to the possibility of 
intrinsic LVAD dysfunction.
Acquisition of echocardiographic data should not de-
lay application of appropriate resuscitative measures in 
acutely ill/unresponsive patients with MCS devices.
Arterial line placement can be undertaken in hospital-
ized patients for accurate BP determination and to iden-
tify the presence of flow in unconscious patients with an 
LVAD without a pulse. Ultrasound guidance can be used 
for line placement given the lack of pulsatility in some pa-
tients. It is important to note that the arterial tracing may 
look flat or with a very low pulse pressure in patients who 
are not pulsatile.
Hemodynamic measurements, including cardiac 
output, peripheral resistance, preload, afterload, and 
RV function, may provide additional important informa-
tion and insight into the significance of the echocardio-
graphic data. All this information may lead to medication 
changes or surgical intervention in these extremely ill 
individuals.
TOTAL ARTIFICIAL HEART
The TAH is also an intracorporeal device, but rather than 
being attached to the native heart with cannulas, the na-
tive ventricles are removed completely when the TAH is 
implanted. The right side of the pump is anastomosed to 
the right atrium and pulmonary artery, and the left side 
of the pump is anastomosed to the left atrium and aorta. 
The pump is powered pneumatically, with each side be-
ing driven by a separate driveline that passes through 
the skin and is attached to a pneumatic driver.25
Three drivers are in use currently in the United 
States. Two drivers, the Circulatory Support System 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1127
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
and the Companion 2, require the patient to remain in 
the hospital until transplantation, and the other driver, 
Freedom, is more portable, allowing the patient to be 
discharged home. All patients are placed initially on the 
large, hospital-based device at the time of surgery. The 
most immediate cause for perioperative collapse is 
compression of the left pulmonary veins or the inferior 
vena cava, resulting in reduction of preload. These are 
best detected by transesophageal echocardiography 
before chest closure. Cardiac tamponade can similarly 
occur by compression of venous return after chest clo-
sure resulting from bleeding.26,27 These complications 
are often seen immediately after surgery and require 
the intervention of a surgeon who can correct the me-
chanical problem quickly by returning to the operating 
room. Such complications are very uncommon after 
discharge home.
The pump parameters are set by the medical team. 
These include the left drive pressure, the right drive pres-
sure, the beat rate, the percent ejection, and a low level 
of vacuum on the Circulatory Support System console, 
which helps with movement of air out of the ventricles. 
Once patients reach clinical stability, very few changes 
are needed to the settings on the drive pressures, vacu-
um, or beat rate. The general drive pressures on the TAH 
range from 180 to 200 mm 
Hg on the left side and 60 to 
100 mm 
Hg on the right side, with a beat rate of 120 to 
135 per minute and vacuum of about −10 mm 
Hg (Cir-
culatory Support System only). Selected patients can be 
transferred to the smaller, portable pneumatic driver for 
discharge to home (Figure 7). This driver has only 1 ad-
justable parameter, namely the beat rate. The movement 
of the internal piston generates the negative pressure, 
and the drive pressures are set at 200 mm 
Hg on the left 
and 100 mm 
Hg on the right.
The TAH produces a pulsatile waveform and a palpa-
ble pulse. It is important to note that as the ventricles 
are removed, these patients do not produce an ECG 
tracing (ie, it is a flat line). This absence of ECG tracing 
may be interpreted as asystole and lead to inappropri-
ate therapy such as chest compressions (ineffective 
because the mechanical ventricles are rigid and can-
not be compressed) or administration of epinephrine, 
which can raise afterload and lead to worsening pump 
function. A dramatic rise in afterload after a vasopres-
sor bolus can lead to incomplete pump ejection, a rap-
id rise in left atrial pressure, and resultant pulmonary 
edema.
The pump compensates quite well in vasodilated 
states such as sepsis and should maintain adequate out-
put for a few hours. This should be ample time for EMS to 
bring the patient to the hospital and contact the primary 
Figure 7. Total artificial heart 
with Freedom portable driver. 
Reproduced with permission from 
SynCardia Systems, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1128
TAH team. If absolutely needed for volume refractory hy-
potension, an infusion of low-dose norepinephrine is the 
best choice. It is important to avoid an intravenous push 
of vasopressor and inotropes because they immediately 
push afterload up and the portable drive cannot pump 
against this, resulting in elevated left atrial pressures and 
pulmonary edema. Once this happens, the right-sided 
pump develops worsening afterload and its output drops. 
This rapidly spirals into unmanageable hypotension.
The most common cause of hemodynamic collapse 
after discharge home is kinking of the drivelines.28–30 The 
next most common cause is an increase in BP as patients 
improve from their heart failure. The increased afterload 
created by hypertension can affect device emptying 
and lead to pulmonary edema and respiratory distress. 
These are true medical emergencies and require imme-
diate assessment and treatment before transport.
Prehospital and emergency personnel need to under-
stand the difference between a TAH and an LVAD. With a 
TAH, the heart is excised and the patients are dependent 
on the TAH, whereas with an LVAD, the native heart re-
mains and usually contributes in some fashion to perfu-
sion. All patients should be sent home with a medic alert 
bracelet, which includes their living will/advance direc-
tives, and the portable driver should be marked clearly.
The most dangerous situation occurs when a patient 
is hypertensive and in mild respiratory distress and EMS 
arrives and finds “asystole.” With an LVAD, the native 
ECG remains. However, with TAH, there is no electric 
depolarization and therefore no detectable ECG tracing. 
Thus, ECG assessment is not recommended for patients 
with a TAH. Epinephrine should not be given for this asys-
tole because it can lead to a further increase in afterload 
and complete hemodynamic collapse with pulmonary 
edema. Figure 8 provides an algorithm for evaluation 
and treatment of a patient with a TAH who is altered 
mentally, unresponsive, or in respiratory distress.
EMS providers should assess first for responsiveness 
and then for the presence or absence of a pulse. If a 
patient is responsive with a pulse, he or she should be 
transported to the nearest TAH center if possible.
If a patient has a pulse and is unresponsive, ventila-
tions should be assisted as required, and as with pa-
tients with an LVAD, noncardiac causes of altered mental 
status (eg, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, stroke, or overdose) 
should be considered. BP should be assessed rapidly 
because systolic hypertension increases afterload and 
therefore decreases forward blood flow from the device. 
When this occurs, patients can present with fulminant 
pulmonary edema because of backflow of blood into the 
lungs, which is a true medical emergency.
For systolic BPs >150 mm 
Hg, treatment should be 
given to maintain systolic BP <130 but >90 mm 
Hg. 
This can be attempted in the prehospital setting with the 
use of sublingual nitroglycerin or administration of 40 
mg furosemide intravenously if the drug and intravenous 
access are available. Many patients with a TAH are dis-
charged from the hospital with oral hydralazine that they 
and their caregivers are instructed to use in the setting 
of hypertension. Advanced life support EMS providers 
can assist the patient with self-administration of hydrala-
zine to further decrease BP. The patient should then be 
transported to the hospital. If a patient is hypotensive 
with a systolic BP <90 mm 
Hg, 1 L normal saline solution 
should be administered during transport.
The portable TAH is pumped mechanically. As long as 
it is functioning properly, there should be a palpable pulse. 
When no pulse is present with a TAH, there is likely a cata-
strophic mechanical malfunction resulting in no blood flow 
or perfusion. Because chest compressions are futile and 
ACLS drugs are contraindicated or ineffective given the 
presence of the TAH, the only therapeutic option is to try 
to restore mechanical function of the device. The driveline 
should be checked immediately for kinks and straight-
ened if needed. If there is still no pulse after ensuring that 
the driveline appears unkinked, then the battery should 
be checked for correct positioning and power status and 
replaced if necessary. Trained personnel should switch to 
the backup controller if one is available. Finally, 1 L nor-
mal saline solution should be administered intravenously 
to treat for possible hypovolemia. Assisted ventilation 
should be performed as needed, and the patient should 
be transported to the hospital as soon as possible.
At no time should manual or mechanical chest com-
pressions be performed in a patient with a TAH. Chest 
compressions are futile because mechanical chambers 
have replaced the ventricles. There would be no contribu-
tion to forward flow from the cardiac pump mechanism of 
blood flow during CPR because the “heart” is not affected 
by intrathoracic pressure changes. There are no data to 
suggest that adequate blood flow occurs in patients with 
a TAH as a result of changes in intrathoracic pressure; 
therefore, there are no data to support the use of chest 
compressions in these patients because their heart has 
been completely replaced by a mechanical heart.
An electrocardiograph, a telemetry monitor, and 
an automated external defibrillator are not useful and 
should not be placed. Antiarrhythmic drugs are also 
of no use because the heart has been removed and 
therefore there are no meaningful arrhythmias. Electric 
therapy (eg, pacing, defibrillation/cardioversion) should 
not be used for similar reasons. Standard vasopressor 
drugs used in ACLS such as epinephrine or vasopressin 
are contraindicated because they increase afterload and 
worsen TAH function.
RESUSCITATION OF INFANTS AND CHILDREN 
WITH THE USE OF DURABLE MCS DEVICES
The use of durable MCS devices as a bridge to trans-
plantation in the pediatric population is increasing.31–33 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1129
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
During 2008 to 2010, 18% of 1440 patients listed 
for transplantation were bridged with a VAD. The Ber-
lin Heart EXCOR VAD accounted for 57% (n=60) of 
devices used for children.33 The Berlin Heart EXCOR 
Pediatric VAD is the only US Food and Drug Administra-
tion–approved device to provide mechanical circulatory 
assistance as a bridge to transplantation in children 
(Figure 3).34 The type of VAD used in a pediatric patient 
is determined largely by patient size.33 The Berlin Heart 
Device is an extracorporeal, pneumatically driven pul-
satile VAD that can be used in both univentricular and 
biventricular support configurations, providing support 
Figure 8. Algorithm showing response to a patient with a total artificial heart (TAH) with altered mental status, 
unresponsiveness, or respiratory distress.  
AED indicates automated external defibrillator; BP, blood pressure; IV, intravenous; NS, normal saline; and SBP, systolic blood pressure.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1130
to the LV, the RV, or both ventricles.35 Different pump 
sizes (10, 25, 30, and 50 mL) are available to tailor to 
the pediatric size ranges. The Berlin Heart EXCOR is 
currently not used in out-of-hospital settings, and pa-
tients supported with the Berlin Heart Device remain 
hospitalized until transplantation.
Older children approaching adult size (eg, body sur-
face area >1.3 m2) have the option of being supported 
with adult devices, and a number of adult devices, in-
cluding implantable VADs, have been used in children. 
Adult-sized children supported with implantable devices 
may be discharged home to await transplantation. An 
estimate of the number of children supported with VAD 
in out-of-hospital settings is not available, but it is likely a 
small number. If an adult pump is chosen, resuscitation 
should follow that of the adult algorithm outlined above.
RESUSCITATION OF CHILDREN SUPPORTED 
WITH A VAD
There is little published information on the management 
of cardiac arrest in children supported with a VAD. Re-
suscitative care for children supported with an adult im-
plantable VAD should be based on algorithms outlined 
for adults in this document. In younger children, prin-
ciples for the management of resuscitation are similar 
to those for the management of adults. Diagnosis of cir-
culatory arrest requires prompt evaluation of the patient 
and the VAD.3 Clinical signs of circulatory arrest may 
include acute change in the level of consciousness and 
the absence of respiratory effort. Severe bradycardia, 
asystole, VT, or VF may be present and may be a clue to 
the presence of cardiopulmonary arrest. Causes of loss 
of circulation in children supported with VADs include 
primary device failure (driveline breakage, disconnec-
tion, driver failure, and loss of power to the driver) and 
patient-related factors (hypovolemia, tension pneumo-
thorax, pericardial tamponade, pulmonary hypertension, 
vasodilatory shock, and apnea related to administration 
of sedation).
CIRCULATORY ARREST IN THE BERLIN HEART 
EXCOR VAD
For an unresponsive patient on the Berlin EXCOR Pe-
diatric VAD, the initial patient survey should include a 
pulse and device check (<10 seconds). A palpable pe-
ripheral pulse is expected in this population and should 
be used as an assessment of flow and perfusion. De-
vice function should then be determined by observing 
movement of the device membrane. If the device mem-
brane is not moving or not providing adequate flow, the 
drivelines should be assessed to ensure that they are 
not kinked or disconnected from the driver and that 
the IKUS driver is powered and functioning. Chest com-
pressions should be started or the hand pump should 
be used to provide flow from the device if it is not func-
tioning. Ventilation should be supported as for pediatric 
patients without a VAD.
If the hand pump is used and a palpable pulse cannot 
be generated, chest compressions should be started im-
mediately. Chest compressions should also be started 
immediately for cardiac arrest in patients with an RVAD. 
The pediatric advanced life support algorithm should 
be used for the management of resuscitation, including 
the administration of medications and defibrillation as 
needed. The VAD team should be alerted at the time 
of resuscitation, and the patient should be transferred 
emergently to an intensive care unit.
If loss of power is the reason for driver malfunction, 
initial support with the hand pump should initiated while a 
new IKUS driver unit is being reconfigured. If unconscious-
ness is not related to device function and the patient has 
a good pulse, other causes of loss of consciousness (eg, 
cerebrovascular event, hypoglycemia, sedative use, hy-
poxemia) should be investigated and treated.
SUMMARY
This document represents consensus opinion among 
MCS specialists and resuscitation and EMS experts 
concerning responding to the unique needs of MCS-sup-
ported patients with cardiac arrest/circulatory collapse. 
Every effort was made to include key organizations and 
providers for patients with MCS. Because this is an evolv-
ing field, devices vary from center to center and popula-
tion to population. For that reason, an attempt was made 
to discuss cardiac arrest in broad terms without focus-
ing on the nuances of each individual device. The Table 
provides a summary that highlights the basic differences 
in performing resuscitation in patients with MCS.
KNOWLEDGE GAPS
• What are the risks/benefits of chest compressions 
to patients with a VAD?
The group’s current consensus was that withholding 
chest compression in a patient with a VAD who is truly 
in circulatory failure that is not attributable to a device 
failure would cause more harm to the patient than the 
potential to dislodge the device.
• Does an MAP of ≥50 mm 
Hg or a Petco2 of ≥20 
mm 
Hg act as a good identifier of patients with mar-
ginal/adequate cardiac output and those for whom 
the risk of chest compressions may be outweighed 
by the benefits?
The group’s current consensus was that an MAP of 
50 mm 
Hg or a Petco2 of >20 mm 
Hg was a reasonable 
measure of perfusion and that the addition of chest com-
pressions, as opposed to other interventions, would not 
be expected to further benefit the patient.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1131
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
• What are the emergency experiences of pediatric 
patients supported by MCS? 
This was truly a consensus opinion because few data 
exist.
• What is the best way to identify a VAD-supported 
patient, and should it be standardized? If so, how 
should that happen? Who would monitor/oversee it?
The group’s current consensus was that there should 
be a standard across the VAD and TAH centers to supply 
identification necklaces or bracelets to discharged MCS 
patients. The identification should include the device 
type, the center contact information, and the patient’s 
advance directives.
Each clinical scenario requires an individualized treat-
ment plan. We hope that this consensus document pro-
vides guidance and standardization in an area where 
there is a recognized lack of published evidence yet a 
clinical need for direction. MCS centers are encouraged 
to publish their experiences and to educate others about 
potential best practices.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This scientific statement is dedicated to the memory of Dr 
Richard Kerber, who died suddenly while this manuscript was 
in press. Dr Kerber was a lifelong volunteer to the AHA, and 
under his leadership, the Emergency Cardiovascular Care 
Committee made groundbreaking progress in bringing CPR 
to the forefront of the AHA and emergency care. His con-
tributions to the science of resuscitation, in particular defi-
brillation, led the field in mapping a better understanding of 
the mechanisms of this lifesaving treatment. He was also a 
nationally recognized expert echocardiographer whose work 
over decades had a substantial impact on the field of cardi-
ology. Dr Kerber’s greatest legacy, however, will be as an 
unwavering friend and colleague and a tireless teacher and 
mentor to generations of physician-scientists. He taught by 
example as well as word, and his passion for resuscitation 
science and mentorship will be carried on by the countless 
lives he touched. The field has truly lost a giant. May our dear 
friend rest in peace.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, 
all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships 
that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on Au-
gust 1, 2016, and the American Heart Association Executive 
Committee on September 23, 2016. A copy of the document 
is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by us-
ing either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-
2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document 
be cited as follows: Peberdy MA, Gluck JA, Ornato JP, Bermudez 
CA, Griffin RE, Kasirajan V, Kerber RE, Lewis EF, Link MS, Miller 
C, Teuteberg JJ, Thiagarajan R, Weiss RM, O’Neil B; on behalf of 
the American Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care 
Committee; Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Periopera-
tive, and Resuscitation; Council on Cardiovascular Diseases in the 
Young; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; Coun-
cil on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; and Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in adults and children 
with mechanical circulatory support: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–
e1134. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted 
by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA state-
ments and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, 
enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not 
permitted without the express permission of the American 
Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are 
located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright- 
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the 
 
“Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right 
side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Table. Basic Differences in Performing Resuscitation in Patients With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Mechanical Support Type
Perfusion  
(Pulse Check)
ECG
Defibrillation/
Cardioversion
Chest  
Compressions
ACLS Drugs
p-RVAD
Pulsatile
Present
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable
p-LVAD
Pulsatile
Present
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable
p-BiVAD
Pulsatile
Present
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable
cf-RVAD
Pulsatile
Present
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable
cf-LVAD
Absent pulsatile
Present
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable
cf-BiVAD
Absent pulsatile
Present
Acceptable
Acceptable
Acceptable
TAH
Pulsatile
Absent
Unacceptable
Unacceptable
Unacceptable
ACLS indicates advanced cardiovascular life support; BiVAD, biventricular assist device; cf, continuous flow; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; p, 
pulsatile; RVAD, right ventricular assist device; and TAH, total artificial heart.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1132
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Mary Ann 
Peberdy
Virginia Commonwealth 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jason A. Gluck
Hartford Hospital
None
None
HeartWare*
None
None
None
None
Christian A. 
Bermudez
University of 
Pennsylvania
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Russell E. 
Griffin
American Heart 
Association, National 
Center
None
American 
Heart 
Association†
None
None
None
None
None
Vigneshwar 
Kasirajan
Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Pauley Heart 
Center and Department 
of Surgery
SynCardia*; 
Thoratec*; 
Atricure*; 
Abiomed*
None
None
None
None
SynCardia*; 
Thoratec,  
St. Jude*; 
Atricure*
None
Richard E. 
Kerber
University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics
None
None
None
None
GE*
None
None
Eldrin F. Lewis
Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Mark S. Link
UT Southwestern 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Corinne Miller
Duke University 
Hospital/Heart Center
Duke Heart 
Center*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Brian O’Neil
Wayne State University
Zoll 
Circulation†
None
Zoll 
Circulation*
None
None
Zoll Circulation*
None
Joseph P. 
Ornato
Virginia Commonwealth 
University Health 
System
None
None
None
None
None
None
Richmond 
Ambulance 
Authority†; 
Virginia 
Commonwealth 
University 
Health System†
Jeffrey J. 
Teuteberg
University of Pittsburgh
None
None
HeartWare†; 
CareDx*; 
Abiomed*
None
None
HeartWare†; 
Abiomed*; 
CareDx*; 
Thoratec*; 
Acorda*
None
Ravi 
Thiagarajan
Children’s Hospital, 
Boston
NIH*
Bristol Myers 
Squibb*; 
Pfizer*
None
None
None
None
NIH (Consultant 
for PUMPKIN 
trial)*
Robert M. 
Weiss
University of Iowa
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
DISCLOSURES
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 CPR With Mechanical Circulatory Support
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504 
June 13, 2017 e1133
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, Rogers JG, Miller LW, Sun B, Russell SD, 
Starling RC, Chen L, Boyle AJ, Chillcott S, Adamson RM, Blood 
MS, Camacho MT, Idrissi KA, Petty M, Sobieski M, Wright S, Myers 
TJ, Farrar DJ; HeartMate II Clinical Investigators. Clinical manage-
ment of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices in advanced 
heart failure. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010;29(suppl):S1–S39. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2010.01.011.
 2. Arnold WS, Bourque K. The engineer and the clinician: understand-
ing the work output and troubleshooting of the HeartMate II rotary 
flow pump. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:32–36. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.07.113.
 3. Duff JP, Decaen A, Guerra GG, Lequier L, Buchholz H. Diagnosis 
and management of circulatory arrest in pediatric ventricular as-
sist device patients: presentation of two cases and suggested 
guidelines. Resuscitation. 2013;84:702–705. doi: 10.1016/j.
resuscitation.2012.09.032.
 4. Cave DA, Fry KM, Buchholz H. Anesthesia for noncardiac proce-
dures for children with a Berlin Heart EXCOR Pediatric Ventricular 
Assist Device: a case series. Paediatr Anaesth. 2010;20:647–
659. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2010.03314.x.
 5. Pratap JN, Wilmshurst S. Anesthetic management of children with 
in situ Berlin Heart EXCOR. Paediatr Anaesth. 2010;20:812–820. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2010.03352.x.
 6. Bennett MK, Roberts CA, Dordunoo D, Shah A, Russell SD. Ideal 
methodology to assess systemic blood pressure in patients with 
continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant. 2010;29:593–594. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.11.604.
 7. Lanier GM, Orlanes K, Hayashi Y, Murphy J, Flannery M, Te-Frey R, Uriel N, 
Yuzefpolskaya M, Mancini DM, Naka Y, Takayama H, Jorde UP, Demmer 
RT, Colombo PC. Validity and reliability of a novel slow cuff-deflation sys-
tem for noninvasive blood pressure monitoring in patients with contin-
uous-flow left ventricular assist device. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:1005–
1012. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.000186.
 8. Gluck JA, Thompson S, Wencker D. “VLAD”: a novel approach 
to community left ventricular assist device education using 
an interactive medical simulator. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2012;31:1321–1322. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2012.09.020.
 9. Cagliostro B, Levin AP, Fried J, Stewart S, Parkis G, Mody KP, Garan 
AR, Topkara V, Takayama H, Naka Y, Jorde UP, Uriel N. Continuous-
flow left ventricular assist devices and usefulness of a standard-
ized strategy to reduce drive-line infections. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant. 2016;35:108–114. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2015.06.010.
 10. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, 
Blume ED, Myers SL, Miller MA, Baldwin JT, Young JB. Seventh 
INTERMACS annual report: 15,000 patients and counting. J 
Heart Lung Transplant. 2015;34:1495–1504. doi: 10.1016/j.
healun.2015.10.003.
 
10a. Feldman D, Pamboukian SV, Teuteberg JJ, Birks E, Lietz K, 
Moore SA, Morgan JA, Arabia F, Bauman ME, Buchholz HW, Deng 
M, Dickstein ML, El-Banayosy A, Elliot T, Goldstein DJ, Grady 
KL, Jones K, Hryniewicz K, John R, Kaan A, Kusne S, Loebe 
M, Massicotte MP, Moazami N, Mohacsi P, Mooney M, Nelson 
T, Pagani F, Perry W, Potapov EV, Eduardo Rame J, Russell 
SD, Sorensen EN, Sun B, Strueber M, Mangi AA, Petty MG, 
Rogers J. The 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung 
Transplantation guidelines for mechanical circulation: executive 
summary. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013;32:157–187. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2012.09.013.
 11. Crow S, Chen D, Milano C, Thomas W, Joyce L, Piacentino V 3rd, 
Sharma R, Wu J, Arepally G, Bowles D, Rogers J, Villamizar-Ortiz 
N. Acquired von Willebrand syndrome in continuous-flow ventricu-
lar assist device recipients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90:1263–
1269. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.04.099.
 12. Starling RC, Moazami N, Silvestry SC, Ewald G, Rogers JG, 
Milano CA, Rame JE, Acker MA, Blackstone EH, Ehrlinger J, 
Thuita L, Mountis MM, Soltesz EG, Lytle BW, Smedira NG. 
Unexpected abrupt increase in left ventricular assist device 
thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:33–40. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1313385.
 13. Falk JL, Rackow EC, Weil MH. End-tidal carbon diox-
ide 
concentration 
during 
cardiopulmonary 
resuscita-
tion. N Engl J Med. 1988;318:607–611. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM198803103181005.
 14. Garnett AR, Ornato JP, Gonzalez ER, Johnson EB. End-tidal car-
bon dioxide monitoring during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
JAMA. 1987;257:512–515.
 15. Ornato JP, Garnett AR, Glauser FL. Relationship between cardiac 
output and the end-tidal carbon dioxide tension. Ann Emerg Med. 
1990;19:1104–1106.
 16. von Planta M, von Planta I, Weil MH, Bruno S, Bisera J, Rackow 
EC. End tidal carbon dioxide as an haemodynamic determinant 
of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the rat. Cardiovasc Res. 
1989;23:364–368.
 17. Trevino RP, Bisera J, Weil MH, Rackow EC, Grundler WG. End-tidal 
CO2 as a guide to successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a 
preliminary report. Crit Care Med. 1985;13:910–911.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Deepak 
Acharya
University of Alabama 
at Birmingham
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Christopher S. 
Almond
Stanford University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Douglas 
Andrusiek
Edith Cowan 
University (Australia)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Burns C. 
Blaxall
Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical 
Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Peberdy et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1115–e1134. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000504
e1134
 
18. Idris AH, Staples ED, O’Brien DJ, Melker RJ, Rush WJ, Del Duca 
KD, Falk JL. End-tidal carbon dioxide during extremely low cardiac 
output. Ann Emerg Med. 1994;23:568–572.
 
19. Link MS, Berkow LC, Kudenchuk PJ, Halperin HR, Hess EP, Moi-
tra VK, Neumar RW, O’Neil BJ, Paxton JH, Silvers SM, White RD, 
Yannopoulos D, Donnino MW. Part 7: adult advanced cardiovas-
cular life support: 2015 American Heart Association guidelines 
update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency car-
diovascular care [published correction appears in Circulation. 
2015;132:e385]. Circulation. 2015;132(suppl 2):S444–S464. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000261.
 
20. Lerner EB, Rea TD, Bobrow BJ, Acker JE 3rd, Berg RA, Brooks SC, 
Cone DC, Gay M, Gent LM, Mears G, Nadkarni VM, O’Connor RE, 
Potts J, Sayre MR, Swor RA, Travers AH; on behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care Commit-
tee; Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative and 
Resuscitation. Emergency medical service dispatch cardiopul-
monary resuscitation prearrival instructions to improve survival 
from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;125:648–655. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823ee5fc.
 
21. Yuzefpolskaya M, Uriel N, Flannery M, Yip N, Mody K, Cagliostro 
B, Takayama H, Naka Y, Jorde UP, Goswami S, Colombo PC. Ad-
vanced cardiovascular life support algorithm for the management 
of the hospitalized unresponsive patient on continuous flow left 
ventricular assist device support outside the intensive care unit. 
Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2016;5:522–526. 
 
22. Stainback RF, Estep JD, Agler DA, Birks EJ, Bremer M, Hung 
J, Kirkpatrick JN, Rogers JG, Shah NR; American Society of 
Echocardiography. Echocardiography in the management 
of patients with left ventricular assist devices: recommen-
dations from the American Society of Echocardiography. J 
Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2015;28:853–909. doi: 10.1016/j.
echo.2015.05.008.
 
23. Weiss RM, Kerber RE, Goerbig-Campbell JL, Davis MK, Cabuay 
BM, Ashrith G, Karrowni W, Davis JE, Johnson FL. The impact 
of prolonged rotary ventricular assist device support upon ven-
tricular geometry and flow kinetics. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2011;24:149–156. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2010.10.009.
 
24. HeartMate II LVAS Clinical Operation and Patient Management. 
Pleasanton, CA: Thoratec Corp; 2008.
 
25. Tang DG, Shah KB, Hess ML, Kasirajan V. Implantation of the 
SynCardia total artificial heart. J Vis Exp. 2014;89:e50377. doi: 
10.3791/50377.
 
26. Parker MS, Fahrner LJ, Deuell BP, Olsen KM, Kasirajan V, Shah 
KB, Medina AE, Doolin KR, de Groot PM, Goodman WC. Total arti-
ficial heart implantation: clinical indications, expected postopera-
tive imaging findings, and recognition of complications [published 
correction appears in AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2014;202:1936]. 
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2014;202:W191–W201. doi: 10.2214/
AJR.13.11066.
 
27. Quader MA, Green AJ, Shah KB, Cooke R, Kasirajan V. Hospital re-
admissions after discharge to home with the Total Artificial Heart 
Freedom driver: readmission reasons, clinical outcomes, and 
health care costs. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35:251–252. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2015.10.031.
 
28. Torregrossa G, Morshuis M, Varghese R, Hosseinian L, Vida V, 
Tarzia V, Loforte A, Duveau D, Arabia F, Leprince P, Kasirajan 
V, Beyersdorf F, Musumeci F, Hetzer R, Krabatsch T, Gummert 
J, Copeland J, Gerosa G. Results with SynCardia total artificial 
heart beyond 1 year. ASAIO J. 2014;60:626–634. doi: 10.1097/
MAT.0000000000000132.
 
29. Shah KB, Volman RA, Harton S, Tang DG, Kasirajan V. Fracture of 
the total artificial heart pneumatic driveline after transition to the 
portable driver. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013;32:1041–1043. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.06.014.
 
30. Demondion P, Fournel L, Niculescu M, Pavie A, Leprince P. 
The challenge of home discharge with a total artificial heart: 
the La Pitie Salpetriere experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2013;44:843–848. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezt146.
 
31. Morales DL, Almond CS, Jaquiss RD, Rosenthal DN, Naftel DC, 
Massicotte MP, Humpl T, Turrentine MW, Tweddell JS, Cohen GA, 
Kroslowitz R, Devaney EJ, Canter CE, Fynn-Thompson F, Reinhartz 
O, Imamura M, Ghanayem NS, Buchholz H, Furness S, Mazor R, 
Gandhi SK, Fraser CD Jr. Bridging children of all sizes to cardiac 
transplantation: the initial multicenter North American experience 
with the Berlin Heart EXCOR ventricular assist device. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2011;30:1–8. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2010.08.033.
 
32. Almond CS, Morales DL, Blackstone EH, Turrentine MW, Imamura 
M, Massicotte MP, Jordan LC, Devaney EJ, Ravishankar C, Kanter 
KR, Holman W, Kroslowitz R, Tjossem C, Thuita L, Cohen GA, Bu-
chholz H, St Louis JD, Nguyen K, Niebler RA, Walters HL 3rd, 
Reemtsen B, Wearden PD, Reinhartz O, Guleserian KJ, Mitchell 
MB, Bleiweis MS, Canter CE, Humpl T. Berlin Heart EXCOR pediat-
ric ventricular assist device for bridge to heart transplantation in 
US children. Circulation. 2013;127:1702–1711. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.000685.
 
33. Duncan BW. Matching the mechanical circulatory support device 
to the child with heart failure. ASAIO J. 2006;52:e15–e21. doi: 
10.1097/01.mat.0000240724.35433.dc.
 
34. Fraser CD Jr, Jaquiss RD, Rosenthal DN, Humpl T, Canter CE, 
Blackstone EH, Naftel DC, Ichord RN, Bomgaars L, Tweddell JS, 
Massicotte MP, Turrentine MW, Cohen GA, Devaney EJ, Pearce 
FB, Carberry KE, Kroslowitz R, Almond CS; Berlin Heart Study 
Investigators. Prospective trial of a pediatric ventricular as-
sist device. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:532–541. doi: 10.1056/ 
NEJMoa1014164.
 
35. Cooper DS, Jacobs JP, Moore L, Stock A, Gaynor JW, Chancy T, 
Parpard M, Griffin DA, Owens T, Checchia PA, Thiagarajan RR, 
Spray TL, Ravishankar C. Cardiac extracorporeal life support: 
state of the art in 2007. Cardiol Young. 2007;17(suppl 2):104–
115. doi: 10.1017/S1047951107001217.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
