 Treatment Sequencing for Childhood ADHD: A Multiple-
Randomization Study of Adaptive Medication and Behavioral 
Interventions
William E. Pelham Jr.1, Gregory A. Fabiano2, James G. Waxmonsky3, Andrew R. Greiner1, 
Elizabeth M. Gnagy1, William E. Pelham III4, Stefany Coxe1, Jessica Verley2, Ira Bhatia2, 
Katie Hart1, Kathryn Karch2, Evelien Konijnendijk2, Katy Tresco2, Inbal Nahum-Shani5, and 
Susan A. Murphy5
1Florida International University
2State University of New York at Buffalo
3Pennsyvania State University
4Arizona State University
5University of Michigan
Abstract
 Objective—Behavioral and pharmacological treatments for children with ADHD were 
evaluated to address whether endpoint outcomes are better depending on which treatment is 
initiated first, and, in case of insufficient response to initial treatment, whether increasing dose of 
initial treatment or adding the other treatment modality is superior.
 Methods—Children with ADHD (ages 5–12, N = 146, 76% male) were treated for one school 
year. Children were randomized to initiate treatment with low doses of either (a) behavioral parent 
training (8 group sessions) and brief teacher consultation to establish a Daily Report Card or (b) 
extended-release methylphenidate (equivalent to .15 mg/kg/dose bid). After 8 weeks or at later 
monthly intervals as necessary, insufficient responders were rerandomized to secondary 
interventions that either increased the dose/intensity of the initial treatment or added the other 
treatment modality, with adaptive adjustments monthly as needed to these secondary treatments.
 Results—The group beginning with behavioral treatment displayed significantly lower rates of 
observed classroom rule violations (the primary outcome) and parent/teacher ratings of 
oppositional behavior at study endpoint and tended to have fewer out-of-class disciplinary events. 
Further, adding medication secondary to initial behavior modification resulted in better outcomes 
on the primary outcomes and other measures than adding behavior modification to initial 
medication. Normalization rates on teacher and parent ratings were generally high. Parents who 
began treatment with behavioral parent training had substantially better attendance than those 
assigned to receive training following medication.
Correspondence should be sent to: William E. Pelham, Jr., Professor of Psychology, Florida International University, 11200 SW 8th St 
AHC1 146, Miami, FL 33199, 305-348-3002; fax 305-348-3646. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2016 ; 45(4): 396–415. doi:10.1080/15374416.2015.1105138.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Conclusions—Beginning treatment with behavioral intervention produced better outcomes 
overall than beginning treatment with medication.
Keywords
Behavioral treatment; pharmacological treatment; ADHD
It is well established that evidence-based treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) includes medication with psychostimulants (Conners, 2002; Greenhill, 
Pliszka, Dulcan, & the Work Group on Quality Issues, 2002) and behavioral interventions 
(Pelham & Fabiano, 2008; Evans, Owens & Bunford, 2014; Fabiano et al., 2009). These two 
modalities of treatment have been studied for decades, both separately and in combination. 
Even so, disagreements remain among professionals regarding which treatment modality is 
preferable, as well as how treatment for ADHD should begin. Some recommend beginning 
medication immediately and supplementing with additional medication when necessary 
(AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues, 2007). Others recommend beginning with 
psychosocial treatments and adding medication if those treatments are insufficient (APA 
Working Group on Psychoactive Medications for Children and Adolescents, 2006). Others 
recommend starting with both treatments simultaneously (http://www.chadd.org). Most 
recently, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended each of the above strategies for 
different ages of children (Subcommittee on Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, 
Steering Committee on Quality Improvement and Management, 2011). However, the 
research base upon which these recommendations have been made is scant and limited in 
important ways (see for example Fabiano, Schatz, Aloe, Chacko, & Chronis-Tuscano, 2015).
In contrast to the hundreds of studies evaluating stimulants and behavioral interventions 
separately, only a handful of randomized controlled trials (RCT) have compared medication, 
behavioral treatment, and their combination, and each of these trials has limitations. A 
common feature in the existing studies is that they have used fixed doses—typically 
relatively high doses—of each treatment. For example, the largest and best-known RCT of 
comparative treatments for ADHD is the MTA (MTA Cooperative Group, 1999a), which 
used “optimal” dosing of medication (e.g., medication at school, evenings, and weekends) 
compared with a package of intensive behavioral treatments (parent training, summer 
treatment program, extensive teacher consultation, a classroom aide in school), and a 
combined condition that added the two high-dose treatments and began them 
simultaneously. The high-dose behavioral treatment was complex and costly, whereas the 
high-dose medication treatment had adverse effects on growth. The results of the MTA vary 
considerably based on the measure, individual differences, setting, timing of assessments, 
length of follow-up, and interpretation (e.g., MTA Cooperative Group, 1999a, 1999b, 2004; 
Molina et al., 2009; Pelham, 1999; Pelham et al., 2000; Owens et al., 2003; Swanson et al., 
2007), suggesting that additional finely-tuned investigations with different doses and 
sequences of treatments are necessary to clarify relative effects of the two major, evidence-
based treatment modalities.
More recent research has used both within-subject and RCT designs to evaluate multiple 
doses of medication in different combinations with varying doses of behavioral treatments 
Pelham et al.
Page 2
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Fabiano et al. 2007; Pelham et al., 2005; Pelham et al., 2014; Pelham et al., under review). 
These studies have consistently found that intensive behavior modification produces acute 
effects similar to relatively high doses of medication, but that low doses of both treatments 
also maximize response in some but not all children. Further, these studies show that 
combining low-dose medication with low-intensity behavioral interventions produces 
equivalent effects to those of high-dose/high-intensity unimodal treatments for the majority 
of children but with lower side effects, high parental satisfaction, and less complex 
behavioral interventions. Side effects of stimulants increase with escalating dose and 
duration of exposure (Barkley et al. 1990; Pelham et al, 1999; Stein et al, 2003, Swanson et 
al., 2007). Therefore, adding behavioral interventions that reduce medication dose should 
improve the tolerability of medication treatments. These studies have provided much-needed 
information regarding the relative effects of different doses of medication and behavior 
modification. However, they were implemented in an analogue summer treatment program 
setting and thus do not directly address whether low doses of either modality or their 
combination would be sufficient for many children in community settings.
Moreover, no studies in the literature have systematically varied and compared the sequence 
in which the two evidence-based modalities for ADHD are implemented. Medication is the 
most commonly employed intervention and often the only intervention used in practice 
(Epstein, et al., 2014; Visser et al. 2014) even in young children where professional 
guidelines recommend starting with behavioral treatments (Subcommittee on Attention-
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, 2011). Psychiatric guidelines endorse optimizing dose at 
home and school and using multiple medications prior to adding behavioral treatments 
(AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues, 2007). When medication is implemented at this 
high intensity level, there is less need for behavioral interventions, so the opportunity does 
not exist to discover whether some or most children would do well with behavioral 
interventions alone. For example, 75% of the individuals in the MTA behavioral treatment 
group remained without medication during the year of treatment, and, for the majority of 
those, for years afterward (MTA Cooperative Group, 1999a, 2004, Molina et al., 2009). This 
implies that many children might not need medication if behavioral treatments were 
employed first. Further, the majority of children in the medication management group 
needed additional treatment during the 14-month treatment period, but only medication 
could be used in this condition, and maintaining the initial medication effect required a 25% 
increase in dose during the year of treatment (Vitiello et al., 2001). In the combined 
treatment group, an adjustment to the classroom intervention—most often the Daily Report 
Card (DRC)—had to be made before medication dose could be increased, and that 
procedure reduced the need for increased doses of medication (Vitiello et al., 2001). The 
simultaneous introduction of conditions in the combined treatment group in the MTA means 
that it is not possible to evaluate whether a behavioral intervention employed before 
medication would have prevented the need for medication or reduced the dosage needed.
Thus, a significant limitation of existing ADHD treatment studies is that questions regarding 
sequencing, dosing, and combining treatments in natural settings have not been 
systematically explored. In contrast to this body of research, treatment decisions in practice 
are ongoing, based on the child’s impairment and response to intervention, and typically 
provided initially at low “doses” that are escalated only if necessary. There are two crucial 
Pelham et al.
Page 3
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 decision points in treating a child with ADHD: (1) which treatment should be implemented 
first? and (2) what should be done if the child does not respond adequately to that initial 
treatment? For example, if a child begins treatment with medication and fails to respond, 
there are two possibilities – increase the medication dose or add behavioral treatment. These 
decision points have many implications with regard to tolerability/side effects, treatment 
cost, and treatment efficacy, yet no studies have systematically evaluated such treatment-
sequencing questions for ADHD.
Adaptive treatment strategies have been gaining recognition as a strategy for preventive 
interventions and management of chronic disorders (Murphy, 2005; Collins, Murphy, & 
Bierman, 2004). In an adaptive approach, different dosages of treatment are provided 
differentially to individuals across time in response to decision rules that are based on 
individual characteristics. The major advantage of adaptive treatment designs is that they 
mimic what happens in typical practice where treatments are often modified or enhanced, 
but they retain controlled procedures, dosages, and rules to ensure replicability. Adaptive 
approaches have previously been used with comprehensive services of the type that are used 
for children with ADHD (for examples see Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 
1999a, 1999b). Thus, in the present investigation, we employed a research design that has 
been recommended for developing and comparing adaptive strategies, a sequential multiple 
assignment randomized trial (SMART; Murphy, 2005; Lavori & Dawson, 2000). In such 
trials, individuals are randomized at multiple decision points to produce each treatment 
strategy, combinations of which can be analyzed because they have been assigned by 
randomization.
The current study was undertaken to address the limitations in the existing treatment 
literature for children with ADHD with regard to treatment decisions and sequencing. A 
SMART design was used to compare the results of various treatment decisions that included 
behavioral and/or pharmacological interventions and their combination that can be widely 
applied in clinical practice. Starting with low doses, treatments were conducted over an 
entire school year in children’s school and home settings and adapted monthly within setting 
based on response and need for additional intervention. End-of-study outcomes were 
measured on objective classroom observations of behavior and parent/teacher ratings to 
determine the relative benefits of the treatments and their sequences.
Within this design we were able to examine three important clinical questions/aims. First 
(Aim 1): does it produce better outcomes on endpoint objective classroom measures and 
parent/teacher ratings to initiate treatment with a low dose of (a) pharmacological 
intervention with a stimulant drug or (b) behavioral intervention (group parent training and a 
DRC at school)? Second (Aim 2), what is the most effective treatment protocol, or pattern of 
initial treatment and conditional secondary/adaptive treatment (e.g., BM: behavioral 
followed by medication in the event of insufficient response) among the four that we 
employed (BM, Behavioral-Behavioral (BB), Medication-Behavioral (MB), and 
Medication-Medication (MM)? Third (Aim 3), in the event of insufficient response to one of 
the initial treatments, are endpoint results improved more by increasing the dose of that 
modality (e.g., adding secondary/adaptive B to initial B (B then B) when necessary) or 
Pelham et al.
Page 4
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adding treatment with the other modality (e.g., adding secondary/adaptive M to initial B (B 
then M)?
 Methods
 Participants
One hundred, fifty-two children with ADHD, between the ages of 5 and 12, participated. 
Participants were recruited in three cohorts of approximately 50 each via radio 
advertisement; direct mail; and referrals from schools, physicians and mental health 
providers. Recruitment occurred during the spring and summer of 2006, 2007, and 2008, 
with treatment commencing in September of each year and continuing throughout the school 
year.
Exclusionary criteria included: (1) Full Scale IQ below 70; (2) history of seizures or other 
neurological problems and/or medication to prevent seizures; (3) history of other medical 
problems for which psychostimulant treatment may involve considerable risk; (4) childhood 
history or concurrent diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorder, schizophrenia or other 
psychotic disorders, sexual disorder, organic mental disorder, or eating disorder; (5) lack of 
functional impairment; and (6) placement in special education classrooms.
After screening and informed consent, parents and teachers completed a number of 
instruments to determine diagnosis and study eligibility. To determine ADHD diagnosis, 
parents and teachers completed the Disruptive Behavior Disorders (DBD) Rating Scale 
(Pelham, Gnagy, Greenslade, & Milich, 1992). The DBD RS is a list of the DSM symptoms 
of ADHD, oppositional-defiant disorder (ODD) and conduct disorder (CD), updated for 
DSM-IV, and rated as not at all, just a little, pretty much, or very much. In addition, parents 
completed a semi-structured DBD interview consisting of DSM-IV symptoms of ADHD, 
ODD, and CD with supplemental situational probes (available from the first author). Parents 
and teachers completed the Impairment Rating Scale (IRS: Fabiano et al., 2006), which asks 
parents and teachers to evaluate on a six point Likert scale the degree to which a child is like 
a typical child and needs no treatment or has extreme problems that definitely require 
treatment or special services in five areas of function—relationship with parents/teachers, 
relationships with peers/siblings, academic progress, general classroom/family functioning, 
and overall functioning. Two clinicians independently reviewed all screening instruments 
and made diagnoses based on the DSM-IV rules, counting a symptom as present when 
endorsed by either teacher or parent (pretty much or very much on the DBD or parent 
interview). Impairment also had to be present in any domain, as indicated by cutpoints on 
the Impairment Rating Scale (IRS; Fabiano et al., 2006). In case of disagreement, a third 
clinician reviewed the file to determine final diagnosis. Eighty percent of the children met 
criteria for ADHD-Combined Type, with 15% Predominately Inattentive and 5% 
Predominately Hyperactive/Impulsive. Comorbid rates of ODD and CD are shown in Table 
1, along with demographic and descriptive information. None of the ADHD diagnoses and 
only 2% of the ODD and CD cases required a third reviewer to confirm diagnosis.
The sample size was determined using data from our previous study in a controlled setting 
(Fabiano et al., 2007; Pelham et al., 2014) to estimate effect sizes for the first-stage 
Pelham et al.
Page 5
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatments used in this study. These calculations determined that a sample size of 150 would 
result in at least 80% power for testing first-stage differences of at least 0.5 standard 
deviations when testing at a 0.05 level of significance. Recruitment and participant flow are 
illustrated in Figure 1. Six participants withdrew prior to the end of the study; 146 children 
completed the study assessments (96%). Three families withdrew because they did not wish 
to use medication and three withdrew because teachers refused participation upon initial 
contact after the family had been randomized. In the context of this multiple-randomization 
design, early withdrawal results in missing data on the group membership variable (i.e., 
responder versus non-responder). Although there are methods that can address this particular 
challenge (e.g., Shortreed, Laber, Scott-Stroup, Pineau, & Murphy, 2014), the subsequent 
analyses utilized only the 146 completers despite the use of multiple imputation to address 
missing data.
 Design
Figure 2 illustrates the study design. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two 
initial treatments that were initiated at the beginning of the school year: low-dose medication 
for school hours only—Medication First (MedFirst) —or low-intensity clinical behavioral 
intervention consisting of weekly behavioral parent training groups (BPT) and a school 
consultation to establish a Daily Report Card (DRC: Jacob & Pelham, 2000; available at 
http://ccf.fiu.edu; Volpe & Fabiano, 2013)—Behavior First (BehFirst). Eight weeks of 
treatment were then provided to allow for sufficient time to implement behavioral treatments 
and medication and to measure their impact, after which each participant’s response was 
measured according to the procedures described below. If a child experienced continued 
impairment in the school and/or home setting—that is, insufficient response to the initial 
treatment—then a second randomization occurred. At this point, one of two treatment 
strategies was employed in the setting(s) where impairment was present: (1) increase the 
dose/intensity of the initial treatment or (2) add the other treatment for a combined treatment 
modality. Children who responded to the initial treatment condition were maintained on that 
condition and monitored monthly; if their performance deteriorated at any time during the 
school year, then the second treatment randomization occurred at that time. Children’s 
progress continued to be monitored and their secondary treatment condition was tailored 
adaptively (initial treatment was not tailored). For example, a child who began treatment 
with a 10-mg dose of medication and was re-randomized to receive behavioral treatment 
stayed on the initial 10-mg dose for the remainder of the school year, and subsequent 
changes were made only to the adaptive behavioral part of the treatment. Treatments, 
evaluations of response, and treatment adjustments were made independently for the home 
and school settings, which afforded independent evaluations of need for treatments, 
adherence, uptake, and effectiveness at home and at school.
 Assessing need for additional treatment—Each month, parents and teachers 
completed ratings on a study-specific version of the IRS. The IRS was modified to ask 
whether, given the treatment currently in place, the child needed additional treatment, with 
responses ranging from 1 (definitely not) to 5 (definitely yes). If a rater responded probably 
yes or definitely yes in any domain, a study staff member called the rater to ask follow-up 
questions about the child’s impairment to ascertain whether the rating indicated true need for 
Pelham et al.
Page 6
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 additional services, and to ensure that the impairment could be addressed with the available 
treatments (e.g., clinicians ruled out that a significant life event may have triggered a 
temporary increase in problem behavior or that comorbid learning problems may have 
accounted for impairment in academic progress).
As an objective measure of response to intervention in the school setting, teachers also kept 
records from an individualized target behavior evaluation (ITBE; Pelham, Fabiano & 
Massetti, 2005). The ITBE is sensitive to treatment effects, can be implemented by general 
education classroom teachers, and is individualized to children’s areas of impairment 
(Fabiano, Vujnovic, Naylor, Pariseau, & Robins, 2009; Fabiano et al., 2010). During the first 
few weeks of school, a study case manager met with each child’s teacher to establish target 
behaviors (e.g., work completion, complying with teacher directions, behavior toward peers) 
and criteria for what the teacher considered success on that target behavior. ITBE goal 
attainment percentages were computed across class periods each day, and weekly averages 
were calculated for evaluation. ITBE results were not shared with children or parents for 
children in the MedFirst group. For children in the BehFirst and adaptive behavioral groups, 
the ITBE doubled as a DRC and was sent home to parents, who provided contingent 
consequences at home.
At the 8-week point and monthly thereafter, the study team met to discuss each case. If 
monthly IRS ratings indicated impairment, the study team ensured that the impairment was 
related to an appropriate target of study treatments. Two clinicians who were not directly 
involved in the child’s treatment and were unaware of the initial treatment condition were 
required to agree that additional treatment was necessary based on the teacher or parent IRS 
before the child could be rerandomized. In the school setting, ITBE performance was 
simultaneously evaluated; if weekly averages consistently fell below 75%, and need for 
additional treatment was also indicated on the IRS, then additional treatment was 
considered. Finally, if a child was in immediate danger of class failure or school suspension, 
these factors were taken into account in treatment decisions.
For the children who were rerandomized, monthly treatment decisions were made regarding 
additional dose increases or adjustments to the behavioral treatment. These decisions were 
made using the same criteria as for initial response. Treatment recommendations were 
tailored to specific domains of impairment as described below. Parents were able to decline 
treatment recommendations for medication or additional behavioral services, but 
recommendations were reoffered monthly if indicated. All treatment recommendations, the 
reasons for them, and records of treatments received were documented.
 Treatment Descriptions
Table 2 lists the components of the low and high dose medication and behavioral treatments. 
Children were initially randomized to a dose of behavioral or medication treatment, with 
additional treatment added, if indicated, based on a second randomization (see Figure 2).
 Initial Treatments—For children assigned to the BehFirst condition, parents received an 
8-session, group parent training program using the Community Parent Education Program 
which has been extensively used with ADHD children (COPE; Cunningham, Bremner, & 
Pelham et al.
Page 7
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Secord-Gilbert, 1998); children participated in concurrent group social skills training 
sessions, modified after a recreational period in the Summer Treatment Program (STP; 
Pelham et al., 2010). Prior to the first group parenting session, parents received an individual 
session to establish a home reward system for the DRC. The case manager also conducted 
three brief consultation visits with the child’s teacher regarding standard classroom 
management strategies. This included an initial review of the teacher’s classroom 
management practices, discussion of basic classroom management, including praising 
appropriate behavior, planned ignoring, and appropriate commands, as well as procedures 
related to implementing a DRC. DRCs were sent home each day and parents provided daily 
and weekly rewards for good performance at school. Following the initial 8-week treatment 
period, monthly parent-training booster sessions with a focus on maintenance and problem-
solving were offered for the remainder of the school year. The case manager also 
communicated with the teacher each month regarding adjustments to the DRC and the basic 
classroom management interventions that were in place.
For children assigned to the MedFirst condition, a dose equivalent to 0.15 mg/kg/dose b.i.d. 
of immediate release methylphenidate was calculated. In order to separate home and school 
settings for assessment and interventions, an 8-hour extended release preparation of 
methylphenidate (MPH) was used for the school setting only. For most children (92%), this 
was 10 mg per day of the extended release MPH preparation; for the remainder, their initial 
dose was 20 mg daily. School doses were administered by parents in the morning prior to 
school, and home meds were administered after school and on weekend mornings. The 0.15 
mg/kg dose was selected based on data from controlled studies (Fabiano et al. 2007, Pelham 
et al., 2005; Pelham et al., 2014) showing significant effects over placebo that are similar to 
a low intensity behavioral intervention with very good tolerability. Side effects were 
monitored weekly for the first two weeks of medication administration and monthly 
thereafter; spontaneous reports of side effects were also collected. Any time a child 
experienced moderate or severe side effects, the study physician made dosing adjustments if 
necessary. The case manager also adjusted the ITBE for children in this group as needed 
monthly based on teacher report.
 Secondary (Adaptive) Treatments—For children who began with behavioral 
treatment and were rerandomized to receive secondary/adaptive behavioral treatment (B-
then-B), more intensive standard behavior management procedures were implemented first 
to address individualized areas of impairment. At school, these included school-based 
rewards for DRC performance, classwide reward contingency systems, intensive classroom-
based contingency programs administered by the teacher or a paraprofessional, and time-out 
procedures. Home-based DRCs and individual parent-training sessions were introduced in 
the home setting. Other interventions were then added to address specific areas of child 
impairment (See Table 2).
For MedFirst children who began with medication and then were rerandomized to 
secondary/adaptive behavioral intervention (M-then-B), the standard initial behavioral 
treatments were implemented first (i.e., group parent training, DRC consultation). After 
eight weeks, the additional services described above were added according to the child’s 
continued impairments and need for tailored behavioral treatments.
Pelham et al.
Page 8
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For children who began with medication treatment and were rerandomized to receive 
secondary/adaptive medication (M-then-M), adjustments were made in two ways. First, the 
morning dose of the extended release MPH preparation given on school days could be 
increased if problems continued at school. Second, an after-school dose of immediate release 
MPH could be added to the child’s regimen if home behavior or homework completion were 
impaired (cf. Greenhill et al., 1996). In addition, MPH could be added for weekends. Parents 
also had the option of switching to a 12-hour formulation if the criteria for additional 
treatment were met in both settings.
For children who began with behavioral treatment and were rerandomized to receive 
secondary/adaptive medication (B-then-M), medication could be added as above for school, 
home, or both settings. Performance was evaluated monthly and adjustments were made 
taking into account impairment level and side effects.
 Primary Dependent Measure
 Classroom rule violations—As it is commonly regarded as the gold standard in 
assessments of treatment outcome for ADHD children in school settings, we used objective 
observation of student behavior in the classroom context as our primary dependent measure 
(Fabiano et al, 2009; Pelham, Fabiano, & Massetti, 2005). Every 4–6 weeks, independent 
observers visited the children’s classrooms and conducted 40-min. direct observations 
during academic tasks. Observers used the Student Behavior/Teacher Response code 
(available from first author), which includes observations of children’s rule-breaking 
behaviors (i.e., disrespect toward others, noncompliance with teacher requests, disrupting 
others, leaving seat without permission, inappropriate use of materials, speaking out without 
permission, and off-task behavior) and the teacher’s response to those behaviors (e.g., 
ignoring, providing a reprimand, providing a consequence; Vujnovic et al., 2014). Child 
behaviors were coded independently of teacher responses and were coded even if the teacher 
did not observe the behavior. Observers watched the entire class and coded behaviors 
exhibited by the target child and classmates. Classmates were observed anonymously and 
were not identified to the observer. The average number of behaviors exhibited by 
classmates was computed to produce a classroom comparison rate used as a covariate in 
analyses. The final observation of the school year was used in endpoint analyses because it 
corresponded with the time interval during which parent and teacher endpoint ratings were 
collected
In order to enhance reliability, observers were required to memorize operational definitions 
of behavior categories and completed a training session consisting of role-plays, practice 
observations, and classroom observations with an experienced observer. For 21% of the 
classroom observations, a second trained observer accompanied the primary observer and 
conducted an independent reliability observation of the same classroom. Reliability of the 
observations was high, with a correlation of 0.91 (p<0.01), and a mean difference of 2.3 (SD 
= 2.8; range = 0–17) for the total classroom rule violations. These figures are consistent with 
those from previous studies using the same observational code (e.g., Fabiano et al., 2010).
Pelham et al.
Page 9
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Secondary Dependent Measures
 Number of out-of-class disciplinary events—Teachers kept daily records of out-
of-class disciplinary events (e.g., being sent to the principal’s office). The number of 
reported events was summed over the length of the school year for subsequent analysis.
 Parent and teacher ratings—At endpoint, parents and teachers completed the DBD 
RS and the Social Skills Rating System (SSRS; Gresham & Elliott, 1989). These measures 
have been widely used in studies of ADHD and have published psychometric information.
 Tracking of Treatment Fidelity
Attendance records were kept for all treatment sessions, and clinicians recorded all meetings 
and contacts with teachers and parents. Medication dispensing records were kept. Parents 
returned all unused pills at each medication visit, and pill counts were conducted to 
determine the number of pills used.
To ensure fidelity with the behavioral treatments, all treatment components were manualized 
and procedural checklists were developed for all parent and teacher sessions. Clinicians met 
weekly with supervisors to review records of their sessions, and supervisors provided 
feedback as necessary. At each classroom observation, the observer recorded whether or not 
the teacher implemented the prescribed behavioral management procedures during the 
observation period.
 Missing Data Handling
Missing values were minimal across all study variables and all participants. Outcomes 
ranged from 0 to 14% missing: classroom rules violations (98% complete), out-of-class 
disciplines (97%), teacher DBD rating (99%), teacher SSRS rating (99%), parent DBD 
rating (90%), parent SSRS rating (86%), and final medication doses (100%). At the 
participant level, 125 of 146 (86%) participants had complete data for all of the analyzed 
outcomes. We used multiple imputation to ensure unbiased estimates, assuming the data to 
be Missing at Random (MAR). Here MAR is a plausible assumption given the inclusion of a 
large number of covariates, including baseline measures of outcome variables; measures’ 
values at earlier waves are typically the best predictors of missing values at later waves in a 
longitudinal design.
 Imputation—In order to accommodate the non-normal distributions of many relevant 
variables, we implemented a chained equations approach in R 3.1.3 (R Core Team, 2015) 
using the mice package (v2.22; van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011) extended by the 
countimp package for imputing count variables (v1.0; Kleinke & Reinecke, 2013). As 
methodologists recommend an inclusive strategy (Collins, Schafer, & Kam, 2001), the 
imputation model included approximately 50 variables: all the variables in the subsequent 
analyses, all the sample characteristics listed in Table 1, and baseline measures of outcomes 
wherever available. Distributions of all imputed variables were inspected and each was 
modeled using normal, predictive mean matching, negative binomial, logistic, and 
multinomial regressions, as indicated. Due to the large number of items and their high 
correlations (i.e., multiple items from the same measure), imputation occurred at the level of 
Pelham et al.
Page 10
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the scale rather than at the level of the item. One hundred imputed data sets were created, 
following recent recommendations that using larger number of imputations can minimize 
simulation error (White, Royston, & Wood, 2011).
 Analysis and pooling—All subsequent analyses were conducted in SAS 9.3. Analysis 
was completed separately on each of the 100 imputations according to the procedures 
described in subsequent sections. SAS 9.3 PROC MIANALYZE was used to combine 
estimates across imputations; all reported estimates represent these combined (or pooled) 
estimates.
 Analytic Plan
Our analyses largely parallel those described by Nahum-Shani and colleagues (2012); we 
direct readers to that article for more details about SMART design analyses. In the present 
study, the analysis of treatment outcome data included a series of comparisons to test 
different treatment decisions. Each comparison is described below.
 Main effect of initial treatment assignment on endpoint outcomes (Aim 1)—
End-of-treatment outcomes of those that started with medication (MedFirst group) and those 
that started with behavioral treatment (BehFirst group) were compared using regressions 
with group membership as a predictor in order to examine whether the initial treatment 
modality impacted outcome. In addition, survival analyses were conducted to determine 
whether the groups differed in the need for additional treatment and the length of time 
before children needed additional treatment.
 Pairwise comparisons among SMART-embedded treatment protocols on 
endpoint outcomes (Aim 2)—Second, outcomes were compared across each of the four 
treatment protocols naturally embedded in the SMART design—BB, BM, MB, and MM. 
The first letter denotes that protocol’s initial treatment (first-stage treatment in Nahum-Shani 
et al, 2012) and the second letter denotes that protocol’s secondary/adaptive treatment 
(second stage treatment in Nahum-Shani et al, 2012), to be implemented in the event of 
insufficient response to the initial treatment. For example, the BM protocol entailed starting 
the participant with behavioral treatment and then adding medication if and only if there was 
insufficient response. It is important to note that the protocols do not reflect the actual 
treatment received, but rather the set of rules followed to assign treatment at both stages. For 
example, a child who responded to Behavior First and is therefore never rerandomized to 
receive secondary/adaptive treatment is included in analyses of the BM protocol even though 
he did not receive medication. This idea of being consistent with a particular embedded 
protocol is a subtle but important aspect of the SMART design that is discussed in detail 
elsewhere (Nahum-Shani et al., 2012). In the present analyses, we used an effects coding 
scheme and generalized estimating equations to achieve all the pairwise comparisons of 
protocols in a single model using SAS PROC GENMOD with robust standard errors, as 
described in the appendices of Nahum-Shani et al. (2012). We also gave weights of 2 to the 
responders to first-stage treatment and weights of 4 to the insufficient responders in order to 
account for the systematic undersampling of the latter in each protocol due to the second re-
randomization (Nahum-Shani et al., 2012).
Pelham et al.
Page 11
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Comparison of endpoint outcomes for secondary/adaptive treatments given 
insufficient response to initial treatment (Aim 3)—Third, supplemental comparisons 
were performed within each of the initial treatment arms to determine whether it is better to 
augment (i.e., increase the dose of) that treatment or add the other treatment, given 
insufficient response to an initial intervention. Thus, responders to the initial treatments were 
excluded from these comparisons. These analyses consisted of regressions with group 
membership as a predictor that compared (1) B-then-B with B-then-M and (2) M-then-M 
with M-then-B.
 Normalization rates—Finally, we used the procedure reported in Swanson et al. (2001) 
to evaluate normalization of functioning on teacher and parent ratings at the study endpoint. 
A score of 1.0 or lower on an aggregate of ADHD and ODD items from the DBD Rating 
Scale was used to define normalization. Teacher and parent reports were examined 
separately due to the separation of interventions across settings.
 Count outcomes—Two dependent variables were counts: observed classroom rule 
violations and number of out-of-class disciplinary events. Count outcomes often violate the 
assumptions of linear (OLS) regression, so we adapted the SMART analysis procedure to 
incorporate negative binomial regression, a robust approach to modeling count outcome 
variables (Coxe, West, & Aiken, 2009). Negative binomial regression is related to the more 
well-known Poisson regression, but relaxes some assumptions of Poisson regression that are 
typically not met (i.e., equidispersion). As with the continuous outcomes, SAS PROC 
GENMOD was used for these analyses, with the addition of the negative binomial modeling 
and incorporating the OFFSET option to adjust for individual differences in the length of 
observation intervals. In the observed classroom rule violations analyses, average peer rule 
violations per hour was included as a covariate to control for the general level of disruptive 
behavior in each classroom.
 Results
 Need for Additional Treatment
In the school setting, 67% of the children who began treatment with behavioral interventions 
required additional treatment by the end of the school year compared with 47% of the 
children who began the school year receiving a low dose of medication (odds ratio or 
OR=2.23). Survival analyses indicated a significant group difference; Breslow χ2=7.4, p < .
01.
In the home setting, there was no difference in rate of rerandomization for BehFirst (82%) 
and MedFirst (88%) groups; OR=0.63. Almost all children met criteria for additional 
treatment in the home setting regardless of initial treatment.
 Endpoint Classroom Observations
Tables 3–6 display the results of analyses for classroom rules violations as well as 
subsequent outcomes. Comparisons of initial treatment strategy (BehFirst vs. MedFirst) 
revealed a significant difference on classroom rule violations, as illustrated in Figure 3. 
Pelham et al.
Page 12
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Children who began treatment with behavior management exhibited significantly fewer rule 
violations per hour than children who received MedFirst (incidence rate ratio or IRR=0.66, 
p<.01). Pairwise comparisons of the four treatment protocols revealed several significant 
differences (Figure 3). The BB protocol resulted in fewer rule violations than the BM 
protocol (IRR=0.78, p=.054), the MM protocol (IRR=0.56, p<.01), and the MB protocol 
(IRR=0.50, p<.001). In addition, the BM protocol resulted in fewer rules violations than the 
MB protocol (IRR=0.65, p<.01). For insufficient responders to first-stage behavioral 
treatment, increasing the dose with second-stage behavioral treatment resulted in 
significantly fewer violations than did adding medication (IRR=0.71, p<.05). For insufficient 
responders to first-stage medication treatment, there were no significant differences between 
second-stage treatments.
 Out-of-Class Disciplinary Events
Comparisons of initial treatment strategy revealed a trend wherein the BehFirst group 
displayed fewer out-of-class disciplinary events than the MedFirst group (IRR=0.52, p<.10, 
Figure 3). Pairwise comparisons of the four treatment protocols indicated that (Figure 3): the 
BM protocol resulted in significantly fewer events than the MB protocol (IRR= 0.16, p<.
001) and the BB protocol (IRR=0.34, p<.05), and the MM protocol resulted in significantly 
fewer events than the MB protocol (IRR=0.34, p<.10). For insufficient responders to initial 
behavioral treatment, adding medication trended toward resulting in significantly fewer 
events than increasing the dose of behavioral treatment (IRR=0.30, p<.10). For insufficient 
responders to first-stage medication treatment, increasing the dose with medication 
treatment trended toward resulting in fewer events than did adding behavioral intervention 
(IRR=0.27, p<.10).
 Teacher Ratings
On teacher DBD ratings, no significant differences emerged for ADHD symptoms. For 
ratings of oppositional/defiant behavior, the pairwise comparisons of the four treatment 
protocols indicated a near significant advantage of the BM protocol over the MB protocol 
(d=0.40, p=.06). The supplemental comparisons indicated that for insufficient responders to 
first-stage medication, increasing the dose with second-stage medication trended toward 
resulting in lower ratings of oppositional/defiant behavior than did adding behavioral 
(d=0.61, p<.10).
For Total Social Skills score of the teacher SSRS, there was a trend toward advantage of the 
BM protocol over the MB protocol (d=0.35, p<.10). Other comparisons were nonsignificant.
With regard to normalization of combined ADHD/ODD teacher ratings at endpoint, similar 
numbers of the children assigned to MedFirst or BehFirst had mean DBD ratings of 1.0 or 
less—69% and 78% respectively. Eighty-four percent of those who responded to first-stage 
medication treatment met the normalization criterion, as did 92% of those who responded to 
first-stage behavioral treatment. For those needing additional treatment, 63% of the M-then-
M group was normalized, compared to 61% of the B-then-B group, and 38% of the M-then-
B group compared to 80% of the B-then-M group.
Pelham et al.
Page 13
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Parent Ratings
As with teachers, there were no significant differences on ADHD ratings in any 
comparisons. For ratings of oppositional/defiant behavior, pairwise comparisons of the four 
treatment protocols revealed a significant advantage of the BM protocol over the MB 
protocol (d=0.56, p<.05) and BB protocol (d=0.38, p<.10), as well as a trend advantage of 
the MM protocol over the MB protocol (d=0.40, p<.10). The supplemental comparisons 
indicated that for insufficient responders to first-stage behavioral, adding second-stage 
medication trended toward resulting in lower ratings of oppositional/defiant behavior than 
did increasing the intensity of behavioral treatment (d=0.45, p<.10). Likewise, for 
insufficient responders to first-stage medication, increasing the dose with second-stage 
medication trended toward resulting in lower ratings of oppositional/defiant behavior than 
did adding behavioral (d=0.46, p<.10). There were no significant differences in any 
comparisons of the Total Social Skills score of the parent SSRS.
With regard to normalization of ADHD/ODD parent ratings at endpoint, 31% of the 
MedFirst and 39% of the BehFirst, groups met criteria for normalization. Two-thirds of 
those who responded to first-stage medication treatment met the normalization criterion, as 
did 54% of those who responded to first-stage behavioral treatment. For those needing 
additional treatment, 34% of the M-then-M group was normalized, compared to 30% of the 
B-then-B group, and 18% of the M-then-B group compared to 40% of the B-then-M group.
 Treatment Received
For those who began with BehFirst, 3% of the families declined parent training. Remaining 
parents attended an average of 6 of the 8 group sessions (median=7, mode=8), 69% attended 
an adequate dose of parent training (cf. MTA Cooperative Group, 1999), and 31% attended 
at least one booster session after the initial parent training (see Figure 4). All scheduled 
teacher meetings were completed, and DRCs were established for all but one child in the 
BehFirst condition. For children in B-then-M, 13 parents (21%) declined the initiation of 
medication.
At the initial 8-week assessment point, 9% of the MedFirst families had declined 
medication. Of those who accepted medication, they were medicated on 97% of their school 
days. For those in MedFirst rerandomized to the M-then-B group, 60% of these parents did 
not attend any of the assigned group parent training sessions (mean=1.9, median=0, 
mode=0); only 11% of these families received an adequate dose of parent training, and only 
11% attended at least one booster session (Figure 4). At school, all required teacher 
meetings were completed and school DRCs were established.
In the adaptive behavioral treatment arms (either M-then-B or B-then-B), 11 children 
attended Saturday Treatment Program sessions, 3 received extra academic tutoring, and 13 
received additional intensive interventions at school (e.g., the good behavior game initiated 
as a classwide intervention) administered by the teacher or a paraprofessional as part of the 
adaptive behavioral treatment condition. The remainder received either additional standard 
teacher consultations to establish higher-intensity teacher-delivered consequences such as 
school-based rewards and class-wide contingencies or individual parent sessions to improve 
Pelham et al.
Page 14
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 parenting skills or establish more intensive parent-delivered interventions at home. Eleven 
families assigned to behavioral treatment took medication outside of the protocol. Five of 
these families used the medication for only 1–2 months before stopping the medication.
To determine whether beginning treatment with behavioral intervention would decrease the 
dose of medication required for a child treated with medication in school, school-day dosing 
in mg/kg/dose equivalent was compared for the two groups involving adaptive medication: 
B-then-M and M-then-M at endpoint. At the end of the school year, 24% of the B-then-M 
group was unmedicated at school compared with 5% of the M-then-M group (that is, parents 
either did not start or elected to stop medication). Of those who were medicated, children in 
B-then-M were taking significantly lower doses at school (M=0.21 mg/kg/dose, SD=0.10) 
than M-then-M (M=0.28, SD=0.14), F(1, 70)=4.26, p<.05. At home, 39% of the M-then-M 
group and 35% of the B-then-M group were unmedicated (parents either did not start or 
elected to stop medication). For those who were medicated at home, doses were not 
significantly different: (B-then-M: M=0.22, SD=0.10; M-then-M: M=0.21, SD=0.12).
 Discussion
This study addressed three key questions: first (Aim 1), does it produce better outcomes on 
objective classroom measures and teacher and parent ratings to begin treatment with a low 
dose of (a) medication treatment or (b) behavioral treatment? Second (Aim 2), what is the 
most effective treatment protocol, or pattern of first-stage treatment and conditional second-
stage treatment among the four imbedded SMART treatment protocols? Third (Aim 3), in 
the event of insufficient response to a specific initial treatment, is it more effective to 
increase the dose of that modality or add treatment with the other modality? All groups were 
functioning relatively well at endpoint, as was expected given that two effective treatments 
were compared. However, there were important differences in outcomes, as a result of the 
initial treatment assignment and the protocol followed. Our findings provide the following 
answers to the three questions/Aims noted above as follows:
1.
Beginning treatment with a low dose of behavior modification resulted in 
significantly lower rates of observed classroom rule violations and a trend for 
out-of-class disciplinary events relative to beginning with a low dose of 
medication.
2.
The best of the four specific treatment protocols began with behavioral 
treatment and then added medication in the event of insufficient response 
(BM). The worst protocol began treatment with medication and added 
behavioral treatment in the event of insufficient response (MB). The BB and 
MM protocols produced outcomes in between these two and were often 
comparable, though BB was superior to MB and MM on the primary outcome 
variable.
3.
In the event of insufficient response to initial behavioral treatment, increasing 
the intensity of behavioral treatment (B-then-B) was significantly superior on 
the primary outcome (classroom rule violations); adding medication (B-then-
M) had nominal advantages on several other outcome variables, two of which 
Pelham et al.
Page 15
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were trends. In the event of insufficient response to medication, increasing 
dose of medication (M-then-M) was nominally superior to adding behavior 
modification (M-then-B) on every measure with small to moderate effect sizes, 
three of which were trends.
These results have clear implications for treatment for children with ADHD in mental 
health, primary care, and school settings, and we discuss each in turn.
With regard to our first question, beginning school-based treatment with a low dose of 
behavior modification (eight sessions of group parent training plus establishing a DRC at 
school with home rewards) resulted in functioning in the school setting on key outcome 
measures that was comparable to or better than beginning school-based treatment with a low 
dose of stimulant medication. Notably, the low dose of behavior modification was a superior 
starting strategy on the primary outcome measure, direct observations of classroom behavior 
(66% as many rule violations), as well as the frequency of out-of-class discipline (54% as 
many incidents). Although teacher ratings did not differentiate BehFirst from MedFirst, 
ratings of oppositional behavior decreased by more than 50% from baseline in the BehFirst 
group, and teachers rated 78% of children in the BehFirst group as normalized. For 33% of 
the BehFirst children, the low dose of behavioral intervention was sufficient treatment in 
school for the entire school year.
There were no differences between the groups in the numbers of children who needed 
additional treatment at home, with more than 80% of both groups meeting criteria for 
rerandomization (see discussion below). Similarly, there were no significant differences 
between initial treatments on parent ratings of symptoms, oppositional behavior, or social 
skills.
Interestingly, compared to the 33% who did not need additional school-based treatment in 
BehFirst, nearly two-thirds more, 53% of children in the MedFirst initial assignment did 
sufficiently well with the low dose of medication that they did not require additional 
treatment. Further, a substantial portion of the children assigned to the BM embedded 
protocol (24%) were not taking medication at endpoint—far more than the MB protocol. In 
other words, although the combined treatment protocol (MB) within the MedFirst arm 
contained more medicated children than did the combined treatment protocol (BM) within 
the BehFirst arm, and although there were more initial responders in the MedFirst group 
than in the BehFirst arm, MedFirst remained inferior to BehFirst as an initial treatment 
condition.
These differences in the effects of the initial intervention may be linked to differences in 
treatment uptake of parent training, as shown in Figure 4. Engagement in the parent training 
groups and the booster sessions was dramatically reduced in the MedFirst families relative to 
the BehFirst families. Indeed, most BehFirst parents attended the majority of BPT sessions 
and received an adequate “dose” of BPT, while only a small minority of MedFirst families 
who were assigned to BPT as a secondary/adaptive intervention attended BPT. In other 
words, the provision of medication before the initiation of parent training was associated 
with greatly reduced rates of engagement in parent training, and presumably worse 
functioning at school and home. This finding parallels those reported in the STAR*D study 
Pelham et al.
Page 16
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of antidepressants for adults with major depression: 71% of adults that were insufficient 
responders to SSRI treatment did not choose to pursue subsequent cognitive behavior 
therapy (Wisniewski et al., 2007). Perhaps parents who began with behavioral treatment 
were more motivated to engage because they had not already dealt with several of weeks of 
problem behavior at school without having received the parenting toolkit provided in BPT. 
Alternatively, perhaps parents who began with medication, which requires minimal effort 
and time, were reluctant to participate in more effortful and time-consuming parent training, 
a major portion of which is learning to provide home backup for the school DRC. It is 
possible that the teachers were less engaged in second-stage behavioral interventions 
following initial medication for the same reasons as parents. Other researchers have reported 
difficulties with engagement and attendance in behavioral treatments for ADHD (see for 
example Barkley et al., 2000). Additional research is necessary to elucidate the mechanisms 
of this problem with treatment engagement. Whatever the mechanism, the clinical 
implications are quite clear: if providers intend for the parents of ADHD children to receive 
parent training and for teachers to provide “extra” classroom management for the child (i.e., 
for the child to receive multimodal treatment) but start treatment with medication, they 
reduce the likelihood of engagement in behavioral treatment and thus negatively impact 
treatment outcome. Unfortunately, standard practice among physicians is to provide 
medication immediately rather than delay it until the completion of parent training. The 
results of the present study suggest this is a poor strategy.
With respect to our second question/Aim—which of the four embedded treatment protocols 
produces the best outcomes?—it should be noted that each initial assignment is associated 
with two embedded protocols, specifically those that began with that particular modality 
(i.e., for BehFirst, the BB and BM protocols). With this in mind, the comparisons of 
treatment protocols suggest that the primary driver of the first-stage treatment main effect 
was the discrepancy between the two combined protocols, BM and MB. As Table 4 shows, 
the two protocols involving increasing the initial intervention (BB and MM) produced 
generally comparable results (though BB was superior to MM on classroom observations), 
but the BM combined-treatment protocol was significantly more effective than the MB 
protocol. The former produced the best outcomes on all but two variables, while the latter 
produced the worst outcomes on all but two variables. Children following a combined 
treatment protocol that began with behavioral treatment were superior on measures of 
classroom observations, disciplinary actions, and teacher and parent ratings of ODD. Not 
surprisingly, the normalization rates on teacher ratings in the school setting in the children 
receiving multimodal treatment was double for the B-then-M (80%) versus M-then-B (38%) 
groups, whereas normalization rates for the B-then-B and M-then-M protocols were nearly 
identical (61% and 63%). This finding illustrating the superiority of BM over MB has 
substantial clinical implications, shedding light on how sequencing of intervention can 
enhance (or inhibit) engagement within an evidence-based intervention. For example, the 
results of the present study suggest that the failure to begin behavioral treatment before 
medication may have contributed to the relatively small advantage of combined treatment to 
medication alone in the MTA study.
With respect to our third question/Aim, how to best augment treatment given insufficient 
response to initial treatment, Table 5 shows that a low dose of medication is a useful 
Pelham et al.
Page 17
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adjunctive intervention to add to initial behavioral treatment in the case of insufficient 
response, as is increasing the intensity of behavioral intervention. Both additions were 
helpful on a range of measures. In contrast, given insufficient response to medication, 
increasing the dose of medication was superior across measures to adding behavioral 
treatment (Table 6). This finding has important clinical implications. Once medication has 
been employed, it appears that only a higher medication dose results in continued 
improvement when more treatment is needed. As discussed above, the reasons for this may 
be related to failure of parents (or teachers) to engage in behavioral treatments when they 
follow medication. It should be noted that these comparisons involved small Ns, and power 
to detect differences was limited. Further, a treatment regimen that includes only medication 
is not a viable long-term treatment strategy for ADHD children, as it confers no long-term 
benefit (Molina et al., 2009).
Furthermore, with regard to the secondary treatments involving adaptive medication, 
children in the B-then-M group were taking significantly lower doses of medication at 
school than children in the M-then-M condition. This finding indicates that beginning 
treatment with behavior modification serves to decrease the necessary dose when medication 
is used, which will result in lower levels of dose-related side effects (cf. Swanson et al, 
2006).
Taken altogether, our results replicate and extend in the school-year environment what we 
have reported in earlier studies conducted in analogue summer program settings (Fabiano et 
al., 2007; Pelham et al., 2005; Pelham et al., 2014). Namely, a low dose of behavioral 
treatment—in this study eight sessions of large group BPT and establishing a DRC at school
— is effective and sufficient for a substantial number of children with ADHD in school, 
recreational, and home settings. Further, a low dose of medication (.15 mg/kg/dose b.i.d.) 
was sufficient in the school setting for 53% of the children. Low doses of the two modalities 
in combination were very effective for insufficient responders, but only when the behavioral 
treatment came first. Neither our previous studies nor the MTA sequenced interventions, but 
these results provide clear guidance about which sequence should be followed when 
implementing combined treatment—BM rather than MB.
This is the first study to our knowledge that has addressed the effectiveness of such low-dose 
interventions as a starting treatment for ADHD implemented in a community/school/clinic 
setting. Low dose medication was sufficient in the school setting for a year for nearly half of 
the children, but providing it first limited the effectiveness of additional behavioral treatment 
when necessary. Further, the cost of the MedFirst condition and its protocols in the study 
were far higher than BehFirst and its associated protocols (Page et al, this issue). Thus, the 
study demonstrates that starting with a low dose of behavioral treatment and either 
enhancing behavioral treatment or adding medication when necessary produces better 
outcomes and is a far less costly approach to treatment for ADHD than starting with 
medication (Page et al, this issue). Others have found increased side effects and reduced 
tolerability as the dose and duration of medication increases (Barkley, McMurray, 
Edelbrock, & Robbins., 1990; Stein et al., 2003; Pelham, et al, 1999; Swanson et al. 2006). 
An adaptive approach in clinical practice that begins with low intensity behavior 
modification and increases intensity or adds medication adaptively would appear to be the 
Pelham et al.
Page 18
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment approach of choice for children with ADHD. The MTA had previously shown that 
medication dose escalations over time are less necessary when multimodal treatment is 
being implemented compared to medication alone (Vitiello et al., 2001), but the present 
results extend that finding to considerably lower and less costly (Page et al., this issue) doses 
of both medication and behavioral treatment than employed in the MTA and most other 
studies in the ADHD treatment field.
Importantly, the adaptive nature of the approach to behavioral intervention was effective in 
this study in producing very positive outcomes with relatively low intensity interventions for 
most children and enhanced interventions for a small subset. For example, the adaptive 
behavioral treatments employed in the school setting were carried out by the general 
education teacher without additional intervention staff in two-thirds of the cases, and in only 
six cases was an intensive paraprofessional-based program implemented. In contrast, in the 
MTA a half-day paraprofessional—a very costly intervention—was provided for nearly a 
full semester for all participants regardless of need. The present results suggest that that was 
unnecessary for the vast majority of the children. These findings illustrate the utility of the 
adaptive treatment approach, in which children only receive the types and levels of treatment 
they require based on individual impairment. As discussed in the companion to this paper 
(Page et al., this issue), the BB protocol was the least costly of the four protocols and the 
BM protocol a close second. Thus, our effectiveness results and costs show a far different 
picture than presented in the only other comparative study of cost-effectiveness in the 
ADHD literature (cf. Jensen et al, 2005). These findings have important implications for the 
public health system and insurance companies with regard to treatment costs for ADHD and 
call for a reassessment of federal, insurer, and medical society recommendations on 
treatments for ADHD, which currently prioritize medication and limit the extent to which 
behavioral treatments can be utilized.
 Limitations
It is important to note that this was an effectiveness study carried out in the natural 
environment and therefore strict experimental control over the behavioral interventions 
could not be exerted. Given the prevalence of classroom management training in schools, 
teachers in the medication–only group were no doubt routinely implementing behavioral 
strategies to manage their classrooms, and parents in the medication-only group may have 
been implementing behavioral practices such as time out. Some of the lack of differences in 
behavioral treatments may thus be due to the natural presence of behavioral treatments in 
school and home settings. In addition, it was not possible to collect measures of parents’ in-
home implementation of procedures such as rewarding the Daily Report Card. Furthermore, 
although observers completed checks of treatment integrity and fidelity during their 
observations, they were often unable to observe teachers’ implementation of specific 
procedures that were to be implemented (e.g., tracking DRC targets and giving feedback to 
the child). We therefore were unable to calculate specific data for the fidelity of teacher-
delivered interventions. In contrast, medication was provided with greater experimental 
control, with dosing practices varying some from what is done in routine clinical practice in 
order to systematically assess sequencing effects across settings. For example, initial 
Pelham et al.
Page 19
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 medication treatments focused on school only, with evidence of objective impairment 
required to be eligible for additional treatment at school or at home.
As noted above, many more children met criteria for additional treatment in the home setting 
than in the school setting. In part this may be due to the initial treatment conditions. For 
example, medication was initially provided only at school for MedFirst.. This approach 
exposed those families to the impact of medication on their child at school and may have led 
parents to rate their child as needing medication at home in order to obtain medication for 
the home setting. The BPT program for BehFirst families was a brief, group-based 
program--as opposed to the individually developed DRC for each child--and was sufficient 
for only a subset of families. Others needed more individually-focused BPT, although the 
amount required was relatively little except for a small subset of families. The lack of a 
parallel, home-based DRC criterion (like the one used in the school setting) for additional 
treatment also made it easier for children to meet criteria for additional treatment at home 
relative to the criteria for allocating additional treatment at school. That is, parents simply 
needed to indicate that their child was having problems and needed more treatment, whereas 
teacher indication of need and ITBE target goal attainment rate below 75% were required at 
school. This may also explain the somewhat contrary findings that BehFirst resulted in 
superior outcomes relative to MedFirst, but the majority of children in the study met criteria 
for rerandomization in the home setting. Future studies that utilize similar ITBE goal 
attainment strategies in the home in addition to parent ratings may yield different outcomes 
that are more similar to that obtained in the school setting in this study.
Another limitation relates to our study design, which included a maximum of two 
randomizations per child. Ideally additional decision points might be included. For example, 
in our protocol a child in need of adaptive second stage behavioral treatment could receive 
ad lib treatment, as opposed to systematically limited, incrementally larger “doses” of 
behavioral intervention, which might have been sufficient. Alternatively, for a child who is 
still doing poorly after the first rerandomization, another opportunity to cross over to the 
other treatment might be considered. For example, rather than a temporary classroom 
paraprofessional, medication might have been considered at a third randomization for the 
small number of children who require that level of assistance. This may be particularly true 
in the case of nonadherence to the assigned treatments. The sample size required for 
additional decision points precluded such considerations for the current study. Inclusion 
criteria also required attendance within general education classrooms, so whether these 
results generalize to self-contained special education classrooms is not known.
A final limitation was statistical power to address secondary aims. The study was fully 
powered only for examination of the main effect of first-stage treatment (question/Aim 1). 
We did not expect so many children to respond to first stage treatments and not need 
additional treatment, so we did not plan for a larger N. Thus our power was reduced for 
pairwise comparisons of the embedded treatment protocols (question/Aim 2), and then 
further reduced for the comparison of treatments among insufficient responders 
(question/Aim 3). Thus, numerous small to moderate effect sizes did not achieve statistical 
significance but might have with a larger sample.
Pelham et al.
Page 20
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Future Research
Finally, the adaptive methodology employed is promising for future studies of interventions 
for ADHD in the pursuit of treatment tailoring for individual differences in functional 
deficits. Replication of these results with a larger sample would afford better power and the 
opportunity to investigate mediators and moderators for the treatment results that we 
reported herein, including individual differences in comorbidity and impairment. For 
example, why did parents whose children received medication first have such dramatically 
reduced rates of uptake of parent training and associated poor outcomes relative to the other 
protocols? Why did so many more children meet criteria for rerandomization at home 
compared to school? Since combined treatment starting with behavior modification was so 
effective, a natural follow-up question is how psychologists and other psychosocial mental 
health and school-based providers can collaborate with M.D. prescribers in practice settings 
to implement the conjoint strategies that were shown in this paper to be effective. Finally, 
how might these interventions and approaches have to change to be effective with samples of 
ADHD children both younger and older than our elementary-aged sample?
 Clinical Implications
The results have direct relevance for clinical practice. The relatively low-dose-treatment 
strategies that we employed are implementable in community mental health, primary care, 
and school settings. The results suggest that practitioners should initiate treatment with low 
doses of intervention, increasing intensity only when indicated. Many children will respond 
sufficiently to low doses of initial treatments. Further, practitioners who initiate treatment 
with behavioral intervention (group parent training and a school DRC) will produce better 
outcomes for their patients than those starting with medication. In the face of inadequate 
response to initial behavioral treatment, either more intensive behavioral intervention or the 
addition of a low dose of medication for school hours will produce improved patient and 
family outcomes. In contrast, if medication is the first stage treatment and is insufficient, 
adding behavioral treatment is not an effective treatment option--outcomes are worse than 
other strategies and parent engagement in subsequent parent training is very poor. Physicians 
in particular need to be aware of these facts—simply advising their patients who have started 
medication to go to a psychologist for parent training will not result in the desired outcome
—that is, a multimodal intervention. This paper and our companion paper on the costs of 
these interventions strongly suggest a reconsideration of the current practice of relying on 
medication as first line and typically sole treatment for many ADHD children. These results 
suggest that a stepwise approach to treatment, starting with low doses of behavioral 
treatment and increasing in intensity or adding medication only if necessary, would be a 
cost-effective public health strategy for treatment of childhood ADHD in school and 
community settings.
 Acknowledgments
Funding
This research was funded by a grant from the Institute of Education Sciences (R324B060045). Dr. Pelham was also 
supported in part by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health (MH069614, MH069434, MH092466, 
MH53554, MH065899, MH62988), the Institute of Education Sciences (R324J060024, LO30000665A), the 
Pelham et al.
Page 21
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (AA11873), and the National Institute on Drug Abuse 
(DA12414, DA12986).
References
AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of 
children and adolescents with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2007; 46(7):994–921. DOI: 10.1097/chi.
0b013e318054e724
APA Working Group on Psychoactive Medications for Children and Adolescents. Report of the 
Working Group on Psychoactive Medications for Children and Adolescents. 
Psychopharmacological, psychosocial, and combined interventions for childhood disorders: 
Evidence base, contextual factors, and future directions. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association; 2006. Available at: http://www.apa.org/pi/cyf/childmeds/pdf
Barkley RA, McMurray MB, Edelbrock CS, Robbins K. Side effects of methylphenidate in children 
with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A systematic, placebo-controlled evaluation. Pediatrics. 
86:184–192. [PubMed: 2196520] 
Barkley RA, Shelton TL, Crosswait C, Moorehouse M, Fletcher K, Barrett S, … Metevia L. Multi-
method psycho-educational intervention for preschool children with disruptive behavior: 
Preliminary results at post-treatment. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied 
Disciplines. 2000; 41:319–332.
Barrish HH, Saunders M, Wolf MM. Good Behavior Game: Effects of individual contingencies for 
group consequences on disruptive behavior in a classroom. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis. 
1969; 2:119–124. [PubMed: 16795208] 
Briesch AM, Volpe RJ, Ferguson TD. The influence of student characteristics on the dependability of 
behavioral observation data. School Psychology Quarterly. 2014; 29:171–181. DOI: 10.1037/
spq0000042 [PubMed: 24274156] 
Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. 2. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc; 1988. 
Collins LM, Murphy SA, Bierman KL. A conceptual framework for adaptive preventive interventions. 
Prevention Science. 2004; 5:185–196. DOI: 10.1023/B:PREV.0000037641.26017.00 [PubMed: 
15470938] 
Collins LM, Schafer JL, Kam CM. A comparison of inclusive and restrictive strategies in modern 
missing data procedures. Psychological Methods. 2001; 6(4):330–51. DOI: 10.1037/1082-989X.
6.4.330 [PubMed: 11778676] 
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Initial impact of the fast track prevention trial for 
conduct problems: I. The high-risk sample. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1999a; 
67:631–647. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.67.5.631 [PubMed: 10535230] 
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Initial impact of the fast track prevention trial for 
conduct problems: II: Classroom effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1999b; 
67:648–657. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.67.5.648 [PubMed: 10535231] 
Conners CK. Forty years of methylphenidate treatment in Attention-Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder. 
Journal of Attention Disorders. 2002; 6(Suppl 1):S17–S30. [PubMed: 12685516] 
Coxe S, West SG, Aiken LS. The analysis of count data: A gentle introduction to Poisson regression 
and its alternatives. Journal of Personality Assessment. 2009; 91(2):121–136. [PubMed: 
19205933] 
Cunningham, CE.; Bremner, R.; Secord-Gilbert, M. The community parent education (COPE) 
program: A school-based family systems oriented course for parents of children with disruptive 
behavior disorders. Chedoke-McMaster Hospitals and McMaster University; 1998. 
Epstein JN, Kelleher KJ, Baum R, Brinkman WB, Peugh J, Gardner W, Langberg J. Variability in 
ADHD care in community-based pediatrics. Pediatrics. 2014; 134:1136–1143. DOI: 10.1542/peds.
2014-1500 [PubMed: 25367532] 
Evans SW, Owens JS, Bunford N. Evidence-based psychosocial treatments for children and 
adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology. 2014; 43:527–551. DOI: 10.1080/15374416.2013.850700 [PubMed: 24245813] 
Pelham et al.
Page 22
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fabiano GA, Pelham WE, Coles EK, Gnagy EM, Chronis AM, O’Connor B. A meta-analysis of 
behavioral treatments for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Clinical Psychology Review. 
2009; 29(2):129–140. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2008.11.001 [PubMed: 19131150] 
Fabiano GA, Pelham WE, Gnagy EM, Burrows-MacLean L, Coles EK, Chacko A, … Robb JA. The 
single and combined effects of multiple intensities of behavior modification and methylphenidate 
for children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in a classroom setting. School 
Psychology Review. 2007; 36:195–216.
Fabiano GA, Pelham WE, Waschbusch DA, Gnagy EM, Lahey BB, Chronis AM, … Burrows-
MacLean L. A practical measure of impairment: psychometric properties of the impairment rating 
scale in samples of children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and two school-based 
samples. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 2006; 35:369–385. DOI: 10.1207/
s15374424jccp3503_3 [PubMed: 16836475] 
Fabiano GA, Schatz NK, Aloe AM, Chacko A, Chronis-Tuscano AM. A review of meta-analyses of 
psychosocial treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: systematic synthesis and 
interpretation. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review. 2015; 18:77–97. [PubMed: 
25691358] 
Fabiano GA, Vujnovic R, Naylor J, Pariseau M, Robins ML. An investigation of the technical 
adequacy of a daily behavior report card (DBRC) for monitoring progress of students with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in special education placements. Assessment for Effective 
Intervention. 2009; 34:231–241.
Fabiano GA, Vujnovic R, Pelham WE, Waschbusch DA, Massetti GM, Yu J, … Volker M. Enhancing 
the effectiveness of special education programming for children with ADHD using a daily report 
card. School Psychology Review. 2010; 39:219–239.
Greenhill LL, Pliszka S, Dulcan MK. the Work Group on Quality Issues. Practice parameter for the use 
of stimulant medications in the treatment of children, adolescents, and adults. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 2002; 41:26S–49S. DOI: 
10.1097/00004583-200202001-00003 [PubMed: 11833633] 
Greenhill LL, Abikoff HB, Arnold LE, Cantwell DP, Conners CK, Elliott G, … Wells K. Medication 
treatment strategies in the MTA study: Relevance to clinicians and researchers. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 1996; 35:1304–1313. DOI: 
10.1097/00004583-199610000-00017 [PubMed: 8885584] 
Gresham, FM.; Elliott, SN. Social Skills Rating System: Parent, teacher, and child forms. Circle Pines, 
MN: American Guidance Systems; 1989. 
Jacob, R.; Pelham, WE. Behavior therapy. In: Sadock, B.; Sadock, V., editors. Comprehensive 
Textbook of Psychiatry. 7. New York: Williams & Wilkins; 1999. p. 2080-2127.
Jensen PS, Garcia JA, Glied S, Crowe M, Foster M, Schlander M, … Wells K. Cost-effectiveness of 
ADHD treatments: findings from the multimodal treatment study of children with ADHD. 
American Journal of Psychiatry. 2005; 162(9):1628–1636. [PubMed: 16135621] 
Kleinke, K.; Reinecke, J. countimp 1.0 – A multiple imputation package for incomplete count data. 
University of Bielefeld, Faculty of Sociology; 2013. [Technical Report]available from www.uni-
bielefeld.de/soz/kds/pdf/countimp.pdf
Lavori PW, Dawson R. A design for testing clinical strategies: biased individually tailored within-
subject randomization. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society). 
2000; 163:29–38. DOI: 10.1111/1467-985X.00154
Molina BSG, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM, Arnold LE, Vitiello B, Jensen PS. … the MTA Cooperative 
Group. The MTA at 8 years: Prospective follow-up of children treated for combined-type ADHD 
in a multisite study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2009; 
48:484–500. [PubMed: 19318991] 
MTA Cooperative Group. 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1999a; 56:1073–1086. DOI: 
10.1001/archpsyc.56.12.1073 [PubMed: 10591283] 
MTA Cooperative Group. Moderators and mediators of treatment response for children with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1999b; 56:1088–1096. DOI: 
10.1001/archpsyc.56.12.1088 [PubMed: 10591284] 
Pelham et al.
Page 23
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MTA Cooperative Group. National Institute of Mental Health multimodal treatment study of ADHD 
follow-up: 24-month outcomes of treatment strategies for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD). Pediatrics. 2004a; 113(4):754–761. DOI: 10.1542/peds.113.4.754 [PubMed: 15060224] 
Murphy SA. An experimental design for the development of adaptive treatment strategies. Statistics in 
Medicine. 2005; 24:1455–1481. DOI: 10.1002/sim.2022 [PubMed: 15586395] 
Nahum-Shani I, Qian M, Almirall D, Pelham WE, Gnagy B, Fabiano GA, … Murphy S. Experimental 
design and primary data analysis methods for comparing adaptive interventions. Psychological 
Methods. 2012; 17:457–477. DOI: 10.1037/a0029372 [PubMed: 23025433] 
Owens EB, Hinshaw SP, Kraemer HC, Arnold LE, Abikoff HB, Cantwell DP, … Wigal T. Which 
treatment for whom for ADHD? Moderators of treatment response in the MTA. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2003; 71(3):540–552. DOI: 10.1037/0022-006X.71.3.540 
[PubMed: 12795577] 
Page TF, Fabiano GA, Greiner AR, Gnagy EM, Pelham WE III, Hart K, Coxe S, Waxmonsky JG, 
Foster EM, Pelham WE Jr. Comparative cost analysis of sequential, adaptive, behavioral, 
pharmacological, and combined treatments for ADHD. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent 
Psychology. in press. this issue. 
Pelham WE. The NIMH multimodal treatment study for ADHD: Just say yes to drugs alone? Canadian 
Journal of Psychiatry. 1999; 44:981–990. [PubMed: 10637677] 
Pelham WE, Aronoff HA, Midlam J, Shapiro C, Gnagy E, Chronis A, … Waxmonsky J. A comparison 
of ritalin and adderall: Efficacy and time-course in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder. Pediatrics. 1999; 103(4):1–14. [PubMed: 9917431] 
Pelham WE, Burrows-MacLean L, Gnagy EM, Fabiano GA, Coles EK, Tresco KE, … Hoffman MT. 
Transdermal methylphenidate, behavioral, and combined treatment for children with ADHD. 
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology. 2005; 13(2):111–126. DOI: 
10.1037/1064-1297.13.2.111 [PubMed: 15943544] 
Pelham WE, Burrows-MacLean L, Gnagy EM, Fabiano GA, Coles EK, Wymbs BT, … Waschbusch 
DA. A dose-ranging study of behavioral and pharmacological treatment for children with ADHD. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology. 2014; 42:1019–1031. DOI: 10.1007/s10802-013-9843-8 
[PubMed: 24429997] 
Pelham WE, Burrows-MacLean L, Gnagy EM, Fabiano GA, Coles EK, Wymbs BT, … Coxe S. 
Behavioral, pharmacological, and combined treatment for ADHD: A dose-ranging, between 
groups analysis. 2015 Manuscript under review. 
Pelham WE, Fabiano GA. Evidence-based psychosocial treatment for attention deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder: An update. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 2008; 37(1):185–214. 
DOI: 10.1080/15374410701818681
Pelham WE, Fabiano GA, Massetti GM. Evidence-based assessment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder in children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 2005; 
34:449–476. DOI: 10.1207/s15374424jccp3403_5 [PubMed: 16026214] 
Pelham WE, Gnagy EM, Greiner AR, Hoza B, Hinshaw SP, Swanson JM, … Baron-Myak C. 
Behavioral vs. behavioral and pharmacological treatment in ADHD children attending a summer 
treatment program. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology. 2000; 28:507–526. DOI: 10.1023/A:
1005127030251 [PubMed: 11104314] 
Pelham, WE.; Gnagy, EM.; Greiner, AR.; Waschbusch, DA.; Fabiano, GA.; Burrows-MacLean, L. 
Summer Treatment Programs for Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. In: Kazdin, AE.; 
Weisz, JR., editors. Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Children and Adolescents. 2. New York: 
The Guilford Press; 2010. p. 277-292.
Pelham WE, Gnagy EM, Greenslade KE, Milich R. Teacher ratings of DSM-III-R symptoms of the 
disruptive behavior disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 1992; 31:210–218. DOI: 10.1097/00004583-199203000-00006 [PubMed: 1564021] 
Power, TJ.; Habboushe, D.; Karustis, JL. Homework Success for Children with ADHD: A family-
school intervention program. New York: Guilford Press; 2001. 
R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing; Vienna, Austria: 2015. URL http://www.R-project.org/
Pelham et al.
Page 24
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Schultz, BK.; Evans, SW. A Practical Guide for Implementing School-Based Interventions for 
Adolescents with ADHD. New York, NY: Springer; 2015. 
Shortreed SM, Laber E, Scott Stroup T, Pineau J, Murphy SA. A multiple imputation strategy for 
sequential multiple assignment randomized trials. Statistics in Medicine. 2014; 33(24):4202–4214. 
[PubMed: 24919867] 
Stein MA, Sarampote CS, Waldman ID, Robb AS, Conlon C, Pearl PL, … Newcorn JH. A dose-
response ostudy of OROS methylphenidate in children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
Pediatrics. 2003; 112:e404.doi: 10.1542/peds.112.5.e404 [PubMed: 14595084] 
Subcommittee on Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Steering Committee on Quality 
Improvement and Management. ADHD: Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, 
and treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 
2011; 128:2011–2654. DOI: 10.1542/peds.2011-2654
Swanson J, Greenhill L, Wigal T, Kollins S, Stehli A, Davies M, … Wigal S. Stimulant-related 
reductions of growth rates in the PATS. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 2006; 45:1304–1313. DOI: 10.1097/01.chi.0000235075.25038.5a [PubMed: 
17023868] 
Swanson JM, Hinshaw SP, Arnold LE, Gibbons R, Marcus S, Hur K. … the MTA Cooperative Group. 
Secondary evaluations of MTA 36-month outcomes: Propensity score and growth mixture model 
analyses. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2007; 46:1003–
1014. DOI: 10.1097/CHI.0b013e3180686d63 [PubMed: 17667479] 
Swanson JM, Kraemer H, Hinshaw SP, Arnold LE, Conners CK, Abikoff H, … Wu M. Clinical 
relevance of the primary findings of the MTA: Success rates based on severity of ADHD and ODD 
symptoms at the end of Treatment. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 2001; 40:168–179. [PubMed: 11211365] 
Van Buuren S, Groothuis-Oudshoorn K. mice: Multivariate imputation by chained equations in R. 
Journal of Statistical Software. 2011; 45(3)
Visser SN, Danielson ML, Bitsko BH, Holbrook JR, Kogan MD, Ghandour RM, … Blumberg SJ. 
Trends in the parent-report of health care provider-diagnosed and medicated attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder: United States, 2003-2011. Journal of the American Academy of Child & 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 2014; 53:34–46. DOI: 10.1016/j.jaac.2013.09.001 [PubMed: 24342384] 
Vitiello B, Severe JB, Greenhill LL, Arnold LE, Abikoff HB, Bukstein OG, … Cantwell DP. 
Methylphenidate dosage for children with ADHD over time under controlled conditions: Lessons 
from the MTA. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 2001; 
40:188–196. DOI: 10.1097/00004583-200102000-00013 [PubMed: 11211367] 
Volpe, R.; Fabiano, GA. Daily Behavior Report Cards: An Evidence-Based System of Assessment and 
Intervention. New York: The Guilford Press; 2013. 
Vujnovic RK, Fabiano GA, Waschbusch DA, Pelham WE, Greiner A, Gera S, … Buck M. Preliminary 
psychometric properties of an observation system to assess teachers/ use of effective behavior 
support strategies in preschool classrooms. Education and Treatment of Children. 2014; 37:323–
346. DOI: 10.1353/etc.2014.0020
White IR, Royston P, Wood AM. Multiple imputation using chained equations: Issues and guidance for 
practice. Statistics in Medicine. 2011; 30(4):377–399. [PubMed: 21225900] 
Wisniewski SR, Fava M, Trivedi MH, Thase ME, Warden D, Niederehe G, … John Rush A MD. 
Acceptability of second-step treatments to depressed outpatients: a STAR* D report. The 
American Journal of Psychiatry. 2007; 164(5):753–760. [PubMed: 17475734] 
Pelham et al.
Page 25
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Participant Flow
Pelham et al.
Page 26
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Study Design
Pelham et al.
Page 27
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Means on Observed Classroom Rules Violations and Out-of-Class Disciplinary Events as a 
Function of Treatment Decisions
Pelham et al.
Page 28
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Parent Training Attendance by Initial Treatment Assignment
Note. Figures for the Medication First families consider only those that were rerandomized 
to behavioral treatment (M-then-B, N=35).
Pelham et al.
Page 29
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pelham et al.
Page 30
Table 1
Sample Characteristics
Variable
Medication First
Behavioral First
Number of participants
74
72
Child Age in Years
8.3 (2.0)
8.5 (1.8)
Child Gender (% Male)
77%
75%
Child Race
 White
76%
84%
 Black/African American
17%
7%
 Other
7%
8%
Child IQ
99.9 (16.2)
99.2 (12.5)
Other Diagnoses
 Oppositional/Defiant Disorder
60%
54%
 Conduct Disorder
17%
14%
ADHD Symptoms Endorsed
 Inattention
7.6 (1.9)
8.1 (1.5)
 Hyperactivity/Impulsivity
7.1 (2.2)
6.8 (2.1)
Parent Disruptive Behavior Disorders Rating
 ADHD
1.89 (0.61)
1.99 (0.50)
 ODD
1.32 (0.67)
1.29 (0.57)
 CD
0.26 (0.28)
0.21 (0.20)
Teacher Disruptive Behavior Disorder Rating
 ADHD
1.84 (0.62)
1.78 (0.60)
 ODD
1.17 (0.84)
0.95 (0.73)
 CD
0.45 (0.59)
0.31 (0.44)
Parental Marital Status (% Single Parent)
11%
7%
Highest Parental Education Level
 High School Diploma or Less
10%
10%
 Partial college or technical training
17%
14%
 2-year degree
25%
19%
 4-year degree
24%
31%
 Graduate training
25%
26%
Previous Medication Treatment
27%
31%
Note. Groups did not differ significantly on any demographic measure.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pelham et al.
Page 31
Table 2
Intervention Components
Modality
Initial Treatment
Secondary/Adaptive Treatment
Medication
•
8-hour stimulant equivalent to 0.15 
mg/kg methylphenidate b.i.d.
•
Increased school dose
•
Added evening/weekend doses
Behavioral Treatment
•
8 weekly sessions of group behavioral 
parent training (concurrent group 
social skills training for children)
•
Monthly booster parent training 
sessions
•
3 consultation meetings with primary 
teacher to establish a school-home 
daily report card
•
One individual parent training session 
to establish home rewards for daily 
report card
•
Group or individual classroom 
contingency management systems 
(Barrish, Sauders, & Wolf, 1969)
•
Time-out in school
•
Tutoring
•
Organizational skills training (Schultz & 
Evans, 2015)
•
School-based rewards
•
Weekly Saturday social skills sessions 
(Pelham et al., 2008)
•
Homework skills training (Power et al., 
2001)
•
Paraprofessional-implemented school 
rewards programs
•
Home-based daily report card
Note. The adaptive components listed represent those offered or recommended as-needed based on individual areas of impairment. Not every child 
received every component of the adaptive treatment.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pelham et al.
Page 32
Table 3
Outcomes at Endpoint by Initial Treatment Assignment
Outcome
Medication First
Behavioral First
Effect Size
Classroom rules violations per hour**
12.6 [10.5, 15.3]
8.4 [6.8, 10.3]
IRR = 0.66
Out-of-class disciplinary events per school year†
3.1 [1.8, 5.2]
1.6 [0.9, 2.7]
IRR = 0.52
Teacher DBD—ADHD
0.98 (.67)
1.00 (.64)
d = −0.02
Teacher DBD—ODD
0.59 (.66)
0.45 (.51)
d = 0.24
Teacher SSRS Social Skills Total Score
33.9 (9.5)
36.0 (10.5)
d = 0.21
Parent DBD—ADHD
1.44 (.64)
1.45 (.62)
d = −0.01
Parent DBD—ODD
1.09 (.71)
0.98 (.65)
d = 0.16
Parent SSRS Social Skills Total Score
45.2 (10.8)
45.3 (10.7)
d = 0.01
Note. IRR=incidence rate ratio, DBD=Disruptive Behavior Disorders Rating Scale (scores are average scale scores, range 0–3), ADHD=attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder, ODD=Oppositional defiant disorder, SSRS=Social Skills Rating Scale. Values are means with standard deviations in 
parentheses (for continuous outcomes) or asymmetric 95% confidence intervals about the mean (for count outcomes). The IRR is the ratio of the 
event (e.g., rule violation) incidence rate in one group (here, Behavioral First) to the incidence rate in another group (here, Medication First). The 
other effect sizes are Cohen’s D with pooled standard deviation (equations 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, pp. 66–67, Cohen, 1988), and are listed such that a 
positive d reflects an advantage of Behavioral First.
†p<0.10,
**p<0.01.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pelham et al.
Page 33
Table 4
Outcomes at Endpoint by Treatment Protocol Followed
Outcome
BB protocol
BM protocol
MB protocol
MM protocol
Classroom rules violations per hour
7.2† [5.8, 9.0]
9.3a† [7.6, 11.4]
14.3b [11.1, 18.5]
12.7ab [9.0, 18.0]
Out-of-class disciplinary events per school year
2.6ab [1.1, 6.1]
0.9c [0.5, 1.7]
5.5a† [2.4, 12.9]
1.9bc† [0.9, 4.2]
Teacher DBD— ADHD
1.09 (.65)a
0.91 (.61)a
1.02 (.71)a
0.94 (.63)a
Teacher DBD— ODD
0.48 (.55)ab
0.42 (.46)a†
0.69 (.79)b†
0.50 (.50)ab
Teacher SSRS Social Skills Total Score
35.0 (10.8)ab
36.8 (10.0)a†
33.2 (10.7)b†
34.5 (8.2)ab
Parent DBD— ADHD
1.52 (.63)a
1.37 (.59)a
1.54 (.65)a
1.34 (.60)a
Parent DBD—ODD
1.10 (.69)ab†
0.86 (.58)c†
1.23 (.74)a‡
0.95 (.64)bc‡
Parent SSRS Social Skills Total Score
44.2 (10.0)a
46.4 (11.2)a
45.0 (10.1)a
45.4 (11.3)a
Note. DBD=Disruptive Behavior Disorders Rating Scale (scores are average scale scores, range 0–3), ADHD=attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder, ODD=Oppositional defiant disorder, SSRS=Social Skills Rating Scale. The first letter of each protocol indicates its first-stage treatment 
and the second letter indicates its second-stage treatment, to be implemented in the event of insufficient response (‘B’ for behavioral, ‘M’ for 
medication). Values are means with standard deviations in parentheses (for continuous outcomes) or asymmetric 95% confidence intervals about 
the mean (for count outcomes). They were calculated using the weighting method as described in Nahum-Shani et al. (2012). Within each row, 
means that have no superscript in common are significantly different from each other, p<.05. Cross or doublecross next to a pair of means indicates 
difference was only marginal, p<.10.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pelham et al.
Page 34
Table 5
Outcomes at Endpoint by Secondary/adaptive Treatment Given Insufficient Response to Initial Behavioral 
Treatment
Outcome
B-then-B
B-then-M
Effect Size
Classroom rule violations per hour*
6.6 [5.1, 8.6]
9.4 [7.5, 11.7]
IRR = 1.41
Out-of-class disciplinary events per school year†
3.2 [1.2, 8.3]
1.0 [0.4, 2.7]
IRR = 0.30
Teacher DBD—ADHD
1.28 (.65)
1.00 (.65)
d = 0.44
Teacher DBD—ODD
0.63 (.60)
0.52 (.49)
d = 0.19
Teacher SSRS Social Skills Total Score
32.0 (9.6)
35.0 (9.1)
d = 0.31
Parent DBD—ADHD
1.60 (.66)
1.43 (.63)
d = 0.26
Parent DBD—ODD†
1.20 (.69)
0.90 (.59)
d = 0.45
Parent SSRS Social Skills Total Score
41.8 (9.1)
44.4 (11.2)
d = 0.26
Note. B-then-B=began with behavioral treatment and then received higher dose behavioral treatment, B-then-M=began with behavioral treatment 
then added medication treatment, IRR=incidence rate ratio, DBD=Disruptive Behavior Disorders Rating Scale (scores are average scale scores, 
range 0–3), ADHD=attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ODD=Oppositional defiant disorder, SSRS=Social Skills Rating Scale. Values are 
means with standard deviations in parentheses (for continuous outcomes) or asymmetric 95% confidence intervals about the mean (for count 
outcomes). The IRR is the ratio of the event (e.g., rule violation) incidence rate in one group (here, B-then-M) to the incidence rate in another group 
(here, B-then-B). The other effect sizes are Cohen’s D with pooled standard deviation (equations 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, pp. 66–67, Cohen, 1988), and are 
listed such that a positive d reflects an advantage of B-then-M.
†p<0.10,
*p<0.05.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pelham et al.
Page 35
Table 6
Outcomes at Endpoint by Secondary/adaptive Treatment Given Insufficient Response to Initial Medication 
Treatment
Outcome
M-then-M
M-then-B
Effect Size
Classroom rule violations per hour
14.5 [9.5, 22.1]
17.1 [10.9, 26.9]
IRR = 1.18
Out-of-class disciplinary events per school year†
2.2 [0.8, 6.6]
8.2 [3.5, 19.6]
IRR = 3.66
Teacher DBD—ADHD
1.21 (.63)
1.43 (.71)
d = −0.34
Teacher DBD—ODD†
0.70 (.52)
1.15 (.91)
d = −0.61
Teacher SSRS Social Skills Total Score
32.2 (6.2)
28.8 (11.0)
d = −0.39
Parent DBD—ADHD
1.38 (.60)
1.62 (.63)
d = −0.38
Parent DBD—ODD†
1.02 (.65)
1.33 (.73)
d = −0.46
Parent SSRS Social Skill Total Score
44.5 (11.2)
44.0 (9.6)
d = −0.05
Note. M-then-M=began with medication treatment and then received higher dose medication treatment, M-then-B=began with medication 
treatment and then added behavioral treatment, IRR=incidence rate ratio, DBD=Disruptive Behavior Disorders Rating Scale (scores are average 
scale scores, range 0–3), ADHD=attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ODD=Oppositional defiant disorder, SSRS=Social Skills Rating Scale. 
Values are means with standard deviations in parentheses (for continuous outcomes) or asymmetric 95% confidence intervals about the mean (for 
count outcomes). The IRR is the ratio of the event (e.g., rule violation) incidence rate in one group (here, M-then-B) to the incidence rate in another 
group (here, M-then-M). The other effect sizes are Cohen’s D with pooled standard deviation (equations 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, pp. 66–67, Cohen, 1988), 
and are listed such that a positive d reflects an advantage of M-then-B.
†p<0.10.
J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 01.
