 June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2426
Francesco Pelliccia, MD, 
PhD
Juan Carlos Kaski, MD
Filippo Crea, MD
Paolo G. Camici, MD
ABSTRACT: Originally described by Japanese authors in the 1990s, 
Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) generally presents as an acute myocardial 
infarction characterized by severe left ventricular dysfunction. TTS, 
however, differs from an acute coronary syndrome because patients have 
generally a normal coronary angiogram and left ventricular dysfunction, 
which extends beyond the territory subtended by a single coronary artery 
and recovers within days or weeks. The prognosis was initially thought to 
be benign, but subsequent studies have demonstrated that both short-term 
mortality and long-term mortality are higher than previously recognized. 
Indeed, mortality reported during the acute phase in hospitalized patients 
is ≈4% to 5%, a figure comparable to that of ST-segment–elevation 
myocardial infarction in the era of primary percutaneous coronary 
interventions. Despite extensive research, the cause and pathogenesis of 
TTS remain incompletely understood. The aim of the present review is to 
discuss the pathophysiology of TTS with particular emphasis on the role 
of the central and autonomic nervous systems. Different emotional or 
psychological stressors have been identified to precede the onset of TTS. 
The anatomic structures that mediate the stress response are found in 
both the central and autonomic nervous systems. Acute stressors induce 
brain activation, increasing bioavailability of cortisol and catecholamine. 
Both circulating epinephrine and norepinephrine released from adrenal 
medullary chromaffin cells and norepinephrine released locally from 
sympathetic nerve terminals are significantly increased in the acute phase 
of TTS. This catecholamine surge leads, through multiple mechanisms, 
that is, direct catecholamine toxicity, adrenoceptor-mediated damage, 
epicardial and microvascular coronary vasoconstriction and/or spasm, and 
increased cardiac workload, to myocardial damage, which has a functional 
counterpart of transient apical left ventricular ballooning. The relative 
preponderance among postmenopausal women suggests that estrogen 
deprivation may play a facilitating role, probably mediated by endothelial 
dysfunction. Despite the substantial improvement in our understanding of 
the pathophysiology of TTS, a number of knowledge gaps remain.
Pathophysiology of Takotsubo Syndrome
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Correspondence to: Paolo G. 
Camici, MD, Vita-Salute University, 
Via Olgettina, 58, 20132 Milan, 
Italy. E-mail camici.paolo@hsr.it
IN DEPTH
Key Words: autonomic nervous 
system ◼ cardiomyopathies 
◼ catecholamines ◼ coronary 
circulation ◼ heart diseases 
◼ ischemic heart disease 
◼ Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2427
O
riginally described by Sato et al1 in the 1990s, 
Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) presents as an acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS) characterized by severe 
left ventricular (LV) dysfunction that typically recovers 
spontaneously within days or weeks. Patients may pres-
ent with abrupt-onset chest pain or dyspnea. Several 
stressors have been identified to precede the onset of 
TTS in a substantial proportion of patients.2 Emotional or 
psychological stress caused by the unexpected death of 
a relative or a friend, suppressed terror, the occurrence 
of natural disasters, or strenuous physical stress usu-
ally precedes its onset.3 About 1 in 5 patients, however, 
does not report any form of stress preceding the onset 
of the condition. Recently, it has been shown that TTS 
can also occur after a positive life event, hence the re-
cently proposed term happy heart syndrome.4
Despite extensive research, the cause and pathogen-
esis of TTS remain incompletely understood. The aim of 
the present review is to discuss the pathophysiology of 
TTS, with particular emphasis on the role of the central 
and autonomic nervous systems.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Symptoms, clinical signs, and echocardiographic and 
electrocardiographic findings in patients with TTS are 
suggestive of an ACS.5 The most common symptoms at 
presentation are chest pain and dyspnea. TTS can also 
present as syncope and pulmonary edema. Cardiac ar-
rest, cardiogenic shock, and serious ventricular arrhyth-
mias occur more rarely in patients with TTS. Symptoms 
such as generalized weakness, unexplained cough, and 
fever have also been reported.6
ECG PATTERNS
Abnormalities on the ECG are common at the time of pre-
sentation. The most frequent finding on the admission 
ECG is ST-segment elevation, which most often occurs 
in the precordial leads.7 The magnitude of ST-segment 
elevation and the number of leads with this pattern are 
usually smaller in patients with TTS than in patients with 
ST-elevation–elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).8 It 
is interesting to note that reciprocal ST-segment chang-
es and abnormal Q waves are often absent in TTS. More-
over, ST-segment depression is less common in TTS 
compared with coronary artery disease–related ACS.9 
Some patients with TTS may present with diffuse T-wave 
inversion, particularly in the anterior and lateral leads of 
the ECG. A prolongation in the QT interval, corrected for 
heart rate, has been reported in a substantial proportion 
of patients with TTS. These ECG changes are often tran-
sient, and their presence or absence depends on when 
the ECG is recorded after symptom onset. However, it is 
challenging to distinguish TTS from an ACS on the basis 
of the ECG alone; therefore, access to emergency coro-
nary angiography should not be delayed.5
BIOMARKERS
Typically, patients with TTS manifest modest increases in 
creatine kinase-MB and cardiac troponin concentrations 
compared with patients with STEMI. Of interest, in TTS, 
there is a disparity between the degree of biomarker 
elevation and the extent of myocardial dysfunction ob-
served at left ventriculography. In a minority of patients 
with TTS, however, the elevation of biomarkers of necro-
sis can be substantial, probably reflecting more severe 
myocardial damage.5 Significantly elevated serum brain 
natriuretic peptide or N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic 
peptide can also be detected during the acute phase 
of TTS.10 The production and release of these peptides 
appear to be related mainly to ventricular stretching.11 
Because in most cases TTS is characterized by LV dis-
tension and relatively mild tissue necrosis, a greater 
increase in plasma natriuretic peptides compared with 
biomarkers indicative of necrosis can be detected.10
CORONARY AND LV ANGIOGRAPHY
Diagnostic coronary angiography shows normal coro-
nary arteries or nonobstructive coronary artery disease 
in the vast majority of patients.5 However, ≈15% of pa-
tients with TTS have obstructive coronary atherosclero-
sis.6 In these patients, the diagnosis of TTS is suggested 
by the fact that the area of dysfunction detected on LV 
angiography extends beyond the territory subtended by 
a single coronary artery and by the reversibility of LV 
dysfunction. Hence, the mere presence of obstructive 
coronary atherosclerosis does not allow the exclusion of 
the diagnosis of TTS.12
DIFFERENT TYPES OF LV DYSFUNCTION
Different patterns of LV dysfunction have been reported 
in TTS, including the classic apical variant, a midventricu-
lar variant, a basal or inverted variant, and regional vari-
ants.13 About 80% of patients exhibit the apical variant.14 
Because the heart is densely innervated by sympathetic 
nerves that follow a regional distribution, it has been 
hypothesized that the typical apical pattern of LV dys-
function results from this anatomic substrate,3 as well 
as from the regional distribution of sympathetic adreno-
ceptors.15
CLINICAL OUTCOME
The prognosis of TTS was initially thought to be benign.16 
Subsequent series, however, have demonstrated that 
both short-term mortality and long-term mortality are 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2428
higher than previously recognized.17 Indeed, mortality 
reported during the acute phase in hospitalized patients 
is ≈4% to 5%, a figure comparable to that of STEMI 
in the era of primary percutaneous coronary interven-
tions.18 Of interest, despite the recovery of LV function 
and the absence of significant coronary disease in most 
cases, mortality after hospital discharge is worse than 
that in an aged-matched healthy population.19 A recent 
meta-analysis of clinical correlates of acute mortality in 
TTS has reported that the average in-hospital mortality 
is 4.5%.20 Japanese investigators have recently pointed 
out that TTS is associated with an elevated in-hospital 
mortality resulting from coexisting chronic comorbidities 
and acute medical illnesses.21 In one of the largest pub-
lished series (n=1750), Templin et al6 reported a 30-day 
mortality of 5.9% and a long-term death rate of 5.6% 
per patient per year. Major adverse events, including car-
diogenic shock, cardiac arrest, and mortality, are more 
frequent in women than in men with TTS. There is uncer-
tainty as to the real recurrence rate of TTS because of 
the paucity of data on the risk of a further episode af-
ter the index event. Available evidence points to figures 
ranging from 0% to 22%, depending on the size of the 
population investigated and the duration of follow-up.5
TTS PHENOCOPIES
Generally, TTS is preceded by intense emotional trig-
gers, although in up to one third of patients, no trigger 
can be identified. A TTS-like syndrome can be observed 
in several medical conditions, including sepsis, neurolog-
ical disorders (eg, subarachnoid hemorrhage, seizures, 
stroke/transient ischemic attack, cerebral tumors, head 
trauma),22 and pheochromocytoma.23 Furthermore, a 
TTS-like syndrome can be triggered by drugs (dopamine, 
dobutamine, epinephrine, or norepinephrine in the set-
ting of cardiovascular stress tests, anesthesia, etc).24 
In our view, all these conditions should be differentiated 
from the classic phenotype of TTS and could be labeled 
TTS phenocopies.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
About 90% of patients with TTS are postmenopausal 
women, with a similar prevalence across ethnic groups.6 
In recent years, the increasing number of patients re-
ferred to coronary angiography with suspected ACS 
has allowed better appreciation of the true incidence of 
TTS. At present, it is estimated that ≈2% of all patients 
undergoing emergency coronary angiography for a sus-
pected ACS have TTS,12 and it has been calculated that 
the incidence of TTS is ≈100 new cases per 1 million 
population per annum.25 Indeed, the improved clinical 
characterization of the condition has led to a paradigm 
shift from what was initially the exclusion of STEMI to the 
recognition that TTS has a number of distinctive diag-
nostic features.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Sympathetic Activation in TTS and Its 
Mechanisms
The environmental events experienced by the major-
ity of these patients and perceived as threatening be-
come profoundly stressful if one is not able to cope 
with them.26 Stress is a physiological response that 
mediates the action of a stressor on its target organ.27 
The anatomic structures that mediate the stress re-
sponse are found in both the central and autonomic 
nervous systems (Figure 1). Acute emotional stressors 
have been shown to induce brain activation, increas-
ing bioavailability of cortisol, epinephrine, and norepi-
nephrine.27 In a small series of patients in the acute 
phase of TTS, Suzuki et al28 have measured regional 
cerebral blood flow, a well-established index of brain 
activity, and demonstrated a significant cerebral blood 
flow increase in the hippocampus, brainstem, and basal 
ganglia, paralleled by a decrease in the prefrontal cor-
tex. Although these changes subsided gradually, they 
were still present in the chronic phase of TTS even after 
the typical cardiac wall motion abnormalities had disap-
peared (Figure 2).
The fundamental anatomic structures involved in the 
stress response are the neocortex, limbic system, re-
ticular formation, brainstem, and spinal cord.29 After the 
complex neocortical and limbic integrations that occur 
in the interpretation of a stimulus as threatening,30 the 
neural stress response first occurs through activation 
of brainstem noradrenergic neurons and sympathetic 
adrenomedullary circuits, stimulating the secretion of 
catecholamine.
The principal site for the synthesis of norepinephrine 
in the brain is the locus coeruleus, which is located in 
the posterior area of the rostral pons in the lateral floor 
of the fourth ventricle.31 As a crucial homeostatic control 
center, the locus coeruleus receives afferents from the 
hypothalamus, cingulate gyrus, and amygdala, allowing 
emotional stressors to trigger noradrenergic responses. 
The locus coeruleus contains the largest cluster of nor-
adrenergic neurons in the brain and innervates large 
segments of the neuroaxis.31 Its activation leads to in-
creased norepinephrine secretion, which in turn stimu-
lates the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.29
Adrenal medullary chromaffin cells synthesize, store, 
and release predominantly epinephrine and norepineph-
rine, which constitute the hormonal output of the neuro-
endocrine stress-response axis.32 Activation of the latter 
is crucial to maintain high levels of stress arousal for pro-
longed periods. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis 
is a complex set of direct influences and feedback inter-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2429
actions among 3 endocrine glands: the hypothalamus, 
the pituitary gland, and the adrenal gland (Figure 1).
Apart from the locus coeruleus, the neural impulses 
also descend into the posterior hypothalamus, that is, 
the pathway of sympathetic activation. From here, sym-
pathetic neural pathways descend through the cranial 
and sacral spinal cord regions and trigger the release 
of norepinephrine.33 There are sympathetic pregangli-
onic neurons that lay in the lateral gray column from T1 
to L2-3 that synapse with their postganglionic neurons. 
Sympathetic cardiac innervation originates mainly in the 
right and left stellate ganglia. These fibers travel along 
the epicardial vascular structures of the heart into the 
underlying myocardium and end as sympathetic nerve 
terminals reaching the heart muscle and coronary cir-
culation. The sympathetic nerve endings release norepi-
nephrine directly into the synaptic cleft, activating α and 
β postsynaptic adrenoceptors.34 Thus, all the epineph-
rine in the body and a significant amount of circulating 
norepinephrine derive from the adrenal medulla, and 
the total amount of catecholamine presented to cardiac 
adrenergic receptors at any given time is composed of 
circulating norepinephrine and epinephrine coupled with 
norepinephrine released locally from sympathetic nerve 
terminals.35 In normal humans, under resting conditions, 
only ≈2% to 8% of the circulating norepinephrine is re-
leased by the adrenal medulla, and the rest is released 
by sympathetic nerve endings.26
Increased Circulating and Myocardial 
Catecholamine Levels
Akashi and colleagues36 were the first to report elevated 
serum catecholamine levels in patients with TTS. Witt-
stein et al37 subsequently showed that in the acute phase, 
patients with TTS have increased concentrations of plas-
ma catecholamines (ie, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and 
dopamine) and stress-related circulating neuropeptides 
that are several times higher than those in patients with 
STEMI. These levels remain markedly elevated even a 
week after the onset of symptoms (Figure 3).
A recent study in a murine model has demonstrated 
that the infusion of high concentrations of epinephrine 
can produce the characteristic reversible apical LV bal-
looning coupled with basal hypercontractility observed in 
patients with TTS.38
Indeed, in the acute phase of TTS, along with an in-
creased concentration of circulating catecholamine,37 
there is evidence of increased catecholamine at the myo-
cardial level. Kume et al39 have demonstrated increased 
norepinephrine spillover in the coronary sinus in a small 
series of patients with TTS, suggesting increased local 
myocardial release of catecholamine. An increase in lo-
cal catecholamine levels has been demonstrated also 
in the so-called neurogenic stunned myocardium that 
appears to be mediated by neuronally transmitted nor-
epinephrine.40 The clinical presentation of this condition, 
which is found in patients with aneurysm-related sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage, closely resembles that of TTS 
and is characterized by a fully reversible form of acute 
LV dysfunction.41 Accordingly, experimental work has 
shown that elevated activity of the sympathetic nervous 
system in the acute phase of subarachnoid hemorrhage 
induces myocardial damage and contributes to the de-
velopment of cardiac dysfunction.42
The local release of catecholamine from cardiac nerve 
endings results in an elevated norepinephrine concentra-
tion in the synaptic cleft owing to increased exocytosis 
of norepinephrine from presynaptic vesicles, paralleled 
Figure 1. Central and autonomic nervous system 
interplay.  
Right, Somatic nervous system (motor system and sensory 
systems) and environment. Left, Autonomic nervous system, 
neuroendocrine system, and body organs. Middle, Spinal 
cord, brainstem, hypothalamus limbic system, and neocortex. 
The afferent feedback from the body is neuronal, hormonal, 
and humoral (physicochemical; eg, glucose concentration, 
osmolality) and other types (eg, body temperature). Solid 
line arrows, neuronal; dashed line arrow, hormonal; and 
dotted, neuroendocrine system, hormonal and humoral 
feedback. Limbic system is anatomically descriptive and 
a collective term denoting brain structures common to all 
mammals that include the hippocampus, dentate gyrus with 
archicortex, cingulate gyrus, septal nuclei, and amygdala. 
These forebrain structures are functionally heterogeneous and 
not a unitary system (as the term limbic system may imply). 
They are involved in the generation of emotional and motiva-
tional aspects of behavior. Note the reciprocal communication 
between the hypothalamus, limbic system, and neocortex 
(shaded arrows), indicating that the centers of the cere-
bral hemispheres have powerful influence on all autonomic 
regulations. Reprinted from Janig26 with permission from the 
publisher. Copyright © 2006 Cambridge University Press.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2430
by a decrease in terminal nerve axon norepinephrine 
reuptake through the specific uptake-1 transporter (Fig-
ure 4).43 This process has been originally demonstrated 
by means of iodine-123 meta-iodo-benzyl-guanidine, 
that is, a γ-emitting norepinephrine analog used to im-
age myocardial sympathetic nerve terminals with single-
photon emission computed tomography. Akashi et al44 
examined 8 patients with TTS within 3 days of admis-
sion and at a 3-month follow-up after normalization of LV 
dysfunction. The early scan showed a pattern of cardiac 
sympathetic hyperactivity with improvement at follow-
up.44 The evidence of reduced iodine-123 meta-iodo-
benzyl-guanidine retention in dysfunctional segments is 
consistent with a regional disturbance of sympathetic 
Figure 2. Brain activation in patients with Takotsubo syndrome (TTS). 
Left ventricular (LV) angiograms (top) and single-photon emission computed tomography images of the brain in 3 patients with 
TTS. In patient 1, LV angiograms showed typical apical ballooning in the acute phase (day of onset; A), which disappeared in the 
chronic phase (29 days after onset; B). Normalization of wall motion abnormality was confirmed by echocardiography in patients 
2 and 3. In all patients, brain activation was noted in the acute phase (1, 1, and 4 days after onset; C, E, and G, respectively), 
which subsided in the chronic phase (28, 28, and 39 days after onset; D, F, and H, respectively). The yellow, red, green, and 
blue arrowheads indicate the hippocampus, brainstem, basal ganglia, and prefrontal cortex, respectively. Reprinted from Suzuki 
et al28 with permission from the publisher. Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Circulation Society.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2431
neuronal activity that can persist for months.45 Recent-
ly, Christensen et al46 have demonstrated myocardial 
sympathetic hyperactivity in the subacute phase of TTS 
paralleling plasma epinephrine levels, which were also 
elevated compared with follow-up concentrations.
Role of Endothelial Dysfunction and Estrogen 
Deficiency
New information has shed additional light on the 
pathogenesis of TTS, supporting the concept that the 
condition differs markedly from cardiomyopathies as 
currently defined. Specifically, recent data show that 
endothelial dysfunction is common in patients with TTS, 
which could explain the propensity for epicardial and/
or microvascular coronary artery spasm, which are 2 
likely pathogenetic mechanisms for TTS.47 Indeed, en-
dothelial dysfunction, a pathological state of the endo-
thelium characterized by an imbalance between vaso-
constricting and vasodilating factors, may represent an 
important link between stress and myocardial dysfunc-
tion in TTS.47 Therefore, transient myocardial ischemia 
followed by stunning might be the cause underlying the 
typical, reversible LV dysfunction.
Endothelial dysfunction can also explain why TTS 
is more common in postmenopausal women; they 
have been shown to have both age-related and estro-
gen deficiency–related coronary vasomotor abnormali-
ties.48–50 Under physiological circumstances, estrogen 
beneficially affects the coronary microcirculation via en-
dothelium-dependent and -independent mechanisms, im-
proving coronary blood flow.50 During menopause, both 
increased sympathetic drive and endothelial dysfunction 
are a consequence of reduced estrogen levels.49 In an 
elegant experimental study in animals, Ueyema et al51 
have shown that stress-induced LV apical ballooning can 
be prevented by pretreatment with α- and β-adrenoceptor 
blockers and estrogen. Estrogen supplementation atten-
uated the stress-induced hypothalamo-sympatho-adrenal 
 outflow from the central nervous system to the target 
organs. In addition, estrogen treatment upregulated the 
cardiac levels of cardioprotective substances such as 
Figure 3. Plasma catecholamine 
levels in patients with Takotsubo 
syndrome (TTS) and patients with 
myocardial infarction. 
In the acute phase, patients with TTS have 
increased concentrations of plasma cate-
cholamine (ie, epinephrine, norepinephrine, 
and dopamine) and stress-related circulat-
ing neuropeptides that are several times 
higher than those in patients with myocar-
dial infarction and remain markedly elevated 
even a week after the onset of symptoms. 
Modified from Wittstein et al37 with permis-
sion from the publisher. Copyright © 2005 
Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2432
atrial natriuretic peptide and heat shock protein 70. 
These data suggest that estrogen deficiency after meno-
pause might facilitate the occurrence of TTS, particularly 
that linked to emotional stress, either by indirect action 
on the nervous system or by direct action on the heart. 
Moreover, impairment of endothelial function is associ-
ated with the presence of traditional risk factors and has 
been described in the setting of various systemic inflam-
matory disorders with high cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality.49 Recently, data in large cohorts have shown 
that patients with TTS have a nonnegligible prevalence of 
cardiovascular risk factors, that is, hypertension, hyper-
cholesterolemia, and smoking.2,6,18 In addition, there is 
now evidence that most cases of TTS occur in patients 
with various comorbidities, including neurological, psy-
chiatric, pulmonary, kidney, liver, and connective tissue 
disease,2 that are associated with endothelial dysfunc-
tion and might therefore constitute a previously unrecog-
nized predisposing factor for TTS.52
From these multiple observations, the possibility ex-
ists that endothelial dysfunction might constitute a cru-
cial link between a sympathetic surge and myocardial 
ischemia in TTS.
Mechanisms of LV Dysfunction Induced by 
Sympathetic Hyperactivity
Although there is agreement that TTS is characterized 
by increased circulating and cardiac catecholamine 
levels, how this translates into the typical LV dys-
function remains incompletely understood.53 Multiple 
mechanisms have been postulated to explain the car-
diotoxicity of catecholamines.54 The surge in stimula-
tion of adrenoceptors enhances heart rate and cardiac 
contractility with a secondary imbalance in the ratio of 
oxygen supply to oxygen demand, thus creating areas 
of myocellular hypoxia.55 Myocyte hypoxia can be fur-
ther aggravated by metabolic changes56 such as ex-
cessive deposition of lipid droplets in cardiomyocytes. 
These changes might result in an uncoupling of oxi-
dative phosphorylation in mitochondria, which inhibits 
the coupling between the electron transport and phos-
phorylation reactions, which in turn will interfere with 
ATP synthesis.57 Changes in membrane permeability 
might also lead to electrolyte changes. These include 
hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia, 
with resultant elevations in parathyroid hormone, and 
Figure 4. Autonomic nervous system (ANS) activation and cardiovascular system. 
ANS activation is mediated by release of norepinephrine (NE) and epinephrine (Epi) and occurs via the following mechanisms:  
(1) Release of norepinephrine by cardiac sympathetic nerve terminals (resulting in tachycardia and an increased force of contraction); 
(2) release of epinephrine into the circulation by the adrenal medulla, modulating both myocardium and peripheral vessels; and 
(3) local release of norepinephrine and epinephrine by various peripheral ANSs that can synthesize and release these catecholamines 
in an autocrine/paracrine manner and are located in blood vessels and in cardiac myocytes themselves. AC indicates adenylyl 
cyclase; Ach, acetylcholine; AT1R, angiotensin type 1 receptor; α2AR, α2-adrenergic receptor; βAR, β-adrenergic receptor; β2AR, 
β2-adrenergic receptor; GRK2, G protein–coupled receptor kinase 2; MR, mineralcorticoid receptor; NET, norepinephrine trans-
porter; and PKA, protein kinase A. Reprinted from Lymperopoulos et al43 with permission from the publisher. Copyright © 2013 
American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2433
hypozincemia with hyposelenemia, which are antioxi-
dant defenses. Altered cationic homeostasis might af-
fect several cellular processes and contribute to myo-
cardial toxicity.58 Norepinephrine and epinephrine are 
also potential sources of free radicals. These oxygen-
derived free radicals may interfere with calcium and 
sodium transporters, which may result in additional 
myocyte dysfunction.3
DIRECT CATECHOLAMINE TOXICITY
Some authors favor the hypothesis of direct catechol-
amine-induced myocardial toxicity in TTS. For instance, 
myocardial necrosis can occur in patients with acute 
neurovascular events, and this is caused by direct toxic-
ity of endogenous catecholamine released into the heart 
via nerve terminals.59 Catecholamine released directly 
into the myocardium via sympathetic nerves has been 
suggested to have a greater “toxic” effect than that 
reaching the heart via the bloodstream.60 Indeed, norepi-
nephrine spillover from the cardiac sympathetic nerve 
terminals can decrease myocyte viability through cAMP-
mediated calcium overload, resulting, histologically, in 
contraction band necrosis, which is one of the pathologi-
cal hallmarks of TTS,61 along with increased production 
of extracellular matrix, leading to a rapid increase in fi-
brosis and mild neutrophil infiltration. Nef et al62 studied 
serial myocardial biopsies in 8 patients with TTS during 
the phase of severe LV dysfunction and found histologi-
cal signs of catecholamine toxicity, that is, focal mono-
nuclear inflammatory cells, areas of fibrotic response, 
and characteristic contraction bands. They noted that 
TTS can be accompanied by “severe morphological 
alterations potentially resulting from catecholamine ex-
cess followed by microcirculatory dysfunction and direct 
cardiotoxicity.” They continued, “However, the affected 
myocardium represents a high potential of structural 
reconstitution which correlates with the rapid functional 
recovery.”62
Contraction band necrosis is a unique form of myo-
cyte injury characterized by hypercontracted sarco-
meres, dense eosinophilic transverse bands, and an 
interstitial mononuclear inflammatory response and is 
distinct from the polymorphonuclear inflammation seen 
in infarction.61 Contraction band necrosis has been found 
in patients with pheochromocytoma23 and those with 
subarachnoid hemorrhage,40 both characterized by a 
catecholamine excess. It has also been observed post-
mortem in people who died under terrifying circumstanc-
es such as fatal asthma and violent assault, suggesting 
that catecholamine excess represents an important link 
between emotional stress and cardiac injury.63 The lack 
of persistent, significant morphological changes in most 
cases of TTS is further demonstrated by data accrued 
so far with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR). Differ-
ent studies have pointed out that the acute phase of the 
disease is characterized only by remarkable myocardial 
edema with no evidence of significant late gadolinium en-
hancement (Figure 5).64 These findings are of major im-
portance because they exclude the possibility that TTS 
is mainly the consequence of a catecholamine-mediated 
myocarditis, which commonly occurs in pheochromocy-
toma.23 Although TTS and pheochromocytoma are both 
characterized by increased catecholamine concentra-
tions, this causes a distinct entity in pheochromocytoma 
only, leading to degenerative changes in muscle fibers, 
foci of necrosis, acute inflammation, chronic intersti-
tial inflammatory exudation, and reparative fibrosis.65 
At CMR, these abnormalities may be observed nonin-
vasively as myocardial necrosis (late enhancement), 
edema, and focal and diffuse fibrosis that may lead to 
short- or long-term LV dysfunction.23 A different pattern 
is observed in patients with TTS. Testa and Feola66 per-
formed serial CMR scans in patients with TTS and found 
no evidence of delayed enhancement either in the acute 
phase or at the 3-month follow-up, suggesting that the 
damage in dysfunctional myocardium was transient and 
did not include significant tissue fibrosis.
In summary, it may be hypothesized that direct cat-
echolamine toxicity plays a role in both TTS and pheo-
chromocytoma but with important quantitative differ-
ences. The myocardial damage in pheochromocytoma 
is probably more extensive because of the persistent 
exposition of patients to elevated catecholamine levels. 
In TTS, the elevation is transient and generally results in 
less evident damage, as demonstrated by the relatively 
mild elevation of necrosis biomarkers5,6 and absence of 
late enhancement at CMR in most cases.66 The latter in 
particular might be a consequence of the limited spatial 
resolution of CMR, that is, 0.6 to 1 cm3, which may not 
detect smaller or patchy areas of damage that are pres-
ent in TTS.67
MICROVASCULAR SPASM
A further vascular pathogenetic mechanism that could 
be involved in TTS is acute, transient myocardial isch-
emia. Since the first description of TTS, coronary vaso-
spasm has been suggested as a plausible causative fac-
tor. In their original report, Dote et al68 hypothesized that 
TTS was caused by multivessel coronary vasospasm be-
cause 4 of 5 patients in their series had spontaneous or 
induced coronary vasospasm at coronary angiography. 
Sato et al1 reported epicardial coronary artery spasm in 
8 of 35 patients (23%) and diffuse coronary vasoconstric-
tion in 19 (54%). Similarly, Tsuchihashi et al69 reported 
epicardial coronary spasm in 10 of 48 patients with TTS 
(21%). Although the causative role of coronary spasm 
has been questioned by many authors, in a prospective 
study, Angelini70 confirmed the development of coronary 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2434
spasm in patients with TTS who underwent acetylcholine 
testing. Indeed, severe, subocclusive epicardial coro-
nary artery spasm occurred in these patients, which was 
associated with echocardiographic evidence of transient 
LV dysfunction, as classically observed in TTS. Another 
epicardial coronary abnormality that might cause TTS 
is spontaneous coronary artery dissection, which is a 
form of TTS triggered by an ischemic insult leading to 
postischemic myocardial stunning.71
In addition to abnormalities of the epicardial arteries, 
coronary microvascular dysfunction could play a patho-
genetic role in TTS (Figure 6).72
Abnormal coronary microvascular responses have 
been documented in TTS with invasive and noninvasive 
diagnostic tools.73 Reduced TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myo-
cardial Infarction) frame count in most patients under-
going emergency coronary angiography with spontane-
ous improvement of coronary flow reserve at a 1-month 
follow-up has been reported by some authors,16 although 
this has not been a universal finding.74,75 It is interesting 
to note that using myocardial contrast echocardiogra-
phy, Galiuto et al76 demonstrated reversible coronary mi-
crovascular dysfunction in patients with TTS. A clear per-
fusion defect was observed in the LV segments showing 
reduced contractility. In contrast to what is commonly 
observed in patients with STEMI, the perfusion defect in 
patients with TTS transiently improved after the infusion 
of intracoronary adenosine and recovered permanently 
at 1 month of follow-up (Figure 7). The close relationship 
between the improvement of myocardial perfusion and 
LV dysfunction observed in this study suggests a patho-
genetic role for the coronary microvascular dysfunction 
in this condition.76 Several single-photon emission com-
puted tomography perfusion studies have shown a de-
crease in tracer uptake during the acute phase of TTS 
and a return to normal at follow-up, suggesting a role 
for coronary microvascular dysfunction as a trigger of 
myocardial ischemia in this condition.77–79
Mechanisms of Myocardial Protection
The severe wall motion abnormalities seen in TTS are 
transient in the vast majority of patients, which strong-
ly suggests that protective mechanisms are likely to 
operate to preserve myocardial integrity. Overactive 
Figure 5. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance identification of myocardial edema in Takotsubo syndrome. 
T2-weighted images (short-axis view, top) demonstrating normal signal intensity of the basal myocardium (left) but global edema 
of the mid and apical myocardium (middle and right). Computer-aided signal intensity analysis (bottom of the T2- weighted 
images with color-coded display of relative signal intensity normalized to skeletal muscle [blue indicates a signal intensity ratio of 
myocardium to skeletal muscle of ≥1.9, indicating edema; green/yellow indicates a normal signal intensity ratio of 1.9]) confirms 
the presence of global mid and apical edema. Reprinted from Eitel et al64 with permission from the publisher. Copyright © 2009 
European Society of Radiology.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2435
adrenoceptor signaling, in the presence of supraphysi-
ological catecholamine concentrations, might be the 
trigger of LV dysfunction.80 It is well established that 
catecholamine signaling through β-adrenoceptors me-
diates endogenous regulation of chronotropic, inotro-
pic, and lusitropic cardiac functions. There is general 
consensus that this “brain-cardiac” process occurs via 
the β-adrenoceptor–mediated cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase pathway.81 Regional differences in adrenoceptor 
density might explain the pattern of LV dysfunction of-
ten seen in TTS. Experimental data have shown that β2-
adrenoceptors are more frequently expressed in apical 
than in basal segments of the LV, whereas a reverse dis-
tribution is present for norepinephrine β1-adrenoceptors 
and sympathetic nerve terminals of the neuro-cardiac 
axis, which are expressed much more at the base than 
at the apex of the LV.15
With this background, it might be considered that both 
epinephrine and norepinephrine elicit positive inotropic 
responses through Gs-coupling protein, but they func-
tion differently when activating the β2-adrenoceptors. 
Indeed, supraphysiological levels of epinephrine trig-
ger β2-adrenoceptor to switch from Gs to Gi coupling.82 
The switch to Gi, which causes a negative inotropic re-
sponse, thus contributing to the apical ballooning, may 
be a mechanism to protect myocytes from the cardio-
toxic activation of β1- and β2-adrenoceptor Gs pathways, 
thus limiting the degree of acute myocardial injury in re-
sponse to the catecholamine storm. This mechanism has 
been elegantly shown by Paur et al,38 who demonstrated 
that high-dose epinephrine can induce direct myocyte 
cardiodepression and cardioprotection in a Gi-dependent 
manner. In a rat model, these authors showed that high-
dose intravenous epinephrine given quickly as a bolus, 
to mimic the catecholamine surge after acute stress, 
produced the characteristic reversible apical depression 
of myocardial contraction coupled with basal hypercon-
tractility, whereas an equivalent bolus of norepinephrine 
did not.39 This implies that the mechanism is epinephrine 
specific and confirms the observation that dysfunction 
is not typically observed in the region with the highest 
density of norepinephrine-releasing sympathetic nerve 
terminals.83
Besides the inhibition of Gs protein, a major sig-
naling pathway regulated by β2-adrenoceptors in TTS 
seems to be the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) 
and protein kinase B (AKT) signaling cascade.57 Gene 
expression profiling with the microarray technique has 
demonstrated that genes coding for the PI3K/AKT sig-
naling pathway proteins are differentially expressed in 
TTS. Indeed, Nef et al84 analyzed biopsies from 16 
patients and found that increased catecholamine lev-
els in TTS activate the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway 
in the acute phase of the disease, as shown by an 
upregulation of PI3K, an increase in AKT phosphory-
lation, and a downregulation of the PI3K antagonist 
phosphatase and tensin homolog. AKT is critical for 
postnatal cardiac growth and coronary angiogenesis. 
In addition, its downstream targets, especially mecha-
nistic target of rapamycin and glycogen synthase ki-
Figure 6. Mechanism of myocardial ischemia. 
In addition to the classic mechanisms (ie, atherosclerotic disease and epicardial coronary vasospasm) that lead to myocardial 
ischemia, coronary microvascular dysfunction has recently emerged as a third potential mechanism of myocardial ischemia. As 
in the case of the other 2 mechanisms, coronary microvascular dysfunction (alone or in combination with the other 2) can lead 
to transient myocardial ischemia as in patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) or cardiomyopathy (CMP) or to severe acute 
ischemia as observed in Takotsubo syndrome. CFR indicates coronary flow reserve. Reprinted from Crea et al72 with permission. 
Copyright © 2013 The Author.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2436
nase 3, have been shown to play crucial roles in cell 
survival.85 It is noteworthy that mechanisms of myo-
cardial protection seem to act differently in different 
patients as a consequence of genetic variability. Over 
the past decade, several studies analyzing polymor-
phisms potentially involved in the pathogenesis of TTS 
have demonstrated differences in the various sub-
types of adrenoceptors86 and estrogen receptors.87 
Genetic predisposition to TTS might explain why some 
patients may develop the disease even with no pre-
ceding stressor and are at risk of recurrence.88 Last, 
because myocardial ischemia seems to play a key 
role in the pathophysiology of TTS (see the next sec-
tion), it could also be hypothesized that mechanisms 
triggered by transient ischemia could confer some ad-
ditional myocardial protection.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
The most recent evidence supports the concept that in 
the acute phase of TTS there is an increased concentra-
tion of catecholamine that might induce direct myocar-
dial injury and coronary spasm, mostly at the microvas-
cular level, together with an increased cardiac workload 
that contributes to an acute situation of supply-demand 
Figure 7. Myocardial contrast echocardiography in Takotsubo syndrome (TTS). 
Under baseline conditions, a clear perfusion defect is present within the left ventricular apical myocardium (top left), whereas 
during adenosine, a significant decrease in the extent of the perfusion defect is evident (top right). Contrast score index 
(arbitrary units; A and B) and contrast defect length (C and D) at baseline (Bsl), at peak of 90-second adenosine infusion (Adn), 
and at 1-month follow-up (FUP) in patients with TTS (ABS) and patients with ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). 
*P<0.001 vs baseline. Reprinted from Galiuto et al76 with permission. Copyright © 2010 The Author.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2437
mismatch followed by postischemic stunning. The func-
tional counterpart at the LV level would be the typical api-
cal ballooning that persists as a result of the presence of 
stunned myocardium but is followed by complete func-
tional recovery over relatively short periods of time in 
most cases (Figure 8).
Physiologically, small coronary arteries and arterioles 
are the principal determinants of coronary vascular resis-
tance. These vessels receive autonomic innervation, and 
their diameter is modified by activation of these nerves. 
In healthy subjects, the overall response to sympathetic 
activation is vasodilatation mainly through activation of 
coronary β2-adrenoceptors. Conversely, increased cardi-
ac sympathetic activity can induce coronary microvascu-
lar constriction in the context of endothelial dysfunction 
instead of the vasodilatation observed normally because 
α-adrenergic vasoconstriction becomes unrestrained 
and powerful enough to reduce coronary blood flow, thus 
contributing to myocardial ischemia.89–91 Both α1- and 
α2-adrenoceptors mediate coronary vasoconstriction, 
with α1-adrenoceptors predominant in larger vessels and 
α2-adrenoceptors more abundant in the microcircula-
tion.92,93 In the context of endothelial dysfunction, both 
α1- and α2-adrenoceptors and microvascular constriction 
are augmented and can induce myocardial ischemia.94
Cardiac sympathetic hyperactivity in the acute phase 
of TTS is accompanied by metabolic abnormalities ap-
pearing as a flow-metabolism mismatch.95,96 Specifically, 
cardiac positron emission tomography with [18F]2-fluoro-
deoxyglucose has demonstrated reduced glucose me-
tabolism in the context of normal myocardial perfusion. 
Similar findings have been observed with free fatty acid 
analogs. This pattern, known as inverse metabolic perfu-
sion mismatch, represents a transient metabolic abnor-
mality despite preserved myocardial blood flow, which 
is typically observed in stunned myocardium.97–99 Using 
positron emission tomography in the acute phase, Feola 
et al98 have demonstrated impairment of tissue metabo-
lism in the dysfunctional myocardium, mainly at the apex 
and progressively less in the midventricular myocardium, 
which normalized at the 3-month follow-up. In the same 
study, hyperemic myocardial blood flow and coronary flow 
reserve were shown to be reduced in dysfunctional myo-
cardium, and these abnormalities recovered at follow-up.
There are some apparent discrepancies between the 
flow data obtained with echocardiography and single-
photon emission computed tomography on one hand and 
positron emission tomography on the other. Two main 
reasons likely explain these differences. The first is the 
time in the course of the disease when the studies were 
performed, and the second is related to differences in-
herent to these techniques. In fact, positron emission to-
mography is the only technique that can provide absolute 
myocardial blood flow in milliliters per minute per gram of 
tissue. In contrast, echocardiography and single-photon 
emission computed tomography provide only relative 
regional differences in tracer concentration that, also 
for differences within the normal range, will appear as 
regional defects. For example, if one myocardial region 
has an absolute resting flow of 0.7 mL/min per gram 
and another has a flow of 0.9 mL/min per gram (both of 
these values are within the normal baseline flow range), 
single-photon emission computed tomography and echo-
cardiography might show a defect in the former relative 
to the latter, whereas positron emission tomography will 
show that both flows are within the normal range.
The possibility exists that ischemic stunning confers 
protection against subsequent episodes of ischemia 
and preserves energy metabolism by downregulating 
contractile function and metabolism, thus facilitating re-
covery of LV systolic function.100 It is likely that different 
pathogenetic mechanisms operate in different patients 
Figure 8. Key pathogenetic aspects in 
Takotsubo syndrome. 
The interplay among triggers, pathogenetic 
factors, mechanisms of cardiac injury, 
and clinical consequences. ANS indicates 
autonomic nervous system; CNS, central 
nervous system; LV, left ventricular; and 
MVo2, myocardial oxygen consumption.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2438
presenting with TTS; thus, further mechanistic research 
is required to appropriately unveil the different reasons 
responsible for this intriguing and complex condition.
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
In the past few years, several studies have clarified 
mechanisms responsible for TTS, showing that a cate-
cholamine surge results in direct and indirect myocardial 
damage. The frequent spontaneous resolution of LV dys-
function appears to be related to the activation of sur-
vival pathways such as those observed in postischemic 
stunning. The high prevalence in postmenopausal women 
suggests that estrogen deprivation may play a facilitating 
role, probably mediated by endothelial dysfunction.
Despite the substantial increment in our knowledge 
of TTS, a number of knowledge gaps remain, includ-
ing (1) causes of the sympathetic surge in patients who 
have TTS in the absence of psychological or physical 
stress, neurological disorders, or pheochromocytoma; 
(2) mechanisms making patients, at a certain point in 
time of their life, susceptible to develop TTS in the pres-
ence of a catecholamine surge; (3) reasons for the differ-
ent distributions of wall motion abnormalities in different 
patients; (4) causes of the poor outcome observed in 
a sizeable proportion of these patients; and (5) causes 
of the recurrence of TTS occasionally observed during 
medium-term follow-up.6 These important issues need to 
be carefully addressed in future studies, together with 
work to identify targeted therapies.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
Funding was provided by the Ministero della Salute, BANDO 
2011 to 2012 Progetti di Ricerca, project code NET-2011-
02347173, principal investigator, Camici Paolo, IRCCS Osped-
ale San Raffaele.
DISCLOSURES
Dr Camici reports being a consultant for Servier and speak-
ing engagements with Menarini. The other authors report no 
conflicts.
AFFILIATIONS
From Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Sapienza Univer-
sity, Rome, Italy (F.P.); Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research 
Institute, St George’s, University of London, UK (J.C.K.); Institute 
of Cardiology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy (F.C.); and Vita-
Salute University and San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy (P.G.C.).
FOOTNOTES
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
REFERENCES
 1. Sato TH, Uchida T, Dote K, Ishihara M. Tako-tsubo-like left ventricu-
lar dysfunction due to multivessel coronary spasm. In: Kodama K, 
Haze K, Hori M, eds. Clinical Aspect of Myocardial Injury: From 
Ischemia to Heart Failure. Tokyo, Japan: Kagakuhyoronsha Pub-
lishing Co; 1990:56–64.
 2. Pelliccia F, Parodi G, Greco C, Antoniucci D, Brenner R, Bossone 
E, Cacciotti L, Capucci A, Citro R, Delmas C, Guerra F, Ionescu 
CN, Lairez O, Larrauri-Reyes M, Lee PH, Mansencal N, Marazzi G, 
Mihos CG, Morel O, Nef HM, Nunez Gil IJ, Passaseo I, Pineda AM, 
Rosano G, Santana O, Schneck F, Song BG, Song JK, Teh AW, 
Ungprasert P, Valbusa A, Wahl A, Yoshida T, Gaudio C, Kaski JC. 
Comorbidities frequency in Takotsubo syndrome: an international 
collaborative systematic review including 1109 patients. Am J 
Med. 2015; 128:654.e11–654.e19.
 3. Y-Hassan S. Acute cardiac sympathetic disruption in the patho-
genesis of the Takotsubo syndrome: a systematic review of the 
literature to date. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2014;159:35–42.
 4. Ghadri JR, Sarcon A, Diekmann J, Bataiosu DR, Cammann VL, 
Jurisic S, Napp LC, Jaguszewski M, Scherff F, Brugger P, Jäncke 
L, Seifert B, Bax JJ, Ruschitzka F, Lüscher TF, Templin C; InterTAK 
Co-Investigators. Happy heart syndrome: role of positive emotion-
al stress in Takotsubo syndrome. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2823–
2829. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv757.
 5. Akashi YJ, Nef HM, Lyon AR. Epidemiology and pathophysiology 
of Takotsubo syndrome. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:387–397. doi: 
10.1038/nrcardio.2015.39.
 6. Templin C, Ghadri JR, Diekmann J, Napp LC, Bataiosu DR, Ja-
guszewski M, Cammann VL, Sarcon A, Geyer V, Neumann CA, 
Seifert B, Hellermann J, Schwyzer M, Eisenhardt K, Jenewein J, 
Franke J, Katus HA, Burgdorf C, Schunkert H, Moeller C, Thiele H, 
Bauersachs J, Tschöpe C, Schultheiss HP, Laney CA, Rajan L, Mi-
chels G, Pfister R, Ukena C, Böhm M, Erbel R, Cuneo A, Kuck KH, 
Jacobshagen C, Hasenfuss G, Karakas M, Koenig W, Rottbauer W, 
Said SM, Braun-Dullaeus RC, Cuculi F, Banning A, Fischer TA, Va-
sankari T, Airaksinen KE, Fijalkowski M, Rynkiewicz A, Pawlak M, 
Opolski G, Dworakowski R, MacCarthy P, Kaiser C, Osswald S, Ga-
liuto L, Crea F, Dichtl W, Franz WM, Empen K, Felix SB, Delmas C, 
Lairez O, Erne P, Bax JJ, Ford I, Ruschitzka F, Prasad A, Lüscher 
TF. Clinical features and outcomes of Takotsubo (Stress) cardio-
myopathy. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:929–938. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1406761.
 7. Kurisu S, Inoue I, Kawagoe T, Ishihara M, Shimatani Y, Nakamura 
S, Yoshida M, Mitsuba N, Hata T, Sato H. Time course of elec-
trocardiographic changes in patients with tako-tsubo syndrome: 
comparison with acute myocardial infarction with minimal enzy-
matic release. Circ J. 2004;68:77–81.
 8. Frangieh AH, Obeid S, Ghadri JR, Imori Y, D’Ascenzo F, Kovac M, 
Ruschitzka F, Lüscher TF, Duru F, Templin C; InterTAK Collabo-
rators. ECG criteria to differentiate between Takotsubo (stress) 
cardiomyopathy and myocardial infarction. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2016;5:e003418. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.116.003418.
 9. Kosuge M, Ebina T, Hibi K, Morita S, Okuda J, Iwahashi N, Tsuka-
hara K, Nakachi T, Kiyokuni M, Ishikawa T, Umemura S, Kimura K. 
Simple and accurate electrocardiographic criteria to differentiate 
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy from anterior acute myocardial infarc-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:2514–2516. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2009.12.059.
 
10. Fröhlich GM, Schoch B, Schmid F, Keller P, Sudano I, Lüscher TF, 
Noll G, Ruschitzka F, Enseleit F. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy has a 
unique cardiac biomarker profile: NT-proBNP/myoglobin and NT-
proBNP/troponin T ratios for the differential diagnosis of acute 
coronary syndromes and stress induced cardiomyopathy. Int J Car-
diol. 2012;154:328–332. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.09.077.
 
11. Omland T, Persson A, Ng L, O’Brien R, Karlsson T, Herlitz J, Hart-
ford M, Caidahl K. N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2439
long-term mortality in acute coronary syndromes. Circulation. 
2002;106:2913–2918.
 
12. Prasad A, Lerman A, Rihal CS. Apical ballooning syndrome (Ta-
ko-Tsubo or stress cardiomyopathy): a mimic of acute myocar-
dial infarction. Am Heart J. 2008;155:408–417. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2007.11.008.
 
13. Kurowski V, Kaiser A, von Hof K, Killermann DP, Mayer B, Hart-
mann F, Schunkert H, Radke PW. Apical and midventricular 
transient left ventricular dysfunction syndrome (tako-tsubo car-
diomyopathy): frequency, mechanisms, and prognosis. Chest. 
2007;132:809–816. doi: 10.1378/chest.07-0608.
 
14. Ono R, Falcão LM. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy systematic re-
view: pathophysiologic process, clinical presentation and di-
agnostic approach to Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Int J Cardiol. 
2016;209:196–205. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.02.012.
 
15. Ancona F, Bertoldi LF, Ruggieri F, Cerri M, Magnoni M, Beretta L, 
Cianflone D, Camici PG. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy and neuro-
genic stunned myocardium: similar albeit different. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:2830–2832. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw035.
 
16. Elesber A, Lerman A, Bybee KA, Murphy JG, Barsness G, Singh M, 
Rihal CS, Prasad A. Myocardial perfusion in apical ballooning syn-
drome correlate of myocardial injury. Am Heart J. 2006;152:469.
e9–469.13. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2006.06.007.
 
17. Sharkey SW, Windenburg DC, Lesser JR, Maron MS, Hauser 
RG, Lesser JN, Haas TS, Hodges JS, Maron BJ. Natural history 
and expansive clinical profile of stress (tako-tsubo) cardiomy-
opathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:333–341. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2009.08.057.
 
18. Tornvall P, Collste O, Ehrenborg E, Järnbert-Petterson H. A case-
control study of risk markers and mortality in Takotsubo stress 
cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:1931–1936. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.02.029.
 
19. Song BG, Yang HS, Hwang HK, Kang GH, Park YH, Chun WJ, Oh 
JH. The impact of stressor patterns on clinical features in pa-
tients with tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy: experiences of two ter-
tiary cardiovascular centers. Clin Cardiol. 2012;35:E6–E13. doi: 
10.1002/clc.22053.
 
20. Singh K, Carson K, Shah R, Sawhney G, Singh B, Parsaik A, Gi-
lutz H, Usmani Z, Horowitz J. Meta-analysis of clinical correlates 
of acute mortality in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 
2014;113:1420–1428. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.01.419.
 
21. Isogai T, Yasunaga H, Matsui H, Tanaka H, Ueda T, Horiguchi H, 
Fushimi K. Out-of-hospital versus in-hospital Takotsubo cardiomy-
opathy: analysis of 3719 patients in the Diagnosis Procedure 
Combination database in Japan. Int J Cardiol. 2014;176:413–
417. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.07.110.
 
22. Finsterer J, Wahbi K. CNS disease triggering Takotsubo stress car-
diomyopathy. Int J Cardiol. 2014;177:322–329. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2014.08.101.
 
23. Ferreira VM, Marcelino M, Piechnik SK, Marini C, Karamitsos TD, 
Ntusi NA, Francis JM, Robson MD, Arnold JR, Mihai R, Thomas 
JD, Herincs M, Hassan-Smith ZK, Greiser A, Arlt W, Korbonits M, 
Karavitaki N, Grossman AB, Wass JA, Neubauer S. Pheochromo-
cytoma is characterized by catecholamine-mediated myocarditis, 
focal and diffuse myocardial fibrosis, and myocardial dysfunc-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2364–2374. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2016.03.543.
 
24. Amariles P, Cifuentes L. Drugs as possible triggers of Takotsubo 
cardiomyopathy: a comprehensive literature search–update 
2015. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2016;11:95–109.
 
25. Deshmukh A, Kumar G, Pant S, Rihal C, Murugiah K, Mehta JL. 
Prevalence of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy in the United States. Am 
Heart J. 2012;164:66–71.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2012.03.020.
 
26. Janig W. The Integrative Action of the Autonomic Nervous System. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 2006.
 
27. Steptoe A, Kivimäki M. Stress and cardiovascular disease. Nat 
Rev Cardiol. 2012;9:360–370. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2012.45.
 
28. Suzuki H, Matsumoto Y, Kaneta T, Sugimura K, Takahashi J, Fuku-
moto Y, Takahashi S, Shimokawa H. Evidence for brain activation 
in patients with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Circ J. 2014;78:256–
258.
 
29. Crossman AR, Neary D. Neuroanatomy. 2nd ed. London, UK: 
Churchill Livingston; 2000.
 
30. LeDoux JE. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
2000;23:155–184. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.23.1.155.
 
31. Sved AF, Cano G, Passerin AM, Rabin BS. The locus coeruleus, 
Barrington’s nucleus, and neural circuits of stress. Physiol Behav. 
2002;77:737–742.
 
32. Mazeh H, Paldor I, Chen H. The endocrine system: pituitary and 
adrenal glands. ACS Surgery: Principles and Practice, 2012; 1–
13.
 
33. Francis GS. Modulation of peripheral sympathetic nerve transmis-
sion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1988;12:250–254.
 
34. Lymperopoulos A, Rengo G, Koch WJ. Adrenal adrenoceptors 
in heart failure: fine-tuning cardiac stimulation. Trends Mol Med. 
2007;13:503–511. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2007.10.005.
 
35. Florea VG, Cohn JN. The autonomic nervous system and heart 
failure. Circ Res. 2014;114:1815–1826. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRE-
SAHA.114.302589.
 
36. Akashi YJ, Nakazawa K, Sakakibara M, Miyake F, Musha H, Sasaka 
K. 123I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy in patients with “Takotsubo” 
cardiomyopathy. J Nucl Med. 2004;45:1121–1127.
 
37. Wittstein IS, Thiemann DR, Lima JA, Baughman KL, Schulman 
SP, Gerstenblith G, Wu KC, Rade JJ, Bivalacqua TJ, Champion 
HC. Neurohumoral features of myocardial stunning due to sud-
den emotional stress. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:539–548. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa043046.
 
38. Paur H, Wright PT, Sikkel MB, Tranter MH, Mansfield C, O’Gara 
P, Stuckey DJ, Nikolaev VO, Diakonov I, Pannell L, Gong H, Sun 
H, Peters NS, Petrou M,Zheng Z, Gorelik J, Lyon AR, Harding SE. 
High levels of circulating epinephrine trigger apical cardiodepres-
sion. Circulation. 2012;126:697–706.
 
39. Kume T, Akasaka T, Kawamoto T, Yoshitani H, Watanabe N, Neishi 
Y, Wada N, Yoshida K. Assessment of coronary microcirculation 
in patients with Takotsubo-like left ventricular dysfunction. Circ J. 
2005;69:934–939.
 
40. Moussouttas M, Mearns E, Walters A, DeCaro M. Plasma catechol-
amine profile of subarachnoid hemorrhage patients with neuro-
genic cardiomyopathy. Cerebrovasc Dis Extra. 2015;5:57–67. 
doi: 10.1159/000431155.
 
41. Ohtsuka T, Hamada M, Kodama K, Sasaki O, Suzuki M, Hara Y, 
Shigematsu Y, Hiwada K. Images in cardiovascular medicine: 
neurogenic stunned myocardium. Circulation. 2000;101:2122–
2124.
 
42. Masuda T, Sato K, Yamamoto S, Matsuyama N, Shimohama T, 
Matsunaga A, Obuchi S, Shiba Y, Shimizu S, Izumi T. Sympa-
thetic nervous activity and myocardial damage immediately af-
ter subarachnoid hemorrhage in a unique animal model. Stroke. 
2002;33:1671–1676.
 
43. Lymperopoulos A, Rengo G, Koch WJ. Adrenergic nervous sys-
tem in heart failure: pathophysiology and therapy. Circ Res. 
2013;113:739–753. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.300308.
 
44. Akashi YJ, Nakazawa K, Sakakibara M, Miyake F, Musha H, Sasaka 
K. 123I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy in patients with “Takotsubo” 
cardiomyopathy. J Nucl Med. 2004;45:1121–1127.
 
45. Cimarelli S, Sauer F, Morel O, Ohlmann P, Constantinesco A, Im-
periale A. Transient left ventricular dysfunction syndrome: patho-
physiological bases through nuclear medicine imaging. Int J Car-
diol. 2010;144:212–218. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.04.025.
 
46. Christensen TE, Bang LE, Holmvang L, Skovgaard DC, Oturai 
DB, Søholm H, Thomsen JH, Andersson HB, Ghotbi AA, Ihlemann 
N, Kjaer A, Hasbak P. (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy in the subacute 
state of takotsubo cardiomyopathy. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2016;9:982–990. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2016.01.028.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pelliccia et al
June 13, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121
2440
 
47. Naegele M, Flammer AJ, Enseleit F, Roas S, Frank M, Hirt A, Kai-
ser P, Cantatore S, Templin C, Fröhlich G, Romanens M, Lüscher 
TF, Ruschitzka F, Noll G, Sudano I. Endothelial function and 
sympathetic nervous system activity in patients with Takotsubo 
syndrome. Int J Cardiol. 2016;224:226–230. doi: 10.1016/j.ij-
card.2016.09.008.
 
48. Camici PG, Crea F. Microvascular angina: a women’s affair? 
Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING. 
115.003252.
 
49. Vitale C, Mendelsohn ME, Rosano GM. Gender differences in 
the cardiovascular effect of sex hormones. Nat Rev Cardiol. 
2009;6:532–542. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2009.105.
 
50. Kaski JC. Cardiac syndrome X in women: the role of oestrogen 
deficiency. Heart. 2006;92(suppl 3):iii5–iii9.
 
51. Ueyama T, Ishikura F, Matsuda A, Asanuma T, Ueda K, Ichinose M, 
Kasamatsu K, Hano T, Akasaka T, Tsuruo Y, Morimoto K, Beppu 
S. Chronic estrogen supplementation following ovariectomy im-
proves the emotional stress-induced cardiovascular responses by 
indirect action on the nervous system and by direct action on the 
heart. Circ J. 2007;71:565–573.
 
52. Pelliccia F, Greco C, Vitale C, Rosano G, Gaudio C, Kaski JC. Ta-
kotsubo syndrome (stress cardiomyopathy): an intriguing clinical 
condition in search of its identity. Am J Med. 2014;127:699–704. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2014.04.004.
 
53. Templin C, Napp LC, Ghadri JR. Takotsubo syndrome: underdi-
agnosed, underestimated, but understood? J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2016;67:1937–1940. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.03.006.
 
54. Liaudet L, Calderari B, Pacher P. Pathophysiological mechanisms 
of catecholamine and cocaine-mediated cardiotoxicity. Heart Fail 
Rev. 2014;19:815–824. doi: 10.1007/s10741-014-9418-y.
 
55. Zhang X, Szeto C, Gao E, Tang M, Jin J, Fu Q, Makarewich C, Ai X, 
Li Y, Tang A, Wang J, Gao H, Wang F, Ge XJ, Kunapuli SP, Zhou L, 
Zeng C, Xiang KY, Chen X. Cardiotoxic and cardioprotective fea-
tures of chronic β-adrenergic signaling. Circ Res. 2013;112:498–
509. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.273896.
 
56. Okonko DO, Shah AM. Heart failure: mitochondrial dysfunction 
and oxidative stress in CHF. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:6–8. doi: 
10.1038/nrcardio.2014.189.
 
57. Behonick GS, Novak MJ, Nealley EW, Baskin SI. Toxicology up-
date: the cardiotoxicity of the oxidative stress metabolites of 
catecholamines (aminochromes). J Appl Toxicol. 2001;21(suppl 
1):S15–S22.
 
58. Borkowski BJ, Cheema Y, Shahbaz AU, Bhattacharya SK, Weber 
KT. Cation dyshomeostasis and cardiomyocyte necrosis: the 
Fleckenstein hypothesis revisited. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1846–
1853. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr063.
 
59. Cheung RT, Hachinski V. The insula and cerebrogenic sudden 
death. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:1685–1688.
 
60. Raab W, Stark E, Macmillan WH, Gigee WR. Sympathogenic origin 
and antiadrenergic prevention of stress-induced myocardial le-
sions. Am J Cardiol. 1961;8:203–211.
 
61. Basso C, Thiene G. The pathophysiology of myocardial reperfu-
sion: a pathologist’s perspective. Heart. 2006;92:1559–1562. 
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2005.086959.
 
62. Nef HM, Möllmann H, Kostin S, Troidl C, Voss S, Weber M, Dill T, 
Rolf A, Brandt R, Hamm CW, Elsässer A. Tako-Tsubo cardiomy-
opathy: intraindividual structural analysis in the acute phase and 
after functional recovery. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:2456–2464. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehl570.
 
63. Lacy CR, Contrada RJ, Robbins ML, Tannenbaum AK, Moreyra 
AE, Chelton S, Kostis JB. Coronary vasoconstriction induced 
by mental stress (simulated public speaking). Am J Cardiol. 
1995;75:503–505.
 
64. Eitel I, Lücke C, Grothoff M, Sareban M, Schuler G, Thiele H, 
Gutberlet M. Inflammation in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy: insights 
from cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Eur Radiol. 
2010;20:422–431. doi: 10.1007/s00330-009-1549-5.
 
65. Lenders JW, Eisenhofer G, Mannelli M, Pacak K. Phaeochromo-
cytoma. Lancet. 2005;366:665–675. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(05)67139-5.
 
66. Testa M, Feola M. Usefulness of myocardial positron emission to-
mography/nuclear imaging in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. World J 
Radiol. 2014;6:502–506. doi: 10.4329/wjr.v6.i7.502.
 
67. Saeed M, Van TA, Krug R, Hetts SW, Wilson MW. Cardiac MR 
imaging: current status and future direction. Cardiovasc Di-
agn Ther. 2015;5:290–310. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2223-3652. 
2015.06.07.
 
68. Dote K, Sato H, Tateishi H, Uchida T, Ishihara M. Myocardial stun-
ning due to simultaneous multivessel coronary spasms: a review 
of 5 cases [in Japanese]. J Cardiol. 1991;21:203–214.
 
69. Tsuchihashi K, Ueshima K, Uchida T, Oh-mura N, Kimura K, Owa M, 
Yoshiyama M, Miyazaki S, Haze K, Ogawa H, Honda T, Hase M, Kai 
R, Morii I; Angina Pectoris-Myocardial Infarction Investigations in 
Japan. Transient left ventricular apical ballooning without coronary 
artery stenosis: a novel heart syndrome mimicking acute myocar-
dial infarction: Angina Pectoris-Myocardial Infarction Investigations 
in Japan. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:11–18.
 
70. Angelini P. Transient left ventricular apical ballooning: a unify-
ing pathophysiologic theory at the edge of Prinzmetal angina. 
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2008;71:342–352. doi: 10.1002/
ccd.21338.
 
71. Y-Hassan S. Post-ischemic myocardial stunning was the starting 
point of Takotsubo syndrome: restitution is justified after falling 
down. Int J Cardiol. 2015; 198: 174–175.
 
72. Crea F, Camici PG, Bairey Merz CN. Coronary microvascular 
dysfunction: an update. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1101–1111. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/eht513.
 
73. Vitale C, Rosano GM, Kaski JC. Role of coronary microvascular 
dysfunction in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Circ J. 2016;80:299–
305. doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-15-1364.
 
74. Khalid N, Ikram S. Coronary flow assessment in Takotsubo car-
diomyopathy with TIMI frame count. Int J Cardiol. 2015;197:208. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.06.078.
 
75. Ito K, Sugihara H, Kawasaki T, Yuba T, Doue T, Tanabe T, Ada-
chi Y, Katoh S, Azuma A, Nakagawa M. Assessment of ampulla 
(Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy with coronary angiography, two-
dimensional echocardiography and 99mTc-tetrofosmin myocardial 
single photon emission computed tomography. Ann Nucl Med. 
2001;15:351–355.
 
76. Galiuto L, De Caterina AR, Porfidia A, Paraggio L, Barchetta S, Lo-
corotondo G, Rebuzzi AG, Crea F. Reversible coronary microvas-
cular dysfunction: a common pathogenetic mechanism in apical 
ballooning or Tako-Tsubo syndrome. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1319–
1327. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq039.
 
77. Hadase M, Kawasaki T, Asada S, Kamitani T, Kawasaki S, Sugihara 
H. Reverse redistribution of Tc-99m tetrofosmin in a patient with 
“Takotsubo” cardiomyopathy. Clin Nucl Med. 2003;28:757–759. 
doi: 10.1097/01.rlu.0000082665.77650.e2.
 
78. Nishikawa S, Ito K, Adachi Y, Katoh S, Azuma A, Matsubara H. Am-
pulla (“Takotsubo”) cardiomyopathy of both ventricles: evaluation 
of microcirculation disturbance using 99mTc-tetrofosmin myocar-
dial single photon emission computed tomography and Doppler 
guide wire. Circ J. 2004;68:1076–1080.
 
79. Ito K, Sugihara H, Kinoshita N, Azuma A, Matsubara H. Assess-
ment of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (transient left ventricular api-
cal ballooning) using 99mTc-tetrofosmin, 123I-BMIPP, 123I-MIBG and 
99mTc-PYP myocardial SPECT. Ann Nucl Med. 2005;19:435–445.
 
80. Chen W, Dilsizian V. Cardiac sympathetic disturbance in Takotsubo 
cardiomyopathy: primary etiology or a compensatory response to 
heart failure? JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2016;9:991–993. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmg.2016.01.026.
 
81. Murchison CF, Schutsky K, Jin SH, Thomas SA. Norepinephrine 
and ß₁-adrenergic signaling facilitate activation of hippocampal 
CA1 pyramidal neurons during contextual memory retrieval. Neu-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Pathophysiology of Takotsubo
STATE OF THE ART
Circulation. 2017;135:2426–2441. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.027121 
June 13, 2017
2441
roscience. 2011;181:109–116. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience. 
2011.02.049.
 
82. Heubach JF, Ravens U, Kaumann AJ. Epinephrine activates both 
Gs and Gi pathways, but norepinephrine activates only the Gs 
pathway through human beta2-adrenoceptors overexpressed 
in mouse heart. Mol Pharmacol. 2004;65:1313–1322. doi: 
10.1124/mol.65.5.1313.
 
83. Bybee KA, Prasad A. Stress-related cardiomyopathy syndromes. 
Circulation. 2008;118:397–409. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
106.677625.
 
84. Nef HM, Möllmann H, Hilpert P, Troidl C, Voss S, Rolf A, Behrens 
CB, Weber M, Hamm CW, Elsässer A. Activated cell survival cas-
cade protects cardiomyocytes from cell death in Tako-Tsubo car-
diomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009;11:758–764. doi: 10.1093/
eurjhf/hfp076.
 
85. Zhang X, Szeto C, Gao E, Tang M, Jin J, Fu Q, Makarewich C, Ai X, 
Li Y, Tang A, Wang J, Gao H, Wang F, Ge XJ, Kunapuli SP, Zhou L, 
Zeng C, Xiang KY, Chen X. Cardiotoxic and cardioprotective fea-
tures of chronic β-adrenergic signaling. Circ Res. 2013;112:498–
509. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.273896.
 
86. Triposkiadis F, Karayannis G, Giamouzis G, Skoularigis J, Lou-
ridas G, Butler J. The sympathetic nervous system in heart 
failure physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical implications. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1747–1762. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2009.05.015.
 
87. Goodloe AH, Evans JM, Middha S, Prasad A, Olson TM. Char-
acterizing genetic variation of adrenergic signalling pathways 
in Takotsubo (stress) cardiomyopathy exomes. Eur J Heart Fail. 
2014;16:942–949. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.145.
 
88. Limongelli G, Masarone D, Maddaloni V, Rubino M, Fratta F, Cirillo 
A, Ludovica SB, Pacileo R, Fusco A, Coppola GR, Pisacane F, 
Bossone E, Calabrò P, Calabrò R, Russo MG, Pacileo G. Genetics 
of Takotsubo syndrome. Heart Fail Clin. 2016;12:499–506. doi: 
10.1016/j.hfc.2016.06.007.
 
89. Heusch G, Baumgart D, Camici P, Chilian W, Gregorini L, Hess O, 
Indolfi C, Rimoldi O. Alpha-adrenergic coronary vasoconstriction 
and myocardial ischemia in humans. Circulation. 2000;101:689–
694.
 
90. Seitelberger R, Guth BD, Heusch G, Lee JD, Katayama K, Ross 
J Jr. Intracoronary alpha 2-adrenergic receptor blockade at-
tenuates ischemia in conscious dogs during exercise. Circ Res. 
1988;62:436–442.
 91. Jones CJ, Kuo L, Davis MJ, Chilian WM. Alpha-adrenergic re-
sponses of isolated canine coronary microvessels. Basic Res 
Cardiol. 1995;90:61–69.
 92. Chilian WM. Functional distribution of alpha 1- and alpha 2-ad-
renergic receptors in the coronary microcirculation. Circulation. 
1991;84:2108–2122.
 93. Heusch G. Alpha-adrenergic mechanisms in myocardial ischemia. 
Circulation. 1990;81:1–13.
 94. Baumgart D, Haude M, Görge G, Liu F, Ge J, Grosse-Eggebrecht 
C, Erbel R, Heusch G. Augmented alpha-adrenergic constric-
tion of atherosclerotic human coronary arteries. Circulation. 
1999;99:2090–2097.
 95. Obunai K, Misra D, Van Tosh A, Bergmann SR. Metabolic evidence 
of myocardial stunning in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy: a positron 
emission tomography study. J Nucl Cardiol. 2005;12:742–744. 
doi: 10.1016/j.nuclcard.2005.06.087.
 96. Bybee KA, Murphy J, Prasad A, Wright RS, Lerman A, Rihal 
CS, Chareonthaitawee P. Acute impairment of regional myo-
cardial glucose uptake in the apical ballooning (Takotsubo) 
syndrome. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006;13:244–250. doi: 10.1016/j.
nuclcard.2006.01.016.
 97. Yoshida T, Hibino T, Kako N, Murai S, Oguri M, Kato K, Yajima 
K, Ohte N, Yokoi K, Kimura G. A pathophysiologic study of tako-
tsubo cardiomyopathy with F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:2598–2604. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehm401.
 98. Feola M, Chauvie S, Rosso GL, Biggi A, Ribichini F, Bobbio M. 
Reversible impairment of coronary flow reserve in Takotsubo 
cardiomyopathy: a myocardial PET study. J Nucl Cardiol. 
2008;15:811–817. doi: 10.1007/BF03007363.
 99. Rendl G, Rettenbacher L, Keinrath P, Altenberger J, Schuler J, 
Heigert M, Pichler M, Pirich C. Different pattern of regional meta-
bolic abnormalities in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy as evidenced 
by F-18 FDG PET-CT. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2010;122:184–
185. doi: 10.1007/s00508-010-1356-7.
 
100. Lyon AR, Bossone E, Schneider B, Sechtem U, Citro R, Underwood 
SR, Sheppard MN, Figtree GA, Parodi G, Akashi YJ, Ruschitzka F, 
Filippatos G, Mebazaa A, Omerovic E. Current state of knowledge 
on Takotsubo syndrome: a position statement from the Taskforce 
on Takotsubo Syndrome of the Heart Failure Association of the 
European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18:8–27. 
doi: 10.1002/ejhf.424.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
