 Hippocampal LTP and contextual learning require surface 
diffusion of AMPA receptors
A.C. Penn#1,2,3, C.L. Zhang#1,2, F. Georges1,2,4, L. Royer1,2,5, C. Breillat1,2, E. Hosy1,2, J.D. 
Petersen1,2, Y. Humeau1,2,§, and D. Choquet1,2,6,§
1University of Bordeaux, Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience, UMR5297, F-33000 
Bordeaux, France
2CNRS, Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience, UMR 5297, F-33000, Bordeaux, France
3Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QG, UK
4University of Bordeaux, Institute of Neurodegenerative Diseases, CNRS UMR 5293, 146 Rue 
Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux – France
6Bordeaux Imaging Center, UMS 3420 CNRS, US4 INSERM, University of Bordeaux, France
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Long-term potentiation (LTP) of excitatory synaptic transmission has long been considered a 
cellular correlate for learning and memory1,2. Early LTP (eLTP, <1 hour) had initially been 
explained either by presynaptic increases in glutamate release3–5 or by direct modification of 
post-synaptic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR) 
function6,7. Compelling models have more recently proposed that synaptic potentiation can occur 
by the recruitment of additional post-synaptic AMPARs8, sourced either from an intracellular 
reserve pool by exocytosis or from nearby extra synaptic receptors pre-existing on the neuronal 
surface9–12. However, the exact mechanism through which synapses can rapidly recruit new 
AMPARs during eLTP is still unknown. In particular, direct evidence for a pivotal role of AMPAR 
surface diffusion as a trafficking mechanism in synaptic plasticity is still lacking. Using AMPAR 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.C. (daniel.choquet@u-bordeaux.fr).
5Current address: Department of Biology, Brandeis University, 415 South Street, Waltham, MA, USA.
§These authors jointly supervised the work
Author Contributions A.C.P. performed molecular biology, imaging, slice culture and transfection, designed and executed slice 
electrophysiology experiments (all pertaining to the avidin-biotin X-linking experiments) and wrote the paper. Y.H and C.L.Z. 
performed acute slice electrophysiology using antibody-mediated X-linking approach. C.L.Z performed surgeries and behavioural 
experiments. F.G. performed in vivo electrophysiology experiments. C.B. performed molecular and cell biology. J.D.P. performed 
antibody feeding experiments. E.H. performed single-particle tracking and Q-dot experiments. L.R. performed some imaging 
experiments. A.C.P. and Y.H. analysed the data. D.C. and Y.H. conceived and supervised the study. All authors discussed the results 
and contributed to the manuscript.
Author Information: Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Data availability
The source data that support the findings of this study are available in the online version of the paper and from the corresponding 
author upon reasonable request.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 September 21; 549(7672): 384–388. doi:10.1038/nature23658.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 immobilization approaches, we show that interfering with AMPAR surface diffusion dramatically 
impaired synaptic potentiation of Schaffer collateral/commissural inputs to cornu ammonis area 1 
(CA1) in cultured slices, acute slices and in vivo. Our data also identifies distinct contributions of 
various AMPAR trafficking routes to the temporal profile of synaptic potentiation. In addition, 
AMPAR immobilization in vivo in the dorsal hippocampus (DH) before fear conditioning, 
indicated that AMPAR diffusion is important for the early phase of contextual learning. Therefore, 
our results provide a direct demonstration that the recruitment of new receptors to synapses by 
surface diffusion is a critical mechanism for the expression of LTP and hippocampal learning. 
Since AMPAR surface diffusion is dictated by weak Brownian forces that are readily perturbed by 
protein-protein interactions, we anticipate that this fundamental trafficking mechanism will be a 
key target for modulating synaptic potentiation and learning.
Hebbian LTP is characterized by a prolonged increase in a synaptic response that occurs 
upon robust, coincident activation of pre-and post-synaptic neurons. The induction of 
canonical LTP proceeds by calcium influx through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors 
(NMDARs) and subsequent activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II 
(CaMKII)6,8. However, despite decades of intense research on synaptic plasticity focused 
on the Schaffer collateral/commissural synapses, there is still ambiguity over how canonical 
LTP is ultimately expressed13. A substantial body of evidence points to post-synaptic 
mechanisms8, where the prime candidates have been an increase in the conductance or 
number of AMPARs6–8. Synaptic recruitment of additional receptors had initially been 
proposed to originate from stimulus-induced AMPAR exocytosis from intracellular 
stores14–17. However, work from our lab and others have shown that there is a large amount 
of extra-synaptic surface AMPARs in hippocampal neurons and that a large fraction of them 
diffuse almost freely by Brownian motion before being reversibly confined and trapped at 
synapses10,12. Furthermore, activity dependent activation of CaMKII induces rapid 
immobilization of AMPAR at synapses10,18 and recent work implicates a pre-existing 
extra-synaptic receptor pool in the expression of LTP19. Both lateral movement and 
exocytosis of AMPAR could indeed contribute to LTP20. Altogether, this led us to directly 
investigate the contribution of AMPAR surface diffusion to synaptic potentiation.
We developed manipulations that cross-link (X-link) surface AMPARs, thereby preventing 
their diffusion on the cell membrane. First, we created constructs to autonomously express 
recombinant biotin-tethered AMPAR subunits 1 and 221 (bAP::SEP::GluA1 and 2), which 
we could surface X-link by tetrameric biotin-binding proteins (BBPs, ~60 kDa, Fig. 1a-b). 
We transfected bAP::SEP::GluA subunits into cultured hippocampal neurons and monitored 
their surface diffusion by fluorescence recovery after photo-bleaching (FRAP). Brief pre-
treatment of cultures with BBP neutravidin (NA) significantly inhibited FRAP at dendritic 
spines (Fig. 1c-d), only if both the acceptor peptide (AP) tag was included in the construct 
and if the endoplasmic reticulum-retained biotin ligase (BirA-ER) was co-expressed (Fig. 
1d). Therefore, we could effectively manipulate post-synaptic AMPAR surface diffusion by 
a specific X-linking approach. Similar NA-induced immobilization of AMPARs was 
obtained when measured by tracking bAP::SEP::GluA2 diffusion with quantum dots 
(Extended Data Fig. 1).
Penn et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Much of our current understanding of LTP mechanisms comes from experiments on in vitro 
hippocampal slice preparations. We achieved effective molecular replacement of endogenous 
receptors by delivering bAP::SEP::GluA2 into CA1 neurons of slice cultures from GluA2 
knockout (KO) mice (Gria2-/-). In wild-type mice (Gria2+/+), principal neurons of the 
hippocampus predominantly express hetero-tetrameric AMPARs composed of the GluA1 
and GluA2 subunits, which have a linear current-voltage (I-V) relationship (Fig. 1e, grey). In 
contrast, AMPAR currents in the absence of GluA2 (Gria2-/-) are inwardly rectifying (Fig. 
1e, red)22. Expression of bAP::SEP::GluA2 faithfully restored a linear I-V relationships in 
the Gria2-/- slices for both synaptic currents (Fig. 1e, top, green) and extra-synaptic 
glutamate uncaging currents to near wild-type levels (Fig. 1e, bottom, green). We also 
confirmed that BBPs could effectively diffuse through organotypic slices and bind 
specifically to molecularly replaced neurons (Extended Data Fig. 2a). Importantly, following 
this expression manipulation, we could obtain stable excitatory postsynaptic potentials 
(EPSPs, Extended Data Fig. 2b) and reliably induce synaptic potentiation by applying high-
frequency stimulation (HFS) (Fig. 2a).
We next evaluated the effect of AMPAR X-linking on synaptic transmission and 
potentiation. Acute pre-treatment followed by wash of transfected slice cultures with NA to 
X-link only pre-existing surface AMPARs had no detectable effects on basal synaptic 
transmission (Fig. 1f, top and middle, Extended Data Fig. 2c, e) or surface AMPAR levels 
(Fig. 1f, bottom). However, this pre-treatment with NA completely abolished the short-term 
potentiation (STP) induced by HFS (Fig. 2b). The impaired potentiation was likely not due 
to failure to reach induction threshold since we could not detect significant effects of NA on 
post-synaptic depolarisation during HFS (Extended Data Fig. 2d) or on the average size of 
the EPSP during the baseline (Extended Data Fig. 2e). Furthermore, the amplitude and time 
course of synaptic NMDA receptor currents in bAP::SEP::GluA2 replacement cells were 
unaffected by the X-link manipulation (Fig. 1f; Extended Data Fig. 2f). Finally, we 
confirmed that the effect of NA required specific interactions with bAP::SEP::GluA2 by 
showing that potentiation was normal in neurons co-expressing myc::SEP::GluA2 (which 
does not bind NA) and BirA-ER in NA-treated slices (Extended Data Fig. 3a). These results 
suggest that diffusion of a pre-existing surface pool of post-synaptic AMPARs plays a 
critical role in the expression of synaptic potentiation.
While fully abolishing STP, X-link pre-treatment still allowed the slow development of a 
significant, albeit smaller, eLTP (Fig. 2b). This prompted us to evaluate the contribution of 
different AMPAR trafficking steps in shaping the temporal profile of synaptic potentiation. 
Previous reports described intact STP following intracellular injection of neurotoxins, which 
prevent post-synaptic membrane fusion events and LTP14, or more recently following the 
specific knock out of the exocytic machinery17. After reproducing this ourselves using 
Tetanus Toxin light chain (TeTx, Fig. 2c; Extended Data Fig. 3b), we posited that expression 
of synaptic potentiation only at later time periods is contributed by exocytosis of new 
AMPARs to the cell surface. Consistent with this, gradual run-up of synaptic transmission 
after HFS in slices pre-incubated with NA was blocked by either intracellular TeTx (Fig. 2d) 
or N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Newly exocytosed receptors might 
also require surface diffusion as an intermediate step for synaptic recruitment since 
exocytosis has been proposed to occur away from synapses15,20,23. Indeed, the presence of 
Penn et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 low concentrations of NA in the extracellular recording solution following NA pre-treatment 
of slices prevented both STP and eLTP (Fig. 2e). Since we could not detect an effect of our 
post-synaptic manipulation on presynaptic parameters (Extended Data Fig. 4), these data 
reveal a preferential contribution of mobile post-synaptic AMPARs sourced from pre-
existing surface and intracellular pools to establishing STP and sustaining eLTP, respectively 
(Extended Data Fig. 5).
To confirm that AMPAR diffusion is an important trafficking step for endogenous AMPARs 
during the expression of synaptic potentiation, we used a classical antibody X-linking 
approach. In cultured hippocampal neurons, single-layer X-link using an immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) against GluA2 was also effective at limiting the surface diffusion of AMPARs 
(Extended Data Fig. 1 and 6) without modifying their endocytosis or phosphorylation status 
(Extended Data Fig. 7). Pre-injection of neither X-linking anti-GluA2 Immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) nor their monovalent control fragment antigen binding (Fab) fragments into CA1 of 
acute hippocampal slices had any effect on basal synaptic transmission (Extended Data Fig. 
8a, c-f). In contrast, strong attenuation of STP induced by HFS was observed with the anti-
GluA2 IgG but not the Fab, without affecting the HFS-induced decrease in paired-pulse ratio 
at 200 ms interstimulus interval (ISI), which measures the pre-synaptic component to 
synaptic potentiation (Extended Data Fig. 8b). Strikingly, eLTP induced by HFS or theta 
burst stimulation (TBS) was completely abolished when the anti-GluA2 IgG was infused 
continuously in the slice (Fig. 3b-c, Extended Data Fig. 9).
We then confirmed that endogenous AMPAR diffusion is an important trafficking step for 
eLTP in vivo (Fig. 3d). In contrast to the Fab fragments (Fig. 3e) and control IgG (Fig. 3g), 
injection of anti-GluA2 IgG into the CA1 area of the dorsal hippocampus (DH) (Fig. 3f) 
caused a striking attenuation of field EPSP (fEPSP) potentiation following HFS at the 
commissural CA1 input (Fig. 3h).
The DH is a key structure for acquiring and memorizing contextual aspects of fear 
memories24,25 and these processes have been tied to AMPAR trafficking and synaptic 
potentiation in vivo26,27,28. Therefore, we reasoned that X-linking surface AMPARs in the 
adult DH could impair the ability of mice to form contextual fear memories.
Compared to anti-GluA2 Fab fragments and denatured IgG (Fig. 4a), mice injected in the 
DH with anti-GluA2 IgG exhibited half the level of freezing when re-exposed to the 
conditioning context a day later (context A in Fig. 4a). After 2-3 days of recovery, a second 
contextual conditioning performed on the same mice allowed robust fear learning (context C 
in Fig. 4a). None of the mouse groups exhibited contextual generalization (context B in Fig. 
4a). The effect of IgG was not a temporary impairment of the mice to express conditioned 
fear responses since all groups performed well in hippocampus-independent, cued fear 
memory tests (Fig. 4b). We ruled out a more general impairment of hippocampus function 
from the anti-GluA2 IgG by infusing antibodies before testing and showing that recall of 
contextual fear memories was similar between anti-GluA2 IgG and Fab (Fig. 4c).
Our experiments demonstrate that recruitment of diffusing surface AMPARs is an essential 
mechanism for eLTP, both in brain slices and in vivo and underlies early phases of 
Penn et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 hippocampal-dependent fear learning. Our observations provide direct evidence for a model 
in which rapid but temporary recruitment of AMPARs from a surface pool to synaptic sites 
by lateral movement and activity-dependent trapping at the post-synaptic density mediates 
the earlier phase of synaptic potentiation. This would then be followed by replenishment of 
the extracellular pool by exocytosis of AMPARs, which also need to diffuse to reach 
synaptic sites and sustain synaptic potentiation. That manipulating AMPAR surface 
diffusion in vivo specifically affects learning without modifying basal transmission opens 
the way to new approaches to manipulate synaptic memory.
Methods
Reagents
Monoclonal whole IgG1-κ and Fab fragments recognising the extracellular domain of 
GluA2 (clones 15F1 and 14B11, gifts from E. Gouaux), were prepared using the purified 
GluA2 receptor in detergent solution as the antigen29. Control antibody for in vivo LTP 
experiments was polyclonal goat anti-rat IgG (112-005-071, Jackson). Antibodies were 
stored at -80 °C and at 2.9-5.8 mg/ml in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing (in 
mM): NaCl (50), Na-phosphate (30, pH 7.4). For the denatured antibody control, the anti-
GluA2 IgG was incubated at 100 °C for 10 minutes. The anti-GFP whole IgG1-κ was from 
murine clones 7.1 and 13.1 (11814450001, Roche). The antibody lyophilizate was 
reconstituted at 2.9 mg/ml in water and the buffer was exchanged by dialysis (overnight at 
4 °C, 3500 MWCO) with PBS and the concentration re-adjusted to ~2.9 mg/ml.
The unlabelled, non-glycosylated form of avidin (Neutravidin) was purchased from 
Invitrogen. Recombinant light chain of tetanus toxin was either purchased from (Quadratech 
Diagnostics Ltd.) or obtained as a gift from T. Galli. All solutions were prepared in MilliQ 
water (18.2 MΩ · cm) with salts purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Chemicals used for 
intracellular patchclamp recording solutions were trace metal grade purity. All drugs were 
purchased from Tocris Bioscience.
Molecular biology
An Ig κ-chain signal sequence (METDTLLLWVLLLWVPGSTGDG), AP tag 
(GGLNDIFEAQKIEWHEGATG) and SEP were cloned in-frame with the 5'-end of the 
coding sequence for the mature rat GluA1 and 2 subunit proteins. The entire open reading 
frames (ORFs) were cloned upstream (5’) of an encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) 
internal ribosome entry site (IRES) sequence. The BirA-ER coding sequence30 (a gift from 
A. Ting, MIT Cambridge) was then cloned to the 3' end of the IRES such that the start codon 
of the BirA-ER signal sequence corresponded to the 11th ATG of the IRES sequence. 
Doxycycline-dependent expression of the resulting dual-construct bAP::SEP::GluA was 
achieved by cloning the entire AP::SEP::GluA IRES BirA-ER sequence into the multiple 
cloning site of the pBI vector (BD Bioscience) and co-transfecting it with approximately 
equal molar quantities of rtTA-transactivator. The GluA2 subunit used was edited at the Q/R 
site (R607), unedited at the R/G site (R764) and the ligand-binding domain splice variant 
was flop except for residue S775 (flip), where amino acid numbering corresponds to the 
coding sequence of the immature GluA2 peptide (NP_001077280.1). The GluA1 subunit 
Penn et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 used was flip splice variant. Plasmid DNA was prepared using endotoxin-free MaxiPreps 
(Qiagen). All constructs were verified by restriction enzyme digest patterns and Sanger 
DNA sequencing.
Animals
GluA2 knockout mice31 used for slice culture experiments were bred on a swiss-type NMRI 
background, where the impact of the mutation on weight, height, growth and fertility were 
weaker than on the original background strain. Gria2-/- pups identified by genotyping were 
obtained from heterozygote matings. In vivo recordings and behaviour experiments were 
performed on 2–3 month old male C57BL6/J mice, housed in 12/12 Light/Dark with ad 
libitum feeding. Every effort was made to minimize the number of animals used and their 
suffering. The experimental designs and all procedures were in accordance with the 
European guide for the care and use of laboratory animals and the animal care guidelines 
issued by the animal experimental committee of Bordeaux Universities (CE50; A5012009).
Dissociated neuron cultures
Banker cultures of hippocampal neurons from E18 Sprague-Dawley rat embryos of either 
sex were prepared at a density of 200,000 cells per 60-mm dish on poly-L-lysine pre-coated 
1.5H coverslips (Marienfeld, cat. No. 117 580). Neuron cultures were maintained in 
Neurobasal medium supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine and 1X Neuromix supplement 
(PAA). After 48 hours, 5 µM Ara-C (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the culture medium. 
Astrocyte feeder layers were prepared from the embryos the same age at a density of 20,000 
to 40,000 cells per 60-mm dish (per the Horse Serum batch used) and cultured in MEM 
(Fisher Scientific, cat. No. 21090-022) containing 4.5g/l Glucose, 2 mM L-glutamine and 
10% horse serum (Invitrogen) for 14 days.
Fluorescence Recovery after Photobleaching
Banker cultures were transfected at 11 days in vitro (DIV) using Effectene (Qiagen N.V., 
Venlo, Netherlands). Doxycycline (1 μg/ml) was added to the culture medium 24-48 hours 
before experiments using inducible GluA2 constructs. Coverslips of transfected neurons 
(14-16 DIV) were mounted in a Ludin chamber (Life Imaging Services) and transferred to 
an inverted microscope (Leica, DMI 6000B) maintained near-physiological temperature with 
a microscope temperature control system (Life Imaging Services, Cube 2). The chamber was 
perfused at 1 mg/ml (Gilson MiniPuls3) with extracellular solution containing (in mM): 
NaCl (145), KCl (3.5), MgCl2 (2), CaCl2 (2), D-glucose (10), HEPES (10) (pH 7.4, ~300 
mOsm) and the preparation was observed through a 63x oil objective (Leica, HCX PL APO 
CS, Iris NA 1.4-0.6). Transfected cells were identified under epifluorescence (Leica 
EL6000) and illuminated with 473 nm laser light using a high-speed spinning disk confocal 
scanner unit (Yokogawa CSU22) for acquisition. Emission was captured with an electron 
multiplying charge-coupled device (EMCCD) camera (Photometrics Quantem 512SC) and 
data was stored on the hard disk of a personal computer (DELL Precision, Precision 
PWS690). Hardware was controlled with MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices, v7.1.7) 
and ILAS system software (Roper).
Penn et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Images of SEP-GluA1 expressing neurons were acquired before and after perfusion of 2 ml 
of fluorescently-labelled biotin-binding proteins and then washed for 5 minutes with 
Tyrode’s solution. Following the wash, using an exposure time of 0.5 seconds, the protocol 
consisted of: 1) acquiring 11 images at 0.67 s intervals; 2) photobleaching the regions of 
interest (ROI), then 3) acquiring 40 images at 0.67 s intervals and a further 55 images at 5 s 
intervals. For bleaching, we used a 5 ms pulse of 488 nm laser light (Coherent Sapphire 
CDRH 100 mW) set to ~3.7 mW laser power at the back of the objective, which was 
sufficient to reduce fluorescence by ~50 %. A FRAP head (Roper/Errol) was used to scan 
ROIs (~0.690 μm diameter) with the bleaching laser. ROIs were positioned over a small 
number of independent spines across the field of view. Finally, at the end of the experiment, 
we obtained an image before and after application of membrane impermeant GFP quencher 
(5 mM Trypan red) to confirm that most of the SEP fluorescence was on the cell surface. 
Time-lapse images were corrected for XY-drift observational and bleach-pulse 
photobleaching32 using macros in either MetaMorph (Molecular Devices) or ImageJ (http://
imagej.nih.gov/ij/). ROIs of fixed diameter (10 pixels, eq. to 2.3 μm) were then carefully 
positioned over each bleached spine head and the integrated or mean fluorescence intensity 
was measured for every image. The fluorescence intensity for each ROI was subjected to full 
scale normalization by subtracting the average fluorescence intensity of the pre-bleach 
images and dividing the result by the fluorescence of the first post-bleach image.
Organotypic slice preparation and transfection
Hippocampi were dissected from Gria2 mice (either sex) at postnatal age 6–8 in modified 
Gey's balanced salt solution as described33. Transverse slices were cut with a tissue chopper 
(McIlwain) and positioned on small membrane segments (FHLC01300, Millipore) and 
culture inserts (PICM0RG50, Millipore) in 6-well plates containing 1 ml/well slice culture 
medium, which was minimum essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 15 % heat-
inactivated horse serum, 0.25 mM ascorbic acid, 3 mM L-glutamine, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM 
MgSO4, 25 mM HEPES and 5 g/L D-Glucose. Slices were maintained in an incubator at 
34 °C with 5 % CO2 and the culture medium was replaced every 3-4 days. One week after 
plating, slices were individually transferred to the chamber of an upright microscope 
(Eclipse FN1, Nikon) where cells were co-transfected with Tet-on bAP::SEP::GluA2 and 
transactivator plasmids by single-cell electroporation (SCE)34. In some experiments, soluble 
tdTomato was also co-transfected to aid visualization of transfected cells. Before 
commencing SCE, the microscope chamber was washed with 70 % ethanol and allowed to 
dry. A face mask was always used during the following procedures and hands were regularly 
washed with 70 % ethanol. During SCE, the chamber contained sterile-filtered bicarbonate-
containing Tyrode's solution maintained at ambient temperature and atmospheric conditions 
without perfusion. Bicarbonate-containing Tyrode’s solution was composed of (in mM): 
NaCl (145), KCl (3.5), CaCl2 (2.5), MgCl2 (1.3), HEPES (10), D-Glucose (10), NaHCO3 (2) 
and Na-pyruvate (1) (pH 7.3, 300 mOsm). Patch pipettes (~8 Mohm) pulled from glass 
capillaries (GB150F-8P, Science Products GmbH) were filled with potassium-based solution 
(in mM): K-methanesulfonate (135), NaCl (4), HEPES (10), EGTA (0.06), CaCl2 (0.01), 
MgCl2 (2), Na2-ATP (2) and Na-GTP (0.3) (pH 7.3, 280 mOsm) supplemented with plasmid 
DNA (total 10-33 ng/µL). After obtaining loose-patch seals, electroporation was achieved by 
delivering 12 V at 100-200 Hz for 0.25-0.5 s (pulse-width 0.25-0.5 ms) using a constant 
Penn et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 voltage stimulus isolator (IsoFlex, A.M.P.I.). On returning slices to the incubator, culture 
media was supplemented with 10 µg/ml gentamicin, 1 µg/ml doxycycline and 10 µM D-
biotin until experiments were preformed 2-3 weeks later. We attempted to electroporate 5-10 
CA1 neurons per slice with a typical success rate of 50 %.
Organotypic slice electrophysiology
On the day of the experiment, organotypic slices were transferred to a storage chamber 
containing carbogen-bubbled artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF) (in mM): NaCl (125), 
NaHCO3 (25), NaH2PO4 (1.25), KCl (2.5), CaCl2 (2), MgCl2 (2), D-Glucose (10) and Na-
pyruvate (1). A dialysis device (3500 M.W. cut-off, Slide-A-Lyzer MINI, Thermo Scientific) 
containing 0.25 ml of avidin Texas red conjugate was included in the storage chamber to 
quench free-biotin from the slices for at least 45 minutes. For the X-link, slices were then 
individually transferred to a culture insert in a 35 mm culture dish containing 1 ml 
bicarbonate-containing Tyrode’s solution with 100 nM neutravidin (NA) and incubated at 
ambient temperature and atmospheric conditions for 45 minutes followed by washing in 
bicarbonate-containing Tyrode’s solution prior to electrophysiology experiments. For the 
control, incubation was without neutravidin (where the vehicle was Tyrode’s solution). Prior 
to any electrophysiological recordings of electrically evoked synaptic responses, CA3 was 
cut off to prevent seizures. The order of recordings was randomized for (blinded) neutravidin 
vs. vehicle pre-treatment experiments.
For patch-clamp experiments, transfected Gria2-/- slices were then transferred to the 
microscope chamber perfused with carbogen-bubbled recording AACSF maintained at 
~30 °C by an in-line solution heater (WPI). For recordings of LTP (Fig. 2), the AACSF 
contained (in mM): NaCl (125), NaHCO3 (25), KCl (2.5), CaCl2 (4), MgSO4 (4), D-glucose 
(10), Na-pyruvate (1), picrotoxin (0.005), 2-chloroadenosine (0.005), CGP-52432 (0.002) 
and ascorbic acid (0.25). A tungsten parallel bipolar stimulation electrode (~100 micron 
separation) was positioned in CA1 stratum radiatum close to the border with CA2. Electrode 
placement and patching was visually guided by observing the preparation with oblique 
illumination of infrared light through a 40x water immersion objective (NIR Apo 40X/
0.80W, Nikon) and 1-2X optical zoom. Patch pipettes (~5 Mohm) for whole-cell current 
clamp recordings were filled with potassium-based intracellular solution (recipe as described 
above for SCE) but with the addition of 0.15 mM spermine. After achieving a gigaohm seal, 
cells were maintained in cell-attached configuration for 5 minutes prior to breaking in. After 
opening the cell, stimulation (40 μs) intensity (~10 V) and polarity were adjusted to obtain a 
small EPSP, mean peak amplitude 1.9 ± 0.13 mV (mean ± s.d.). Analog voltage signals were 
filtered online at 10 kHz, digitized at 50 kHz and stored directly to the computer hard disk 
either using an EPC-10 USB controlled by Patchmaster software (HEKA Electronik) from a 
computer workstation running Windows XP (Microsoft), or using a MultiClamp 700B 
(Axon Instruments, Molecular Devices, LLC.) controlled by ACQ4 v0.9.3 (http://
www.acq4.org/) from a computer workstation running Windows 7 (Microsoft). Strictly 2 
min after going whole-cell, the LTP recording was started and consisted of: 1) stimulation at 
0.1 Hz for 2 min to establish the baseline; 2) 100 Hz for 1 s repeated 3 times at 20 s intervals 
(HFS); and 3) stimulation at 0.1 Hz for 40 min to record post-HFS EPSP potentiation. For 
pseudo-HFS recordings, the stimulator was switched off during the induction protocol in 
Penn et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 step 2. Short baseline recordings were necessary to prevent washout of LTP in slice culture 
whole-cell recordings. LTP protocols were limited to once per slice. The ensemble average 
obtained for every 3 traces was differentiated and filtered at 0.333 kHz (4-pole Bessel filter). 
The peak signal within 2-10 ms from the start of the stimulus artefact in the resulting traces 
corresponded to the steepest slope measurement, which is proportional to the underlying 
peak current (dV/dt ∝ I). These values were routinely normalised to the measured pre-
artefact membrane potential to obtain more accurate slope measurements proportional to the 
underlying conductance. Peaks in the filtered first derivative had a latency of 4.6 ± 1.2 ms 
(mean ± s.d.) from the onset of the stimulation articant and were on average, an amplitude 
equating to 18.0 ± 8.0 (mean ± s.d.) standard deviations of the pre-stimulus baseline noise.
For whole-cell voltage clamp recordings of synaptic AMPAR rectification, AMPA/NMDA 
ratios and evoked EPSC amplitudes, the recording ACSF instead contained (in mM): NaCl 
(125), NaHCO3 (25), KCl (3.5), CaCl2 (5), MgCl2 (1), D-Glucose (10) and Na-pyruvate (1), 
picrotoxin (0.05), gabazine (0.002). Patch pipettes (~3-5 Mohm) for whole-cell voltage 
clamp recordings were filled with a caesium-based intracellular solution containing (in 
mM): Cs-methanesulfonate (135), NaCl (4), HEPES (10), QX-314 Cl (3), BAPTA (1), 
EGTA (0.6), CaCl2 (0.1), MgCl2 (2), Na2-ATP (2), Na-GTP (0.3) and spermine (0.15) (pH 
7.3, 290 mOsm). Voltage clamp recordings were filtered online at 5 kHz and digitized at 25 
kHz. For AMPA/NMDA ratios, ~30 evoked EPSCs were acquired and averaged at holding 
potentials of -70 and + 40 mV. The ratio was calculated from the peak current at -70 mV 
over the current measured at +40 mV with a delay of 50 ms after the start of the stimulus 
artefact. In recordings of synaptic AMPAR rectification only, ACSF was further 
supplemented with 0.1 mM D-APV to inhibit NMDAR-mediated currents and ~30 evoked 
EPSCs were acquired and averaged at holding potentials of -60, + 30 and 0 mV. After 
subtraction of 0 mV traces, rectification index was calculated as the ratio of peak 
conductance measurements at +30 mV over -60 mV. For basal transmission, peak synaptic 
conductance measurements were obtained from evoked EPSCs recorded at holding 
potentials between -70 and -60 mV using stimulation intensities of ~10 V. In all voltage 
clamp recordings, a calculated and experimentally verified liquid junction potential of 
approximately +9 mV was corrected online.
For single-photon glutamate uncaging, voltage clamp recordings were performed at room 
temperature without bath perfusion, in Tyrode’s solution (recipe as described above for 
SCE) supplemented with (in mM): MNI-glutamate (0.5), D-APV (0.1), picrotoxin (0.05), 
cyclothiazide (0.02) and TTX (0.001), (pH 7.3, 300 mOsm). A caesium-based intracellular 
solution used was as described above for voltage clamp recordings but without BAPTA and 
with 0.001 mM MK-801(+). Single-photon glutamate uncaging was achieved by pulses (5 
ms) of a 405 nm laser (0.4 mW) focused through a 60x water immersion objective (NIR Apo 
60X/1.00W, Nikon). The laser spot position was positioned with galvanometric mirrors by a 
FRAP head (Roper) controlled using ILAS system software in Metamorph (Molecular 
devices). Rectification was measured and calculated as described above for synaptic 
recordings.
Whole-cell recordings of NMDAR-mediated currents were evoked by electrical stimulation 
of the Schaffer Collaterals. Recordings were performed at 30-32 °C and a holding potential 
Penn et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 of -60 mV. The recording aCSF contained (in mM): NaCl (125), NaHCO3 (25), KCl (2.5), 
CaCl2 (4), MgCl2 (4), D-glucose (10) and Na-pyruvate (1), picrotoxin (0.05), NBQX (0.01), 
gabazine (0.002) and CGP-52432 (0.002). Patch pipettes (~3-5 Mohm) were filled with a 
caesium-based intracellular solution containing (in mM): Cs-methanesulfonate (135), NaCl 
(4), HEPES (10), QX-314 Cl (3), EGTA (0.6), CaCl2 (0.1), MgCl2 (2), Na2-ATP (2) and Na-
GTP (0.3) (pH 7.3, 290 mOsm). Decay of the EPSC currents were fit by a 2-component 
exponential decay with offset initially using the Chebyshev algorithm, where the fit 
parameters were then used as starting values for further optimization by the Levenberg-
Marquardt algorithm.
Throughout the paper, for clear presentation the stimulus artefact was blanked out. Slice 
electrophysiology data was analysed in Stimfit v0.13 (https://github.com/neurodroid/stimfit/
wiki/Stimfit) using custom python modules (see Code availability).
Confocal imaging in slice culture
Organotypic slices were prepared, transfected, dialysed and pre-treated with biotin-binding 
protein as for the experiments illustrated in Fig. 2, except that we used 500 nM 
AlexFluor(AF)-633 conjugate of Streptavidin (Molecular Probes) instead of unlabelled 
neutravidin. After 45 minute incubation with Streptavidin AF-633, slices were washed in 
Tyrodes solution (3 x 15 minutes) and fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde / 0.2% 
glutaraldehyde in PBS. Slices were then washed in PBS and water before mounting between 
a glass slide and coverslip with Fluoromount-G mounting medium (Southern Biotech). 
Samples were imaged through a 63x oil objective with the same spinning disk confocal 
microscope described for the FRAP experiments. Streptavidin AF-633, tdTomato and 
bAP::SEP::GluA2 and were excited sequentially at each 0.2 micron Z-step using 635, 532 
and 473 and nm lasers respectively. Emitted light was captured with 100 ms exposure times 
and each Z-step image represents an average of 50 frames.
Acute slice electrophysiology
For field recordings, we prepared hippocampus-containing acute slices from C57BL6/J mice 
(8-9 weeks old). Briefly, mice were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine/xylazine (100 
and 10 mg/kg, respectively), and cardiac-perfused with ice-cold, oxygenated sucrose-based 
solution containing (in mM): 220 Sucrose, 2 KCl, 26 NaHCO3, 1.15 NaH2PO4, 10 Glucose, 
0.2 CaCl2, 6 MgCl2. The brains were rapidly removed, and cut in the same sucrose-based 
solution using a vibratome (VT1200S, Leica Microsystems, USA). Sagittal slices (350μm) 
were transferred to an incubation chamber for 45 min at 34 ºC, which contained a recording 
ACSF solution (mM): 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 10 Glucose, 2 CaCl2, 
1 MgCl2. After incubation, the slices were maintained at room temperature in oxygenated 
ACSF for at least 30 min.
Code availability
Custom python code used for protocols and analysis are available at GitHub (v0.1, https://github.com/acp29/penn). Custom Matlab 
code for additional statistical functions (multicmp and epsilon, both v1.0) are available from Matlab Central File Exchange (#61659 
and #61660 respectively).
Penn et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Hippocampal slices were recorded in a perfusion chamber continuously perfused with warm 
(33.5 °C), carbogen (95% O2 / 5% CO2)-bubbled recording ACSF using a peristaltic pump 
(Ismatec, Switzerland). A bipolar twisted platinum/iridium wire electrode (50μm diameter, 
FHC Inc., USA) was positioned in stratum radiatum of CA1 region, allowing the afferent 
schaffer collateral-commissural pathway from the CA3 to CA1 region to be stimulated. The 
field-EPSPs (fEPSPs) were recorded from stratum radiatum of CA1 area, using glass 
electrode (2~3 Mohm) pulled from borosilicate glass tubing (Harvard Apparatus, USA; 1.5 
mm O.D x 1.17 mm I.D) and filled with ACSF. Pulses were delivered at 10s intervals by 
Clampex 10.4 (Molecular Devices, USA), and current was set using a stimulus isolator 
(Isoflex, AMPI, Jerusalem, Israel) to obtain 30-40 % of the maximum fEPSP. To induce LTP 
we used either a high-frequency stimulus (HFS, 1s at 100 Hz) repeated 3 times with an 
interval of 20 s, or theta burst stimuli (TBS) consisting of ten bursts (4 pulses at 100 Hz) 
repeated at 5Hz a delivered four times with 10 s intervals. Data were recorded with a 
Multiclamp700B (Axon Instruments, USA) and acquired with Clampex 10.4. The slope of 
the fEPSP was measured using clampfit with all values normalized to a 10 min baseline 
period. All experiments done with field recording were with no pharmacology.
For whole cell recordings, mice were cardiac-perfused with ice-cold, carbogen (95% O2 / 
5% CO2)-bubbled NMDG-based cutting solution containing (in mM): 93 NMDG, 93 HCl, 
2.5 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 30 NaHCO3, 25 Glucose, 10 MgSO4, 0.5 CaCl2, 5 sodium 
ascorbate, 3 sodium pyruvate, 2 thiourea and 12 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine (pH 7.3–7.4, with 
osmolarity of 300–310 mOsm). The sagittal slices (350μm) were prepared in the ice-cold 
and oxygenated NMDG cutting solution described above, then transferred to an incubation 
chamber containing the same NMDG cutting solution for 15 min at 34 ºC. Before recording, 
the slices were maintained at room temperature for at least 45 min in carbogen (95% O2 / 
5% CO2)-bubbled ACSF containing (mM): 92 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 30 NaHCO3, 
20 HEPES, 25 glucose, 2 MgSO4, 2 CaCl2, 5 sodium ascorbate, 3 sodium pyruvate, 2 
thiourea and 12 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine (pH 7.3–7.4, with osmolarity of 300–310 mOsm).
After the CA3 region were cut off, the hippocampal slices were recorded in a perfusion 
chamber and continuously perfused with warm (33.5 °C), carbogen (95% O2 / 5% CO2)-
bubbled recording ACSF (mM): 124 NaCl, 2.7 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 
NaH2PO4, 18.6 glucose, and 2.25 ascorbic acid. Neurons in the CA1 region were visually 
identified with infrared videomicroscopy using an upright microscope equipped with a 60x 
objective. Patch electrodes (4–5 Mohm) were pulled from borosilicate glass tubing and filled 
with a low-chloride solution containing (in mM): 140 Cs-methylsulfonate, 5 QX314-Cl, 10 
HEPES, 10 phosphocreatine, 4 Mg-ATP and 0.3 Na-GTP (pH adjusted to 7.25 with CsOH, 
295 mOsm). To evoke the EPSCs response, the stimulating electrode was positioned in 
stratum radiatum of CA1 region. All whole-cell recording experiments were performed in 
the presence of gabazine (10μM) to block the GABA-A receptors. To acquire the AMPA- 
and NMDA-EPSCs ratios, the ratio was calculated from the peak current at -70 mV over the 
current measured at +50 mV with a delay of 200 ms after the start of the stimulus artefact. 
For recording the NMDA-EPSCs, CNQX (50μM) was also included in the recording ACSF.
For antibody application, prior to field recording or whole cell recording, an injecting pipette 
(2~3 Mohm) was filled with either α-GluA2 Fab (0.29 mg/ml dissolved in ACSF), α-GluA2 
Penn et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 IgG (0.29 mg/ml dissolved in ACSF) or ACSF vehicle, and infused into the stratum 
radiatum at CA1 region by using a constant air-pressure (55-65 mbar) maintained in a tubing 
(1~1.2m length, 0.8mm ID) connected with a 1ml syringe. After 30 min of injection, we 
removed the injection pipette, and started field recording in the injected area and the whole-
cell recording in the CA1 cellular area. In the continuous injection of antibody, one injecting 
pipette remained in CA1 area with constant infusion, and the other field recording pipette 
was put close to the tip of injecting one. The experimenter was blind to the antibody solution 
used in the experiments.
In vivo electrophysiology
Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSP) measured in CA1 of the right hemisphere 
were evoked by stimulation of fibres projecting from the contralateral CA3 as described 
previously23. Briefly, stereotaxic surgery for electrophysiology experiments was performed 
under isoflurane anaesthesia (1.0-1.2 %, O2 flow rate: 1L/min). Mouse body temperature 
was maintained using at 37 °C using a temperature control system (FHC, ME, USA). 
Concentric bipolar stimulating electrodes (Rhodes Medical Instruments, CA, USA) were 
inserted into the VHC (anteroposterior: -0.5 mm from bregma, mediolateral: +0.3 mm from 
midline on the left hemisphere; dorsoventral: 2.3 mm from brain surface).
Forty-five minutes before HFS (1 train of 1 s at 100 Hz), α-GluA2 Fab (0.58 mg/ml), α-
GluA2 IgG (0.58 mg/ml) or α-Rat IgG (0.36 mg/ml) was infused into the dorsoventral axis 
of CA1 area (3 consecutive infusions of 60 nL at 30 s intervals at 1.0, 1.25 and 1.5 mm from 
brain surface) using controlled pressure-pulses of compressed air (20 psi, 2 min period, 180 
nL total volume) applied via a Picospritzer® (Parker Hannifin, NJ, USA) through a single 
ejection-micropipette. The experimenter was blind to the antibody solution used in the 
experiments. fEPSPs were recorded through a glass recording electrode, filled with 0.5 M 
sodium acetate / 2% pontamine sky blue and positioned in area CA1 stratum radiatum 
(anteroposterior: -1.8 mm from bregma, mediolateral: -1.25 mm from midline on the right 
hemisphere; dorsoventral: 1.2-1.4 mm from brain surface).
Voltage recordings of fEPSPs were amplified (Axoclamp2B amplifier, Molecular devices, 
CA, USA), filtered (differential AC amplifier, model 1700; A-M Systems, WA, USA), 
digitized and collected on-line using a laboratory interface and software (CED 1401, SPIKE 
2; Cambridge Electronic Design, UK). Test pulses (500 μs duration) were evoked using a 
square pulse stimulator and stimulus isolator (DS3; Digitimer, Hertfordshire, UK) every 2 s 
(corresponding to a 0.5Hz basal stimulation rate). Recordings were acquired at a 10 kHz 
sampling frequency and averaged over a 5 minute bin width. Basal stimulation intensity was 
adjusted to 30-40% of the current intensity that evoked a maximum field response. All 
responses were expressed as percent change of the average responses recorded during the 10 
min before high frequency stimuli (HFS, 1 train of 1 s at 100 Hz). At the end of each 
recording experiment, the electrode placement was marked with an iontophoretic deposit of 
pontamine sky blue dye (20 µA, 30-min). To mark electrical stimulation sites, +50 µA was 
passed through the stimulation electrode for 2-min. Brains were rapidly removed, placed in 
dry ice before storage at -80°C. Coronal sections (40 µm-wide) were then cut using a 
Penn et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Microm HM 500M cryostat (Microm Microtech, Francheville, France), stained with Neutral 
Red.
Cannula implantation and antibody infusion
Under continuous anesthesia with isoflurane, mice were positioned in stereotaxic apparatus 
(David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA, USA), and treated with intraperitoneal 
buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg) and local lidocaine (0.4 mL/kg of a 1% solution). Stainless steel 
guide cannulae (26 gauge; PlasticsOne, Roanoke, VA, USA) were bilaterally implanted 
above the hippocampus (from Bregma position, anteroposterior [AP] -1.8-2.0 mm, 
mediolateral [ML] ±2.2-2.5 mm, angled settings from 30º either side of vertical, 
dorsoventral [DV] 0.5-0.6 mm). Guide cannulae were anchored to the skull with dental 
cement (Super-Bond, Sun Medical Co. Lt, Japan). After the surgery, the mice recovered 
from anaesthesia on a 35ºC warm pad, and dummy cannulae were inserted into the guide to 
reduce the risk of infection. Infusion cannulae (33 gauge; connected to a 1 µL Hamilton 
syringe via polyethylene tubing) extended beyond the end of the guide cannulea by 2 mm to 
target the dentate gyrus (DG) of the dorsal hippocampus. Retracting the infusion cannulae 
by 1 mm enabled infusions directly into the CA1 area. The antibodies (2.9 mg/ml in ACSF, 
see reagents) were infused bilaterally at a rate of 100 nL per min for a total volume of 500 
nL (250 nL in the DG area, 250 nL in the CA1 area) per brain hemisphere, under the control 
of an automatic pump (Legato 100, Kd Scientific Inc., Hilliston, MA, USA). To allow 
penetration of drug, the injector was maintained for an additional 3 min at either site of DG 
and CA1. The mice were then transferred back to their cages to rest. After the behaviour 
experiments, to observe the location of the injection area brains were fixed by intracardiac 
perfusion with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS. Then slices (60 μm) were immunostained, 
and imaged using an epifluorescence microscope (Leica DM5000, Leica Microsystems, 
Germany).
Fear conditioning
Mice were housed individually in a ventilation area before the start of behavioural training. 
Two weeks after surgery, the mice were handled for a further week. To reduce stress of the 
mice during subsequent experiments, they were trained by inserting and removing dummy 
cannulae several times each day. On day 1 of the experiment, animals were transferred to the 
conditioning context (Context A) for habituation. Both CS+ (30 s duration, consisting of 50 
ms tones repeated at 0.9 Hz, tone frequency 7.5 kHz, 80 dB sound pressure level) and 
CS− (30 s duration, consisting of white noise repeated at 0.9 Hz, 80 dB sound pressure level) 
were presented 4 times with a variable interstimulus interval (ISI). On day 2, the pre-
conditioning group was injected 45-60 min before acquisition of both cued and contextual 
fear. We proceeded with the conditioning phase in Context A as follows: 5 pairings of CS+ 
with the US onset coinciding with the CS+ offset (1 s foot shock, 0.6 mA, ISI 10–60 s). In 
all cases, CS− presentations were intermingled with CS+ presentations and ISI was variable 
over the whole training course. Contextual memory was tested 24 h after conditioning by 
analyzing the freezing levels at 60 - 120 s after mice were exposed in Context A. Cued 
memory was tested 30 hrs after conditioning by analyzing the freezing levels at the first CS+ 
presentations in Context B (recall) Additionally, we performed a pure contextual 
conditioning protocol, which typically consisted of 3 foot shocks of 0.6 mA for 2 s with 60 s 
Penn et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 ISI. Discriminative contextual fear memory was tested 24 h after conditioning by analyzing 
the freezing levels in context C vs B. Freezing behavior was recorded in each behavioral 
session using a fire-wire CCD camera (Ugo Basile, Italy), connected to automated freezing 
detection software (ANY-maze, Stoelting, USA). The experimenter was blind to the 
antibody solution used in the experiments. Measurements of freezing behaviour were 
alternated between (blinded) experimental groups and the mice within each group were 
selected randomly.
Biochemistry
Hippocampal neurons from Sprague-Dawley rat embryos (E18, either sex) were plated at a 
density of 600,000 cells / well in 6-well-culture plates. 5 µM Ara-C (Sigma-Aldrich) was 
added at DIV 3 and neurons were then fed twice a week with Neurobasal supplemented with 
SM1 supplement (Stemcell) and 2 mM Glutamine.
At 14-16 DIV, neurons were rinsed with Tyrode’s buffer containing 1µM TTX, and then 
treated for 15 min with the same buffer containing 10 µg/ml of an irrelevant antibody (anti-
GFP whole IgG1-κ from murine clones 7.1 and 13.1 (11814450001, Roche)) as a control 
condition or with an anti-GluA2 IgG1-κ for the crosslink condition. After 2 washes, cells 
were lysed in Lysis buffer (1% NP40, 0.5% DOC, 0.02% SDS in PBS, 1X protease inhibitor 
cocktail (Roche) and 2X Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). 
Cell lysates were collected and spun down at 16,000g for 10 min. Protein concentration of 
each lysate was quantified using BCA reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 30 µg of 
protein per condition was loaded twice on SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose 
membrane and blocked with Odyssey blocking buffer. Each membrane was incubated with 
mouse anti-N-terminus GluA1 (NeuroMab clone N355/1) and either anti-rabbit GluA1 
Phospho Ser 831 (Millipore Cat. # 04-823), or anti-rabbit GluA1 Phospho Ser 845 (Abcam 
Cat. # ab76321). Following incubation with secondary antibodies anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 
680 and anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 800, blots were imaged using an Odyssey Imaging System. 
Analysis was done using the Odyssey software and quantification of GluA1 phosphorylation 
level, normalized to GluA1, was performed using the average intensity of each single band. 
The experimenter was blind to the antibody solution used in the experiments.
AMPAR endocytosis
Cultured hippocampal neurons (17 DIV) were rinsed in Tyrode’s solution and then 
incubated in 10 µg/mL anti GluA2 (clone 15F1) to crosslink AMPARs, or control (water or 
anti-GFP at 10 µg/mL, 11814450001, Roche) for 15 minutes in the incubator. The 
experimenter was blind to the antibody solution used in the experiments.. Neurons were then 
rinsed with Tyrode’s and immediately live-stained for surface GluA1 (2 µg/mL for 6 
minutes), using a rabbit polyclonal IgG raised against the extracellular region 
RTSDSRDHTRVDWKRC (Agro-Bio, France).
One set of coverslips was fixed immediately at time = 0 min, to know starting level of 
GluA1 on surface. The remaining coverslips were returned to the incubator for 30 minutes to 
allow basal endocytosis, and then fixed with 4% PFA and 4% sucrose in PBS for 15 minutes 
at RT. After fixation and rinsing with PBS, non-specific staining was blocked by 30 minute 
Penn et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 incubation in PBS containing 1% BSA. Then surface-bound GluA1 antibody was revealed 
by incubation of un-permeabilized cells with Gt anti Rb CF568 (Biotium 20102) diluted to 4 
µg/mL in blocking solution for 30 minutes. For acquisition, 12-15 cells per coverslip were 
selected in transmission to avoid bias from fluorescence signal, and imaged at 63x with 
identical acquisition settings. Background, defined as average fluorescence in an empty 
region of coverslip + 1 x St Dev, was subtracted from each image pixel. Fluorescence from 
cell bodies was omitted by ‘painting black’ regions encompassing cell bodies to allow 
quantification of dendrite fluorescence only. After background subtraction the average 
fluorescence of all pixels above background in each image was averaged. The identity of 
samples’ experimental treatment was revealed to experimenter after image analysis to avoid 
bias.
Receptor tracking experiments
For SPT experiments, dissociated neurons (13-14 DIV) were imaged at 37°C in an open 
Ludin Chamber (Ludin Chamber, Life Imaging Services, Switzerland) filled with 1 ml of 
Tyrode’s. ROIs were selected on the dendrites of cells expressing GFP fluorescence. 
ATTO-647 coupled to α-GluA2 IgG (clone 15F1) was then added to the chamber at 
sufficient quantity to control the density of labelling. The fluorescence signal was collected 
using a sensitive EMCCD (Evolve, Photometric, USA). Acquisition was driven with 
MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices, USA) and exposure time was set to 20 ms. 
Around 10 000 frames were acquired in typical experiment, collecting up to few thousands 
of trajectories. Sample was illuminated in oblique illumination mode, where the angle of 
refracted beam varied smoothly and was adjusted manually to maximize signal to noise 
ratio. The main parameters determined from the experiments was the diffusion coefficient 
(D) based on the fit of the mean square displacement curve (MSD). Multi-colour 
fluorescence microspheres (Tetraspeck, Thermofisher, France) were used for image 
registration and drift compensation. SPT data analysis was reported before.29
Quantum dot experiments are acquired on the same system. Neurons are transfected at DIV 
10 with bAP-SEP-GluA2 construct. At DIV 13-14, neurons are pre-incubated for 5 minutes 
in a mix containing mouse anti-GFP, and then washed twice time with culture medium. A 
second incubation was then carried out in culture medium + 1% BSA supplemented with 
quantum dots coated with secondary anti mouse. After two washes, coverslips are amounted 
and observed for 30 minutes. Crosslinking was achieved by 15 minutes’ pre-incubation in 
either anti-GluA2 antibody or neutravidin in Tyrode’s solution.
Statistical analysis
The chosen sample size in most experiments satisfied the resource equation, where the error 
degrees of freedom in the General Linear Model (GLM) (e.g. the denominator of F in 
ANOVA) would reach between 10-20. Statistics were performed in Prism 6.04 (GraphPad 
Software, Inc.), SPSS Statistics (version 22, IBM) and in Matlab R2009b (MathWorks) 
using anovan, aoctool and multcomp functions from the Statistics and Machine Learning 
Toolbox (MathWorks, Inc.). All statistics are two-sided tests comparing groups of biological 
replicates. To correct for violations of sphericity in repeated-measures ANOVA designs, 
adjustments to the degrees of freedom were carried out using the function epsilon (see Code 
Penn et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 availability). Corrections for multiple comparisons were carried out using the function 
multicmp (see Code availability). For N-way ANOVA in Matlab or General Linear Modelling 
(GLM) in SPSS, care was taken in appropriately nesting factors (where applicable) and 
assigning factors as ‘random’ or ‘fixed’. Interactions with nuisance (blocking) factors were 
not included in the ANOVA models. Sum-of-squares type III was used routinely except for 
2-way ANOVA without interaction models, which used type II. Histograms, normal 
probability plots of N-way ANOVA model residuals and residuals vs model fit plots were 
routinely examined to confirm that ANOVA/GLM assumptions were met. Continuous 
dependent variables with a lower bound of 0 were routinely subjected to log10 
transformation to satisfy assumptions of standard parametric statistical tests. Outliers were 
identified by Grubbs’ test with an alpha level of 0.1, and instances where this occurred are 
described in the Figure statistics section. Most percentage time freezing data used for 
hypothesis testing was within 20-80 % range and required no transformation. Where 
parametric assumptions were not satisfied, tied-rank transformation were used instead (e.g. 
Fig 4b). Statistical significance was considered at P < 0.05 except for interaction terms in N-
way ANOVA tests, which were considered significant at P < 0.1 and were followed up with 
post-tests. Unless stated otherwise, all post-tests used the Holm-Bonferroni method. All 
graphs were plot in Prism 6.04. For graphing ANOVA results, marginal means and 83% 
confidence intervals (CI) or Fisher’s Least Significant Difference (LSD) error bars were 
calculated in SPSS and Matlab respectively; 83% CI and LSD error bars overlap at P > 0.05. 
Specific details of the statistical analyses are provided in the Figure statistics section of the 
Supplementary Information.
For analysis of normalized FRAP curves, the ensemble mean normalized spine FRAP curve 
was calculated for each cell, which was subsequently fit with the following equation:
where the first post-bleach image occurs at t = 0, F(t) is the normalized fluorescence at time 
t, Rmob is the mobile fraction and τ½ is the half-time of the recovery curve. Curve fitting to 
minimize the sum-of-squared residuals was achieved using the Levenberg-Marquardt 
algorithm. Standard error bands were obtained by calculation of the standard error of the 
mean of the fitted data points at each time point. To analyse the Rmob, individual spine 
FRAP curves were fit using the above equation. Almost 90 % of spine FRAP curves were fit 
successfully and could be included in the analysis.
Penn et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. X-link of AMPA receptors in cultured hippocampal neurons measured 
by quantum dot tracking.
Neutravidin (NA) and anti-GluA2 IgG (clone 14B11) X-linking, to a similar extent, reduce 
the surface diffusion of bAP::SEP::GluA2 expressed in rat hippocampal neurons as 
measured by quantum dot tracking. Relative frequency histogram (left) of log-transformed 
diffusion coefficients (D), bar graph of mobile fraction (middle) and a plot of group data for 
mean-squared displacement (MSD) curves of all trajectories (right). Control was no 
antibody. Bar graph shows mean with s.e.m. error bars and data points. Statistical 
significance was assessed by 1-way ANOVA with Holm-Bonferroni post-tests (ns = not 
significant, ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001).
Penn et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Controls relating to X-link by pre-treating bAP::SEP::GluA2-
transfected slices cultures with NA.
a, Biotin-binding proteins diffuse through living organotypic slices and bind specifically to 
bAP::SEP::GluA2-expressing cells. Images show a maximum projection of an example 6.6 
micron Z-stack in a transfected Gria2-/- organotypic slice. CA1 neurons were cotransfected 
with tdTomato and bAP::SEP::GluA2. Streptavidin AF-633 staining was observed in all 12 
bAP::SEP::GluA2-transfected CA1/3 cells observed and imaged. In contrast, no surface 
staining was observed in 5 CA1/3 cells transfected with myc::SEP::GluA2. b-c Whole-cell 
recordings of bAP::SEP::GluA2 replacement CA1 neurons reveal stable baseline synaptic 
Penn et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 transmission (without high-frequency stimulation, i.e. pseudo (p)HFS) in slices either with 
(c) or without NA-pretreatment (b). Summary plots of mean normalised EPSP slope ± s.e.m. 
(left) and cumulative histograms of STP and LTP (right). d, Top, Superimposed post-
synaptic response of each cell during the first HFS train (grey) for Ctl and NA pre-treatment 
groups; the average responses (after spikes were removed using a median filter with window 
width ranging from 2-6 ms) are shown in black and blue respectively. Bottom, Bar graph 
showing no significant effect detected of NA pre-treatment on the area-under-curve (AUC) 
of the post-synaptic depolarization recorded across the three HFS trains used to induce 
synaptic potentiation. e, Bar graph showing no significant effect of NA pre-treatment on the 
EPSP slope during the baseline recording. f, No significant effect of NA pre-treatment on the 
amplitude and time course of NMDAR currents is detected in bAP::SEP::GluA2 
replacement cells. Top, Evoked NMDAR excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) were 
simultaneously recorded in bAP::SEP::GluA2-transfected and neighbouring untransfected 
cells of Gria2-/- slices. Example NMDAR-mediated EPSC recordings from transfected cells 
in Ctl (left) and NA pre-treatment (right). Two-exponent fits to the decay (dashed red lines) 
and the weighted average (bold red line) are superimposed over the traces. Bottom, Scatter 
plots of NMDAR EPSC amplitude (above) and decay time constant (below) for transfected 
and untransfected cells from the Ctrl (left) and NA pre-treatment (right). Bold line represents 
the line of unity. Dashed lines represent 95 % confidence bands from linear fits through the 
origin. The line of unity is between the confidence bounds in all cases. All bar graphs show 
means with s.e.m. error bars and data points (d-e). Statistical significance was assessed by 
mixed model nested ANOVA (d) or 2-way ANOVA without interaction (e; ns = not 
significant, * P < 0.05).
Penn et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. Controls relating to manipulations preventing AMPAR diffusion and 
exocytosis.
Left, Summary plots of mean normalized EPSP slope ± s.e.m. (HFS = high-frequency 
stimulation). Right, Cumulative histograms for average normalized EPSP slope during STP 
and LTP. a, Robust STP and LTP following HFS in myc::SEP::GluA2 replacement cells 
following NA pre-treatment. b Rundown of basal transmission by 0.5 μM intracellular TeTx 
during pseudo (p)HFS recordings of bAP::SEP::GluA2 replacement cells. c, Absent 
potentiation following HFS in bAP::SEP::GluA2 replacement cells when NA pre-treatment 
Penn et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 is combined with intracellular 500 μM NEM. Statistical significance was assessed by RM- 
ANOVA (a-c; ns = not significant, * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01).
Extended Data Figure 4. Presynaptic plasticity controls for NA X-linking of bAP::SEP::GluA2.
a NA has effect on paired-pulse ratio (PPR) of: a, the slope of AMPA-mediated EPSPs 
evoked at 50 ms intervals in untransfected CA1 pyramidal neurons. b, the amplitude of 
NMDA-mediated EPSCs evoked at 50 ms intervals in bAP::SEP::GluA2 replacement cells. 
All bar graphs show means with s.e.m. error bars and data points. Statistical significance 
was assessed by unpaired t-tests (a-b; ns = not significant).
Penn et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 5. Statistical comparison between all the different treatments for STP and 
LTP.
Bar graph summarizing statistical comparison of the data for the manipulations in Fig. 2a-e, 
Extended Data Fig. 2b-c and Extended Data Fig. 3a-c. Different AMPAR trafficking 
manipulations have distinct effects on synaptic potentiation. The results demonstrate that 
HFS-dependent STP is only significantly different from control when surface diffusion of 
existing surface AMPARs is prevented. In contrast, HFS-dependent LTP is significantly 
different only for manipulations that prevent the delivery of newly exocytosed receptors. Bar 
graph shows marginal means and Least Significant Difference (LSD) error bars. Data points 
for all conditions are plot in the cumulative histograms of Fig. 2a-e, Extended Data Fig, 2b-c 
and Extended data Figure 3a-c. Statistical significance was assessed by 2-way RM-ANOVA 
with Benjamini and Hochberg post-tests (ns = not significant, * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; *** P 
< 0.001).
Penn et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 6. Control experiments for antibody-mediated X-link of AMPA receptors 
in cultured hippocampal neurons.
a Anti-GluA2 IgG (bivalent) but not Fab (monovalent) prevents normal FRAP of spine SEP-
GluA2. Graphs show ensemble grand mean FRAP curves, fits and standard error bands for 
experiments using transfected cultures pre-treated for half an hour with 80 mg/L anti-GluA2 
Fab clone 15F1 (Top), 80 mg/L anti-GluA2 IgG clone 15F1 (Middle) or vehicle (Bottom). 
b-c Relative frequency histogram of log-transformed diffusion coefficients (D, left) and bar 
graph of percentage mobile fractions obtained from single-particle tracking (SPT) 
experiments. b U-PAINT single particle tracking of endogenous GluA2 in the presence or 
absence of anti-GluA2 IgG clone 14B11. c PALM single particle tracking of expressed 
mGluR5::mEOS in the presence or absence of anti-GluA2 IgG clone 14B11. All bar graphs 
show means with s.e.m. error bars and data points. Statistical significance was assessed by 
unpaired t-tests (b-c, ns = not significant, *** P < 0.001).
Penn et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 7. No detectable effect of incubation with X-linking anti-GluA2 IgG on 
basal endocytosis or phosphorylation of GluA1-containing AMPA receptors.
a Schematic of the experimental protocol performed on DIV 17 cultured hippocampal 
neurons and data summary of fluorescence (normalized to the mean fluorescence at time 
zero) for anti GluA1 antibody feeding 30 minutes following 15 minute X-link by 10 μg/ml 
anti-GluA2 IgG (clone 15F1). Note that most GluA1 AMPA receptors in pyramidal neurons 
exist as GluA1/2 heteromers. Similar results were obtained from two experiments and 
combined, where the control was either: 1) no antibody; or 2) anti-GFP. The images are all 
Penn et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 scaled the same. b Schematic of experimental protocol (top), images of example Western 
blots (middle) and data for phosphorylation at GluA1 serine 845 and 831 after 15 minute X-
link by 10 μg/ml anti-GluA2 IgG (clone 15F1) or control IgG (anti-GFP). Phosphorylation 
was unaffected by the X-link manipulation. c. Schematic of experimental cLTP protocol 
(top), images of example Western blots (middle) and data for phosphorylation at GluA1 
serine 845 after 15 minute X-link by 10 μg/ml anti-GluA2 IgG (clone 15F1) or control IgG 
(anti-GFP) followed by chemical LTP (cLTP) or control treatment. The X-link manipulation 
had little impact on S845 phosphorylation induced by cLTP. We achieved similar 
phosphorylation results for AMPARs isolated by surface biotinylation and eluting from 
streptavidin beads. All bar graphs show means with s.e.m. error bars and data points. Note 
that in b and c the data points for each experiment were recentered on the grand mean; thus 
the error bars approximate within-experiment s.e.m. Black arrow heads adjacent to the 
molecular weight (MW) lane in b and c denote the 95 kDa size marker. Statistical 
significance was assessed by mixed model nested ANOVA (a), 2-way ANOVA without 
interaction (b) or 2-way RM-ANOVA (ns = not significant, *** P < 0.001). For gel source 
data, see Supplementary Figure 1.
Penn et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Effect of X-linking AMPA receptors on synaptic potentiation and basal 
transmission in acute hippocampal slices.
a Schematic diagram illustrating the protocol for pre-injection antibody X-link experiments 
in acute slices. b Summary plots of mean normalised fEPSP slope (top) and paired-pulse 
ratio (PPR, 200 ms interval) of the slope (bottom) ± s.e.m. c Input-output curves of the field 
EPSP slope are unaffected by antibody infusion. The fiber volley varied linearly over the 
range of stimulation intensities (data not shown). d Input-output curves of evoked NMDAR-
mediated EPSCs are unaffected by antibody infusion. e Spontaneous EPSC frequency (left) 
Penn et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and amplitude (right) are unaffected by antibody infusion. f NMDA/AMPA ratios are 
unaffected by antibody infusion. ANOVA on log10(ratio NMDA/AMPA), F(2,54) = 0.53, P = 
0.5942. Numbers in brackets indicate the number of cells (f) or the number of slices (c-e), 
where measurements from whole cell recordings within the same slice were averaged (d-e). 
All bar graphs show means ± s.e.m. error bars and data points. Statistical significance was 
assessed by 1-way ANCOVA (c-d) or 1-way ANOVA (e-f).
Extended Data Figure 9. 
Cumulative histograms for the average normalized EPSP slope during STP and LTP from 
the HFS- and TBS-induced synaptic potentiation experiments summarised in Fig 3b and c 
respectively.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Alice Ting (MIT) for providing the BirA-ER cDNA; Elisabeth Normand for histology; 
Hajer el Oussini for helping with acute slice experiments, Audrey Lacquemant, Amandine Gautier, Melissa Deshors 
and others at the Pôle In Vivo in the IINS for animal husbandry; the Plateforme Génotypage in Neurocentre 
Magendie; Mario Carta for insightful discussions; Rolf Sprengel for providing the Gria2 KO mice; Eric Gouaux for 
providing the anti-GluA2 antibodies, Anna Carbone for data she obtained on a short-term EMBO fellowship. The 
help of the Bordeaux Imaging Center, part of the national infrastructure France BioImaging, granted by 
ANR-10INBS-04-0, is acknowledged. This work was funded by: EMBO long-term fellowship ALTF 129-2009 
(A.C.P); European Commission Marie Curie Actions FP7-PEOPLE-2010-IEF-273567 (A.C.P), Medical Research 
Council Career Development Award fellowship MR/M020746/1 (A.C.P), funding from the Ministère de 
l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, the Conseil Régional 
d'Aquitaine, the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche Grant Nanodom and the ERC grants nano-dyn-syn and 
ADOS to DC.
Penn et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 References
1. Takeuchi T, Duszkiewicz AJ, Morris RG. The synaptic plasticity and memory hypothesis: encoding, 
storage and persistence. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014; 369 20130288. 
2. Nicoll RA. A Brief History of Long-Term Potentiation. Neuron. 2017; 93:281–290. [PubMed: 
28103477] 
3. MacDougall MJ, Fine A. The expression of long-term potentiation: reconciling the preists and the 
postivists. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013; 369 20130135. 
4. Padamsey Z, Emptage N. Two sides to long-term potentiation: a view towards reconciliation. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013; 369 20130154. 
5. Yang Y, Calakos N. Presynaptic long-term plasticity. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2013; 5:8. [PubMed: 
24146648] 
6. Lisman J, Yasuda R, Raghavachari S. Mechanisms of CaMKII action in long-term potentiation. Nat 
Rev Neurosci. 2012; 13:169–182. [PubMed: 22334212] 
7. Lu W, Roche KW. Posttranslational regulation of AMPA receptor trafficking and function. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol. 2012; 22:470–479. [PubMed: 22000952] 
8. Granger AJ, Nicoll RA. Expression mechanisms underlying long-term potentiation: a postsynaptic 
view, 10 years on. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014; 369 20130136. 
9. Huganir RL, Nicoll RA. AMPARs and synaptic plasticity: the last 25 years. Neuron. 2013; 80:704–
717. [PubMed: 24183021] 
10. Opazo P, et al. CaMKII Triggers the Diffusional Trapping of Surface AMPARs through 
Phosphorylation of Stargazin. Neuron. 2010; 67:239–252. [PubMed: 20670832] 
11. Chater TE, Goda Y. The role of AMPA receptors in postsynaptic mechanisms of synaptic plasticity. 
Front Cell Neurosci. 2014; 8:401. [PubMed: 25505875] 
12. Opazo P, Choquet D. A three-step model for the synaptic recruitment of AMPA receptors. Mol Cell 
Neurosci. 2011; 46:1–8. [PubMed: 20817097] 
13. Bliss TV, Collingridge GL. Expression of NMDA receptor-dependent LTP in the hippocampus: 
bridging the divide. Mol Brain. 2013; 6:5. [PubMed: 23339575] 
14. Lledo PM, Zhang X, Sudhof TC, Malenka RC, Nicoll RA. Postsynaptic membrane fusion and 
long-term potentiation. Science. 1998; 279:399–403. [PubMed: 9430593] 
15. Park M, Penick EC, Edwards JG, Kauer JA, Ehlers MD. Recycling endosomes supply AMPA 
receptors for LTP. Science. 2004; 305:1972–1975. [PubMed: 15448273] 
16. Patterson MA, Szatmari EM, Yasuda R. AMPA receptors are exocytosed in stimulated spines and 
adjacent dendrites in a Ras-ERK-dependent manner during long-term potentiation. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2010; 107:15951–15956. [PubMed: 20733080] 
17. Wu D, et al. Postsynaptic synaptotagmins mediate AMPA receptor exocytosis during LTP. Nature. 
2017; 544:316–321. [PubMed: 28355182] 
18. Borgdorff AJ, Choquet D. Regulation of AMPA receptor lateral movements. Nature. 2002; 
417:649–653. [PubMed: 12050666] 
19. Granger AJ, Shi Y, Lu W, Cerpas M, Nicoll RA. LTP requires a reserve pool of glutamate receptors 
independent of subunit type. Nature. 2013; 493:495–500. [PubMed: 23235828] 
20. Makino H, Malinow R. AMPA receptor incorporation into synapses during LTP: the role of lateral 
movement and exocytosis. Neuron. 2009; 64:381–390. [PubMed: 19914186] 
21. Howarth M, Takao K, Hayashi Y, Ting AY. Targeting quantum dots to surface proteins in living 
cells with biotin ligase. PNAS. 2005; 102:7583–7588. [PubMed: 15897449] 
22. Williams K. Modulation and block of ion channels: a new biology of polyamines. Cell Signal. 
1997; 9:1–13. [PubMed: 9067625] 
23. Patterson MA, Szatmari EM, Yasuda R. AMPA receptors are exocytosed in stimulated spines and 
adjacent dendrites in a Ras-ERK-dependent manner during long-term potentiation. PNAS. 2010; 
107:15951–15956. [PubMed: 20733080] 
24. Liu X, et al. Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall. 
Nature. 2012; 484:381–385. [PubMed: 22441246] 
Penn et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 25. McHugh TJ, et al. Dentate gyrus NMDA receptors mediate rapid pattern separation in the 
hippocampal network. Science. 2007; 317:94–99. [PubMed: 17556551] 
26. Takemoto K, et al. Optical inactivation of synaptic AMPA receptors erases fear memory. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2017; 35:38–47. [PubMed: 27918547] 
27. Kessels HW, Malinow R. Synaptic AMPA receptor plasticity and behavior. Neuron. 2009; 61:340–
350. [PubMed: 19217372] 
28. Whitlock JR, Heynen AJ, Shuler MG, Bear MF. Learning induces long-term potentiation in the 
hippocampus. Science. 2006; 313:1093–1097. [PubMed: 16931756] 
29. Giannone G, et al. Dynamic superresolution imaging of endogenous proteins on living cells at 
ultra-high density. Biophysical journal. 2010; 99:1303–1310. [PubMed: 20713016] 
30. Howarth M, Takao K, Hayashi Y, Ting AY. Targeting quantum dots to surface proteins in living 
cells with biotin ligase. PNAS. 2005; 102:7583–7588. [PubMed: 15897449] 
31. Jia Z, et al. Enhanced LTP in mice deficient in the AMPA receptor GluR2. Neuron. 1996; 17:945–
956. [PubMed: 8938126] 
32. Phair RD, Gorski SA, Misteli T. Measurement of dynamic protein binding to chromatin in vivo, 
using photobleaching microscopy. Methods in enzymology. 2004; 375:393–414. [PubMed: 
14870680] 
33. Penn AC, Balik A, Wozny C, Cais O, Greger IH. Activity-mediated AMPA receptor remodeling, 
driven by alternative splicing in the ligand-binding domain. Neuron. 2012; 76:503–510. [PubMed: 
23141062] 
34. Rathenberg J, Nevian T, Witzemann V. High-efficiency transfection of individual neurons using 
modified electrophysiology techniques. J Neurosci Methods. 2003; 126:91–98. [PubMed: 
12788505] 
35. Potier M, et al. Temporal Memory and Its Enhancement by Estradiol Requires Surface Dynamics 
of Hippocampal CA1 N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptors. Biol Psychiatry. 2016; 79(9):734–745.
Penn et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Biotin-tethered AMPARs are effectively X-linked by neutravidin to prevent their 
surface diffusion.
a, Construct for dual expression of AP::SEP::GluA and BirA-ER. b, Strategy to X-link 
bAP::SEP::GluA (AP = acceptor peptide; SEP = Super-Ecliptic pHluorin; IRES = internal 
ribosome entry site). c, Example images (top) and graph showing mean FRAP curves, fits 
and standard error bands (bottom) for control and pre-treatment with NA (50 nM for 2 min). 
Inverted image lookup table. d, Receptor mobile fraction in spines of cells expressing 
AP::SEP::GluA1 and AP::SEP::GluA2 is reduced by NA pre-treatment and depends on the 
Penn et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 AP tag and BirA-ER. e, Molecular replacement with bAP::SEP::GluA2 in CA1 neurons. 
Example AMPAR current traces from Schaffer collateral (SC) synapse stimulation (top) or 
by 1-photon glutamate uncaging on the soma (bottom). f, Pre-treating slices with NA (100 
nM for 45 min) caused no detectable effect on: Top. AMPA/NMDA ratios, Middle, evoked 
excitatory postsynaptic conductances, or Bottom, glutamate uncaging responses. Bar graphs 
show marginal means with 83% confidence intervals (d) or mean with s.e.m. error bars and 
data points (e-f). Statistical significance was assessed by mixed model nested ANOVA (d), 
1-way ANOVA (e) or 2-way ANOVA with Holm-Bonferroni post-tests (f; ns = not 
significant, ** P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001).
Penn et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. X-link reveals surface diffusion as a critical step in the synaptic delivery of AMPARs 
during synaptic potentiation.
Top, Scheme illustrates experimental protocols on organotypic Hippocampal slices. a-e, 
Left, Example whole-cell voltage traces and summary plots of mean normalized EPSP slope 
± s.e.m. (HFS = high-frequency stimulation). Middle, Cumulative histograms for average 
normalized EPSP slope during STP and LTP. Right, Models of experimental manipulations. 
a, Robust STP and LTP following HFS under control conditions (4 experiments) b, 
Detectable HFS-induced LTP but not STP in slices pre-treated with 100 nM NA (5 
Penn et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 experiments). c, Severe attenuation of LTP but not STP with 0.5 μM intracellular TeTx. d-e, 
No detectable change in EPSP slope after HFS when 100 nM NA pre-treatment is combined 
with either: d, TeTx in intracellular recording solution, or e, continuous infusion of 10 pM 
NA in the external recording solution (3 experiments). Statistical significance was assessed 
by repeated measures (RM)-ANOVA with Holm-Bonferroni post-tests (a-e; ns = not 
significant, * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01).
Penn et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Antibody X-link of endogenous GluA2 attenuates LTP of CA1 fEPSPs in vitro and in 
vivo.
a Acute slice experimental setup and antibody labelling controls. b-c Protocol (top), 
example traces (middle) and summary plots of mean normalized fEPSP slope ± s.e.m. (Ab = 
antibody). No stable synaptic potentiation following high frequency stimulation (HFS, b) or 
theta-burst stimulation (TBS, c) when α-GluA2 IgG pre-injection is combined with 
continuous infusion of the antibody. Cumulative histograms for STP and LTP are plot in 
Extended Data Fig. 8. d In vivo experimental protocol and histological controls. (VHC = 
Penn et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 ventral hippocampal commissure; Ab = antibody). e-h LTP recordings following injection 
of: e, anti-GluA2 Fab; f, anti-GluA2 IgG or g, control IgG. Left. Mean normalized fEPSP 
slope ± s.e.m. Right. Example voltage traces before and after HFS. h, Bar graph of the 
means with s.e.m. error bars and data points for the normalized fEPSP slope potentiation 
calculated from the data in Fig. 3e-g. Statistical significance was assessed by 1-way ANOVA 
with Holm-Bonferroni post-tests (h, ns = not significant, * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01)
Penn et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Impairment of a hippocampal-dependent learning task by infusion of X-linking anti-
GluA2 IgG.
Shaded data are controls for baseline freezing levels. Unshaded data were used for 
hypothesis testing. a-b, Selective effects on contextual (a) versus cued (b) fear learning. a, 
Left, Antibody infusion sites. Right, Pre-conditioning infusion of anti-GluA2 IgG reduces 
freezing to conditioned context (A). b, Cued fear learning was robust for all antibodies. c, 
No detectable difference in freezing to conditioned context between antibodies for pre-test 
infusions. All bar graphs show means ± s.e.m. error bars. Data points are shown where data 
Penn et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 is compared using statistics. Statistical significance was assessed by 2-way repeated 
measures (RM)-ANOVA with Holm-Bonferroni post-tests (ns = not significant, ** P < 0.01; 
*** P < 0.001). The mouse brain drawing is reproduced with permission from ‘The mouse 
brain atlas’, Franklin K.B.J. and Paxinos G., p74, Copyright Elsevier (2007).
Penn et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
