 International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Commentary
Pollution from Fossil-Fuel Combustion is the Leading
Environmental Threat to Global Pediatric Health and
Equity: Solutions Exist
Frederica Perera
Columbia Center for Children’s Environmental Health, Department of Environmental Health Sciences,
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, 722 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA;
fpp1@cumc.columbia.edu
Received: 22 November 2017; Accepted: 20 December 2017; Published: 23 December 2017
Abstract: Fossil-fuel combustion by-products are the world’s most significant threat to children’s
health and future and are major contributors to global inequality and environmental injustice.
The emissions include a myriad of toxic air pollutants and carbon dioxide (CO2), which is the
most important human-produced climate-altering greenhouse gas. Synergies between air pollution
and climate change can magnify the harm to children. Impacts include impairment of cognitive
and behavioral development, respiratory illness, and other chronic diseases—all of which may
be “seeded“ in utero and affect health and functioning immediately and over the life course.
By impairing children’s health, ability to learn, and potential to contribute to society, pollution and
climate change cause children to become less resilient and the communities they live in to become
less equitable. The developing fetus and young child are disproportionately affected by these
exposures because of their immature defense mechanisms and rapid development, especially those
in low- and middle-income countries where poverty and lack of resources compound the effects.
No country is spared, however: even high-income countries, especially low-income communities
and communities of color within them, are experiencing impacts of fossil fuel-related pollution,
climate change and resultant widening inequality and environmental injustice. Global pediatric
health is at a tipping point, with catastrophic consequences in the absence of bold action.
Fortunately, technologies and interventions are at hand to reduce and prevent pollution and
climate change, with large economic benefits documented or predicted. All cultures and communities
share a concern for the health and well-being of present and future children: this shared value
provides a politically powerful lever for action. The purpose of this commentary is to briefly review
the data on the health impacts of fossil-fuel pollution, highlighting the neurodevelopmental impacts,
and to briefly describe available means to achieve a low-carbon economy, and some examples of
interventions that have benefited health and the economy.
Keywords: children’s health; fossil fuel emissions; air pollution; climate change; neurodevelopment;
benefits of intervention; policy
1. Introduction
Children, and especially the poor, bear a disproportionate burden of disease and developmental
impairment from both environmental pollution and climate change due to the combustion of coal,
oil, gasoline, diesel and natural gas. Assessments of the health and economic costs of the impacts
of fossil-fuel combustion by-products on children have typically been fragmented, published in
specialized journals and have separately considered air pollution and climate change. This silo effect
has precluded a full reckoning of the harm to children that results from a carbon-based economy and
has stymied the advancement of properly comprehensive policies to protect this vulnerable group.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16; doi:10.3390/ijerph15010016
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
2 of 17
This commentary calls for a holistic accounting of the harm from fossil-fuel burning. Such an
accounting is needed to spur the required global mitigation and action to reduce disparities between
regions and socioeconomic classes and address the growing threat to future generations. Unless we
act forcefully right now, our children and theirs will inherit an unsustainable world, lacking the
essential ecological resources and social stability to support them. A major theme of this commentary
is environmental injustice: the disproportionately heavy health and economic burden that falls on
the young, the poor, and certain minorities, especially those in developing countries who are most
vulnerable to the impacts of toxic air pollutants as well as CO2-driven climate change resulting from the
combustion of fossil fuel. Alleviating this burden would bring great and lasting benefits to children and
their progeny. In his Encyclical, Laudate Si, Pope Francis concluded that global capitalism, based on the
burning of fossil fuels, has created unsustainable consumption and mounting inequity. This warning
was also sounded in the recent report of the Lancet Commission on Health and Climate Change [1].
To paraphrase the Lancet Commission: government policies and other strategies to reduce dependence
on fossil fuel and build sustainable communities represent the biggest opportunity of our century to
improve public health, redress inequality and increase the resilience of individuals, communities and
the broader society.
In a prior commentary [2], I envisioned fossil fuel as the modern day version of the many-headed
Hydra in Greek mythology, inflicting multiple forms of health and developmental harm in children
through its emissions of toxic pollutants and carbon dioxide (CO2). Were we to slay the hydra
by transitioning to sustainable and renewable energy sources for transport, electricity generation,
and industry, we would reap lasting benefits for children. These include significantly fewer cases
of babies born preterm or with low birth weight, children with cognitive and behavioral disorders,
mental-health problems, asthma and other respiratory illness, and potentially cardiovascular disease
and cancer—all of which have been linked to toxic air pollutants. Mitigation of climate change would
mean fewer children suffering from heat-related disease, malnutrition, infectious disease, physical and
psychological trauma, mental-health problems, and respiratory illness. All of these health benefits
would occur immediately and play out over the life course, since exposure-related damage, disease,
or impairment in early life can affect long-term health and functioning. Of growing concern are the
adverse effects on early brain development, impairing children’s ability to learn, hence their future
economic productivity and ability to contribute ideas and energy to society. As a result, they, their
families and the broader community are less resilient (“able to survive, adapt, and grow in the face of
stress and shocks and transform when conditions require”) [3]. Society becomes even less fair, since the
children who are most affected are the poor and disadvantaged.
This commentary builds upon a prior review by this author that contains more detail and
references [2], updating it with more recent or additional scientific and economic data on the
current and projected health impacts of fossil-fuel combustion.
A major focus here is on the
neurodevelopmental impacts of air toxics and climate change and their combination, because heretofore
the effects on the developing brain have been less recognized than the other health impacts of
these exposures.
2. The Young Are Especially Vulnerable to Air Pollution and Climate Change
The developing fetus and young child are more biologically and psychologically vulnerable than
adults to the many adverse effects of toxic air pollutants and climate change from fossil-fuel combustion.
This differential susceptibility is due to their rapid growth, dynamic developmental programming,
immature detoxification, immune, and thermoregulatory systems, and their dependence on
adult caretakers. The complexity of early development conveys vulnerability to disruption by toxic
exposures of all kinds, including toxic pollutants and stress. Like the respiratory and immune systems,
the brain continues to develop during infancy through childhood; however, the prenatal period
is considered to be the most dynamic.
For example, between conception and birth the brain
undergoes highly synchronized maturation from the initial formation of the neural tube to the
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
3 of 17
proliferation and migration of the neurons, synaptogenesis, apoptosis or “pruning” of synapses,
and the early phase of myelination [4]. Most of the more than 86 billion neurons of the mature brain
are formed during the prenatal period [5]. Numerous studies demonstrate that the fetal and early
childhood stages are especially vulnerable to both genetic damage and epigenetic dysregulation from
exposure to xenobiotics and stress; these molecular effects may have lifelong and transgenerational
consequence [6–8].
In addition, because children breathe more air per kilogram of body weight than do adults
and require three to four times the amount of food on a body-weight basis than adults, they are
more exposed to pollutants in air and food [9,10]. Testifying to the differential vulnerability of
the young, the World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that more than 40% of the burden
of environmentally related disease and more than 88% of the burden of climate change is borne by
children under 5, although that age group constitutes only 10% of the global population [11–13].
The most serious impacts of climate change are occurring in developing countries; however, the entire
global population is affected.
3. Fossil-Fuel Combustion is the Major Source of Global Air Pollution and CO2
Globally, the majority of air pollution is generated by the combustion of fossil fuel (coal, diesel fuel,
gasoline, oil, and natural gas) for electricity production, heating, transportation, and industry [14].
Worldwide, in 2011, fossil fuels represented 82% of the total primary energy supply [15]. In the US, oil,
natural gas, and coal account for 81% of current fuel use [16]. Energy-related fossil-fuel combustion in
high- and middle-income countries and biomass burning in low-income countries accounts for most
of the global air pollution, generating 85% of airborne respirable particulate pollution and almost all
sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions to the atmosphere [17]. Also emitted are black carbon,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), nitrogen and sulfur dioxides, mercury, and volatile chemicals
that form ground-level ozone (O3). All are associated with multiple adverse health effects in children.
Air pollution affects practically all countries in the world and all parts of society; only one person
in 10 lives in a city that complies with the WHO Air quality guidelines [18]. Household air pollution
is an important risk factor for an estimated 2.9 billion people worldwide, especially those in low-
and middle-income countries where biomass fuels and coal are commonly burned for cooking and
heating [19] In total, about 2 billion children live in areas that exceed the WHO annual guideline for
fine particles of 10 µg/m3 (the concentration of fine particulate matter that constitutes a long-term
inhalation hazard) [20]. About 300 million children currently live in areas where outdoor air pollution
exceeds international guidelines at least six-fold [21]. These guidelines are likely underestimates,
since recent epidemiological studies have reported impacts below these levels.
Globally, although it remains a very important risk, indoor air pollution has been on the decline in
recent years due largely to the reduction in use of solid fuels for cooking from around 60% of homes in
1980 to 42% in 2012 [22]. In contrast, ambient air pollution has shown a dramatic rise. Urban ambient
air pollution increased by about 8% between 2008 and 2013; and the upward trend is projected to
continue [21].
Fossil-fuel combustion is also the major human source of the greenhouse gases and short-lived
climate pollutants that drive climate change.
As stated in a recent US interagency report:
“Many lines of evidence demonstrate that human activities, especially emissions of greenhouse gases,
are primarily responsible for the observed climate changes in the industrial era, especially over the
last six decades” [23]. Human activities emit about 35 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere every year, primarily from energy use [24]. The Annual Greenhouse Gas Index, which is
used by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to track the warming influence
of long-lived climate-altering greenhouse gases, increased by 40% from 1990 to 2016, with most of
that increase attributable to rising CO2 levels [25]. CO2 levels in the atmosphere are at their highest
in 800,000 years [26]. In the US, coal and natural gas are the largest contributors to carbon pollution
(constituting a third of all domestic carbon emissions). Methane released by production of natural gas,
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
4 of 17
oil, and coal is second in importance. Although natural gas emits significantly less toxic air pollution
and CO2 than the other fossil fuels [27], the drilling, extraction, and transportation of natural gas
results in the leakage of methane that is 34 times more effective than CO2 at trapping heat over a
100-year period [28]. Given its increasing share of total fuel use, natural gas is expected to surpass coal
as a source of energy-related CO2 emissions in the US [29].
According to the International Energy Agency, worldwide growth in coal consumption is
predicted to decline between 2015 and 2021 as developed countries continue to abandon coal as
an energy source and China’s consumption plateaus. However, that decline will be offset by growing
demand among emerging nations, particularly in India and south-east Asia. Based on the assumption
of business as usual, the US Energy Information Administration predicts that coal will remain the
second-largest energy source worldwide, following petroleum and other liquid fuels, until 2030;
and from 2030 through 2040, it will be the third-largest energy source, surpassed only by liquid fuels
and natural gas [30]. In the US and some other countries, carbon emissions from cars and trucks have
exceeded carbon emissions from electric power [31].
4. Fossil-Fuel Combustion-Related Air Pollutants and Climate Change are a Major Cause of
Environmental Injustice
A major environmental injustice is that children, who are dependent on adults and did not
create the problems, bear the brunt of the impacts of air pollution and climate change. It is a further
injustice that children in low- and middle-income countries as well as lower-income communities
and communities of color in high-income countries like the US are disproportionately affected.
Echoing an earlier WHO finding, the recent report of the Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health,
on which this author was a commissioner, stated that pollution in all its forms disproportionately
affects the poor and marginalized in every country worldwide, with air pollution being the largest
contributor to pollution-related deaths, mainly in low- and middle-income countries [32]. Low- and
middle-income countries in the WHO South-East Asia and Western Pacific Regions had the greatest air
pollution-related burden in 2012, with a total of 2.6 million deaths related to outdoor air pollution and
3.3 million deaths linked to indoor air pollution [33]. However, in contrast to pollution-related deaths,
which largely occur among adults over 60, disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) resulting from
pollution-related disease are highly concentrated among infants and young children, reflecting the
vulnerability of the young and the many years of life lost with each death of a child [34].
Two factors contribute to the socioeconomic disparities in the impacts of air pollution: differential
exposure and heightened susceptibility. Globally, there is a notable pattern of disproportionate
exposure of the poor and of certain racial/ethnic groups to air pollution. Studies have shown that
low-income communities and communities of color in the US experience disproportionately high
exposure to particulate air pollution and air pollution from coal-fired power plants [2]. A GIS-based
study of over 150,000 children in the US found that the distribution of three stationary and mobile
air-pollution sources followed a consistent pattern of racial inequity, with Hispanic and black children
facing significantly higher levels of potential exposure than white children [35]. With respect to
heightened susceptibility, an analysis of the Mexico City scenario concluded that low socioeconomic
status (SES) children in that megacity are not only exposed to high levels of pollution buttend to
have inadequate nutrition and deficient schools, and often face domestic, school and street violence .
Because these co-factors make children more vulnerable to air toxins, the significant impact of high air
pollution is likely affecting predominantly low SES children in Mexico City [36].
The same factors contribute to disparities in the impacts of climate change. It is the poor who
are most often forced to live in areas that are especially vulnerable to extreme flooding, drought and
other impacts of climate change. Poor children are also less buffered and less resilient in the face
of climate change: “a child living in poverty or deprived of adequate water and sanitation before
a crisis will be more affected by a flood, drought or storm, less likely to recover quickly and at
even greater risk in a subsequent crisis” [37]. Pre-existing inadequate nutrition, lack of adequate
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
5 of 17
social support, and psychosocial stress due to poverty magnify the effects of both climate change and
air pollution. Worldwide, the number of children living in poverty is staggering: one billion children,
almost half of the 2.2 billion children below 15 years of age, are living in poverty [38]. In the US,
the world’s most prosperous country, the child poverty rate is a shocking 22%. As will be discussed,
our research following parallel birth cohorts in the US and Poland has found that co-exposure of
pregnant women to air pollution and social stress or hardship due to poverty significantly increases
the adverse effect of air pollution on children’s IQ and behavioral problems including attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) [39–41]. For example, our research in Poland found evidence of
significant interactions between maternal demoralization during pregnancy, itself correlated with
material hardship, and prenatal air-pollution exposure on children’s behavioral problems [41]. In our
NYC research, combined prenatal exposure to PAH and material hardship was associated with a
significant reduction in the IQ of children [39].
5. The Health Impacts of Air Pollution in Children Include Mortality and
Neurodevelopmental Problems
The Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health [32] noted that air pollution remains one of the
great killers of our age, echoing an earlier conclusion by the WHO that: “Air pollution, both ambient
(outdoor) and household (indoor), is a public health emergency” and the biggest environmental risk
to health. Most of the attention has been on excess mortality in the overall population, with the
largest number of deaths in adults [33,42]. However, in children under 5 years’ old, 1.7 million
deaths are attributed to pollution and environmental risks in general; with air pollution linked
to 600,000 of these deaths each year, largely due to pneumonia [37,43]. Because of the increasing
trend in outdoor air-pollution levels, according to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), under-5 mortality could be 50% higher than—or even double—current estimates
by 2050 as a result of outdoor air pollution [22]. It is predicted that by 2050 outdoor air pollution
will become the leading cause of child death [37]. However, millions more children are affected
by chronic illness, including respiratory illness other than pneumonia and effects on physical and
cognitive development [37].
A previous commentary by this author reviewed in some detail the documented effects
of combustion-related air pollution on multiple outcomes including adverse birth outcomes,
respiratory illness, and cancer [2]. Here the focus is on neurodevelopmental impacts, an area that has
been under-recognized. Low birth weight and preterm birth will be briefly discussed in the context of
child neurodevelopment.
A growing body of evidence indicates that early-life exposure to combustion-related air pollutants
adversely affects children’s cognitive and behavioral development. There are inconsistencies in
the results among studies that can be explained in part by differences in measures used and
levels of air pollution, in race/ethnicity, potentially in susceptibility, and in methods to assess
children’s neurodevelopment.
Particulate matter (PM) and traffic-related pollutants: Many studies have assessed the associations
between PM or traffic-related air pollutants and cognitive outcomes in children from cohorts in the US,
Europe and Asia [44–54]. The studies relied on estimates of exposure to PM or traffic-related pollutants
(black carbon or nitrogen dioxide/NO2) largely based on land-use regression models, distance of the
maternal residence during pregnancy to roadways, or traffic density. Although the results for PM have
been mixed, most of the studies on traffic-related pollutant exposure have reported associations with
decreased mental and psychomotor development. Several studies found that the two traffic-related
pollutants were associated with reductions in children’s memory and IQ, after sociodemographic
factors were taken into account [52,53]. Exposure to traffic pollution in childhood has also been linked
to slower brain maturation [55].
With respect to attention problems, a study in Boston found more such problems with
higher exposure to fine, respirable particulate matter having an aerodynamic diameter of less
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
6 of 17
than 2.5 microns (PM2.5), during the sensitive periods of gestation, with differences between
boys and girls [56]. Studies in South Korea and Japan also reported more attentional problems
with higher prenatal exposure to PM or other pollutants [57,58]. The association with prenatal
exposure to traffic-related air pollutants was not observed in German cohort studies; but there was a
significant association between higher PM2.5 levels at the children’s current addresses and increased
hyperactivity/inattention scores [45].
Air pollution, mainly PM2.5 or traffic-related pollution, has been associated in a number of studies
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) [59–63]. In contrast, European studies reported no association
with autistic traits [64,65]. Although studies have not all been consistent, there is growing evidence
that prenatal exposure to traffic-related air pollutants and PM2.5 may be risk factors for ASD [66–68].
There is some evidence using molecular biomarkers and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of the brain that chronic exposure to airborne pollutants in the early years may contribute to
neurodegenerative disease processes including Alzheimers’s disease [69,70].
In Mexico City,
researchers have reported distinct brain changes that have been associated with adult
neurodegenerative disease in children living in high air-pollution areas [69].
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH): PAH are a class of neurotoxic air pollutants that my
colleagues and I have studied with respect to cognitive and behavioral outcomes and mood disorders
in complementary cohort studies in New York City, Krakow, Poland and Chongqing, China [39,71–88]
In our NYC cohort, prenatal exposure to PAH measured by personal air-monitoring or biomarkers of
PAH exposure in cord or maternal blood was associated with developmental delay, reduced IQ,
symptoms of anxiety, depression, and inattention, ADHD, deficient maturation of emotional
self–regulation capacity, and poorer social responsiveness in childhood. Significant interactions
were observed between prenatal PAH and material hardship due to poverty on child IQ [39]
and between prenatal PAH and maternal psychological distress on mood-related problems [2].
More recently, significant combined effects of PAH and material hardship have been observed on
ADHD outcomes [40]. MRI brain imaging of a subset of children in the NYC cohort showed significant
correlations between measures of prenatal PAH exposure and distinct anatomical changes [80].
An example of the neurodevelopmental benefits of reducing air-pollution levels is provided by
our research in Tongliang, China, that compared a cohort born before the closure of a centrally located
coal power plant to a cohort conceived after plant closure. The second cohort had more favorable birth
and neurodevelopmental outcomes, significantly lower cord blood levels of the biomarker of exposure
measured in cord blood (PAH-DNA adducts), higher levels of a protein important in early brain
development known as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and longer telomeres, a general
marker of health [89,90].
In addition to their immediate toll, preterm birth and low birth weight are known risk factors for
a number of neurodevelopmental disorders in children [91]. Recent studies confirm the reproductive
effects of air pollution, their socioeconomic and racial disparities and the large cost imposed on
affected families, furthering socioeconomic inequality and increasing the risk of neurodevelopmental
effects in vulnerable populations.
For example, a large prospective study in China found a
significant increase in preterm birth with each 5 µg/m3 increase in maternal exposure to PM2.5
during the pregnancy [92]. A recent analysis found that about 2.7 million premature births per year
(18% of preterm births) globally are associated with PM2.5 exposure, including from fossil-fuel and
biomass burning, mostly in developing countries [93]. A recent multi-country study concluded that,
across all study populations, maternal exposure to particulate pollution was associated with low
birth weight at term [94]. Racial disparities exist. In the US, preterm birth rates are 7.4% among
Non-Hispanic white infants compared to 17.2% for Non-Hispanic black infants. Both social and
physical environmental factors contribute to these disparities [95]. These effects are costly to society
and individuals. In the US alone, PM2.5 caused an estimated 15,000 preterm births in 2010, costing about
$5 billion in medical care, special education services and lost economic productivity for that single
year’s cohort [96].
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
7 of 17
6. Climate Change is Linked to Serious Health Impacts in Children Including Mortality and
Developmental Impairment
As noted in the Introduction, references for this section can be found in [2]. Increased illness,
injury, and deaths from heat stress, floods, drought, and increased frequency of forest fires and intense
storms are among the direct effects of climate change. The indirect effects include malnutrition and
under-nutrition, the spread of infectious-disease vectors, food insecurity, illness due to increased air
pollution and aeroallergens, and mental ill health from displacement, social and political instability.
Children are especially vulnerable to both the indirect and direct consequences of climate change.
There is broad scientific agreement that climate change has already taken a significant toll on
children and that the impacts will increase dramatically unless forceful action is taken. The WHO
estimated that climate change since the mid-1970s contributed to about 5 million lost DALYs
world-wide in 2000 through malnutrition, diarrhea, and malaria, mostly in children and in
developing countries. The toll is expected to rise to 175 million children affected each year in the next
several years. These numbers are substantial underestimates since they reflect only a few of the health
effects from climate change.
Children bearing the greatest burden of climate-sensitive diseases are those living in regions
with the least capacity to adapt to risks—regions that have contributed the least in terms of global
emissions of greenhouse gases. Although children in developing countries bear the brunt, the impacts
of climate change are increasingly being seen in the US and Europe, especially among populations of
low socioeconomic status.
Virtually all of the impacts of climate change can affect children’s neurodevelopment,
cognitive functioning, behavior, and mental health, either directly or indirectly.
Further, as
with air pollution, the impacts are likely to be felt over the lifetime, affecting resilience,
health and productivity. Climate change impacts the development of children’s brains in many ways.
Malnutrition during the first 1000 days causes stunting of the brain and body, with associated reduced
neurodevelopmental and cognitive function in children and subsequent decreased ability to learn and
be economically productive [97]. In 2017, 155 million children under five (1 in 4 children) are stunted
due to hunger [98].
Stress from extreme weather events also contributes to neurodevelopmental and mental health
problems in children. Although no single extreme weather event, such as floods, droughts, wildfires,
or hurricanes and cyclones, can be attributed directly to climate change, human-induced climate
change is contributing to the frequency and severity of such events. Over the last several decades,
there have also been more intense and frequent heat waves as well as marked regional changes
in floods, droughts and wildfires in certain parts of the US and globally [99].
An estimated
66.5 million children world-wide were directly affected by weather-related disasters every year
from 1990–2000, of whom 600,000 died. Sea-level rise due to global climate warming has made
coastal storms increasingly dangerous for coastal infrastructure and inhabitants, contributing to deaths
from drowning. Drowning is a major cause of fatality in children in developing countries. According to
a recent study, rates of sea-level rise between 1993 and 2011 exceeded by 60% the highest projections
made in 2007 by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. In 2017, the NOAA estimated that
the sea-level rise by the end of this century could reach as high as 6.5 feet, enough to inundate many
waterfront cities around the globe [100]. Notable extreme weather events in the last decade include the
massive flooding across south-east Asia in 2011 which affected an estimated 9.6 million people, many of
them children [101]. In the US, Hurricane Katrina in 2005 forced 1 million people in New Orleans
from their homes and left 372,000 children without schools; and Hurricane Sandy in 2012 affected
people in 8 countries including 24 states in the US, with particularly severe damage in New Jersey
and New York. Children who were affected by Hurricane Katrina were found to have higher rates of
anxiety and depression [102]. Most recently, in September 2017 Hurricane Irma devastated islands in
the Caribbean; and massive flooding in South Asia placed almost 16 million children in urgent need of
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
8 of 17
life-saving support [103]. While populations of all economic statuses have been impacted, these events
have most seriously affected the children in low-income communities.
The psychological and emotional impacts of climate change include the acute, traumatic effects of
extreme weather events, mental and emotional distress resulting from direct experience or anxiety
about future risks, chronic stress from heat, drought, forced migrations, and climate-related conflicts,
and the stress of adjustment in the wake of weather-related disasters. Migration and population
displacement as a result of social and political instability due to climate change affects the mental
health of children in low-income, developing countries, contributing to the perpetuation of poverty and
civil unrest. These countries, in which children less than 18 years’ old represent 50% of their population,
already bear most of the global burden of poverty and childhood disease.
7. Prenatal or Childhood Exposure to Air Toxics and Climate Change Can Have Long-Term and
Synergistic or Combined Health Impacts
By launching a trajectory of adverse effects following the initial physical or developmental
impairment, and/or by “seeding” latent disease that only becomes evident in later life, toxic air
pollutants can affect health and functioning over the life-course. For example, adverse reproductive
outcomes associated with in utero environmental exposures are risk factors for neurodevelopmental,
respiratory, and other health problems in infancy and childhood, as well as heart disease, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and diabetes in adulthood. As noted above, childhood ADHD and
ASD have been associated with early-life exposure to air pollution; these disorders may persist into
adulthood, affecting professional and personal life and increasing the costs of healthcare for individuals
and families. There is empirical evidence that early childhood exposure to air pollution is linked to
lower scores on IQ and other intelligence tests, with long-term economic consequences in terms of
lifetime earnings.
Similarly, the impacts of climate change can also play out over a child’s lifetime. As noted,
stunting of children’s bodies and brains due to malnutrition during the first 1000 days results in
impairment of cognitive functioning and learning. Early adversity and toxic stress are also linked to
impairments in learning, behavior, and physical and mental health.
There is an increasing body of evidence that early-life exposures to air pollutants,
nutritional deprivation, and stress can result in transgenerational impacts, possibly via the transmission
of epigenetic changes.
Combustion-related PAH have been shown to alter epigenetic marks
in newborns, potentially dysregulating genes involved in disease pathways.
Although such effects have not been adequately documented, there can be harmful synergy
or combined effects of toxic air emissions from the burning of fossil fuels and climate change.
In California, during the month of November 2017 toxic air pollution from 22 concurrent fires
has affected millions of people, adding to the pollution from traffic and stationary sources [104].
As another example, the effect of air-pollution exposure during pregnancy on risk of preterm birth is
likely to be magnified by concurrent experience of extreme temperatures, food insecurity and stress
due to climate change. The same is true for effects of co-exposure to air toxics, malnutrition and stress
on child neurodevelopment. Children affected by malnutrition are likely to be more vulnerable to
the neurotoxic effects of air pollution; and children born with low birth weight or preterm due to air
pollution will be at greater risk of malnutrition or infectious disease.
8. Economic Benefits of Action are Underestimated but Significant
Lacking in the literature and in the public understanding is a holistic assessment of the economic
costs of the many impacts of fossil-fuel combustion on children’s health, hence the full economic
benefits of action to reduce or prevent these impacts. The numbers below do not capture the full
costs to individuals, families and society in terms of direct medical costs, costs to healthcare systems,
opportunity costs resulting from lost productivity, and lower economic growth. However, even
the limited available estimates of the monetary costs of deaths and morbidity from air pollution or
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
9 of 17
climate change, individually, are staggering. The available data indicate that reduction of dependence
on fossil fuel will bring very large economic benefits. They demonstrate the false dichotomy between
regulation of air pollution and economic growth. Estimates of the avoided and avoidable economic
health costs of air pollution and climate change include the following:
•
Avoided health costs attributed to the US Clean Air amendments: ~$2 trillion for the year
2020 [105];
•
A prediction of ~$250 billion/year by 2030 ($140 billion to $1050 billion) in avoided health costs
from clean energy policies in the US [106];
•
An estimated $361 to $886 billion/year in health costs due to US fossil fuel electricity [105,107];
•
An estimated cost of ~$187 billion/year due to air pollution from coal combustion in the US [108];
•
Gains in lifetime earnings related to a hypothetical 25% reduction in PAH in NYC air: $215 million
for each annual NYC birth cohort of Medicaid births [109];
•
An estimate of $3.5 trillion/year in costs of ambient air pollution in OECD countries, India and
China [1];
•
Total annual costs of air pollution currently estimated to be approximately 0.3 per cent of global
GDP and expected to increase to approximately 1 per cent of GDP by 2060 [110];
•
Reductions in airborne particulate matter between 2001 and 2010 in Taiyuan, Shanxi province,
China associated with 2810 fewer premature deaths, 31,810 fewer hospital admissions, 141,457
fewer outpatient visits, 969 fewer emergency department visits, 951 fewer cases of bronchitis and
more than 30,000 fewer DALYs attributed to air pollution in Taiyuan in 2010 compared to 2001.
The decrease in the estimated cost of premature death due to air pollution: 3.83 billion Yuan, or
approximately $621 million USD [111];
•
Estimated cost of deaths from air pollution to the global economy: about $225 billion in lost
labor income and more than $5 trillion in welfare losses in 2013 (World Bank/Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation study, cited in WHO, Clear the Air) [112];
•
Estimated ~$14 billion cost due to six climate-change-related events in the US between 2002 and
2009 [113];
•
The expected benefits of the California climate change program: a $76 billion increase in the state’s
Gross State Product, a $48 billion increase in real household incomes, and the creation of 403,000
new efficiency- and climate-driven jobs [114];
•
Between 1980 and 2017, the cost of 208 extreme weather and climate events in the US: at least $1
billion each, with total damages of more than $1.1 trillion, and a similar increase in these costly
events happening around the world [115];
•
The estimated global cost of climate change from deaths and diseases such as diarrhea,
malnutrition, malaria, and heat stress up to $4 billion per year by 2030 [116];
•
Globally, up to $230 billion of avoided external health costs each year by 2030 with an increase to
36% renewables in global energy consumption by 2030 [1].
9. Solutions Exist and Interventions are Being Mounted
Means are at hand, and already at work in many communities, cities and countries to transition
from dirty fossil fuels to clean energy. This transition is seen by experts as both the major challenge
and the major opportunity of our time [1]. Expert groups have underscored the feasibility of seizing
this opportunity, citing policies and initiatives that have been effective. They have also underscored
that to be successful and benefit the health and future well-being of children worldwide, the transition
from dirty fossil fuels to clean energy must be done equitably and inclusive of all communities,
especially those that are disadvantaged [117].
The WHO [42] describes a number of policies in transport, urban planning, power generation and
industry that are known to be effective in reducing emissions of fossil fuel-related air toxics and CO2:
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
10 of 17
•
Clean technologies that reduce industrial smokestack emissions; improved management of urban
and agricultural waste, including the capture of methane gas emitted from waste sites as an
alternative to incineration (for use as biogas);
•
Shifting to clean modes of power generation; prioritizing rapid urban transit, walking and cycling
networks in cities as well as rail inter-urban freight and passenger travel; shifting from heavy-duty
diesel vehicles to low-emission vehicles and fuels, including fuels with reduced sulfur content;
•
Improving the energy efficiency of buildings and making cities more compact, and thus
energy efficient;
•
Increased use of low-emissions fuels and renewable combustion-free power sources (like solar,
wind or hydropower); co-generation of heat and power; and distributed energy generation
(e.g., mini-grids and rooftop solar-power generation).
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), “the technologies for the energy sector
to push air pollution levels into a steep decline in all countries exist and are in widespread use
today; and they can be applied at great net economic benefit. Such actions can help avoid millions
of pollution-related deaths; greenhouse-gas emissions would also be cut and fossil-fuel import bills
reduced” [17]. In fact, many countries have lowered CO2 emissions through fuel-economy standards
for auto emissions, limits for power plants, stricter energy-efficiency codes for buildings, and other
available methods.
Examples of interventions now being mounted to address climate change and fossil fuel-related
pollution include the India Heat Action Plan (HAP) [118]. The HAP has provided an early-warning
system to better prepare and protect local communities from deadly heat waves. Along with the
immediate benefit in terms of adaptation to the current threat, the increased awareness of climate
change is incentivizing the Indian government to move away from coal and other fossil fuel.
Another is the California climate change initiative launched in 2006 as a multi-year program
to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions in California, with a 2030 greenhouse-gas emissions reduction
target of 40% below 1990 levels. The expected benefits included a $76 billion increase in the state’s
Gross State Product, a $48 billion increase in real household incomes, the creation of over 400,000 new
efficiency- and climate-driven jobs, and more than $8 billion by 2025 in pollution-related health costs
avoided [114]. With respect to equity, the program is designed to ensure that the benefits of energy
efficiency reach low-income residents as well as middle- and high-income residents.
The regional initiative to reduce air pollution and CO2 emissions in the north-eastern states (US)
known as the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) placed a regional limit on the amount of
CO2 that power plants can emit and instituted a cap-and-trade policy. A 2017 analysis found that
RGGI created major benefits to public health and productivity including the avoidance of 300–830
early deaths among adults; 39,000–47,000 lost work days; and 35–390 non-fatal heart attacks [119].
The total health-cost savings from RGGI to date are estimated to be $5.7 billion.
Another example is the provincial-level initiative in Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, China.
Shanxi Province is the major coal-mining and coal-burning region.
Taiyuan, the capital of
Shanxi Province, has, in the past, been counted as one of the world’s worst cities for air quality.
The Columbia Center for Children’s Environmental Health (CCCEH) at the Mailman School of
Public Health, the Shanxi Medical University, the Center of Disease Control and Prevention of Taiyuan
Municipality, and Shanghai Fudan University School of Public Health estimated the health and
economic benefits of policies between 2001–2010 to reduce the burden of air pollution in Taiyuan [81].
They include 30,000 fewer DALYs attributed to air pollution in Taiyuan in 2010 compared to 2001 and
economic savings in avoided health costs of premature death due to air pollution of 3.83 billion Yuan,
or approximately $621 million. The team is now updating these findings, assessing subsequent policy
changes from 2010 to 2016, including additional health outcomes in children, and incorporating
additional satellite and ground-level monitoring data.
A final example is the Paris Agreement [120]. Unfortunately, alone among the 195 signers
of the Treaty, the current US Administration has stated the intention to withdraw from this major
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
11 of 17
international treaty. The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) report, Climate Change in the
United States: Benefits of Global Action [121], estimated that billions of dollars of avoided damages
in the US would result from global efforts to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions. These included a
significant portion of the health costs attributed to air pollution and climate change. The Clean
Power Plan, now being rolled back by the current administration, was intended to play a key role in
meeting the targets set by the Paris Agreement. From a benefit-cost perspective, the EPA estimated
that the air pollution co-benefits of the Clean Power Plan were worth $25–$62 billion, far more than
the estimated $7–$9 billion in compliance costs [122]. Adding in global climate benefits increased total
benefits to $55–$93 billion.
These examples are encouraging but also pose the challenge of more fully documenting
their health and economic benefits and the extent to which we promote environmental justice.
Fortunately, methods are in place to make advances in that area and efforts are ongoing.
10. Conclusions
Consideration of the full impacts of fossil-fuel pollution and our carbon-based economy shows
that unless strong action is taken now, our children and their progeny will inherit an increasingly
unsustainable and unfair world in which they, their families and communities will not be able
to survive, adapt, grow and transform where needed. The mounting health and economic costs
of pollution and climate change from fossil-fuel combustion are already spurring mitigation efforts
that can serve as models for other communities, and regional, state and global entities. These provide
hope for the future.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Watts, N.; Adger, W.N.; Agnolucci, P.; Blackstock, J.; Byass, P.; Cai, W.; Chaytor, S.; Colbourn, T.; Collins, M.;
Cooper, A.; et al. Health and climate change: Policy responses to protect public health. Lancet 2015, 386,
1861–1914. [CrossRef]
2.
Perera, F.P. Multiple threats to child health from fossil fuel combustion: Impacts of air pollution and
climate change. Environ. Health Perspect. 2017, 125, 141–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Yael Friedman, T.L. Cities Taking Action:
How the 100C Network is Building Urban Resilience;
The Rockefeller Foundation: New York, NY, USA, 2017; p. 74.
4.
Giedd, J. Brain development, IX: Human brain growth. Am. J. Psychiatry 1999, 156, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Crelin, E.S. Functional Anatomy of the Newborn; Yale University Press: New Haven, CT, USA, 1973.
6.
Perera, F.P.; Tang, D.; Whyatt, R.M.; Lederman, S.A.; Jedrychowski, W. Comparison of PAH-DNA Adducts
in Four Populations of Mothers and Newborns in the U.S., Poland and China. In Proceedings of the 95th
AACR Annual Meeting, Orlando, FL, USA, 27–31 March 2004; American Association for Cancer Research:
Orlando, FL, USA; p. 454.
7.
Dolinoy, D.C.; Weidman, J.R.; Jirtle, R.L. Epigenetic gene regulation: Linking early developmental
environment to adult disease. Reprod. Toxicol. 2007, 23, 297–307. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Heindel, J.J. The fetal basis of adult disease: Role of environmental exposures—Introduction. Birth Defects
Res. A Clin. Mol. Teratol. 2005, 73, 131–132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
World Health Organization. Principles for Evaluating Health Risks in Children Associated with Exposure to
Chemicals (Environmental Health Criteria; 237); World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
10.
Xu, Z.; Sheffield, P.E.; Hu, W.; Su, H.; Yu, W.; Qi, X.; Tong, S. Climate change and children’s health—A call for
research on what works to protect children. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2012, 9, 3298–3316. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
11.
Smith, K.R.; Corvalan, C.F.; Kjellstrom, T. How much global ill health is attributable to environmental factors?
Epidemiology 1999, 10, 573–584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
World Health Organization.
Healthy Environments for Children:
Initiating an Alliance for Action;
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2002.
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
12 of 17
13.
Zhang, Y.; Bi, P.; Hiller, J.E. Climate change and disability-adjusted life years. J. Environ. Health 2007, 70,
32–36. [PubMed]
14.
US Environmental Protection Agency. Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Available online: https://www3.epa.
gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/ (accessed on 12 October 2017).
15.
World Energy Council. World Energy Resources 2013 Survey: Summary; World Energy Council: London, UK,
2013; p. 29.
16.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. Primary Energy Consumption by Source and Sector, 2014; U.S. Energy
Information Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 2014.
17.
International Energy Agency (IEA). Weo-2016 Special Report Energy and Air Pollution; International Energy
Agency: Paris, France, 2016; p. 266.
18.
World Health Organization. Ambient Air Pollution: A Global Assessment of Exposure and Burden of
Disease. 2016. Available online: http://who.int/phe/publications/air-pollution-global-assessment/en/
(accessed on 7 September 2017).
19.
World Health Organization. Household Air Pollution and Health. 2016. Available online: http://www.who.
int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs292/en/ (accessed on 12 October 2017).
20.
World Health Organization. Air Quality Guidelines Global Update 2005. Particulate Matter, Ozone, Nitrogen
Dioxide and Sulfur Dioxide; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2005.
21.
UNICEF. Clear the Air for Children. 2016. Available online: www.unicef.org/publications/index_92957.html
(accessed on 6 October 2017).
22.
World Health Organization. Who Indoor Air Quality Guidelines: Household Fuel Combustion; WHO: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2014.
23.
Wuebbles, D.J.; Fahey, D.W.; Hibbard, K.A.; DeAngelo, B.; Doherty, S.; Hayhoe, K.; Horton, R.; Kossin, J.P.;
Taylor, A.M.W.; Weaver, C.P. Climate Science Special Report: A Sustained Assessment Activity of the U.S. Global
Change Research Program; U.S. Global Change Research Program: Washington, DC, USA, 2017; p. 669.
24.
IEA. CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion—2016 Edition—Key CO2 Emissions Trends.
2016.
Available online: https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/co2-emissions-from-
fuel-combustion---2016-edition---excerpt---key-trends.html (accessed on 6 October 2017).
25.
NOAA. Noaa’s Greenhouse Gas Index Up 40 Percent Since 1990. 2017. Available online: http://www.noaa.
gov/news/noaa-s-greenhouse-gas-index-up-40-percent-since-1990 (accessed on 4 October 2017).
26.
Climate Central. Highest Levels in 800,000 Years. Available online: http://www.climatecentral.org/gallery/
graphics/highest-levels-in-800000-years (accessed on 27 September 2017).
27.
NETL. Cost and Performance Baseline for Fossil Energy Plants Volume 1: Revision 3; National Energy Technology
Laboratory: Albany, OR, USA, 2015; p. 240.
28.
Myhre, G.; Shindell, D.; Bréon, F.-M.; Collins, W.; Fuglestvedt, J.; Huang, J.; Koch, D.; Lamarque, J.-F.; Lee, D.;
Mendoza, B.; et al. Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. In Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: Cambridge, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2013.
29.
EIA. Energy-Related CO2 Emissions from Natural Gas Surpass Coal as Fuel Use Patterns Change.
Available online: www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=27552# (accessed on 2 October 2017).
30.
EIA. EIA—International Energy Outlook 2017. Available online: www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/ (accessed on
27 September 2017).
31.
EIA. In Total Energy. Available online: https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/ (accessed on 11 December 2017).
32.
Landrigan, P.J.; Fuller, R.; Acosta, N.J.R.; Adeyi, O.; Arnold, R.; Basu, N.; Baldé, A.B.; Bertollini, R.;
Bose-O’Reilly, S.; Boufford, J.I.; et al. The lancet commission on pollution and health. Lancet 2017. [CrossRef]
33.
World Health Organization.
7 Million Premature Deaths Annually Linked to Air Pollution.
2014.
Available online: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-pollution/en/ (accessed on
27 September 2017).
34.
World Health Organization. Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases; World Health Organizations:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2010; p. 176.
35.
Chakraborty, J.; Zandbergen, P.A. Children at risk: Measuring racial/ethnic disparities in potential exposure
to air pollution at school and home. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2007, 61, 1074–1079. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Calderón-Garcidueñas, L.; Torres-Jardón, R. Air pollution, socioeconomic status, and children’s cognition in
megacities: The Mexico City scenario. Front. Psychol. 2012, 3, 217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
13 of 17
37.
UNICEF. Unless We Act Now: The Impact of Climate Change on Children; UNICEF: New York, NY, USA, 2015;
p. 81.
38.
UNICEF. Children Living in Poverty. 2017. Available online: http://www.unicef.org/sowc05/english/
poverty.html (accessed on 27 September 2017).
39.
Vishnevetsky, J.; Tang, D.; Chang, H.W.; Roen, E.L.; Wang, Y.; Rauh, V.; Wang, S.; Miller, R.L.; Herbstman, J.;
Perera, F.P. Combined effects of prenatal polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and material hardship on child IQ.
Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 2015, 49, 74–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Perera, F.P.; Wheelock, K.; Wang, Y.; Tang, D.; Margolis, A.E.; Badia, G.; Cowell, W.; Miller, R.L.; Rauh, V.;
Wang, S.; et al. Combined effects of prenatal exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and material
hardship on child adhd behavior problems. Environ. Res. 2018, 160, 506–513. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Perera, F.P.; Wang, S.; Rauh, V.; Zhou, H.; Stigter, L.; Camann, D.; Jedrychowski, W.; Mroz, E.; Majewska, R.
Prenatal exposure to air pollution, maternal psychological distress, and child behavior. Pediatrics 2013, 132,
e1284–e1294. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
World Health Organization.
Ambient (Outdoor) Air Quality and Health.
2016.
Available online:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/ (accessed on 17 October 2017).
43.
World Health Organization. The Cost of a Polluted Environment: 1.7 Million Child Deaths a Year, Says
WHO. 2017. Available online: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/pollution-child-
death/en/ (accessed on 17 October 2017).
44.
Cowell, W.J.; Bellinger, D.C.; Coull, B.A.; Gennings, C.; Wright, R.O.; Wright, R.J. Associations between
prenatal exposure to black carbon and memory domains in urban children: Modification by sex and
prenatal stress. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0142492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Fuertes, E.; Standl, M.; Forns, J.; Berdel, D.; Garcia-Aymerich, J.; Markevych, I.; Schulte-Koerne, G.; Sugiri, D.;
Schikowski, T.; Tiesler, C.M.; et al. Traffic-related air pollution and hyperactivity/inattention, dyslexia and
dyscalculia in adolescents of the german giniplus and lisaplus birth cohorts. Environ. Int. 2016, 97, 85–92.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Guxens, M.; Sunyer, J. A review of epidemiological studies on neuropsychological effects of air pollution.
Swiss Med. Wkly. 2012, 141, w13322. [PubMed]
47.
Guxens, M.; Garcia-Esteban, R.; Giorgis-Allemand, L.; Forns, J.; Badaloni, C.; Ballester, F.; Beelen, R.;
Cesaroni, G.; Chatzi, L.; de Agostini, M.; et al. Air pollution during pregnancy and childhood cognitive and
psychomotor development: Six european birth cohorts. Epidemiology 2014, 25, 636–647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Harris, M.H.; Gold, D.R.; Rifas-Shiman, S.L.; Melly, S.J.; Zanobetti, A.; Coull, B.A.; Schwartz, J.D.; Gryparis, A.;
Kloog, I.; Koutrakis, P.; et al. Prenatal and childhood traffic-related air pollution exposure and childhood
executive function and behavior. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 2016, 57, 60–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Harris, M.H.; Gold, D.R.; Rifas-Shiman, S.L.; Melly, S.J.; Zanobetti, A.; Coull, B.A.; Schwartz, J.D.; Gryparis, A.;
Kloog, I.; Koutrakis, P.; et al. Prenatal and childhood traffic-related pollution exposure and childhood
cognition in the project viva cohort (Massachusetts, USA). Environ. Health Perspect. 2015, 123, 1072–1078.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Lin, C.C.; Yang, S.K.; Lin, K.C.; Ho, W.C.; Hsieh, W.S.; Shu, B.C.; Chen, P.C. Multilevel analysis of air pollution
and early childhood neurobehavioral development. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11, 6827–6841.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Morales, E.; Garcia-Esteban, R.; de la Cruz, O.A.; Basterrechea, M.; Lertxundi, A.; de Dicastillo, M.D.;
Zabaleta, C.; Sunyer, J. Intrauterine and early postnatal exposure to outdoor air pollution and lung function
at preschool age. Thorax 2015, 70, 64–73. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Porta, D.; Narduzzi, S.; Badaloni, C.; Bucci, S.; Cesaroni, G.; Colelli, V.; Davoli, M.; Sunyer, J.; Zirro, E.;
Schwartz, J.; et al. Air pollution and cognitive development at age 7 in a prospective italian birth cohort.
Epidemiology 2016, 27, 228–236. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Suglia, S.F.; Gryparis, A.; Wright, R.O.; Schwartz, J.; Wright, R.J. Association of black carbon with cognition
among children in a prospective birth cohort study. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2008, 167, 280–286. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
54.
Kim, E.; Park, H.; Hong, Y.C.; Ha, M.; Kim, Y.; Kim, B.N.; Kim, Y.; Roh, Y.M.; Lee, B.E.; Ryu, J.M.; et al.
Prenatal exposure to PM10 and NO2 and children’s neurodevelopment from birth to 24 months of age:
Mothers and children’s environmental health (MOCEH) study. Sci. Total Environ. 2014, 481, 439–445.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
14 of 17
55.
Pujol, J.; Martinez-Vilavella, G.; Macia, D.; Fenoll, R.; Alvarez-Pedrerol, M.; Rivas, I.; Forns, J.;
Blanco-Hinojo, L.; Capellades, J.; Querol, X.; et al. Traffic pollution exposure is associated with altered brain
connectivity in school children. Neuroimage 2016, 129, 175–184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Chiu, Y.H.; Hsu, H.H.; Coull, B.A.; Bellinger, D.C.; Kloog, I.; Schwartz, J.; Wright, R.O.; Wright, R.J.
Prenatal particulate air pollution and neurodevelopment in urban children: Examining sensitive windows
and sex-specific associations. Environ. Int. 2016, 87, 56–65. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Min, J.Y.; Min, K.B. Exposure to ambient PM10 and NO2 and the incidence of attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder in childhood. Environ. Int. 2017, 99, 221–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Yorifuji, T.; Kashima, S.; Higa Diez, M.; Kado, Y.; Sanada, S.; Doi, H. Prenatal exposure to traffic-related
air pollution and child behavioral development milestone delays in Japan. Epidemiology 2016, 27, 57–65.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Volk, H.E.; Hertz-Picciotto, I.; Delwiche, L.; Lurmann, F.; McConnell, R. Residential proximity to freeways
and autism in the charge study. Environ. Health Perspect. 2011, 119, 873–877. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Volk, H.E.; Lurmann, F.; Penfold, B.; Hertz-Picciotto, I.; McConnell, R. Traffic-related air pollution,
particulate matter, and autism. JAMA Psychiatry 2013, 70, 71–77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Becerra, T.A.; Wilhelm, M.; Olsen, J.; Cockburn, M.; Ritz, B. Ambient air pollution and autism in
Los Angeles County, California. Environ. Health Perspect. 2013, 121, 380–386. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Raz, R.; Roberts, A.L.; Lyall, K.; Hart, J.E.; Just, A.C.; Laden, F.; Weisskopf, M.G. Autism spectrum disorder
and particulate matter air pollution before, during, and after pregnancy: A nested case-control analysis
within the Nurses’ Health Study II Cohort. Environ. Health Perspect. 2015, 123, 264–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Talbott, E.O.; Marshall, L.P.; Rager, J.R.; Arena, V.C.; Sharma, R.K.; Stacy, S.L. Air toxics and the risk of autism
spectrum disorder: The results of a population based case-control study in Southwestern Pennsylvania.
Environ. Health 2015, 14, 80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Gong, T.; Almqvist, C.; Bolte, S.; Lichtenstein, P.; Anckarsater, H.; Lind, T.; Lundholm, C.; Pershagen, G.
Exposure to air pollution from traffic and neurodevelopmental disorders in Swedish twins. Twin Res.
Hum. Genet. 2014, 17, 553–562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Guxens, M.; Ghassabian, A.; Gong, T.; Garcia-Esteban, R.; Porta, D.; Giorgis-Allemand, L.; Almqvist, C.;
Aranbarri, A.; Beelen, R.; Badaloni, C.; et al. Air pollution exposure during pregnancy and childhood autistic
traits in four european population-based cohort studies: The ESCAPE project. Environ. Health Perspect. 2016,
124, 133–140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Lam, J.; Sutton, P.; Kalkbrenner, A.; Windham, G.; Halladay, A.; Koustas, E.; Lawler, C.; Davidson, L.;
Daniels, N.; Newschaffer, C.; et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of multiple airborne pollutants
and autism spectrum disorder. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0161851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Lyall, K.; Croen, L.; Daniels, J.; Fallin, M.D.; Ladd-Acosta, C.; Lee, B.K.; Park, B.Y.; Snyder, N.W.; Schendel, D.;
Volk, H.; et al. The changing epidemiology of autism spectrum disorders. Annu. Rev. Public Health 2017, 38,
81–102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Flores-Pajot, M.C.; Ofner, M.; Do, M.T.; Lavigne, E.; Villeneuve, P.J. Childhood autism spectrum disorders and
exposure to nitrogen dioxide, and particulate matter air pollution: A review and meta-analysis. Environ. Res.
2016, 151, 763–776. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Calderón-Garcidueñas, L.; Torres-Jardón, R.; Kulesza, R.J.; Park, S.-B.; D’Angiulli, A. Air pollution and
detrimental effects on children’s brain. The need for a multidisciplinary approach to the issue complexity
and challenges. Fron. Hum. Neurosci. 2014, 8, 613.
70.
Calderon-Garciduenas, L.; Kavanaugh, M.; Block, M.; D’Angiulli, A.; Delgado-Chavez, R.; Torres-Jardon, R.;
Gonzalez-Maciel, A.; Reynoso-Robles, R.; Osnaya, N.; Villarreal-Calderon, R.; et al. Neuroinflammation,
hyperphosphorylated tau, diffuse amyloid plaques, and down-regulation of the cellular prion protein in air
pollution exposed children and young adults. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2012, 28, 93–107. [PubMed]
71.
Edwards, S.C.; Jedrychowski, W.; Butscher, M.; Camann, D.; Kieltyka, A.; Mroz, E.; Flak, E.; Li, Z.; Wang, S.;
Rauh, V.; et al. Prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and children’s intelligence
at 5 years of age in a prospective cohort study in Poland. Environ. Health Perspect. 2010, 118, 1326–1331.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Genkinger, J.M.; Stigter, L.; Jedrychowski, W.; Huang, T.J.; Wang, S.; Roen, E.L.; Majewska, R.; Kieltyka, A.;
Mroz, E.; Perera, F.P. Prenatal polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure, antioxidant levels and
behavioral development of children ages 6–9. Environ. Res. 2015, 140, 136–144. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
15 of 17
73.
Lee, J.; Kalia, V.; Perera, F.; Herbstman, J.; Li, T.; Nie, J.; Qu, L.R.; Yu, J.; Tang, D. Prenatal airborne polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon exposure, LINE1 methylation and child development in a Chinese cohort. Environ. Int.
2017, 99, 315–320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Perera, F.; Li, T.Y.; Lin, C.; Tang, D. Effects of prenatal polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure and
environmental tobacco smoke on child IQ in a Chinese cohort. Environ. Res. 2012, 114, 40–46. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
75.
Perera, F.P.; Tang, D.; Qu, L.; Li, T.Y. Significant Decrease in Cord Blood PAH-DNA Adducts Following Closure of a
Coal-Burning Power Plant in Chongqing, China, Proceedings of the 2008 AACR Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA,
USA, 12–16 April 2008; American Association for Cancer Research: San Diego, CA, USA, 2008.
76.
Perera, F.; Phillips, D.H.; Wang, Y.; Roen, E.; Herbstman, J.; Rauh, V.; Wang, S.; Tang, D. Prenatal exposure
to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons/aromatics, BDNF and child development. Environ. Res. 2015, 142,
602–608. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Perera, F.P.; Li, Z.; Whyatt, R.; Hoepner, L.; Wang, S.; Camann, D.; Rauh, V. Prenatal airborne polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon exposure and child IQ at age 5 years. Pediatrics 2009, 124, e195–e202. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
78.
Perera, F.P.; Rauh, V.; Whyatt, R.M.; Tsai, W.Y.; Tang, D.; Diaz, D.; Hoepner, L.; Barr, D.; Tu, Y.H.;
Camann, D.; et al.
Effect of prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on
neurodevelopment in the first 3 years of life among inner-city children. Environ. Health Perspect. 2006,
114, 1287–1292. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Perera, F.P.; Tang, D.; Rauh, V.; Tu, Y.H.; Tsai, W.Y.; Becker, M.; Stein, J.L.; King, J.; Del Priore, G.;
Lederman, S.A. Relationship between polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts, environmental
tobacco smoke, and child development in the World Trade Center Cohort. Environ. Health Perspect. 2007, 115,
1497–1502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Peterson, B.S.; Rauh, V.A.; Bansal, R.; Hao, X.; Toth, Z.; Nati, G.; Walsh, K.; Miller, R.L.; Arias, F.;
Semanek, D.; et al. Effects of prenatal exposure to air pollutants (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) on the
development of brain white matter, cognition, and behavior in later childhood. JAMA Psychiatry 2015, 72,
531–540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Tang, D.; Li, T.Y.; Chow, J.C.; Kulkarni, S.U.; Watson, J.G.; Ho, S.S.; Quan, Z.Y.; Qu, L.R.; Perera, F.
Air pollution effects on fetal and child development: A cohort comparison in China. Environ. Pollut.
2014, 185, 90–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Tang, D.; Li, T.Y.; Liu, J.J.; Zhou, Z.J.; Yuan, T.; Chen, Y.H.; Rauh, V.A.; Xie, J.; Perera, F. Effects of prenatal
exposure to coal burning pollutants on children’s development in China. Environ. Health Perspect. 2008, 116,
674–679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Wang, S.; Chanock, S.; Tang, D.; Li, Z.; Edwards, S.; Jedrychowski, W.; Perera, F.P. Effect of gene-environment
interactions on mental development in African American, dominican, and caucasian mothers and newborns.
Ann. Hum. Genet. 2010, 74, 46–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Perera, F.P.; Tang, D.; Wang, S.; Vishnevetsky, J.; Zhang, B.; Diaz, D.; Camann, D.; Rauh, V. Prenatal polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure and child behavior at age 6–7 years. Environ. Health Perspect. 2012,
120, 921–926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Perera, F.P.; Chang, H.; Tang, D.; Roen, E.L.; Herbstman, J.; Camann, D.; Miller, R.L.; Wang, S.; Rauh, V.
Early-life exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and ADHD behavior problems. PLoS ONE 2014, 9,
e111670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Perera, F.P.; Wang, S.; Vishnevetsky, J.; Zhang, B.; Cole, K.J.; Tang, D.; Rauh, V.; Phillips, D.H. PAH/aromatic
DNA adducts in cord blood and behavior scores in New York City children. Environ. Health Perspect. 2011,
119, 1176–1181. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Margolis, A.E.; Herbstman, J.B.; Davis, K.S.; Thomas, V.K.; Tang, D.; Wang, Y.; Wang, S.; Perera, F.P.;
Peterson, B.S.; Rauh, V.A. Longitudinal effects of prenatal exposure to air pollutants on self-regulatory
capacities and social competence. J. Child. Psychol. Psychiatry 2016, 57, 851–860. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Perera, F.; Vishnevetsky, J.; Herbstman, J.B.; Calafat, A.M.; Xiong, W.; Rauh, V.; Wang, S. Prenatal bisphenol a
exposure and child behavior in an inner-city cohort. Environ. Health Perspect. 2012, 120, 1190–1194. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
16 of 17
89.
Kalia, V.; Perera, F.; Tang, D. Environmental pollutants and neurodevelopment: Review of benefits from
closure of a coal-burning power plant in Tongliang, China. Glob. Pediatr. Health 2017, 4, 2333794x17721609.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Tang, D.; Lin, C.; Qu, L. Shorter Telomere Length in Cord Blood Associated with Prenatal Air Pollution Exposure:
Benefits of Intervention; Columbia University: New York, NY, USA, 2017; in press.
91.
Morse, S.B.; Zheng, H.; Tang, Y.; Roth, J. Early school-age outcomes of late preterm infants. Pediatrics 2009,
123, e622–e629. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Qian, Z.; Liang, S.; Yang, S.; Trevathan, E.; Huang, Z.; Yang, R.; Wang, J.; Hu, K.; Zhang, Y.; Vaughn, M.; et al.
Ambient air pollution and preterm birth: A prospective birth cohort study in Wuhan, China. Int. J. Hyg.
Environ. Health 2016, 219, 195–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Malley, C.S.; Kuylenstierna, J.C.; Vallack, H.W.; Henze, D.K.; Blencowe, H.; Ashmore, M.R. Preterm birth
associated with maternal fine particulate matter exposure: A global, regional and national assessment.
Environ. Int. 2017, 101, 173–182. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Dadvand, P.; Parker, J.; Bell, M.L.; Bonzini, M.; Brauer, M.; Darrow, L.A.; Gehring, U.; Glinianaia, S.V.;
Gouveia, N.; Ha, E.H.; et al.
Maternal exposure to particulate air pollution and term birth weight:
A multi-country evaluation of effect and heterogeneity. Environ. Health Perspect. 2013, 121, 267–373.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Burris, H.H.; Collins, J.W.; Wright, R.O. Racial/ethnic disparities in preterm birth:
Clues from
environmental exposures. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 2011, 23, 227–232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Trasande, L.; Malecha, P.; Attina, T.M. Particulate matter exposure and preterm birth: Estimates of U.S.
Attributable burden and economic costs. Environ. Health Perspect. 2016, 124, 1913–1918. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Aguayo, V.M.; Menon, P. Stop stunting: Improving child feeding, women’s nutrition and household
sanitation in South Asia. Matern. Child Nutr. 2016, 12 (Suppl. 1.), 3–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
FAO. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2017. Building Resilience for Peace and Food Security;
FAO: Rome, Italy, 2017; p. 132.
99.
US EPA. Understanding the Link between Climate Change and Extreme Weather.
Climate Change
Science 2016.
Available online:
https://www.epa.gov/climate-change-science/understanding-link-
between-climate-change-and-extreme-weather (accessed on 18 April 2017).
100. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Global and Regional Sea Level Rise Scenarios for
the United States; NOAA: Washington, DC, USA, 2017; p. 75.
101. Bean, J. 9.5 Million People Experience Flooding in Southeast Asia. Pacific Disaster Centre Weather Wall:
World’s Weather and Disaster News. 2011. Available online: http://weather.pdc.org/index.php/2011/11/
18/9-5-million-people-experience-flooding-in-southeast-asia/ (accessed on 17 October 2017)).
102. Save the Children.
Legacy of Disasters:
The Impact of Climate Change on Children.
2007.
Available online: http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/sites/default/files/docs/legacy-of-disasters_1.pdf
(accessed on 17 October 2017).
103. UNICEF. 16 Million Children Affected by Massive Flooding in South Asia, with Millions More at Risk. 2017.
Available online: https://www.unicef.org/media/media_100719.html (accessed on 22 September 2017).
104. Atkin, E. The toxic air in California is a public health crisis. New Repub. 2017. Available online: https:
//newrepublic.com/article/145259/toxic-air-california-public-health-crisis (accessed on 12 December 2017).
105. EPA. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act from 1990 to 2020. Available online: https://www.epa.
gov/sites/production/files/2015-07/documents/summaryreport.pdf (accessed on 12 December 2017).
106. Shindell, D.T.; Lee, Y.; Faluvegi, G. Climate and health impacts of us emissions reductions consistent with 2
degrees C. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2016, 6, 503–507. [CrossRef]
107. Machol, B.; Rizk, S. Economic value of U.S. Fossil fuel electricity health impacts. Environ. Int. 2013, 52, 75–80.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Union of Concerned Scientists. The Hidden Costs of Fossil Fuels. 30 August 2016. Available online: http:
//www.ucsusa.org/clean-energy/coal-and-other-fossil-fuels/hidden-cost-of-fossils#bf-toc-0 (accessed on
18 April 2017).
109. Perera, F.; Weiland, K.; Neidell, M.; Wang, S. Prenatal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
and IQ: Estimated benefit of pollution reduction. J. Public Health Policy 2014, 35, 327–336. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
110. OECD. The Economic Consequences of Outdoor Air Pollution; OECD: Paris, France, 2016; p. 20.
 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 16
17 of 17
111. Tang, D.; Wang, C.; Nie, J.; Chen, R.; Niu, Q.; Kan, H.; Chen, B.; Perera, F. Health benefits of improving air
quality in Taiyuan, China. Environ. Int. 2014, 73, 235–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. The World Bank. The Cost of Air Pollution. Strengthening the Economic Case for Action; The World Bank:
Washington, DC, USA, 2016; p. 122.
113. Knowlton, K.; Rotkin-Ellman, M.; Geballe, L.; Max, W.; Solomon, G.M. Six climate change-related events in
the United States accounted for about $14 billion in lost lives and health costs. Health Aff. (Millwood) 2011, 30,
2167–2176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Roland-Holst, D. Energy Efficiency, Innovation, and Job Creation in California; University of California:
Berkeley, CA, USA, 2008; p. 82.
115. NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information.
U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate
Disasters. 2017. Available online: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/ (accessed on 5 September 2017).
116. World Health Organization. Climate Change and Health. 2017. Available online: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs266/en/ (accessed on 28 September 2017).
117. Gould, S.; Berko, J.; Miller, J.; Gonzalez, C.; Rudolph, L. Climate Change, Health, and Equity: Opportunities
for Action; Public Health Institute: Oakland, CA, USA, 2015.
118. NRDC. Ahmedabad Heat Action Plan 2016. Available online: https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/
ahmedabad-heat-action-plan-2016.pdf (accessed on 5 September 2017).
119. Abt Associates. Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiatve Improves Health, Saves Lives, and Generates 5.7 billion
in Benefits. 2017. Available online: http://www.abtassociates.com/NewsReleases/2017/RGGI-Improves-
Health,-Saves-Lives,-and-Generates-$.aspx (accessed on 20 November 2017).
120. United Nations.
The Paris Agreement.
2015.
Available online: http://unfccc.int/files/essential_
background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf (accessed on 12 December 2017).
121. EPA. Climate Change in the United States: Benefits of Global Action. Available online: https://www.epa.
gov/sites/production/files/2015-06/documents/cirareport.pdf (accessed on 17 October 2017).
122. Waskow, D. Examining the International Climate Negotiations. In Testimony of David Waskow, Hearing
Before the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works; 2015. Available online: https://www.
epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/hearings?ID=0BFAE2BB-416F-40A1-9698-5BED0FE72BDC (accessed on
21 December 2017).
© 2017 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
