 The antifungal pipeline: a reality check
John R. Perfect
Duke University Medical Center, 200 Trent Drive, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA
Abstract
Invasive fungal infections continue to appear in record numbers as the immunocompromised 
population of the world increases, owing partially to the increased number of individuals who are 
infected with HIV and partially to the successful treatment of serious underlying diseases. The 
effectiveness of current antifungal therapies — polyenes, flucytosine, azoles and echinocandins (as 
monotherapies or in combinations for prophylaxis, or as empiric, pre-emptive or specific 
therapies) — in the management of these infections has plateaued. Although these drugs are 
clinically useful, they have several limitations, such as off-target toxicity, and drug-resistant fungi 
are now emerging. New antifungals are therefore needed. In this Review, I discuss the robust and 
dynamic antifungal pipeline, including results from preclinical academic efforts through to 
pharmaceutical industry products, and describe the targets, strategies, compounds and potential 
outcomes.
As modern medicine advances and allows us to manage diseases that have previously been 
refractory to medical and surgical intervention, the patient can become vulnerable to 
invasion by microorganisms. The use of anticancer chemotherapies, new monoclonal anti 
bodies with immunological properties, immunosuppressive drugs, broad-spectrum 
antimicrobials that affect our microbiome and numerous medical devices can dysregulate or 
breach the immune surveillance system. Within this opportunistic window during which 
individuals are immunocompromised, they are susceptible to invasion by certain fungi.
It has been estimated that there are more than 5 million fungal species worldwide; 
approximately 300 fungal species have been recorded to cause disease in humans, but only 
20–25 of these do so on a relatively frequent basis (TABLE 1). Most of these fungal 
Correspondence to J.R.P., perfe001@mc.duke.edu. 
Competing interests statement
The author declares competing interests: see Web version for details.
DATABASES
ClinicalTrials.gov: https://clinicaltrials.gov/
FURTHER INFORMATION
Cloudbreak technology: https://www.cidara.com/cloudbreak/
MethylGene reports results of phase II trial of MGCD290: http://www.advfn.com/news_MethylGene-Reports-Results-of-Phase-II-
Trial-of-MG_56785808.html
Researchers identify new class of antifungal agents: http://www.asm.org/index.php/journal-press-releases/93560-reserachers-
identify-new-class-of-antifungal-agents
(SUBA)-itraconazole: https://www.maynepharma.com/
T-2307 developmental pipeline: http://www.toyama-chemical.co.jp/en/rd/pipeline/index.html
Viamet receives Orphan Drug Designation from the FDA for VT-1598 for the treatment of coccidioidomycosis: http://
www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160525005794/en/Viamet-recives-orphen-drug-designation-FDA-VT-1598.2016
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2017 September ; 16(9): 603–616. doi:10.1038/nrd.2017.46.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 infections are not transmissible from person to person and do not routinely affect healthy 
individuals. With the exception of dermatophytic fungal nuisances of the skin and nails, 
fungal infections are underappreciated by the general public. However, invasive mycoses are 
a growing problem for clinicians to manage in many medical settings1. In the clinical 
climate of an ‘at-risk’ population of immunosuppressed hosts that is increasing in size owing 
to modern medical treatment, particularly of HIV infections, combined with outbreaks of 
disfiguring mycetomas in some economically disadvantaged societies, these invasive and 
superficial mycoses have become a major public health problem, with substantial associated 
morbidities and mortalities. For example, at the peak of the HIV epidemic in the early 
2000s, it was estimated that there were more than 1 million cases per year of disseminated 
cryptococcosis, and an estimated 600,000 of these cases resulted in death2. These alarming 
figures have decreased with the widespread distribution of effective antiretroviral treatments, 
which has reduced the spread and disease progression of HIV, but the number of infections 
still remains very high, particularly in areas of sub-Saharan Africa. On another medical 
front, aggressive chemotherapy to manage life-threatening cancers is increasingly being used 
in countries with limited health-care resources, and the resulting increase in life-threatening 
complications of invasive mycoses will follow, which presents another challenge for these 
health-care systems. Even highly resourced countries continue to be challenged by the 
diagnosis and management of invasive mycoses in the at-risk populations. Invasive mycoses 
can change the landscape of outcomes for certain underlying diseases.
It is important to note that our high mammalian body temperature, combined with a 
powerful immune surveillance system, means that we routinely resist fungal challenges, and 
primary fungal infections or diseases are an uncommon clinical phenomenon. Furthermore, 
human mycoses generally result from an accidental encounter with a fungus — such as 
inhalation of aerosolized spores or direct inoculation with yeasts — and these fungi, which 
proliferate within immunocompromised human hosts, have access to plenty of carbon and 
nitrogen sources. Most sites of the human body can potentially provide a safe environment 
for fungi if immune surveillance is low.
Clinicians have developed several strategies to meet this new invasive fungal infection 
challenge. First, they can categorize patients into certain at-risk groups to allow more 
focused strategies for diagnosis and prophylactic, empiric and pre-emptive therapies. 
Second, the diagnostic toolbox for fungal infections has been substantially improved and 
includes crucial histopathology of infected tissues when available. Culture techniques are 
validated and robust, and now with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight 
mass spectrometry (MALDI–TOF MS), PCR and T2 MRI technology, along with advances 
in genomic sequencing, the invading fungus can be rapidly and accurately identified. 
Furthermore, biomarkers, such as the levels of the fungal polysaccharides β-D-glucan, 
galactomannan and mannan in the blood or other body fluids, have been validated as 
potential surrogates to help prescribe pre-emptive therapy. These biomarkers enable invasive 
mycoses to be controlled at the early stages of infection when the tissue burden of fungi is 
low, an important feature of effective fungal control. Third, there has been a collation of both 
objective and subjective opinions into a series of antifungal management guidelines3–8, so 
that health-care systems and clinicians have basic standards to help initiate and compare 
successful treatments and strategies. Last, the most important factor for the successful 
Perfect
Page 2
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 management of fungal infections is the continued development and appropriate use of both 
new and old antifungal drugs.
In the United States, the enthusiasm for antifungal drug development may have been further 
stimulated by the GAIN Act, the Orphan Drug Act and the Fast Track designation by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), all of which potentially apply to antifungal agents 
and thus provide a favourable economic climate for investment in newly discovered and 
developed antifungal agents9. However, even with these incentives at both the basic and 
developmental levels of discovery that are discussed in further detail in this Review, there 
remains some belief that the development of antifungal agents will be difficult. A key reason 
for this scepticism is that approximately 80% of antifungal targets in the literature turn out to 
be false positives with little potential to develop target-based inhibitors with desirable 
features from them10. Both humans and fungi use similar eukaryotic machinery, and — 
despite a plethora of potential targets — there needs to be substantial selectivity and few or 
no complicating interactions with host proteins and the cellular machinery.
What issues and needs are specific to antifungal drug development11? First, mortality that is 
attributable to fungal infections simply remains too high with current antifungal agents. 
Second, there needs to be a greater emphasis on more rapid fungicidal activity by new 
antifungal agents. For improved clinical outcomes, drugs must kill yeasts or moulds rapidly 
and completely. Currently, the general treatment course for common antifungal agents is too 
long and thus introduces the potential for poor immediate-term fungicidal activity, reduced 
patient compliance and/or tolerability, or even the emergence of direct antifungal drug 
resistance12 (BOX 1). Third, there is a need to widen the spectrum of antifungal activity 
against some emerging, highly drug-resistant fungi (such as Lomentospora (Scedosporium) 
prolificans and Candida auris) that are increasingly observed in patients who are being 
immunosuppressed for other severe underlying diseases and are thus admitted to hospitals. 
There are simply no antifungal agents that can adequately treat infections caused by certain 
fungal strains. Fourth, it is important to have an optimized combination of therapeutic agents 
or classes to increase potency and reduce the emergence of drug resistance. Fifth, resistant 
strains are increasing in number for some antifungal agent classes, particularly for the azoles 
and the echinocandins13. Sixth, safety remains a very important issue for antifungal drug 
use. Invasive mycoses occur in very fragile patients who cannot tolerate much additional 
organ toxicity from other treatments. Furthermore, these patients are frequently taking 
multiple other therapeutic agents, so drug–drug interactions need to be carefully considered. 
Last, there are multiple issues around the clinical development of new antifungal drugs. 
Despite the importance of and need for new antifungal agents, successful clinical drug 
development has a series of roadblocks that need to be overcome (BOX 2). All of these 
specific issues or difficulties can be managed, but it takes an experienced team with 
insightful protocols and careful management of the trial to carry out and complete these 
licensing studies.
Perfect
Page 3
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1
Resistance to current antifungal agents
The mechanisms that have been acquired by fungi to become resistant to current 
antifungal agents are fairly well understood. It is important to note that, unlike bacteria, 
there are no known plasmid- or transposon-mediated mechanisms for drug resistance. For 
instance, polyene resistance is rarely acquired; most resistance to polyenes is primary and 
thus observed in fungal species that have ergosterol membranes that are not susceptible to 
or only mildly affected by polyenes. However, polyenes can lose their fungicidal activity 
during prolonged exposure of the fungus to the drug, which leads to reduced efficacy or 
clinical resistance144.
Azoles, by contrast, have multiple mechanisms for the development of both primary and 
acquired resistance, including mutations in the gene encoding lanosterol 14α-
demethylase (ERG11), so that azoles can no longer block its catalytic activity, and 
amplification of ERG11, so that Erg11 molecules overwhelm the inhibitory capacity of 
the azole145. Also, some fungal species have amplified or induced efflux pumps to 
remove azoles from the fungal cell and therefore from the target. This rise in azole 
resistance has been observed consistently in hospitals for years and has even been linked, 
in certain cases, to the environmental use of fungicides in agriculture146.
Over the past 5–6 years and with the widespread use of echinocandins in hospitals, there 
has clearly been an increase in the identification of yeasts that have become resistant to 
echinocandins, through the development of mutations in FKS1, which encodes the 1,3-β-
D-glucan enzyme that helps in the formation of the fungal cell wall. This echinocandin 
resistance mechanism has been most prominently observed in the haploid yeast, Candida 
glabrata147.
Recently, mutations in MSH1, a mismatch repair gene, have also been observed to cause 
multiple drug-resistant phenotypes (to azoles and echinocandins) in yeast strains148. 
Finally, drug-resistant mutations in the pyrimidine pathway occur at the rate of 1 in every 
106–107 yeast cells, so 5-flucytosine is very vulnerable to the development of drug 
resistance if used as a monotherapy in high fungal burden infections149.
Box 2
Antifungal drug development considerations
A number of hurdles to antifungal drug development must be overcome and will 
determine the clinical utility of these compounds and the development path:
•
The value of limited- versus broad-spectrum antifungal activity must be 
balanced. For instance, a drug with antifungal activity only against particular 
yeasts or moulds will rely heavily on diagnostic acumen
•
For eukaryotic targets, the toxicity data will always be crucial
Perfect
Page 4
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Biomarkers should be accepted as validated primary end points instead of 
relying exclusively on death: these patents have too many other comorbidities, 
so efficacy signals will require large number of patients
•
Although there are substantial numbers of invasive fungal infections, many 
patients will often need to be screened to get a single patient enrolled. This is 
particularly true for candidaemia studies
•
The use of compounds for prophylaxis or for treatment should be considered 
as an initial focus for the development of safe and broad-spectrum compounds
•
Although more rapid fungicidal activity and shorter treatment courses are 
needed, initial studies will probably require prolonged treatment duration
•
Invasive fungal infections classically occur in patients with the most severe 
illnesses, so both underlying diseases and tolerability can frequently affect the 
outcome assessment of the antifungal drug
•
Many of the scoring systems use radiographic results, and this is simply too 
imprecise
•
Success should include disease control, rather than disease eradication, in 
many circumstances
•
The clinical studies are particularly expensive. These patients are fragile and 
require close monitoring as well as detailed records. Furthermore, there may 
be interruptions of assessments due to decisions by the clinical care team
It is truly an appropriate time to review antifungal drug development, and to discuss its 
current leads and directions, so that this important antifungal pipeline can be re-
evaluated14–16. In this Review, I examine the currently available antifungal agents and 
provide an overview of the ongoing efforts to develop completely new classes of drugs, 
which includes strategies to repurpose existing drugs, develop new drugs from current 
antifungal classes and create new biological antifungal agents.
Currently available antifungal drugs
For many of the superficial mycoses, there have been a series of topical drugs used over the 
past century that have had moderate success in controlling common and irritating infections. 
By contrast, for the invasive mycoses, which require systemic antifungal therapy, there have 
been only four major classes of antifungal agents (polyenes, flucytosine, azoles and 
echinocandins) (FIG. 1).
A central feature of antifungal agents is the requirement for the eukaryotic machinery to be 
differentially blocked or destroyed in the fungus but do limited or no damage to host cellular 
functions17. The lineage of successful systemic antifungal drugs started in the 1950s with 
the approval of the polyene amphotericin B deoxycholate. Despite its substantial toxicities, 
amphotericin B, in formulation with deoxycholate or other solubilizing agents, remains the 
most potent fungicide and has the broadest antifungal spectrum of the systemic antifungal 
Perfect
Page 5
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 agents in clinical use today. The polyenes interact with ergosterol-containing fungal 
membranes and disrupt them by puncturing these membranes (FIG. 2), but they can also 
interact with cholesterol-containing membranes and thus injure host cells, so host toxicity 
has always been an issue. In the mid-1990s, the formulation of amphotericin B was vastly 
improved with the creation of lipid formulations of amphotericin B, such as AmBisome and 
amphotericin B lipid complex, that reduced host toxicity, especially the occurrence of renal 
dysfunction.
Flucytosine is a pyrimidine analogue that was approved in the 1960s and is generally used in 
limited circumstances, such as in combination with a polyene for cryptococcal meningitis. 
Flucytosine is rarely used alone because of the rapid development of drug resistance that 
occurs during monotherapy. Flucytosine is converted by a cytosine deaminase that is not 
present in humans to the toxic compound 5-fluorouracil, which interferes with RNA and 
DNA metabolism.
In the late 1970s, the systemic azoles started their ascension to become a first-line choice for 
the treatment of invasive fungal infections. The azoles primarily block ergosterol synthesis 
by inhibiting lanosterol 14α-demethylase (Erg11), a primary target in the fungal membrane 
that is not present on the host cell membrane. The first azole-based therapies were an 
intravenous miconazole preparation and an oral ketoconazole tablet. The second generation, 
the extended-spectrum azoles, improved on the spectrum of antifungal activity, safety and 
pharmaco kinetics, and were available in new formulations. For instance, fluconazole and 
itraconazole have both intravenous and oral formulations. Following further discovery and 
development, there are now third-generation extended-spectrum azoles: voriconazole, 
posaconazole and isavuconazole. The merits of these newer azoles are substantial as they 
have improved antifungal activity, safety, pharmaco kinetics and formulations. They are a 
key component of the current clinical management of invasive mycoses as wide-spectrum 
antifungal agents for use in prophylaxis (to prevent infection), and pre-emptive (to prevent 
disease manifestations), empiric and therapeutic strategies. The azoles have been shown to 
reduce mortality and allow clinicians to practise aggressive medical and surgical 
management of many serious underlying diseases18.
The development and marketing of the fourth class of antifungal agents, the echinocandins, 
began in the early 2000s. The echinocandins block 1,3-β-glucan synthase, which helps to 
form the cell wall (a unique structure of the fungus that is not present in mammals). Indeed, 
the echinocandins have very little host toxicity, and this is one factor that contributes to their 
frequent use in the hospital setting. Three echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin and 
anidulafungin) have had much success over the past decade in the clinic owing to their 
broad-spectrum fungicidal activity against yeasts, their reduced drug–drug interactions and 
their improved safety. This antifungal class has become the first line of treatment for the 
deadly and relatively common nosocomial candidaemia and invasive candidiasis4.
Finally, the squalene epoxidase (also known as squalene monooxygenase) inhibitor 
terbinafine is used, albeit uncommonly, as a combination agent in invasive fungal infections, 
and aerosolized pentamidine is infrequently used in prophylaxis against pneumocystis 
infections.
Perfect
Page 6
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 There have been several excellent detailed discussions of the mechanisms of the antifungal 
agents in use at present18–22. Each currently used class has both strengths and weaknesses in 
terms of efficacy and safety. These weaknesses are clearly emphasized by the mortality rates 
attributable to invasive mycoses, which remain substantial. For instance, in invasive 
candidiasis, the mortality rate has been estimated to be around 40%23; the mortality rate 
among individuals with disseminated cryptococcosis is 20–30% in well-resourced health-
care systems24, and this rate is substantially higher in resource-limited areas (50% or 
greater)25. By contrast, the mortality rate among individuals with invasive aspergillosis has 
been reduced over the past decade but has now plateaued at approximately 20%26. In many 
other invasive mould infections, the reported mortality rates are much higher (≥50%). 
Although a new azole, isavuconazole, was approved for treatment of aspergillosis and 
mucormycosis in 2015, it has been more than a decade since a new class of antifungal agents 
has been introduced into the clinic.
Novel pathways and targets
Over the past two decades — during the fungal genomic era — there has been substantial 
progress in antifungal drug development for a multitude of potential drug targets27 and 
inhibitors28,29. Notably, antifungal molecules are frequently discovered in phenotypic 
screens for antifungal inhibitors, and these strategies require live fungus readouts, natural 
products as sources of molecules and pharmaceutical insights to move identified molecules 
forward30–34. This Review focuses on several examples of promising pathways and specific 
targets (TABLE 2, FIG. 1) but is not comprehensive. These specific pathways were chosen 
as prime examples of the mechanistic approach to block important fungal molecules. The 
following specific target studies illustrate the depth and the potential for the detailed, 
mechanistic approaches to antifungal target development at an early exploratory stage as a 
foundation for the future anti fungal drug pipeline.
Calcineurin
The calcineurin pathway is important in eukaryotes and is potentially a target of selective 
inhibitors that could become antifungal drugs35,36. The serine/threonine phosphatase 
calcineurin (also known as protein phosphatase 3; a hetero dimer that is composed of the 
subunits calcineurin A and calcineurin B) is the target for the most commonly used 
transplant anti-rejection drugs: tacrolimus and cyclosporine. Cyclosporine was initially 
discovered in a screen as an anti-Candida molecule, and calcineurin is central to the stress 
responses of many pathogenic fungi. For instance, calcineurin has been shown to be 
essential for the virulence composite of the major fungal pathogens (Aspergillus fumigatus, 
Candida albicans and Cryptococcus neoformans) and thus for fungal survival and fitness in 
the host37. Furthermore, calcineurin can be linked to other well-studied stress signalling 
pathways, including the heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90)38 pathway. Hsp90 has also become 
an excellent target for antifungal inhibitors, and an antibody against Hsp90 (efungumab; also 
known as Mycograb; NeuTec Pharma/Novartis) in combination with amphotericin B made it 
into a substantial, comparative clinical trial and demonstrated therapeutic efficacy in invasive 
candidiasis39. The potential to make calcineurin a viable target for antifungal drug discovery 
has been contingent on finding specific inhibitors that have the differential ability to block 
Perfect
Page 7
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fungal over mammalian calcineurin. In this respect, the inhibitors must be fungicidal with 
minimal or no immunosuppressive activity. It has been helpful that the fungal and human 
homologues of calcineurin are well understood from a structural perspective36. It is with this 
knowledge and a concerted chemistry effort that progress is being made in discovering 
potent antifungal, anti-calcineurin molecules with reduced immuno suppressive activity; 
these are currently being tested in animal models40.
Sphingolipid synthesis and RAS
Two pathways (RAS41 and sphingolipid synthesis42) have been active areas in the search for 
new anticancer agents. However, genetic and structural studies have also shown that both of 
these signalling pathways are important for fungi to efficiently produce disease. Fungal 
sphingolipids have emerged as a potential target for new antifungal agents because the 
biosynthesis of these molecules in fungi is structurally different from that in mammals. 
Sphingolipids are important in cellular metabolism but can also be important in the 
regulation of the fungal virulence composite. There are now diverse strategies that could be 
used to block the synthesis and/or function of sphingolipids43. Several new compounds (N′-
(3-bromo-4-hydroxybenzylidene)-2-methyl benzohydrazide and its derivative, 3-bromo-N′-
(3-bromo-4-hydroxybenzylidene) benzohydrazide) have been found to selectively decrease 
levels of fungal glycosphingolipids relative to the mammalian ones. These compounds are 
anticipated to go into clinical trials (see the American Society for Microbiology press 
release). In the RAS pathway, there are several antifungal targets within the protein 
farnesylation and prenylation processes that could be of interest, as the structures differ 
between the fungal and mammalian proteins41. With these observations and the ability to 
design and/or discover molecules that would inhibit the actively growing fungi but have no 
or little effect on human cells, a potent antifungal agent could emerge. Similarly to the 
calcineurin inhibitors, these targets have been validated with inhibitors for the human 
enzymes during the development of potential anticancer agents. Therefore, the focus will be 
on finding inhibitors with selectivity for the fungal over the human homologues and, 
importantly, on getting the molecules to the site of action within the intact fungal cells.
Trehalose
The trehalose pathway comprises several enzymes that are connected to glycolysis and 
creates the regulatory molecule trehalose-6-phosphate and the disaccharide sugar 
trehalose44. Relative to compounds targeting the RAS and calcineurin pathways, molecules 
targeting this pathway are at a much earlier developmental stage, and few inhibitors have 
been discovered thus far. Despite this lack of development, many targets within the trehalose 
pathway possess attractive features of antifungal agents. First, unlike many of the fungal 
stress pathways that are currently being studied, this pathway is present in fungi, bacteria, 
plants and invertebrates, but is not found in the mammalian biochemical machinery. 
Therefore, the potential for inhibitor toxicity should be minimal, unless there are off-target 
issues. Second, this pathway, which contains two primary synthesizing enzymes 
(trehalose-6-phosphate synthase (Tps1) and trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase (Tps2)), has 
been validated as essential to tolerating stress in all of the major fungal pathogens44. Third, 
genetically blocking this pathway kills pathogenic fungi, which clearly demonstrates that 
this pathway is a fungicidal target45,46. Recently, the crystal structures of the C. albicans 
Perfect
Page 8
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 proteins Tps1 and Tps2 have been solved47, so molecules that specifically bind to active 
catalytic components to inhibit the enzymes could be found computationally or in compound 
libraries47.
Other targets
Several other pathways have been identified as potential antifungal targets. For instance, the 
metabolic glyoxylate cycle, specifically the enzyme isocitrate lyase, is important for C. 
albicans and A. fumigatus invasion but not C. neoformans invasion, and has been a target of 
some potent inhibitors, such as mohangamide A and mohangamide B, which inhibit the 
enzyme in C. albicans48. The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and the high-
osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathways, which are required for adaptation to environmental 
signals, have also been attractive targets. The HOG pathway was identified as the target for 
the antifungal action of fludioxonil49–51. New targets and inhibitors also include the cell 
wall target 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (Pdk1) and an inhibitor, VCN-01 
(REF. 29), of calcium signalling. The sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator, 
fingolimod hydrochloride (also known as FTY720), also has broad-spectrum antifungal 
activity52. Finally, even altering gene expression through the manipulation of transcription 
factors has emerged as an attractive antifungal approach: a prime example of this strategy 
has been the successful identification of compounds that block the transcription factor sterol 
uptake control protein 2 (Upc2)53.
The above pathways are examples of potential antifungal targets but do not constitute an 
exhaustive list. However, they are clear examples of how academic research can provide the 
framework to discover and validate antifungal targets and thus provide a platform to identify 
and develop antifungal molecules. From these robust scientific platforms for targets and 
inhibitors, the pharmaceutical industry can then use their chemistry infrastructure, 
formulation expertise and molecule libraries to identify and/or further develop antifungal 
drugs. To target these ubiquitous and highly linked pathways, the ideal compounds should 
have a broad antifungal spectrum, not overlap with existing drug-resistant mechanisms and 
potentially synergize with either new or old antifungal drugs. The main focus of these 
studies must remain on the identification of powerful fungicidal targets that will work within 
the host, as the final goal is to identify and develop new drugs that are clinically useful.
There also remains a robust platform for the discovery of natural products with antifungal 
activity, and many natural antifungal compounds have been reported. For instance, psoriasin 
(also known as S100A7), a mammalian protein that is commonly found in psoriatic lesions, 
has antifungal activity, particularly against Trichophyton rubrum54. Other products such as 
humidimycin (also known as MDN-0010), a bacterial natural product, potentiate known 
antifungal agents by targeting an echinocandin salvage pathway55. Although nature can help 
to select antifungal compounds, we must then make them into drugs. From impressive 
antifungal scaffolds56 and screening of natural products57 to finding natural products such as 
carvacrol58 and the antibacterial quinolone analogues that are active leads against members 
of the fungal kingdom59, the strategies for antifungal compound discovery from natural 
products are diverse and robust.
Perfect
Page 9
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 New agents in development
Multiple types of antifungal molecules are in clinical development and currently have 
substantial support from pharmaceutical companies. For a variety of reasons, three groups of 
antifungal compounds — the aminocandins60,61, sordarins (which inhibit protein synthesis 
by stabilizing the ribosome–elongation factor 2 (Ef2) complex)62 and icofungipen (which is 
an isoleucyl-tRNA synthesis inhibitor) 63 — have received little recent developmental 
attention, and a broad-spectrum triazole, albaconazole64, is now only studied for its use in 
treating superficial fungal infections, whereas before it was considered a potential compound 
for the treatment of systemic fungal diseases65. Therefore, these compounds are not 
emphasized in this Review. The focus of this section is on the targets and mechanisms of 
action of the compounds, the general antifungal susceptibility pattern of the compound and 
its preliminary in vivo activities (TABLE 2).
ASP2397
A new antifungal compound, ASP2397 (Vical), produces its antifungal effects by disrupting 
the intracellular fungal biochemical machinery. Its precise target inside the fungal cell 
remains uncertain, but ASP2397 localizes within fungi such as A. fumigatus, as it is taken 
up by the specific siderophore iron transporter 1 (Sit1)66. As mammalian cells do not have 
this transporter, it is hypothesized that the compound will have excellent selective fungal 
toxicity. In both in vitro and in vivo studies, ASP2397 has very potent fungicidal activity 
against A. fumigatus67. Along with potent activity against both azole-susceptible and azole-
resistant strains of Aspergillus spp., it also has in vitro antifungal activity against a few 
Candida spp. and some rare moulds and yeasts, such as the Fusarium spp. and Trichosporon 
spp.66.
T-2307
The allylamine T-2307 (Tokuyama Corporation) has been in development for several years. 
It has interesting and unusual mechanisms for selectivity and activity. First, the compound is 
selectively transported and accumulates in fungal cells through a specific polyamine 
transporter68. Once inside the yeast cell, it specifically inhibits the mitochondrial membrane 
potential, and this has profound fungicidal activity, as the fungal strains that cause human 
disease are primarily respiratory fungi69. This compound has broad-spectrum and potent 
antifungal activity against Candida spp., Cryptococcus spp. and Aspergillus spp., with 
extremely low minimum inhibitory concentrations for yeasts and moulds70. Furthermore, the 
in vitro antifungal activity is corroborated by impressive antifungal activity in the treatment 
of animal models of mycoses. In some models, T-2307 is more potent than standard azoles 
and polyenes for the treatment of mycoses71. However, for unclear reasons, it has yet to be 
advanced into clinical trials.
AR-12
The celecoxib derivative AR-12 (Arno Therapeutics) is a repurposed compound in some 
respects. It was first used in phase I oncology trials, so safety has been determined in 
humans (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00978523). However, it was shown to have 
consistent antifungal activity against yeasts, such as C. neoformans and C. albicans, and 
Perfect
Page 10
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 moulds, including those from the Mucorales order and the hyalohyphomycosis group, such 
as Fusarium spp. and Scedosporium spp.72,73. In animal models, AR-12 potentiates the 
activity of fluconazole against C. neoformans infection72. The mechanism of action of this 
compound is not precisely known. AR-12 seems to act via two mechanisms: by blocking 
acetyl-CoA synthetase 1 in fungal metabolism and by downregulating host chaperone 
proteins, such as 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), HSP90 and HSP27 (REF. 73), 
which reduces the host immune response. Targeting the host immune response may provide 
a high genetic barrier to the development of resistance compared with the direct antifungal 
activity of most agents used for the treatment of invasive fungal infections.
F901318
F901318 (F2G) is a member of the new orotomide class of antifungal agents. It is currently 
in phase II development as an intravenous and oral agent for use in systemic mould 
infections, with a particular emphasis on aspergillosis and scedosporiosis (NCT02856178)8. 
The mechanism of action is very well described. It is a potent inhibitor of Aspergillus spp. 
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, which is crucially involved in fungal pyrimidine 
biosynthesis8. Humans also have this enzyme, but F901318 is a 2,000-fold more potent 
inhibitor of the fungal enzyme than the mammalian enzyme homologue and, with this 
differential inhibitory activity, its toxicity towards mammalian cells is anticipated to be very 
low8. A similar phenomenon had previously been observed with an antibacterial compound, 
trimethoprim, which inhibits dihydrofolate reductase in both bacteria and humans with 
substantially different kinetics. F901318 has potent anti-Aspergillus activity in treatment of 
animal models8. Although it has poor activity against yeasts in vitro, it does possess 
fungicidal activity against a series of moulds and most endemic (dimorphic) mycoses8.
APX001
The first-in-class compound APX001 (also known as E1211; Eisai) is an antifungal 
compound that has been transferred to Amplyx Pharmaceuticals for further development. 
APX001 is a prodrug that is converted to the active moiety E1210 in the presence of alkaline 
phosphatase in vivo. This compound is an inhibitor of glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) 
synthesis and thus hinders the attachment of essential adhesion proteins (such as 
mannoproteins) to the outer fungal cell wall, a process that is mediated by GPI-anchored 
wall transfer protein 1 (Gwt1)74,75. Another GPI inhibitor (gepinacin) that also blocks Gwt1 
has recently been discovered76. These GPI-anchored proteins provide cell wall integrity and 
are involved in membrane homeostasis, and fungal mannoproteins promote adhesion, 
pathogenicity and immune evasion. APX001 specifically inhibits the conversion of 
glucosaminylphosphatidyl inositol to its acrylate form, glucosaminyl(acyl)phosphatidyl 
inositol, an essential step in GPI synthesis75. Furthermore, APX001 has excellent, broad-
spectrum potency with antifungal activity in vitro against Candida spp. and Aspergillus spp., 
and can provide antifungal activity against some drug-resistant yeasts and moulds77,78. It 
even has potent antifungal activity in vitro against moulds that are difficult to treat, such as 
Fusarium spp. and Scedosporium spp.79. Finally, APX001 has some direct antifungal 
activity against the Mucorales in vitro79. In animal models, APX001 has potent and 
consistent fungicidal activity, and can be additive or synergistic with other antifungal agents, 
Perfect
Page 11
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 such as the azoles or echinocandins77. At present, APX001 is in phase I (NCT02956499 and 
NCT02957929), and phase II clinical trials are planned.
Nikkomycin Z
Nikkomycin Z has a protracted history, and its development might have been delayed by its 
poor antifungal activity as a stand-alone agent against yeasts such as Candida spp.. It was 
first discovered in the 1970s by Bayer. Shaman Pharmaceuticals held the rights to its 
development during the 1990s, but the University of Arizona, which still has this compound 
in development, obtained those rights in 2005 (REF. 80). Nikkomycin Z resembles uridine 
diphosphate (UDP)-N-acetyl glucosamine, which is a precursor of a major component of the 
fungal cell wall, chitin. Nikkomycin Z is a competitive inhibitor of chitin synthase. It has 
been a very potent fungicidal agent for the treatment of murine coccidioidomycosis, 
histoplasmosis and blastomycosis81, and as its target is a component of the cell wall, it has 
additive or synergistic in vitro and in vivo activity with the 1,3-β-glucan synthase inhibitors 
(echinocandins)82. As nikkomycin Z targets the fungal cell wall, it is likely to be safe for 
clinical use. Its ability to potentiate the antifungal activity of echinocandins makes 
nikkomycin Z plus an echinochandin an ideal broad-spectrum drug combination to attack 
the fungal cell wall in both yeasts and moulds. Furthermore, new chemistry studies of the 
peptidyl nucleoside antibiotics, which includes nikkomycins and polyoxins, may enable 
further development of this class of compounds83.
MGCD290
The histone deacetylase 2 (Hos2) inhibitor MGCD290 (Mirati Therapeutics) is effective in 
combination with both azoles and echinocandins in vitro and in animal models84,85. Histone 
deacetylases remove acetyl groups from lysines on core histones, HSP90 and other cellular 
proteins, and thus have important roles in the regulation of gene transcription and control 
other cellular functions, such as cell proliferation and death. Hsp90 is a molecular chaperone 
that regulates crucial cell responses to both cell membrane and cell wall stresses86, so 
inhibiting Hsp90 could help to block the cellular stress responses and thus potentiate 
standard cell wall or membrane inhibitors. The stress response in the fungal cell is mediated 
by both Hsp90 and its client protein calcineurin. Therefore, blockade of either of these 
targets could be synergistic with other inhibitors, such as azoles or echinocandins. Much 
work has been carried out to investigate HSP90 inhibitors, such as the geldanamycin-like 
agents38,87 and the monoclonal antibody efungumab39,88,89. Notably, the capacity of 
MGCD290 to synergize with known antifungals is retained even when there is some 
apparent resistance to the primary, established drug84. This compound has the potential to be 
a potent enabler to increase fungicidal activity, overcome resistance and broaden the activity 
of other antifungal drugs. However, in the first human trial in severe vulvovaginal 
candidiasis, combining MGCD290 with fluconazole did not give better results than 
fluconazole treatment alone (see MethylGene press release). Recapitulating the positive 
results observed during testing in vitro and in animal models can be challenging in the 
human host for a variety of reasons, including differing pharmacokinetics, burden of fungus 
at the site of infection and host immune responses.
Perfect
Page 12
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Aureobasidin A
Aureobasidin A is a very potent natural product inhibitor of an essential and unique enzyme, 
inositol phosphorylceramide synthase, which catalyses a pivotal step in fungal sphingolipid 
biosynthesis90. This enzyme has been a broad-spectrum antifungal target, and potent 
antifungal aureobasidin A analogues have been generated through medicinal chemistry90,91. 
AureoGen Biosciences has recently signed a licensing agreement with Merck & Co. for 
novel derivatives of aureobasidin A that are made with AureoGen’s chemistry platform, and 
these have improved antifungal activity against yeasts and moulds. Inositol 
phosphorylceramide synthase and its natural product inhibitors have attracted renewed 
therapeutic interest.
Targeted delivery approaches
A very new and evolving concept in cancer therapies has been adopted by the antifungal 
discovery field: targeting a drug to the relevant site. Small bispecific molecules have been 
made using Cloudbreak technology (Cidara Therapeutics). These compounds comprise an 
effector moiety that attaches to host cells (such as granulocytes), which enables the 
compound to accumulate at the site of infection, and an echinocandin moiety that attaches to 
fungal cell walls and exerts antifungal activity. Therefore, this bispecific molecule attaches 
to granulocytes and is taken to the site of infection, where it accumulates in high 
concentrations near the fungus and exerts direct antifungal effects. In a related approach, T 
cells have been engineered to express chimeric T cell receptors that contain extra cellular 
dectin 1 (also known as CLEC7A) domains and thus become activated upon interaction with 
the fungal cell wall, thereby localizing cytotoxic immune activity to fungus- infected sites. 
Infusion of these dectin 1–chimeric antigen receptor (D–CAR) T cells reduces fungal burden 
and mortality in mouse models of aspergillosis92. Directing or concentrating antifungals or 
host immune cells to infection sites, either with bispecific molecules or targeting specific 
effector host cells, is an area that could identify a potent and creative future fungicidal 
solution.
Improving existing antifungals
There are four promising initiatives to improve on existing antifungal compounds (FIG. 1). 
First, for the class of polyenes (for example, amphotericin B and nystatin)93, safer and more 
effective broad-spectrum drugs are under development. These include changing the structure 
of amphotericin B from ‘molecular umbrella conjugates’ (REF. 94) to alternative structures, 
such as nanoparticles95 and conjugated polysaccharides96,97, that may be able to penetrate 
certain body compartments and reduce membrane toxicity97,98. One proposed mechanism 
for this reduced toxicity is that the aggregated forms of amphotericin B have very different 
activities (specifically toxicities) compared with monomers: aggregates target host cells and 
thereby increase toxicity, whereas the monomers should target fungi preferentially over the 
host cells99. Another considerable advance in this area has been to produce an oral 
formulation for polyene treatment. An oral drug delivery formulation consisting of 
amphotericin B cochleate lipid–crystal nanoparticles (Matinas BioPharma) has shown in 
vivo activity in animals and is now in clinical trials (NCT02971007 and NCT02629419)100.
Perfect
Page 13
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In regard to 1,3-β-glucan synthase inhibitors, there are two areas of investigation. First, the 
echinocandin CD101 (Cidara Therapeutics) has a chemical modification on the 
echinocandin backbone that makes the compound more stable, and phase II trials 
(NCT02733432 and NCT02734862) have been initiated for this long-acting 
echinocandin101,102. The improved stability of the molecule has created two new features for 
the echinocandins: this drug can now be used as a topical agent for skin and vaginal 
infections, and the substantially longer half-life in the blood may allow for treatment with 
weekly dosing. The second area of investigation involves another 1,3-β-glucan synthase 
inhibitor, SCY078 (also known as enfumafungin; Scynexis), which is in phase II trials for 
treatment of yeast infections (NCT02679456). This is a triterpene 1,3-β-glucan synthase 
inhibitor, and its primary advantage is its oral bioavailability. SCY078 has similar activity 
against yeasts to that of the echinocandins103 but has some in vitro antifungal activity 
against echinocandin-resistant yeasts. It should be a safe compound, as it targets the fungal 
cell wall, a feature that is not present in mammalian cells, and SCY078 also has some 
antifungal activity against certain moulds87.
In addition, even the widely used and developed azole class of antifungal agents has been 
further modified with a new chemistry approach, which might have exciting implications for 
the clinic. The ‘Achilles heel’ of currently available triazoles is that polypharmacy is 
common in patients with serious illnesses, so many individuals experience negative side 
effects through drug–drug interactions. The Viamet Pharmaceutical platform uses the metal-
binding group of the standard azole compounds. Following proprietary manipulation of this 
part of the molecule, compounds have now been developed that have substantially reduced 
interactions with cytochrome P450 and thus fewer potential drug– drug interactions. This 
platform has yielded several new compounds: VT-1161 (REFS 104,105), which is in phase 
II clinical trials for onychomycosis106 and vaginal candidiasis (NCT02267356 and 
NCT02267382), and a very potent anti-cryptococcal compound, VT-1129, which has 
outstanding efficacy in vitro and in animal models107. Finally, in their portfolio is VT-1598, 
which is a potent azole, with activity against endemic mycosis (see the Business Wire press 
release) and cryptococcosis. Viamet’s platform has also generally increased the half-lives of 
the newly created azoles by chemical optimization of the active antifungal backbone of the 
triazole, thereby generating potent and broad-spectrum compounds. Through this creative 
chemical modification of an old class of molecules, a fourth generation of effective 
antifungal azoles could emerge.
Repurposing old drugs
The discovery of new therapies for fungal infections can be enriched by the ability to 
identify antifungal activity in approved drugs and to direct them to the antifungal 
pipeline108. There is an ample history of using established drugs, including antibacterial 
agents, for fungal infections. For example, although not used in standard clinical practice, 
the addition of a known antibacterial agent, such as the RNA polymerase inhibitor rifampin, 
has been examined and shown to enhance the antifungal activity of established antifungal 
agents in vitro109. Calcium channel blockers, such as verapamil110, also amplify antifungal 
drug potency. Possibly owing to drug–drug interactions, increased toxicity or a lack of 
funding for clinical trials, most of these repurposing agents have not had much clinical 
Perfect
Page 14
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 success, so most remain intriguing hypothetical tools for further antifungal drug 
development and discovery.
Since the introduction of the fungistatic azole fluconazole more than 25 years ago, the 
treatment of cryptococcosis has not advanced substantially111. There have been at least three 
attempts to repurpose old drugs for cryptococcosis infections. First, as previously noted, 
calcineurin inhibitors have anti-cryptococcal activity both individually and in combination 
with other compounds112. They are, however, immunosuppressive agents, and 
cryptococcosis can occur while patients are receiving them. Nonetheless, upon closer 
inspection of clinical outcomes, patients receiving the calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus had 
more skin infections than internal infections with cryptococcosis113, which is consistent with 
reduced survival of cryptococci at high body temperatures upon blockade of calcineurin 
function. Clearly, these immunosuppressive compounds (cyclosporine, tacrolimus and 
rapamycin) will need to be manipulated to reduce immunosuppression, but if this group of 
drugs could be modified to be more fungicidal and less immunosuppressive, an effective 
antifungal drug could be generated.
Second, studies carried out more than 50 years ago showed that an oestrogen, 
diethylstilbestrol, had in vitro anti-cryptococcal activity. Attempts have been made to show 
in vivo activity, but it was not clear whether this hormonal approach would work114,115. 
However, recent studies have demonstrated that a compound used to treat breast cancer, the 
oestrogen receptor-targeting drug, tamoxifen, has anti-cryptococcal activity and could be 
combined with fluconazole as an all-oral treatment option to enhance anti-cryptococcal 
activity116,117.
Third, the most advanced repurposing attempt is the adjunctive use of sertraline in 
cryptococcal meningitis. Sertraline is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor that is 
primarily used to manage depression. However, sertraline has been shown to potentiate the 
anti-cryptococcal activity of azoles118. After a successful exploratory phase II study with the 
use of sertraline as adjunctive therapy for cryptococcal meningitis119, the investigators are 
approximately half-way through a phase III study to determine the value of adding this 
compound to a standard induction therapy for cryptococcal meningitis (NCT01802385). 
This randomized, comparative study is a structural paradigm for how to get these established 
drugs repurposed.
For many decades, antineoplastic agents have been used to treat eukaryotic 
hyperproliferation in the form of cancer, although they might not be direct antifungals. Many 
of these anticancer agents have antifungal activity, and their clinical history can be used by 
investigators to reduce the toxicity of these drugs while preserving their anticellular or 
antifungal activity120,121. In a serendipitous way, anticancer compounds, which often cause 
immunosuppression and thus increase the incidence of fungal infections, could be 
chemically manipulated to produce congeners that effectively treat these opportunistic 
fungal infections. For example, miltefosine is an alkyl phosphocholine compound that was 
initially developed as an anticancer agent but now has indications for treatment of protozoan 
infections, such as Leishmania infections, in some countries. Miltefosine had been shown to 
have antifungal activities in vitro and in animal models122. However, studies have also 
Perfect
Page 15
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 demonstrated little in vivo activity against cryptococcosis123, which makes its use as an 
antifungal less certain and demonstrates how robust the preliminary studies must be to 
advance repurposed drugs. On a similar note, a new oral preparation of itraconazole (also 
known as ‘super bioavailability’ (SUBA)-itraconazole; Mayne Pharma) is under 
investigation for the treatment of patients with basal cell carcinoma nevus syndrome 
(NCT02354261). The anticancer properties of itraconazole come from its inhibition of both 
angiogenesis and Hedgehog signalling124. However, the new nanosuspension formulation 
has improved bioavailability125, so it might be co-opted again by clinicians for its antifungal 
activity, and Mayne Pharma could direct efforts towards its development in the antifungal 
arena. Finally, antifungal agents and basic antiseptic chemicals have been altered to make 
formulations that can be aerosolized for delivery into the lungs126, including new powder 
formulations127, or incorporated into formulations that can attack yeast biofilms on foreign 
bodies and could therefore be used as antifungal solutions or coatings to preserve 
catheters128.
Host immune cell-targeted approaches
The increased focus on immune diseases and immunooncology has also been helpful for 
developing strategies for the antifungal pipeline. For example, there have been promising 
results using adoptive transfer of activated immune cells in infections with Candida spp., 
Aspergillus spp. and Mucorales in animal models129. Another fascinating example of work 
in immune cell antifungals is in targeting JUN amino-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1; also known 
as MAPK8), which has an important role in T cell activation and T helper cell 
differentiation. JNK1 negatively regulates the host antifungal innate immune response, and 
JNK1 inhibitors exert potent antifungal therapeutic effects both in mice and in human 
cells130. Finally, unlike for viral and bacterial infections, currently there is no commercial 
fungal vaccine for humans. There is, however, a substantial infrastructure of work in this 
area for proof of principle131– 137. In fact, there is fundamental knowledge that vaccines can 
prevent fungal infections in model systems, but very little data on therapeutic fungal 
vaccines exist. Preliminary human fungal vaccine studies have been carried out in cocci 
dioidomycosis and candidiasis138,139. A Candida spp. vaccine (NovaDigm Therapeutics) has 
been used in phase I and phase II studies (NCT01447407 and NCT01926028). 
Understanding the potential of these vaccines will require clinical studies in carefully 
identified at-risk groups to assess outcomes and the development of a financial plan for their 
implementation. Prevention is an important goal in the management of fungal infections. As 
host immunity is crucial for the long-term management of fungal infections, protection 
given by vaccines and/or immune cell-targeted approaches should receive high priority in 
the antifungal pipeline.
Antifungal biological agents
Although there are few primary antifungal therapy recommendations for the use of 
biological agents in the Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines3–7, the area has 
received some attention and could be further developed. The use of monoclonal antibodies to 
attack fungi88,140 or even carry potent antifungal material, such as radiation 
(radioimmunotherapy), to the fungus has been validated in animal models141 as a potential 
Perfect
Page 16
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment strategy. However, it should be noted how carefully these antibodies need to be 
tested. For instance, when the efungumab formulation was changed to an efungumab-C28Y 
variant, it lost its anti-Candida spp. activity89. The adjuvant therapeutic use of cytokines has 
been explored, and these molecules could be useful142,143, but precise control of immune 
reconstitution might need some fine-tuning.
Summary
The current antifungal tools that are available to tackle the invasive fungal epidemic 
occurring in the clinics and hospitals have improved, but are still inadequate for use in all 
patient groups. In response to this need for more and better antifungal agents, this Review 
has focused on four areas that could bolster and refine the antifungal pipeline: basic pursuits 
to identify fungal pathways, targets and mechanisms of action that could lead to new 
antifungal inhibitors; antifungal compounds and immune strategies currently in development 
that could become new antifungal therapies; improved formulations of existing compounds; 
and the repurposing of drugs approved for other indications that have the potential to be 
antifungal agents.
Invasive fungal infections will not go away anytime soon. Therefore, we need to circumvent 
resistance to treatment by continued discovery and development of new antifungal agents 
and strategies. Hopefully, these new fungicidal agents will meet the management challenges 
of an enlarging population of susceptible ‘human Petri dishes’ as we attempt to manage 
serious underlying diseases.
Acknowledgments
The author has research support from Public Health Service Grants (AI73896, AI04533, AI93257).
Glossary
Mycetomas
Chronic fungal infections of skin and soft tissue
T2 MRI
(Magnetic resonance imaging). A testing system from T2 
Biosystems that uses advances in nanotechnology and 
molecular biology to detect microorganisms directly from 
body fluids
GAIN Act
The Generating Antibiotic Incentives Now (GAIN) Act by 
the US Federal Government is legislation that aims to 
stimulate antimicrobial discovery
Orphan Drug Act
The Orphan Drug Act enables the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to designate a treatment as being 
developed for a rare disease upon request from a sponsor
Fast Track
Fast Track is a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
designation for expedited review of drugs to fill unmet 
medical needs, as requested by a drug company
Perfect
Page 17
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nosocomial
Hospital-based
Virulence composite
The genetic and phenotypic traits that encompass 
pathogenicity
References
1. Brown GD, Denning DW, Levitz SM. Tackling human fungal infections. Science. 2012; 336:647. 
This work reviews the current magnitude of issues relating to invasive fungal infections. [PubMed: 
22582229] 
2. Park BJ, et al. Estimation of the current global burden of cryptococcal meningitis among persons 
living with HIV/AIDS. AIDS. 2009; 23:525–530. [PubMed: 19182676] 
3. Patterson TF, et al. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of aspergillosis: 2016 
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2016; 63:e1–e60. [PubMed: 
27365388] 
4. Pappas PG, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the management of candidiasis: 2016 update by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2016; 62:e1–e50. [PubMed: 26679628] 
5. Galgiani JN, et al. 2016 Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) clinical practice guideline 
for the treatment of coccidioidomycosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2016; 63:e112–e146. [PubMed: 27470238] 
6. Perfect JR, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of cryptococcal disease: 2010 
update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2010; 50:291–322. [PubMed: 
20047480] 
7. Kauffman CA, Hajjeh R, Chapman SW. Practice guidelines for the management of patients with 
sporotrichosis. For the Mycoses Study Group. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2000; 30:684–687. [PubMed: 10770730] 
8. Oliver JD, et al. F901318 represents a novel class of antifungal drug that inhibits dihydroorotate 
dehydrogenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:12809–12814.
9. Shahid SK. Newer patents in antimycotic therapy. Pharm Pat Anal. 2016; 5:115–134. [PubMed: 
26900731] 
10. Pouliot M, Jeanmart S. Pan assay interference compounds (PAINS) and other promiscuous 
compounds in antifungal research. J Med Chem. 2016; 59:497–503. [PubMed: 26313340] 
11. Pitman SK, Drew RH, Perfect JR. Addressing current medical needs in invasive fungal infection 
prevention and treatment with new antifungal agents, strategies and formulations. Expert Opin 
Emerg Drugs. 2011; 16:559–586. This study is an extensive review of the available antifungal 
agents and discusses how they are optimally used today. [PubMed: 21846302] 
12. Cuenca-Estrella M. Antifungal drug resistance mechanisms in pathogenic fungi: from bench to 
bedside. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014; 20(Suppl 6):54–59. [PubMed: 24372680] 
13. Smith KD, et al. Increased antifungal drug resistance in clinical isolates of Cryptococcus 
neoformans in Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 59:7197–7204. [PubMed: 
26324276] 
14. Denning DW, Bromley MJ. Infectious disease. How to bolster the antifungal pipeline. Science. 
2015; 347:1414–1416. This insightful discussion describes the potential needs and barriers to 
antifungal development. [PubMed: 25814567] 
15. Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Casadevall A, Galgiani JN, Odds FC, Rex JH. An insight into the antifungal 
pipeline: selected new molecules and beyond. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010; 9:719–727. By 
comparing reference 15 and this Review, the progress that has been made in the antifungal pipeline 
in the past decade can be determined. [PubMed: 20725094] 
16. Osherov N, Kontoyiannis DP. The anti-Aspergillus drug pipeline: is the glass half full or empty? 
Med Mycol. 2017; 55:118–124. [PubMed: 27562862] 
17. Odds FC, Brown AJ, Gow NA. Antifungal agents: mechanisms of action. Trends Microbiol. 2003; 
11:272–279. [PubMed: 12823944] 
18. Allen D, Wilson D, Drew R, Perfect J. Azole antifungals: 35 years of invasive fungal infection 
management. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2015; 13:787–798. [PubMed: 25843556] 
Perfect
Page 18
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Hamill RJ. Amphotericin B formulations: a comparative review of efficacy and toxicity. Drugs. 
2013; 73:919–934. [PubMed: 23729001] 
20. Holt SL, Drew RH. Echinocandins: addressing outstanding questions surrounding treatment of 
invasive fungal infections. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2011; 68:1207–1220. [PubMed: 21690427] 
21. Peyton LR, Gallagher S, Hashemzadeh M. Triazole antifungals: a review. Drugs Today (Barc). 
2015; 51:705–718. [PubMed: 26798851] 
22. Nett JE, Andes DR. Antifungal agents: spectrum of activity, pharmacology, and clinical 
indications. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2016; 30:51–83. [PubMed: 26739608] 
23. Andes DR, et al. Impact of treatment strategy on outcomes in patients with candidemia and other 
forms of invasive candidiasis: a patient-level quantitative review of randomized trials. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2012; 54:1110–1122. [PubMed: 22412055] 
24. Bratton EW, et al. Comparison and temporal trends of three groups with cryptococcosis: HIV-
infected, solid organ transplant, and HIV-negative/non-transplant. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e43582. 
[PubMed: 22937064] 
25. Nyazika TK, et al. Cryptococcus neoformans population diversity and clinical outcomes of HIV-
associated cryptococcal meningitis patients in Zimbabwe. J Med Microbiol. 2016; 65:1281–1288. 
[PubMed: 27638836] 
26. Marr KA, et al. Combination antifungal therapy for invasive aspergillosis: a randomized trial. Ann 
Intern Med. 2015; 162:81–89. [PubMed: 25599346] 
27. Perfect JR. Fungal virulence genes as targets for antifungal chemotherapy. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 1996; 40:1577–1583. [PubMed: 8807043] 
28. Kitamura A, Someya K, Hata M, Nakajima R, Takemura M. Discovery of a small-molecule 
inhibitor of β-1,6-glucan synthesis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009; 53:670–677. [PubMed: 
19015325] 
29. Baxter BK, DiDone L, Ogu D, Schor S, Krysan DJ. Identification, in vitro activity and mode of 
action of phosphoinositide-dependent-1 kinase inhibitors as antifungal molecules. ACS Chem 
Biol. 2011; 6:502–510. [PubMed: 21294551] 
30. Breger J, et al. Antifungal chemical compounds identified using a C. elegans pathogenicity assay. 
PLoS Pathog. 2007; 3:e18. [PubMed: 17274686] 
31. Spitzer M, et al. Cross-species discovery of syncretic drug combinations that potentiate the 
antifungal fluconazole. Mol Syst Biol. 2011; 7:499. [PubMed: 21694716] 
32. Roemer T, et al. Confronting the challenges of natural product-based antifungal discovery. Chem 
Biol. 2011; 18:148–164. [PubMed: 21338914] 
33. Tebbets B, et al. Identification and characterization of antifungal compounds using a 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae reporter bioassay. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e36021. [PubMed: 22574132] 
34. Krysan DJ, Didone L. A high-throughput screening assay for small molecules that disrupt yeast 
cell integrity. J Biomol Screen. 2008; 13:657–664. [PubMed: 18626115] 
35. Lamoth F, Juvvadi PR, Steinbach WJ. Editorial: advances in Aspergillus fumigatus pathobiology. 
Front Microbiol. 2016; 7:43. [PubMed: 26870009] 
36. Juvvadi PR, Lee SC, Heitman J, Steinbach WJ. Calcineurin in fungal virulence and drug 
resistance: prospects for harnessing targeted inhibition of calcineurin for an antifungal therapeutic 
approach. Virulence. 2017; 8:186–197. [PubMed: 27325145] 
37. Blankenship JR, Steinbach WJ, Perfect JR, Heitman J. Teaching old drugs new tricks: 
reincarnation immunosuppressants as antifungal drugs. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2003; 4:192–
199.
38. Cowen LE, et al. Harnessing Hsp90 function as a powerful, broadly effective therapeutic strategy 
for fungal infectious disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:2818–2823. [PubMed: 
19196973] 
39. Pachl J, et al. A randomized, blinded, multicenter trial of lipid-associated Amphotericin B alone 
versus in combination with an antibody-based inhibitor of heat shock protein 90 in patients with 
invasive candidiasis. Clin Infect Dis. 2006; 42:1404–1413. [PubMed: 16619152] 
40. Nambu, M., et al. A calcineurin antifungal strategy with analogs of FK506. Bioorg Med Chem 
Lett. 2011. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2017.04.004
Perfect
Page 19
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 41. Hast MA, et al. Structures of Cryptococcus neoformans protein farnesyltransferase reveal strategies 
for developing inhibitors that target fungal pathogens. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:35149–35162. 
[PubMed: 21816822] 
42. Mor V, et al. Identification of a new class of antifungals targeting the synthesis of fungal 
sphingolipids. mBio. 2015; 6:e00647. [PubMed: 26106079] 
43. Rollin-Pinheiro R, Singh A, Barreto-Bergter E, Del Poeta M. Sphingolipids as targets for treatment 
of fungal infections. Future Med Chem. 2016; 8:1469–1484. [PubMed: 27502288] 
44. Perfect JR, Tenor JL, Miao Y, Brennan RG. Trehalose pathway as an antifungal target. Virulence. 
2016; 8:143–149. [PubMed: 27248439] 
45. Petzold EW, et al. Characterization and regulation of the trehalose synthesis pathway and its 
importance in the pathogenicity of Cryptococcus neoformans. Infect Immun. 2006; 74:5877–5887. 
[PubMed: 16988267] 
46. Ngamskulrungroj P, et al. The trehalose pathway: an integral part of virulence composite for 
Cryptococcus gattii. Infect Immun. 2009; 77:4584–4596. [PubMed: 19651856] 
47. Miao Y, et al. Structures of trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase from pathogenic fungi reveal the 
mechanisms of substrate recognition and catalysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:7148–
7153. [PubMed: 27307435] 
48. Cheah HL, Lim V, Sandai D. Inhibitors of the glyoxylate cycle enzyme ICL1 in Candida albicans 
for potential use as antifungal agents. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e95951. [PubMed: 24781056] 
49. Knauth P, Reichenbach H. On the mechanism of action of the myxobacterial fungicide ambruticin. 
J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2000; 53:1182–1190. [PubMed: 11132965] 
50. Levine HB, Ringel SM, Cobb JM. Therapeutic properties of oral ambruticin (W7783) in 
experimental pulmonary coccidioidomycosis of mice. Chest. 1978; 73:202–206. [PubMed: 
620582] 
51. Shubitz LF, et al. Efficacy of ambruticin analogs in a murine model of coccidioidomycosis. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2006; 50:3467–3469. [PubMed: 17005834] 
52. Hagihara K, et al. Fingolimod (FTY720) stimulates Ca2+/calcineurin signaling in fission yeast. 
PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e81907. [PubMed: 24312601] 
53. Gallo-Ebert C, et al. Novel antifungal drug discovery based on targeting pathways regulating the 
fungus-conserved Upc2 transcription factor. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014; 58:258–266. 
[PubMed: 24145546] 
54. Hein KZ, et al. Disulphide-reduced psoriasin is a human apoptosis-inducing broad-spectrum 
fungicide. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:13039–13044. [PubMed: 26438863] 
55. Valiante V, et al. Hitting the caspofungin salvage pathway of human-pathogenic fungi with the 
novel lasso peptide humidimycin (MDN-0010). Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 59:5145–
5153. [PubMed: 26055366] 
56. Liu N, Wang C, Su H, Zhang W, Sheng C. Strategies in the discovery of novel antifungal scaffolds. 
Future Med Chem. 2016; 8:1435–1454. [PubMed: 27463376] 
57. Scorzoni L, et al. Searching new antifungals: the use of in vitro and in vivo methods for evaluation 
of natural compounds. J Microbiol Methods. 2016; 123:68–78. [PubMed: 26853122] 
58. Nobrega RO, Teixeira AP, Oliveira WA, Lima EO, Lima IO. Investigation of the antifungal activity 
of carvacrol against strains of Cryptococcus neoformans. Pharm Biol. 2016; 54:2591–2596. 
[PubMed: 27225838] 
59. Zuo R, et al. In vitro antifungal and antibiofilm activities of halogenated quinoline analogues 
against Candida albicans and Cryptococcus neoformans. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2016; 48:208–
211. [PubMed: 27256584] 
60. Ghannoum MA, Kim HG, Long L. Efficacy of aminocandin in the treatment of immunocompetent 
mice with haematogenously disseminated fluconazole-resistant candidiasis. J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2007; 59:556–559. [PubMed: 17242032] 
61. Warn PA, Sharp A, Morrissey G, Denning DW. Activity of aminocandin (IP960; HMR3270) 
compared with amphotericin B, itraconazole, caspofungin and micafungin in neutropenic murine 
models of disseminated infection caused by itraconazole-susceptible and -resistant strains of 
Aspergillus fumigatus. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2010; 35:146–151. [PubMed: 20015618] 
Perfect
Page 20
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 62. Hanadate T, et al. FR290581, a novel sordarin derivative: synthesis and antifungal activity. Bioorg 
Med Chem Lett. 2009; 19:1465–1468. [PubMed: 19196509] 
63. Hasenoehrl A, et al. In vitro activity and in vivo efficacy of icofungipen (PLD-118), a novel oral 
antifungal agent, against the pathogenic yeast Candida albicans. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 
2006; 50:3011–3018. [PubMed: 16940096] 
64. Sigurgeirsson B, van Rossem K, Malahias S, Raterink K. A phase II, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, parallel group, dose-ranging study to investigate the efficacy and safety of 4 
dose regimens of oral albaconazole in patients with distal subungual onychomycosis. J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2013; 69:416–425. [PubMed: 23706639] 
65. Miller JL, et al. In vitro and in vivo efficacies of the new triazole albaconazole against 
Cryptococcus neoformans. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004; 48:384–387. [PubMed: 
14742184] 
66. Nakamura I, et al. ASP2397: a novel antifungal agent produced by Acremonium persicinum 
MF-347833. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2017; 70:45–51. [PubMed: 27599768] 
67. Nakamura I, et al. Discovery of a new antifungal agent ASP2397 using a silkworm model of 
Aspergillus fumigatus infection. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2017; 70:41–44. [PubMed: 27577982] 
68. Nishikawa H, et al. T-2307, a novel arylamidine, is transported into Candida albicans by a high-
affinity spermine and spermidine carrier regulated by Agp2. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016; 
71:1845–1855. [PubMed: 27090633] 
69. Shibata T, et al. T-2307 causes collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential in yeast. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother. 2012; 56:5892–5897. [PubMed: 22948882] 
70. Mitsuyama J, et al. In vitro and in vivo antifungal activities of T-2307, a novel arylamidine. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008; 52:1318–1324. [PubMed: 18227186] 
71. Yamada E, Nishikawa H, Nomura N, Mitsuyama J. T-2307 shows efficacy in a murine model of 
Candida glabrata infection despite in vitro trailing growth phenomena. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2010; 54:3630–3634. [PubMed: 20547803] 
72. Koselny K, et al. The celecoxib derivative AR-12 has broad spectrum antifungal activity in vitro 
and improves the activity of fluconazole in a murine model of cryptococcosis. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2016; 60:7115–7127. [PubMed: 27645246] 
73. Koselny K, et al. Antitumor/antifungal celecoxib derivative AR-12 is a non-nucleoside inhibitor of 
the ANL-family adenylating enzyme acetyl CoA synthetase. ACS Infect Dis. 2016; 2:268–280. 
[PubMed: 27088128] 
74. Richard ML, Plaine A. Comprehensive analysis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins 
in Candida albicans. Eukaryot Cell. 2007; 6:119–133. [PubMed: 17189485] 
75. Watanabe NA, et al. E1210, a new broad-spectrum antifungal, suppresses Candida albicans hyphal 
growth through inhibition of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2012; 56:960–971. [PubMed: 22143530] 
76. McLellan CA, et al. Inhibiting GPI anchor biosynthesis in fungi stresses the endoplasmic reticulum 
and enhances immunogenicity. ACS Chem Biol. 2012; 7:1520–1528. [PubMed: 22724584] 
77. Hata K, et al. Efficacy of oral E1210, a new broad-spectrum antifungal with a novel mechanism of 
action, in murine models of candidiasis, aspergillosis, and fusariosis. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2011; 55:4543–4551. [PubMed: 21788462] 
78. Wiederhold NP, et al. The investigational agent E1210 is effective in treatment of experimental 
invasive candidiasis caused by resistant Candida albicans. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 
59:690–692. [PubMed: 25331706] 
79. Miyazaki M, et al. In vitro activity of E1210, a novel antifungal, against clinically important yeasts 
and molds. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011; 55:4652–4658. [PubMed: 21825291] 
80. Shubitz LF, et al. Modeling nikkomycin Z dosing and pharmacology in murine pulmonary 
coccidioidomycosis preparatory to phase 2 clinical trials. J Infect Dis. 2014; 209:1949–1954. 
[PubMed: 24421256] 
81. Hector RF, Zimmer BL, Pappagianis D. Evaluation of nikkomycins X and Z in murine models of 
coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and blastomycosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1990; 
34:587–593. [PubMed: 2344165] 
Perfect
Page 21
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 82. Fortwendel JR, et al. Differential effects of inhibiting chitin and 1,3-β-D-glucan synthesis in ras 
and calcineurin mutants of Aspergillus fumigatus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009; 53:476–
482. [PubMed: 19015336] 
83. Lilla EA, Yokoyama K. Carbon extension in peptidylnucleoside biosynthesis by radical SAM 
enzymes. Nat Chem Biol. 2016; 12:905–907. [PubMed: 27642865] 
84. Pfaller MA, et al. Activity of MGCD290, a Hos2 histone deacetylase inhibitor, in combination with 
azole antifungals against opportunistic fungal pathogens. J Clin Microbiol. 2009; 47:3797–3804. 
[PubMed: 19794038] 
85. Pfaller MA, Rhomberg PR, Messer SA, Castanheira M. In vitro activity of a Hos2 deacetylase 
inhibitor, MGCD290, in combination with echinocandins against echinocandin-resistant Candida 
species. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2015; 81:259–263. [PubMed: 25600842] 
86. Cowen LE. The fungal Achilles’ heel: targeting Hsp90 to cripple fungal pathogens. Curr Opin 
Microbiol. 2013; 16:377–384. [PubMed: 23588026] 
87. Lamoth F, Alexander BD, Juvvadi PR, Steinbach WJ. Antifungal activity of compounds targeting 
the Hsp90-calcineurin pathway against various mould species. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015; 
70:1408–1411. [PubMed: 25558076] 
88. Bugli F, et al. Human monoclonal antibody-based therapy in the treatment of invasive candidiasis. 
Clin Dev Immunol. 2013; 2013:403121. [PubMed: 23878583] 
89. Louie A, et al. Dose range evaluation of Mycograb C28Y variant, a human recombinant antibody 
fragment to heat shock protein 90, in combination with amphotericin B-desoxycholate for 
treatment of murine systemic candidiasis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011; 55:3295–3304. 
[PubMed: 21502626] 
90. Aeed PA, Young CL, Nagiec MM, Elhammer AP. Inhibition of inositol phosphorylceramide 
synthase by the cyclic peptide aureobasidin A. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009; 53:496–504. 
[PubMed: 19047657] 
91. Kurome T, Inoue T, Takesako K, Kato I. Syntheses of antifungal aureobasidin A analogs with alkyl 
chains for structure-activity relationship. J Antibiot. 1998; 51:359–367. [PubMed: 9589073] 
92. Kumaresan PR, et al. Bioengineering T cells to target carbohydrate to treat opportunistic fungal 
infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:10660–10665. [PubMed: 25002471] 
93. Arikan S, Rex JH. Nystatin LF (Aronex/Abbott). Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2001; 2:488–495.
94. Janout V, Bienvenu C, Schell W, Perfect JR, Regen SL. Molecular umbrella-amphotericin B 
conjugates. Bioconjug Chem. 2014; 25:1408–1411. [PubMed: 25068916] 
95. Yang Z, et al. Development and characterization of amphotericin B nanosuspensions for oral 
administration through a simple top-down method. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2014; 15:569–576. 
[PubMed: 25005312] 
96. Halperin A, et al. Novel water-soluble amphotericin B-PEG conjugates with low toxicity and 
potent in vivo efficacy. J Med Chem. 2016; 59:1197–1206. [PubMed: 26816333] 
97. Ickowicz DE, et al. Activity, reduced toxicity, and scale-up synthesis of amphotericin B-conjugated 
polysaccharide. Biomacromolecules. 2014; 15:2079–2089. [PubMed: 24779556] 
98. Jung SH, et al. Amphotericin B-entrapping lipid nanoparticles and their in vitro and in vivo 
characteristics. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2009; 37:313–320. [PubMed: 19491021] 
99. Janout V, et al. Taming amphotericin B. Bioconjug Chem. 2015; 26:2021–2024. [PubMed: 
26340430] 
100. Delmas G, et al. Efficacy of orally delivered cochleates containing amphotericin B in a murine 
model of aspergillosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2002; 46:2704–2707. [PubMed: 
12121962] 
101. Ong V, et al. Preclinical evaluation of the stability, safety and efficacy of CD101, a novel 
echinocandin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016; 60:6872–6879. [PubMed: 27620474] 
102. Pfaller MA, Messer SA, Rhomberg PR, Jones RN, Castanheira M. Activity of a longacting 
echinocandin, CD101, determined using CLSI and EUCAST reference methods, against Candida 
and Aspergillus spp., including echinocandin- and azole-resistant isolates. J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2016; 71:2868–2873. [PubMed: 27287236] 
103. Walker SS, et al. Discovery of a novel class of orally active antifungal β-1,3-D-glucan synthase 
inhibitors. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011; 55:5099–5106. [PubMed: 21844320] 
Perfect
Page 22
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 104. Gebremariam T, et al. VT-1161 protects immunosuppressed mice from Rhizopus arrhizus var. 
arrhizus infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 59:7815–7817. [PubMed: 26369977] 
105. Warrilow AG, et al. The clinical candidate VT-1161 is a highly potent inhibitor of Candida 
albicans CYP51 but fails to bind the human enzyme. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014; 
58:7121–7127. [PubMed: 25224009] 
106. Gupta AK, Studholme C. Novel investigational therapies for onychomycosis: an update. Expert 
Opin Investig Drugs. 2016; 25:297–305.
107. Lockhart SR, et al. The investigational fungal Cyp51 inhibitor VT-1129 demonstrates potent in 
vitro activity against Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2016; 60:2528–2531. [PubMed: 26787697] 
108. Butts A, Krysan DJ. Antifungal drug discovery: something old and something new. PLoS Pathog. 
2012; 8:e1002870. [PubMed: 22969422] 
109. Christenson JC, Shalit I, Welch DF, Guruswamy A, Marks MI. Synergistic action of amphotericin 
B and rifampin against Rhizopus species. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1987; 31:1775–1778. 
[PubMed: 3435124] 
110. Liu S, et al. Synergistic effect of fluconazole and calcium channel blockers against resistant 
Candida albicans. PLoS ONE. 2016; 11:e0150859. [PubMed: 26986478] 
111. Coelho C, Casadevall A. Cryptococcal therapies and drug targets: the old, the new and the 
promising. Cell Microbiol. 2016; 18:792–799. [PubMed: 26990050] 
112. Shirazi F, Kontoyiannis DP. The calcineurin pathway inhibitor tacrolimus enhances the in vitro 
activity of azoles against Mucorales via apoptosis. Eukaryot Cell. 2013; 12:1225–1234. 
[PubMed: 23851337] 
113. Husain S, Wagner M, Singh N. Cryptococcus neoformans infection in organ transplant recipients: 
variables influencing clinical characteristics and outcome. Emerg Infect Dis. 2001; 7:375–381. 
[PubMed: 11384512] 
114. Duke SS, Fromtling RA. Effects of diethylstilbestrol and cyclophosphamide on the pathogenesis 
of experimental Cryptococcus neoformans infections. Sabouraudia. 1984; 22:125–135. [PubMed: 
6374933] 
115. Mohr JA, Tatem BA, Long H, Muchmore HG, Felton FG. Increased susceptibility of 
Cryptococcus neoformans to amphotericin B in the presence of steroids. Sabouraudia. 1973; 
11:140–142. [PubMed: 4584201] 
116. Butts A, et al. Estrogen receptor antagonists are anti-cryptococcal agents that directly bind EF 
hand proteins and synergize with fluconazole in vivo. mBio. 2014; 5:e00765–13. [PubMed: 
24520056] 
117. Dolan K, et al. Antifungal activity of tamoxifen: in vitro and in vivo activities and mechanistic 
characterization. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009; 53:3337–3346. [PubMed: 19487443] 
118. Zhai B, Wu C, Wang L, Sachs MS, Lin X. The antidepressant sertraline provides a promising 
therapeutic option for neurotropic cryptococcal infections. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012; 
56:3758–3766. [PubMed: 22508310] 
119. Rhein J, et al. Efficacy of adjunctive sertraline for the treatment of HIV-associated cryptococcal 
meningitis: an open-label dose-ranging study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016; 16:809–818. [PubMed: 
26971081] 
120. Del Poeta M, et al. Comparison of in vitro activities of camptothecin and nitidine derivatives 
against fungal and cancer cells. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1999; 43:2862–2868. [PubMed: 
10582872] 
121. Cardenas ME, et al. Antifungal activities of antineoplastic agents: Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a 
model system to study drug action. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1999; 12:583–611. [PubMed: 10515904] 
122. Widmer F, et al. Hexadecylphosphocholine (miltefosine) has broad-spectrum fungicidal activity 
and is efficacious in a mouse model of cryptococcosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2006; 
50:414–421. [PubMed: 16436691] 
123. Wiederhold NP, et al. Limited activity of miltefosine in murine models of cryptococcal 
meningoencephalitis and disseminated cryptococcosis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013; 
57:745–750. [PubMed: 23165465] 
Perfect
Page 23
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 124. Pace JR, et al. Repurposing the clinically efficacious antifungal agent itraconazole as an 
anticancer chemo therapeutic. J Med Chem. 2016; 59:3635–3649. [PubMed: 27014922] 
125. Abuhelwa AY, Foster DJ, Mudge S, Hayes D, Upton RN. Population pharmacokinetic modeling 
of itraconazole and hydroxyitraconazole for oral SUBA-itraconazole and sporanox capsule 
formulations in healthy subjects in fed and fasted states. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 
59:5681–5696. [PubMed: 26149987] 
126. Le J, Schiller DS. Aerosolized delivery of antifungal agents. Curr Fungal Infect Rep. 2010; 4:96–
102. [PubMed: 20502511] 
127. Pornputtapitak W, El-Gendy N, Berkland C. NanoCluster itraconazole formulations provide a 
potential engineered drug particle approach to generate effective dry powder aerosols. J Aerosol 
Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015; 28:341–352. [PubMed: 25679514] 
128. Walraven CJ, Lee SA. Antifungal lock therapy. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013; 57:1–8. 
[PubMed: 23070153] 
129. Tramsen L, et al. Clinical-scale generation of multi-specific anti-fungal T cells targeting Candida, 
Aspergillus and mucormycetes. Cytotherapy. 2013; 15:344–351. [PubMed: 23579059] 
130. Zhao X, et al. JNK1 negatively controls antifungal innate immunity by suppressing CD23 
expression. Nat Med. 2017; 23:337–346. [PubMed: 28112734] 
131. Galgiani JN. Vaccines to prevent systemic mycoses: holy grails meet translational realities. J 
Infect Dis. 2008; 197:938–940. This article discusses the potential for antifungal vaccines. 
[PubMed: 18419469] 
132. Casadevall A, Pirofski LA. Feasibility and prospects for a vaccine to prevent cryptococcosis. Med 
Mycol. 2005; 43:667–680. [PubMed: 16422296] 
133. Cutler JE, Deepe GS Jr, Klein BS. Advances in combating fungal diseases: vaccines on the 
threshold. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2007; 5:13–28. [PubMed: 17160002] 
134. Levitz SM. Aspergillus vaccines: hardly worth studying or worthy of hard study? Med Mycol. 
2017; 55:103–108. [PubMed: 27639242] 
135. Upadhya R, et al. Induction of protective immunity to cryptococcal infection in mice by a heat-
killed, chitosan-deficient strain of Cryptococcus neoformans. mBio. 2016; 7:e00547–16. 
[PubMed: 27165801] 
136. Mor V, et al. Glucosylceramide administration as a vaccination strategy in mouse models of 
cryptococcosis. PLoS ONE. 2016; 11:e0153853. [PubMed: 27082428] 
137. Wormley FL Jr, Perfect JR, Steele C, Cox GM. Protection against cryptococcosis by using a 
murine gamma interferon-producing Cryptococcus neoformans strain. Infect Immun. 2007; 
75:1453–1462. [PubMed: 17210668] 
138. Pappagianis D. Evaluation of the protective efficacy of the killed Coccidioides immitis spherule 
vaccine in humans. The Valley Fever Vaccine Study Group. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1993; 148:656–
660. [PubMed: 8368636] 
139. Edwards JE Jr. Fungal cell wall vaccines: an update. J Med Microbiol. 2012; 61:895–903. 
[PubMed: 22267544] 
140. Larsen RA, et al. Phase I evaluation of the safety and pharmacokinetics of murine-derived 
anticryptococcal antibody 18B7 in subjects with treated cryptococcal meningitis. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother. 2005; 49:952–958. [PubMed: 15728888] 
141. Bryan RA, et al. Toward developing a universal treatment for fungal disease using 
radioimmunotherapy targeting common fungal antigens. Mycopathologia. 2012; 173:463–471. 
[PubMed: 22048869] 
142. Jarvis J, et al. Adjunctive interferon-γ immnotherapy for the treatment of HIV-associated 
cryptococcal meningitis: a randomized controlled trial. AIDS. 2012; 26:1105–1113. [PubMed: 
22421244] 
143. Pappas PG, et al. Recombinant interferon-γ 1b as adjunctive therapy for AIDS-related acute 
cryptococcal meningitis. J Infect Dis. 2004; 189:2185–2191. [PubMed: 15181565] 
144. Rodero L, et al. In vitro susceptibility studies of Cryptococcus neoformans isolated from patients 
with no clinical response to amphotericin B therapy. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2000; 45:239–242. 
[PubMed: 10660509] 
Perfect
Page 24
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 145. Sanglard D, Odds FC. Resistance of Candida species to antifungal agents: molecular mechanisms 
and clinical consequences. Lancet Infect Dis. 2002; 2:73–85. [PubMed: 11901654] 
146. Verweij PE, Chowdhary A, Melchers WJ, Meis JF. Azole resistance in Aspergillus fumigatus: can 
we retain the clinical use of mold-active antifungal azoles? Clin Infect Dis. 2016; 62:362–368. 
[PubMed: 26486705] 
147. Alexander BD, et al. Increasing echinocandin resistance in Candida glabrata: clinical failure 
correlates with presence of FKS mutations and elevated minimum inhibitory concentrations. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2013; 56:1724–1732. [PubMed: 23487382] 
148. Healey KR, et al. Prevalent mutator genotype identified in fungal pathogen Candida glabrata 
promotes multidrug resistance. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:11128. [PubMed: 27020939] 
149. Edlind TD, Katiyar SK. Mutational analysis of flucytosine resistance in Candida glabrata. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2010; 54:4733–4738. [PubMed: 20823283] 
Perfect
Page 25
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Currently available antifungal compounds and future derivatives thereof
There are currently four classes of antifungals available: polyenes, flucytosine, azoles and 
echinocandins. Improvements have been made to three of these classes to increase efficacy 
or reduce toxicity. Future generations of these classes of compounds are in development.
Perfect
Page 26
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Antifungal targets
Numerous molecules can be attacked by antifungals, including fungus-specific components 
of the cell wall or cell membrane, or processes such as metabolism, DNA synthesis, 
mitochondrial function or the stress response. Investigational antifungal agents targeting 
these components are indicated in light blue boxes, and approved antifungal classes are 
indicated in dark blue boxes. Some antifungals exert their specificity by being taken up by 
fungus-specific transporters. Acs1, acetyl-CoA synthetase 1; BHBM, N′-(3-bromo-4-
hydroxybenzylidene)-2-methylbenzohydrazide; Dhodh, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase; 
HOG, high-osmolarity glycerol; Hsp90, heat shock protein 90; Icl, isocitrate lyase; Pdk1, 3-
phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1; PMN, polymorphonuclear; UDP, uridine 
diphosphate.
Perfect
Page 27
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Perfect
Page 28
Table 1
Common invasive fungal diseases
Disease
Fungal species
Clinical outlook
Treatment 
options (in order 
of preference)
Areas for improvement
Dimorphic mycoses
•
Blastomyces dermatitidis
•
Coccidioides immitis
•
Coccidioides posadasii
•
Histoplasma capsulatum
•
Sporothrix spp.
•
Geographically 
restricted
•
Infect both 
immunocompetent 
and 
immunosuppressed 
individuals
Azoles > polyenes
•
A vaccine 
would be 
welcomed 
and is in 
development
•
In need of 
more 
effective and 
oral agents, 
and better 
diagnostics 
for earlier 
identification
Disseminated cryptococcosis
•
Cryptococcus neoformans
•
Cryptococcus gattii
•
Even with ART, 
there are still many 
new cases
•
No new therapies 
in more than 25 
years
•
Cryptococcal 
antigen levels are 
not used to 
monitor outcome
•
Differences in 
outcome correlate 
with health-care 
resource 
availability
•
IRIS and increased 
ICP have been 
associated with 
this infection and 
need to be 
managed
Amphotericin B 
in combination 
with 5-flucytosine 
> monotherapies
Need improved 
management of IRIS and 
ICP
Invasive aspergillosis
•
Aspergillus fumigatus
•
Aspergillus flavus
•
Aspergillus terreus
•
Aspergillus calidoutus
•
Increasing 
resistance to azoles
•
Early treatment or 
prevention is 
essential
Azoles > polyenes 
> echinocandins
•
Genetic 
susceptibility 
needs to be 
defined
•
A biomarker 
that can be 
used for 
diagnosis 
and to 
monitor 
treatment 
outcome 
would be 
very useful
Invasive candidiasis
•
Candida albicans
•
Candida tropicalis
•
Candida glabrata
•
Candida parapsilosis
•
Candida krusei
•
High mortality 
attributable to 
infections
•
Drug resistance 
develops in 
pathogens
Echinocandins > 
azoles > polyenes
•
Need better 
integration of 
new 
diagnostic 
tools with 
specific 
treatment 
strategies
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Perfect
Page 29
Disease
Fungal species
Clinical outlook
Treatment 
options (in order 
of preference)
Areas for improvement
•
Candida auris
•
Requires early-
stage treatment
•
An agent 
with a new 
mechanism 
of action 
would be 
advantageous 
for treatment
Mucormycosis
•
Rhizopus spp.
•
Mucor spp.
•
Cunninghamella 
bertholletiae
•
Control underlying 
diseases, initiate 
polyene therapy 
and consider 
surgery
•
Poor prognosis
Polyenes > azoles
•
Improved 
diagnostics 
to ensure 
early, 
accurate 
diagnosis
•
Empiric 
therapy is 
not often 
successful
ART, antiretroviral therapy; ICP, intracranial pressure; IRIS, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Perfect
Page 30
Table 2
Antifungal compounds with novel targets in development
Compound
Molecular target
Target species or relevant disease
Development stage
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier or 
ref.
Unapproved compounds with novel structures
APX001
Glycosyl phosphatidylin-ositol 
synthesis (prevents attachment of 
mannose proteins to the outer cell 
wall)
•
Broad-spectrum 
potency against 
pathogens, including 
Mucorales order, 
Candida spp., 
Aspergillus spp., 
Fusarium spp. and 
Scedosporium spp.
•
Synergizes with 
approved antifungals
Phase I; phase II 
planned
NCT02957929 and NCT02956499
AR-12
•
Probably blocks fungal 
acetyl-CoA synthetase 
1
•
Increases host immune 
response by 
downregulating host 
chaperone proteins
•
Cryptococcus 
neoformans
•
Candida albicans
•
Mucorales order 
moulds
•
Hyalohyphomycosis, 
including those 
caused by Fusarium 
spp. and 
Scedosporium spp.
Completed phase I for 
oncology indications
NCT00978523
ASP2397
Unknown, but taken up by Sit1
•
Aspergillus 
fumigatus
•
Some Candida spp.
•
Fusarium spp.
•
Trichosporon spp.
Preclinical but 
potentially approaching 
clinical studies
–
Aureobasidin A
Inositol phosphorylceramide synthase
Broad spectrum
Preclinical
–
Cloudbreak molecules 
(bispecific antibodies)
Binds to granulocytes and thereby 
concentrates the antifungal at the 
infection
Could have focused or broad-
spectrum antifungal activity
Preclinical
–
Efungumab (also known 
as Mycograb)
Hsp90
Candida spp.
Phase II
NCT00324025 and NCT00847678
F901318
Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase
•
Aspergillosis spp.
•
Scedosporidium spp.
Phase II
NCT02856178
Geldanamycin-like agents
Hsp90
Broad spectrum
Completed phase I for 
oncology indications
148
MGCD290
Hos2
•
Broad spectrum
•
Synergizes with 
approved antifungals
Phase II
NCT01497223
Nikkomycin Z
Chitin synthase
•
Coccidioidomycosis, 
histoplasmosis and 
blastomycosis
•
Synergizes with 
approved antifungals
Phase I
NCT00834184
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Perfect
Page 31
Compound
Molecular target
Target species or relevant disease
Development stage
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier or 
ref.
T-2307
Mitochondrial membrane potential
•
Candida spp.
•
Cryptococcus spp.
•
Aspergillus spp.
Phase I (see Further 
information for details)
–
Compounds that could be repurposed
Cyclosporine, tacrolimus 
or rapamycin
mTOR or calcineurin
•
Broad spectrum
•
To be used alongside 
existing antifungals
Approved for post-
transplant 
immunosuppression
–
Rifampin
RNA polymerase
•
Broad spectrum
•
To be used alongside 
existing antifungals
Approved for bacterial 
infections
–
Sertraline
Serotonin reuptake
•
Cryptococcal 
meningitis
•
To be used alongside 
existing antifungals
Approved for depression
–
Tamoxifen
Oestrogen receptor
•
Cryptococcosis
•
To be used alongside 
existing antifungals
Approved for oestrogen 
receptor-positive breast 
cancer
–
Verapamil
Calcium channel
•
Broad spectrum
•
To be used alongside 
existing antifungals
Approved for cardiac 
conditions (including 
hypertension and 
arrhythmias)
–
Hos2, histone deacetylase 2; Hsp90, heat shock protein 90; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; Sit1, siderophore iron transporter 1.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 10.
