 Young Child Feeding
WORLD HEAL
TH
ORGANIZATION
Global Strategy 
for Infant and
 Global Strategy
for Infant and
Young Child
Feeding
World Health Organization
Geneva
 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding.
1.Infant nutrition 2.Breast feeding 3.Feeding behavior 4.National health programs
5.Health policy 6.Guidelines I.World Health Organization
II. UNICEF
ISBN 92 4 156221 8
(NLM classification: WS 120)
© World Health Organization 2003
All rights reserved. Publications of the 
World Health Organization can be obtained from
Marketing and Dissemination, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211
Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email:
bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publi-
cations –
 whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution –
 should be addressed to
Publications, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int).
Designed by minimum graphics
Printed in Singapore
 Contents
Abbreviations
iv
Foreword
v
Introduction
1
Global strategy for infant and young child feeding
5
Defining the challenge
5
Determining the aim and objectives
6
Promoting appropriate feeding for infants and young children
7
Exercising other feeding options
10
Feeding in exceptionally difficult circumstances
10
Improving feeding practices
12
Achieving the strategy’s objectives
13
Implementing high-priority action
15
For protection
16
For promotion
16
For support through the health care system
16
For support in the community
18
For support for feeding infants and young children in
exceptionally difficult circumstances
18
Obligations and responsibilities
19
Governments
19
Other concerned parties
20
Health professional bodies
20
Nongovernmental organizations including
community-based support groups
21
Commercial enterprises
22
The social partners
23
Other groups
23
International organizations
23
Conclusion
25
Annex Resolution WHA55.25, Infant and young child nutrition
27
Endorsement of the UNICEF Executive Board
30
 iv
Abbreviations
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
HIV/AIDS
Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome
ILO
International Labour Organization
UNAIDS
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR
United Nations High Commission for Refugees
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund
WHO
World Health Organization
 v
Foreword
W
HO and UNICEF jointly developed the Global Strategy for
Infant and Young Child Feeding to revitalize world attention to
the impact that feeding practices have on the nutritional status, growth
and development, health, and thus the very survival of infants and young
children.
The Global Strategy is based on the evidence of nutrition’s significance
in the early months and years of life, and of the crucial role that appro-
priate feeding practices play in achieving optimal health outcomes. Lack
of breastfeeding –
 and especially lack of exclusive breastfeeding during
the first half-year of life –
 are important risk factors for infant and child-
hood morbidity and mortality that are only compounded by inappro-
priate complementary feeding. 
The life-long impact includes poor school
performance, reduced productivity, and impaired intellectual and
social development.
The Strategy is the result of a comprehensive two-year participatory
process. The aim, from the outset, was to move towards formulating a
sound approach to alleviating the tragic burden borne by the world’s
children –
 50 to 70% of the burden of diarrhoeal disease, measles,
malaria and lower respiratory infections in childhood are attributable
to undernutrition –
 and to contribute to a lasting reduction in poverty
and deprivation.
This exercise provided an exceptional opportunity to re-examine criti-
cally, in the light of the latest scientific and epidemiological evidence,
the fundamental factors affecting feeding practices for infants and young
children. At the same time, it renewed commitment to continuing joint
action consistent with the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative, the Inter-
national Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes, and the Innocenti
Declaration on the Protection, Promotion and Support of Breast-
feeding.
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
vi
The Strategy is intended as a guide for action; it identifies interventions
with a proven positive impact, it emphasizes providing mothers and
families the support they need to carry out their crucial roles, and it
explicitly defines the obligations and responsibilities in this regard of
governments, international organizations and other concerned parties.
We are proud of the unanimous endorsement that the governing bodies
of our two agencies have pronounced in support of the Global
Strategy.1 The first necessary political step has been taken. It is now
time for everyone concerned –
 governments as well as all the other
innumerable actors throughout society –
 to move swiftly and deliber-
ately to give tangible effect to the Strategy’s vital aim and practical
objectives. There can be no delay in applying the accumulated knowl-
edge and experience to help make our world a truly fit environment
where all children can thrive and achieve their full potential.
Gro Harlem Brundtland
Carol Bellamy
MD, MPH
Executive Director
Director-General
United Nations Children’s
World Health Organization
Fund
1 The Global Strategy was endorsed, by consensus, on 18 May 2002 by the Fifty-fifth
World Health Assembly, and on 16 September 2002 by the UNICEF Executive Board
(see annex).
 1
1. Introduction
T
he Executive Board of the World Health Organization, at its 101st
session in January 1998, called for a revitalization of the global com-
mitment to appropriate infant and young child nutrition, and in par-
ticular breastfeeding and complementary feeding. Subsequently, in close
collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund, WHO organ-
ized a consultation (Geneva, 13–
17 March 2000) to assess infant and
young child feeding practices, review key interventions, and formulate
a comprehensive strategy for the next decade.
Following discussions at the Fifty-third 
World Health Assembly in May
2000 and the 107th session of the Executive Board in January 2001 of
the outline and critical issues of the global strategy, the Fifty-fourth
World Health Assembly (May 2001) reviewed progress and requested
the Director-General to submit the strategy to the Executive Board at
its 109th session and to the Fifty-fifth World Health Assembly, respec-
tively in January and May 2002.1
During their discussion of the draft of the global strategy, members of
the Executive Board commended the setting in motion of the consulta-
tive, science-based process that had led to its formulation as a guide for
developing country-specific approaches to improving feeding practices.
They also welcomed the strategy’s integrated and comprehensive ap-
proach. Several members made suggestions with regard to the exact
wording of the draft strategy. These suggestions were taken carefully
into account in preparing the strategy, as were comments from Mem-
ber States following the Board’s 109th session2 and observations of other
interested parties, including professional associations, nongovernmental
organizations and the processed-food industry. Stressing the validity of
a well-structured draft, the Executive Board recommended that the
Health Assembly endorse the global strategy and that Member States
1 Resolution WHA54.2, paragraph 3(6).
2 Provided in response to circular letter C.L.5.2002, dated 8 February 2002.
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
2
implement it, as appropriate to national circumstances, in order to pro-
mote optimal feeding for all infants and young children.1
An emerging policy framework
From the outset it was agreed that the global strategy should build on
past and continuing achievements –
 particularly the Baby-friendly
Hospital Initiative (1991), the International Code of Marketing of
Breast-milk Substitutes (1981) and the Innocenti Declaration on the
Protection, Promotion and Support of Breastfeeding (1990) –
 in the
overall context of national policies and programmes on nutrition and
child health, and consistent with the World Declaration and Plan of
Action for Nutrition.2 However, it should go further and emphasize the
need for comprehensive national policies on infant and young child
feeding, including guidelines on ensuring appropriate feeding of in-
fants and young children in exceptionally difficult circumstances, and
the need to ensure that all health services protect, promote and support
exclusive breastfeeding and timely and adequate complementary feed-
ing with continued breastfeeding.
Two principles guided the development of the strategy: it should be
grounded on the best available scientific and epidemiological evidence,
and it should be as participatory as possible. Consequently, the work
involved extensive review of the scientific literature and several techni-
cal consultations. The latter focused on both crucial elements of the
strategy and specific issues. For instance, the WHO/UNICEF consul-
tation in March 2000 brought together experts in strategic and pro-
grammatic aspects of the subject and representatives of ILO, UNHCR
and UNAIDS; the UNAIDS/UNICEF/UNFPA/WHO Interagency 
Task
Team meeting (Geneva, 11–
13 October 2000) considered the preven-
tion of mother-to-child transmission of HIV;3 and the expert consulta-
1 Resolution EB109.R18.
2 World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition. International Conference on Nutrition,
Rome, FAO/WHO, 1992.
3 New data on the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and their policy
implications: conclusions and recommendations. 
WHO technical consultation on behalf
of the UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/UNAIDS Interagency 
Task 
Team on Mother-to-Child
Transmission of HIV, October 2001, Geneva, WHO (document WHO/RHR/01.28).
 3
tion (Geneva, 28–
30 March 2001) reviewed the optimal duration of
exclusive breastfeeding.1
Consistent with an approach in which countries participated, from the
outset, in tailoring the strategy to their specific needs, during the
period 2000–
2001 the draft strategy was considered at country consul-
tations in Brazil, China, Philippines, Scotland, Sri Lanka, 
Thailand and
Zimbabwe. Six regional consultations followed with representatives of
more than 100 Member States and the participation of UNICEF, FAO,
ILO, the International Lactation Consultant Association, the Interna-
tional Baby Food Action Network, and the World Alliance for
Breastfeeding Action. On the basis of the inputs provided and the prin-
ciples that evolved through this process, the following policy frame-
work emerged.
● Inappropriate feeding practices and their consequences are ma-
jor obstacles to sustainable socioeconomic development and pov-
erty reduction. Governments will be unsuccessful in their efforts
to accelerate economic development in any significant long-term
sense until optimal child growth and development, especially
through appropriate feeding practices, are ensured.
● Appropriate evidence-based feeding practices are essential for
attaining and maintaining proper nutrition and health.
● Mothers and babies form an inseparable biological and social
unit; the health and nutrition of one group cannot be divorced
from the health and nutrition of the other.
● Keeping improved infant and young child feeding high on the
public health agenda is crucial to consolidating gains made dur-
ing the past two decades.
● Twenty years after adoption of the International Code of Mar-
keting of Breast-milk Substitutes and 10 years into giving practi-
cal effect to the World Declaration and Plan of Action for
Nutrition, the Innocenti Declaration and the Baby-friendly
Hospital Initiative, it is time for governments, the international
community and other concerned parties to renew their commit-
1. INTRODUCTION
1 The optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding. Report of an expert consultation.
Geneva, 
WHO (document 
WHO/NHD/01.09, 
WHO/FCH/CAH/01.24) March 2001.
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
4
ment to promoting the health and nutrition of infants and young
children and to work together for this purpose.
● Although not every component is new, what is novel about the
global strategy is its integrated comprehensive approach and the
degree of urgency called for in implementing it, in order to deal
effectively with so elementary a challenge as ensuring appropri-
ate feeding for the world’s children.
● The most rational and economical approach to achieving the strat-
egy’s aim and objectives is to use existing health and intersectoral
structures, reinforced where necessary.
● Success in implementing the global strategy rests, first and fore-
most, on achieving political commitment at the highest level and
assembling the indispensable human and financial resources.
● Additional high-priority conditions for success include defini-
tion of suitable goals and objectives, a realistic timeline for their
achievement, and measurable process and output indicators that
will permit an accurate monitoring and evaluation of action taken
and a rapid response to identified needs.
 5
2. Global strategy for infant and
young child feeding
Defining the challenge
1.
Malnutrition has been responsible, directly or indirectly, for 60%
of the 10.9 million deaths annually among children under five. 
Well
over two-thirds of these deaths, which are often associated with
inappropriate feeding practices, occur during the first year of life.
No more than 35% of infants worldwide are exclusively breastfed
during the first four months of life; complementary feeding fre-
quently begins too early or too late, and foods are often nutrition-
ally inadequate and unsafe. Malnourished children who survive are
more frequently sick and suffer the life-long consequences of im-
paired development. Rising incidences of overweight and obesity in
children are also a matter of serious concern. Because poor feeding
practices are a major threat to social and economic development,
they are among the most serious obstacles to attaining and main-
taining health that face this age group.
2.
The health and nutritional status of mothers and children are inti-
mately linked. Improved infant and young child feeding begins with
ensuring the health and nutritional status of women, in their own
right, throughout all stages of life and continues with women as
providers for their children and families. Mothers and infants form
a biological and social unit; they also share problems of malnutri-
tion and ill-health. Whatever is done to solve these problems con-
cerns both mothers and children together.
3.
The global strategy for infant and young child feeding is based on
respect, protection, facilitation and fulfilment of accepted human
rights principles. Nutrition is a crucial, universally recognized com-
ponent of the child’s right to the enjoyment of the highest attain-
able standard of health as stated in the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. Children have the right to adequate nutrition and access
to safe and nutritious food, and both are essential for fulfilling their
right to the highest attainable standard of health. Women, in turn,
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
6
have the right to proper nutrition, to decide how to feed their chil-
dren, and to full information and appropriate conditions that will
enable them to carry out their decisions. These rights are not yet
realized in many environments.
4.
Rapid social and economic change only intensifies the difficulties
that families face in properly feeding and caring for their children.
Expanding urbanization results in more families that depend on
informal or intermittent employment with uncertain incomes and
few or no maternity benefits. Both self-employed and nominally
employed rural women face heavy workloads, usually with no ma-
ternity protection. Meanwhile, traditional family and community
support structures are being eroded, resources devoted to support-
ing health- and, especially, nutrition-related, services are dwindling,
accurate information on optimal feeding practices is lacking, and
the number of food-insecure rural and urban households is on the
rise.
5.
The HIV pandemic and the risk of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV through breastfeeding pose unique challenges to the promo-
tion of breastfeeding, even among unaffected families. Complex
emergencies, which are often characterized by population displace-
ment, food insecurity and armed conflict, are increasing in number
and intensity, further compromising the care and feeding of infants
and young children the world over. Refugees and internally
displaced persons alone currently number more than 40 million,
including 5.5 million under-five children.
Determining the aim and objectives
6.
The aim of this strategy is to improve –
 through optimal feeding –
the nutritional status, growth and development, health, and thus
the survival of infants and young children.
7.
The strategy’s specific objectives are:
● to raise awareness of the main problems affecting infant and young
child feeding, identify approaches to their solution, and provide
a framework of essential interventions;
● to increase the commitment of governments, international
 7
organizations and other concerned parties1 for optimal feeding
practices for infants and young children;
● to create an environment that will enable mothers, families and
other caregivers in all circumstances to make –
 and implement –
informed choices about optimal feeding practices for infants and
young children.
8.
The strategy is intended as a guide for action; it is based on accu-
mulated evidence of the significance of the early months and years
of life for child growth and development and it identifies interven-
tions with a proven positive impact during this period. Moreover to
remain dynamic, successful strategy implementation will rely on
keeping pace with developments, while new clinical and popula-
tion-based research is stimulated and behavioural concerns are
investigated.
9.
No single intervention or group can succeed in meeting the chal-
lenge; implementing the strategy thus calls for increased political
will, public investment, awareness among health workers, involve-
ment of families and communities, and collaboration between gov-
ernments, international organizations and other concerned parties
that will ultimately ensure that all necessary action is taken.
Promoting appropriate feeding for infants and
young children
10. Breastfeeding is an unequalled way of providing ideal food for the
healthy growth and development of infants; it is also an integral
part of the reproductive process with important implications for
the health of mothers. As a global public health recommendation,
infants should be exclusively breastfed for the first six months of
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
1 For the purposes of this strategy, other concerned parties include professional bodies,
training institutions, industrial and commercial enterprises and their associations,
nongovernmental organizations whether or not formally registered, religious and
charitable organizations and citizens’ associations such as community-based
breastfeeding support networks and consumer groups.
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
8
life to achieve optimal growth, development and health.1 There-
after, to meet their evolving nutritional requirements, infants should
receive nutritionally adequate and safe complementary foods while
breastfeeding continues for up to two years of age or beyond. Ex-
clusive breastfeeding from birth is possible except for a few medical
conditions, and unrestricted exclusive breastfeeding results in
ample milk production.
11. Even though it is a natural act, breastfeeding is also a learned be-
haviour. Virtually all mothers can breastfeed provided they have
accurate information, and support within their families and com-
munities and from the health care system. They should also have
access to skilled practical help from, for example, trained health
workers, lay and peer counsellors, and certified lactation consult-
ants, who can help to build mothers’ confidence, improve feeding
technique, and prevent or resolve breastfeeding problems.
12. Women in paid employment can be helped to continue breastfeeding
by being provided with minimum enabling conditions, for example
paid maternity leave, part-time work arrangements, on-site crèches,
facilities for expressing and storing breast milk, and breastfeeding
breaks (see paragraph 28).
13. Infants are particularly vulnerable during the transition period when
complementary feeding begins. Ensuring that their nutritional needs
are met thus requires that complementary foods be:
● timely –
 meaning that they are introduced when the need for
energy and nutrients exceeds what can be provided through ex-
clusive and frequent breastfeeding;
● adequate –
 meaning that they provide sufficient energy, protein
and micronutrients to meet a growing child’s nutritional needs;
● safe –
 meaning that they are hygienically stored and prepared,
and fed with clean hands using clean utensils and not bottles and
teats;
1 As formulated in the conclusions and recommendations of the expert consultation
(Geneva, 28–
30 March 2001) that completed the systematic review of the optimal
duration of exclusive breastfeeding (see document A54/INF.DOC./4). See also
resolution WHA54.2.
 9
● properly fed –
 meaning that they are given consistent with a child’s
signals of appetite and satiety, and that meal frequency and feed-
ing method –
 actively encouraging the child, even during illness,
to consume sufficient food using fingers, spoon or self-feeding –
are suitable for age.
14. Appropriate complementary feeding depends on accurate informa-
tion and skilled support from the family, community and health
care system. Inadequate knowledge about appropriate foods and
feeding practices is often a greater determinant of malnutrition than
the lack of food. Moreover, diversified approaches are required to
ensure access to foods that will adequately meet energy and nutri-
ent needs of growing children, for example use of home- and
community-based technologies to enhance nutrient density, bio-
availability and the micronutrient content of local foods.
15. Providing sound and culture-specific nutrition counselling to
mothers of young children and recommending the widest possible
use of indigenous foodstuffs will help ensure that local foods are
prepared and fed safely in the home. The agriculture sector has a
particularly important role to play in ensuring that suitable foods
for use in complementary feeding are produced, readily available
and affordable.
16. In addition, low-cost complementary foods, prepared with locally avail-
able ingredients using suitable small-scale production technologies
in community settings, can help to meet the nutritional needs of
older infants and young children. Industrially processed complemen-
tary foods also provide an option for some mothers who have the
means to buy them and the knowledge and facilities to prepare and
feed them safely. Processed-food products for infants and young
children should, when sold or otherwise distributed, meet applica-
ble standards recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commis-
sion and also the Codex Code of Hygienic Practice for Foods for
Infants and Children.
17. Food fortification and universal or targeted nutrient supplementation
may also help to ensure that older infants and young children re-
ceive adequate amounts of micronutrients.
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
10
Exercising other feeding options
18. The vast majority of mothers can and should breastfeed, just as the
vast majority of infants can and should be breastfed. Only under
exceptional circumstances can a mother’s milk be considered un-
suitable for her infant. For those few health situations where in-
fants cannot, or should not, be breastfed, the choice of the best
alternative –
 expressed breast milk from an infant’s own mother,
breast milk from a healthy wet-nurse or a human-milk bank, or a
breast-milk substitute fed with a cup, which is a safer method than
a feeding bottle and teat –
 depends on individual circumstances.
19. For infants who do not receive breast milk, feeding with a suitable
breast-milk substitute –
 for example an infant formula prepared in
accordance with applicable Codex Alimentarius standards, or a
home-prepared formula with micronutrient supplements –
 should
be demonstrated only by health workers, or other community work-
ers if necessary, and only to the mothers and other family members
who need to use it; and the information given should include ad-
equate instructions for appropriate preparation and the health haz-
ards of inappropriate preparation and use. Infants who are not
breastfed, for whatever reason, should receive special attention from
the health and social welfare system since they constitute a risk
group.
Feeding in exceptionally difficult circumstances
20. Families in difficult situations require special attention and practical
support to be able to feed their children adequately. In such cases
the likelihood of not breastfeeding increases, as do the dangers of
artificial feeding and inappropriate complementary feeding. Wher-
ever possible, mothers and babies should remain together and be
provided the support they need to exercise the most appropriate
feeding option under the circumstances.
21. Infants and young children who are malnourished are most often
found in environments where improving the quality and quantity
of food intake is particularly problematic. To prevent a recurrence
and to overcome the effects of chronic malnutrition, these children
need extra attention both during the early rehabilitation phase and
over the longer term. Nutritionally adequate and safe complemen-
 11
tary foods may be particularly difficult to obtain and dietary sup-
plements may be required for these children. Continued frequent
breastfeeding and, when necessary, relactation are important pre-
ventive steps since malnutrition often has its origin in inadequate
or disrupted breastfeeding.
22. The proportion of infants with low birth weight varies from 6% to
more than 28% depending on the setting. Most are born at or near
term and can breastfeed within the first hour after birth. Breast
milk is particularly important for preterm infants and the small
proportion of term infants with very low birth weight; they are at
increased risk of infection, long-term ill-health and death.
23. Infants and children are among the most vulnerable victims of natu-
ral or human-induced emergencies. Interrupted breastfeeding and
inappropriate complementary feeding heighten the risk of malnu-
trition, illness and mortality. Uncontrolled distribution of breast-
milk substitutes, for example in refugee settings, can lead to early
and unnecessary cessation of breastfeeding. For the vast majority
of infants emphasis should be on protecting, promoting and sup-
porting breastfeeding and ensuring timely, safe and appropriate
complementary feeding. There will always be a small number of
infants who have to be fed on breast-milk substitutes. Suitable sub-
stitutes, procured, distributed and fed safely as part of the regular
inventory of foods and medicines, should be provided.
24. An estimated 1.6 million children are born to HIV-infected women
each year, mainly in low-income countries. 
The absolute risk of HIV
transmission through breastfeeding for more than one year –
 glo-
bally between 10% and 20% –
 needs to be balanced against the
increased risk of morbidity and mortality when infants are not
breastfed. All HIV-infected mothers should receive counselling,
which includes provision of general information about meeting their
own nutritional requirements and about the risks and benefits of
various feeding options, and specific guidance in selecting the op-
tion most likely to be suitable for their situation. Adequate replace-
ment feeding is needed for infants born to HIV-positive mothers who
choose not to breastfeed. It requires a suitable breast-milk substi-
tute, for example an infant formula prepared in accordance with
applicable Codex Alimentarius standards, or a home-prepared for-
mula with micronutrient supplements. Heat-treated breast milk, or
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
12
breast milk provided by an HIV-negative donor mother, may be an
option in some cases. 
To reduce the risk of interfering with the pro-
motion of breastfeeding for the great majority, providing a breast-
milk substitute for these infants should be consistent with the
principles and aim of the International Code of Marketing of Breast-
milk Substitutes (see paragraph 19). For mothers who test negative
for HIV, or who are untested, exclusive breastfeeding remains the
recommended feeding option (see paragraph 10).
25. Children living in special circumstances also require extra attention –
for example, orphans and children in foster care, and children born
to adolescent mothers, mothers suffering from physical or mental
disabilities, drug- or alcohol-dependence, or mothers who are im-
prisoned or part of disadvantaged or otherwise marginalized
populations.
Improving feeding practices
26. Mothers, fathers and other caregivers should have access to objec-
tive, consistent and complete information about appropriate feed-
ing practices, free from commercial influence. In particular, they
need to know about the recommended period of exclusive and con-
tinued breastfeeding; the timing of the introduction of complemen-
tary foods; what types of food to give, how much and how often;
and how to feed these foods safely.
27. Mothers should have access to skilled support to help them initiate
and sustain appropriate feeding practices, and to prevent difficul-
ties and overcome them when they occur. Knowledgeable health
workers are well placed to provide this support, which should be a
routine part not only of regular prenatal, delivery and postnatal
care but also of services provided for the well baby and sick child.
Community-based networks offering mother-to-mother support,
and trained breastfeeding counsellors working within, or closely with,
the health care system, also have an important role to play in this
regard. Where fathers are concerned, research shows that breast-
feeding is enhanced by the support and companionship they pro-
vide as family providers and caregivers.
 13
28. Mothers should also be able to continue breastfeeding and caring
for their children after they return to paid employment. This can be
accomplished by implementing maternity protection legislation and
related measures consistent with ILO Maternity Protection Con-
vention, 2000 No. 183 and Maternity Protection Recommenda-
tion, 2000 No. 191. Maternity leave, day-care facilities and paid
breastfeeding breaks should be available for all women employed
outside the home.
29. Continuing clinical and population-based research and investiga-
tion of behavioural concerns are essential ingredients for improv-
ing feeding practices. Crucial areas include completion and
application of the new international growth reference, prevention
and control of micronutrient malnutrition, programmatic ap-
proaches and community-based interventions for improving
breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices, improving
maternal nutritional status and pregnancy outcome, and interven-
tions for preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV in rela-
tion to infant feeding.
Achieving the strategy’s objectives
30. A first step to achieving the objectives of this strategy is to reaffirm
the relevance –
 indeed the urgency –
 of the four operational targets
of the Innocenti Declaration on the Protection, Promotion and
Support of Breastfeeding:1
● appointing a national breastfeeding coordinator with appropri-
ate authority, and establishing a multisectoral national breast-
feeding committee composed of representatives from relevant
government departments, nongovernmental organizations, and
health professional associations;
● ensuring that every facility providing maternity services fully prac-
tices all the “Ten steps to successful breastfeeding” set out in the
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
1 Meeting in Florence, Italy, in July 1990, government policy-makers from more than
30 countries adopted the Innocenti Declaration. The Forty-fourth World Health
Assembly, in 1991, welcomed the Declaration as “a basis for international health policy
and action” and requested the Director-General to monitor achievement of its targets
(resolution 
WHA44.33).
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
14
WHO/UNICEF statement on breastfeeding and maternity serv-
ices;1
● giving effect to the principles and aim of the International Code
of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant
Health Assembly resolutions in their entirety;
● enacting imaginative legislation protecting the breastfeeding rights
of working women and establishing means for its enforcement.
31. Many governments have taken important steps towards realizing
these targets and much has been achieved as a result, notably through
the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative and the legislation and other
measures that have been adopted with regard to the marketing of
breast-milk substitutes. Achievements are far from uniform, how-
ever, and there are signs of weakened commitment, for example in
the face of the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the number and gravity of
complex emergencies affecting infants and young children. More-
over, the Innocenti Declaration focuses uniquely on breastfeeding.
Thus, additional targets are needed to reflect a comprehensive ap-
proach to meeting care and feeding requirements during the first
three years of life through a wide range of interrelated actions.
32. In the light of accumulated scientific evidence, and policy and pro-
gramme experience, the time is right for governments, with the sup-
port of international organizations and other concerned parties:
● to reconsider how best to ensure the appropriate feeding of
infants and young children and to renew their collective com-
mitment to meeting this challenge;
● to constitute effective broad-based bodies to lead the implemen-
tation of this strategy as a coordinated multisectoral national
response by all concerned parties to the multiple challenges of
infant and young child feeding;2 and
1 Protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding: the special role of maternity services.
A joint WHO/UNICEF statement. Geneva, WHO, 1989.
2 Consistent with the first target of the Innocenti Declaration, more than 100 countries
have already appointed a national breastfeeding coordinator and established a
multisectoral national committee. These arrangements could form the basis for the
creation of the new body called for here.
 15
● to establish a system to monitor regularly feeding practices,
assess trends using sex-disaggregated data and evaluate the im-
pact of interventions.
33. With these considerations in mind, the global strategy includes as a
priority for all governments the achievement of the following addi-
tional operational targets:1
● to develop, implement, monitor and evaluate a comprehensive
policy on infant and young child feeding, in the context of
national policies and programmes for nutrition, child and repro-
ductive health, and poverty reduction;
● to ensure that the health and other relevant sectors protect, pro-
mote and support exclusive breastfeeding for six months and
continued breastfeeding up to two years of age or beyond, while
providing women access to the support they require –
 in the
family, community and workplace –
 to achieve this goal;
● to promote timely, adequate, safe and appropriate complemen-
tary feeding with continued breastfeeding;
● to provide guidance on feeding infants and young children in
exceptionally difficult circumstances, and on the related support
required by mothers, families and other caregivers;
● to consider what new legislation or other suitable measures may
be required, as part of a comprehensive policy on infant and
young child feeding, to give effect to the principles and aim of
the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes
and to subsequent relevant Health Assembly resolutions.
Implementing high-priority action
34. A comprehensive national policy, based on a thorough needs as-
sessment, should foster an environment that protects, promotes and
supports appropriate infant and young child feeding practices. An
effective feeding policy consistent with efforts to promote overall
household food security requires the following critical interventions:
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
1 Governments should set a realistic date for achievement of all the global strategy’s
targets and define measurable indicators to assess their progress in this regard.
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
16
For protection
● adopting and monitoring application of a policy of maternity
entitlements, consistent with the ILO Maternity Protection Con-
vention and Recommendation, in order to facilitate breastfeeding
by women in paid employment, including those whom the stand-
ards describe as engaging in atypical forms of dependent work,
for example part-time, domestic and intermittent employment;
● ensuring that processed complementary foods are marketed for
use at an appropriate age, and that they are safe, culturally
acceptable, affordable and nutritionally adequate, in accordance
with relevant Codex Alimentarius standards;
● implementing and monitoring existing measures to give effect to
the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes
and to subsequent relevant Health Assembly resolutions, and,
where appropriate, strengthening them or adopting new mea-
sures;
For promotion
● ensuring that all who are responsible for communicating with
the general public, including educational and media authorities,
provide accurate and complete information about appropriate
infant and young child feeding practices, taking into account
prevailing social, cultural and environmental circumstances;
For support through the health care system
● providing skilled counselling and help for infant and young child
feeding, for instance at well-baby clinics, during immunization
sessions, and in in- and out-patient services for sick children,
nutrition services, and reproductive health and maternity ser-
vices;
● ensuring that hospital routines and procedures remain fully sup-
portive of the successful initiation and establishment of
breastfeeding through implementation of the Baby-friendly Hos-
pital Initiative, monitoring and reassessing already designated
facilities, and expanding the Initiative to include clinics, health
centres and paediatric hospitals;
 17
● increasing access to antenatal care and education about breast-
feeding, to delivery practices which support breastfeeding and to
follow-up care which helps to ensure continued breastfeeding;
● promoting good nutrition for pregnant and lactating women;
● monitoring the growth and development of infants and young
children as a routine nutrition intervention, with particular
attention to low-birth-weight and sick infants and those born to
HIV-positive mothers, and ensuring that mothers and families
receive appropriate counselling;
● providing guidance on appropriate complementary feeding with
emphasis on the use of suitable locally available foods which are
prepared and fed safely;
● promoting adequate intake of essential nutrients through access
to suitable –
 including fortified –
 local foods and, when neces-
sary, micronutrient supplements;
● enabling mothers to remain with their hospitalized children to
ensure continued breastfeeding and adequate complementary
feeding and, where feasible, allow breastfed children to stay with
their hospitalized mothers;
● ensuring effective therapeutic feeding of sick and malnourished
children, including the provision of skilled breastfeeding support
when required;
● training health workers who care for mothers, children and fami-
lies with regard to:
— counselling and assistance skills needed for breastfeeding,
complementary feeding, HIV and infant feeding and, when
necessary, feeding with a breast-milk substitute,
— feeding during illness,
— health workers’ responsibilities under the International Code
of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes;
● revising and reforming pre-service curricula for all health work-
ers, nutritionists and allied professionals to provide appropriate
information and advice on infant and young child feeding for
use by families and those involved in the field of infant and young
child nutrition;
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
18
For support in the community
● promoting development of community-based support networks
to help ensure appropriate infant and young child feeding, for
example mother-to-mother support groups and peer or lay coun-
sellors, to which hospitals and clinics can refer mothers on dis-
charge;
● ensuring that community-based support networks not only are
welcome within the health care system but also participate ac-
tively in the planning and provision of services;
For support for feeding infants and young children in exceptionally
difficult circumstances
● ensuring that health workers have accurate and up-to-date infor-
mation about infant feeding policies and practices, and that they
have the specific knowledge and skills required to support
caregivers and children in all aspects of infant and young child
feeding in exceptionally difficult circumstances;
● creating conditions that will facilitate exclusive breastfeeding, by
provision, for example, of appropriate maternity care, extra food
rations and drinking-water for pregnant and lactating women,
and staff who have breastfeeding counselling skills;
● ensuring that suitable –
 preferably locally available –
 comple-
mentary foods are selected and fed, consistent with the age and
nutritional needs of older infants and young children;
● searching actively for malnourished infants and young children
so that their condition can be identified and treated, they can be
appropriately fed, and their caregivers can be supported;
● giving guidance for identifying infants who have to be fed on
breast-milk substitutes, ensuring that a suitable substitute is pro-
vided and fed safely for as long as needed by the infants con-
cerned, and preventing any “spillover effect” of artificial feeding
into the general population;
● ensuring that health workers with knowledge and experience in
all aspects of breastfeeding and replacement feeding are avail-
able to counsel HIV-positive women;
 19
● adapting the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative by taking account
of HIV/AIDS and by ensuring that those responsible for emer-
gency preparedness are well trained to support appropriate feed-
ing practices consistent with the Initiative’s universal principles;
● ensuring that whenever breast-milk substitutes are required for
social or medical reasons, for example for orphans or in the case
of HIV-positive mothers, they are provided for as long as the
infants concerned need them.
Obligations and responsibilities
35. Governments, international organizations and other concerned
parties share responsibility for ensuring the fulfilment of the right
of children to the highest attainable standard of health and the right
of women to full and unbiased information, and adequate health
care and nutrition. Each partner should acknowledge and embrace
its responsibilities for improving the feeding of infants and young
children and for mobilizing required resources. All partners should
work together to achieve fully this strategy’s aim and objectives,
including by forming fully transparent innovative alliances and part-
nerships consistent with accepted principles for avoiding conflict of
interest.
Governments
36. The primary obligation of governments is to formulate, implement,
monitor and evaluate a comprehensive national policy on infant and
young child feeding. In addition to political commitment at the
highest level, a successful policy depends on effective national co-
ordination to ensure full collaboration of all concerned government
agencies, international organizations and other concerned parties.
This implies continual collection and evaluation of relevant infor-
mation on feeding policies and practices. Regional and local gov-
ernments also have an important role to play in implementing this
strategy.
37. A detailed action plan should accompany the comprehensive policy,
including defined goals and objectives, a timeline for their achieve-
ment, allocation of responsibilities for the plan’s implementation
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
20
and measurable indicators for its monitoring and evaluation. For
this purpose, governments should seek, when appropriate, the co-
operation of appropriate international organizations and other agen-
cies, including global and regional lending institutions. The plan
should be compatible with, and form an integral part of, all other
activities designed to contribute to optimal infant and young child
nutrition.
38. Adequate resources –
 human, financial and organizational –
 will have
to be identified and allocated to ensure the plan’s timely successful
implementation. Constructive dialogue and active collaboration with
appropriate groups working for the protection, promotion and sup-
port of appropriate feeding practices will be particularly important
in this connection. Support for epidemiological and operational
research is also a crucial component.
Other concerned parties
39. Identifying specific responsibilities within society –
 crucial comple-
mentary and mutually reinforcing roles –
 for protecting, promoting
and supporting appropriate feeding practices is something of a new
departure. Groups that have an important role in advocating the
rights of women and children and in creating a supportive environ-
ment on their behalf can work singly, together and with govern-
ments and international organizations to improve the situation by
helping to remove both cultural and practical barriers to appropri-
ate infant and young child feeding practices.
Health professional bodies
40. Health professional bodies, which include medical faculties, schools
of public health, public and private institutions for training health
workers (including midwives, nurses, nutritionists and dietitians),
and professional associations, should have the following main
responsibilities towards their students or membership:
● ensuring that basic education and training for all health workers
cover lactation physiology, exclusive and continued breastfeeding,
complementary feeding, feeding in difficult circumstances, meet-
ing the nutritional needs of infants who have to be fed on breast-
milk substitutes, and the International Code of Marketing of
Breast-milk Substitutes and the legislation and other measures
 21
adopted to give effect to it and to subsequent relevant Health
Assembly resolutions;
● training in how to provide skilled support for exclusive and con-
tinued breastfeeding, and appropriate complementary feeding
in all neonatal, paediatric, reproductive health, nutritional and
community health services;
● promoting achievement and maintenance of “baby-friendly”
status by maternity hospitals, wards and clinics, consistent with
the “Ten steps to successful breastfeeding”1 and the principle of
not accepting free or low-cost supplies of breast-milk substitutes,
feeding bottles and teats;
● observing, in their entirety, their responsibilities under the Inter-
national Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and sub-
sequent relevant Health Assembly resolutions, and national
measures adopted to give effect to both;
● encouraging the establishment and recognition of community
support groups and referring mothers to them.
Nongovernmental organizations including community-based
support groups
41. The aims and objectives of a wide variety of nongovernmental
organizations operating locally, nationally and internationally in-
clude promoting the adequate food and nutrition needs of young
children and families. For example, charitable and religious organi-
zations, consumer associations, mother-to-mother support groups,
family clubs, and child-care cooperatives all have multiple oppor-
tunities to contribute to the implementation of this strategy through,
for example:
● providing their members accurate, up-to-date information about
infant and young child feeding;
● integrating skilled support for infant and young child feeding in
community-based interventions and ensuring effective linkages
with the health care system;
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
1 Protecting, promoting and supporting breastfeeding: the special role of maternity services.
A joint WHO/UNICEF statement. Geneva, WHO, 1989.
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
22
● contributing to the creation of mother- and child-friendly com-
munities and workplaces that routinely support appropriate
infant and young child feeding;
● working for full implementation of the principles and aim of the
International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and
subsequent relevant Health Assembly resolutions.
42. Parents and other caregivers are most directly responsible for feed-
ing children. Ever keen to ensure that they have accurate informa-
tion to make appropriate feeding choices, parents nevertheless are
limited by their immediate environment. Since they may have only
infrequent contact with the health care system during a child’s first
two years of life, it is not unusual for caregivers to be more influ-
enced by community attitudes than by the advice of health work-
ers.
43. Additional sources of information and support are found in a vari-
ety of formal and informal groups, including breastfeeding-support
and child-care networks, clubs and religious associations. Commu-
nity-based support, including that provided by other mothers, lay
and peer breastfeeding counsellors and certified lactation consult-
ants, can effectively enable women to feed their children appropri-
ately. Most communities have self-help traditions that could readily
serve as a base for building or expanding suitable support systems
to help families in this regard.
Commercial enterprises
44. Manufacturers and distributors of industrially processed foods in-
tended for infants and young children also have a constructive role
to play in achieving the aim of this strategy. They should ensure
that processed food products for infants and children, when sold,
meet applicable Codex Alimentarius standards and the Codex Code
of Hygienic Practice for Foods for Infants and Children. In addi-
tion, all manufacturers and distributors of products within the scope
of the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes,
including feeding bottles and teats, are responsible for monitoring
their marketing practices according to the principles and aim of the
Code. They should ensure that their conduct at every level con-
forms to the Code, subsequent relevant Health Assembly resolu-
 23
tions, and national measures that have been adopted to give effect
to both.
The social partners
45. Employers should ensure that maternity entitlements of all women
in paid employment are met, including breastfeeding breaks or other
workplace arrangements –
 for example facilities for expressing and
storing breast milk for later feeding by a caregiver –
 in order to
facilitate breast-milk feeding once paid maternity leave is over. Trade
unions have a direct role in negotiating adequate maternity entitle-
ments and security of employment for women of reproductive age
(see paragraphs 28 and 34).
Other groups
46. Many other components of society have potentially influential roles
in promoting good feeding practices. These elements include:
● education authorities, which help to shape the attitudes of
children and adolescents about infant and young child feeding –
accurate information should be provided through schools and
other educational channels to promote greater awareness and
positive perceptions;
● mass media, which influence popular attitudes towards
parenting, child care and products within the scope of the Inter-
national Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes –
 their
information on the subject and, just as important, the way they
portray parenting, childcare and products should be accurate,
up to date, objective, and consistent with the Code’s principles
and aim;
● child-care facilities, which permit working mothers to care for
their infants and young children, should support and facilitate
continued breastfeeding and breast-milk feeding.
International organizations
47. International organizations, including global and regional lending
institutions, should place infant and young child feeding high on
the global public health agenda in recognition of its central signifi-
cance for realizing the rights of children and women; they should
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
24
serve as advocates for increased human, financial and institutional
resources for the universal implementation of this strategy; and, to
the extent possible, they should provide additional resources for
this purpose.
48. Specific contributions of international organizations to facilitate the
work of governments include the following:
Developing norms and standards
● developing evidence-based guidelines to facilitate achievement
of the strategy’s operational targets;
● supporting epidemiological and operational research;
● promoting the consistent use of common global indicators for
monitoring and evaluating child-feeding trends;
● developing new indicators, for example concerning adequate com-
plementary feeding;
● improving the quality and availability of sex-disaggregated
global, regional and national data;
Supporting national capacity-building
● sensitizing and training health policy-makers and health service
administrators;
● improving health worker skills in support of optimal infant and
young child feeding;
● revising related pre-service curricula for doctors, nurses, mid-
wives, nutritionists, dietitians, auxiliary health workers and other
groups as necessary;
● planning and monitoring the Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative
and expanding it beyond the maternity-care setting;
● helping to ensure sufficient resources for this purpose, especially
in highly indebted countries;
Supporting policy development and promotion
● supporting social-mobilization activities, for example using the
mass media to promote appropriate infant feeding practices and
educating media representatives;
 25
● advocating ratification of ILO Maternity Protection Convention
2000 No. 183 and application of Recommendation 2000 No.
191, including for women in atypical forms of dependent work;
● urging implementation of the International Code of Marketing
of Breast-milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant Health
Assembly resolutions, and providing related technical support
on request;
● ensuring that all Codex Alimentarius standards and related texts
dealing with foods for infants and young children give full con-
sideration to 
WHO policy concerning appropriate marketing and
distribution, recommended age of use, and safe preparation and
feeding, including as reflected in the International Code of
Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant
Health Assembly resolutions;
● ensuring that the International Code of Marketing of Breast-
milk Substitutes and subsequent relevant Health Assembly reso-
lutions are given full consideration in trade policies and
negotiations;
● supporting research on marketing practices and the International
Code.
Conclusion
49. This strategy describes essential interventions to protect, promote
and support appropriate infant and young child feeding. It focuses
on the importance of investing in this crucial area to ensure that
children develop to their full potential, free from the adverse conse-
quences of compromised nutritional status and preventable illnesses.
It concentrates on the roles of critical partners –
 governments, in-
ternational organizations and other concerned parties –
 and assigns
specific responsibilities for each to ensure that the sum of their col-
lective action will contribute to the full attainment of the strategy’s
aim and objectives. It builds on existing approaches, extended where
necessary, and provides a framework for linking synergistically the
contributions of multiple programme areas, including nutrition,
child health and development, and maternal and reproductive health.
The strategy now needs to be translated into action.
2. GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
26
50. There is convincing evidence from around the world that govern-
ments, with the support of the international community and other
concerned parties, are taking seriously their commitments to pro-
tect and promote the health and nutritional well-being of infants,
young children, and pregnant and lactating women.1 One of the
enduring tangible results of the International Conference on
Nutrition, namely the 
World Declaration on Nutrition, offers a chal-
lenging vision of a world transformed. Meanwhile, its Plan of
Action for Nutrition charts a credible course for achieving this trans-
formation.2
51. In the decade since its adoption, 159 Member States (83%) have
demonstrated their determination to act by preparing or strength-
ening their national nutrition policies and plans. More than half
(59%) have included specific strategies to improve infant and young
child feeding practices. This encouraging result needs to be con-
solidated, and expanded to include all Member States, even as it is
reviewed and updated to ensure that it takes full account of the
present comprehensive agenda. Clearly, however, much more is re-
quired if the aim and objectives of this strategy –
 and present and
future feeding challenges –
 are to be met.
52. This global strategy provides governments and society’s other main
agents with both a valuable opportunity and a practical instrument
for rededicating themselves, individually and collectively, to pro-
tecting, promoting and supporting safe and adequate feeding for
infants and young children everywhere.
1 Document A55/14.
2 World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition. International Conference on Nutrition,
Rome, FAO and WHO, 1992.
 27
ANNEX
Resolution WHA55.25 Infant and young child nutrition
The Fifty-fifth World Health Assembly,
Having considered the draft global strategy for infant and young-
child feeding;
Deeply concerned about the vast numbers of infants and young chil-
dren who are still inappropriately fed and whose nutritional status,
growth and development, health and very survival are thereby compro-
mised;
Conscious that every year as much as 55% of infant deaths from
diarrhoeal disease and acute respiratory infections may be the result of
inappropriate feeding practices, that less than 35% of infants world-
wide are exclusively breastfed for even the first four months of life, and
that complementary feeding practices are frequently ill-timed, inap-
propriate and unsafe;
Alarmed at the degree to which inappropriate infant and young-child
feeding practices contribute to the global burden of disease, including
malnutrition and its consequences such as blindness and mortality due
to vitamin A deficiency, impaired psychomotor development due to
iron deficiency and anaemia, irreversible brain damage as a consequence
of iodine deficiency, the massive impact on morbidity and mortality of
protein-energy malnutrition, and the later-life consequences of child-
hood obesity;
Recognizing that infant and young-child mortality can be reduced
through improved nutritional status of women of reproductive age, es-
pecially during pregnancy, and by exclusive breastfeeding for the first
six months of life, and with nutritionally adequate and safe comple-
mentary feeding through introduction of safe and adequate amounts of
indigenous foodstuffs and local foods while breastfeeding continues up
to the age of two years or beyond;
Mindful of the challenges posed by the ever-increasing number of
people affected by major emergencies, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and
 GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
28
the complexities of modern lifestyles coupled with continued promul-
gation of inconsistent messages about infant and young-child feeding;
Aware that inappropriate feeding practices and their consequences
are major obstacles to sustainable socioeconomic development and pov-
erty reduction;
Reaffirming that mothers and babies form an inseparable biological
and social unit, and that the health and nutrition of one cannot be
divorced from the health and nutrition of the other;
Recalling the Health Assembly’s endorsement, in their entirety, of
the statement and recommendations made by the joint 
WHO/UNICEF
Meeting on Infant and Young Child Feeding (1979) (resolution
WHA33.32); its adoption of the International Code of Marketing of
Breast-milk Substitutes (resolution WHA34.22), in which it stressed
that adoption of and adherence to the Code were a minimum require-
ment; its welcoming of the Innocenti Declaration on the Protection,
Promotion and Support of Breastfeeding as a basis for international
health policy and action (resolution 
WHA44.33); its urging encourage-
ment and support for all public and private health facilities providing
maternity services so that they become “baby-friendly” (resolution
WHA45.34); its urging ratification and implementation of the Con-
vention on the Rights of the Child as a vehicle for family health devel-
opment (resolution 
WHA46.27); and its endorsement, in their entirety,
of the World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition adopted by
the International Conference on Nutrition (Rome, 1992) (resolution
WHA46.7);
Recalling also resolutions WHA35.26, WHA37.30, WHA39.28,
WHA41.11, 
WHA43.3, 
WHA45.34, 
WHA46.7, 
WHA47.5, 
WHA49.15
and WHA54.2 on infant and young-child nutrition, appropriate feed-
ing practices and related questions;
Recognizing the need for comprehensive national policies on infant
and young-child feeding, including guidelines on ensuring appropriate
feeding of infants and young children in exceptionally difficult circum-
stances;
Convinced that it is time for governments to renew their commit-
ment to protecting and promoting the optimal feeding of infants and
young children,
 29
1. ENDORSES the global strategy for infant and young-child feeding;
2. EXHORTS Member States, as a matter of urgency:
(1) to adopt and implement the global strategy, taking into account
national circumstances, while respecting positive local traditions and
values, as part of their overall nutrition and child-health policies and
programmes, in order to ensure optimal feeding for all infants and
young children, and to reduce the risks associated with obesity and
other forms of malnutrition;
(2) to strengthen existing, or establish new, structures for implement-
ing the global strategy through the health and other concerned sec-
tors, for monitoring and evaluating its effectiveness, and for guiding
resource investment and management to improve infant and young-
child feeding;
(3) to define for this purpose, consistent with national circumstances:
(a) national goals and objectives,
(b)a realistic timeline for their achievement,
(c) measurable process and output indicators that will permit ac-
curate monitoring and evaluation of action taken and a rapid
response to identified needs;
(4) to ensure that the introduction of micronutrient interventions
and the marketing of nutritional supplements do not replace, or
undermine support for the sustainable practice of, exclusive breast-
feeding and optimal complementary feeding;
(5) to mobilize social and economic resources within society and to
engage them actively in implementing the global strategy and in
achieving its aims and objectives in the spirit of resolution 
WHA49.15;
3. CALLS UPON other international organizations and bodies, in par-
ticular ILO, FAO, UNICEF, UNHCR, UNFPA and UNAIDS, to
give high priority, within their respective mandates and programmes
and consistent with guidelines on conflict of interest, to provision of
support to governments in implementing this global strategy, and
invites donors to provide adequate funding for the necessary mea-
sures;
ANNEX. WHA55.25 INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD NUTRITION
 4. REQUESTS the Codex Alimentarius Commission to continue to
give full consideration, within the framework of its operational man-
date, to action it might take to improve the quality standards of pro-
cessed foods for infants and young children and to promote their
safe and proper use at an appropriate age, including through
adequate labelling, consistent with the policy of WHO, in particular
the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes,
resolution WHA54.2, and other relevant resolutions of the Health
Assembly;
5. REQUESTS the Director-General:
(1) to provide support to Member States, on request, in implement-
ing this strategy, and in monitoring and evaluating its impact;
(2) to continue, in the light of the scale and frequency of major emer-
gencies worldwide, to generate specific information and develop train-
ing materials aimed at ensuring that the feeding requirements of
infants and young children in exceptionally difficult circumstances
are met;
(3) to strengthen international cooperation with other organizations
of the United Nations system and bilateral development agencies in
promoting appropriate infant and young-child feeding;
(4) to promote continued cooperation with and among all parties
concerned with implementing the global strategy.
Endorsement of the UNICEF Executive Board
The second regular session of the UNICEF Executive Board
17 September 2002
2002/12. Global strategy on infant and young child feeding
The Executive Board
Endorses the global strategy for infant and young child feeding, as
presented in the report on Infant and young child nutrition (A55/15 of 16
April 2002) and as endorsed by the Fifty-fifth World Health Assembly
in its resolution WHA55.25 of 18 May 2002.
GLOBAL STRATEGY FOR INFANT AND YOUNG CHILD FEEDING
30
