 Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
A Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial
Michael R. Perkin, PhD; Henry T. Bahnson, MPH; Kirsty Logan, PhD; Tom Marrs, MB, BS; Suzana Radulovic, MD;
Joanna Craven, MPH; Carsten Flohr, PhD; Gideon Lack, MB, BCh
IMPORTANCE The World Health Organization recommends exclusive breastfeeding for 6
months. However, 75% of British mothers introduce solids before 5 months and 26% report
infant waking at night as influencing this decision.
OBJECTIVE To determine whether early introduction of solids influences infant sleep.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS The Enquiring About Tolerance study was a
population-based randomized clinical trial conducted from January 15, 2008, to August 31,
2015, that included 1303 exclusively breastfed 3-month-old infants from England and Wales.
Clinical visits took place at St Thomas’ Hospital, London, England, and the trial studied the
early introduction of solids into the infant diet from age 3 months.
INTERVENTIONS The early introduction group (EIG) continued to breastfeed while
nonallergenic and then 6 allergenic foods were introduced. The standard introduction group
(SIG) followed British infant feeding guidelines (ie, exclusive breastfeeding to around age 6
months and to avoid any food consumption during this period).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Secondary analysis of an a priori secondary outcome of the
effect of early food introduction on infant sleep using the standardized Brief Infant Sleep
Questionnaire.
RESULTS Of the 1303 infants who were enrolled in the Enquiring About Tolerance study, 1225
participants (94%) completed the final 3-year questionnaire (618 SIG [95%] and 607 EIG
[93%]). Randomization was effective and there were no significant baseline differences
between the 2 groups. Following the early introduction of solids, infants in the EIG slept
significantly longer and woke significantly less frequently than infants in the SIG. Differences
between the 2 groups peaked at age 6 months. At this point, in the intention-to-treat analysis
infants in the EIG slept for 16.6 (95% CI, 7.8-25.4) minutes longer per night and their night
waking frequency had decreased from 2.01 to 1.74 wakings per night. Most clinically
important, very serious sleep problems, which were significantly associated with maternal
quality of life, were reported significantly more frequently in the SIG than in the EIG (odds
ratio, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.22-2.61).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE In a randomized clinical trial, the early introduction of solids
into the infant’s diet was associated with longer sleep duration, less frequent waking at night,
and a reduction in reported very serious sleep problems.
TRIAL REGISTRATION isrctn.org Identifier: ISRCTN14254740
JAMA Pediatr. 2018;172(8):e180739. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2018.0739
Published online July 9, 2018.
Audio
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: The Population
Health Research Institute,
St George's, University of London,
London, England (Perkin);
The Immune Tolerance Network,
Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle,
Washington (Bahnson); The
Paediatric Allergy Research Group,
the Department of Women and
Children’s Health, King’s College
London, London, England (Logan,
Marrs, Radulovic, Craven, Flohr,
Lack); The Unit for Population-Based
Dermatology Research, St John’s
Institute of Dermatology School of
Basic and Medical Biosciences,
Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine,
King's College London, London,
England (Flohr).
Corresponding Author: Gideon
Lack, MB, BCh, King's College
London; Guy’s & St Thomas’ National
Health Service Foundation Trust,
Children's Allergies Department,
St Thomas’ Hospital, Westminster
Bridge Road, London SE1 7EH,
England (gideon.lack@kcl.ac.uk).
Research
JAMA Pediatrics | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
1/8
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 T
he British government currently advises all mothers to
breastfeed exclusively for around the first 6 months of
life.1 However, the proportion of mothers who achieve
6 months of exclusive breastfeeding is low at around 1% in the
last Infant Feeding Survey undertaken in 2010, and three-
quarters of mothers (75%) had chosen to introduce solids by
the time their baby was 5 months old.2
The UK Department of Health advises that infants be in-
troduced to solids when they are ready. They also state that it
is normal for infants to wake up in the night and that this is
notnecessarilyasignofhungeroranindicationthatsolidfoods
should be introduced.3 If infants seem hungrier at any time be-
foreage6months,itisrecommendedthatadditionalmilkfeeds
are given.3
However,inthe2010InfantFeedingSurvey,themostcom-
mon reason, given by 52% of respondents, for introducing sol-
ids before 6 months was the perception that their baby was no
longer satisfied with milk feeds. Twenty-nine percent started
introducing solids because they felt their infant was develop-
mentally mature enough (able to sit up and hold food in his or
her hand), but a similar proportion of mothers (26%) men-
tioned their baby waking up in the night as a motivation to be-
gin introducing solids.2
It is a commonly held belief that introducing solids early
will help babies sleep better.4-6 However, the choices website
of the UK National Health Service states “Starting solid foods
won’t make your baby any more likely to sleep through the
night”3 and the National Childbirth Trust leaflet “Introduc-
tion to Solid Foods” states “There is evidence that introduc-
ing solids does not affect the length of time babies sleep.”7
The latter references the Davis Area Research on Lactation,
Infant Nutrition, and Growth study, which was a small, non-
randomized study that assessed sleep (at ages 9 and 18
months), development, and nutrient intake in matched
cohorts of 60 breastfed and 45 formula-fed infants.8 Compar-
ing the breastfed infants who had been introduced to solids
before or after age 6 months, total sleeping time (day and
night) at age 9 months was the same in those who had been
introduced solids before and after age 6 months, and the age
at solid food introduction was not related to the frequency of
night feeds.8
The Enquiring About Tolerance (EAT) study is a large
randomized clinical trial of 1303 infants that examined the
effects of the early introduction of 6 allergenic foods
from age 3 months as compared with infants encouraged
to exclusively breastfeed until age 6 months and who
were then introduced to allergenic foods at parental
discretion.9,10 Infants who were introduced to the 6 aller-
genic foods were allowed to consume nonallergenic foods as
well. The study's primary hypothesis was that early intro-
duction would prevent the development of food allergies to
these 6 foods. As part of the study, a detailed validated
sleep questionnaire was completed on 15 occasions between
ages 3 months and 3 years. Therefore, the EAT cohort pro-
vides a unique opportunity to undertake a secondary analy-
sis of sleep data to more definitively answer the question as
to whether introducing solids results in improved sleep in
infants.
Method
Participants
A total of 1303 three-month-old infants were recruited from
the general population in England and Wales through direct
advertising and enrolled between November 2, 2009, and July
30, 2012. Ethical approval for the EAT study was provided by
St Thomas’ Hospital Research Ethics Committee and in-
formed consent was obtained from the parents of all children
enrolled in the study. The Consolidated Standards of Report-
ing Trials flow chart for the primary outcome of the EAT study
is shown in Figure 1. Full methods, the trial protocol, and the
statistical analysis plan (original documents and final ver-
sions, with a summary of all changes made to both docu-
ments) and other Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials
information for the primary outcome of the EAT study are pub-
lished elsewhere.9,10 The oirignal trial protocol, final proto-
col, summary of changes to EAT protocol, original SAP, final
SAP, and summary of changes to SAP can be found in
Supplements 2-7. All children were healthy, exclusively breast-
fed, and born at term (≥37 weeks’ gestation).
Procedures
Participants were randomized by simple randomization to the
standard or early introduction group. The standard introduc-
tion group (SIG) was asked to exclusively breastfeed to around
6 months of age. The early introduction group (EIG) was en-
couraged to continue breastfeeding but also to introduce non-
allergenic foods for the first week and then, while continuing
these,tointroduce6allergenicfoodstotheirinfant:cow’smilk,
peanut, hen’s egg, sesame, white fish, and wheat. Full details
are given in the eMethods in Supplement 1.
All families were sent an online questionnaire each month
up to 1 year and then every 3 months until the child reached
age 3 years. This recorded the frequency of food consump-
tion (allergenic and nonallergenic) for both groups and in-
cluded questions about breastfeeding frequency and
duration.9,10 The online questionnaires included a standard-
ized tool for assessing infant sleep, the Brief Infant Sleep Ques-
tionnaire (eTable 1 in Supplement 1), which asks about a child's
sleep during the past week.11
The 3-month, 1-year, and 3-year interim questionnaires as-
sessed maternal quality of life using the World Health Orga-
nization’s (WHO) Quality of Life–BREF instrument.12 This is a
Key Points
Question Does the early consumption of solids before 6 months
of age influence infant sleep?
Findings In this randomized clinical trial that included 1303
three-month-old infants randomized to early solids introduction vs
exclusive breastfeeding, early solids introduction significantly
increased sleep duration and reduced nighttime wakings and the
reporting of very serious sleep problems.
Meaning The early introduction of solids resulted in small but
significant improvements in infant sleep characteristics.
Research Original Investigation
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
2/8
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 26-item version of the WHO Quality of Life–100 and assesses
4 broad domains of quality of life: physical health, psycho-
logical health, social relationships, and environment. Do-
main scores are scaled in a positive direction (ie, higher scores
denote a higher quality of life).
Statistical Analyses
Analyses were undertaken using Stata, version 14 (Stata Corp),
R, version 3.4.3 (R Foundation), SAS, version 9.4, and JMP, ver-
sion 14 (SAS Institute). Longitudinal night time sleep (hours)
was fit using linear mixed-effects models with a random in-
tercept. Missing values were multiply imputed and modeled
results were pooled across 100 imputed data sets. All model
effects were linear except visit month, which was modeled
using a flexible restricted cubic spline with 3 knots placed at
the 0.10, 0.5, and 0.90 quantiles of the observed distribution
ofvisitmonths,asrecommendedbyHarrell.13Anaveragetreat-
ment effect was estimated over the entire study duration
(eTable 2 in Supplement 1). In addition, the age of a peak treat-
ment effect was identified in a second mixed-effects com-
plete case model in which an interaction term was included
for assessment month (categorical variable) and randomized
treatmentassignment.Datawereassumedtobemissingatran-
dom. The mixed-effects model is known to give unbiased es-
timates when covariates associated with missing data and the
outcome are included—this formed the primary basis for co-
variate selection. The covariates included were race/
ethnicity, number of siblings, enrollment eczema severity (as-
sessed with the SCORing Atopic Dermatitis score), hours of
sleep at baseline, age at enrollment, and where and how the
infant sleeps (eTable 2 in Supplement 1). While the missing-
at-random assumption is impossible to verify statistically,
an analysis of missing data (eFigure 1 in Supplement 1) dem-
onstrates that the intervention effect was consistent and
stronger at the key assessments (12 months and 36 months)
when the data were most complete (ie, 88% and 93%
response rates, respectively). Furthermore, we asked a sec-
ond statistician, who was not privy to the completed analy-
ses, to independently conduct several modeling approaches
to assess the robustness of our findings. The multiple impu-
tation analysis results (eTable 2 in Supplement 1) and the
sensitivity analyses (eTable 3 in Supplement 1) are detailed
in the eMethods in Supplement 1. For the secondary out-
comes, normal, binomial, and Poisson distributions were
used to model sleep in hours, the presence of sleep prob-
lems, and the number of night wakings, respectively. A
spatial power law correlation matrix was assumed for hours
of nighttime sleep and number of night wakings. Last, a
Figure 1. Enquiring About Tolerance (EAT) Enrollment and Randomization
1319 Participants were screened for the EAT study
16 Ineligible for enrollment: major health concerns
identified from blood test results/clinical findingsa
564 Were evaluable for per protocol adherence
524 SIG per protocol
40 SIG non–per protocol
486 Were evaluable for per protocol adherence
208 EIG per protocol
278 EIG non–per protocol
595 Were included in the primary outcome ITT analysis
567 Were included in the primary outcome ITT analysis
651 Were assigned to the SIG
652 Were assigned to the EIG
56 Had missing data on the primary outcome
43 Withdrew voluntarilyb
7 Exceeded visit window at final visit
6 Could not be evaluated for the
primary outcome by means of the
diagnostic algorithm
85 Had missing data on the primary outcome
69 Withdrew voluntarilyb
9 Exceeded visit window at final visit
7 Could not be evaluated for the
primary outcome by means of the
diagnostic algorithm
31 Had missing data on SIG adherence criteria
SIG adherence nonvaluable
81 Had missing data on EIG adherence criteria
EIG adherence nonevaluable
1303 Randomized
Baseline visits occurred when participants were age 3 months. ITT indicates intention to treat. The primary outcome for the EAT study was challenge-proven food
allergy to 1 or more of the 6 early-introduction foods between age 1 and 3 years.
a Eight infants randomized to each group were found to have significant health issues either on blood test results or the clinical examination at the enrollment visit,
rendering them ineligible for enrollment; conditions included severe vitamin D deficiency, severe iron deficiency, severe failure to thrive, familial hypercholester-
olemia, congenital stridor, epidermolysis bullosa, and cartilage hair hypoplasia syndrome.
bForty-three participants in the standard introduction group (SIG) and 69 participants in the early introduction group (EIG) withdrew voluntarily from the study.
Reasons given were as follows: concerns about the blood tests (SIG, 0; EIG, 2), emigration (SIG, 10; EIG, 12), expenses (SIG, 1; EIG, 1), family health issues (SIG, 3;
EIG, 0), family issues (SIG, 2; EIG, 4), no reason given (SIG, 11; EIG, 16), lost contact with family (SIG, 15; EIG, 28), too far to travel for study assessments (SIG, 0;
EIG, 1) and unhappy participating in the study (SIG, 1; EIG, 5).
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
3/8
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 repeated-measures logistic regression model with an ex-
changeable correlation structure was fit after dichotomizing
the presence or absence of participant reported sleep
problems.
Results
The randomization was effective and there were no baseline
demographic differences between the 2 groups (eTable 4 in
Supplement 1).9,10 Interim questionnaire noncompletion rates
increased over the course of the study and were consistently
higher in the EIG compared with the SIG. An analysis of miss-
ing data showed that the differential completion rate be-
tween the randomized groups did not introduce a bias that
overestimates the duration of sleep in the EIG participants
(eFigure 1 in Supplement 1).
The age at which solids were introduced in the EIG was sig-
nificantly younger than in the SIG (mean [SD] age EIG, 16.2
[2.15] weeks; SIG, 23.1 [3.18] weeks) (Figure 2). However, while
the introduction of allergenic foods before age 6 months in the
SIGwasminimal,mosthadintroducednonallergenicsolidsbe-
forethispoint,albeitsignificantlylaterthantheEIG,andhence
there was a broader distribution of age of solid food introduc-
tion within the SIG compared with the EIG (Figure 2). Shortly
after age 6 months, infants in both groups were all consum-
ing solids in essentially the same quantities, with no differ-
ence in any anthropometric parameter between the 2 groups
when measured at age 1 year.10
Nocturnal Sleep Characteristics: Intention-to-Treat Analysis
In the unadjusted intention-to-treat comparison between
the groups, infants in the EIG demonstrated a significantly
longer duration of nocturnal sleep from age 5 months that
persisted beyond age 1 year (Figure 3). The associations
between covariates and nocturnal sleep duration and night
waking frequency at enrollment are shown in eTables 5 and
6, respectively, and the eResults in Supplement 1. The asso-
ciation between enrollment SCORAD status and longitudinal
nocturnal sleep characteristics is reported in eFigure 2 and
discussed in the eResults in Supplement 1. Using the multi-
variable mixed-effects multiple imputation analysis model,
it was estimated that infants in the EIG slept a mean of 7.3
minutes (95% CI, 2.0-12.5) more per night on average over
the duration of the study, (eTable 2 in Supplement 1). In the
Figure 2. Age of Solid Food Introduction in Infants Participating in the
Enquiring About Tolerance (EAT) Study
Early Introduction Group
Standard Introduction Group
32
34
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Age of Solid Food Induction, wk
The black bar indicates the median, the box upper hinge the 75th percentile,
and the box lower hinge the 25th percentile.
Figure 3. Nocturnal Sleep Characteristics by Study Group in the
Intention-to-Treat Unadjusted Analysis
11.0
10.5
10.0
9.5
9.0
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
18
21
24
36
Mean Nighttime Sleep, h
Assessment, mo
Standard introduction group
Standard introduction group
Early introduction group
Early introduction group
Nighttime sleep
A
2.5
2.0
1.0
1.5
0.5
0
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
18
21
24
36
Mean No. of Night Wakings
Assessment, mo
Night wakings
B
A smoothed mean response across all the assessments using a cubic spline with
lambda = 0.5. The mean response and confidence region for each randomized
group were observed, unadjusted means (ie, they were not derived from the
mixed-effects model). The confidence interval was produced by bootstrapping
the marginal mean at each assessment for each treatment group.
Research Original Investigation
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
4/8
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 multivariable mixed-effects complete case analysis model,
the difference peaked at 16.6 (95% CI, 7.8-25.4) minutes
more per night at age 6 months. There was no difference in
the amount of daytime sleep between the 2 groups (data not
shown).
A similar pattern was seen in the unadjusted analysis for
the number of night wakings (Figure 3). In the multivariable
mixed-effects complete case analysis model, the EIG group ex-
perienced a mean (SD) of 9.1% (95% CI, 4%-14%) fewer night
wakings over the duration of the study when compared with
the SIG group in the intention-to-treat (ITT) analyses (eFig-
ure 3 in Supplement 1).
The differences observed in nocturnal sleep characteris-
tics were not explained by the introduction of formula milk,
which was minimal in both groups before age 6 months (see
eResults in Supplement 1). Responses to the generic Brief In-
fant Sleep Questionnaire question of whether a family con-
sidered their child to have a sleep problem varied signifi-
cantly by study group. In the ITT comparison, families in the
SIG were significantly more likely than those in the EIG to re-
portasmallproblem(oddsratio,1.2;95%CI,1.05-1.41)oravery
serious problem (odds ratio, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.22-2.61) with their
child’s sleep (Figure 4). Parent's perceptions that their child
had a sleep problem were significantly correlated with mater-
nal global and sleep quality of life as well as all 4 quality of life
domains (environmental, psychological, social, and physi-
cal) (eFigure 4 in Supplement 1). Moreover, parental percep-
tion of infant sleep problems correlated with the infant's night
time sleep duration and night waking frequency (eFigure 4 in
Supplement 1).
Nocturnal Sleep Characteristics per Protocol Analysis
We have previously shown that families found it difficult to
feed their EIG infants the per protocol amount of all 6 aller-
Figure 4. Parent Reporting of a Sleep Problem in Their Child by Study Group (Intention-to-Treat Analysis)
Early introduction group
Standard introduction group
5
3
4
2
1
0
Incidence of Sleep Problems, %
Assessment, mo
A very serious problem
A
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
18
21
24
36
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Incidence of Sleep Problems, %
Assessment, mo
A small problem
B
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
18
21
24
36
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Incidence of Sleep Problems, %
Assessment, mo
Not a problem at all
C
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
18
21
24
36
In an intention-to-treat analysis,
families were significantly more likely
to report a sleep problem in their
child in the standard introduction
group compared with the early
introduction group.
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
5/8
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 genicfoodsinthetightwindowthattheyweregiventoachieve
per protocol adherence by age 6 months. The result was that
full adherence to the EIG regimen was achieved by only 223
EIG participants (42%) in whom adherence was evaluable
(eTable 7 in Supplement 1).9 These infants had significantly
greater improvement in nocturnal sleep characteristics (eFig-
ure 5 in Supplement 1) and reported sleep problems (eFigure
6 in Supplement 1). An association between degrees of adher-
encewiththeEIGrecommendedweeklydoseofallergenicpro-
tein consumption and nighttime sleep characteristics was also
apparent (eFigure 7 in Supplement 1). These per protocol find-
ings are discussed in the eResults in Supplement 1.
Discussion
Infants who were introduced to solids earlier slept longer at
night and woke less frequently. Throughout the first year of
life, families in the EIG reported fewer very serious sleep
problems affecting their infant than in the SIG. While the
effect of the early introduction of solids on sleep in indi-
vidual infants is likely to vary, the significant difference in
sleep characteristics between the EIG and SIG was apparent
in an ITT analysis that should control for the presence of indi-
vidual differences.
Strengths and Limitations
Thecommonlyheldbeliefthatintroducingsolidsearlywillhelp
infantssleepbettercouldhaveproducedareportingbias.Moth-
ers, anticipating improved infant sleep, could have reported
better outcomes.4-6 This potential bias could have been cir-
cumvented by assessing infant sleep by undertaking actigra-
phy, and not using actigraphy could be seen as a limitation of
our study. However, to undertake actigraphy through to age 3
years (to match the data provided from the Brief Infant Sleep
Questionnaire questionnaire which itself has been validated
against actigraphy) was not feasible logistically or finan-
cially. It would have also imposed an unacceptable burden on
the families.
There are several reasons why we believe such a report-
ing bias is unlikely to explain these findings. Most impor-
tantly,theimprovementinsleepwassustainedthroughoutthe
firstyearofinfancyandbeyond.Whileitisplausiblethatmoth-
ers might overreport better sleep in the key early months (up
to age 6 months), it seems very unlikely that beyond age 6
months, when both groups were consuming essentially iden-
tical quantities of solids, that this biased reporting would per-
sist. Furthermore, the strong dose-response relationship seen
not just in the key early months but through to 1 year and be-
yond, argues against this simply reflecting a bias.
That the early introduction of solids before age 6 months
should result in sustained sleep differences lasting beyond age
1 year, when both groups of infants would be consuming es-
sentially identical quantities of solids, should not be unex-
pected. The Barker hypothesis, which evolved into the Inter-
national Society for Developmental Origins of Health and
Disease, has a remit “to recognize the broader scope of devel-
opmental cues, extending from the oocyte to the infant and
beyond, and the concept that the early life environment has
widespread consequences for later health.”14 If fetal and in-
fant nutrition can influence adult cardiovascular health, then
it seems entirely plausible that sleep patterns established in
early infancy can persist for several years.
Consistent with the Barker hypothesis, infant sleep is also
associated with other health outcomes. Studies in childhood
have shown graded inverse associations between sleep dura-
tion and levels of adiposity, with increased sleep duration as-
sociated with lower levels of obesity15,16 and a recent British
study has shown a strong inverse graded association in chil-
dren between sleep duration, adiposity, and diabetes risk
markers.17 In the latter study of 4525 9- to 10-year-old chil-
dren, a 1-hour greater sleep duration was associated with a 0.19
lower body mass index (calculated as weight in kilograms di-
vided by height in meters squared) (95% CI, 0.09-0.28 kg/
m2), 0.03 kg/m5 lower fat mass index (95% CI, 0.00-0.05
kg/m5), 2.9% lower homeostatic model assessment insulin re-
sistance (95% CI, 1.2%-4.4%), and 0.24% lower fasting glu-
cose level (95% CI, 0.03%-0.44%).17
Our results confirm that poor infant sleep is strongly as-
sociated with parental quality of life. At age 6 months, when
theITTdifferencesweremostsignificantbetweenthe2groups,
EIG infants were sleeping 17 minutes longer per night, equat-
ing to 2 hours of extra sleep per week, and were waking 2 fewer
times at night per week. Most significantly, at this point, EIG
families were reporting half the rate of very serious sleep prob-
lems. It is unknown over what period sleep differences need
to be sustained to result in the changes in type 2 diabetes risk
markers observed in the British study,17 and while the differ-
ences observed in the study of British children were small at
an individual level, at a population level they are likely to be
of more significance.
Sleep patterns at enrollment were associated with the like-
lihood of EIG participants adhering to the early introduction
intervention. Infants who subsequently were adherent to the
EIG regimen were sleeping significantly longer and had less
night wakings at enrollment. It seems likely that infant matu-
rity links the ability to consume solid food early and to have
improved sleeping patterns. However, the ITT results indi-
cate the improvement in sleep extends beyond differences in
infant maturity at enrollment.
The heaviest infants at enrollment slept the longest at
night. Conversely, while it has been claimed that poor sleep
and night wakenings in infancy are not related to hunger, we
found that those infants with the highest weight gain be-
tween birth and enrollment were most likely to be waking at
night. This is consistent with the idea that their rapid weight
gain was leading to an enhanced caloric and nutritional re-
quirement, resulting in hunger and disrupted sleep.
Trials randomizing solid food introduction are scarce, and
to our knowledge, no systematic reviews in this area exist.
There has been 1 randomized clinical trial of feeding infants
rice cereal in the bottle before bedtime at age 5 weeks or at age
4 months that did not show a statistically significant effect on
sleep.18
The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
(ALSPAC) collected sleep data in their cohort at age 6, 18, and
Research Original Investigation
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
6/8
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 30 months. Parents recorded the amount of day and night
sleep and the number of night wakings. Total sleep in
ALSPAC was very similar to that in the EAT SIG, but night
wakings at 6 months were much more common in EAT. This
may reflect the clear differences in breastfeeding rates at age
6 months: in ALSPAC 31.7% of mothers were still breastfeed-
ing as compared with 97.5% in EAT.19 The differential ques-
tionnaire completion rate between study groups has the
potential to bias the results, but a multiple imputation analy-
sis suggests that bias due to missing data was unlikely to
have influenced our results.
We have shown previously that the EAT cohort is repre-
sentative of the population in England and Wales because the
study population was drawn from a wide geographical area.9
We have also shown that within an ITT comparison, the early
introduction of solids did not adversely influence the dura-
tion of breastfeeding in EIG mothers compared with SIG
mothers.9 A further strength of our study is that all mothers
reported sleep patterns contemporaneously. The combined
strengths of the number of participants in the EAT study, the
highly significant ITT effect, and the enhanced per protocol
effect shown in this analysis of sleep data demonstrate the ro-
bustness of the results presented. Additionally, the clear dose
response between food consumption and better sleep indi-
cates the biological plausibility of these results.
Conclusions
To our knowledge, we show for the first time in a randomized
clinicaltrialsettingthat,consistentwiththebeliefofmanypar-
ents, the early introduction of solids does have a small but sig-
nificant effect on sleep characteristics. With recent guide-
lines advocating introducing solids from age 4 to 6 months in
some20 or all21 infants, our results suggest that improved sleep
may be a concomitant benefit.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 8, 2018.
Published Online: July 9, 2018.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2018.0739
Open Access: This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the CC-BY License.
© 2018 Perkin MR et al. JAMA Pediatrics.
Author Contributions: Drs Perkin and Lack had full
access to all of the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Concept and design: Perkin, Bahnson, Logan, Flohr,
Lack.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Perkin, Bahnson, Logan,
Lack.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Perkin, Bahnson, Logan, Lack.
Obtained funding: Perkin, Flohr, Lack.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Perkin, Logan, Marrs, Craven.
Supervision: Perkin, Bahnson, Radulovic, Flohr,
Lack.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: The main components of the
Enquiring About Tolerance (EAT) Study were jointly
funded by the UK Food Standards Agency (FSA,
contract code T07051) and the Medical Research
Council (MRC, grant MC_G1001205). Additionally,
we thank the Davis Foundation. The skin-related
aspects of the study were supported by the UK
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). Dr
Flohr held an NIHR Clinician Scientist Award
(NIHRCS/01/2008/009). The analyses presented
in this article were supported by a subsequent
grant from the FSA (contract code FS101178).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The FSA
commissioned this work, and reviewed the study
protocol, statistical methods, and study report, and
thereby contributed to the design and conduct of
the study and interpretation of data. The FSA
contributed to review and approval of the
manuscript. The FSA had no role in the collection,
management, or analysis of data; preparation of the
manuscript; or decision to submit the manuscript
for publication. The National Institute for Health
Research had no role in the design and conduct of
the study; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; or decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this article are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the FSA, MRC, the National Health Service, the
NIHR, the Wellcome Trust, or the UK Department of
Health.
Additional Contributions: We thank the parents
and children of the EAT Study for participating. We
thank the EAT study nursing staff (Louise Young,
RN Children, Victoria Offord, BSc Nursing, Mary
DeSousa, BSc Nursing, Jason Cullen, BSc Nursing,
and Katherine Taylor, MRes) and dieticians (Anna
Tseng, MPH Nutrition, Bunmi Raji, MSc Nutrition,
Sarah Byrom, BSc Human Nutrition and Dietetics,
Gillian Regis, BSc Human Nutrition and Dietetics,
Charlie Bigwood, and Charlotte Stedman, PGDip
Dietetics) as well as those responsible for study
management and administration (Sharon Tonner,
PhD, Emily Banks, Yasmin Kahnum, Rachel Babic,
BA, Ben Stockwell, BSc, Erin Thompson, BSc, and
Lorna Wheatley, BSc), phlebotomy (Devi
Patkunam), and laboratory projects (Kerry
Richards, MSc Medicine, Ewa Pietraszewicz, MSc,
Alick Stephens, PhD, Asha Sudra, MSc, and Victor
Turcanu, PhD). We also thank Colin O’Rourke, MS,
for his feedback on the manuscript and for his help
addressing the questions from the statistical review
of this article. All individuals listed as part of the EAT
study were compensated. Mr O’Rourke was
compensated by Benaroya Research Institute for
this work.
REFERENCES
1. National Health Service. Benefits of
breastfeeding. http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions
/pregnancy-and-baby/Pages/benefits
-breastfeeding.aspx. Accessed April 3, 2018.
2. McAndrew F, Thompson J, Fellows L, Large A,
Speed M, Renfrew MJ. Infant Feeding Survey 2010.
Leeds, England: Health and Social Care Information
Centre; 2012.
3. National Health Service. Your baby's first solid
foods. http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/pregnancy
-and-baby/Pages/solid-foods-weaning.aspx.
Accessed April 3, 2018.
4. Clayton HB, Li R, Perrine CG, Scanlon KS.
Prevalence and reasons for introducing infants early
to solid foods: variations by milk feeding type.
Pediatrics. 2013;131(4):e1108-e1114.
5. Alder EM, Williams FL, Anderson AS, Forsyth S,
Florey CduV, van der Velde P. What influences the
timing of the introduction of solid food to infants?
Br J Nutr. 2004;92(3):527-531.
6. Scott JA, Binns CW, Graham KI, Oddy WH.
Predictors of the early introduction of solid foods in
infants: results of a cohort study. BMC Pediatr.
2009;9:60.
7. National Childbirth Trust. Evidence made easy:
introduction to solid foods. https://www.nct.org.uk
/sites/default/files/related_documents
/Introduction%20to%20solid%20foods.pdf.
Accessed April 3, 2018.
8. Heinig MJ, Nommsen LA, Peerson JM, Lonnerdal
B, Dewey KG. Intake and growth of breast-fed and
formula-fed infants in relation to the timing of
introduction of complementary foods: the
DARLING study. Davis Area Research on Lactation,
Infant Nutrition and Growth. Acta Paediatr. 1993;82
(12):999-1006.
9. Perkin MR, Logan K, Marrs T, et al; EAT Study
Team. Enquiring About Tolerance (EAT) study:
feasibility of an early allergenic food introduction
regimen. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;137(5):
1477-1486.e8.
10. Perkin MR, Logan K, Tseng A, et al; EAT Study
Team. Randomized trial of introduction of allergenic
foods in breast-fed infants. N Engl J Med. 2016;374
(18):1733-1743.
11. Sadeh A. A brief screening questionnaire for
infant sleep problems: validation and findings for an
Internet sample. Pediatrics. 2004;113(6):e570-e577.
12. Skevington SM, Lotfy M, O’Connell KA;
WHOQOL Group. The World Health Organization’s
WHOQOL-BREF quality of life assessment:
psychometric properties and results of the
international field trial. a report from the WHOQOL
group. Qual Life Res. 2004;13(2):299-310.
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
7/8
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 13. Harrell FE. Regression Modeling Strategies With
Applications to Linear Models, Logistic and Ordinal
Regression and Survival Analysis. 2nd ed. New York,
NY: Springer-Verlag; 2015.
14. Gillman MW, Barker D, Bier D, et al. Meeting
report on the 3rd International Congress on
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease
(DOHaD). Pediatr Res. 2007;61(5, pt 1):625-629.
15. Cappuccio FP, Taggart FM, Kandala NB, et al.
Meta-analysis of short sleep duration and obesity in
children and adults. Sleep. 2008;31(5):619-626.
16. Hasler G, Buysse DJ, Klaghofer R, et al. The
association between short sleep duration and
obesity in young adults: a 13-year prospective study.
Sleep. 2004;27(4):661-666.
17. Rudnicka AR, Nightingale CM, Donin AS, et al.
Sleep duration and risk of type 2 diabetes. Pediatrics.
2017;140(3):e20170338.
18. Macknin ML, Medendorp SV, Maier MC. Infant
sleep and bedtime cereal. Am J Dis Child. 1989;143
(9):1066-1068.
19. Donath SM, Amir LH; ALSPAC Study Team. The
relationship between maternal smoking and
breastfeeding duration after adjustment for
maternal infant feeding intention. Acta Paediatr.
2004;93(11):1514-1518.
20. Togias A, Cooper SF, Acebal ML, et al.
Addendum guidelines for the prevention of peanut
allergy in the United States: summary of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases-sponsored expert panel. Pediatr Dermatol.
2017;34(1):5-12.
21. Australian Society of Clinical Immunology and
Allergy. Infant feeding and allergy prevention.
https://www.allergy.org.au/images/pcc/ASCIA
_Guidelines_infant_feeding_and_allergy_prevention
.pdf. Accessed April 3, 2018.
Research Original Investigation
Association of Early Introduction of Solids With Infant Sleep
8/8
JAMA Pediatrics
August 2018
Volume 172, Number 8
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
