 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / October 14, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 40 
1117
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Notes from the Field
Mycobacterium chimaera Contamination of 
Heater-Cooler Devices Used in Cardiac Surgery — 
United States
Kiran M. Perkins, MD1; Adrian Lawsin, MS1; Nabeeh A. Hasan, PhD2; 
Michael Strong, PhD2; Alison L. Halpin, PhD1; Rachael R. Rodger, 
MPH2; Heather Moulton-Meissner, PhD1; Matthew B. Crist, MD1; 
Suzanne Schwartz, MD3; Julia Marders, MS3; Charles L. Daley, MD2; 
Max Salfinger, MD2; Joseph F. Perz, DrPH1 
In the spring of 2015, investigators in Switzerland 
reported a cluster of six patients with invasive infection with 
Mycobacterium chimaera, a species of nontuberculous myco-
bacterium ubiquitous in soil and water. The infected patients 
had undergone open-heart surgery that used contaminated 
heater-cooler devices during extracorporeal circulation (1). 
In July 2015, a Pennsylvania hospital also identified a cluster 
of invasive nontuberculous mycobacterial infections among 
open-heart surgery patients. Similar to the Swiss report, a field 
investigation by the Pennsylvania Department of Health, with 
assistance from CDC, used both epidemiologic and laboratory 
evidence to identify an association between invasive M. avium 
complex, including M. chimaera, infections and exposure to 
contaminated Stöckert 3T heater-cooler devices, all manufac-
tured by LivaNova PLC (formerly Sorin Group Deutschland 
GmbH) (2). M. chimaera was described as a distinct species 
of M. avium complex in 2004 (3). The results of the field 
investigation prompted notification of approximately 1,300 
potentially exposed patients.* Although heater-cooler devices 
are used to regulate patients’ blood temperature during cardio-
pulmonary bypass through water circuits that are closed, these 
reports suggest that aerosolized M. chimaera from the devices 
resulted in the invasive infections (1,2). The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) and CDC have issued alerts regarding 
the need to follow updated manufacturer’s instructions for use 
of the devices, evaluate the devices for contamination, remain 
vigilant for new infections, and continue to monitor reports 
from the United States and overseas (2).
Whole genome sequencing was completed on isolates from 
11 patients and from five Stöckert 3T heater-cooler devices 
from hospitals in Pennsylvania and Iowa, two of the states 
where clusters of infections were identified (2). Samples from 
heater-cooler devices included swabs from the interior of 
the device, water drained from the devices, and air samples 
collected while a device was operating. Single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified after comparing patient 
and device samples against sequence data from an M. chimaera 
reference isolate. Results from pairwise comparisons among 
all sequences across a core genome of approximately 5 million 
base pairs revealed a maximum of 38 SNPs between any two 
isolates related to the outbreak investigation, versus a mini-
mum of 2,900 SNPs between any single outbreak isolate and 
the epidemiologically unlinked isolate (sequence files available 
from the National Center for Biotechnology Information: 
Pennsylvania isolates Bioproject PRJNA344472; Iowa isolates 
Bioproject PRJNA345021; epidemiologically unlinked isolate 
RefSeq Assembly Accession GCF_001307335.1).
These results strongly suggest a point-source contamination 
of Stöckert 3T heater-cooler devices with M. chimaera. A recent 
report from Germany noted that preliminary typing results of 
M. chimaera from heater-cooler devices from three different 
European countries were almost identical to samples obtained 
from the manufacturing site, further supporting the likeli-
hood of point-source contamination (4). Additional sequence 
comparisons between patient specimens and device samples 
obtained from facilities from various regions in the United 
States are ongoing. Sequence comparisons between U.S. and 
European samples, as well as samples from the manufacturing 
site, could provide additional information for evaluating the 
possibility of point-source contamination at the heater-cooler 
manufacturing site. Efforts are currently ongoing to obtain and 
compare European sequencing results.
Although thousands of patients in the United States have 
been notified regarding potential exposure to contaminated 
heater-cooler devices, the number who were exposed might 
be much larger. Over 250,000 procedures using cardiopul-
monary bypass are performed in the United States each year 
(5). Stöckert 3T heater-cooler devices represent approximately 
60% of the U.S. market (2). CDC and FDA are continuing 
their efforts to increase provider and patient awareness of the 
risk. CDC has issued guidance on identifying patients at risk 
to ensure timely diagnosis and treatment of these indolent and 
often unrecognized infections (2). FDA is continuing to gather 
information, issue communications, and assess the situation 
from both public health and regulatory perspectives (6).†
* https://www.wellspan.org/news/story/15810.
† http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/UCM520191.htm.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
1118 
MMWR / October 14, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 40
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acknowledgments
Bette Jensen, MMSc, Shannon Keckler, PhD, Division of 
Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC.
 1Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 2National Jewish Health; 3Food and 
Drug Administration.
Corresponding author: Kiran M. Perkins, kperkins@cdc.gov, 404-639-1161.
References
1. Sax H, Bloemberg G, Hasse B, et al. Prolonged outbreak of Mycobacterium 
chimaera infection after open-chest heart surgery. Clin Infect Dis 
2015;61:67–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ198
2. Food and Drug Administration. Nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) 
infections associated with heater-cooler devices (HCD) during cardiothoracic 
surgery. Gaithersburg, MD: FDA Circulatory System Devices Panel of the 
Medical Devices Advisory Committee; June 2–3, 2016. http://www.fda.
gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/MedicalDevices/
MedicalDevicesAdvisoryCommittee/CirculatorySystemDevicesPanel/
ucm485091.htm
3. Tortoli E, Rindi L, Garcia MJ, et al. Proposal to elevate the genetic 
variant MAC-A, included in the Mycobacterium avium complex, to 
species rank as Mycobacterium chimaera sp. nov. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 
2004;54(Pt 4):1277–85.
4. Haller S, Höller C, Jacobshagen A, et al. Contamination during production 
of heater-cooler units by Mycobacterium chimaera potential cause for invasive 
cardiovascular infections: results of an outbreak investigation in Germany, 
April 2015 to February 2016. Euro Surveill 2016;21.
5. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Adult cardiac surgery volumes and 
procedures. Adult Cardiac Surgery Database 2015. Chicago, IL: The 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons; 2016  http://www.sts.org/sts-national-
database/database-managers/adult-cardiac-surgery-database
6. Food and Drug Administration. Mycobacterium chimaera infections 
associated with Sorin Group Deutschland GmBH Stöckert 3T Heater-
Cooler System: FDA Safety Communication. June 1, 2016. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug 
Administration; 2016. http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/
AlertsandNotices/ucm504213.htm
