 American Economic Review 2018, 108(4-5): 1214–1252 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20141406
1214
Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health  
of the Next Generation†
By Petra Persson and Maya Rossin-Slater*1
This paper studies how in utero exposure to maternal stress from fam-
ily ruptures affects later mental health. We find that prenatal exposure 
to the death of a maternal relative increases take-up of ADHD medi-
cations during childhood and anti-anxiety and depression medications 
in adulthood. Further, family ruptures during pregnancy depress birth 
outcomes and raise the risk of perinatal complications necessitating 
hospitalization. Our results suggest large welfare gains from prevent-
ing fetal stress from family ruptures and possibly from economically 
induced stressors such as unemployment. They further suggest that 
greater stress exposure among the poor may partially explain the 
intergenerational persistence of poverty. (JEL I12, J12, J13)
Mental illness generates vast private and social costs. In 2008, the market for pre-
scription drugs treating depression totaled $9.6 billion in the United States, a sales 
volume exceeded only by cholesterol regulators and pain medications (Dickstein 
2014). In 2013, one in seven school-age boys were treated with prescription drugs 
for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), fueling a $9 billion market, 
1 Since the acceptance of this article, it was brought to our attention that there are other related studies on this 
topic, in particular Class et al. (2011, 2014). At the end of the article, we discuss the relation of our work to these 
papers. This footnote, as well as the section on the relation of our paper to these earlier papers, has been written 
post-acceptance and reviewed by the handling Coeditor and Editor of the American Economic Review.
* Persson: Stanford University, 579 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305, NBER, and the Research Institute for 
Industrial Economics (email: perssonp@stanford.edu); Rossin-Slater: Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Redwood Building T101C, 259 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, NBER, and IZA (email: mrossin@stanford.
edu). This paper was accepted to the AER under the guidance of Hilary Hoynes, Coeditor. This paper was previ-
ously circulated under the title “Family Ruptures and Intergenerational Transmission of Stress.” This project has 
been evaluated for ethical compliance by the Swedish Central Ethical Review Board (Approval# 2011:1297/31). 
We are grateful to Malin Olsson-Talläs for excellent research assistance. We thank Anna Aizer, Doug Almond, 
Marcella Alsan, Prashant Bharadwaj, Lorenzo Casaburi, Pierre-André Chiappori, Rebecca Diamond, Pascaline 
Dupas, Mikael Elinder, Oscar Erixon, Sebastian Escobar, Johannes Haushofer, Caroline Hoxby, Shelly Lundberg, 
Melissa Kearney, Peter Kuhn, Ilyana Kuziemko, Magne Mogstad, Henry Ohlsson, Torsten Persson, Heather Royer, 
Kjell Salvanes, Heidi Williams, four anonymous referees, and participants at the Berkeley Haas Oliver Williamson 
seminar, the NBER Children’s Group Spring Meeting, the NBER Summer Institute Health Economics Meeting, the 
Institute for International Economic Studies, the Bergen-Stavanger Workshop in Labor Economics, the Economic 
Demography Workshop at the PAA Meetings, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Bi-Weekly 
Discussion Group, the UCSB Broom Center for Demography, and Uppsala University for helpful comments. Data 
acquisition was financed by grant 2011-FOA11H-146 from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Persson 
gratefully acknowledges funding from the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation. All remaining errors are 
our own. The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research 
described in this paper.
† Go to https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20141406 to visit the article page for additional materials and author 
 
disclosure statement(s).
 1215
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
which is more than five times larger than the $1.7 billion market just a decade earlier 
(Visser et al. 2014). Estimates also suggest that mental illness accounts for over one-
half of the rise in disability receipt among men in the last two decades (Duggan and 
Imberman 2009). Moreover, in Sweden (the setting for this paper), mental illness 
accounts for a larger share of health expenditures on prescription drugs than any 
other therapeutic class.2
The high and rapidly increasing incidence of mental conditions such as depres-
sion, anxiety, ADHD, and autism-spectrum disorders has prompted fervent debate 
regarding their causes and correlates both in popular media and across scientific dis-
ciplines. While this question is undeniably complex (a variety of factors are likely 
important), the understanding of specific causes is necessary for prevention and 
cost-effective policy design. Existing research has documented correlations between 
different mental conditions and a range of socioeconomic, hereditary, and environ-
mental factors. Yet, as discussed further in Section I, the evidence on causal driv-
ers is limited and misperceptions abound. For example, a widely popularized (yet 
repeatedly refuted) claim that the Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) vaccine 
causes autism-spectrum disorders has contributed to a substantial decline in vac-
cination rates, causing measles to reemerge in Europe and the United States after 
having been effectively eliminated (see, e.g., McIntyre and Leask 2008).
In this paper, we focus on one possible causal factor at a critical stage of human 
development: in utero exposure to maternal stress. Specifically, we use Swedish 
administrative data to analyze how a mother’s stress resulting from a death in the 
family during pregnancy affects her unborn child’s well-being from birth to adult-
hood, with a particular emphasis on the child’s mental health.
Our focus on the fetal stage is consonant with two recent studies in econom-
ics that trace adult mental illness to malnutrition during the fetal stage, using data 
from Uganda and Iraq (Almond and Mazumder 2011), as well as Ghana (Adhvaryu, 
Fenske, and Nyshadham forthcoming).3 Our study offers complementary evidence 
linking early-life circumstance to adult mental health, but breaks new ground by 
focusing on stress, which may be more pertinent than malnutrition in modern devel-
oped countries such as the United States and Sweden, and by tracing health out-
comes throughout the time period between the fetal shock and adulthood.
Our emphasis on stress is influenced by a growing literature documenting per-
sistent intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status (see, e.g., Solon 2001 
and Chetty et al. 2014 for evidence from the United States, and Boserup, Kreiner, 
and Kopczuk 2014 for evidence from Scandinavia). As low socioeconomic status 
women experience higher levels of stress than their more advantaged counterparts,4 
2 See Table 11 in Socialstyrelsen (2013) for Sweden’s health expenditures by therapeutic class. 
3 Consistent with this evidence, epidemiological studies have documented a correlation between in utero expo-
sure to the Dutch famine of 1944 and the onset of mental disease in adulthood (Susser and Lin 1992; Susser et 
al. 1996; Neugebauer, Hoek, and Susser 1999; McClellan, Susser, and King 2006). Further, recent neuroscientific 
evidence shows that mental illness is related to brain abnormalities that likely arise before birth, which further 
emphasizes the importance of the fetal environment. See, for example, Liu et al. (2012) for depression and Berquin 
et al. (1998) and Stoner et al. (2014) for ADHD and other autism-spectrum diseases. 
4 See the recent discussion in Thompson (2014) for evidence on self-reported stress levels. Additionally, esti-
mated levels of the stress hormone cortisol have been shown to be negatively correlated with socioeconomic status 
(Kunz-Ebrecht, Kirschbaum, and Steptoe 2004; Cohen, Doyle, and Baum 2006). 
 1216
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
a causal link between fetal stress exposure and mental disease later in life could shed 
light on one channel through which disadvantage is transmitted across generations.
Our focus on stress is also motivated by prior evidence of a correlation between 
mothers’ pregnancy levels of the stress hormone cortisol and their children’s mental 
health.5 Yet, to the best of our knowledge, no existing study establishes credible evi-
dence of a causal link between antenatal exposure to maternal stress (from family 
bereavement or from other stressors) and later life mental health.
To investigate whether the uterine environment propagates the impact of stress 
to the unborn child, we leverage administrative data from Sweden. As we detail in 
Section II, we start from the universe of children born in Sweden between 1973 
and 2011, and use multigenerational population registers to construct family trees 
that span four generations, from the child to his/her maternal great-grandparents. 
Our sample includes all children whose mother loses a family member (a sibling, 
a parent, a maternal grandparent, the child’s father, or an own (older) child) in the 
nine months after the child’s date of conception or in the year after the child’s date 
of birth. By considering the deaths of different relatives, our approach presents a 
new measure of the intensity of stress exposure: the strength of the family tie that 
is severed.6 We then merge these data with information about the children’s health 
throughout childhood and into adulthood stemming from birth and inpatient records. 
We also merge our data to novel, unique data from Sweden’s prescription drug reg-
istry, which contain the universe of prescription drug purchases with information on 
the exact substance and dose prescribed.
For identification, we take advantage of quasi-random variation in the exact tim-
ing of bereavement relative to the child’s expected date of delivery at full-term, as 
described in Section III. Intuitively, we exploit the fact that some mothers experi-
ence the death of a relative during pregnancy, while others experience such a death 
shortly after giving birth. While all these children are exposed to the postnatal con-
sequences of the relative’s passing (e.g., the associated income shocks), only the 
former group is exposed to the mother’s experience of the death through the uterine 
environment. By comparing the outcomes of these two groups, we isolate any addi-
tional effects of fetal exposure to maternal stress from family bereavement, relative 
to the consequences of such exposure shortly after birth. Our analysis relies on the 
assumption that the precise timing of death within a narrow time frame of the esti-
mated expected birth date, which is predetermined at conception, is uncorrelated 
with other determinants of child well-being, and we provide evidence that there is 
no significant association between the timing of death and a variety of observable 
family characteristics.
This paper makes two primary contributions. First, to the best of our knowledge, 
our study is the first to document a causal link between fetal stress exposure and 
mental health in later life.7 As presented in Section IV, we find that in utero exposure 
5 A multitude of epidemiological papers have documented a correlation between antenatal stress and ADHD; 
see online Appendix F for details. 
6 This measure is motivated by a psychological literature, which documents that losses of closer family members 
induce greater levels of self-reported grief and produce stronger cortisol responses (see, e.g., Segal and Bouchard 
1993; O’Connor et al. 2012). 
7 Here, we reference the existing literature on humans, which we discuss further in Section I. Animal studies 
have provided credible causal evidence of a link between in utero exposure to stress and adverse offspring out-
comes. See, e.g., the experimental work on rats of Welberg, Sekl, and Homes (2001). 
 1217
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
to the death of a mother’s close relative has substantial effects on the consumption of 
prescription drugs treating mental health conditions both during childhood (around 
age 10) and in adulthood (around age 35). For children, these effects are driven by 
a 25 percent rise in the likelihood of purchasing a drug used to treat ADHD and a 
24 percent increase in the average daily dose of ADHD medications. For adults, we 
see 13 and 8 percent increases in the likelihood of consuming prescription drugs for 
anxiety and depression, respectively, as well as 19 and 12 percent increases in the 
average daily doses of these medications. The estimated effects are stronger when 
the deceased is a close relative of the mother, suggesting that the severity of stress 
exposure is important for its mental health consequences.
Second, by following the same children from birth to adulthood, we can trace 
the onset of adverse effects of exposure to maternal bereavement in utero. We doc-
ument that important physical health consequences are already evident at birth and 
in early childhood. In particular, we see 12 
, 24 
, and 12 percent increases in the 
likelihoods of low-birth-weight (less than 2,500 grams), very-low-birth-weight (less 
than 1,500 grams), and pre-term (less than 37 weeks gestation) births, respectively. 
Further, after birth, we find that in utero exposure to stress due to the death of a rel-
ative increases a child’s likelihood of being hospitalized for a condition originating 
in the perinatal period during the first year of life.
Our analysis is most closely related to recent work by Black, Devereux, and 
Salvanes (2016) in Norway, who study the impacts of deaths of maternal parents 
during pregnancy using a sibling fixed effects methodology. They find small adverse 
effects on birth outcomes, but no effects on adult body mass index (BMI), educa-
tional attainment, or labor market outcomes. Our paper is complementary as we 
show that, despite the limited impacts on physical health or adult economic out-
comes, there are important consequences of in utero exposure to maternal bereave-
ment for childhood and adult mental health. Additionally, by including relatives 
other than maternal parents in our empirical design, we are able to create a novel 
measure of the severity of antenatal stress exposure, which we find to be especially 
relevant for the mental health analysis. Finally, our methodology is slightly different 
from the main strategy employed by Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2016): we do 
not use a sibling fixed effects design, as, in our particular context, we provide some 
evidence that the presence of younger siblings is endogenous due to maternal fer-
tility responses.
In sum, our results show that the death of a relative up to three generations apart 
during pregnancy has far-reaching consequences for physical health at birth and in 
the first year of life, as well as for mental health during childhood and adulthood. 
A number of medical studies show that the loss of a loved one is associated with 
a physiological response in the human body characterized by an increase in the 
level of the stress hormone cortisol (Irwin et al. 1988; Pfeffer et al. 2007; Dietz et 
al. 2013; Holland et al. 2014). While it is impossible to rule out all other mecha-
nisms aside from in utero exposure to maternal grief-induced stress, we provide 
evidence against key alternative explanations such as changes in maternal behav-
iors (e.g., smoking and weight gain), or physical health conditions (e.g., hyperten-
sion), or adverse income effects that might produce separate insults to child health. 
Our findings suggest large general welfare gains from preventing fetal exposure to 
severe stress: for example, based on the 2008 figure for the US market, the 8 percent 
 1218
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
decrease in the consumption of prescription drugs treating depression alone can be 
valued at around $800 million annually.
While we recognize that stress from grief is in some ways different from stress 
induced by economic hardship (e.g., as a result of unemployment or poverty), we 
believe that our findings may nevertheless be applicable to understanding how eco-
nomic sources of stress could have intergenerational impacts on mental health. In 
Section V, we conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation to understand how expo-
sure to maternal economically induced stress during the fetal stage might affect 
the mental well-being of the next generation by relying on past research estimat-
ing cortisol responses to grief (Irwin et al. 1988; Pfeffer et al. 2007; Dietz et al. 
2013; Holland et al. 2014) and to economic shocks like unemployment and poverty 
(Arnetz et al. 1991; Haushofer and Shapiro 2013). Our calculation suggests that in 
utero exposure to stress from unemployment may lead to a 17.3 percent increase in 
the likelihood of ever purchasing a drug to treat ADHD in middle childhood, and 9 
and 5.5 percent increases in the likelihoods of ever purchasing drugs to treat anxiety 
and depression in adulthood, respectively.
The causal link between antenatal stress and mental disease that we establish 
points to one potential reason for why so few children born into disadvantage are able 
to escape it in adulthood. Indeed, a growing literature has highlighted how  
early-life 
health disparities may perpetuate economic inequality in adulthood (Currie 2011; 
Aizer and Currie 2014). Our results, combined with prior research documenting a 
strong socioeconomic gradient in stress exposure (see Thompson 2014 for an over-
view), contribute to this literature by providing novel evidence on how disparities 
in early-life health may also translate into lasting disparities in adult mental illness.
I. Hypotheses
The primary contribution of this paper is to shed light on the mental health effects 
of fetal exposure to maternal stress. In this section, we discuss our hypotheses 
regarding the expected effects on mental health outcomes, as well as the expected 
timing of the onset of these effects. Our analysis also considers the impacts on phys-
ical health at birth and later in life, and analyzes differential effects across gesta-
tional age at exposure and with respect to the severity of stress. We provide a brief 
description of our hypotheses regarding these other impacts; for a longer discussion, 
see online Appendix B.
A. Mental Health Outcomes
The existing evidence on the mental health effects of fetal stress exposure is 
extremely limited. We are only aware of two recent studies in economics that show 
that malnutrition in utero may lead to mental and learning disabilities later in life 
(Almond and Mazumder 2011; Adhvaryu, Fenske, and Nyshadham forthcoming). 
Both papers focus on adult measures of mental health and neither investigates more 
precisely where in the life cycle these effects appear.
Further, to the best of our knowledge, no existing study in economics analyzes the 
impact of stress during the fetal stage, or, more generally, of any in utero shock, on 
mental health in childhood. Our focus on stress is most closely related to the work 
 1219
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
of Aizer, Stroud, and Buka (2016), who implement a sibling fixed effects estimation 
and show that exposure to elevated cortisol in utero adversely affects cognition at 
age seven and educational attainment later in life.8 Some of these effects on cogni-
tion could potentially be driven by mental health issues, consistent with psychiatric 
studies showing a correlation between cognitive impairment and the use of ADHD 
prescription drugs (Simon et al. 2000).
Outside of economics, there is more direct evidence on correlations between men-
tal illness in childhood and adverse conditions during the fetal stage. For instance, 
recent neuroscientific research traces the origins of depression and autism-spectrum 
diseases such as ADHD to the fetal period (Liu et al. 2012; Berquin et al. 1998; 
Stoner et al. 2014). Other epidemiological studies have also established a correla-
tion between mothers’ cortisol levels during pregnancy and their children’s men-
tal health.9 Related, Malaspina et al. (2008) provide evidence that exposure to the 
 
Six-Day Arab-Israeli War in utero increased the likelihood of developing schizo-
phrenia by age 30.10
Thus, taken together, while credible causal evidence on the impact of early-life 
shocks on mental health is scant, existing evidence does suggest that we may expect 
mental health effects both in childhood and adulthood. Our analysis specifically 
focuses on three conditions: ADHD, anxiety, and depression. We focus on ADHD in 
childhood because it is the most prevalent mental health condition among children 
in Sweden that can be measured by drug consumption (as well as in many other 
developed countries like the United States) (Socialstyrelsen 2015), and since medical 
research has determined that environmental influences including fetal stress exposure 
are important for its etiology (Berquin et al. 1998; Van den Bergh and Marcoen 2004; 
Van den Bergh et al. 2005). For adults, we study depression and anxiety, which are 
also some of the most common mental illnesses in Sweden (Socialstyrelsen 2013), 
and which have been shown to be related to ADHD diagnosis in childhood.11
B. Timing of the Onset of Mental Health Effects
Importantly, our data allow us to try to pin down when in the life cycle potential 
mental health effects appear. Since our analysis uses Swedish prescription registry 
data to measure these effects, we discuss here the specific institutional context that 
informs the pattern of results we may expect.
When it comes to ADHD, prescription drugs have only been readily available 
since 2002 in Sweden, when the first prescription drug with the active substance 
Methylphenidate was permitted for treatment of ADHD in children below age 18.12 
8 Though this design controls for time-invariant differences between mothers that might be correlated with 
stress, it cannot fully control for time-varying factors that might lead to variation in cortisol levels across pregnan-
cies within the same mother. 
9 See online Appendix F for details. 
10 An important limitation of this empirical design is that it precludes the isolation of fetal exposure to stress 
from the other consequences of the war, such as its economic repercussions. 
11 Tables 7, 8, and 12 in Socialstyrelsen (2013) show that depression and anxiety are the most prevalent condi-
tions treated by pharmaceuticals for neurological conditions, after painkillers and sleeping pills. See http://www.
adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/related-illnesses/other-related-conditions/adult-adhd for more information on the 
relationship between ADHD and anxiety and depression. 
12 In Sweden, Methylphenidate is consumed by 89 percent of all individuals using any prescription drug treating 
ADHD, with trade names in the United States such as Concerta, Methylin, Ritalin, and Equasym XL. 
 1220
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
Though treatment rates were low during the first couple of years, Sweden’s National 
Board of Health and Welfare (NBHW) has documented a continuous and substantial 
increase in the prescription rate of this substance since 2005 (Socialstyrelsen 2012), 
which is the year when our prescription drug data begin.
The NBHW has also documented that both prevalence (share treated) and inci-
dence (share initiating treatment) are highest among individuals aged 10–17 years 
old during the time period covered by our prescription drug data (Socialstyrelsen 
2015).13 These ages coincide with the end of primary school and the entirety of 
middle school in Sweden.
The fact that initiation of prescription drugs treating ADHD is most common at 
these school ages may be explained by the structure of the Swedish school health 
care system (Skolhälsovården). All children attending primary and middle school 
in Sweden go through free annual health check-ups. Further, according to the most 
recent guidelines issued by the NBHW in 2002 (Socialstyrelsen 2002), there is a 
particularly detailed health check-up in grade four (age ten) at which each child’s 
concentration skills and mental health are evaluated. The guidelines also state that 
all students have the right to further evaluations, and to get help with any mental or 
concentration issues that are detected at the age of ten.
Additionally, there is reason to believe that Sweden’s school financing rules give 
schools a direct economic incentive to help detect and initiate treatment of chil-
dren’s mental health problems.14 For example, Hjörne (2012) argues that most eval-
uations of whether a child has ADHD are initiated by teachers or schools, who alert 
parents of problems and suggest further evaluation. In sum, given that all children 
are screened for mental health issues at age ten and the schools’ direct incentives in 
promoting ADHD treatment, it is plausible that the detection of any consequences 
of in utero stress on ADHD may appear around that age in our data.
With regard to anxiety and depression, the other mental health conditions we focus 
on, there are fewer specific institutional factors that might guide our expectations. In 
general, according to the NBHW, nationwide prevalence of prescription drugs treat-
ing anxiety and depression in Sweden is higher in older age groups (Socialstyrelsen 
2013).15 This pattern may suggest that detection of any consequences of in utero 
stress on anxiety and depression may appear at relatively old ages in our sample.
C. Other Hypotheses
When it comes to the expected impacts of fetal stress exposure on birth out-
comes and physical health in later life, we draw on the large existing literature that 
points to adverse short- and long-term effects of exposure to physical insults during 
the fetal period (see Almond and Currie 2011 for a review).16 The evidence on 
13 The considered age groups are 5–9; 10–17; 18–24; 25–34; 45–54; and 55–64. 
14 In Sweden, schools are financed at the municipal level. Direct school fees imposed on parents are prohibited 
by law, and municipalities often offer schools extra transfers for pupils with special needs. Hence, these rules 
impose direct financial incentives on school principals and teachers to help parents detect and commence treatment 
of ADHD in their children. 
15 See Table 72 for anxiety and Table 74 for depression. 
16 See also, e.g.,Van den Berg, Lindeboom, and Portrait (2006); Almond et al. (2010); Hoynes, Page, and Stevens 
(2011); Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach (2011); Almond and Mazumder (2013); Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and 
Almond (2016); Scholte, Van Den Berg, and Lindeboom (2015); Rossin-Slater (2013) on malnutrition; Almond 
 1221
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
the  
consequences of purely psychological stressors is more scarce, as studies that 
exploit variation from extreme and rare events like natural disasters and terrorist 
attacks are limited in their ability to separate the effects of in utero stress exposure 
from any postnatal responses, as well as from the physical health and economic 
insults associated with these events.17 Our empirical methodology (described in 
detail in Section III) focuses on a nearly universal stressor designed to overcome 
these limitations.
An important caveat to the analysis of long-run physical health is that our cohorts, 
whom we can only follow into their thirties, may be too young to detect any effects 
on conditions such as obesity and diabetes. Indeed, evidence in support of David 
J. Barker’s “fetal origins hypothesis” (Barker 1990), which argues that poor con-
ditions in utero can lead to latent effects on disease much later in life, comes from 
studies of adults who are much older than the individuals in our sample.18
Additionally, throughout the paper, we explore whether there are any differen-
tial effects of exposure to maternal stress across different months or trimesters of 
pregnancy. The existing literature does not provide a clear picture of whether we 
should expect in utero exposure to maternal stress to have differential effects across 
gestational age at the time of shock. While some studies find differential effects with 
respect to gestational age, other studies, including some that are most closely related 
to ours (Almond and Mazumder 2011; Mansour and Rees 2012; Currie and Rossin-
Slater 2013; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2016), fail to find such heterogeneity.
Finally, in contrast with the abundance of studies estimating differential effects 
across gestational age at the time of shock, the existing literature provides rela-
tively little guidance on whether we might expect to see heterogeneous effects with 
respect to the intensity of stress exposure. Most closely related to our paper, Aizer, 
Stroud, and Buka (2016) explore potential nonlinearities in the effect of stress by 
separately analyzing different quartile ranges of the maternal cortisol distribution. 
Interestingly, the effects on birth outcomes do not vary with the severity of stress 
exposure. By contrast, the adverse impacts on cognition, captured by child IQ at 
age seven and educational attainment, are the largest for the most severe stress. In 
fact, the effects on cognitive outcomes are not statistically significant in the linear 
specifications, but are instead driven entirely by the highest quartile of the maternal 
cortisol distribution. This evidence suggests that mental health and cognition out-
comes may be more sensitive to the severity of stress exposure than birth outcomes.
II. Data
Our analysis uses administrative population-level data from Sweden. We have 
data on the universe of children born in Sweden from 1973 to 2011, who  
experienced 
the death of a relative (other than the mother) in the 40 weeks after their date of 
(2006); Barreca (2010) on disease outbreaks; Almond, Edlund, and Palme (2009); Black et al. (2013) on radiation; 
Sanders (2012); and Isen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker (2017) on air pollution. 
17 See, for example, evidence on hurricanes (Simeonova 2011; Currie and Rossin-Slater 2013), earthquakes 
(Tan et al. 2009; Glynn et al. 2001; Torche 2011), and the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 (Berkowitz et al. 
2003; Lederman et al. 2004; Lauderdale 2006; Eskenazi et al. 2007). Another recent paper uses in utero exposure 
to the Super Bowl to identify the effects of prenatal stress on birth outcomes (Duncan, Mansour, and Rees 2015). 
18 See, e.g., Susser and Lin (1992); Almond (2006); Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond (2016). 
 1222
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
conception or in the one year after their date of birth. Put differently, our baseline 
sample includes all children whose mother loses a family member (a sibling, a par-
ent, a maternal grandparent, the child’s father, or an own (older) child) either during 
her pregnancy or in the year after childbirth. Our data include both live births and 
stillbirths (at 22 weeks gestation or later), allowing us to examine changes to the 
composition of live births. For each relative who died, we have information on the 
cause and exact date of death. We also have information about the mothers’ and 
fathers’ educational attainment, labor market income, and marital status measured 
around the time of conception.
For each child in our sample, we have data on the exact date of birth, birth weight, 
birth length, head circumference, gestation (in days), and a variety of diagnosis 
codes at birth. We also have variables related to the mother’s pregnancy and deliv-
ery: tobacco use during pregnancy, pregnancy risk factors (diabetes, kidney disease, 
epilepsy, asthma, hypertension, or urinary infection), the first date of prenatal care 
and the number of prenatal visits, Cesarean section (C-section) delivery, induction 
of labor, and any complications at delivery.
To trace health outcomes after birth and throughout life, we add information from 
inpatient records and the prescription drug registry. For all of these, we have the 
universe of records associated with prespecified health conditions described below. 
Inpatient records exist from 1964 to 2012, while the prescription drug data exist for 
the years 2005 to 2014. For each occasion when a prescription drug was bought, the 
data contain detailed information about the drug name, active substance, average 
daily dose, and the drug’s exact ATC code.19 The ATC classification allows us to 
link the drugs to the conditions they are most commonly used to treat.
To select the inpatient and prescription drug records, we prespecified certain 
health conditions before undertaking any analysis.20 First, we include all mental 
illnesses. We further prespecified the eight subcategories of mental disorders that 
were recently selected by the NBHW to track prevalence and prescription drug use 
(Socialstyrelsen 2012): ADHD, anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder, psychotic dis-
orders, sleeping disorders, addiction, and Parkinson’s disease. While we  
prespecified 
all eight subcategories for completeness, our analysis focuses on ADHD, anxiety, 
and depression, as we discussed in Section I.
Second, although our primary focus is mental health, we prespecified a small set 
of physical health conditions that have been linked to stress in utero or after birth in 
the epidemiological and medical literature: type II diabetes, heart disease, Cushing’s 
syndrome, hypo- and hyperthyroidism, cholesterol, neoplasms, and conditions orig-
inating in the perinatal period.21 We include all of these for completeness, although 
19 The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification System is controlled by the World Health 
Organization Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology (WHOCC), and was first published in 1976. 
20 We have access only to the subset of the inpatient and prescription drug records described here, not to the 
entire universe of inpatient and prescription drug records for all possible conditions. We are therefore unable to 
explore health effects beyond the prespecified ones in our analysis. 
21 We are grateful to Johannes Haushofer for help in compiling this list. See online Appendix E for exact 
ICD codes for these conditions, as well as ATC codes for prescription drugs that can be linked to their treatment. 
Cushing’s syndrome is a condition that occurs when the body is exposed to high levels of the hormone cortisol for 
a long time. Online Appendix F has details and references relating to the biological mechanisms through which 
stress affects human health. 
 1223
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
our cohorts may be too young to detect any effects on physical health other than 
conditions originating in the perinatal period.22
III. Empirical Methodology
Our goal is to examine the causal link between antenatal exposure to the death 
of a family member and children’s physical and mental well-being at birth and later 
in life. The loss of a relative is a traumatic event that induces acute and immediate 
stress in the expectant mother (Irwin et al. 1988; Pfeffer et al. 2007; Dietz et al. 
2013; Holland et al. 2014). However, the occurrence of death is likely correlated 
with unobserved family characteristics. For example, some types of accidental 
deaths are negatively associated with socioeconomic status (Adda, Björklund, and 
Holmlund 2011). Additionally, this loss may have many consequences for families 
aside from stress. For instance, a relative’s passing may constitute either a financial 
burden or a source of income through bequests or insurance payouts. A death in the 
family may lead to a decline in household productivity and necessitate time away 
from work for the survivors. If a relative’s death is due to a hereditary condition, 
then it may also provide other family members with information about their own 
genetic makeup, life expectancy, and expected health costs. All of these factors can 
also affect the child after birth.
To identify the impact of antenatal exposure to a family rupture, we must there-
fore address two challenges: (i) separation of impacts that operate through the 
uterine environment from other impacts that also operate through the postnatal envi-
ronment, and (ii) nonrandom selection into death. We do this by exploiting variation 
in the exact timing of family rupture relative to the expected date of delivery (at 
full term). Our analysis essentially compares individuals who experience the death 
of a relative during gestation with individuals who experience such a death in the 
year after birth. Thus, while all children included in this analysis are exposed to the 
postnatal consequences of the relative’s passing, only the former group is exposed 
through the uterine environment.
A. Isolation of Antenatal Effects
More concretely, to see how we address (i), let the causal relationship between an 
outcome of interest,  
 
y 
i 
 
, and the occurrence of a family rupture be given by
(1) 
 
 
y 
i = γRelativeDeat 
h 
i 
 +  
x 
i 
′ 
 
 
κ +  
u 
i 
, 
 
where  
 
x 
i 
 is a vector of all other relevant determinants of  
 
y 
i 
 
, and  
 
u 
i 
 is a random vector 
of predetermined and unobservable characteristics. Here,  
γ captures the combined 
impact of all pre- and postnatal consequences of the relative’s passing.
22 As outlined in online Appendix E, the inpatient records also include visits related to health outcomes that 
might be impacted through a behavioral channel: sexually transmitted disease, injury, suicide, and lifestyle issues. 
These we do not capture through prescription drugs, either because no prescription drug is used, or because no drug 
can uniquely be linked to their treatment. 
 1224
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
Now instead consider a sample of children who either experience the death of a 
relative during gestation, or shortly after birth:
     
S =  
{i : 1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i 
 
   = 1 | 
1 
 
[b ≤ RelativeDeath < b + w] 
i = 1} 
, 
where  
c denotes the child’s date of conception,  
b denotes the child’s 
date of birth, and  
w denotes a time window after birth (in days), so that 
 
 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i = 1 indicates that the family rupture occurred during 
pregnancy, and  
1 
 
[b ≤ RelativeDeath < b + w] 
i = 1 indicates that it occurred 
within  
w days of the child’s birth, respectively.
For all  
i ∈ {S} 
, suppose we estimate
(2) 
 
 
y 
i = σ1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i 
 +  
x 
i 
′ 
 
η +  
ϵ 
i 
, 
 
where all of the variables are defined as above. Here,  
σ captures the effect of bereave-
ment in utero relative to the effect of bereavement immediately after birth, and not 
the entire effect of bereavement. Comparing individuals who experience a stressful 
shock during gestation with those who experience such a shock shortly after birth 
effectively addresses the issue of distinguishing between antenatal and postnatal 
effects, and has a distinct advantage over the existing studies in this literature that 
rely on exposure to war or other disasters. These studies cannot rule out that the doc-
umented effects on adult outcomes arise from postnatal differences that were induced 
by the events that occurred during pregnancy, rather than by the differences in the 
uterine environments. A compelling feature of our methodology is that our estimates 
are not contaminated by such postnatal effects: these effects are borne by all children 
in our sample, while only the treatment group is exposed to maternal trauma in utero.
By separating antenatal effects from postnatal consequences, our estimate cap-
tures the impact of the unborn child’s physiological exposure to maternal stress 
through the uterine environment. The extent to which  
σ isolates only the effect of 
this stress exposure depends on whether other consequences of the family rupture 
(e.g., positive or negative income effects or changes in household productivity) 
are the same across the pre- and postnatal periods, or whether some of them have 
differential impacts during the prenatal period. To be more precise, two different 
assumptions on the separability of the effects of a relative’s passing translate into 
two different interpretations of  
σ 
.
A1 (Strong Additive Separability).—First, interpreting  
σ in (2) as the impact of 
intrauterine stress exposure alone is equivalent to coupling model (1) with the fol-
lowing assumption, which we refer to as “strong additive separability”:
(3)   
RelativeDeat 
h 
i 
 
   =  
α 
1 
UteroStres 
s 
i 
∗ 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i 
 +  
α 
2 
Othe 
r 
i 
 +  
ε 
i 
, 
 
where  
UteroStres 
s 
i 
 represents intrauterine exposure to the physiological stress expe-
rienced by the mother, and  
Othe 
r 
i 
 captures all other consequences and correlates of 
 1225
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
family bereavement, including shocks to family income, changes to the mother’s work 
schedule, changes to the mother’s information regarding her own health status, and 
any family characteristics that make death more likely. Given (1) and (3), children 
whose mothers experience a death shortly after giving birth face the same income 
shocks and other consequences as the children whose mothers experience a death 
during pregnancy. But unlike the children who are in utero when the death occurs, the 
former group does not have intrauterine exposure to the physiological stress experi-
enced by the mother. Consequently, if  
A1 holds,  
σ obtained from estimation of (2) on 
sample  
S isolates the impact of intrauterine stress caused by the family rupture.
A2 (Weak Additive Separability).—Second, if instead income shocks associated 
with the death of a family member affect the child differently depending on whether 
the loss occurs during pregnancy or if it happens shortly after childbirth, then we 
would interpret  
σ in (2) as capturing both the effect of physiological exposure to 
maternal stress and the differential impact of income during pregnancy relative to 
postpartum (which may interact with the stress exposure). This is equivalent to cou-
pling model (1) with the following, less restrictive assumption, which we refer to as 
“weak additive separability”:
(4)  
RelativeDeat 
h 
i =  
α 
1 
UteroStres 
s 
i 
∗ 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i 
 
 
+  
α 
2 
 
UteroStres 
s 
i 
∗ 
1 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b 
] 
i 
∗ 
 Incom 
e 
i 
 
+  
α 
3 Othe 
r 
i 
 +  
ε 
i 
, 
 
and assuming that the new term is additively separable from any other income effects.
In Section IV, we examine whether there are any additional income effects 
stemming from the prenatal period, that is, income effects that do not only operate 
through the postnatal environment, and find little evidence of their presence. We 
also examine a range of mechanisms other than maternal stress. As we discuss fur-
ther in Section IV, all of these tests support the interpretation of  
σ in (2) as largely 
capturing the impact of intrauterine stress exposure (though we, of course, cannot 
rule out all other mechanisms with certainty).
B. Addressing Endogeneity in Date of Birth
Model (2) represents a causal relationship between in utero exposure to bereave-
ment and child outcomes if, for all  
i ∈ {S} 
,  
E(1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i 
 
ϵ 
i 
) = 0 
. 
However, as discussed further below, we find that exposure to the death of a relative 
in utero reduces gestational age. Since the key treatment variable in equation (2), 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
i 
 
, is defined based on the child’s actual birth date,  
b 
, 
we face a violation of the excludability restriction. Moreover, there is a mechanical 
correlation between the length of the pregnancy and the likelihood that the death 
occurs during it.23
23 See Currie and Rossin-Slater (2013) and Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2016) for more discussion of these 
issues. 
 1226
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
To address these issues, we adjust our treatment variable by defining it relative 
to the expected date of birth at full term instead of the actual date of birth. More 
precisely, we define a child’s estimated date of birth as  
 
e 
b = c + 280 
: that is, 
280 days (40 weeks) after the date of conception,  
c 
. Unlike the actual date of birth, 
this expected date of birth is predetermined at the relative’s death date.
Consequently, instead of estimating equation (2), we estimate the following 
equation on the sample with  
i ∈ {S} 
:
(5) 
 
 
y 
iymp =  
β 
0 
 +  
β 
1 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath <  
e 
b 
] 
iymp 
 
 
 +  
ψ 
y 
 +  
ϕ 
m 
 +  
ρ 
p 
 +  
x 
i 
′ 
 
 
β 
2 
 +  
ν 
iymp 
, 
 
where  
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath <  
e 
b 
] 
iymp 
 captures “treatment,” a discontinuous vari-
able that takes the value of 1 if the relative’s death occurs before the child’s estimated 
date of birth at full term, and 0 otherwise. Intuitively, our empirical strategy exploits 
a discontinuity around the threshold of 280 days after conception and assigns a child 
to intrauterine stress exposure if the relative’s death occurred before this date.24
In model (5),  
 
y 
iymp 
 is an outcome of individual  
i 
, conceived in year and month 
 
(y, m) 
, with a mother residing in municipality  
p in the year before conception. 
 
 
ψ 
y 
 and  
 
ϕ 
m 
 are year and month of conception fixed effects, respectively, and  
 
ρ 
p 
 are 
pre-conception municipality fixed effects. Further,  
 
x 
i 
 is a vector of variables captur-
ing mother- and child-specific characteristics, including indicator variables for the 
mother’s age at conception (four categories: <20 
, 20–24 
, 25–34 
, >35), the moth-
er’s education in the year prior to conception (four categories: <HS, HS diploma, 
some college, college+), indicators for the mother being born outside of Sweden 
and being married in the year prior to conception, and dummies for parity (three 
categories: 1, 2, 3+). Additionally,  
 
x 
i 
 includes the relative’s age and age squared at 
the time of death. Standard errors are clustered on the mother’s municipality of res-
idence in the year prior to conception. Under the identifying assumption discussed 
below, the estimate of interest,  
β 
ˆ 
 
1 
 
, captures the causal impact of exposure to mater-
nal stress due to a family rupture through the uterine environment.25
In parts of our analysis, we also analyze pregnancy trimester- and month-specific 
impacts, replacing  
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath <  
e 
b 
] 
iymp 
 with indicator variables captur-
ing whether the death occurred in the expected first, second, or third trimester or the 
expected first through ninth months of pregnancy, respectively.
24 We also can estimate models where we use  
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath <  
e 
b 
] 
iymp 
 to instrument for exposure to 
death before the child’s actual date of birth. As the instrument (relative death before expected birth date) is different 
from the actual exposure variable (relative death before actual birth date) for only about 1 percent of the individuals 
in our data, the first stage is very strong with a coefficient of around 0.97. The two-stage least squares (2SLS) results 
(presented in online Appendix D) are very similar to those from our main specifications. 
25 Equation (5) represents a reduced-form relationship between a relative’s death during the mother’s expected 
length of the pregnancy and child outcomes. We also present some results from 2SLS specifications where we use 
 
1 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath <  
e 
b 
] to instrument for exposure to death during the mother’s actual length of pregnancy. 
In these specifications, the first stage takes the form of
(6) 
 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath < b] 
iymp =  
γ 
0 
 +  
γ 
1 
1 
 
[c ≤ RelativeDeath <  
e 
b 
] 
iymp 
 
 
+  
η 
y 
 +  
ϵ 
m 
 +  
θ 
p 
 +  
x 
i 
′ 
 
 
γ 
2 
 +  
ζ 
iymp 
, 
 
with the 2SLS estimate given by  
β 
ˆ 
 
1 
/ 
γ 
ˆ 
 
1 
 . 
 1227
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
C. Identifying Assumption
This methodology yields an estimate of the causal effect of antenatal maternal 
stress under the identifying assumption that the exact timing of death within a short 
time frame around the expected date of birth is uncorrelated with unobserved char-
acteristics of the child or family. Put differently, we assume that there is no selection 
on unobservables into treatment, where treatment is defined as experiencing death 
during the first 40 weeks (280 days) after conception.
While less restrictive than assuming no selection into death per se, the assumption 
is nonetheless not innocuous. We therefore subject it to several “plausibility tests,” 
since the exact assumption is inherently untestable. First, we test whether selection 
into treatment is correlated with a range of parental characteristics that are observed 
prior to conception: each parent’s age, first parity birth, each parent’s marital status, 
each parent’s educational attainment (indicators for below high school, high school 
degree, some college; with college degree or higher as the omitted category), each 
parent’s wage income, and an indicator for the mother being born outside Sweden.26 
As shown in online Appendix Tables A1 and A2 for maternal and paternal charac-
teristics, respectively, we find little evidence for a systematic relationship between 
parental characteristics and the occurrence of death during pregnancy.27 Out of the 
16 coefficients reported in these tables, only 2 are statistically significant (we find a 
positive correlation between treatment and first parity births and a negative correla-
tion between treatment and the likelihood of the mother being foreign-born) and the 
magnitudes are relatively small when compared to sample means.
We explored the correlation between treatment and first parity births in detail, and 
conclude that it is mechanically driven by differential seasonality in conceptions by 
parity that coincides with a seasonal pattern in relative deaths. We discuss this issue 
at length in online Appendix C. For this reason, all of our analyses include month of 
conception and parity fixed effects, and we show that our results are also robust to 
the inclusion of parity  
× month of conception interactions in online Appendix D.28
A second, and related, concern for our identification assumption is that the death 
of a relative during pregnancy may cause an increase in miscarriages or fetal or 
infant deaths, leading to selection in our sample of surviving children. Moreover, 
there may be differential selection by parity, which could introduce the correla-
tion between treatment and first parity that we see in online Appendix Table A1. 
While we do not have data on miscarriages, we explore the impacts of treatment 
26 Information on child parity and whether the mother is born outside Sweden comes from the medical birth 
register; we do not have information on child parity or nativity for fathers. We do not include father characteristics 
as controls in our main analysis as they are missing for some children in our sample and we want to maximize 
our sample size. However, results that include father characteristics as controls are generally very similar to those 
reported here. 
27 Since our analyses compare individuals who experience a relative death in utero to those who experience a 
relative death after birth while controlling for year-of-conception fixed effects, there is a mechanical correlation 
between the treatment variable and age of the relative: those who die during the mother’s pregnancy are mechani-
cally slightly younger than those who die in the year after childbirth. Thus, all of the regressions in online Appendix 
Tables A1 and A2 control for the relative’s age and age squared. 
28 The correlation between treatment and the likelihood of the mother being born outside Sweden is driven by 
a highly skewed distribution of relative deaths in the sample of children of foreign-born mothers that exhibits extra 
mass of relative deaths around 400–500 days post-conception (i.e., after birth). In online Appendix D, we show that 
our results are robust to dropping children of foreign-born mothers from our sample. 
 1228
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
on stillbirths (at 22 weeks gestation or more), perinatal deaths (stillbirths or deaths 
in the first 28 days of life), and the sex ratio at birth separately by parity in online 
Appendix Table A3, finding no statistically significant effects.29
As a third test of the identification assumption, we link our sample of children 
to their older siblings (if they exist) and test whether a younger child’s in utero 
exposure to the death of a relative has any spurious impacts on his/her older sib-
ling’s outcomes.30 In online Appendix Table A4, we present results from these 
specifications where the older sibling’s outcomes considered are: an indicator for a 
 
low-birth-weight birth (less than 2,500 grams), an indicator for a pre-term birth 
(less than 37 weeks gestation), an indicator for ever being hospitalized before age 1 
for a condition originating in the perinatal period, an indicator for ever consuming 
drugs treating ADHD between ages 9 and 11, and indicators for ever consuming 
drugs treating anxiety and depression between ages 34 and 36.31 These are the main 
outcomes for which we find effects in Section IV, and we therefore use them as “pla-
cebo outcomes” in this analysis. Just as in the main analysis, we focus the placebo 
analysis of mental health outcomes on a subsample limited to mothers who experi-
ence a parental or sibling death. Online Appendix Table A4 shows that there is no 
statistically significant relationship between a younger child’s prenatal exposure to 
a relative’s death and the older child’s outcomes.32
These results are reassuring as they suggest that the timing of a family member’s 
death in relation to the child’s expected date of birth is uncorrelated with a variety of 
family characteristics. Nevertheless, we also examine the robustness of our results 
to limitations in types of death causes that have been shown to be more exogenous 
and less anticipated than others. See Section IV and online Appendix D for details.
D. Sample and Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents variable means and standard deviations in parentheses. As 
described above, we define the set of treated individuals as those experiencing 
the death of a relative during the 40 weeks after conception (i.e., in days, the 
time interval of  
[c, c + 280] 
). Our comparison group includes all children who 
experience a relative death at any point between the estimated date of birth and 
one year after their actual birth date.33 Column 1 displays statistics for our full 
29 We follow several papers in this literature by examining the sex ratio as a signal of changes to miscarriage 
rates (e.g., Sanders and Stoecker 2015; Halla and Zweimüller 2013). Since male fetuses are more likely to miscarry, 
a reduction in male births may indicate an increase in miscarriages. 
30 Siblings data are only available to us for children born in selected years: 1973, 1977, 1983, 1988, 1995, 1999, 
2001, and 2005. 
31 When we analyze the indicator for being hospitalized for a condition originating in the perinatal period as 
an outcome, we limit the sample to siblings born in 1987 or later (as the definition of perinatal conditions is not 
comparable with earlier years). 
32 We should note that the interpretation of these placebo results is less clear in light of the correlation between 
treatment and child parity. As discussed above, the correlation between treatment and child parity is mostly mechan-
ical and does not affect our main results. Another concern with this placebo analysis is that we have less power 
to detect statistically significant effects due to the smaller sample size of cohorts that can be linked to siblings. 
However, we have replicated our main analysis only using children in the “sibling sample” cohorts (i.e., those who 
were born in 1973, 1977, 1983, 1988, 1995, 1999, 2001, and 2005). In contrast to the results for older siblings, 
we find statistically significant deleterious effects of exposure to a relative’s death during pregnancy on our main 
outcomes of interest for children born in these years (results available upon request). 
33 To estimate the date of conception,  
c 
, we subtract the number of gestation days from the date of birth,  
b 
. 
 1229
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
sample, while the second and third columns consider the treatment and compari-
son groups separately. In our sample, mean maternal age at childbirth is about 28 
years, and about 31 percent of mothers are married in the year prior to conception. 
The modal mother has a high school degree in the year before conception. Average 
birth weight is 3,544 grams, with 3 percent of children born low-birth-weight and 
5 percent of children born pre-term. Notably, the maternal characteristics are quite 
similar across the treatment and comparison groups. However, even this simple 
unadjusted comparison shows that treatment children tend to have slightly worse 
birth outcomes relative to the comparison group. In the subsequent section, we 
explore the differences between the outcomes of the two groups more rigorously 
using the methods described above.
Column 4 displays related statistics for the universe of all births in Sweden during 
the same time period. Relative to the universe of births, average birth weight in our 
sample is slightly higher, while the likelihoods of pre-term and  
low-birth-weight 
Table 1—Summary Statistics
Our 
whole sample
Death 
during pregnancy
Death 
after pregnancy
All births 
in Sweden
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mother’s age at
27.88
27.92
27.86
28.53*
 conception
(5.058)
(5.061)
(5.056)
Mother married
0.311
0.308
0.313
 pre-concep.
(0.463)
(0.462)
(0.464)
Mother’s ed:  
< HS
0.177
0.174
0.179
0.1543*
 pre-concep.
(0.382)
(0.379)
(0.383)
Mother’s ed: HS
0.314
0.308
0.318
0.476*
 pre-concep.
(0.464)
(0.462)
(0.466)
Mother’s ed: some
0.202
0.205
0.199
0.1435*
 college pre-concep.
(0.401)
(0.404)
(0.399)
Child’s birth weight
3,543.9
3,537.2
3,549.0
3,505.1
 (g)
(557.9)
(564.7)
(552.7)
Child is low birth
0.0323
0.0346
0.0305
0.0424
 weight ( 
< 2,500g)
(0.177)
(0.183)
(0.172)
Child is preterm
0.0497
0.0534
0.0469
0.0586
 ( 
< 37 weeks)
(0.217)
(0.225)
(0.211)
Observations
296,557
127,406
169,151
3,988,858
Notes: In the first three columns, the sample includes all children whose mother loses a family member (a sibling, 
a parent, a grandparent, the child’s father, or an own (older) child) within 280 days of the child’s estimated date 
of conception or in the year after birth. To assign exposure to treatment, we first calculate each child’s estimated 
date of conception,  
c 
, by subtracting the number of gestation days from the date of birth. We then define the set of 
treated individuals as those experiencing the death of a relative in the time interval  
[c, c + 280] 
. Column 1 displays 
statistics for the full sample, while the second and third columns consider the treatment and comparison groups sep-
arately. Column 4 displays related statistics for the universe of births in Sweden during the same time period. Note 
that the variables marked by * are measured slightly differently in the sample that we use (columns 1–3) than in the 
universe of births (column 4). In particular, in our sample, all variables indicated by * are measured at conception. 
In the universe of births, these variables are instead measured at the first prenatal visit. In addition, the three edu-
cational attainment categories would not be directly comparable even if they were measured at the same point in 
time. For our sample (columns 1–3), our dataset contains the official educational attainment variable, matched from 
records from Statistics Sweden. For the universe of births, we use the variable from the Swedish Board of Health 
and Welfare, where the educational categories are defined slightly differently. Most importantly, high school attain-
ment includes a broader range of programs than regular three-year high school programs (e.g., various two-year 
programs). We do not have information about marital status for the universe of births.
 1230
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
births are slightly lower.34 Additionally, mothers in our sample are slightly less 
likely to have a high school degree than all mothers giving birth in Sweden, but this 
difference is at least partially driven by differences in how educational attainment is 
measured between the two sources of data.35
IV. Results
We present results in chronological order. We start with the analysis of birth out-
comes, and then study physical and mental health throughout childhood and into 
adulthood. We also present some additional results that examine the possibility of 
alternative explanations besides stress in our analyses, and that test the robustness 
of our main findings.
A. Birth Outcomes
Table 2 presents the results on the effects of exposure to a relative death in 
utero on average birth weight, and indicators for low-birth-weight, very-low-birth-
weight, and high-birth-weight (more than 4,000 grams) and pre-term births. In 
online Appendix Table A5, we report results for additional outcomes: indicators for 
small-for-gestational-age (SGA) and large-for-gestational-age (LGA), birth length 
and head circumference (in centimeters), and indicators for procedures at delivery 
(C-section, induction of labor). All of our analyses include the vector  
 
x 
i 
 described 
above, as well as fixed effects for the year and month of conception and the mother’s 
municipality of residence in the year prior to conception.
To examine whether the effects are different depending on the severity of the 
stressful event, these tables are split into three panels. Panel A presents results for 
our entire analysis sample. Panel B limits the sample to children whose mothers lose 
close relatives, who are defined as those within one generation from the mother: a 
mother’s sibling, a mother’s parent, the child’s father, or a mother’s own older child 
(i.e., we drop maternal grandparent deaths). Finally, panel C further limits the sam-
ple to children whose mothers experience the death of a parent or a sibling (i.e., a 
 
subsample of the “close relative” group). The death of a maternal parent or sibling 
likely  
generates severe stress for the mother, but leads to fewer other changes to 
household resources and immediate family structure than the death of the child’s 
father or the mother’s own older child would.
34 We believe that these differences arise as a result of the fact that our sample, which is conditional on being 
linked to a relative death, has a slightly smaller share of all births from the earlier years than the later years. The mul-
tigenerational register has lower quality data further back in time, and we therefore observe fewer  
great-grandparent 
deaths for children born in the 1970s than for those born in the later years. Since birth outcomes have been improv-
ing over time, our sample has slightly better infant health measures than the overall population of births. 
35 Specifically, in Table 1, the variables marked by * are measured slightly differently in the sample that we use 
(columns 1–3) than in the universe of births (column 4). In particular, in our sample, all variables indicated by * are 
measured at conception. In the universe of births, these variables are instead measured at the first prenatal visit. In 
addition, the three educational attainment categories would not be directly comparable even if they were measured 
at the same point in time. For our sample, our dataset contains the official educational attainment variable, matched 
from records from Statistics Sweden. For the universe of births, we use the variable from the Swedish Board of 
Health and Welfare, where the educational categories are defined slightly differently. Most important, high school 
attainment includes a broader range of programs than regular three-year high school programs (e.g., various two-
year programs). We do not have information about marital status for the universe of births. 
 1231
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
Our estimates suggest that in utero stress due to family bereavement leads to 
a small negative effect on average birth weight of 11 grams. However, much of 
this effect is driven by impacts at the lower end of the birth weight distribution. 
Prenatally exposed infants are 12 percent more likely to be born low-birth-weight, 
and 24 percent more likely to be born very-low-birth-weight. In contrast, there is 
only a 3 percent decline in the likelihood of a high-birth-weight birth.36 These chil-
dren are also 12 percent more likely to be born pre-term, are 0.18 percent shorter, and 
have 0.1 percent smaller head circumference. The mothers are 3 percent more likely 
to have a C-section delivery. Additionally, comparing the results across panels sug-
gests that the effects of in utero exposure to the death of a relative are similar across 
different relative types. The lack of heterogeneous treatment effects with respect 
to our measure of the intensity of stress exposure for birth outcomes is  
consistent 
with other studies of maternal cortisol (Aizer, Stroud, and Buka 2016) and stressful 
shocks like hurricanes (Currie and Rossin-Slater 2013).
In Figure 1 and online Appendix Figure A1, we examine whether our estimated 
impacts are different across the nine months of pregnancy for low-birth-weight and 
36 High birth weight (defined as more than 4,000 grams) is typically seen as a negative health outcome, which 
is correlated with a greater incidence of obesity and other adverse conditions like diabetes in later life (see, e.g., 
Cnattingius et al. 2012). Thus, the decline in the likelihood of a high-birth-weight birth can be seen as a small 
beneficial effect of in utero stress exposure. However, the magnitude of this decline is much smaller than the corre-
sponding magnitudes of the increases in low-birth-weight and very-low-birth-weight births. 
Table 2—Effects of Relative Death In Utero on Birth Outcomes
Birwt
LBW
VLBW
HBW
Pret.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A. All relative deaths
Death during pregnancy
−11.47
0.00392
0.00124
−0.00501
0.00617
[2.067]
[0.000633]
[0.000269]
[0.00150]
[0.000838]
Mean dep. var.
3,546.3
0.0320
0.00511
0.188
0.0494
Observations
288,337
288,337
288,337
288,337
289,087
Panel B. Close relative deaths
Death during pregnancy
−10.08
0.00358
0.000740
−0.00460
0.00517
[3.563]
[0.00140]
[0.000526]
[0.00258]
[0.00145]
Mean dep. var.
3,523.0
0.0372
0.00603
0.179
0.0511
Observations
84,584
84,584
84,584
84,584
84,817
Panel C. Maternal parent/sibling deaths
Death during pregnancy
−10.76
0.00420
0.00119
−0.00444
0.00542
[3.780]
[0.00146]
[0.000519]
[0.00265]
[0.00150]
Mean dep. var.
3,525.8
0.0365
0.00576
0.180
0.0504
Observations
80,956
80,956
80,956
80,956
81,177
Notes: See Table 1 for more information on the sample of analysis. Each column in each panel is a separate regres-
sion. Panel A uses the entire sample of analysis. In panel B, we drop children of mothers who experience the death 
of a grandparent. In panel C, we only include children of mothers who experience the death of a parent or a sib-
ling. All regressions include controls for the mother’s age at conception (five categories: <20, 20–24, 25–34 
,  
>35), 
maternal education in the year prior to conception (four categories: <HS, HS diploma, some college, college+), 
indicator variables for the mother being born outside of Sweden and being married in the year prior to conception 
year, dummies for parity (three categories: 1, 2, 3+), and the relative’s age at death and age squared. Additionally, 
all regressions control for fixed effects for the year and month of conception, as well as the mother’s municipality 
of residence during the year prior to conception. Robust standard errors are clustered on the mother’s municipality 
of residence in the year prior to conception. 
 1232
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
pre-term births, respectively. The graphs present the coefficients (and 95 percent 
confidence intervals) from a single regression that includes indicators for exposure 
to the death of a relative in each of the 9 (expected) months of pregnancy, with the 
omitted category being exposure after 280 days (40 weeks) of gestation.
Both figures show positive coefficients on exposure to stress during most months 
of the pregnancy relative to postpartum, with slightly higher effects during the fourth 
month. In online Appendix Tables A6 and A7, we also display trimester-specific 
effects on all of the birth outcomes. In general, however, the coefficients tend to be 
quite similar throughout the pregnancy, and with overlapping confidence intervals. 
As discussed in more detail in Section I, the lack of significant differences across the 
gestational age at exposure is consistent with other recent studies on the effects of 
in utero shocks on birth outcomes (e.g., Almond and Mazumder 2011; Mansour and 
Rees 2012; Currie and Rossin-Slater 2013; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2016).
B. Physical Health Outcomes Beyond Birth
Having documented that exposure to family bereavement in utero adversely 
impacts health at birth, we turn to the analysis of physical health measures later in 
life. First, we examine the effects on the occurrence of hospitalizations by different 
ages. Our inpatient data exist for years 1964 to 2012 and thus allow us to study 
cumulative hospitalizations into adulthood.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
>9 m
−0.002
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
Coefficient
Pregnancy month of relative death
Figure 1. Effect of Relative Death on the Incidence of the Child Being Born Low-Birth-Weight
Notes: The sample includes all children whose mother loses a family member (a sibling, a parent, a grandparent, 
the child’s father, or an own (older) child) within 280 days of the child’s estimated date of conception or in the year 
after birth. To assign exposure to treatment, we first calculate each child’s estimated date of conception by subtract-
ing the number of gestation days from the date of birth. This figure plots the coefficients (and 95 percent confidence 
intervals in dashed lines) on the effects of the death of a relative during the first through ninth months of pregnancy. 
The omitted category is an indicator for the relative death occurring after 280 days (40 weeks) of gestation (i.e., 
post-childbirth in most cases). The outcome is an indicator for the child being born low-birth-weight.
 1233
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
Table 3 presents results on the effects of in utero exposure to a relative death on 
child hospitalizations by age 1. We find that in utero stress is associated with a 3 per-
cent increase in the likelihood that a child is ever hospitalized by age 1 (column 1).37 
We explored in detail the diagnoses codes to try to understand which causes are driv-
ing these results and found that they are entirely driven by treatments for conditions 
originating in the perinatal period, as seen in columns 2 and 4 of Table 3.38 As with 
the results on birth outcomes, we do not see substantial differences in effects across 
relative types (panels A to C). In online Appendix Figure A2 and online Appendix 
Table A8, we also present the results by month and trimester of pregnancy, respec-
tively. The estimates suggest that the health effects may be stronger when exposure 
occurs during the first trimester, although we again cannot reject the null hypothesis 
that the coefficients are the same across different months of exposure.
37 We also examined outpatient visits, and found suggestive evidence of similar increases in outpatient visits 
occurring by age 1, although we have less power due to smaller sample sizes in these analyses (outpatient data are 
only available for years 2001 to 2012). These results, as well as a description of the outpatient data, are available 
upon request. 
38 The analysis of perinatal conditions is limited to cohorts born in 1987 or later as the definition is not directly 
comparable to earlier years. For these years, we use the entire set of perinatal conditions, which include all condi-
tions with ICD-10 codes in the range P00-P96. These include the following categories of conditions: (i) fetus and 
newborn affected by maternal factors and by complications of pregnancy, labor, and delivery; (ii) disorders related 
to length of gestation and fetal growth; (iii) birth trauma; (iv) respiratory and cardiovascular disorders specific to 
the perinatal period; (v) infections specific to the perinatal period; (vi) hemorrhagic and hematological disorders of 
fetus and newborn; (vii) transitory endocrine and metabolic disorders specific to fetus and newborn; (viii) digestive 
system disorders of fetus and newborn; (ix) conditions involving the integument and temperature regulation of fetus 
and newborn; (x) other disorders originating in the perinatal period. 
Table 3—Effects of Relative Death In Utero on Hospitalizations by Age 1
Any hosp.
Tot. hosp.
Any hosp.-peri.
Tot. hosp.-peri.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A. All relative deaths
Death during pregnancy
0.00192
0.00148
0.00351
0.00294
[0.000924]
[0.00176]
[0.000892]
[0.00107]
Mean dep. var.
0.0737
0.102
0.0575
0.0646
Observations
288,606
288,606
231,398
231,398
Panel B. Close relative deaths
Death during pregnancy
0.00107
−0.000250
0.00402
0.00335
[0.00174]
[0.00291]
[0.00192]
[0.00249]
Mean dep. var.
0.0660
0.0914
0.0595
0.0681
Observations
84,676
84,676
46,500
46,500
Panel C. Maternal parent/sibling deaths
Death during pregnancy
0.00140
−0.0000993
0.00396
0.00326
[0.00183]
[0.00299]
[0.00197]
[0.00257]
Mean dep. var.
0.0659
0.0908
0.0595
0.0680
Observations
81,036
81,036
44,634
44,634
Notes: See Tables 1 and 2 for more information on the sample and controls. “Any hosp.-peri.” refers to an indicator 
for ever being hospitalized for a condition originating in the perinatal period. “Tot. hosp.-peri.” refers to the total 
number of hospitalizations for conditions originating in the perinatal period. The sample in columns 3 and 4 is lim-
ited to cohorts born in 1987 or later (as the definition of perinatal conditions is not comparable with earlier years). 
Robust standard errors are clustered on the mother’s municipality of residence in the year prior to conception.
 1234
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
On the whole, our physical health results suggest that the adverse consequences 
of fetal stress exposure last beyond birth and impact child health through age 1. 
However, the impacts seem to fade after early childhood: we find no effects on hos-
pitalizations at later ages (see online Appendix Table A9).39 Though, as we pointed 
out in Section I, our results do not rule out the possibility of latent physical health 
consequences for individuals at older ages (Barker 1990); our cohorts are too young 
to detect such effects.
C. Mental Health Outcomes
We next use the prescription drug registry data to analyze effects on mental health. 
As described in Section II, these data contain information about prescription drugs 
bought during the period 2005–2014. We create variables capturing the incidence 
of prescription drug consumption at different ages throughout childhood and adult-
hood. Specifically, we focus on drugs consumed around ages 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 
and 35. To reduce measurement error and maximize sample size, we focus on the 
consumption of prescription drugs in three-year age ranges centered around these 
multiples of five (e.g., ages 4 to 6, 9 to 11, etc.). While some individuals appear in 
the drug registry data at all three of the ages in a given range (e.g., children born in 
2001 appear at ages 4, 5, and 6), others only appear at one or two of the ages (e.g., 
children born in 1999 appear at age 6 only). To calculate our outcomes, we include 
everyone who appears in the data at least at one of the ages in any given range.
Figure 2 graphs the coefficients (and associated 95 percent confidence intervals in 
dashed vertical lines) from separate regressions where the outcomes are indicators 
for individuals consuming prescription drugs used to treat any of the mental health 
conditions described in Section II at five-year age intervals. In panel A of Figure 2, 
which plots the estimates for our entire sample, none of the coefficients is statisti-
cally significant. However, a pattern begins to emerge: mental health impacts seem 
more likely to arise in middle childhood (ages 9 to 11) and adulthood (ages 34 to 
36). When we limit the sample to individuals whose mothers experience close rel-
ative deaths in panel B, the pattern becomes more pronounced, with the coefficient 
for consuming mental health drugs at ages 9 to 11 now statistically significant. The 
pattern remains strong in panel C when the sample is further limited to maternal 
parent and sibling deaths.
Figure 2 captures the incidence of purchasing any mental health drugs; we 
explore the specific conditions driving these results further in Table 4. In the close 
relative sample (panel B), we find that the mental health effects in middle child-
hood are driven primarily by increases in the consumption of ADHD medications: 
a 25 percent increase in the likelihood of ever purchasing a drug to treat ADHD 
and a 24 percent increase in the average daily dose. Among adults in their 30s, the 
effects are concentrated among anti-anxiety and depression medications: we see 13 
and 8 percent increases in the likelihood of ever purchasing drugs to treat anxiety 
39 Additionally, we have used our prescription drug registry data to explore effects on the consumption of drugs 
used to treat any of the following health conditions at ages 4 through 36: obesity, diabetes, Cushing’s syndrome, 
hypo- and hyperthyroidism, cholesterol, and heart conditions (i.e., beta blockers). We find little evidence that expo-
sure to a relative death during pregnancy increases the consumption of these prescription drugs at any of our observ-
able ages (see online Appendix Table A10). 
 1235
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
and depression, respectively; and 19 and 12 percent increases in the average daily 
doses of anti-anxiety and depression medications, respectively. Panel C shows that 
these effects still remain in the subsample further limited to individuals whose 
mothers lose a parent or a sibling. As with the impacts on the physical health out-
comes, we fail to detect statistically significant differences in effects across preg-
nancy months of exposure (see Figure 3 for ADHD drug consumption among 9 to 
11 year-olds and Figure 4 for anxiety and depression drug consumption among 34 
to 36 year-olds).
As we discussed in Section I, the age pattern of mental health effects that we find 
is consistent with certain features of our prescription registry data and the institu-
tional context in Sweden. To interpret our results, it is important to keep in mind that 
we do not observe whether drugs were ever consumed by certain ages; instead, we 
observe the prescription drug purchases of some cohorts (i.e., those born in the late 
1990s and 2000s) during early and middle childhood, of other cohorts (i.e., those 
born in the late 1980s and early 1990s) during high school, and of still others (i.e., 
4–6
9–11
14–16
19–21
24–26
29–31
34–36
Age range observed
−0.01
−0.005
0.005
0.01
0.015
0
Any mental RX coefficient
4–6
9–11
14–16
19–21
24–26
29–31
34–36
Age range observed
−0.01
0.01
0.02
0
Any mental RX coefficient
4–6
9–11
14–16
19–21
24–26
29–31
34–36
Age range observed
−0.01
0.01
0.02
0
Any mental RX coefficient
Panel A. All deaths
Panel C. Maternal parent/sibling deaths
Panel B. Close relative deaths
Figure 2. Effect of Relative Death on the Incidence of the Child Consuming Any Mental Health 
Medications by Age
Notes: See Figure 1 notes for more information on the sample. These figures plot the coefficients (and 95 percent 
confidence intervals in vertical lines) on the effects of the death of a relative on the likelihood that the child con-
sumes any mental health medications at different age intervals. Each of the three panels present results from a 
sample including a certain set of relative deaths. Intuitively, the samples capture different degrees of proximity in 
the family tree between the expectant mother and the deceased, and hence different intensities of stress exposure.
 1236
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
those born in the 1970s and early 1980s) during adulthood.40 As we have pointed 
out, ADHD prescription drugs have only been available in Sweden since 2002, and 
the prescription rate has been steadily increasing since 2005. Thus, intuitively, the 
 
x 
-axes in Figure 2 indicate the age ranges of different cohorts during this “ADHD 
revolution.” The fact that we see the strongest effects on ADHD prescription drug 
use among cohorts who were aged 9 to 11 during the “ADHD revolution” is also 
very consistent with Sweden’s guidelines that require mental health screenings of 
children at age 10, and with the direct economic incentives for schools to detect and 
treat ADHD among students, described in detail in Section I.
In online Appendix Table A11, we attempt to shed more light on this explanation. 
We split the sample according to the age at which different cohorts would have 
been at most 11 years old in 2002. Specifically, the first three columns consider the 
consumption of any mental health drugs, any ADHD drugs, and the ADHD average 
dose observed at any age between 4 and 14 in our data, while the last three columns 
consider these outcomes at ages 15 to 36 in our data. Individuals who are at most 
14 years old in our data were born in  
2005 − 14 = 1991 
 or later, and were thus at 
most 11 years old in 2002. Consequently, only individuals who are represented in 
the first three columns were likely exposed to a mandated mental health screening 
and had access to ADHD drugs at the time of the screening. The results demonstrate 
40 In supplementary analyses, we explored whether there are any heterogeneous effects on birth outcomes 
across these cohorts. We find that these cohorts experience similar adverse impacts on birth outcomes (results 
available upon request). 
Table 4—Effects of Relative Death In Utero on Prescription Use for Mental Health Conditions  
at Ages 9–11 and 34–36
ADHD, 9–11
Anxiety, 34–36
Depression, 34–36
Any RX
Avg. dose
Any RX
Avg. dose
Any RX
Avg. dose
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. All relative deaths
Death during pregnancy
0.000973
0.0373
0.00499
0.0202
0.00517
0.404
[0.000933]
[0.0337]
[0.00306]
[0.0195]
[0.00373]
[0.235]
Mean dep. var.
0.0228
0.667
0.0685
0.217
0.114
4.664
Observations
114,906
114,906
27,641
27,641
27,641
27,641
Panel B. Close relative deaths
Death during pregnancy
0.00620
0.172
0.00719
0.0304
0.00736
0.472
[0.00205]
[0.0774]
[0.00358]
[0.0210]
[0.00436]
[0.246]
Mean dep. var.
0.0244
0.713
0.0674
0.205
0.112
4.559
Observations
20,380
20,380
22,907
22,907
22,907
22,907
Panel C. Maternal parent/sibling deaths
Death during pregnancy
0.00648
0.169
0.00864
0.0390
0.00915
0.553
[0.00210]
[0.0811]
[0.00367]
[0.0223]
[0.00441]
[0.259]
Mean dep. var.
0.0238
0.702
0.0666
0.204
0.111
4.546
Observations
19,605
19,605
21,763
21,763
21,763
21,763
Notes: See Tables 1 and 2 for more information on the sample and controls. Robust standard errors are clustered 
on the mother’s municipality of residence in the year prior to conception. Exact definitions of the prescription drug 
categories are given in online Appendix E.
 1237
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
that, despite the fact that the sample size in the younger age group is only about one-
half that of the size of the older age group, the effects on ADHD drug purchases are 
much stronger for cohorts who are observed at ages 4 to 14 in our prescription data. 
In other words, we find positive treatment effects on the consumption of ADHD 
drugs only for cohorts that were in elementary and middle school during the time 
period when ADHD drugs were available and mental health screenings were man-
dated in the transition between elementary and middle school.
An alternative interpretation of the fact that we only observe impacts on ADHD 
among school-aged children is that symptoms of ADHD vanish over time. This story 
is inconsistent, however, with evidence that treatment often continues for many 
years once it is commenced, indicating that symptoms may not disappear at the 
end of school age, even among individuals who are treated with the medications.41 
Thus, the absence of effects beyond school age may instead suggest that ADHD 
is more readily detected while children are in school, which is again consistent 
with school financing rules that offer schools extra transfers for pupils with special 
needs. Indeed, when we interact our treatment variable with the share of municipal 
41 Among individuals in Sweden who begun treatment with an ADHD prescription drug in 2006, at the age of 18 
to 24, approximately 50 percent remained on these drugs 5 years later. The figure is similar in all older age groups 
where treatment is begun before the age of 55 (Socialstyrelsen 2012). 
−0.02
−0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
Coefficient
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
>9 m
Pregnancy month of relative death
Figure 3. Effect of Maternal Parent/Sibling Death on the Incidence of the Child Consuming Any 
ADHD Medications at Ages 9–11
Notes: The sample includes all children whose mother loses a parent or a sibling within 280 days of the child’s esti-
mated date of conception or in the year after birth. To assign exposure to treatment, we first calculate each child’s 
estimated date of conception by subtracting the number of gestation days from the date of birth. This figure plots the 
coefficients (and 95 percent confidence intervals in dashed lines) on the effects of the death of a relative during the 
first through ninth months of pregnancy. The omitted category is an indicator for the relative death occurring after 
280 days (40 weeks) of gestation (i.e., post-childbirth in most cases). The outcome is an indicator for the child ever 
consuming any medications used to treat ADHD at ages 9–11.
 1238
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
Coefficient
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
>9 m
Pregnancy month of relative death
−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
Coefficient
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
>9 m
Pregnancy month of relative death
Panel A. Any anxiety RX
Panel B. Any depression RX
Figure 4. Effect of Maternal Parent/Sibling Death on the Incidence of the Child Consuming Any 
Anxiety or Depression Medications at Ages 34–36
Notes: The sample includes all children whose mother loses a parent or a sibling within 280 days of the child’s esti-
mated date of conception or in the year after birth. To assign exposure to treatment, we first calculate each child’s 
estimated date of conception by subtracting the number of gestation days from the date of birth. These figures plot 
the coefficients (and 95 percent confidence intervals in dashed lines) on the effects of the death of a relative during 
the first through ninth months of pregnancy. The omitted category is an indicator for the relative death occurring 
after 280 days (40 weeks) of gestation (i.e., post-childbirth in most cases). The outcome is an indicator for the child 
ever consuming any medications used to treat anxiety (panel A) or depression (panel B) at ages 34–36.
 1239
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
resources allocated based on special education needs, we obtain a positive (albeit 
insignificant) coefficient, providing suggestive evidence of this mechanism.42
For individuals who were already out of school when the “ADHD revolution” 
took place, detection of mental health issues may take a longer time. In fact, it may 
take a “precipitating event,” such as marriage or childbirth, for one to seek mental 
health treatment. Consistent with this idea, in online Appendix Table A12, we show 
that the effects on the consumption of anti-anxiety and anti-depression drugs at 
ages 34–36 are driven entirely by individuals who are married during those ages.43
Overall, our results suggest that experiencing a very stressful event in utero is 
more deleterious for mental health than experiencing such an event shortly post-
birth. Our estimates also imply that the adverse mental health impacts of exposure 
to stress in utero are larger when the stress is more severe, as captured by the mother 
losing a closer relative. The finding that adverse mental health impacts seem to be 
sensitive to the intensity of the stressor is consistent with Aizer, Stroud, and Buka’s 
(2016) evidence that only the highest levels of maternal cortisol in utero impair 
children’s later cognitive outcomes. In contrast, we showed above that the physical 
health impacts are less sensitive to the severity of stress exposure (again, consistent 
with evidence from Aizer, Stroud, and Buka 2016 on birth outcomes).
D. Magnitudes
To gauge the plausibility of our estimates, we compare the magnitudes of our 
effect sizes to those reported in the existing literature. First, our 11-gram decrease 
in birth weight is within the confidence interval of Black, Devereux, and Salvanes’s 
(2016) 23-gram decrease associated with the death of a maternal parent in Norway. 
However, we show relatively large effects on the incidence of low-birth-weight and 
very-low-birth-weight births (12 percent and 24 percent, respectively), while Black, 
Devereux, and Salvanes (2016) find statistically insignificant impacts on these out-
comes. Additionally, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2016) report a 12 percent 
increase in the likelihood of a C-section delivery, while we only find a 3 percent 
increase for this outcome. The differences between our estimates and those in Black, 
Devereux, and Salvanes (2016) likely reflect different institutional settings (Sweden 
versus Norway), and the fact that Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2016) use a sam-
ple of siblings, while we focus on all individuals who experience a relative death in 
utero or in the year after birth.
It is also informative to compare our estimates for birth outcomes to those found 
in studies on the effects of natural disasters and terrorist attacks. For example, our 
12 percent increase in low-birth-weight births is substantially smaller than the corre-
sponding 40 percent increase in Torche (2011) resulting from exposure to a Chilean 
earthquake in a “high-intensity” region. Similarly, Eskenazi et al. (2007) find that 
exposure to the September 11 attacks in New York City was associated with a 
 
44 percent increase in very-low-birth-weight births, a magnitude much higher than 
42 We use a 2012 cross section of municipal shares devoted to special needs education. The results are available 
on request. 
43 There is no effect of treatment on the likelihood of being married (results available upon request). We do 
not have information on the fertility of the cohorts in our sample, and thus cannot study the effects separately by 
whether or not they have children. 
 1240
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
our estimated 24 percent increase. The fact that the impacts we find are smaller than 
those reported in these studies suggests that analyses of disasters and attacks may 
be bundling the effects of multiple “treatments” (i.e., combining stress with the 
economic and physical health consequences of these events), whereas our research 
design is more precisely able to isolate in utero exposure to maternal stress.
With regard to mental health, we can compare our estimates to the two existing 
studies in economics that have examined the impacts of in utero exposure to malnu-
trition. Almond and Mazumder (2011) find that exposure to Ramadan in utero dou-
bles the likelihood of having a mental disability in adulthood in data from Uganda 
and Iraq, while Adhvaryu, Fenske, and Nyshadham (forthcoming) show that a one 
standard deviation increase in cocoa prices (which improves nutrition during preg-
nancy) leads to a 50 percent decrease in the likelihood of suffering from severe 
mental distress in adulthood in Ghana. Our 25 percent, 13 percent, and 8 percent 
impacts on the take-up of ADHD, anxiety, and depression medications, respectively, 
are considerably smaller. These differences in effect sizes could arise for a num-
ber of reasons, including that we are (i) studying different institutional contexts (a 
high-income country with a large social safety net versus developing countries), 
(ii) estimating effects of different types of shocks (in utero exposure to maternal 
stress from bereavement versus malnutrition), and (iii) measuring mental health in 
different ways (prescription drug take-up versus survey responses). Nevertheless, it 
is reassuring that our estimates are within the bounds of the recent limited literature 
in economics on this question.
E. Alternative Channels
Thus far, we have argued that the adverse physical and mental health conse-
quences of family bereavement in utero are driven by physiological exposure to 
maternal stress. In particular, as discussed in detail in Section III, we posit that 
the other consequences of a death in the family are netted out when our compari-
son group consists of children who experience such a death in the year after birth. 
Additionally, we argue that the severity of stress exposure is important for affecting 
child mental health. However, our method leaves room for some alternative expla-
nations, which we discuss here.
Maternal Behaviors and Physical Conditions.—First, it is possible that a fetus 
is not affected by the stress on its own, but rather by a maternal behavior or phys-
ical health condition during pregnancy that is induced by stress. For example, if 
a woman responds to a stressful event by taking up smoking, developing hyper-
tension, changing her eating habits, or adjusting her labor supply, then this may 
adversely affect the child. Additionally, if the mother has to travel to another loca-
tion as a result of the relative’s death (e.g., to attend the funeral), and if she therefore 
must give birth in a different hospital than where she had planned to, then the child 
may be impacted by this sudden hospital change. In online Appendix Table A13, we 
examine these potential mechanisms in more detail. We study whether the death of 
a relative during pregnancy is associated with changes in prenatal care, the presence 
of “high-risk” factors (diabetes, kidney disease, epilepsy, asthma, hypertension, or 
urinary infection), initiation of smoking during pregnancy, pregnancy weight gain 
 1241
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
(in kilograms), an indicator for the child’s hospital of birth being in a different 
municipality than the mother’s municipality of residence (our proxy for unplanned 
travel), and an indicator for the mother having any positive wage income during the 
year of conception or the year after.44
In the overall sample, we find no effects on any of these outcomes. When we 
limit to the close relative and maternal parent/sibling subsamples, we see statis-
tically significant reductions in the adequacy of prenatal care, as measured by the 
Kotelchuck Index (Kotelchuck 1994).45 The magnitudes of these estimates are quite 
small, however: for example, there is a 1 percentage point decline in the likelihood 
of the mother having adequate prenatal care in the close relative sample, relative to 
a sample mean of 81 percent. In practice, this effect likely translates into one missed 
prenatal visit within a small fraction of the treated population (e.g., to attend the 
relative’s funeral).46 Given that the number of prenatal visits has been shown to have 
very little effect on children’s health at birth (Sikorski et al. 1996; Fiscella 1995; 
Evans and Lien 2005), we do not think that our main results could be plausibly 
explained by such a small reduction in prenatal care.
In sum, we believe that changes in pregnancy behaviors and conditions that we 
can observe are unlikely to drive our estimated effects on birth outcomes, hospi-
talizations during the first year of life, and mental health in later childhood and 
adulthood.
Differences in Maternal Reactions to Stress.—Second, the mother’s own mental 
health may respond differently to a stressful event that occurs during pregnancy than 
to an event occurring after giving birth. For example, relative to pregnant women, 
mothers of infants may, on the one hand, be less vulnerable as they can divert their 
attention toward childrearing; on the other hand, mothers of newborns may be prone 
to postpartum depression, or generally be more sensitive to additional stressors. In 
online Appendix Table A14, we try to examine the plausibility of this mechanism 
by studying maternal mental health outcomes as measured by our prescription vari-
ables. We find no evidence that experiencing a parent’s or sibling’s death during 
pregnancy has a differential effect on maternal mental health relative to experienc-
ing such a death post-childbirth.47 Thus, our results suggest that the adverse effects 
of in utero exposure to family bereavement are not driven by differences in maternal 
experiences of the event between pregnancy and post-childbirth, but rather signify 
the critical nature of the fetal period in propagating the effects of stress, through a 
biological channel, from mother to fetus.
44 We measure any wage income in the year of conception and the year after to try to capture labor supply during 
pregnancy. Unfortunately, we cannot look at a more precise measure of labor supply since our wage income data 
are at an annual level. 
45 The Kotelchuck Index compares the number of prenatal visits received to the number of expected visits, 
adjusting for gestational age when care began and gestational age at delivery. Adequate prenatal care means that the 
ratio of observed to expected visits is at least 80 percent. Intermediate prenatal care means that the ratio of observed 
to expected visits is 50–79 percent. 
46 The death of a relative does not affect the likelihood that a woman is eligible for prenatal care due to the 
existence of universal health insurance coverage. 
47 In these specifications, we study the incidence of consuming mental health medications at any point between 
2005 and 2014 when our drug registry data are available (i.e., we do not limit to specific age ranges of the mother). 
We also examined all other mental health conditions and found no effects. 
 1242
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
Differential Income Shocks.—Third, it may be the case that any income shocks 
associated with the death of a family member affect the child differently depending 
on whether the loss occurs during pregnancy or if it happens shortly after child-
birth. In the notation of our framework presented in Section III, this possibility 
would entail that the less restrictive assumption, that of weak additive separability, 
is appropriate. Then, our estimates would capture both the effect of physiological 
exposure to maternal stress and the differential impact of income during pregnancy 
relative to postpartum.
This issue is most relevant for income shocks that affect families immediately 
following the death of a relative: for example, funeral expenses. However, in 
Sweden,  
90 percent of all estates can fully cover the funeral expenses, and then 
also leave some inheritance to the surviving relatives (Erixson and Ohlsson 2014). 
Also, immediate income shocks may arise if, for example, when a maternal parent 
dies, the other maternal parent moves in with her child (the (expectant) mother). In 
Sweden, however, co-residence between adult children and their parents or other 
extended family members is very uncommon, largely due to cultural reasons and the 
fact that the government provides assistance for the care and financial support of the 
elderly. Therefore, this channel is likely not very relevant in our context.
Moreover, relative to other countries such as the United States, income shocks, 
and hence their precise timing, likely matter less in Sweden due to the extensive 
social security and benefits system. In online Appendix Table A15, we present some 
indirect evidence that differential income effects are likely unimportant in our con-
text. In particular, if income effects were to matter in utero, then we would expect 
them to matter more for lower-income families, which would translate into hetero-
geneous treatment effects with respect to the socioeconomic status of the mother. 
Online Appendix Table A15 shows the results from regressions that interact our 
treatment variable with an indicator for the mother having a high school degree 
or less at the time of conception. We find no evidence that the impacts of in utero 
exposure to family bereavement are stronger for children of less-educated mothers.
In sum, while we of course cannot rule out all potential alternative mechanisms, 
the evidence in this section is suggestive of maternal stress as the primary driver of 
our main results.
F. Additional Results
This section presents two sets of results that test the robustness of our main find-
ings and explore an important maternal behavioral response. In addition, in online 
Appendix D, we present results from two-stage least squares specifications for our 
main outcomes of interest; explore the sensitivity of our findings to sample limitations 
based on causes of death that are determined to be more exogenous than others; explore 
the heterogeneity in effects by the physical proximity of the mother to the deceased 
relative; assess an alternative interpretation of our measure of intensity of emotional 
stress related to the size of inheritances; and perform various additional robustness 
checks addressing the correlation between treatment, parity, and  
foreign-born mothers.
Adjusting for Multiple Hypothesis Testing.—First, an important concern for our 
analysis is that we may find spurious effects due to the number of outcomes we 
 1243
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
 
consider. To address this issue, we follow Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) and 
create two outcome indices: one for physical health and one for mental health. The 
physical health index consists of the 28 outcomes analyzed in Tables 2, 3, A3, A5, 
A9, and A10, described in the notes to Table 5. The mental health index consists 
of 49 outcomes: 7 indicators for ever purchasing a mental health drug at any of 
the main age categories we consider in Figure 2 (4–6, 9–11, 14–16, 19–21, 24–26, 
29–31, 34–36), as well as  
2 × 3 × 7 = 42 other outcomes comprised of our two 
measures, an indicator for ever purchasing the drug and the average daily dose, 
per condition (ADHD, anxiety, depression) and per age group (4–6, 9–11, 14–16, 
19–21, 24–26, 29–31, 34–36).
To create the indices, we first orient each outcome such that a higher value rep-
resents a better outcome (e.g., the indicator for low-birth-weight is inversed such 
that we instead consider an indicator for not being low-birth-weight). Then, we 
standardize each oriented outcome by subtracting the comparison group mean and 
dividing by the comparison group standard deviation. Finally, we take an equally 
weighted average of the standardized outcomes.
Table 5 presents the results from our main specifications using the two indices 
as outcomes. Just like our main results, these estimates suggest that physical health 
is adversely affected by exposure to any relative death in utero. Mental health is 
also impacted, but only in the case of severe stress, as measured by the death of the 
mother’s close relative, and specifically, parent or sibling.48
Maternal Responses to In Utero Shocks: Effects on Subsequent Fertility.—Second, 
we study whether our in utero shock of interest is correlated with an  
important 
48 The magnitudes of the effect sizes for the two indices are small. This is not unexpected as there are effects for 
only some parts of the indices, but not others. 
Table 5—Effects of Relative Death In Utero on Physical and Mental Health Indices
Physical health index
Mental health index
All
Close
Mom par/sib
All
Close
Mom par/sib
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Death during pregnancy
−0.00905
−0.00737
−0.00824
−0.000129 −0.00724
−0.00904
[0.00175]
[0.00293]
[0.00297]
[0.00188]
[0.00363]
[0.00365]
Mean dep. var.
−0.00854
−0.0185
−0.0165
−0.00172
0.00188
0.00369
Observations
289,087
84,817
81,177
280,699
83,581
79,980
Notes: See Tables 1 and 2 for more information on the sample and controls. The physical health index consists of 
the 28 outcomes analyzed in Tables 2, 3, A3, A5, A9, and A10: continuous birth weight, low-birth-weight indica-
tor, very-low-birth-weight indicator, high-birth-weight indicator, pre-term indicator, stillbirth indicator, perinatal 
death indicator, SGA indicator, LGA indicator, birth length, head circumference, C-section indicator, induced labor 
indicator, any hospitalizations by age 1, total hospitalizations by age 1, any hospitalizations for perinatal causes by 
age 1, total hospitalizations for perinatal causes by age 1, 7 indicators for ever purchasing a physical health pre-
scription at any of the age categories we consider (4 
– 
6, 9–11, 14 
–16, 19–21, 24 
–26, 29–31, 34 
–36), and indicators 
for any hospitalizations by ages 5, 10, 18, and 27. The mental health index consists of 7 indicators for ever pur-
chasing a mental health drug at any of the main age categories we consider in Figure 2 (4 
– 
6, 9–11, 14 
–16, 19–21, 
24 
–26, 29–31, 34 
–36), as well as  
2 × 3 × 7 = 42 other outcomes comprised of our two measures: an indicator 
for ever purchasing the drug and the average daily dose, per condition (ADHD, anxiety, depression) and per age 
group (4 
– 
6, 9–11, 14 
–16, 19–21, 24 
–26, 29–31, 34 
–36). See Section IV for more information on how the indices 
are constructed. Robust standard errors are clustered on the mother’s municipality of residence in the year prior to 
conception.
 1244
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
maternal behavioral response: fertility. This analysis is motivated by recent work 
studying parental responses to fetal shocks. For example, Halla and Zweimüller 
(2013) find that low-education Austrian mothers who were exposed to radiation 
fallout from the Chernobyl accident during pregnancy reduced their subsequent fer-
tility. The authors interpret this response as a form of compensating behavior as the 
mothers were able to allocate more resources to the affected children by reducing 
the quantity of children that they had.
We examine maternal fertility in online Appendix Table A16, which shows that 
women who experience a relative death during pregnancy are more likely to have a 
subsequent child in our data. Since some women in our sample have not yet com-
pleted their childbearing years, this effect could be driven by a retiming of births 
rather than an increase in lifetime fertility. Nevertheless, our findings suggest that, 
unlike Austrian mothers in the context of Chernobyl, the mothers in our data do not 
reduce their fertility after an adverse shock during pregnancy, but instead are more 
likely to have additional children.
While our data do not allow us to better understand the mechanism behind this 
fertility effect, this analysis suggests caution in the interpretation of estimates from 
sibling fixed effects designs. The possibility of endogenous subsequent fertility sug-
gests that comparisons of treated children with younger siblings could be biased. 
This problem is not entirely alleviated by comparing treated children to only their 
older siblings, as the older siblings are likely to be affected by the endogenous change 
in family size, and they may be differentially affected than the treated children.
V. Implications for the Costs of Economically Induced Stress
Throughout this paper, we have analyzed the internal validity of our estimates 
by conducting a variety of robustness checks and indirect tests of mechanisms. 
However, it is also worth discussing whether our results on the effects of in utero 
exposure to maternal stress from the death of a relative have any external validity. 
In particular, in light of evidence on the intergenerational persistence of socioeco-
nomic status in the United States and other developed countries (Solon 2001; Chetty 
et al. 2014; Boserup, Kreiner, and Kopczuk 2014), and the strong socioeconomic 
gradient in reported stress levels (Kunz-Ebrecht, Kirschbaum, and Steptoe 2004; 
Cohen, Doyle, and Baum 2006; Thompson 2014), the question of how economically 
induced stress can affect individual well-being across generations is of interest to 
both academics and policymakers.
Although grief-induced stress resulting from the death of a family member and 
stress stemming from adverse economic shocks are in many ways not the same, 
both types of stress produce a physiological response in the human body char-
acterized by an increase in the level of the cortisol hormone (which controls the 
“fight-or-flight” response). Thus, we conduct an exploratory back-of-the-envelope 
calculation to “translate” our estimates into the costs of economically induced 
stress. Specifically, we proceed in three steps. First, we use existing studies that 
quantify the effect of the death of a relative on cortisol levels. Second, we use 
studies that quantify the impact of adverse economic conditions on cortisol. These 
two steps together allow us to translate the impact of economic hardship on cortisol 
into our “relative death scale.” In the final step, we use our results to speak to how 
 1245
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
in utero exposure to maternal stress from economic hardship may affect long-term 
mental health.
A. The Impact of a Relative Death on Cortisol
Several recent studies show that the death of a loved one is associated with 
increased cortisol levels. Cortisol levels can be measured in blood (plasma) and in 
saliva. Because levels estimated in blood are higher than levels estimated in saliva, 
we distinguish between studies that use these two types of measurements.49
Irwin et al. (1988) compare morning plasma cortisol levels of women who expe-
rienced the death of a spouse six months earlier with women in a non-bereaved 
control group. They find that the mean plasma cortisol level is 99.3 nmol/l higher 
in the bereaved group.
Similarly, Pfeffer et al. (2007) compare the salivary cortisol levels of individuals 
who lost a parent with individuals in a non-bereaved control group. They find that 
the mean salivary cortisol level is 2.75 nmol/l higher in the bereaved group, mea-
sured four months after bereavement.50
B. The Impact of Economically Induced Stress on Cortisol
A number of studies present correlational evidence documenting a strong socio-
economic gradient in cortisol. Individuals with lower levels of education, income, 
and lifetime economic status tend to have elevated cortisol when compared to their 
more educated, higher income, and higher economic status counterparts (see, e.g., 
Cohen, Doyle, and Baum 2006; Li et al. 2007).
There are also several studies that present more rigorous quasi-experimental and 
experimental evidence on this question. In Sweden, Arnetz et al. (1991) find that 
individuals who were laid off in a mass layoff had blood plasma cortisol levels that 
were 68 nmol/l higher than individuals who were securely employed, measured 
one year after the layoff. Comparing to the results in Irwin et al. (1988) discussed 
above, this study suggests that the impact of economically induced stress through 
unemployment on cortisol is about 69 (= 68/99) percent of the impact of the death 
of a close relative.
Similarly, in a developing country context, Haushofer and Shapiro (2013) con-
duct a randomized controlled trial that investigates the impact of poverty on stress 
by randomly allocating cash transfers to households. They find that cortisol levels 
are 2.03 nmol/l lower in households that received large transfers ($1,525) than in 
households that received small transfers ($404). The difference corresponds to a 
substantial income effect, given that Kenya’s GDP per capita was $1,184 in 2012, 
49 Different studies also measure cortisol levels using different units. For the purpose of comparison, we here 
convert all results that we discuss to nmol/l. (Conversion rate: 1 μg/dl = 27.59 nmol/l.) 
50 In addition, several studies show evidence on the impact of bereavement on diurnal cortisol regulation, i.e., 
the ability of cortisol to be broken down over the course of the day. The evidence suggests that recently bereaved 
individuals not only have higher morning cortisol levels, but also experience a flatter slope during the course of the 
day (meaning that cortisol falls less during the day). See Dietz et al. (2013) on the impact on cortisol regulation of 
the loss of a parent and Holland et al. (2014) on the impact of the loss of a spouse. Further, O’Connor et al. (2012) 
examine diurnal cortisol production patterns in women who have experienced the death of different relatives and 
find that more intense grieving is associated with a flatter slope across the day. 
 1246
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
at the time of the intervention.51 Comparing to the results in Pfeffer et al. (2007), 
this estimate suggests that the effect of economically induced stress through lower 
income on cortisol is about 74 (= 2.03/2.75) percent of the impact of the death of 
a close relative.
C. Economically Induced Stress In Utero and Later Mental Health
Using the estimate above that the impact on cortisol from a layoff is approxi-
mately  
69 percent of the impact of the death of a close relative, we can calculate how 
in utero exposure to maternal economically induced stress (resulting from unem-
ployment) might affect the future mental health of the unborn child. This calculation 
implies that in utero exposure to stress from maternal unemployment induces a  
17.3 
(= 0.69 × 25) percent increase in the likelihood of ever purchasing a drug to treat 
ADHD in middle childhood, and a 16.6 (= 0.69 × 24) percent increase in the aver-
age daily dose. Further, among adults in their thirties, the calculations suggest that 
in utero exposure to stress from maternal unemployment leads to 9 (= 0.69 × 13) 
and 5.5 (= 0.69 × 8) percent increases in the likelihoods of ever purchasing 
drugs to treat anxiety and depression, respectively; and in 13.1 (= 0.69 × 19) and 
8.3 (= 0.69 × 12) percent increases in the average daily doses of anti-anxiety and 
depression medications.52
Of course, these back-of-the-envelope calculations rely on a strong assumption of 
linearity in the effect of cortisol. Nevertheless, this exercise implies that the effects 
of economically induced stress on the mental health of the next generation could be 
quite large.
VI. Conclusion
This paper analyzes whether the uterine environment propagates the impact of 
stress across generations. We exploit multigenerational registers in Sweden to create 
family trees that span four generations, and study how deaths of family members 
during pregnancy affect the unborn child. Unlike other studies of shocks to the pre-
natal environment, our empirical strategy isolates the effect of physiological fetal 
exposure to stress by comparing the outcomes of children whose relatives die while 
they are in utero to those whose relatives die in the year after birth.
We find that in utero exposure to the death of a relative up to three generations 
apart negatively affects physical health at birth and in the first year of life. We also 
provide novel evidence that severe antenatal stress, as measured by bereavement 
of closer family members, has causal impacts on the onset of psychological condi-
tions, including ADHD during childhood and anxiety and depression in adulthood. 
Our findings suggest large general welfare gains of preventing fetal exposure to 
severe stress: for example, based on the 2008 figure for the US market, the 8 percent 
decrease in the consumption of prescription drugs treating depression alone can be 
valued at $800 million per year.
51 GDP per capita in current US$ is available at: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD. 
52 If we instead use the estimated relationship between household income and cortisol in the context of Kenya, 
we obtain very similar impacts of in utero exposure to maternal stress due to poverty. 
 1247
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
While our findings may not generalize to all other possible sources of stress, we 
believe that we make some important headway toward understanding the potentially 
far-reaching consequences of stress during pregnancy. This is pertinent in light of the 
fact that stress is a growing health problem around the world. For example, accord-
ing to recent survey evidence from the United States using a ten-item Perceived 
Stress Scale, women’s average stress levels have increased by about 18 percent 
between 1983 and 2009 (Cohen and Janicki-Deverts 2012). Concurrently, over 
these last few decades, mental health diagnoses and prescription drug use among 
both children and adults have risen substantially. For instance, a recent study by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows that antidepressant consumption 
among individuals aged 12 years or older has increased by 400 percent from 1988 to 
2008.53 Certainly, it is likely that some of the growth in antidepressant use is driven 
by increases in diagnoses and in the availability of prescription drugs. Nevertheless, 
our results present some of the first evidence on a causal link between these two 
trends in the population (the prevalence of stress and the incidence of mental health 
issues) perpetuated by the fetal environment.
The presence of such a causal link may point to novel avenues for curbing the 
high and rapidly rising private and social costs associated with mental illness. 
Specifically, if a mother’s stress during pregnancy harms her unborn child’s mental 
health later in life, measures that help reduce stress during pregnancy may come at 
low costs relative to their social benefits. For example, although most countries have 
some kind of family leave policy that facilitates reductions in women’s labor supply 
in the weeks or months following childbirth, regulation allowing women to take 
protected time off from work during pregnancy may also be important.
Finally, as poor women are subject to more stress than women who have more 
resources, our results suggest that fetal stress exposure may play a potentially 
important role in the intergenerational transmission of disadvantage. Future research 
might explore these conjectures in more detail by examining the effects of specific 
interventions that reduce pregnant women’s stress levels on their children’s mental 
health, especially among low-income populations.
VII. Note (Added Post-Acceptance)
Since acceptance of this article, it was brought to our attention that there are other 
related studies on this topic. This note describes the relation of our work to these 
studies (the pertinent references have also been added). Class et al. (2011, 2014) use 
Swedish register data to document associations between maternal bereavement in 
utero and adverse birth outcomes and hospitalizations for mental health conditions, 
respectively.54 Similarly, Khashan et al. (2008, 2011) use Danish register data to 
document an association between uterine exposure to maternal bereavement and 
hospitalizations for mental health conditions. These studies compare the outcomes 
of children whose mothers experienced a close relative death during pregnancy (or 
in the surrounding years) to the outcomes of children whose mothers did not. They 
53 See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db76.htm for more details. 
54 Abel et al. (2014) also use Swedish register data to examine a potential association between maternal 
bereavement in utero and hospitalizations for mental health conditions, but find no evidence of such an association.
 1248
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
also examine the timing of exposure, by comparing children exposed to maternal 
bereavement during different stages (e.g., specific months of pregnancy or in the first 
or second year of life) to children who have no exposure to maternal bereavement.
By contrast, our empirical design compares the outcomes of children whose 
mothers experienced a relative death within 280 days post-conception to the out-
comes of children whose maternal relatives died in the year after their expected date 
of birth. Further, we explore the heterogeneity of effects across different months 
of pregnancy, using the group exposed to maternal bereavement in the year after 
their expected date of birth as the control group (as opposed to a control group 
that is unexposed, as in the studies referenced above). As we write in Section III, 
this approach helps us to: (i) separate the impacts of maternal stress that operate 
through the uterine environment from other impacts (such as income effects) that 
also operate through the postnatal environment, and (ii) address the concern that 
the occurrence of death is not a random event and has been shown to be correlated 
with other family characteristics such as socioeconomic status. Intuitively, all chil-
dren included in our analysis are exposed to the relative’s passing, and hence to the 
postnatal consequences and correlates of this event, but only the treatment group is 
exposed to the event through the uterine environment. Our paper also differs from 
the referenced studies above in that we measure mental health outcomes using pre-
scription drug data, which enables detection not only of the occurrence of a condi-
tion, but also of its severity (as captured by the prescribed dose).
Our approach is similar to that of a much earlier study by Huttunen and Niskanen 
(1978), who used data from Helsinki, Finland and studied a sample of 335 individu-
als whose fathers died before age 35 either before their birth or in the year after their 
birth. They conducted analyses using Student’s t-tests and χ2 tests, finding that, rel-
ative to the control group, the treatment group had higher rates of diagnosed schizo-
phrenics treated in psychiatric hospitals and higher rates of individuals committing 
crimes. They did not find any statistically significant differences between the groups 
for ten other outcomes that they considered, such as childhood behavior disorders 
and minor depressive and neurotic disorders. Huttunen and Niskanen (1978, p. 431) 
further comment:
“The number in our total sample and the number of psychiatric cases 
in the two groups are so small that the present results cannot be consid-
ered as conclusive evidence for the proposed hypothesis of the etiological 
role of maternal stress during pregnancy in psychiatric and behavioral 
disorders.” 
We view our work as building on the earlier Huttunen and Niskanen (1978) paper 
in the following ways: (i) we assign treatment based on the expected date of birth 
rather than the actual date of birth, in light of the evidence that in utero exposure to 
the death of a relative affects gestation length (and hence, the date of birth); (ii) we 
document impacts of antenatal stress on conditions other than schizophrenia; (iii) 
we use more recent population-level Scandinavian registry data that provide us with 
a sample size that is nearly 1,000 times larger than that in Huttunen and Niskanen 
(1978) and thus lend us much more statistical power; (iv) we use novel prescription 
registry data to measure mental health outcomes; (v) we study deaths of relatives 
other than children’s fathers, which allows us to test for heterogeneity in effects by 
 1249
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
the severity of antenatal stress exposure; and (vi) we use regression models that 
allow us to control for maternal, child, and relative characteristics, and conduct a 
variety of additional analyses to test for alternative channels (other than stress), and 
address issues of multiple hypothesis testing.
REFERENCES
Abel, K. M., H. P. Heuvelman, L. Jörgensen, C. Magnusson, S. Wicks, E. Susser, J. Hallkvist, and C. 
Dalman. 2014. “Severe Bereavement Stress during the Prenatal and Childhood Periods and Risk of 
Psychosis in Later Life: Population Based Cohort Study.” British Medical Journal 348. 
Adda, Jerome, Anders Björklund, and Helena Holmlund. 2011. “The Role of Mothers and Fathers in 
Providing Skills: Evidence from Parental Deaths.” IZA Discussion Paper 5425.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, James Fenske, and Anant Nyshadham.  
Forthcoming. “Early Life Circumstance 
and Adult Mental Health.” Journal of Political Economy.
Aizer, Anna, and Janet Currie. 2014. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality: Maternal 
Disadvantage and Health at Birth.” Science 344 (6186): 856–61.
Aizer, Anna, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka. 2016. “Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes: Evidence 
from Siblings.” Journal of Human Resources 51: 523–55. 
Almond, Douglas. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero Influ-
enza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population.” Journal of Political Economy 114 (4): 672–712.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. “Human Capital Development before Age Five.” In Hand-
book of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, edited by O. Ashenfleter and D. Card, 1315–1486. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, Hongbin Li, and Junsen Zhang. 2010. “Long-Term Effects of Ear-
ly-Life Development: Evidence from the 1959 to 1961 China Famine.” In The Economic Conse-
quences of Demographic Change in East Asia, NBER-EASE, Vol. 19, edited by Takatoshi Ito and 
Andrew Rose, 321–45. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Mårten Palme. 2009. “Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal 
Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden.” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics 124 (4): 1729–72.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. “Inside the War on 
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93 
(2): 387–403.
Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The 
Effect of Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy.” American Economic Journal: Applied Econom-
ics 3 (4): 56–85.
Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2013. “Fetal Origins and Parental Responses.” Annual 
Review of Economics 5: 37–56.
Arnetz, B. B., S. O. Brenner, L. Levi, R. Hjelm, I. L. Petterson, J. Wasserman, B. Petrini, P. Eneroth, A. 
Kallner, and R. Kvetnansky. 1991. “Neuroendocrine and Immunologic Effects of Unemployment 
and Job Insecurity.” Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics 55 (2–4): 76–80.
Barker, David J. 1990. “The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease.” British Medical Journal 301 
(6761): 1111.
Barreca, Alan I. 2010. “The Long-Term Economic Impact of In Utero and Postnatal Exposure to 
Malaria.” Journal of Human Resources 45 (4): 865–92.
Berkowitz, Gertrud S., Mary S. Wolff, Teresa M. Janevic, Ian R. Holzman, Rachel Yehuda, and Philip 
J. Landrigan. 2003. “The World Trade Center Disaster and Intrauterine Growth Restriction.” JAMA 
290 (5): 595–96.
Berquin, P. C., J. N. Giedd, L. K. Jacobsen, S. D. Hamburger, A. L. Krain, J. L. Rapoport, and F. X. 
Castellanos. 1998. “Cerebellum in Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Morphometric MRI 
Study.” Neurology 50 (4): 1087–93.
Black, Sandra E., Aline Butikofer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2013. “This Is Only a Test? 
Long-Run Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Downfall.” NBER Working Paper 18987.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2016. “Does Grief Transfer Across Gen-
erations? Bereavements During Pregnancy and Child Outcomes.” American Economic Journal: 
Applied Economics 8 (1): 193–223.
Boserup, Simon, Claus Kreiner, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2014. “Stability and Persistence of Intergen-
erational Wealth Formation: Evidence from Danish Wealth Records of Three Generations.” Unpub-
lished.
 1250
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where Is the Land of 
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 129 (4): 1553–1623. 
Class, Q. A., P. Lichtenstein, N. Långström, and B. M. D’Onofrio. 2011. “Timing of Prenatal Maternal 
Exposure to Severe Life Events and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes: A Population Study of 2.6 Mil-
lion Pregnancies.” Psychosomatic Medicine 73 (3): 234–41.
Class, Q. A., K. M. Abel, A. S. Khashan, M. E. Rickert, C. Dalman, H. Larsson, C. M. Hultman, N. Lång-
ström, P. Lichtenstein, and B. M. D’Onofrio. 2014. “Offspring Psychopathology Following Precon-
ception, Prenatal and Postnatal Maternal Bereavement Stress.” Psychological Medicine 44 (1): 71–84.
Cnattingius, Sven, E. Villamor, Y. T. Lagerros, Anna-Karin Wikström, and Fredrik Granath. 2012. 
“High Birth Weight and Obesity: A Vicious Circle across Generations.” International Journal of 
Obesity 36 (10): 1320–24.
Cohen, S., W. J. Doyle, and A. Baum. 2006. “Socioeconomic Status Is Associated with Stress Hor-
mones.” Psychosom Med 68 (3): 414–20.
Cohen, Sheldon, and Denise Janicki-Deverts. 2012. “Who’s Stressed? Distributions of Psychological 
Stress in The United States in Probability Samples From 1983, 2006, and 2009.” Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology 42 (6): 1320–1334.
Currie, Janet. 2011. “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences.” American Economic 
Review 101 (3): 1–22.
Currie, Janet, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2013. “Weathering the Storm: Hurricanes and Birth Out-
comes.” Journal of Health Economics 32 (3): 487–503.
Dickstein, Michael J. 2014. “Efficient Provision of Experience Goods: Evidence from Antidepressant 
Choice.” Unpublished.
Dietz, L. J., S. Stoyak, N. Melhem, G. Porta, K. A. Matthews, M. Walker Payne, and D. A. Brent. 2013. 
“Cortisol Response to Social Stress in Parentally Bereaved Youth.” Biol. Psychiatry 73 (4): 379–87.
Duggan, Mark, and Scott A. Imberman. 2009. “Why Are the Disability Rolls Skyrocketing? The Con-
tribution of Population Characteristics, Economic Conditions, and Program Generosity.” In Health 
at Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of Declining Disability among the Elderly, edited by 
David M. Cutler and David A. Wise, 337–79. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Duncan, Brian, Hani Mansour, and Daniel I Rees. 2015. “Prenatal Stress and Low Birth Weight: Evi-
dence from the Super Bowl.” IZA Discussion Paper 9053.
Erixson, Oscar, and Henry Ohlsson. 2014. “Estate Division: Equal Sharing as Choice, Social Norm, 
and Legal Requirement.” Unpublished.
Eskenazi, Brenda, Amy R. Marks, Ralph Catalano, Tim Bruckner, and Paolo G. Toniolo. 2007. “Low 
Birthweight in New York City and Upstate New York Following the Events of September 11th.” 
Human Reproduction 22 (11): 3013–20.
Evans, William N., and Diana S. Lien. 2005. “The Benefits of Prenatal Care: Evidence from the PAT 
Bus Strike.” Journal of Econometrics 125 (1): 207–39.
Fiscella, Kevin. 1995. “Does Prenatal Care Improve Birth Outcomes? A Critical Review.” Obstetrics 
and Gynecology 85 (3): 468–479.
Glynn, Laura M., Pathik D. Wadhwa, Christine Dunkel-Schetter, Aleksandra Chicz-DeMet, and 
Curt A. Sandman. 2001. “When Stress Happens Matters: Effects of Earthquake Timing on Stress 
Responsivity in Pregnancy.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 184 (4): 637–42.
Halla, Martin, and Martina Zweimüller. 2013. “Parental Response to Early Human Capital Shocks: 
Evidence from the Chernobyl Accident.” IZA Discussion Paper 7968.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2013. “Household Response to Income Changes: Evidence 
from an Unconditional Cash Transfer Program in Kenya.” Unpublished.
Hjörne, Eva. 2012. “Det Har Skett En Stor Förändring Hemma. Elevidentitet, föräldrars motstånd och 
ADHD i den svenska skolan.” Utbildning & demokrati 21 (3): 91–96.
Holland, J. M., V. Rozalski, K. L. Thompson, R. J. Tiongson, A. F. Schatzberg, R. O’Hara, and D. Gal-
lagher-Thompson. 2014. “The Unique Impact of Late-Life Bereavement and Prolonged Grief on 
Diurnal Cortisol.” J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 69 (1): 4–11. 
Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2011. “Can Targeted Transfers Improve Birth 
Outcomes?: Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program.” Journal of Public Economics 
95 (7): 813–27.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. “Long-Run Impacts of 
Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” American Economic Review 106 (4): 903–34. 
Huttunen, M. O., and P. Niskanen. 1978. “Prenatal Loss of Father and Psychiatric Disorders.” Archives 
of General Psychiatry 35 (4): 429–31.
Irwin, Michael, Marcia Daniels, S. Craig Risch, Eda Bloom, and Herbert Weiner. 1988. “Plasma Cor-
tisol and Natural Killer Cell Activity during Bereavement.” Biological Psychiatry 24 (2): 173–78.
 1251
PERSSON AND ROSSIN-SLATER: STRESS IN UTERO AND LATER MENTAL HEALTH
VOL. 108 NO. 4-5
Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and W. Reed Walker. 2017. “Every Breath You Take–Every Dollar 
You’ll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970.” Journal of Political 
Economy 125 (3): 848–902.
Khashan, A. S., K. M. Abel, R. McNamee, M. G. Pedersen, R. T. Webb, P. N. Baker, L. C. Kenny, and P. 
B. Mortensen. 2008. “Higher Risk of Offspring Schizophrenia Following Antenatal Maternal Expo-
sure to Severe Adverse Life Events.” Archives of General Psychiatry 65 (2): 146–52.
Khashan, A. S, R. McNamee, T. B. Henriksen, M. G. Pedersen, L. C. Kenny, K. M. Abel, and P. B. 
Mortensen. 2011. “Risk of Affective Disorders Following Prenatal Exposure to Severe Life Events: 
A Danish Population-Based Cohort Study.” Journal of Psychiatric Research 45 (7): 879–85.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neigh-
borhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1): 83–119.
Kotelchuck, Milton. 1994. “An Evaluation of the Kessner Adequacy of Prenatal Care Index and a Pro-
posed Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization Index.” American Journal of Public Health 84 (9): 
1414–20.
Kunz-Ebrecht, Sabine, Clemens Kirschbaum, and Andrew Steptoe. 2004. “Work Stress, Socioeco-
nomic Status, and Neuroendocrine Activation over the Working Day.” Social Science and Medicine 
58: 1523–30.
Lauderdale, Diane S. 2006. “Birth Outcomes for Arabic-Named Women in California before and after 
September 11.” Demography 43 (1): 185–201.
Lederman, Sally Ann, Virginia Rauh, Lisa Weiss, Janet L. Stein, Lori A. Hoepner, Mark Becker, and 
Frederica P. Perera. 2004. “The Effects of the World Trade Center Event on Birth Outcomes among 
Term Deliveries at Three Lower Manhattan Hospitals.” Environmental Health Perspectives 112 
(17): 1772–78.
Li, L., C. Power, S. Kelly, C. Kirschbaum, and C. Hertzman. 2007. “Life-Time Socio-Economic Posi-
tion and Cortisol Patterns in Mid-Life.” Psychoneuroendocrinology 32 (7): 824–33.
Liu, Li, Ling-Li Zeng, Yaming Li, Qiongmin Ma, Baojuan Li, Hui Shen, and Dewen Hu. 2012. “Altered 
Cerebellar Functional Connectivity with Intrinsic Connectivity Networks in Adults with Major 
Depressive Disorder.” PLoS ONE 7: e39516.
Malaspina, D., C. Corcoran, K. R. Kleinhaus, M.C. Perrin, S. Fennig, D. Nahon, Y. Freidlander, and S. 
Harlap. 2008. “Acute Maternal Stress in Pregnancy and Schizophrenia in Offspring: A Cohort Pro-
spective Study.” BMC Psychiatry 8 (71): 1473–91.
Mansour, Hani, and Daniel I. Rees. 2012. “Armed Conflict and Birth Weight: Evidence from the 
Al-Aqsa Intifada.” Journal of Development Economics 99 (1): 190–99.
McClellan, Jack M., Ezra Susser, and Mary-Claire King. 2006. “Maternal Famine, de Novo Muta-
tions, and Schizophrenia.” JAMA 296 (5): 582–84.
McIntyre, Peter, and Julie Leask. 2008. “Improving Uptake of MMR Vaccine.” British Medical Jour-
nal 336 (7647): 729–30.
Neugebauer, R., H. W. Hoek, and E. Susser. 1999. “Prenatal Exposure to Wartime Famine and Devel-
opment of Antisocial Personality Disorder in Early Adulthood.” JAMA 282 (5): 455–62.
O’Connor, M. F., D. K. Wellisch, A. L. Stanton, R. Olmstead, and M. R. Irwin. 2012. “Diurnal Cortisol 
in Complicated and Non-Complicated Grief: Slope Differences across the Day.” Psychoneuroen-
docrinology 37 (5): 725–28.
Persson, Petra, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. “Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health of 
the Next Generation: Dataset.” American Economic Review. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20161406.
Pfeffer, Cynthia R., Margaret Altemus, Moonseong Heo, and Hong Jiang. 2007. “Salivary Cortisol and 
Psychopathology in Children Bereaved by the September 11, 2001 Terror Attacks.” Biological Psy-
chiatry 61 (8): 957–65.
Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2013. “WIC in your Neighborhood: New Evidence on the Impacts of Geographic 
Access To Clinics.” Journal of Public Economics 102: 51–69.
Sanders, Nicholas J. 2012. “What Doesn’t Kill You Makes You Weaker: Prenatal Pollution Exposure 
and Educational Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 47 (3): 826–50.
Sanders, Nicholas J., and Charles Stoecker. 2015. “Where Have All the Young Men Gone? Using Sex 
Ratios to Measure Fetal Death Rates.” Journal of Health Economics 41: 30–45.
Scholte, Robert S., Gerard J. Van Den Berg, and Maarten Lindeboom. 2015. “Long-Run Effects of 
Gestation During the Dutch Hunger Winter Famine on Labor Market and Hospitalization Out-
comes.” Journal of Health Economics 39: 17–30.
Segal, Nancy L., and Thomas J. Bouchard. 1993. “Grief Intensity Following the Loss of a Twin and 
Other Relatives: Test of Kinship Genetic Hypotheses.” Human Biology 65 (1): 87–105.
Sikorski, Jim, Jennifer Wilson, Sarah Clement, Sarah Das, and Nigel Smeeton. 1996. “A Randomised 
Controlled Trial Comparing Two Schedules of Antenatal Visits: The Antenatal Care Project.” Brit-
ish Medical Journal 312 (7030): 546–53.
 1252
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW
APRIL 2018
Simeonova, Emilia. 2011. “Out of Sight, Out of Mind? Natural Disasters and Pregnancy Outcomes in 
the USA.” CESifo Economic Studies 57 (3): 403: 31.
Simon, Sara L, Catherine Domier, Jennifer Carnell, Paul Brethen, Richard Rawson, and Walter Ling. 
2000. “Cognitive Impairment in Individuals Currently Using Methamphetamine.” American Jour-
nal on Addictions 9 (3): 222–31.
Socialstyrelsen. 2002. “Socialstyrelsens riktlinjer för skolhlsovården.” Socialstyrelsens Rapporter.
Socialstyrelsen. 2012. “Användning av centralstimulantia vid adhd.” Socialstyrelsens Rapporter.
Socialstyrelsen. 2013. “Läkemedel–statistik fö år 2012.” Socialstyrelsens Rapporter.
Socialstyrelsen. 2015. “Förskrivning av centralstimulerande läkemedel vid adhd.” Socialstyrelsens 
Rapporter.
Solon, Gary. 2001. “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market.” In Handbook of Labor Econom-
ics. Vol. 3, edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, 71–79. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Stoner, Rich, Maggie L. Chow, Maureen P. Boyle, Susan M. Sunkin, Peter R. Mouton, Subhojit Roy, 
Anthony Wynshaw-Boris, Sophia A. Colamarino, Ed S. Lein, and Eric Courchesne. 2014. “Patches 
of Disorganization in the Neocortex of Children with Autism.” New England Journal of Medicine 
370 (13): 1209–19. 
Susser, Ezra S., and Shang P. Lin. 1992. “Schizophrenia after Prenatal Exposure to the Dutch Hunger 
Winter of 1944–1945.” Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (12): 983.
Susser, Ezra S., Richard Neugebauer, Hans W. Hoek, Alan S. Brown, Shang Lin, Daniel Labovitz, and 
Jack M. Gorman. 1996. “Schizophrenia after Prenatal Famine: Further Evidence.” Archives of Gen-
eral Psychiatry 53 (1): 25.
Tan, C. E., H. J. Li, X. G. Zhang, H. Zhang, P. Y. Han, Q. An, W. J. Ding, and M. Q. Wang. 2009. “The 
Impact of the Wenchuan Earthquake on Birth Outcomes.” PLoS One 4 (12): e8200.
Thompson, Ross. 2014. “Stress and Child Development.” The Future of Children 24 (1): 41–59.
Torche, Florencia. 2011. “The Effect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a Natural 
Experiment.” Demography 48 (4): 1473–91.
van den Berg, Gerald, J., Maarten Lindeboom, and France Portrait. 2006. “Economic Conditions 
Early in Life and Individual Mortality.” American Economic Review 96 (1): 290–302.
Van den Bergh, Bea R. H., and Alfons Marcoen. 2004. “High Antenatal Maternal Anxiety Is Related 
to ADHD Symptoms, Externalizing Problems and Anxiety in 8- and 9-Year-Olds.” Child Develop-
ment 75 (4): 1085–97.
Van den Bergh, Bea R. H., Maarten Mennes, Jaap Oosterlaan, Veerle Stevens, Peter Stiers, Alfons 
Marcoen, and Lieven Lagae. 2005. “High Antenatal Maternal Anxiety Is Related to Impulsivity 
During Performance on Cognitive Tasks in 14- and 15-Year-Olds.” Neuroscience and Biobehav-
ioral Reviews 29 (2): 259–69.
Visser, S. N., Melissa L. Danielson, Rebecca H. Bitsko, Joseph R. Holbrook, Michael D. Kogan, Reem 
M. Ghandour, Ruth Perou, and Stephen J. Blumberg. 2014. “Trends in the Parent-Report of Health 
Care Provider-Diagnosed an Medicated Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: United States, 
2003–2011.” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 53 (1): 34–46.
Welberg, Lam, Jonathan Sekl, and Megan Homes. 2001. “Prenatal Glucocorticoid Programming of 
Brian Corticosteroid Receptors and Corticotrophin-Releasing Hormone: Possible Implications for 
Behaviour.” Neuroscience 104: 71–79.
 This article has been cited by:
1. Douglas Almond, Janet Currie, Valentina Duque. 2018. Childhood Circumstances and Adult
Outcomes: Act II. Journal of Economic Literature 56:4, 1360-1446. [Abstract] [View PDF article]
[PDF with links]
2. Ilyana Kuziemko, Katherine Meckel, Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. Does Managed Care Widen Infant
Health Disparities? Evidence from Texas Medicaid. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10:3,
255-283. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
3. Brett Matsumoto. 2018. Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health of the Next Generation:
Comment. American Economic Review 108:4-5, 1253-1255. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with
links]
4. Petra Persson, Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health of the Next
Generation: Reply. American Economic Review 108:4-5, 1256-1263. [Abstract] [View PDF article]
[PDF with links]
