 Optogenetic stimulation of dentate gyrus engrams restores 
memory in Alzheimer's disease mice
Jennifer N. Perusinia,b, Stephanie A. Cajigasa, Omid Cohensedgha, Sean C. Limb,c, Ina P. 
Pavlovab, Zoe R. Donaldsona,b,d, and Christine A. Dennya,b,*
aDepartment of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY, U.S.A
bDivision of Integrative Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute (NYSPI) / Research 
Foundation for Mental Hygiene, Inc. (RFMH), New York, NY, U.S.A
cDepartment of Neuroscience, MD-PhD Program, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY, U.S.A
dDepartment of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology; Department of Psychology and 
Neuroscience, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, U.S.A
Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disorder characterized by amyloid-beta 
(Aβ) plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles. APPswe/PS1dE9 (APP/PS1) mice have been 
developed as an AD model and are characterized by plaque formation at 4-6 months of age. Here, 
we sought to better understand AD-related cognitive decline by characterizing various types of 
memory. In order to better understand how memory declines with AD, APP/PS1 mice were bred 
with ArcCreERT2 mice. In this line, neural ensembles activated during memory encoding can be 
indelibly tagged and directly compared with neural ensembles activated during memory retrieval 
(i.e., memory traces/engrams). We first administered a battery of tests examining depressive- and 
anxiety-like behaviors, as well as spatial, social, and cognitive memory to APP/PS1 × 
ArcCreERT2 × channelrhodopsin (ChR2)-enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) mice. 
Dentate gyrus (DG) neural ensembles were then optogenetically stimulated in these mice to 
improve memory impairment. AD mice had the most extensive differences in fear memory, as 
assessed by contextual fear conditioning (CFC), which was accompanied by impaired DG memory 
traces. Optogenetic stimulation of DG neural ensembles representing a CFC memory increased 
memory retrieval in the appropriate context in AD mice when compared with control (Ctrl) mice. 
Moreover, optogenetic stimulation facilitated reactivation of the neural ensembles that were 
previously activated during memory encoding. These data suggest that activating previously 
learned DG memory traces can rescue cognitive impairments and point to DG manipulation as a 
potential target to treat memory loss commonly seen in AD.
Corresponding Author: Christine Ann Denny, Ph.D., Address: Columbia University / RFMH, 1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 87, NYSPI 
Kolb Research Annex, Room 777, New York, NY 10032, Phone: (646) 774-7100, Fax: (646) 774-7102, 
cad2125@cumc.columbia.edu. 
Finanacial Disclosures: The authors declare that they have no actual or potential conflicts of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Hippocampus. 2017 October ; 27(10): 1110–1122. doi:10.1002/hipo.22756.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Alzheimer's; hippocampus; Arc; engram; optogenetics
Introduction
AD is a prevalent neurodegenerative disorder impacting over 5 million people in the US. 
Memory deficits are evident in the earliest stages (e.g., decreased ability to remember 
names; misplaced objects). This progresses to major gaps in memory of recent and remote 
experiences and diminished awareness of surroundings. AD patients also have difficulty 
recognizing friends and family and often withdraw from social engagement (Reisberg et al., 
1982; Chung and Cummings, 2000; Hargrave et al., 2002). In addition to the human 
suffering caused by the disease, AD has placed an enormous financial burden on the 
healthcare system and on patients' families.
AD pathology is characterized by Aβ peptide plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles 
(Serrano-Pozo et al., 2012). The Aβ hypothesis of AD stipulates that Aβ aggregates form 
neurotoxic amyloid plaques, leading to neurodegeneration and dementia (Hardy and Allsop, 
1991). The strongest evidence for this comes from molecular genetic studies of amyloid 
precursor proteins (APPs) and presenilins 1 and 2 (PS1, PS2) in early-onset familial AD, 
showing that all genetically-linked AD mutations increase the propensity for Aβ to 
aggregate in vitro (Selkoe, 2001). Mice with both the APPswe and PS1dE9 mutant 
transgenes have been previously developed (Jankowsky et al., 2001), with Aβ deposition 
appearing as early as 4 months of age (Jankowsky et al., 2004). These mice model multiple 
aspects of AD; they have poor coordination using a rotarod (Volianskis et al., 2010), 
contextual memory deficits (Gong et al., 2004; Kilgore et al., 2010) and impaired spatial 
learning in the Morris water maze (Gong et al., 2004; Lalonde et al., 2005). While this 
mouse line has been commercially available for some time, a complete behavioral analysis 
has not yet been performed to uncover the extent of behavioral and memory deficits with 
AD progression.
Growing evidence points to a link between the immediate early gene (IEG) Arc/Arg3.1 and 
AD. Arc is predominantly expressed in cortical and hippocampal glutamatergic neurons and 
is required for LTP maintenance and memory consolidation (Lyford et al., 1995; Guzowski 
et al., 2000; Steward and Worley, 2001). Rodent studies report decreased IEG expression in 
cortical and hippocampal regions with AD (Rudinskiy et al., 2012; Palop et al., 2005). Wu et 
al. (2011) showed that Arc expression is required for the activity-dependent Aβ generation 
and for APP dysfunction. Furthermore, individuals with a novel Arc single nucleotide 
polymorphism reportedly have a reduced risk of AD (Landgren et al., 2012). Since Arc 
expression has been directly tied to AD, here, we proposed to utilize Arc expression as 
proxy of neuronal activity in order to localize AD-related memory deficits.
We previously generated a murine line that can be used to tag individual memories. The 
ArcCreERT2 mice can indelibly tag neural ensembles activated during learning with EYFP, 
and these populations can then be compared with those activated during memory retrieval, as 
labeled using Arc or c-Fos protein (Denny et al., 2014). This line is unique in that, unlike 
Perusini et al.
Page 2
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 most existing tools (e.g., Reijmers et al., 2007), it allows for the permanent labeling of 
activated neural ensembles, thereby permitting long-term or age-related studies. Using the 
ArcCreERT2 mice, we previously demonstrated that neuronal ensembles in the DG and CA3 
hippocampal subregions are necessary for memory expression, and these memory traces are 
impacted by context, time, and adult hippocampal neurogenesis (Denny et al., 2014). 
Moreover, we have recently improved our protocols to tag neuronal ensembles by using 
superior pharmacological targeting windows, allowing for more specific studies (Cazzulino 
et al., 2016).
Here, we first administered an array of behavioral tests to the APP/PS1 × ArcCreERT2 × 
ChR2-EYFP mice in order to better understand how AD impacts behavior and memory as 
the disease develops. We hypothesized that if any deficits exist, they would be evident in the 
oldest age group, as plaque number increases. We found substantial deficits in social, spatial, 
and cognitive memories with onset of plaque development, with the most extensive 
quantifiable changes being in CFC. CFC deficits were accompanied by normal levels of 
EYFP and Arc labeling in the DG but by decreased EYFP+/Arc+ co-labeling, suggesting a 
decreased recruitment of the original CFC memory trace. These data suggest that AD 
cognitive impairments result from weakened memory traces in that the memory is originally 
stored correctly in the brain, but cannot be properly accessed. The CFC memory deficits 
were rescued via optogenetic activation of the previously-encoded DG-dependent CFC 
memory trace. These findings support the hypothesis that targeting or stimulating the DG 
may be a successful method to treat memory loss, particularly cognitive or contextual 
memory loss, in AD.
Materials and Methods
Mice
ArcCreERT2(+) mice (18) (predominantly 129S6/SvEv) were bred with ROSA26-CAG-
stopflox-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP (Ai32) (Madisen et al., 2012) (predominantly 129S6/SvEv but 
mixed with C57BL/6). Triple transgenic lines were then generated in which male 
ArcCreERT2(+) × ChR2-EYFP homozygous (f/f) mice were bred with a mouse model of 
AD, female B6.Cg-Tg(APPswe; PSEN1dE9) 85Dbo/Mmjax (APP/PS1) mice (034832-JAX, 
MMRRC) (Jankowsky et al., 2004). This APP/PS1 line (on a C57BL/6 background) had a 
relatively high incidence of seizures (Minkeviciene et al., 2009). By crossing these mice 
with ArcCreERT2 mice, which are primarily bred on a 129S6/SvEv background, we were 
able to significantly reduce seizure frequency (data not shown). Male mice were used in all 
experiments. The Ctrl mice were: APP/PS1(-) × ArcCreERT2(+) or (-) × ChR2-EYFP(+/f). 
The AD mice were: APP/PS1(+) × ArcCreERT2(+) or (-) × ChR2-EYFP(+/f).
Genotyping
The Cre and ChR2 genotyping was performed as previously described (Denny et al., 2014). 
The APP and PSEN genotyping was performed as described on the Jackson Laboratory 
website. All genotyping was performed separately.
Perusini et al.
Page 3
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Standard Housing and Dark Housing
Mice were housed 4-5 per cage in a 12-h (06:00–18:00) light-dark colony room maintained 
at 22°C. Food and water were provided ad libitum. Behavioral testing was performed during 
the light phase. Each cohort was tested at the specific age to which it was assigned and mice 
were not tested at multiple ages.
Dark housing procedures occurred as previously described (Denny et al., 2014). Briefly, 
mice were dark housed the night before and then for 3 days following the 4-OHT injection. 
This allows for specific labeling of Arc+ cells, as it limits other stimuli from turning on Arc. 
The procedures described herein were conducted in accordance with the National Institutes 
of Health regulations and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of 
Columbia University and the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
Behavioral Tests
Behavioral assays were performed on 2-, 4-, and 6-month-old mice. These assays were 
administered over 10 days. Please see Table S1 for the behavioral assays, as well as 
Supplemental Methods for additional behavioral tests and modified versions of the tests.
Contextual Fear Conditioning (CFC)
The 1- and 3-shock CFC protocols were administered as previously described (Drew et al., 
2010; Denny et al., 2012). For the 1-shock CFC protocol, mice were placed into the 
conditioning chamber, received 1 shock at 180 s (2 s, 0.75 mA), and were removed 15 s 
following the shock. For the 3-shock CFC procedure, mice were placed in the conditioning 
chamber, received 3 shocks 180, 240, and 300 s later (2 s, 0.75 mA), and were removed 15 s 
following the last shock.
Drugs
Recombination was induced with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). 4-
OHT was dissolved by sonication in 10% EtOH/90% corn oil at a concentration of 10 
mg/ml; each mouse was injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with 200 μl (2 mg) (Cazzulino et al., 
2016).
Mice were given an i.p. injection of Methoxy-X04 (5 mg/kg; Tocris Bioscience, 
Minneapolis, MN) 24 h prior to sacrifice to label plaques (Meyer- Luehmann et al., 2008). 
This procedure was adapted from Rudinskiy et al. (2012).
Immunohistochemistry
Brains were processed as previously described (Denny et al., 2014; Cazzulino et al., 2016).
Cell Quantification
An investigator blind to treatment used a Zeiss Axioplan-2 upright microscope to count 
immunoreactive cells bilaterally in the DG throughout the entire rostrocaudal axis as 
previously described (Denny et al., 2014; Cazzulino et al., 2016).
Perusini et al.
Page 4
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Confocal Microscopy
Fluorescent confocal micrographs were captured with a Leica TCS SP8 MP microscope as 
previously described (Cazzulino et al., 2016). To obtain the percent of reactivated cells, the 
total numbers of Arc+ and EYFP+ cells were counted in each confocal image. The number 
of Arc+ cells that were co-labeled with EYFP+ was then counted. The ratio is expressed as 
((EYFP+/Arc+) / Arc+) × 100%.
Stereotaxic Surgery
Male mice were surgically implanted as previously described (Denny et al., 2014). Briefly, 
mice were implanted bilaterally with chronically dwelling optical fibers targeted to the DG 
(+/−1.0 mm ML, −1.5 mm AP, −1.7 mm DV).
Optogenetic Stimulation
Mice were first habituated to the fiber optic patch cables, attached bilaterally via zirconia 
sleeves, four times in their home cages. For stimulation during testing, the patch cables were 
interfaced to an FC/PC rotary joint (Doric lenses, Quebec, CAN), which was attached on the 
other end to a 473-nm laser diode. During the light ON epoch, blue light was provided for 3 
min at a light power of 2-3 mW, 10 Hz, at 20 ms pulses at the tip of the implanted fiber 
optic.
Statistical Analysis
All data were analyzed using StatView (v. 5.0) software (SAS Institute). Data were analyzed 
using ANOVA, with repeated measures where appropriate. For each behavioral test, a priori 
planned comparisons (i.e., planned orthogonal contrasts) were performed for each age group 
in order to highlight genotype comparisons at each age and to test the hypothesis that 
behavioral deficits worsen with plaque development. For the regression analyses, the average 
CFC freezing versus either EYFP+, Arc+, or average co-labeled cells were plotted for each 
individual mouse. R2 and p values are noted. Alpha was set to 0.05 for all analyses. Data are 
expressed as means ± SEM. All statistical tests are included in Table S2.
Results
AD disease progression as evidenced by amyloid deposits increases from 2 to 6 months of 
age
The APP/PS1 model (Jankowsky et al., 2014) was utilized and bred with the ArcCreERT2 
(Denny et al., 2014) × ChR2-EYFP (Madisen et al., 2012) mouse line (Fig. 1A). The mice 
were aged to 2, 4, or 6 months for behavioral assessment (Fig. 1B). Sample hippocampal 
micrographs with EYFP and Arc staining are shown for AD mice at all three ages (Fig. 1C). 
Amyloid expression was qualitatively characterized and used to verify AD progression by 
injecting Methoxy-X04, a derivative of Congo Red and Chrysamine-G (Klunk et al., 2002), 
24 h before sacrifice. Methoxy-X04 deposits were observed in both 4- and 6-month old AD 
mice, but not in 2-year old mice (Fig. 1C). The number and size of Methoxy-X04 deposits 
also increased with age, which is consistent with previous studies (Volianskis et al., 2010; 
Garcia-Alloza et al., 2006).
Perusini et al.
Page 5
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Depressive- and anxiety-like behavior is not altered by AD
The forced swim test (FST) was utilized to determine if AD impacts depressive-like 
behavior. On day 1, all mice had comparable immobility times (data not shown). On day 2, 
while there was a significant effect of Age, there was no effect of Genotype or of the 
Genotype × Age interaction (Fig. 2A-2C). Average immobility time for minutes 3-6 on day 
2 was comparable for Ctrl and AD mice (Fig. 2D-2F).
Next, the open field (OF), elevated plus maze (EPM), and novelty suppressed feeding (NSF) 
tests were administered to assess the impact of AD on anxiety-related behaviors. During the 
OF, basic movements were not affected by Age or Genotype (Fig. 2G-2I). All mice traveled 
similar distances in the center (Fig. 2J-2L). In the EPM, all mice, with the exception of 6-
month-old AD mice, spent significantly more time in the closed arms than in the open arms 
(Fig. 2M-2O). In the NSF paradigm, all groups showed similar latencies to approach the 
pellet before the maximum allotted time of 8 min (Fig. 2P-2R). There was a significant 
effect of Age, but not of Genotype, on body weight (Fig. 2S-2U). There was no effect of 
Age or Genotype on weight loss during the fast-preceding the NSF paradigm (Fig. 2V-2X). 
Moreover, with the exception of 4-month-old AD mice, all groups showed similar levels of 
consumption in the home cage (Fig. 2Y-2AA). These data suggest that AD does not 
significantly impact depressive- or anxiety-like behaviors at 2- to 6-months of age in the 
APP/PS1 mice.
Novelty detection is impaired by aging, but not AD
Novelty detection was tested by first administering a 2-trial novel object recognition (NOR) 
paradigm (Fig. 3A-3C) as we previously described (28). Ctrl and AD mice failed to detect 
the novel object (Fig. 3C), suggesting that in this murine line, more time is needed to 
sufficiently encode the initial two objects.
Next, a 5-trial NOR paradigm was administered to determine if increased exposures would 
allow mice to sufficiently encode the two objects (24) (Fig. 3D-3M). In this paradigm, mice 
were habituated to two objects for four exposures, followed by a single exposure with one 
familiar (constant) object and one novel object. All mice had similar levels of activity across 
exposures (Fig. 3E-3G). There was a significant effect of Age, but not of Genotype on object 
investigation during habituation (Fig. 3H-3J). During the replacement trial, both Ctrl and AD 
mice detected the novel object, as evidenced by increased novel object exploration when 
compared with that of the constant object (Fig. 3K-3M). These data indicate that novelty 
detection is not severely impacted by AD.
Spatial working memory and social recognition is impaired by AD
To test spatial memory, an unbaited Y-maze was utilized (Fig. 4A). At 2 months of age, both 
the Ctrl and AD mice explored the novel arm significantly more than the constant arm 
during the test trial (Fig. 4B). However, at 4 months of age, AD mice showed similar levels 
of exploration of both arms, while the Ctrl mice explored the novel arm significantly more 
than the constant arm (Fig. 4C). At 6 months of age, Ctrl and AD mice explored both arms 
similarly (Fig. 4D).
Perusini et al.
Page 6
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To ensure that mice were using contextual cues outside of the Y-maze, in a separate 
experiment, the Y-maze was rotated 180° between training and test trials (Fig. S1A). Ctrl 
mice showed equal exploration of both arms (Fig. S1B), suggesting that outside contextual 
cues do influence the arm distinction. Moreover, these data suggest that this version of the 
task is too complex and more training trials would be necessary for enhanced performance.
Next, to test social investigation and to ensure that Ctrl and AD mice able of detecting social 
stimuli, a 1-trial social investigation test was administered using juvenile male mice (Fig. 
S1C). The time exploring an empty cup or a cup containing a novel male mouse was 
measured. Ctrl and AD mice were capable of detecting and investigating a novel male 
mouse, as evidenced by increased investigation of the mouse (Fig. S1D).
We next tested social memory of ovariectomized female conspecifics with a social 
recognition (SR) paradigm for Ctrl and AD mice (Fig.4E). During trial 1, there was an effect 
of Age, but not of Genotype, on the amount of exploration for the novel mouse when 
compared with the empty cup (Fig. 4F-4H). During the second trial, at 2 months, both Ctrl 
and AD mice explored the novel mouse more than the familiar mouse (Fig. 4I). However, at 
4 months, Ctrl but not AD mice explored the novel mouse more than the familiar mouse 
(Fig. 4J). At 6 months of age, both Ctrl and AD mice investigated the novel and familiar 
mouse equally (Fig. 4K). These data indicate that all mice show age related deficits in SR, 
but these are exacerbated and occur earlier in AD mice.
Contextual fear memory is impaired by AD and this correlated with impaired DG memory 
traces
Lastly, in order to test long-term contextual fear memory, either 1-shock or 3-shock CFC 
procedures were administered to Ctrl and AD mice (Fig. 5A). To create the indelible label of 
memory encoding, 4-OHT was injected 5 h prior to CFC (Fig. 5B). For the 1-shock CFC 
procedure, at 2 months of age, both Ctrl and AD mice had comparable, albeit low, levels of 
freezing during the context test which was administered 5 days after the 1-shock procedure. 
However, at 4 and 6 months, while freezing increased in general over that of 2-month-old 
mice, AD mice exhibited lower levels of freezing when compared with Ctrl mice (Fig. 5C). 
While this weak procedure produces variable freezing across age, memory retrieval using a 
1-shock CFC protocol is impaired in AD mice at 4 and 6 months of age.
After the context test, the mice were sacrificed, and immunohistochemistry was performed 
to quantify EYFP (memory encoding), Arc (memory expression), and EYFP+/Arc+ co-
labeling (memory traces) in the DG (Fig. 5D-5F). For 1-shock CFC, Age but not Genotype 
impacted the number of EYFP+ cells; 2-month-old mice had less EYFP+ DG cells when 
compared with 4- and 6-month-old groups (Fig. 5D). Neither Genotype nor Age impacted 
the number of Arc+ cells (Fig. 5E). However, at 6 months of age, but not 2 or 4 months of 
age, AD mice had significantly less co-labeled DG cells than did Ctrl mice (Fig. 5F), 
suggesting that the originally-encoded memory trace was not being recalled properly and 
that the behavioral deficit was paralleled by impaired DG memory traces. Moreover, because 
2-month old mice displayed similar EYFP and Arc DG levels to 4-month old mice and 6-
month-old Ctrl mice, this suggests that these cells do not represent behavioral output but 
rather contextual memory.
Perusini et al.
Page 7
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For 3-shock CFC, there was an overall effect of Genotype on freezing behavior (Fig. 5G). At 
2 and 4 months, Ctrl and AD mice showed comparable levels of freezing during the context 
test, which was administered 5 days after the initial 3-shock procedure. However, at 6 
months, AD mice showed a robust decrease in freezing in the aversive context when 
compared with Ctrl mice (Fig. 5G). While not statistically significant, 6-month-old Ctrl mice 
froze slightly more than did the two younger age groups, contributing to the striking 
difference observed between genotype at this age. These data indicate that CFC memory 
retrieval using a stronger shock protocol is simultaneously most impaired in AD mice and 
strongest in Ctrl mice at 6 months of age.
Following the same procedure as for 1-shock CFC, mice were sacrificed after the context 
test, and immunohistochemistry was performed to quantify EYFP, Arc, and co-labeling in 
the DG (Fig.s 5H-5J). For 3-shock CFC, both Ctrl and AD mice had comparable expression 
of DG EYFP+ and Arc+ cells across all ages (Fig.s 5H-5I). However, at 6 months, AD mice 
had significantly less co-labeling in the DG when compared with Ctrl mice (Fig. 5J). These 
data suggest that CFC becomes impaired with age but that these deficits are more profound 
in AD mice. This is paralleled by altered DG memory traces at more advanced stages of 
plaque development.
To address the varied freezing across age and to determine which factors contributed to fear 
expression, simple regression analyses with all 1-shock and 3-shock CFC data were 
performed. For 6-month-old mice, the number of EYFP+ and co-labeled cells in the DG, but 
not Arc+ cells, positively correlated with freezing percentage (Fig. S2A-S2C; Table S2). 
This suggests that, in the oldest group, both the cells representing the originally-encoded 
memory and those representing the memory trace best predict freezing behavior.
Optogenetic stimulation of a CFC DG memory trace improves memory retrieval in 6-month-
old mice
Given the robust behavioral and IEG differences observed between 6-month-old AD and 
Ctrl mice, we hypothesized that impaired 3-shock CFC is due to weakened contextual 
memory retrieval in the DG with AD and that optogenetic stimulation of the neural 
ensemble representing this encoded memory would improve memory retrieval. Six-month-
old APP/PS1 × ArcCreERT2 × ChR2-EYFP mice were implanted with fiber optics directly 
above the DG (Fig. 6A). Mice were injected with 4-OHT and, 5 h later, exposed to context A 
and given 3 shocks. (Fig. 6B). Mice were then exposed to context A without shocks 5 days 
after the initial 3-shock CFC training, first with optogenetic stimulation for 3 min (2-3 mW, 
10 Hz stimulation at 20 ms pulses) and then with no optogenetic stimulation for 3 min. 
Optogenetically stimulating the DG in AD × ArcCreERT2(-) (Cre- AD) mice did not impact 
freezing behavior, as AD mice froze significantly less than Ctrl mice (Fig. 6C). However, 
optogenetically stimulating the DG in AD × ArcCreERT2(+) (Cre+ AD) mice increased 
freezing behavior throughout the session; AD and Ctrl mice froze at comparable levels (Fig. 
6D-6E).
The following day, during a context test without light stimulation, Cre- AD mice froze 
significantly less than Cre- Ctrl mice (Fig. 6F). Moreover, Cre+ AD mice also froze 
significantly less than Cre+ Ctrl mice (Fig. 6G-6H). These data suggest that the 
Perusini et al.
Page 8
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 improvements seen during the previous optogenetic stimulation are not long-lasting and that 
increased optogenetic stimulation is needed if long-lasting cognitive improvements are 
possible.
In order to determine if the timing of laser presentation impacts behavior and to more 
definitively attribute increased freezing to laser stimulation, mice received laser OFF and 
then laser ON periods in context A (Fig. 6B). Cre- AD mice froze significantly less than 
Cre- Ctrl mice during the laser OFF and laser ON periods (Fig. 6I). Cre+ AD mice froze 
significantly less than Cre+ Ctrl mice during the laser OFF period (Fig. 6J). However, during 
the laser ON period, Cre+ AD mice froze comparably to Cre+ Ctrl mice, again suggesting 
that optogenetic stimulation is capable of rescuing the memory deficit in AD mice at any 
portion of the context test (Fig. 6J-6K). These data suggest that optogenetic stimulation of 
an aversive contextual memory trace rescues the 3-shock CFC memory impairment in AD 
mice, as evidenced by increased freezing in the shock context.
Lastly, mice were sacrificed after 10 min of laser stimulation, and immunohistochemistry 
was performed for Cre+ mice as previously described (Fig. 5). Both Cre+ Ctrl and AD mice 
had similar levels of DG EYFP and Arc expression (Fig. 6L-6N). However, stimulation 
increased overall DG co-labeling in Cre+ AD mice, significantly higher than impaired AD 
mice without stimulation (Table S2). This increased DG co-labeling reflects the behavioral 
improvements for Cre+ AD mice during optogenetic stimulation of the appropriate CFC 
memory trace. Moreover, for all Cre+ mice, irrespective of Genotype, co-labeling was 
significantly increased in DG sections directly under the ferrule (i.e., DG sections directly 
simulated by the laser) compared to those past the ferrule (i.e., DG sections not directly 
stimulated by the laser) (Fig. 6O). Therefore, these data show that optogenetic stimulation of 
DG engrams improves memory retrieval in AD mice by increasing the reactivation of neural 
ensembles which were active during memory encoding.
Discussion
AD has become a devastating societal and health problem among the elderly. In this study, 
we aimed to first characterize the time course of changes in multiple behavioral domains in 
an AD mouse model. Some behaviors were unaffected by plaque development, namely 
anxiety-like behaviors and novelty detection. However, we found that social, spatial, and 
cognitive memories were severely impaired with plaque progression. These data are in 
accord with other studies using similar AD murine lines. For example, spatial memory 
deficits using the water maze (Lalonde et al., 2005; Cao et al., 2007), as well as SR deficits 
(Hsaio et al., 2014), have been found in APP/PS1 mice. Most importantly, here, we report 
that one of the most robust and measurable deficits were in cognitive fear memory as 
assessed by CFC. This is consistent with human literature on AD-related memory 
dysfunction, especially as AD progresses into later stages (e.g., Koedam et al., 2010).
After both 1- and 3-shock CFC, DG EYFP and Arc expression were comparable across all 
groups despite behavioral memory deficits occurring at 6 months of age. Since we utilized a 
murine line that allows for indelible labeling of memory traces, we were able to compare 
neuronal populations active during memory encoding and retrieval. EYFP+/Arc+ co-labeling 
Perusini et al.
Page 9
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (i.e., reactivated memory traces / engrams) was significantly decreased in 6-month-old AD 
mice when compared with the age-matched Ctrl mice. This implies that in this oldest age 
group with AD, the cells activated during context re-exposure were not the same as those 
activated during memory encoding. That is, the mice may be recalling an incorrect memory, 
as the wrong cells—or possibly a new ensemble that may have different mnemonic 
properties than the original ensemble—are being activated. False recollection and 
diminished memory accuracy, especially of those with emotional valence, are common in 
AD patients, and studies report these impairments are due to hippocampal dysfunction (e.g., 
Gallo et al., 2010). Interestingly, we observed slight freezing increases in aged Ctrl mice, 
which was most apparent in 3-shock CFC. While unexpected, this finding is supported by 
human literature stating that the aging population is more sensitive to the effects of stress 
(e.g., Wilson et al., 2011). Nonetheless, percent co-labeling was typical for this group (∼8%; 
Denny et al., 2014), significantly higher than that of the age-matched AD group, and 
regression analysis showed that in this oldest group, both the cells representing the 
originally-encoded memory and those representing the memory trace were indeed predictors 
of fear expression.
We hypothesized that AD mice had deficits in CFC because the original encoding population 
was not reactivated properly during re-exposure, thereby incorrectly accessing the memory 
trace. By tagging the neural ensembles representing memory encoding, we tested if 
optogenetic stimulation of this population would be sufficient to improve memory retrieval. 
Indeed, optogenetic stimulation of this neural population increased fear memory retrieval as 
well as DG co-labeling (i.e., memory retrieval) to that of Ctrl levels. Increased co-labeling 
for Cre+ mice suggests that laser stimulation directly strengthens the memory trace, which is 
then reflected in improved behavior for AD mice. Moreover, these results indicate that the 
CFC memory still exists and has not degraded, but is difficult to access for memory retrieval 
or behavioral expression when AD is present. Because we were able to improve fear 
memory deficits in these studies, in the future it may be possible optogenetically stimulate 
neural ensembles representing SR or spatial memories to also improve these impairments in 
these triple transgenic mice.
Two recent studies are particularly relevant to interpreting our data. Firstly, a recent study 
similarly used optogenetics to reactivate fear memory traces in AD mice (Roy et al., 2016). 
In this study, the authors were able to also temporarily increase freezing during light 
stimulation; however, the stimulation was never performed in the CFC training context but in 
a completely novel context. It is unclear from the procedure whether they were activating the 
complete CFC engram or cells representing behavioral output (i.e., freezing). Here, we 
optogenetically stimulated cells labeled during CFC training in the same aversive context. 
With a procedure utilizing the same aversive context for both CFC training and memory 
recall, we provide a cleaner and more accurate comparison of cells active during encoding 
versus retrieval, which allows for a more meaningful interpretation of co-labeled cells. 
Moreover, we have shown that we can improve fear memory to unimpaired Ctrl levels 
within the relevant context and not an alternate one; testing in an alternate context could be 
inappropriate in practice or clinical instances. Secondly, a recent study also showed that 
optogenetically driving fast-spiking Parvalbumin+ hippocampal interneurons at gamma, but 
not other frequencies reduced the levels of Aβ (Iaccarino et al., 2016). These data suggest 
Perusini et al.
Page 10
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that non-invasively targeting brain rhythms may improve memory retrieval by decreasing the 
AD-associated pathology. Altogether, both studies suggest that optogenetic modulation 
during AD progression results in improved memory and also highlights the hippocampus as 
a node of influence for improving long-term memory retrieval.
In summary, these data represent an in-depth behavioral and IEG profiling of the APP/PS1 
murine model commonly used to study AD. We have identified distinct memory deficits that 
occur with AD progression. We believe that each of these behaviors (cognitive, spatial, and 
social) is mediated by distinct memory traces that will require distinct targeting procedures 
to potentially improve deficits. In the case of 1-shock and 3-shock CFC, we have localized 
memory trace impairments in the DG and optogenetically targeted the cells used to 
originally encode the CFC memory. This context-specific memory trace activation rescued 
memory retrieval, as indicated by the enhanced degree of IEG expression overlap. Overall, 
these findings propose that the DG is a prime target for treating AD-related cognitive 
decline.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
J.N.P. was supported by a NIH DP5 OD017908 and NIH T32 MH015174. S.C.L. was supported by a NIH DP5 
OD017908. I.P. was supported by a NYSTEM C-029157. C.A.D. was supported by a NIH DP5 OD017908-01, a 
NARSAD Young Investigator Grant from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation (P&S Fund Investigator), a 
NYSTEM C-029157, a Research Initiatives for Science and Engineering (RISE) grant, and a Robert N. Butler 
Columbia Aging Center of Columbia University Faculty Research Fellowship.
References
Cao D, Lu H, Lewis TL, Ling L. Intake of sucrose-sweetened water induces insulin resistance and 
exacerbates memory deficits and amyloidosis in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer Disease. J 
Bio Chem. 2007; 282:36275–36282. [PubMed: 17942401] 
Cazzulino AS, Martinez R, Tomm NK, Denny CA. Improved specificity of hippocampal memory trace 
labeling. Hippocampus. 2016; 26:752–62. [PubMed: 26662713] 
Chung JA, Cummings JL. Neurobehavioral and neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer's disease: 
characteristics and treatment. Neuro Clin. 2000; 18:829–46.
Denny CA, Burghardt NS, Schachter DM, Hen R, Drew MR. 4- to 6-week old adult born hippocampal 
neurons influence novelty-evoked exploration and contextual fear conditioning. Hippocampus. 
2012; 22:1188–1201. [PubMed: 21739523] 
Denny CA, Kheirbek MA, Alba EL, Tanaka KF, Brachman RA, Laughman KB, Tomm NK, Turi GF, 
Losonczy A, Hen R. Hippocampal memory traces are differentially modulated by experience, time, 
and adult neurogenesis. Neuron. 2014; 83:189–201. [PubMed: 24991962] 
Drew MR, Denny CA, Hen R. Arrest of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice impairs single- but 
not multiple-trial contextual fear conditioning. Behav Neurosci. 2010; 124:446–454. [PubMed: 
20695644] 
Gallo DA, Foster KT, Wong JT, Bennett DA. False recollection of emotional pictures in Alzheimer's 
disease. Neuropsychologia. 2010; 48:3614–3618. [PubMed: 20727904] 
Garcia-Alloza M, Robbins EM, Zhang-Nunes SX, Purcell SM, Betensky RA, Raju S, Prada C, 
Greenberg SM, Bacskai BJ, Frosch MP. Characterization of amyloid deposition in the APPswe/
PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2006; 24:516–524. [PubMed: 
17029828] 
Perusini et al.
Page 11
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gong B, Vitolo OV, Trinchese, Liu S, Shelanski M, Arancio O. Persistent improvement in synaptic and 
cognitive functions in an Alzheimer mouse model after rolipram treatment. J Clin Invest. 2004; 
114:1624–1634. [PubMed: 15578094] 
Guzowski JF, Lyford GL, Stevenson GD, Houston FP, McGaugh JL, Worley PF, Barnes CA. Inhibition 
of activity-dependent arc protein expression in the rat hippocampus impairs the maintenance of 
long-term potentiation and the consolidation of long-term memory. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:3993–
4001. [PubMed: 10818134] 
Hardy J, Allsop D. Amyloid deposition as the central event in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease. 
Trends Pharmacol Sci. 1991; 12:383–388. [PubMed: 1763432] 
Hargrave R, Maddock RJ, Stone V. Impaired recognition of facial expressions of emotion in 
Alzheimer's Disease. J Neuropsych Clin N. 2002; 14:64–71.
Hsaio YH, Hung HC, Chen SH, Gean PV. Social interaction rescues memory deficit in an animal 
model of Alzheimer's disease by increasing BDNF-dependent hippocampal neurogenesis. J 
Neurosci. 2014; 34:16207–16219. [PubMed: 25471562] 
Iaccarino HF, Singer AC, Martorell AJ, Rudenko A, Gao F, Gillingham TZ, Mathys H, Seo J, Kritskiy 
O, Abdurrob F, Adaikkan C, Canter RG, Rueda R, Brown EN, Boyden ES, Tsai LH. Gamma 
frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and modifies microglia. Nature. 2016; 540:230–
235. [PubMed: 27929004] 
Jankowsky JL, Fadale DJ, Anderson J, Xu GM, Gonzales V, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Lee MK, 
Younkin LH, Wagner SL, Younkin SG, Borchelt DR. Mutant presenilins specifically elevate the 
levels of the 42 residue beta-amyloid peptide in vivo: evidence for augmentation of a 42-specific 
gamma secretase. Hum Mol Genet. 2004; 13:159–170. [PubMed: 14645205] 
Jankowsky JL, Slunt HH, Ratovitski T, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Borchelt DR. Co-expression of 
multiple transgenes in mouse CNS: a comparison of strategies. Biomol Eng. 2001; 17:1157–1165.
Kilgore M, Miller CA, Fass DM, Hennig KM, Haggarty SJ, Sweatt JD, Rumbaugh G. Inhibitors of 
class 1 histone deacetylases reverse contextual memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer's 
Disease. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35:870–880. [PubMed: 20010553] 
Klunk WE, Bacskai BJ, Mathis CA, Kajdasz ST, McLellan ME, Frosch MP, Debnath ML, Holt DP, 
Wang Y, Hyman BT. Imaging Abeta plaques in living transgenic mice with multiphoton 
microscopy and methoxy-X04, a systemically administered Congo red derivative. J Neuropathol 
Exp Neurol. 2002; 61:797–805. [PubMed: 12230326] 
Koedam EL, Lauffer V, van der Vlies AE, van der Flier WM, Scheltens P, Pijnenberg YA. Early- 
versus late-onset Alzheimer's disease: more than age alone. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010; 19:1401–
1408. [PubMed: 20061618] 
Lalonde R, Kim HD, Maxwell JA, Fukuchi K. Exploratory activity and spatial learning in 12-month-
old APP695SWE/co+PS1/ΔE9 mice with amyloid plaques. Neurosci Lett. 2005; 390:87–92. 
[PubMed: 16169151] 
Landgren S, von Otter M, Palmér MS, Zetterström C, Nilsson S, Skoog I, Gustafson DR, Minthon L, 
Wallin A, Andreasen N, Bogdanovic N, Marcusson J, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Kettunen P. A 
novel ARC gene polymorphism is associated with reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease. J Neural 
Transm. 2012; 199:833–842.
Lyford GL, Yamagata K, Kaufmann WE, Barnes CA, Sanders LK, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins 
NA, Lanahan AA, Worley PF. Arc, a growth factor and activity-regulated gene, encodes a novel 
cytoskeleton-associated protein that is enriched in neuronal dendrites. Neuron. 1995; 14:433–445. 
[PubMed: 7857651] 
Madisen L, Mao T, Zhuo JM, Berenyi A, Fujisawa S, Hsu YW, Garcia AJ 3rd, Gu X, Zanella S, 
Kidney J, Gu H, Mao Y, Hooks BM, Boyden ES, Buzsaki G, Ramirez JM, Jones AR, Svoboda K, 
Han X, Turner EE, Zeng H. A toolbox of Cre-dependent optogenetic transgenic mice for light-
induced activation and silencing. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:793–802. [PubMed: 22446880] 
Meyer-Luehmann M, Spires-Jones T, Prada C, Garcia-Alloza M, de Calignon A, Rozkalne M, 
Koenigsknecht-Talboo J, Holtzman DM, Bacskai BJ, Hyman BT. Rapid appearance and local 
toxicity of amyloid-beta plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Nature. 2008; 451:720–
724. [PubMed: 18256671] 
Perusini et al.
Page 12
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Minkeviciene R, Rheims S, Dobszay MB, Zilberter M, Hartikainen J, Fülöp L, Penke B, Zilberter Y, 
Harkany T, Pitkanen A, Tanila H. Amyloid β-induced neuronal hyperexcitability triggers 
progressive epilepsy. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:3453–3462. [PubMed: 19295151] 
Oury F, Khrimian L, Denny CA, Gardin A, Chamouni A, Goeden N, Huang YY, Lee H, Srinivas P, 
Gao XB, Suyama S, Langer T, Mann JJ, Horvath TL, Bonnin A, Karsenty G. Maternal and 
offspring pools of osteocalcin influence brain development and functions. Cell. 2013; 26:228–241.
Palop JJ, Chin J, Bien-Ly N, Massaro C, Yeung BZ, Yu GQ, Mucke L. Vulnerability of dentate granule 
cells to disruption of arc expression in human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. J 
Neurosci. 2005; 25:9686–9693. [PubMed: 16237173] 
Reijmers LG, Perkins BL, Matsuo N, Mayford M. Localization of a stable neural correlate of 
associative memory. Science. 2007; 317:1230–1233. [PubMed: 17761885] 
Reisberg B, Ferris SH, de Leon MJ, Crook T. The Global Deterioration Scale for assessment of 
primary degenerative dementia. Am J Psychiatry. 1982; 139:1136–1139. [PubMed: 7114305] 
Roy DS, Arons A, Mitchell TI, Pignatelli M, Ryan TJ, Tonegawa S. Memory retrieval by activating 
engram cells in mouse models of early Alzheimer's disease. Nature. 2016; 531:508–512. [PubMed: 
26982728] 
Rudinskiy N, Hawkes JM, Betensky RA, Eguchi M, Yamaguchi S, Spires-Jones TL, Hyman BT. 
Orchestrated experience-driven Arc responeses are disrupted in a mouse model of Alzheimer's 
disease. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:1422–1429. [PubMed: 22922786] 
Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer's disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol Rev. 2001; 81:741–766. 
[PubMed: 11274343] 
Serrano-Pozo, A., Frosch, MP., Masliah, E., Hyman, BT. Neuropathological Alterations in Alzheimer 
Disease. In: Selkoe, DJ.Mandelkow, EM., Holtzman, DM., editors. The Biology of Alzheimer 
Disease. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2012. 
Steward O, Worley PF. Selective targeting of newly synthesized Arc mRNA to active synapses requires 
NMDA receptor activation. Neuron. 2001; 30:227–240. [PubMed: 11343657] 
Volianskis A, Køstner R, Mølgaard M, Hass S, Jensen MS. Episodic memory deficits are not related to 
altered gluatmatergic synaptic transmission and plasticity in the CA1 hippocampus of the APPswe/
PS1ΔE9-deleted transgenic mice model of β-amyloidosis. Neurobiol Aging. 2010; 31:1173–1187. 
[PubMed: 18790549] 
Wilson RS, Begeny CT, Boyle PA, Schneider JA, Bennett DA. Vunerability to stress, anxiety, and 
development of dementia in old age. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011; 19:327–334. [PubMed: 
21427641] 
Wu J, Petralia RS, Kurushima H, Patel H, Jung MY, Volk L, Chowdhury S, Shepherd JD, Dehoff M, Li 
Y, Kuhl D, Huganir RL, Price DL, Scannevin R, Troncoso JC, Wong PC, Worley PF. Arc/Arg3.1 
regulates an endosomal pathway essential for activity-dependent β -amyloid generation. Cell. 
2011; 147:615–628. [PubMed: 22036569] 
Perusini et al.
Page 13
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Experimental design for APP/PS1 (AD) × ArcCreERT2 × ChR2-EYFP mice
(A) Genetic design.
(B) Behavioral design.
(C) Representative images of EYFP, Arc, and Methoxy-X04 immunohistochemistry at 2, 4, 
and 6 months of age. Scale bar represents 100 μm.
Perusini et al.
Page 14
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Depressive- and anxiety-like behavior is not altered in AD mice
(A-C) Ctrl and AD mice had similar levels of immobility time on day 2 of the FST.
(D-F) Ctrl and AD mice had similar levels of average immobility time for minutes 3-6 on 
day 2 of the FST.
(G-I) In the OF, Genotype did not impact basic movements at 2, 4, or 6 months of age.
(J-L) Neither Genotype nor Age impacted the distance traveled in the center over total 
distance traveled.
Perusini et al.
Page 15
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (M-O) Ctrl and AD mice spent more time in the closed arms of the EPM at all ages tested, 
except for the AD group at 6 months of age.
(P-R) For the NSF test, neither Genotype nor Age impacted the latency to eat a pellet.
(S-U) Ctrl and AD mice had comparable body weights at all ages measured.
(V-X) Ctrl and AD mice had comparable percentage of body weight loss.
(Y-AA) Ctrl and AD mice ate similar amounts of food in the home cage following the NSF. 
(n = 6-13 male mice per group). Error bars represent ± SEM. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p 
< 0.001. Forced Swim Test, FST; Open Field, OF; Elevated Plus Maze, EPM; Novelty 
Suppressed Feeding, NSF; Average, Avg; minutes, min; seconds, s; control, Ctrl; 
Alzheimer's disease, AD; gram, g; percent, %; centimeter, cm.
Perusini et al.
Page 16
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Aging and AD do not affect novelty detection in 2-trial NOR, but aging alters novelty 
detection in 5-trial NOR
(A) Experimental design.
(B) In exposure 2, Ctrl and AD mice had similar levels of exploration, as measured by grid 
crossings.
(C) Ctrl and AD mice had similar levels of investigation of the two objects, with both groups 
showing no preference for the novel object, suggesting that this paradigm is not sufficient for 
testing long-term NOR. (n = 3-4 male mice per group).
(D) Experimental design.
Perusini et al.
Page 17
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E-G) Ctrl and AD mice had similar levels of exploration, as measured by grid crossings, at 
all ages measured.
(H-J) Ctrl and AD mice had similar levels of investigation of the two objects at all ages 
measured.
(K-M) Ctrl and AD mice investigated the novel object significantly more than the constant 
object at 2, 4, and 6 months of age. (n = 6-13 male mice per group). Error bars represent ± 
SEM. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Minutes, min; Novel Object Recognition, 
NOR; control, Ctrl; Alzheimer's disease, AD; seconds, s; number, No.
Perusini et al.
Page 18
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Spatial and social memories are altered with both aging and plaque onset
(A) Y-maze experimental design.
(B) Two-month-old Ctrl and AD mice explore the novel arm significantly more than the 
constant arm.
(C) At 4 months, Ctrl, but not AD mice explore the novel arm significantly more than the 
constant arm.
(D) At 6 months, both groups of mice explore the constant and novel arms comparably.
(E) SR experimental design.
Perusini et al.
Page 19
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F-H) During trial 1, Ctrl and AD mice explore the novel mouse significantly more than the 
empty cup.
(I) At 2 months of age, Ctrl and AD mice explore the novel mouse significantly more than 
the familiar mouse during trial 2.
(J) At 4 months, Ctrl but not AD mice explore the novel mouse significantly more than the 
familiar mouse during trial 2.
(K) At 6 months, both groups of mice explore the novel and familiar mice comparably 
during trial 2. (n = 6-13 male mice per group). Error bars represent ± SEM. * p < 0.05, ** p 
< 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Control, Ctrl; Alzheimer's disease, AD; seconds, s; intertrial interval, 
ITI.
Perusini et al.
Page 20
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. CFC and IEG expression is impaired in AD mice
(A) CFC experimental designs.
(B) Representative image of EYFP, Arc, and Methoxy-X04. Scale bar represents 100 
microns.
(C) At 2 months of age, Ctrl and AD mice exhibit comparable freezing levels following1-
shock CFC. At 4 and 6 months, AD mice exhibit significantly less freezing than Ctrl mice.
(D-E) There was no effect of Genotype on the number of EYFP+ or the number of Arc+ DG 
cells.
(F) At 6 months, AD mice have significantly less DG EYFP+/Arc+ co-labeling than do Ctrl 
mice.
(G) At 6 months, AD mice exhibit significantly less freezing than Ctrl mice following 3-
shock CFC.
(H-I) There was no effect of Genotype on the number of EYFP+ or the number of Arc+ DG 
cells.
Perusini et al.
Page 21
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (J) At 6 months, AD mice have a significantly less co-labeling than Ctrl mice. (n = 6-13 
male mice per group). Error bars represent ± SEM. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. 4-
hydroxytamoxifen, 4-OHT; sacrifice, Sac; Contextual Fear Conditioning, CFC; control, Ctrl; 
Alzheimer's disease, AD; percent, %; enhanced yellow fluorescent protein, EYFP; dentate 
gyrus, DG.
Perusini et al.
Page 22
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Optogenetic stimulation of a DG memory trace improves memory retrieval in AD mice
(A) Schematic of the bilateral ferrule placement.
(B) Behavioral schematic. Context A memory traces are labeled after a 4-OHT injection.
(C) Freezing in Context A is not impacted by optogenetic stimulation of the aversive A 
memory trace in ArcCreERT2(-) × ChR2-EYFPxAPP/PS1 (Cre- AD) mice.
(D) Freezing in Context A is significantly increased by optogenetic stimulation of the 
aversive A memory trace in ArcCreERT2(+) × ChR2-EYFP × APP/PS1 (Cre+ AD) mice.
Perusini et al.
Page 23
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E) Cre- AD mice freeze significantly less than Cre- Ctrl mice. Optogenetic stimulation of 
the aversive A memory trace increases freezing in Cre+ AD mice when compared with Cre- 
AD mice.
(F-H) Cre- and Cre+ AD mice freeze significantly less than do Cre- and Cre+ Ctrl mice 
during context A test without optogenetic stimulation.
(I) Optogenetic stimulation of the aversive A memory trace does not impact freezing 
behavior in Cre- AD mice when compared with Cre- Ctrl mice.
(J) Optogenetic stimulation of the aversive A memory trace increases freezing in Cre+ AD 
mice to levels similar to those of Cre+ Ctrl mice.
(K) Cre- AD mice freeze significantly less than Cre- Ctrl mice. Optogenetic stimulation of 
the aversive A memory trace increases freezing in Cre+ AD mice when compared with Cre- 
AD mice.
(L) Representative image of ferrule placement.
(M-N) There was no effect of Genotype on the number of EYFP+ or the number of Arc+ 
cells during optogenetic stimulation.
(O) Stimulation increased co-labeling directly under the ferrule for both Cre+ AD and Ctrl 
mice. (n = 4-5 male mice per group). Error bars represent ±SEM. * p < 0.05, *** p < 0.0001. 
Control, Ctrl; Alzheimer's disease, AD; dentate gyrus, DG; enhanced yellow fluorescent 
protein, EYFP; percent, %, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, 4-OHT; seconds, s; ArcCreERT2(-), Cre-; 
ArcCreERT2(+), Cre+.
Perusini et al.
Page 24
Hippocampus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
