 SPECIAL ARTICLE
LEVEL OF RECOMMENDATION
Practice guideline update summary: Mild
cognitive impairment
Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
Ronald C. Petersen, MD, PhD, Oscar Lopez, MD, Melissa J. Armstrong, MD, MSc, Thomas S.D. Getchius,
Mary Ganguli, MD, MPH, David Gloss, MD, MPH&TM, Gary S. Gronseth, MD, Daniel Marson, JD, PhD,
Tamara Pringsheim, MD, Gregory S. Day, MD, MSc, Mark Sager, MD, James Stevens, MD, and
Alexander Rae-Grant, MD
Neurology® 2018;90:126-135. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000004826
Correspondence
American Academy of
Neurology
guidelines@aan.com
Abstract
Objective
To update the 2001 American Academy of Neurology (AAN) guideline on mild cognitive
impairment (MCI).
Methods
The guideline panel systematically reviewed MCI prevalence, prognosis, and treatment articles
according to AAN evidence classification criteria, and based recommendations on evidence and
modified Delphi consensus.
Results
MCI prevalence was 6.7% for ages 60–64, 8.4% for 65–69, 10.1% for 70–74, 14.8% for 75–79,
and 25.2% for 80–84. Cumulative dementia incidence was 14.9% in individuals with MCI older
than age 65 years followed for 2 years. No high-quality evidence exists to support pharmaco-
logic treatments for MCI. In patients with MCI, exercise training (6 months) is likely to
improve cognitive measures and cognitive training may improve cognitive measures.
Major recommendations
Clinicians should assess for MCI with validated tools in appropriate scenarios (Level B).
Clinicians should evaluate patients with MCI for modifiable risk factors, assess for functional
impairment, and assess for and treat behavioral/neuropsychiatric symptoms (Level B). Clini-
cians should monitor cognitive status of patients with MCI over time (Level B). Cognitively
impairing medications should be discontinued where possible and behavioral symptoms treated
(Level B). Clinicians may choose not to offer cholinesterase inhibitors (Level B); if offering,
they must first discuss lack of evidence (Level A). Clinicians should recommend regular
exercise (Level B). Clinicians may recommend cognitive training (Level C). Clinicians should
discuss diagnosis, prognosis, long-term planning, and the lack of effective medicine options
(Level B), and may discuss biomarker research with patients with MCI and families (Level C).
From the Department of Neurology (R.C.P.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Department of Neurology (O.L.), University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, PA; Department of Neurology
(M.J.A.), University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville; Heart Rhythm Society (T.S.D.G.), Washington, DC; Department of Psychiatry (M.G.), University of Pittsburgh, PA;
Department of Neurology (D.G.), Charleston Area Medical Center, WV; Department of Neurology (G.S.G.), University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City; Department of Neurology
(D.M.), University of Alabama, Birmingham; Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Psychiatry, Pediatrics and Community Health Sciences (T.P.), Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Canada; Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center (G.S.D.), Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Institute (M.S.),
School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Department of Neurology (J.S.), Fort Wayne Neurological Center, IN; and Department of Neurology (A.R.-G.),
Cleveland Clinic, OH.
Approved by the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee on July 16, 2016; by the Practice Committee on August 22, 2016; and by the AAN Institute
Board of Directors on October 5, 2017.
This guideline was endorsed by the Alzheimer’s Association on May 1, 2017.
Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
MORE ONLINE
Podcast
Dr. Jeff Burns talks with
Dr. Ronald Petersen about
the updated AAN guideline
on mild cognitive
impairment.
NPub.org/ojn0w9
126
Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Neurology
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 Glossary
AAN = American Academy of Neurology; AD = Alzheimer disease; aMCI = amnestic mild cognitive impairment; CI =
confidence interval; CIND = cognitively impaired, no dementia; FDA = Food and Drug Administration; IADL = instrumental
activities of daily living; MCI = mild cognitive impairment; RR = relative risk.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a condition in which
individuals demonstrate cognitive impairment with minimal
impairment of instrumental activities of daily living (IADL).1–3
Although MCI can be the first cognitive expression of Alz-
heimer disease (AD), it can also be secondary to other disease
processes (i.e., other neurologic, neurodegenerative, systemic,
or psychiatric disorders).4 The term amnestic MCI (aMCI)
describes a syndrome in which memory dysfunction predom-
inates; in nonamnestic MCI, impairment of other cognitive
features (e.g., language, visuospatial, executive) is more
prominent.2
This practice guideline updates a 2001 American Academy of
Neurology (AAN) practice parameter with recommendations
concerning the diagnosis and treatment of MCI.5 The guide-
line focuses on presumed idiopathic or neurodegenerative
MCI—particularly relating to AD—rather than mild cognitive
changes relating to potentially reversible causes (e.g., metabolic,
vascular, systemic, or psychiatric disorders) or Parkinson
disease–MCI or vascular cognitive impairment, as these may have
different epidemiologic and treatment spectra than AD. This
article summarizes the guideline findings, conclusions, and rec-
ommendations. The full text of the guideline, including appen-
dices e-1 through e-8, is available as supplemental data (links.lww.
com/WNL/A125), as are tables e-1 through e-3 (links.lww.com/
WNL/A34) and references e1–e50 (links.lww.com/WNL/A50).
The guideline addresses 4 questions:
1.
What is the prevalence of MCI in the general population?
2.
What is the prognosis for patients diagnosed with MCI
for progression to a diagnosis of dementia, and how does
this compare with an age-matched general population?
3.
What pharmacologic treatments are effective for patients
diagnosed with MCI?
4.
What nonpharmacologic treatments are effective for
patients diagnosed with MCI?
This guideline does not review the rapidly evolving field of bio-
marker research in MCI; the guideline panel determined that this
should be thesubjectof a future guideline orsystematic review.In
addition, the potential psychological distress of a diagnosis of
MCI (which has been discussed in the literature) was not one of
the questions reviewed by the expert panel for this guideline.6
Description of the analytic process
This practice guideline principally follows the methodolo-
gies described in the 2004 edition of the AAN’s guideline
development process manual.7 Conclusions and recom-
mendations were developed in accordance with the process
outlined in the 2011 guideline development process man-
ual, as amended to include the updated scheme for classi-
fying therapeutic articles.8 The complete guideline provides
a description of the exact methodology followed, including
the processes of convening the author panel, performing the
literature search, and reviewing the evidence. In accordance
with the 2011 guideline manual, recommendations were
based not only on the evidence in the systematic review, but
also on strong related evidence, established principles of
care, and inferences. The level of obligation for each rec-
ommendation was based on the strength of these premises
and the risk–benefit ratio of following the recommendation,
with adjustments based on importance of outcomes, vari-
ation in patient preferences, feasibility/availability, and
patient costs. Consensus was determined by a modified
Delphi voting process in accordance with prespecified
rules.8
The panelists noted that various definitions of MCI and of
related terms, such as cognitively impaired, no dementia
(CIND), were used in the reviewed literature. Variation was
based on different ascertainment methods, different neu-
ropsychological measures, different measure thresholds,
and requirements for different cognitive deficits. There was
also variation in the use of aMCI and nonamnestic MCI in
these studies. To address these discrepancies, the panelists
reflected the specific definition used for a study where fea-
sible in the evidence synthesis tables and guideline text, and
provided specific comments on the potential effect of dif-
fering definitions.
Analysis of evidence
What is the prevalence of MCI in the
general population?
Background
Various definitions of MCI have been used over time,
reflecting an evolution of thought from primarily focusing on
amnesia to including other cognitive deficits. Because
memory deficits are the clinical hallmark of AD, some groups
used criteria for MCI that required the presence of memory
deficits in isolation (e.g., aMCI),3,9,10 and others included
a broader definition that included either single-domain
Supplemental Data
Full text of guideline at:
NPub.org/4evlhy
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
127
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 nonamnestic deficits or deficits in multiple cognitive
domains, either with memory impairment (multidomain
aMCI) or without (multidomain nonamnestic MCI).1,2,11
The definition of MCI is also affected by the psychometric
properties of, and norms for, the tests used to identify
thresholds between normal aging and MCI. Table e-1 (links.
lww.com/WNL/A34) presents the characteristics of various
definitions of MCI used in the literature evaluated here. Table
e-2 shows the effect on frequency of MCI in the population
when less or more stringent MCI criteria were applied.
Analysis
Twenty Class I studies9,10,12–29 and 14 Class II studies30–40,e1–e3
were identified. Eight of the Class I studies showed that
a lower education level was significantly associated with
a higher prevalence of MCI.9,10,14,18,21,24,27,28 Two of the Class I
studies indicated that male sex was associated with the pres-
ence of MCI13,24 but other studies found similar baseline
prevalence in men and women.14,15,27
A random-effects meta-analysis using Class I and II studies
confirmed an increased prevalence with cohort age. The all-
studies estimate for individuals aged 60–64 years was 6.7%
(95% confidence interval [CI] 3.4%–12.7%, I2 11.0); for
those aged 65–69, 8.4% (95% CI 5.2%–13.4%, I2 0); for
ages 70–74, 10.1% (95% CI 7.5%–13.5%, I2 5.2); for ages
75–79, 14.8% (95% CI 10.1%–21.1%, I2 60.7); and for ages
80–84, 25.2% (95% CI 16.5%–36.5%, I2 0) (see table e-3,
links.lww.com/WNL/A34).
Conclusions
MCI is common in older populations, and its prevalence
increases with age (high confidence, multiple Class I and
Class II studies, consistent meta-analysis) and lower edu-
cational level (high confidence, multiple Class I studies).
What is the prognosis for patients diagnosed
with MCI for progression to a diagnosis of
dementia, and how does this compare with an
age-matched general population?
Analysis
Nine Class I studies evaluated prognosis for individuals
with MCI,9,13,19,23,27,e2,e4–e7 all showing an increased risk of
progression to dementia when participants with MCI were
compared with age-matched participants without MCI. A
random-effects meta-analysis demonstrated that the cumulative
incidence for the development of dementia in individuals with
MCI/CIND older than age 65 followed for 2 years was 14.9%
(95% CI 11.6%–19.1%, I2 = 0). In those with MCI/CIND vs
age-matched participants at 2–5 years after, the relative risk
(RR) of dementia (all types) was 3.3 (95% CI 2.5–4.5, I2 = 4.9);
the RR of the diagnosis of AD was 3.0 (95% CI 2.1–4.8,
I2 = 17.3).
Reversion to normal cognition in individuals with MCI
Four Class I studies9,19,23,e5 showed reversion to normal cog-
nition on follow-up in 14.4%,19 33.3%,9 19%,23 and 38%e5 of
participants with MCI. However, 2 studies documented
increased rates of ultimate conversion to dementia in
participants with MCI who reverted to normal cognition,
suggesting that individuals who revert remain at a higher
risk of progression back to MCI or dementia than indi-
viduals who have never received an MCI diagnosis (in
these studies, 65%e5 and 55% ultimately converted to
dementiae8).
Conclusions
Persons with MCI are at higher risk of progressing to dementia
than age-matched controls (high confidence, multiple con-
cordant Class I studies, meta-analysis). Persons diagnosed with
MCI may remain stable, return to neurologically intact, or
progress to dementia (multiple Class I studies, 14.4%–55.6%
reverting to normal).
What pharmacologic treatments are available
for patients diagnosed with MCI, and are these
treatments effective on cognitive measures of
progression to dementia, excluding other
symptomatic effects?
Analysis
One Class I study,e9 10 Class II studies described in 9 pub-
lications,e10–e18 and 3 Class III studiese19–e21 addressed phar-
macologic treatment of MCI. Table 1 describes the available
studies and conclusions for each pharmacologic intervention.
Comprehensive descriptions of each study, including ef-
fect sizes and CIs, are available in the full-length guideline
(links.lww.com/WNL/A125).
What nonpharmacologic treatments are
effective for patients diagnosed with MCI?
Analysis
Two Class II studies were reviewed that used exercise as an
intervention in individuals with MCI,e22,e23 and 1 Class IIe24
and 4 Class III studiese25–e28 investigated the use of various
cognitive interventions. Table 2 describes the available
studies and conclusions for each nonpharmacologic in-
tervention; details are provided in the full-length guideline
(links.lww.com/WNL/A125).
Putting the evidence into
clinical context
Care for persons with cognitive impairment meeting various
MCI criteria continues to evolve, with the area of biomarker
research changing particularly rapidly. Even in the context of
an evolving field, clinicians can provide high-quality care
focusing on counseling, treatment, and comorbidity man-
agement. Where clinicians are not proficient in caring for
the cognitive or behavioral/psychiatric needs of persons
with MCI, referral to appropriate specialists is an important
part of the treatment paradigm in line with the following
recommendations.
128
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 Practice recommendations
Section A: Recommendations for assessing
for MCI
Recommendation A1
Rationale
Appropriate
diagnosis
of
MCI
is
important
because
MCI becomes increasingly common as individuals age and is
associated with an increased risk of progression to dementia,
suggesting that this condition reflects a pathologic disease state
rather than normal cognitive aging. Appropriate diagnosis of
MCI is important in order to assess for reversible causes of
cognitive impairment, to help patients and families understand
the cause of their cognitive concerns, and to discuss the
prognostic possibilities with the provider so they can plan ac-
cordingly, although sharing the diagnosis must be balanced
with the potential harm of anxieties from diagnosing a patient
with a condition that may not progress. Ascribing cognitive
symptoms to normal aging without an assessment for MCI may
Table 1 Evidence and conclusions for pharmacologic treatments for mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
Agent
Classification of evidence
Conclusion
Donepezil
3 Class II studies (Petersen 2005,e10
Doody 2009,e11 Salloway 2004e12)
In patients with MCI, donepezil use over 3 years is possibly ineffective for reducing the
chances of a progression to possible or probable Alzheimer dementia (low confidence in
the evidence, single Class II study [Petersen 2005e10]). In patients with MCI, it is unknown
whether donepezil slows progression on various cognitive scales (very low confidence in
the evidence based on 2 Class II studies with limited precision and small magnitude of
effect) (Doody 2009,e11 Salloway 2004e12). Study CIs could not exclude an important
effect and the ADAS-Cog change was statistically significant but not clinically meaningful.
Galantamine
2 Class II studies (Winblad 2008,e13 both
studies reported in 1 article)
In patients with MCI, galantamine use over 24 months is probably ineffective for
reducing progression to dementia (moderate confidence in the evidence based on 2
Class II studies).
Rivastigmine
1 Class II study (Feldman 2007e14)
In patients with MCI, rivastigmine use up to 48 months is possibly ineffective for reducing
the rate of progression to possible or probable Alzheimer dementia (low confidence in
the evidence based on a single Class II study).
Flavonoid-
containing drink
1 Class II study (Desideri 2012e15)
In patients with MCI, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the cognitive
benefits of a drink with high-dose flavonoids (about 990 mg) on an integrated measure
(cognitive z score) of overall cognitive function at 8 weeks (very low confidence in the
evidence based on a single Class II study with CIs including unimportant effects;
evidence of a dose response was also unclear).
Homocysteine-
lowering B vitamins
1 Class II study (Smith 2010e16)
In patients with MCI, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of
homocysteine-lowering therapies in patients with MCI (very low confidence in the
evidence based on a single Class II study with decreased confidence in the evidence
owing to use of a primary endpoint with unclear clinical significance).
Transdermal
nicotine patch
1 Class I study (Newhouse 2012e9)
Six months of transdermal nicotine (15 mg/d) use possibly improves cognitive test
performance but not Clinical Global Impression of Change in patients with aMCI who do
not smoke (low confidence in the evidence based on 1 Class I study with decreased
confidence in the evidence owing to uncertain clinical significance of the outcome of hit
reaction time).
Piribedil
1 Class III study (Nagaraja 2001e19)
Data are insufficient to support or refute an effect of piribedil on cognitive measures in
MCI (very low confidence in the evidence based on 1 Class III study).
Rofecoxiba
1 Class II study (Thal 2005e17)
Rofecoxib possibly increases the risk of progression to AD in patients with MCI (low
confidence in the evidence based on 1 Class II study).
Tesamorelin
injections
1 Class II study (Baker 2012e18)
In patients with MCI, treatment with tesamorelin injections over 20 weeks is possibly
effective to improve performance on various cognitive measures (low confidence in the
evidence based on 1 Class II study).b
V0191
1 Class III study (Dubois 2012e20)
Data are insufficient to support or refute an effect of V0191 use on ADAS-Cog response
rates in patients with MCI (very low confidence in the evidence based on 1 Class III study).
Vitamin E
1 Class II study (Petersen 2005e10)
In patients with MCI, use of vitamin E 2,000 IU daily is possibly ineffective for reducing
progression to AD (low confidence in the evidence based on a single Class II study).
Vitamin E +
vitamin C
1 Class III study (Naeini 2014e21)
In patients with MCI, combined use of oral vitamin E 300 mg and C 400 mg daily over 12
months is of uncertain efficacy (very low confidence in the evidence based on 1 Class III
study).
Abbreviations: AD = Alzheimer disease; ADAS-Cog = Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale–cognitive subscale; aMCI = amnestic mild cognitive impairment;
CI = confidence interval.
References cited here can be found in the e-references (links.lww.com/WNL/A50) for the guideline summary article.
a Rofecoxib was removed from the market worldwide in September 2004. There are no data on whether other anti-inflammatory medications are effective or
harmful in patients with MCI.
b It is unclear from this study whether this is effect is sustained beyond 20 weeks.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
129
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 result in failure to assess for reversible causes of cognitive im-
pairment or to provide patients and families with an accurate
diagnosis that may affect life choices, or both. Although sub-
jective cognitive complaints alone are insufficient to diagnose
MCI,e29 such complaints from either patients or their close
contacts are core to most major MCI diagnostic criteria, as they
may reflect a change in cognitive function.e30
Recommendation
For patients for whom the patient or a close contact voices
concern about memory or impaired cognition, clinicians
should assess for MCI and not assume the concerns are re-
lated to normal aging (Level B).
Recommendation A2
Rationale
In the United States, the Medicare Annual Wellness Visit
requires an assessment to detect cognitive impairment.e31
Subjective cognitive complaints alone can result in over-
diagnosis or underdiagnosis of MCI and thus are insufficient
to screen for MCI.e29 Clinicians assessing for cognitive im-
pairment should use a brief, validated cognitive assessment
instrument in addition to eliciting patient and informant
history regarding cognitive concerns.
Recommendation
When performing a Medicare Annual Wellness Visit, clini-
cians should not rely on historical report of subjective
memory concerns alone when assessing for cognitive im-
pairment (Level B).
Recommendation A3
Rationale
When screening or assessing for MCI, validated assessment
tools should be used. Various instruments have acceptable
diagnostic accuracy for detecting MCI, with no instrument
being superior to another.e32 Because brief cognitive as-
sessment instruments are usually calibrated to maximize
sensitivity rather than specificity, patients who test positive
for MCI should then have further assessment (e.g., more in-
depth cognitive testing, such as neuropsychological testing
with interpretation based on appropriate normative data) to
formally assess for this diagnosis. Diagnosis of MCI is based
ultimately on a clinical evaluation determining cognitive
function and functional status and not solely on a specific
test score.
Recommendation
For patients for whom screening or assessing for MCI is ap-
propriate, clinicians should use validated assessment tools to
assess for cognitive impairment (Level B). For patients who
test positive for MCI, clinicians should perform a more formal
clinical assessment for diagnosis of MCI (Level B).
Recommendation A4
Rationale
In the presence of cognitive impairment, clinicians need to
distinguish between a diagnosis of MCI and one of dementia,
although the boundary is not always clear. Diagnosing
dementia prematurely can lead to negative consequences
for patients and families. Only a proportion of patients with
MCI will proceed to dementia. In patients with cognitive
Table 2 Evidence and conclusions for nonpharmacologic treatments for mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
Agent
Classification of evidence
Conclusion
Exercise
2 Class II studies (Nagamatsu 2012,e22 Suzuki 2013e23)
In patients with MCI, treatment with exercise training for 6 months is likely to
improve cognitive measures (moderate confidence in the evidence based on
2 Class II studies).
Cognitive
interventions
1 Class II (Kinsella 2009e24) and 4 Class III studies (Kinsella
2016,e25 Tsolaki 2011,e26 Nakatsuka 2015,e27 Lam
2015e28)
There is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of any individual
cognitive intervention strategy (1 Class II study with results that are not
statistically significant and with suspected imprecision, 4 Class III studies,
each examining a different cognitive intervention strategy). When various
cognitive interventions are considered as a group, for patients with MCI,
cognitive interventions may improve select measures of cognitive function
(low confidence in the evidence based on 1 Class II study with insufficient
precision [Kinsella 2009e24], 1 Class III study showing improvements in
strategy knowledge, internal strategy use, and well-being but not external
strategy or memory [Kinsella 2016e25], 1 Class III study [Tsolaki 2011e26]
showing improvement on multiple cognitive measures, 1 Class III study
[Nakatsuka 2015e27] showing improvement on the MMSE but with some
limitations, and 1 Class III study [Lam 2015e28] showing no differences when
all patients with MCI are considered, but with improvements in the
integrated cognitive–physical training groups when considering the ADAS-
Cog, fluency, and recall in patients with single-domain MCI and fluency in
patients with multidomain MCI).
Abbreviations: ADAS-Cog = Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale–cognitive subscale; MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination.
References cited here can be found in the e-references (links.lww.com/WNL/A50) for the guideline summary article.
130
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 impairment, clinicians must carefully assess for evidence of
functional impairment limiting independence in daily activi-
ties (e.g., by taking a careful history from the patient and
a close contact), a requirement for all dementia diagnoses, to
help distinguish between MCI and dementia. With a specific
inquiry about functional impairment, clinicians may also
identify dementia in patients when patients and family are less
forthcoming about functional problems.
Recommendation
For patients with MCI, clinicians should assess for the pres-
ence of functional impairment related to cognition before
giving a diagnosis of dementia (Level B).
Recommendation A5
Rationale
Diagnoses of MCI and dementia have important implications
for patients and families. Appropriate diagnosis is important for
informing evaluation for underlying causes, counseling on long-
term prognosis, and recommending therapeutic strategies.
Clinicians in many disciplines can have experience in caring for
individuals with cognitive impairment, including family prac-
tice, geriatrics, internal medicine, neurology, psychiatry, and
psychology. When clinicians without experience in cognitive
impairment identify patients for whom there is a concern of
MCI, they should refer these patients to a specialist with ex-
perience in cognition for further evaluation.
Recommendation
For patients suspected to have MCI, clinicians who lack the
necessary experience should refer these patients to a specialist
with experience in cognition (Level B).
Recommendation A6
Rationale
Although MCI is a high-risk state for progression to dementia,
some patients with MCI remain stable and some improve.
Some cases of MCI are associated with reversible causes of
cognitive impairment, including medication side effects, sleep
apnea, depression, and other medical conditions.e33 Patients
with MCI should undergo a medical evaluation for MCI risk
factors that may be treatable.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians should perform
a medical evaluation for MCI risk factors that are potentially
modifiable (Level B).
Recommendation A7
Rationale
Because patients with MCI can improve, remain stable,
or progress cognitively, identifying biomarkers that can stratify
risk is expected to be particularly important for prognosis. The
use of biomarkers in patients with MCI is a rapidly evolving
field,e34–e36 but to date, there are no biomarkers clearly shown
to predict progression in patients with MCI.e37
Recommendation A7a
For patients and families asking about biomarkers in MCI,
clinicians should counsel that there are no accepted bio-
markers available at this time (Level B).
Recommendation A7b
For interested patients, clinicians may discuss the option of
biomarker research or referpatients,orboth,if feasible,to centers
or organizations that can connect patients to this research (e.g.,
subspecialty centers, Trial Match, ClinicalTrials.gov) (Level C).
Recommendation A8
Rationale
Because patients with MCI can improve, remain stable, or
progress cognitively over time, patients must be monitored
serially for changes in status that could change diagnosis and
thus management approach (e.g., treatment, counseling).
Although MCI has no approved pharmacologic management,
there are US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–
approved agents for treatment of Alzheimer dementia,e38–e42
further emphasizing the importance of assessing for a change
in cognitive status over time.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians should perform
serial assessments over time to monitor for changes in cog-
nitive status (Level B).
Section B: Recommendations for management
of MCI
Recommendation B1
Rationale
Some patients with MCI improve or remain stable rather than
progress. In addition, some cases of MCI are associated with
reversible causes of cognitive impairment, including medication
side effects, general medical conditions, sleep disturbance, and
depression.e33 Because these risk factors are treatable and have
implications of their own, weaning patients from use of cog-
nitively impairing medications where feasible and treating risk
factors that may contribute to cognitive impairment should be
the first steps in managing MCI, particularly because symp-
tomatic treatment options are limited for impaired cognition.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians should wean
patients from medications that can contribute to cognitive
impairment (where feasible and medically appropriate) and
treat modifiable risk factors that may be contributing (Level B).
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
131
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 Recommendation B2
Rationale
There are no FDA-approved medications for the treatment of
MCI. Moreover, there are no high-quality, long-term studies
identifying pharmacologic or dietary agents that either improve
cognition or delay progression in patients with MCI.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians should counsel
the patients and families that there are no pharmacologic or
dietary agents currently shown to have symptomatic cognitive
benefit in MCI and that no medications are FDA-approved
for this purpose (Level B).
Recommendation B3
Rationale
Studies of cholinesterase inhibitors showed no benefit on
cognitive outcomes or reduction in progression from MCI to
dementia, although some studies could not exclude an im-
portant effect. In addition to lacking efficacy, side effects of
cholinesterase inhibitors are common, including gastrointes-
tinal symptoms and cardiac concerns.e43
Recommendation B3a
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians may choose not
to offer cholinesterase inhibitors (Level B).
Recommendation B3b
If clinicians choose to offer cholinesterase inhibitors, they must
first discuss with patients the fact that this is an off-label pre-
scription not currently backed by empirical evidence (Level A).
Recommendation B4
Rationale
Clinical trials provide an opportunity for interested patients to
participate in identifying or testing new treatment options,
which is of particular importance when no pharmacologic
options are available.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI who are interested in
pharmacologic treatment, clinicians may inform these
patients of centers or organizations that can connect patients
to clinical trials (e.g., subspecialty centers, Trial Match,
ClinicalTrials.gov) (Level C).
Recommendation B5
Rationale
Although long-term studies are unavailable, 6-month studies
suggest a possible benefit of twice-weekly exercise for cognition
in MCI. Exercise also has general health benefits and generally
limited risk.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians should recom-
mend regular exercise (twice/week) as part of an overall ap-
proach to management (Level B).
Recommendation B6
Rationale
Because the concept of MCI may be poorly understood or
distressing to patients and families, it is important to edu-
cate patients and families regarding the diagnosis of MCI
and how it may progress to dementia but also how indi-
viduals with MCI can remain stable or improve. Because
MCI may progress to dementia, and particularly because of
the lack of effective pharmacologic therapy or any proven
methods to reduce the risk of progression of MCI to de-
mentia, it is particularly important to educate patients
with MCI regarding their diagnosis and prognosis at the
MCI stage while they can still understand the discussion
and participate in planning, even though they may or may
not progress. Because of the possibility of progression
to a dementia state where patients may no longer be able
to participate in decision making, patients with MCI should
be encouraged to participate in long-term planning, in-
cluding topics such as advance directives, living wills, power
of attorney designations, and finances, which are important
irrespective of progression.
Recommendation
For patients diagnosed with MCI, clinicians should discuss
diagnosis and uncertainties regarding prognosis. Clinicians
should counsel patients and families to discuss long-term
planning topics such as advance directives, driving safety,
finances, and estate planning (Level B).
Recommendation B7
Rationale
Although there are no treatments for cognitive symptoms
in MCI, clinicians need to evaluate for and treat other
symptoms that can contribute to quality of life in MCI.
Behavioral/psychiatric symptoms are common in MCIe44–
e46 and may be associated with greater functional impair-
mente47 and an increased risk of progression from MCI to
dementia.e48,e49
Recommendation
Clinicians should assess for behavioral and neuropsychi-
atric symptoms in MCI and treat with both pharmaco-
logic and nonpharmacologic approaches when indicated
(Level B).
132
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 Recommendation B8
Rationale
In patients with MCI, cognitive interventions may be bene-
ficial in improving measures of cognitive function. It is good
practice to offer nonmedication approaches to care.
Recommendation
In patients with MCI, clinicians may recommend cognitive
interventions (Level C).
Suggestions for future research
The guideline panel recommends (1) the use of consistent
diagnostic criteria for MCI and dementia in clinical trials, to
improve the ability to apply and combine results; (2) the
inclusion of patient cohorts with specific biomarker data in
treatment studies targeted at specific pathologies (e.g., MCI
due to AD); (3) the use of outcome measures that are direct
measures
of
clinically
meaningful
patient
outcomes
(i.e., development of dementia, reduction of ability to un-
dertake activities of daily living or IADL, patient or caregiver
[or both] quality of life measures) or surrogate markers that
have previously been shown to have a strong correlation with
such measures; (4) standardized reporting of trial design in
publications using CONSORT criteriae50; (5) study of MCI
thought to be secondary to AD and MCI related to other
pathologies (e.g., vascular MCI, MCI related to Lewy body
pathology); and (6) further study of early lifestyle and
comorbidity modifications and the effects of such changes on
the progression of MCI to different dementia subtypes.
Disclaimer
Clinical practice guidelines, practice advisories, systematic
reviews, and other guidance published by the American
Academy of Neurology (AAN) and its affiliates are assess-
ments of current scientific and clinical information provided
as an educational service. The information (1) should not be
considered inclusive of all proper treatments, methods of care,
or as a statement of the standard of care; (2) is not continually
updated and may not reflect the most recent evidence (new
evidence may emerge between the time information is de-
veloped and when it is published or read); (3) addresses only
the question(s) specifically identified; (4) does not mandate
any particular course of medical care; and (5) is not intended
to substitute for the independent professional judgment of the
treating provider, as the information does not account for
individual variation among patients. In all cases, the selected
course of action should be considered by the treating provider
in the context of treating the individual patient. Use of the
information is voluntary. The AAN provides this information
on an “as is” basis and makes no warranty, expressed or im-
plied, regarding the information. The AAN specifically dis-
claims any warranties of merchantability or fitness for
a particular use or purpose. The AAN assumes no re-
sponsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property
arising out of or related to any use of this information or for
any errors or omissions.
Conflict of interest
The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) is committed
to producing independent, critical, and truthful clinical prac-
tice guidelines (CPGs). Significant efforts are made to mini-
mize the potential for conflicts of interest to influence the
recommendations of this CPG. To the extent possible, the
AAN keeps separate those who have a financial stake in
the success or failure of the products appraised in the CPGs
and the developers of the guidelines. Conflict of interest forms
were obtained from all authors and reviewed by an oversight
committee prior to project initiation. The AAN limits the
participation of authors with substantial conflicts of interest.
The AAN forbids commercial participation in, or funding of,
guideline projects. Drafts of the guideline have been reviewed
by at least 3 AAN committees, a network of neurologists,
Neurology peer reviewers, and representatives from related
fields. The AAN Guideline Author Conflict of Interest Policy
can be viewed at aan.com. For complete information on this
process, access the 2004 AAN process manual.7
Author contributions
Dr. Petersen: study concept and design, acquisition of data,
analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the man-
uscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important in-
tellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Lopez: study
concept and design, analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Armstrong:
analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the man-
uscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important in-
tellectual content, study supervision. T.S.D. Getchius: study
concept and design, study supervision. Dr. Ganguli: study
concept and design, analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Gloss:
analysis
or
interpretation
of
data,
study
supervision.
Dr. Gronseth: analysis or interpretation of data. Dr. Marson:
study concept and design, analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Prings-
heim: analysis and interpretation of data, study supervision.
Dr. Day: analysis and interpretation of data, study supervision.
Dr. Sager: study concept and design, analysis or interpretation
of data, critical revision of the manuscript for important in-
tellectual content. Dr. Stevens: study concept and design,
analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the man-
uscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important in-
tellectual content. Dr. Rae-Grant: analysis or interpretation of
data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
133
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 Acknowledgment
The authors thank Patricia J. Erwin of the Mayo Medical
Library for performing the literature searches; Julie Cox,
MFA, and Jonathan Dittman, MA, MFA, of the AAN for their
work in copyediting the manuscripts and related documents;
and Shannon Merillat, MLIS, of the AAN for her work in
coordinating the project.
Study funding
This practice guideline was developed with financial support
from the American Academy of Neurology. Authors who
serve as AAN subcommittee members, methodologists, or
employees, past or present (M.J.A., T.S.D.G., D.G., G.S.G.,
T.P., G.S.D, A.R.G.), were reimbursed by the AAN for
expenses related to travel to subcommittee meetings where
drafts of manuscripts were reviewed.
Disclosure
R. Petersen has served as a consultant for Roche Inc., Merck
Inc., Genentech Inc., and Biogen Inc.; receives publishing
royalties from Oxford University Press; performs clinical
procedures relating to mild cognitive impairment in his clin-
ical neurology practice; and receives research support from
the National Institute on Aging of the NIH. O. Lopez has
been a consultant for Grifols Inc., Lundbeck, and Raman
Technologies and has received grant support from the NIH.
M. Armstrong serves on the Level of Evidence editorial board
for Neurology® (but is not compensated financially) and
serves as an evidence-based medicine methodologist for the
American Academy of Neurology (AAN). T. Getchius was an
employee of the AAN and has nothing to disclose. M. Ganguli
has served on the data safety and monitoring board for
Indiana University and on the advisory committee for Biogen
Inc. and has received research support from the National
Institute on Aging of the NIH. D. Gloss serves as an evidence-
based medicine methodologist for the AAN. G. Gronseth
serves as associate editor for Neurology, serves on the editorial
advisory board for Neurology Now, and is compensated by the
AAN for methodologic activities. D. Marson serves as a con-
sultant for and received royalties from Janssen Pharmaceut-
icals and receives research support from the National Institute
on Aging for the NIH. T. Pringsheim has received financial
reimbursement for travel to attend the Movement Disorder
Society Meeting from Allergan Canada and Teva Canada
Innovation and has received research support from Shire
Canada Inc. and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
G. Day received honoraria for serving as faculty at the 2016
AAN annual meeting and holds stock (>$10,000) in ANI
Pharmaceuticals (generic manufacturer). M. Sager, J. Stevens,
and A. Rae-Grant report no disclosures relevant to the man-
uscript. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.
Received February 24, 2017. Accepted in final form September 22, 2017.
References
1.
Winblad B, Palmer K, Kivipelto M, et al. Mild cognitive impairment: beyond con-
troversies, towards a consensus: report of the International Working Group on Mild
Cognitive Impairment. J Intern Med 2004;256:240–246.
2.
Petersen RC. Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity. J Intern Med 2004;
256:183–194.
3.
Petersen RC, Smith GE, Waring SC, Ivnik RJ, Tangalos EG, Kokmen E. Mild cognitive
impairment: clinical characterization and outcome. Arch Neurol 1999;56:303–308.
4.
Huey ED, Manly JJ, Tang MX, et al. Course and etiology of dysexecutive MCI in
a community sample. Alzheimers Dement 2013;9:632–639.
5.
Petersen RC, Stevens JC, Ganguli M, Tangalos EG, Cummings JL, DeKosky ST.
Practice parameter: early detection of dementia: mild cognitive impairment (an
evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology. Neurology 2001;56:1133–1142.
6.
Lyketsos CG, Lopez OL, Jones B, Breitner J, DeKosky ST. A population-based study
of the prevalence of neuropsychiatric disturbances in dementia and mild cognitive
impairment: results from the Cardiovascular Health Study. JAMA 2002;288:
1425–1483.
7.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guideline Process Manual, 2004
ed. [online]. St. Paul: The American Academy of Neurology. Available at: aan.com/
uploadedFiles/Website_Library_Assets/Documents/2.Clinical_Guidelines/4.
About_Guidelines/1.How_Guidelines_Are_Developed/2004%20AAN%20Process
%20Manual.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2008.
8.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guideline Process Manual, 2011
ed. Available at: aan.com/Guidelines/Home/Development. Accessed April 12, 2012.
9.
Ganguli M, Dodge HH, Shen C, DeKosky ST. Mild cognitive impairment, amnestic
type: an epidemiologic study. Neurology 2004;63:115–121.
10.
Fei M, Qu YC, Wang T, Yin J, Bai JX, Ding QH. Prevalence and distribution of
cognitive impairment no dementia (CIND) among the aged population and the
analysis of socio-demographic characteristics: the community-based cross-sectional
study. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2009;23:130–138.
11.
Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Bienias JL, Evans DA, Wilson RS. Mild cognitive im-
pairment is related to Alzheimer disease pathology and cerebral infarctions. Neurol-
ogy 2005;64:834–841.
12.
Anstey KJ, Cherbuin N, Christensen H, et al. Follow-up of mild cognitive impairment
and related disorders over four years in adults in their sixties: the PATH through Life
Study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2008;26:226–233.
13.
Di Carlo A, Lamassa M, Baldereschi M, et al. CIND and MCI in the Italian elderly:
frequency, vascular risk factors, progression to dementia. Neurology 2007;68:
1909–1916.
14.
Hanninen T, Hallikainen M, Tuomainen S, Vanhanen M, Soininen H. Prevalence of
mild cognitive impairment: a population-based study in elderly subjects. Acta Neurol
Scand 2002;106:148–154.
15.
Louis ED, Schupf N, Manly J, Marder K, Tang MX, Mayeux R. Association between
mild parkinsonian signs and mild cognitive impairment in a community. Neurology
2005;64:1157–1161.
16.
Purser JL, Fillenbaum GG, Wallace RB. Memory complaint is not necessary for
diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and does not predict 10-year trajectories of
functional disability, word recall, or short portable mental status questionnaire limi-
tations. J Am Geriatr Soc 2006;54:335–338.
17.
Schonknecht P, Pantel J, Kruse A, Schroder J. Prevalence and natural course of aging-
associated cognitive decline in a population-based sample of young-old subjects. Am J
Psychiatry 2005;162:2071–2077.
18.
Artero S, Ancelin ML, Portet F, et al. Risk profiles for mild cognitive impairment and
progression to dementia are gender specific. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008;79:
979–984.
19.
Boyle PA, Wilson RS, Aggarwal NT, Tang Y, Bennett DA. Mild cognitive impairment:
risk of Alzheimer disease and rate of cognitive decline [see comment]. Neurology
2006;67:441–445.
20.
Busse A, Hensel A, Guhne U, Angermeyer MC, Riedel-Heller SG. Mild cognitive
impairment: long-term course of four clinical subtypes. Neurology 2006;67:
2176–2185.
21.
Das SK, Bose P, Biswas A, et al. An epidemiologic study of mild cognitive impairment
in Kolkata, India. Neurology 2007;68:2019–2026.
22.
Lobo A, Lopez-Anton R, de-la-Camara C, et al. Non-cognitive psychopathological
symptoms associated with incident mild cognitive impairment and dementia, Alz-
heimer’s type. Neurotox Res 2008;14:263–272.
23.
Lopez OL, Kuller LH, Becker JT, et al. Incidence of dementia in mild cognitive
impairment in the Cardiovascular Health Study Cognition Study. Arch Neurol 2007;
64:416–420.
24.
Petersen RC, Roberts RO, Knopman DS, et al. Prevalence of mild cognitive impairment
is higher in men: The Mayo Clinic Study of Aging. Neurology 2010;75:889–897.
25.
Wilson RS, Schneider JA, Arnold SE, Tang Y, Boyle PA, Bennett DA. Olfactory
identification and incidence of mild cognitive impairment in older age. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2007;64:802–808.
26.
Ganguli M, Chang CC, Snitz BE, Saxton JA, Vanderbilt J, Lee CW. Prevalence
of mild cognitive impairment by multiple classifications: the Monongahela-
Youghiogheny Healthy Aging Team (MYHAT) project. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
2010;18:674–683.
27.
Lopez OL, Jagust WJ, DeKosky ST, et al. Prevalence and classification of mild cog-
nitive impairment in the Cardiovascular Health Study Cognition Study: part 1. Arch
Neurol 2003;60:1385–1389.
28.
Shi Z, Zhang Y, Yue W, et al. Prevalence and clinical predictors of cognitive impair-
ment in individuals aged 80 years and older in rural China. Dement Geriatr Cogn
Disord 2013;36:171–178.
29.
Guaita A, Vaccaro R, Davin A, et al. Influence of socio-demographic features and
apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 expression on the prevalence of dementia and cognitive
134
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 impairment in a population of 70-74-year olds: the InveCe.Ab study. Arch Gerontol
Geriatr 2015;60:334–343.
30.
Anttila T, Helkala E, Viitanen M, et al. Alcohol drinking in middle age and subsequent
risk of mild cognitive impairment and dementia in old age: a prospective population
based study. BMJ 2004;329:539–542.
31.
Barcelos-Ferreira R, Bottino C. Prevalence of amnestic mild cognitive impairment in
depressed and nondepressed elderly Brazilian community residents. Alzheimers
Dement 2014;10(suppl):P907.
32.
De Ronchi D, Palmer K, Pioggiosi P, et al. The combined effect of age, education, and
stroke on dementia and cognitive impairment no dementia in the elderly. Dement
Geriatr Cogn Disord 2007;24:266–273.
33.
Ding D, Zhao Q, Guo Q, et al. Prevalence of mild cognitive impairment in an urban
community in China: a cross-sectional analysis of the Shanghai Aging Study. Alz-
heimers Dement 2015;11:300–309.e302.
34.
Gavrila D, Antunez C, Tormo MJ, et al. Prevalence of dementia and cognitive im-
pairment in Southeastern Spain: the Ariadna study. Acta Neurol Scand 2009;120:
300–307.
35.
Hilal S, Ikram MK, Saini M, et al. Prevalence of cognitive impairment in Chinese:
Epidemiology of Dementia in Singapore study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2013;
84:686–692.
36.
Kivipelto M, Helkala E, Hanninen T, et al. Midlife vascular risk factors and late-life mild
cognitive impairment: a population-based study. Neurology 2001;56:1683–1689.
37.
Lee SB, Kim KW, Youn JC, et al. Prevalence of mild cognitive impairment and its
subtypes are influenced by the application of diagnostic criteria: results from the
Korean Longitudinal Study on Health and Aging (KLoSHA). Dement Geriatr Cogn
Disord 2009;28:23–29.
38.
Li X, Ma C, Zhang J, et al; on behalf of the Beijing Ageing Grain Rejuvenation
Initiative. Prevalence of and potential risk factors for mild cognitive impairment
in community-dwelling residents of Beijing. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013;61:2111–2119.
39.
Miyamoto M, Kodama C, Kinoshita T, et al. Dementia and mild cognitive im-
pairment among non-responders to a community survey. J Clin Neurosci 2009;16:
270–276.
40.
Olazaran J, Valenti M, Frades B, et al. The Vallecas Project: a cohort to identify early
markers and mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci 2015;7:181.
What’s Your Story? Submit a Video to 2018 Neuro Film Festival
Do you have a powerful story about the impacts of brain disease on yourself or a loved one? Are you studying neuroscience in
school or considering neurology as a career? Do you want to help raise awareness of and funding for critical brain disease
research? Or are you simply fascinated by the wonders of the brain? Share your unique story for the 2018 Neuro Film Festival.
Video submission deadline is March 2, 2018. Learn more at NeuroFilmFestival.com.
Neurology in the Spotlight at 2018 Annual Meeting in Los Angeles
Registration is now open for the totally flexible, dynamic 2018 Annual Meeting. We’ll be shining the spotlight on neurology
and what you need to excel in your career. Look for the latest science, education, and networking you won’t find anywhere else
when the biggest names in neurology and neuroscience convene in Los Angeles April 21 through 27. Learn more and register
now at AAN.com/view/AM18.
Neurology.org/N Offers Important Information to Patients and Their Families
The Neurology® Patient Page provides:
• A critical review of ground-breaking discoveries in neurologic research that are written especially for patients and their families
• Up-to-date patient information about many neurologic diseases
• Links to additional information resources for neurologic patients
All Neurology Patient Page articles can be easily downloaded and printed, and may be reproduced to distribute for educational purposes.
Click on the ‘Patients’ link on the home page (Neurology.org/N) for a complete index of Patient Pages.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 3 | January 16, 2018
135
Copyright     201  American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
8
dªfdr
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004826
2018;90;126-135 Published Online before print December 27, 2017
Neurology 
Ronald C. Petersen, Oscar Lopez, Melissa J. Armstrong, et al. 
American Academy of Neurology
Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of the 
Practice guideline update summary: Mild cognitive impairment: Report of the
This information is current as of December 27, 2017
Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/90/3/126.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Supplementary Material
 
826.DC2
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2018/12/07/WNL.0000000000004
 
826.DC1
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2018/01/11/WNL.0000000000004
Supplementary material can be found at: 
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/90/3/126.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 38 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at: 
Citations
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/90/3/126.full##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/mci_mild_cognitive_impairment
MCI (mild cognitive impairment)
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_cognitive_disorders_dementia
All Cognitive Disorders/Dementia
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
Neurology. All rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright Copyright © 2017 American Academy of 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
