 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
30 
MMWR / January 22, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On January 19, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
CDC has developed interim guidelines for health care pro-
viders in the United States caring for pregnant women during 
a Zika virus outbreak. These guidelines include recommenda-
tions for pregnant women considering travel to an area with 
Zika virus transmission and recommendations for screening, 
testing, and management of pregnant returning travelers. 
Updates on areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission are 
available online (http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/). 
Health care providers should ask all pregnant women about 
recent travel. Pregnant women with a history of travel to an 
area with Zika virus transmission and who report two or more 
symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease (acute onset of 
fever, maculopapular rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis) during 
or within 2 weeks of travel, or who have ultrasound findings 
of fetal microcephaly or intracranial calcifications, should 
be tested for Zika virus infection in consultation with their 
state or local health department. Testing is not indicated for 
women without a travel history to an area with Zika virus 
transmission. In pregnant women with laboratory evidence of 
Zika virus infection, serial ultrasound examination should be 
considered to monitor fetal growth and anatomy and referral 
to a maternal-fetal medicine or infectious disease specialist with 
expertise in pregnancy management is recommended. There is 
no specific antiviral treatment for Zika virus; supportive care 
is recommended.
Zika virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus transmitted primar-
ily by Aedes aegypti mosquitoes (1,2). These vectors also trans-
mit dengue and chikungunya virus and are found throughout 
much of the Americas, including parts of the United States. 
An estimated 80% of persons infected with Zika virus are 
asymptomatic (2,3). Symptomatic disease is generally mild 
and characterized by acute onset of fever, maculopapular rash, 
arthralgia, or nonpurulent conjunctivitis. Symptoms usually 
last from several days to 1 week. Severe disease requiring hospi-
talization is uncommon, and fatalities are rare. Guillain-Barré 
syndrome has been reported in patients following suspected 
Zika virus infection (4–6).
Pregnant women can be infected with Zika virus in any 
trimester (4,7,8). The incidence of Zika virus infection in 
pregnant women is not currently known, and data on pregnant 
women infected with Zika virus are limited. No evidence exists to 
suggest that pregnant women are more susceptible to Zika virus 
infection or experience more severe disease during pregnancy.
Maternal-fetal transmission of Zika virus has been docu-
mented throughout pregnancy (4,7,8). Although Zika virus 
RNA has been detected in the pathologic specimens of fetal 
losses (4), it is not known if Zika virus caused the fetal losses. 
Zika virus infections have been confirmed in infants with 
microcephaly (4), and in the current outbreak in Brazil, a 
marked increase in the number of infants born with micro-
cephaly has been reported (9). However, it is not known how 
many of the microcephaly cases are associated with Zika virus 
infection. Studies are under way to investigate the association 
of Zika virus infection and microcephaly, including the role 
of other contributory factors (e.g., prior or concurrent infec-
tion with other organisms, nutrition, and environment). The 
full spectrum of outcomes that might be associated with Zika 
virus infections during pregnancy is unknown and requires 
further investigation.
Recommendations for Pregnant Women 
Considering Travel to an Area of Zika Virus 
Transmission
Because there is neither a vaccine nor prophylactic medica-
tions available to prevent Zika virus infection, CDC recom-
mends that all pregnant women consider postponing travel 
to areas where Zika virus transmission is ongoing (10). If a 
pregnant woman travels to an area with Zika virus transmis-
sion, she should be advised to strictly follow steps to avoid 
mosquito bites (11,12). Mosquitoes that spread Zika virus 
bite both indoors and outdoors, mostly during the daytime; 
therefore, it is important to ensure protection from mosquitoes 
throughout the entire day (13). Mosquito prevention strategies 
include wearing long-sleeved shirts and long pants, using U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)–registered insect 
repellents, using permethrin-treated clothing and gear, and 
staying and sleeping in screened-in or air-conditioned rooms. 
When used as directed on the product label, insect repellents 
containing DEET, picaridin, and IR3535 are safe for pregnant 
women (14,15). Further guidelines for using insect repellents 
are available online (http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/avoid-
bug-bites) (11,15).
Interim Guidelines for Pregnant Women During a Zika Virus Outbreak — 
United States, 2016
Emily E. Petersen, MD1; J. Erin Staples, MD, PhD2; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD3; Marc Fischer, MD2; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH1; 
William M. Callaghan, MD1; Denise J. Jamieson, MD1
                                Please note: Updated guidance has been published. To view the update, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / January 22, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE. Interim guidance: testing algorithm*,†,§ for a pregnant woman with history of travel to an area¶ with Zika virus transmission, with or 
without clinical illness** consistent with Zika virus disease
 * Availability of Zika virus testing is limited; consult your state or local health department to facilitate testing. Tests include Zika virus reverse transcription–polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Zika virus immunoglobulin M (IgM) and neutralizing antibodies on serum specimens. Given the overlap of symptoms and endemic 
areas with other viral illnesses, evaluate for possible dengue or chikungunya virus infection.
 † Laboratory evidence of maternal Zika virus infection: 1) Zika virus RNA detected by RT-PCR in any clinical specimen; or 2) positive Zika virus IgM with confirmatory 
neutralizing antibody titers that are ≥4-fold higher than dengue virus neutralizing antibody titers in serum. Testing would be considered inconclusive if Zika virus 
neutralizing antibody titers are <4-fold higher than dengue virus neutralizing antibody titers.
 § Amniocentesis is not recommended until after 15 weeks of gestation. Amniotic fluid should be tested for Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR.
 ¶ Updates on areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission are available online (http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/).
 ** Clinical illness is consistent with Zika virus disease if two or more symptoms (acute onset of fever, maculopapular rash, arthralgia, or conjunctivitis) are present.
Pregnant woman with history of travel 
to an area with Zika virus transmission
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices/
Pregnant woman reports clinical illness 
consistent with Zika virus disease during or 
within 2 weeks of travel
Test for Zika virus infection
Positive or inconclusive test for 
Zika virus infection
Fetal ultrasound to detect 
microcephaly or intracranial 
calcifcations
Ofer amniocentesis for Zika virus 
testing
Negative test(s) for Zika virus infection
Fetal ultrasound to detect microcephaly 
or intracranial calcifcations
Either fnding present
No fndings present
Consider amniocentesis 
for Zika virus testing
Pregnant woman does NOT report clinical illness 
consistent with Zika virus disease during or 
within 2 weeks of travel
Fetal ultrasound to detect microcephaly or 
intracranial calcifcations
Either fnding present
No fndings present
Test pregnant woman for 
Zika virus infection 
Consider amniocentesis 
for Zika virus testing
Consider serial 
ultrasounds to detect 
development of 
microcephaly or 
intracranial calcifcations
Either fnding develops
Recommendations for Pregnant Women with 
History of Travel to an Area of Zika Virus 
Transmission
Health care providers should ask all pregnant women about 
recent travel. Women who traveled to an area with ongoing 
Zika virus transmission during pregnancy should be evaluated 
for Zika virus infection and tested in accordance with CDC 
Interim Guidance (Figure). Because of the similar geographic 
distribution and clinical presentation of Zika, dengue, and chi-
kungunya virus infection, patients with symptoms consistent 
with Zika virus disease should also be evaluated for dengue 
and chikungunya virus infection, in accordance with existing 
guidelines (16,17).
Zika virus testing of maternal serum includes reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing 
for symptomatic patients with onset of symptoms within the 
previous week. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) and neutralizing 
antibody testing should be performed on specimens collected 
≥4 days after onset of symptoms. Cross-reaction with related 
flaviviruses (e.g., dengue or yellow fever) is common with anti-
body testing, and thus it might be difficult to distinguish Zika 
virus infection from other flavivirus infections. Consultation 
with state or local health departments might be necessary to 
assist with interpretation of results (18). Testing of asymptom-
atic pregnant women is not recommended in the absence of 
fetal microcephaly or intracranial calcifications.
Zika virus RT-PCR testing can be performed on amniotic 
fluid (7,9). Currently, it is unknown how sensitive or specific 
this test is for congenital infection. Also, it is unknown if a posi-
tive result is predictive of a subsequent fetal abnormality, and 
if so, what proportion of infants born after infection will have 
abnormalities. Amniocentesis is associated with an overall 0.1% 
risk of pregnancy loss when performed at less than 24 weeks of 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
32 
MMWR / January 22, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
gestation (19). Amniocentesis performed ≥15 weeks of gesta-
tion is associated with lower rates of complications than those 
performed at earlier gestational ages, and early amniocentesis 
(≤14 weeks of gestation) is not recommended (20). Health care 
providers should discuss the risks and benefits of amniocentesis 
with their patients. A positive RT-PCR result on amniotic fluid 
would be suggestive of intrauterine infection and potentially 
useful to pregnant women and their health care providers (20).
For a live birth with evidence of maternal or fetal Zika virus 
infection, the following tests are recommended: histopatho-
logic examination of the placenta and umbilical cord; testing 
of frozen placental tissue and cord tissue for Zika virus RNA; 
and testing of cord serum for Zika and dengue virus IgM 
and neutralizing antibodies. CDC is developing guidelines 
for infants infected by Zika virus. If a pregnancy results in a 
fetal loss in a woman with history of travel to an area of Zika 
virus transmission with symptoms consistent with Zika virus 
disease during or within 2 weeks of travel or findings of fetal 
microcephaly, Zika virus RT-PCR and immunohistochemi-
cal staining should be performed on fetal tissues, including 
umbilical cord and placenta.
There is no commercially available test for Zika virus. Testing 
for Zika virus infection is performed at CDC and several state 
health departments. Health care providers should contact their 
state or local health department to facilitate testing and for 
assistance with interpreting results (4).
How to Treat Pregnant Women with Diagnoses of 
Zika Virus Disease
No specific antiviral treatment is available for Zika virus 
disease. Treatment is generally supportive and can include rest, 
fluids, and use of analgesics and antipyretics (4). Fever should 
be treated with acetaminophen (21). Although aspirin and 
other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are not typically 
used in pregnancy, these medications should specifically be 
avoided until dengue can be ruled out to reduce the risk for 
hemorrhage (4,9,17).
In pregnant a woman with laboratory evidence of Zika 
virus in serum or amniotic fluid, serial ultrasounds should 
be considered to monitor fetal anatomy and growth every 
3–4 weeks. Referral to a maternal-fetal medicine or infectious 
disease specialist with expertise in pregnancy management is 
recommended.
 1Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 2Arboviral Diseases Branch, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 3Office of the 
Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC.
Corresponding author: Denise Jamieson, djj0@cdc.gov, 770-488-6377.
References
 1. Hayes EB. Zika virus outside Africa. Emerg Infect Dis 2009;15:1347–50. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1509.090442.
 2. CDC. Zika virus. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/index.html.
 3. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap 
Island, Federated States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med 2009;360:2536–
43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0805715.
 4. CDC. CDC health advisory: recognizing, managing, and reporting Zika 
virus infections in travelers returning from Central America, South 
America, the Caribbean and Mexico. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://emergency.cdc.gov/
han/han00385.asp.
 5. Oehler E, Watrin L, Larre P
, et al. Zika virus infection complicated by 
Guillain-Barre syndrome—case report, French Polynesia, December 
2013. Euro Surveill 2014;19:4–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-
7917.ES2014.19.9.20720.
 6. Musso D, Nilles EJ, Cao-Lormeau VM. Rapid spread of emerging Zika 
virus in the Pacific area. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014;20:O595–6. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/1469-0691.12707.
 7. Besnard M, Lastere S, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau V, Musso D. Evidence 
of perinatal transmission of Zika virus, French Polynesia, December 
2013 and February 2014. Euro Surveill 2014;19:13–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.13.20751.
 8. Oliveira Melo AS, Malinger G, Ximenes R, Szejnfeld PO, Alves Sampaio 
S, Bispo de Filippis AM. Zika virus intrauterine infection causes fetal 
brain abnormality and microcephaly: tip of the iceberg? Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2016;47:6–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/uog.15831.
 9. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Rapid risk 
assessment. Zika virus epidemic in the Americas: potential association 
with microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Stockholm, Sweden: 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control; 2015. http://ecdc.
europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/zika-virus-americas-association-
with-microcephaly-rapid-risk-assessment.pdf.
 
10. CDC. Travelers’ health. CDC issues interim travel guidance related to 
Zika virus for 14 countries and territories in Central and South America 
and the Caribbean. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, CDC; 2016. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices.
 
11. CDC. Travelers’ health: avoid bug bites. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2013. http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/
travel/page/avoid-bug-bites.
 
12. CDC. Zika virus: prevention. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/prevention/
index.html.
 
13. Schaffner F
, Mathis A. Dengue and dengue vectors in the WHO European 
region: past, present, and scenarios for the future. Lancet Infect Dis 
2014;14:1271–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)70834-5.
 
14. CDC. West Nile virus: insect repellent use & safety. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.
cdc.gov/westnile/faq/repellent.html.
 
15. CDC. 
T
ravelers’ 
health: 
protection 
against 
mosquitoes, 
ticks, 
& 
other 
arthropods. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. 
http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2016/the-pre-travel-consultation/
protection-against-mosquitoes-ticks-other-arthropods.
 
16. CDC. Chikungunya virus: clinical evaluation & disease. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://
www.cdc.gov/chikungunya/hc/clinicalevaluation.html.
 
17. World Health Organization. Dengue: guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, 
prevention and control. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2009. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44188/1/9789241547871_eng.pdf.
 
18. CDC. Zika virus. For health care providers: diagnostic testing. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://
www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/diagnostic.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / January 22, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 2 
33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
19. Akolekar R, Beta J, Picciarelli G, Ogilvie C, D’Antonio F. Procedure-
related risk of miscarriage following amniocentesis and chorionic villus 
sampling: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2015;45:16–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/uog.14636.
 
20. American Academy of Pediatrics/American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists. Guidelines for perinatal care. 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, 
IL: American Academy of Pediatrics/American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists; 2012.
 
21. Rasmussen SA, Kissin DM, Yeung LF, et al.; Pandemic Influenza and 
Pregnancy Working Group. Preparing for influenza after 2009 H1N1: 
special considerations for pregnant women and newborns. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2011;204(Suppl 1):S13–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ajog.2011.01.048.
