 Regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism in health and disease
Max C. Petersen1,2, Daniel F. Vatner1, and Gerald I. Shulman1,2,3
1Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine
2Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, 
USA
Abstract
The liver is crucial for the maintenance of normal glucose homeostasis — it produces glucose 
during fasting and stores glucose postprandially. However, these hepatic processes are 
dysregulated in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus, and this imbalance contributes to 
hyperglycaemia in the fasted and postprandial states. Net hepatic glucose production is the 
summation of glucose fluxes from gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, glycogen synthesis, 
glycolysis and other pathways. In this Review, we discuss the in vivo regulation of these hepatic 
glucose fluxes. In particular, we highlight the importance of indirect (extrahepatic) control of 
hepatic gluconeogenesis and direct (hepatic) control of hepatic glycogen metabolism. We also 
propose a mechanism for the progression of subclinical hepatic insulin resistance to overt fasting 
hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Insights into the control of hepatic gluconeogenesis by 
metformin and insulin and into the role of lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance in modifying 
gluconeogenic and net hepatic glycogen synthetic flux are also discussed. Finally, we consider the 
therapeutic potential of strategies that target hepatosteatosis, hyperglucagonaemia and adipose 
lipolysis.
Hepatic glucose production (HGP) accounts for ~90% of endogenous glucose production1, 
and it is crucial for systemic glucose homeostasis2. Net HGP is the summation of fluxes 
from gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, glycogen synthesis, glycolysis and other pathways. 
In the fasted state, the liver provides glucose to maintain euglycaemia and fuel obligate 
glucose-consuming cell types, such as neurons, red blood cells and renal medullary cells3. 
Postprandially, the liver contributes to normal glucose tolerance4. The liver contributes to the 
disposal of enteral glucose loads by increasing the rate of glycogen synthesis and 
Correspondence to G.I.S. gerald.shulman@yale.edu. 
Author contributions
All authors contributed to all aspects of the preparation of the article. The order of authorship and contribution is M.C.P., D.F.V. and 
G.I.S.
Competing interests statement
M.C.P. and D.F.V. declare no competing interests. G.I.S. serves on scientific advisory boards for Merck, Novo Nordisk, Celgene, 
Aegerion and AstraZeneca, receives investigator-initiated support from Gilead Sciences, Inc., and is an inventor on Yale patents for 
liver-targeted mitochondrial uncoupling agents for the treatment of NAFLD, NASH, type 2 diabetes and related metabolic disorders.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2017 October ; 13(10): 572–587. doi:10.1038/nrendo.2017.80.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suppressing hepatic glucose output; these result in a net switch from hepatic glucose output 
to hepatic glucose uptake2. The suppression of hepatic glucose output involves the 
suppression of hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. As both glycogenolysis and 
gluconeogenesis contribute to HGP in humans that have fasted for less than 24 h (REF.5), 
knowledge of the mechanisms that mediate the postprandial suppression of both processes is 
relevant to understanding the hyperglycaemia observed in diabetes mellitus. Net hepatic 
glucose uptake, as measured by splanchnic arteriovenous balance and tracer methods, is 
estimated to be approximately one-third of a moderate enteral glucose load in humans and 
dogs2,4,6–9. However, the liver also contributes to the systemic disposal of an enteral glucose 
load through the suppression of glucose output, thus facilitating the consumption of residual 
exogenous glucose by extrahepatic tissues, such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.
Key regulators of hepatic glucose metabolism act through diverse mechanisms. For example, 
HGP is regulated by the provision of substrates, such as glucose or glycerol; allosteric 
control by metabolites, such as acetyl-CoA, glucose and glucose-6-phosphate; the balance of 
hormones, including insulin, glucagon, catecholamines and corticosteroids; and cellular 
redox state, which can be modified by treatment with metformin. This list is not 
comprehensive, which highlights the complexity of the physiological regulation of HGP. In 
addition, the processes that contribute to net HGP, including glycogen synthesis, 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, are regulated by independent mechanisms10–12. As a 
result of this complexity, hepatic glucose uptake is maximally stimulated by conditions that 
mimic the postprandial state, such as portal venous hyperglycaemia and 
hyperinsulinaemia8,13. Of note, the ‘gold-standard’ test of peripheral and hepatic insulin 
sensitivity — the hyperinsulinaemic–euglycaemic clamp technique14 — fails to 
recreate the postprandial hepatic sinusoidal milieu. For example, maintaining euglycaemia 
rather than achieving portal venous hyper glycaemia does not promote net hepatic glycogen 
synthesis2. Furthermore, the infusion of insulin through a peripheral catheter decreases the 
normal insulin concentration gradient between the portal vein and systemic vein (normally 
approximately threefold higher relative to the concentration in the portal vein)15. 
Consequently, for hyperinsulinaemic–euglycaemic clamps that only increase peripheral 
insulin concentration by approximately threefold, the insulin level that is detected by the 
liver will not change. These limitations must be considered in studies of hepatic glucose 
metabolism using the hyperinsulinaemic–euglycaemic clamp.
This Review aims to detail both the established mechanistic knowledge and newer insights 
regarding the regulation of HGP in health and in diabetes mellitus. We begin by discussing 
lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance, which is one of the primary pathophysiological 
processes that are involved in the dysregulation of hepatic glucose metabolism in type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM). We then consider elements of the regulation of hepatic 
gluconeogenesis and hepatic glycogen metabolism, and use this knowledge to propose a 
unified framework for understanding hepatic insulin action. Finally, we highlight some of 
the therapeutic implications of these advances.
Petersen et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hepatosteatosis and insulin resistance
Although both insulin and glucose are required for net hepatic glucose uptake, insulin alone 
suppresses HGP in a dose-dependent manner16,17. In individuals with T2DM, the rate of 
HGP is increased under basal physiological conditions, and insulin-dependent suppression 
of HGP is impaired at both physiological and modest supra physiological plasma levels of 
insulin3,18,19. Although the insulin-dependent suppression of HGP has several physiological 
components (see below), impaired suppression of HGP is generally considered to represent 
hepatic insulin resistance. Accordingly, the suppression of HGP is widely used in 
mechanistic studies as a measure of hepatic insulin action20. Impaired suppression of HGP is 
reproducibly associated with increased intra hepatic triglyceride (IHTG) content, which is a 
hallmark of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). IHTG content is a better predictor of 
hepatic insulin resistance than visceral adiposity or BMI in individuals without diabetes 
mellitus and with obesity21, and interventions that decrease IHTG content are associated 
with the reversal of hepatic insulin resistance in humans with NAFLD and rodent models of 
this disease20,22–26. Hepatic levels of diacylglycerol — the penultimate intermediate in the 
triglyceride synthesis pathway — have been proposed to mediate lipid-induced hepatic 
insulin resistance27. In the four human studies that have measured hepatic diacylglycerol 
content and hepatic insulin sensitivity, diacylglycerol content was strongly correlated with 
hepatic insulin resistance in all four, whereas other potential mediators of hepatic insulin 
resistance (such as ceramides) showed an inconsistent relationship21,28–30. An increase in 
the level of hepatic diacylglycerol activates protein kinase Cε (PKCε), which impairs the 
tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor (INSR)31,32 through inhibitory 
phosphorylation of INSR at Thr1160; mice homozygous for a Thr1150Ala (the homologous 
residue to human Thr1160) mutation in Insr were protected from lipid-induced hepatic 
insulin resistance33.
Hepatic insulin resistance is also associated with other abnormalities that might contribute to 
dysregulated glucose metabolism. For example, the progression of NAFLD to liver fibrosis 
and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is common, and is associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality34. The increased deposition of extra cellular matrix (ECM) due to 
high-fat diet (HFD)-induced hepatic fibrosis results in interactions between the ECM and 
mediators of insulin signalling, such as AKT, through the scaffolding pseudokinase integrin-
linked protein kinase (ILK)35. The liver-specific deletion of Ilk protected mice from HFD-
induced hepatic steatosis, and therefore from HFD-induced hepatic insulin resistance, 
hinting at a bidirectional relationship between fibrosis and hepatic lipid deposition in this 
model35.
Improvements in our understanding of the regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism and of 
hepatic insulin resistance might inform potential therapeutic strategies for normalizing 
hepatic glucose production in T2DM. The physiological and pathophysiological regulation 
of hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogen metabolism are examined below.
Petersen et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Control of hepatic gluconeogenesis
Gluconeogenesis contributes approximately half of the total HGP in humans following an 
overnight fast and is primarily responsible for the increase in fasting HGP in individuals 
with T2DM5,19,36–39. Major gluconeogenic precursors, including lactate, alanine and 
glycerol, are subject to diverse regulatory mechanisms. Below, we consider the recent 
progress in our understanding of gluconeogenic regulation (FIG. 1).
Indirect control of hepatic gluconeogenesis by lipolysis
Indirect control (that is, non-hepatocyte-autonomous control) of HGP was first hypothesized 
to occur more than half a century ago by Levine and Fritz40. It is now clear that multiple 
indirect mechanisms contribute to the physiological regulation of HGP. For example, insulin 
strongly regulates the secretion of glucagon from pancreatic α-cells, and the loss of this 
paracrine mode of regulation contributes to the development of hyperglucagonaemia and 
increased HGP in diabetes mellitus41,42. HGP is also indirectly regulated by the products of 
lipolysis — glycerol and nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA). Progress in this field accelerated 
when investigators began to compare the suppression of HGP during portal venous versus 
peripheral venous insulin infusions. In an early canine study, these modes of infusion 
achieved similar peripheral concentrations of insulin but markedly different portal 
concentrations of insulin; however, both methods of infusion resulted in similar magnitudes 
of HGP suppression43. In healthy humans, portal and peripheral venous infusions achieved 
similar portal insulin concentrations and different peripheral insulin concentrations, and 
revealed that individuals who had the highest peripheral insulin concentrations also 
displayed the greatest degree of HGP suppression44. Although a specific increase in portal 
venous insulin levels also caused the suppression of HGP in dogs45 and humans44, a role for 
the indirect control of HGP by insulin was apparent46. Attention quickly turned to the role of 
lipolytic products (NEFA and glycerol) in the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis. In 
humans, low-dose infusion of the lipid emulsion Intralipid attenuated fasting-induced 
decreases in gluconeogenesis, which indicates that NEFA and/or glycerol have a 
physiological effect on gluconeogenesis47. Furthermore, low-dose infusion of an Intralipid 
and heparin mixture to prevent insulin-mediated decreases in plasma levels of NEFA 
abolished the enhanced suppression of HGP observed with peripheral infusion compared 
with equimolar tolbutamide-stimulated portal insulin secretion in humans48. Insulin-
dependent suppression of HGP was also impaired by this ‘fatty acid clamp’ in dogs49,50, 
which implicates insulin-mediated suppression of lipolysis as a mediator of insulin-
dependent suppression of HGP.
Additional studies have advanced the hypothesis that the control of hepatic gluconeogenesis 
by lipolysis involves the conversion of glycerol to glucose, and, quantitatively, the acetyl-
CoA-mediated allosteric activation of pyruvate carboxylase51–53. Conceptually, the effect of 
lipolysis to increase hepatic gluconeogenesis from glycerol is mechanistically 
straightforward; it involves a ‘substrate push’ mechanism, in which increased substrate 
availability drives an increase in the formation of product54. However, the mechanism by 
which an increased turnover and oxidation of fatty acids might drive gluconeogenesis from 
pyruvate cannot be explained by a ‘substrate push’ mechanism, as acetyl-CoA and acetate, 
Petersen et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the products of β-oxidation of fatty acids, are not gluconeogenic substrates; they do not 
contribute net carbon to gluconeogenesis. Instead, fatty acids can activate hepatic 
gluconeogenesis by increasing mitochondrial levels of acetyl CoA and, consequently, by 
allosterically activating pyruvate carboxylase, as was described in the 1960s52,55–57. Indeed, 
hepatic concentrations of acetyl-CoA and pyruvate carboxylase activity were increased in rat 
models of insulinopenic diabetic ketoacidosis and suppressed following pharmacological 
inhibition of lipolysis52,53. These concepts were then extended to the normal physiological 
suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis by insulin. Infusion of insulin in fasted rats rapidly 
and markedly suppressed plasma concentrations of NEFA and glycerol, which was 
accompanied by decreases in hepatic acetyl-CoA concentration and HGP51. Functionally 
blocking the insulin-dependent suppression of lipolysis using acetate and glycerol infusions 
that were calibrated to match basal hepatic levels of acetyl-CoA and rates of whole-body 
glycerol turnover completely prevented insulin-mediated suppression of HGP51. 
Importantly, these studies were carried out in fasted rats that had minimal hepatic glycogen 
stores; therefore, insulin-dependent suppression of HGP solely reflected the suppression of 
gluconeogenesis.
Further evidence for this indirect mechanism of gluconeogenic suppression was provided by 
studies in rodents with genetic defects in hepatocellular insulin signalling. Mice in which 
Akt1, Akt2, and Forkhead box O1 (Foxo1) — genes that encode three crucial effectors of 
hepatocellular insulin action — were knocked out behaved similarly to wild-type mice, 
suppressing HGP normally in hyperinsulinaemic–euglycaemic clamp studies but showing 
increased HGP when acetate and glycerol infusions were superimposed on the clamp51,58. 
Moreover, rats in which Insr was ablated in liver and white adipose tissue (WAT) by 
antisense oligonucleotides regained the ability to suppress HGP in an insulin-dependent 
manner when adipose lipolysis was pharmacologically blocked51. This finding is consistent 
with other studies in mice that reported that the ablation of hepatic Insr does not prevent the 
insulin-dependent suppression of HGP59, and that liver-specific rescue of Insr expression 
does not restore acute insulin-dependent suppression of HGP60. These results demonstrate 
that hepatic insulin signalling is not essential for the suppression of HGP by insulin in an 
overnight fasted rodent, which is depleted of hepatic glycogen and is mostly dependent on 
hepatic gluconeogenesis. Overall, substantial data point to a crucial role for the inhibition of 
adipose lipolysis, and resultant decreases in the turnover of NEFA and glycerol, in the acute 
insulin-mediated suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Whether the impaired lipolytic control of hepatic gluconeogenesis contributes to the increase 
in HGP that is associated with T2DM is unclear. Humans who have poorly controlled T2DM 
(fasting plasma glucose >250 mg dl−1) have higher plasma concentrations of NEFA than 
healthy controls throughout the day, and increased plasma concentrations of NEFA are an 
independent predictor of incident T2DM61–67. Insulin-dependent suppression of glycerol 
turnover, which is a readout of lipolytic flux, is impaired in individuals who have insulin 
resistance, with or without diabetes mellitus68–71. The rates of glycerol turnover and of 
gluconeogenesis from glycerol are also increased in overnight fasted humans with 
T2DM72,73. Although these data are largely correlative, they suggest that chronic increases 
in the rate of lipolysis might promote an increased rate of hepatic gluconeogenesis in T2DM. 
Of note, the plasma turnover of β-hydroxybutyrate might be a non-invasive surrogate 
Petersen et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 biomarker for hepatic concentrations of acetyl-CoA74. This method might be useful for 
human studies that examine the lipolytic control of hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis by metformin
The biguanide compound metformin is used as a first-line therapy for T2DM75, and acts 
primarily through the suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis76,77. However, the molecular 
mechanism that underlies this effect remains a subject of active investigation. Perhaps the 
best-studied potential mechanism of metformin action is the stimulatory phosphorylation of 
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) at Thr172 (REF.78). This mechanism was supported 
by studies in mice with a liver-specific deletion of the gene that encodes serine/threonine 
liver kinase B1 (LKB1; also known as STK11), which phosphorylates AMPK at Thr172; 
these mice were refractory to metformin therapy and displayed substantial transcriptional 
dysregulation as a result of chronic inactivation of AMPK79. The link between metformin, 
AMPK and gluconeogenesis has been proposed to involve both the AMPK-mediated 
disassembly of the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB)–CREB-binding 
protein (CBP)–CREB-regulated transcription co-activator 2 (CRTC2) transcriptional 
complex, which positively regulates the expression of the gluconeogenic genes 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (Pck1) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6pc)80, and 
improvements in lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance81. However, metformin continues 
to inhibit glucose production in Ampk-knockout primary mouse hepatocytes and improves 
glucose tolerance in Ampk-knockout mice to a similar extent to wild-type control mice82. 
Furthermore, metformin suppressed glucose production in mouse hepatocytes that 
overexpressed the gluconeogenic enzymes cytosolic PCK1 and G6PC, which challenges the 
hypothesis that transcriptional mechanisms are essential for the action of metformin82. In 
addition, both galegine (a related guanide compound) and metformin suppressed hepatic 
gluconeogenesis within 20 min of intravenous infusion in rats, a time frame that is 
inconsistent with that of transcriptional mechanisms83. In hepatocytes, the activation of 
AMPK in response to guanide and biguanide compounds is well established78,80,82,84–86 and 
occurs rapidly following the intravenous administration of galegine83. However, 
interestingly, pharmacological activation of AMPK with A-769662 (which activates AMPK 
to a similar extent to galegine) did not suppress HGP in awake hepatic glycogen-depleted 
rats83. Thus, several lines of evidence have cast doubt on the necessity of AMPK activation 
for the metformin-dependent suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis, warranting the 
investigation of alternative mechanisms of action.
An alternative but related hypothesis posits that metformin inhibits the activity of 
mitochondrial complex I and thus alters the adenine nucleotide energy charge (that is, the 
cellular [AMP]:[ATP] and [ADP]:[ATP] ratios)87. An increase in the [AMP]:[ATP] ratio 
would activate AMPK and inhibit the activity of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, which is a key 
gluconeogenic enzyme88. However, some reports suggest that metformin-dependent 
inhibition of mitochondrial complex I is observed only at suprapharmacological 
concentrations (millimolar) of metformin, in contrast to the clinically relevant plasma 
concentration range of 50–100 μM, which is observed in patients who take 2 g of metformin 
daily83,87. Moreover, many studies disagree on whether pharmacologically relevant 
concentrations of biguanides can increase intracellular levels of AMP83,84,89. In one study89, 
Petersen et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 long-term treatment of mouse hepatocytes with physiologically relevant biguanide 
concentrations increased intra cellular levels of AMP, and decreased intracellular levels of 
cAMP (consistent with the allosteric inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by AMP); this decrease 
in the concentration of cAMP was hypothesized to reduce HGP by antagonizing the action 
of glucagon. However, other studies in mouse hepatocytes84 and rats83 have not observed a 
link between metformin-dependent suppression of HGP and changes in intracellular 
concentrations of cAMP. Furthermore, metformin did not inhibit glucagon-stimulated HGP 
in a randomized placebo-controlled double-blind trial in humans with prediabetes90.
Metformin is less potent than other related guanide and biguanide compounds, such as 
galegine and phenformin91. In particular, phenformin was withdrawn from clinical use 
owing to adverse effects, including lactic acidosis91. However, the observation that acute 
galegine treatment decreased hepatic gluconeogenesis and increased plasma concentrations 
of lactate in rats within 30 min of administration provided an initial clue to a third proposed 
mechanism for the action of metformin83. In rats, metformin increased the cytoplasmic 
redox state and decreased the mitochondrial redox state, which suggests that metformin 
inhibits one of the metabolic shuttles that are involved in equilibrating cytoplasmic and 
mitochondrial redox states83. Indeed, metformin was shown to non-competitively inhibit 
mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (mGPD) in isolated hepatocytes with a 
clinically relevant Ki of ~50 μM83. An important distinguishing feature of this mechanism, 
in contrast to all previous proposed mechanisms, is that inhibition of mGPD was predicted 
to impair gluconeogenesis only from redox-dependent substrates: lactate, as lactate 
dehydrogenase requires the reduction of NAD+, and glycerol, as mGPD produces the 
gluconeogenic precursor dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP)83. This prediction was 
confirmed in cultured hepatocytes that were treated with metformin or small interfering 
RNA (siRNA) targeting the mGPD transcript83. Consistent with this model, knockdown of 
hepatic mGPD using antisense oligonucleotides phenocopied metformin treatment in rats, 
and Gpd2-knockout mice displayed reduced HGP during fasting that was unaltered by 
treatment with metformin83, which is consistent with a previous report of decreased fasting 
glycaemia in Gpd2-knockout mice92. As the importance of the glycerol-3-phosphate shuttle 
in gluconeogenesis in the human liver is unclear93,94, studies in humans are required to 
determine whether metformin regulates gluconeogenesis by modulating cellular redox state. 
A unique testable prediction of the redox hypo thesis is that treatment with metformin 
should decrease gluconeogenesis from lactate and glycerol, but not from pyruvate, alanine or 
DHAP.
Hormonal control of hepatic gluconeogenesis
Glucagon and catecholamines positively regulate hepatic gluconeogenesis through cAMP-
dependent activation of protein kinase A (PKA)95. Glucagon action is essential for 
hyperglycaemia in rodent models of T2DM; db/db diabetic mice that lack the glucagon 
receptor (Gcgr) did not develop hyperinsulinaemia or hyperglycaemia96. Glucagon and 
catecholamines stimulate net hepatic gluconeogenic flux in the acute setting by promoting 
the phosphorylation of PKA, inhibition of the liver-type isozyme of pyruvate kinase (L-PK; 
with glucagon only)97 and phosphorylation of the bifunctional enzyme 6-phosphofructo-2-
kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 2 (PFK2/FBPase-2)98 at Ser36. Phosphorylation of 
Petersen et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PFK2/FBPase-2 favours its phosphatase activity, enabling it to decrease the production of 
fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, an allosteric inhibitor of the gluconeogenic enzyme fructose-2,6-
bisphosphatase 1 (FBPase-1)98,99; phosphorylated PFK2/FBPase-2 also facilitates the 
nuclear translocation and consequent functional inactivation of glucokinase (GCK)100. 
These mechanisms might also underlie the stimulatory effect of asprosin (an adipose-derived 
peptide hormone that activates hepatocellular cAMP–PKA signalling) on HGP101. The 
observation that asprosin stimulated HGP in mice that were fasted for 18 h (REF.10) 
suggests that asprosin stimulates gluconeogenesis; however, cAMP–PKA-dependent 
stimulation of hepatic glycogenolysis (see below) would also be expected to contribute to 
HGP in non-fasted mice.
By contrast, the acute and direct negative control of gluconeogenesis by insulin is not 
prominent in vivo11,102. High concentrations of insulin can counteract cAMP-mediated 
effects, such as the phosphorylation of L-PK and PFK2/FBPase-2, within 30 min 
(REFS97,102,103); however, the insulin-dependent regulation of gluconeogenesis primarily 
occurs through slow transcriptional mechanisms. The best-characterized pathway for 
insulin-dependent transcriptional control of gluconeogenic gene expression involves 
members of the FOXO family of transcription factors (FOXO1, FOXO3a and FOXO4)11. 
FOXO proteins, in concert with the transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α; also known as PPARGC1A), positively 
regulate the expression of PCK1 and G6PC104–107. FOXO proteins are phosphorylated by 
AKT following stimulation with insulin, which induces their nuclear exclusion and 
consequent inactivation106. Gain-of-function or loss-of-function perturbations of the FOXO–
PGC1α axis have marked effects on G6PC and PCK1 protein levels and glycaemia in rodent 
studies105,108,109. However, normalization of hyperglycaemia and re-sensitization of HGP to 
insulin stimulation were observed following the deletion of Foxo1 in mice with liver-specific 
knockout of Insr, which illustrates both the profound consequences of continuous activation 
of FOXO and the dispensability of the FOXO–PGC1α axis for acute insulin-mediated 
suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis110,111. Overall, the place of the FOXO–PGC1α axis 
in the hierarchy of gluconeogenic control mechanisms remains ambiguous. For example, it 
is unclear whether dysregulation of FOXO transcription factors contributes to the increased 
rate of gluconeogenesis observed in T2DM. Rodents that are fed a HFD have hepatic insulin 
resistance but unaltered levels of the gluconeogenic enzymes G6PC and PCK1 (REFS24,51). 
Similarly, the expression levels of G6PC and PCK1 were not altered in humans with 
T2DM112. Available evidence, although limited, does not currently support a central role for 
perturbed gluconeogenic gene transcription in the increased gluconeogenesis involved in 
T2DM.
Glucagon and catecholamines also participate in the slow transcriptional control of 
gluconeogenesis by stimulating the cAMP–PKA-dependent activation of the CREB–CBP–
CRTC2 complex80,113. The key mediator of hormonal control in the CREB–CBP–CRTC2 
module seems to be CRTC2. Similarly to FOXO1, CRTC2 is dephosphorylated and 
localized to the nucleus during fasting113, and is phosphorylated and excluded from the 
nucleus in response to insulin114. The dephosphorylation of CRTC2 during fasting involves 
the PKA-dependent inhibition of the serine/threonine kinase SIK2, which normally 
phosphorylates CRTC2, and the PKA-dependent phosphorylation of inositol-1,4,5-
Petersen et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 trisphosphate receptors (IP3R) with a resultant increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels, which 
activates the CRTC2-specific phosphatase calcineurin115. Crosstalk between the FOXO1 and 
CRTC2 pathways includes the induction of PGC1α expression by CREB113. Consistent with 
this crosstalk, the CREB–CBP–CRTC2 module exerts stronger control over the expression 
of G6pc during the first 6 h of fasting in mice, whereas the FOXO1–PGC1α module has a 
larger role in stimulating G6pc transcription over longer durations (~18 h) of fasting in 
mice116. As predicted, Crtc2–knockout mice had fasting hypoglycaemia and mice with 
adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated overexpression of constitutively active CRTC2 were 
hyperglycaemic117,118.
Gluconeogenic capacity of the liver
Oscillations in the FOXO- and CREB-regulated expression of gluconeogenic enzymes have 
been proposed to dictate the ‘gluconeogenic capacity’ of the liver. These transcriptional 
oscillations are probably superimposed on normal circadian oscillations119; the circadian 
clock modulates the activity of CREB (and therefore glucagon and glucocorticoid 
function)120,121. Liver-specific knockout of the circadian clock component aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor translocator-like protein 1 (Bmal1, also known as Arntl) in mice was associated 
with fasting hypoglycaemia; however, this effect was primarily attributable to a marked 
decrease in the expression of glucose transporter 2 (Glut2; also known as Slc2a2) rather than 
changes in gluconeogenic gene transcription122. Interesting associations between the 
circadian control of gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis have been uncovered. Mice with 
hepatic knockout of the gene that encodes histone deacetylase 3 (Hdac3), which regulates 
the circadian rhythm of lipogenesis, rerouted gluconeogenic substrates to lipid storage, 
resulting in modest decreases in fasting glycaemia and improved glucose tolerance123. 
However, interestingly, these alterations in gluconeogenic flux were not associated with 
changes in the expression of G6pc or Pck1 (REF.123). Overall, no direct evidence indicates 
that modest oscillations in the transcription of gluconeogenic genes drive changes in 
gluconeogenic flux — the pyruvate tolerance test, which is used in many studies of 
circadian control of gluconeogenesis, is highly responsive to changes in gluconeogenic 
capacity but might not reflect physiological rates of gluconeogenesis. Indeed, indirect 
evidence suggests that gluconeogenic capacity might not be a major regulator of 
gluconeogenic flux in mice. In one study, a >90% decrease in the expression of Pck1 in mice 
resulted in only a moderate 40% reduction in gluconeogenesis124. Similarly, in G6pc−/− 
mice, adenoviral-mediated restoration of G6pc expression to only 20% of the activity in 
wild-type mice alleviated fasting hypoglycaemia125. These remarkable phenotypes suggest 
that modest oscillations in the expression of Pck1 and G6pc, mediated by insulin, the 
circadian clock, glucagon and other mechanisms, exert limited control of gluconeogenic flux 
in the normal liver; however, compensations, such as the activation of alternative metabolic 
pathways in these mouse models, potentially complicate this simple interpretation.
Neural control of HGP
A role for the central nervous system (CNS) in the regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism 
has been appreciated since the 1850s126, and this subject has experienced a resurgence in 
research in the past few years127,128. Leptin, an adipose-derived hormone that controls 
satiety, acts through several mechanisms to modulate energy balance and hepatic glucose 
Petersen et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 metabolism129. Insulin is transcytosed across the blood– brain barrier130 and can bind to 
INSR on neurons and glial cells131. Neuron-specific deletion of Insr predisposes mice to 
diet-induced obesity and concomitant hepatic insulin resistance, probably through increasing 
appetite132. However, CNS-dependent regulation of hepatic insulin action might occur 
through mechanisms that are independent of energy balance. For example, insulin action in 
hypothalamic nuclei can potently suppress HGP127,133. Hepatic vagotomy might also alter 
hepatic insulin action, although the mechanisms that underlie this are currently unclear134. 
The intracerebroventricular infusion of insulin suppressed HGP in rodents135; however, a 
physiological increase in levels of insulin in the brain achieved through intra-arterial 
infusion did not alter HGP in dogs136,137. Although the physiological mechanisms that link 
insulin action in the brain and liver are unclear, they involve direct sympathetic and 
parasympathetic efferents, as well as the activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal 
axis127,128.
Control of hepatic glycogen metabolism
Hepatic glycogen can be synthesized from glucose directly (glucose to glucose-6-phosphate 
to UDP-glucose to glycogen) or indirectly (glucose to glucose-6-phosphate to pyruvate to 
glucose-6-phosphate to UDP-glucose to glycogen); these pathways contribute similarly to 
glycogen synthesis in the liver138. Net hepatic glycogen deposition depends on the 
coordinated suppression of glycogenolytic flux and the stimulation of glycogen synthetic 
flux. Both glycogenolysis and glycogen synthesis are subject to complex regulatory 
mechanisms; however, generally, a useful simplification is to consider glucose as the 
primary suppressor of hepatic glycogenolysis and insulin as the principal activator of hepatic 
glycogen synthesis in vivo. This paradigm was illustrated in a study that used 13C magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) measurements of hepatic glycogen in healthy individuals 
who had fasted overnight and who were subjected to hyperglycaemia (10 mM glucose), 
hyperinsulinaemia (400 pM insulin), both hyperglycaemia and hyperinsulinaemia, or 
neither10. Endogenous secretion of insulin and glucagon was suppressed using somatostatin. 
Control individuals who were not subjected to hyperglycaemia or hyperinsulinaemia 
exhibited net hepatic glycogenolysis, as expected. Hyperinsulinaemia was required for the 
stimulation of glycogen synthesis but did not suppress glycogenolysis. By contrast, 
hyperglycaemia was required for the suppression of glycogenolysis; consequently, the 
hyperinsulinaemic–hyperglycaemic group achieved maximal hepatic glycogen synthesis10. 
Of note, the degree of hepatic hyperinsulinaemia that was achieved in this study was modest; 
higher concentrations of exogenous insulin might suppress glycogenolysis, as observed in 
cultured human hepatocytes139.
The conclusion that both hyperglycaemia and hyperinsulinaemia are necessary for maximal 
hepatic glycogen synthesis also has implications for the use of hyperinsulinaemic– 
euglycaemic clamps. The action of hepatic insulin during the hyperinsulinaemic– 
euglycaemic clamp is often measured as suppression of HGP; however, suppression of HGP 
has a large extrahepatic component, owing largely to the lipolytic control of 
gluconeogenesis. Insulin-dependent stimulation of hepatic glycogen synthesis would be a 
useful readout of direct hepatic insulin action, but under hyperinsulinaemic–euglycaemic 
conditions both glycogen synthesis and glycogenolysis are active, which results in glycogen 
Petersen et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cycling and attenuated net hepatic glycogen synthesis10. Thus, a hyperinsulinaemic–
hyperglycaemic clamp is necessary to achieve maximal net hepatic glycogen synthesis and, 
accordingly, this technique has been used to measure absolute rates of hepatic glycogen 
synthesis through both direct and indirect glycogen synthesis pathways in rodents33 and 
dogs140. The prevention of lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance in InsrT1150A mice 
(which are insensitive to INSR inhibition by PKCε) was associated with improvements in 
insulin-stimulated hepatic glycogen synthesis compared with HFD-fed wild-type controls 
during hyperinsulinaemic–hyperglycaemic clamp studies33. Although they are infrequently 
used, these in vivo measurements of net hepatic glycogen synthesis probably provide the 
best direct readout of hepatic insulin action.
Insulin, glucagon and glucose regulate hepatic glycogenolysis and glycogen synthesis 
through mechanisms that alter the activity of GCK, glycogen synthase and glycogen 
phosphorylase (FIG. 2).
GCK activity and glycogenesis
The transport of glucose into hepatocytes occurs by facilitated diffusion through GLUT2, 
and, consequently, intrahepatic glucose concentrations parallel those in the plasma. GCK — 
which catalyses the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate — is therefore the 
gatekeeper for glucose metabolism in hepatocytes141,142. GCK strongly regulates hepatic 
glycogen deposition. Transgenic mice that have an extra copy of the Gck displayed more 
than threefold greater hepatic glycogen deposition than wild-type mice during 
hyperglycaemic clamp studies143. Similarly, the glucose intolerance of mice that have liver-
specific deletions of the genes that encode AKT (Akt1−/−/Akt2−/−) is normalized by the 
overexpression of Gck144. Conversely, patients with maturity onset diabetes mellitus of the 
young type 2 (MODY2) — which is caused by loss-of-function mutations in GCK — have 
reduced hepatic glycogen synthesis in the postprandial state, which is attributable to both the 
loss of hepatic GCK activity and a reduction in pancreatic insulin secretion145. GCK activity 
is largely regulated by its subcellular localization. Glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP) 
binds to GCK in the nucleus when cytoplasmic concentrations of glucose are low146 (FIG. 
2a). Glucose induces the dissociation of the GCK–GKRP complex, thus enabling the 
translocation of GCK to the cytosol, where it is active147 (FIG. 2b). Insulin facilitates this 
glucose-induced dissociation of the GCK–GKRP complex and upregulates the expression of 
Gck in rat hepatocytes through unclear AKT-dependent mechanisms147. Conversely, 
glucagon inhibits the dissociation of the GCK–GKRP complex and represses Gck 
expression in rodents147. GCK exerts a high degree of metabolic control over glycogen 
synthesis, and only small increases in cytosolic free GCK are required to stimulate glycogen 
synthesis148.
Glycogen synthase and glycogenesis
Although GCK has a high metabolic control coefficient for glycogen synthesis in the 
hepatocyte, liver glycogen synthase (GYS2) also shares control147. Indeed, the concomitant 
overexpression of both Gck and Gys2 in mouse models enhanced hepatocellular glycogen 
synthesis more than the overexpression of either gene alone141. This shared control of 
glycogen synthesis is probably partly attributable to the GCK-dependent production of 
Petersen et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glucose-6-phosphate, which is the key allosteric activator of GYS2 (REFS141,149). Mice than 
have an Arg582Ala mutation in GYS2, which renders the enzyme insensitive to allosteric 
activation by glucose-6-phosphate, displayed severely impaired hepatic glycogen synthesis 
and unstable GYS2, which highlights the essential role of allostery in mediating the activity 
of GYS2 (REF.150). GYS2 is also regulated by phosphorylation at seven sites; 
phosphorylated GYS2 has a decreased maximum reaction rate (Vmax)151 (FIG. 2a). This 
mode of regulation of GYS2 is complex, as it can be phosphorylated by PKA, PKC 
isoforms, AMPK, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and possibly other kinases151. 
However, site-directed mutagenesis studies indicate that the most important phosphorylation 
site for GYS2 activity is Ser7, which is a substrate of AMPK and PKA152,153; mice with 
adenoviral overexpression of GYS2 with a Ser7Ala mutation displayed increased levels of 
liver glycogen under both fasting and fed conditions154. These mice had markedly improved 
glucose tolerance and lower plasma levels of glucose in the fed state but not in the fasted 
state, which highlights the crucial role of hepatic glycogen synthesis in postprandial glucose 
disposal154. Insulin, which is essential for hepatic glycogen synthase flux in vivo10, was 
long thought to act through the AKT-dependent inhibition of GSK3, which would favour the 
dephosphorylation of GYS2 (REF.155). In fasting–refeeding studies, Akt2−/− mice had 
impaired hepatic glycogen synthesis, which demonstrates the necessity of AKT for insulin-
dependent stimulation of glycogen synthesis; however, Gsk3αSer21Ala/Gsk3βSer9Ala mice 
displayed normal hepatic glycogen metabolism, suggesting that inhibitory phosphorylation 
of GSK3 by AKT is unnecessary for glycogen synthesis156. The mechanism for the insulin-
dependent activation of GYS2 might involve the activation of phosphodiesterase 3B 
(PDE3B) by AKT, which antagonizes the cAMP-mediated phosphorylation of GYS2 (REF.
157) In addition, this process might involve the dephosphorylation of GYS2 by protein 
phosphatase 1 (PP1), which involves targeting subunits of PP1, especially GL (REF.158) 
(FIG. 2b).
Glycogen phosphorylase and glycogenolysis
The stimulation of hepatic glycogenolysis during fasting or adrenergic stimulation occurs 
largely through well-characterized pathways downstream of cAMP– PKA signalling; both 
GYS2 and glycogen phosphorylase are phosphorylated by PKA, which results in the 
coordinated inhibition of GYS2 and activation of glycogen phosphorylase. This elegant 
reciprocal control of glycogen synthesis and glycogenolysis is mediated by the GL targeting 
subunit of PP1, which regulates both GYS2 and glycogen phosphorylase through 
dephosphorylation. The phosphorylated active form of glycogen phosphorylase binds to and 
inhibits PP1-GL, preventing PP1-dependent dephosphorylation and activation of GYS2 
(REF.159); this process prevents futile glycogen cycling (FIG. 2a). Glucose also regulates 
glycogen phosphorylase activity by allosterically binding to glycogen phosphorylase, which 
stabilizes a conformation that enables dephosphorylation and inactivation of the 
enzyme147,160. In this way, glycogen phosphorylase senses plasma levels of glucose to 
ensure that glycogenolysis is halted when glucose is abundant in plasma (FIG. 2b). 
Interestingly, a prediction of this model is that hyperglycaemia should lead to the 
dephosphorylation of glycogen phosphorylase, the release of PP1-GL and the consequent 
dephosphorylation and activation of GYS2; however, in humans, when the release of insulin 
and glucagon was prevented by somatostatin infusion, hyperglycaemia could block hepatic 
Petersen et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glycogenolysis but it could not stimulate hepatic glycogen synthesis10. This finding suggests 
that the role of insulin in stimulating hepatic glycogen synthesis extends beyond its ability to 
promote the PDE-mediated attenuation of glucagon signalling. Therefore, further research is 
required to elucidate the complete mechanistic basis for the regulation of hepatic glycogen 
synthesis by insulin and glucagon.
Understanding hepatic insulin action
A clinically and therapeutically relevant perspective on hepatic glucose metabolism requires 
an understanding of how hepatic glucose fluxes fit together in states of health and disease. 
On the basis of data described in this Review, we attempt to construct a unified framework to 
describe the control of hepatic glucose metabolism by insulin, both in healthy physiological 
states and in the state of metabolic dysfunction that causes T2DM (FIG. 3).
The most important aspect of this framework is to distinguish the direct (cell intrinsic) 
effects of insulin on hepatocytes from the indirect (cell non-autonomous) effects: that is, to 
regard the acute suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis in response to insulin as primarily 
an indirect effect that is mediated by the insulin-dependent inhibition of adipocyte lipolysis, 
and to regard the acute stimulation of net hepatic glycogen metabolism in response to insulin 
as a direct effect that is mediated by the activation of the INSR in hepatocytes. This is a 
simplification: for example, insulin also alters the phosphorylation status of several 
gluconeogenic and glycolytic enzymes (as described above), and suppresses lipolysis in 
hepatocytes. However, as discussed above, physiological data indicate that these 
mechanisms contribute relatively little to the insulin-mediated suppression of 
gluconeogenesis compared with the insulin-mediated inhibition of adipose lipolysis. Insulin-
mediated suppression of adipose lipolysis suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis through two 
main mechanisms: first, it decreases the delivery of NEFA to the liver, which results in an 
acute reduction in hepatic mitochondrial acetyl-CoA levels and a consequent decrease in 
pyruvate carboxylase activity; second, it decreases the turnover of glycerol, which decreases 
hepatic gluconeogenesis from this substrate. Concomitantly, the direct action of insulin in 
the liver, which occurs through insulin receptor signalling, stimulates hepatic glycogen 
synthesis, mostly through the activation of both GCK and glycogen synthase. As noted, 
maximal net hepatic glycogen synthesis also requires hyperglycaemia to inhibit glycogen 
phosphorylase in a glucose-dependent manner.
This framework can be adapted to understand the physiological basis of impaired hepatic 
glucose metabolism in T2DM. Lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance, which involves 
diacylglycerol-dependent activation of PKCε and the resulting inhibitory phosphorylation of 
INSR at Thr1160, would be primarily expected to impair insulin-stimulated hepatic 
glycogen synthesis33. However, lipid-induced hepatocellular insulin resistance would not be 
expected to substantially alter the acute suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis by insulin 
because that process is mostly controlled indirectly. Rather, impaired insulin-dependent 
suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis would be expected to result from adipocyte insulin 
resistance; that is, an inability of the adipocyte to suppress lipolysis following insulin 
stimulation. Although the mechanisms of adipose insulin resistance are incompletely 
Petersen et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 understood, and are beyond the scope of this Review, they probably involve macrophage 
activation and inflammatory signalling, and intrinsic adipocyte defects161,162.
Inflammatory signalling might also drive adipose lipolysis independent of insulin signalling 
and might therefore have implications for understanding the progression of metabolic 
disease from subclinical insulin resistance to overt T2DM. The development of NAFLD is 
an early step in the progression of metabolic disease; most individuals with NAFLD do not 
have T2DM, although the majority of individuals with both obesity and T2DM have 
NAFLD163. Lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance, but not necessarily inflammation-
associated adipose insulin resistance, accompanies NAFLD. Accordingly, lipid-induced 
hepatic insulin resistance might precede impairments in the insulin-mediated suppression of 
gluconeogenesis. Individuals who have isolated hepatic insulin resistance (that is, without 
adipose insulin resistance) would be expected to display fasting euglycaemia, and might 
even show normal suppression of HGP in hyperinsulinaemic–euglycaemic clamp studies, 
owing to the fact that fasted glycogen-depleted individuals are reliant on gluconeogenesis 
for the majority of HGP. We hypothesize that progression to the state of fasting 
hyperglycaemia that defines T2DM involves inflammation-associated lipolysis and 
associated adipose insulin resistance (in addition to β-cell dysfunction). Importantly, there 
are likely to be interrelations between the direct and indirect modes of control of hepatic 
glucose metabolism. For example, the indirect regulation of hepatic NEFA delivery by 
adipose lipolysis might drive hepatic lipid accumulation and therefore impair direct 
hepatocellular insulin action.
This framework incorporates observations from human, dog and rodent studies. It is heavily 
dependent on insights from tracer studies of the integrated physiology of insulin action in 
vivo, without which the indirect effects of insulin would not have been elucidated. 
Importantly, this framework is incomplete; for example, it is focused on the acute effects of 
insulin and does not account for the many relevant transcriptional mechanisms that are 
discussed above, which probably participate in the chronic control of hepatic glucose 
metabolism. However, we believe that this framework might prove to be a useful heuristic 
tool for scientists and clinicians who wish to understand and further probe the complexities 
of hepatic glucose metabolism in physiological states of health and disease, especially those 
who seek to interpret hyperinsulinaemic clamp data in rodents. The framework also has 
therapeutic implications, which we consider below.
Targeting hepatic glucose production
The dysregulated hepatic glucose metabolism in individuals with T2DM is an attractive 
therapeutic target. Three major pathophysiological mechanisms that can be targeted include 
the excessive action of glucagon, lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance and excess adipose 
lipolysis. Hyperglucagonaemia is a hallmark of both T1DM and T2DM, and antagonizing 
the action of glucagon has been remarkably effective at decreasing hyperglycaemia in 
diverse rodent models of diabetes mellitus164. Similarly, the case for targeting lipid-induced 
hepatic insulin resistance is well supported. Weight loss following lifestyle modification 
improves, or even resolves, T2DM in humans, in part, by reversing lipid-induced hepatic 
insulin resistance165. A study that examined the mechanism that underlies these 
Petersen et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 improvements demonstrated that modest weight loss (~8 kg) led to the resolution of NAFLD 
and the normalization of fasting plasma concentrations of glucose. The improvement in 
plasma glucose was attributed to decreases in rates of fasting HGP and gluconeogenesis, and 
increased insulin-mediated suppression of HGP22. The mechanism by which the resolution 
of NAFLD improves the dysregulated hepatic glucose metabolism that is associated with 
T2DM might involve the reversal of INSR inhibition through the inactivation of the 
diacylglycerol–PKCε axis33, and reductions in hepatic acetyl-CoA content that result in 
decreased activity of pyruvate carboxylase45,52. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) 
recommends a target of 5% weight loss through lifestyle interventions for individuals with 
obesity and diabetes mellitus who are ready to lose weight166. However, readiness to lose 
weight is often elusive; the multitude of physiological, societal and psychosocial barriers to 
weight loss frequently render even a 5% long-term weight loss target by lifestyle 
intervention elusive. Therefore, searching for additional therapies that target hepatic steatosis 
and lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance is warranted (FIG. 4).
Glucagon antagonism and HGP
The antagonism of circulating glucagon or of GCGR to reduce excess HGP is a long-
standing and active area of investigation42,167–170. Plasma levels of glucagon are aberrantly 
increased in individuals with T2DM171–174. In addition, animal models of reduced or 
ablated glucagon action show improvements in T2DM96,175,176 (FIG. 4a,b). Although the 
complete prevention of T2DM observed in some of these rodent models contrasts with the 
insulin dependence observed in humans with pancreoprivic diabetes mellitus, the 
marked antidiabetic phenotypes underscore the promise of such anti-glucagon therapeutics. 
Currently, data in humans is limited to three GCGR antagonists, BAY 27–9955 (REF.177), 
MK-0893 (REF.178) and LY2409021 (REFS179,180). BAY 27–9955 inhibited glucagon-
stimulated glucose production in humans177, but no follow-up studies were published. 
MK-0893 improved hyperglycaemia in a human clinical trial, but was associated with 
increases in plasma levels of LDL cholesterol178. In phase I and phase II trials, LY2409021 
improved glycaemic control in patients with T2DM, which was complicated only by a 
modest and reversible increase in the levels of transaminases179,180. One potential caveat of 
anti-glucagon therapies is that, in rodents, glucagon seems to activate peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPARα), which results in an increase in hepatic fatty acid 
oxidation and a decrease in the export of VLDL181. It is unclear whether this aspect of 
glucagon action in rodents translates to human physiology; however, hypertriglyceridaemia 
has not been reported thus far in the human studies of LY2409021 (REFS179,180).
Hepatosteatosis and T2DM
A rational therapeutic approach for the treatment of NAFLD and its sequelae, such as 
NASH, is to increase hepatic energy expenditure and thereby increase hepatic fat oxidation. 
Thyroid hormone receptor-β agonists have been tested preclinically for their ability achieve 
this and, although they can reverse NAFLD, none has been shown to improve the 
suppression of HGP by insulin (in part due to increased adipose lipolysis)182,183. In addition, 
a T3–glucagon conjugate improved glycaemia and NAFLD, without causing the rapid 
development of cardiac hypertrophy and osteopenia observed with T3 alone184; additional 
Petersen et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 studies to evaluate the safety and effects of this conjugate on HGP (which was not evaluated 
in this study184) will help to assess the promise of this class of compounds.
Liver-targeted mitochondrial uncouplers, which can dissipate the inner mitochondrial 
membrane proton gradient in the liver, are another promising class of agents for the 
treatment of NAFLD, NASH and diabetes mellitus. Two modified forms of the 
mitochondrial protonophore 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP), DNP-methyl ether (DNPME) and 
controlled-release mitochondrial protonophore (CRMP), reverse diabetes mellitus, hepatic 
inflammation and hepatic fibrosis in rodent models of T2DM and NASH24,25. Importantly, 
the reversal of hyperglycaemia and hepatic insulin resistance by these drugs was attributed 
to decreases in diacylglycerol-dependent activation of PKCε and decreases in hepatic acetyl-
CoA content24,25 (FIG. 4a,b). Both of these liver-targeted mitochondrial uncoupling agents 
promoted increased energy expenditure exclusively in liver, and, importantly, the reversal of 
diabetes mellitus and NASH in these rodent models was not associated with detectable 
changes in body temperature, whole-body energy expenditure or body weight, which 
minimizes the concerns of toxicity that are inherent to all non-selective mitochondrial 
uncouplers24,25. These studies provide a proof of concept for the development of novel liver-
targeted mitochondrial protonophores to treat NAFLD, NASH and T2DM.
Incretin receptor agonists, and in particular glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) analogues, are 
used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus and obesity, and might be useful for the treatment 
of NAFLD. In a phase II clinical trial in patients with NASH, the histology of NASH was 
resolved more frequently in patients who were treated with the GLP1 analogue liraglutide 
than in patients who were treated with placebo185. In preclinical studies, a novel compound 
agonist of the GLP1, gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) and glucagon receptors improved 
glycaemic control, decreased food intake, increased energy expenditure and reversed 
hepatosteatosis in rodents186. This strategy of mixed agonism, also used in the 
aforementioned glucagon–T3 conjugate, might help to minimize the undesired effects of any 
one hormone (for example, glucagon-mediated hyperglycaemia and T3-mediated 
tachycardia), and thus warrants further exploration184.
Targeting the adipocyte
Thiazolidinediones, the best-established pharmacological agents for the treatment for 
NAFLD and NASH, are PPARγ agonists that have multiple downstream effects. 
Thiazolidinediones increase adipose function and adipose mass by increasing their capacity 
for lipid storage and decreasing inappropriate lipolysis187. The treatment of individuals with 
T2DM with the thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone markedly improved insulin-stimulated 
glucose metabolism, which was associated with decreased plasma concentrations of fatty 
acids and lowered hepatic triglyceride content188. These changes were associated with an 
increase in extra myocellular lipid content and an increase in the sensitivity of peripheral 
adipocytes to the inhibitory effects of insulin on lipolysis188. These results led to the 
hypothesis that thiazolidinediones enhance insulin sensitivity in patients with T2DM by 
promoting increased insulin sensitivity in peripheral adipocytes, resulting in lower plasma 
concentrations of fatty acids and the redistribution of intracellular lipids from insulin-
responsive organs into peripheral adipocytes (FIG. 4a,b). Consistent with these results, in 
Petersen et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 patients with NASH who had either impaired glucose tolerance or overt T2DM, and who 
were fed a hypocaloric diet, a 6 month treatment regimen with the thiazolidinedione 
pioglitazone improved hepatic insulin sensitivity and hepatic steatosis compared with 
placebo189. In patients with NASH, pioglitazone-mediated improvements in hepatic steatosis 
and histological NASH were correlated with improvements in adipose insulin 
responsiveness190. However, the clinical use of thiazolidinediones is limited by concerns 
regarding adverse effects. For pioglitazone, the most widely prescribed thiazolidinedione 
compound in the United States, adverse effects include weight gain (in an already obese 
population), peripheral oedema, exacerbation of heart failure and increased frequency of 
bone fractures191. Thus, although pioglitazone effectively improves adipose function, 
decreases excess lipolysis and improves insulin sensitivity, ample opportunities exist for 
development of better-tolerated therapies that target adipose tissue function in T2DM.
Direct inhibitors of lipolytic enzymes, such as adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and 
hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL), are not used in clinical practice. However, niacin (or 
nicotinic acid) — a drug that has been used for decades to increase HDL levels and decrease 
triglyceride levels — also inhibits adipose lipolysis. Niacin binds to, and activates, a small G 
protein-coupled receptor, GPR109A, which decreases intracellular levels of cAMP, leading 
to a decrease in the activity of HSL in adipose tissue and reduced adipocyte lipolysis192. 
However, rather than improving endogenous glucose production, niacin can increase plasma 
glucose concentrations in some patients193,194. This paradoxical effect could be explained 
by a ‘rebound increase’ in adipose lipolysis following dissociation of the niacin–GPR109A 
complex195. Changes in niacin dosing strategy might prevent this rebound increase in 
plasma levels of NEFA and might improve glycaemic control195. Thus, novel formulations 
of niacin with different pharmacokinetic profiles, novel GPR109A agonists or other anti-
lipolytics (for example, WAT-specific ATGL inhibitors) might indirectly improve hepatic 
glucose metabolism and therefore merit further investigation.
Conclusions
Well-coordinated hepatic glucose metabolism is essential to health, and dysregulation of 
hepatic glucose metabolism is central to the pathogenesis and complications of T2DM. The 
key components of HGP reviewed in this article include gluconeogenesis, which exhibits 
complex regulation by substrate provision, redox state, gluconeogenic gene transcription and 
other mechanisms (FIG. 1), and glycogen metabolism, which is remarkably sensitive to both 
hormonal tone and plasma concentrations of glucose (FIG. 2). We have highlighted the 
importance of indirect extrahepatic control of gluconeogenesis and of direct hepatic control 
of glycogen metabolism, and have proposed a paradigm in which dysregulation of both 
direct and indirect mechanisms contribute to the increased HGP of T2DM (FIG. 3). The 
multifaceted regulation of HGP through both direct and indirect mechanisms limits the use 
of in vitro hepatocyte models that are removed from the normal hormonal, anatomical and 
biochemical context of the in situ liver. Although much remains to be elucidated, current 
knowledge of the multimodal control of HGP invites rational therapeutic targeting of 
multiple mechanisms simultaneously. Thus, it is conceivable to imagine a future in which 
metformin is used to control redox-dependent regulation of gluconeogenesis, a liver-targeted 
mitochondrial protonophore is used to reverse lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance, a 
Petersen et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glucagon antagonist is used to neutralize the excessive HGP that results from 
hyperglucagonaemia and a thiazolidinedione or antilipolytic agent is used to reduce lipolytic 
stimulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis (FIG. 4). It is also conceivable that reducing hepatic 
diacylglycerol and acetyl-CoA content using liver-targeted mitochondrial uncoupling agents 
alone might be sufficient to reverse both hepatic insulin resistance and increased rates of 
hepatic gluconeogenesis in T2DM, as shown in preclinical studies24,25. Although many 
preclinical and clinical studies will be required to test the viability of these novel agents and 
combinatorial approaches, the global need for effective medical management of 
dysregulated HGP in T2DM provides an urgent impetus for such work.
Acknowledgments
The authors apologize to those many colleagues whose important contributions could not be discussed owing to 
word and reference limits. The authors thank A.K. Madiraju for helpful comments. M.C.P. acknowledges grant 
support from the US National Institutes of Health (NIH; grants F30 DK-104596 and T32 GM-007205). D.F.V. 
acknowledges grant support from the NIH (grant K23 DK-102874). G.I.S. acknowledges grant support from the 
NIH (grants R01 DK40936, R01 DK113984 and P30 DK045735).
Glossary
Hyperinsulinaemic– euglycaemic clamp technique
A technique in which insulin is infused at a constant rate to achieve hyperinsulinaemia and 
glucose is infused at a variable rate to maintain euglycaemia; once steady-state euglycaemia 
has been achieved, the glucose infusion rate is proportional to the whole-body insulin 
sensitivity of the individual
Pyruvate tolerance test
A test in which a large bolus of the gluconeogenic substrate pyruvate is administered and 
plasma levels of glucose are measured at defined time intervals; plasma glucose excursion is 
assumed to be proportional to the rate of pyruvate-stimulated hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Pancreoprivic diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus caused by medical or surgical loss of pancreatic function, such as after a 
pancreatectomy or pancreatitis
References
1. Ekberg K, et al. Contributions by kidney and liver to glucose production in the postabsorptive state 
and after 60 h of fasting. Diabetes. 1999; 48:292–298. [PubMed: 10334304] 
2. Moore MC, Coate KC, Winnick JJ, An Z, Cherrington AD. Regulation of hepatic glucose uptake 
and storage in vivo. Adv Nutr. 2012; 3:286–294. [PubMed: 22585902] 
3. Rizza RA. Pathogenesis of fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes: implications 
for therapy. Diabetes. 2010; 59:2697–2707. [PubMed: 20705776] 
4. Moore MC, et al. Sources of carbon for hepatic glycogen synthesis in the conscious dog. J Clin 
Invest. 1991; 88:578–587. [PubMed: 1864968] 
5. Rothman DL, Magnusson I, Katz LD, Shulman RG, Shulman GI. Quantitation of hepatic 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis in fasting humans with 13C NMR. Science. 1991; 254:573–
576. [PubMed: 1948033] 
6. Mari A, Wahren J, DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E. Glucose absorption and production following oral 
glucose: comparison of compartmental and arteriovenous-difference methods. Metabolism. 1994; 
43:1419–1425. [PubMed: 7968597] 
Petersen et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Ishida T, et al. Differential effects of oral, peripheral intravenous, and intraportal glucose on hepatic 
glucose uptake and insulin and glucagon extraction in conscious dogs. J Clin Invest. 1983; 72:590–
601. [PubMed: 6348094] 
8. Pagliassotti MJ, Cherrington AD. Regulation of net hepatic glucose uptake in vivo. Annu Rev 
Physiol. 1992; 54:847–860. [PubMed: 1562194] 
9. Ferrannini E, et al. The disposal of an oral glucose load in healthy subjects A quantitative study. 
Diabetes. 1985; 34:580–588. [PubMed: 3891471] 
10. Petersen KF, Laurent D, Rothman DL, Cline GW, Shulman GI. Mechanism by which glucose and 
insulin inhibit net hepatic glycogenolysis in humans. J Clin Invest. 1998; 101:1203–1209. 
[PubMed: 9502760] 
11. Lin HV, Accili D. Hormonal regulation of hepatic glucose production in health and disease. Cell 
Metab. 2011; 14:9–19. [PubMed: 21723500] 
12. Cherrington AD, Edgerton D, Sindelar DK. The direct and indirect effects of insulin on hepatic 
glucose production in vivo. Diabetologia. 1998; 41:987–996. [PubMed: 9754815] 
13. Pagliassotti MJ, Moore MC, Neal DW, Cherrington AD. Insulin is required for the liver to respond 
to intraportal glucose delivery in the conscious dog. Diabetes. 1992; 41:1247–1256. [PubMed: 
1397697] 
14. McGuinness OP, Ayala JE, Laughlin MR, Wasserman DH. NIH experiment in centralized mouse 
phenotyping: the Vanderbilt experience and recommendations for evaluating glucose homeostasis 
in the mouse. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009; 297:E849–E855. [PubMed: 19638507] 
15. Kowalski GM, Bruce CR. The regulation of glucose metabolism: implications and considerations 
for the assessment of glucose homeostasis in rodents. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 
307:E859–E871. [PubMed: 25205823] 
16. Steele R, et al. Inhibition by insulin of hepatic glucose production in the normal dog. Am J Physiol. 
1965; 208:301–306. [PubMed: 14259965] 
17. Rizza RA, Mandarino LJ, Gerich JE. Dose–response characteristics for effects of insulin on 
production and utilization of glucose in man. Am J Physiol. 1981; 240:E630–E639. [PubMed: 
7018254] 
18. Basu A, Shah P, Nielsen M, Basu R, Rizza RA. Effects of type 2 diabetes on the regulation of 
hepatic glucose metabolism. J Investig Med. 2004; 52:366–374.
19. Magnusson I, Rothman DL, Katz LD, Shulman RG, Shulman GI. Increased rate of 
gluconeogenesis in type II diabetes mellitus. A 13C nuclear magnetic resonance study. J Clin 
Invest. 1992; 90:1323–1327. [PubMed: 1401068] 
20. Perry RJ, Samuel VT, Petersen KF, Shulman GI. The role of hepatic lipids in hepatic insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. Nature. 2014; 510:84–91. [PubMed: 24899308] 
21. Kumashiro N, et al. Cellular mechanism of insulin resistance in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:16381–16385. [PubMed: 21930939] 
22. Petersen KF, et al. Reversal of nonalcoholic hepatic steatosis, hepatic insulin resistance, and 
hyperglycemia by moderate weight reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2005; 
54:603–608. [PubMed: 15734833] 
23. Petersen KF, et al. Leptin reverses insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis in patients with severe 
lipodystrophy. J Clin Invest. 2002; 109:1345–1350. [PubMed: 12021250] 
24. Perry RJ, Zhang D, Zhang X-M, Boyer JL, Shulman GI. Controlled-release mitochondrial 
protonophore reverses diabetes and steatohepatitis in rats. Science. 2015; 347:1253–1256. 
[PubMed: 25721504] 
25. Perry RJ, et al. Reversal of hypertriglyceridemia, fatty liver disease, and insulin resistance by a 
liver-targeted mitochondrial uncoupler. Cell Metab. 2013; 18:740–748. [PubMed: 24206666] 
26. Kim JK, Gavrilova O, Chen Y, Reitman ML, Shulman GI. Mechanism of insulin resistance in A-
ZIP/F-1 fatless mice. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:8456–8460. [PubMed: 10722680] 
27. Samuel VT, Shulman GI. Mechanisms for insulin resistance: common threads and missing links. 
Cell. 2012; 148:852–871. [PubMed: 22385956] 
28. Magkos F, et al. Intrahepatic diacylglycerol content is associated with hepatic insulin resistance in 
obese subjects. Gastroenterology. 2012; 142:1444–1446 e2. [PubMed: 22425588] 
Petersen et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Luukkonen PK, et al. Hepatic ceramides dissociate steatosis and insulin resistance in patients with 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Hepatol. 2016; 64:1167–1175. [PubMed: 26780287] 
30. ter Horst KW, et al. Hepatic diacylglycerol-associated protein kinase Cε translocation links hepatic 
steatosis to hepatic insulin resistance in humans. Cell Rep. 2017; 19:1997–2004. [PubMed: 
28591572] 
31. Samuel VT, et al. Inhibition of protein kinase Cε prevents hepatic insulin resistance in 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:739–745. [PubMed: 17318260] 
32. Samuel VT, et al. Mechanism of hepatic insulin resistance in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. J 
Biol Chem. 2004; 279:32345–32353. [PubMed: 15166226] 
33. Petersen MC, et al. Insulin receptor Thr1160 phosphorylation mediates lipid-induced hepatic 
insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2016; 126:4361–4371. [PubMed: 27760050] 
34. Michelotti GA, Machado MV, Diehl AM. NAFLD, NASH and liver cancer. Nat Rev Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2013; 10:656–665. [PubMed: 24080776] 
35. Williams AS, et al. Integrin-linked kinase is necessary for the development of diet-induced hepatic 
insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2017; 66:325–334. [PubMed: 27899483] 
36. Boden G. Gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis in health and diabetes. J Investig Med. 2004; 
52:375–378.
37. Chen X, Iqbal N, Boden G. The effects of free fatty acids on gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis 
in normal subjects. J Clin Invest. 1999; 103:365–372. [PubMed: 9927497] 
38. Katz J, Tayek JA. Gluconeogenesis and the Cori cycle in 12-, 20-, and 40-h-fasted humans. Am J 
Physiol. 1998; 275:E537–E542. [PubMed: 9725823] 
39. Landau BR, et al. Contributions of gluconeogenesis to glucose production in the fasted state. J Clin 
Invest. 1996; 98:378–385. [PubMed: 8755648] 
40. Levine R, Fritz IB. The relation of insulin to liver metabolism. Diabetes. 1956; 5:209–219. 
[PubMed: 13317772] 
41. Gaisano H, MacDonald PE, Vranic M. Glucagon secretion and signaling in the development of 
diabetes. Front Physiol. 2012; 3:349. [PubMed: 22969729] 
42. Pearson MJ, Unger RH, Holland WL. Clinical trials, triumphs, and tribulations of glucagon 
receptor antagonists. Diabetes Care. 2016; 39:1075–1077. [PubMed: 27330122] 
43. Ader M, Bergman RN. Peripheral effects of insulin dominate suppression of fasting hepatic 
glucose production. Am J Physiol. 1990; 258:E1020–E1032. [PubMed: 2193527] 
44. Lewis GF, Zinman B, Groenewoud Y, Vranic M, Giacca A. Hepatic glucose production is 
regulated both by direct hepatic and extrahepatic effects of insulin in humans. Diabetes. 1996; 
45:454–462. [PubMed: 8603767] 
45. Sindelar DK, Balcom JH, Chu CA, Neal DW, Cherrington AD. A comparison of the effects of 
selective increases in peripheral or portal insulin on hepatic glucose production in the conscious 
dog. Diabetes. 1996; 45:1594–1604. [PubMed: 8866566] 
46. Prager R, Wallace P, Olefsky JM. Direct and indirect effects of insulin to inhibit hepatic glucose 
output in obese subjects. Diabetes. 1987; 36:607–611. [PubMed: 3552793] 
47. Staehr P, et al. Effects of free fatty acids per se on glucose production, gluconeogenesis, and 
glycogenolysis. Diabetes. 2003; 52:260–267. [PubMed: 12540595] 
48. Lewis GF, Vranic M, Harley P, Giacca A. Fatty acids mediate the acute extrahepatic effects of 
insulin on hepatic glucose production in humans. Diabetes. 1997; 46:1111–1119. [PubMed: 
9200644] 
49. Sindelar DK, et al. The role of fatty acids in mediating the effects of peripheral insulin on hepatic 
glucose production in the conscious dog. Diabetes. 1997; 46:187–196. [PubMed: 9000693] 
50. Rebrin K, Steil GM, Mittelman SD, Bergman RN. Causal linkage between insulin suppression of 
lipolysis and suppression of liver glucose output in dogs. J Clin Invest. 1996; 98:741–749. 
[PubMed: 8698866] 
51. Perry RJ, et al. Hepatic acetyl coa links adipose tissue inflammation to hepatic insulin resistance 
and type 2 diabetes. Cell. 2015; 160:745–758. [PubMed: 25662011] 
52. Perry RJ, et al. Leptin reverses diabetes by suppression of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis. 
Nat Med. 2014; 20:759–763. [PubMed: 24929951] 
Petersen et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 53. Perry RJ, Peng L, Shulman GI. Mechanism for leptin’s acute insulin-independent effect to reverse 
diabetic ketoacidosis. J Clin Invest. 2017; 127:657–669. [PubMed: 28112679] 
54. Previs SF, Cline GW, Shulman GI. A critical evaluation of mass isotopomer distribution analysis of 
gluconeogenesis in vivo. Am J Physiol. 1999; 277:E154–E160. [PubMed: 10409139] 
55. Krebs HA, Speake RN, Hems R. Acceleration of renal gluconeogenesis by ketone bodies and fatty 
acids. Biochem J. 1965; 94:712–720. [PubMed: 14340063] 
56. Keech DB, Utter MF. Pyruvate carboxylase. II Properties. J Biol Chem. 1963; 238:2609–2614. 
[PubMed: 14063280] 
57. Williamson JR, Kreisberg RA, Felts PW. Mechanism for the stimulation of gluconeogenesis by 
fatty acids in perfused rat liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1966; 56:247–254. [PubMed: 4381783] 
58. Lu M, et al. Insulin regulates liver metabolism in vivo in the absence of hepatic Akt and Foxo1. 
Nat Med. 2012; 18:388–395. [PubMed: 22344295] 
59. Buettner C, et al. Severe impairment in liver insulin signaling fails to alter hepatic insulin action in 
conscious mice. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:1306–1313. [PubMed: 15864350] 
60. Okamoto H, Obici S, Accili D, Rossetti L. Restoration of liver insulin signaling in Insr knockout 
mice fails to normalize hepatic insulin action. J Clin Invest. 2005; 115:1314–1322. [PubMed: 
15864351] 
61. Chen YD, Golay A, Swislocki AL, Reaven GM. Resistance to insulin suppression of plasma free 
fatty acid concentrations and insulin stimulation of glucose uptake in noninsulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1987; 64:17–21. [PubMed: 3782431] 
62. Fraze E, et al. Ambient plasma free fatty acid concentrations in noninsulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus: evidence for insulin resistance. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1985; 61:807–811. [PubMed: 
3900120] 
63. Reaven GM, Hollenbeck C, Jeng CY, Wu MS, Chen YD. Measurement of plasma glucose, free 
fatty acid, lactate, and insulin for 24 h in patients with NIDDM. Diabetes. 1988; 37:1020–1024. 
[PubMed: 3292322] 
64. Golay A, Swislocki AL, Chen YD, Reaven GM. Relationships between plasma-free fatty acid 
concentration, endogenous glucose production, and fasting hyperglycemia in normal and non-
insulin-dependent diabetic individuals. Metabolism. 1987; 36:692–696. [PubMed: 3298937] 
65. Swislocki AL, Chen YD, Golay A, Chang MO, Reaven GM. Insulin suppression of plasma-free 
fatty acid concentration in normal individuals and patients with type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) 
diabetes. Diabetologia. 1987; 30:622–626. [PubMed: 3308603] 
66. Charles MA, et al. The role of non-esterified fatty acids in the deterioration of glucose tolerance in 
Caucasian subjects: results of the Paris Prospective Study. Diabetologia. 1997; 40:1101–1106. 
[PubMed: 9300248] 
67. Paolisso G, et al. A high concentration of fasting plasma non-esterified fatty acids is a risk factor 
for the development of NIDDM. Diabetologia. 1995; 38:1213–1217. [PubMed: 8690174] 
68. Jocken JWE, et al. Insulin-mediated suppression of lipolysis in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle 
of obese type 2 diabetic men and men with normal glucose tolerance. Diabetologia. 2013; 
56:2255–2265. [PubMed: 23907381] 
69. Heptulla RA, et al. In situ evidence that peripheral insulin resistance in adolescents with poorly 
controlled type 1 diabetes is associated with impaired suppression of lipolysis: a microdialysis 
study. Pediatr Res. 2003; 53:830–835. [PubMed: 12702748] 
70. Gelding SV, Coldham N, Niththyananthan R, Anyaoku V, Johnston DG. Insulin resistance with 
respect to lipolysis in non-diabetic relatives of European patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabet 
Med. 1995; 12:66–73. [PubMed: 7712708] 
71. Robinson C, et al. Effect of insulin on glycerol production in obese adolescents. Am J Physiol. 
1998; 274:E737–E743. [PubMed: 9575836] 
72. Puhakainen I, Koivisto VA, Yki-Järvinen H. Lipolysis and gluconeogenesis from glycerol are 
increased in patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1992; 
75:789–794. [PubMed: 1517368] 
73. Nurjhan N, Consoli A, Gerich J. Increased lipolysis and its consequences on gluconeogenesis in 
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Clin Invest. 1992; 89:169–175. [PubMed: 1729269] 
Petersen et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 74. Perry RJ, Peng L, Cline GW, Petersen KF, Shulman GIA. Non-invasive method to assess hepatic 
acetyl-CoA in vivo. Cell Metab. 2017; 25:749–756. [PubMed: 28111213] 
75. American Diabetes Association. 7. Approaches to glycemic treatment. Diabetes Care. 2016; 
39:S52–S59. [PubMed: 26696682] 
76. Hundal RS, et al. Mechanism by which metformin reduces glucose production in type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes. 2000; 49:2063–2069. [PubMed: 11118008] 
77. Inzucchi SE, et al. Efficacy and metabolic effects of metformin and troglitazone in type II diabetes 
mellitus. N Engl J Med. 1998; 338:867–872. [PubMed: 9516221] 
78. Zhou G, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J Clin 
Invest. 2001; 108:1167–1174. [PubMed: 11602624] 
79. Shaw RJ, et al. The kinase LKB1 mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic effects of 
metformin. Science. 2005; 310:1642–1646. [PubMed: 16308421] 
80. He L, et al. Metformin and insulin suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis through phosphorylation of 
CREB binding protein. Cell. 2009; 137:635–646. [PubMed: 19450513] 
81. Fullerton MD, et al. Single phosphorylation sites in Acc1 and Acc2 regulate lipid homeostasis and 
the insulin-sensitizing effects of metformin. Nat Med. 2013; 19:1649–1654. [PubMed: 24185692] 
82. Foretz M, et al. Metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis in mice independently of the LKB1/
AMPK pathway via a decrease in hepatic energy state. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:2355–2369. 
[PubMed: 20577053] 
83. Madiraju AK, et al. Metformin suppresses gluconeogenesis by inhibiting mitochondrial 
glycerophosphate dehydrogenase. Nature. 2014; 510:542–546. [PubMed: 24847880] 
84. Cao J, et al. Low concentrations of metformin suppress glucose production in hepatocytes through 
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:20435–20446. [PubMed: 
24928508] 
85. Hawley SA, Gadalla AE, Olsen GS, Hardie DG. The antidiabetic drug metformin activates the 
AMP-activated protein kinase cascade via an adenine nucleotide-independent mechanism. 
Diabetes. 2002; 51:2420–2425. [PubMed: 12145153] 
86. Howell JJ, et al. Metformin inhibits hepatic mTORC1 signaling via dose-dependent mechanisms 
involving AMPK and the TSC complex. Cell Metab. 2017; 25:463–471. [PubMed: 28089566] 
87. El-Mir MY, et al. Dimethylbiguanide inhibits cell respiration via an indirect effect targeted on the 
respiratory chain complex I. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:223–228. [PubMed: 10617608] 
88. Hardie DG, Ross FA, Hawley SA. AMPK: a nutrient and energy sensor that maintains energy 
homeostasis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:251–262. [PubMed: 22436748] 
89. Miller RA, et al. Biguanides suppress hepatic glucagon signalling by decreasing production of 
cyclic AMP. Nature. 2013; 494:256–260. [PubMed: 23292513] 
90. Konopka AR, et al. Hyperglucagonemia mitigates the effect of metformin on glucose production in 
prediabetes. Cell Rep. 2016; 15:1394–1400. [PubMed: 27160898] 
91. Pernicova I, Korbonits M. Metformin — mode of action and clinical implications for diabetes and 
cancer. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014; 10:143–156. [PubMed: 24393785] 
92. Brown LJ, et al. Normal thyroid thermogenesis but reduced viability and adiposity in mice lacking 
the mitochondrial glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:32892–32898. 
[PubMed: 12093799] 
93. Saheki T, et al. Citrin/mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase double knock-out mice 
recapitulate features of human citrin deficiency. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:25041–25052. [PubMed: 
17591776] 
94. Baur JA, Birnbaum MJ. Control of gluconeogenesis by metformin: does redox trump energy 
charge? Cell Metab. 2014; 20:197–199. [PubMed: 25100057] 
95. Exton JH, Park CR. Control of gluconeogenesis in liver. II. Effects of glucagon, catecholamines, 
and adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate on gluconeogenesis in the perfused rat liver. J Biol Chem. 
1968; 243:4189–4196. [PubMed: 5679958] 
96. Lee Y, et al. Hyperglycemia in rodent models of type 2 diabetes requires insulin-resistant alpha 
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:13217–13222. [PubMed: 25157166] 
Petersen et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 97. Blair JB, Cimbala MA, Foster JL, Morgan RA. Hepatic pyruvate kinase. Regulation by glucagon, 
cyclic adenosine 3′-5′-monophosphate, and insulin in the perfused rat liver. J Biol Chem. 1976; 
251:3756–3762. [PubMed: 180008] 
98. Rider MH, et al. 6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase/ fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase: head-to-head with a 
bifunctional enzyme that controls glycolysis. Biochem J. 2004; 381:561–579. [PubMed: 
15170386] 
99. Wu C, et al. Perturbation of glucose flux in the liver by decreasing F26P2 levels causes hepatic 
insulin resistance and hyperglycemia. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006; 291:E536–E543. 
[PubMed: 16621898] 
100. Cullen KS, Al-Oanzi ZH, O’Harte FPM, Agius L, Arden C. Glucagon induces translocation of 
glucokinase from the cytoplasm to the nucleus of hepatocytes by transfer between 6-
phosphofructo 2-kinase/fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase-2 and the glucokinase regulatory protein. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1843:1123–1134. [PubMed: 24566088] 
101. Romere C, et al. Asprosin, a fasting-induced glucogenic protein hormone. Cell. 2016; 165:566–
579. [PubMed: 27087445] 
102. Edgerton DS, et al. Effects of insulin on the metabolic control of hepatic gluconeogenesis. in vivo 
Diabetes. 2009; 58:2766–2775. [PubMed: 19755527] 
103. Ramnanan CJ, et al. Molecular characterization of insulin-mediated suppression of hepatic 
glucose production. in vivo Diabetes. 2010; 59:1302–1311. [PubMed: 20185816] 
104. Puigserver P, et al. Insulin-regulated hepatic gluconeogenesis through FOXO1–PGC-1α 
interaction. Nature. 2003; 423:550–555. [PubMed: 12754525] 
105. Yoon JC, et al. Control of hepatic gluconeogenesis through the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1. 
Nature. 2001; 413:131–138. [PubMed: 11557972] 
106. Nakae J, Kitamura T, Silver DL, Accili D. The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 (Fkhr) confers 
insulin sensitivity onto glucose-6-phosphatase expression. J Clin Invest. 2001; 108:1359–1367. 
[PubMed: 11696581] 
107. Schmoll D, et al. Regulation of glucose-6-phosphatase gene expression by protein kinase Bα and 
the forkhead transcription factor FKHR Evidence for insulin response unit-dependent and -
independent effects of insulin on promoter activity. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:36324–36333. 
[PubMed: 10960473] 
108. Matsumoto M. Dual role of transcription factor FoxO1 in controlling hepatic insulin sensitivity 
and lipid metabolism. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:2464–2472. [PubMed: 16906224] 
109. Haeusler RA, Kaestner KH, Accili D. FoxOs function synergistically to promote glucose 
production. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:35245–35248. [PubMed: 20880840] 
110. O-Sullivan I, et al. FoxO1 integrates direct and indirect effects of insulin on hepatic glucose 
production and glucose utilization. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7079. [PubMed: 25963540] 
111. Titchenell PM, Chu Q, Monks BR, Birnbaum MJ. Hepatic insulin signalling is dispensable for 
suppression of glucose output by insulin in vivo. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7078. [PubMed: 
25963408] 
112. Samuel VT, et al. Fasting hyperglycemia is not associated with increased expression of PEPCK or 
G6Pc in patients with type 2 diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:12121–12126. 
[PubMed: 19587243] 
113. Koo S-H, et al. The CREB coactivator TORC2 is a key regulator of fasting glucose metabolism. 
Nature. 2005; 437:1109–1111. [PubMed: 16148943] 
114. Dentin R, et al. Insulin modulates gluconeogenesis by inhibition of the coactivator TORC2. 
Nature. 2007; 449:366–369. [PubMed: 17805301] 
115. Wang Y, et al. Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis in fasting 
and diabetes. Nature. 2012; 485:128–132. [PubMed: 22495310] 
116. Liu Y, et al. A fasting inducible switch modulates gluconeogenesis via activator/coactivator 
exchange. Nature. 2008; 456:269–273. [PubMed: 18849969] 
117. Wang Y, et al. Targeted disruption of the CREB coactivator Crtc2 increases insulin sensitivity. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:3087–3092. [PubMed: 20133702] 
118. Hogan MF, et al. Hepatic insulin resistance following chronic activation of the CREB coactivator 
CRTC2. J Biol Chem. 2015; 290:25997–26006. [PubMed: 26342077] 
Petersen et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 119. Bass J, Lazar MA. Circadian time signatures of fitness and disease. Science. 2016; 354:994–999. 
[PubMed: 27885004] 
120. Zhang EE, et al. Cryptochrome mediates circadian regulation of cAMP signaling and hepatic 
gluconeogenesis. Nat Med. 2010; 16:1152–1156. [PubMed: 20852621] 
121. Lamia KA, et al. Cryptochromes mediate rhythmic repression of the glucocorticoid receptor. 
Nature. 2011; 480:552–556. [PubMed: 22170608] 
122. Lamia KA, Storch K-F, Weitz CJ. Physiological significance of a peripheral tissue circadian 
clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:15172–15177. [PubMed: 18779586] 
123. Sun Z, et al. Hepatic Hdac3 promotes gluconeogenesis by repressing lipid synthesis and 
sequestration. Nat Med. 2012; 18:934–942. [PubMed: 22561686] 
124. Burgess SC, et al. Cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase does not solely control the rate 
of hepatic gluconeogenesis in the intact mouse liver. Cell Metab. 2007; 5:313–320. [PubMed: 
17403375] 
125. Zingone A, et al. Correction of glycogen storage disease type 1a in a mouse model by gene 
therapy. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:828–832. [PubMed: 10625614] 
126. Bernard, C. Leçons de physiologie expérimentale appliquée a la médecine. J.-B. Baillière; 1855. 
127. Schwartz MW, et al. Cooperation between brain and islet in glucose homeostasis and diabetes. 
Nature. 2013; 503:59–66. [PubMed: 24201279] 
128. Myers MG, Olson DP. Central nervous system control of metabolism. Nature. 2012; 491:357–
363. [PubMed: 23151578] 
129. Perry RJ, Petersen KF, Shulman GI. Pleotropic effects of leptin to reverse insulin resistance and 
diabetic ketoacidosis. Diabetologia. 2016; 59:933–937. [PubMed: 26961503] 
130. Duffy KR, Pardridge WM. Blood–brain barrier transcytosis of insulin in developing rabbits. Brain 
Res. 1987; 420:32–38. [PubMed: 3315116] 
131. Plum L, Schubert M, Brüning JC. The role of insulin receptor signaling in the brain. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab. 2005; 16:59–65. [PubMed: 15734146] 
132. Brüning JC, et al. Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction. 
Science. 2000; 289:2122–2125. [PubMed: 11000114] 
133. Obici S, Zhang BB, Karkanias G, Rossetti L. Hypothalamic insulin signaling is required for 
inhibition of glucose production. Nat Med. 2002; 8:1376–1382. [PubMed: 12426561] 
134. Pocai A, et al. Hypothalamic KATP channels control hepatic glucose production. Nature. 2005; 
434:1026–1031. [PubMed: 15846348] 
135. Kleinridders A, Ferris HA, Cai W, Kahn CR. Insulin action in brain regulates systemic 
metabolism and brain function. Diabetes. 2014; 63:2232–2243. [PubMed: 24931034] 
136. Edgerton DS, et al. Insulin’s direct effects on the liver dominate the control of hepatic glucose 
production. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:521–527. [PubMed: 16453026] 
137. Ramnanan CJ, et al. Brain insulin action augments hepatic glycogen synthesis without 
suppressing glucose production or gluconeogenesis in dogs. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121:3713–3723. 
[PubMed: 21865644] 
138. Shulman GI, Landau BR. Pathways of glycogen repletion. Physiol Rev. 1992; 72:1019–1035. 
[PubMed: 1438578] 
139. Syed NA, Khandelwal RL. Reciprocal regulation of glycogen phosphorylase and glycogen 
synthase by insulin involving phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and protein phosphatase-1 in HepG2 
cells. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000; 211:123–136. [PubMed: 11055555] 
140. Moore MC, et al. Hepatic glucose disposition during concomitant portal glucose and amino acid 
infusions in the dog. Am J Physiol. 1998; 274:E893–E902. [PubMed: 9612248] 
141. Gomis RR, Ferrer JC, Guinovart JJ. Shared control of hepatic glycogen synthesis by glycogen 
synthase and glucokinase. Biochem J. 2000; 351:811–816. [PubMed: 11042138] 
142. O’Doherty RM, et al. Differential metabolic effects of adenovirus-mediated glucokinase and 
hexokinase I overexpression in rat primary hepatocytes. J Biol Chem. 1996; 271:20524–20530. 
[PubMed: 8702794] 
Petersen et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 143. Niswender KD, Shiota M, Postic C, Cherrington AD, Magnuson MA. Effects of increased 
glucokinase gene copy number on glucose homeostasis and hepatic glucose metabolism. J Biol 
Chem. 1997; 272:22570–22575. [PubMed: 9278411] 
144. Titchenell PM, et al. Direct hepatocyte insulin signaling is required for lipogenesis but is 
dispensable for the suppression of glucose production. Cell Metab. 2016; 23:1154–1166. 
[PubMed: 27238637] 
145. Velho G, et al. Impaired hepatic glycogen synthesis in glucokinase-deficient (MODY-2) subjects. 
J Clin Invest. 1996; 98:1755–1761. [PubMed: 8878425] 
146. Raimondo A, Rees MG, Gloyn AL. Glucokinase regulatory protein: complexity at the crossroads 
of triglyceride and glucose metabolism. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2015; 26:88–95. [PubMed: 
25692341] 
147. Agius L. Glucokinase and molecular aspects of liver glycogen metabolism. Biochem J. 2008; 
414:1–18. [PubMed: 18651836] 
148. Agius L, Peak M, Newgard CB, Gomez-Foix AM, Guinovart JJ. Evidence for a role of glucose-
induced translocation of glucokinase in the control of hepatic glycogen synthesis. J Biol Chem. 
1996; 271:30479–30486. [PubMed: 8940014] 
149. Härndahl L, Schmoll D, Herling AW, Agius L. The role of glucose 6-phosphate in mediating the 
effects of glucokinase overexpression on hepatic glucose metabolism. FEBS J. 2006; 273:336–
346. [PubMed: 16403021] 
150. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff A, et al. Glucose-6-phosphate-mediated activation of liver 
glycogen synthase plays a key role in hepatic glycogen synthesis. Diabetes. 2013; 62:4070–4082. 
[PubMed: 23990365] 
151. Bollen M, Keppens S, Stalmans W. Specific features of glycogen metabolism in the liver. 
Biochem J. 1998; 336:19–31. [PubMed: 9806880] 
152. Ros S, García-Rocha M, Domínguez J, Ferrer JC, Guinovart JJ. Control of liver glycogen 
synthase activity and intracellular distribution by phosphorylation. J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:6370–
6378. [PubMed: 19124463] 
153. Bultot L, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates and inactivates liver glycogen 
synthase. Biochem J. 2012; 443:193–203. [PubMed: 22233421] 
154. Ros S, et al. Hepatic overexpression of a constitutively active form of liver glycogen synthase 
improves glucose homeostasis. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:37170–37177. [PubMed: 20841354] 
155. Cohen P. The Croonian Lecture 1998. Identification of a protein kinase cascade of major 
importance in insulin signal transduction. Phil Trans R Soc B. 1999; 354:485–495. [PubMed: 
10212493] 
156. Wan M, et al. A noncanonical, GSK3-independent pathway controls postprandial hepatic 
glycogen deposition. Cell Metab. 2013; 18:99–105. [PubMed: 23823480] 
157. Kitamura T, et al. Insulin-induced phosphorylation and activation of cyclic nucleotide 
phosphodiesterase 3B by the serine–threonine kinase Akt. Mol Cell Biol. 1999; 19:6286–6296. 
[PubMed: 10454575] 
158. Jurczak MJ, Danos AM, Rehrmann VR, Brady MJ. The role of protein translocation in the 
regulation of glycogen metabolism. J Cell Biochem. 2008; 104:435–443. [PubMed: 18022842] 
159. Alemany S, Cohen P. Phosphorylase a is an allosteric inhibitor of the glycogen and microsomal 
forms of rat hepatic protein phosphatase-1. FEBS Lett. 1986; 198:194–202. [PubMed: 3007211] 
160. Carabaza A, Ciudad CJ, Baqué S, Guinovart JJ. Glucose has to be phosphorylated to activate 
glycogen synthase, but not to inactivate glycogen phosphorylase in hepatocytes. FEBS Lett. 
1992; 296:211–214. [PubMed: 1733780] 
161. Samuel VT, Shulman GI. The pathogenesis of insulin resistance: integrating signaling pathways 
and substrate flux. J Clin Invest. 2016; 126:12–22. [PubMed: 26727229] 
162. Olefsky JM, Glass CK. Macrophages, inflammation, and insulin resistance. Annu Rev Physiol. 
2010; 72:219–246. [PubMed: 20148674] 
163. Tolman KG, Fonseca V, Dalpiaz A, Tan MH. Spectrum of liver disease in type 2 diabetes and 
management of patients with diabetes and liver disease. Diabetes Care. 2007; 30:734–743. 
[PubMed: 17327353] 
Petersen et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 164. Lee YH, Wang M-Y, Yu X-X, Unger RH. Glucagon is the key factor in the development of 
diabetes. Diabetologia. 2016; 59:1372–1375. [PubMed: 27115412] 
165. Henry RR, Scheaffer L, Olefsky JM. Glycemic effects of intensive caloric restriction and 
isocaloric refeeding in noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1985; 
61:917–925. [PubMed: 4044780] 
166. American Diabetes Association. 6 Obesity management for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care. 2016; 39:S47–S51. [PubMed: 26696681] 
167. Lefebvre PJ, Luyckx AS. Glucagon and diabetes: a reappraisal. Diabetologia. 1979; 16:347–354. 
[PubMed: 381082] 
168. Lotfy M, Kalasz H, Szalai G, Singh J, Adeghate E. Recent progress in the use of glucagon and 
glucagon receptor antagonists in the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Open Med Chem J. 2014; 
8:28–35. [PubMed: 25674162] 
169. Bagger JI, Knop FK, Holst JJ, Vilsbøll T. Glucagon antagonism as a potential therapeutic target in 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011; 13:965–971. [PubMed: 21615669] 
170. Habegger KM, et al. The metabolic actions of glucagon revisited. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010; 
6:689–697. [PubMed: 20957001] 
171. Reaven GM, Chen YD, Golay A, Swislocki AL, Jaspan JB. Documentation of 
hyperglucagonemia throughout the day in nonobese and obese patients with noninsulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1987; 64:106–110. [PubMed: 3536980] 
172. Baron AD, Schaeffer L, Shragg P, Kolterman OG. Role of hyperglucagonemia in maintenance of 
increased rates of hepatic glucose output in type II diabetics. Diabetes. 1987; 36:274–283. 
[PubMed: 2879757] 
173. Woerle HJ, et al. Mechanisms for abnormal postprandial glucose metabolism in type 2 diabetes. 
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006; 290:E67–E77. [PubMed: 16105859] 
174. Menge BA, et al. Loss of inverse relationship between pulsatile insulin and glucagon secretion in 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2011; 60:2160–2168. [PubMed: 21677283] 
175. Lee Y, et al. Metabolic manifestations of insulin deficiency do not occur without glucagon action. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:14972–14976. [PubMed: 22891336] 
176. Neumann UH, et al. Glucagon receptor gene deletion in insulin knockout mice modestly reduces 
blood glucose and ketones but does not promote survival. Mol Metab. 2016; 5:731–736. 
[PubMed: 27656411] 
177. Petersen KF, Sullivan JT. Effects of a novel glucagon receptor antagonist (Bay 27–9955) on 
glucagon-stimulated glucose production in humans. Diabetologia. 2001; 44:2018–2024. 
[PubMed: 11719833] 
178. Guan H-P, et al. Glucagon receptor antagonism induces increased cholesterol absorption. J Lipid 
Res. 2015; 56:2183–2195. [PubMed: 26373568] 
179. Kelly RP, et al. Short-term administration of the glucagon receptor antagonist LY2409021 lowers 
blood glucose in healthy people and in those with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2015; 
17:414–422. [PubMed: 25656305] 
180. Kazda CM, et al. Evaluation of efficacy and safety of the glucagon receptor antagonist 
LY2409021 in patients with type 2 diabetes: 12- and 24-week phase 2 studies. Diabetes Care. 
2016; 39:1241–1249. [PubMed: 26681715] 
181. Longuet C, et al. The glucagon receptor is required for the adaptive metabolic response to fasting. 
Cell Metab. 2008; 8:359–371. [PubMed: 19046568] 
182. Vatner DF, et al. Thyroid hormone receptor-β agonists prevent hepatic steatosis in fat-fed rats but 
impair insulin sensitivity via discrete pathways. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013; 305:E89–
E100. [PubMed: 23651850] 
183. Martagón AJ, Lin JZ, Cimini SL, Webb P, Phillips KJ. The amelioration of hepatic steatosis by 
thyroid hormone receptor agonists is insufficient to restore insulin sensitivity in ob/ob mice. 
PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0122987. [PubMed: 25849936] 
184. Finan B, et al. Chemical hybridization of glucagon and thyroid hormone optimizes therapeutic 
impact for metabolic disease. Cell. 2016; 167:843–857 e14. [PubMed: 27720451] 
Petersen et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 185. Armstrong MJ, et al. Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(LEAN): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study. Lancet. 
2016; 387:679–690. [PubMed: 26608256] 
186. Finan B, et al. A rationally designed monomeric peptide triagonist corrects obesity and diabetes in 
rodents. Nat Med. 2015; 21:27–36. [PubMed: 25485909] 
187. Soccio RE, Chen ER, Lazar MA. Thiazolidinediones and the promise of insulin sensitization in 
type 2 diabetes. Cell Metab. 2014; 20:573–591. [PubMed: 25242225] 
188. Mayerson AB, et al. The effects of rosiglitazone on insulin sensitivity, lipolysis, and hepatic and 
skeletal muscle triglyceride content in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2002; 51:797–802. 
[PubMed: 11872682] 
189. Belfort R, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in subjects with nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:2297–2307. [PubMed: 17135584] 
190. Gastaldelli A, et al. Importance of changes in adipose tissue insulin resistance to histological 
response during thiazolidinedione treatment of patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. 
Hepatology. 2009; 50:1087–1093. [PubMed: 19670459] 
191. Rizos CV, Kei A, Elisaf MS. The current role of thiazolidinediones in diabetes management. Arch 
Toxicol. 2016; 90:1861–1881. [PubMed: 27165418] 
192. Tunaru S, et al. PUMA-G and HM74 are receptors for nicotinic acid and mediate its anti-lipolytic 
effect. Nat Med. 2003; 9:352–355. [PubMed: 12563315] 
193. Phan BAP, et al. Effects of niacin on glucose levels, coronary stenosis progression, and clinical 
events in subjects with normal baseline glucose levels (<100 mg/ dl): a combined analysis of the 
Familial Atherosclerosis Treatment Study (FATS), HDL-Atherosclerosis Treatment Study 
(HATS), Armed Forces Regression Study (AFREGS), and Carotid Plaque Composition by MRI 
during lipid-lowering (CPC) study. Am J Cardiol. 2013; 111:352–355. [PubMed: 23168285] 
194. Guyton JR. Niacin in cardiovascular prevention: mechanisms, efficacy, and safety. Curr Opin 
Lipidol. 2007; 18:415–420. [PubMed: 17620858] 
195. Kroon T, Kjellstedt A, Thalén P, Gabrielsson J, Oakes ND. Dosing profile profoundly influences 
nicotinic acid’s ability to improve metabolic control in rats. J Lipid Res. 2015; 56:1679–1690. 
[PubMed: 26168997] 
Petersen et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key points
•
Hepatic glucose metabolism encompasses several catabolic and anabolic 
fluxes that have distinct modes of hepatocyte-autonomous (direct) and 
hepatocyte-non-autonomous (indirect) regulatory mechanisms
•
Acute regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism is achieved through changes 
in protein phosphorylation, substrate availability, allostery and redox state
•
Chronic regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism occurs through 
transcriptional mechanisms and the development of insulin resistance
•
Acute suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis by insulin is largely an indirect 
effect that is mediated mostly through the suppression of adipose lipolysis, 
which reduces delivery of nonesterified fatty acids and glycerol to the liver
•
The major direct effect of insulin on hepatic glucose metabolism is the acute 
regulation of hepatic glycogen metabolism; however, hyperglycaemia and 
hyperinsulinaemia are required to maximally stimulate net hepatic 
glycogenesis
•
Lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance, hyperglucagonaemia and excessive 
adipose lipolysis represent three pathophysiological processes that might be 
amenable to pharmacological intervention in humans who have impaired 
hepatic glucose metabolism
Petersen et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Control of hepatic gluconeogenesis
Hepatic gluconeogenesis is regulated by the availability of substrates (light blue boxes), 
allostery from metabolites (green boxes), transcriptional mechanisms (purple boxes) and 
cellular redox state (dark blue boxes). Lipolysis in white adipose tissue (WAT) produces 
nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) and glycerol, both of which can stimulate gluconeogenesis. 
The β-oxidation of NEFA yields mitochondrial acetyl-CoA, which promotes 
gluconeogenesis by allosterically activating pyruvate carboxylase (PC), which, in turn, 
catalyses the conversion of pyruvate to the gluconeogenic substrate oxaloacetate. Glycerol 
can be phosphorylated and converted into the gluconeogenic precursor dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate (DHAP). This process is inhibited by metformin, a non-competitive inhibitor of 
mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (mGPD). Inhibition of mGPD impairs 
the production of DHAP, which results in a decrease in gluconeogenesis from glycerol. 
Furthermore, the increased cytosolic redox state ([NADH+]:[NAD+]) that results from the 
inhibition of mGPD inhibits the redox-dependent enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 
thus limiting the production of pyruvate, and thus gluconeogenesis, from lactate. The 
Petersen et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transcriptional regulation of gluconeogenesis by glucagon and insulin is relatively slow 
compared with the effects of these hormones on hepatic glycogen metabolism, acting 
primarily through transcriptional activation and repression, respectively, of the genes that 
encode the gluconeogenic cytosolic enzymes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PCK1) 
and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC). The binding of insulin to the insulin receptor (INSR) 
leads to the activation of AKT, which phosphorylates and excludes the transcription factor 
Forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) from the nucleus. In the absence of insulin, FOXO1 promotes 
gluconeogenic gene transcription with its co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α; encoded by PGC1a). Glucagon binding to the glucagon 
receptor (GCGR) increases intracellular concentrations of cAMP and activates protein 
kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates the inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R), 
increasing cytosolic Ca2+ levels and activating CREB-regulated transcription co-activator 2 
(CRTC2). However, GCGR-dependent activation of PKA also acts acutely by inducing 
inhibitory phosphorylation of glycolytic regulatory enzymes, including 6-phosphofructo-2-
kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PFK2/FBPase-2) and liver-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK), 
to decrease glucose oxidation and thereby favour net glucose production. Small up and down 
arrows represent an increase or decrease, respectively, in protein level or activity. Dotted 
arrows represent glycolysis. CBP, CREB-binding protein; CREB, cAMP-responsive 
element-binding protein 1; GLUT2, glucose transporter 2.
Petersen et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Control of hepatic glycogen metabolism
a| Under fasted conditions, glycogenolysis is activated and glycogen synthesis is suppressed. 
Activation of the glucagon receptor (GCGR) induces increased intracellular concentrations 
of cyclic AMP (cAMP; indicated by an up arrow), which leads to the activation of protein 
kinase A (PKA). Activated PKA inhibits the transcription of the glucokinase (GCK) gene; 
inhibits the dissociation of GCK from glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP), and thus 
induces the nuclear sequestration of GCK; phosphorylates, and thus inactivates, glycogen 
synthase; and phosphorylates and activates phosphorylase kinase, which activates glycogen 
phosphorylase by phosphorylating Ser15. Phosphorylated, active glycogen phosphorylase 
also binds to and inhibits the GL subunit of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), which prevents the 
PP1-dependent dephosphorylation and inactivation of glycogen synthase. The coordinated 
activation of glycogen phosphorylase and inhibition of glycogen synthase result in net 
glycogenolysis. b | Under fed conditions, hormonal and allosteric mechanisms coordinate 
the stimulation of glycogen synthesis through direct and indirect pathways. Glucose 
promotes the dissociation of GCK from GKRP, which leads to the cytoplasmic translocation 
of GCK; glucose also allosterically inhibits glycogen phosphorylase. The ‘direct pathway’ 
of glycogen synthesis involves the conversion of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate and its 
Petersen et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subsequent incorporation into glycogen, with all six carbons of the glucosyl unit intact. The 
‘indirect pathway’ of glycogen synthesis involves the conversion of glucose to pyruvate, and 
pyruvate to glucose-6-phosphate, before incorporation into glycogen. Glucose-6-phosphate 
both allosterically activates glycogen synthase and is a substrate for glycogen synthesis. 
Insulin activates AKT, which, in turn, induces the transcription of GCK and the cytoplasmic 
translocation of GCK and activates phosphodiesterase 3B (PDE3B), which decreases 
intracellular levels of cAMP (indicated by a down arrow) and leads to the inhibition of the 
PKA-dependent processes described in part a. Active PP1 with its GL targeting subunit 
dephosphorylates and inactivates glycogen phosphorylase, and dephosphorylates and 
activates glycogen synthase. The coordinated inhibition of glycogen phosphorylase and 
activation of glycogen synthase result in net hepatic glycogen synthesis. In parts a, b the 
insulin receptor (INSR) and glucagon receptor (GCGR) are shown in faded colours for 
context, and grey inhibitory arrows depict the processes in which they are not dominant. The 
dashed arrows indicate dephosphorylation. Small up and down arrows indicate an increase 
or decrease, respectively, in protein level or activity. GLUT2, glucose transporter 2; pSer15, 
phosphorylated Ser15.
Petersen et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Framework for understanding the insulin-dependent regulation of hepatic glucose 
metabolism
a| Under normal physiological conditions, the direct actions of hepatocellular insulin (dark 
blue boxes) primarily facilitate net hepatic glycogen synthesis through the activation of 
glucokinase (GCK) and glycogen synthase. Insulin receptor (INSR)-dependent inactivation 
of Forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) decreases the transcription of gluconeogenic genes, but this is 
a relatively slow mechanism that does not mediate the acute suppression of hepatic 
gluconeogenesis by insulin. Suppression of lipolysis in white adipose tissue (WAT), which is 
an indirect mechanism of hepatic insulin action (green boxes), acutely suppresses hepatic 
Petersen et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gluconeogenesis by decreasing the delivery of nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) and glycerol 
to the liver, which results in reduced acetyl-CoA-dependent activation of pyruvate 
carboxylase (PC), and decreased gluconeogenesis from glycerol. The direct stimulation of 
net hepatic glycogen synthesis and the indirect suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis 
collectively suppress hepatic glucose production (HGP). b | In type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM), the direct (dark blue boxes) and indirect (green boxes) effects of insulin are 
impaired through different mechanisms. Lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance increases 
hepatic levels of diacylglycerol (DAG), which results in the activation of protein kinase Cε 
(PKCε) and thereby impairs direct hepatic insulin signalling through PKCε-dependent 
phosphorylation of INSR at Thr1160. This inhibits the INSR-dependent stimulation of 
hepatic glycogen synthesis in response to insulin. Impaired INSR signalling is indicated by 
grey arrows. In WAT, macrophage activation and consequent inflammatory signalling, as 
well as intrinsic adipocyte dysfunction, increase lipolysis and promote adipocyte insulin 
resistance, resulting in the continued delivery of NEFA and glycerol to the liver despite high 
plasma concentrations of insulin. Continued delivery of NEFA and glycerol to the liver 
promotes hepatic lipid accumulation and PKCε-mediated hepatic insulin resistance, and 
promotes gluconeogenesis by increasing hepatic acetyl-CoA and gluconeogenesis from 
glycerol. Impaired net hepatic glycogen synthesis and unrestrained hepatic gluconeogenesis 
together lead to increases in HGP. Small up and down arrows indicate an increase or 
decrease, respectively, in protein level or activity. DAG, diacylglycerol.
Petersen et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Therapeutic opportunities for dysregulated hepatic glucose metabolism
a| In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance 
might result from activation of the diacylglycerol (DAG)–protein kinase Cε (PKCε) axis 
and the consequent inhibition of insulin receptor (INSR) signalling through inhibitory 
phosphorylation of INSR at Thr1160. This leads to impaired insulin stimulation of hepatic 
glycogen synthesis. In parallel, inappropriate increases in adipose lipolysis can drive hepatic 
gluconeogenesis through increases in hepatic acetyl-CoA and pyruvate carboxylase (PC) 
activity, and promote ectopic lipid accumulation in liver and muscle. These processes 
promote the increased hepatic glucose production (HGP) that occurs in T2DM. b | These 
contributors to increased HGP can be pharmacologically targeted. Mechanisms that target 
lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance (purple ovals) include the selective induction of 
mitochondrial uncoupling in the liver (for example, with 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP) analogues, 
such as DNP-methyl ether (DNPME) and other liver-targeted mitochondrial uncoupling 
agents) to increase hepatic fat oxidation, or mixed agonism of incretin, glucagon and/or 
thyroid hormone receptors (for example, a mixed agonist of glucagon receptor (GCGR), 
gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor (GIPR) and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor 
(GLP1R)) to promote fat oxidation. A second therapeutic strategy is to target excessive 
lipolysis (light green ovals) by promoting the sequestration of lipids in white adipose tissue 
(WAT). The inhibition of lipolysis or the stimulation of lipogenesis in WAT is predicted to 
decrease hepatic lipid accumulation and reverse lipid-induced hepatic insulin resistance by 
decreasing delivery of lipids to the liver. The thiazolidinediones (TZD) are agonists of the 
lipogenic transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ). The 
inhibition of lipolysis with GPR109A agonists, or with WAT-specific adipose triglyceride 
lipase (ATGL) inhibitors, would also be predicted to reverse dysregulated glucose 
Petersen et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 metabolism through these mechanisms. Glucagon antagonism (red oval) represents a third 
potential therapeutic strategy to target the hyperglucagonaemia and excessive hepatic 
glucose production associated with T2DM if it can be dissociated from on-target adverse 
effects (for example, hepatic steatosis). Small up and down arrows indicate an increase or 
decrease, respectively, in protein level or activity. The grey arrow depicts inhibition of 
lipolysis. ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; TAG, triacylglycerol.
Petersen et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Endocrinol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
