 LSHTM Research Online
Petticrew, M.; Douglas, N.; Knai, C.; Maani Hessari, N.; Durand, M.A.; Eastmure, E.; Mays,
N.; (2017) [Accepted Manuscript] Provision of information to consumers about the calorie con-
tent of alcoholic drinks:
did the Responsibility Deal pledge by alcohol retailers and produc-
ers increase the availability of calorie information?
Public health.
ISSN 0033-3506 DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2017.04.020
Downloaded from: http://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/4018409/
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2017.04.020
Usage Guidlines:
Please refer to usage guidelines at http://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/policies.html or alternatively
contact researchonline@lshtm.ac.uk.
Available under license: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.5/
https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provision of information to consumers about the calorie content of alcoholic 
drinks: did the Responsibility Deal pledge by alcohol retailers and producers 
increase the availability of calorie information? 
M. Petticrew1,2*, N. Douglas1, C. Knai1, N. Maani Hessari,2 MA1 Durand1, E. Eastmure1, N. 
Mays1 
1. Policy Innovation Research Unit, Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine (LSHTM), 15-17 Tavistock Place, London WC1H 9SH, UK 
2. Department of Social and Environmental Health Research, Faculty of Public Health and Policy, London 
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), 15-17 Tavistock Place, London WC1H 9SH, UK 
 
* Corresponding author: mark.petticrew@lshtm.ac.uk 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Objectives: Alcohol is a significant source of dietary calories and is a contributor to obesity. Industry 
pledges to provide calorie information to consumers have been cited as reasons for not introducing 
mandatory ingredient labelling. As part of the Public Health Responsibility Deal (RD) in England, 
alcohol retailers and producers committed to providing consumers with information on the calorie 
content of alcoholic drinks. This study examines what was achieved following this commitment, and 
considers the implications for current industry commitments to provide information on alcohol 
calories. 
Study design: Analysis of RD pledge delivery plans and progress reports. Assessment of calorie 
information in supermarkets and in online stores. 
Methods: (i) Analysis of the content of pledge delivery plans and annual progress reports of RD 
signatories to determine what action they had committed to, and had taken, to provide calorie 
information. (ii) Analysis of the availability of calorie information on product labels; in UK 
supermarkets; and on online shopping sites and websites.  
Results: No information was provided in any of 55 stores chosen to represent all the main UK 
supermarkets. Calorie information was not routinely provided on supermarkets’ websites, or on 
product labels.  
Conclusions:  One of the stated purposes of the RD was to provide consumers with the information 
to make informed health-related choices, including providing information on the calorie content of 
alcoholic drinks.   This study indicates that this did not take place to any significant extent. The 
voluntary implementation of alcohol calorie labelling by industry needs to continue to be carefully 
monitored to determine whether and how it is done. 
 
 
Keywords: Alcohol; labelling; calories; evaluation; Responsibility deal; public health policy; obesity 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
Introduction 
Alcohol is a significant source of calories in the diet of UK adults who drink, and a significant 
contributor to obesity.1 On average alcohol provides 8.4% and 6.4% of energy intake for 
adults aged 19 to 64 years, and 65 years and over, respectively.2 The 2015 Public Health 
England report on sugar reduction reports that alcoholic drinks are one of the main 
contributors to sugar in the adult diet.3 An analysis of data from the Health Survey for 
England also found that the mean alcohol calorie consumption was 27% of the 
recommended daily calorie intake in men, and 19% in women on their heaviest drinking day, 
with a positive association  between calories derived from alcohol and obesity.4 This 
relationship has been found in other countries.5 6 
Weight for weight, alcohol and fat contain almost the same number of calories.7 The NHS 
Choices website states that a pint of lager has about the same calorie content as a packet of 
crisps, and that two large glasses of white wine would provide women with nearly 20% of 
their recommended daily calorie intake, as well as putting them over the recommended daily 
limit for regular alcohol consumption.8   However, no country in the world currently requires 
the calorie content of alcohol to be stated on packaging, though it is a measure being 
actively considered in Ireland. 9 10 Martin-Moreno et al. (2013) have noted that consumers 
have less access to health and nutritional information about alcoholic beverages than they 
do about a glass of milk, a bowl of cereal or a soft drink.10 In the UK, 85% of consumers do 
not know the calorie content of a glass of wine.11 12  
A recent report European Commission report on the mandatory labelling of alcoholic 
beverages suggested that industry appears to be increasingly willing to adopt voluntary 
initiatives to offer nutritional information, citing commitments by some alcohol producers.13 
However, relatively little is known about how and to what extent such pledges are 
implemented by alcohol producers in the UK or in other EU countries.    
There is one possible source of evidence on this issue. Many alcoholic drinks producers and 
retailers committed to providing calorie information about alcoholic drinks, as part of the 
Public Health Responsibility Deal (RD) in England, which was launched in 2011 (See Box 1 
and Table 1). The relevant voluntary pledge states: “A3. Awareness of Alcohol Units, 
Calories & other information in the Off-trade: We will provide simple and consistent 
information as appropriate in the off-trade (supermarkets and off-licences) as well as other 
marketing channels (e.g. in-store magazines), to raise awareness of the units, calorie 
content of alcoholic drinks, NHS lower-risk drinking guidelines, and the health harms 
associated with exceeding the guidelines." (See Box 2). 
As part of a wider evaluation of the RD, we collected data on what action signatories to the 
pledge had taken. At that time (October 2014), 50 organisations had committed to this 
pledge, including all the main UK supermarkets, alcohol producers such as Diageo, 
Heineken and Molson Coors, and representative bodies such as the Wine and Spirit Trade 
Association (WSTA), and the British Beer & Pub Association.14 
Supermarkets are a particularly important outlet for alcohol. Evidence given to the House of 
Commons Health Select Committee on alcohol in 2009 noted that one of the biggest 
changes in alcohol availability in recent decades has been purchasing from supermarkets at 
heavily discounted prices, and the use by supermarkets of alcohol as loss leaders to pull in 
customers.15 Off-trade alcohol sales, which includes off licenses and supermarkets, 
accounts for about two-thirds of the alcohol market in Great Britain.16 
 4 
 
This analysis examines whether the RD pledge did result in the provision of information on 
alcoholic beverage calories to consumers. 
 
Methods 
(i) Analysis of RD pledge delivery plans and progress reports 
Upon signing up to the RD, all organisations were asked to provide pledge delivery plans, 
setting out how they would deliver on each pledge they had selected. They were also asked 
to send annual progress reports to the Department of Health, setting out what they had 
achieved in the previous year. The delivery plans and annual progress reports were to be 
made publicly available on the RD website. All delivery plans (n=49) and progress reports (n 
ranged from 35 to 44) that were available up to September 2014 (i.e., including data from 
years 2011-2014) were downloaded into an Excel spreadsheet for analysis and coding. 
Many plans were missing; however, 86% of the 2013-14 delivery plans were available for 
analysis. Each delivery plan was coded independently by two researchers. A third 
researcher resolved any disagreements.  
We coded the actions relating to the calorie pledge into five possible categories: 
1. Organisation gives a specific commitment to provide information direct to consumer (e.g. 
to provide information on product labels); 
2. Organisation refers to indirect or partial provision of information to consumer (e.g. that it 
will provide information on a website, in a customer magazine, or leaflet); 
3. Organisation states that it will provide information, but not to public (e.g. by giving 
information to a wholesaler);  
4. Organisation states no clear commitment to provision of information, or makes no mention 
of calorie labelling in the pledge delivery plan; or 
5. No specific commitment appears to have been made, or it is unclear from the wording 
what the commitment is.  
Data on any activity relating to alcohol calories were also extracted from the progress reports 
and tabulated. 
  
(ii) Availability of calorie information on labels, in stores and online  
We had previously collected labelling data on the top 100 alcohol brands, excluding own-
brands. Details are published elsewhere.17 We used these data (collected in the first half of 
2014) to estimate what proportion of products on UK shelves included calorie information 
(full details available elsewhere, but, in brief, these are labelling data from 156 individual 
product lines, from the top 100 alcohol brands for 2013, excluding own-label products17). 
This analysis was done separately from the analysis of provision of in-store and online 
information (see above). 
Because of the wording of the pledge, it is possible that signatories may only have intended 
it to refer to in-store and online provision of information on alcohol calories.  We therefore 
visited 55 stores in the South of England during June-September 2014 to assess what 
information on calories was provided in the alcohol sections of stores. The convenience 
sample included five city-based stores from each of Aldi, Asda, Co-Op, Lidl, Marks & 
 5 
 
Spencer, Morrison, Sainsbury, Tesco, Waitrose, Spar, and Majestic Wine Warehouse. This 
represents all the supermarkets (and one major wine retailer, Majestic) which had signed the 
A3 pledge. We visited each aisle of the alcohol section including shelf edges and aisle ends, 
to look for labels, or leaflets or other signage.  
Some pledge delivery plans refer to provision of information on websites, so during this 
period we also visited the online shopping websites (where available) of each supermarket 
to check what calorie information was provided on three specific alcohol products (white 
wine, beer and vodka; (47% of the top 156 products were either white wine, beer or vodka). 
At this stage we checked what information was provided about the calorie and unit content of 
any of these products (Table 1). We also searched elsewhere on the supermarket websites 
and on their Facebook pages, for information on alcohol calories. 
 
Results 
 (i) Analysis of pledge delivery plans and progress reports 
Pledge delivery plans: The detail of how signatories would deliver on the pledge to improve 
provision of information on alcohol calorie content was extracted from each delivery plan. 
Over half (28 signatories - 56%) made no mention of calories in their pledge delivery plans. 
Of those that did mention calories, two made a specific pledge to provide information directly 
to customers. Brand Phoenix Ltd committed to having the calorie claims added to all its 5.5% 
products within six months, and Molson Coors stated “our beers' calorie content…is 
currently featured on our Carling (the UK's best-selling lager), Coors Light and Animée beers 
only. This still equates to over 80% of the beer brands we sell in the UK off trade”.  Many 
others included non-specific commitments e.g. “Calorie information will be introduced in due 
course”.  
Overall, most (78%; n=39) pledge delivery plans fell into either Category 4 or 5, indicating 
that no specific pledge had been made, or it was not possible to tell what the specific 
commitment was (Table 2). Examples of pledges in these categories included ‘We are 
exploring with our wineries how we can comply with calorific values on packaging during 
2012” and “We will provide information to our customers on units and calorie content of our 
products when requested to do so”.  
Progress reports: Progress reports were only available for a minority of signatories in 2012 
and 2013, and for most signatories (86%) in 2014. Most progress reports (74%) did not 
mention alcohol calories. 
Fourteen signatories mentioned calorie information but in most cases had not provided 
information direct to consumers, or only in a very limited fashion. For example, one retailer 
reported that it used several channels to raise awareness of alcohol calories, including its 
magazine. However only 1 of 65 articles mentioning alcohol on the relevant part of the 
website explicitly stated the calorie content of alcohol; two others briefly referred to alcohol 
being calorific. 
The Drinkaware website was often (in 40% of cases) used by RD signatories as a way of 
referring customers to health-related information. Several retailers did include calorie 
information on their websites. Sainsbury included calorie content of its own brand wine, 
though not on all own brand alcohol products, and Co-Op provided calorie information on its 
own brand products. Molson Coors provided calorie information on Carling lager and Coors 
light (Animée beer, which had also included calorie information, is no longer sold in the 
 6 
 
UK18).  In one case, a method of calculating calorie content was provided by the signatory on 
a website, but appeared to require a high level of numeracy to understand (See Box 3). 
 
(ii) Availability of calorie information on labels, in stores and online. 
Two of 156 alcohol products examined (1.3%) reported calorie information on the label. No 
calorie information was present in the alcohol section of any of the 55 physical stores we 
visited (See Table 1). There was no information on the Facebook page of the stores under 
review. No calorie information was provided in the online shopping sections of any 
supermarket.  Generally, there was no information about the calories in alcohol on other 
parts of their websites, or in the rare cases where calories in alcohol were mentioned, this 
was difficult to locate. In two cases, supermarkets stated in their delivery plans that they 
provided calorie information on their websites. In one, information about calories in alcohol 
appeared in a separate webpage that was not directly linked to the alcohol sales section of 
the main website, and did not give calorie information about specific alcohol products. The 
second supermarket provided information on calories in alcohol only in the Christmas edition 
of its customer magazine, but not on the website.  
 
Discussion 
Main findings 
Alcohol contributes significant calories to the diet of even moderate drinkers, and provision 
of calorie information to consumers is a potentially important way of helping them reduce 
their calorie intake if they so wish. It also seems reasonable that consumers should be given 
this information in the same way as other foodstuffs.  Nonetheless it is clear from these data 
that few of the organisations which committed to act on this issue as part of the RD had 
taken specific action to provide consumers with alcohol calorie information in either their 
physical or online stores. A minority of signatories provided alcohol calorie information on 
their websites, though the separation of the information from the point of purchase means 
that this information may be unlikely to be seen by consumers or purchasers. Calorie 
information appeared only on the labels of a very few branded products, and on a minority of 
own-brand products (e.g., Sainsbury supermarket provided calorie information on a range of 
its own-brand wines 11). 
The Drinkaware website was often (in 40% of cases) used by RD signatories as a way of 
referring customers to health-related information. This has the major handicap as a source of 
consumer information of being dissociated from the immediate points of sale, and 
consumption. 
What is already known on this topic, and what this study adds 
The public is in favour of alcohol calorie labelling.18  Such labelling was excluded from EU 
law which only covers food and non-alcoholic drinks and requires that labels include 
ingredients and nutritional information. It has been suggested that the exclusion of alcohol is 
due to lobbying by the alcohol industry.19  This study finds that the voluntary pledge by 
industry to provide information on alcohol calories did not lead to any significant provision of 
such information to consumers. Subsequent to our data collection, several producers 
(including Diageo, AB InBev, and Treasury Wine Estates) have stated that they will begin to 
 7 
 
provide calorie information on some products, though provision of information through 
websites rather than on labels appears to be the industry’s preference.1 20 21 22 Even if 
calorie labelling were to be adopted voluntarily, the legibility and clarity of presentation of the 
information will require independent monitoring, as health-related information on alcohol 
product labels is currently unclear and/illegible in around half of products. 23 17 For example, 
the drinking in pregnancy warning logo is smaller on products more likely to be drunk by 
women, and appears in a wide range of colours, with red  - the traditional warning colour in 
the West – only used in 10% of cases.17 Therefore, if calorie information is to be provided 
more widely, it is important to assess not just whether this indeed takes place, but also how 
(e.g. in terms of the colour of text against the background, clarity and size of font) and where 
(front, back and position on label), and in what context (i.e. grouped with the other health 
information, or separated) it appears.  
Limitations and strengths of study 
The study’s main limitation is the absence of many RD signatory progress reports, which 
means that progress may be under-reported. However, given that we also checked websites 
and physical stores as well as labels themselves during the same period, this seems 
unlikely. From a separate analysis of these reports,24 it also appears that if progress was 
made in an earlier period, it tended to be mentioned again in later reports.   
Our findings may not generalise to all stores across England, but given the total absence of 
provision of information in all 55 stores visited, it is unlikely that this is an artefact of the 
sample and may reflect a wider absence of information. The main strength of the study is the 
triangulation of data across many sources: the pledge delivery plans; the progress reports; 
physical stores; websites; house magazines; and online shopping sites. This gives a 
comprehensive picture of the lack of provision of calorie information to consumers. This 
anomalous position was noted in a leader article in “The Grocer” trade magazine, which 
supported the inclusion of calorie information on alcohol product labels.25 The findings also 
raise questions about the likely effectiveness of a voluntary labelling regime, as recently 
recommended by the European Commission,26 particularly if it simply results in information 
being presented on websites, rather than on labels or at the point of sale.  
Conclusions 
One of the stated purposes of the RD was to provide consumers with the information to 
make informed health-related choices, including in relation to the calorie intake associated 
with consumption of alcoholic drinks.   This study indicates that this did not take place in the 
case of alcohol calorie information. Provision of information on alcohol products, including 
their calories, is not just a health issue, but also a matter of consumer rights. In August 2014, 
the Parliamentary All Party Group on Alcohol Misuse called for health warnings on all alcohol 
labels as a key measure to reduce alcohol-related harm, stating that “consumers should 
have the right to make informed decisions about the products they purchase…”.27 Provision 
of alcohol calorie information would contribute to this goal, as well as potentially contributing 
to measures to address the problem of adult obesity. The implementation of calorie labelling 
by industry needs to continue to be carefully monitored to determine whether and how it is 
done. 
 
 
 8 
 
Funding and acknowledgements 
This research was funded by the Policy Research Programme of the Department of Health 
for England via its core support for the Policy Research Unit in Policy Innovation Research 
(PIRU, http://www.piru.ac.uk/). This is an independent report. We are not aware of any 
conflicts of interest amongst members of the research team.  The funder had no role in the 
study design; in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; 
or in the decision to submit the article for publication; and the views expressed are not 
necessarily those of the Department of Health. 
 
Competing interests: No other competing interests declared 
Ethical approval: Not required 
 
 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 1: The Public Health Responsibility Deal 
The Public Health Responsibility Deal (RD) was launched by the 
Department of Health in England in March 2011 as a public-
private partnership involving voluntary agreements by 
businesses and public bodies in which they pledge to make 
public health-promoting changes in the four areas of food, 
alcohol, physical activity, and health at work (organised as four 
networks). The RD involves organisations committing to 
pledges to make changes within their organisation. The RD 
website (https://responsibilitydeal.dh.gov.uk/about/) states 
that it “embodies the Government’s ambition for a more 
collaborative approach to tackling the challenges caused by our 
lifestyle choices”. 
One of the core RD commitments made by participating 
organisations is to “…foster a culture of responsible drinking, 
which will help people to drink within guidelines”. 
 10 
 
 
 
Box 2: Pledge A3:  “What this pledge sets out to achieve, and why this is important 
“(emphasis added) 
“This pledge will help raise people’s awareness and understanding of units, NHS lower-risk 
drinking guidelines, the calorie content of alcoholic drinks and the Chief Medical 
Officer’s advice on drinking during pregnancy. 
This pledge commits off-trade retailers to provide unit and health information for consumers 
in off-trade premises. 
The off-trade sells over 60 per cent of the alcohol consumed in the country. In the last 20 
years the affordability of wines increased by 129 per cent and beer 153 per cent in the off-
trade. In recent years more and more people have been drinking alcohol purchased from 
the off-trade before going out, as a way of saving money. 
Improving awareness of alcohol and calorie content of drinks bought in the off-trade can 
help people make informed choices about when and how much they drink. It enables 
people to better measure their alcohol consumption and understand whether this is in line 
with lower-risk guidelines.” 
 11 
 
 
 
 
Box 3: Wines of Interest Information leaflet on calories in wine 
http://www.winesofinterest.co.uk/acatalog/alcohol-units-and-calories.html 
Accessed 16th Sept 2014 
“How do I work out how many calories there are in a glass of wine? 
Right – another maths lesson then… 
1g of alcohol contains about 7 calories and 1ml of alcohol weighs 0.8g. So we 
first need to multiply the abv (alcohol by volume) percentage of the drink by the 
amount of liquid to find the amount of alcohol. 
Let’s use our 175ml glass of 13.5% abv wine we had earlier, this contains 
23.625ml of alcohol since: 
175ml x 13.5%abv = 23.625ml (of alcohol). 
23.625ml of alcohol is then multiplied by 0.8 to give 18.9g of alcohol which, 
multiplied by 7, is 132.3 calories 
Had you chosen a 125ml glass of 12%abv wine you would have saved yourself 
about 48 calories since: 
125ml x 12%abv = 15ml of alcohol which, multiplied by 0.8 gives 12g of alcohol 
which, multiplied by 7 is 84 calories.” 
 
 12 
 
Table 1: UK supermarkets’ and retailers action on the A3 pledge on alcohol calories: summary of each pledge delivery 
plan, progress reports, and provision of instore, online and other information on alcohol calories  
Supermarkets 
signed to 
pledge A3 
Pledge Delivery plan 
Summary of 
progress report 
When buying individual product online: ** 
Calorie or health-related 
information elsewhere on 
website? 
Wording on calories 
Type of 
pledge 
delivery 
plan * 
Calorie info on product 
page? **  
Unit or other health 
info on product 
page (e.g. CMO 
guidelines)?** 
Aldi Stores Ltd 
“We will be continually talking to our 
off-trade customers advising them 
how to provide clear and consistent 
information on alcoholic units and 
calorie content of alcoholic drinks”  
 
 (3) 
 
No mention of 
calories in 
progress reports 
 
 (i) No (Limestone Coast 
Chardonnay) (ii) No (iii) 
No (Tamova vodka) 
Units/health info: (i) 
None (ii) None (iii) 
None 
CMO health warning and 
information on units on website, 
link to Drinkaware; no calorie 
information. Nothing on 
Facebook page, or in store. 
ASDA 
“In 2012 we will work with the 
Department of Health on the 
introduction of calorie information” 
 
 (5) 
 
No mention of 
calories in 
progress reports 
 
 (i) None (ii) None (iii) 
None  
 
Units/health info: (i) 
ABV and units/bottle  
(ii) ABV only, no unit 
info (iii) ABV and 
units/bottle 
 
No calories, units or other 
information in drinks section. 
One product, low alcohol 
Banrock Station chardonnay, 
displays calories/glass. Nothing 
on Facebook page, or in store. 
Co-operative 
Group Ltd 
 
“The Co-operative Group provides 
simple and consistent information on 
the labels of all own brand beer, wine, 
cider and spirits products about 
calorie content of drinks in addition 
to the information on units and NHS 
drinking guidelines. Calorie content 
has been included on own brand 
wine since 2002.” 
(1) 
Progress report 
notes that 
calorie content 
included on own 
brand wine 
since 2002 
No full online shopping 
website; nothing on 
Facebook. However own 
brand wine, and some 
own brand beer have 
calorie info on product 
label. Some labelling 
information is “per 100ml 
only” not “per bottle”. 
No online shopping 
website. 
Reports on website on corporate 
social responsibility mention the 
RD, units etc. ‘Offers’ leaflet on 
website includes drinkaware but 
not calorie information or units; 
food and drink pages does not 
include information on alcohol 
calories or units. No information 
in stores. 
LIDL UK 
“LIDL UK GmbH will, in close 
cooperation with other food retailers 
and as a member within the Retail 
Practices Subgroup of the 
Responsibility Deal Alcohol Network, 
keep itself informed of the latest 
updates and proposals to further 
the consumer awareness of 
alcohol units, calorie content, NHS 
drinking guidelines and health harms 
from excessive alcohol consumption”. 
(4) (LIDL 
will “keep 
itself 
informed”
) 
No mention of 
calories in 
progress reports 
Nothing on website wine 
section other than ABVs 
of wines; nothing in 
online wine leaflet: 
http://leaflet.lidl.co.uk/b35
c67d3-08f6-43cd-ac91-
2d01fffc2b64/#/1 
 
ABVs only. 
Nothing on Facebook page or in 
stores. 
 13 
 
Supermarkets 
signed to 
pledge A3 
Pledge Delivery plan 
Summary of 
progress report 
When buying individual product online: ** 
Calorie or health-related 
information elsewhere on 
website? 
Wording on calories 
Type of 
pledge 
delivery 
plan * 
Calorie info on product 
page? **  
Unit or other health 
info on product 
page (e.g. CMO 
guidelines)?** 
Majestic Wine 
Warehouse  
 
 
No mention of 
calorie labelling 
in pledge 
delivery plan 
No calorie information.  
Product descriptions 
include ABV and 
units/bottle. 
Information on units and link to 
drinkaware on the CSR page 
http://www.majestic.co.uk/about/
responsibility. Nothing on 
Facebook page or in stores. 
Marks and 
Spencer 
“Our website has a? comprehensive 
and popular health section which 
includes advice on sensible drinking 
http://health.marksandspencer.com/h
ealthy-eating/alcohol. This covers 
NHS sensible drinking guidelines; a 
unit calculator; effects of drinking too 
much including calories and weight 
gain as well as other serious damage 
to your health and personal life…” 
(2) 
Progress report 
states that 
calorie 
information is 
included on 
website (see 4th 
column->) 
No calorie information on 
individual products (beer, 
wine, or vodka).  
No unit or ABV 
information on 
individual products 
(beer, wine, or 
vodka). 
The “Healthy eating website” 
with alcohol calculator etc 
mentioned in the pledge is not 
linked to the alcohol sales 
section of the M&S website, and 
it is not found by searching the 
main M&S website. No 
information in stores. 
 
Morrisons 
“Our customer magazine (published 
every two months with over one 
million copies distributed to stores) 
always features a Here to help page, 
which explains the unit content and 
calorie content of standard alcohol 
measures, such as a glass of wine or 
pint of beer” 
(2) 
Progress report 
mentions calorie 
information in 
customer 
magazine 
No calorie information. 
 
ABV and units/bottle 
for wine, ABV but not 
units for vodka; ABV, 
units/can, CMO 
warning, drinkaware 
link and responsibility 
message for beer 
Beer, wine and spirits general 
section of website has no unit, 
calorie or other health-related 
information. Nothing on 
Facebook page or in stores. 
Past 12 issues of online 
magazine examined; no alcohol 
calorie or unit information on any 
drink product or mentioned in 
any drinks feature. 
 
Sainsbury 
 
“We will continue with existing activity 
and look for new opportunities to 
engage customers, particularly 
around the units and calories 
contained within alcoholic drinks”. 
(5) 
Progress report: 
Calorie content 
included on own 
brand wine. 
Calorie information:  (i) 
No (ii) No (iii) No 
 
Health/unit 
information (i) Unit 
content of bottle and 
ABV only  (ii) ABV 
only (iii) ABV and 
units per bottle only 
None in any of the drinks 
sections (beer & cider, spirits, 
wine) of stores. Searching for 
“calories” or “Drinkaware” or 
“alcohol calories” found nothing 
on 5/9/14. Some own brand 
wines included calorie 
information. 
 
SPAR UK Ltd 
No mention of calorie labelling in 
pledge delivery plan 
(4) 
No mention of 
calories in 
progress reports 
No calorie info on 
website.  
No detail of individual 
products. 
Drink section of website has 
message: “Wine should be 
enjoyed responsibly. For the 
facts visit drinkaware.co.uk”. No 
information in stores.  
 14 
 
Supermarkets 
signed to 
pledge A3 
Pledge Delivery plan 
Summary of 
progress report 
When buying individual product online: ** 
Calorie or health-related 
information elsewhere on 
website? 
Wording on calories 
Type of 
pledge 
delivery 
plan * 
Calorie info on product 
page? **  
Unit or other health 
info on product 
page (e.g. CMO 
guidelines)?** 
Tesco plc 
No mention of calorie labelling in 
pledge delivery plan  
  
(4) 
Progress report: 
“We have 
continued to use 
several 
channels to 
ensure that we 
raise awareness 
of alcohol units 
and calorie 
content. These 
include the 
Tesco Magazine 
(http://www.tesc
omagazine.com, 
the Tesco wine 
club magazine 
and our 
websites”. 
No calorie information for 
products 
 
(i) Units/bottle and 
ABV only (Hardys 
Crest Chardonnay) 
(ii) ABV only, no units 
(iii) Units/bottle and 
ABV only 
No information on calories, or 
other health information on main 
drinks section page. Nothing on 
Facebook page or in stores. 
Some information on calories 
appears in Tesco magazine, in 
an article about Christmas in 
2013: 
www.tescoliving.com/health-
and-wellbeing/healthy-
eating/2013/november/know-
your-units-this-christmas 
 
Waitrose 
 
(5) 
No mention of 
calorie labelling 
in pledge 
delivery plan 
No calorie info for any 
online product;  
 
i) ABV and 
units/bottle only (ii) 
ABV only, no unit info 
(iii) ABV only; no unit 
info 
Calorie information on labels of 
own brand products. No 
information in stores. 
 
* Key: (1) Specific commitment to provide information direct to consumer (e.g. on labels); (2) Indirect or partial provision of information to consumer (e.g. website, magazine, 
leaflet); (3) Provision of information but not to public (e.g. to wholesaler); (4) No clear commitment to provision of information, or no mention of calorie labelling) 
**Key: (i) White wine (Jacobs Creek or similar Chardonnay) (ii) beer (Stella Artois 440 can) (iii) Spirits (Smirnoff Vodka 70cl) 
 
 
 
 
 15 
 
 
Table 2: Type of pledge to which organisation has committed 
Type of pledge commitment 
Number of signatories making that type of 
pledge (%)  
1. Organisation gives a specific commitment to 
provide information direct to consumer (e.g. to 
provide information on product labels) 
5 (10%) 
2. Organisation mentions indirect or partial 
provision of information to consumer (e.g. that it 
will provide information on a website, in a 
customer magazine, or leaflet) 
5 (10%) 
3. Organisation states that it will provide 
information, but not to public (e.g. by giving 
information to a wholesaler)  
1 (2%) 
4. Organisation states no clear commitment to 
provision of information, or makes no mention of 
calorie labelling in the pledge delivery plan 
35 (70%) 
5. No specific commitment appears to have 
been made, or it is unclear from the wording 
what the commitment is  
4 (8%) 
 
 
 
 16 
 
 
 
References 
1. 
Sim F. Alcoholic drinks contribute to obesity and should come with mandatory calorie 
counts. BMJ 2015; 350. 2015. 
2. 
Bates B, Lennox A, Prentice A, Bates C, Page P, Nicholson S, et al. National Diet and Nutrition 
Survey Results from Years 1, 2, 3 and 4 (combined) of the Rolling Programme (2008/2009-
2011/2012). Public Health England, London. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/310995/NDNS_Y1
_to_4_UK_report.pdf. Accessed 26th Ocvtober 2014; 2014. 
3. 
Sugar Reduction: The evidence for action. Public Health England; London, October 2015. 
4. 
Shelton N, Knott C. Association Between Alcohol Calorie Intake and Overweight and Obesity 
in English Adults. Am J Pub Health. 2014; 104:629-31. 
5. 
Schröder H, Morales-Molina J, Bermejo S, Barral D, Mándoli E, Grau M, et al. Relationship of 
abdominal obesity with alcohol consumption at population scale. Eur J Nutr 2007. 2007; 46:369-76. 
6. 
Tanne J. Alcohol, as well as sugary drinks, adds calories to the US diet, finds study. Br Med J  
Nov 21;345:e7898 doi: 101136/bmje7898. 2012. 
7. 
Calories in alcohol. NHS Choices website, available at: 
http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/alcohol/Pages/calories-in-alcohol.aspx. Accessed 14th April 2017. 
8. 
NHS Choices: Calories in alcohol. Available at: 
http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/alcohol/Pages/calories-in-alcohol.aspx. Accessed 24th August 2014. 
9. 
Leo Varadkar has a plan to put calorie counts on beer bottles. Irish Examiner Nov 3rd 2015 
http://www.thejournal.ie/calories-alcohol-2423916-Nov2015/ Accessed 10th Nov 2015. 
10. 
Martin-Moreno J, Harris M, Breda J, Møller L, Alfonso-Sanchez J, Gorgojo L. Enhanced 
labelling on alcoholic drinks: reviewing the evidence to guide alcohol policy. Eur J Public Health. 
2013; 23:1082-7. 
11. 
Sainsburys slaps calorie count labels on own-brand wines. The Grocer, 20th Feb 2014. 
Available at: http://www.thegrocer.co.uk/channels/supermarkets/sainsburys/sainsburys-slaps-
calorie-count-labels-on-own-brand-wines/354775.article. Accessed 26th October 2014. 
12. 
Increasing awareness of invisible calories from alcohol. Royal Society for Public Health, 
November 2014. 
13. 
Labelling of alcoholic beverages: Commission report invites the industry to submit a self-
regulatory proposal. Available at: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-17-551_en.htm. Accessed 
14th April 2017. 
14. 
List of Alcohol pledge A3 signatoriesavailable at:  
https://responsibilitydeal.dh.gov.uk/pledges/pledge/?pl=3. Accessed 23rd August 2014. 
15. 
Health Committee, First report: alcohol. Available at: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmhealth/151/15113.htm. 
Accessed 18th September 2014. 
16. 
Robinson R, Geuem C, Lewsey J, Mackay D, McCartney G, Curnock E, et al. Evaluating the 
impact of the alcohol act on off-trade alcohol sales: a natural experiment in Scotland. Addiction. 
2014; Online first at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/add.12701/pdf. 
17. 
Petticrew M, Douglas N, Knai C, Durand M, Eastmure E, Mays E. Health information on 
alcoholic beverage labels in the UK: has the alcohol industry’s voluntary agreement to improve 
labelling been met? Addiction. 2016; 111:51-5. 
18. 
Molson Coors pulls "ladylike" beer. Marketing Week 24th September 2012  
http://www.marketingweek.co.uk/news/molson-coors-pulls-ladylike-beer/4003968.article. 
Accessed 16th October 2014. 
19. 
EUROCARE website: Label calories on alcohol, says Labour MEP. 
http://www.eurocare.org/library/updates/label_calories_on_alcohol_says_labour_mep. Accessed 
14th October 2014. 
 17 
 
20. 
Diageo commits to calorie labelling. The Drinks Business, 19th March 2015: 
http://www.thedrinksbusiness.com/2015/03/diageo-commits-to-calorie-labeling/. 
21. 
Diageo commits to calorie labelling. 19th March 2015.  Available 
at:http://www.thedrinksbusiness.com/2015/03/diageo-commits-to-calorie-labeling/. Accessed 4th 
April 2017. 
22. 
Pernod ramps up calorie label pledge after EU report. 15th March 2017. 
https://www.thedrinksbusiness.com/2017/03/pernod-ramps-up-calorie-label-pledge-after-eu-
report/. Accessed 4th April 2017. 
23. 
Final report on: Audit of compliance of alcoholic beverage labels available from the off-trade 
with the Public Health Responsibility Deal Labelling Pledge. Work performed by Campden BRI 
(Chipping Campden) Limited, 17 October 2014. 
24. 
Knai C, Petticrew M, Eastmure E, James L, Mehrotra A, Scott C, et al. The Public Health 
Responsibility deal: has a public–private partnership brought about action on alcohol reduction? 
Addiction. 2015; 54:1-10. 
25. 
Leyland A. Alcohol abuse: health warnings a step too far but no harm in more information. 
The Grocer, 16th August 2014. 
26. 
The Drinks Business Trade given one year to develop calorie labelling system Available at: 
https://wwwthedrinksbusinesscom/2017/03/trade-given-one-year-to-develop-calorie-labelling-
system/ Accessed 30th March 2017. 
27. 
All Party Parliamentary Group on Alcohol Misuse Manifesto 2015. Available at: 
http://www.alcoholconcern.org.uk/publications/other-publications/appg-alcohol-misuse-manifesto. 
Accessed 8th August 2014. 
 
 
