 1
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
Official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
Genomic medicine (GM) uses information about a person’s 
genome to improve his or her health. Growing interest in GM 
coincides with heightened recognition of the need for better-
quality evidence to support informed decisions. Therefore, 
the widespread adoption of GM into patient care will require 
high-quality evidence that it improves patient outcomes when 
compared with conventional care. A third trend, which may 
influence the research in genomic medicine, is the inclusion 
of study outcomes that patients say are of greatest concern to 
them.
This focus on patient-relevant outcomes is the hallmark of 
comparative effectiveness research (CER). The purpose of CER 
is to improve the evidence base for making decisions that are 
relevant to patients and other stakeholders. CER encompasses 
the synthesis of existing evidence and the generation of new 
evidence that compares alternative approaches to the preven-
tion, diagnosis, or treatment of a health condition. In the con-
text of genetic tests, CER is applicable both in the analysis of 
individual studies and when conducting systematic reviews of 
a body of evidence. Specifically, after establishing the analytic 
validity (reliability in clinical laboratory practice) and clinical 
validity (diagnostic or prognostic accuracy) of a test, CER is the 
approach for determining how the use of the test impacts health 
outcomes compared with an appropriate alternative (no testing 
or a comparison test).
The purpose of this review is to identify opportunities for 
CER to contribute to making the application of GM to patient 
care more evidence-based and more patient-centered. Previous 
studies have proposed a conceptual framework or focused on 
specific topics such as cancer tumor profiling.1–8 We summarize 
the findings of systematic reviews of CER of specific GM inter-
ventions (“structured review”) and use expert assessment of 
these findings to help identify evidence gaps (“landscape analy-
sis”). Structured literature reviews map the literature landscape 
by identifying what evidence is available and assessing the find-
ings with respect to gaps in the evidence,9 whereas landscape 
analysis provides an overview of a topic by combining a struc-
tured literature review with expert input.10
METHODS
We abstracted and then summarized information from each 
included systematic review (Figure 1). A technical working 
Submitted 10 November 2016; accepted 24 January 2017; advance online publication 13 April 2017. doi:10.1038/gim.2017.21
Comparative effectiveness research (CER) in genomic medicine (GM) 
measures the clinical utility of using genomic information to guide 
clinical care in comparison to appropriate alternatives. We summarized 
findings of high-quality systematic reviews that compared the analytic 
and clinical validity and clinical utility of GM tests. We focused on 
clinical utility findings to summarize CER-derived evidence about GM 
and identify evidence gaps and future research needs. We abstracted 
key elements of study design, GM interventions, results, and study 
quality ratings from 21 systematic reviews published in 2010 through 
2015. More than half (N = 13) of the reviews were of cancer-related 
tests. All reviews identified potentially important clinical applications 
of the GM interventions, but most had significant methodological 
weaknesses that largely precluded any conclusions about clinical util-
ity. Twelve reviews discussed the importance of patient-centered out-
comes, although few described evidence about the impact of genomic 
medicine on these outcomes. In summary, we found a very limited 
body of evidence about the effect of using genomic tests on health 
 
outcomes and many evidence gaps for CER to address.
Genet Med advance online publication 13 April 2017
Key Words: comparative effectiveness research; genomic medicine; 
health policy; patient outcomes; systematic reviews
1Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Center for Translational and Policy Research on Personalized Medicine (TRANSPERS), UCSF Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy and UCSF 
Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA; 2American Institutes for Research, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA; 3Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA; 4Office of Public Health Genomics, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA; 5UnitedHealth Group, Minnetonka, Minnesota, USA; 6Duke Center for Applied Genomics and Precision Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA; 7Center for Medical Technology Policy, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; 8Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA; 9University of California at San Francisco, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Center for Translational and Policy Research on Personalized Medicine 
(TRANSPERS), San Francisco, California, USA. Correspondence: Kathryn A. Phillips (Kathryn.Phillips@ucsf.edu)
Making genomic medicine evidence-based and patient-
centered: a structured review and landscape analysis of 
comparative effectiveness research
Kathryn A. Phillips, PhD1, Patricia A. Deverka, MD, MS2, Harold C. Sox, MD3,  
Muin J. Khoury, MD, PhD4, Lewis G. Sandy, MD, FACP5, Geoffrey S. Ginsburg, MD, PhD6, 
Sean R. Tunis, MD, MSc7, Lori A. Orlando, MD, MHS8 and Michael P. Douglas, MS9
Open
Genetics in medicine
 2
Phillips et al  |  Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
group (TWG) with GM expertise (the members are listed in 
the Supplementary Materials online) reviewed this informa-
tion and suggested ways to portray the current landscape of 
GM. Our research questions were as follows:
1. What is the evidence from systematic reviews of CER of 
GM?
a. What tests, testing indications, comparators, and 
outcomes have been studied?
b. What is the impact of GM on patient outcomes (clin-
ical utility)?
c. Did the systematic reviews use standard methods to 
evaluate the quality of the studies and what did they 
conclude?
d. What did the reviews say about the potential clinical 
role of the GM interventions?
e. Did any studies use patient-reported outcomes (e.g., 
impact on activities of daily living)?
f. 
Did the reviews identify gaps in the evidence about 
patient outcomes? What CER might address those 
gaps?
2. When taking into account both the evidence from the 
systematic reviews and expert assessments, what is the 
current state of CER of GM and its future?
Structured review
We systematically identified, selected, and appraised systematic 
reviews conducted by technology-assessment groups (TAGs), 
which we defined as organizations that assess health technolo-
gies to support clinical practice guidelines or insurance cov-
erage decisions. We limited ourselves to systematic reviews 
because they have several desirable characteristics. Most impor-
tantly for assessing the quality of the body of evidence (our key 
objective), they use widely accepted quality-assessment instru-
ments that incorporate measures of the components of study 
quality. They also choose topics that are important to the public 
at large. For example, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association 
Technology Evaluation Center (BCBSA TEC; now called 
BCBSA Evidence Street) performs systematic reviews for its 
independent Medical Advisory Panel, and other organizations11 
use its reports, and the Agency for Health Care Research and 
Quality (AHRQ) uses public input to inform the choice of top-
ics for systematic reviews. We focused on systematic reviews 
because they are comprehensive by design, bias-free in their 
conduct, and collectively summarize a vast body of individual 
studies.
We describe our approach to identifying systematic reviews 
in Figure 2 and the Supplementary Materials online. We first 
developed a list of potential TAGs based on our review of the 
literature and confirmed this list with the TWG. Using inclu-
sion criteria, we narrowed this to 13 key TAGs (Supplementary 
Materials online). We searched TAG websites using the key 
words “personalized medicine,” “precision medicine,” or 
“genomic testing” and by reviewing report titles. We included 
a systematic review if it summarized multiple studies of CER 
that addressed GM tests (as of December 2015). We limited our 
search to reviews from the past 5 years, which is an empirically 
derived interval after which a systematic review is considered 
outdated.12
We found relevant systematic reviews by BCBSA TEC (9 
reviews), AHRQ (10 reviews), and the Cochrane Collaboration 
(2 reviews). Only two CER reviews were older than 5 years. All 
21 performed at least a Medline search, and five performed a 
gray literature search. All had prespecified inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria. In all the AHRQ and Cochrane reviews, two indi-
viduals independently extracted data from individual studies. 
Fourteen systematic reviews described the standards used to 
rate the risk of bias (Supplementary Materials online).
Data abstraction
We abstracted variables chosen to reflect study objectives and 
approaches used to prioritize topics for CER13 and TWG input 
(Supplementary Materials online). We coded reviews using 
the test(s) included in the review as the unit of analysis, not 
Figure 1 Study design. We conducted a structured literature review by 
abstracting information from each included review and then summarizing 
the results (Table 1; Supplementary Materials online). The reviews, along 
with interviews and assessments by the Technical Working Group, were used 
to develop the landscape analysis.
Structured review
Data Abstraction of
Individual Reviews
(Supplementary Materials)
Summaries of Reviews
(Table 1)
Expert
interviews
Technical
working
group
assessment
Landscape analysis
Figure 2 PRISMA diagram. We conducted a structured literature review 
and identified 348 total evidence reviews on the Technical Assessment 
Websites. After screening, we included 21 in the study.
Total Evidence reviews found on
Technical Assessment Websites
n = 348
Excluded after title review
n = 296
Excluded after
Abstract/Executive
Summary Review
n = 21
Excluded after
Full Text Review n = 10
Exclusion reasons
Full Abstract/Executive Summary
Review
n = 52
Full Text Evidence Review
n = 31
Evidence Reviews included in
Analysis after complete
review/coding
n = 21
3 determined to be systematic review
protocols
2 older than 5 years
2 determined to be future topic briefs
2 comparison is not of genetic testing
but of treatment
1 genetic test of organism not human
Genetics in medicine
 3
Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine  |  Phillips et al
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
each individual study within the review. We categorized the 
reviews according to clinical testing indications (e.g., can-
cer tumor profiling tests). Four authors (K.P., P.D., H.S., and 
M.D.) summarized each review. One author (H.S.) assessed 
the quality of the methods used in individual studies within 
reviews by describing the instruments used to assess qual-
ity and recording the overall quality ratings of the evidence 
(Table 1). We assessed whether our conclusions were likely 
to have been different if we had reviewed individual stud-
ies versus TAGs using two approaches. First, we determined 
whether the TWG reviewed all key conclusions and noted any 
outdated findings. Second, we compared conclusions from an 
included TAG review of sequencing tests for prenatal screen-
ing to recent systematic reviews not included in our study 
because they were not TAG reviews14–16 as well as to key indi-
vidual studies.17,18 We found that these conclusions were simi-
lar and would not have substantively changed the findings of 
our study.
Synthesis of the body of evidence
We first obtained background information by conducting 
semistructured interviews with each TWG member and four 
other experts, including one patient advocate (Supplementary 
Materials online). Later, we asked TWG members to iden-
tify related GM tests that had not been subjected to CER and 
important changes in the evidence since the last study included 
in the 21 reviews. TWG members also commented on the CER 
questions. Responses reflected the individual TWG member’s 
opinion, not a formal process of priority setting.
RESULTS
Table 1 lists the 21 reviews along with their stated objectives 
and their evidence quality ratings (details in Supplementary 
Materials online). Every review found methodological short-
comings and little or no evidence about the impact of GM on 
patient outcomes. Cancer-related tests predominated (tumor 
profiling n = 9; germ-line testing n = 4), whereas the other eight 
reviews were divided among five topics. Twelve reviews dis-
cussed the importance of patient-centered outcomes, although 
most noted the limited direct evidence about these outcomes. 
Two reviews focused on delivery of genomic information to 
patients (communication of risk information and approaches 
to risk assessment). Most reviews (81%) explicitly identified 
comparators, which included no testing, other genomic tests, 
nongenomic tests, clinical criteria, and phenotype-based risk 
scores.
Cancer: tumor profiling for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, 
and/or treatment
Clinical context. Tumor profiling means testing tumor tissue 
for mutations or abnormal expression of gene products (GEP) 
that may be driving malignant behavior. Tumor profiling may 
classify the patient’s probability of recurrent disease or identify 
treatments that target the molecular mechanism of malignant 
growth.
Review topics. Review topics include urine-based tests for 
bladder and prostate cancer; gene expression tests for prostate, 
breast, and colon cancer; tests for cancers of unknown primary 
sites; prognostic tests for common cancers; genetic tests for 
cancer drug metabolism variants; and molecular tests to target 
cancer treatment.
Review conclusions (N = 9)19–27
• 
The best evidence for a gene expression profiling (GEP) 
test shows that OncotypeDx, which estimates the recur-
rence rate after surgery for early stage breast cancer, 
improves predictions based on clinical prognostic fac-
tors alone. Low to moderate risk of bias studies show that 
lower-risk OncotypeDX results are associated with lower 
rates of adjuvant chemotherapy.
• 
No published trials have prospectively measured the 
effect of OncotypeDX testing on clinical outcomes of 
early-stage breast cancer (clinical utility). A randomized 
trial (TAILORx)28 of adjuvant chemotherapy versus no 
chemotherapy is underway involving patients at interme-
diate risk for recurrence by OncotypeDX testing.
• 
In a 2013 review,20 tests for individual mutations (KRAS, 
ALK, EGFR, BRAF) and expression of multiple mRNA 
biomarkers (OncotypeDX, MammaPrint) improved 
prognostication when compared to clinical predictors 
(clinical validity). No study directly assessed whether 
these tests change downstream health outcomes, 
although OncotypeDX results did affect treatment deci-
sion making.
• 
A 2013 review25 of multigene panels to detect targeted 
therapy opportunities in advanced cancer found three 
prospective-retrospective studies using archival tumor 
samples. One compared outcomes of therapy matched 
to a single panel biomarker with unmatched therapy, 
whereas two had no controls.
• 
Studies should measure whether genomic tests lead to 
better clinical outcomes than alternative prognostic 
methods during different stages of common cancers.
Landscape analysis. The evidence base for using genomic tests to 
individualize cancer care is small. Good-quality evidence shows 
an effect on treatment choice in one test–cancer combination 
(OncotypeDX for recurrence of early-stage breast cancer). 
Furthermore, the MINDACT29 and TAILORx28 studies showed 
that the Mammaprint and OncotypeDX GEP panels predicted 
which early-stage breast cancer patients with low risk scores may 
be managed with endocrine therapy and avoid chemotherapy.29 
The outcomes of these large trials involving breast cancer have 
been overall survival, disease-free survival, and survival without 
Genetics in medicine
 4
Phillips et al  |  Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
Table 1 Reviews of comparative effectiveness research of genomic medicine (N = 21)
Year
Organization
Main focus (paraphrased from review)
Assessment of study quality (author summary)
Cancer: tumor profiling for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and/or treatment (N = 9)
2015
AHRQ
Diagnostic tests and treatments for nonmuscle-invasive bladder cancer compared to cytology, 
imaging, and cystoscopy19
Nearly all studies had a medium risk of bias
2014
AHRQ
Prognostic value and test performance associated with 11 prognostic molecular pathology tests for 
cancer treatment20
Evidence quality was low or insufficient for impact of testing on  
decision-making for most tests examined
2014
BCBS TEC
Gene expression profiling tests (Prolaris and OncotypeDx Prostate) for prostate cancer prognosis  
and to predict response to radical prostatectomy vs. active surveillance compared to standard clinical 
criteria23
No systematic assessment of the strength of the evidence
2014
BCBS TEC
Gene expression profiling to select adjuvant chemotherapy in women with node-negative, HR-positive, 
early-stage breast cancer compared to conventional risk assessment tools24
Rated overall risk of bias as low to moderate
2013
AHRQ
PCA3 testing (urine-based molecular testing) for the diagnosis and management of prostate cancer 
compared to serum tPSA, specific isoforms of tPSA, and validated risk assessment calculators21
Insufficient evidence to assess impact on health outcomes
2013
AHRQ
Genetic testing to identify the tissue of origin of the cancer in patients with cancer of unknown 
primary cancer site22
Insufficient to fair-quality evidence that tests change treatment decisions 
and patient outcomes
2013
BCBS TEC
Molecular marker panels to guide selection of targeted cancer treatment25
Noted that evidence was so weak that an assessment against validated 
criteria sets was not possible
2012
AHRQ
Gene expression profiling for predicting outcomes (prognosis and response to treatment) in patients 
with stage II colorectal cancer compared to clinical data and histological examination of the tumora,26
No systematic assessment of the strength of the evidence
2010
AHRQ
CYP2D6 for tamoxifen in breast cancer, KRAS for anti-EGFR antibodies in colorectal cancer, and  
BCR-ABL1 for tyrosine kinase inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukemia compared to no testing27
There are no validated quality assessment criteria for pharmacogenetics 
studies. Most studies were underpowered
Cancer: cancer risk assessment (N = 4)
2014
BCBS TEC
Fecal DNA testing (Cologuard) as a strategy for colorectal cancer screening compared to fecal 
immunochemical testing and screening colonoscopy33
Only one study available—quality was rated by reviewers as “good.”
2013
AHRQ
Risk assessment, genetic counseling, and genomic testing for BRCA-related cancer compared to 
general breast cancer risk stratification models and familial risk stratification models31
Rated the quality of individual studies and systematic reviews. Study ratings 
were fair and fair to good. No quality ratings for studies of interventions to 
reduce cancer risk.
2012
Cochrane
Cancer genomic risk assessment services for patients at risk for familial breast cancer compared to 
alternative models of service delivery34
None of the studies had a low risk of bias
2012
AHRQ
Fecal DNA testing to screen for colorectal cancer in adults at average risk for colorectal cancer 
compared to invasive screening32
Test acceptability and adherence: fair to poor evidence. No studies directly 
compare fecal DNA testing with immunochemical tests for detection of fecal 
blood
Chronic conditions and neurodevelopmental disorders (N = 2)
2015
AHRQ
Genome-wide assays and conventional G-banded karyotyping to test for developmental disabilities 
compared to standard-of-care diagnostic strategya,38
No systematic assessment of the strength of the evidence
2015
BCBS TEC
Chromosomal microarray testing to identify copy number variations in children with global 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder37
No systematic assessment of the strength of the evidence
Pharmacogenetic testing (includes tests for drug-metabolizing enzymes and tests not included in another category) (N = 2)
2013
BCBS TEC
CYP2D6 genotyping to direct tamoxifen treatment regimen choices for patients at high risk for primary 
breast cancer or breast cancer recurrence compared to no testing40
Analytic validity studies were small, leading to confidence intervals that 
were too wide to prove an association between these variables; therefore, 
evidence on clinical utility was inconclusive
2013
AHRQ
Testing (CYP2C19 variants and phenotypic testing) to identify patients who are most likely to benefit 
from clopidogrel-based antiplatelet therapy and to guide therapy compared to phenotypic testing  
(for platelet reactivity) or no testing39
Risk of bias in the assessment of prognostic effects rated as low to moderate. 
Evidence for use of genomic tests to predict response to the clopidogrel 
rated as insufficient
Prenatal screening (N = 2)
2014
BCBS TEC
Sequencing-based testing for T13, T18, and sex chromosome aneuploidies compared to traditional 
combined serum-based and ultrasound-based prenatal screening strategy in high-risk and average-risk 
pregnancies48
Low risk of bias, except in the domain of patient selection
2012
BCBS TEC
Sequencing-based testing for noninvasive prenatal screening for trisomy 21, 18, and 13 compared to 
traditional serum and ultrasound testing strategies49
Three studies of clinical validity had low risk of bias. Five clinical validity 
studies failed to describe the assembly of the study cohort or controls; one 
had a high risk of bias.
Population screening for risk assessment (N=1)
2010
Cochrane
Communicating actual and hypothetical DNA-based disease risk estimates on risk-reducing behaviors 
(smoking, diet, activity, vitamin use) and motivation to undertake such behaviors compared to  
non-DNA–based disease risk estimates or no disease risk estimates50
None of the 21 studies had a low risk of bias, and the reviewers rated 
protection against bias as “generally poor”
Whole-exome/whole-genome sequencing and testing for rare diseases (N = 1)
2013
BCBS TEC
Exome sequencing for diagnosing patients with suspected genetic disorders that are caused by 
mutations in a single gene compared to Sanger sequencing51
Quality criteria for exome sequencing do not exist; therefore, assessment of 
study quality was not possible
Reviews were placed into only one testing indication category, although some were applicable to multiple categories.
AHRQ, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; BCBS TEC, Blue Cross Blue Shield Technical Evaluation Center; HR, hormone receptor; PCA3, prostate cancer gene 3; tPSA, total prostate-specific antigen.
aTechnical Brief (rapid, early look at new technology that systematically identifies but does not synthesize evidence).
Genetics in medicine
 5
Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine  |  Phillips et al
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
distant metastases. However, the RxPONDER trial (evaluation 
of OncotypeDX in node-positive patients) did involve patient 
advocates in the design of the study and includes quality of life 
and other patient-reported outcomes.11
Although GEP tests can estimate prognosis (clinical validity), 
CER should assess its effect on clinical outcomes (clinical util-
ity). CER could also focus on colorectal, lung, skin, and hema-
tologic cancers, for which tests have been developed and could 
be useful.30 The one review that assessed multiple molecular 
markers to target treatment found no high-quality evidence 
and highlighted the methodological complexities of designing 
unbiased studies to measure clinical utility.25
Cancer risk assessment
Clinical context. Detecting genes that are associated with an 
increased probability of developing cancer or harboring an 
undiagnosed cancer may lead to more intense surveillance or 
early treatment.
Review topics. Review topics include fecal DNA testing for 
colorectal cancer risk and genomic risk assessment for breast 
cancer risk.
Review conclusions (N = 4)31–34
• 
Fecal DNA testing can detect colorectal cancer and large 
adenomas that are likely to become malignant. The only 
study of a currently marketed test measured sensitiv-
ity and specificity (clinical validity), but not the added 
impact of testing on clinical outcomes.34
• 
Short-term patient outcomes such as reduced distress and 
accuracy of perceived risk improve after breast cancer risk 
assessment.
• 
An intact chain of evidence leads from a strong fam-
ily history of breast cancer to GM testing for BRCA1/2 
to better outcomes after prophylactic bilateral mastec-
tomy for BRCA mutation carriers,35,36 but no studies have 
directly measured the impact of BRCA testing on health 
outcomes. Existing studies lack real-world settings or 
diverse at-risk populations.
• 
Studies should examine consequences of testing for indi-
viduals and families, including acceptability to patients, 
adherence to screening, delivery of genomic testing, and 
models to estimate the incremental net benefit of testing 
and optimal testing intervals.
Landscape analysis. The list of inherited genetically determined 
variations in cancer risk is growing, as is the demand for genomic 
approaches to risk assessment. The included systematic reviews 
found no studies of clinical impact on disease outcomes. Targets 
for CER include family history and BRCA testing to identify 
breast/ovarian cancer risk and family histories of colorectal 
cancer and testing for mutations in the five genes associated 
with Lynch syndrome.30 The availability of several genomic tests 
for the same cancer presents opportunities for head-to-head 
comparisons. In addition to clinical outcomes, these studies 
should evaluate the acceptability of the tests and follow-up rates 
after abnormal test results.
Chronic conditions including neurodevelopmental delays
Clinical context. Among children with delayed cognitive 
development, identifying a gene that is associated with a 
specific condition has potential benefits, including informed 
reproductive decision making, a firmer prognosis, access 
to needed services, avoidance of unnecessary testing, and, 
possibly, improved health outcomes.
Review topics. Review topics include testing for developmental 
delay, intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorder.
Review conclusions (N = 2)37,38
• 
Observational, noncomparative studies have mea-
sured the yield of chromosomal microarray testing for 
gene copy number variants (which are more common 
in developmentally disabled children) and the actions 
taken by families. The effects of these actions and 
whether they would have occurred without GM testing 
are unknown.
• 
No study has compared the clinical outcomes of genomic 
testing for neurodevelopmental disorders with no testing.
• 
Comparative studies should compare positive and nega-
tive outcomes important to patients and their families, 
including the impact on reproductive decision making.
Landscape analysis. Chronic conditions have a high health 
burden and impact family members. Testing could potentially 
be useful for a large number of chronic conditions, but our 
selection of reviews addressed only neurodevelopmental 
delays in children (two reviews). Tests for familial 
hypercholesterolemia30 offer other opportunities for CER 
studies of the incremental benefits and harms of genomic 
testing. Because genes related to chronic diseases typically 
have low penetrance and high heterogeneity, assessing the 
impact of genomic testing on health outcomes will most likely 
require very large populations, suggesting the need for disease 
registries. Although the protracted course of chronic disease 
implies the need for long follow-up, the effect of genomic 
testing could lead relatively quickly to interventions that affect 
short-term patient-centered outcomes.
Pharmacogenetic testing
Clinical context. The metabolism of some drugs (conversion 
to an active form or an inactive form) is under genetic control. 
Mutations in the genes for enzymes that metabolize drugs 
may lead to too much or too little active drug when physicians 
prescribe standard doses. A pharmacogenetic test aims to 
detect a genetic basis for differences in the response to a drug.
Review topics. Review topics include testing for CYP2C19 
genetic variants to guide antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery 
disease (clopidogrel) and testing for CYP2D6 genetic variants 
Genetics in medicine
 6
Phillips et al  |  Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
to guide tamoxifen therapy for women at high risk for primary 
breast cancer or recurrence.
Review conclusions (N = 2)39,40
• 
A heterogeneous body of evidence regarding the effects 
of testing for CYP2C19 variants on clinical outcomes 
is insufficient to show that testing or CYP2C19 status 
alters cardiovascular event rates. Studies were small, 
had short-term outcomes, and seldom reported clinical 
outcomes.
• 
Trials of the impact of CYP2D6 testing on breast cancer 
outcomes have not been performed, probably because the 
evidence that variants in the CYP2D6 gene affect clinical 
outcomes is observational, inconsistent, and of only mod-
erate quality.
• 
Studies should focus on standardizing testing methods 
and directly comparing the impact of testing strategies on 
patient-relevant clinical outcomes in large trials.
Landscape analysis. The two reviews identified only one small 
trial that measured the impact of pharmacogenetic testing 
on clinical outcomes. Since the completion of the systematic 
review, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and 
Mayo Clinic have been sponsoring a large pragmatic trial 
(TAILOR-PCI) to evaluate use of CYP2C19 genotyping 
to guide the choice between clopidogrel and ticagrelor. 
The purpose of this study was to determine whether using 
pharmacogenetic (PGx) testing to guide anti-platelet therapy 
improves cardiovascular outcomes following coronary 
stent placement in patients with impaired activation of 
clopidogrel.41 There are many other opportunities to conduct 
CER studies of PGx tests because nearly 200 drugs contain 
pharmacogenetic information.42 For example, three high-
quality trials published in 2013 showed that, overall, a clinical 
algorithm was a better approach than PGx testing for dosing 
either warfarin or acenocoumarol and phenprocoumon and 
achieving desired states of anticoagulation.43–45 PGx testing 
might impact several conditions (e.g., infectious disease, 
mental health conditions, Stevens-Johnson syndrome).46 
Further opportunities for CER include comparing PGx 
testing before starting treatment versus prescribing without 
testing. This strategy involves having access to PGx data 
at the point of care and requires access to clinical decision 
support but overcomes many of the logistical hurdles that 
have limited clinical integration of PGx testing.47
Prenatal screening
Clinical context. Aneuploidies (an abnormal number of 
autosomal or sex chromosomes) often lead to developmental 
abnormalities, the best known of which is Down syndrome 
(trisomy 21). Until recently, noninvasive tests for aneuploidies 
were not specific enough to act upon and therefore required 
tissue sampling for confirmatory karyotyping. Sequencing 
DNA from maternal serum can detect fragments of fetal DNA, 
which are present as early as 8–10 weeks of gestation.
Review topics. Review topics include sequencing-based tests 
for fetal Down syndrome (trisomy 21) and other aneuploidies.
Review conclusions (N = 2)48,49
• 
The goals of the studies were to measure sensitivity, mea-
sure specificity, and measure posttest probabilities, but 
not to measure the clinical impact of fetal DNA testing 
versus other noninvasive tests for aneuploidies.
• 
Tests for aneuploidies in maternal serum are nearly 100% 
specific (rare false-positive results) and more sensitive 
than conventional tests. The study’s risk of bias was low.
• 
The posttest probabilities of aneuploidies after positive 
and negative test results were better than conventional 
screening tests, thereby providing indirect evidence of 
better clinical utility for DNA sequencing–based tests for 
trisomy 21, trisomy 18, and trisomy 13.
• 
No studies measured patient-centered outcomes.
• 
Future studies should compare all potential screening 
strategies and prospectively examine outcomes in aver-
age-risk populations and screening for other chromo-
somal abnormalities.
Landscape analysis. Prenatal screening for fetal chromosomal 
abnormalities is considered the standard of care in the United 
States for women at high risk. Because of its very high specificity, 
cell-free DNA screening is a strong alternative to testing for 
maternal serum markers and fetal ultrasound and should result 
in fewer invasive procedures to perform karyotyping. CER 
studies could compare parent preferences for further testing 
after learning the results of DNA testing versus conventional 
noninvasive testing, explore ethical questions, and study 
patient, family, and system effects of expanding prenatal testing 
to average-risk populations.
Population screening for risk assessment
Clinical context. DNA-based tests can detect genes that 
increase the risk of diseases like breast cancer, lung cancer, 
or diabetes. In some cases, detecting such genes could lead to 
preventive measures (e.g., bilateral mastectomy for carriers of 
BRCA mutations, which increases the risk of breast cancer) or 
changes in risky behaviors.
Review topics. Review topics include effects of communicating 
DNA-based risk estimates on risk-reducing behaviors.
Review conclusions (N = 1)50
• 
Larger and better-quality randomized, control trials 
should examine patient-centered outcomes, including 
behavior and unintended adverse effects. Sample sizes 
should be large enough to detect small effects.
Genetics in medicine
 7
Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine  |  Phillips et al
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
• 
Poor-quality evidence suggests that communicating 
genetic disease risk has little or no impact on smoking or 
physical exercise.
• 
No studies had a low risk of bias or compared genomic 
test and conventional risk factor counseling versus coun-
seling alone.
Landscape analysis. Although risky behaviors are a major 
health threat, current evidence does not support claims that 
DNA-based risk assessments motivate behavior change. The 
key unanswered question is the added effect of genomic risk 
information on clinical outcomes when combined with and 
compared to conventional testing, family history, clinical risk 
factors, and treatment. Such studies require a comparison 
group that receives conventional care but no genomic testing. 
Several randomized trials involved in the only systematic 
review that focused on provision of genetic information to 
reduce risk behaviors (e.g., smoking, diet, physical activity) 
did meet this study design criterion but were of low quality. 
The best approach to assessing the impact of genomic testing 
on risky behaviors such as cigarette smoking may be to study 
screening for mutations in highly penetrant genes in patients 
with a target condition for which effective interventions exist. 
Such studies should examine whether genomic information 
has an incremental impact on behavior and outcomes by using 
carefully designed comparators.
Whole-exome sequencing and whole-genome sequencing 
and testing for rare diseases
Clinical context. Disorders that present with multiple 
anomalies, often early in life, suggest a mutation in a single 
gene. These disorders can be difficult to diagnose because of 
their rarity, nonspecific phenotype, and lack of a well-defined 
pathway to a diagnosis. Establishing a genetic cause can lead 
to specific treatment and to establishing the carrier status of 
family members.
Review topics. Review topics include sequencing for disorders 
caused by a single gene.
Review conclusions (N = 1)51
• 
Sequencing may end “diagnostic odysseys” for patients 
and inform reproductive decisions, but the only informa-
tion regarding clinical utility is anecdotal (no systematic 
study of clinical impact).
• 
No studies of the broader uses of sequencing tests.
• 
Ethical issues, such as the consequences of pursuing sec-
ondary findings, require study.
Landscape analysis. Opportunities for CER studies may 
increase as the indications for whole-exome sequencing 
(WES) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) expands. 
Testing only to diagnose a suspected rare disease will have 
a small public health impact due to low prevalence and lack 
of treatments. Evidence of clinical utility is lacking for the 
broader use of WES and WGS beyond diagnosis of rare 
diseases. The American College of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics guidelines on the return of secondary findings 
from WES and WGS list some potentially important 
tests for CER studies such as detection of genetic familial 
hypercholesterolemia.52,53
DISCUSSION
In summary, we found a very limited body of evidence about 
the effect of using genomic tests on health outcomes and many 
evidence gaps for CER to address. Like the systematic reviews, 
we defined clinical utility as improved health outcomes trig-
gered by a test result and mediated by changes in patient behav-
ior and clinical decisions. We also found a lack of evidence for 
effects on intermediate outcomes (e.g., avoiding unnecessary 
care, improving access to services, or providing prognostic or 
predictive information), which negates efforts to build a chain 
of evidence from test results through these intermediate out-
comes to altered clinical outcomes.
Key implications of our findings for research and policy are 
presented here.
Address important questions
Two important decisions relevant to CER involve whether to 
perform a test and what to do with patients at intermediate 
risk or with uncertain test results. The first decision addresses 
the question “Is the test result likely to change the treatment 
plan suggested by my clinical assessment?” A CER study design 
might compare health-related outcomes after the clinical 
assessment alone with outcomes after performing the assess-
ment plus a GM test. The second decision is in regard to what 
to do in ambiguous situations. A study design might randomly 
assign patients with intermediate-risk test results to receive 
either low-intensity treatment or high-intensity treatment.
Diversify the evidence base
Most of the reviews focused on cancer; however, many oncol-
ogy-specific GM tests known to have promising evidence sup-
porting their use in clinical practice were not included in the 
reviews because of either their scope or their timing. In addi-
tion to oncology, active areas of research in neurology, psychia-
try, cardiology, and rare disorders suggest opportunities for 
future studies and evidence syntheses.54 The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention’s Office of Public Health Genomics cat-
egorize genetic tests in three tiers according to whether they 
have a base of synthesized evidence.30 The agency’s list of tests 
categorized as “Tier 2” would be attractive targets for future 
CER studies because they are mentioned in clinical practice 
guidelines or Food and Drug Administration labeling, but the 
supporting evidence is insufficient to guide clinical use. Finally, 
even the best studies focused on how test results affected deci-
sion-making by clinicians rather than by patients. Missing are 
high-quality studies comparing the effect of different mod-
els for communicating DNA-based disease risk estimates on 
patient motivation to take appropriate actions.
Genetics in medicine
 8
Phillips et al  |  Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
Use established methods to improve the evidence base
We found only a few randomized trials designed to assess the 
impact of GM testing on patient outcomes. However, obser-
vational studies (cohort, retrospective-prospective, single 
arm) and use of indirect evidence (modeling) can also com-
pare clinical utility, albeit with less certain results. Studies to 
establish analytic and clinical validity should precede studies 
to measure clinical utility to ensure that study participants are 
exposed to accurate and reliable tests that could change patient 
care. Many of the included tests had good evidence regarding 
analytical validity but lacked a chain of evidence leading from 
test results to clinical outcomes. Several publications have pro-
vided methodological guidance for studying genomic tests.55–57 
GM has some characteristics that may require more complex 
analyses than other types of interventions (e.g., analyzing the 
impact of inherited mutations on family members), although 
conventional study designs can still be used. Using established 
methods could reduce concerns that GM is subject to higher 
evidence standards than other interventions.
Include outcomes that matter to patients
For genomic tests to become routine practice, using them 
should favorably impact outcomes that matter to patients. To 
determine whether GM is fulfilling its promise, patient-cen-
tered CER should compare GM tests plus non-GM risk assess-
ment versus non-GM risk assessment alone, other GM tests, 
or both. Research team leaders should use real-world settings 
and seek advice from patients about which outcomes matter 
most.58
Use consistent and unbiased study methods
In the future, the evidence for individualized patient care will 
increasingly come from statistically reliable subgroup analyses 
derived from patient-level meta-analyses. These meta-analyses 
require many large, high-quality studies. Some evidence gaps 
in the systematic reviews were due to poor-quality research 
that could not support any conclusions. Moreover, the studies 
used diverse study designs, tests, study populations, and out-
come measures, which would make it difficult to draw conclu-
sions from a pooled study population. To raise the standard of 
evidence, GM researchers should cooperate to establish study 
quality standards.
Keep pace with technology changes
As GM evolves beyond single-gene tests, CER studies must 
keep pace. Only two of our systematic reviews covered mul-
tigene tests, WES, and WGS. Multigene tests are complex and 
evolving. A recent National Academy of Medicine report noted 
the obstacles and recommended several approaches to address 
them.59 Tumor-agnostic, biomarker-driven clinical trials such 
as NCI-MATCH, SWOG’s LUNG-MAP, and the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology’s TAPUR are evidence of progress. 
Recent publications about WES in rare diseases, cancer, and 
complex disorders suggest the need to address current evidence 
gaps about personal and clinical utility soon.53,60
Our review suggests opportunities to close important evi-
dence gaps about using genomic tests; however, additional 
methods-development work is needed. Methodological topics 
that need ongoing stakeholder-informed dialogue include the 
following.
Patient preferences
The purpose of CER is to design and conduct studies that meet 
the information needs of patients, clinicians, and policymak-
ers facing decisions. Engaging these stakeholders as partners 
in all phases of the research process should ensure that future 
CER meets their information needs. Meaningful engagement 
of patients in GM CER will require attention to numeracy and 
genetic literacy and the willingness to engage in shared deci-
sion-making about performing genomic tests and their inter-
pretation. For example, noninvasive prenatal screening tests for 
fetal chromosomal abnormalities (i.e., trisomy 21, 18, and 13) 
have become standard clinical practice on the basis of their clin-
ical validity and private insurer coverage.48 However, questions 
remain about whether clinicians and patients fully understand 
the risks and benefits of using these tests, which also detect sex 
chromosome aneuploidies and microdeletions, as compared to 
alternative screening methods that do not detect them. Also, 
we lack research about how patients and clinicians make deci-
sions after positive test results and about between-partner con-
cordance about pregnancy termination decisions in patient 
subgroups stratified by maternal risk, race, ethnicity, or socio-
economic status.61,62 Another issue is that outcomes of WES 
and WGS may lead to gains in well-being that go beyond the 
impact on morbidity and mortality (e.g., reassurance or provid-
ing a diagnosis for an untreatable condition).51 GM tests may 
also harm. CER questions to address might include whether 
WES tests increase personal well-being beyond conventional 
testing and genetic counseling and under what circumstances. 
The answers to these questions might inform the debate about 
whether to consider personal utility when developing practice 
guidelines and coverage policies.
Behavior change strategies
Changing risky behaviors is difficult, and the motivation to 
change is part of the problem.50 Of particular relevance to com-
mon, chronic conditions is whether current risk assessment 
approaches such as obtaining family histories are sufficient or 
whether taking the next step and performing genetic testing 
lead to better health outcomes.38 In the field of cardiovascular 
disease, CER questions involve the following: the net benefits 
to patients, families, and society from adding genetic infor-
mation on cardiovascular disease to conventional risk assess-
ment approaches, such as family risk history and clinical risk 
scores, and whether providing genetic information in addition 
to information about smoking, hypertension, and hypercholes-
terolemia leads to adopting a healthier lifestyle or more com-
prehensive preventive therapy and, ultimately, better cardiac 
outcomes. Trials to date have shown little or no effect on health-
risk behaviors.
Genetics in medicine
 9
Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine  |  Phillips et al
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
Value
With decreasing costs of next-generation sequencing, pro-
ponents of multigene panels have argued that it is more effi-
cient to test for multiple mutations simultaneously rather than 
to conduct multiple single-gene tests. High-quality evidence 
is lacking.63 Advocates for using multigene panels for tumor 
profiling argue that future treatment advances depend on an 
understanding of tumor biology gained through tumor bio-
marker panels, not conventional classifications based on tumor 
histology, grade, and stage.64 Key questions include the optimal 
gene panel size, how to select treatments based on presumed 
driver mutations, and the role of tumor genome heterogene-
ity.25,65,66 CER could address the key question regarding how 
often patients are matched to potential treatments using large, 
tumor-agnostic multigene panels and the clinical outcomes ver-
sus tumor-specific single-gene testing and clinical factors alone.
Our study had limitations. We examined systematic reviews 
rather than individual CER studies, and we selected system-
atic reviews commissioned or conducted by TAGs. Thus, our 
results do not represent the entire universe of CER studies of 
GM. This strategy did mean that experienced teams of sys-
tematic reviewers performed the included reviews using stan-
dardized definitions of study quality, which was important to 
one of our principal goals: to form credible judgment regard-
ing the quality of CER for GM. Although the TWG found the 
conclusions of the reviews to be representative of the broader 
literature, we did not systematically search for recent articles 
on these topics. Although we included a range of TAGs in our 
search, 2 of them (AHRQ and BCBSA TEC) produced all but 
2 of the 21 included systematic reviews and therefore provide 
a predominately United States–focused perspective. Finally, to 
address our study objectives, we had to categorize and summa-
rize across disparate reviews and augment the review findings 
with expert opinions. Therefore, readers should not consider 
our results definitive. Still, the included systematic reviews 
cover most of the spectrum of clinical topics addressed by GM. 
Future research should examine the cost-effectiveness and bud-
get impact and how evidence can be aligned with the current 
use of tests in the best way possible.
In conclusion, our findings can inform decisions about where 
to focus future research and policy initiatives. Over the next few 
decades, patients, clinicians, and policymakers will be asking 
whether the added information provided by GM leads to better 
health outcomes than using conventional clinical information, 
such as family history and non-GM tests. CER is the research 
design for answering these questions.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper 
at http://www.nature.com/gim
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the experts who provided back-
ground information and participated in expert interviews: James 
P
. Evans, Robert Nussbaum (Invitae and UCSF), Sharon F. Terry, 
(Genetic Alliance), and Bruce Quinn (Bruce Quinn Associates). We 
also acknowledge insightful comments from Stanley Ip (PCORI). 
None of the consulting experts received compensation, and each 
provided written permission to be to acknowledged. One author 
(H.S.) is an employee of the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 
Institute (PCORI). All statements in this report, including its find-
ings and conclusions, are solely the responsibility of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the views of PCORI, its Board 
of Governors, or its Methodology Committee. Nothing in this 
manuscript should be inferred to represent the viewpoints of the 
National Institutes of Health. 
DISCLOSURE
This study was funded in part by a National Human Genome 
Research Institute grant (R01HG007063 to K.A.P
.) and a National 
Cancer Institute grant to the UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehen-
sive Cancer Center (5P30CA082013). In addition, research reported 
in this publication was partially funded through PCORI contracts (to 
K.A.P
., P
.A.D., S.R.T., and L.A.O.). H.C.S. is an employee of PCORI. 
The other authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
 
1. 
Ginsburg GS, Kuderer NM. Comparative effectiveness research, genomics-
enabled personalized medicine, and rapid learning health care: a common 
bond. J Clin Oncol 2012;30:4233–4242.
 
2. 
Khoury MJ, Rich EC, Randhawa G, Teutsch SM, Niederhuber J. Comparative 
effectiveness research and genomic medicine: an evolving partnership for 21st 
century medicine. Genet Med 2009;11:707–711.
 
3. 
Deverka PA, Haga SB. Comparative effectiveness research and demonstrating 
clinical utility for molecular diagnostic tests. Clin Chem 2015;61:142–144.
 
4. 
IJzerman M, Manca A, Keizer J, Ramsey S. Implementation of comparative 
effectiveness research in personalized medicine applications in oncology: 
current and future perspectives. J Comp Eff Res. 2015;5:65–72.
 
5. 
Ramsey SD, Veenstra D, Tunis SR, Garrison L, Crowley JJ, Baker LH. How 
comparative effectiveness research can help advance ‘personalized medicine’ 
in cancer treatment. Health Aff (Millwood) 2011;30:2259–2268.
 
6. 
Thariani R, Wong W, Carlson JJ, et al.; Center for Comparative Effectiveness 
Research in Cancer Genomics (CANCERGEN). Prioritization in comparative 
effectiveness research: the CANCERGEN Experience. Med Care 2012;50:388–
393.
 
7. 
Phillips KA, Trosman JR, Kelley RK, Pletcher MJ, Douglas MP, Weldon CB. 
Genomic sequencing: assessing the health care system, policy, and big-data 
implications. Health Aff (Millwood) 2014;33:1246–1253.
 
8. 
Phillips KA. Closing the evidence gap in the use of emerging testing 
technologies in clinical practice. JAMA 2008;300:2542–2544.
 
9. 
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Committee on Standards for 
Systematic Reviews of Comparative Effectiveness Research. Eden J, Levit L, 
Berg A, Morton S (eds). Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for 
Systematic Reviews. National Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2011.
 
10. Thariani R, Wong W, Carlson JJ, et al.; Center for Comparative Effectiveness 
Research in Cancer Genomics (CANCERGEN). Prioritization in comparative 
effectiveness research: the CANCERGEN Experience. Med Care 2012;50:388–
393.
 
11. Ramsey SD, Barlow WE, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, et al. Integrating comparative 
effectiveness design elements and endpoints into a phase III, randomized clinical 
trial (SWOG S1007) evaluating oncotypeDX-guided management for women 
with breast cancer involving lymph nodes. Contemp Clin Trials 2013;34:1–9.
 
12. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: Archived EPC Evidence Reports. 
http://archive.ahrq.gov/clinic/epcarch.htm. Accessed 9 September 2016.
 
13. PCORI: Generation and Prioritization of Topics for Funding Announcements. 
2015. http://www.pcori.org/research-results/how-we-select-research-topics/
generation-and-prioritization-topics-funding-4. Accessed 13 April 2016.
Genetics in medicine
 10
Phillips et al  |  Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine
SYSTEM
 REvIEw
 
14. Gil MM, Quezada MS, Revello R, Akolekar R, Nicolaides KH. Analysis of cell-
free DNA in maternal blood in screening for fetal aneuploidies: updated meta-
analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2015;45:249–266.
 
15. Gregg AR, Skotko BG, Benkendorf JL, et al. Noninvasive prenatal screening for 
fetal aneuploidy, 2016 update: a position statement of the American College of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genet Med 2016;18:1056–1065.
 
16. Langlois S, Brock JA, Wilson RD, et al.; Genetics Committee. Current status in 
non-invasive prenatal detection of Down syndrome, trisomy 18, and trisomy 13 
using cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 2013;35:177–
183.
 
17. Norton ME, Wapner RJ. Cell-free DNA analysis for noninvasive examination of 
trisomy. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2582.
 
18. Zhang H, Gao Y, Jiang F, et al. Non-invasive prenatal testing for trisomies 21, 
18 and 13: clinical experience from 146,958 pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2015;45:530–538.
 
19. Chou R, Buckley D, Fu R, et al. Emerging Approaches to Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Non–Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer. AHRQ: Pacific Northwest 
Evidence-based Practice Center. 25 October 2015.
 
20. Meleth S, Reeder-Hayes K, Ashok M, et al. Technology Assessment of Molecular 
Pathology Testing for the Estimation of Prognosis for Common Cancers. AHRQ: 
RTI International–University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Evidence-based 
Practice Center. 29 May 2014.
 
21. Bradley L, Palomaki G, Gutman S, Samson D, Aronson N. PCA3 Testing for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Prostate Cancer. AHRQ: Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield Association Technology Evaluation Center Evidence-based Practice 
Center. April 2013.
 
22. Meleth S, Whitehead N, Swinson-Evans T, Lux L. Technology Assessment on 
Genetic Testing or Molecular Pathology Testing of Cancer with Unknown 
Primary Site to Determine Origin. AHRQ: RTI International-University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill Evidence-based Practice Center. 20 February 2013.
 
23. Ratko T. Gene Expression Analysis for Prostate Cancer Management. Blue Cross 
and Blue Shield Technology Evaluation Center. January 2015.
 
24. Glacy J, Chopra R. Gene Expression Profiling in Women with Lymph Node-
Negative Breast Cancer to Select Adjuvant Chemotherapy. Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield Technology Evaluation Center. October 2014.
 
25. Mark D, Ratko T. Special Report: Multiple Molecular Testing of Cancer to Identify 
Targeted Therapies. Blue Cross and Blue Shield Technology Evaluation Center. 
June 2013.
 
26. Black E, Falzon L, Aronson N. Gene Expression Profiling for Predicting Outcomes 
in Stage II Colon Cancer. AHRQ: Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association 
Technology Evaluation Center Evidence-based Practice Center. December 2012.
 
27. Terasawa T, Dahabreh I, Castaldi P
, Trikalinos T. Systematic Reviews on Selected 
Pharmacogenetic Tests for Cancer Treatment: CYP2D6 for Tamoxifen in Breast 
Cancer, KRAS for anti-EGFR antibodies in Colorectal Cancer, and BCR-ABL1 for 
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. AHRQ: Tufts Evidence-
based Practice Center. 7 June 2010.
 
28. Sparano JA, Gray RJ, Makower DF, et al. Prospective validation of a 21-gene 
expression assay in breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2015;373:2005–2014.
 
29. Cardoso F, van’t Veer LJ, Bogaerts J, et al.; MINDACT Investigators. 70-gene 
signature as an aid to treatment decisions in early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J 
Med 2016;375:717–729.
 
30. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Genetic Testing—Genomic Tests 
and Family Health History by Levels of Evidence. 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/
genomics/gtesting/tier.htm. Accessed 12 April 2016.
 
31. Nelson H, Fu R, Goddard K, et al. Risk Assessment, Genetic Counseling, and 
Genetic Testing for BRCA-related Cancer: Systematic Review to Update the 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation. AHRQ: Pacific Northwest 
Evidence-based Practice Center. December 2013.
 
32. Lin J, Webber E, Beil T, Goddard K, Whitlock E. Fecal DNA Testing in Screening 
for Colorectal Cancer in Average-Risk Adults. AHRQ: Oregon Evidence-based 
Practice Center. 29 February 2012.
 
33. Mark D. Fecal DNA Analysis for Colorectal Cancer Screening. Blue Cross and 
Blue Shield Technology Evaluation Center. December 2014.
 
34. Hilgart J, Coles B, Iredale R. Cancer genetic risk assessment for individuals at risk 
of familial breast cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;CD003721.
 
35. Rebbeck TR, Friebel T, Lynch HT, et al. Bilateral prophylactic mastectomy reduces 
breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: the PROSE Study 
Group. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:1055–1062.
 
36. Moyer VA; US Preventive Services Task Force. Risk assessment, genetic 
counseling, and genetic testing for BRCA-related cancer in women: U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 
2014;160:271–281.
 
37. Grant M, Chopra R. Special Report: Chromosomal Microarray for the Genetic 
Evaluation of Patients With Global Developmental Delay, Intellectual Disability, 
and Autism Spectrum Disorder. Blue Cross and Blue Shield Technology 
Evaluation Center. August 2015.
 
38. Sun F, Oristaglio J, Levy S, et al. Genetic Testing for Developmental Disabilities, 
Intellectual Disability and Autism Spectrum Disorder. AHRQ: ECRI Institute–
Penn Medicine Evidence-based Practice Center. 29 June 2015.
 
39. Dahabreh I, Moorthy D, Lamont J, Chen M, Kent D, Lau J. Testing of CYP2C19 
Variants and Platelet Reactivity for Guiding Antiplatelet Treatment. AHRQ: Tufts 
Evidence-based Practice Center. 25 September 2013.
 
40. Glacy J. CYP2D6 Pharmacogenomics of Tamoxifen Treatment. Blue Cross and 
Blue Shield Technology Evaluation Center. January 2014.
 
41. Klein T. Mayo Clinic Studying Genomics of Antiplatelet Heart Medication. 2016. 
http://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/discussion/mayo-clinic-studying-genomics-
of-antiplatelet-heart-medication-2644cc/.
 
42. PharmGkb. Drug Labels. 2016. https://www.pharmgkb.org/view/drug-labels.
do. Accessed 2 November 2016.
 
43. Kimmel SE, French B, Kasner SE, et al.; COAG Investigators. A pharmacogenetic 
versus a clinical algorithm for warfarin dosing. N Engl J Med 2013;369:2283–
2293.
 
44. Pirmohamed M, Burnside G, Eriksson N, et al.; EU-PACT Group. A randomized 
trial of genotype-guided dosing of warfarin. N Engl J Med 2013;369:2294–
2303.
 
45. Verhoef TI, Ragia G, de Boer A, et al.; EU-PACT Group. A randomized trial of 
genotype-guided dosing of acenocoumarol and phenprocoumon. N Engl J Med 
2013;369:2304–2312.
 
46. Plumpton CO, Roberts D, Pirmohamed M, Hughes DA. A systematic review 
of economic evaluations of pharmacogenetic testing for prevention of adverse 
drug reactions. Pharmacoeconomics 2016;34:771–793.
 
47. Bielinski SJ, Olson JE, Pathak J, et al. Preemptive genotyping for personalized 
medicine: design of the right drug, right dose, right time-using genomic data to 
individualize treatment protocol. Mayo Clin Proc 2014;89:25–33.
 
48. Ratko T, Chopra R. Noninvasive Prenatal Cell-Free Fetal DNA-based screening 
for Aneuploidies Other Than Trisomy 21. Blue Cross and Blue Shield Technology 
Evaluation Center. December 2014.
 
49. Piper M, Civic D, Grant M, Lefevre F. Sequencing-Based Tests to Determine Fetal 
Down Syndrome (Trisomy 21) form Maternal Plasma DNA. Blue Cross and Blue 
Shield Technology Evaluation Center. April 2013.
 
50. Marteau T, French D, Griffin S, et al. Effects of communicating DNA-based 
disease risk estimates on risk-reducing behaviors. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2010;CD007275.
 
51. Piper M, Grant M. Special Report: Exome Sequencing for Clinical Diagnosis 
for Patients with Suspected Genetic Disorders. Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
Technology Evaluation Center. August 2013.
 
52. Green RC, Berg JS, Grody WW, et al.; American College of Medical Genetics 
and Genomics. ACMG recommendations for reporting of incidental findings in 
clinical exome and genome sequencing. Genet Med 2013;15:565–574.
 
53. ACMG Board of Directors. ACMG policy statement: updated recommendations 
regarding analysis and reporting of secondary findings in clinical genome-scale 
sequencing. Genet Med 2015;17:68–69.
 
54. Schully SD, Lam TK, Dotson WD, et al. Evidence synthesis and guideline 
development in genomic medicine: current status and future prospects. Genet 
Med 2015;17:63–67.
 
55. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Micheel CM, Nass SJ, 
Omenn GS (eds). Evolution of Translational Omics: Lessons Learned and the 
Path Forward. National Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2012.
 
56. Deverka P, Messner DA, McCormack R, et al. Generating and evaluating 
evidence of the clinical utility of molecular diagnostic tests in oncology. Genet 
Med 2016;18:780–787.
 
57. Parkinson DR, McCormack RT, Keating SM, et al. Evidence of clinical utility: an 
unmet need in molecular diagnostics for patients with cancer. Clin Cancer Res 
2014;20:1428–1444.
 
58. Basch E, Spertus J, Dudley RA, et al. Methods for Developing Patient-Reported 
Outcome-Based Performance Measures (PRO-PMs). Value Health 2015;18:493–
504.
 
59. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Biomarker Tests 
for Molecularly Targeted Therapies: Key to Unlocking Precision Medicine. 
National Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2016.
Genetics in medicine
ATIC
 11
Comparative effectiveness research on genomic medicine  |  Phillips et al
SYSTEMATIC REvIEw
 
60. Tetreault M, Bareke E, Nadaf J, Alirezaie N, Majewski J. Whole-exome 
sequencing as a diagnostic tool: current challenges and future opportunities. 
Expert Rev Mol Diagn 2015;15:749–760.
 
61. Weitzel KW, Elsey AR, Langaee TY, et al. Clinical pharmacogenetics 
implementation: approaches, successes, and challenges. Am J Med Genet C 
Semin Med Genet 2014;166C:56–67.
 
62. Chang KL, Weitzel K, Schmidt S. Pharmacogenetics: using genetic information 
to guide drug therapy. Am Fam Physician 2015;92:588–594.
 
63. Saffitz JE. Genomic pathology: a disruptive innovation. Medicine (Baltimore). 
2012:237–239.
 
64. Meric-Bernstam F, Farhangfar C, Mendelsohn J, Mills GB. Building a 
personalized medicine infrastructure at a major cancer center. J Clin Oncol 
2013;31:1849–1857.
 
65. Trosman JR, Weldon CB, Kelley RK, Phillips KA. Challenges of coverage policy 
development for next-generation tumor sequencing panels: experts and payers 
weigh in. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 2015;13:311–318.
 
66. Phillips K, Trosman J, Weldon C, Chambers J, Deverka P
, Douglas M. Few insurer 
policies currently cover multi-gene panels: findings from a systematic registry. 
Nat Biotechnol, in press.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 
4.0 
International License. The images or other third party material 
in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons 
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the 
material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder 
to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Genetics in medicine
