 www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017 
e180
Articles
Empirical evidence of the public health benefits of tropical 
forest conservation in Cambodia: a generalised linear 
mixed-effects model analysis
Thomas Pienkowski, Borame Lee Dickens, Haoyang Sun, Luis Roman Carrasco
Summary
Background Potential synergies between public health and environmental protection that offer new opportunities for 
achieving health and sustainable development targets have been postulated. However, empirical evidence of the effect 
of ecosystem degradation and protection on public health outcomes is scarce, which restricts policy makers’ ability to 
assess the net health effects of land-use change.
Methods We used generalised linear mixed-effects models to analyse data for 35 547 households in 1766 communities 
from the Cambodian Demographic Health Surveys to investigate the relation between health and protected areas 
across deforestation gradients in Cambodia between Feb 1, 2005, and April 30, 2014. Diarrhoea, acute respiratory 
infection, and fever in children younger than 5 years were used as population health indicators. Dense and mixed 
forest coverage were derived from Open Development Cambodia, and forest loss was calculated from 2000 to 2004, 
2004 to 2009, and 2009 to 2014. The incidence of non-specific illness and injury in people older than 15 years was used 
as a negative control. Our analyses included rich pseudo-panel data (combining cross-sectional datasets from 2005, 
2010, and 2014) that accounted for socioeconomic, demographic, and behavioural characteristics, and had a negative 
control, approximating a quasi-experimental study design.
Findings Deforestation of dense forest was associated with an increased incidence of diarrhoea (p=0·007), fever 
(p=0·0495), and acute respiratory infection in children (p=0·003). For example, a 10 percentage point increase in loss 
of dense forest was estimated to be associated with an increase of 14·1% (95% CI 2·6–35·8) in the incidence of 
diarrhoea in children younger than 5 years per household in the 2 weeks before the Cambodian Demographic Health 
Surveys. Protected area coverage, but not type, was associated with decreased incidences of diarrhoea (p=0·028) and 
acute respiratory infection (p=0·030). Apart from an association between mixed forest coverage and increased 
incidence of diarrhoea, forest coverage was not associated with any health outcomes.
Interpretation Deforestation is associated with increased risk of several major sources of global childhood morbidity 
and mortality. Although causal mechanisms are unclear, our findings suggest that protected areas could help to 
alleviate the global health burden, presenting new possibilities for simultaneous achievement of public health and 
conservation goals.
Funding Ministry of Education of Singapore.
Copyright © The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
Introduction
Diarrhoea, malaria, and pneumonia are leading con­
tributors to the global health burden and caused nearly 
2 million deaths in children younger than 5 years in 2013.1 
The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission2 on 
planetary health emphasised the contribution of eco­
system degradation to this burden. Deforestation is a 
primary driver of global ecosystem change.3 An estimated 
1·5 million km² of forest were lost between 2000 and 
2012,3 and thus understanding the role of deforestation in 
health is essential in planetary health. Much of the 
emerging research linking deforestation and health is 
disease specific or vector specific. Such research is 
important for mapping high­resolution causal pathways, 
but integration of the evidence generated into policy 
could be challenging because the specific diseases that 
comprise the public health burden will change after 
landscape alteration. Empirical research is therefore 
required to assess the broad effects of ecosystem change 
across several conditions, supported by evidence of 
disease­specific mechanisms.2,4
The emerging One Health, planetary health, and 
ecohealth movements seek to transcend public health 
and environmental­protection boundaries to tackle 
collective challenges.5 Identification of synergies and 
trade­offs between health and forest protection could 
offer new, cost­effective ways to jointly meet human and 
ecosystem health goals.5,6 Protected areas are commonly 
used to limit forest loss and could help to mitigate the 
health effects of deforestation. Yet relations between 
protected areas and health are poorly understood, and 
could generate health costs and benefits that extend 
Lancet Planet Health 2017; 
1: e180–87
See Comment page e164
Department of Biological 
Sciences, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore (T Pienkowski MSc, 
B L Dickens PhD, H Sun BSc, 
L R Carrasco PhD) 
Correspondence to: 
Mr Thomas Pienkowski, 
Department of Biological 
Sciences, National University of 
Singapore, 14 Science Drive 4, 
Singapore 117543, Singapore 
pienkowski.thomas@gmail.
com
 Articles
e181 
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017
beyond any mitigation of deforestation.7 McKinnon and 
colleagues8 reported that, of 1043 studies linking con­
servation and wellbeing, health outcomes were analysed 
in less than 2%. They concluded that links between 
conservation and health are understudied and should be 
researched further.8
Forest loss seems to be linked with increased malaria 
risk in Africa and South America, but a wide range of 
factors—including resultant land use, microclimatic 
characteristics, vector species, and human behaviour—
mediate this relation 
ship (figure 1).9 For example, 
deforestation can increase local temperatures, creating 
surface water suitable for mosquito breeding and thereby 
increasing malaria risk.10 Although a close link between 
deforestation and diarrhoea has been postulated in 
several studies,11,12 it has yet to be systematically reviewed. 
Deforestation increases peak flows and erosion, reduces 
groundwater recharge and low flows,13 and is often 
associated with agricultural expansion. These factors can 
increase microbial load and exposure, potentially raising 
the risk of diarrhoea in downstream communities. 
Deforestation might also be associated with respiratory 
illnesses through various mechanisms: fire is often used 
to clear tropical forests, and fine particulate matter from 
biomass smoke can penetrate deep into the lungs, 
thereby increasing the risk of respiratory infection 
(including pneumonia).14 Overall, habitat disturbance 
can increase several disease risks by disrupting the 
hypothesised dilution effect, in which high host diversity 
is associated with decreased probability of zoonotic trans­
mission.6 Additionally, deforestation could also affect 
health through non­environmental mechanisms. For 
instance, dietary diversity was positively associated with 
tree coverage in 21 African countries.15 Forest loss could 
therefore have adverse nutritional effects, which increase 
disease vulnerability, when people are not able to offset 
resulting dietary changes with increased food production 
or purchasing power.
The interactions between ecosystems and human health 
are complex and many (figure 1). Empirical analyses in 
which several diseases are assessed simul 
taneously are 
needed, and the potential role of protected areas in 
mitigating health effects needs to be elucidated. Our 
research responds to important gaps by investigating two 
questions: is deforestation associated with major causes of 
childhood morbidity, and do the type and coverage of 
protected areas reduce the risk of these causes? Cambodia 
faces persistent health challenges and rapid environmental 
change. Many tropical countries face similar health and 
conservation issues, and thus Cambodia is a suitable case 
study in which to explore these questions. The country is 
part of the threatened Indo­Burma biodiversity hotspot, 
and more than 60% of its dense forest was lost 
between 1973 and 2014;16 much of the deforestation 
after 2002 was illegal.17 Deforestation has been driven by 
agricultural expansion, large­scale development projects, 
and illegal timber harvesting compounded by poor 
institutional capacity, unclear land tenure, and restricted 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Important research gaps at the interface of public health 
and environmental management, including the effects of 
environmental alteration and protection on multiple health 
outcomes, have been identified. We searched Web of Science 
and SCOPUS with the search string “human health” AND 
“conservation” OR “protected area” AND “ecosystem” OR 
“deforestation” for articles published in any language on or 
before April 24, 2017. We also searched the reference lists of 
articles identified by our search. We omitted articles about land 
uses not associated with deforestation, those that did not 
include primary data, and those outside the scope of the 
research. Three studies were also omitted because of 
methodological concerns. Most studies of links between health, 
deforestation, and conservation focused on single diseases. 
Links between protected areas and several health outcomes 
were investigated in only two studies with empirical data. 
However, these studies were done at subnational scales.
Added value of this study
To our knowledge, we did the largest empirical analysis of 
links between deforestation, conservation, and several public 
health outcomes so far, with data from 35 547 households 
across deforestation gradients in Cambodia between 2005 
and 2014. Our results address two key evidence gaps. 
First, most studies linking ecosystem change and health focus 
on single diseases. However, the relative proportion of 
diseases that comprise the total health burden is likely to 
change after environmental alteration. Within our study, 
dense forest loss was associated with increased rates of 
diarrhoea, acute respiratory illness, and fever in children, 
all of which are strongly associated with childhood mortality. 
Second, we respond to calls to identify potential win–win 
situations, whereby health and environmental goals are 
addressed by the same management actions. Our results 
suggest that protected area coverage was associated with 
decreased incidences of diarrhoea and acute respiratory 
illness.
Implications of all the available evidence
Our findings add to the growing body of evidence that 
deforestation, a major component of land coverage change 
worldwide, might increase the prevalence of several sources of 
global morbidity. Policy makers should consider these public 
health implications when assessing trade-offs in land-use 
planning. The role and cost-effectiveness of conservation in 
supporting human health remains uncertain. However, studies 
of the role of conservation in public health suggest that 
managing protected areas could help to achieve health and 
sustainable development targets.
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017 
e182
law enforcement.18,19 In response to these pressures, 17% of 
Cambodia’s terrestrial area has been designated as 
protected areas.18 Much of Cambodia’s roughly 80% rural 
population is dependent on agriculture and use forest 
resources for food and medicine,20 and many of these 
protected areas contain existing settlements.17 Despite 
rapid economic development, 20% of the population were 
below the national poverty line in 2011, and many health 
challenges persist.21 According to data from 2014,21 one in 
every 29 children does not survive to their fifth birthday, 
and 6%, 28%, and 13% of children had symptoms of acute 
respiratory infection, fever, or diarrhoea, respectively, in 
the 2 weeks before these data were gathered.
We used generalised linear mixed­effects models 
to investigate health outcomes in Cambodia across 
protected areas and forest coverage and loss gradients 
between 2005 and 2014. Our analysis was multiple scale, 
and included landscape­level spatial data and rich 
household­level socioeconomic data. We assessed rela­
tive health and land­use changes with time, and used a 
negative control in a quasi­experimental study design.
Methods
Household health and socioeconomic data
We used health data from the 2005, 2010, and 2014 
Cambodia Demographic and Health Surveys (CDHSs),21–23 
which included 35 547 households in 1766 communities 
(figure 2). Households were systematically sampled within 
communities, which were prob 
abilistically sampled on the 
basis of population size across Cambodia in 2005, 2010, 
and 2014. Data included socio 
economic and health out­
comes in adults and children. The CDHS randomly dis­
located most community locations by as much as 5 km to 
protect anonymity.
For more on the details of 
methods for the CDHS see 
http://www.dhsprogram.com
Figure 1: Examples of potential links between protected areas, forest coverage, deforestation, and health
Green plus symbols represent potential health benefits, whereas red minus symbols represent possible health threats. Some factors, such as changing diets, could have 
antagonistic health effects.
(+) Safeguarding hydrological services that regulate 
microbial load, reduce flooding, and increase 
groundwater recharge, suppressing diarrhoea risk
(+) Restriction of human–wildlife contact, reducing 
risk of zoonotic disease transmission
(+) Amelioration of air pollution, restriction of access 
to domestic biomass fuel, and management of fire 
occurrence, reducing risk of acute respiratory infection
(+) Formalisation of sustainable access to natural 
resources within multiuse protected areas, which 
could stabilise access to forest products important for 
health
(+) Diverse host communities mitigate disease risk in 
individual species (the dilution effect)
(+) Provision of products, such as food and medicine, 
important for health
(+) Provision of social and cultural functions, such as 
recreation, that support mental, social, and 
physiological health
(+) Predator populations might suppress vector 
abundance, regulating disease risk
(+) Income from extractive activities, new employment 
opportunities, and agriculture, which can improve 
diets, and access to health care, and buffer against 
environmental risks 
(+) Increase in dietary quality from agriculture in some 
cases
(+) Can be associated with the expansion of other 
industrial activities, which might reduce some disease 
risks
(–) Restriction of access to forest products from strict 
protected areas, such as food and medicine, important 
for health
(–) Crop raiding by wild animals could potentially 
reduce agricultural yields, exacerbating malnutrition, 
and increasing disease risk
(–) Zoonosis from high populations of wild animals 
transgressing park boundaries
(–) Increased exposure to zoonotic diseases among 
protected area staff and visitors
(–) Supporting forest-dependent hosts and vectors, 
harbouring emerging infectious diseases, or 
maintaining disease reservoirs
(–) Zoonoses from human wildlife contact during 
forest product harvesting and processing
(–) Forests can be associated with socioeconomic 
contexts, such as restricted access to health care and 
economic opportunities that perpetuate poverty—a 
strong predictor of health outcomes
(–) Smoke from fires containing fine particulate matter 
increases the risk of acute respiratory infection
(–) Loss of dietary diversity and quality of forest foods, 
impairing the immune system and increasing disease 
vulnerability
(–) Increased run-off, increasing microbial load and 
diarrhoea risk from surface water
(–) New biophysical conditions suitable for some 
vector and disease species
(–) Changing human behaviour, such as guarding crops 
at night, increasing disease exposure
(–) Might be associated with the expansion of other 
industrial activities posing novel health risks
(–) Habitat encroachment and stressed host 
populations might increase emerging infectious 
diseases risk
Deforestation
Intact forest
Protected area
 Articles
e183 
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017
Diarrhoea, acute respiratory infection, and fever in 
children younger than 5 years were used as population 
health indicators by the CDHS and in our analysis. The 
incidence of non­specific illness and injury in people older 
than 15 years was used as a negative control. Covering 
all illnesses, including injuries and non­communicable 
diseases, we deemed general adult health to be less closely 
associated with ecosystem changes than diarrhoea, fever 
and acute respiratory infections. Malaria, lower respiratory 
tract infections, and diarrhoeal diseases combined con­
tributed only 5·1% of disability­adjusted life­years from the 
top 100 causes of disease burden in adults aged 15–49 years 
in Cambodia in 2015.24 Therefore, we expected general 
adult health to be strongly associated with socioeconomic 
characteristics but weakly associated with ecosystem 
changes, making it an informative negative control. 
Incidence of diarrhoea, fever, and acute respiratory 
infections in children during the 2 weeks before the 
CDHS, and of general adult illness and injury in the 
30 days before the CDHS, among household residents was 
included in the analysis. Children’s health data were 
aggregated when more than one woman participated from 
each household. We selected explanatory variables on the 
basis of relevant literature (appendix). The variables 
selected were number of children, number of adults, 
owned agricultural land (in hectares), water source, water 
treatment, sanitation (type of toilet facility), cooking fuel 
(biomass or non­biomass), cooking location (indoor or 
outdoor), smoking, mean adult age in each household 
(and the square of mean adult age), wealth (from asset 
indices), and location (urban or rural). All observations 
with complete data were included.
Geospatial data
Spatial data were obtained from Open Development 
Cambodia, a non­governmental organistion that compiles 
spatially explicit economic and developmental data on 
Cambodia.16 Forest cover maps had 30 m × 30 m resolution 
and were constructed by Open Development Cambodia 
from Landsat TM and Landsat 8 satellite images. Open 
Development Cambodia con 
verted multiband raster 
images into a single composite band raster image, which 
was then classified into five forest­cover categories with 
maximum likelihood methods. Dense and mixed forests 
were defined according to Forestry Administration’s 
Cambodia Forest Cover 2010.16,25
We delineated a 15 km buffer from the centre of each 
community to encompass spatial dislocations in the 
CDHS data. Areas outside Cambodia (affecting 8% of 
communities) and 13 non­georeferenced communities 
were excluded. We calculated the proportion of dense 
and mixed forest coverage and gross loss from Jan 1, 2000, 
to Dec 31, 2004, Jan 1, 2005, to Dec 31, 2009, and Jan 1, 2010, 
to Dec 31, 2014, and the protected area extent within the 
buffer regions (as a proportion of the absolute buffer 
size). Euclidean distances between community and 
urban areas (defined as those with >10 000 people) were 
measured, centred, and scaled. 23 existing protected 
areas during the study period were included in the 
analysis. Protected areas were grouped into three 
categories on the basis of how strictly they were managed 
according to the 2008 Law on Nature Protection Area.26 
These categories were national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, 
12° N
14° N
104° E
106° E
A
12° N
14° N
104° E
106° E
B
0
50 km
N
0
50 km
N
Mixed forest
Dense forest
Mixed forest loss
Dense forest loss
CDHS, 2014
CDHS, 2010
CDHS, 2005
Protected area
Figure 2: Communities surveyed in the CDHS (2005, 2010, 2014) and protected areas (A), and dense and 
mixed forest coverage and loss (B)
Forest coverage data are for 2014; forest loss data are for 2004–14. CDHS=Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.
See Online for appendix
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017 
e184
and multiuse protected areas, which corresponded to 
the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
categories II, IV, and V and VI (combined), respectively. 
The category of the protected area closest to each 
community was included as a variable in the analysis. 
A dummy level, “no protected area”, was included in this 
variable if there was no protected area within 15 km of a 
community.
Statistical analysis
Generalised linear mixed­effects models were fitted with 
the Poisson distribution and log link function. The 
log­transformed number of children or adults per house­
hold was used as an offset to account for differences in 
household size. A random intercept was created for 
each community and province to account for spatial 
dependency. Because households and communities were 
anonymised, health outcomes at these levels could not be 
tracked over time. However, we assumed that changes in 
health status were correlated over time within each 
province. Therefore, a random slope (year) was included to 
model the variation in changes in disease incidence over 
time for different provinces, thus creating panel members 
(units observed over time) for 2005, 2010, and 2014 at the 
provincial level. Global models for the four health 
outcomes were fitted. No model assumption violations 
were noted. Model residuals were slightly underdispersed, 
so CIs were likely to be conservative. 27 hierarchical 
candidate models were developed a priori for each of the 
four illnesses. Inclusion of socioeconomic, demographic, 
and behavioural factors varied among the four illnesses. 
For example, sanitation and water source characteristics 
were included when we modelled diarrhoea, and location 
and type of cooking fuel were included when we modelled 
acute respiratory infections. These socioeconomic vari­
ables were con 
sistent within each illness’s candidate set 
(appendix). Choice of spatial variables, which varied within 
candidate sets, was in 
formed by conceptual scenarios. 
Candidate models were ranked with the Akaike infor­
mation criterion. No models had a Δ Akaike information 
criterion of greater than 2, and therefore model averaging 
was done across the entire candidate set.
In addition to the primary analyses, we explored the 
relations between protected areas, forest coverage, and 
forest loss to help separate the effects of protected areas 
from those of deforestation (appendix). In this additional 
analysis, forest and protected area variables were 
dropped to test the sensitivity of the results and model 
fit (appendix). Bootstrap CIs (1000 simulations) were 
also calculated for the models with the lowest Akaike 
information criterion to assess the robustness of our 
results. We used R for all statistical analyses.
Role of the funding source
The study funder had no role in study design; data 
collection, analysis, or interpretation; or writing of the 
Article. TP had full access to all study data and had 
final responsibility for the decision to submit for 
publication.
Results
Loss of dense forest within buffer areas in the 
5 years before each CDHS was positively associated 
with increased frequency of diarrhoea (p=0·007), acute 
respiratory infection (p=0·003), and fever (p=0·0495) 
after socioeconomic characteristics were controlled for 
(figure 3). For example, a 10 percentage point increase 
in loss of dense forest within buffer areas was estimated 
to be associated with an increase of 14·1% (95% CI 
2·6–35·8) in the incidence of diarrhoea in children 
younger than 5 years per household in the 2 weeks 
before the CDHS. Greater protected area coverage was 
associated with decreased frequency of diarrhoea 
(p=0·028) and acute respiratory infection (p=0·030), 
but not of fever (p=0·064; figure 3). For example, 
a 10 percentage point increase in protected area coverage 
within buffer areas was estimated to be associated with 
a 3·5% (95% CI 0·5–5·5) decrease in the incidence 
of diarrhoea. The type of protected area was not 
significantly associated with any health outcomes 
(figure 3). Adult health was not significantly associated 
with forest loss or cover, or protected area variables.
Distance from communities to urban areas, dense forest 
coverage, and loss of mixed forest within buffer areas were 
not significantly associated with incidence of any illness 
(appendix). Mixed forest coverage was positively associated 
with the incidence of diarrhoea but not of the other 
0
100
200
Change in illness (%)
Spatial features
Multiuse protected area
Wildlife sanctuary
National park
Protected area coverage
Mixed forest loss
Dense forest loss
Mixed forest
Dense forest
Adult health
Acute respiratory infection
Diarrhoea
Fever
Figure 3: Effects of forest coverage and loss and protected area coverage and type on incidence of acute 
respiratory infection, diarrhoea, and fever in children, and overall adult health
Data are point estimates and 95% CIs associated with a 50 percentage point increase in forest coverage and forest 
loss or a 100 percentage point increase in protected area coverage within the 15 km buffer regions around 
communities. Also included are point estimates and 95% CIs associated with type of protected area within 15 km 
of each community (the reference level is “no protected area”). 
For more on Open Development 
Cambodia see https://
opendevelopmentcambodia.net
 Articles
e185 
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017
illnesses (figure 3). The association between socioeconomic 
variables and health was generally consistent with our 
expectations—ie, that improved socioeconomic status and 
living standards were associated with better health 
(appendix). For example, the richest households were 
estimated to have a 17·4% (95% CI 5·6–27·7; p=0·005) 
lower incidence of diarrhoea (in children younger than 
5 years in the 2 weeks before the CDHS) and a 39·5% 
(95% CI 31·7–46·5; p=0·001) lower incidence of general 
adult illness and injury than the poorest households when 
all other variables were controlled for. Additionally, the 
incidence of all illnesses declined between 2005 and 2014 
(appendix).
Our analysis included 9148 incidences of diarrhoea 
(in 19 231 households), 10 327 incidences of fever (in 
19 083 households), and 6295 incidences of acute 
respiratory infection (in 14 996 households) in children 
in 2005, 2010, and 2014. 14 429 incidences of moderate 
to severe illness or injury in adults were recorded in 
31 435 households. Household and community level 
descriptive statistics for variables included in the analysis 
are in the appendix. Protected area coverage was associated 
with higher rates of deforestation of dense and mixed 
forest, especially from national parks, compared with 
unprotected areas. Protected area coverage, particularly 
national parks and wildlife sanctuaries, within community 
buffers was also associated with higher dense and mixed 
forest coverage (appendix). The association between loss 
of dense forest and health was consistent when protected 
area coverage and type were excluded (appendix). The 
correlation between protected area coverage and health 
outcomes became less significant when dense and mixed 
forest coverage and loss were excluded from the models 
(appendix). Nonetheless, the models did no better, and 
often worse, when protected areas and forest variables 
were excluded from the analysis (appendix). Bootstrapped 
CIs were consistent with our primary results (appendix).
Discussion
Our study of conditions related to major causes of 
childhood morbidity and deforestation (a driver of global 
ecosystem change) responds to calls for empirical research 
exploring the effects of land­use change on combined 
health outcomes. We identified potential policy­relevant 
synergies between public health and environmental 
protection. Loss of dense forest was associated with 
increased incidences of diarrhoea, fever, and acute 
respiratory infection in children. The coverage of protected 
areas, but not the type, was associated with lower 
incidences of diarrhoea and acute respiratory infection, 
but not of fever. Apart from a positive association between 
mixed forest and diarrhoea, forest coverage was not 
associated with any health outcomes. Adult health, the 
negative control, was not associated with forest coverage 
or loss, or protected area coverage or type.
Our findings support hypothesised links between de­
forestation and health (figure 1). For example, Pattanayak 
and Wendland11 argued that forest loss can disrupt water­
regulation cycles, which increases microbial load, leading 
to greater risk of diarrhoea in downstream communities. 
More than 35% of Cambodia’s rural households source 
their drinking water from unprotected wells, springs, and 
surface water, and only 67% of households used appropriate 
water­treatment methods before drinking.21 A study27 in the 
Kandal province of Cambodia showed that Escherichia coli 
concentrations in pretreated water far exceeded WHO 
recommendations for maximum safe levels in drinking 
water. This finding suggests that the population could be 
vulnerable to disruption of hydrological services by 
deforestation. Cambodia’s pre 
dominantly rural population 
could also be vulnerable to the effects of deforestation on 
malaria risk, a major cause of fever. There are many 
pathways linking deforestation and malaria.9 For instance, 
deforestation can create hotter microclimates, increasing 
mosquito vectors’ reproductive rates and potentially 
heightening malaria risk.10 De 
forestation can also be 
associated with changing reservoir species’ behaviour and 
greater human exposure.28 By contrast, the relation 
between deforestation and acute respiratory infection 
might be less dependent on inter 
mediate ecological 
processes. Biomass smoke increases the incidence of 
respiratory illness, and 15 600 child, infant, and fetal deaths 
were attributed to poor air quality after forest fires in 
Indonesia in 1997
.29 Fire is used in both small­scale and 
industrial forest clearance in Cambodia, and could have 
increased the risk of acute respiratory infection in children.
Forest loss might also be linked to health through 
socioeconomic pathways. Forest products are an import­
ant source of food in Cambodia, especially for the poorest 
populations.20 Deterioration of dietary quality after de­
forestation could increase disease susceptibility, particu­
larly among vulnerable groups, such as people living in 
poverty. Large­scale land acquisition is a major driver of 
deforestation. Forest loss was 29–105% higher in 
economic land concession areas, a mechanism for selling 
or leasing state land to investors, than in matched counter­
factuals between 2000 and 2012.19 These procurements 
were often associated with loss of access to natural 
resources and evictions.30 Thus, land acquisition can 
disrupt the provision and accessibility of health­related 
ecosystem services. By contrast with specific local effects 
of deforestation, national health outcomes improved with 
time during the study period, which might be partly 
attributable to economic development derived from 
exploitation of natural resources. Thus, the health costs 
should be weighed against the benefits of industrial 
expansion in assess 
ments of the net health effects of 
deforestation.31
Forest coverage was not significantly associated with 
health, apart from the correlation between mixed forest 
coverage and a slightly increased incidence of diarrhoea. 
Because our analysis differentiated only between forest 
and non­forest, and did not account for the health effects 
of other types of land coverage, the effects of forest 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017 
e186
coverage might be obscured. Furthermore, behavioural 
and tech 
nological adaptations to environ 
mental risks, such 
as the use of mosquito nets, can develop in established 
forest communities but might be slow to emerge in 
response 
to 
rapid 
deforestation. 
Although 
these 
communities might exploit forest resources in times of 
illness or economic stress,32 isolation from modern health 
care and economic prospects will worsen health 
outcomes.33 Our analyses suggest that socioeconomic 
status has a more distinct association with health than 
proximity to forest. These results have parallels with 
findings that suggest that wealth and urbanisation were 
strongly associated with health in 60 medium­sized 
countries but forestation was not.34
Our results linking protected areas and health are 
broadly consistent with those of the few other studies of 
this topic. Strictly managed protected areas in Amazonia 
seem to have reduced biophysical disruption from 
deforestation and restricted people’s exposure to disease 
sources, which might have reduced the incidence of 
malaria, acute respiratory infections, and diarrhoea.12 
Protected areas in Indonesia might have protected 
forests that regulate water quality, thereby reducing the 
incidence of diarrhoea in nearby communities.11 
Conversely, proximity to protected areas, which retain 
greater forest coverage suitable for malaria vectors than 
unprotected areas, might have increased malaria risk in 
Brazilian cities,35 but there were concerns about the 
methods used in this study, including failure to account 
for some demographic changes.36,37 Our results support 
findings of the positive association between protected 
areas and health. Protected areas and forest coverage 
were positively correlated within community buffers 
(appendix), but the community buffer areas that 
contained greater protected area coverage had greater 
absolute forest loss. This result could be explained by the 
displacement of deforestation to areas outside of park 
boundaries. Nevertheless, these results suggest that 
protected areas did not affect health through the 
prevention of deforestation—other behavioural and 
socioecological factors could account for the correlation 
between protected areas and health. Protected areas 
could have restricted human–wildlife contact, reduced 
zoonotic disease exposure, or protected ecosystem 
services that were independent of deforestation.
Protected areas are also associated with institutional 
and socioeconomic health factors. Clements and 
colleagues30 reported that Cambodian resin harvesters in 
protected areas were better off and had higher rice yields 
than those outside. They argued that protected areas 
could have stabilised land access and reduced selective 
logging of economically important trees, which cannot 
be detected by satellite maps of deforestation. The health 
of residents could have been supported by improved 
socioeconomic conditions and natural­resource access 
within these protected areas. In our study, we did not 
find a significant association between the type of 
protected area and health. Protected area category might 
have been a poor measure of actual conservation manage­
ment. Overall, these results suggest that processes 
beyond deforestation affect the role of protected areas in 
health in Cambodia, although these mechanisms remain 
speculative, and require further research.
Our analysis accounted for local heterogeneity and 
spatially dependent bias but was constrained by a paucity 
of data. Regrettably, data for mosquito net ownership and 
use, household hygiene, forest use, forest type, human 
migration, and adaptive behaviour were not available. 
Additionally, the accuracy of self­reported health out 
comes 
is likely to be affected by under­reporting, misdiagnosis, 
and recall bias. We therefore did not estimate national 
disease incidences. We also used a random­effects 
structure to account for spatially dependent differences in 
reporting, and calculated bootstrapped CIs to test 
sensitivity to reporting error. However, the strength and 
direction of possible bias are unknown, which is a 
limitation of our analysis. The dislocation of communities 
by the CDHS reduced the accuracy of forest coverage and 
loss estimates, but the direction and distance were random 
so we do not expect it to have introduced bias to our 
analysis.
Adult health was not associated with deforestation, 
forest coverage, or protected area variables. As a negative 
control, it was included to ensure that important health 
factors associated with deforestation gradients were not 
omitted from the analysis. We anticipated that adult health 
would be weakly associated with deforestation—because 
it covered all illnesses, including non­communicable 
diseases, was not limited to diarrhoea, acute respiratory 
infection, and fever (which account for only a small share 
of the adult disease burden), and was only partly 
dependent on child health as a result of intrahousehold 
transmission—but more strongly associated with socio­
economic characteristics. Furthermore, our results were 
robust to the removal of protected area and forest variables, 
suggesting that our analysis was not sensitive to related 
spatial dependencies.
The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on 
planetary health identified key challenges, including limited 
transdisciplinary research, which need to be addressed to 
improve human health in the face of rapid ecosystem 
degradation.2 Our research contributes to efforts to over­
come these challenges by providing empirical evidence of 
the negative effect of de 
forestation, a major source of global 
environmental change, on leading causes of childhood 
morbidity. Similar to Cambodia, many other tropical 
countries face sub 
stantial threats to health and forest 
ecosystems, and have restricted conservation capacity. Our 
results support the role of protected areas in Cambodia, but 
also suggest a need for further research into the mechanisms 
linking conservation management and health. Social, 
economic, political, and biophysical factors make the 
simultaneous attainment of different goals difficult, and the 
relation 
ship between protected areas and people has often 
 Articles
e187 
www.thelancet.com/planetary-health   Vol 1   August 2017
been challenging. Explor 
ation of which aspects of 
conservation manage 
ment are beneficial or deleterious to 
health, and how these aspects can be optimised and 
operationalised in a multiple objective context, will be 
essential if con 
ser 
vation is to make meaningful public 
health contri 
butions.7 Although the mechanisms linking 
con 
ser 
vation and health need clarification, our results 
strengthen the case for environ 
mental protection as a tool to 
help reduce global disease burden.
Contributors
TP did the data collection and analysis. All authors contributed to study 
design, interpretation of the results, and the writing and revision of the 
Article.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the Ministry of Education of Singapore 
(tier 2 grant MOE2015­T2­2­121).
References
1 
Liu L, Oza S, Hogan D, et al. Global, regional, and national causes 
of child mortality in 2000–13, with projections to inform post­2015 
priorities: an updated systematic analysis. Lancet 2015; 385: 430–40.
2 
Whitmee S, Haines A, Beyrer C, et al. Safeguarding human health 
in the Anthropocene epoch: report of the Rockefeller 
Foundation–Lancet Commission on planetary health. Lancet 2015; 
386: 1973–2028.
3 
Hansen MC, Potapov PV, Moore R, et al. High­resolution global 
maps of 21st­century forest cover change. Science 2013; 342: 850–53.
4 
Myers SS, Gaffikin L, Golden CD, et al. Human health impacts of 
ecosystem alteration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110: 18753–60.
5 
Galvani AP, Bauch CT, Anand M, Singer BH, Levin SA. 
Human–environment interactions in population and ecosystem 
health. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2016; 113: 14502–06.
6 
Ostfeld RS. Biodiversity loss and the ecology of infectious disease. 
Lancet Planet Health 2017; 1: e2–3.
7 
Pattanayak SK, Kramer RA, Vincent JR. Ecosystem change and 
human health: implementation economics and policy. 
Phil Trans R Soc B 2017; 372: 20160130.
8 
McKinnon MC, Cheng SH, Dupre S, et al. What are the effects of 
nature conservation on human well­being? A systematic map of 
empirical evidence from developing countries. Environ Evid 2016; 
5: 1–25.
9 
Guerra CA, Snow RW, Hay SI. A global assessment of closed 
forests, deforestation and malaria risk. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 
2006; 100: 189–204.
10 
Kweka EJ, Kimaro EE, Munga S. Effect of deforestation and land use 
changes on mosquito productivity and development in western Kenya 
highlands: implication for malaria risk. Front Public Health 2016; 4: 1–9.
11 
Pattanayak SK, Wendland KJ. Nature’s care: diarrhoea, watershed 
protection, and biodiversity conservation in Flores, Indonesia. 
Biodivers Conserv 2007; 16: 2801–19.
12 
Bauch SC, Birkenbach AM, Pattanayak SK, Sills EO. Public health 
impacts of ecosystem change in the Brazilian Amazon. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015; 112: 7414–19.
13 
Bruijnzeel LA. Hydrological functions of tropical forests: not seeing 
the soil for the trees? Agric Ecosyst Environ 2005; 104: 185–228.
14 
Reid CE, Brauer M, Johnston FH. Critical review of health impacts of 
wildfire smoke exposure. Environ Health Persp 2016; 124: 1334–43.
15 
Ickowitz A, Powell B, Salim MA, Sunderland TCH. Dietary quality 
and tree cover in Africa. Glob Environ Change 2014; 24: 287–94.
16 
Open Development Cambodia. Forest cover in Cambodia (1973–2014). 
https://opendevelopmentcambodia.net/dataset/?id=forest­cover­in­
cambodia­1973­2014 (accessed Sept 1, 2016). 
17 
Clements T, John A, Nielsen K, Dara A, Setha T, Milner­Gulland EJ. 
Payments for biodiversity conservation in the context of weak 
institutions: comparison of three programs from Cambodia. 
Ecol Econ 2010; 69: 1283–91.
18 
Forestry Administration: Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries. Cambodia Readiness Project idea note (R­PIN) for the 
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility. http://theredddesk.org/sites/
default/files/cambodia_r­pin.pdf (accessed June 29, 2017).
19 
Davis KF, Yu K, Rulli MC, Pichdara L, D’Odorico P. 
Accelerated deforestation driven by large­scale land acquisitions in 
Cambodia. Nat Geosci 2015; 8: 772–75.
20 Jiao X, Smith­Hall C, Theilade I. Rural household incomes and land 
grabbing in Cambodia. Land Use Policy 2015; 48: 317–28.
21 
National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General for Health, 
Inner City Fund (ICF) International. Cambodia Demographic and 
Health Survey 2014. Phnom Penh: National Institute of Statistics, 
Directorate General for Health, ICF International, 2014.
22 
National Institute of Public Health, National Institute of Statistics, 
Opinion Research Corporation (ORC) Macro. Cambodia Demographic 
and Health Survey 2005. Phnom Penh: National Institute of Public 
Health, National Institute of Statistics, ORC Macro, 2006.
23 National Institute of Statistics, Directorate General for Health, 
Inner City Fund (ICF) Macro. Cambodia Demographic and Health 
Survey 2010. Phnom Penh: National Institute of Statistics, 
Directorate General for Health, ICF International, 2011.
24 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. GBD compare. Seattle: 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2015.
25 Forestry Administration: Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and 
Fisheries. Cambodia forest cover 2010. http://www.twgfr.org/itto/
wp­content/uploads/2012/06/Cambodia­Forest­Cover­2010_KH.pdf 
(accessed Sept 1, 2016).
26 Royal Government of Cambodia. Law on nature protection area 
(NS/RKM//0208/007), chapter 11. http://www.skpcambodia.com/
Laws & Regulations of the Kingdom of Cambodia/Property & Land 
Law/RKT­93­ Protected Areas­E.pdf (accessed Sept 1, 2016).
27 
Brown J, Sobsey MD. Boiling as household water treatment in 
Cambodia: a longitudinal study of boiling practice and 
microbiological effectiveness. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2012; 
87: 394–98.
28 Fornace KM, Abidin TR, Alexander N, Brock P, Grigg MJ, 
Murphy A. Association between landscape factors and spatial 
patterns of Plasmodium knowlesi infections in Sabah, Malaysia. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2016; 22: 201–08.
29 Jayachandran S. Air quality and early­life mortality: evidence from 
Indonesia’s wildfires. J Hum Resour 2009; 44: 916–54.
30 Clements T, Suon S, Wilkie DS, Milner­Gulland EJ. Impacts of 
protected areas on local livelihoods in Cambodia. World Dev 2014; 
64: S125–34.
31 
Kilpatrick AM, Salkeld DJ, Titcomb G, Hahn MB. Conservation of 
biodiversity as a strategy for improving human health and 
well­being. Phil Trans R Soc B 2017; 372: 20160131.
32 Wunder S, Börner J, Shively G, Wyman M. Safety nets, gap filling 
and forests: a global­comparative perspective. World Dev 2014; 
64: S29–42.
33 Levang P, Dounias E, Sitorus S. Out of the forest, out of poverty? 
For Trees Livelihoods 2005; 15: 211–35.
34 
Wood CL, McInturff A, Young SL, Kim D­H, Lafferty KV. 
Human infectious disease burdens decrease with urbanization but 
not with biodiversity. Phil Trans R Soc B 2017; 372: 20160122.
35 Valle D, Clark J. Conservation efforts may increase malaria burden 
in the Brazilian Amazon. PLoS One 2013; 8: e57519.
36 Hahn MB, Olson SH, Vittor AY, Barcellos C, Patz JA, Pan W. 
Conservation efforts and malaria in the Brazilian Amazon. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2014; 90: 591–94.
37 
Valle D. Response to the critique by Hahn and others entitled 
“Conservation and malaria in the Brazilian Amazon”. 
Am J Trop Med Hyg 2014; 90: 595–96.
