 Cardiac fibroblasts adopt osteogenic fates and can be targeted 
to attenuate pathological heart calcification
Indulekha C.L. Pillai#,1,2,3,4,5,6, Shen Li#,1,2,3,4,5,6, Milagros Romay2,7, Larry Lam3,4,5,6, Yan 
Lu1,2,3,4,5,6, Jie Huang1,2,3,4,5,6, Nathaniel Dillard1,2,3,4,5,6, Marketa Zemanova1,2,3,4,5,6, 
Liudmilla Rubbi3,4,5,6, Yibin Wang2,8,9, Jason Lee6,10, Ming Xia6,11, Owen Liang6,11, Ya-
Hong Xie6,11, Matteo Pellegrini3,4,5,6, Aldons J. Lusis1,2,7, and Arjun Deb*,1,2,3,4,5,6
1Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), CA 90095, U.S.A
2Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, CA 90095, U.S.A
3Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Letters and Sciences, 
UCLA, CA 90095, U.S.A
4Eli & Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, UCLA, CA 
90095, U.S.A
5Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, CA 90095, U.S.A
6Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, CA 90095, U.S.A
7Departments of Human Genetics & Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, UCLA, 
CA 90095, U.S.A
8Department of Anesthesiology, UCLA, CA 90094, U.S.A
9Department of Physiology, UCLA, CA 90095, U.S.A
10Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine and 
Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging, UCLA, CA 90095, U.S.A
*Corresponding author: (Will also serve as lead Contact), Arjun Deb, 3609 A MRL, 675 Charles E Young Drive S, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, U.S.A., adeb@mednet.ucla.edu, Phone: 310-825-9911.
#Both authors contributed equally to the manuscript
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Supplemental information
Supplemental information for this paper including supplemental figures, supplemental table, movie, experimental procedures and 
references can be found online with this article.
Author contributions
I.C.L.P. and S.L. performed all experiments, obtained and analyzed data, performed statistical analysis and assisted in preparation of 
the manuscript. Y.L. performed animal surgeries. J.H maintained animal colonies and assisted in in-vivo experiments. M.Z. and N.D. 
assisted in experiments. J.L. assisted in PET and CT imaging and analysis of radiographic data. M.X., O.P. and YX performed Raman 
spectroscopy and analyzed data. Y.W. assisted in experiments. L.R created the libraries and L.L and M.P analyzed RNA-seq data and 
assisted in writing the manuscript. M.R. assisted in experiments and together with A.J.L provided crucial reagents. A.J.L. also assisted 
in writing the manuscript. A.D. conceptualized the project, supervised the work and wrote the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell Stem Cell. 2017 February 02; 20(2): 218–232.e5. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2016.10.005.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11Department of Materials Science & Engineering, School of Engineering, UCLA, CA 90095, 
U.S.A
Summary
Mammalian tissues calcify with age and injury. Analogous to bone formation, osteogenic cells are 
thought to be recruited to the affected tissue and induce mineralization. In the heart, calcification 
of cardiac muscle leads to conduction system disturbances and is one of the most common 
pathologies underlying heart blocks. However the cell identity and mechanisms contributing to 
pathological heart muscle calcification remain unknown. Using lineage tracing, murine models of 
heart calcification and in vivo transplantation assays, we show that cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) adopt 
an osteoblast celllike fate and contribute directly to heart muscle calcification. Small molecule 
inhibition of ENPP1, an enzyme that is induced upon injury and regulates bone mineralization, 
significantly attenuated cardiac calcification. Inhibitors of bone mineralization completely 
prevented ectopic cardiac calcification and improved post injury heart function. Taken together, 
these findings highlight the plasticity of fibroblasts in contributing to ectopic calcification and 
identify pharmacological targets for therapeutic development.
Graphical Abstract
Introduction
Pathological mineralization of soft tissues, or ectopic calcification, commonly occurs with 
tissue injury, degeneration and in common diseases such as diabetes and chronic kidney 
disease. Calcification of soft tissues is a cell mediated process that resembles bone formation 
in the skeletal system with calcification of the extracellular matrix by cells capable of 
mineralization (Demer and Tintut, 2014). Heart muscle calcification is an under-reported 
and unusual form of soft tissue calcification characterized by calcific deposits within the 
myocardium, which can occur in the absence of calcification of valves, vessels or other 
Pillai et al.
Page 2
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 organs (Shackley et al., 2011). Myocardial calcification is observed in the aging heart and in 
patients with diabetes, renal disease, and myocardial injury secondary to ischemia or 
inflammation (Rostand et al., 1988). Calcification within the heart muscle is one of the most 
common underlying causes of heart blocks where calcification and fibrosis of the conduction 
system interrupt smooth propagation of electrical impulses (Lev, 1964). Cardiac pump 
dysfunction and arrhythmias can also occur depending on the extent and anatomic site of 
calcification and calcified myocardial scars have been reported to cause refractory 
ventricular tachycardia. Cardiac calcification is also a prognostic indicator of poor outcomes 
following myocardial infarction or myocarditis (Stallion et al., 1994). Even during 
embryonic development, progressive calcification of myocardial walls can occur and leads 
to fetal or neonatal demise (Simchen et al., 2006).
Despite the occurrence of heart muscle calcification in a variety of disease conditions, little 
is known about the identity of cells contributing to pathological myocardial calcification. We 
have recently demonstrated that cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) can exhibit plasticity after heart 
injury and adopt alternative cell fates (Ubil et al., 2014). Ectopic calcification of soft tissues 
usually occurs in areas of injury associated with fibrosis (Pugashetti et al., 2011) and this led 
us to hypothesize that cardiac fibroblasts can adopt osteoblast cell like fates and directly 
contribute to calcification of the heart muscle.
Results
CFs adopt osteogenic cell-like fates and induce calcification in vitro
To test this hypothesis, we subjected cardiac fibroblasts (isolated from 8 week old, male and 
female C57BL/6J murine hearts) to osteogenic differentiation. Osteogenic differentiation 
was induced by treating isolated fibroblasts with culture medium known to induce 
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (Jaiswal et al., 1997). Treatment of 
cardiac fibroblasts with osteogenic differentiation medium (DM) for 21 days led to 
deposition of calcium hydroxyapatite, visualized with Alizarin Red staining (Figure 1B). No 
calcium deposition occurred in cardiac fibroblasts treated with control growth medium for 
the same duration (Figure 1A). Gene expression analysis by RNA sequencing of cardiac 
fibroblasts harvested at different time points following induction of differentiation revealed 
clusters of genes whose expression was significantly altered in a temporal specific manner 
(Figure 1C). Genes regulating cell cycle that were highly expressed in undifferentiated 
cardiac fibroblasts were down-regulated at the onset of differentiation and remained at low 
expression levels throughout the duration of osteogenic differentiation, consistent with the 
principle that induction of differentiation is associated with reduced rates of proliferation 
(Buttitta and Edgar, 2007) (Figure 1C, Figure S1A). In contrast, genes that were minimally 
expressed in cardiac fibroblasts were induced in a specific temporal manner during the 
course of osteogenic differentiation (Figure 1C) and included sets of genes known to 
regulate inflammation, extracellular matrix proteins and cell metabolism (Figure S1A). Next, 
we created an osteogenic signature based on a set of 37 genes that are induced during 
osteogenic differentiation (Chen et al., 2012);(Choi et al., 2010);(Graneli et al., 2014);
(Harkness et al., 2011);(Hoshiba et al., 2009);(Liu et al., 2013);(Miguez et al., 2014);(Nora 
et al., 2012);(Olivares-Navarrete et al., 2011) (Figure S1B). We used the mean fold change 
Pillai et al.
Page 3
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in expression of this set of genes to quantitatively determine an osteogenic signature and 
observed that compared to control cardiac fibroblasts, cardiac fibroblasts subjected to 
osteogenic differentiation progressively adopted an osteogenic signature (Figure 1D). 
Quantitative PCR confirmed induction of expression of canonical osteoblast genes (Runx2, 
osteocalcin, osterix, bone sialoprotein and osteopontin) in cardiac fibroblasts following 
osteogenic differentiation (Figure 1 E-I). We next performed experiments with endothelial 
cells, as a control, to determine whether the ability to undergo osteogenic differentiation and 
induce mineralization is specific to fibroblasts. We treated human arterial endothelial cells 
(HAECs) (Romanoski et al., 2010) and human cardiac fibroblasts to osteogenic DM in vitro 
for 21 days (Figure S2A–D). Similarly to murine cardiac fibroblasts, human cardiac 
fibroblasts robustly induced mineralization of the matrix (Figure S2B,D) but HAECs under 
identical conditions failed to induce mineralization of the matrix (Figure S2A,C) suggesting 
that the ability to undergo osteogenic differentiation was not autonomous of the phenotype 
of the cell. We next investigated whether the changes in expression of osteogenic genes in 
cardiac fibroblasts were reversible. We treated cardiac fibroblasts with osteogenic DM for 14 
days and then reseeded them in the presence or absence of osteogenic DM for another 14 
days (Figure S2E). Expression of the canonical master osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 
did not substantially change upon removing the cells from an osteogenic environment and 
placing them under regular growth conditions (Figure S2F). These observations suggest that 
the osteogenic phenotype adopted by cardiac fibroblasts is stable.
To confirm our in vitro observations, we isolated cardiac fibroblasts from transgenic mice in 
which cardiac fibroblasts are genetically labeled. For this purpose we crossed transgenic 
mice harboring a tamoxifen inducible Cre recombinase driven by enhancer elements of the 
Type 1 collagen α2 gene (Col1a2-CreERT) or a Cre recombinase driven by promoter 
elements of the Fibroblast specific protein 1 gene (FSP1-Cre) to the lineage reporter 
R26RtdTomato mice to create progeny Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato or FSP1-
Cre:R26RtdTomato mice (Qian et al., 2012);(Ubil et al., 2014);(Zheng et al., 2002). We have 
recently shown that administration of tamoxifen for 10 days in Col1a2-
CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice results in specific labeling of approximately 55% of cardiac 
fibroblasts (Ubil et al., 2014). We isolated tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts from 
Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice (99% purity by flow cytometry) (Figure S3A,B), 
subjected labeled cardiac fibroblasts to osteogenic differentiation (Figure 1J,K) and observed 
calcium hydroxyapatite deposition (Figure 1K) but not in labeled cardiac fibroblasts cultured 
under control conditions (Figure 1J). In the FSP1-Cre:R26RtdTomato transgenic mice, the 
FSP-1 promoter elements drive Cre recombinase and this system has been used to track 
fibroblast fates (Qian et al., 2012);(Song et al., 2012). Labeled cardiac fibroblasts were 
isolated from FSP1-Cre:R26RtdTomato mice by flow cytometry (98% purity) (Figure S3C,D) 
and upon induction of osteogenic differentiation (Figure 1L,M) formed calcium 
hydroxyapatite (Figure 1M) while FSP1 labeled cardiac fibroblasts under control conditions 
did not (Figure 1L). The extent of hydroxyapatite deposition following 21 days of 
osteogenic differentiation was not significantly different between FSP1 and Col1a2 labeled 
cardiac fibroblasts (Figure 1N) suggesting that the ability to undergo osteogenic 
differentiation was not dependent on the Cre drivers chosen.
Pillai et al.
Page 4
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We next investigated the possibility that osteogenic differentiation of genetically labeled 
cardiac fibroblasts could be secondary to the presence of progenitor like cells that undergo 
osteogenic differentiation. We first determined expression of the progenitor marker C-Kit in 
FSP1 labeled cardiac fibroblasts but observed that 99.9% of labeled cells were negative for 
C-Kit expression (Figure S3E). Cardiac progenitors identified by expression of Stem cell 
antigen (Sca-1) are the most populous type of progenitor cell present within the mouse heart 
(Leri et al., 2005). More recently, a colony forming unit-fibroblast (CFU-F) has been 
identified in the heart to mark cardiac stromal cells with progenitor characteristics and also 
expresses Sca-1 (Chong et al., 2011). We isolated labeled cardiac fibroblasts from 
FSP-1Cre:R26RtdTomato mice and separated the tdTomato labeled cells into a predominantly 
Sca-1 expressing and Sca-1 negative population (98.5% and 97% purity respectively) by 
flow cytometry (Figure S3F,G). Consistent with CFU properties of Sca-1 expressing cells 
(Chong et al., 2011), we observed significant reduction of colony forming unit capacity of 
tdTomato(+)Sca-1(−) fraction compared to tdTomato(+)Sca-1(+) fractions (Figure S3H,I). 
However, upon osteogenic differentiation, there was no significant difference in the extent of 
calcium hydroxyapatite deposition between tdTomato(+)Sca-1(+) and tdTomato(+)Sca-1(−) 
cells (Figure 1O,P), thereby suggesting that osteogenic differentiation of genetically labeled 
fibroblasts is unlikely to be secondary to the presence of Sca-1 expressing progenitor cells.
Pericytes in organs are thought to possess multipotent progenitor cell characteristics (Crisan 
et al., 2008) and we next determined whether pericytes potentially present in the genetically 
labeled fibroblast pool could have contributed to calcification. Pericytes can be identified by 
expression of NG2, CD146 and Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptorβ (PDGFRβ) 
(Murray et al., 2016). We examined sections of uninjured hearts of FSP1Cre:R26RtdTomato 
mice but observed minimal expression of NG2 (98.4% of tdTomato cells negative for NG2) 
or CD146 (99.2% of tdTomato cells negative for NG2) in tdTomato labeled cells (Figure 
S4A–F). With flow cytometry, we did observe a fraction of FSP1 labeled cells to express 
PDGFRβ and separated the cells into tdTomato(+)PDGFRβ enriched and 
tdTomato(+)PDGFRβ depleted cells (Figure S4G,H). Upon osteogenic differentiation, the 
extent of hydroxyapatite deposition was similar in FSP1 labeled PDGFRβ enriched and FSP 
labeled PDGFRβ depleted pools (Figure 1Q,R) thus demonstrating that PDGFRβ expressing 
cells are not the predominant source of cells in the fibroblast pool undergoing osteogenic 
differentiation. Taken together these observations suggest that cardiac fibroblasts isolated 
from the adult murine heart can adopt osteogenic cell like fates and contribute to calcium 
deposition in vitro.
Osteogenic differentiation of CFs in multiple murine models of myocardial calcification
We next investigated whether cardiac fibroblasts can adopt osteoblast cell like fates in vivo 
and directly contribute to ectopic calcification of the myocardium. To address this question, 
we created three murine models of myocardial calcification and determined with lineage 
tracing techniques whether genetically labeled cardiac fibroblasts adopted an osteoblast 
phenotype and contributed to heart calcification in vivo. Cardiac injury or aging in certain 
strains of mice (e.g. C3H/HeJ, BALB/cByJ, DBA/2J) can lead to the development of 
calcification within the myocardium (Glass et al., 2013);(Ivandic et al., 1996);(Korff et al., 
2006). We used several different methods to induce myocardial injury in C3H strain of mice. 
Pillai et al.
Page 5
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 First, we administered high dose systemic steroids daily for 10 days which is known to 
induce myocyte necrosis (Sparks et al., 1955). Uninjured hearts did not exhibit any 
calcification (Figure 2A,B) but animals injected with steroids exhibited patchy cardiac 
calcification within 5 days of cessation of steroid injections (Figure 2C,D). Cryo-probe 
mediated injury of the mid ventricle (Aherrahrou et al., 2004) also resulted in calcification of 
the injury region within 7 days of injury (Figure 2E,F). Finally, ischemic injury of the 
myocardium by ligating the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery, (Korff et al., 
2006) led to patchy calcification of the injury region within 4 weeks of ischemic insult 
(Figure 2G,H). Consistent with the known association of fibrosis and calcification, we 
observed calcification only in regions where there was fibrosis (identified by Masson 
trichrome staining) (Figure 2 I , J).
Next we induced injury in the Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato transgenic mice to determine 
whether fibroblasts adopted an osteoblast fate and contributed to myocardial calcification. 
For this purpose the Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice (B6 background) were backcrossed 
to a C3H background for 8–10 generations to obtain a robust calcification phenotype after 
heart injury. Tamoxifen was administered for 10 days to 8 week old animals to label cardiac 
fibroblasts and following a 5 day gap, myocardial injury was induced either with 
hydrocortisone, cryo-probe or permanent ligation of the LAD coronary artery and tissue 
harvested at 5 days following completion of hydrocortisone injections, or 7 days and 4 
weeks after cryo and ischemic injury respectively (Figure 2K). In uninjured hearts of 
Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice, tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts did not express the 
canonical osteogenic markers Runx2, Osteocalcin (OCN) or Osterix (Figure 2 L-N). In the 
model of cardiac calcification induced by systemic high dose steroids, tdTomato labeled 
cardiac fibroblasts expressed the master osteogenic transcription factor Runx2 and osteoblast 
markers osteocalcin and osterix and were arranged in close physical apposition to calcium 
hydroxyapatite deposits (Figure 2 O-T). The extracellular matrix protein osteopontin has 
been implicated in the regulation of ectopic cardiac calcification and we observed abundant 
osteopontin expression in labeled fibroblasts adjacent to calcified myocardium (Figure S5A–
E). We analyzed the expression of osteogenic markers by tdTomato labeled cardiac 
fibroblasts within the region of calcification and observed that 23.5±3.6%, 35.9±4.3% and 
37.9±9.4% (mean±S.E.M.) of labeled cardiac fibroblasts expressed the markers Runx2, 
OCN and Osterix respectively while the fraction of labeled cardiac fibroblasts expressing 
these markers in uninjured hearts was less than 1.5% (p<0.05) (Figure 2U). In cryo and 
ischemic injury induced myocardial calcification we similarly observed a substantial fraction 
of labeled cardiac fibroblasts to express osteogenic markers. The fraction of labeled cardiac 
fibroblasts expressing osteogenic markers (Runx2, OCN) was approximately 42.7±3% and 
53.6±3.4% for cryo injury, (mean±S.E.M.) (Figure 3A–F) and 43.5±1.7% and 58.4±10.9% 
for ischemic injury (mean±S.E.M.) (Figure 3G–K) respectively with expression of these 
markers in the control uninjured hearts at less than 1% of labeled fibroblasts (p<0.05) 
(Figure 3F,K). The number of Runx2 positive cells not labeled by tdTomato was 
approximately 38% after injury, that could reflect limitations with efficiency of Cre labeling 
or unlabeled fibroblasts expressing osteogenic markers.
To corroborate our findings with the Col1a2-CreERT mice, we used the 
TCF21MerCreMer:R26RtdTomato mouse (backcrossed to a C3H background), that has been 
Pillai et al.
Page 6
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 used to specifically label cardiac fibroblasts in the adult heart (Acharya et al., 2011);
(Kanisicak et al., 2016). In uninjured hearts injected with tamoxifen, tdTomato labeled cells 
did not express Runx2 or OCN (Figure 4A,B). However following cryo injury, we observed 
that substantial numbers of tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts in the region of injury 
expressed osteogenic markers (Figure 4C–E), corroborating our findings with the Col1a2-
CreERT driver. As calcification occurs in the region of injury, we also performed 
immunostaining to determine expression of Runx2 in myocytes but did not observe any 
myocytes expressing Runx2 (Figure S5F–H). We also did not observe any evidence of 
intravascular calcification (Figure S5I–K). Finally, in strains of mice (B6) that do not exhibit 
calcification after injury, labeled cardiac fibroblasts did not express any osteogenic markers 
demonstrating that expression of osteoblast markers in cardiac fibroblasts is not simply a 
response to injury but is associated with the calcific phenotype (Figure S5L,M). Collectively 
these in vivo experiments using fate mapping with independent Cre drivers and multiple 
models of myocardial calcification suggest that cardiac fibroblasts can adopt an osteoblast 
cell like fate.
CFs directly induce mineralization of the affected tissue
Osteoblasts not only express extracellular matrix proteins but also directly contribute to the 
mineralization of the extracellular matrix. We next investigated whether cardiac fibroblasts 
in regions of myocardial calcification can directly contribute to mineralization of 
extracellular matrix. To address this question, we dissected regions of myocardial 
calcification following cryo-injury in Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice and performed in 
vitro explant culture of calcified myocardial tissue (Figure 5A). We observed that tdTomato 
labeled cardiac fibroblasts migrated outwards from the control or calcified myocardial tissue 
(Figure 5B). Immunofluorescent staining showed that 24.8±2.9% and 64.7±3% (mean
±S.E.M.) of tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts that had migrated from the calcific explant 
culture expressed Runx2 and OCN (Figure 5C–E). In contrast, tdTomato labeled cardiac 
fibroblasts migrating from explanted myocardial cultures of non-injured hearts did not 
express osteogenic markers (Figure 5E). Labeled fibroblasts (tdTomato+) from the control or 
calcified myocardial explanted tissue were then sorted by flow cytometry to 99% purity, and 
injected into subcutaneous pockets surgically fashioned on the dorsum of mice (Abdallah et 
al., 2008) (recipient mice were wild type C3H strain, no tdTomato transgene present) (Figure 
5F). As a control, we isolated cardiac fibroblasts from explant cultures of uninjured heart 
tissue of Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice and implanted them in an identical manner in a 
subcutaneous pocket fashioned on the contralateral side of the same animal (Figure 5G). 
Finally another subcutaneous dorsal pocket was created to inject medium without any cells 
(Figure 5A,G). We subjected the animals to Computer Associated Tomography (micro-CT) 
at weekly intervals. At 4 weeks after implantation, we observed a significantly greater 
degree of calcification of the subcutaneous region injected with labeled cardiac fibroblasts 
isolated from calcific myocardial tissue compared to subcutaneous tissue injected with 
labeled fibroblasts from uninjured animals or not injected with fibroblasts (Figure 5H–J and 
Movie S1). There was no difference in the degree of calcification between subcutaneous 
pockets injected without cells or with tdTomato labeled cells isolated from explant culture of 
uninjured myocardium (Figure 5J). To confirm that the increase in calcification represented 
new osteogenic activity, we performed positron emission tomography (micro-PET) 
Pillai et al.
Page 7
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with 18NaF radionuclide, which binds to calcium hydroxyapatite in newly formed bone and 
is used in clinical practice to identify regions of new bone formation (Czernin et al., 2010). 
We observed a significant and marked increase in PET signal in subcutaneous tissues 
injected with labeled cardiac fibroblasts isolated from calcified myocardial tissue compared 
to control groups (Figure 5K,L) and the anatomic location of the enhanced signal 
colocalized with region of subcutaneous calcification noted on the CT scan (Figure 5L).
We next dissected the calcified subcutaneous tissue to determine the presence of tdTomato 
labeled osteogenic cells. Histological stains (Von Kossa and Hematoxylin) identified 
subcutaneous calcific deposits (Figure 5M,N). On immunofluorescent staining, we observed 
abundant tdTomato labeled cells expressing osteogenic markers OCN and Runx2 and 
present on the edges of calcified matrix (Figure 5O–T). These cell transplantation 
experiments demonstrate that cardiac fibroblasts harvested from calcific but not uninjured 
myocardium, when injected into soft tissues are sufficient to induce ectopic soft tissue 
calcification, showing a direct role of the cardiac fibroblast in mediating soft tissue 
calcification.
A disparate injury response underlies pathological cardiac calcification
Having demonstrated that cardiac fibroblasts can induce mineralization of the matrix, we 
investigated mechanisms of osteogenesis or mineralization that could be potentially targeted 
to decrease ectopic calcification. We performed RNA-seq on uninjured and injured cardiac 
regions regions of C3H (calcify after injury) and B6 strains (no calcification after injury) 
(Figure S6A). Gene expression analysis demonstrated that calcific hearts compared to non-
calcific hearts responded to injury with a dramatically different transcriptional program. In 
contrast to only 70 odd genes that were differentially upregulated following injury in non-
calcified mouse hearts (B6) about 960 genes were upregulated in C3H hearts following 
injury induced calcification (Figure S6B). Out of the 960 differentially upregulated genes, 
only 35 were found to be common or upregulated in both C3H and B6 hearts after injury 
(Figure S6B) illustrating of the overlapping but dramatically different magnitude of the 
injury response. Families of genes regulating diverse aspects of an injury response including 
inflammation, extracellular matrix proteins, cell proliferation and collagen production were 
differentially expressed between the calcific and non-calcific hearts after injury (Figure 
S6C). We examined the expression of a set of osteogenic genes used by us earlier (Figure 
S1B) to represent an osteogenic signature (Figure S6D) and observed that the mean 
expression of osteogenic genes (osteogenic signature) was significantly higher in injured 
C3H hearts compared to uninjured C3H hearts (Figure S6E). The osteogenic signature was 
not higher in injured B6 hearts compared to control uninjured B6 hearts (Figure S6E). B6 
mouse hearts had only 1 osteogenic gene that was upregulated (Figure S6F); in contrast C3H 
hearts had 11 osteogenic genes upregulated after injury (Figure S6G). Runx2, Enpp1, 
Col1a1, and Fibronectin were upregulated genes that are well recognized to regulate 
osteogenesis in the skeleton (Figure S6G).
Inhibition of ENPP1-PPi-Pi axis attenuates pathological cardiac calcification
Calcification of the extracellular matrix is critically regulated by the balance of extracellular 
phosphate (Pi) and pyrophosphate (PPi) (Terkeltaub, 2001). Pyrophosphate is generated at 
Pillai et al.
Page 8
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the cell surface by the enzyme ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1 
(ENPP1) that breaks down ATP to AMP and PPi. Pyrophosphate is well recognized to 
inhibit calcium hydroxyapatite mineralization (Rutsch et al., 2011) in non-skeletal tissues, 
but in bone and teeth, pyrophosphate promotes mineralization by serving as a substrate for 
tissue non specific alkaline phosphatase that hydrolyzes pyrophosphate to generate inorganic 
phosphate (Terkeltaub, 2006). ENPP1 is expressed in osteoblasts, thought to regulate 
osteoblast maturation and bone mineralization and animals deficient in ENPP1 have 
decreased mineralization of long bones (Johnson et al., 2003). Considering the importance 
of ENPP1 in mineralization of the skeleton, we examined whether ENPP1, a gene identified 
by us to be differentially expressed (by RNA-seq) between calcific and non-calcified cardiac 
regions was contributing to ectopic cardiac calcification. We first confirmed our observation 
and subjected C3H mice and B6 mice to cryo-induced cardiac injury. We observed with 
qPCR, that injury increased ENPP1 expression in both C3H and B6 mouse hearts (p<0.05, 
n=6), but the increase in ENPP1 expression after injury was significantly higher in C3H 
hearts compared to B6 mice that did not exhibit cardiac calcification after injury (p<0.01, 
n=6) (Figure 6A). Immunostaining for ENPP1 confirmed that ENPP1 was expressed in 
uninjured B6 hearts (Figure 6B) and was more abundant following injury (Figure 6C). 
Compared to uninjured C3H hearts (Figure 6D), ENPP1 expression was markedly increased 
in injured C3H mouse hearts (Figure 6E). We next determined whether cardiac fibroblasts in 
the injury region were a source of increased ENPP1 expression. We subjected 
Col1a2CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice hearts to cardiac injury and observed abundant 
expression of ENPP1 by tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts in calcified regions. (Figure 
6F–H). Extracellular pyrophosphate generated by ENPP1 can induce mineralization of 
tissues by precipitating out as calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) or serving as a 
substrate for phosphate generation and formation of calcium hydroxyapatite. To distinguish 
between these two, we performed Raman spectroscopy (Chen et al., 2009) and observed that 
the myocardial calcific deposits comprised calcium hydroxyapatite and not pyrophosphate 
dihydrate (Figure 6I). PPi generated by ENPP1 can be hydrolyzed by tissue nonspecific 
alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) to Pi. The heart is known to express TNAP and we confirmed 
that both injured and uninjured cardiac tissue is rich in tissue non-specific alkaline 
phosphatase (TNAP) (Figure S7A,B). We measured gene expression and enzymatic activity 
of alkaline phosphatase and observed abundant expression and activity although TNAP gene 
expression or activity did not change following injury (Figure S7C,D). Biochemical 
measurements confirmed significantly higher phosphate levels in calcified regions (Figure 
6J). Mice that did not exhibit post injury cardiac calcification, in contrast, showed a decrease 
in phosphate levels in the injured region (Figure 6J), although it is difficult to ascertain from 
our study whether this contributes to protection from calcification or a consequence of not 
exhibiting calcification.
We next investigated whether the ENPP1-PPi-Pi axis could be targeted to decrease ectopic 
cardiac calcification. To address this question, we injected a small molecule inhibitor of 
ENPP1 (SYL-001) that has been used previously to antagonize ENPP1 in the heart (Sassi et 
al., 2014) (Figure 6K–N). ENPP1 inhibitor (delivered via continuous infusion) or vehicle 
was administered for 2 days prior to cardiac injury and for 5 days after injury. Compared to 
vehicle injected control animals (Figure 6K), animals that received the ENPP1 inhibitor, 
Pillai et al.
Page 9
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SYL-001 had decreased post injury cardiac calcification evident on gross inspection (Figure 
6L). Micro CT along with 3D reconstruction (Figure 6M,N) showed a 42% decrease in 
calcific deposits in animals that received the ENPP1 inhibitor (Figure 6N) compared to 
vehicle treated animals (Figure 6M). To strengthen the evidence that ENPP1 contributes to 
calcification, we employed another small molecule inhibitor of ENPP1 (ARL67156) (Cote et 
al., 2012);(Levesque et al., 2007). ARL67156 was administered in an identical manner 
continuously via a mini pump. ARL67156 similar to SYL-001 significantly inhibited 
calcification (Figure 6O) compared to vehicle injected controls (Figure 6K). A CT scan 
demonstrated 85% decrease in calcification (Figure 6P). Biochemical measurements 
demonstrated a significant 35% (p<0.05) and 79% (p<0.05) reduction in calcium deposits in 
the injured hearts of mice that received the ENPP1 inhibitors SYL-001 or ARL67156 
respectively (Figure 6Q).
Bisphosphonates are compounds structurally similar to pyrophosphate where two phosphate 
moieties are joined by a non-hydrolysable carbon bond rather than an oxygen bond as in 
pyrophosphate. Although primarily used for their anti-resorptive effect on bone, first 
generation bisphosphonates such as etidronate can bind to calcium hydroxyapatite in sites of 
active bone remodeling, and as they are not hydrolysable, prevent further bone 
mineralization (Drake et al., 2008). In this manner they serve as functional antagonists of the 
ENPP1-PPi-Pi axis and have been used to decrease ectopic vascular calcification in rodent 
models of kidney disease (Lomashvili et al., 2009). We investigated whether 
bisphosphonates could antagonize mineralization in the injured heart. We administered 
etidronate one day prior to cardiac cryo injury and then daily till the hearts were harvested. 
In contrast to vehicle injected controls (Figure 6R,S), etidronate completely rescued the 
calcific phenotype and no calcification was seen on gross inspection or on CT scans (Figure 
6T,U). However, etidronate, when administered after the development of calcification, did 
not reverse or decrease the amount of deposited calcium [data not shown].
Inhibition of cardiac calcification is associated with better cardiac function
We next investigated the physiologic significance of inhibiting cardiac calcification on 
cardiac function. In a subset of C3H animals, we performed echocardiography to determine 
cardiac function prior to cardiac cryo-injury and following administration of etidronate. 
Inhibition of calcification by etidronate was associated with significant preservation of post 
injury cardiac function (Figure 7A–F). Echocardiography demonstrated better systolic 
function in injured animals that received etidronate (Figure 7A,B; Table S1). The left 
ventricular end diastolic diameter (LVEDD) and end systolic diameter (LVESD) were 
significantly decreased post injury in etidronate injected animals compared to vehicle treated 
control animals (Figure 7C,D). Ejection fraction (Figure 7E) and fractional shortening 
(Figure 7F) were substantially better following injury in animals where calcification was 
inhibited with etidronate. Etidronate had no effect on sham injured hearts (Figure 7C–F). 
Taken together, these experiments demonstrate the potential of targeting the ENPP1-PPi-Pi 
axis for inhibiting ectopic cardiac calcification and augmenting cardiac function.
Pillai et al.
Page 10
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
Cell plasticity is known to play an important physiological role during development and 
wound healing (Nieto et al., 2016). Mesenchymal stromal cells from different organs have 
been shown to be capable of inducing calcification in vitro (Ronchetti et al., 2013). Our 
report suggests that aberrant plasticity of cardiac fibroblasts after injury drive them towards 
an osteogenic phenotype inducing mineralization of the cardiac extracellular matrix in vivo. 
The results described here broadly fulfill the Koch’s postulates (Evans, 1976) in causally 
implicating the fibroblast in pathological cardiac calcification i.e. (i) presence of cardiac 
fibroblasts expressing osteoblast markers in models of cardiac calcification but not in control 
hearts (ii) induction of calcific phenotype following implantation into another host and (iii) 
identification of the labeled cardiac fibroblast from calcific lesions of the host animal.
The animal models we used are clinically germane to heart calcification in humans. Human 
cardiac calcification is most often seen after various types of cardiac injury (ischemic, viral, 
toxic), which motivated our use of different modalities of cardiac injury in mice to elicit the 
phenotype. Moreover, all patients after injury do not develop cardiac calcification and hence 
the use of different strains of mice to determine a mechanism that is differentially regulated 
in calcific versus non-calcific hearts.
Our data points to the role of ENPP1 that is differentially expressed in fibroblasts of hearts 
developing post injury calcification. Osteoblasts express ENPP1, and ENPP1 mediated 
generation of PPi in bone augments mineralization via hydrolysis of PPi to generate Pi and 
subsequent hydroxyapatite formation. Our data suggests that similar mechanisms are likely 
at play in regulating ectopic cardiac calcification. Administration of small molecules that 
inhibit ENPP1, or a bisphosphonate led to significantly decreased ectopic cardiac 
calcification and preservation of post injury cardiac function. Heart calcification is a 
physiologically important consequence of clinical and subclinical heart injury. Our study 
identifies the cardiac fibroblast and the ENPP1-PPi-Pi axis as potential cellular and 
pharmacological targets for treating this pathological condition.
STAR Methods text
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the 
corresponding author, Dr. Arjun Deb (Adeb@mednet.ucla.edu)
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animal care and use
All animal studies were approved by the Animal Research Committee, University of 
California, Los Angeles. All animals were maintained at the UCLA vivarium according to 
the policies instituted by the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal 
Care. Sample size was estimated based on published reports on murine models of cardiac 
calcification (Aherrahrou et al., 2004). No animal was subjected to more than one procedure.
Pillai et al.
Page 11
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Generation of mice harboring genetically labeled fibroblasts
Three different Cre transgenic mice (Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato, FSP1-Cre:R26RtdTomato 
and TCF21-MerCreMer:R26RtdTomato) were used for genetic fate mapping of cardiac 
fibroblasts in this study. The reporter lines were obtained by crossing Col1a2-CreERT, 
FSP1-Cre and TCF21-MerCreMer mice with the lineage reporter R26RtdTomato mice. The 
Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato and TCF21-MerCreMer:R26RtdTomato mice (B6 background) 
were backcrossed with the C3H strain for 8–10 generations prior to cardiac injury for 
obtaining a calcific phenotype. Tamoxifen (1 mg) (Sigma,T5648) was injected 
intraperitoneally for 10 days in 8–10 weeks old Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato and TCF21-
MerCreMer:R26RtdTomato to induce Cre-mediated recombination. Five days following 
cessation of tamoxifen, animals were subjected to cardiac injury. Littermates were used as 
controls. In all experiments, adult mice (both male and female), 8–10 weeks old were used. 
The TCF21-MerCreMer and the Col1a2-CreERT mice were used for in vivo experiments as 
the Cre is inducible and thus more rigorous for fate mapping. The FSP1Cre is not an 
inducible Cre and has been shown to label immune cells in vivo after injury and thus was not 
preferred for in vivo mapping.
Murine models of cardiac calcification
Three different murine models of cardiac calcification were created for this study by 
inducing cardiac injury by rapid freeze thaw of cardiac tissue (cryo-injury), ligation of the 
left anterior descending artery (myocardial infarction) or by systemic injection of high dose 
corticosteroids. For cryo-injury, mice were deeply anesthetized with 2% isoflurane, 
maintained at 1.5–2% isoflurane, and intubated using a volume-cycled ventilator. A left 
thoracotomy was performed at the level of 2nd intercostal space and the exposed beating 
heart was frozen for 10 seconds by gently pressing a pre-cooled steel rod of 1mm diameter 
in dry ice (Aherrahrou et al., 2004);(Korff et al., 2006). Freezing of cardiac tissue was 
confirmed by the rapid discoloration of the tissue. Seven days after injury, the hearts were 
harvested and processed for histological analysis.
Myocardial infarction was performed by ligating the left anterior descending (LAD) 
coronary artery (Ubil et al., 2014). After 28 days, the hearts were harvested and processed 
for histological analysis.
For corticosteroid induced cardiac injury and calcification (Sparks et al., 1955), we injected 
a saline suspension of 2.5 mg hydrocortisone (Sigma, H3035) daily subcutaneously for 10 
days and hearts were harvested for histological analysis within 5 days of completion of 
steroid injections.
To determine effects of ENPP1 inhibition on ectopic cardiac calcification, a cryo injury was 
used. The ENPP1 inhibitor SYL-001 (Sigma, R4033) mixed in 10% propylene glycol 
(Sigma, W294004), was infused continuously (10mg/kg/day) via osmotic pump (Alzet, 
1007D). Another ENPP1 inhibitor, ARL67156 trisodium salt, (Tocris, 1021868-83-6) was 
administered in an identical manner via osmotic pump at a dose of 1mg/kg/day. Control 
animals only received propylene glycol. Prior to cryo-injury, mice were injected with the 
drug for 24 hours. Following 7 days of etidronate or vehicle infusion, animals were 
Pillai et al.
Page 12
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subjected to micro CT scans to obtain quantitative estimates of calcium deposition. Animals 
were subsequently sacrificed, hearts harvested to determine calcium deposition by gross 
inspection and biochemical assays. For estimation of calcium deposits, calcified tissue was 
dried overnight and homogenized in 0.6mM HCL. After 24 hours incubation, calcium ion in 
supernatants was quantified by QuantiChrom™ Calcium Assay Kit (BioAssay Systems, 
DICA-500).
To determine effects of bisphosphonate, Etidronate disodium hydrate (Sigma, P5248) was 
administrated intraperitoneally to 9–11 weeks old C3H mice at a dose of 80mg/kg/day for 2 
days and then at 30mg/kg/day till animals were harvested. On the second day of etidronate 
administration, mice were subjected to cryo injury of the heart. Animals were subjected to 
CT scanning 5 days later and subsequently hearts were harvested to determine extent of 
calcification.
For the generation of murine models of cardiac calcification, both male and female mice 
aged between 8–12 weeks were used. Control groups of mice were obtained from the same 
litter and the mice randomly allocated either to control or experimental arm.
METHOD DETAILS
Isolation of cardiac fibroblasts and osteogenic differentiation in vitro
Cardiac fibroblasts were isolated as described previously (Ubil et al., 2014). Briefly, hearts 
from euthanized uninjured mice were washed 3 times with ice cold 1X HBSS (GIBCO). 
Fibroblasts were isolated from human heart tissue that is perioperatively routinely discarded 
during ventricular assist device placement or transplantation. Heart tissue was chopped into 
1mm2 pieces and digested using 5ml of 0.1% Trypsin (GIBCO) solution with 50units/ml 
collagenase II (Worthington, NC9693955) at 37°C for 10 minutes. Five sequential digestions 
were performed and cells collected from 2 to 5 digestions were pooled and strained using a 
40µm filter and plated in IMDM, 1X penicillin/streptomycin, 20% FBS for 2 h at 37°C. 
Then medium was changed to F12K with 1X penicillin/streptomycin, 20% FBS (Gibco), 
and 10ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (Millipore). Cells were maintained under 
these conditions until they became confluent and used for further experiments.
For osteogenic differentiation, freshly isolated cardiac fibroblasts (Passage 0 or passage 1) 
were plated at a density of 2.5 × 104 cells/cm2 in growth medium. After overnight 
incubation, osteogenesis was induced using differentiation medium (a-MEM supplemented 
with 10% FBS, 10 nM dexamethasone (Sigma, D4902), 20 mM β-glycerol phosphate 
(Sigma, G9422), and 50 µM L-ascorbic acid (Sigma, A4403) (Jaiswal et al., 1997). 
Differentiation was visualized after 21 days either by staining with alizarin red 
(Sigma,A5533) or using OsteoImage™ (PA 1503, Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA) 
(Langenbach et al., 2011) The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and washed once 
with 1X PBS. The cells were again stained with 1:100 diluted OsteoImage™ staining 
solutions for 30 minutes at room temperature. After incubation, the cells were washed thrice 
with 1X wash buffer and the images were taken in a confocal laser scanning microscope 
(LSM 780, Zeiss). Human endothelial cells (Romanoski et al., 2010) grown in MCDB131 
Pillai et al.
Page 13
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 complete growth medium (VEC Technologies, MCDB-131C) were subjected to osteogenic 
differentiation under identical conditions
For determining the area of mineralization in vitro, labeled cardiac fibroblasts were seeded 
onto 6cm dishes and subjected to osteogenic differentiation for 21 days. The wells were then 
stained with a fluorescent dye, OsteoImage™ (Langenbach, et al., 2011) that binds to 
calcium hydroxyapatite and the area of fluorescence quantitated with Image J and expressed 
as a ratio to the surface area of the well. Ten random microscopic fields were examined to 
obtain mean area of mineralization.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography was performed on conscious animals without anesthesia. The mouse is 
briefly restrained manually, hair is removed from the chest and distress minimized by 
performing the echocardiogram rapidly. Echocardiographic imaging was done with a 
VisualSonics Vevo 2100 machine. Prior to conscious echocardiography, animals are 
acclimatized to the restraining procedure and environment by holding them in that position 
for about 1 min, 3 days prior to the procedure and repeating 2 days prior to the procedure.
RNA-seq and expression analysis
RNA-seq was performed on cardiac fibroblasts or cardiac tissue using standard Illumina 
RNA-seq library construction protocols. RNA-seq libraries were sequenced on Illumina 
HiSeq 2000 or Illumina Hiseq 4000. Reads were aligned to the mm9 reference genome 
using TopHat and gene counts were quantified with HTSeq. DESeq was used to identify 
differentially expressed genes of cardiac fibroblasts undergoing differentiation treatment. 
1685 genes with a FDR < 0.05 and a minimum 2 fold (log2) change were subsequently 
clustered and visualized. A set of osteogenic genes known to be induced during bone 
formation or osteogenic differentiation was compiled from the literature to determine an 
osteogenic signature (Chen et al., 2012); (Choi et al., 2010); (Graneli et al., 2014); 
(Harkness et al., 2011); (Hoshiba et al., 2009); (Liu et al., 2013); (Miguez et al., 2014); 
(Nora et al., 2012); (Olivares-Navarrete et al., 2011). All RNA-seq analysis were performed 
with ≥ 2 biological replicates.
Immunohistochemistry, confocal imaging and quantitation
For harvesting the heart, the left ventricle was perfused with 5 ml PBS followed by 2 ml of 
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). The hearts were post fixed in 4% PFA for additional 4 hours 
and cryo-protected using 25% sucrose and embedded in OCT compound (Tissue-Tek). 
Immunofluorescent staining was performed on 7 µm frozen sections. For triple staining of 
calcium hydroxyapatite (HA) and osteogenic markers, sections were initially stained 
(according to manufacturer’s instructions) with OsteoImage™ (Lonza, PA 1503, 
Walkersville, MD, USA), a fluorescent dye that stains hydroxyapatite. Sections were washed 
and blocked using 10% normal goat serum for 1 hour and then stained with primary 
antibodies against Runx2 (Novus biologicals, NBP1–77461), Osteocalcin (Abcam, ab 
93876), Osterix (Santacruz, sc 22536-R), CD146 (Abcam, ab75769), NG2 (EMD Millipore, 
AB5320), ENPP1 (Abcam, ab40003), ALP (R&D Systems, AF2910), Osteopontin (Abcam, 
ab8448), Troponin (Santacruz, sc-8121) and CD31 (Abcam, ab7388) for overnight at 4°C. 
Pillai et al.
Page 14
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 After washing three times with PBS, sections were incubated in secondary antibodies for 1 h 
followed by washing an additional three times with PBS. Finally, the sections were mounted 
in slow fade gold antifade reagent with DAPI (Life technologies, S36938). Labeled sections 
were imaged using a LSM 780 inverted Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope (Zeiss) or 
Digital Eclipse C1 Confocal Microscope System (Nikon). For each sample, eight 
independent images within 100µm radius of the calcified region were used for quantitative 
analysis. The images were merged using Image J software (NIH) and the total number of 
tdTomato cells expressing different osteogenic markers (double positive cells) was expressed 
as a fraction of the number of tdTomato cells present.
Confocal Raman Microscopy
Raman spectra were measured using a confocal Raman microscope (inVia Qontor) under 
785 nm laser excitation at room temperature. The laser power used was ~50 mW. The 
grating used was 1200 l/mm, and the objective lens used was 20X with N.A. 0.4. Exposure 
time and the accumulation time for standard HA (Sigma, 574791) and CPPD (InvivoGen, 
tlrl-cppd) were 1 second and 60 times, respectively (Chen et al., 2009). For heart tissue 
Raman measurement, exposure time and the accumulation time were 1 second and 35 times, 
respectively. Raman data were analyzed using Renishaw WiRE 4.0 software.
Von Kossa and Masson’s trichrome staining
Von Kossa staining on heart section was performed using Von Kossa staining reagent 
(Abcam, ab150687) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Masson’s trichrome staining was 
performed on heart sections using the reagent (Sigma, HT15-1KT) as per manufacturer’s 
instructions (Ubil et al., 2014).
Alkaline Phosphatase activity and Phosphate assay
Injury and uninjured regions within the same heart were homogenized in ultrapure water 
(1mg tissue/ 50 uL water). Following homogenization the samples were placed into a 10kDa 
spin column (Thermo, 88513) at 14,000xg for 5 minutes. Alkaline Phosphatase activity was 
quantified by SensoLyte® pNPP Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit (Anaspec, AS-72146) and 
Phosphate by PiPer™ Phosphate Assay Kit (Invitrogen, MP22061).
Quantitative real-time PCR
RNA was isolated from cardiac fibroblasts at 3, 7, 14 and 21 days after the induction of 
differentiation and from control cells maintained in growth medium without differentiation 
factors. RNA isolation was performed using Qiagen RNA Isolation Kit and reverse 
transcription using Reverse Transcription System (Promega, A3500). qPCR was performed 
using the SensiMix SYBR and Fluorescein Kit (Quantace, QT615) on an iQ5 thermal cycler 
(BioRad).
Flow cytometry analysis and sorting
Cultured cardiac fibroblasts were dissociated using accutase (Innovative Cell Technologies), 
stained in FACS buffer (0.1%BSA PBS) with APC-conjugated anti-Sca1 antibody (17–5981 
-eBioscience) or PDGFRβ (17–1402, eBioscience), for 20 min at 4°C. After washing with 
Pillai et al.
Page 15
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FACS buffer twice, stained cells were sorted in FACS Aria II (BD Biosciences). Similarly, 
flow cytometric analysis for cell surface markers were done using antibodies c-Kit APC 
(561074, BD Bioscience). For isolation of tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts, cardiac 
fibroblasts isolated from non-transgenic mice were first run through the flow cytometer to 
establish gates. Next population of cardiac fibroblasts isolated from Col1a2-
CreERT:R26RtdTomato or FSP1Cre:R26RtdTomato mice hearts were run through the same 
gates to identify tdTomato labeled cells. Similarly for other antigens analyzed on tdTomato 
labeled cells, unstained control cells were run first to establish gates followed by the cells 
stained with the primary antibody conjugated to the fluorophore.
Colony forming unit (CFU) assay
Sca1 positive and negative cells were sorted by flow cytometry and seeded in a 10 cm tissue 
culture dish at a density of 5×102 cells per dish for determination of colony forming unit 
capacity as described (Chong et al., 2011). The cells were maintained in growth medium for 
10 days, then fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at 4°C, stained with 0.5% crystal 
violet (Fisher, C581-25,w/v in water) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Whole stained 
plates were scanned in an HP scanner, Microtek Scanmaker i800) at a resolution of 4200 
pixels/inch and the number of colonies per plate were counted manually. Colony forming 
efficiency was expressed as a percentage of number of colonies formed per 5×102 cells 
plated. Representative images from three independent biological samples were shown in the 
figure
Explant culture and Ectopic Bone formation Assay of cardiac fibroblasts
For explant culture, the mice subjected to cryo-injury were deeply anesthetized and perfused 
with 5 ml of HBSS (GIBCO). The calcified myocardial region was dissected out and diced 
into 2–3 mm pieces, and were placed in collagen coated (50µg/ml) tissue culture plates. 
Outgrowth cells were observed by day 1 and these cells were maintained in IMDM, 1X 
penicillin/streptomycin, 20% FBS for 5–7 days and were harvested for further experiments.
Assessment of osteogenic potential of cells from calcified and control cardiac fibroblasts 
were done using ectopic in vivo bone formation assay as described previously (Abdallah et 
al., 2008). Genetically labeled cardiac fibroblasts (1×106 cells resuspended in 100ul of 
IMDM, 1X penicillin/streptomycin, 10% FBS medium ) from either explant cultures of 
calcified or from uninjured Collagen1a2-CreERT: R26RtdTomato mice, were loaded onto 
40mg of wet hydroxyapatite and β-tri-calcium phosphate granules (Berkeley Advanced 
Biomaterials,Bio-02G) in a syringe and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. Implants having 40mg 
of hydroxyapatite and β-tri-calcium phosphate granules without cells were served as control 
in each transplanted mouse. For ectopic implantation, mice were initially anaesthetized with 
3% isoflurane, maintained at 2% isoflurane and three small longitudinal incision of about 
1cm were made and through a blunt dissection, three subcutaneous pockets were fashioned 
on the dorsum of mice. 200ul of the prepared mixture with or without cells was placed in 
different subcutaneous sites in wild type C3H mouse and surgical sites were finally closed 
by suturing.
Pillai et al.
Page 16
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In vivo micro PET/CT imaging
After subcutaneous implantations, mice underwent weekly 18F-sodium fluoride (18F-NaF) 
microPET/CT imaging (Inveon microPET, Siemens Medical Solutions USA Inc.; 
CrumpCAT microCT, Arion Chatziioannou lab, UCLA). 18F-NaF was produced as 
previously described (Czernin et al., 2010). The CrumpCAT, a Crump Institute prototype 
microCT, acquired images under “high resolution” continuous mode using a 50 kVp, 200 µA 
X-ray source with a 45 degree cone angle and positioned at 13–15 cm from the isocenter. 
The camera is a flat panel CMOS detector with a CsI scintillator (1536 by 1944 pixels, pitch 
of 75 µm). Images were taken with 720 projections at 100 ms per projection, and 
reconstructed using the Feldkamp algorithm with a voxel size of 125 µm and calibrated for 
Hounsfield units.
Mice were injected with 100 µCi 18F-NaF. After 60 min probe uptake time, mice were 
anesthetized with 2% isoflurane and placed in a dedicated heated imaging chamber. 
microPET images were acquired for 600 sec, followed by 3D histogramming and 
reconstruction with a zoom factor of 2.1 using 3D–OSEM with 2 iterations followed by 
MAP with 18 iterations (beta=0.1). This was followed by microCT imaging. Images were 
analyzed using AMIDE version 1.0.5 and OsiriX version 3.8 imaging software. microPET 
and microCT quantifications were performed separately using AMIDE by drawing 
individual 3D isocontours each originating at an implanted nodular region. Total new bone 
formation (microPET) and calcification (microCT) were determined by multiplying the 
mean ROI value (percent injected dose per milliliter for microPET; Hounsfield units for 
microCT) by the total volume of the ROI. Values were normalized to no-cells control.
Analysis of the extent of calcification by CT scanning following injection of ENPP1 
inhibitors was confirmed by an independent observer analyzing the data in a blinded manner.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All data is presented as mean± standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). The value of n is 
mentioned in the figure/figure legends and always stands for separate biological replicates. 
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad software (Prizm) using Student’s t- test 
(two tailed) and one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison analysis as 
appropriate. A P value <0.05 was considered statistically significant and individual p values 
are mentioned in the figure/figure legends.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Data Resources
Raw data files for the RNA sequencing analysis have been deposited in the NCBI Gene 
Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE87836 and GSE87837.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Pillai et al.
Page 17
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We thank the California Nanosystems Institute, UCLA, the Broad Stem Cell Center confocal microscopy facilities, 
and the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer center Flow Cytometry facilities. This work was supported by grants from 
the National Institutes of Health (HL129178), California Institute of Regenerative Medicine (DISC1-08790), 
Department of Defense (PR152219), Oppenheimer Foundation and James Eason Cardiovascular Discovery Award 
to A. Deb and NIH grants HL28481 and HL30568 to AJL. The project in part also received support from NIH/
NCATS UCLA CTSI (ULTR000124). We also thank Dr. Eric Olson, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center for providing us the TCF21MerCreMer mice and Dr. Andrew Leask, University of Western Ontario, Canada 
for sharing the Col1a2CreERT mice.
References
Abdallah BM, Ditzel N, Kassem M. Assessment of bone formation capacity using in vivo 
transplantation assays: procedure and tissue analysis. Methods Mol Biol. 2008; 455:89–100. 
[PubMed: 18463812] 
Acharya A, Baek ST, Banfi S, Eskiocak B, Tallquist MD. Efficient inducible Cre-mediated 
recombination in Tcf21 cell lineages in the heart and kidney. Genesis. 2011; 49:870–877. [PubMed: 
21432986] 
Aherrahrou Z, Axtner SB, Kaczmarek PM, Jurat A, Korff S, Doehring LC, Weichenhan D, Katus HA, 
Ivandic BT. A locus on chromosome 7 determines dramatic up-regulation of osteopontin in 
dystrophic cardiac calcification in mice. Am J Pathol. 2004; 164:1379–1387. [PubMed: 15039225] 
Buttitta LA, Edgar BA. Mechanisms controlling cell cycle exit upon terminal differentiation. Curr 
Opin Cell Biol. 2007; 19:697–704. [PubMed: 18035529] 
Chen C, Uludag H, Wang Z, Jiang H. Noggin suppression decreases BMP-2-induced osteogenesis of 
human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells in vitro. J Cell Biochem. 2012; 113:3672–
3680. [PubMed: 22740073] 
Chen KH, Li MJ, Cheng WT, Balic-Zunic T, Lin SY. Identification of monoclinic calcium 
pyrophosphate dihydrate and hydroxyapatite in human sclera using Raman microspectroscopy. Int J 
Exp Pathol. 2009; 90:74–78. [PubMed: 19200254] 
Choi YA, Lim J, Kim KM, Acharya B, Cho JY, Bae YC, Shin HI, Kim SY, Park EK. Secretome 
analysis of human BMSCs and identification of SMOC1 as an important ECM protein in osteoblast 
differentiation. J Proteome Res. 2010; 9:2946–2956. [PubMed: 20359165] 
Chong JJ, Chandrakanthan V, Xaymardan M, Asli NS, Li J, Ahmed I, Heffernan C, Menon MK, 
Scarlett CJ, Rashidianfar A, et al. Adult cardiac-resident MSC-like stem cells with a proepicardial 
origin. Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 9:527–540. [PubMed: 22136928] 
Cote N, El Husseini D, Pepin A, Bouvet C, Gilbert LA, Audet A, Fournier D, Pibarot P, Moreau P, 
Mathieu P. Inhibition of ectonucleotidase with ARL67156 prevents the development of calcific 
aortic valve disease in warfarin-treated rats. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012; 689:139–146. [PubMed: 
22659116] 
Crisan M, Yap S, Casteilla L, Chen CW, Corselli M, Park TS, Andriolo G, Sun B, Zheng B, Zhang L, 
et al. A perivascular origin for mesenchymal stem cells in multiple human organs. Cell Stem Cell. 
2008; 3:301–313. [PubMed: 18786417] 
Czernin J, Satyamurthy N, Schiepers C. Molecular mechanisms of bone 18F–NaF deposition. J Nucl 
Med. 2010; 51:1826–1829. [PubMed: 21078790] 
Demer LL, Tintut Y. Inflammatory, metabolic, and genetic mechanisms of vascular calcification. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014; 34:715–723. [PubMed: 24665125] 
Drake MT, Clarke BL, Khosla S. Bisphosphonates: mechanism of action and role in clinical practice. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 2008; 83:1032–1045. [PubMed: 18775204] 
Evans AS. Causation and disease: the Henle-Koch postulates revisited. Yale J Biol Med. 1976; 
49:175–195. [PubMed: 782050] 
Glass AM, Coombs W, Taffet SM. Spontaneous cardiac calcinosis in BALB/cByJ mice. Comp Med. 
2013; 63:29–37. [PubMed: 23561935] 
Pillai et al.
Page 18
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Graneli C, Thorfve A, Ruetschi U, Brisby H, Thomsen P, Lindahl A, Karlsson C. Novel markers of 
osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation of human bone marrow stromal cells identified using a 
quantitative proteomics approach. Stem Cell Res. 2014; 12:153–165. [PubMed: 24239963] 
Harkness L, Mahmood A, Ditzel N, Abdallah BM, Nygaard JV, Kassem M. Selective isolation and 
differentiation of a stromal population of human embryonic stem cells with osteogenic potential. 
Bone. 2011; 48:231–241. [PubMed: 20869473] 
Hoshiba T, Kawazoe N, Tateishi T, Chen G. Development of stepwise osteogenesis-mimicking 
matrices for the regulation of mesenchymal stem cell functions. J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:31164–
31173. [PubMed: 19762920] 
Ivandic BT, Qiao JH, Machleder D, Liao F, Drake TA, Lusis AJ. A locus on chromosome 7 determines 
myocardial cell necrosis and calcification (dystrophic cardiac calcinosis) in mice. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 1996; 93:5483–5488. [PubMed: 8643601] 
Jaiswal N, Haynesworth SE, Caplan AI, Bruder SP. Osteogenic differentiation of purified, culture-
expanded human mesenchymal stem cells in vitro. J Cell Biochem. 1997; 64:295–312. [PubMed: 
9027589] 
Johnson K, Goding J, Van Etten D, Sali A, Hu SI, Farley D, Krug H, Hessle L, Millan JL, Terkeltaub 
R. Linked deficiencies in extracellular PP(i) and osteopontin mediate pathologic calcification 
associated with defective PC-1 and ANK expression. J Bone Miner Res. 2003; 18:994–1004. 
[PubMed: 12817751] 
Kanisicak O, Khalil H, Ivey MJ, Karch J, Maliken BD, Correll RN, Brody MJ, SC JL, Aronow BJ, 
Tallquist MD, et al. Genetic lineage tracing defines myofibroblast origin and function in the 
injured heart. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:12260. [PubMed: 27447449] 
Korff S, Riechert N, Schoensiegel F, Weichenhan D, Autschbach F, Katus HA, Ivandic BT. 
Calcification of myocardial necrosis is common in mice. Virchows Arch. 2006; 448:630–638. 
[PubMed: 16211391] 
Langenbach F, Berr K, Naujoks C, Hassel A, Hentschel M, Depprich R, Kubler NR, Meyer U, 
Wiesmann HP, Kogler G, et al. Generation and differentiation of microtissues from multipotent 
precursor cells for use in tissue engineering. Nature protocols. 2011; 6:1726–1735. [PubMed: 
22011655] 
Leri A, Kajstura J, Anversa P. Cardiac Stem Cells and Mechanisms of Myocardial Regeneration. 
Physiol Rev. 2005; 85:1373–1416. [PubMed: 16183916] 
Lev M. Anatomic Basis for Atrioventricular Block. Am J Med. 1964; 37:742–748. [PubMed: 
14237429] 
Levesque SA, Lavoie EG, Lecka J, Bigonnesse F, Sevigny J. Specificity of the ecto-ATPase inhibitor 
ARL 67156 on human and mouse ectonucleotidases. Br J Pharmacol. 2007; 152:141–150. 
[PubMed: 17603550] 
Liu C, Gu S, Sun C, Ye W, Song Z, Zhang Y, Chen Y. FGF signaling sustains the odontogenic fate of 
dental mesenchyme by suppressing beta-catenin signaling. Development. 2013; 140:4375–4385. 
[PubMed: 24067353] 
Lomashvili KA, Monier-Faugere MC, Wang X, Malluche HH, O’Neill WC. Effect of bisphosphonates 
on vascular calcification and bone metabolism in experimental renal failure. Kidney Int. 2009; 
75:617–625. [PubMed: 19129793] 
Miguez PA, Terajima M, Nagaoka H, Ferreira JA, Braswell K, Ko CC, Yamauchi M. Recombinant 
biglycan promotes bone morphogenetic protein-induced osteogenesis. J Dent Res. 2014; 93:406–
411. [PubMed: 24482033] 
Murray IR, Baily JE, Chen WC, Dar A, Gonzalez ZN, Jensen AR, Petrigliano FA, Deb A, Henderson 
NC. Skeletal and cardiac muscle pericytes: Functions and therapeutic potential. Pharmacol Ther. 
2016
Nieto MA, Huang RY, Jackson RA, Thiery JP. Emt: 2016. Cell. 2016; 166:21–45. [PubMed: 
27368099] 
Nora CC, Camassola M, Bellagamba B, Ikuta N, Christoff AP, Meirelles Lda S, Ayres R, Margis R, 
Nardi NB. Molecular analysis of the differentiation potential of murine mesenchymal stem cells 
from tissues of endodermal or mesodermal origin. Stem Cells Dev. 2012; 21:1761–1768. 
[PubMed: 21970410] 
Pillai et al.
Page 19
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Olivares-Navarrete R, Hyzy SL, Park JH, Dunn GR, Haithcock DA, Wasilewski CE, Boyan BD, 
Schwartz Z. Mediation of osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells on titanium 
surfaces by a Wnt-integrin feedback loop. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:6399–6411. [PubMed: 
21636130] 
Pugashetti R, Shinkai K, Ruben BS, Grossman ME, Maldonado J, Fox LP. Calcium may preferentially 
deposit in areas of elastic tissue damage. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011; 64:296–301. [PubMed: 
21112670] 
Qian L, Huang Y, Spencer CI, Foley A, Vedantham V, Liu L, Conway SJ, Fu JD, Srivastava D. In vivo 
reprogramming of murine cardiac fibroblasts into induced cardiomyocytes. Nature. 2012; 
485:593–598. [PubMed: 22522929] 
Romanoski CE, Lee S, Kim MJ, Ingram-Drake L, Plaisier CL, Yordanova R, Tilford C, Guan B, He A, 
Gargalovic PS, et al. Systems genetics analysis of gene-by-environment interactions in human 
cells. Am J Hum Genet. 2010; 86:399–410. [PubMed: 20170901] 
Ronchetti I, Boraldi F, Annovi G, Cianciulli P, Quaglino D. Fibroblast involvement in soft connective 
tissue calcification. Front Genet. 2013; 4:22. [PubMed: 23467434] 
Rostand SG, Sanders C, Kirk KA, Rutsky EA, Fraser RG. Myocardial calcification and cardiac 
dysfunction in chronic renal failure. Am J Med. 1988; 85:651–657. [PubMed: 3055977] 
Rutsch F, Nitschke Y, Terkeltaub R. Genetics in arterial calcification: pieces of a puzzle and cogs in a 
wheel. Circ Res. 2011; 109:578–592. [PubMed: 21852556] 
Sassi Y, Ahles A, Truong DJ, Baqi Y, Lee SY, Husse B, Hulot JS, Foinquinos A, Thum T, Muller CE, 
et al. Cardiac myocyte-secreted cAMP exerts paracrine action via adenosine receptor activation. J 
Clin Invest. 2014; 124:5385–5397. [PubMed: 25401477] 
Shackley BS, Nguyen TP, Shivkumar K, Finn PJ, Fishbein MC. Idiopathic massive myocardial 
calcification: a case report and review of the literature. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2011; 20:e79–e83. 
[PubMed: 20598909] 
Simchen MJ, Toi A, Silver M, Smith CR, Hornberger LK, Taylor G, Chitayat D. Fetal cardiac 
calcifications: report of four prenatally diagnosed cases and review of the literature. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol. 2006; 27:325–330. [PubMed: 16485251] 
Song K, Nam YJ, Luo X, Qi X, Tan W, Huang GN, Acharya A, Smith CL, Tallquist MD, Neilson EG, 
et al. Heart repair by reprogramming non-myocytes with cardiac transcription factors. Nature. 
2012; 485:599–604. [PubMed: 22660318] 
Sparks LL, Rosenau W, Macalpin RN, Daane TA, Li CH. Production of dystrophic calcification of 
cardiac muscle in mice by hydrocortisone. Nature. 1955; 176:503–504. [PubMed: 13253600] 
Stallion A, Rafferty JF, Warner BW, Ziegler MM, Ryckman FC. Myocardial calcification: a predictor 
of poor outcome for myocarditis treated with extracorporeal life support. J Pediatr Surg. 1994; 
29:492–494. [PubMed: 8014800] 
Terkeltaub R. Physiologic and pathologic functions of the NPP nucleotide pyrophosphatase/
phosphodiesterase family focusing on NPP1 in calcification. Purinergic Signal. 2006; 2:371–377. 
[PubMed: 18404477] 
Terkeltaub RA. Inorganic pyrophosphate generation and disposition in pathophysiology. Am J Physiol 
Cell Physiol. 2001; 281:C1–C11. [PubMed: 11401820] 
Ubil E, Duan J, Pillai IC, Rosa-Garrido M, Wu Y, Bargiacchi F, Lu Y, Stanbouly S, Huang J, Rojas M, 
et al. Mesenchymal-endothelial transition contributes to cardiac neovascularization. Nature. 2014; 
514:585–590. [PubMed: 25317562] 
Zheng B, Zhang Z, Black CM, de Crombrugghe B, Denton C. Ligand-dependent genetic 
recombination in fibroblasts : a potentially powerful technique for investigating gene function in 
fibrosis. Am J Pathol. 2002; 160:1609–1617. [PubMed: 12000713] 
Pillai et al.
Page 20
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) can adopt osteogenic cell like fates and contribute to 
calcification in vitro
(A,B) Cardiac fibroblasts stained with Alizarin Red following 21 day treatment with (A) 
control medium or (B) osteogenic differentiation medium (arrowheads point to calcium 
deposition) (n=20). (C) Heatmap of temporal changes in gene expression of CFs undergoing 
osteogenic differentiation. Each row represents the scaled expression level of a gene across 
the 21-day differentiation period with red designating high expression and blue low 
expression). The genes are clustered into 4 main groups blue, magenta, orange and green. 
Pillai et al.
Page 21
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The blue cluster includes 470 genes and is dominated by low expression in the control 
samples and peak expression at the later time point day 14 and 21. The magenta cluster 
includes 91 genes and is dominated by peak expression at day 7. The orange cluster includes 
466 genes and is dominated by peak expression at day 14. The green cluster includes 660 
genes and is dominated by peak expression in the control samples with low expression 
throughout the differentiation period (n=2 independent cultures/time point are shown. Ctrl 1 
and 2 represent control CFs harvested at Day 0). (D) Bar chart of the mean expression fold 
change of CFs undergoing osteogenic differentiation across a set of 37 osteogenic related 
genes with 2 samples analyzed at each time point. (*p<0.002, compared to controls). (E–I) 
q-PCR to confirm changes in expression of canonical osteoblast genes (E) Runx2 (F) 
osteocalcin (OCN) (G) Osterix (Osx) (H) Bone sialoprotein (BSP) (I) Osteopontin (OPN) in 
CFs induced to differentiate (mean±S.E.M., n=3, *p<0.05 compared to control) (J–N) CFs 
isolated from Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato or FSP1Cre:R26RtdTomato mice were subjected 
to osteogenic differentiation and wells stained for calcium hydroxyapatite (HA) (green) 
following 21 day treatment with (J,L) control medium or (K,M) differentiation medium 
(representative images, n=6, arrows show tdTomato labeled CFs surrounded by calcium 
hydroxyapatite) (N) Area of mineralization induced by differentiation of CFs labeled by the 
Col1a2 or FSP1Cre drivers (n=6). (O) Calcium HA (green) deposition following 
differentiation of FSP1 labeled Sca-1+ and Sca-1 negative fractions and (P) quantitation of 
the area of mineralization (representative images, mean±S.E.M, n=6) (Q) Calcium HA 
deposition following osteogenic differentiation of FSP1 labeled PDGFRβ+ and PDGFRβ 
negative fractions and (R) Quantitation of the area of mineralization (representative images, 
mean±S.E.M, n=5).
Pillai et al.
Page 22
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) can adopt osteogenic cell like fates in murine models of 
myocardial calcification
(A–H) Hearts of C3H mice demonstrating (A,B) absence of any calcification in the 
uninjured state, but calcific lesions following (C,D) high dose systemic steroids (E,F) cryo-
injury or (G,H) ischemic injury; (blue arrowheads; representative images, n=15) (B–H) Von 
Kossa staining to identify calcium deposition. (I,J) Region of myocardial calcification 
(following systemic steroids) stained with (I) Von Kossa or (J) Masson trichrome showing 
region of calcification (I, arrowheads) associated with collagen deposition (J, arrowheads). 
Pillai et al.
Page 23
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (K) Experimental strategy for labeling CFs and induction of cardiac calcification. (L-N) 
Uninjured hearts of Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice do not have calcium (blue), nor do 
labeled fibroblasts express osteogenic markers (green). (O-T) Expression of osteogenic 
markers in labeled CFs following systemic steroid administration showing calcium HA 
formation within the myocardium (blue, arrowheads), tdTomato labeled cardiac fibroblasts 
(red, arrowheads), osteogenic markers (green, arrowheads) (O) Runx2, (Q) Osteocalcin and 
(S) Osterix with merged image demonstrating labeled fibroblasts expressing osteogenic 
markers (arrowheads). (P-T) Magnified images demonstrating labeled CFs expressing 
osteogenic markers in close proximity to the deposited calcium HA (arrowheads, 
representative images, n=5). (U) Quantitation of the fraction of tdTomato labeled CFs 
expressing osteogenic markers in hearts of uninjured or steroid injected animals (mean
±S.E.M., n=3, *p<0.05, compared to control uninjured hearts).
Pillai et al.
Page 24
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) express osteogenic markers in myocardial calcification 
induced by cryo injury or myocardial infarction
Col1a2CreERT:R26RtdTomato mice (C3H background) were subjected to (A–F) cryo injury 
or (G–K) myocardial infarction and calcified region of the heart analyzed (A) Section 
through the calcified injured region demonstrates abundant tdTomato cells (red, arrows) 
present within deposits of calcium hydroxyapatite (green). (B,C) Low magnification images 
of tdTomato labeled CFs expressing (B) Runx2 and (C) Osteocalcin (OCN) (representative 
images, n=5). (D,E) Higher magnification images of tdTomato labeled CFs (arrows) 
Pillai et al.
Page 25
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expressing (D) Runx2 or (E) OCN with merged image demonstrating colocalization of 
fluorophores (arrows). (F) Quantitation of the fraction of labeled CFs expressing Runx2 and 
OCN in uninjured versus cryo-injured calcific regions (mean±S.E.M., n=3, *p<0.001 
compared to uninjured control hearts). (G–K) Immunofluorescent staining of calcific 
regions of infarcted hearts of Col1a2CreERT:R26RtdTomato animals 4 weeks after infarction 
shows tdTomato labeled cells (arrows) in area of calcification expressing (G) Runx2 with 
merged image showing tdTomato cells expressing Runx2 (arrows) and (H) in higher 
magnification or (I) OCN with merged image demonstrating tdTomato cells expressing 
OCN (arrows) and (J) in higher magnification. (K) Quantitation of the fraction of tdTomato 
labeled CFs expressing Runx2 or OCN in uninjured and calcified regions of infarcted hearts 
(mean±S.E.M., n=3, *p<0.01 compared to control uninjured hearts).
Pillai et al.
Page 26
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) identified by the TCF21 label express osteogenic markers 
following cryo-injury induced cardiac calcification
(A–B) Heart sections of tamoxifen injected but uninjured TCF21MerCreMer:R26RtdTomato 
(C3H background) hearts show tdTomato cells not expressing (A)Runx2 or (B)OCN. (C,D) 
Immunofluorescent staining of injured calcified regions shows multiple tdTomato labeled 
cells expressing (C) Runx2 or (D) OCN (merged image, arrowheads) (representative images, 
n=3). (E) Quantitation of tdTomato labeled CFs expressing Runx2 and OCN in calcified 
Pillai et al.
Page 27
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regions versus uninjured TCF21MerCreMer:R26RtdTomato mice (mean±S.E.M., n=3, 
*p<0.05)
Pillai et al.
Page 28
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Fibroblasts isolated from calcific heart lesions can induce soft tissue calcification when 
injected into another host
(A) Experimental strategy where genetically labeled cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) harvested 
following explant culture of calcified or uninjured myocardium are injected into 
subcutaneous pockets fashioned on the dorsum of animals. Medium without cells is injected 
into a third pocket over the lower dorsum. (B) Explant culture of calcified myocardial lesion 
(cryo-injury induced) with tdTomato labeled CFs migrating from the lesion (arrowheads) 
(C,D) Migrating tdTomato labeled cells expressing (C) Runx2 and (D) OCN (green, 
Pillai et al.
Page 29
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 arrowheads) and (E) quantification of the fraction of migrating tdTomato labeled CFs 
expressing Runx2 or OCN (representative images, n=3, mean±S.E.M, n=8, *p<0.01 and 
**p<0.001 compared to fibroblasts from uninjured animals). (F) Surgical technique of 
injecting tdTomato labeled cells into subcutaneous pocket, where a single incision and blunt 
dissection was performed to create a pocket and sutured to close the pocket following 
injection of cells. (G) Dorsum of representative animal demonstrating typical sites of 
injection (solid arrowhead-area of injection of tdTomato cells isolated from calcific 
myocardium; unfilled arrowhead-area of injection of tdTomato cells isolated from uninjured 
myocardium; yellow unfilled arrowhead-area of injection of medium without cells) (H–I) 
CT scan showing (H) lateral view with minimal calcification noted in region of injection of 
medium without cells (yellow unfilled arrowhead) and robust calcification in area injected 
with labeled fibroblasts from calcific myocardium (solid arrowhead) (I) Antero-posterior 
view demonstrating minimal calcification on region injected with labeled fibroblasts from 
uninjured myocardial explant cultures (unfilled arrowhead) in contrast to that noted with 
injection of cells from calcific myocardium (solid arrowhead) (J) Quantification of the 
extent of calcification expressed as a fold change compared to region injected without cells. 
Fold change was calculated by comparing the density of calcification in Hounsfield units 
(mean±S.E.M., n=8, *p<0.05, one way Anova with Tukey’s post test analysis) (K)18NaF 
PET scan demonstrating increased signal in region injected with labeled fibroblasts from 
calcific myocardium (solid arrowhead) compared to that injected with fibroblasts from 
uninjured myocardium (unfilled arrowhead) (representative images, n=8) (L) Merged 
PET/CT scan demonstrating co-localization of PET signal in region of subcutaneous soft 
tissue calcification seen on CT (arrowhead) (PET signals are normalized to injected dose 
(ID) and images presented as percent injected dose per gram (%ID/g). (M–N) Histological 
staining of subcutaneous calcific tissue dissected from dorsal subcutaneous pocket with (M) 
Von Kossa and (N) Hematoxylin-eosin stains identifies areas of calcification (yellow 
arrows). (O–T) Immunofluorescent staining of calcific region in dissected subcutaneous 
tissue shows (O) expression of OCN or (P) Runx2 by tdTomato labeled cells (arrowheads) 
with (Q,R) corresponding merged images with bright field demonstrating expression of (Q) 
OCN or (R) Runx2 by tdTomato labeled cells (solid arrowheads) residing on edges of 
calcific deposits (unfilled arrowheads) and (S,T) higher magnification of merged image with 
bright field showing tdTomato labeled cells expressing (S) OCN or (T) Runx2. 
(representative images, n=4)
Pillai et al.
Page 30
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Role of ENPP1-PPi-Pi axis in ectopic cardiac calcification
(A) Expression of ENPP1 by qPCR in injured and uninjured regions of hearts of B6 and 
C3H mice 7 days after cryo injury (mean± S.E.M., n=6, *p<0.01). (B–D) 
Immunofluorescent staining for ENPP1 in (B) uninjured B6 heart (C) injured B6 heart and 
(D) uninjured C3H heart (green, arrowheads). (E–G) Immunofluorescent staining of (E) 
ENPP1 in injured calcified regions of Col1a2Cre:R26Rtdtomato (C3H) heart (arrowheads) (F) 
ENPP1 expressing cells in higher magnification (G) tdTomato expressing fibroblasts in the 
same field and (H) merged image demonstrating expression of ENPP1 by tdTomato cells 
Pillai et al.
Page 31
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (arrowheads). (I) Confocal Raman microscopy demonstrating spectra of myocardial calcific 
deposits (blue line) compared to that of pure CPPD (black line) and hydroxyapatite (HA, red 
line) crystals (n=3). (J) Phosphate concentrations in injured and uninjured regions of non-
calcified (B6) and calcified hearts (C3H) (mean±S.E.M.; n=6 animals; *p<0.01). (K–P) 
Cryo injured C3H animals treated with (K,M) vehicle or ENPP1 inhibitor (L,N) SYL-001 or 
(O,P) ARL67156 demonstrating calcium deposition on (K–O) gross inspection and (M–P) 
CT scan and following 3D reconstruction (ribs removed to visualize cardiac calcification in 
retrosternal region) (yellow and white arrow) (Q) Biochemical measurements of myocardial 
calcium deposits (n=6 in vehicle treated and n=9 animals for SYL-001 and n=5 or 
ARL67156, mean±S.E.M., *p<0.05 versus vehicle injected group). (R–U) Cryo-injured 
C3H animals treated with (R,S) normal saline or (T,U) etidronate demonstrating 
calcification on (R,T) gross inspection and (S,U) CT scan and following 3D reconstruction 
(yellow and white arrow). Note complete absence of any calcium deposits in the etidronate 
injected animals (representative images of n=3 for vehicle treated animals and n=6 for 
etidronate injected animals)
Pillai et al.
Page 32
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Inhibition of calcification following injury is associated with better preservation of 
cardiac function
(A,B) 2D Echocardiography 7 days after cardiac cryo-injury in C3H mice treated with either 
(A) vehicle or (B) etidronate (representative images of n=6 animals for vehicle and n=8 
animals for etidronate (C–F) Quantitation of (C) Ieft ventricular end diastolic dimension 
(LVEDD) and (D) left ventricular end systolic dimension (LVESD) (E) ejection fraction and 
(F) fractional shortening pre injury, post injury and following sham injury in vehicle and 
Pillai et al.
Page 33
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 etidronate injected animals. (p<0.05, mean±S.E.M., n=6 in vehicle, n=8 in etidronate and 
n=4 in sham injured groups, ns: p>0.05)
Pillai et al.
Page 34
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pillai et al.
Page 35
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Runx2
Novus biologicals
NBP1-77461
Osteocalcin
Abcam
ab 93876
Osterix
Santacruz
sc 22536-R
CD146
Abcam
ab75769
NG2
EMD Millipore
AB5320
ENPP1
Abcam
ab40003
ALP
R&D Systems
AF2910
Osteopontin
Abcam
ab8448
Troponin
Santacruz
sc-8121
CD31
Abcam
ab7388
Sca1
eBioscience
17–5981
PDGFRβ
eBioscience
17–1402
c-Kit
BD Bioscience
561074
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Tamoxifen
Sigma
T5648
Hydrocortisone
Sigma
H3035
SYL-001
Sigma
R4033
ARL67156
Tocris
1021868-83-6
Etidronate disodium hydrate
Sigma
P5248
Hydroxyapatite
Sigma
574791
CPPD Crystals
InvivoGen
tlrl-cppd
Von Kossa staining reagent
Abcam
ab150687
Trichrome Stain (Masson)
Sigma
HT15-1KT
Dexamethasone
Sigma
D4902
β-glycerol phosphate L-ascorbic acid
Sigma Sigma
G9422 A4403
Hydroxyapatite and β-tri-calcium phosphate
Berkeley Advanced
Biomaterials
Bio-02G
Critical Commercial Assays
Osmotic pump
Alzet
1007D
QuantiChrom™ Calcium Assay Kit
BioAssay Systems
DICA-500
OsteoImage™ Bone Mineralization Assay
Lonza
PA 1503
SensoLyte® pNPP Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit
Anaspec
AS-72146
PiPer™ Phosphate Assay Kit
Invitrogen
MP22061
RNeasy Plus Mini Kit
Qiagen
74134
Reverse Transcription System
Promega
A3500
SensiMix SYBR and Fluorescein Kit
Quantace
QT615
Deposited Data
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Pillai et al.
Page 36
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Raw data files for RNA sequencing: Cardiac fibroblast
NCBI Gene
Expression Omnibus
GEO: GSE87836
Raw data files for RNA sequencing: Heart tissue
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
GEO: GSE87837
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Mouse: primary cardiac fibroblast
This paper
N/A
Human: primary cardiac fibroblast
This paper
N/A
Human: endothelial cell
Romanoski et al., 2010
N/A
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: C3H
The Jackson
Laboratory
000659
Mouse: B6
The Jackson
Laboratory
000664
Mouse: Col1a2-CreERT:R26RtdTomato
Ubil et al., 2014
N/A
Mouse: FSP1-Cre:R26RtdTomato
Ubil et al., 2014
N/A
Mouse: TCF21-MerCreMer
Acharya et al., 2011
N/A
Recombinant DNA
Quantitative real-time PCR Primers
table S2 in this paper
IDT
Software and Algorithms
DEseq
Bioconductor
1.24.0
Image J
NIH
1.6.0_24
WiRE 4
Renishaw
4.0
AMIDE
http://amide.sourceforge.net/
1.0.5
OsiriX version 3.8 imaging software
Pixmeo SARL
3.8
GraphPad Prism 6
GraphPad
6
Cell Stem Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 02.
