 Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10461-018-2184-4
SUBSTANTIVE REVIEW
Improving PrEP Implementation Through Multilevel Interventions: 
A Synthesis of the Literature
Rogério M. Pinto1,4 · Kathryn R. Berringer1 · Rita Melendez2 · Okeoma Mmeje3
Published online: 5 June 2018 
© The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
There are many challenges to accessing PrEP and thus low uptake in the United States. This review (2007–2017) of PrEP 
implementation identified barriers to PrEP and interventions to match those barriers. The final set of articles (n = 47) included 
content on cognitive aspects of HIV service providers and individuals at risk for infection, reviews, and case studies. Cogni-
tive barriers and interventions regarding patients and providers included knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about PrEP. The 
“purview paradox” was identified as a key barrier—HIV specialists often do not see HIV-negative patients, while primary 
care physicians, who often see uninfected patients, are not trained to provide PrEP. Healthcare systems barriers included lack 
of communication about, funding for, and access to PrEP. The intersection between PrEP-stigma, HIV-stigma, transphobia, 
homophobia, and disparities across gender, racial, and ethnic groups were identified; but few interventions addressed these 
barriers. We recommend multilevel interventions targeting barriers at multiple socioecological domains.
Keywords PrEP implementation · PrEP integrative review · HIV prevention · Continuum of care
Resumen
Existen muchos desafíos para acceder a PrEP y, por lo tanto, poca aceptación en los Estados Unidos. Esta revisión (2007-
17) de la implementación de PrEP identificó las barreras a la PrEP y las intervenciones para hacer coincidir esas barreras. 
El conjunto final de artículos (n = 47) incluyó contenido sobre los aspectos cognitivos de los proveedores de servicios de 
VIH y las personas en riesgo de infección, revisiones y estudios de casos. Las barreras cognitivas y las intervenciones con 
respecto a los pacientes y proveedores incluyeron el conocimiento, las actitudes y las creencias sobre la PrEP. La “purview 
paradox” se identificó como una barrera clave: los especialistas en VIH a menudo no ven pacientes VIH negativos, mientras 
que los médicos de atención primaria, que a menudo ven pacientes no infectados, no están capacitados para proporcionar 
PrEP. Las barreras de los sistemas de salud incluyen la falta de comunicación, financiación y acceso a la PrEP. Se identificó 
la intersección entre el estigma de la PrEP, el estigma del VIH, la transfobia, la homofobia y las disparidades entre los grupos 
de género, raciales y étnicos; pero pocas intervenciones abordaron estas barreras. Recomendamos intervenciones multinivel 
dirigidas a las barreras en múltiples dominios socioecológicos.
Introduction
In 2011–2012, the United States Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) launched the high-impact HIV pre-
vention (HIP) approach to respond to research showing that 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) reduces HIV transmission by 
lowering viral load in the bloodstream [1]. In 2012, the use 
of ART emerged as the dominant strategy for HIV treatment 
and prevention [2]—research predicted reduction of sexual 
transmission in HIV-serodiscordant couples by more than 
96% [3]. High-impact interventions—HIV testing, linkage 
to care, and HIV viral suppression with ART—constitute 
 
* Rogério M. Pinto 
 
ropinto@umich.edu
1 
School of Social Work, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA
2 
Sociology and Sexuality Studies, San Francisco State 
University, San Francisco, CA, USA
3 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University 
of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
4 
University of Michigan School of Social Work, Room 2850, 
1080 South University, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
 3682
 
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691
1 3
key steps of the HIV Continuum of Care, recommended by 
the World Health Organization [4, 5]. HIP promotes HIV 
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP). PrEP has been tradition-
ally considered as once daily oral dosing of ART prescribed 
to individuals at risk for HIV infection. The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approved Truvada™ [Emtricitabine/
Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate (TDF/FTC)] in 2012 as a 
PrEP strategy that reduced the risk of HIV acquisition by 
73% among adult men who have sex with men (MSM) and 
transgender women who took it 90% of the time [6]; with 
greater efficacy (up to 99%) for individuals with higher rates 
of adherence and increased concentrations among serodis-
cordant heterosexual couples [7, 8].
Herein, the steps patients and providers must take to 
follow policies governing access to PrEP and to navigate 
healthcare systems will be referred to as “PrEP implemen-
tation.” PrEP implementation may appear to be an easy 
and effective way to stop HIV transmission; however, there 
are many challenges to accessing and adhering to PrEP, as 
reflected in low levels of PrEP uptake in the US [9, 10]. 
Concern over rates of adherence and retention have been 
reported in PrEP care in clinical trials and “real world” PrEP 
demonstration projects [11, 12]. Racial and gender dispari-
ties have also been identified, including disproportionately 
low PrEP uptake among Black MSM [13]. Research regard-
ing low access, uptake, and adherence to PrEP in the US has 
focused mostly on breakdowns in the healthcare systems 
implementing PrEP, lack of provider awareness and willing-
ness to prescribe PrEP [9, 14], and unfavorable patient and 
community attitudes about PrEP [15, 16]. Our aim therefore 
is to comprehensively review this literature, focusing on how 
barriers to PrEP uptake might affect both individual actors 
and healthcare systems.
Barriers to PrEP implementation occur across gender, 
racial, and ethnic groups. Various interventions have been 
proposed to solve this public health problem, including those 
targeting different domains of prevention and care—patients, 
providers, and healthcare systems. Nonetheless, proposed 
interventions to improve PrEP implementation may vary 
across the fields of medicine, nursing, social work, pub-
lic health, and the social sciences. Therefore, this review 
included papers in all these disciplines and sought to identify 
barriers to PrEP and the interventions available that spe-
cifically matched those barriers. We focused specifically 
on PrEP implementation in the US and on implementation 
issues faced by at-risk individuals and HIV service provid-
ers, the agency settings in which services are offered, and 
the policies that guide HIV service provision. “HIV service 
providers” in this context refer to counselors, educators, case 
managers and others who provide HIV testing, linkage to 
care, and other services, as well as HIV-care providers. Our 
review aims to improve HIV-prevention strategies nation-
wide by demonstrating how to confront identified barriers 
with interventions that might improve access, uptake, and 
adherence to PrEP.
Methods
Literature Review Conceptual Approach
The extant literature consistently suggests that to improve 
PrEP implementation, key barriers need to be overcome 
and interventions need to be developed at all levels (cli-
ents/patients, HIP service providers, healthcare systems, 
and policy) [17–19]. Therefore, our review follows a socio-
ecological perspective [20] suggesting that barriers to PrEP 
implementation fall within four domains. The Individual and 
Relationships Domains represent patients and care provid-
ers, as well as the professional connections they establish 
along the HIV Continuum of Care that may hinder or facili-
tate PrEP implementation; barriers in this domain involve 
knowledge of, attitudes about, and burdens regarding PrEP 
implementation. The Community and Policy Domains rep-
resent policies governing HIV-prevention efforts, including 
PrEP implementation across healthcare systems and agency 
settings in communities where at-risk individuals access 
PrEP; barriers in this domain include structural factors in 
Fig. 1  Conceptual approach: 
socioecological barriers to PrEP 
implementation
 3683
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691 
1 3
healthcare systems, and governmental and health-organi-
zation guidelines that might hinder PrEP implementation. 
The socioecological perspective, summarized in Fig. 1 
(modified from Mugavero et al. 2013), is consistent with 
ecological models in public health and epidemiology, from 
Bronfenbrenner’s ecological systems theory to more-recent 
theories in social epidemiology [21]. This approach focuses 
on individuals within larger social environments (patients) 
and institutional environments (care providers); significantly, 
it distinguishes between interventions that target individu-
als and their environmental and structural contexts. Our 
approach to PrEP implementation acknowledges that both 
individuals and their healthcare providers are embedded 
within larger healthcare systems governed by multiple poli-
cies [22, 23].
Integrative Review Model
We adopted an integrative review model to provide a more 
comprehensive understanding of PrEP implementation in 
various domains of reference [24]. Our review focuses on a 
period (January 2007 to June 2017) that included the emer-
gence of the concept of the HIV Continuum of Care and the 
high-impact prevention (HIP) approach, followed by large-
scale clinical trials (e.g., the iPrEx study) [6, 25, 26], and 
the subsequent approval by the FDA (in July 2012) of the 
provision of PrEP in service settings [27].
Literature Search Terms
We used combinations of search terms in ArticlesPlus, a 
comprehensive database of peer-reviewed clinical and aca-
demic journals in medicine, public health, social work, nurs-
ing, pharmacy, and law, hosted by the University of Michi-
gan Library. Our combination of search terms, including 
truncation operators (*), was as follows:
Subject Terms: (HIV OR HIV/AIDS OR AIDS) AND
Title: (PrEP OR “Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis”) OR 
[(antiretroviral* OR pharmaceutical*) AND prevent*)] AND
All Fields: [(worker* OR practitioner* OR provider*) 
AND (linkage* OR linking OR referral* OR implementa-
tion OR uptake)]
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
We included peer-reviewed papers presenting research on 
PrEP implementation, PrEP in the US, HIV service work-
ers, practitioners, medical or social-service providers, and 
service agencies. We excluded papers that exclusively 
addressed the attitudes and beliefs of individuals targeted 
by HIV-prevention programs; however, we did include stud-
ies focused on the attitudes and beliefs of potential PrEP 
patients specifically related to the effective implementa-
tion of PrEP. We also included studies focused on attitudes 
and beliefs of HIV-prevention providers. We restricted this 
review to research in the US because of the unique historical 
response to HIV/AIDS in the US and the particular attributes 
of its healthcare system, and to yield results applicable to 
PrEP implementation in the US.
Procedures for Article Selection
Figure 2 summarizes our procedures for article selection. 
Our initial search yielded 294 articles. Following our inclu-
sion criteria, we first read titles and abstracts and screened 
out 227 papers that did not match our criteria. For exam-
ple, in this screening we excluded articles focusing on PrEP 
implementation outside the US and papers exclusively 
addressing attitudes and beliefs of individuals (e.g., PrEP 
acceptability studies)—yielding 67 articles, which were 
fully assessed. As we read and discussed the articles, we 
screened out another 20 whose contributions lacked rele-
vance to the study of PrEP implementation (e.g., editorials 
on the promise of PrEP alone, studies of public support, 
and cost-effectiveness studies), bringing our final sample to 
47 articles. To organize and manage our library, we created 
an Excel spreadsheet to record key information about each 
publication: title, authors, journal, publication date, journal 
type, methods and methodology, and a summary of findings.
Analysis
Our analysis focused on identifying barriers to PrEP and the 
interventions aligned with those barriers. To enhance the 
rigor of our analysis, we adopted the following techniques: 
purposive sampling; grounded theory; and multidisciplinary 
collaborative interpretation [28].
Purposive Sampling
We borrow the term “purposive sampling” to describe the 
procedures we used (described above) to select the articles 
for this integrative review—specific search terms, inclusion 
and exclusion selection criteria, and procedures for article 
selection.
Grounded Theory
Our analysis reflects a modified version of grounded theory 
[29] in which how we selected the final set of articles for 
analysis, as well as how we read/interpreted the articles, was 
based on the content we found and grounded in our experi-
ences as both HIV/AIDS researchers and practitioners in 
 3684
 
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691
1 3
community settings offering HIV-related services. We con-
curred on definitions, recurring terms, and barriers and solu-
tions to PrEP implementation before beginning analysis. We 
also used a conceptual framework to guide how we identi-
fied and aligned barriers with interventions in the selected 
articles.
Multidisciplinary Collaborative Interpretation
The examination of the 47 selected articles included a full-
text reading of each paper. The list of articles was ordered by 
relevance to our search terms and this order was maintained 
throughout the review. Articles were discussed by the first 
two authors, with expertise in social work and anthropol-
ogy, grounded in the conceptual foundation above. Given the 
close connections across barriers and interventions regard-
ing patients and providers, we combined them under the 
“Individual and Relationships Domains.” Since healthcare 
systems operate within communities and are concurrently 
influenced by myriad policies, we combined healthcare-sys-
tem barriers and interventions under “Community and Pol-
icy Domains.” To address researcher bias, we used rigorous 
procedures (described above) to select articles for the review. 
The first two authors held seven weekly 60-min discussions 
to finalize the list of barriers and matching interventions and 
came to 100% agreement. This list was presented to the third 
(sociologist) and fourth (medical doctor) authors for further 
interpretation. Based on our shared interpretation and judg-
ment, we organized a pragmatic list (Table 1).
Results
The final set of articles (n = 47) included four broad cat-
egories of papers: primary data on cognitive variables (e.g., 
perspectives, beliefs, and concerns) of HIV-prevention pro-
viders (n = 18) [9, 14, 30–45]; primary data on cognitive var-
iables and perspectives of individuals considered at risk for 
HIV infection (n = 9) [46–54]; reviews of current literature 
on PrEP implementation (n = 16) [10, 11, 17, 19, 55–66]; 
and case studies of PrEP demonstration and implementation 
projects (n = 4) [12, 54, 67, 68]. From the text of these arti-
cles, we extracted and recorded key barriers to implementa-
tion and the interventions proposed to address them. Then 
we mapped out the barriers. Among patients and providers, 
we identified cognitive barriers and interventions regarding 
their knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about PrEP. Barriers 
involving healthcare systems included communication and 
awareness about PrEP, lack of funding and/or insurance, and 
capacity and access. We also identified pharmaceutical- and 
population-specific barriers. Below we provide an account of 
these barriers and the interventions that might address them, 
thus improving PrEP implementation. Table 1 provides a 
summary of these findings.
Identified articles 
through database 
search
(n=294)
Screened articles for 
full-text assessment for 
inclusion in review
(n=67)
Final articles selected 
for inclusion in review 
(n=47)
Inclusion Criteria:
(1) Implementation of PrEP programs for HIV prevention
(2) Focus on PrEP implementation in the US
(3) Focus on HIV service providers and medical and social-
service providers in agency settings 
Excluded articles: n=227
Exclusion Criteria:
(1) Focus on PrEP implementation outside the US (n=4)
(2) Retrospective chart reviews without relevant 
contribution to study (n=1)
(3) Summaries of PrEP clinical guidelines or efficacy trials
alone (n=5)
(4) Editorials without implementation content (n=8)
(5) Focus on public support for PrEP (n=1)
(6) Cost-effectiveness study (n=1)
Excluded articles: n=20
Fig. 2  Summary of article selection and inclusion and exclusion criteria
 3685
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691 
1 3
Table 1  Summary of barriers to, and interventions to improve, PrEP implementation
Conceptual 
domain and inter-
vention level
Barriers to PrEP implementation
Interventions matching specific barriers
Individual and 
Relationships 
Domains:
Provider Level
Knowledge
Lack of training in PrEP provision
Disagreement/uncertainty about appropriate PrEP patients
Concerns/uncertainty about insurance coverage for PrEP
Attitudes and beliefs
Biases against patients’ race and sexual behaviors
Concerns about PrEP efficacy, toxicity, and resistance
Concerns about patients’ disinhibition and risk compensation 
leading to lack of adherence/compliance
Knowledge
Improved education of potential PrEP providers
Development of trainings and interventions to assist providers in 
identifying appropriate PrEP candidates
Attitudes and beliefs
Development and delivery of trainings to increase provider “cul-
tural competency,” including trans- and gender-affirming care
Interventions to identify and disrupt provider-held stereotypes 
about potential PrEP users
Individual and 
Relationships 
Domains:
Patient Level
Knowledge
Low awareness of PrEP and low demand for PrEP
Attitudes and beliefs
Side effects; effectiveness; toxicities; interaction with femin-
izing hormones
Managing multiple health concerns and PrEP side effects
Prioritization of care for current conditions (e.g., pain or stress) 
above HIV prevention
Prioritization of gender-affirming feminizing hormone therapy
Distrust of medical system: structural racism, transphobia, and 
negative experiences
Competing priorities during periods of substance use
Diminished concern for prevention with intimate partners
Concerns about HIV-reporting systems, including potential 
insurance implications of a positive HIV result
Unwillingness to discuss PrEP with primary care providers
Knowledge
Increased education and counseling to increase PrEP knowledge
Attitudes and beliefs
Development of supportive behavioral interventions (e.g., risk-
reduction, medication-adherence, and retention counseling)
Assistance in navigating the healthcare system, including access-
ing health insurance and co-pay assistance
Referrals of patients with mental-health, substance-use, or “social” 
issues (e.g., housing insecurity) to social workers or community 
resources
Side-effect monitoring
Community and 
Policy
Domains:
Healthcare-Sys-
tem Level
Communication and awareness
Lack of effective messaging about PrEP
Lack of communication between healthcare providers and 
community-based organizations
Funding
Limited health budgets to sustain PrEP programs
Lack of insurance coverage and financial-assistance programs
Capacity & access
Lack of focus on “nonprescribing service providers”
Purview paradox: neither HIV specialists nor PCPs consider 
PrEP implementation within their clinical domain
Lack of training, referral systems, or established reimbursement 
levels for care and drugs
Legal constraints to providing PrEP for youth, including man-
dates to involve parental figures in working with minors
Lack of access to care: inadequate transportation; inflexible 
work schedules; inconvenient locations dispensing PrEP
Time constraints on medical appointments
Lack of medical insurance and limited insurance networks
Lack of patient confidence and perseverance to access care
Pharmaceutical barriers
Particular constraints of Truvada™ as PrEP (e.g., daily dosing 
schedule, side effects)
Population-specific barriers and stigma
Lack of gender-affirming healthcare for transgender women
Lack of trans-inclusive marketing of PrEP
Low prioritization of PrEP for people who inject drugs
Stigma associated with PrEP use and accessing HIV services
The intersection of HIV-stigma with transphobia and homopho-
bia
Communication and awareness
Community-engagement and community-mobilization strategies
Systems to improve interagency/interprofessional collaboration
Funding
General advocacy for expanded health insurance
Funding for medication costs, adherence counseling/monitoring, 
and support services; referral to medication-assistance programs
Capacity and access
Expanded PrEP-delivery systems, staff, time, space, expertise
Engagement of generalist PCPs in PrEP provision for scale-up 
(addressing the purview paradox)
Expanded/diversified settings providing PrEP (e.g., private prac-
tices, mental-health clinics, ERs) and integration of PrEP into 
primary care
Expanded education, screening, referrals to PrEP services
Improved methods to identify appropriate PrEP candidates
Specific guidelines from “normative bodies” (e.g., CDC, APA)
Partnerships between medical and social-service providers
Development of systems to monitor and evaluate PrEP use
Cross-training of staff (e.g., educators, pharmacists, nurses)
Improvements in pharmacists’ PrEP education
Pharmaceutical barriers
Advancing new PrEP technologies: innovative pharmacologic 
chemoprophylactic approaches (e.g., on-demand PrEP dosing, 
injectable, microbicides, rings, films)
Pharmacokinetic studies of potential drug–drug interactions, par-
ticularly in oral PrEP medications and feminizing hormones
Population-specific barriers and stigma
Disaggregating transgender women from MSM in research and 
clinical practice and developing trans-inclusive research strate-
gies
Improving access to trans-competent PrEP providers
Integrating PrEP care with contraceptive services
Focusing resources on vulnerable communities
Expanded “youth-friendly” health services, including augmented 
PrEP visit schedules, adherence clubs and social-support groups
 3686
 
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691
1 3
Barriers to and Interventions with Potential 
to Improve PrEP Implementation
Individual and Relationships Domains—Provider Level
Eighteen articles focused on primary care physicians, HIV 
and infectious-disease specialists, pharmacists, and nurse 
practitioners—including analyses of focus groups, inter-
views, and surveys. None of the papers included data from 
social-service providers, though most of them mentioned 
the need for the expansion of referrals to mental-health and 
other support services, care coordination, and peer-based 
groups, all of which might improve PrEP implementation 
[10, 30, 32, 46, 57, 66]. Providers described concerns and 
solutions across socioecological levels. For instance, pro-
posed system-level solutions included engaging generalist 
physicians in PrEP provision [31], community education 
campaigns [32], and increased funding for counseling and 
social support services [32].
Significantly, many of these papers noted the “purview 
paradox”—the idea that the providers who are best trained 
and most willing to prescribe PrEP (i.e., HIV specialists) 
often do not see HIV-negative patients who would benefit 
from PrEP, while physicians who regularly care for HIV-
negative patients (i.e., primary care physicians) are often 
not trained to provide PrEP [14, 56]. Other barriers included 
providers’ lack of knowledge, negative attitudes toward 
PrEP, lack of training in PrEP provision, disagreements 
about who might be appropriate candidates for PrEP use, 
and concerns about insurance coverage for PrEP. The solu-
tions proposed to address knowledge gaps included trainings 
and interventions to assist providers in identifying appropri-
ate PrEP candidates. We also found that prejudicial beliefs 
(e.g., assessments of the likelihood of risk behavior based 
on race) [38], concerns about the efficacy (or “real world” 
efficacy) of PrEP, toxicities, and future resistance, and about 
patients’ behavior (e.g., sexual risk and lack of adherence) 
were often reported as substantial barriers to PrEP imple-
mentation [56].
Individual and Relationships Domains—Patient Level
Nine articles reported on primary data about potential 
PrEP patients’ attitudes, beliefs, and experiences. Most 
included qualitative interviews and results of focus groups 
with community members. We considered data from pro-
vider perspectives on patient-level barriers and solutions—
for example, perceived barriers regarding increased risk 
behaviors associated with PrEP use. Barriers cited included 
patients’ lack of knowledge and low demand for PrEP, as 
well as socioeconomic (e.g., stigma and difficult access to 
transportation) and medical burdens (e.g., side effects of 
PrEP) that complicate PrEP uptake. Perceived barriers, some 
not confirmed by strong evidence, included concerns about 
effectiveness [57], toxicities [11, 14, 32, 69], and interac-
tions with gender-affirming hormones among transgender 
women [56, 62]. Research cited the higher priority given to 
care for current conditions, both medical and psychosocial, 
and gender-affirming hormone therapy than to HIP [46, 48, 
49]. The “seasonal” nature of sexual risk trajectories was 
also reported as a barrier to PrEP [68]. Distrust of the medi-
cal system based on historical legacies of structural racism, 
transphobia, and other forms of discrimination was reported 
as a significant barrier to PrEP access [10, 62].
The review also revealed a diminished concern about 
HIP when patients are in intimate partnerships and/or using 
substances [46, 49], an unwillingness to discuss PrEP with 
primary care providers, and challenges managing mul-
tiple health concerns, in addition to potential side effects 
from PrEP. While many of these barriers focused on the 
patient, we found that proposed interventions often neces-
sitated system-level interventions (e.g., expanded access to 
and capacity for PrEP and targeted interventions to address 
population-specific barriers to PrEP). Individual-level solu-
tions proposed included targeting knowledge and awareness, 
attitudes, beliefs, and burdens; focusing on increased edu-
cation and counseling; and offering supportive behavioral 
interventions such as risk reduction, medication adherence, 
and retention counseling [12, 17, 50, 56]. Interventions were 
proposed to help patients navigate healthcare systems and 
improve the frequency of referrals to mental health, sub-
stance abuse, and other supportive services.
Community and Policy Domains—Healthcare‑System Level
Twenty studies consisted of broad reviews of existing PrEP 
literature or reviews of large-scale PrEP demonstration or 
implementation projects. These studies, as well as those 
focused on provider and potential-patient perspectives, 
addressed myriad system-level barriers to PrEP implemen-
tation and proposed system-level solutions. We organized 
the system-level barriers into five categories: problems with 
communication and awareness; lack of funding and/or insur-
ance; lack of capacity and access; pharmaceutical barriers; 
and population-specific issues and stigma.
Problems with Communication and Awareness Our review 
revealed a lack of effective messaging about PrEP and com-
munication between healthcare providers and community-
based organizations [52]. Proposed solutions in this domain 
included community engagement and mobilization strat-
egies [62] as well as systems to improve interagency and 
interprofessional collaboration.
 3687
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691 
1 3
Funding and/or Insurance Barriers Lack of funding is the 
most consistently cited system-level barrier, including 
limited health budgets to sustain PrEP programs and lack 
of insurance coverage [9, 46, 47, 54, 56]. The latter has 
been framed as both a systems-level barrier to access and 
care, with studies showing that patients without access 
to insurance are less likely to successfully obtain PrEP 
[54]; and as a provider-level barrier, with insurance barri-
ers affecting providers’ attitudes and behaviors about pre-
scribing PrEP [9]. The cost of PrEP is covered by many 
health insurance plans [70]. Gilead Advancing  
Access® 
program, a commercial medication assistance program, 
provides free PrEP to eligible HIV-negative adults in the 
US with limited income and no insurance covering PrEP 
[71]. However, individuals enrolled in government pro-
grams (e.g., Medicare Part D, Medicaid, TRICARE, or 
VA) are not eligible for this program. Adolescents under 
18-years-old and young people covered by their parents’ 
insurance, and who may wish to seek PrEP independently 
to avoid disclosure through their parents’ Explanation of 
Benefits, are also excluded from this program [65, 66, 72]. 
Private insurers’ policies concerning medications, includ-
ing PrEP, are insurance-specific and thus outside the 
scope of this review. However, it is important to mention 
that insurers have enacted policies that may exacerbate 
existing barriers to PrEP implementation, such as prior 
authorization paperwork requirements, and strict require-
ments regarding completion of test results prior to author-
izations and prescription renewals. In addition to suggest-
ing help for patients in navigating healthcare systems to 
access insurance and co-pay assistance programs, articles 
proposed general advocacy for expanded health insurance 
[46], coverage of medication costs, PrEP adherence coun-
seling, and support services [56].
Capacity and Access Barriers included a lack of focus on 
non-prescribing providers [10]; the purview paradox; lack 
of referral systems, and lack of training on, for example, 
when to initiate PrEP; legal constraints to providing PrEP 
for youth [65]; lack of access to care caused by inadequate 
transportation, inflexible work schedules, time constraints 
during medical appointments [56], and inconvenience of 
locations dispensing PrEP; and lack of medical insurance. 
Solutions to these barriers included expanded space, time, 
and expertise for PrEP-delivery systems [67]; engagement 
of generalist PCPs in PrEP provision (to address the purview 
paradox); diversification of settings providing PrEP (e.g., 
mental-health clinics and criminal-justice settings) [46]; 
integration of PrEP into primary care; education, screen-
ing, and referrals to PrEP; improved methods to identify 
appropriate PrEP candidates [56]; stronger guidelines and 
policies for providers [34]; partnerships between medical 
and social-service providers; cross-training of staffers (e.g., 
social workers, educators, pharmacists, and nurses); leader-
ship support of increased staff time to address financial bar-
riers [12]; and improving pharmacists’ PrEP education [45].
Pharmaceutical Barriers We identified barriers specific to 
Truvada™ and its oral daily dosing schedule and potential 
side effects. Proposed solutions included advancing new 
PrEP technologies, such as pursuing innovative pharma-
cologic chemoprophylactic approaches (e.g., on-demand 
PrEP dosing, injectables, microbicides, rings, and films), 
and pharmacokinetic studies of potential drug–drug inter-
actions, particularly involving those with feminizing hor-
mones [11, 62].
Population‑Specific Issues and Stigma Several papers 
focused on transgender women [49, 53, 62], Black and 
Latina women [48], Black and Latino MSM [51], adoles-
cents [65, 66], men who engage in street-based sex work 
[46], heterosexual couples [69], and people who inject drugs 
[43, 63]. These papers point to stigma associated with PrEP 
use and the intersection of HIV-stigma with transphobia and 
homophobia [48, 49]. Despite the number of articles that 
identify stigma as a barrier to PrEP, few interventions were 
proposed that would directly address the effects of stigma.
Transgender Women Barriers specific to transgender 
women included non-inclusive marketing of PrEP; per-
ceived interactions with feminizing hormones and prioriti-
zation of hormone care; managing multiple medical appoint-
ments and medications; mistrust arising from transphobia in 
the medical system; and life instabilities and substance use. 
Proposed gender-affirming healthcare initiatives included 
prioritizing hormones and gender-affirming medical care, 
exclusively using patients’ preferred names and pronouns, 
and creating safe spaces for trans clients [62]. Studies also 
proposed pharmacokinetic studies of potential drug–drug 
interactions between oral PrEP medications and gender-
affirming hormones in transgender women [11, 62]. Seve-
lius et al. [49] argue that current deficits in the provision of 
gender-affirming care for transgender women are connected 
to the conflation of transgender women with MSM, which 
serves to conceal transgender women’s unique social and 
behavioral vulnerabilities.
Cisgender Black Women and Latinas Like transgender 
women, cisgender Black women and Latinas face particu-
lar barriers to engaging with messages often designed for 
MSM [48]. PrEP implementation among women may be 
helped by addressing the burden of frequent medical visits; 
the stigma associated with accessing HIV services; and the 
burden of pill-taking, including concerns about adding to 
an existing pill burden. Increasing the availability of PrEP 
in settings where women receive services may also improve 
 3688
 
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691
1 3
PrEP uptake, for example by integrating PrEP care with pro-
vision of contraceptives and screening for sexually transmit-
ted infections [48].
Black and Latino Men Barriers for Black and Latino men 
include decreased access to private health insurance and 
more access through public clinics, as well as frequently 
endorsed stigma-related concerns about PrEP [47, 51]. 
Healthcare is a problematic area for MSM of color, who are 
more likely than other men to view talking about their sex 
lives to their doctors as a barrier to PrEP [51]. Moreover, 
research included in this review indicates that medical pro-
viders in training exhibit prejudicial assessments of Black 
patients based on stereotypes about risk compensation (e.g., 
increased condomless sex associated with PrEP use) [38]. 
While this study was limited to current medical students, 
exploratory research surveying medical providers (primar-
ily HIV specialists) suggests that providers’ likelihood to 
prescribe PrEP varies widely across patient groups, making 
the potential consequences of prejudicial assessments par-
ticularly troubling [73]. These barriers underscore the limi-
tations and potentially severe consequences of considering 
seemingly individual-level interventions (such as provider 
knowledge or individual behavior) in isolation from larger 
systemic factors, such as structural racism.
Discussion
The purpose of this integrative review was to identify bar-
riers to PrEP implementation and interventions to improve 
it. The 47 reviewed articles reported barriers at all four 
domains of the conceptual framework. But these barriers 
rarely exist in isolation, and proposed interventions are not 
always aligned to specific barriers. For instance, while a 
number of papers (n = 18) focused exclusively on the per-
spectives, knowledge, and concerns of providers, these 
papers rarely offered solutions to overcome barriers related 
to providers; instead, they offered solutions focused on tar-
geting the behavior of individual patients, such as interven-
tions to improve patient adherence [57] or evidence-based 
interventions to reduce risk compensation [10]. Moreover, 
frequently cited barriers to PrEP implementation cut across 
all three levels, as in the case of the purview paradox [14, 
56], and also in the case of structural barriers, such as patient 
distrust of the medical system based on historical legacies 
of structural racism and of transphobia [10, 62]. Grounded 
in our understanding of this literature, we provide a com-
prehensive picture of how potential changes to PrEP imple-
mentation can be mapped onto specific barriers identified 
in the extant literature. In so doing, we are filling a research 
gap in the literature.
Given the interconnected nature of the barriers identi-
fied, we recommend the adoption of a dynamic social-
systems model, as developed by Latkin and colleagues, 
for PrEP implementation in which individual, dyad, and 
structural factors are viewed as elements of a complex 
system in which none functions in isolation (p. S233) [74]. 
We also suggest (below) specific targets of interventions 
based on Nunn et al.’s nine-step PrEP care continuum, 
analogous to the HIV Continuum of Care, as a model for 
PrEP implementation—identifying individuals at high 
risk, increasing individual HIV-risk awareness, enhanc-
ing PrEP awareness, facilitating PrEP access, linking to 
PrEP care, prescribing PrEP, initiating PrEP, adhering to 
PrEP, and retaining individuals in PrEP care [75]. Both 
these models suggest multilevel interventions to achieve 
effective PrEP implementation. Multilevel interventions 
would integrate biomedical, behavioral, and structural or 
systemic components [17]. Just as patients, providers, and 
systems do not operate in isolation, proposed interventions 
cannot be considered to perform isolated functions (e.g., 
biomedical, behavioral, or structural).
“PrEP navigation”—auxiliary, non-prescribing provid-
ers whose role is to assist people in overcoming structural 
barriers to care [20] is an intervention whose potential 
to address barriers in different socioecological domains 
has been acknowledged. The National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) has submitted requests for proposals for PrEP 
implementation programs, including a call for “PrEP 
navigator resource development and dissemination” [76]. 
A search of the NIH U.S. National Library of Medicine 
reveals four clinical trials involving PrEP navigators [77] 
and the NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools 
(RePORT) reveals six projects on PrEP navigation for 
Black MSM, young Latino MSM, women upon release 
from incarceration, people who inject drugs (PWID), and 
methamphetamine users [78]. Though promising, PrEP 
navigation is not likely to address many of the barriers 
identified by this review—for example; at the Individual 
and Relationships Domains, primary care providers’ lack 
of knowledge in identifying PrEP candidates and prescrib-
ing PrEP; and, at the systems level, lack of funding and 
insurance, and stigma.
Therefore, the combination of and future testing of the 
effect of additional interventions is recommended. Clinic-
based interventions should include trainings to assist both 
HIV-prevention and HIV-care providers in identifying 
appropriate PrEP candidates. Such training must target 
knowledge development (e.g., concerns about “real world” 
efficacy, toxicities, and future resistance); attitudes (e.g., 
prejudicial beliefs and assessments of the likelihood of 
risk behavior based on race or gender identity); and social 
norms about patients’ behavior (e.g., sexual risk and lack of 
adherence). Though provider training may improve PrEP 
 3689
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691 
1 3
implementation, system-level interventions (e.g., clinic 
funding and capacity) are needed to address population-
specific barriers [79]. Navigation suggests help for patients 
in navigating healthcare systems to access insurance and 
co-pay assistance programs; nonetheless, system-level advo-
cacy is also needed for expanding health insurance, cover-
age of medication, PrEP adherence counseling, and support 
services. Furthermore, interventions that directly address the 
effects of race- and gender-related stigma and racism may 
improve participation of underserved groups (e.g., Black 
MSM and transgender women) in the HIV Continuum of 
Care and thus their access to PrEP.
Conclusion
Our approach and analysis highlight the structural dimen-
sions of barriers to healthcare and public health and are 
consistent with literature addressing tensions between indi-
vidual- and system-level barriers [80], structural stigma 
[81], and the shift from models of “cultural competency” to 
“structural competency” [82]. One possible limitation of our 
search terms is that we did not use the less common variation 
“preexposure prophylaxis,” and some papers using such term 
may have been missed. Nonetheless, based on our search, 
we identified, categorized, and analyzed barriers to PrEP 
implementation and interventions at the patient, provider, 
and healthcare-system levels. We argue for multilevel inter-
ventions that do not target providers, patients, or systems in 
isolation, but rather incorporate each of these levels into new 
models of implementation. We understand that our sugges-
tion that interventions target all three areas is challenging, 
especially with regard to healthcare systems. As we know 
from current political discourse, healthcare systems are dif-
ficult to change and must be viewed in the context of larger 
political and structural realities that are challenging at best 
and nearly impossible to navigate at worst. An awareness of 
the challenges of healthcare systems, and the provision of 
concrete solutions for those needing and seeking PrEP, can 
be valuable means of improving healthcare-system interven-
tions. Without attention to the ways structural factors affect 
individuals within healthcare systems, PrEP implementation 
may actually reinforce existing inequities that place the over-
whelming burden of the HIV epidemic on more-vulnerable 
groups.
Funding There is no funding attached to this manuscript.
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflict of interest Rogério M. Pinto declares that he has no conflict of 
interest. Kathryn Berringer declares that she has no conflict of interest. 
Rita Melendez declares that she has no conflict of interest. Okeoma 
Mmeje declares that she is a paid consultant (i.e., detailee) for the CDC 
Program Development and Quality Improvement Branch of the Na-
tional Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB.
Human and Animal Rights No animals or humans were involved in 
this research.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat 
iveco 
mmons 
.org/licen 
ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
 1. Thompson MA, et al. Guidelines for improving entry into and 
retention in care and antiretroviral adherence for persons with 
HIV: evidence-based recommendations from an international 
association of physicians in AIDS care panel. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;156(11):817–33.
 2. Cohen MS, McCauley M, Gamble TR. HIV treatment as preven-
tion and HPTN 052. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2012;7(2):99.
 3. Dodd PJ, Garnett GP, Hallett TB. Examining the promise of 
HIV elimination by ‘test and treat’ in hyper-endemic settings. 
AIDS. 2010;24(5):729.
 4. World Health Organization, Clinical Guidelines Across the Con-
tinuum of Care: Linking people diagnosed with HIV infection to 
HIV care and treatment, in Consolidated guidelines on the use 
of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection: 
Recommendations for a public health approach June 13. 2013, 
World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland. p. 272.
 5. CDC, High-impact HIV prevention: CDC’s approach to reduc-
ing HIV infections in the United States. 2011, Centers for Dis-
ease Control & Prevention National Center for HIV/AIDS VH, 
STD, and TD Prevention, Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention.
 6. Grant RM, et al. Preexposure chemoprophylaxis for HIV 
prevention in men who have sex with men. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363(27):2587–99.
 7. Donnell D, et al. HIV protective efficacy and correlates of teno-
fovir blood concentrations in a clinical trial of PrEP for HIV 
prevention. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2014;66(3):340.
 8. Anderson PL, et al. Emtricitabine-tenofovir concentrations and 
pre-exposure prophylaxis efficacy in men who have sex with 
men. Sci Transl Med. 2012;4(151):151.
 9. Petroll AE, et al. PrEP awareness, familiarity, comfort, and pre-
scribing experience among US primary care providers and HIV 
specialists. AIDS Behav. 2017;21(5):1256–67.
 
10. Wilton J, et al. Pre-exposure prophylaxis for sexually-acquired 
HIV risk management: a review. HIV/AIDS (Auckland, NZ). 
2015;7:125.
 
11. Mayer KH, et al. Antiretroviral pre-exposure prophylaxis imple-
mentation in the United States: a work in progress. J Int AIDS 
Soc. 2015;18(4 Suppl 3):19980.
 
12. Chan PA, et al. Retention in care outcomes for HIV pre-expo-
sure prophylaxis implementation programmes among men 
who have sex with men in three US cities. J Int AIDS Soc. 
2016;19(1):20903.
 
13. Eaton LA, et al. Minimal awareness and stalled uptake of pre-
exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) among at risk, HIV-negative, 
black men who have sex with men. AIDS Patient Care STDs. 
2015;29(8):423–9.
 3690
 
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691
1 3
 
14. Krakower D, et al. HIV providers’ perceived barriers and facili-
tators to implementing pre-exposure prophylaxis in care set-
tings: a qualitative study. AIDS Behav. 2014;18(9):1712–21.
 
15. Krakower DS, et al. Limited awareness and low immediate 
uptake of pre-exposure prophylaxis among men who have sex 
with men using an internet social networking site. PLoS ONE. 
2012;7(3):e33119.
 
16. Liu AY, et al. Limited knowledge and use of HIV post- and pre-
exposure prophylaxis among gay and bisexual men. J Acquir 
Immune Defic Syndr. 2008;47(2):241–7.
 
17. Underhill K, et al. Implementation science of pre-exposure 
prophylaxis: preparing for public use. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep. 
2010;7(4):210–9.
 
18. Hankins C, Macklin R, Warren M. Translating PrEP effective-
ness into public health impact: key considerations for decision-
makers on cost-effectiveness, price, regulatory issues, distribu-
tive justice and advocacy for access. J Int AIDS Soc. 2015;18(4 
Suppl 3):19973.
 
19. Castel AD, Magnus M, Greenberg AE. Pre-exposure proph-
ylaxis for human immunodeficiency virus. Infect Dis Clin. 
2014;28(4):563–83.
 
20. Mugavero MJ, et al. The state of engagement in HIV care in the 
United States: from cascade to continuum to control. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2013;57(8):1164–71.
 
21. McLaren L, Hawe P. Ecological perspectives in health research. 
J Epidemiol Community Health. 2005;59(1):6–14.
 
22. Krieger N. A glossary for social epidemiology. J Epidemiol Com-
munity Health. 2001;55(10):693–700.
 
23. Krieger N. Theories for social epidemiology in the 21st century: 
an ecosocial perspective. Int J Epidemiol. 2001;30(4):668–77.
 
24. Whittemore R, Knafl K. The integrative review: updated method-
ology. J Adv Nurs. 2005;52(5):546–53.
 
25. Baeten JM, et al. Antiretroviral prophylaxis for HIV pre-
vention in heterosexual men and women. N Engl J Med. 
2012;2012(367):399–410.
 
26. Thigpen MC, et al. Antiretroviral preexposure prophylaxis for 
heterosexual HIV transmission in Botswana. N Engl J Med. 
2012;2012(367):423–34.
 
27. FDA, FDA approves first medication to reduce HIV risk. Silver 
Spring; 2012.
 
28. Cypress BS. Rigor or reliability and validity in qualitative 
research: perspectives, strategies, reconceptualization, and rec-
ommendations. Dimens Crit Care Nurs. 2017;36(4):253–63.
 
29. Strauss A, Corbin JM. Basics of qualitative research: Grounded 
theory procedures and techniques. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publica-
tions; 1990.
 
30. Calabrese SK, et al. Putting PrEP into practice: lessons learned 
from early-adopting US providers’ firsthand experiences providing 
HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis and associated care. PLoS ONE. 
2016;11(6):e0157324.
 
31. Krakower DS, et al. Primary care clinicians’ experiences prescrib-
ing HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis at a specialized community 
health centre in Boston: lessons from early adopters. J Int AIDS 
Soc. 2016. https 
://doi.org/10.7448/IAS.19.1.21165 
.
 
32. Arnold EA, et al. A qualitative study of provider thoughts on 
implementing pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) in clinical settings 
to prevent HIV infection. PLoS ONE. 2012;7(7):e40603.
 
33. Blackstock OJ, et al. A cross-sectional online survey of HIV pre-
exposure prophylaxis adoption among primary care physicians. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2017;32(1):62–70.
 
34. Puro V, et al. Attitude towards antiretroviral pre-exposure prophy-
laxis (PrEP) prescription among HIV specialists. BMC Infect Dis. 
2013;13(1):217.
 
35. Calabrese SK, et al. “Support Your Client at the Space That 
They’re in”: HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) prescribers’ 
perspectives on PrEP-related risk compensation. AIDS Patient 
Care STDs. 2017;31(4):196–204.
 
36. Blumenthal J, et al. Knowledge is power! Increased provider 
knowledge scores regarding pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) are 
associated with higher rates of PrEP prescription and future intent 
to prescribe PrEP. AIDS Behav. 2015;19(5):802–10.
 
37. Tellalian D, et al. Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV 
infection: results of a survey of HIV healthcare providers evalu-
ating their knowledge, attitudes, and prescribing practices. AIDS 
Patient Care STDs. 2013;27(10):553–9.
 
38. Calabrese SK, et al. The impact of patient race on clinical deci-
sions related to prescribing HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP): 
assumptions about sexual risk compensation and implications for 
access. AIDS Behav. 2014;18(2):226–40.
 
39. Castel AD, et al. Understanding HIV care provider attitudes 
regarding intentions to prescribe PrEP. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr. 2015;70(5):520.
 
40. Spector AY, Remien RH, Tross S. PrEP in substance abuse treat-
ment: a qualitative study of treatment provider perspectives. Subst 
Abuse Treat Prev Policy. 2015;10(1):1.
 
41. Hakre S, et al. Knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about HIV pre-
exposure prophylaxis among US Air Force Health Care Providers. 
Medicine. 2016;95(32):4511.
 
42. Krakower DS, et al. Knowledge, beliefs and practices regard-
ing antiretroviral medications for HIV prevention: results from 
a survey of healthcare providers in New England. PLoS ONE. 
2015;10(7):e0132398.
 
43. Edelman EJ, et al. Primary care physicians’ willingness to pre-
scribe HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis for people who inject drugs. 
AIDS Behav. 2017;21(4):1025–33.
 
44. Smith DK, et al. PrEP awareness and attitudes in a national survey 
of primary care clinicians in the United States, 2009–2015. PLoS 
ONE. 2016;11(6):e0156592.
 
45. Shaeer KM, et al. Exploratory survey of Florida pharmacists’ 
experience, knowledge, and perception of HIV pre-exposure 
prophylaxis. J Am Pharm Assoc. 2014;54(6):610–7.
 
46. Underhill K, et al. Access to healthcare, HIV/STI testing, and 
preferred pre-exposure prophylaxis providers among men who 
have sex with men and men who engage in street-based sex work 
in the US. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(11):e112425.
 
47. Smith DK, et al. Attitudes and program preferences of African-
American urban young adults about pre-exposure prophylaxis 
(PrEP). AIDS Educ Prev. 2012;24(5):408–21.
 
48. Collier KL, Colarossi LG, Sanders K. Raising awareness of 
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) among women in New York 
City: community and provider perspectives. J Health Commun. 
2017;22(3):183–9.
 
49. Sevelius JM, et al. ‘I am not a man’: trans-specific barriers and 
facilitators to PrEP acceptability among transgender women. 
Global Public Health. 2016;11(7–8):1060–75.
 
50. Taylor SW, et al. Optimizing content for pre-exposure prophy-
laxis (PrEP) counseling for men who have sex with men: perspec-
tives of PrEP users and high-risk PrEP naive men. AIDS Behav. 
2014;18(5):871–9.
 
51. Lelutiu-Weinberger C, Golub SA. Enhancing PrEP Access 
for Black and Latino Men Who Have Sex With Men. J Acquir 
Immune Defic Syndr. 2016;73(5):547–55.
 
52. Raifman JR, Flynn C, German D. Healthcare provider contact and 
pre-exposure prophylaxis in Baltimore men who have sex with 
men. Am J Prev Med. 2017;52(1):55–63.
 
53. Galindo GR, et al. Community member perspectives from 
transgender women and men who have sex with men on pre-expo-
sure prophylaxis as an HIV prevention strategy: implications for 
implementation. Implement Sci. 2012;7(1):116.
 3691
AIDS and Behavior (2018) 22:3681–3691 
1 3
 
54. Doblecki-Lewis S, et al. Healthcare access and PrEP continuation 
in San Francisco and Miami after the US PrEP demo project. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2017;74(5):531–8.
 
55. Golub SA, Operario D, Gorbach PM. Pre-exposure prophylaxis 
state of the science: empirical analogies for research and imple-
mentation. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep. 2010;7(4):201–9.
 
56. Silapaswan A, Krakower D, Mayer KH. Pre-exposure prophy-
laxis: a narrative review of provider behavior and interventions to 
increase PrEP implementation in primary care. J Gen Intern Med. 
2017;32(2):192–8.
 
57. Burns DN, et al. Role of oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) 
in current and future HIV prevention strategies. Curr HIV/AIDS 
Rep. 2014;11(4):393–403.
 
58. Doblecki-Lewis S, Cohen S, Liu A. Clinical treatment options 
infectious diseases: update on PrEP implementation, adher-
ence, and advances in delivery. Curr Treat Options Infect Dis. 
2015;7(2):101–12.
 
59. Krakower DS, Mayer KH. Pre-exposure prophylaxis to prevent 
HIV infection: current status, future opportunities and challenges. 
Drugs. 2015;75(3):243–51.
 
60. Rowniak S. PrEP: a case study. J Am Assoc Nurse Pract. 
2015;27(6):296–9.
 
61. Krakower D, Mayer KH. Engaging healthcare providers to imple-
ment HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 
2012;7(6):593.
 
62. Sevelius JM, Deutsch MB, Grant R. The future of PrEP among 
transgender women: the critical role of gender affirmation in 
research and clinical practices. J Int AIDS Soc. 2016. https 
://doi.
org/10.7448/IAS.19.7.21105 
.
 
63. Marshall BD, Milloy MJ. Improving the effectiveness and delivery 
of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to people who inject drugs. 
Addiction. 2017;112(4):580–2.
 
64. Mansergh G, Koblin BA, Sullivan PS. Challenges for HIV pre-
exposure prophylaxis among men who have sex with men in the 
United States. PLoS Med. 2012;9(8):e1001286.
 
65. Burda JP. PrEP and our youth: implications in law and policy. 
Columbia J Gender Law. 2015;30:295.
 
66. Hosek S, et al. Preventing HIV among adolescents with oral PrEP: 
observations and challenges in the United States and South Africa. 
J Int AIDS Soc. 2016. https 
://doi.org/10.7448/IAS.19.7.21107 
.
 
67. Liu A, et al. Early experiences implementing pre-exposure proph-
ylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention in San Francisco. PLoS Med. 
2014;11(3):e1001613.
 
68. Hojilla JC, et al. Sexual behavior, risk compensation, and HIV pre-
vention strategies among participants in the San Francisco PrEP 
demonstration project: a qualitative analysis of counseling notes. 
AIDS Behav. 2016;20(7):1461–9.
 
69. McMahon JM, et al. Oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for 
prevention of HIV in serodiscordant heterosexual couples in the 
United States: opportunities and challenges. AIDS Patient Care 
STDs. 2014;28(9):462–74.
 
70. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. PrEP. 2018; https 
://
www.cdc.gov/hiv/basic 
s/prep.html.
 
71. Gilead Sciences Inc. Gilead Advancing Access. 2018; https 
://
www.gilea 
dadva 
ncing 
acces 
s.com/.
 
72. Doll M, et al. Linking HIV-negative youth to prevention services 
in 12 US cities: barriers and facilitators to implementing the HIV 
prevention continuum. J Adolesc Health. 2017;62:424–33.
 
73. Adams LM, Balderson BH. HIV providers’ likelihood to prescribe 
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention differs by 
patient type: a short report. AIDS Care. 2016;28(9):1154–8.
 
74. Latkin C, et al. A dynamic social systems model for considering 
structural factors in HIV prevention and detection. AIDS Behav. 
2010;14(2):222–38.
 
75. Nunn AS, et al. Defining the HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis care 
continuum. AIDS (London, England). 2017;31(5):731.
 
76. NIH. NLM Requests Quotations for 2017 HIV/AIDS Community 
Information Outreach Projects. 2017 June 01, 2017 March 27, 
2018; https 
://www.nlm.nih.gov/news/nlm_rfq_hiv_aids_outre 
ach_2017.html.
 
77. Medicine U.S.N.L.o. ClinicalTrials.gov Database. https 
://clini 
caltr 
ials.gov/.
 
78. US Department of Health and Human Services, Research Portfolio 
Online Reporting Tools (RePORT).
 
79. Pinto RM, et al. Factors that influence linkages to HIV continuum 
of care services: implications for multi-level interventions. Int J 
Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(11):1355.
 
80. Metzl JM. Structural competency. Am Q. 2012;64(2):213–8.
 
81. Hatzenbuehler ML, Link BG. Introduction to the special issue on 
structural stigma and health. Social Sci Med. 2014;103:1–6.
 
82. Metzl JM, Hansen H. Structural competency: theorizing a new 
medical engagement with stigma and inequality. Soc Sci Med. 
2014;103:126–33.
