 Medical Imagery
Fatal Balamuthia mandrillaris brain infection associated with
improper nasal lavage
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 19 July 2018
Received in revised form 9 September 2018
Accepted 13 September 2018
Corresponding Editor: Eskild Petersen, Aar-
hus, Denmark
Keywords:
Amoeba
Balamuthia mandrillaris
Infectious encephalitis
Amoebic encephalitis
Nasal lavage
A B S T R A C T
We report the case of a 69-year-old female who presented with a chronic nasal skin rash, new onset focal
seizure, and a cerebral ring-enhancing lesion after a year of improper nasal irrigation. Despite aggressive
and novel anti-amoebic treatment, she died as a result of a Balamuthia mandrillaris brain infection.
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of International Society for Infectious Diseases.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Introduction
Balamuthia mandrillaris is a free-living amoeba that is found in
the soil and fresh water and is associated with granulomatous
amoebic encephalitis (GAE) (Chang et al., 2016). It was discovered
in 1986 in an autopsy specimen from the brain of a mandrill
monkey at San Diego Zoo (Visvesvara et al., 1990). The amoeba was
declared a new species in 1993 and has subsequently been
associated with GAE. There have only been about 200 cases of
human infection recorded worldwide, and at least 70 in the USA
(Takei et al., 2018). Histopathological diagnosis requires expert
neuropathological evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
stained tissue biopsy; diagnosis may also be performed by
Balamuthia-specific PCR (Matin et al., 2008; Qvarnstrom et al.,
2006). Due to the difficulty of diagnosis and severity of this
infection, the fatality rate for Balamuthia infection is near 100%
(Matin et al., 2008).
Case report
The patient was a 69-year-old female with a distant history of
breast cancer. One year prior to diagnosis of the brain infection, she
had developed a chronic sinus infection. The patient’s primary care
physician had prescribed 800–160 mg sulfamethoxazole–trimeth-
oprim twice daily to treat the acute recurrent maxillary sinusitis,
but this did not provide her symptom relief.
Otolaryngology suggested that the patient use a saline irrigation
to clear her sinuses. While it is recommended that only sterile water
orsalinebe usedforthese procedures, thepatientusedtap waterthat
was filtered with a Brita Water Purifier (Brita LP, Oakland, CA, USA).
After a month of using non-sterile water for nasal lavage without
success, she developed a quarter-sized red raised rash on the right
side of the bridge of her nose and raw red skin at the nasal opening,
which was thought to be rosacea (Figure 1). She was subsequently
prescribed mupirocin 2% ointment, which provided her no symptom
relief. The patient went to the dermatologist several times and
biopsies of the nasal sore were taken on three occasions over the
course of 1 year; however, no definitive diagnosis could be obtained.
The biopsies demonstrated skin with mixed inflammation, giant
cells, and rare non-necrotizing granulomas. The pathologists
suggested a differential diagnosis of rosacea or granulomatous
rosacea on all three occasions, with additional considerations
including ruptured folliculitis, infection, sarcoidosis, granuloma
faciale, and perifollicular lymphogranuloma.
Then about 1 year after the initial development of the nasal rash,
the patient was seen at an outside hospital due to a left upper
extremity focal seizure. The patient had remained conscious during
the seizure but had lost cognition and experienced generalized left-
sidedshaking.Asidefromleft armweakness, physical examinationof
the patient was unremarkable and she was immediately started on
intravenous (IV) levetiracetam and lorazepam. A computed tomog-
raphy (CT) scan with contrast of the head revealed a 1.5-cm ring-
enhancing lesion in the motor cortex on the right side of the brain
(Figure 2). The patient was evaluated and thought to potentially have
a primary high-grade glioma, since a systemic CT scan did not show
evidence of metastatic disease.
She was taken to the operating room, at which time she
underwent an open stereotactic-guided biopsy of the right frontal
lesion. Frozen section came back consistent with necrosis and
possible high-grade glioma. Given the unusual characteristics of the
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2018.09.013
1201-9712/© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of International Society for Infectious Diseases. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
International Journal of Infectious Diseases 77 (2018) 18–22
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Infectious Diseases
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijid
 histopathology, the pathological specimen was sent out to the Johns
Hopkins University neuropathology department for further analysis.
The patient’s hospital course was uncomplicated, and she went
home postoperative day 2 on anticonvulsants and dexamethasone.
After tapering the dexamethasone dosage, she returned on
postoperative day 6 with new complaints of left arm and leg
numbness. A CT scan demonstrated increased edema in the area of
the biopsy. She was then re-admitted on postoperative day 15 with
a new left-sided hemiplegia and altered mental status. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and CT imaging at that time demon-
strated evidence of an expanded mass consistent with possible
hemorrhage or fluid accumulation. An electroencephalogram
demonstrated some focal seizure activity. The patient was treated
with dexamethasone; however, she continued to deteriorate.
Repeat imaging several days later showed that the mass effect had
continued to increase and she had new multifocal ring-enhancing
lesions in the right frontal lobe, left parietal lobe, right occipital
lobe, bilateral cerebellum, and right paracentral pons (Figure 3).
Onpostoperative day 19, the consulting neuropathologist at Johns
Hopkins University suggested the possibility of amoebic infection.
The patient was therefore taken back to the operating room that day
for re-resection of the expanding right frontal motor cortex mass.
Subsequent histopathological evaluation from the second resection
revealed clear evidence of amoebic infection and dramatic hemor-
rhagic necrosis (Figure 4). The infectious disease services immedi-
ately contacted the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
and within 24 h, miltefosine, a novel drug for amoebic brain infection,
was delivered to the hospital. The patient was promptly started on
miltefosine (50 mg three times daily) along with the CDC recom-
mended broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy of pentamidine
(4 mg/kg/day), sulfadiazine (1.5 g every 6 h), flucytosine (37.5 mg/
kg every 6 h), fluconazole (12 mg/kg/day administered in one dose),
and azithromycin (20 mg/kg/day administered in one dose).
Despite aggressive anti-amoebic therapy, the patient’s condi-
tion continued to deteriorate. Within 1 week she was more
somnolent and then became comatose. Repeat CT imaging
demonstrated further hemorrhage into the original resection
cavity. At this point, the family decided to withdraw support.
Subsequently, the CDC performed Balamuthia-specific PCR of
tissue from the nasal lesion and brain abscess, followed by an
indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) of a serum sample. Both
real-time PCR (rtPCR) and IFA were positive for B. mandrillaris, and
negative for Naegleria fowleri and Acanthamoeba, revealing B.
mandrillaris as the definitive causative agent of the patient’s GAE.
Discussion
Ring-enhancing lesions presenting with seizures in adults with a
historyof breast cancer are usually associated with metastatic tumor
or new onset of a primary high-grade glioma. Rarely, spontaneous
brain abscesses are identified. Even more rarely, spontaneous fungal
or amoebic infections are identified as the cause of the brain abscess.
The case reported here shows an extremely unusual disease, with an
almost uniformly fatal outcome. Nevertheless, it is important for the
clinician to be aware of this disease since rapid diagnosis and
subsequent therapy has, in some cases, been associated with survival
(Deetz et al., 2003).
Improper nasal irrigation has been reported as a method of
infection for the comparably insidious amoeba, N. fowleri (Yoder
et al., 2012). This precedent led us to suspect the same route of
entry for the Balamuthia amoeba in our case. Although this
hypothesis is consistent with the patient’s history and ultimate
diagnosis, the water supply to the patient’s home was not tested,
hence our ability to definitively trace the patient’s infection to
improper nasal lavage is limited.
While Balamuthia and Naegleria share some similarities,
Balamuthia is more difficult to detect. This is due to its
resemblance to histiocytes under the microscope (Chang et al.,
2016) and unique culture requirements: unlike Naegleria, Bala-
muthia cannot be grown on agar because it only feeds on
mammalian cells and other amoebas (Dunneback, 2007). Further-
more, healthy individuals can be seropositive for Balamuthia
antibodies due to the amoeba’s pervasive presence in the
environment, while those with GAE show low titers (Siddiqui
and Khan, 2008). Additionally, cerebrospinal fluid analysis rarely
demonstrates the organism (Stidd et al., 2012), and the time course
for the appearance of lesions and the onset of GAE is inconsistent
(Parija et al., 2015).
Imaging findings are often non-specific and typically reflect
underlying infectious processes with associated inflammatory
change. The overall appearance is often confused with more
common clinical entities such as primary or secondary tumors,
pyogenic bacterial abscess, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis,
toxoplasmosis, and neurocysticercosis. Variable enhancement
patterns including ring enhancement and diffusion restriction
have been reported. B. mandrillaris encephalitis often exhibits
hemorrhagic hypointense components on T2-weighted or suscep-
tibility-weighted imaging. In this case, the lack of central diffusion
restriction is atypical for bacterial pyogenic abscess and more often
seen in infections of atypical organisms (Mueller-Mang et al.,
2007). A personal history of primary malignancy (breast cancer)
makes metastatic disease a foremost initial diagnostic consider-
ation. While proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) has
been utilized successfully to distinguish between neoplastic and
infectious processes (Horská and Barker, 2010), we are unaware of
MRS findings definitive for GAE.
For these reasons and others, it is possible that many more cases
of Balamuthia have been missed. Retroactive studies on deceased
primates done at San Diego Zoo, where the amoeba was first
discovered, revealed five additional cases of amoebic meningoen-
cephalitis that were undiagnosed (Rideout et al., 1997).
A final feature of disease progression to consider is the
appearance of new lesions throughout the brain after the
administration of steroids. While no significant causative relation-
ship has been drawn between the administration of steroids and
the onset of new lesions, our case follows suit with others who
have noted this phenomenon (Doyle et al., 2011; Deol et al., 2000).
Figure 1. The nasal sore, initially believed to be rosacea, which preceded the
patient’s brain lesion and never resolved.
K.J. Piper et al. / International Journal of Infectious Diseases 77 (2018) 18–22 
19
 Figure 2. (A) Post contrast CT showing focal vasogenic edema surrounding an intra-axial ring-enhancing mass in the superior right precentral gyrus. (B) Axial diffusion-
weighted MRI showing a peripheral rim of diffusion restriction. (C) Axial post contrast T1 image showing a peripheral rim of enhancement. (D) Axial T2 FLAIR image showing
surrounding vasogenic edema. (E) Axial T2 image showing a target-like lesion with peripheral T2 hypointensity and central T2 hyperintensity.
20 
K.J. Piper et al. / International Journal of Infectious Diseases 77 (2018) 18–22
 Furthermore, clinicians should be aware that patients who develop
a nasal rash after sinus irrigation with non-sterile saline washes
might be at high risk of amoeba skin infection. We encourage
clinicians to utilize the CDC’s multiplex rtPCR assay for the
detection of amoeba species-specific 18S ribosomal ribonucleic
acid (rRNA) genes in skin lesion and brain tissue biopsies and also
serum IFA as early-stage prognostic tools for patients who present
with a chronic nasal sore and a cerebral ring-enhancing lesion to
identify suspected Balamuthia infection.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the editors and reviewers for their
thoughtful comments and guidance.
Funding
This work was supported by the Ben & Catherine Ivy Center for
Advanced Brain Tumor Treatment General Fund.
Ethics statement
This study was carried out in adherence to the principles of Good
Clinical Practice, including adequate Human Subject Protections, in
Figure 3. Two axial T2 FLAIR images (A, B) and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (C, D) of the posterior fossa, showing multifocal T2 hyperintense, ring-enhancing
parenchymal Balamuthia mandrillaris meningoencephalitis/abscesses in the bilateral cerebellum and ventral pons with surrounding vasogenic edema. The lesion in the
posterior right cerebellum, marked with arrows (A, C), exhibited T2 hypointense blood products/hemorrhage.
Figure 4. H&E stain of non-necrotic brain tissue with arrows indicating viable
Balamuthia mandrillaris trophozoites. The trophozoites display a purple, moderately
bubbly cytoplasm, a distinct single dark red nucleus, and indistinct cell borders.
Brain biopsy consisted primarily of necrosis in which a background of rounded
cystic-like structures with a distinct nucleus and prominent distinct cell borders
were demonstrated (not pictured).
K.J. Piper et al. / International Journal of Infectious Diseases 77 (2018) 18–22 
21
 accordance with the recommendations and guidance of the Swedish
Medical CenterInstitutionalReview Board. Consent was not required
from the subject included in this report, as the treatment received
was per standard of care, the subject had died prior to the time of
manuscript preparation, and no protected health information is
included in the report.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the work was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Author contributions
DS, CLM, SDT, and CC participated in the patient’s treatment
and/or diagnosis. KP, HF, DS, and CC did the literature search and
drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
References
Chang O, Liu F, Knopp E, Muehlenbachs A, Cope J, Ali I, et al. Centrofacial
Balamuthiasis: case report of a rare cutaneous amebic infection. J Cutan Pathol
2016;43:892–7.
Deetz TR, Sawyer MH, Billman G, Schuster FL, Visvesvara GS. Successful treatment of
Balamuthia Amoebic Encephalitis: presentation of 2 cases. Clin Infect Dis
2003;37:1304–12.
Deol I, Robledo L, Meza A, Visvesvara GS, Andrews RJ. Encephalitis due to a free-
living amoeba (Balamuthia mandrillaris): case report with literature review.
Surg Neurol 2000;53:611–6.
Doyle JS, Campbell E, Fuller A, Spelman DW, Cameron R, Malham G, et al. Balamuthia
mandrillaris brain abscess successfully treated with complete surgical excision
and prolonged combination antimicrobial therapy. J Neurosurg 2011;114:458–
62.
Dunneback TH. The ameba Balamuthia mandrillaris feeds by entering into
mammalian cells in culture. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2007;54:452–64.
Horská A, Barker PB. Imaging of brain tumors: MR spectroscopy and metabolic
imaging. Neuroimaging Clinics 2010;20:293–310.
Matin A, Siddiqui R, Jayasekera S, Khan NA. Increasing importance of Balamuthia
mandrillaris. Clin Microbiol Rev 2008;21:435–48.
Mueller-Mang C, Castillo M, Mang TG, Cartes-Zumelzu F, Weber M, Thurnher MM.
Fungal versus bacterial brain abscesses: is diffusion-weighted MR imaging a
useful tool in the differential diagnosis?. Neuroradiology 2007;49:651–7.
Parija SC, Dinoop KP, Venugopal H. Management of granulomatous amebic
encephalitis: laboratory diagnosis and treatment. Trop Parasitol 2015;5:23.
Qvarnstrom Y, Visvesvara GS, Sriram R, da Silva AJ. Multiplex real-time PCR assay for
simultaneous detection of Acanthamoeba spp.,Balamuthia mandrillaris, and
Naegleria fowleri. J Clin Microbiol 2006;44:3589–95.
Rideout BA, Gardiner H, Stalis H, Zuba JR, Hadfield T, Visvesvara GS. Fatal infections
with Balamuthia madrillaris (a free-living amoeba) in gorillas and other old
world primates. Vet Pathol 1997;34:15–22.
Siddiqui R, Khan NA. Balamuthia amoebic encephalitis: an emerging disease with
fatal consequences. Microb Pathog 2008;44:89–97.
Stidd DA, Root B, Weinand ME, Anton R. Granulomatous amoebic encephalitis
caused by Balamuthia mandrillaris in an immunocompetent girl. World
Neurosurg 2012;78:7–12.
Takei K, Toyoshima M, Nakamura M, Sato M, Shimizu H, Inoue C, et al. An acute case
of granulomatous amoebic encephalitis-Balamuthia mandrillaris infection.
Japan Soc Intern Med 2018;10:11–7.
Visvesvara GS, Martinez AJ, Schuster FL, Leitch GJ, Wallace SV, Sawyer TK, et al.
Leptomyxid ameba, a new agent of amebic meningoencephalitis in humans and
animals. J Clin Microbiol 1990;28:2750–6.
Yoder JS, Straif-Bourgeois S, Roy SL, Moore TA, Visvesvara GS, Ratard RC, et al.
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis deaths associated with sinus irrigation
using contaminated tap water. Clin Infect Dis 2012;55:e79–85.
Keenan J. Pipera
Haidn Fostera,b
Daniel Susantoa,c
Cynthia L. Mareea
Sean D. Thorntona,d
Charles S. Cobbsa,*
aSwedish Medical Group, 550 17th Avenue Suite 540, Seattle, WA
98122, USA
bUniversity of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3235 Eden Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA
cRadia Inc., 500 17th Ave, Seattle, WA 98122, USA
dCellNetix Pathology and Laboratories, 1124 Columbia St Suite 200,
Seattle, WA 98104, USA
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: Keenan.Piper@swedish.org (K. Piper),
Haidn.Foster@swedish.org (H. Foster),
Daniel.Susanto@swedish.org (D. Susanto),
Cynthia.Maree@swedish.org (C. Maree),
Sean.Thornton@swedish.org (S. Thornton),
Charles.Cobbs@swedish.org (C. Cobbs).
Corresponding Editor: Eskild Petersen, Aarhus, Denmark
Received 19 July 2018
Received in revised form 9 September 2018
Accepted 13 September 2018
22 
K.J. Piper et al. / International Journal of Infectious Diseases 77 (2018) 18–22
