 August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
1
PersPective
published: 22 August 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00142
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Francis J. McMahon, 
National Institute of 
Mental Health, USA
Reviewed by: 
Alessio Squassina, 
University of Cagliari, Italy 
 
Bryan Weston Luikart, 
Dartmouth College, USA 
 
Judith L. Rapoport, 
National Institute of 
Mental Health, USA
*Correspondence:
Pat Levitt 
plevitt@med.usc.edu
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Behavioral and Psychiatric Genetics, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 28 June 2016
Accepted: 02 August 2016
Published: 22 August 2016
Citation: 
Plummer JT, Gordon AJ 
and Levitt P (2016) The Genetic 
Intersection of Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders and Shared Medical 
Comorbidities – Relations that 
Translate from Bench to Bedside. 
Front. Psychiatry 7:142. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00142
the Genetic intersection of 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
and shared Medical  
comorbidities – relations that 
translate from Bench to Bedside
Jasmine T. Plummer1, Alexis J. Gordon2 and Pat Levitt1,3*
1 
Institute for the Developing Mind, The Saban Research Institute, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 
2 
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 3 
Department of Pediatrics, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Most psychiatric disorders are considered neurodevelopmental, and the associated genes 
often are expressed in tissues outside of the brain. This suggests a biological relatedness 
with medical co-occurrences that could have broad clinical implications for diagnosis and 
patient management over a lifetime. A qualitative integration of public data from genetic con-
sortia of psychiatric disorders and medical comorbidities explores the question of whether 
genetically associated psychiatric illnesses present with co-occurring disturbances can be 
used to define specific mental–physical health relations. Novel patterns of gene-disorder 
relations appear with approximately one-third of conservatively defined, consortia- 
generated 
candidate risk genes with multiple psychiatric diagnoses. Moreover, nearly as many genes 
overlap with non-psychiatric phenotypes, including cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, and 
metabolic disturbances. While the landscape of genetic risk will change as study populations 
are expanded and biological confirmations accrue, the current relationships suggest that 
a mostly siloed perspective of gene relatedness to one categorical psychiatric diagnosis is 
not clinically useful. The future holds the promise that once candidates are fully validated, 
genome screening and mutation identification will bring more precision for predicting the 
risk for complex health conditions. Our view is that as genetic data are refined, continuing 
to decipher a shared pattern of genetic risk for brain and peripheral organ pathophysiology 
is not simply an academic exercise. Rather, determining relatedness will impact predictions 
of multifaceted health risks, patient treatment, and management.
Keywords: mental illness, neurogenetics, autism, schizophrenia, brain development
iNtrODUctiON
Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are caused by abnormalities of brain development due to 
somatic or germ line mutations, and include certain psychiatric disorders (1). NDDs affect an estimated 
15% of the population and are a major source of economic and clinical care burden on the healthcare 
system (National Institute of Mental Health Statistics).1 NDDs, such as schizophrenia (SCZ), autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD), attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), and mood disorders [bipo-
lar disorder (BD) and major depressive disorder (MDD)], are characterized by a range of brain-based 
1 http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/index.shtml
 2
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
symptoms, some of which overlap between diagnostic categories 
(2). The de-emphasis on specific clinical categories and a greater 
focus on dimensions of behavioral and neurobiological measures 
reflects a goal of using new discoveries to inform treatment that 
extend beyond classic disease boundaries (3). Yet, the origins of 
symptoms overlap and clinical variation remains a challenge to 
discern. The pathophysiological mechanisms of NDD symptoms 
are complex and the developmental mechanisms that underlie 
psychiatric disorder risk remain largely unknown. Advances in the 
understanding of altered gene expression and its role in NDD risk 
are providing a more advanced framework for deciphering disease 
etiologies.
The co-occurrence of non-psychiatric and mental health 
disturbances may not be surprising, given that nearly all genes 
in the genome are expressed in the developing human brain, 
with subsets found in peripheral organs. There is increasing 
interest in studies of the relations between specific NDDs, such 
as SCZ and BD, and enrichment of medical conditions, includ-
ing cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and respiratory conditions 
(4). The question then arises: given the current state of mental 
illness and medical genetic discoveries, how much shared genetic 
risk exists between the brain and other organs? If, for example, 
coding mutations impact NDD risk gene function in the brain, 
is it likely that other organ systems in which the gene functions 
will also be negatively impacted? NDD gene expression may be 
more complex when allelic variations occur in the regulatory 
regions of these genes because the same gene may be regulated 
quite differently in distinct tissues. While not yet understood in 
terms of impact on specific disorder symptoms, recent analyses of 
polymorphisms from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 
have demonstrated significant genetic relations across certain 
disorders, such as between SCZ with BD (5) and with anorexia 
nervosa (5). We have conceptualized these potential relations by 
analyzing current gene–disease findings across physical and men-
tal illnesses to better understand co-occurring clinical patterns.
Given that different psychiatric genetic consortia have 
reported “high confidence” risk and causal genes, we posited that 
analysis of these genes might promote a refined understanding of 
the genetic origins of and relations to non-psychiatric comorbidi-
ties. This perspective is put forth with the understanding that the 
landscape of genetic risk is certain to change over time due to 
methodological improvements in genetic discovery and analysis, 
biological validation of risk polymorphisms, and continued 
increase of subjects analyzed. The analysis revealed relation-
ships between consortia-defined NDD risk genes and medical 
comorbidities.
A cUrreNt NDD GeNe List: A stArtiNG 
POiNt BUt ever-evOLviNG
In the analysis, the designation of NDD included syndromic dis-
orders (SYN – categorized as genetically determined Mendelian 
NDDs, such as Rett Syndrome or Fragile-X Syndrome), as well as 
typically childhood (ASD and ADHD) or adult-onset (BD, MDD, 
and SCZ) brain-based disturbances (Table 1). A NDD risk gene 
list was compiled by selecting “high confidence” risk or causal 
genes, as defined by each consortium, for a specific categorical 
diagnosis using criteria established by the following psychiatric 
disorder databases:
(1) ADHD: the “Hot Gene List” from ADHDgene.2
(2) ASD: genes listed as Category 1 (high confidence) and 
Category 2 (strong candidate) on Simons Foundation 
Autism Research Initiative Gene (SFARIgene).3
(3) BD: the “Core Gene List” from BDgene.4
(4) MDD: the top 20 gene associations with MDD from 
PsyGeNet.5
(5) SCZ: because the SCZ genetic database (SCZgene) had 
not been updated since 2009, we used data generated by 
the 2014 Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric 
Genomics Consortium (6). This is the most extensive 
psychiatric genetic study to date. However, all data meet-
ing genome-wide significance were not included, because 
many polymorphisms are not within close proximity to 
coding genes. Thus, we included only genes from loci that 
had single gene hits (54 of 108), recognizing that non-
coding RNA species and regulatory polymorphisms are not 
included.
(6) SYN: genes listed in Category S (syndromic) of SFARIgene.3
2 http://adhd.psych.ac.cn/topGene.do
3 https://gene.sfari.org/autdb/GS_Home.do
4 http://bdgene.psych.ac.cn/topGene.do
5 http://www.psygenet.org/
 
tABLe 1 | Neurodevelopmental (NDD) and OMiM-defined physical disorders.
Disorder
Abbreviation and Neurodevelopmental 
Disorder color code
Schizophrenia
SCZ
Bipolar disorder
BP
Syndromic disorders
SYN
Autism spectrum disorder
ASD
Attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder
ADHD
Major monopolar disorder
MDD
Intellectual disability
ID
Craniofacial
CRANIO
Epilepsy
EPI
Musculoskeletal
MSK
Cardiovascular
CARDIAC
Ataxia/motor
MOTOR
Genitourinary
GU
Endocrine
ENDO
Cancer
CANCER
Ophthalmological
OPHTHO
Respiratory
RESP
Speech-language
SPEECH
Ear, nose, and throat
ENT
Gastrointestinal
GI
Dermatological
DERM
Allergy/immunological
IMMUNO
Color codes demarcate genes in each specific NDD category.
 3
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
After compiling the NDD gene list, non-psychiatric phe-
notypes associated with each gene, generated from Online 
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM),6 were assigned using 
Biomart [ENSEMBL Genes 82, Homo sapiens gene (GRCh38.
p3)]. The NDD gene list was uploaded by Entrez Gene IDs and 
then filtered for attributes by MIM Morbid Gene Description 
(e.g., phenotype associated in OMIM) (Ensembl Biomart).7 Note 
that there currently is debate in the literature on the voracity of 
identifying risk genes (7, 8). Our list includes genes that underlie 
highly penetrant, rare events that are thought to be causal, as well 
as genes associated with statistically significant polymorphisms 
in smaller cohorts with a categorical diagnosis, or larger patient 
cohorts of a certain diagnosis. The list should not be considered 
absolute, as current data do not typically include determination of 
the functional impact of genome-wide polymorphisms on specific 
genes. There currently are few examples of such studies (9–11).
Genes were first stratified by their psychiatric phenotype 
(ADHD, ASD, BD, MDD, SCZ, and SYN) (Table 1). Secondary cat-
egorization of NDD genes by non-psychiatric phenotypic comor-
bidities was done by separating genes into basic organ systems. 
These categories were (1) ears, nose, and throat (ENT – included 
tonsils, snoring, and hearing), (2) ophthalmologic (OPHTHO), (3) 
cardiac (CARDIAC), (4) respiratory (RESP), (5) gastrointestinal 
(GI), (6) genitourinary (GU), (7) endocrine (ENDO – included 
temperature regulation), (8) allergy/immunological (IMMUNO), 
(9) musculoskeletal (MSK), (10) dermatological (DERM), (11) 
craniofacial (CRANIO), and (12) neurological. Because these 
genes were associated with NDDs and, therefore, have many 
brain-associated disturbances, the neurological category was 
further subdivided into (1) epilepsy/seizures (EPI), (2) intellectual 
disability (ID), (3) speech–language impairments (SPEECH), and 
(4) ataxia/motor impairments (MOTOR). Including CANCER, 
there were 16 non-psychiatric categories (Table 1).
The non-psychiatric categories were not mutually exclusive, 
as comorbidities were often spectral. For example, genes associ-
ated with speech, language, and speech-related communication 
deficits were part of the same phenotypic SPEECH category. In 
addition, some genes were associated with communication delays 
secondary to ID. These were classified as ID and not the SPEECH 
category unless the genes were also associated with risk for specific 
SPEECH deficits. To highlight how a NDD gene was categorized 
in this analysis, we use transcription factor 4 (TCF4) as an exam-
ple. TCF4 had associations with ASD, BD, SCZ, and Pitt–Hopkins 
Syndrome (SYN), the latter causing clinical symptoms that include 
seizures, constipation, and myopia. The clinical disturbances asso-
ciated with TCF4 were assigned to the following non-psychiatric 
categorizations: (1) EPI, (2) GI, and (3) OPHTHO. Furthermore, 
TCF4 had an association with Diabetes Mellitus II; accordingly, a 
categorization of endocrine disorders (ENDO) was included.
NDD risK GeNe reLAtiONsHiPs
There are 208 individual risk genes on the selection list (Figure 1). 
There were substantial multiple category diagnoses for ~50% of 
6 http://www.omim.org
7 http://uswest.ensembl.org/biomart/martview/5c4ed4a0df8a4edd185363c07c92e0ce
the genes, with 78 associated with SCZ, 26 genes with ADHD, 49 
with ASD, 72 with BD, 19 with MDD, and 53 with SYN (a total 
greater than 208 individual risk genes). Note that the data are 
relatively skewed, because of more available information from 
the large, GWAS SCZ studies compared to the other five psychi-
atric diagnoses, yet there was considerable overlap with other 
diagnostic categories. Across the 16 non-psychiatric phenotypic 
categories, there was a broad distribution of associated NDD 
risk genes (Figure 1B). Not surprisingly, the largest number of 
NDD risk genes was associated with ID, with the other brain-
based phenotypes also highly represented. Consistent with the 
notion that NDD risk genes likely affect organ systems other 
than the brain, approximately half of the NDD risk genes 
were associated with non-brain-based disturbances. The larg-
est of these phenotypic categories included CRANIO, MSK, 
CARDIAC, GU, and ENDO disturbances. Thus, in addition to 
non-psychiatric brain-based abnormalities, NDD genes have 
considerable connections to disturbances in other tissues and 
physiological targets, an observation not typically considered 
when characterizing NDDs.
Analysis of NDD genes and their psychiatric phenotypes 
revealed a striking degree of overlap between seemingly unre-
lated disorders (Figure 1C). Overall, 33% of the 208 genes were 
associated with two or more disorders. For instance, of the 49 
ASD-related risk genes, 28 were noted with one additional NDD 
(Figure 2B), with the largest subgroup (18 genes) shared by ASD 
and SYN. By contrast, only two genes were shared by ASD and 
SCZ alone. When considering the 72 BD risk genes on the list, 
interesting subgroups of shared genes emerged. Specifically, 
discrete subgroups were associated with BD and ADHD (5 
genes), BD and SCZ (12 genes), and BD and MDD (2 genes). 
Intriguingly, genes associated with these subgroups encoded 
proteins involved in diverse cellular functions. For example, 
BD + SCZ subgroup included a d-amino acid oxidase (DAO) 
and its activator (DAOA), a Wnt pathway enzyme (GSK3β), a 
mitotic protein (MAD1L1), an ATP binding protein (TRANK1), 
a cell signaling receptor tyrosine kinase (ERRB4), a regulator of G 
protein signaling (RGS4), a cholinergic receptor (CHRNA7), and 
glutamate receptors (GRM3, GRIN1, and GRIA1). This is distinct 
from the BD + MDD subgroup, which included a protein-
modifying enzyme (FKBP5) and a nuclear receptor (NR3C1). 
There typically was limited overlap of gene function between 
subgroups associated with BD (Figure 1D). Finally, there was a 
modest number of genes in three or more NDD categories. This 
is best exemplified by SLC6A4, which was associated with all of 
our NDD categories, with the exception of SYN. This is consistent 
with the idea that perturbations of the same genetic pathway can 
result in different psychiatric diagnoses, likely due to genetic and 
environmental phenotypic modifiers.
Neurodevelopmental disorder risk genes across all six psychi-
atric categories shared common non-psychiatric comorbidities 
(Figure 2A) To gain insight into the relatedness of psychiatric 
categories and non-psychiatric comorbidities, two groups, both of 
which included genes from the six NDD categories, were created. 
The ENDO group comprises the following: SCZ (1 gene), ASD 
(3), ADHD (1), MDD (2), BD (3), and SYN (5) (Figure 2B). NDD 
genes from all six psychiatric categories were present in the ENDO 
 FiGUre 1 | categorization of neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) risk genes and their associated comorbidities.  
 
(Continued)
4
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
 FiGUre 1 | continued
(A) NDD categories and the number risk genes for attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), bipolar disorder (BD), major 
depressive disorder (MDD), schizophrenia (SCZ), and syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders (SYN). Note that because a single gene may be assigned to more 
than one category, the total is greater than the 208 genes analyzed. (B) The distribution of NDD risk genes with OMIM-generated, related non-psychiatric conditions. 
The phenotypic categories listed in (A,B) are not mutually exclusive. (c) Diagram of relationship between NDD risk genes. NDD risk genes depicted with their 
primary psychiatric associations. Abbreviations for each NDD are as noted for (A), and are shown as hubs (yellow rectangles). Note the connection of NDD genes 
associated with one or more psychiatric conditions. (D) Histogram with color code that depicts NDD risk genes associated with a single or two or more psychiatric 
categories, the latter comprising nearly half of the 208 psychiatric NDD genes. NDD abbreviations are noted in table 1. X-axis indicates number of genes in each 
combination or single category.
5
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
subgroup, demonstrating the likelihood of non- 
neurological 
comorbidities related to specific NDDs. For example, the NDD 
risk gene PTEN is observed in the ENDO subgroup but also is 
associated with several other non-neurological comorbidities 
(CARDIAC, GI, GU, MSK, CRANIO, and CANCER).
Finally, we explored the comorbidities associated with 
a specific NDD by generating an ASD risk gene subgroup 
(Figure 2C). We focused on non-neurological associations, 
excluding ID and EPI. Remarkably, there were 11 organ system 
categories associated with ASD risk genes. Certain genes were 
also associated with multiple non-neurological comorbidities. 
For example, MAGEL2 was associated with seven organ sys-
tems comorbidities: MSK, GU, ENDO, OPHTHO, CRANIO, 
MOTOR, and RESP. Within this subgroup, the genes associ-
ated with MSK also exhibited shared risk for other disorders 
(including SCZ and SYN). Certain subgroups of genes associ-
ated with different NDDs were related to similar phenotypic 
categories. For instance, CNTNAP2 (ASD + SYN) and TCF4 
(ASD + BD + SYN + SCZ) were associated with CRANIO, GI 
and RESP. Shared ASD risk genes also overlap in their relations 
to non-neurological phenotypes.
These relationships highlight that there are many non-
neurological comorbidities associated with the NDD risk genes. 
Thus, as medical genetics evolves, so does the necessity to 
reduce single gene-single disease boundaries and view a broader 
pathophysiological impact on other organ systems. The analyses 
presented here may help reframe how clinicians and scientists 
approach the treatment and study of NDDs beyond single condi-
tions. This perspective aligns with the recent Research Domain 
Criteria (RDoC) to de-emphasize categories of diagnoses, and 
instead utilize functional dimensions to delineate and ultimately 
treat clinical symptoms (3, 12). It is important to emphasize that 
the present study does not address the relative strength of the 
relations nor the specific genetic variants that drive the relations, 
although recent investigations are attempting to address this 
 
(5, 7). Additionally, it is important to emphasize that unknown 
referral and ascertainment bias in the NDD populations that 
dominate some of the genetic consortia may provide a biased 
sample with unknown or absent major medical comorbidities. 
Ultimately, a population study will be needed to assess medical 
comorbidities, such as the AGRE and Simons Simplex collections 
for the studies of ASD. As new data from deep gene sequencing 
and larger population association analyses accumulate, additional 
analyses will be capable of bringing even more clarity to novel 
patterns of relations across psychiatric NDDs and medical 
conditions.
ADvANciNG A sHAreD BiOLOGY FOr 
FUtUre iNvestiGAtiONs
We focused on gaining a perspective on the degree to which there 
are relationships between NDDs and non-psychiatric comor-
bidities, through either common or rare genetic risk as the field 
currently defines these. The relationships reported here highlight 
a potentially shared biology for genes expressed during brain and 
peripheral organ system development. It will be important in future 
studies to align a refined genetic understanding with compara-
tive analyses of gene expression for specific NDDs and medical 
conditions. Because genes encode proteins that are mediating dif-
ferent functions in distinct cell and developmental contexts, gene 
mis-regulation or dysfunction due to allelic variation or coding 
mutations may produce unique, context-specific outcomes. These 
genetic perturbations could contribute to different phenotypes 
observed in psychiatric disorders and other non-psychiatric dis-
turbances. That is, the same gene can be associated with seemingly 
unrelated disorders and conditions because the gene product may 
be part of different molecular networks in distinct tissue and cell 
settings. In addition, clinical heterogeneity, even within a single-
gene syndrome, such as Rett or Angelman Syndromes, is sub-
stantial. The combination of clinical heterogeneity and diversity 
of biological functions creates challenges for understanding the 
contribution of specific genes to the pathogenesis and pathophysi-
ology of a specific categorical disorder. Nonetheless, the relations 
between non-psychiatric disturbances, mental illness, and NDD 
risk genes provide an important framework for recognizing the 
clinical complexity of any NDD. Currently, standard care focuses 
on the neurological aspect of psychiatric NDDs or mental illness. 
Here, we suggest a potential platform for utilizing a more holistic 
method for treating other organ systems along with NDDs.
Highlighting Autism comorbidities
Syndromic Disorder genes were the largest subgroup of overlap-
ping ASD risk genes. Since disruptions in SYN NDDs by defini-
tion affect multiple organ systems, it was not surprising that there 
were numerous co-occurring conditions associated with ASD 
genes, including GI, CANCER, IMMUNO, GU, and CARDIAC 
disorders. GI was composed of eight genes: CDKL5, CHD7, 
CNTNAP2, DHCR7, MET, NIPBL, PTEN, and TCF4. This 
coincides with the high prevalence of GI disturbances, over 40%, 
in children with ASD (13–15), and is consistent with the perspec-
tive that functional genetic variations that increase risk for ASD 
may also underlie ASD-associated GI dysfunctions. For example, 
the MET receptor regulates enteric neuron development and 
 FiGUre 2 | NDD risk genes and their non-psychiatric conditions. (A) Diagram displays NDD risk genes (ellipses) and their associated non-psychiatric 
conditions (yellow diamonds). (B) NDD risk genes and their association with endocrine disorders (ENDO). This group is derived from Figure 2A (orange outline). 
(c) Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) comorbidity subgroup. The analysis depicts relations of genes associated with ASD and other psychiatric disorders with 
medical conditions (yellow diamonds). See table 1 for color code of genes associated with each NDD, and Figure 1D for the color code for various combinations 
of NDDs to which a gene was assigned.
6
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
 7
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
intestinal motility (16), and in humans, MET promoter variant 
rs1858830, a common functional promoter polymorphism that 
increases the risk for ASD, is enriched further in individuals with 
co-occurring GI dysfunction (13). Interestingly, genes within the 
ASD-GI grouping differ in their protein function, consistent with 
the idea that different cellular mechanisms may underlie similar 
non-psychiatric comorbidities, as well as other associated ASD 
comorbidities. For example, in contrast to MET, CDKL5, a tran-
scription factor, is not only associated with ASD risk but also is 
a susceptibility locus for early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 
2 (EIEE2). In addition to presenting with seizures, children with 
EIEE2 present with GI disturbances, subtle dysmorphic facial fea-
tures, sleep disturbances, and stereotypic hand movements (15).
iNFOrMiNG treAtMeNt AND PAtieNt 
MANAGeMeNt
Viewing non-psychiatric comorbidities of NDDs through a 
current understanding of genetic relations raises a number of 
interesting possibilities. This perspective promotes the idea of 
a more integrated approach to treatments of individuals with a 
particular diagnosis, more predictable treatment responses and 
better predictive side effect profiles. In fact, research relevant to 
this approach is presently underway (17). For example, several 
genes are associated with altered enzyme levels that can impact 
drug metabolism (18). Additionally, certain medications used to 
treat specific NDDs also are associated with metabolic syndrome 
or an increased risk for cardiovascular disease (19). Ultimately, as 
the identification of high confidence risk genes undergoes modifi-
cation with new human genetic discoveries and biological valida-
tion, identifying non-psychiatric conditions associated with NDD 
genes may be useful as a practical screen for recognizing possible 
treatment side effects and promoting the careful tailored treat-
ments that avoid deleterious effects. These connections also may 
be useful for interpreting potential health implications based on 
clinical genetic assays that are being implemented more routinely.
There may be additional benefits in a greater understanding 
of the relation between co-occurring non-psychiatric and psy-
chiatric disturbances. First, the stigma and misunderstanding 
that accompany the diagnosis of NDDs or psychiatric disorders, 
in contrast to medical conditions, remain significant, but a 
better understanding of genetic relations may advance society’s 
viewpoints (20). We suggest that an increased recognition of 
co-occurring psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders, and the 
genetic and biological factors that underlie co-occurrences, may 
reframe opinions on causality. This reframing may help alter the 
view that individual weakness is a risk for psychiatric disorders 
and instead refocus society’s viewpoint toward the contribution 
of genetic risk for mental illness. Deciphering the patterns of 
non-psychiatric disturbances associated with specific NDDs and 
mental illnesses also will lead to a better understanding of the 
bio-psycho-social complexity of challenges faced by these indi-
viduals and their families (21). Second, there are limited efforts 
to develop integrated preclinical research models that incorpo-
rate genetic strategies for both non-psychiatric and psychiatric 
disturbances. There is, thus, a significant knowledge gap, due to 
the rising understanding that peripheral organ systems, such as 
the GI or IMMUNO system, can directly influence brain devel-
opment, structure, and function (22). Future clinical and basic 
investigations into the shared genetic relations among psychiatric 
and peripheral organ function will provide opportunities for 
both healthcare providers and researchers to build a framework 
to address the challenges of complex patient care and disorder 
etiologies.
AUtHOr cONtriBUtiONs
JP and PL conceived of the project. JP developed the analysis 
strategy. JP and AG contributed to the analysis and wrote the 
first draft of the manuscript. PL supervised the project, and 
contributed to revisions of the data analyses and writing of the 
manuscript. All authors discussed the results and implications 
and commented on the manuscript at all stages.
AcKNOWLeDGMeNts
The authors thank Dr. Kathie Eagleson for helpful comments in 
writing the manuscript and members of the Levitt Laboratory for 
useful discussions.
FUNDiNG
This research was funded by an Autism Speaks Meixner 
Fellowship (JP), the Simms/Mann Chair in Developmental 
Neurogenetics, Keck Chair in Neurogenetics, and NIMH Grant 
MH067842 (PL), and a Keck School of Medicine Dean’s Research 
Scholar Award (AG).
sUPPLeMeNtArY MAteriAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online 
at http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00142
reFereNces
1. Sahin M, Sur M. Genes, circuits, and precision therapies for autism and 
related neurodevelopmental disorders. Science (2015) 350(6263):aab3897. 
doi:10.1126/science.aab3897 
2. Geschwind DH, Flint J. Genetics and genomics of psychiatric disease. Science 
(2015) 349(6255):1489–94.
3. Casey BJ, Oliveri ME, Insel T. A neurodevelopmental perspective on 
the research domain criteria (RDoC) framework. Biol Psychiatry (2014) 
76(5):350–3.
4. Happell B, Galletly C, Castle D, Platania-Phung C, Stanton R, Scott D, et al. 
Scoping review of research in Australia on the co-occurrence of physical 
and serious mental illness and integrated care. Int J Ment Health Nurs (2015) 
24(5):421–38. doi:10.1111/inm.12142 
5. Bulik-Sullivan B, Finucane HK, Anttila V, Gusev A, Day FR, Loh P-R, et al. An 
atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases and traits. Nat Genet (2015) 
47(11):1236–41. doi:10.1038/ng.3406 
6. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. 
Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 
(2014) 511(7510):421–7. doi:10.1038/nature13595 
 8
Plummer et al.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Medical Comorbidities
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 142
7. Schmitt A, Rujescu D, Gawlik M, Hasan A, Hashimoto K, Iceta S, et al. 
Consensus paper of the WFSBP Task Force on Biological Markers: criteria 
for biomarkers and endophenotypes of schizophrenia part II: cognition, 
neuroimaging and genetics. World J Biol Psychiatry (2016):1–23. doi:10.1080/ 
15622975.2016.1183043 
8. Ziats MN, Rennert OM. The evolving diagnostic and genetic landscapes 
of autism spectrum disorder. Front Genet (2016) 7:65. doi:10.3389/fgene. 
2016.00065 
9. Kerner B. Toward a deeper understanding of the genetics of bipolar disorder. 
Front Psychiatry (2015) 6:105. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00105 
10. Fullard JF, Halene TB, Giambartolomei C, Haroutunian V, Akbarian S, 
Roussos P. Understanding the genetic liability to schizophrenia through the 
neuroepigenome. Schizophr Res (2016). doi:10.1016/j.schres.2016.01.039 
11. Schaefer GB. Clinical genetic aspects of ASD spectrum disorders. Int J Mol Sci 
(2016) 17(2):E180. doi:10.3390/ijms17020180 
12. Cuthbert BN, Insel TR. Toward the future of psychiatric diagnosis: the 
seven pillars of RDoC. BMC Med (2013) 11(1):126. doi:10.1186/1741- 
7015-11-126 
13. Campbell DB, Buie TM, Winter H, Bauman M, Sutcliffe JS, Perrin JM, et al. 
Distinct genetic risk based on association of MET in families with co- 
occurring 
autism and gastrointestinal conditions. Pediatrics (2009) 123(3):1018–24. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2008-0819 
14. Organ SL, Tsao MS. An overview of the c-MET signaling pathway. Ther Adv 
Med Oncol (2011) 3(1 Suppl):S7–19. doi:10.1177/1758834011422556 
15. Yamazaki K, Umeno J, Takahashi A, Hirano A, Johnson TA, Kumasaka N, et al. 
A genome-wide association study identifies 2 susceptibility Loci for Crohn’s 
disease in a Japanese population. Gastroenterology (2013) 144(4):781–8. 
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2012.12.021 
16. Avetisyan M, Wang H, Schill EM, Bery S, Grider JR, Hassell JA, et al. 
Hepatocyte growth factor and MET support mouse enteric nervous system 
development, the peristaltic response, and intestinal epithelial proliferation 
in response to injury. J Neurosci (2015) 35(33):11543–58. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.5267-14.2015 
17. Bruxel EM, Salatino-Oliveira A, Akutagava-Martins GC, Tovo-Rodrigues L, 
Genro JP, Zeni CP, et al. LPHN3 and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: 
a susceptibility and pharmacogenetic study. Genes Brain Behav (2015) 
14(5):419–27. doi:10.1111/gbb.12224 
18. Yun DH, Pae CU, Drago A, Mandelli L, De Ronchi D, Patkar AA, et al. Effect 
of the dysbindin gene on antimanic agents in patients with bipolar I disorder. 
Psychiatry Investig (2008) 5(2):102–5. doi:10.4306/pi.2008.5.2.102 
19. Sharma E, Rao NP, Venkatasubramanian G. Association between antipsy-
chotic-induced metabolic side-effects and clinical improvement: a review 
on the Evidence for “metabolic threshold”
. Asian J Psychiatr (2014) 8:12–21. 
doi:10.1016/j.ajp.2013.11.017 
20. Phelan JC. Genetic bases of mental illness – a cure for stigma? Trends Neurosci 
(2002) 25(8):430–1. doi:10.1016/S0166-2236(02)02209-9 
21. Broady TR, Stoyles GJ, Morse C. Understanding carers’ lived experience of 
stigma: the voice of families with a child on the autism spectrum. Health Soc 
Care Community (2015). doi:10.1111/hsc.12297 
22. Baganz NL, Blakely RD. A dialogue between the immune system and brain, 
spoken in the language of serotonin. ACS Chem Neurosci (2013) 4(1):48–63. 
doi:10.1021/cn300186b 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Plummer, Gordon and Levitt. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). 
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution 
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
