 This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: Pollock A., Campbell 
P., Deery R., Fleming M., Rankin J., Sloan G. & Cheyne H. (2017) A 
systematic review of evidence relating to clinical supervision for nurses, 
midwives and allied health professionals. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing 73(8), 1825–1837, which has been published in final form at 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13253. This article may be used for non-commercial 
purposes in accordance With Wiley Terms and Conditions for self-archiving. 
 TITLE PAGE 
 
Full title 
A systematic review of evidence relating to clinical supervision for nurses, midwives and 
allied health professionals. 
Running head 
Clinical supervision for NMAHPs: a systematic review 
Author details  
Alex POLLOCK, PhD BSc(Hons), Senior Research Fellow, Nursing Midwifery and Allied Health 
Professions Research Unit, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK. 
Alex.Pollock@gcu.ac.uk  
Pauline CAMPBELL, PhD BSc(Hons), Research Fellow, Nursing Midwifery and Allied Health 
Professions Research Unit, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK. 
Ruth DEERY, PhD ADM RM, Professor of Maternal Health, Institute of Healthcare Policy and 
Practice, University of the West of Scotland, UK. 
Mick FLEMING, PhD MA RMN, Associate Professor, The School of Nursing, Midwifery and 
Social Care, Napier University, Edinburgh, UK. 
Jean RANKIN, PhD RN RM, Professor, Supervisor of Midwives, Health, Nursing and 
Midwifery, University of the West of Scotland, UK. 
Graham SLOAN, PhD RMN RGN, Consultant Nurse in Psychological Therapies, Psychological 
Services, NHS Ayrshire and Arran, Ayr, UK.  
Helen CHEYNE, PhD RM RGN, Royal College of Midwives (Scotland) Professor of Midwifery, 
Nursing Midwifery and Allied Health Professions Research Unit, University of Stirling, 
Stirling, UK. 
Conflict of interest statement  
No conflict of interest has been declared by the authors (Alex Pollock, Pauline Campbell, 
Ruth Deery, Mick Fleming, Jean Rankin, Graham Sloan and Helen Cheyne).  
Funding statement 
This work was commissioned and supported by the Scottish Government’s Chief Nursing 
Officer’s Directorate. The Nursing Midwifery and Allied Health Professions (NMAHP) 
Research Unit is supported by the Scottish Government Health Directorate’s Chief Scientist 
Office.  The work presented here represents the view of the authors and not necessarily 
those of the funding bodies. 
Author Contributions 
All authors have agreed on the final version and meet at least one of the following criteria 
(recommended by the ICMJE*): 
1) substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, or analysis and 
interpretation of data; 
2) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content. 
* http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/  
 ABSTRACT:   
Aim 
To systematically review evidence relating to clinical supervision for nurses, midwives and 
allied health professionals. 
Background 
Since 1902 statutory supervision has been a requirement for UK midwives, but this is due to 
change.  Evidence relating to clinical supervision for nurses and allied health professions 
could inform a new model of clinical supervision for midwives.    
Design 
A systematic review with a contingent design, comprising a broad map of research relating 
to clinical supervision, and two focused syntheses answering specific review questions. 
Data Sources 
Electronic databases were searched from 2005 until September 2015, limited to English-
language peer-reviewed publications. 
Review Methods 
Systematic reviews evaluating the effectiveness of clinical supervision were included in 
Synthesis 1. Primary research studies including a description of a clinical supervision 
intervention were included in Synthesis 2.  Quality of reviews were judged using a risk of 
bias tool, and review results summarised in tables.  Data describing the key components of 
clinical supervision interventions were extracted from studies included in Synthesis 2, 
categorised using a reporting framework and a narrative account provided. 
Results 
Ten reviews were included in Synthesis 1; these demonstrated an absence of convincing 
empirical evidence and lack of agreement over the nature of clinical supervision.  Nineteen 
primary studies were included in Synthesis 2; these highlighted a lack of consistency, and 
large variations between delivered interventions.  
Conclusion 
Despite insufficient evidence to directly inform the selection and implementation of a 
framework, the limited available evidence can inform the design of a new model of clinical 
supervision for UK-based midwives.    
 
 
 SUMMARY STATEMENT 
Why is this research or review needed? 
 UK midwives currently receive statutory supervision but changes will soon separate 
its investigatory and developmental functions.  The Nursing and Midwifery Council 
(NMC) will be responsible for regulation, leaving the opportunity to develop a non-
regulatory framework for supervision which may be more effective in meeting the 
needs of practicing midwives. 
 Existing models of clinical supervision currently used for nurses or allied health 
professionals may inform a framework of non-regulatory supervision for midwives. 
 There is a lack of consensus over the nature of clinical supervision and how it can be 
optimally facilitated. 
 
What are the key findings? 
 An overview of reviews which explore effectiveness of clinical supervision 
demonstrates consensus that there is no convincing evidence of effectiveness, and a 
lack of agreement over the nature of clinical supervision. 
 A synthesis of descriptions of clinical supervision within primary research studies 
demonstrates that there is lack of consistency and large variations within what is 
delivered as supervision. 
 There is insufficient evidence to directly inform the selection of a specific model, or 
way of delivering clinical supervision, to promote optimal outcomes for health 
practitioners and their clients. 
 
How should the findings be used to influence policy/practice/research/education? 
 These findings could be used to inform the development and implementation of a 
non-regulatory framework for clinical supervision in midwifery. 
 Despite insufficient evidence to enable direct selection of a new framework from 
existing models, available information about intervention components could be used 
to inform the design of a new model of clinical supervision for UK midwives which 
should then be rigorously tested.    
 Further systematic exploration of research evidence exploring perceived barriers and 
facilitators to clinical supervision should be carried out to assist decisions relating to 
future supervision of midwives in the UK.    
KEY WORDS 
Clinical supervision, midwifery, nursing models, systematic reviews and meta-analyses 
 
 
 MAIN TEXT 
INTRODUCTION 
Clinical supervision is widely considered to be an integral part of good professional practice 
for healthcare practitioners (Bowers and Bottiglien 2007, Brunero and Lamont 2012, Buus et 
al. 2013, Gonge and Buus 2015, NHS 2013).  While there is no universally accepted 
definition of the term clinical supervision, there is broad agreement over its purpose and 
objectives.  For the purposes of this paper, clinical supervision is considered to be the 
facilitation of support and learning for healthcare practitioners enabling safe, competent 
practice and the provision of support to individual professionals who may be working in 
stressful situations.  This reflects definitions from established texts: 
 "a formal process of professional support and learning which enables individual 
practitioners to develop knowledge and competence, assume responsibility for their own 
practice and enhance consumer protection and safety in complex situations” (DoH 1993)  
 “clinical supervision provides a route to developing and maintaining emotionally healthier 
individuals in an emotionally healthier workforce culture. Effective systems of clinical 
supervision can bring benefits not only to practitioners but also to the organisation and its 
clients” (Bond and Holland 1998). 
Internationally there are many frameworks, policies and procedures relating to the concept 
of clinical supervision, placing responsibility on individual professionals, managers, 
organisations or health care systems.  Reported impacts of clinical supervision comprise 
benefits at all these different levels, although evidence relating to improved quality of care 
provided by professionals to individual clients or patients is rare (Bradshaw et al. 2007) and 
studies have been unable to demonstrate direct and signficant benefits to patients (Watkins 
2011; White & Winstanley 2010).  Yet there is widespread consensus over the merits of 
clinical supervision, despite a lack of clarity over what clinical supervision is, and little 
agreement about what constitutes a “good” model of clinical supervision (Chilvers and 
Ramsey 2009, Evans and Marcroft 2015).  
Within this paper, evidence relating to the effectiveness of clinical supervision interventions 
is systematically synthesised, and descriptions of clinical supervision interventions are 
derived from primary research evidence.   
Background 
Uniquely, within the UK there is a legal requirement for all midwives to receive regular 
supervision, but no similar statutory requirement for nurses or allied health professions.  
Participation in statutory supervision (i.e. supervision for which there is a legal requirement) 
has been an essential requirement for midwives in the UK since 1902 in order to maintain 
their registration to practice. Statutory supervision purports to provide a mechanism for 
 both regulation of practice (including registration of midwives and investigation in cases of 
suggested mal-practice) and for support and guidance (including a review of the midwife’s 
practice and an assessment of educational needs). However it has been argued by some 
that there is a blurring of boundaries within the statutory supervision model and that 
regulation and support for a midwife cannot exist in the same model (Deery and Corby 
1996, Stapleton  et al. 1998). 
The stated purpose of statutory supervision of midwives is to “protect women and babies by 
actively promoting a safe standard of midwifery practice” (NHS 2015). Recently, following a 
number of enquiries into adverse events, a report from The King’s Fund  (an independent 
charity working to improve health and health care in England, which aims to shape policy 
and practice through research and analysis: http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/) recommended 
the separation of the processes of supervision and regulation for midwives (Baird et al. 
2015) with relevant changes to the law anticipated to be in place by early 2017 (NMC 2015).  
The removal of the statutory requirement for supervision of UK midwives represents a 
significant change for the profession.  The UK’s Nursing and Midwifery Council will continue 
to have responsibility for the regulatory aspects of supervision, but not aspects relating to 
professional and personal support (i.e. not clinical supervision). The current statutory 
supervision model has traditionally been considered to be essential for the protection of the 
public (i.e. mothers and babies) and its removal implies a threat to public safety. There is 
therefore a need to adopt a suitable alternative to ensure safety and optimal outcomes for 
mothers and babies.  Consequently the four Chief Nursing Officers in the UK are now 
seeking to implement a model of clinical supervision (NMC 2015), and the Scottish 
Government brought together lead midwives and researchers to begin exploration of an 
alternative model or framework. 
However, there are significant challenges to the identification, development and 
implementation of a robust model of clinical supervision. There is a lack of consensus over 
the nature of clinical supervision and its facilitation.   This creates barriers to the 
development and implementation of an alternative model of supervision which is designed 
to meet the professional support and developmental needs of midwives and to have a 
positive impact on clinical outcomes for women, babies, midwives and maternity services.  
Non-regulatory models of clinical supervision currently used for nurses and allied health 
professionals (AHPs), and by midwives outwith the UK, may potentially inform the 
development of a replacement to statutory supervision and evidence relating to these need 
to be considered to determine the optimal framework for clinical supervision for midwives 
in the UK.   
THE REVIEW 
Aim  
 The aim was to inform the identification, development and implementation of a framework 
for clinical supervision in midwifery by exploring evidence relating to clinical supervision for 
nurses, midwives and AHPs. Identified evidence was synthesised in order to answer the 
following research questions: 
1. What is the evidence of effectiveness of clinical supervision interventions for nurses, 
midwives or AHPs? 
2. What are the key components of clinical supervision interventions delivered within 
primary research studies to nurses, midwives and AHPs? 
The protocol for this review has been published in the PROSPERO database (Pollock et al. 
2015). 
Design 
A systematic review using a contingent design was carried out. Contingent designs comprise 
a cycle of research syntheses, conducted to answer defined research questions, and 
assimilate evidence according to its relevance to a research question, rather than grouping 
studies according to whether they have a qualitative or quantitative research design 
(Sandelowski et al. 2006). The process of starting with a broad review question or aim can 
enable subsequent efficient syntheses focussed on narrower review questions (Gough et al. 
2012). The planned contingent design therefore, comprised two stages: (1) mapping the 
evidence and (2) synthesising evidence relevant to the two focussed research questions.   
This is illustrated in Figure 1. 
The framework developed by Arksey and O’Malley (2005) provided a structured approach to 
both stages of the planned systematic review.  This framework comprises 5 stages: clarifying 
and linking the purpose and research question (stage 1); balancing feasibility with breadth 
and comprehensiveness of the mapping process (stage 2); using an iterative team approach 
to selecting studies (stage three) and extracting data (stage four); incorporating a numerical 
summary and qualitative thematic analysis, reporting results, and considering the 
implications of study findings to policy, practice, or research (stage five) (Arksey and 
O'Malley 2005, Levac et al. 2010). To ensure adherence to the ‘iterative team approach’ the 
review authors, who comprised experts in clinical supervision, midwifery and research 
methods, held regular team meetings throughout the review process. This iterative 
approach ensured that feasibility and timely completion of this review could be balanced 
with breadth and comprehensiveness. 
Search methods 
The electronic databases searched were: MEDLINE, CINAHL, EMBASE, AMED (Allied and 
Complementary Medicine Database), CDSR (Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews), 
DARE (Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effectiveness), CENTRAL (Cochrane Central 
 Register of Controlled Trials), HTA (Health Technology Assessment Database), from 2005 
until September 2015, limited to English language papers in peer-reviewed publications. 
Comprehensive search strategies were developed and adapted for use across databases, 
combining MESH and free text terms for keywords relating to profession (e.g. “nurse”, 
“midwife”, “allied health professional”) and supervision (e.g. “clinical supervision” OR 
“professional supervision”) (see Table S1 for sample search string for CINAHL database).  
Boolean operators were used in order to maximise the penetration of terms searched, and 
appropriate “wild cards” used to account for plurals, variations in databases and spelling.  
Search outcome 
Selection criteria for inclusion in the broad map of research evidence were purposefully 
wide. To be eligible for inclusion studies had to be specifically focussed on clinical 
supervision, according to the pre-defined working definition (see Introduction). To ensure 
that included clinical supervision interventions were relevant to the UK, only studies based 
in Europe, North America or Australasia were eligible for inclusion.  Any primary or 
secondary research studies, regardless of design, were eligible for inclusion, but letters, 
commentaries, expert opinion and non-peer reviewed studies were excluded. 
Studies were excluded if they were exclusively focused on the supervisee only (for example, 
studies focussing only on resilience building), the supervisor role (for example, studies 
focussed specifically on processes or actions of the supervision), or education (that is, 
clinical supervision provided to those completing educational courses or programmes). 
An audit trail of the search outcome was maintained, with details of included and excluded 
studies summarised within tables. 
Quality appraisal 
The quality of reviews included within synthesis 1 were assessed using the ROBIS tool 
(Whiting et al. 2016), and each review rated as being at low, high or unclear risk of bias, 
based on the responses to the ROBIS questions.  The quality of primary research studies 
included within synthesis 2 were not systematically appraised, as this was not contingent 
with the aim of this synthesis, which was focused on providing a description of interventions 
(rather than synthesising or interpreting outcome data), however a judgement of the 
comprehensiveness of the description of the intervention was applied using a pre-planned 
‘traffic-light’ system. The following definitions were used for this categorisation:  
 ‘Green’ - comprehensive description of clinical supervision intervention, with few 
missing data.  Details ought to be sufficient to facilitate replication. 
  ‘Amber’  - Details of some areas of the clinical supervision intervention well 
reported, but absent for some areas.  Details would not be sufficient to facilitate 
replication, but could be integrated into an intervention with similar characteristics. 
  ‘Red’ - Few details provided and/or inadequate description of the clinical supervision 
intervention.  Details would not be sufficient to facilitate replication of the 
intervention. 
Judgment of comprehensiveness of reporting was done by one researcher, and checked by a 
second researcher. 
Data abstraction 
Methods of selection of studies 
One member of the review team ran the search strategy and excluded any obviously 
irrelevant titles. Two review authors independently reviewed the abstracts of all remaining 
records, applying selection criteria to identify eligible studies. Full papers were obtained for 
all studies considered potentially relevant by at least one reviewer, and were independently 
assessed by two reviewers. Any disagreements between reviewers were resolved through 
discussion.  In accordance with the Arksey and O’Malley (2005) framework, discussion 
meetings were held to discuss the process of study selection following completion of 
abstract review, but prior to full paper review, to provide opportunities for discussion and 
review of the inclusion criteria (Arksey and O'Malley 2005). Any agreed modifications to 
inclusion criteria were fully documented, with reasons provided, to ensure transparency in 
this process. 
Selection of studies for inclusion in synthesis 1: For inclusion within synthesis 1 studies had 
to be specifically designed to evaluate the effectiveness of the clinical supervision 
intervention.  Outcomes of interest were pre-stated as (but not limited to): measures of 
cost, numbers of complaints, number of staff sickness days, measure of staff retention, and 
scales to assess perceived acceptability and usefulness.  Selection of studies for inclusion 
within synthesis 1 was carried out through discussion between review authors.  
Selection of studies for inclusion in synthesis 2: For synthesis 2, which aimed to synthesise 
descriptions of clinical supervision interventions, the comprehensiveness of the description 
of the clinical supervision intervention was judged using the previously described ‘traffic 
light’ system.  Only studies judged to be ‘green’ or ‘amber’ were taken forward into 
synthesis 2. 
Data extraction 
Synthesis 1: Following consensus to focus on relevant reviews, recommended methods for 
overviews of reviews (or ‘umbrella reviews’) were adopted.  These included ensuring that 
methods were in line with well-recognised high quality standards for systematic reviews of 
primary studies (Hartling et al. 2012), and including the essential elements for overviews of 
reviews including non-quantitative data (Aromataris et al. 2015). The characteristics of the 
10 included reviews were systematically extracted, including aims, inclusion criteria, date of 
 search, outcomes assessed, details of included studies, data synthesised, any effectiveness 
data and review conclusion. Data were extracted by one of the review authors, using a data 
collection form specifically designed for this study.  
Synthesis 2: The characteristics of the 19 included studies were systematically extracted, 
including country of study, study aims, study design and description of the clinical 
supervision.  Data were extracted by one review author, using a data collection form 
specifically designed for this study.    
Synthesis 
Synthesis 1: Extracted data and ROBIS assessments for each review were combined within 
summary tables. Had the included reviews presented meta-analyses exploring the 
effectiveness of clinical supervision on any of our pre-stated outcomes of interest, we 
planned to summarise these pooled data within tables using recommended  methods 
(Hartling et al. 2012, Smith et al. 2011). 
Synthesis 2: Descriptions of key components of the clinical supervision intervention were 
systematically tabulated for each study using items from the TIDieR checklist (Hoffmann et 
al. 2014), to categorise descriptions under the following headings:   
i) BRIEF NAME of model of clinical supervision and WHY it was selected. 
ii) WHAT materials and procedures were used?  
iii) WHO provided clinical supervision? 
iv) HOW was clinical supervision provided?  
v) WHERE was clinical supervision provided?  
vi) WHEN and HOW MUCH clinical supervision was provided?   
Information on tailoring, modifications and how well the clinical supervision was 
implemented was considered and relevant descriptions incorporated in the above 
categories.   Differences and similarities between studies within each of these categories 
were explored. 
RESULTS 
Results of search 
The results of the search are detailed in Figure 2.  Eighty-six papers, which reported 47 
primary studies (60 papers) and 26 reviews were included in the broad map of evidence.  
Synthesis 1 
Iterative discussion in accordance with the planned design (Arksey and O'Malley 2005) led 
to consensus that it was pragmatic and efficient to first consider whether the 26 reviews 
included in the broad map answered the research question within proposed synthesis 1.  
Exploration of these reviews led to exclusion of 16 reviews (see Table S2 for reasons for 
 exclusion, and references for excluded reviews), leaving 10 reviews to be included within 
Synthesis 1 (Brunero 2008, Butterworth et al. 2008, Buus and Gonge 2009, Dawson et al. 
2013, Dilworth et al. 2013, Ducat and Kumar 2015, Fitzpatrick et al. 2012, Francke and de 
Graaff 2012, Kleiser and Cox 2008, Pearce et al. 2013).  Characteristics of these reviews are 
detailed in Table S3. Only 5 of these 10 included were judged to be a low risk of bias (using 
the ROBIS tool) and relevant to our review question (Buus and Gonge 2009, Dawson et al. 
2013, Dilworth et al. 2013, Ducat and Kumar 2015, Francke and de Graaff 2012).  Four of 
these included qualitative primary research studies in addition to quantitative studies  (Buus 
and Gonge 2009, Dawson et al. 2013, Dilworth et al. 2013, Ducat and Kumar 2015, Francke 
and de Graaff 2012), while one included quantitative studies only (Francke and de Graaff 
2012). None of the reviews pooled any data within meta-analyses; one review presented 
quantitative results data from individual studies (Francke and de Graaff 2012).  All 5 reviews 
provided narrative descriptions of the results of the included primary studies.   
Systematic exploration of the evidence from all reviews of clinical supervision (including 
those judged to be at high risk of bias) demonstrates clear consensus that there is lack of 
agreement over what clinical supervision is or how it should be performed and that there is 
no convincing empirical evidence to support clinical supervision for nurses, midwives and 
AHPs (NMAHPs).  The reviews were also in general agreement that while there is some 
evidence of limited quality, which does suggest benefits associated with clinical supervision, 
this is conflicting, and the evidence is low quality and poorly described.   
Synthesis 2 
The 47 primary research studies were all considered to potentially include relevant 
descriptions of clinical supervision interventions.  Application of the ‘traffic light’ system to 
rate the comprehensiveness of the description of the clinical supervision intervention rated 
3/47 as ‘green’, 16/47 as ‘amber’ and 28/47 as ‘red’. Table S4 summarises the study design, 
judgement of quality / comprehensiveness of description of clinical supervision and Table S5  
describes the characteristics and lists citations for the 48 primary studies. 
Thus 19 primary studies were judged to contain some details relating to the clinical 
supervision intervention.  These included 4 randomised controlled trials (Bambling et al. 
2006, Gonge and Buus 2015, Heaven et al. 2006, White and Winstanley 2010), one cohort 
study (Livni et al. 2012), 3 mixed methods studies (Dawber 2013, O'Connell et al. 2013, 
Turner and Hill 2011), 2 qualitative studies ((Brink et al. 2012, Cross et al. 2010), 5 
survey/questionnaire-based studies (Bailey et al. 2014, Brunero and Lamont 2012, Buus et 
al. 2013, Evans and Marcroft 2015, Girling et al. 2009), 3 case studies or reports (Bowers and 
Bottiglien 2007, Chilvers and Ramsey 2009, Cross et al. 2012) and one action research study 
(Bergdahl et al. 2011). The numbers of people participating in the studies was generally low 
(ranging from 2-87 supervisees) and were often poorly reported, with many studies 
describing the number of groups receiving supervision or the number of supervisors rather 
than number of supervisees. 
 Narrative description of key components 
i) BRIEF NAME of model of clinical supervision and WHY it was selected.  
There were a number of different named models of supervision cited with several studies 
referring to more than one named model. The most frequently cited model of supervision 
was Proctor’s model (Proctor 1987, 2000), with 8/19 studies specifically referring to 
Proctor’s Model (Bowers and Bottiglien 2007, Brunero and Lamont 2012, Cross et al. 2010, 
Dawber 2013, Gonge and Buus 2015, Evans and Marcroft 2015, Turner and Hill 2011, White 
and Winstanley 2010). Models of reflective practice were cited by 3 studies (Chilvers and 
Ramsey 2009, Dawber 2013, White and Winstanley 2010), while other studies described 
“Working Alliance” (Bambling et al. 2006), “Collegial group supervision” (Brink et al. 2012), 
“Supervisory Alliance” (Livni et al. 2012), models of “Hawkins and Shohet” (Buus et al. 2013)  
and “Bandura’s social cognitive learning” model (Heaven et al. 2006). Only 4/19 studies 
(Bergdahl et al. 2011, Cross et al. 2012, Girling et al. 2009, O'Connell et al. 2013) did not 
state a named model of clinical supervision or cite a supporting reference when describing 
the intervention.  However, in the papers where specifically named models were cited, it 
was generally unclear how these models impacted on the practical application of clinical 
supervision, and why this particular model had been selected. 
ii) WHAT materials and procedures were used? 
Few studies provided a comprehensive description of the content of the sessions and how 
these were structured. Two of the studies specifically referred to the establishment of 
“ground rules” at the start of the clinical supervision process (Bowers and Bottiglien 2007, 
Turner and Hill 2011).  Some studies either implicitly or explicitly described a process in 
which a “problem” or “issue” was raised and then explored by the supervisee (Brunero and 
Lamont 2012, Cross et al. 2010, Cross et al. 2012, O'Connell et al. 2013). In general the 
descriptions provided in the study lacked clarity around the content and structure of the 
sessions. 
In the majority of the studies (9/19) participation in clinical supervision was voluntary.  In 
one study it was stated that participation was not mandatory, but that staff were “strongly 
advised to attend" (Chilvers and Ramsey 2009), while in another it was mandatory for 
participants in one setting (ward), and voluntary in another (Buus et al. 2013). In two studies 
participation required consent for ethical reasons associated with the study design (Heaven 
et al. 2006, White and Winstanley 2010), and information was unclear or not stated in three 
studies. 
There was very little information provided in the studies in relation to whether (or how) 
clinical supervision sessions were documented. Two studies stated that records or notes 
were kept by the supervisors (Cross et al. 2010, Livni et al. 2012), one mentioned minutes of 
 meetings (Bowers and Bottiglien 2007), and two used standard forms to record the session 
(Chilvers and Ramsey 2009, Turner and Hill 2011). 
iii) WHO PROVIDED clinical supervision?  
Clinical supervision was facilitated by a range of different people, with very varied levels of 
experience in clinical supervision.  Three main groups of people who provided or facilitated 
supervision were identified; these included (1) clinical supervision facilitator who had 
completed specialist training (Cross et al. 2010, Cross et al. 2012, Dawber 2013, Girling et al. 
2009, O'Connell et al. 2013), (2) clinical NMAHPs who had attended some training (Bambling 
et al. 2006, Chilvers and Ramsey 2009, Evans and Marcroft 2015, Livni et al. 2012, White and 
Winstanley 2010), and (3) members of a group in which the lead person, or facilitator, 
rotated between members (Bailey et al. 2014, Heaven et al. 2006, Bowers and Bottiglien 
2007). Other people involved in facilitating clinical supervision were researchers (Buus et al. 
2013, Gonge and Buus 2015) and line managers (Turner and Hill 2011).  In one study clinical 
supervision was delivered jointly by two co-facilitators (Brunero and Lamont 2012).   
The training provided to clinical NMAHPs comprised a 2-day university course tailored to the 
supervisor’s needs (Chilvers and Ramsey 2009) and a 4-day “residential, intensive, 
experiential” course combining practical exercises with theory-based seminars (White and 
Winstanley 2010).  Another study provided one training session and a manual, but all 
supervisors in this study had to have previously had at least 2 years’ experience of providing 
clinical supervision (Bambling et al. 2006). Three studies provided supervisors with a written 
manual, or handbook, detailing the role and functions of clinical supervision (Brunero and 
Lamont 2012, Buus et al. 2013, Gonge and Buus 2015). 
iv) HOW was clinical supervision provided? 
All clinical supervision interventions were delivered face-to-face.  The majority of studies 
focussed on group supervision (12/19) (Bailey et al. 2014, Bergdahl et al. 2011, Bowers and 
Bottiglien 2007, Brink et al. 2012, Brunero and Lamont 2012, Buus et al. 2013, Chilvers and 
Ramsey 2009, Cross et al. 2010, Dawber 2013, Gonge and Buus 2015, O'Connell et al. 2013, 
White and Winstanley 2010). This was generally led by a facilitator, but occasionally is peer-
led (Cross et al. 2010). Five studies delivered individual (one-to-one) supervision (Bambling 
et al. 2006, Cross et al. 2012, Girling et al. 2009, Heaven et al. 2006, Turner and Hill 2011), 
while 2 delivered a mixture of either group or individual (Evans and Marcroft 2015, Livni et 
al. 2012). Evans and Marcroft (2015) specifically planned to enable a range of different 
modes of delivery, stating that “A menu of 6 options was provided to enable supervision to 
be adaptable and tailored to individual staff & service needs” (Evans and Marcroft 2015). In 
Livni et al. 2012 supervisors and supervisees were randomly allocated to either individual or 
group supervision conditions (Livni et al. 2012). 
v) WHERE was clinical supervision provided? 
 The included studies were mainly carried out in Australia (8 studies: (Bailey et al. 2014, 
Bambling et al. 2006, Brunero and Lamont 2012, Cross et al. 2010, Cross et al. 2012, Dawber 
2013, O'Connell et al. 2013, White and Winstanley 2010) and the United Kingdom (7 studies: 
(Bowers and Bottiglien 2007, Chilvers and Ramsey 2009, Evans and Marcroft 2015, Girling et 
al. 2009, Heaven et al. 2006, Livni et al. 2012, Turner and Hill 2011) with 2 studies also 
carried out in each of Sweden (Bergdahl et al. 2011, Brink et al. 2012) and Denmark (Buus et 
al. 2013, Gonge and Buus 2015). 
Clinical supervision was provided in a wide variety of different settings including hospital, 
community and emergency care settings.  Six of the studies explored clinical supervision 
either within a mental health care setting (Bambling et al. 2006, Buus et al. 2013, Gonge and 
Buus 2015, White and Winstanley 2010) or to supervisees who were involved in the delivery 
of counselling services (Bailey et al. 2014, Livni et al. 2012). Clinical supervision was often 
provided to nurses (including registered nurses and midwives, health-care assistants, nurse 
managers) working within a range of settings including community / home-based services 
(Bergdahl et al. 2011, Bowers and Bottiglien 2007, Cross et al. 2012, Heaven et al. 2006), 
general or mixed hospital settings (Brunero and Lamont 2012, Dawber 2013, O'Connell et al. 
2013), or specialist care settings (Chilvers and Ramsey 2009, Cross et al. 2010).  Clinical 
supervision was also provided to clinical staff (including nurses and AHPs) within specific 
settings or locations (Evans and Marcroft 2015, Girling et al. 2009) and to ambulance nurses 
and technicians (Brink et al. 2012).  
vi) WHEN and HOW MUCH clinical supervision was provided?  
There was little evidence available regarding the frequency of participation in clinical 
supervision. The frequency of clinical supervision can be measured as the number of 
sessions conducted or, more specifically, as the number of sessions an individual nurse has 
attended (Gonge and Buus 2015). The frequency and duration of clinical supervision 
delivered within group or one to one sessions is summarized in Table 1. Group sessions 
were delivered between once a week and every 8 weeks, and varied between 45 minutes 
and 2 hours in length. One to one sessions varied from a 1 hour session once a fortnight, to 
a 1 hour session once every 3 months. One study reported a total of 12 hours supervision 
delivered as four ½ day sessions over a four week period (Heaven et al. 2006); in this study 
clinical supervision was delivered specifically with the aim of supporting transfer of 
communication skills training into clinical practice, potentially accounting for the greater 
duration of delivery. Another study reported clinical supervision which occurred after each 
client (Bambling et al. 2006), but this was delivered in the context of a randomised 
controlled trial, with the aim of supporting adherence to a specific treatment protocol. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 This systematic review has mapped research evidence relating to clinical supervision, and 
synthesised evidence in order to address two clearly focussed research questions. In general 
the evidence relating to clinical supervision is of poor quality, confounded by absence of 
definitions and descriptions of clinical supervision. Despite the widespread acceptance that 
clinical supervision is beneficial to individuals, clients and organisations, there remains no 
convincing empirical evidence to support clinical supervision for nurses, midwives or allied 
health professionals. Exploration of the few available descriptions of clinical supervision 
within the primary research evidence highlights inconsistencies, and large variations 
between facilitated interventions. There is insufficient evidence to inform the selection of a 
specific model, or way of facilitating clinical supervision, to promote optimal outcomes for 
health practitioners and their clients.  
Implications for midwifery and clinical supervision in the UK 
The midwifery profession is now in a unique position to be able to devise a model of clinical 
supervision that meets the needs of midwives in the UK.  Although the findings of this 
review provide insufficient evidence to directly inform the selection of a clinical supervision 
model for midwives, information about intervention components relating to typology, 
processes and the role of the facilitator may help inform the design of a model of clinical 
supervision which can then be rigorously tested.  Named models of supervision may inform 
development, but care must be taken to consider how such models impact on the practical 
application of clinical supervision. As there are a range of ways of delivering clinical 
supervision, and no evidence of superiority of any specific method, incorporating a number 
of alternatives into a model may be advantageous in enabling tailoring to different settings 
and individual practitioners. Specification of the components of a new model and 
development of a handbook or manual may provide a practical way of ensuring clarity, and 
may be a useful supplement to any training which is provided to those who will facilitate 
clinical supervision sessions. It will be essential to be clear about whether participation in 
clinical supervision sessions will be voluntary or mandatory, both as a supervisor or as a 
supervisee. Development of contracts between supervisors and supervisees, standard 
methods of record keeping, and minimum criteria for attendance of individual midwives 
may all be important components.      
Given that the new model will not have a regulatory function this presents the opportunity 
for a focus on bringing, and reflecting on, issues from work in a safe and supportive, but 
challenging context.  To provide optimal care to mothers and babies, midwives require 
adequate support and guidance; consequently there is a case that this new model should be 
predicated on relationship based care, ensuring that midwives do not suffer from the 
stresses that have become common within midwifery and enabling them to take care of 
themselves as well as mothers and babies. Effective clinical supervision is likely to require 
continuous learning and development for supervisors and supervisees, who will need to be 
committed to self-assessing their skills and competencies through reflection and review of 
 their performance.   Appropriate training and knowledge development, for both supervisors 
and supervisees, will arguably be essential to ensuring successful implementation of a new 
supervision process. In order to successfully develop and implement a national framework 
of clinical supervision for UK midwives each individual component of this complex 
intervention will need to be considered, with consideration of the context in which it is to 
implemented and with collaboration from all relevant stakeholders.  
Strengths and limitations of the review 
The lack of consistent terminology relating to clinical supervision led to significant 
challenges associated with identification of relevant studies, which may have led to failure 
to identify and include some potentially relevant papers. However the large number of 
review papers identified, and the clear consensus in their reported findings, does increase 
confidence that there were no key papers missing from this review.  The conclusions 
reached within this systematic review are limited by the poor quality of evidence identified 
relating to clinical supervision.  Within synthesis 1 a recognised tool was used to assess the 
quality of evidence of the included reviews, and a strength of this approach was the focus 
on the reviews which were judged to be at low risk of bias.  In contrast, within synthesis 2 
no assessment of the quality of the included primary studies was made, as quality was not 
considered relevant to the research question, which specifically focused on the description 
of the intervention, rather than on the study design or results.   Despite this justification, the 
absence of quality assessment may have resulted in inclusion of data from studies which 
had study designs at high risk of bias.  Throughout this review, strategies were implemented 
to reduce the introduction of biases, including the use of two independent reviewers at all 
key stages of the study selection and data extraction and transparent reporting of 
judgements and decision making. The review authors did make a number of iterative 
decisions, potentially  introducing bias into the review, but attempts were made to 
systematically document all iterative decision-making to minimise the limitations associate 
with this approach. 
 
CONCLUSION 
This systematic review of evidence relating to clinical supervision was undertaken to inform 
the development and implementation of a framework for clinical supervision in midwifery. 
While the review highlights the lack of high quality evidence relating to clinical supervision, 
and concludes that this is insufficient to directly inform the selection and implementation of 
a new framework, the limited available evidence could be used to inform the design of a 
new model of clinical supervision for UK-based midwives. The absence of empirical evidence 
relating to the effectiveness of clinical supervision interventions, and variations and 
inconsistencies in descriptions, definitions and what is implemented in clinical practice, 
provide no clear way forward in the identification of a replacement for statutory supervision 
 for UK-based midwives.  Yet clinical supervision is widely delivered and there are a 
considerable number of peer-reviewed papers in which there are reports of the facilitation 
of clinical supervision for nurses, midwives and AHPs.  The available evidence provides a 
range of options which could be considered during the development of a new model or 
framework for clinical supervision in midwifery in the UK. To further inform this 
development and implementation, systematic exploration of additional data, such as 
evidence relating to the perceived barriers and facilitators to effective supervision and 
reports of current practice for other health professionals, is recommended.   
 
References 
 
 
Arksey, A. & O'Malley, L. (2005) Scoping studies: towards a methodological 
framework. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8(1), 19-32. 
 
Aromataris, E., Fernandez, R., Godfrey, C.M., Holly, C., Khalil, H. & Tungpunkom, P. 
(2015) Summarizing systematic reviews: methodological development, conduct and 
reporting of an umbrella review approach. Int J Evid Based Healthc, 13(3), 132-40. 
 
Bailey, R., Bell, K., Kalle, W. & Pawar, M. (2014) Restoring Meaning to Supervision 
Through a Peer Consultation Group in Rural Australia. Journal of Social Work 
Practice, 28(4), 479-495. 
 
Baird, B., Murray, R., Seale, B., Foot, C. & Perry, C. (2015) Midwifery regulation in the 
United Kingdom. The King’s Fund, London, UK. 
 
Bambling, M., King, R., Raue, P., Schweitzer, R. & Lambert, W. (2006) Clinical 
supervision: Its influence on client-rated working alliance and client symptom 
reduction in the brief treatment of major depression. Psychotherapy Research, 16, 
317-331. 
 
Bergdahl, E., Benzein, E., Ternestedt, B.M. & Andershed, B. (2011) Development of 
nurses' abilities to reflect on how to create good caring relationships with patients in 
palliative care: an action research approach. Nursing Inquiry, 18(2), 111-122. 
 
Bond, M. & Holland, S. (1998) Skills of Clinical Supervision for Nurses, Open 
University Press, Buckingham. 
 
Bowers, B. & Bottiglien, T. (2007) The value of a staff nurse forum in meeting the 
local needs of a district nursing service. Primary Health Care, 17(8), 34-38. 
 
Brink, P., Bäck-Pettersson, S. & Sernert, N. (2012) Group supervision as a means of 
developing professional competence within pre-hospital care. International 
Emergency Nursing, 20(2), 76-82. 
  
Brunero, S. (2008) The effectiveness of clinical supervision in nursing: an evidenced 
based literature review. Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing, 25(3), 86-94. 
 
Brunero, S. & Lamont, S. (2012) The process, logistics and challenges of 
implementing clinical supervision in a generalist tertiary referral hospital. Scand J 
Caring Sci, 26(1), 186-93. 
 
Butterworth, T., Bell, L., Jackson, C. & Majda, P. (2008) Wicked spell or magic bullet? 
A review of clinical supervision literature 2001-2007. Nurse Education Today, 28, 
264-272. 
 
Buus, N., Cassedy, P. & Gonge, H. (2013) Developing a manual for strengthening 
mental health nurses' clinical supervision. Issues Ment Health Nurs, 34(5), 344-9. 
 
Buus, N. & Gonge, H. (2009) Empirical studies of clinical supervision in psychiatric 
nursing: A systematic literature review and methodological critique. Int J Ment 
Health Nurs, 18(4), 250-64. 
 
Chilvers, R. & Ramsey, S. (2009) Implementing a clinical supervision programme for 
nurses in a hospice setting. Int J Palliat Nurs, 15(12), 615-9. 
 
Cross, W., Moore, A. & Ockerby, S. (2010) Clinical supervision of general nurses in a 
busy medical ward of a teaching hospital. Contemp Nurse, 35(2), 245-53. 
 
Cross, W.M., Moore, A.G., Sampson, T., Kitch, C. & Ockerby, C. (2012) Implementing 
clinical supervision for ICU Outreach Nurses: a case study of their journey. Australian 
Critical Care 25(4), 263-270. 
 
Dawber, C. (2013) Reflective practice groups for nurses: a consultation liaison 
psychiatry nursing initiative: part 2--the evaluation. Int J Ment Health Nurs, 22(3), 
241-8. 
 
Dawson, M., Phillips, B. & Leggat, S. (2013) Clinical supervision for allied health 
professionals: a systematic review. J Allied Health, 42(2), 65-73. 
 
Deery, R. & Corby, D. (1996) Chapter 14: A Case for Clinical Supervision in Midwifery. 
In Supervision of Midwives(Kirkham, M. ed. Books for Midwives Press, London. 
 
Dilworth, S., Higgins, I., Parker, V., Kelly, B. & Turner, J. (2013) Finding a way forward: 
a literature review on the current debates around clinical supervision. Contemp 
Nurse, 45(1), 22-32. 
 
DoH (1993) A Vision for the Future: The Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting 
Contribution to Health and Health Care. (HMSO ed. London. 
 
Ducat, W.H. & Kumar, S. (2015) A systematic review of professional supervision 
experiences and effects for allied health practitioners working in non-metropolitan 
health care settings. J Multidiscip Healthc, 8, 397-407. 
  
Evans, C. & Marcroft, E. (2015) Clinical supervision in a community setting. Nurs 
Times, 111(22), 16-8. 
 
Fitzpatrick, S., Smith, M. & Wilding, C. (2012) Quality allied health clinical supervision 
policy in Australia: a literature review. Aust Health Rev, 36(4), 461-5. 
 
Francke, A.L. & de Graaff, F.M. (2012) The effects of group supervision of nurses: a 
systematic literature review. Int J Nurs Stud, 49(9), 1165-79. 
 
Girling, A., Leese, C. & Maynard, L. (2009) How clinical supervision can improve 
hospice care for children. Nursing Management 16(7), 20-23. 
 
Gonge, H. & Buus, N. (2015) Is it possible to strengthen psychiatric nursing staff's 
clinical supervision? RCT of a meta‐supervision intervention. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 71(4), 909-921. 
 
Gough, D., Thomas, J. & Oliver, S. (2012) Clarifying differences between review 
designs and methods. Systematic Reviews, 1, 28. 
 
Hartling, L., Chisholm, A., Thomson, D. & Dryden, D.M. (2012) A descriptive analysis 
of overviews of reviews published between 2000 and 2011. PLoS One, 7(11), e49667. 
 
Heaven, C., Clegg, J. & Maguire, P. (2006) Transfer of communication skills training 
from workshop to workplace: the impact of clinical supervision. Patient Educ Couns, 
60(3), 313-25. 
 
Hoffmann, T.C., Glasziou, P.P., Boutron, I., Milne, R., Perera, R., Moher, D., Altman, 
D.G., Barbour, V., Macdonald, H., Johnston, M., Lamb, S.E., Dixon-Woods, M., 
McCulloch, P., Wyatt, J.C., Chan, A.W. & Michie, S. (2014) Better reporting of 
interventions: template for intervention description and replication (TIDieR) checklist 
and guide. BMJ, 348, g1687. 
 
Kleiser, H. & Cox, D.L. (2008) The Integration of Clinical and Managerial Supervision: 
a Critical Literature Review. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 71(1), 2. 
 
Levac, D., Colquhoun, H. & O'Brien, K.K. (2010) Scoping studies: advancing the 
methodology. Implement Sci, 5, 69. 
 
Livni, D., Crowe, T.P. & Gonsalvez, C.J. (2012) Effects of supervision modality and 
intensity on alliance and outcomes for the supervisee. Rehabil Psychol, 57(2), 178-
86. 
 
NHS (2013) NHS Grampian: Clinical supervision (Reflective Learning) Policy & 
Guidelines for Nurses, Midwives & Allied Health Professionals. NHSGCS POL/2013, 
Scotland. 
 
NHS (2015) NHS England: Supervision of midwives. NHS England. 
  
NMC (2015) Nursing and Midwifery Council. Review of midwifery regulation. An 
update on midwifery regulation. 
 
O'Connell, B., Ockerby, C.M., Johnson, S., Smenda, H. & Bucknall, T.K. (2013) Team 
clinical supervision in acute hospital wards: a feasibility study. West J Nurs Res, 35(3), 
330-47. 
 
Pearce, P., Phillips, B., Dawson, M. & Leggat, S.G. (2013) Content of clinical 
supervision sessions for nurses and allied health professionals: A systematic review. 
Clinical Governance, 18(2), 139-154. 
 
Pollock, A., Campbell, P., Deery, R., Fleming, M., Rankin, J., Sloan, G. & Cheyne, H. 
(2015) Clinical supervision for NMAHPs: a rapid systematic review of research 
evidence. PROSPERO. 
 
Sandelowski, M., Voils, C.I. & Barroso, J. (2006) Defining and Designing Mixed 
Research Synthesis Studies. Res Sch, 13(1), 29. 
 
Smith, V., Devane, D., Begley, C.M. & Clarke, M. (2011) Methodology in conducting a 
systematic review of systematic reviews of healthcare interventions. BMC Med Res 
Methodol, 11(1), 15. 
 
Stapleton , H., Duerden, J. & Kirkham (1998) Evaluation of the impact of the 
supervison of midiwves on professional practice and the quality of midiwfery care. 
Research commissioned by the English National Board, London and UKCC, University 
of Sheffield. 
 
Turner, J. & Hill, A. (2011) Implementing clinical supervision (part 2): using proctor's 
model to structure the implementation of clinical supervision in a ward setting. 
Mental Health Nursing, 31(4), 14-19. 
 
White, E. & Winstanley, J. (2010) A randomised controlled trial of clinical supervision: 
selected findings from a novel Australian attempt to establish the evidence base for 
casual relationships with quality of care and patient outcomes, as an informed 
contribution to mental health nursing practice development. Journal of Research in 
Nursing, 15(2), 151-67. 
 
Whiting, P., Savovic, J., Higgins, J.P., Caldwell, D.M., Reeves, B.C., Shea, B., Davies, P., 
Kleijnen, J., Churchill, R. & group, R. (2016) ROBIS: A new tool to assess risk of bias in 
systematic reviews was developed. J Clin Epidemiol, 69, 225-34. 
 
 
 
 
 FIGURES & TABLES 
 
Figure 1: Systematic map of planned review design 
Figure 2: Results of search and identification and inclusion of studies within 2 syntheses 
 
TABLE 1: WHEN and HOW MUCH clinical supervision 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES 
Table S1: Sample search string 
Table S2: Reviews excluded from synthesis 1, and references to excluded reviews 
Table S3: Characteristics of included reviews relating to clinical supervision 
TABLE S4: Study design and quality / comprehensiveness of description of clinical studies 
within included studies 
TABLE S5: Characteristics of primary studies (n=47), and references to these studies (n=60) 
 
 
 FIGURE 1: Systematic map of planned review design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NMAHPs – Nurses, midwives and allied health professionals 
 
Broad aim:  to inform the identification, 
development and implementation of a 
framework for clinical supervision in 
midwifery by exploring evidence relating 
to clinical supervision for NMAHPs 
Broad map:  research evidence relating to 
clinical supervision for NMAHPs (focus and 
design) 
Synthesis 1:  What is the evidence 
of effectiveness of clinical 
supervision interventions for 
NMAHPs? 
Synthesis 2:  What are the key 
components of clinical supervision 
interventions delivered within 
primary research studies to 
NMAHPs? 
 FIGURE 2: Results of search and identification and inclusion of studies within 2 syntheses 
 
 
 
 
 
Broad map of evidence  
– 86 papers relating to clinical supervision:  
Studies potentially 
meeting selection criteria – 
143 full papers assessed 
Electronic search results – 
2994 titles considered 
Potentially relevant studies 
– 583 abstracts considered 
2411 obviously irrelevant 
results excluded 
440 studies not meeting 
selection criteria 
excluded (with reasons) 
57 studies not meeting 
selection criteria (with 
reasons) 
47 primary studies (reported in 60 papers): 
22 surveys/questionnaires; 5 case reports; 
5 mixed methods; 5 qualitative study; 5 
clinical trial; 4 action research; 1 cohort 
study 
26 reviews 
Synthesis 1: Studies 
evaluating effectiveness 
of clinical supervision – 
10 reviews included 
Synthesis 2: Describing 
clinical supervision 
interventions – 19 studies 
included 
 TABLE 1: WHEN and HOW MUCH clinical supervision 
Study 
Frequency of clinical supervision 
Duration of session 
Group clinical supervision 
(Bailey et al. 
2014) 
"group would meet one evening per 
month" 
90 minutes 
(Bergdahl et al. 
2011) 
13 sessions with approximately 5 weeks 
between the sessions 
2 hours 
(Bowers and 
Bottiglien 2007) 
Monthly 
2 hours 
(Brink et al. 
2012) 
Not stated 
Not stated 
(Brunero and 
Lamont 2012) 
Fortnightly to monthly "dependent on 
the clinical area" 
1 hour 
(Buus et al. 
2013, Gonge 
and Buus 2015) 
Three sessions: introduction (3 hours) 
followed 6 weeks later by  two follow-up 
sessions (lasting one hour each) 
Varied (manual described an intervention 
with three sessions: introductory session 
lasting three hours and, at about six weeks 
interval, two follow-up sessions lasting one 
hour each) 
(Chilvers and 
Ramsey 2009) 
Every 8 weeks 
Six sessions; length of session not stated 
(Cross et al. 
2010) 
Weekly  
15 sessions, 1 hour length over 6 months 
(Dawber 2013) 
Model 1 = alternated between 
fortnightly and monthly sessions. Model 
2 = between fortnightly and monthly, 
based on perceived need.  Model 3 = 
fortnightly. 
Model 1 = 45 minutes. Model 2 = 1 hour. 
Model 3 = 1 hour. 
(O'Connell et al. 
2013) 
Weekly 
1 hour 
(White and 
Winstanley 
2010) 
Monthly 
45-60 minutes 
One-to-one clinical supervision 
(Bambling et al. 
2006) 
After each client (treated within a 
randomised controlled trial) 
Not stated 
(Cross et al. 
2012) 
Fortnightly 
1 hour sessions, delivered over 12 months 
(Girling et al. 
2009) 
Every 3 months 
1 hour 
(Heaven et al. 
2006) 
Four ½ day sessions 
Total of 12 hours, delivered over 4 weeks 
(Turner and Hill 
2011) 
Usually monthly 
Not stated 
 
 
 Table S1 – sample search string 
S1. clinical supervision  
S2. professional supervision  
S3. S1 OR S2  
S4. allied health professional*  
S5. nurs*  
S6. midwife*  
S7. midwives 
S8. arts therapist*  
S9. biomedical scientist*  
S10. chiropodist*  
S11. podiatrist*  
S12. clinical scientist*  
S13. dietician*  
S14. hearing aid dispenser*  
S15. occupational therapist*  
S16. operating department practitioner*  
S17. orthoptist*  
S18. paramedic*  
S19. physiotherapist*  
S20. physical therapist*  
S21. practitioner psychologist*  
S22. prosthetist*  
S23. orthotist*  
S24. radiographer*  
S25. social worker*  
S26. speech and language therapist*  
S27. speech and language pathologist*  
S28. S4 OR S5 OR S6 OR S7 OR S8 OR S9 OR S10 OR S11 OR S12 OR S13 OR S14 OR S15 OR 
S16 OR S17 OR S18 OR S19 OR S20 OR S21 OR S22 OR S23 OR S24 OR S25 OR S26 OR S27 
S29. S3 AND S28  
 
 
 
 
 TABLE S2: Reviews excluded from synthesis 1, and references to excluded reviews 
Reason for exclusion 
Number of 
reviews 
Reviews 
Did not meet criteria to be 
considered a ‘systematic’ 
review 
12 
Bland and Rossen 2005, Calvert 2014, Cleary 
et al. 2010, Cummins 2009, Fone 2006, 
Lennox et al. 2008, MacDonald and Ellis 
2012, McCloughen et al. 2006, Mills et al. 
2005, Ross 2013, Turner and Hill 2011, 
Wright 2012 
Did not meet our pre-stated 
definition of clinical 
supervision 
2 
Duffy 2007, Sirola-Karvinen and Hrykas 2006  
Judged not to be relevant to 
our research questions 
1 
Berggren et al. 2005 
Search end date was before 
2005 
1 
Sloan 2005 
 
Total = 
16/26 
 
 
References to excluded reviews 
 
Berggren, I., Barbosa da Silva, A., & Severinsson E. (2005) Core ethical issues of clinical 
nursing supervision. Nursing and Health Sciences 7(1), 21-28. 
 
Bland, A.R., & Rossen, E.K. (2005) Clinical Supervision of Nurses Working with Patients with 
Borderline Personality Disorder. Issues in Mental Health Nursing 26(5), 507-517. 
 
Calvert, I. (2014) Support for midwives — a model of professional supervision based on the 
recertification programme for midwives in New Zealand. Women and Birth 27(2), 145-150. 
 
Cleary, M., Horsfall, J., & Happell, B. (2010) Establishing clinical supervision in acute mental 
health inpatient units: Acknowledging the challenges. Issues in Mental Health Nursing 31(8), 
525-531. 
 
Cummins, A. (2009) Clinical supervision: The way forward? A review of the literature. Nurse 
Education In Practice 9(3), 215-220. 
 
Duffy, A. (2007) A concept analysis of reflective practice: determining its value to nurses. 
British Journal of Nursing 16(22), 1400-1407. 
 
Fone, S. (2006) Effective supervision for occupational therapists: The development and 
implementation of an information package. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal 53(4), 
277-283. 
 
 Lennox, S., Skinner, J., & Foureur, M. (2008) Mentorship, preceptorship, and clinical 
supervision: three key processes for supporting midwives. New Zealand College of Midwives 
Journal 39, 7-12. 
 
MacDonald, J., & Ellis, P.M. (2012) Supervision in psychiatry: Terra incognita? Current 
Opinion in Psychiatry 25(4), 322-326. 
 
McCloughen, A., O'Brien, L., & Jackson, D. (2006) Positioning mentorship within Australian 
nursing contexts: A literature review. Contemporary Nurse 23(1), 120-134. 
 
Mills, J.E., Francis, K.L., & Bonner, A. (2005) Mentoring, clinical supervision and 
preceptoring: clarifying the conceptual definitions for Australian rural nurses. A review of 
the literature. Rural And Remote Health 5(3), 410-410. 
 
Ross, M. (2013) Implementing clinical supervision in mental health practice. Mental Health 
Practice 17(2), 34-39. 
 
Sirola-Karvinen, P., & Hyrkas, K. (2006) Clinical supervision for nurses in administrative and 
leadership positions: a systematic literature review of the studies focusing on administrative 
clinical supervision. Journal of Nursing Management 14(8), 601-609. 
 
Sloan, G. (2005) Clinical supervision: beginning the supervisory relationship. British Journal 
of Nursing 14(17), 918-923. 
 
Turner, J., & Hill, A. (2011) Implementing clinical supervision (part 1): a review of the 
literature. Mental Health Nursing 31(3), 8-12. 
 
Wright, J. (2012) Clinical supervision: a review of the evidence base. Nursing Standard 27(3), 
44-49. 
 
 
 
 Table S3: Characteristics of included reviews relating to clinical supervision 
Review.  Title. 
Brunero 2008. The effectiveness of clinical supervision in nursing: an evidenced based literature review. 
Stated aim 
The purpose of this paper is to review selected research studies that have focused on evaluating the effectiveness of 
clinical supervision in nursing. 
Included studies 
22 studies - 4 "comparative", 3 "pre-post" evaluation studies; 15 "post-only" evaluation studies 
Data presented 
Description of clinical supervision (including summary of frequency etc), comparison intervention, and statement of 
focus of study.  Outcomes relating to Normative, Formative & Restorative function were stated.  It is unclear whether 
these data are effectiveness data.  No numerical data extracted from studies (other than participant numbers). 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
There is research evidence to suggest that clinical supervision provides peer support and stress relief for nurses 
(restorative function) as well a means of promoting professional accountability (normative function) and skill and 
knowledge development (formative function). 
Judgment of risk of bias 
HIGH 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Butterworth et al. 2007.  Wicked spell or magic bullet? A review of clinical supervision literature 2001-2007. 
Stated aim 
This literature review aims to 
- offer an analysis of themes arising from the literature that have emerged during the last six year period; 
- describe any emerging trends and outcomes that are precipitated through the use of clinical supervision. 
Included studies 
92 studies 
Data presented 
Under themes of: (i) levels of engagement; (ii) the usefulness of clinical supervision as an educational and supportive 
device; (iii) ethical debate, personal and organisational challenges; (iv) effects on patient outcome and staffing 
disposition. 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
Levels of engagement carry a number of confounding factors. They are likely to be determined by organisational 
culture, availability of time, supervisor numbers and a host of other local factors. Few significant conclusions can be 
drawn from the reported data but organisational culture is consistently reported as an important determinant of 
implementation. Clinical supervision as a supportive device has attracted more attention than any other. Most studies 
are self-reported, qualitative in method and suggest that clinical supervision and its processes confer benefit in many 
ways. It is not possible to attribute all these positive effects merely to clinical supervision. However, it is quite proper 
to suggest that structured opportunities to discuss case related practice, personal and educational development are 
vital to nurses, their practice and patient safety. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
HIGH 
  
 
Review.  Title. 
Buus and Gonge 2009. Empirical studies of clinical supervision in psychiatric nursing: A systematic literature review 
and methodological critique. 
Stated aim 
The aim of the following systematic literature review was to summarize and critically evaluate all empirical studies of 
clinical supervision in psychiatric nursing and to identify and discuss issues that would benefit from additional 
research in the future. 
Included studies 
34 papers, reported from 25 empirical projects. These were 9 "effect" studies, 12 "survey" studies, 6 "interview" 
studies, 7 "case studies" 
Data presented 
Aim, design, methods/instruments, settings & participants, analyses, description of supervision, result, limitations. 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
The reported findings from the four projects designed to measure the effect of clinical supervision did not provide 
convincing empirical evidence to support the assumption that clinical supervision in psychiatric nursing settings had 
an effect on the nurses and/or the patients in their care. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
LOW 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Dawson et al. 2013. Clinical Supervision for Allied Health Professionals: A Systematic Review. 
Stated aim 
A current systematic review of the evidence for clinical supervision for AHPs was conducted to answer the review 
questions: what is clinical supervision?, why do AHPs have clinical supervision?, and what are the processes and 
outcomes of clinical supervision? Due to the paucity of allied health clinical supervision literature, the review needed 
to consider empirical studies from other health professional groups. 
Included studies 
33 papers; 8 systematic reviews, 2 comparison & quasi-experimental studies; 12 cross-sectional studies; 9 interview 
studies 
Data presented 
Table summarising systematic reviews.  Tables of studies - aim, setting & participants, results, limitations 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
The current review identified a significant gap in clinical supervision research for AHPs. Those studies that included 
AHPs did so in small numbers or had inadequately developed research methods.  The current review was not able to 
identify a common definition of clinical supervision, and many of the studies did not offer a definition of clinical 
supervision.  There is, however, much less clarity about how clinical supervision should be provided as there are 
conflicting positions on the inclusion of normative and restorative functions.3,9 The form of clinical supervision varied 
across the studies and included 1:1, group, or peer supervision. The 1:1 and group forms were most commonly 
reported, however there was no evidence to suggest that one clinical supervision form was superior. The scope of 
clinical supervision also varied, with sessions occurring fortnightly to monthly, lasting from 45 minutes up to 2 hours; 
again there was no evidence for the best approach.  
 Judgment of risk of bias 
LOW 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Dilworth et al. 2013. Finding a way forward: A literature review on the current debates around clinical supervision. 
Stated aim 
The purpose of the review was to scope the current field, identify the main debates and existing evidence around 
clinical supervision with a view to develop an understanding of current practices that will inform a larger project 
(Dixon-Woods, Cavers, et al., 2006; Mays, Pope, & Popay, 2005). 
Included studies 
59 studies 
Data presented 
Presents a "critical interpretive approach" to the clinical supervision literature. 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
There are a plethora of clinical supervision models within the nursing literature but few of them are well defined 
(Buus and Gonge, 2009; Fowler, 1996; Sloan, White, and Coit, 2000). Proctor’s model is becoming widely utilised 
within the nursing research. Despite its increasing popularity, there is criticism that perhaps this model is too 
imprecise, failing to identify interventions appropriate to each domain (Sloan et al., 2000). The lack of clarity about 
role and structure has led to a large body of evidence that is diffuse. As a result it lacks strength in the claims it makes 
for clinical supervision.   All of the reviews appear to reach a similar conclusion: the evidence that clinical supervision 
is effective is not strong and there is a need to address methodological limitations in order to improve the strength of 
the evidence. Despite methodological limitations, and resistance from health professionals and organisations there is 
an argument for positive changes in work satisfaction, decreases stress, burnout nurses wellbeing and effective 
clinical supervision (Dawson, Phillips, and Leggat, 2012; Edwards et al., 2006; Hyrkäs et al., 2006; Koivu, Saarinen, and 
Hyrkas, 2012; Severinsson and Kamaker, 1999; Wallbank and Hatton, 2011). There is also some evidence that clinical 
supervision can improve patient and staff satisfaction (White and Winstanley, 2010); enhance education, expand 
scope of practice (Mannix et al., 2006; Moorey et al., 2009) and provide a forum for critical reflective practice (Cleary 
and Freeman, 2005; Cross et al., 2010; Hyrkäs et al., 2002; Kilcullen, 2007). 
Judgment of risk of bias 
LOW 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Ducat and Kumar 2015.  A systematic review of professional supervision experiences and effects of allied health 
practitioners working in non-metropolitan health care settings 
Stated aim 
The aim of this comprehensive systematic review was to synthesize the current evidence base for both the experience 
and effects of professional supervision for allied health professionals working in non-metropolitan health settings. 
Specifically, the review questions were: 
1. What are the experiences of professional supervision for allied health professionals working in non-metropolitan 
settings? 
 2. What are the effects of professional supervision on allied health practitioner practice and client outcomes in non-
metropolitan locations? 
Included studies 
5 studies included - 2 qual studies; 2 cross-sectional quant; 1 pre-post quant 
Data presented 
Design, participants, sample, key findings, limitations, quality appraisal 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
Considering the large pool of studies retrieved for further investigation, few of these met inclusion criteria 
demonstrating the paucity of primary research in this area. Increased training, policies, and implementation 
frameworks to ensure the definition and functions of supervision are agreed upon across the allied health disciplines 
in non-metropolitan areas is needed. Furthermore, systematic evaluation of supervision implementation in non-
metropolitan settings, investigation of the experience and effects of distance based supervision (versus face-to-face), 
and increased rigor in research studies investigating non-metropolitan allied health profession supervision is needed. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
LOW 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Fitzpatrick et al. 2012. Quality allied health clinical supervision policy in Australia: a literature review. 
Stated aim 
Not stated 
Included studies 
n=25 
Data presented 
Narrative 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
By gaining an understanding of what high quality clinical supervision is and how it is best put into practice, it is 
anticipated that this will form the first step in developing an 
understandable and useful universal supervision policy for all allied health professionals. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
HIGH 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Francke and de Graaff 2012. The effects of group supervision of nurses: A systematic literature review 
Stated aim 
Review questions 
1. What are the effects of group supervision of nurses on nurse and patient outcomes?  
2. What are the characteristics of the group supervision programmes in relevant studies? 
3. What are the methodological quality and characteristics of relevant studies? 
Included studies 
17 studies: 8 controlled studies, 9 pre-post test design studies (no RCTs) 
Data presented 
characteristics of group supervision (including topics discussed, process, period & duration); study quality, sample, 
variables/ instruments, analysis, results (narrative) 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
All studies indicated that group supervision produced to a greater or lesser extent certain positive effects. However, 
the outcome variables varied and not all studies pointed in the same direction. For instance, some publications 
 indicated that emotional exhaustion decreased in supervised nurses (e.g. Butterworth et al., 1998, 1999), whilst 
others did not find significant effects on burnout or emotional exhaustion at all (Berg et al., 1994; Hallberg, 1994; 
Paulsson et al., 1996).   At the moment the nursing profession has more than two decades profound experiences with 
clinical group supervision for nurses. However, this systematic review provides the same overall conclusion as two 
reviews performed at the end of the previous century (Hyrkas et al., 1999; Williamson and Dodds, 1999), namely that 
the empirical evidence is still limited. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
LOW 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Kleiser and Cox 2008. The integration of clinical and managerial supervision: a critical literature review.  
Stated aim 
The aim of this study was to review and evaluate the existing evidence in order to establish if the collaboration of 
clinical and managerial supervision can be sustained effectively. If so, then the government’s new appraisal system 
(KSF, DH 2004) may offer structure and guidance within the process. The research question, therefore, was ‘Should 
supervision be used as a tool for monitoring competency in clinical practice? 
Included studies 
25 studies; 16 with SIGN level of evidence of 3 or more; 9 were 'expert opinion' 
Data presented 
SIGN level/grade of evidence and authors conclusions 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
This review did not find any evidence to support the co-alliance of supervision and appraisal. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
HIGH 
 
 
Review.  Title. 
Pearce et al. 2013. Content of clinical supervision sessions for nurses and allied health professionals: A systematic 
review.  
Stated aim 
The aim of this systematic review was to evaluate the current evidence regarding the content of clinical supervision 
for nursing and allied health professionals. 
Included studies 
n=20: 9 cross-sectional studies; 2 literature reviews; 9 opinion pieces 
Data presented 
Aim, participants & intervention, data collection, themes identified, limitations 
Conclusions (quote from 
paper) 
The findings of this systematic review demonstrated that there is scarce current evidence for what content is included 
in clinical supervision for health professionals. None of the published articles included in this review explicitly 
addressed the question of content of clinical supervision and there were methodological issues with many of the 
studies.   This systematic review extrapolated some recurring themes related to the content of clinical supervision for 
the nursing, allied health and medical professions from the current literature. 
Judgment of risk of bias 
HIGH 
 TABLE S4: Study design and quality / comprehensiveness of description of clinical supervision within included studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type of study design 
Traffic light rating of 
quality / 
comprehensiveness of 
description of clinical 
supervision 
 
 
Number of studies 
GREEN: Comprehensive 
description of clinical 
supervision intervention, 
with few missing data.  
Details ought to be 
sufficient to facilitate 
replication. 
AMBER: Details of some 
areas of the clinical 
supervision intervention 
well reported, but absent 
for some areas.  Details 
would not be sufficient to 
facilitate replication, but 
could be integrated into 
an intervention with 
similar characteristics. 
RED: Few details provided 
and/or inadequate 
description of the clinical 
supervision intervention.  
Details would not be 
sufficient to facilitate 
replication of the 
intervention. 
Action research 
4 
0 
1 
3 
Case report or study 
5 
0 
3 
2 
Cohort study 
1 
0 
1 
0 
Mixed methods 
5 
0 
3 
2 
Qualitative study 
5 
0 
2 
3 
Clinical trial 
5 
1 
3 
1 
Survey/questionnaire 
22 
2 
3 
18 
TOTAL 
47 
3 
16 
29 
 TABLE S5: Characteristics of primary studies (n=47), and references to these studies (n=60) 
Study references  
 
Country 
of study 
Study aims.  
Study design.  
TRAFFIC LIGHT$ 
Abbott et al. 2006*  
 
UK 
Report of development and evaluation of mandatory clinical supervision for all nursing staff at a 
London primary care trust. 
Case report / study.  
RED 
Alleyne and Jumaa 
2007*  
 
UK 
"to identify, create and evaluate effective processes for collaborative working so that the nurses  
capacity for clinical decision-making could be improved" 
Action research.  
RED 
Ayres et al. 2014*  
 
UK 
To explore "the quality and effectiveness of the clinical supervision received by occupational 
therapists working for the West London Mental Health Trust" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Bailey et al. 2014*  
 
Australia 
"to explore the impact of a rurally situated peer consultation group on its participants" 
Survey / questionnaire. 
AMBER 
Bambling et al. 
2006*  
Australia 
"evaluated the impact of clinical supervision on client working alliance and symptom reduction in 
the brief treatment of major depression" 
RCT.  
AMBER 
Bergdahl et al. 
2011*  
Sweden 
"action research process aimed at enhancing nurses’ abilities to reflect on how to create good 
caring relationships with patients in advanced home care. Another aim was to examine the 
usefulness of an emerging theory, derived from results from a previous study. The request for this 
project to take place came from an advanced home care unit which had received complaints 
concerning patients in the palliative phase. The action performed was clinical supervision, 
structured around abilities that nurses need in order to create good caring relationships". 
Action research.  
AMBER 
Best et al. 2014*  
 
Australia 
"assessed the relationship between clinical supervision ratings and overall satisfaction at work, 
hypothesizing that workers’ ratings of clinical supervision would be predictive of their overall 
workplace satisfaction." 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Boland et al. 2010*  Australia 
"examined the methods and frequency of professional supervision in Queensland’s work 
rehabilitation sector" 
Mixed methods.  
RED 
Bowers and 
Bottiglien 2007 *  
UK 
To examine how "the seven community staff nurses working in the teams established a monthly 
two-hour forum to support each other’s development through accessing group clinical supervision 
and educational sessions. The subsequent audit measuring how participants felt the forum had 
affected their clinical practice is explored" 
Case report / study.  
AMBER 
Brink et al. 2012*  
Sweden 
"to evaluate the experience of group supervision and to explore its impact on the participants’ 
personal and professional development" 
Qualitative.  
AMBER 
Brunero & Lamont 
2012*  
Australia 
"To review the implementation of clinical supervision across several different nursing specialities" 
Survey / questionnaire. 
GREEN 
Buus et al., 2013 *  Denmark "To explain the development, implementation, and adjustment of the manual for the intervention, Survey / questionnaire. 
 describe the content and structure of the final educational intervention, and reflect on six key-
issues in relation to implementing the manual" 
GREEN 
Carney 2005* 
UK 
"To explore whether qualified nursing staff in the hospital’s five clinical divisions were satisfied 
with the clinical supervision they received. Also, the survey examined whether supervision was of 
good quality, was suitable for different specialist environments and if it affected motivation, skills, 
confidence and stress levels. The survey also explored if there was a difference between D or E-
grade nurses and nurses who are F grade and above regarding their perception of clinical 
supervision." 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Cerinus 2005*  
UK 
"To investigate the nature of clinical supervision" 
Action research. 
RED 
Chilvers and 
Ramsey 2009* 
UK 
To describe "the methods employed to initiate a reflective clinical supervision programme using a 
group model" 
Case report / study.  
AMBER 
Cookson et al. 
2014*  
UK 
 "Determine whether the provision of clinical supervision for nurses and AHPs in mental health 
services meets the standards recommended”. 
 “Identify whether the specific recommendations in the guideline are being adhered to”.  
 “Identify differences in adherence to guideline recommendations between mental health 
nurses and AHPs, and between those working in community and inpatient settings" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Cox and Araoz 
2009*  
UK 
"to explore the experience of supervision by the therapists within the trial and to consider 
whether: 1) the experience of supervision differed between the therapist groups and 2) previous 
experience of supervision was similar or different to that within the trial" 
Survey / questionnaire. 
RED 
Cross et al. 2010*  
 
Australia 
"To implement and evaluate group clinical supervision (clinical supervision) for Associate Nurse 
Unit Managers (ANUMs) in a busy medical ward of a tertiary teaching hospital" 
Qualitative.  
AMBER 
Cross et al. 2012*  
 
Australia 
" report clinical supervision for two Outreach Nurses as they adapted to their new, largely 
autonomous role in an Australian tertiary hospital" 
Case report / study.  
AMBER 
Cutcliffe and 
Hrykas 2006*  
USA 
"to describe multidisciplinary attitudes towards/about clinical supervision" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Davis and Burke 
2012*  
UK 
"evaluative audit assessing the effectiveness of clinical supervision for ward managers" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Dawber 2013*  
Australia 
To examined ways of measuring the effect and effectiveness of reflective practice group.. 
Mixed methods.  
AMBER 
Dawson et al. 
2012* 
Dawson et al. 2013  
Australia 
"Explored current clinical supervision effectiveness for allied health professionals (AHPs) at a 
regional health service from a supervisee perspective and identified improvements" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Deery 2005*  
UK 
"To explore community midwives’ views and experiences of their support needs in clinical 
practice, and then to identify how they would wish to receive such support. Further objectives 
Action research.  
RED 
 were to redress the imbalance identified by planning and facilitating a model of clinical supervision 
devised by the participating midwives." 
Edwards et al. 
2006*  
Edwards et al. 
2005  
UK 
"To establish the degree to which clinical supervision might influence levels of reported burnout in 
community mental health nurses.” 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Evans and 
Marcroft 2015*  
UK 
To develop an organisation-wide clinical supervision system. 
Survey / questionnaire. 
AMBER 
Girling et al. 2009* UK 
To demonstrate success of project; to discover the effect of practice supervision on staff & on 
care; to audit compliance with the practice supervision policy. 
Survey / questionnaire. 
AMBER 
Gonge and Buus 
2015*  
Denmark "To test the effects of a meta-supervision intervention in terms of participation, effectiveness and 
benefits of clinical supervision of psychiatric nursing staff" 
RCT.  
GREEN 
Hall and Cox 2009*  UK 
"to investigate the experiences of physiotherapists engaged in clinical supervision..and to indicate 
whether physiotherapists understood the purpose of clinical supervision and whether the term 
affected their understanding and use of the process" 
Qualitative.  
RED 
Heaven et al. 
2006*  
UK 
"Communication skills learned in the training environment are not always transferred back into 
the clinical setting. Study investigated the potential of clinical supervision in enhancing the 
transfer process". Hypothesis:  "That nurses who have received clinical supervision after training 
will show more evidence of transfer of newly acquired communication skills to real patient 
encounters, than those who have not." 
RCT.  
AMBER 
Herbert and Trusty 
2006*  
 
USA 
"To gain a more complete understanding of current practices within the public vocational 
rehabilitation system" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Jarrett and Barlow 
2014*  
UK 
"aimed to explore the perceptions of home visitors of fortnightly clinical supervision sessions in 
enabling them to work effectively with families with complex needs" 
Mixed methods.  
RED 
Kenny and Allenby 
2013*  
Australia 
"The aim of the study was to develop a clinical supervision programme to support nurses in rural 
hospitals and to explore their experiences in the programme." 
Qualitative.  
RED 
Koivu et al. 2012*  
Finland 
"The aims of this study were (1) to identify which nurses benefitted most from clinical supervision 
and (2) to explore whether they were healthier and more satisfied with their work than their peers 
who did not attend clinical supervision." 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Kuipers et al. 
2013*  
Australia 
Do structured arrangements for multidisciplinary peer group supervision make a difference for 
allied health professional outcomes? 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Livni et al. 2012* 
UK 
"To assess how supervision structure and process affect supervision outcomes for the supervisee".    
"It was hypothesized that: (1) there would be significant benefits of AOD staff involvement in 
individual or group based supervision in terms of increases in wellbeing and job satisfaction and 
Cohort study.  
AMBER 
 reductions in burnout compared to levels pre supervision; (2) time spent in supervision would 
correlate positively with wellbeing, job satisfaction, perceived supervisory alliance, perceived 
supervision effectiveness, and negatively with burnout; (3) supervisory alliance (and cohesion in 
group supervision) would correlate positively with wellbeing, job satisfaction and perceived 
supervision effectiveness, and negatively with burnout; (4) alliance in individual supervision would 
be a stronger predictor of supervision outcomes than alliance in group supervision, but group 
cohesion would have similar predictive capacity in group supervision, and (5) evaluations of 
perceived effectiveness of individual supervision would be better than evaluations of group 
supervision" 
Long et al. 2014* 
UK 
"a survey of registered nurses and health care assistants within a secure women’s service was 
undertaken to examine the: (1) Perceived benefits of clinical supervision; (2) Best practice 
elements of clinical supervision including: partnership and respect for the use of a supervision 
contract; use of Proctor’s model; the availability of supervision; opportunities to reflect on work 
related issues and training in supervision and (3) Practical aspects of clinical supervision including 
meeting standards, meeting learning needs, issues in supervision and how to improve the practice 
of clinical supervision" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Lynch and Happell 
2008a*  
Lynch and Happell 
2008b 
Lynch and Happell 
2008c 
Lynch et al. 2008  
Australia 
"Part 1. to explore and evaluate ways of implementing clinical supervision as undertaken in a rural 
health-care organization; Part 2 describes stages 3–5, including: the strategic plan; implementing 
the strategic plan; and reflecting on the past and moving forward. Part 3 "presents a new model of 
implementation with interrelated and dynamic stages" 
Qualitative.  
RED 
McKenna et al. 
2010*  
 
New 
Zealand 
Aimed to generate information on the number of nurses receiving professional supervision, the 
number of trained supervisors and their credentials, and the models of professional supervision 
currently being used. The research also investigated ways of improving professional supervision, 
the place of service user and cultural input into the supervision programmes, and the plausibility 
of developing a standardised national approach for professional supervision and the training of 
supervisors." 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
Milne 2010* 
UK 
to evaluate participants’ reactions to the supervisor training workshop, and to assess whether 
consultancy added anything to the provision of the manual alone 
RCT.  
RED 
O'Connell et al. 
2011* 
Australia 
"study explored the feasibility of implementing and evaluating ward-based team clinical 
supervision for general nurses" 
Mixed methods.  
AMBER 
Rice et al. 2007*  
Northern 
Ireland 
"to explore ways to make clinical supervision available to all mental health nurses and in doing so 
to evaluate and improve their contribution to patient care" 
Survey / questionnaire.  
RED 
 Taylor et al. 2009* Scotland 
"describes how a mental health team in a remote rural landscape benefited from restructuring its 
clinical supervision team." 
Case report / study.  
RED 
Turner and Hill 
2011a*  
Hill and Turner 
2011 
Turner and Hill 
2011b  
UK 
"1. To evaluate the implementation of Proctor’s (1987) model of clinical supervision. 2. To test a 
number of hypotheses based on this: a. That clinical supervision is valued as a process in dealing 
with Proctor’s three areas of Formative, Normative and Restorative. b. That Restorative aspects 
may be the primary need of acute mental health nurses from clinical supervision.  That using 
documentation of the clinical supervision sessions facilitates continuity of clinical supervision" 
Mixed methods. AMBER 
Turner et al. 2005*  UK 
"the purpose of this paper is to demonstrate how clinical supervision can be easily facilitated and 
discuss the development journey…" 
Survey / questionnaire. 
RED 
White & 
Winstanley 2010a* 
White & 
Winstanley 2009a 
White & 
Winstanley 2009b 
White & 
Winstanley 2009c 
White & 
Winstanley 2010b 
White & 
Winstanley 2010c 
White & 
Winstanley 2010d  
Australia 
"to conduct a randomised controlled trial (RCT) of clinical supervision provided to a sample of 
nurses working in mental health settings." 
RCT.  
AMBER 
White 2008*  
 
Australia 
“…to examine existing models of [child protection] supervision and then establish an alternative, 
more effective model…” 
Survey / questionnaire. 
RED 
* Primary study reference; $ - judgement of comprehensiveness of reporting of clinical supervision intervention; RCT – randomised controlled trial 
 References to primary studies (n=60) 
Abbott, S., Dawson, L., Hutt, J., Johnson, B., & Sealy A. (2006) Introducing clinical supervision 
for community-based nurses. British Journal Of Community Nursing 11(8), 346-348. 
Alleyne, J. & Jumaa, M.O. (2007) Building the capacity for evidence-based clinical nursing 
leadership: The role of executive co-coaching and group clinical supervision for quality 
patient services. Journal of Nursing Management 15(2), 230-243. 
Ayres, J., Watkeys, F., & Carthy, J. (2014) Quality and effectiveness of clinical supervision: 
evaluation of an occupational therapy service. British Journal of Occupational Therapy 77(9), 
447–450. 
Bailey, R., Bell, K., Kalle, W. & Pawar, M. (2014) Restoring Meaning to Supervision Through a 
Peer Consultation Group in Rural Australia. Journal of Social Work Practice 28(4), 479-495. 
Bambling, M., King, R., Raue, P., Schweitzer, R., & Lambert, W. (2006) Clinical supervision: Its 
influence on client-rated working alliance and client symptom reduction in the brief 
treatment of major depression. Psychotherapy Research 16, 317-331. 
Bergdahl, E., Benzein, E., Ternestedt, B-M., & Andershed, B. (2011) Development of nurses' 
abilities to reflect on how to create good caring relationships with patients in palliative care: 
an action research approach. Nursing Inquiry 18(2), 111-12. 
Best, D., White E., Cameron, J., Guthrie, A., Hunter, B., Hall, K., Leicester, S. & Lubman, D.I. 
(2014) A model for predicting clinician satisfaction with clinical supervision. Alcoholism 
Treatment Quarterly 32(1), 67-78. 
Boland, N., Strong, J., & Gibson, L. (2010) Professional supervision in the work rehabilitation 
arena in one Australian State. Work: Journal of Prevention, Assessment & Rehabilitation 
37(2), 155-165. 
Bowers, B., & Bottiglien, T. (2007) The value of a staff nurse forum in meeting the local 
needs of a district nursing service. Primary Health Care 17(8), 34-38. 
Brink, P., Bäck-Pettersson, S. & Sernert, N. (2012) Group supervision as a means of 
developing professional competence within pre-hospital care. International Emergency 
Nursing 20(2),76-82. 
Brunero, S. & Lamont, S. (2012) The process, logistics and challenges of implementing 
clinical supervision in a generalist tertiary referral hospital. Scandinavian Journal of Caring 
Sciences 26(1), 186-193. 
Buus N., Cassedy P., & Gonge H. (2013) Developing a manual for strengthening mental 
health nurses' clinical supervision. Issues in Mental Health Nursing 34, 344-349. 
 Carney, S. (2005) Clinical supervision in a challenging behaviour unit. Nursing Times 101(47), 
32-34. 
Cerinus, M. (2005) The role of relationships in effective clinical supervision. Nursing Times 
101(14), 34-37. 
Chilvers, R. & Ramsey, S. (2009) Implementing a clinical supervision programme for nurses 
in a hospice setting. International Journal Of Palliative Nursing 15(12), 615-619. 
Cookson, J., Sloan, G., Dafters, R. & Jahoda, A. (2014) Provision of clinical supervision for 
staff working in mental health services. Mental Health Practice 17(7), 29-34. 
Cox, D.L. & Araoz, G. (2009) The experience of therapy supervision within a UK multi-centre 
randomized controlled trial. Learning in Health and Social Care 8(4), 301-314. 
Cross, W., Moore, A. & Ockerby, S. (2010) Clinical supervision of general nurses in a busy 
medical ward of a teaching hospital. Contemporary Nurse 35(2), 245-253. 
Cross, W.M., Moore, A.G., Sampson, T., Kitch, C. & Ockerby, C. (2012) Implementing clinical 
supervision for ICU Outreach Nurses: a case study of their journey.  Australian Critical Care 
25(4), 263-270. 
Cutcliffe, J.R. & Hyrkas, K. (2006) Multidisciplinary attitudinal positions regarding clinical 
supervision: a cross-sectional study. Journal of nursing management 14(8), 617-627. 
Davis, C. & Burke, L. (2012) The effectiveness of clinical supervision for a group of ward 
managers based in a district general hospital: An evaluative study. Journal of Nursing 
Management 20(6), 782-793. 
Dawber, C. (2013) Reflective practice groups for nurses: A consultation liaison psychiatry 
nursing initiative: Reflective practice groups for nurses: A consultation liaison psychiatry 
nursing initiative: Part 2 - the evaluation. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing 
22(3), 241-248. 
Dawson, M., Phillips, B. & Leggat, S.G. (2012) Effective clinical supervision for regional allied 
health professionals - the supervisee's perspective. Australian Health Review 36(1), 92-97. 
Dawson, M., Phillips, B., & Leggat, S.G. (2013) Effective clinical supervision for regional allied 
health professionals: the supervisor's perspective. Australian Health Review 37(2), 262-267. 
Deery, R. (2005) An action-research study exploring midwives' support needs and the affect 
of group clinical supervision. Midwifery 21(2), 161-176. 
Edwards, D., Cooper, L., Burnard, P., Hanningan, B., Adams, J., Fothergill, A. & Coyle, D. 
(2005) Factors influencing the effectiveness of clinical supervision. Journal of psychiatric and 
mental health nursing 12(4), 405-414. 
 Edwards, D., Burnard, P., Hannigan, B., Cooper, L., Adams, J., Juggessur, T., Forthergil, A. & 
Coyle, D. (2006) Clinical supervision and burnout: the influence of clinical supervision for 
community mental health nurses. Journal of Clinical Nursing 15(8), 1007-1015. 
Evans, C. & Marcroft, E. (2015) Clinical supervision in a community setting. Nursing Times 
111(22), 16-18. 
Girling, A., Leese, C. & Maynard, L. (2009) How clinical supervision can improve hospice care 
for children. Nursing Management 16(7), 20-23. 
Gonge, H. & Buus, N. (2015) Is it possible to strengthen psychiatric nursing staff's clinical 
supervision? RCT of a meta‐supervision intervention. Journal of Advanced Nursing 71(4), 
909-921. 
Hall, T. & Cox, D.  (2009) Clinical supervision: An appropriate term for physiotherapists? 
Learning in Health and Social Care 8(4):282-291. 
Heaven, C., Clegg, J. & Maguire, P. (2006) Transfer of communication skills training from 
workshop to workplace: the impact of clinical supervision. Patient education and counseling  
60, 313-325. 
Herbert, J.T. & Trusty, J. (2006) Clinical supervision practices and satisfaction within the 
public vocational rehabilitation program. Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin 49(2), 66. 
Hill, A. & Turner, J. (2011) Implementing clinical supervision (part 3): an evaluation of a 
clinical supervisor's recovery-based resource and support package. Mental Health Nursing 
31(5), 16-20. 
Jarrett, P & Barlow, J. (2014) Clinical supervision in the provision of intensive home visiting 
by health visitors. Community Practitioner 87(2), 32-36. 
Kenny, A. & Allenby, A. (2013) Implementing clinical supervision for Australian rural nurses. 
Nurse Education In Practice 13(3),165-169. 
Koivu, A., Saarinen, P.I. & Hyrkas, K. (2012) Who benefits from clinical supervision and how? 
The association between clinical supervision and the work‐related well‐being of female 
hospital nurses. Journal of Clinical Nursing 21(17-18), 2567-2578. 
Kuipers P., Pager S., Bell K., Hall F. & Kendall M. (2013) Do structured arrangements for 
multidisciplinary peer group supervision make a difference for allied health professional 
outcomes? Journal Of Multidisciplinary Healthcare 6, 391-397. 
Livni, D., Crowe, T.P. & Gonsalvez, C.J. (2012) Effects of supervision modality and intensity 
on alliance and outcomes for the supervisee. Rehabilitation Psychology 57, 178-186. 
 Long, C.G., Harding, S., Payne, K. & Collins, L. (2014) Nursing and health‐care assistant 
experience of supervision in a medium secure psychiatric service for women: Implications 
for service development. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 21(2),154-162. 
Lynch, L., Happell B., Sharrock, J. & Cross, W. (2008) Implementing clinical supervision for 
psychiatric nurses - the importance of education. International Journal of Psychiatric Nursing 
Research 14(1), 1785-1796. 
Lynch, L. & Happell, B. (2008a) Implementing clinical supervision: Part 1: laying the ground 
work. International Journal Of Mental Health Nursing 17(1), 57-64. 
Lynch, L. & Happell, B. (2008b) Implementation of clinical supervision in action: part 3: the 
development of a model. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing 17(1),73-82. 
Lynch, L. & Happell, B. (2008c) Implementation of clinical supervision in action: Part 2: 
Implementation and beyond. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing 17(1), 65-72. 
McKenna, B., Thom, K., Howard, F. & Williams, V. (2010) In search of a national approach to 
professional supervision for mental health and addiction nurses: The New Zealand 
experience. Contemporary Nurse 34(2), 267-276. 
Milne, D. (2010) Can we enhance the training of clinical supervisors? A national pilot study 
of an evidence-based approach. Clinical psychology & psychotherapy 17, 321-328. 
O'Connell, B., Ockerby, C.M., Johnson, S., Smenda, H. & Bucknall, T.K. (2013) Team clinical 
supervision in acute hospital wards: a feasibility study. Western Journal Of Nursing Research 
35(3), 330-347. 
Rice, F., Cullen, P., McKenna, H., Kelly, B., Keeney, S. & Richey, R. (2007) Clinical supervision 
for mental health nurses in Northern Ireland: Formulating best practice guidelines. Journal 
of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 14(5), 516-521. 
Taylor, E., Austin K. & Gibb J. (2009) Clinical supervision in a remote island setting. Mental 
Health Practice 12(10), 16-19. 
Turner, J. & Hill, A. (2011b) Implementing clinical supervision (part 1): a review of the 
literature. Mental Health Nursing 31(3), 8-12. 
Turner, J. & Hill, A. (2011a) Implementing clinical supervision (part 2): using proctor's model 
to structure the implementation of clinical supervision in a ward setting. Mental Health 
Nursing 31(4), 14-19. 
Turner, K., Laut, S., Kempster, J., Nolan, S., Ross, E. & Edmonds, E. (2005) Group clinical 
supervision: supporting neurology clinical nurse specialists in practice. Journal of Community 
Nursing 19(9), 4. 
 White, E. & Winstanley, J. (2010) A randomised controlled trial of clinical supervision: 
selected findings from a novel Australian attempt to establish the evidence base for casual 
relationships with quality of care and patient outcomes, as an informed contriobution to 
mental health nursing practice development. Journal of Research in Nursing 15(2), 151-167. 
White, E. & Winstanley, J (2009b) Clinical supervision for nurses working in mental health 
settings in Queensland, Australia: A randomised controlled trial in progress and emergent 
challenges [[ACTRN12611000726954]]. Journal of research in nursing 14, 263-276. 
White, E. & Winstanley, J. (2009d) Clinical supervision: outsider reports of a research-driven 
implementation programme in Queensland, Australia [ACTRN12611000726954]. Journal of 
nursing management  18, 689-696. 
White, E. & Winstanley, J. (2010c) Does clinical supervision lead to better patient outcomes 
in mental health nursing? Nursing times 106, 16-18. 
White, E. & Winstanley, J. (2009a) Implementation of Clinical Supervision: educational 
preparation and subsequent diary accounts of the practicalities involved, from an Australian 
mental health [corrected] nursing innovation. Journal of psychiatric and mental health 
nursing 16, 895-903. 
White, E. & Winstanley, J. (2010b) Implementation of clinical supervision: educational 
preparation and subsequent diary accounts of the practicalities involved, from an Australian 
mental health nursing innovation. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 
2009;16:895-903. Journal of Psychiatric & Mental Health Nursing 17(1), 96-96. 
White, E,. & Winstanley, J. (2009c)  Quality of care and patient outcomes: a randomised 
controlled trial of Clinical Supervision in Queensland, Australia. Final Report Brisbane, 
Australia:Queensland Treasury/Golden Casket Foundation [available from Osman Consulting 
Pty Ltd; osmanconsulting@ozemail,com.au] [ACTRN12611000726954]. 
White, J. (2008) A model of child protection supervision for school health practitioners. 
Community Practitioner 81(5), 23-27. 
 
 
