 European Respiratory Society
guidelines for the management
of adult bronchiectasis
Eva Polverino1, Pieter C. Goeminne2,3, Melissa J. McDonnell4,5,6,
Stefano Aliberti
7, Sara E. Marshall8, Michael R. Loebinger9,
Marlene Murris10, Rafael Cantón11, Antoni Torres12, Katerina Dimakou13,
Anthony De Soyza14,15, Adam T. Hill16, Charles S. Haworth17,
Montserrat Vendrell18, Felix C. Ringshausen19, Dragan Subotic20,
Robert Wilson9, Jordi Vilaró21, Bjorn Stallberg22, Tobias Welte19,
Gernot Rohde23, Francesco Blasi7, Stuart Elborn9,24, Marta Almagro25,
Alan Timothy25, Thomas Ruddy25, Thomy Tonia26, David Rigau27 and
James D. Chalmers28
@ERSpublications
The publication of the first ERS guidelines for bronchiectasis http://ow.ly/wQSO30dU0nE
Cite this article as: Polverino E, Goeminne PC, McDonnell MJ, et al. European Respiratory Society
guidelines for the management of adult bronchiectasis. Eur Respir J 2017; 50: 1700629 [https://doi.org/
10.1183/13993003.00629-2017].
ABSTRACT
Bronchiectasis in adults is a chronic disorder associated with poor quality of life and
frequent exacerbations in many patients. There have been no previous international guidelines.
The European Respiratory Society guidelines for the management of adult bronchiectasis describe the
appropriate investigation and treatment strategies determined by a systematic review of the literature.
A multidisciplinary group representing respiratory medicine, microbiology, physiotherapy, thoracic
surgery, primary care, methodology and patients considered the most relevant clinical questions (for both
clinicians and patients) related to management of bronchiectasis. Nine key clinical questions were
generated and a systematic review was conducted to identify published systematic reviews, randomised
clinical trials and observational studies that answered these questions. We used the GRADE approach to
define the quality of the evidence and the level of recommendations. The resulting guideline addresses the
investigation of underlying causes of bronchiectasis, treatment of exacerbations, pathogen eradication, long
term antibiotic treatment, anti-inflammatories, mucoactive drugs, bronchodilators, surgical treatment and
respiratory physiotherapy.
These recommendations can be used to benchmark quality of care for people with bronchiectasis across
Europe and to improve outcomes.
This article has supplementary material available from erj.ersjournals.com
Received: March 26 2017 | Accepted after revision: July 10 2017
The guidelines published by the European Respiratory Society (ERS) incorporate data obtained from a comprehensive
and systematic literature review of the most recent studies available at the time. Health professionals are encouraged to
take the guidelines into account in their clinical practice. However, the recommendations issued by this guideline may
not be appropriate for use in all situations. It is the individual responsibility of health professionals to consult other
sources of relevant information, to make appropriate and accurate decisions in consideration of each patient’s health
condition and in consultation with that patient and the patient’s caregiver where appropriate and/or necessary, and to
verify rules and regulations applicable to drugs and devices at the time of prescription.
This document was endorsed by the ERS Executive Committee and by the European Society of Clinical Microbiology
and Infectious Disease in August 2017.
Copyright ©ERS 2017
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
Eur Respir J 2017; 50: 1700629
TASK FORCE REPORT
ERS GUIDELINES
 Affiliations: 1Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron (HUVH), Institut de Recerca Vall
d’Hebron (VHIR); Fundación Clínic, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERES
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 2Dept of Respiratory Medicine, AZ Nikolaas, Sint-Niklaas, Belgium. 3Dept of
Respiratory Medicine, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
4Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Galway University
Hospitals, Galway, Ireland. 5Lung Biology Group, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. 6Institute of
Cell and Molecular Biology, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 7Dept of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Internal Medicine Department, Respiratory Unit and Adult
Cystic Fibrosis Center Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milan, Milan, Italy. 8Dept
of Clinical Research, Immunology and Physiological Sciences, Wellcome, London, UK. 9Host Defence Unit,
Royal Brompton Hospital, Imperial College, London, UK. 10Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Larrey, CHU de
Toulouse, Toulouse, France. 11Servicio de Microbiología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and Instituto
Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, Spain. 12Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Clínic de
Barcelona, Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERES Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 135th Pulmonary Dept,
“Sotiria” Chest Hospital, Athens, Greece. 14Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, UK. 15Bronchiectasis Service, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 16Dept of Respiratory
Medicine, Royal Infirmary and University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 17Cambridge Centre for Lung Infection,
Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, UK. 18Bronchiectasis Group, Girona Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBGI), Dr
Trueta University Hospital, Girona, Spain. 19Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Member
of the German Centre for Lung Research, Hannover, Germany. 20Clinic for Thoracic Surgery - Clinical Centre
of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. 21FCS Blanquerna. Physical Activity and Health Group,
Universitat Ramon Llull, Barcelona, Spain. 22Dept of Public Health and Caring Science, Family Medicine and
Preventive Medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
23Dept of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 24Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK. 25European
Lung Foundation (ELF)/EMBARC bronchiectasis patient advisory group. 26Institute of Social and Preventive
Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
27Iberoamerican Cochrane Center, Barcelona, Spain.
28College of Medicine, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.
Correspondence: James D. Chalmers, Scottish Centre for Respiratory Research, Ninewells Hospital and
Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SY, UK. E-mail: jchalmers@dundee.ac.uk
Scope and objectives
This guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for the management of adult patients with
bronchiectasis. It only applies to patients with clinically significant bronchiectasis, defined by the presence
of both permanent bronchial dilatation on computed tomography (CT) scanning and the clinical
syndrome of cough, sputum production and/or recurrent respiratory infections. Radiological bronchiectasis
may be evident in healthy asymptomatic individuals, particularly in the elderly [1] or may occur, for
example, due to traction in interstitial lung disease. Such radiological bronchiectasis without clinical
symptoms are not addressed in this guideline. The following conditions are also excluded: cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis, which has a distinct pathophysiology and treatment pathway, children with bronchiectasis,
treatment of primary immunodeficiencies and non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), where disease
specific therapy is indicated. The majority of these clinical issues are addressed in other guidelines.
This guideline document does not address clinical and radiological diagnosis of bronchiectasis but rather
focuses on key questions in management. Areas such as smoking cessation, nutrition, influenza and
pneumococcal vaccination among other aspects of general management are not specifically addressed in
this document. Readers are referred to relevance guidelines and national policies. A guideline document
cannot address the full complexity of a disease such as bronchiectasis, hence all recommendations should
be interpreted taking into account the clinical circumstances and patients’ perceptions, values and
preferences.
Table 1 provides a framework to understand the recommendations made in this document [2, 3].
The target audience for this guideline are all stakeholders involved bronchiectasis care. This includes
specialists in respiratory medicine, infectious diseases, clinical microbiology, general internists, specialists
in thoracic surgery, primary care physicians, pharmacists, respiratory physiotherapists, specialist nurses,
regulatory authorities, pharmaceutical companies and policy makers. The guideline is also to inform
people with bronchiectasis to help them to discuss with their care teams and to access appropriate care.
Introduction
Bronchiectasis is a chronic respiratory disease characterised by a clinical syndrome of cough, sputum
production and bronchial infection, and radiologically by abnormal and permanent dilatation of the
bronchi. The objectives of treatment in bronchiectasis are to prevent exacerbations, reduce symptoms,
Support statement: The task force was funded by the European Respiratory Society. Funding information for this article
has been deposited with the Crossref Funder Registry.
Conflict of interest: D. Rigau and T. Tonia act as methodologists for the European Respiratory Society. All other
disclosures can be found alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
2
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 improve quality of life and stop disease progression. Cough and sputum production, along with
breathlessness are the most frequent symptoms but rhinosinusitis, fatigue, haemoptysis and thoracic pain
are also common [4]. Quality of life impairment in bronchiectasis is equivalent in terms of scores on the
St George’s Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and other disabling respiratory diseases [5, 6].
Exacerbations of bronchiectasis are key targets for therapy as they are major determinants of healthcare
costs. They are associated with increased airways and systemic inflammation [7] and progressive lung
damage [8, 9]. In addition, more severe and more frequent exacerbations are associated with worse quality
of life, daily symptoms [10], lung function decline [11], and mortality [9]. Consequently, the majority of
therapeutic interventions are aimed at reducing exacerbations. Despite current treatment approaches,
European registry data shows that approximately 50% of European bronchiectasis patients have two or
more exacerbations per year and one third require at least one hospitalisation per year [12].
Our understanding of what causes symptoms and exacerbations is based on the vicious cycle concept, with
key components of the disease being chronic bronchial infection, inflammation, impaired mucociliary
clearance and structural lung damage. Treatment is primarily based on the principles of preventing or
suppressing acute and chronic bronchial infection, improving mucociliary clearance and reducing the
impact of structural lung disease (figure 1).
Chronic airways infection, most frequently with Haemophilus influenzae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
less frequently with Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus and Enterobacteriaceae, stimulate and
sustain lung inflammation. Persistent isolation of these organisms in sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage is
associated with an increased frequency of exacerbations, worse quality of life and increased mortality
[13, 14]. This is particularly the case with P. aeruginosa infection. A systematic review of observational
studies identified that P. aeruginosa infection is associated with a three-fold increase in mortality risk, an
almost seven-fold increase in risk of hospital admission and an average of one additional exacerbation per
patient per year [15].
Inflammation in bronchiectasis is primarily neutrophilic and closely linked to persistent bacterial infection.
Excessive neutrophilic inflammation is linked to an increased frequency of exacerbations and rapid lung
function decline through degradation of airway elastin, among other mechanisms [16–19]. The available
data also support a role for cell-mediated immunity, specifically T-cells in the pathophysiology of
bronchiectasis, but the role of other inflammatory cells is less clear [17].
Mucociliary clearance is impaired by the impact of structural bronchiectasis, airway dehydration, excess
mucus volume and viscosity. More than 70% of bronchiectasis patients expectorate sputum daily with
highly variable sputum volumes. Treatment aims to prevent mucus stasis and the associated mucus
plugging, airflow obstruction and progressive lung damage [20].
Structural changes in the lung associated with disease include bronchial dilatation, bronchial wall
thickening, and mucus plugging as well as small airways disease and emphysema. More than 50% of
patients have airflow obstruction, but restrictive, mixed ventilatory pattern and preserved lung function are
TABLE 1 Understanding the recommendations made in this document
Target group
Strong recommendations#
Conditional (weak) recommendations
Patients
All or almost all informed people would choose the
recommended choice for or against an
intervention.
Most informed people would choose the recommended course of
action, but a substantial number would not.
Clinicians
Most patients should receive the recommended
course of action.
Recognise that different choices will be appropriate for different
patients. Clinicians and other healthcare providers need to devote
more time to the process of shared decision making by which they
ensure that the informed choice reflects individual values and
preferences; decision aids and shared decision making are
particularly useful.
Policy makers
The recommendation can be adopted as a policy in
most situations.
Policy making will require substantial debate and involvement of
many stakeholders.
#: strong recommendations based on high quality evidence will apply to most patients for whom these recommendations are made, but they
may not apply to all patients in all conditions; no recommendation can take into account all of the unique features of individual patients and
clinical circumstances.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
3
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 also frequently observed. Breathlessness is due to the impact of airflow obstruction, impaired gas transfer,
exercise deconditioning and the impact of comorbidities [21–24]. Breathlessness is one of the strongest
predictors of mortality [9, 14]. Therapies may aim to treat airflow obstruction (e.g. bronchodilators), to
improve exercise capacity (pulmonary rehabilitation), or to remove poorly functioning or diseased lung
(e.g. surgery).
Bronchiectasis has long been a neglected disease. The prevalence of bronchiectasis has been estimated at
53 to 566 cases per 100000 inhabitants. Prevalence increases with age and female gender [25–29].
QUINT et al. [28] described that age-adjusted mortality rate for bronchiectasis was 1437.7 per 100000.
Several longitudinal studies have described up to a 30% mortality at 1-year follow-up after suffering an
exacerbation [30, 31], particularly in the presence of COPD [32].
The economic burden of this disease has been estimated to be similar to COPD; this increases with disease
severity, hospitalisations, need for intensive care, and use of inhaled antibiotics [25, 26, 30, 33, 34]. No
therapies are currently specifically licensed by regulatory authorities in Europe or the USA for the
treatment of bronchiectasis. Historically, treatment has been extrapolated from the management of cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis, but randomised clinical trials and clinical experience has demonstrated that
treatment responses are different and that specific guidance for bronchiectasis not due to cystic fibrosis is
necessary [35, 36].
National guidelines are available in Europe: the Spanish guidelines (SEPAR) were published in 2008 [37]
and the British Thoracic Society (BTS) guidelines were published in 2010 [38]. Aspects of management of
acute exacerbations in bronchiectasis were addressed in the European Respiratory Society (ERS)/European
Society for Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases lower respiratory tract infections guidelines
published in 2011 [39]. However, to date, there are no international guidelines for the management of
adult bronchiectasis published and no national guidelines published in Europe in the past 5 years.
Methods
This guideline was developed by a European Respiratory Society bronchiectasis task force chaired by
E. Polverino (Spain) and J.D. Chalmers (UK). The task force included specialists in respiratory medicine
with recognised expertise in the management of patients with lung infections, as well as a microbiologist,
an immunologist, a physiotherapist, a general practitioner, a thoracic surgeon, three patient representatives
from the European Multicentre Bronchiectasis Audit and Research Collaboration (EMBARC)/European
Lung Foundation (ELF) bronchiectasis patient advisory group and two ERS methodologists.
The guideline panel held four face-to-face meetings, beginning in January 2015. The most relevant clinical
questions on the management of bronchiectasis in adults (for both clinicians and patients) were debated.
A total of nine clinical questions were formulated using the PICO format (Patients, Intervention,
Comparison, Outcomes) and systematic reviews were conducted to answer these specific questions, until
September 2016 when the final guideline recommendations were discussed and agreed. Regular
teleconferences and discussions via e-mail around individual topics were held. The patient representatives
were actively involved in all discussions as full members of the guideline committee, provided input into
the final recommendations and will be involved in developing a lay version of the guideline.
Chronic bronchial infection
Long-term inhaled or oral antibiotic therapy
Eradication of new pathogenic microorganisms
Antibiotic treatment of exacerbations
Impaired mucociliary clearance
Long-term mucoactive treatments
Airway clearance
Structural lung disease
Long-term bronchodilator therapy
Surgery
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Inflammation
Long-term anti-inflammatory 
therapies
FIGURE 1 Treatments for bronchiectasis considered in this guideline according to the vicious cycle concept of
bronchiectasis.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
4
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest
Committee members disclosed all potential conflicts of interest according to ERS policy. Conflicted
members were asked to abstain from discussions and voting on recommendations in which they were
considered to have potential conflicts. Compliance with the conflict of interest policy was monitored by
the chairs. The methodologists were non-voting members of the panel.
Systematic review
An experienced external librarian designed and ran a search strategy using MeSH terms and keywords for
each clinical question, in collaboration with the methodologists. More details of the search strategy are
shown in the supplementary material. The search retrieved 3038 records; after removal of duplicates and
exclusion of citations that did not meet the established inclusion criteria, a total of 48 references were
included in the evidence summaries (figure 2; supplementary material).
Assessment of the level of evidence and degree of recommendations
The panel selected outcomes of interest for each clinical question a priori, based on their relative
importance to adult patients with bronchiectasis and to clinical decision making (supplementary material).
We followed the GRADE approach to assess the confidence in the evidence (quality) and the degree of
recommendations [2]. Recommendations are graded as strong or conditional after considering the quality
of the evidence, the balance of desirable and undesirable consequences of compared management options,
the assumptions about the relative importance of outcomes, the implications for resource use, and the
acceptability and feasibility of implementation [40].
Evidence summary of findings tables and evidence to decisions frameworks were generated for each
clinical question (supplementary material) [41]. Based on these formats, the panel formulated the clinical
recommendations and decided on their strength by consensus, or, if required, by voting. Following the
GRADE approach, strong recommendations are worded as “we recommend”, while conditional
recommendations are worded as “we suggest”.
Question 1: Is standardised testing for the cause of bronchiectasis beneficial when
compared with no standardised testing?
Recommendations
We suggest the minimum bundle of aetiological tests in adults with a new diagnosis of bronchiectasis
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence) is: 1) differential blood count; 2) serum
immunoglobulins (total IgG, IgA and IgM); and 3) testing for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
(ABPA).
It is expected that sputum culture is undertaken for monitoring purposes of bacterial infection.
Mycobacterial culture may be helpful in selected cases where NTM are suspected as an aetiological cause
of bronchiectasis. Additional tests may be appropriate in response to specific clinical features, or in
patients with severe or rapidly progressive disease.
Summary of the evidence
The SEPAR and BTS guidelines have previously recommended a routine “bundle” of tests at diagnosis to
identify possible underlying causes of bronchiectasis [37, 38]. Our systematic review identified no
publications which directly addressed whether routine aetiological investigation protocols provide benefit
compared to clinically driven investigations or no testing. Four observational studies were identified which
describe the percentage of adult patients (7−37%) whose management changed following investigation of
aetiology while no other relevant outcomes were reported [42–45].
Justification of the recommendation
Measurement of circulating white cell count and differential is suggested in all patients. The presence of
lymphopenia or neutropenia may suggest primary or secondary immune deficiency, while lymphocytosis
may suggest secondary immune deficiency as a consequence of haematological malignancy.
Serum IgA, IgM, IgG are generally tested together, and we have considered them jointly. Low IgG, with or
without low IgM or low IgA may indicate a defective antibody production that is an important modifiable
cause of bronchiectasis, and 2–8% of patients with bronchiectasis have common variable immune
deficiency [42–44]. Importantly, in these cases immunoglobulin replacement treatment can result in
significant improvement in short and long-term outcomes. The cost of serum immunoglobulin testing is
low and testing is readily available.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
5
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 The geographic distribution of ABPA is thought to be variable, but establishing diagnosis alters
management [45]. Hence the panel advises routine screening of all patients for ABPA at diagnosis. The
generally recommended screening tests for ABPA are total serum IgE, specific IgG to Aspergillus, and
specific IgE to Aspergillus or, as an alternative, skin prick tests to Aspergillus [46, 47].
A range of other tests may be appropriate in specific circumstances. In patients with radiological features
of NTM or clinical features such as weight loss, haemoptysis, rapid deterioration or symptoms
non-responsive to standard therapy, three sequential daily sputum cultures for mycobacterial cultures or a
single bronchoalveolar lavage should be considered [48]. Some authorities recommend measuring antibody
responses to S. pneumoniae 23 valent polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23) in order to identify individuals with
specific polysaccharide antibody deficiency [37, 38]. Failure to make an antibody response to PPV23
(four-fold increase in titre at 4–6 weeks) may suggest a defect in carbohydrate antigen responses. However,
due to the large variability in individual antibody response to PPV23 and in testing protocols, this
Records screened after duplicates removed
n=138 systematic reviews
n=1997 clinical trials
n=903 observational studies
Records excluded by title/abstract
n=97 systematic reviews
n=1894 clinical trials
n=849 observational studies
Full-text articles assessed for eligibility
n=41 systematic reviews
n=103 clinical trials
n=54 observational studies (PICO 1)
Full-text articles excluded
n=21 systematic reviews
n=80 clinical trials
n=49 observational studies
PICO 1: 5
PICO 4: 7
PICO 7: 6
PICO 2: 1
PICO 5: 10
PICO 8: 1
PICO 3: 0
PICO 6: 3
PICO 9: 8
PICO 1: 0
PICO 4: 3
PICO 7: 2
PICO 2: 12
PICO 5: 26
PICO 8: 7
PICO 3: 8
PICO 6: 10
PICO 9: 35
Studies included up to July 2015
n=20 systematic reviews
n=23 clinical trials
n=5 observational studies (PICO 1)
Identification of relevant references after 
July 2015
n=2 systematic reviews (PICO 8 and 9)
n=1 clinical trial
PICO 1: 0
PICO 4: 6
PICO 7: 1
PICO 2: 0
PICO 5: 8
PICO 8: 0
PICO 3: 0
PICO 6: 3
PICO 9: 2
PICO 1: 0
PICO 4: 2
PICO 7: 0
PICO 2: 3
PICO 5: 2
PICO 8: 0
PICO 3: 0
PICO 6: 2
PICO 9: 14
Studies included up to 2015
n=22 systematic reviews
n=24 clinical trials
n=5 observational studies (PICO 1)
FIGURE 2 PRISMA flow diagram.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
6
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 evaluation should not be performed without specialist support. Testing for cystic fibrosis with
measurement of sweat chloride, other biomarkers of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR)-mediated chloride ion transport and CFTR gene mutation analysis should be considered in young
adults or with specific clinical features of cystic fibrosis, such as upper lobe predominance of
bronchiectasis on chest CT, the presence of nasal polyposis and/or chronic rhinosinusitis, recurrent
pancreatitis, male primary infertility and/or malabsorption. Testing for primary ciliary dyskinesia with
nasal nitric oxide, high-speed video analysis, transmission electron microscopy, immunofluorescence and/
or genetic testing should be considered for patients with several of the following features: persistent wet
cough since childhood, situs anomalies, congenital cardiac defects, nasal polyposis and/or chronic
rhinosinusitis, chronic middle ear disease with or without hearing loss, a history of neonatal respiratory
distress or neonatal intensive care admittance in term infants. Refer to the ERS guidelines for the diagnosis
of primary ciliary dyskinesia for more information [49]. The presence of basal emphysema or early onset
airflow obstruction could suggest the need to exclude alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency. There are a wide range
of other causes of bronchiectasis many of which can be identified by history, physical examination and CT
scanning. We do not recommend routine testing of autoantibodies to screen for connective tissue disease,
but evidence of connective tissue disease should be sought by history and physical examination.
The suggested bundle is justified by the fact that, despite the lack of strong evidence, selected tests can
considerably
alter
the
clinical
management
of
bronchiectasis
by
indicating
specific
therapeutic
interventions such as immunoglobulin replacement, corticosteroids or antifungal treatment. These
interventions imply significant potential benefits for some individuals, and minimal undesirable effects
from testing for others. The patient advisory group reported that patients placed a high value on
identifying the underlying cause of bronchiectasis.
Implementation considerations
The standard tests recommended in this bundle should be available in the majority of healthcare systems
and should not present major implementation issues.
Question 2: Are courses of 14–21 days of systemic antibiotic therapy compared to
shorter courses (<14 days) beneficial for treating adult bronchiectasis patients with
an acute exacerbation?
Recommendation
We suggest acute exacerbations of bronchiectasis should be treated with 14 days of antibiotics (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Summary of the evidence
Bronchiectasis patients are typically given prolonged courses of antibiotics of 14 days’ duration for
infective exacerbations. This recommendation is given in previous guidelines for bronchiectasis [37, 38]. It
is based on expert consensus and studies that documented good clinical outcomes with such treatment
regimens. However, the evidence base for this duration is poor.
The published literature was assessed as to whether shorter (<14 days) courses of antibiotics would be as
clinically effective or be associated with any harm compared to 14–21 days of therapy. There was no direct
evidence of benefit favouring either 14–21 days or shorter courses of antibiotic therapy. The only data
comes from an indirect comparison of response at day 7 versus day 14 in 53 patients, all receiving
ciprofloxacin (with or without inhaled tobramycin) for 14 days. After pooling both study arms, bacterial
load (MD: +0.23 cfu·mL-1 higher at day 14, 95% CI −1.55 to +2.01) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s
(FEV1) (MD: +0.01 L at day 14, 95% CI −0.51 to +0.53) were similar at 7 and 14 days with wide
confidence intervals including both benefit and harm. No data was available for clinical outcome such as
subsequent quality of life and exacerbations (supplementary material) [50].
Data from other studies
Some authors have shown a favourable impact of 14 days of antibiotics for treatment of a bronchiectasis
exacerbation. One study of 32 exacerbations treated with 14 days of intravenous antibiotics demonstrated
significant improvement in 24-h sputum volume, bacterial clearance, C-reactive protein, incremental walk
test and SGRQ, but no improvement in spirometry [51]. A further study of 34 patients treated with
intravenous antibiotics for 14 days demonstrated a reduction in sputum bacterial load and markers of
airway inflammation after antibiotic treatment [7].
Justification of the recommendations
In the absence of any direct data comparing longer and shorter courses of antibiotics, we suggest
continuing the usual practice of treating acute exacerbations of bronchiectasis with 14 days of antibiotics
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
7
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 on the basis of the patient’s prior microbiology testing and the severity of the exacerbation. Patients have
diverse views on the duration of antibiotics for exacerbations, with some preferring longer courses, and
other patients wishing to use shorter courses if possible.
Implementation considerations
It is possible that shorter courses of antibiotics may be appropriate in some cases. The task force panel
suggests that mild exacerbations, exacerbations in mild patients, those associated with pathogens more
sensitive to antibiotics (e.g. S. pneumoniae), or patients with a rapid return to baseline state may benefit
from shorter courses, but evidence supporting shorter course treatment is lacking. Otherwise, in patients
with lack of recovery by 14 days of antibiotic therapy we suggest re-evaluation of the patient’s clinical
condition and a new microbiological investigation. Sending a sputum sample at the start of an
exacerbation is helpful to guide choice of antibiotics in the event of inadequate response to initial therapy.
Due to variations in antibiotic use and healthcare practices across Europe, we do not address choice of
specific antibiotics, or the role of combination versus monotherapy in this guideline.
Further research studies assessing the optimal duration of antibiotics are recommended.
Question 3: Is eradication treatment beneficial for treating bronchiectasis patients
with a new isolate of a potentially pathogenic microorganism in comparison to no
eradication treatment?
Recommendations
We suggest that adults with bronchiectasis with a new isolation of P. aeruginosa should be offered
eradication antibiotic treatment (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
We suggest not offering eradication antibiotic treatment to adults with bronchiectasis following new
isolation of pathogens other than P. aeruginosa (conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
Summary of the evidence
Eradication treatment refers to any antibiotic treatment given with the express intention of achieving
complete clearance of the pathogen from the airway. In bronchiectasis, eradication treatment regimens
vary, but there is some evidence suggesting that a regimen including a nebulised antibiotic achieves greater
rates of clearance and clinical benefits than intravenous treatment alone in achieving clearance of P.
aeruginosa [52].
Chronic airway infection in adult patients with bronchiectasis is frequent and usually associated with
worse outcomes such as more exacerbations and poorer quality of life [15, 53]. Definitions of chronic
airway infection in bronchiectasis are not established but a systematic review identified that the most
frequent definition used in bronchiectasis studies is two or more isolates of the same organism at least
3 months apart in 1 year [15]. Unfortunately, in patients with persistent infections, there is little evidence
about the beneficial effects of pathogen eradication beyond P. aeruginosa.
We could not identify any randomised controlled trial directly addressing the question. Therefore we
included two studies that investigated whether eradication treatment in adult patients with bronchiectasis
improved clinical outcomes compared to the patient’s own baseline [54, 55]. Pooled analysis provides
some evidence of the potential benefits of P. aeruginosa eradication in terms of negative sputum samples,
frequency of subsequent exacerbations and quality of life, but the evidence is indirect and considered of
low quality.
In particular, the retrospective observational study of WHITE et al. [55] analysed different eradication
treatment regimens: i.v. antibiotics (12 cases), i.v. antibiotics followed by inhaled antibiotics (13 cases), and
oral ciprofloxacin alone. 25 patients across all groups received 3 months of inhaled colistin. Initial
clearance rate from sputum was 80%, but 54% of all patients remained P. aeruginosa free at follow-up and
the exacerbation rate fell from 3.93 to 2.09 per year after the eradication treatment. In addition, two thirds
of patients experienced clinical improvement although lung function remained unchanged.
ORRIOLS et al. [54] performed a 15-month single-masked, randomised controlled trial in 35 patients with
early P. aeruginosa infection. These patients received initial therapy with i.v. ceftazidime or tobramycin
followed by 3 months of 300 mg of nebulised tobramycin b.d. or placebo. At the end of follow-up
(12 months), 54% of patients were free of P. aeruginosa in the tobramycin group versus 29% in the placebo
group. Despite some potential methodological limitations, this study showed that the median time to
recurrence of P. aeruginosa was longer in the treatment arm compared to placebo and numbers of
exacerbations and hospital admissions were lower in the nebulised tobramycin group. The impact of
eradication treatments on the development of antibiotic resistance was not extensively studied. This study
had no control group and so is limited in terms of informing whether eradication is effective.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
8
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 There is no clear evidence to support one regimen over another, and therefore figure 3 illustrates some
commonly used regimes.
Justification of the recommendation
The poor clinical outcomes associated with chronic P. aeruginosa infection, the data from one
observational study and the clinical experience in cystic fibrosis suggests that P. aeruginosa eradication
may positively influence important clinical outcomes including exacerbation frequency.
There is no evidence to support eradication of organisms other than P. aeruginosa and in organisms that
are not so clearly associated with poorer outcomes, the risk-benefit ratio is less in favour of eradication
treatment.
Implementation considerations
Identification of new isolates of P. aeruginosa requires regular sputum surveillance which has resource
implications. We suggest as a minimum that patients should have a sputum sample sent when clinically
stable once per year. In circumstances where the date of acquisition of P. aeruginosa is uncertain, a clinical
judgement must be made on the likely success or otherwise of an eradication attempt. This guideline does
not address attempted eradication of chronic P. aeruginosa infection, where the infection has been present
for many years, as this is thought unlikely to be successful. The quality of evidence is low and further
research is also needed on potential side effects of eradication therapies and, particularly, the emergence of
resistance or new infections.
Question 4: Should long-term anti-inflammatory agents be used in adult patients
with bronchiectasis?
Recommendation:
We suggest not offering treatment with inhaled corticosteroids to adults with bronchiectasis (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We recommend not offering statins for the treatment of bronchiectasis (strong recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
We suggest that the diagnosis of bronchiectasis should not affect the use of inhaled corticosteroids in
patients with comorbid asthma or COPD (best practice advice, indirect evidence).
Oral fluoroquinolone OR
intravenous antibiotics PLUS
inhaled antibiotics, e.g.
ciprofloxacin 750 mg b.i.d.
plus inhaled colistin
First/new isolation of P. aeruginosa
Continued
inhaled antibiotics
Total duration
3 months
Initial phase
2 weeks
Intravenous antibiotics, e.g.
beta-lactam plus aminoglycoside
Inhaled antibiotics,
e.g. colistin/tobramycin/gentamicin
Total duration
3 months
Initial phase
2 weeks
Oral fluoroquinolone
e.g. ciprofloxacin 750 mg b.i.d.
Consider repeat sample to 
confirm persistent P. aeruginosa
Inhaled antibiotics,
e.g. colistin/tobramycin/gentamicin
Intravenous antibiotics, e.g. 
beta-lactam plus aminoglycoside
Total duration
3 months
Initial phase
2 weeks
FIGURE 3 Three possible and alternative eradication treatment pathways based on what is commonly used in clinical practice. After each step it is
recommended to repeat sputum sampling for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and to progress to the next step if the culture remains positive.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
9
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 We considered only studies of anti-inflammatory drugs that were at least 3 months in duration. Although
macrolides may have anti-inflammatory activity their role in bronchiectasis is discussed within PICO
question 5 of these guidelines (regarding antibiotics). We identified six systematic reviews [56–61] and
three studies that met our inclusion criteria [62–64].
HERNANDO et al. [64] reported a double-blind randomised controlled trial over 6 months with 77 patients
allocated to inhaled budesonide 400 μg b.d. or placebo with a primary outcome of lung function. TSANG
et al. [62] reported a trial of inhaled fluticasone versus placebo over 12 months in 86 patients with
co-primary end-points of 24 h sputum volume and annual exacerbation frequency. MANDAL et al. [63]
studied atorvastatin in 30 patients over 6 months compared to a matched group receiving placebo with a
primary outcome improvement in cough related quality of life measured by the Leicester cough
questionnaire. Overall the three studies included only 193 patients. Two of the studies assessed the effects
of anti-inflammatories on exacerbations with a wide confidence interval (rate ratio (RR) 0.99, 95% CI
0.76–1.30) [62, 64]. Hence no clear benefit on reducing exacerbations was noted.
The effect on quality of life, using the SGRQ, was only reported in two studies (123 patients) [63, 64],
with an observed improvement of 0.91 points (below the minimal clinically significant difference of 4
points, 95% CI −4.51 to +6.33). All three studies reported FEV1 and forced vital capacity (FVC) as lung
function outcomes [62–64]. No significant benefit was seen with any of the treatments studied for lung
function.
The study design and small number of patients make these studies not optimal for safety assessment.
Across the three studies the pooled estimate of suffering any adverse event was RR 2.75 (95% CI
1.21–6.25) as compared to control. The adverse effect profile of both inhaled corticosteroids and statins
has been well described.
The increase in pooled adverse events was largely driven by MANDAL et al. [63] who reported that adverse
events led to withdrawal from the atorvastatin group (one case of headache, one of diarrhoea, and two of
combined diarrhoea and headache). One was withdrawn due to liver function abnormalities at 3 months.
10 (33%) patients receiving atorvastatin had an adverse event versus three (10%) allocated placebo
(difference 23%, 95% CI 3–43; p=0.02).
For the inhaled corticosteroid trials in bronchiectasis, adverse event reporting was incomplete. Known and
frequent local adverse events across all diseases include dysphonia and oropharyngeal candidiasis. More
severe adverse events include: alteration of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function, pneumonia,
increased intraocular pressure, formation of cataracts and decreased bone density.
Justification of recommendations
There are no large trials of anti-inflammatory therapies in bronchiectasis and the existing studies show
minimal and, in most cases, no clinically significant benefits. The increased frequency of adverse events,
particularly with statins, justifies a recommendation against their use. The guideline panel concludes that
inhaled corticosteroids do not have a role in the routine management of bronchiectasis. Inhaled
corticosteroids have an established role in the treatment of asthma and a proportion of patients with
COPD. In the absence of specific data in adult patients with bronchiectasis and these two conditions, the
guideline panel concludes that the presence of bronchiectasis alone should not lead to a decision to
withdraw inhaled corticosteroids from patients with established asthma or COPD.
Implementation considerations
We recommend randomised controlled trials of inhaled corticosteroids in bronchiectasis who are naïve to
inhaled corticosteroid therapy. Inhaled corticosteroid use is, however, already widespread in bronchiectasis.
In those already treated with inhaled corticosteroids and no clear history of asthma or COPD a
randomised controlled trial of inhaled corticosteroid withdrawal may help define true utility of this widely
prescribed therapy.
Question 5: Is long-term antibiotic treatment (⩾3 months) compared to no
treatment beneficial for treating adult bronchiectasis patients?
Recommendations
We suggest offering long-term antibiotic treatment for adults with bronchiectasis who have three or more
exacerbations per year (conditional recommendation, moderate quality evidence).
All subsequent recommendations refer to patients with three or more exacerbations per year.
We suggest long-term treatment with an inhaled antibiotic for adults with bronchiectasis and chronic
P. aeruginosa infection (conditional recommendation, moderate quality evidence).
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
10
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 We
suggest
long-term
treatment
with
macrolides
(azithromycin,
erythromycin)
for adults
with
bronchiectasis and chronic P. aeruginosa infection in whom an inhaled antibiotic is contraindicated, not
tolerated or not feasible (conditional recommendation, low quality evidence).
We suggest long-term treatment with macrolides (azithromycin, erythromycin) in addition to or in place
of an inhaled antibiotic, for adults with bronchiectasis and chronic P. aeruginosa infection who have a
high exacerbation frequency despite taking an inhaled antibiotic (conditional recommendation, low quality
evidence).
We
suggest
long-term
treatment
with
macrolides
(azithromycin,
erythromycin)
for adults
with
bronchiectasis not infected with P. aeruginosa (conditional recommendation, moderate quality evidence).
We suggest long-term treatment with an oral antibiotic (choice based on antibiotic susceptibility and
patient tolerance) for adults with bronchiectasis not infected with P. aeruginosa in whom macrolides are
contraindicated, not tolerated or ineffective (conditional recommendation, low quality evidence).
We suggest long-term treatment with an inhaled antibiotic for adults with bronchiectasis not infected with
P. aeruginosa in whom oral antibiotic prophylaxis is contraindicated, not tolerated or ineffective
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We identified eight systematic reviews [65–72] and 17 relevant studies for this clinical question [36, 52,
73–86]. Our evidence summary suggests that long-term antibiotic use, pooling both inhaled and oral
antibiotic data, reduces the number of exacerbations, time to first exacerbation, sputum purulence and
breathlessness in adults with bronchiectasis; however, they are also associated with more adverse events
and bacterial resistance.
Three randomised controlled trials evaluating the effect of nebulised antibiotics in adults with
bronchiectasis suggested beneficial effects on exacerbation frequency and/or time to first exacerbation [65,
76, 78, 83]. In a study involving 144 adults with bronchiectasis and P. aeruginosa infection, colistin 1MU
delivered twice daily through the I-neb was not associated with a statistically significant improvement in
time to first exacerbation compared to placebo [83]. However, in a pre-planned analysis in adherent
individuals (defined as taking ⩾81% of doses recorded by the I-neb), the median (25th quartile) time to
exacerbation was 168 (65) days versus 103 (37) days in the colistin and placebo groups, respectively
(p=0.038). A similar treatment effect was reported in a study evaluating nebulised liposomal ciprofloxacin
in 42 adult patients with bronchiectasis and P. aeruginosa infection [78]. A 12-month single blind study of
nebulised gentamicin in 65 adults with bronchiectasis predominantly infected with H. influenzae (n=26,
46%) or P. aeruginosa (n=24, 42%) showed significant benefits including fewer exacerbations compared to
0.9% saline-treated patients [76].
Three randomised controlled trials showed beneficial effects of macrolide antibiotics (azithromycin or
erythromycin) on exacerbation frequency in adults with bronchiectasis: EMBRACE (141 patients on
azithromycin or placebo for 6 months) [77], BAT (83 patients on azithromycin or placebo for 12 months)
[80] and BLESS (117 patients on erythromycin or placebo for 12 months) [79]. The EMBRACE study
showed the rate of event-based exacerbations was 0.59 per patient in the azithromycin group and 1.57 per
patient in the placebo group in the 6-month treatment period (RR 0.38, 95% CI 0.26–0.54; p<0.0001); the
BAT study showed the median (interquartile range) number of exacerbations in the azithromycin group
was 0 (0–1), compared with 2 (1–3) in the placebo group (p<0.001); and the BLESS study showed
erythromycin significantly reduced protocol defined exacerbations compared to placebo (mean 1.29, 95%
CI 0.93–1.65 versus 1.97, 95% CI 1.45–2.48 per patient per year; p<0.003). Doses used in clinical trials or
in clinical practice range from 250 mg azithromycin daily, 500 mg or 250 mg three times per week, and
erythromycin 400 mg twice daily.
Historical randomised controlled trials evaluating penicillin and tetracycline based antibiotic regimens also
suggest some benefit in adults with bronchiectasis, with two long-term studies reporting less days off work
and reduced sputum purulence with oxytetracycline [84] or amoxicillin treatment [73].
Important adverse events were reported with long-term antibiotic treatment. Diarrhoea was more common
with oral antibiotics than placebo in the macrolide studies, although treatment discontinuation was rare
[66–70]. There was also a 28% increase in the proportion of macrolide-resistant commensal oropharyngeal
Streptococci after 12 months treatment with erythromycin and a macrolide resistance rate of 88% following
12 months of azithromycin [79, 80]. In contrast, there was no antimicrobial resistance reported after 6–
12 months of nebulised colistin, dual release liposomal ciprofloxacin or gentamicin [76, 78, 83]. While
these specific nebulised preparations were well tolerated, two phase III trials reported more frequent
treatment-related adverse events (1.4 and 1.8 times greater) and discontinuations (2.1 and 6.7 times
greater) associated with nebulised aztreonam compared to placebo [36]. The most commonly reported
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
11
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 adverse events were breathlessness, cough and increased sputum production. The incidence of potential
treatment-related adverse events such as QTc prolongation with macrolides, tinnitus/hearing loss with
macrolides and inhaled aminoglycosides, and renal dysfunction with inhaled aminoglycosides is not
known in people with bronchiectasis, but should be considered when weighing up the potential benefits
and harms of long-term antibiotic treatment.
Justification of recommendations
The overall balance of desirable effects (particularly fewer exacerbations), undesirable effects (particularly
gastrointestinal upset and antimicrobial resistance) and patient values favours long-term antibiotic treatment
in selected patients (figure 4). For individuals with P. aeruginosa, the currently available evidence supports
continuous use of nebulised colistin [83] or gentamicin [76]). Nebulised aztreonam is not recommended due
to the lack of efficacy with regard to quality of life improvement over two treatment cycles and a high
adverse event rate reported in the pivotal phase III trials [36]. Due to the relatively low number of
participants with P. aeruginosa in the macrolide studies, the use of macrolide antibiotics is suggested as a
second-line option in patients with this organism [77, 79, 80]. However, for individuals with no evidence of
P. aeruginosa infection, macrolide treatment is suggested as first-line treatment due to the high-quality
evidence for exacerbation reduction and an acceptable side-effect profile [77, 79, 80].
Although the macrolide studies included a minimum exacerbation frequency of one [77], two [79] or three
[80] exacerbations in the year preceding enrolment as an entry criterion, the mean exacerbation frequency
in the year prior to enrolment in each of the three studies was ⩾3. Due to potential undesirable effects, the
suggested threshold for starting long-term antibiotic treatment is ⩾3 exacerbations per year. However, this
threshold may be reduced for individuals with: a history of severe exacerbation, relevant comorbidities
such as primary/secondary immunodeficiency, patients in whom exacerbations are having a significant
impact on their quality of life or those with more severe bronchiectasis [9].
Before considering the prescription of long-term antibiotics, general aspects of bronchiectasis management
need to be optimised, such as airway clearance and treating modifiable underlying causes. Careful
characterisation of sputum pathogens (bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi) before and after implementation
of long-term antibiotics is essential to direct antibiotic choices, monitor resistance patterns and identify
treatment emergent organisms. Drug toxicity monitoring is also required, most notably with macrolides
and inhaled aminoglycosides.
Implementation considerations
The use of inhaled antibiotics is associated with a 10–32% risk of bronchospasm [76, 87] and a supervised
test dose with pre- and post-spirometry is recommended. Prior inhalation of a short-acting bronchodilator
may prevent bronchospasm and, therefore, is advisable.
≥3 exacerbations per year
Optimise airway clearance
Treat underlying causes
Lack of response or intolerance
Lack of response 
or intolerance
Inadequate response
Non-P. aeruginosa infection
P. aeruginosa infection
Long-term inhaled
antibiotic treatment
Long-term 
macrolide treatment
Long-term targeted 
oral antibiotic
Combined oral and
inhaled antibiotic
treatment
FIGURE 4 Summary of recommendations for long-term antibiotic treatment.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
12
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 Prior to long-term treatment with macrolides, we recommend excluding active NTM infection because
macrolide monotherapy can increase the risk of macrolide resistance in NTM.
No cost-effectiveness studies were identified regarding the use of long-term antibiotics in adult patients
with bronchiectasis and further research will be required to determine if cyclical or continuous treatment
(possibly involving combinations of preparations) is optimal in terms of exacerbation frequency reduction,
treatment burden and risk of antimicrobial resistance.
Figure 4 summarises the approach to long-term antibiotic treatment in adults with bronchiectasis
summarising the above guideline recommendations.
Question 6: Is long-term mucoactive treatment (⩾3 months) compared to no
treatment beneficial for treating adult bronchiectasis patients?
Recommendation
We suggest offering long-term mucoactive treatment (⩾3 months) in adult patients with bronchiectasis
who have difficulty in expectorating sputum and poor quality of life and where standard airway clearance
techniques have failed to control symptoms (weak recommendation, low quality evidence).
We recommend not to offer recombinant human DNase to adult patients with bronchiectasis (strong
recommendation, moderate quality evidence)
Summary of the evidence
Airway clearance adjuncts such as mucolytics and hyperosmolar agents alter mucus viscosity and/or
enhance mucociliary clearance. We identified three systematic reviews [88–90] and five relevant studies
meeting inclusion criteria for this clinical question [35, 91–94]. Of these five randomised controlled trials,
two were performed with dry powder mannitol at doses of 320 mg (n=343) [93] and 400 mg twice daily
(n=461) [94], one with nebulised recombinant human DNase at a dose of 2.5 mg twice daily (n=349) [35],
and two with nebulised hypertonic saline (one with 4 mL 7% once daily [91] or 5 mL 6% twice daily [92],
n=28 and n=40 respectively). Only in two studies [35, 93] was the treatment compared to placebo. In one
study with mannitol [94] and in both studies with hypertonic saline [91, 92], the treatment was compared
to low dose mannitol (50 mg twice daily) [94] and isotonic saline [91], respectively. Three previous
meta-analyses of mucoactive and inhaled hyperosmolar agents in bronchiectasis prior to the most recent
mannitol study [93] found insufficient evidence to draw firm conclusions on the effect of inhaled
mucoactive and hyperosmolar treatment due to the significant differences in methodology, patient groups
and findings amongst the limited data available [88–90].
Patients with ⩾2 exacerbations in the previous year and a baseline minimum SGRQ score of 30 who received
mannitol showed a significantly greater improvement in total SGRQ score compared to controls (low dose
mannitol), although the difference between arms did not reach the minimal clinically important difference for
the total SGRQ score [93]. An improvement in SGRQ components was shown in patients without chronic P.
aeruginosa infection and with no long-term antibiotic treatment who received hypertonic saline 7% [92].
None of the mucoactive agents significantly reduced the number of exacerbations, and the exacerbation
rate was higher in the rhDNase group compared with placebo [35]. In patients with ⩾2 exacerbations in
the previous year, mannitol increased the time to first exacerbation [94]. In one study with hypertonic
saline 7% there were reductions in health care utilisation when comparing prospectively collected data
between hypertonic saline and isotonic saline phases [92].
In four studies, a tolerance test was performed at first administration: patients with mannitol-induced
bronchospasm (16%) [93, 94] or a decrease in FEV1 of more than 10% [92] or 15% [91] after inhalation
of hypertonic saline (7% and 6%, respectively) were excluded.
In the 3-month study, 1.8% of patients randomised to mannitol experienced bronchospasm and 1.3%
reported dyspnoea as opposed to none in the placebo group [93]. In the 13-month study, 20.2% of
patients in the mannitol arm and 16.7% in the control group experienced adverse events related to study
medication, most of which were judged to be mild or moderate [94]. Hypertonic saline was well tolerated
with the number of patients with adverse events similar to those of the control groups.
The mannitol studies both showed a significantly increased 24 h sputum weight after treatment compared
to the control arms, consistent with improved mucociliary clearance [93, 94]. Mean 24 h sputum weight
decreased progressively during the study in both mannitol and control arms of both studies, but remained
higher in the mannitol arms throughout.
No change in lung function was observed in the studies with mannitol [93, 94] or hypertonic saline 6%
[91]. However, a significant improvement in FEV1 and FVC was shown with hypertonic saline 7% at
3 months [92]. In contrast, a decrease in FEV1 was demonstrated in patients treated with RhDNase.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
13
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 There is insufficient evidence to permit evaluation of the use of oral mucolytics such as carbocisteine for
bronchiectasis [89].
Justification of the recommendation
In summary, despite the wide heterogeneity in studies (agent used, study design and treatment duration),
overall the literature showed a small improvement in the time to first exacerbation with a slightly elevated
but
acceptable
adverse
event
profile
with
inhaled
long-term
mucoactive
agents.
The
reported
improvements in quality of life indicate that a proportion of patients will experience a significant benefit
with these agents, but many patients will not.
The current research evidence and the ELF/EMBARC bronchiectasis patient advisory group suggest that
patients give intermediate value to this treatment and acknowledge difficulties with its administration.
Mucoactive therapy is time-consuming and the therapeutic equipment, in the case of nebulisers, may be
difficult to take outside of the patient’s home.
Implementation considerations
The indication and type of treatment given should be tailored to each individual patient according to their
baseline symptom profile (frequency and severity of exacerbations, quality of life, bronchial hyperreactivity,
and sputum viscosity), baseline lung function and patient preferences. We suggest testing tolerance prior
to starting therapy and to consider beta-agonist premedication.
Larger studies should be considered in the future to investigate optimal treatment, dosages, durations and
combinations.
Question 7: Is long-term bronchodilator treatment (⩾3 months) compared to no
treatment beneficial for adult bronchiectasis patients?
Recommendations
We suggest not routinely offering long-acting bronchodilators for adult patients with bronchiectasis
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence)
We suggest to offer long acting bronchodilators for patients with significant breathlessness on an
individual basis (weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
We suggest using bronchodilators before physiotherapy, inhaled mucoactive drugs, as well as before
inhaled antibiotics, in order to increase tolerability and optimise pulmonary deposition in diseased areas of
the lungs (good practice point, indirect evidence).
We suggest that the diagnosis of bronchiectasis should not affect the use of long acting bronchodilators in
patients with comorbid asthma or COPD (good practice point, indirect evidence) [95, 96].
Where multiple inhaled therapies are used in the same patient, the sequence of treatments shown in
figure 5 is commonly used by members of the task force.
Summary of the evidence
Very limited and indirect evidence is available for the benefit of the long-term treatment with
bronchodilators from a systematic review that included a single trial, comparing high-dose inhaled
FIGURE 5 Flowchart of multiple
sequential
airways
treatment
administration in adult patients with
bronchiectasis.
Short- or long-acting bronchodilators
Mucolytic/physiotherapy adjuncts
Airway clearance
Inhaled antibiotics
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
14
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 corticosteroids to medium-dose inhaled corticosteroid/long acting beta-agonist combination [97]. The
results from this study indicate some positive effects on symptom control/symptomatic improvement, in
particular decreased dyspnoea, better cough control, better health-related quality of life (measured by
SGRQ symptoms domain), and reduced use of β2-agonist rescue medication. Specific side-effects were
generally mild (tremor, nervousness and tachycardia). A systematic review identified major methodological
and reporting concerns relating to this trial [56]. However, extrapolating evidence from populations with
other obstructive airway diseases some bronchiectasis subpopulations may benefit from bronchodilators, in
particular subjects with chronic obstructive airflow limitation (FEV1/FVC <0.7; with or without FEV1
reversibility to bronchodilators), or associated asthma in combination with inhaled corticosteroids [95, 96].
Justification of the recommendations
We suggest the use of bronchodilators in patient with significant breathlessness due to the feasibility of
application, the easy availability at a primary care level, the comparatively low treatment costs, and a
putatively positive ratio of benefits to adverse events. Appropriate inhalation device selection and inhaler
technique training are recommended. If treatment with bronchodilators does not result in a reduction in
symptoms it should be discontinued. There is no evidence to support the use of bronchodilators routinely
as part of the management of bronchiectasis patients without symptomatic breathlessness. According to
both research evidence and patient advisory group feedback, it seems that patients regard this as a low risk
and low burden intervention.
Implementation considerations
The
intervention
is
easy
to
administer
and
acceptable
to
the
majority
of
patients.
Further
investigator-driven research on the benefit of bronchodilators in bronchiectasis in various clinical
situations is needed.
Question 8: Are surgical interventions more beneficial compared to standard
(non-surgical) treatment for adult bronchiectasis patients?
Recommendation
We suggest not offering surgical treatments for adult patients with bronchiectasis with the exception of
patients with localised disease and a high exacerbation frequency despite optimisation of all other aspects
of their bronchiectasis management (weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Summary of the evidence
The rationale for surgical treatment of bronchiectasis is to break the vicious circle of bronchiectasis by
removing the lung segments that are no longer functional, and preventing the contamination of adjacent
lung zones. The most frequent indication for the operation is recurrent infections with chronic symptoms
such as productive cough, purulent sputum and haemoptysis [98, 99].
Lobectomy is the most frequently performed operation, but numerous options have been described (e.g.
segmentectomy and pneumonectomy) [100–102]. Surgery is the procedure of choice for massive
haemoptysis refractory to bronchial artery embolisation, but emergency surgery in unstable patients is
associated with higher morbidity and mortality reaching 37% [103]. Although bilateral bronchiectasis
(reported in 5.8 to 30% of surgical series) are not an absolute contraindication for surgery [104], other
options such as prolonged conservative treatment or bronchial artery embolisation are frequently used as
an alternative. The video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) is often preferred to better preserve lung
function or reduce scarring. In comparison with open surgery, VATS has been reported to produce
comparable
symptomatic
improvement
(94
versus
88%),
but
with
shorter
hospital
stay,
fewer
complications (17.5 versus 23.7%) and less pain after VATS procedures [105]. Contraindications to VATS
include major parenchymal or pleural fibrosis, and calcified nodes close to the hilar vessels.
No randomised controlled trials of surgical treatment versus standard care were identified. A meta-analysis
included 38 observational studies with 5541 patients, dealing with efficacy and safety of different surgical
interventions for adult patients with bronchiectasis focused on three main outcomes: mortality, morbidity
(adverse events) and quality of life improvement (symptomatic changes defined as reduction or alleviation
of preoperative symptoms) [98].
The pooled mortality from 29 studies that focused on adult patients was 1.4% (95% CI 0.8%–2.5%) [98].
Post-operative pooled morbidity for adults was analysed in 26 observational studies and was 16.2% (95%
CI,12.5%–19.8%) [98]. It needs to be emphasised that there are no data comparing morbidity to continued
medical non-surgical management alone. Moreover, according to the aforementioned studies, some of the
morbidity is considered relatively minor (air leak, atelectasis, wound infection). Symptomatic changes were
analysed in 26 observational studies. In the pooled meta-analysis, complete alleviation of symptoms was
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
15
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 seen in 71.5% (95% CI 68–74.9) and reduction of preoperative symptoms was seen in 20.2% of the adult
population (95% CI 17.3–23.1) [98]. Other research has shown that extent of residual bronchiectasis and
P. aeruginosa infection were reported as unfavourable prognostic factors [99].
Justification of the recommendations
Overall, surgical interventions seem to be beneficial only in very carefully selected patients requiring the
best risk-benefit profile of improved symptoms against the morbidity associated with surgery. Feedback
from the ELF/EMBARC patient advisory group suggests that patients would choose surgery only if there
was no effective medical option for treatment and this feedback informs the recommendation.
Implementation considerations
Involvement of an experienced surgeon in partnership with an expert respiratory physician is advisable if
surgical treatment is being considered. Attention should be paid to pre-operative nutritional status and
pulmonary rehabilitation. More research is needed on surgical interventions. Although a randomised trial
would be very challenging future studies should include a matched control population with meticulous
description of other treatments used in both populations.
Question 9: Is regular physiotherapy (airway clearance and/or pulmonary
rehabilitation) more beneficial than control (no physiotherapy treatment) in adult
bronchiectasis patients?
Recommendations
We suggest that patients with chronic productive cough or difficulty to expectorate sputum should be
taught an airway clearance technique (ACT) by a trained respiratory physiotherapist to perform once or
twice daily (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We recommend that adult patients with bronchiectasis and impaired exercise capacity should participate
in a pulmonary rehabilitation programme and take regular exercise. All interventions should be tailored to
the patient’s symptoms, physical capability and disease characteristics (strong recommendation, high quality
of evidence).
Summary of the evidence (figure 6)
In bronchiectasis, it is a common belief that physiotherapy can improve mucus clearance and reduce lung
inflammation and risk of infection. In addition, it is well accepted by patients. Respiratory physiotherapy
includes ACTs and pulmonary rehabilitation [106, 107]. ACTs consist of breathing techniques, e.g. active
cycle of breathing and autogenic drainage, sometimes combined with an instrument, e.g. flutter or
Chest physiotherapy
Mucus problems
Positioning
Postural
drainage
AD
ELTGOL
Slow
expiration
Forced
expiration
PEP
Oscillatory
PEP
PEP mask
T-PEP
Flutter
Acapella
HFCWO
ACBT
Cough
Huffing
Instrumental
techniques
Aerobic
training
Strength
training
Inspiratory
muscle
training (IMT)
Expiratory
flow
modification
Exercise
intolerance
Physical
activity
Counselling
Respiratory/muscle
weakness
FIGURE 6 Chest physiotherapy interventions flow chart based on clinical experience from the task force panel. AD: autogenic drainage; ELTGOL:
total slow expiration with open glottis and infralateral position; ACBT: active cycle of breathing techniques; PEP: positive expiratory pressure;
T-PEP: temporary positive expiratory pressure; HFCWO: high frequency chest wall oscillation.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
16
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 TABLE 2 Summary of PICO questions and recommendations
Question
Title
Recommendations
Question 1
Is standardised testing for the cause of bronchiectasis
beneficial when compared with no standardised testing?
We suggest the minimum bundle of aetiological tests in adults
with a new diagnosis of bronchiectasis (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence) is:
1) Differential blood count
2) Serum immunoglobulins (total IgG, IgA, IgM)
3) Testing for allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
It is expected that sputum culture is undertaken for monitoring
purposes of bacterial infection. Mycobacterial culture may be
helpful in selected cases where non-tuberculous mycobacteria
are suspected as an aetiological cause of bronchiectasis.
Additional tests may be appropriate in response to specific
clinical features, or in patients with severe or rapidly
progressive disease.
Question 2
Are courses of 14–21 days of systemic antibiotic therapy
compared to shorter courses (<14 days) beneficial for
treating adult bronchiectasis patients with an acute
exacerbation?
We suggest acute exacerbations of bronchiectasis should be
treated with 14 days of antibiotics (conditional recommendation,
very low quality of evidence).
It is possible that shorter or longer courses of antibiotics may be
appropriate in some cases, depending on specific clinical
conditions (such as exacerbation severity, patient response to
treatment, or microbiology).
Question 3
Is an eradication treatment beneficial for treating
bronchiectasis patients with a new isolate of a potentially
pathogenic microorganism in comparison to no eradication
treatment?
We suggest that adults with bronchiectasis with a new isolation of
P. aeruginosa should be offered eradication antibiotic treatment
(conditional recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
We suggest not offering eradication antibiotic treatment to adults
with bronchiectasis following new isolation of pathogens other
than P. aeruginosa (conditional recommendation, very low quality
of evidence).
Question 4
Is long-term (⩾3 months) anti-inflammatory treatment
compared to no treatment beneficial for treating adult
bronchiectasis patients?
We suggest not offering treatment with inhaled corticosteroids to
adults with bronchiectasis (conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
We recommend not offering statins for the treatment of
bronchiectasis (strong recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We suggest that the diagnosis of bronchiectasis should not affect
the use of inhaled corticosteroids in patients with comorbid
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (best practice
advice, indirect evidence).
Question 5
Is long-term antibiotic treatment (⩾3 months) compared to
no treatment beneficial for treating adult bronchiectasis
patients?
We suggest offering long-term antibiotic treatment for adults
with bronchiectasis who have three or more exacerbations per
year (conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
All subsequent recommendations refer to patients with three or
more exacerbations per year.
We suggest long-term treatment with an inhaled antibiotic for
adults with bronchiectasis and chronic P. aeruginosa infection
(conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
We suggest macrolides (azithromycin, erythromycin) for adults
with bronchiectasis and chronic P. aeruginosa infection in
whom an inhaled antibiotic is contraindicated, not tolerated or
not feasible (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We suggest macrolides (azithromycin, erythromycin) in addition to
or in place of an inhaled antibiotic, for adults with
bronchiectasis and chronic P. aeruginosa infection who have a
high exacerbation frequency despite taking an inhaled antibiotic
(conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We suggest long-term macrolides (azithromycin, erythromycin)
for adults with bronchiectasis not infected with P. aeruginosa
(conditional recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
We suggest long-term treatment with an oral antibiotic (choice
based on antibiotic susceptibility and patient tolerance) for
adults with bronchiectasis not infected with P. aeruginosa in
whom macrolides are contraindicated, not tolerated or
ineffective (conditional recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Continued
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
17
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 Acapella, that modify expiratory flow and volumes or produce chest wall oscillations in order to increase
mucus clearance [108–112]. The principal effect obtained by ACTs is an increase in sputum volume [108,
112, 113] and a reduced impact of cough on quality of life [109, 114]. Interesting, but still preliminary
data, shows reduced peripheral airways obstruction, less inflammatory cells in sputum and improved
exercise capacity after ACTs [109, 112, 114]. The aim of a pulmonary rehabilitation programme is to
improve exercise tolerance and quality of life through a tailored standardised exercise protocol [115–117].
We identified three systematic reviews [106, 118, 119] and several additional trials. We included a total of
14 clinical trials in our analysis [91, 108, 110–112, 114–117, 120–124].
The pooled analysis shows that pulmonary rehabilitation has a clear impact on exercise capacity
immediately after the programme and a nonsignificant trend to improved quality of life (SGRQ) [116, 117,
TABLE 2 Continued
Question
Title
Recommendations
We suggest long-term treatment with an inhaled antibiotic for
adults with bronchiectasis not infected with P. aeruginosa in
whom oral antibiotic prophylaxis is contraindicated, not
tolerated or ineffective (conditional recommendation, low quality
of evidence).
Long-term antibiotic therapy should be considered only after
optimisation of general aspects of bronchiectasis management
(airway clearance and treating modifiable underlying causes).
Question 6
Is long-term mucoactive treatment (⩾3 months) compared to
no treatment beneficial for treating adult bronchiectasis
patients?
We suggest offering long-term mucoactive treatment (⩾3 months)
in adult patients with bronchiectasis who have difficulty in
expectorating sputum and poor quality of life and where
standard airway clearance techniques have failed to control
symptoms (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We recommend not offering recombinant human DNase to adult
patients with bronchiectasis (strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence).
Question 7
Is long-term bronchodilator treatment (⩾3 months)
compared to no treatment beneficial for adult
bronchiectasis patients?
We suggest not routinely offering long-acting bronchodilators for
adult patients with bronchiectasis (conditional recommendation,
very low quality of evidence).
We suggest offering long acting bronchodilators for patients with
significant breathlessness on an individual basis (weak
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
We suggest using bronchodilators before physiotherapy, including
inhaled mucoactive drugs, as well as before inhaled antibiotics,
in order to increase tolerability and optimise pulmonary
deposition in diseased areas of the lungs (good practice point,
indirect evidence).
We suggest that the diagnosis of bronchiectasis should not affect
the use of long acting bronchodilators in patients with
comorbid asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(good practice point, indirect evidence) [95, 96].
Question 8
Are surgical interventions more beneficial compared to
standard (non-surgical) treatment for adult bronchiectasis
patients?
We suggest not offering surgical treatments for adult patients
with bronchiectasis with the exception of patients with localised
disease and a high exacerbation frequency despite optimisation
of all other aspects of their bronchiectasis management (weak
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Question 9
Is regular physiotherapy (airway clearance and/or pulmonary
rehabilitation) more beneficial than control (no
physiotherapy) in adult bronchiectasis patients?
We suggest that patients with chronic productive cough or
difficulty to expectorate sputum should be taught an airway
clearance technique by a trained respiratory physiotherapist to
perform once or twice daily (weak recommendation, low quality
of evidence).
We recommend that adult patients with bronchiectasis and
impaired exercise capacity should participate in a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme and take regular exercise. All
interventions should be tailored to the patient’s symptoms,
physical capability and disease characteristics (strong
recommendation, high quality of evidence).
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
18
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 119, 122, 123]. However, the unpooled study of MANDAL et al. [122] (pulmonary rehabilitation duration
(8 weeks) shorter than for pooled studies) described that improvements on exercise capacity and patient’s
quality of life may be maintained for a longer period of time. Finally, there is one publication showing an
impact of pulmonary rehabilitation (8 weeks of supervised exercise training and review of ACTs)
decreasing the frequency of exacerbations (median 1 (interquartile range 1–3) versus 2 (1–3); p=0.012)
over 12-month follow-up and longer time to first exacerbation (8 versus 6 months; p=0.047) [116]. The
reported impact of both ACTs and pulmonary rehabilitation on pulmonary function is not clinically
important [107–109, 112, 121].
Justification of the recommendations
The evidence for airways clearance techniques is weak because the studies are small and poorly
comparable due to methodological issues. However, most studies demonstrated a significant increase of
sputum volume. The evidence is stronger for pulmonary rehabilitation, showing improvements in exercise
capacity, cough symptoms and quality of life, and possibly a reduction in exacerbations. The benefits of
pulmonary rehabilitation are achieved in 6 to 8 weeks and maintained for between 3 to 6 months. Finally,
there are no relevant adverse effects and the bronchiectasis patients advisory group value the intervention.
Implementation considerations
The
research
priorities
in
physiotherapy
are:
larger
controlled
studies
with
clinical
outcomes
(exacerbations, cough and quality of life); larger controlled studies including physiotherapy training plus
mucoactive agents such as hypertonic saline; the role of pulmonary rehabilitation on exacerbations; and
finally, the compliance with these interventions over a longer period of time (>12 months) [125].
Summary
The recommendations are summarised in table 2. Management of bronchiectasis aims to reduce
exacerbations, reduce symptoms, improve quality of life [126, 127] and reduce the risk of future
complications such as lung function decline [128] and severe exacerbations [129]. Treatment decisions
must balance the potential beneficial effects of the intervention against the burden of treatment and the
risk of adverse events. It is important to take into account the patients values and preferences in all
treatment decisions, alongside the history of exacerbations, quality of life [126, 127], severity of disease [9]
and underlying aetiology [22], all of which can impact on the patients long-term outcome [130–132].
The purpose of clinical guidelines is to improve the quality of patient care and to promote safe, effective
and cost-effective treatment. The majority of recommendations in this guideline are conditional and based
on low quality evidence. One outcome of this guideline should be to promote further research into the
optimal treatment of patients with bronchiectasis. Bronchiectasis is a rapidly evolving field and our
recommendations will require revision as additional data becomes available in the coming years.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Valentina Balasso for assistance with the literature search. Guideline development was
supported by the European Bronchiectasis Network (EMBARC) and the EMBARC/European Lung Foundation
bronchiectasis patient advisory group.
References
1
Winter DH, Manzini M, Salge JM, et al. Aging of the lungs in asymptomatic lifelong nonsmokers: findings on
HRCT. Lung 2015; 193: 283–290.
2
Brozek JL, Akl EA, Compalati E, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations in clinical
practice guidelinesPart 3 of 3. The GRADE approach to developingrecommendations. Allergy 2011; 64:
1109–1116.
3
Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. Going from evidence to recommendations: The
significance and presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 66: 719–725.
4
King PT, Holdsworth SR, Freezer NJ, et al. Characterisation of the onset and presenting clinical features of adult
bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2006; 100: 2183–2189.
5
Raghu G, King TE, Behr J, et al. Quality of life and dyspnoea in patients treated with bosentan for idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (BUILD-1). Eur Respir J 2010; 35: 118–123.
6
Tashkin DP, Celli B, Senn S, et al. A 4-year trial of tiotropium in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl
J Med 2008; 359: 1543–1554.
7
Chalmers JD, Smith MP, McHugh BJ, et al. Short- and long-term antibiotic treatment reduces airway and
systemic inflammation in non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 186: 657–665.
8
Sheehan RE, Wells AU, Copley SJ, et al. A comparison of serial computed tomography and functional change in
bronchiectasis. Eur Respir J 2002; 20: 581–587.
9
Chalmers JD, Goeminne P, Aliberti S, et al. The bronchiectasis severity index. An international derivation and
validation study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189: 576–585.
10
Aliberti S, Lonni S, Dore S, et al. Clinical phenotypes in adult patients with bronchiectasis. Eur Respir J 2016; 47:
1113–1122.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
19
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 11
Kapur N, Masters IB, Chang AB. Longitudinal growth and lung function in pediatric non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: What influences lung function stability? Chest 2010; 138: 158–164.
12
Chalmers JD, Aliberti S, Polverino E, et al. The EMBARC European Bronchiectasis Registry: protocol for an
international observational study. ERJ Open Res 2016; 2: 00081-2015.
13
Loebinger MR, Wells AU, Hansell DM, et al. Mortality in bronchiectasis: a long-term study assessing the factors
influencing survival. Eur Respir J 2009; 34: 843–849.
14
McDonnell MJ, Aliberti S, Goeminne PC, et al. Multidimensional severity assessment in bronchiectasis: an
analysis of seven European cohorts. Thorax 2016; 71: 1110–1118.
15
Finch S, McDonnell MJ, Abo-Leyah H, et al. A comprehensive analysis of the impact of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
colonization on prognosis in adult bronchiectasis. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015; 12: 1602–1611.
16
Wilson CB, Jones PW, O’Leary CJ, et al. Systemic markers of inflammation in stable bronchiectasis. Eur Respir J
1998; 12: 820–824.
17
Tsang KW, Chan KN, Ho PL, et al. Sputum elastase in steady-state bronchiectasis. Chest 2000; 117: 420–426.
18
Chalmers JD, Moffitt KL, Suarez-Cuartin G, et al. Neutrophil elastase activity is associated with exacerbations
and lung function decline in bronchiectasis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017; 195: 1384–1393.
19
Chalmers JD, Hill AT. Mechanisms of immune dysfunction and bacterial persistence in non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis. Mol Immunol 2013; 55: 27–34.
20
Snijders D, Dominguez BF, Calgaro S, et al. Mucociliary clearance techniques for treating non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: Is there evidence? Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2015; 28: 150–159.
21
McDonnell MJ, Aliberti S, Goeminne PC, et al. Comorbidities and the risk of mortality in patients with
bronchiectasis: an international multicentre cohort study. Lancet Respir Med 2016; 4: 969–979.
22
Du Q, Jin J, Liu X, et al. Bronchiectasis as a comorbidity of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0150532.
23
Navaratnam V, Muirhead CR, Hubbard RB, et al. Critical care admission trends and outcomes in individuals
with bronchiectasis in the UK. QJM 2016; 109: 523–526.
24
Navaratnam V, Millett ER, Hurst JR, et al. Bronchiectasis and the risk of cardiovascular disease: a
population-based study. Thorax 2017; 72: 161–166.
25
Ringshausen FC, de Roux A, Pletz MW, et al. Bronchiectasis-associated hospitalizations in Germany, 2005-2011:
a population-based study of disease burden and trends. PLoS One 2013; 8: e71109.
26
Weycker D, Edelsberg J, Oster G, et al. Prevalence and economic burden of bronchiectasis. Clin Pulm Med 2005;
12: 205–209.
27
Kwak HJ, Moon J-YY, Choi YW, et al. High prevalence of bronchiectasis in adults: analysis of CT findings in a
health screening program. Tohoku J Exp Med 2010; 222: 237–242.
28
Quint JK, Millett ER, Joshi M, et al. Changes in the incidence, prevalence and mortality of bronchiectasis in the
UK from 2004 to 2013: A population-based cohort study. Eur Respir J 2016; 47: 186–193.
29
Chang AB, Grimwood K, Mulholland EK, et al. Bronchiectasis in Indigenous children in remote Australian
communities. Med J Aust 2002; 177: 200–204.
30
Seitz AE, Olivier KN, Steiner CA, et al. Trends and burden of bronchiectasis-associated hospitalizations in the
United States, 1993-2006. Chest 2010; 138: 944–949.
31
Finklea JD, Khan G, Thomas S, et al. Predictors of mortality in hospitalized patients with acute exacerbation of
bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2010; 104: 816–821.
32
Goeminne PC, Nawrot TS, Ruttens D, et al. Mortality in non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: A prospective cohort
analysis. Respir Med 2014; 108: 287–296.
33
de la Rosa D, Martinez-Garcia MA, Olveira C, et al. Annual direct medical costs of bronchiectasis treatment:
Impact of severity, exacerbations, chronic bronchial colonization and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
coexistence. Chron Respir Dis 2016; 13: 361–371.
34
Gursel G. Does coexistence with bronchiectasis influence intensive care unit outcome in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease? Heart Lung 2006; 35: 58–65.
35
O’Donnell AE, Barker AF, Ilowite JS, et al. Treatment of idiopathic bronchiectasis with aerosolized recombinant
human DNase I. Chest 1998; 113: 1329–1334.
36
Barker AF, O’Donnell AE, Flume P, et al. Aztreonam for inhalation solution in patients with non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis (AIR-BX1 and AIR-BX2): Two randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trials. Lancet
Respir Med 2014; 2: 738–749.
37
Vendrell M, de Gracia J, Olveira C, et al. Normativa SEPAR: diagnóstico y tratamiento de las bronquiectasias.
Arch Bronconeumol 2008; 44: 629–640.
38
Pasteur MC, Bilton D, Hill AT, British Thoracic Society Bronchiectasis non-CF Guideline Group. British
Thoracic Society guideline for non-CF bronchiectasis. Thorax 2010; 65: Suppl. 1, i1–i58.
39
Woodhead M, Blasi F, Ewig S, et al. Guidelines for the management of adult lower respiratory tract
infections--full version. Clin Microbiol Infect 2011; 17: Suppl. 6, E1–59.
40
Andrews JC, Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 15. Going from evidence to
recommendation—determinants of a recommendation’s direction and strength. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 66:
726−735.
41
Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J, et al. GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic
and transparent approach to making well informed healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ 2016; 353: i2016.
42
Anwar GA, McDonnell MJ, Worthy SA, et al. Phenotyping adults with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: A
prospective observational cohort study. Respir Med 2013; 107: 1001–1007.
43
Shoemark A, Ozerovitch L, Wilson R. Aetiology in adult patients with bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2007; 101:
1163–1170.
44
Pasteur MC, Helliwell SM, Houghton SJ, et al. An investigation into causative factors in patients with
bronchiectasis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162: 1277–1284.
45
Lonni S, Chalmers JD, Goeminne PC, et al. Etiology of non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis in adults and its
correlation to disease severity. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2015; 12: 1764–1770.
46
Greenberger PA. When to suspect and work up allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 2013; 111: 1–4.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
20
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 47
Knutsen AP, Bush RK, Demain JG, et al. Fungi and allergic lower respiratory tract diseases. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2012; 129: 280–291.
48
Griffith DE, Aksamit T, Brown-Elliott BA, et al. An official ATS/IDSA statement: Diagnosis, treatment, and
prevention of nontuberculous mycobacterial diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 175: 367–416.
49
Lucas JS, Barbato A, Collins SA, et al. European Respiratory Society guidelines for the diagnosis of primary
ciliary dyskinesia. Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1601090.
50
Bilton D, Henig N, Morrissey B, et al. Addition of inhaled tobramycin to ciprofloxacin for acute exacerbations of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in adult bronchiectasis. Chest 2006; 130: 1503–1510.
51
Murray MP, Turnbull K, MacQuarrie S, et al. Assessing response to treatment of exacerbations of bronchiectasis
in adults. Eur Respir J 2009; 33: 312–317.
52
Orriols R, Roe J. Inhaled antibiotic therapy in non-cystic fibrosis patients with bronchiectasis and chronic
broncial infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Respir Med 1999; 93: 476–480.
53
McDonnell MJ, Jary HR, Perry A, et al. Non cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: A longitudinal retrospective
observational cohort study of Pseudomonas persistence and resistance. Respir Med 2015; 109: 716–726.
54
Orriols R, Hernando R, Ferrer A, et al. Eradication therapy against Pseudomonas aeruginosa in non-cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis. Respiration 2015; 90: 299–305.
55
White L, Mirrani G, Grover M, et al. Outcomes of Pseudomonas eradication therapy in patients with non-cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2012; 106: 356–360.
56
Goyal V, Chang AB. Combination inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta2-agonists for children and adults
with bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; CD010327.
57
Steele K, Greenstone M, Lasserson JA. Oral methyl-xanthines for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2001; CD002734.
58
Lasserson T, Holt K. Oral corticosteroids for bronchiectasis (stable and acute exacerbations). Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2001; CD002162.
59
Corless JA, Warburton CJ. Leukotriene receptor antagonists for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2000; CD002174.
60
Kapur N, Chang AB. Oral non steroid anti-inflammatories for children and adults with bronchiectasis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2007; CD006427.
61
Pizzutto SJ, Upham JW, Yerkovich ST, et al. Inhaled non-steroid anti-inflammatories for children and adults
with bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; CD007525.
62
Tsang KW, Tan KC, Ho PL, et al. Inhaled fluticasone in bronchiectasis: a 12 month study. Thorax 2005; 60:
239–243.
63
Mandal P, Chalmers JD, Graham C, et al. Atorvastatin as a stable treatment in bronchiectasis: A randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2014; 2: 455–463.
64
Hernando R, Drobnic ME, Cruz MJ, et al. Budesonide efficacy and safety in patients with bronchiectasis not due
to cystic fibrosis. Int J Clin Pharm 2012; 34: 644–650.
65
Brodt AM, Stovold E, Zhang L. Inhaled antibiotics for stable non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: a systematic
review. Eur Respir J 2014; 44: 382–393.
66
Gao Y, Guan W, Xu G, et al. Macrolide therapy in adults and children with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2014; 9: e90047.
67
Shi ZL, Peng H, Hu XW, et al. Effectiveness and safety of macrolides in bronchiectasis patients: a meta-analysis
and systematic review. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2014; 28: 171–178.
68
Wu Q, Shen W, Cheng H, et al. Long-term macrolides for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Respirology 2014; 19: 321–329.
69
Zhuo GY, He Q, Xiang-Lian L, et al. Prolonged treatment with macrolides in adult patients with non-cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2014; 30: 1–9.
70
Fan LC, Lu HW, Wei P, et al. Effects of long-term use of macrolides in patients with non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BMC Infect Dis 2015; 15: 160.
71
Yang JW, Fan LC, Lu HW, et al. Efficacy and safety of long-term inhaled antibiotic for patients with noncystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis: a meta-analysis. Clin Respir J 2016; 10: 731–739.
72
Hnin K, Nguyen C, Carson K V, et al. Prolonged antibiotics for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis in children and
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 8: CD001392.
73
Currie DC, Garbett ND, Chan KL, et al. Double-blind randomized study of prolonged higher-dose oral
amoxycillin in purulent bronchiectasis. Q J Med 1990; 76: 799–816.
74
Cymbala AA, Edmonds LC, Bauer MA, et al. The disease-modifying effects of twice-weekly oral azithromycin in
patients with bronchiectasis. Treat Respir Med 2005; 4: 117–122.
75
Drobnic ME, Suñé P, Montoro JB, et al. Inhaled tobramycin in non-cystic fibrosis patients with bronchiectasis
and chronic bronchial infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Ann Pharmacother 2005; 39: 39–44.
76
Murray MP, Govan JRW, Doherty CJ, et al. A randomized controlled trial of nebulized gentamicin in non-cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 183: 491–499.
77
Wong C, Jayaram L, Karalus N, et al. Azithromycin for prevention of exacerbations in non-cystic fi brosis
bronchiectasis (EMBRACE): A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2012; 380: 660–667.
78
Serisier DJ, Bilton D, De Soyza A, et al. Inhaled, dual release liposomal ciprofloxacin in non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis (ORBIT-2): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Thorax 2013; 68: 812–817.
79
Serisier DJ, Martin ML, McGuckin MA, et al. Effect of long-term, low-dose erythromycin on pulmonary
exacerbations among patients with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: the BLESS randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2013; 309: 1260–1267.
80
Altenburg J. Effect of azithromycin maintenance treatment on infectious exacerbations among patients with
non–cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. JAMA 2013; 309: 1251–1259.
81
De Diego A, Milara J, Martinez-Moragón E, et al. Effects of long-term azithromycin therapy on airway oxidative
stress markers in non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Respirology 2013; 18: 1056–1062.
82
Tabernero Huguet E, Gil Alaña P, Alkiza Basañez R, et al. Inhaled colistin in elderly patients with non-cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis and chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa bronchial infection. Rev española Geriatr y Gerontol
2015; 50: 111–115.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
21
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 83
Haworth CS, Foweraker JE, Wilkinson P, et al. Inhaled colistin in patients with bronchiectasis and chronic
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189: 975–982
84
PROLONGED antibiotic treatment of severe bronchiectasis; a report by a subcommittee of the Antibiotics
Clinical Trials (non-tuberculous) Committee of the Medical Research Council. Br Med J 1957; 2: 255–259.
85
Lourdesamy AI, Muthukumaru U. Efficacy of azithromycin in the treatment of bronchiectasis. Respirology 2014;
19: 1178–1182.
86
Liu J, Zhong X, He Z, et al. Effect of Low-Dose, long-term roxithromycin on airway inflammation and
remodeling of stable noncystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Mediators Inflamm 2014; 2014: 708608.
87
Barker AF, Couch L, Fiel SB, et al. Tobramycin solution for inhalation reduces sputum Pseudomonas aeruginosa
density in bronchiectasis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162: 481–485.
88
Hart A, Sugumar K, Milan SJ, et al. Inhaled hyperosmolar agents for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2014; 5: CD002996.
89
Wilkinson M, Sugumar K, Milan SJ, et al. Mucolytics for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 5:
CD001289.
90
Wills P, Greenstone M. Inhaled hyperosmolar agents for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002; 1:
CD002996.
91
Nicolson CHH, Stirling RG, Borg BM, et al. The long term effect of inhaled hypertonic saline 6% in non-cystic
fibrosis bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2012; 106: 661–667.
92
Kellett F, Robert NM. Nebulised 7% hypertonic saline improves lung function and quality of life in
bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2011; 105: 1831–1835.
93
Bilton D, Daviskas E, Anderson D, et al. Phase 3 randomized study of the efficacy and safety of inhaled dry
powder mannitol for the symptomatic treatment of non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Chest 2013; 144: 215–225.
94
Bilton D, Tino G, Barker AF, et al. Inhaled mannitol for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis: a randomised,
controlled trial. Thorax 2014; 69: 1073–1079.
95
Vogelmeier CF, Criner GJ, Martinez FJ, et al. Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease 2017 Report: GOLD Executive Summary. Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1700214.
96
Reddel HK, Bateman ED, Becker A, et al. A summary of the new GINA strategy: A roadmap to asthma control.
Eur Respir J 2015; 46: 622–639.
97
Martínez-García
MÁ,
Soler-Cataluña
JJ,
Catalán-Serra
P,
et
al.
Clinical
efficacy
and
safety
of
budesonide-formoterol in non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Chest 2012; 141: 461–468.
98
Fan L-C, Liang S, Lu H-W, et al. Efficiency and safety of surgical intervention to patients with non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: a meta-analysis. Sci Rep 2015; 5: 17382.
99
Hiramatsu M, Shiraishi Y, Nakajima Y, et al. Risk factors that affect the surgical outcome in the management of
focal bronchiectasis in a developed country. Ann Thorac Surg 2012; 93: 245–250.
100
Hoffman E. The late results of the conservation of the apical segment of the lower lobe in resections for
bronchiectasis. Thorax 1955; 10: 137–141.
101
Collis J. Fate of the lower apical segment in resections for bronchiectasis. Thorax 1953; 8: 323–325.
102
Tanaka H, Matsumura A, Okumura M, et al. Pneumonectomy for unilateral destroyed lung with pulmonary
hypertension due to systemic blood flow through broncho-pulmonary shunts. Eur J Cardiothoracic Surg 2005; 28:
389–393.
103
Gourin A, Garzon AA. Operative treatment of massive hemoptysis. Ann Thorac Surg 1974; 18: 52–60.
104
Schneiter D, Meyer N, Lardinois D, et al. Surgery for non-localized bronchiectasis. Br J Surg 2005; 92: 836–839.
105
Zhang P, Zhang F, Jiang S, et al. Video-assisted thoracic surgery for bronchiectasis. Ann Thorac Surg 2011; 91:
239–243.
106
Lee AL, Burge AT, Holland AE. Airway clearance techniques for bronchiectasis. Cochrane database Syst Rev
2015; 11: CD008351.
107
Bradley J, Moran F, Greenstone M. Physical training for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002;
CD002166.
108
Guimarães FS, Moço VJR, Menezes SLS, et al. Effects of ELTGOL and Flutter VRP1® on the dynamic and static
pulmonary volumes and on the secretion clearance of patients with bronchiectasis. Rev Bras Fisioter 2012; 16:
108–113.
109
Nicolini A, Cardini F, Landucci N, et al. Effectiveness of treatment with high-frequency chest wall oscillation in
patients with bronchiectasis. BMC Pulm Med 2013; 13: 21.
110
Eaton T, Young P, Zeng I, et al. A randomized evaluation of the acute efficacy, acceptability and tolerability of
flutter and active cycle of breathing with and without postural drainage in non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis.
Chron Respir Dis 2007; 4: 23–30.
111
Naraparaju S, Vaishali K, Venkatesan P, et al. A comparison of the Acapella and a threshold inspiratory muscle
trainer for sputum clearance in bronchiectasis-A pilot study. Physiother Theory Pract 2010; 26: 353–357.
112
Figueiredo PHS, Zin WA, Guimarães FS. Flutter valve improves respiratory mechanics and sputum production in
patients with bronchiectasis. Physiother Res Int 2012; 17: 12–20.
113
Patterson JE, Bradley JM, Hewitt O, et al. Airway clearance in bronchiectasis: A randomized crossover trial of
active cycle of breathing techniques versus acapella? Respiration 2005; 72: 239–242.
114
Murray MP, Pentland JL, Hill AT. A randomised crossover trial of chest physiotherapy in non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis. Eur Respir J 2009; 34: 1086–1092.
115
Faulkner J, Gerhard J, Stoner L, et al. Self-paced walking within a diverse topographical environment elicits an
appropriate training stimulus for cardiac rehabilitation patients. Rehabil Res Pract 2012; 2012: 140871.
116
Lee AL, Hill CJ, Cecins N, et al. The short and long term effects of exercise training in non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis – a randomised controlled trial. Respir Res 2014; 15: 44.
117
Zanini A, Aiello M, Adamo D, et al. Effects of pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: a retrospective analysis of clinical and functional predictors of efficacy. Respiration 2015; 89:
525–533.
118
Bradley J, Moran F, Greenstone M. Physical training for bronchiectasis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002;
CD002166.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00629-2017
22
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
 119
Lee AL, Hill CJ, McDonald CF, et al. Pulmonary rehabilitation in individuals with non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: a systematic review. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2016; 774–782.e1.
120
Patterson JE, Bradley JM, Elborn JS. Airway clearance in bronchiectasis: a randomized crossover trial of active
cycle of breathing techniques (incorporating postural drainage and vibration) versus test of incremental
respiratory endurance. Chron Respir Dis 2004; 1: 127–130.
121
Gokdemir Y, Karadag-Saygi E, Erdem E, et al. Comparison of conventional chest physiotherapy and
high-frequency chest wall oscillation in primary ciliary dyskinesia. Pediatr Pulmonol 2014; 49: 611–616.
122
Mandal P, Sidhu MK, Kope L, et al. A pilot study of pulmonary rehabilitation and chest physiotherapy versus
chest physiotherapy alone in bronchiectasis. Respir Med 2012; 106: 1647–1654.
123
Newall C, Stockley RA, Hill SL. Exercise training and inspiratory muscle training in patients with bronchiectasis.
Thorax 2005; 60: 943–948.
124
Liaw M-Y, Wang Y-H, Tsai Y-C, et al. Inspiratory muscle training in bronchiectasis patients: a prospective
randomized controlled study. Clin Rehabil 2011; 25: 524–536.
125
Aliberti S, Masefield S, Polverino E, et al. Research priorities in bronchiectasis: a consensus statement from the
EMBARC Clinical Research Collaboration. Eur Respir J 2016; 48: 632–647.
126
Wilson CB, Jones PW, O’Leary CJ, et al. Validation of the St. George’s respiratory questionnaire in
bronchiectasis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 156: 536–541.
127
Quittner AL, O‘Donnell AE, Salathe MA, et al. Quality of Life Questionnaire-Bronchiectasis: final psychometric
analyses and determination of minimal important difference scores. Thorax 2015; 70: 12–20.
128
Martínez-García MA, Soler-Cataluña J-J, Perpiñá-Tordera M, et al. Factors associated with lung function decline
in adult patients with stable non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Chest 2007; 132: 1565–1572.
129
Chalmers JD, Aliberti S, Blasi F. Management of bronchiectasis in adults. Eur Respir J 2015; 45: 1446–1462.
130
Goeminne PC, Scheers H, Decraene A, et al. Risk factors for morbidity and death in non-cystic fibrosis
bronchiectasis: a retrospective cross-sectional analysis of CT diagnosed bronchiectatic patients. Respir Res 2012;
13: 21.
131
Hill AT, Haworth CS, Aliberti S, et al. Pulmonary exacerbation in adults with bronchiectasis: a consensus
definition for clinical research. Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1700051.
132
Spinou A, Siegert RJ, Guan WJ, et al. The development and validation of the bronchiectasis health questionnaire.
Eur Respir J 2017; 49: 1601532.
ERS GUIDELINES | E. POLVERINO ET AL.
