 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=zgha20
Global Health Action
ISSN: 1654-9716 (Print) 1654-9880 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/zgha20
Broken dreams of a better life in Sweden: Thai
women’s lived experiences of intimate partner
violence by Swedish men in international
marriages
Weerati Pongthippat, Mehrdad Darvishpour, Jureerat Kijsomporn & Gunnel
Östlund
To cite this article: Weerati Pongthippat, Mehrdad Darvishpour, Jureerat Kijsomporn & Gunnel
Östlund (2018) Broken dreams of a better life in Sweden: Thai women’s lived experiences of
intimate partner violence by Swedish men in international marriages, Global Health Action, 11:1,
1496889, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2018.1496889
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2018.1496889
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 03 Aug 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 774
View Crossmark data
 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Broken dreams of a better life in Sweden: Thai women’s lived experiences of
intimate partner violence by Swedish men in international marriages
Weerati Pongthippat
a,b, Mehrdad Darvishpour
a, Jureerat Kijsomporn
c and Gunnel Östlund
a
aSchool of Health, Care and Social Welfare, Mälardalen University, Eskilstuna, Sweden; bMental Health and Psychiatric Nursing
Department, Boromarajonani College of Nursing Udon Thani, Udon Thani, Thailand; cPraboromrajchanok Institute for Health Workforce
Development, Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand
ABSTRACT
Background: Intimate partner violence by men against women has detrimental effects on
equality, health and integration. Migrated and ‘imported’ wives experience an increased risk
of intimate partner violence.
Objectives: The purpose of this study was to explore Thai immigrant women’s lived experi-
ences of intimate partner violence in Sweden.
Method: Semi-structured interviews based on the critical incident technique with specific
questions about experiences of male-to-female intimate partner violence were used to collect
data. The participants were Thai immigrant women who had lived in Sweden for more than
five years. Qualitative content analysis was used to identify patterns and variations in the
transcribed data material.
Results: Eighteen interviewees reported psychological, physical, economic and/or sexual violence
in their international marriages. These Thai women described being faithful and silent and reliable
housewives. However, this did not keep them from being replaced and losing dignity as a result of
intimate partner violence, including experiencing broken dreams and deception. Although their
dreams were broken, they did not give up their efforts to achieve better lives in Sweden.
Conclusions: The vulnerability of imported wives in international marriages needs to be
further recognised by health and welfare agencies in Sweden, as elsewhere, to ensure that
these women have equal access to human rights, welfare and health as other citizens. From a
health promotion perspective, home-based health check-ups are needed to stop the exploi-
tation of imported wives. In Thailand, information and education about the unrecognised
negative conditions of the Mia farang role (Imported wife role) need to be disseminated.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 19 March 2018
Accepted 27 June 2018
RESPONSIBLE EDITOR
Isabel Goicolea, Umeå
University, Sweden
KEYWORDS
Economic migration; domestic
violence; mental illness; Asian
wives; female migrants
Background
The Thai women who are the focus of the present paper
are termed ‘imported wives’ because they have moved to
a new country as part of an in international marriage or
partnership. The largest proportion of ‘import marriages’
occur between Swedish men and women from Southeast
Asia [1,2]. Imported wives’ marriages tend to be more
unequal than other partnerships [3,6] and often include
dependency and vulnerability on the woman’s part.
Swedish-born males in international marriages are gen-
erally older and less well educated than the average
married male [3–7].
Statistics show that Thai women are most often
granted residence permits based on family factors,
mainly through marriage (93%), and few emigrate for
work, educational studies or humanitarian reasons [3].
The number of Thai women arriving in Sweden for
marital purposes increased dramatically in recent
years, from 17,099 in 2009 to 36,974 in 2013 [3,8]. The
number of Thai women who were registered as living
with a Swedish man was 16,000 in December 2017 [3].
Thai women tend to marry foreigners to improve
their living conditions and lifestyle [9]. Additionally,
Thai family and relatives request financial support
from these imported wives, based on the needs and
poverty levels of Thai families [10–14]. Thai women
are active agents in their migration process, but the
transition to another country often results in unex-
pected problems in the new country [8]. Adaptation to
a new country is a process of personal change and
adjustment [15]. Emigrants often carry distress with
them from one nation or culture to the new one. In
effect, migration is a stressful life event that may be
associated with subsequent marital instability, which,
in turn, influences immigrant women’s health [16,17].
Moreover, imported wives increase the flow of women
abandoning their family and children and relocating
their home, which opens up new areas of so-called
transnational spaces within which perpetrators can
perform new forms of violence against women, often
with impunity [18].
Violence against women has been identified as a
major
public
health
and
human
rights
problem
CONTACT Weerati Pongthippat
weerati.pongthippat@mdh.se; w_pongthippat@yahoo.com
Mälardalen University, Box 325, SE-631 05
Eskilstuna, Sweden
GLOBAL HEALTH ACTION
2018, VOL. 11, 1496889
https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2018.1496889
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
 throughout the world [19–21]. The World Health
Organization (WHO) emphasises that violence by men
towards women is a significant health problem affecting
one in three women globally [19]. Addressing violence
against women is critical for both health and family
reasons [22–25]. Research has shown that male intimate
partner violence against women can increase when the
husband experiences a loss of power and lack of control
in
addition
to
socioeconomic
poverty;
moreover,
women’s increased educational level and power position
might provoke men [26]. Male pathologies are often still
used to explain intimate partner violence against women;
men who commit such acts are likely to be insecure due
to increased distress, anger/hostility, personality disor-
ders, alcohol problems and lack of secure attachments
[27]. In situations where men experience a lack of control
within their partnership, they may react violently as a
means of exerting control over their partner [28].
Research has shown that powerless men exhibit violence
to a greater extent [29] and that men might feel empow-
ered as part of a group but not individually [26,30].
To understand male intimate partner violence against
women in the globalised world, an ecological model of
social-level factors has been developed that focuses on
the individual, the relationship, the community, the
social context and global exchange [30]. This ecological
model focuses on violence against women worldwide,
but there is not a specific emphasis on international
marriages. In the present study, we wanted to learn
more about the situation of Thai imported wives in
Sweden with a particular focus on male intimate partner
violence (IPV) against women since few studies have
been conducted on this topic [31].
Previous research has shown that the lifetime pre-
valence of IPV among Thai women residing in
Sweden was 22% and that exposure was also signifi-
cantly related to poor mental health [31]. Fernbrant
et al. (2014) concluded that obstacles to integration
for Thai immigrant women were social isolation and
mental health problems, and they suggested social
trust as a resilience factor. In a follow-up study
exploring the social process of migration among
Thai imported wives, it was found that self-strength
and social relationships promoted these women’s
well-being and ability to leave unhealthy relationships
[32]. However, more knowledge is needed to make
the health situation of Thai imported wives visible
and manageable through research in Sweden and
elsewhere. Therefore, the present study aimed to
explore Thai immigrant women’s lived experiences
of intimate partner violence by Swedish men.
Methods
This study had a qualitative interview design. The
interview guide was semi-structured with questions
based on the critical incident technique (CIT) [33].
The CIT methodology was designed to categorise the
difficult situations that people experience and the
consequences of these critical incidents [34]. The
CIT can be understood as a phenomenological
approach [35,36] appropriate for studying human
lived experiences in specific situations. Moreover, by
using described appraisals of behaviour, the CIT can
explore experienced social, emotional and moral
dilemmas [37,38] to elucidate participants’ perspec-
tives on situations. In health and welfare research, the
CIT has been used as a data collection method to help
the researcher focus on specific situations in everyday
life to collect high-quality data, but the CIT includes
no specific methodology for data analysis.
Description of the participants
The participants in the present project were recruited
according to the following criteria: (a) born in
Thailand and self-identified as Thai, (b) lived in
Sweden for at least five years, and (c) currently or
previously married to a native-born Swedish man.
To find a group of participants with sufficiently varied
experiences, three different sizes of cities were included
in areas close to the capital of Sweden. The data collec-
tion sources were three Thai cultural associations since
they engage a large number of Thai immigrants living in
Sweden. The use of Thai cultural associations to support
data collection was our second choice; our first choice,
using the Central Bureau of Statistics to conduct quali-
tative interviews, was too expensive due to the small
number of interviews. In the present project, 60 women
were invited to participate through invitation by 3 chair-
persons of these Thai cultural organizations, based on
inclusion criteria that were determined beforehand. An
invitation letter was sent to the chairpersons of Thai
cultural associations describing the research project and
asking about the possibility of contacting Thai women to
request their participation in the research. Two of these
Thai
women
missed
repeated
appointments,
one
declined participation because of discomfort with shar-
ing her experiences and one was forbidden to participate
by her partner. Finally, 40 women were interviewed in
the present project. In exploring the women’s experi-
ences of intimate partner violence as part of the planned
project aim,we did not know whether this research ques-
tion could be treated as a separate study. However, after
having received 14–15 participants who reported IPV
experiences, the data were moving towards saturation
and we decided to treat this dataset as a seperate sample.
In total, 18 of the 40 interviewees in the project reported
IPV. The participants had lived in Sweden for an average
of 19 years at the time of the interviews, most of them
had children, most had 12 years or more of education,
and
half
originated
from
northeastern
Thailand
(Table 1).
2
W. PONGTHIPPAT ET AL.
 The interview
The interview questions were first pilot tested to
appraise their functionality and to test the interview
procedure; following the pilot testing, small correc-
tions were made to the questions [39]. During the
phone call from the interviewer, the time, date and
location of the interview were decided. The Thai
immigrant women chose the location of the inter-
view, which took place at their home, their work-
place, a Thai temple or the university. The possible
participants received verbal information in Thai
regarding the objective of the study, both during the
call and at the time of the interview, emphasising that
participation was voluntary and that they had the
right to withdraw at any time before publication of
the results.
During the interviews, the Thai immigrant women
were asked to share their experiences and were
encouraged to provide and expand on detailed infor-
mation based on the described specific situation. All
the interviews started with the following central ques-
tion: ‘How do you experience everyday life?’ and then
continued with guided questions; for example, ‘Could
you please describe how your everyday life works in
term of being a “Thai-Swedish wife” or Mia farang or
Panya farang?’ However, if the question of male inti-
mate partner violence against the woman had not
been mentioned earlier in the interview by the
interviewees themselves in terms of critical situations,
the following questions were posed at the end of the
interview: ‘Do you recognise that there are four forms
of abusive situations, such as physical, psychological,
economic and sexual violence?’ and ‘Have you experi-
enced any threats or abusive situations since coming
here?’
The length of the interviews depended on each
participant and ranged from 50 to 90 minutes, and
all the interviews were conducted in the language of
the Thai woman’s choice: Thai, the Isan local dialect
or Thai mixed with English. Data were collected from
11 July 2016 to 12 December 2016. The interviews
were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim into Thai
by the first author.
Data analysis
Qualitative content analysis was used when interpret-
ing the collected data [40]. The transcriptions were
read several times to identify passages that included
meaning units that were relevant to the study aim.
These meaning units were condensed and labelled
with codes that were later grouped into subcategories
and categories. To validate the preliminary results,
the other bilingual co-author (JK) read the tran-
scribed interviews in Thai and suggested interpreta-
tions. The meaning units were translated from Thai
into English, and the analysis was further discussed
among the research team to ensure a close connec-
tion among the original transcripts, the identified
meaning units, and the subcategories and categories
when framing the results. An example of our data
analysis is presented in Table 2.
Ethical considerations
All informed consent forms were written in Thai
and verbally explained, and the participants were
asked to read the consent form carefully before sign-
ing their consent to become a research participant
[41]. They all understood that participation was
voluntary, and they had received information about
the objectives of the study. Confidentiality, anonym-
ity and the right to withdraw at any time before
publication of the results were also discussed and
guaranteed.
After the interview, the interviewer asked the
interviewee whether the questions in the interview
had made her feel uncomfortable and whether she
knew who to turn to if that was the case. The inter-
viewer also reminded the the interviewee that an
address for health care support was listed in the
consent form she had just received.
The participants’ integrity was preserved by using
fictional names in the results section and by with-
drawing specific details (for example, in quotes) that
Table 1. Sociodemographic data of the 18 Thai immigrant
women who reported experiences of domestic violence in
Sweden, 2016.
Sociodemographic characteristics
N = 18 Mean years
Age at the interview
35–68
52
Age upon arrival in
Sweden
23–50
33
Length of time living in
Sweden
6–43
19
Region of origin in
Thailand*
Northeastern (Isan)
9
North
1
South
1
Central
7
Marital status
Cohabiting
8
Living apart
5
Divorced
5
Children
Thai women who have children
16
Thai women who have no children
2
Number of children
Thai children
13
Half Thai- half Swedish
10
Location where children currently reside
Half Thai- half Swedish living in
Sweden
10
Thai children living in Thailand
7
Thai children living in Sweden
6
Education
(1) Illiterate
3
(2) Primary school (6 years)
2
(3) High school (12 years)
2
(4) College (Courses at bachelor level)
5
(5) Bachelor’s degree
6
* Birth province/part of Thailand where the participants lived for a sig-
nificant time
GLOBAL HEALTH ACTION
3
 might
jeopardise
their
integrity;
however,
the
women’s age, educational level and type of work in
Sweden were included. Additionally, approval for the
project was received by the Regional Ethical Review
Board in Uppsala, number 2016/542.
Results
The intimate partner violence by Swedish men
reported in the interviews showed that the immigrant
women had experienced not only psychological vio-
lence in their family life in particular, but also a
combination of physical, economic and sexual vio-
lence
(Table
3).
The
interviewed
Thai
women
described in detail their experiences with how they
handled the domestic violence by acting faithful and
silent and being a reliable housewife. However, this
did not keep them from being replaced and losing
dignity through experiencing broken dreams and
deception. These main categories (written in italics)
were interpreted through the content analysis in the
present study (Table 4).
Faithful and silent
From the interviewees’ perspective, male intimate
partner violence in family life was something that a
wife had to endure. It was almost normal, and you
had to be patient, according to how these immigrant
women without citizenship thought. Being patient
was also the advice given by Thai female friends in
Sweden. A common description of the violence that
the interviewed women endured involved the men
becoming hostile and angry, using insulting terms
and threatening the women; in some cases, the
abuse escalated to physical violence:
Many times, he liked to drink and hang around with
friends. He would leave me alone with my little
daughter, and when he came back home, he would
be angry with everything, and he pushed me and
beat me. I fell and got abrasive wounds on my
body. There were red and bluish-purple colours on
my wounds, and I did not go out for a few days. It
Table 2. Examples of content analysis: Thai immigrant women’s reported experiences of psychological violence from interviews
in Sweden, 2016.
Interview #1
Interview #2
Meaning units
We have been living together for seven years and have two
sons, six and one-and-a-half years old. He was a great man
in the beginning, but soon into the marriage I realized he
was immature . . . he was [taking] fewer responsibilities
[.. .] playing [video] games, watching TV, or socializing
with his friends but disliked cleaning or taking care of the
kids.. . He liked to call his mother to help [.. .] I was very
stressed when he started a new job. He worked night
shifts and sometimes in the early morning [.. .] He
complained about his job. He was annoyed and angry
with everything. We quarrelled; he was mad and angry at
the kids, shouting and saying bad words to us, throwing
things on the floor [.. .] I had warned that I might divorce
him if he did not improve his behaviour
His income was less than mine, and we had many
arguments when I visited my family or gave money to
my family . . . he was jealous and never understood that
in the Thai culture, we have to take care of family [.. .] My
ex-Swedish husband was lazy, lacked responsibility and
enthusiasm and did not do anything (household chores).
I did everything by myself. I climbed on the ladder to
change lightbulbs, made repairs when the water did not
flow [.. .] I was tired and gave up on him. He never hit
me, but he used evil words and hurt my feelings. [. . .]
Finally, I asked him for a divorce
Condensed meaning units
Swedish husband does not help with or take care of children;
he just spends time on his own
Thai wife wants Swedish husband to help out in the
household, understand Thai culture and share family
responsibilities. Husband withdraws from responsibilities
and quarrels
Codes
Married to a mum’s boy
Cultural differences
Subcategory
Family responsibilities
Category
Reliable housewife
Table 4. Domestic violence as experienced by Thai immigrant
women from interviews in Sweden, 2016.
Categories
Subcategories
Codes
Faithful and silent
Violence as a family
issue
Violence as part of
marriage
Violence is normal
Violent treatment as
embarrassment
Endure and be
patient
Dust-up
Drinking and using drugs
Violent treatment
Reliable housewife
Family
responsibilities
Married to a mum’s boy
Engagement and
consideration
Unequal relationship
Giving without getting
Being replaced and
losing dignity
Not good enough
Involved with other
women
Being asked for a divorce
Homeless and
heartless
Break-up feelings and
mental problems
Losing home, business
and self-esteem
Broken dreams and
deception
My children and
others’ kids
Native Thai children
Expectations of Mia
farang
Swedish ex-wife and
mother-in-law
Exploitation; sex and
housemaid
Table 3. Thai imported wives’ experiences of domestic vio-
lence from interviews in Sweden, 2016.
Types of domestic violence
N = 18
Psychological violence (exclusively)
9
Physical and psychological violence
6
Physical, psychological and economic violence
1
Psychological and sexual violence
1
Psychological, economic and sexual violence
1
4
W. PONGTHIPPAT ET AL.
 was family life, and I thought it was simple and
normal [just a small thing in the family], and [it
made me silent]. (Tangkua, 50, illiterate, cleaner)
The intimate partner violence, particularly when
combined with drug and alcohol abuse, made family
life almost intolerable. Nonetheless, some couples
were in love, especially at the beginning of their
international marriages, after cohabiting for a while
or even after living together for several years as a
married couple. Thai women reported they fulfilled
wives’ duties, such as being faithful and patiently
enduring their Swedish husbands’/partners’ temper
and violence. Enduring and being patient for at
least two years was also advice received from Thai
female friends in Sweden.
Reliable housewife
The intimate partner violence by the men against the
interviewed women sometimes included economic
violence, such as having to feed the children and the
family without sufficient economic resources and
being given an inadequate amount of household
cash each month. According to the imported wives,
intimate partner violence was closely related to their
husbands’ jealousy, paranoia, laziness, lack of enthu-
siasm, and withdrawal from family responsibilities.
Some husbands had abandoned all adult responsibil-
ities and never took care of the children or did any
housework. In one of the interviews, the woman
explained that even if the children were injured or
sick with pneumonia, her husband went out to spend
money and socialise with friends instead of caring for
the family:
Three weeks after I entered Sweden, I met and mar-
ried [a] Swedish man. We have been living together
for seven years and have two sons, six and one-and-
a-half years old. He was a great man in the begin-
ning, but soon into the marriage, I realised he was
immature; he was [taking] on fewer responsibilities
[. . .] playing [video] games, watching TV, or socialis-
ing with his friends. He disliked cleaning or taking
care of the kids and shouted at them . . . often he
called his mother to help. [. . .] I had warned him that
I might divorce him if he did not improve his beha-
viour; now [he] just makes a [big] deal about having
sex. (Chaba, 35, Thai, partially finished college
degree, restaurant worker)
Most of the Swedish husbands did not understand or
want to learn about Thai Buddhism and cultural
traditions, and from the women’s point of view this
was almost a betrayal because family responsibilities
and cultural habits are closely connected in the Thai
community.
Moreover,
the
interviewed
women
reported that their husbands did not accept them
sending (self-earned) money to their parents and
complained about it, although the women explained
that a crucial aspect of Thai traditional norms and
values is offspring showing respect and trust towards
the parents who raised and supported them.
Being replaced and losing dignity
Some of these international marriages ended in
divorce
or
break-up.
The
interviewed
women
described that losing their husbands in a foreign
country where the male partner was the chief link
to society was a very stressful experience that
affected their health and well-being, especially if
the Thai woman was illiterate in both the foreign
and native languages. Being replaced by another
woman and losing dignity through the experience
of intimate partner violence produced psychoso-
matic symptoms and mental health problems, such
as feeling depressed, stressed and restless; sleepless-
ness; migraines; and stomach aches. Half of the
women reported that their husbands had been
unfaithful to them and become involved with
other immigrant women from Thailand, Finland,
the
Philippines
or
Syria.
Some
of
these
men
defended their actions by blaming the woman for
the lack of erotic passion in the marriage or for not
earning enough money or taking sufficient care of
the family:
He had many women, but I never thought he could
choose a new woman and throw me away. We had
formed a business together selling fruit. He was my
husband and business partner [. . .] He was cheating
[on me] and [brought] a new Filipino woman to
Sweden. He hit me and hurt me. He said ‘you are
getting old and are not desirable’ [. . .]. I was home-
less
and
depressed.
(Kanda,
51,
illiterate,
entrepreneur)
Inevitably, in these infidelity situations, the older
Thai wife was forced to move out of the house
when another, often younger, the woman took her
place.
The
interviewed
women
reported
feeling
stripped of their human dignity with no respect for
their legal rights or any clear means of protecting
their human rights or individual well-being.
Broken dreams and deception
The interviewees perceived that the reality of life (for
example, quarrels and conflicts concerning children
from present and previous marriages) was definitely
different from their dreams. These family difficulties
sometimes involved an ex-wife or mother-in-law. The
quarrels could start with an issue such as the Thai
woman being expected to act as a nanny or servant to
her husband’s children from a previous marriage or
collecting them if they were coming home late. This
type of extra service was never a concern in relation
to Thai children; in those cases, the quarrels often
GLOBAL HEALTH ACTION
5
 concerned economics and the sharing of household
costs. Moreover, some of the children witnessed vio-
lence and/or were maltreated themselves according to
the women’s descriptions:
I divorced [in Thailand], my sister and her Swedish
husband organised a guy for me; our goal was [to be]
Mia farang, get a job and have a better life [...]. Ever
since he brought my little four-year-old daughter and
me to Sweden, he maltreated my daughter: unfriendly,
shouting at her, and ignorant; she was afraid of him. He
was a jealous man; he did not allow me to send my
daughter to bed and say ‘goodnight’. He requested that I
be with him, not my daughter, 24 hours a day. We
argued; he said he hated my daughter. We fought [phy-
sically], he hit me, pushed me and threw out my daugh-
ter and me. Luckily, my Swedish neighbour helped us
before we got frostbitten and died in the snow [...] the
police came finally, I divorced him. (Keeta, 38, bachelor’s
degree, factory worker and cleaner)
According to the Thai immigrant wives, their roles in
family life often included being a maid, a housewife, a
cleaner and a provider of sex. Contrary to the Thai
women’s expectations, life in Sweden did not result in
better status and rank, nor did they receive care and
respect from their new husbands and families. Rather,
the interviewed Thai women’s experiences were the
opposite: they were often degraded and maltreated in
their roles as Asian wives within the new family, but
their neighbours and welfare services in the new coun-
try were helpful. Their dreams of being a Mia farang
(Madam or Khun Nai), which included attaining a
better and more comfortable life, did not come true.
However, none of the interviewed women wanted to
lose face and return home to Thailand, so they felt that
they had to be patient with their husbands and part-
ners and continue to strive for a better life in Sweden.
Discussion
The present study explored Thai women’s experi-
ences of intimate partner violence by Swedish men
in
international
marriages.
These
Thai
women
described being faithful and silent and reliable house-
wives. However, this did not keep them from being
replaced as wives and losing dignity due to IPV,
resulting in broken dreams and deception from
male partners and family in Sweden. Clearly, these
Thai women’s international marriages were based on
unequal power [28], and they lacked equality. The
newly arrived Thai women ended up being depen-
dent on their husbands, particularly because of the
rule requiring a two-year residency before formal
citizenship can be attained.
The present study found that Thai women presented
themselves as faithful and silent, keeping the men’s
intimate partner violence as a family issue. Norms,
traditions and a lack of personal support and resources
in the new country made the interviewed women
endure their husbands’ violent acts. The women did
not want to talk to friends or the authorities about the
intimate partner violence they experienced, due to
embarrassment and fear of being sent home and possi-
bly due to previous marriage experiences that, for some,
might have included abusive husbands. Previous
research in Sweden found that Thai female immigrants
had a rather high (22%) lifetime prevalence of IPV,
although the prevalence was much lower (7%) in their
current relationship [15].
The interviewed Thai women also brought up their
husbands’ withdrawal from family obligations and
responsibilities as related to the men’s intimate part-
ner violence. The women’s explanations for the
occurrence of violence were based on their husbands’
alcohol and drug problems, cultural differences (e.g.
Western males not understanding Thai customs and
traditions), immature behaviour by their partners,
and infidelity on the husband’s behalf. Research find-
ings support some of the women’s explanations;
increased risk of IPV among female immigrants has
previously been found to be related to males’ heavy
alcohol consumption, poverty and lack of education
[42–45], male psychopathology [27,46], and family
dysfunction and intercultural differences [46–48]. At
the individual level, research indicates that a combi-
nation of alcohol use, mental health problems and
gender role expectations affects the relationship and,
in turn, seems to reinforce and increase violence
against women [49]. Broken dreams resulted when
these international marriages did not meet imagined
ideals; the interviewed women sometimes felt disre-
spected by Swedish family members, and they also
reported psychosomatic symptoms and mental health
problems based on their experiences of IPV.
It is understandable that Thai immigrant women
have difficulties learning about their rights in Sweden
[50], where to turn if they are victimised, and how to
manage on their own if they decide to report their
husband’s intimate partner violence. Most of the
interviewees in the present study were educated, and
only two were illiterate; some even had university
education, although most worked as manual workers
in Sweden, a finding that has also been reported by
other researchers [26,51]. Previous research findings
have shown that women who are empowered educa-
tionally, economically and socially are the most pro-
tected in situations of male intimate partner violence
[19,20,46].
However, education does not seem to completely
protect women from intimate partner violence by
men; sometimes, education might provoke men to
exert even more power [26], which seems to be the
case for some of the imported wives in the present
study. Education helps women to recognise their
needs and rights, which might also be provoking to
men. As Jewkes [52] argues, it is now time to include
6
W. PONGTHIPPAT ET AL.
 gender as well as socioeconomic inequalities as main-
stream health considerations when teaching students
and when discussing possible causes of ill health with
professionals working in the area of health and
welfare.
Moreover, according to the ecological model [30],
men might react to women’s improvements and
development of equity by resisting the social gender
order and trying to maintain traditional views that
include
women’s
subordination.
Possibly,
some
Swedish men who import Thai women have reacted
to
social
changes
in
Sweden
involving
women
demanding equal rights with men by dreaming of a
wife who is more adaptable to their needs and wants.
Finally, our findings and previous research [15]
show that some Thai women are abused and mal-
treated by their partners in Sweden, and sometimes
this maltreatment also includes children (see the
above quotes by Chaba and Keeta). Women in
Third World countries often see social acceptance of
violence as a way of resolving family conflicts [30,31].
Although the interviewees in the present study were
worried about their children’s safety, they often kept
silent and patient as this was also the advice they
received from Thai friends. The present study also
found that disclosing family issues such as intimate
partner violence is not an option, according to the
interviewed Thai women. Moreover, as found in ear-
lier research, receiving social support from Swedish
friends is seldom possible [32].
Some Thai imported wives also found relations
with their Swedish mothers-in-law and partner’s ex-
wives very difficult, especially if previous Swedish
children were included. Additionally, the female part-
ners in the international marriages allowed these
abusive relations to continue because being married
to a Western man allowed them the possibility of
starting a new life, even if a sexual relationship was
the price of economic security [53–55]. In a broader,
global context, imported wives can be viewed as a
lightly disguised version of transnational trafficking,
frequently referred to as a ‘modern form of slavery’
[56]. Women from Thailand who were trafficked into
the Japanese sex industry during the 1980s and 1990s
displayed the same general characteristics and moti-
vation as the Thai women in this study, whose stated
reasons for remaining in clearly abusive circum-
stances led to the same conclusions: in both cases,
the Thai women were fighting to protect themselves
and their children and to support their families at
home [56].
Methodological considerations
The methodological strengths of the present study are
that all the interviews were conducted in the Thai
participant’s language of choice (Thai, the Isan local
language or Thai mixed with English). The inter-
viewer in the present study was a native Thai speaker
who could speak the necessary dialects and translate
without risking misinterpretation. The use of a native
Thai speaker also served to make the Thai partici-
pants feel comfortable, which was an important and
delicate issue. As Lee et al. [56] noted, male intimate
partner violence against women is a highly sensitive
issue to investigate, and important details are often
withheld by the interviewees due to embarrassment
or humiliation.
The interviewer (WP) is a mental health nurse and
nurse instructor with a master’s degree who at time of
the interviews was a PhD student in nursing. WP is
experienced in professional encounters with patients
and nursing students, and at the time of the inter-
views she had studied in Sweden full-time for six
years, since 2010. Additionally, having grown up in
the same region as the interviewees, the interviewer
understood the environmental influence of the Thai
women’s traditions and cultural backgrounds.
Limitations and difficulties
The limited number of women with experieces of IPV
must be taken into consideration when discussing the
saturation of data, but most women find it difficult to
talk about this sensitive topic, irrespective of country
of origin. This sample of immigrated women (so-
called
imported
wives)
is
sufficient
to
claim
saturation.
The interviewer found it tiring and sometimes
difficult to handle negative feelings and thoughts
related to the participants’ life circumstances and
choices. As the interviewer asked for reflections on
specific situations of everyday life and encouraged
Thai women to explain and clarify, the interviews
were in some cases heavily emotional . Several of
these Thai immigrant women left their Thai children
with family in Thailand, such as with grandparents or
other relatives.
Future research needs to focus on the domestic
reasons for Thai women’s migration and the cultural
aspects and transnational responsibilities of imported
wives. In addition, research needs to be conducted
concerning the children involved – both those from
previous marriages and those resulting from interna-
tional marriages – and the negative effects that abu-
sive relationships have on them.
Conclusion
The vulnerability of imported wives in international
marriages needs to be further recognised by health
and welfare agencies in Sweden, as elsewhere, to
ensure that these women have equal access to
human rights, welfare and health as other citizens.
GLOBAL HEALTH ACTION
7
 From a health promotion perspective, home-based
health check-ups are needed to stop the exploita-
tion of imported wives. In Thailand, information
and education about the unrecognised negative
conditions of the Mia farang role need to be
disseminated.
Acknowledgments
The researchers express their gratitude to the participants
in this project, who were Thai immigrant women living in
Sweden, for sharing their experiences. We would also like
to express our appreciation to the chairpersons of the Thai
cultural associations, who were involved in giving us the
opportunity and support to conduct this research.
Author contributions
Weerati Pongthippat made substantial contributions to this
work and conducted all interviews. She made the transcrip-
tions of the text and preliminarily interpreted the data and
translated the texts to English. As the first author, she
prepared the manuscript before and after each revision by
the co-authors. Mehrdad Darvishpour contributed knowl-
edge in the research area of international marriages in
immigrants. He agrees to be accountable for all aspects of
the research process and for ensuring that all of the
research was appropriately investigated. He has given his
final approval for the resubmitted version of the manu-
script. Jureerat Kijsomporn rechecked the bilingual analysis
of the data and the preliminary results. She agrees to be
accountable for all aspects of the data analysis and for
ensuring
that
the
transcriptions
were
appropriately
handled. She has given her final approval for the resub-
mitted version of the manuscript. Gunnel Östlund made
substantial contributions to the conception and design of
the work as well as the formulation of the results for the
manuscript. She also supervised and supported the research
process. She has given her final approval for the resub-
mitted version of the manuscript.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the
authors.
Ethics and consent
The project was approved by the Regional Ethical Review
Board in Uppsala, number 2016/542.
Funding information
This paper is part of a PhD project funded by the
Boromarajonani College of Nursing, Udon Thani. The
college is part of the Praboromarajchanok Institute for
Health Workforce Development (PIHWD), Ministry of
Public Health, Thailand, and this project was funded in
cooperation with Mälardalen University in Sweden.
Paper context
Sweden has 10 million inhabitants, and 16,000 of them are
Thai women living with a Swedish man. The immigration of
Thai women to Sweden for marriage has increased dramati-
cally during the last years. Few research studies have focused
on Thai women’s experiences of life in Sweden. This inter-
view study focused on the lived experiences of domestic
violence
of
Thai
‘imported
wives’.
Previous
research
employed quantitative measures to study IPV. Gender equity
is not present in all Swedish marriages, especially those
involving immigrant women, who experience a less equal
situation, as shown in previous research.
ORCID
Weerati Pongthippat
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1774-
9427
Mehrdad Darvishpour
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6079-
6755
Jureerat Kijsomporn
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2911-
1110
Gunnel Östlund
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3068-5384
References
[1] Fernbrant F. Violence against foreign-born women in
Sweden. Malmö: Department of Clinical Clinical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine: Lund University; 2013.
[2] Niedomysl T, Östh J, Van Ham M. The globalisation
of marriage fields: the Swedish case. J Ethn Migr Stud.
2010;36:1119–1138.
[3] Statistics of Sweden. Statistical yearbook of Sweden.
Stockholm: Norstedts Tryckeri AB; 2014.
[4] Haandrikman K. Binational marriages in Sweden: is
there
an
EU
effect?
Population.
Space
Place.
2014;20:177–199.
[5] Hedman H, Nygren L, Fahlgren S. Thai-Swedish couples
in the Swedish daily press-discursive constitutions of the
other. Nordic J Feminist Gend Res. 2009;17:34–47.
[6] Fernbrant C, Emmelin M, Essén B, et al. Intimate
partner violence and poor mental health among Thai
women residing in Sweden. Glob Health Action.
2014;7:1–12.
[7] Ahlberg J Criminality among immigrants and their chil-
dren: a statistical analysis. BRÅ-Report Stockholm:
Fritzes; 1996.
[8] Webster AN, Haandrikman K. Thai women in Sweden:
victims or participants? Soc Sci Asia. 2016 [cited 2017
Dec 12];2:13–29. Available from: https://pdfs.seman
ticscholar.org/987c/628878f36cf6288f3741d6cf77
d253336a14.pdf
[9] Duangkumnerd V. The Intermarriage of Thai Women
in Germany. A Dissertation Submitted in Partial
Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy (Population and Development)
School of Applied Statistics National Institute of
Development Administration 2009. [cited 2017 Nov
19]. Available from: http://libdcms.nida.ac.th/thesis6/
2009/b162504.pdf.
[10] Jongwilaiwan
R,
Thompson
CE.
Thai
wives
in
Singapore
and
transnational
patriarchy.
Gender,
Place & Culture. 2013;20:363–381.
[11] Suksomboon P. Remittance and social remittance:
their impact on livelihoods of Thai women in the
8
W. PONGTHIPPAT ET AL.
 netherlands and non-migrants in Thailand gender.
Technol Dev. 2008;12:461–482.
[12] Angeles L, Sunanta S. Demanding daughter duty:
gender, community, village transformation, and trans-
national marriages in northeast Thailand. Crit Asian
Stud. 2009;41:549–574.
[13] Wojtenko K. International Marriages in Sweden: A
Case Study of Asian Women and Western Men.
Master’s Programme in Asian Studies Spring seme-
ster. Lund University. Centre for East and South -East
Asian Studies 2012. [cited 2018 Apr 11]. Available
from: http://lup.lub.lu.se/luur/download?func=
downloadFile&recordOId3459644&fileOId=3910996.
[14] Spanger M. Doing love in the borderland of transna-
tional sex work: female Thai migrants in denmark.
NORA Nordic J Feminist Gend Res. 2013;21:92–107.
[15] Berry JW, Poortinga YH, Segall MH, et al. Cross-cul-
tural psychology: research and applications. Rev.2nded.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2002.
[16] Bhugra D. Migration, distress and cultural identity. Br
Med Bull. 2004;69:129–141.
[17] Gayle V, Boyle P, Flowerdew R, et al. Exploring the
relationship between family migration and social stra-
tification through the investigation of women’s labour
market experiences in contemporary Britain. Int
Sociol Soc Policy. 2008;28:293–303.
[18] Patel P, Handa R, Anitha S, et al. Emerging issues for
international family law. Part 3: transnational marriage
abandonment and the dowry question. Fam Law J.
2016 [cited 2018 Apr 18];46:1443–1449. Available
from http://eprints.lincoln.ac.uk/24892/1/25892%
20Pragna%20et%20al%20FLJ2016_TMA%20and%
20dowry-%20practice% 20implications.docx.pdf
[19] Krug EG, Mercy JA, Dahlberg LL, et al. The world report
on violence and health. Lancet. 2002;360:1083–1088.
[20] García -Moreno C, Jansen HAFM, Ellsberg M, et al.
Prevalence of intimate partner violence: findings from
the WHO multi-country study on women’s health and
domestic violence against women study team. Lancet.
2006;368:1260–1269.
[21] Ellsberg M, Jansen AFMH, Heise L, et al. Intimate
partner violence and women’s physical and mental
health in the WHO multi-country study on women’s
health and domestic violence: an observational study.
Lancet. 2008;5:1165–1172.
[22] Tavoli Z, Tavoli A, Amirpour R, et al. Quality of life in
women who were exposed to domestic violence during
pregnancy. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2016;16:1–7.
[23] Khosla HA, Dua D, Devi L, et al. Domestic violence in
pregnancy in north Indian women. Indian J Med Sci.
2005;59:195–199.
[24] Romito P, Pomicino L, Lucchetta C, et al. The relation-
ships between physical violence verbal abuse and
women’s psychological distress during the postpartum
period. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol. 2009;30:115–121.
[25] Coker AL, Flerx VC, Smith PH, et al. Partner violence
screening in rural health care clinics. Am J Public
Health. 2007;97:1319–1325.
[26] Jewkes R. Intimate partner violence: causes and pre-
vention. Lancet. 2002;359:1423–1429.
[27] Holtzworth-Munroe A, Stuart GL, Hutchinson G.
Violent versus nonviolent husbands: differences in
attachment patterns, dependency, and jealousy. J
Fam Psychol. 1997;11:314–331.
[28] Hoffman KL, Edwards JN. An integrated theoretical
model of sibling violence and abuse. J Fam Violence.
2004;9:185–200.
[29] Connell RW. Masculinities. Cambridge (UK): Polity
Press; 1995.
[30] Fulu E, Miedema S. Violence against women: globa-
lizing
the
integrated
ecological
model.
Violence
Against Women. 2015;21:1431–1455.
[31] World Health Organization. Understanding and addres-
sing violence against women. [cited 2018 May 28].
Available from: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/han
dle/10665/77432/WHORHR12.36eng.pdf;jsessionid=
03D26AD0256F2DD2188A55E1687 CF203? sequence=1.
[32] Fernbrant C, Agardh A, Emmelin M. Possibilities for
maintaining a strong self - a grounded theory study of
relational experiences among Thai women in Sweden.
Glob Health Action. 2017;10:1396881.
[33] Flanagan CJ. The critical incident technique. Psychol
Bull. 1954;51:327–358.
[34] Woolsey LK. The critical incident technique: an inno-
vative
qualitative
method
of
research.
Can
J
Counselling. 1986;20:242–254.
[35] Merleau-Ponty
M.
The
primary
of
perception.
Evanston (IL): North-western University Press; 1964.
[36] Oiler C. The phenomenological approach in nursing
research. Nurs Res. 1982;31:178–181.
[37] Wark GR, Krebs DL. Gender and dilemma differ-
ences in real-life moral judgment. Dev Psychol.
1996;3:220–230.
[38] Wark GR, Krebs DL. The construction of moral dilem-
mas in everyday life. J Moral Educ. 2000;29:5–21.
[39] Green P. A rigorous journey into phenomenography:
from a naturalistic inquirer viewpoint. In: Bowden J,
Green P, editors. Doing developmental phenomenogra-
phy. Melbourne: RMIT University Press; 2005. p. 3246.
[40] Graneheim UH. Lundman. qualitative content analy-
sis in nursing research: concept procedures and mea-
sures to archive trustworthiness. Nurs Educ Today.
2004;24:105–112.
[41] Holloway I, Wheeler S. Qualitative research in nursing
and
healthcare.
3rded.
Chichester,
UK:
Wiley-
Blackwell; 2010.
[42] Jewkes R, Levinb J, Penn-Kekana L. Risk factors for
domestic violence: findings from a South African cross-
sectional study. Soc Sci Med. 2002;55:1603–1617.
[43] Coker AL, Davis KE, Arias I, et al. Physical and
mental health effects of intimate partner violence for
men and women. Am J Prev Med. 2002;23:260–268.
[44] Thompson MP, Kingree JB. The roles of victim and
perpetrator alcohol use in intimate partner violence
outcomes. J Interpers Violence. 2006;21:63–77.
[45] Galvani S. Alcohol and domestic violence. Women’s
Views. Violence against Women. 2006;12:641–662.
[46] Al-Tawil NG. Association of violence against women
with religion and culture in Erbil Iraq: a cross-sec-
tional study. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:1–7.
[47] Patel A. Alcohol use and mental health in developing
countries. Ann Endemial. 2007;17:S87–92.
[48] Szaflarski M, Cubbins LA, Ying J. Epidemiology of
alcohol abuse among US immigrant populations. J
Immigrant Minority Health. 2011;13:647–658.
[49] Nemeth MJ, Bonomi AE, Lee A, et al. Sexual infidelity
as trigger for intimate partner violence. J Women’s
Health. 2012;21:942–949.
[50] Lundberg CP. Cultural care of Thai immigrants in
uppsala: a study of transcultural nursing in Sweden.
J Transcultural Nurs. 2000;11:274–280.
[51] Ohtsuki Y. “Weak ties” a Key Ingredient for Social
Integration:
Women’s
Organizations
and
Thai
Women in Sweden. Master Program in Development
GLOBAL HEALTH ACTION
9
 Studies.Lund University Department of Social Work.
[cited 2017 Nov 25]. Available from: http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
[52] Esara
P.
Imagining
the
western
husband:
Thai
women’s desires for matrimony, status and beauty.
Ethnos. 2009;74:403–426.
[53] Angeles L, Sunanta S. From rural life to transnational
wife: agrarian transition, gender mobility, and intimate
globalization in transnational marriages in northeast
Thailand
Gender,
Place
&
Culture.
J
Feminist
Geography. 2016;20:699–717.
[54] Thiangtong V. Economic Impact of cross-cultural
marriage on the Northeast of Thailand. In: Fuxman
J, Delener N, Lu V, et al. editors. Proceeding of the
Global
Business
and
Technology
Association
(GBATA) evolution and revolution in the global
knowledge economy: enhancing innovation and com-
petitiveness worldwide. Madrid, Spain: The Global
Business and Technology Association Press; 2008 Jul
8-12. p. 1062–1065. [cited 2017 Nov 25]. Available
from: http://gbata.org/wp-ontent/uploads/2013/06/
GBATA2008_Readings_Book.pdf
[55] Dinan AK. Migrant Thai women subjected to slavery-
like abuses in Japan. Violence Against Women.
2002;8:1113–1139.
[56] Lee RM, Renzetti CM. The problems of researching
sensitive topics: an overview and introduction. Am
Behav Scientist (1986-1994). 1990;33:510–528.
10
W. PONGTHIPPAT ET AL.
