 THE
JOURNAL
•
RESEARCH
•
www.fasebj.org
Pharmacologic activation of estrogen receptor b
increases mitochondrial function, energy expenditure,
and brown adipose tissue
Suriyan Ponnusamy,* Quynh T. Tran,† Innocence Harvey,‡ Heather S. Smallwood,§
Thirumagal Thiyagarajan,* Souvik Banerjee,{ Daniel L. Johnson,k James T. Dalton,#,1 Ryan D. Sullivan,**
Duane D. Miller,{ Dave Bridges,‡,§,2 and Ramesh Narayanan*,††,3
*Department of Medicine, †Department of Preventive Medicine, ‡Department of Physiology, §Department of Pediatrics, {Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, kMolecular Informatics Core, and **Department of Comparative Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA; #Preclinical Research and Development, GTx, Incorporated, Memphis, Tennessee, USA; and ††West Cancer
Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA
ABSTRACT: Most satiety-inducing obesity therapeutics, despitemodestefficacy, have safetyconcernsthatunderscore
the need for effective peripherally acting drugs. An attractive therapeutic approach for obesity is to optimize/
maximize energy expenditure by increasing energy-utilizing thermogenic brown adipose tissue. We used in vivo
and in vitro models to determine the role of estrogen receptor b (ER-b) and its ligands on adipose biology. RNA
sequencing and metabolomics were used to determine the mechanism of action of ER-b and its ligands. Estrogen
receptor b (ER-b) and its selective ligand reprogrammed preadipocytes and precursor stem cells into brown adipose
tissue and increased mitochondrial respiration. An ER-b-selective ligand increased markers of tricarboxylic acid–
dependentand–independentenergybiogenesisandoxygenconsumptioninmicewithoutaconcomitantincreasein
physical activity or food consumption, all culminating in significantly reduced weight gain and adiposity. The
antiobesity effects of ER-b ligand were not observed in ER-b-knockout mice. Serum metabolite profiles of adult
lean and juvenile mice were comparable, while that of adult obese mice was distinct, indicating a possible impact of
obesity on age-dependent metabolism. This phenotype was partially reversed by ER-b-selective ligand. These data
highlight a new role for ER-b in adipose biology and its potential to be a safer alternative peripheral therapeutic
target forobesity.—Ponnusamy,S.,Tran, Q.T.,Harvey,I.,Smallwood,H.S., Thiyagarajan,T.,Banerjee,S.,Johnson,
D. L., Dalton, J. T., Sullivan, R. D., Miller, D. D., Bridges, D., Narayanan, R. Pharmacologic activation of estrogen
receptor b increases mitochondrial function, energy expenditure, and brown adipose tissue. FASEB J.
31, 266–281 (2017). www.fasebj.org
KEY WORDS: exercise mimetic
• mitochondria
• oxygen consumption
• obesity
• metabolic diseases
Obesity is pandemic, with over 50% of the global pop-
ulation and two-thirds of the U.S. population overweight
or obese (1, 2). Obesity is a serious health risk factor: it is
directlyassociated with numerouscomorbidities (3, 4) and
is correlated with an increased associated mortality rate
(5). The obesity epidemic also has significant economic
consequences. A forecast suggests that if the 12.7 million
obese children living today in the United States remain
overweight throughout their life, it will result in a cost to
economy of $1.1 trillion, or 6% of the U.S. gross domestic
product (6).
There are currently a paucity of clinically available an-
tiobesity drugs (7). Most, if not all, of the pharmacologic
agents that reduce body weight are designed to induce
satiety (7). Some of the common adverse effects associated
with the available antiobesity drugs are hypertension and
valve disease (8). Although antiobesity drugs elicit ap-
proximately 5% weight reduction, people will not be able
ABBREVIATIONS: BAT, brown adipose tissue; b-LGND2, estrogen receptor
b–selective ligand; b3AR, b3 adrenergic receptor; CLAMS, Comprehen-
sive Laboratory Monitoring System; ECAR, extracellular acidification rate;
ER, estrogen receptor; FBS, fetal bovine serum; FCCP, carbonyl cyanide-4-
(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone;
GFP,
green
fluorescent
protein;
HFD, high-fat diet; KO, knockout; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; ND,
normal-diet rodent chow; OCR, oxygen consumption rate; oxphos, oxi-
dative phosphorylation; PCA, principal component analysis; PPAR, per-
oxisome proliferator-activated receptor; TCA, tricarboxylic acid; WAT,
white adipose tissue; WT, wild-type
1 Current affiliation: College of Pharmacy, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA.
2 Current affiliation: Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of
Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
3 Correspondence: Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center, 19 South Manassas, Room 120, Memphis, TN
38103, USA. E-mail: rnaraya4@uthsc.edu
doi: 10.1096/fj.201600787RR
This article includes supplemental data. Please visit http://www.fasebj.org to
obtain this information.
266
0892-6638/17/0031-0266 © FASEB
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 to maintain the weight reduction for prolonged periods,
highlighting the need for efficacious and safe alternatives
(9). Strategies proposed to be useful in treating obesity, in
addition to inducing satiety (10, 11), include enhancing
energy expenditure by converting white adipose tissue
(WAT) to brown adipose tissue (BAT) or beige adipose
tissue (12–14); or increasing metabolism by enhancing the
basal metabolic rate, increasing the intensity of physical
activity, or using exercise mimetics, if available (15). Al-
though exercise is an option to increase energy expendi-
ture,itisfeasibleonlyinambulatoryindividualsandnotin
disabled, morbidly obese individuals with comorbidities.
Pharmaceuticals that increase energy expenditure have
been considered to be the Holy Grail in achieving the
benefits of physical activity in morbidly obese individuals
(15). Although such exercise mimetics have not yet been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for
clinical use, previous studies with the AMPK activators
metformin and 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribo-
nucleotide (AICAR) have suggested that such therapeutic
goals are achievable (16).
Although the beneficial effects of estrogens on adipose
and cholesterol metabolism as well as on the cardiovascular
system have been demonstrated, data on the receptor or
receptors that mediate these positive effects have been
conflicting(17–19).ThesexuallydimorphicanatomyofBAT
in females supports the hypothesis that estrogens might be
responsible for synthesizing BAT or for converting WAT to
BAT (20). The difference in body composition between pre-
and postmenopausal women clearly indicates the beneficial
effect of estrogens in adipose biology. Studies have shown
that administration of estradiol to ovariectomized rats or
mice reduces obesity (21), supporting the hypothesis that
estrogens are responsible for tightly regulating body weight
in women. In addition to favorable effects on adipose tissue,
estrogens also attenuate hyperphagia through ER-a (22, 23)
and through actions in the central nervous system (24, 25),
all culminating in weight loss.
The pharmacologic functions of estrogens are mediated
principally by estrogen receptors (ERs) a and b as well as
by a membrane receptor (26–28). In vitro and in vivo
models provide evidence for the involvement of these re-
ceptors in obesity and cholesterol metabolism (29–31).
Support for the antiobesity effects of ER-b ligands is but-
tressed by studies examining phytoestrogens such as fla-
vonoids and isoflavones (32). The synthetic ER-b agonists
estrogen receptor b–selective ligand (b-LGNDs; GTx, Inc.,
Memphis,TN,USA)and8b-VE2havebeenshowntohave
antiobesity and antimetabolic diseases effects (31, 33). An
advantage of using ER-b-selective ligands as opposed to
estradiol to promote weight loss is the lack of cross-
reactivity with ER-a. Although these findings support the
concept that ER-b-selective ligands have antiobesity and
antimetabolic diseases properties, the mechanism by
which these molecules elicit the effect is unclear.
Although ER-a has stronger physiologic role in females
than in males, the role of ER-b does not appear to depend
on sex. Despite the robust functional role of ER-a in fe-
males, ER-a knockout (KO) male mice, but not female
mice, demonstrated an 11% reduction in energy expendi-
ture with concomitant 20% increase in epididymal and
perirenal adipocytes (34). Another study demonstrated a
more pronounced effect of ER-a KO in male mice, with
100%increase in adipose sizecompared to wild-type (WT)
male mice (35). This evidence suggests that ER-a and ER-b
have significant functional relevance in tissues such as
adipose and brain (36, 37) in both males and females de-
spite the widespread perception that they are functionally
pertinent only to females.
We found that b-LGND2, also known as GTx-878 (GTx,
Inc. (31)), reduces body weight and fat mass without alter-
ing feed consumption of high-fat diet (HFD)-fed WT, but
not ER-bKO, mice. In vitro and in vivo studies suggest that
b-LGND2 significantly reduces the expression of genes as-
sociated with WAT along with increasing the expression of
genes associated with BAT. b-LGND2 increases oxygen
consumptionandmitochondrialactivitywithoutincreasing
physical activity at both 25 and 18°C, a phenomenon
predominantly associated with exercise mimetics. These
results collectively support our conclusion that ER-
b-selective ligands might confer antiobesity effects by
altering adipose metabolism and by increasing energy
expenditure. They thus may serve as potential targets for
clinical development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The sources of the reagents used are provided in Supplemental
Table 3.Allinvivoexperiments wereperformedin mice aged 6to 8
wk at the initiation of the experiment. C57BL6/J mice were used
for experiments conducted with WT, while ER-bKO (004745) and
ob/ob (000632) mice obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar
Harbor, ME, USA) were used for experiments with transgenic
mice. All animals were maintained in 12 h dark/light cycle with
roomtemperaturemaintainedat21°C.Animalshadaccesstofood
and water ad libitum. All animal experiments were carried out in
accordance with a University of Tennessee Health Science Center
animal care and use committee–approved protocol.
High-fat diet
HFD studies with WT or ER-bKO mice were performed as de-
scribed elsewhere (31). Ob/ob mice were maintained on rodent
chow (normal diet, ND), and studies were conducted as in-
dicatedinthefigurecaptions.b-LGND2wasdissolvedinDMSO:
PEG-300 (15:85%), and the DMSO:PEG-300 formulation was
used as the vehicle. All ND mice were also treated with vehicle.
Body weight, food consumption, and body composition using
MRI were recorded at regular intervals.
RNA isolation, RNA-Seq, and real-time PCR
RNA was isolated using the Qiagen (Germantown, MD, USA)
RNA isolation kit and were further processed for RNA-Seq
(Supplemental Methods). Real-time PCR was performed with
TaqMan primers and probe on an ABI-7900 real-time PCR ma-
chine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Preadipocyte and mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation toward adipocytes
Preadipocyte 3T3-L1 cells and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
were differentiated as described earlier (38). Briefly, cells were
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
267
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 platedin24-wellplatesat50,000cellsperwellinDMEM+10%fetal
bovine serum (FBS). After 2 to 3 d, when they attained confluence,
differentiation medium I containing DMEM + 10% FBS, insulin
(1 mg/ml), dexamethasone (250 nM), and IBMX (3-isobutyl-1-
methylxanthine) was added to the cells and incubated for 3 to 4 d.
After 3 to 4 d, differentiation medium II containing DMEM + 10%
FBS and insulin was added and incubated for 2 to 3 d (for a total of
6 d). Cells were imaged during every medium change. After 6 d,
medium was replaced with DMEM + 10% FBS and maintained in
this medium for 3 d. The same protocol was followed with MSCs,
but the medium included rosiglitazone (0.5 mM) to activate
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-ɣ. 3T3-L1
cells were stably transfected with lentivirus-expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP), ER-a, or ER-b.
Transactivation
Transactivation studies were performed as previously de-
scribed (31).
Insulin tolerance test
Mice(n=16)wereunfedfor6hbeforeadministrationof0.75mU/kg
insulin (Humulin R; Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA) in PBS via
i.p. injection. Blood glucose was measured from the tail vein with
a glucometer (OneTouch Ultra; Lifescan, Johnson & Johnson,
New Brunswick, NJ, USA) before and every 15 min after injection
for2h.Becauseofheterogeneityintheinsulintolerancetestvalues
between animals, outliers were determined by Grubb’s test, and
the resulting data were analyzed by 1-way ANOVA.
Adipose tissue mitochondrial DNA analysis
Primers were designed for mitochondrial- and nuclear-encoded
gene regions to detect mRNA transcript levels of mitochondrial
genes from cDNA, as well as mitochondrial DNA copy number
from genomic DNA, obtained from adipose tissue. SYBR Green
and the appropriate primers were used for detection and am-
plification of genomic DNA or cDNA via quantitative real-time
PCR. The specific PCR protocol included an activation cycle of
95°C for 10 min, followed by 45 amplification cycles of 15 s at
95°C, 15 s at 60°C, and 10 s at 73°C and using ABI 7900 real-time
PCR (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Mitochondrial DNA primer sequences (59–39) are as fol-
lows: mt-Nd1, forward: CGTCCCCATTCTAATCGCCA, re-
verse: ATGGCGTCTGCAAATGGTTG; and mt-Cytb, forward:
CTTCATGTCGGACGAGGCTT, reverse CCTCATGGAAGG
ACGTAGCC.
Bioanalysis
Mitochondrial function was assessed in live 3T3-L1 cells using the
XF Cell Mito Stress Test in the XF-24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer
(Seahorse Bioscience, North Billerica, MA, USA). A total of 5000
cells were seeded in XF24 plates and differentiated in the presence
of10nMestradiolor1mMb-LGND2.Mediumwasaspirated,then
rinsed in and replaced with nonbuffered DMEM with 25 mM
glucose, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma-
Aldrich,St.Louis,MO,USA),incubatedat37°cfor15min,andrun
in a flux analyzer per the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, oxygen
consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate
(ECAR) were measured every 9 min for a total of 12 reads (i.e., 3
reads per injection and for basal levels). Basal rates were estab-
lished, followed by an injection of 1 mM oligomycin to block ATP
synthesis, allowing for the calculation of coupling efficiency (i.e.,
basal-less oligomycin treated). Then 0.5 mM carbonyl cyanide-4-
(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone (FCCP) was injected to un-
couplehydrogentransportandATPproduction;theprotonophore
artificially inflates proton conductance, and this maximal respira-
tion is due to electron transport and substrate delivery. The dif-
ference in the basal and uncoupled OCR yields the spare
respiratory capacity of the cells. Next, 0.5 mM rotenone was added
toinhibitcomplexI,providingcompleteblockingofmitochondrial
respirationandoxidativephosphorylation(oxphos)toallowoneto
access nonmitochondrial respiration and proton leak (i.e., the OCR
after all mitochondria respiration is blocked and the difference
between OCR after FCCP addition and rotenone, respectively).
Comprehensive Laboratory Monitoring System
Male C57BL6/J mice 6 to 8 wk old were purchased from The
Jackson Laboratory and allowed to acclimatize to our animal
facility for 1 wk. Animals were then singly housed in a Com-
prehensive Laboratory Monitoring System (CLAMS; Columbus
Instruments, Columbus, OH, USA) in home cage–style cages
with locked running wheels. Animals were initially maintained
in a humidity- and temperature-controlled enclosure at 25°C and
50% humidity. The first 6 h of data were discarded while the
animals explored their new surroundings. After 3 d of chow feed-
ing, allanimals were switched to an HFD diet and randomized into
vehicle- or drug-treated groups. Vehicle or drugs were adminis-
tered subcutaneously daily. Throughout the study, oxygen utili-
zation, carbon dioxide production, and ambulatory movement
were determined at approximately 21-min intervals. After 2 wk,
animals were switched to 18°C over the course of 90 min and
monitored for a further 7 d. To analyze the data, mixed linear
models were constructed and adjusted using fat-free mass, light/
dark cycle, and duration of treatment as covariates, giving the an-
imal a random intercept. Linear models containing or lacking
treatment as a covariate were compared via chi-square tests using
the lme4 package (v. 1.1-9) in R software (R Foundation for Statis-
tical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Respiratory exchange ratio was
evaluatedsimilarly,exceptfat-freemasswasnotusedasacovariate.
Ambulatory movement was analyzed using light/dark cycle and
duration of treatment as covariates and fit to a Poisson distribution.
Transcriptomic analysis
Total RNA was extracted from adipose tissue using the Qiagen
RNA isolation kit, and its quality was verified using the Agilent
2100 Bioanalyzer(Agilent Technologies,Santa Clara, CA,USA). A
total of 1 mg of total RNA was enriched for poly A RNA using the
Dynabeads mRNA Direct Micro Purification Kit according to the
manufacturer’s standard protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life
Sciences). The resulting enriched RNA samples were then used to
prepare barcoded libraries for sequencing using the Ion Total
RNAseqV2kitandtheIonXpress1-48Barcodekit(ThermoFisher
Scientific).Librarieswereamplifiedfor16cycles,andthequalityof
the libraries was confirmed on an Agilent Bioanalyzer using a
DNA High Sensitivity chip. The libraries were pooled on the basis
of concentrations from the High Sensitivity chip, purified on a
Pippin Prep gel (Sage Science, Beverly, MA, USA), quantified by
the Agilent Bioanalyzer, and sequenced on an Ion Torrent proton
sequencer(ThermoFisherScientific).Thesequencingrunherehad
ameanreadlengthof168bpandconsistedofatotalof79.3million
reads for the 2 samples (34.5 million for sample 9 and 44.8 million
for sample 10). These were aligned to the mouse mm9 tran-
scriptome using RNA-Spliced Transcripts Alignment to Reference
(STAR) 2.5.2 tool (https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR/archive/2.5.2b.
tar.gz). The read counts were gathered and normalized using the
trimmedmeanofMvaluesmethod.Thefoldchangewascalculated,
and Student’s t test was used to determine significance. The
BenjaminiandHochbergmethodwasusedtocalculatetheadjusted
268
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 P values. Only genes with a 2-fold change and an adjusted
value of P # 0.05 was considered differentially expressed.
These data were deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GSE85498; National Center for Biotechnology Information,
Bethesda, MD, USA; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).
Metabolomics analyses
Metabolomics analyses wereperformed byMetabolon (Durham,
NC, USA).
Statistical analysis
Data obtained from 2 groups were analyzed by Student’s t test,
while data obtained from more than 2 groups were analyzed by
1-way ANOVA.
RESULTS
ER-bKO mice become obese more quickly
Earlier studies demonstrated that ER-bKO mice gain more
body weight than WT mice when maintained on an HFD
(39). However, the effect of knocking down ER-b on body
fat and weight when fed with ND had not previously been
established. To address this question, male C57BL6/J and
ER-bKO mice were maintained on either ND or HFD, and
their body weight and composition measured by MRI at
regularintervals.Asanticipated,themicemaintainedonthe
HFDgainedsignificantlymorebodyweightandfatthanthe
micemaintainedonND(SupplementalFig.1).Interestingly,
while ER-bKO mice gained significantly more body weight
than the WT mice when maintained on either ND or HFD,
therelativegaininbodyweight(WTvs.ER-bKO)wasmuch
higher when the ER-bKO mice were maintained on ND
thanontheHFD(SupplementalFig.1A).WhiletheER-bKO
mice gained approximately 3 times more body fat than WT
mice when fed with ND, ER-bKO mice exhibited a 2-fold
increase in body fat than WT mice maintained on HFD
(Supplemental Fig. 1B). No change in lean mass was ob-
served between WT and ER-bKO mice under these condi-
tion (data not shown). An interesting observation made in
this study is that the gain in body weight and fat mass are
much higher when mice are maintained on ND than HFD.
Similarly, the temporal changes in body weight occurred
much earlier when mice were fed with ND than HFD.
Although we hypothesize that the lesser magnitude of
changecould bedue tothemaskingeffect of greaterweight
andfatgainbyHFD,furtherworkneedstobeperformedto
establish the mechanism for this difference. These data
collectively suggest that ER-b is an important regulator of
body composition and accordingly body weight, and that
loss of ER-b function is sufficient to promote weight gain.
ER-b-selective ligand reduced body weight
and fat gain to a greater degree than clinically
available antiobesity drugs
In a previous study, we demonstrated that ER-b-selective
ligands have antiobesity properties (31). However, at the
time that those studies were performed, the ER-b-selective
ligands were not benchmarked against U.S. Food and
Drug Administration–approved antiobesity drugs to de-
termine the relative magnitude of effect. In the current
study, b-LGND2 (Fig. 1A), an ER-b-selective ligand, was
selected from a library to evaluate the role of ER-b and its
ligands on adipose biology. In a transactivation assay,
b-LGND2 activated ER-b with an EC50 of approximately
2 nM, while it activated ER-a with an EC50 of approxi-
mately 52nM,indicating a selectivity of approximately 25-
fold for ER-b (Supplemental Fig. 2).
C57BL6/J mice fed with either ND or HFD were
treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg/d b-LGND2 sub-
cutaneously. In order to compare the magnitude of
the effect of b-LGND2 to those observed with cur-
rently approved compounds, lorcaserin and orlistat
were included in the experiment. Lorcaserin, a 5HT2c
receptor agonist, increases pro-opiomelanocortin,
leading to satiety (Supplemental Fig. 3) and reduced
body weight (40). In our study, the doses used were
selected on the basis of published work (41–43).
Weekly body weight and feed consumption were
recorded, and body composition was measured every
third week by MRI. At euthanasia, epididymal adi-
pose tissue was isolated and weighed. HFD-fed,
vehicle-treated mice gained significantly more body
weight, fat mass, and epididymal adipose tissue than
ND-fed mice (Fig. 1B), which were significantly re-
duced by b-LGND2 without altering food consump-
tion (Supplemental Fig. 3). These results confirm our
earlier findings (31). The effect of b-LGND2 was
consistently better than the effects observed with
lorcaserin or orlistat.
Effect of b-LGND2 on metabolic syndrome
b-LGND2 has also been shown to have other benefi-
cial effects on metabolic diseases such as hypercho-
lesterolemia, hyperleptinemia, and hyperglycemia,
potentially resulting from alterations in body weight
and composition (31). In the current studies, we tested
b-LGND2’s effects on insulin resistance in obese mice
using the insulin tolerance test. In the data outlined in
mice shown in Fig. 1B, the mice were administered
insulin, and blood glucose levels were measured ev-
ery 15 min over a period of 2 h. HFD-fed, vehicle-
treated mice had higher serum glucose levels than
ND-fed mice, and this increase was reversed back to
ND levels by b-LGND2 (Supplemental Fig. 4). The
trend matches our previously reported glucose toler-
ance test data (31).
In ordertodeterminetheeffectsofb-LGND2inamodel
of metabolic syndrome, ob/ob (leptin mutant) mice were
used; these animals are morbidly obese and exhibit met-
abolic syndrome (44). While vehicle-treated ob/ob mice
gained approximately 75% body weight and 100% fat
mass within 4 wk of study initiation, b-LGND2-treated
ob/ob mice gained only 25 to 30% body weight and about
50% fat mass during the same 4-wk period (Fig. 1C). The
body weight and fat of b-LGND2-treated ob/ob mice were
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
269
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 significantly lower than vehicle-treated mice. b-LGND2
promoted this effect without affecting feed consumption
(Supplemental Fig. 5).
b-LGND2 requires ER-b to function
Earlier studies clearly established that b-LGND2 does
not mediate its antiobesity effects through ER-a, as
shown by lack of changes in hypothalamus–pituitary–
hypogonadal axis, testes weight, or uterus weight in
female mice (31). To test whether b-LGND2’s effects
required ER-b for efficacy, ER-bKO mice were fed an
HFD and treated with vehicle or b-LGND2. b-LGND2
failed to prevent body fat gain and epididymal WAT
increase in ER-bKO mice (Fig. 1D). Although a 20%
decrease in WAT mass in b-LGND2-treated ER-bKO
mice, compared to 50 to 60% decrease in WT mice, was
observed, the change was not statistically significant.
These results confirm that b-LGND2 requires ER-b to
elicit most of its antiobesity effects.
b-LGND2 inhibited WAT-specific and increased
BAT-specific transcripts in epididymal
WAT tissue
In an attempt to understand the mechanisms of action
for b-LGND2’s antiobesity effects, we performed RNA
sequencing studies in WAT obtained from animals (Fig.
1B). RNA from WAT was isolated and sequenced using
an Ion Torrent next-generation sequencer. While the
HFD up-regulated the expression of 326 genes (q , 0.05
and 2-fold change) and down-regulated the expres-
sion of 26 genes compared to the ND, b-LGND2
up-regulated the expression of 153 genes and down-
regulated the expression of 126 genes compared to
HFD-fed, vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 2A). While feeding
Figure 1. ER-b-selective ligand inhibits obesity. A) Structure of b-LGND2. B) b-LGND2 inhibits HFD-induced body weight and fat
mass better than commercial drugs. Male C57BL6/J mice (6–8 wk old; n = 6–7 per group) were fed with ND or HFD. Animals fed
with HFD were treated with vehicle, 30 mg/kg/d s.c. b-LGND2, lorcaserin (18 mg/kg/twice daily/s.c.), or orlistat (10 mg/kg/d s.c.).
Body weight (left panel) was recorded weekly, and body fat mass (center panel) was measured using MRI once every 3 wk. Animals
were humanely killed after 9 wk, and epididymal WAT weight was recorded (right panel). C) b-LGND2 inhibits body weight and fat
in ob/ob mice. Male ob/ob mice (6–8 wk; n = 5) were treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg/d s.c. b-LGND2. Weekly body weight and fat
mass were recorded. Values are represented as percentage change from initiation of experiment. D) b-LGND2 inhibits body fat in
WT, but not in ER-bKO, male mice. Male WT or ER-bKO mice (6–8 wk old; n = 6 per group) were maintained on ND or HFD and
treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg/d s.c. b-LGND2. Body fat was measured once every 3 wk using MRI. Animals were humanely killed,
and epididymal WAT weight was recorded. Values are expressed as averages 6 SE. Lorc, lorcaserin; Orli, orlistat. *P , 0.05 vs. ND;
#P , 0.05 vs. HFD.
270
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 mice with an HFD significantly changed the pattern of
the genes compared to ND-fed mice, this pattern was
reversed back to the levels observed in ND-fed mice by
b-LGND2. The numbers of genes regulated by HFD and
b-LGND2 are shown as log fold change in Fig. 2B, C,
respectively, clearly demonstrating that the number of
genes up-regulated by HFD was more than the number
of genes inhibited by HFD. Alternatively, the magnitude
fold of inhibition by b-LGND2 was much higher than the
fold activation of the genes by b-LGND2.
A search of the literature provided us with a list of
adipogenic, WAT, BAT, or beige adipose tissue marker
genes (45, 46). Although it is known that rodents have
BAT, only recently has BAT been identified in humans
(20, 47). Of the 15 previously described BAT marker
genes, in our study, 7 were increased by b-LGND2 (RNA
Figure 2. ER-b-selective ligand increases expression of marker genes associated with BAT in WAT. A) RNA from epididymal WAT
from mice (n = 3 per group) shown in Fig. 1B was sequenced using Ion Torrent next-generation sequencer. Significantly different
genes are expressed in heat map. B, C) Genes regulated by HFD (B) and b-LGND2 (C) are represented as fold change. D) Top
genes regulated in HFD-fed mice compared to ND-fed mice. E) Top genes (based on P value) that were up-regulated by
b-LGND2 compared to HFD vehicle-treated samples are represented. F) Genes representing BMP4 signaling pathway. Values are
represented as average 6 SE fold change from ND vehicle-treated animals or from HFD vehicle-treated animals. *P , 0.05 vs. ND;
#P , 0.05 vs. HFD.
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
271
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 sequencing data). BAT marker genes that were up-
regulated by b-LGND2 include Ebf2, Foxc2, Pdk4, and
Tbx2. These genes have been shown to be critical for the
formation of brown adipocytes, mitochondrial function,
and mitochondriogenesis (48–50). These results point
toward BAT-like characteristics of WAT.
BAT marker genes that were shown to be down-
regulated during the formation of BAT were also analyzed
in this data set. While all of the genes that inhibit BAT
function were up-regulated in WAT of vehicle-treated
HFD-fed mice, 5 of 6 of the genes belonging to this class
were down-regulated by b-LGND2. Genes that were
down-regulated by b-LGND2 administration include
CIDEA, myostatin (Mstn), Sfrp5, and Vegf. Although
because of variability between replicates statistical signif-
icance was not achieved in some of the up- and down-
regulated genes, thetrends point toward a reduction in the
expression of these genes by b-LGND2. Collectively, these
data support the hypothesis that b-LGND2 treatment
correlates with BAT-like characteristics in WAT, which
subsequently increases energy expenditure and thermo-
genesis, culminating in body weight reduction.
Genes that are known to be important regulators of
adipogenesis and obesity were also identified within the
data set (Fig. 2D). While HFD altered the expression of
these genes,supportingan increase in adiposity,b-LGND2
reversed their expression toward the levels observed in the
WAT of mice fed with ND.
The top10most up- and down-regulatedgenesin WAT
obtained from b-LGND2-treated animals support the in-
crease in mitochondrial function and energy expenditure
(Fig. 2C, E). Top up-regulated genes such as P2rx1, Acta1,
Inmt1, and Grem2 are important for energy expenditure
and oxphos (51–53). Increase in the expression of these
genes will result in enhanced mitochondrial function and
ATP generation (54, 55). Similarly, all of the top down-
regulated genes—Gpx5, Gm4846, Lcn8-10, and Cst11—
inhibit oxphos and energy expenditure (56–58).
Ingenuity pathway analysis suggested that genes be-
longing totheBMP4 pathway are enriched in samples that
were treated with b-LGND2 (Fig. 2F). One of the primary
functions of BMP4 signaling in WAT is to increase the
brown/beige adipose tissue, resulting in enhanced oxphos,
mitochondriogenesis, and energy expenditure (59). Several
genes,includingBMP4,aremarkedlyup-regulatedinWAT
of animals treated with b-LGND2.
Collectively, the gene expression data demonstrate that
WAT is reprogrammed toward BAT by b-LGND2,
resulting in an increase in oxphos, thermogenesis, and
energy expenditure and subsequently a significant de-
crease in obesity and adipogenesis.
Metabolomics in WAT indicate that treatment
with b-LGND2 increased energy expenditure,
oxphos, and energy biogenesis by
tricarboxylic acid cycle and non-tricarboxylic
acid cycle pathways
In order to further probe into the mechanisms of action for
the antiobesity effects of b-LGND2, we performed global
metabolomics profiling in the WAT isolated from animals
for which data are presented in Fig. 1B. WAT from mice
fed with HFD exhibited an increase in the level of 135
metabolites and a decrease in the level of 49 metabolites
compared to the WAT from mice fed with the ND (Sup-
plemental Table 1). On the other hand, treatment with
b-LGND2 increased the levels of 123 metabolites and de-
creased 8 metabolites compared to WAT isolated from
HFD-fed, vehicle-treated mice. Similar to the gene ex-
pression results, a heat map of the metabolites indicates
that their expression was significantly altered by the HFD
compared to the ND, which were principally reversed by
b-LGND2 (Fig. 3A). Principal component analysis (PCA)
of the metabolite levels from individual samples shows
that while samples from the ND-fed animals and HFD-fed
b-LGND2-treated animals clustered together, especially
on component 1, which contained 45% of the metabolites,
samples from HFD-fed, vehicle-treated mice clustered
distinctly (Fig. 3B). Of the 4 samples analyzed, 1 sample in
each group was an outlier, indicating the heterogeneity
that exists between the animals.
On the basis of the gene expression results demon-
stratinganincreaseinmarkersofBATintheWATsamples
obtained fromanimalstreated with b-LGND2,we queried
the metabolome data for metabolites belonging to path-
ways involved in energy synthesis and expenditure. Two
important pathways are critical for energy creation and
expenditure. They are the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
and the non-TCA cycle pathways, such as oxphos and
glycolysis (60, 61). While levels of 5 of the 6 TCA cycle
intermediates were reduced in the WAT samples from
vehicle-treated, HFD-fed animals, these intermediates
were increased in WAT samples from the b-LGND2-
treated, HFD-fed animals (Fig. 3C). Both metabolites be-
longing to the oxphos pathway, acetylphosphate and
phosphate, were decreased in vehicle-treated HFD-fed
mice and were significantly increased by b-LGND2
treatment (Fig. 3D).
Glycolysis is another major non-TCA cycle pathway
utilized to create energy (62). Metabolites belonging to
glycolysisweresignificantlyinhibitedintheWATsamples
obtained from HFD-fed, vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 3E).
b-LGND2 treatment significantly increased these metab-
olites, further increasing the potential for enhanced ATP
synthesis and energy levels.
ER-b, but not ER-a, ligand-dependently
inhibited differentiation of preadipocytes and
MSCs toward WAT and promoted
differentiation toward BAT
RNA sequencing and metabolomics data provide evi-
dencefortheformation ofBATbyb-LGND2that resultsin
an increase in energy synthesis and expenditure. These
data provide evidence that b-LGND2 either promotes the
formation of new BAT from stem cells or converts the
existing WAT to BAT (beige adipose tissue). In order to
resolve this question, we utilized in vitro cell culture ex-
periments where we overexpressed GFP, ER-a, or ER-b in
preadipocyte 3T3-L1 cells and in MSCs and differentiated
them toward mature adipocytes in the presence or ab-
sence of ER-b-selective b-LGND2 or isoform nonselective
272
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 estradiol (E2). At the end of 13 d of differentiation, cells
were analyzed to determine the type of adipocytes
formed (Fig. 4A). While treatment of ER-a-expressing
preadipocytes with E2 did not inhibit the formation of oil
droplets, treatment of ER-b-expressing preadipocytes with
estradiol significantly inhibited the number of oil droplets
formed in 3T3-L1 cells (Fig. 4B). These results were repro-
duced when the cells were treated with b-LGND2 (Sup-
plemental Fig. 6).
Expression of WAT- and BAT-related genes was mea-
sured in GFP-, ER-a-, and ER-b-expressing 3T3-L1 cells.
While ER-a-expressing E2-treated mature adipocytes
expressedsignificantlyhigherlevelsofWATmarkergenes
such as FABP4 (63, 64), CEBP-a (65), and LIPE (64), ER-
b-expressing, E2-treated mature adipocytes expressed
WAT marker genes at lower levels than GFP-transfected
cells (Fig. 4C, left panel). Contrary to the expression of
WAT-related genes, expression of BAT-related genes such
as UCP-1 (66), ELOVL3 (67), and CYC1 (68) were all sig-
nificantly up-regulated in ER-b-expressing E2-treated
cells, but not in ER-a-expressing E2-treated cells (Fig. 4C,
center panel). These results were reproduced with
b-LGND2 (Supplemental Fig. 7). Expression of ER-a and
ER-b within the cells is shown in Fig. 4C (right panel).
Preadipocytes evolve from MSCs (69), which will then
differentiate toward WAT or BAT, depending on the envi-
ronmental stimuli. We stably transfected GFP or ER-b into
human MSCs and differentiated them toward mature adi-
pocytes in the presence of b-LGND2 or E2 (Fig. 4A). Treat-
mentofER-b-expressingMSCswithb-LGND2significantly
inhibited the expression of WAT marker genes such as LPL
and CEBPa and concurrently increased the expression of
BAT marker genes such as UCP-1 and CYC-1 (Fig. 4D).
Theseresultsconfirmthedataobtainedinpreadipocyte3T3-
L1 and also provide evidence that ER-b and its ligands
differentiate stem cells toward BAT and away from WAT.
In order to determine whether ER-b and its ligands will
switch preadipocytes that have already embarked on a
differentiated path, we differentiated 3T3-L1 cells as de-
scribed in Fig. 4A, but we initiated treatment on various
days during differentiation (Fig. 4E) and measured
the expression of the BAT marker gene UCP-1. While
Figure 3. Metabolomics in WAT indicate enhancement of mitochondrial function and energy metabolism by b-LGND2.
Metabolites were profiled in WAT obtained from animals (n = 4 per group) shown in Fig. 1B. A) Heat map representing
statistically different metabolites. Scale and metabolites category are provided to right of heat map. B) PCA shows
clustering of individual samples used in metabolite profiling. C–E) Significantly different metabolites belonging to TCA
cycle (C), oxphos (D), and glucose metabolism (E) are represented. Values are expressed as averages 6 SE. *P , 0.05 vs.
ND; #P , 0.05 vs. HFD.
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
273
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 Figure 4. ER-b inhibits preadipocyte and MSC differentiation toward adipocytes and increases BAT marker genes. A) Schematic
showing experimental design adopted to differentiate preadipocytes 3T3-L1 and MSCs toward mature adipocytes. B)
Overexpression of ER-b inhibits differentiation of preadipocytes. 3T3-L1 cells stably transfected with GFP, ER-a, or ER-b
lentivirus were differentiated in presence of 10 nM estradiol as indicated in A. At the end of 14 d, oil droplets were imaged under
a microscope. Representative image is shown. Numbers of oil droplets in 10 random fields from each transfection were quantified
and are represented in right panel. C) Expression of ER-b ligand-dependently increases expression of BAT marker genes. 3T3-L1
cells were stably transfected with GFP, ER-b, or ER-a. Cells were differentiated toward mature adipocytes in presence of 10 nM
estradiol for 14 d, as depicted in A. At the end of 14 d, RNA was isolated, and expression of WAT (left panel) and BAT (right
panel) marker genes was quantified using real-time PCR and normalized to expression of glyceraldehyde phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and expression of ER-a and ER-b was quantified (right panel). D) ER-b inhibits differentiation of
MSCs toward mature adipocytes. MSCs stably transfected with GFP or ER-b were differentiated as described in presence of 1 mM
b-LGND2. At the end of 14 d, RNA was isolated, and expression of WAT (LPL-1, CEBP, and FABP4) and BAT (UCP-1 and CYC1)
marker genes was quantified using real-time PCR and normalized to expression of GAPDH. E) Time course of UCP-1 induction
by b-LGND2 in ER-b-expressing adipocytes. GFP- or ER-b-expressing 3T3-L1 cells were differentiated toward mature adipocytes
and treated (1 mM b-LGND2) on different days of differentiation. UCP-1 expression was quantified and normalized to expression
of GAPDH. Values are expressed as averages 6 SE. *P , 0.05 vs. ND; #P , 0.05 vs. HFD.
274
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 treatment initiation of ER-b-expressing cells with b-LGND2
on day 0 significantly increased the expression of UCP-1,
treatment initiation on days 4 or 7 failed to induce the
UCP-1 expression (Fig. 4E).
b-LGND2 treatment increased oxygen
consumption without increasing physical
activity of mice
Alloftheabovedescribedstudiespointtowardanincrease
in the formation of BAT by ER-b and its ligands. If this
hypothesis is true, formation of more BAT will increase
oxygen consumption and body temperature as a result of
an increase in thermogenesis. To test this, C57BL6/J mice
werefeda HFD and treated with vehicle or b-LGND2.The
mice were maintained at 25°C in CLAMS to continuously
monitor oxygen consumption, respiratory exchange ratio,
andactivity.b-LGND2treatment and HFD exposurewere
initiated 48 h after acclimatization of the animals to the
CLAMS. Vehicle-treated and b-LGND2-treated animals
had similar oxygen consumption and activity scores for
the first 48 h of acclimatization (Fig. 5A). Oxygen con-
sumption in the animals treated with b-LGND2 re-
markably increased over the next 6 d by 21% (P = 1.8e-131)
(Fig. 5A, left panel). This increase in oxygen consumption
was not a result of ambulatory activity (Fig. 5A, right
panel), indicating that these mice are burning more energy
and generating body heat without changing their physical
activity. This magnitude of oxygen consumption increase
widened over next 6 d. There was no change in respiratory
exchange ratio, body weight, or fat mass in the b-LGND2-
treated animals (Supplemental Fig. 8), indicating that the
increase in metabolic rate and energy expenditure pre-
cedes the previously observed antiobesity effects (Fig. 1B).
One of the properties of BAT is to increase core body
temperature, resulting in cold tolerance. In order to eval-
uate the performance of b-LGND2-treated animals under
cold exposure, CLAMS temperature was decreased to
18°C after 15 d at 25°C, and oxygen consumption and
activity score were measured while animals continued to
receive treatment (Fig. 5B). As expected, cold exposure
immediately and significantly increased oxygen con-
sumption in both groups, with b-LGND2-treated mice
immediately exhibiting a further 12.4% increase. The
b-LGND2-treated mice continued to maintain the signifi-
cant difference in oxygen consumption compared to the
vehicle-treated mice.
Increase in core body temperature is another confir-
mation of increased energy expenditure. Core body tem-
perature was measured in mice fed an HFD and treated
with vehicle or b-LGND2 (Fig. 5C). b-LGND2-treated
mice had a higher body core temperature than vehicle-
treated mice.
b-LGND2 treatment increased mitochondrial
gene expression in WAT
One of the hallmarks of energy expenditure is an increase
in mitochondrial activity (60). To determine whether
b-LGND2 increased mitochondrial gene expression as a
measure of mitochondriogenesis and mitochondrial
function, RNA was isolated from WAT of mice main-
tained at 25°C or at 18°C and fed with HFD and treated
with vehicle or b-LGND2. Expression of mitochondrial
and nuclear genes was measured by real-time PCR. As
expected, cold exposure increased mitochondrial gene
cytochrome B (CytB) significantly (Fig. 5D, left panel).
WAT from HFD-fed, b-LGND2-treated mice exhibited
significantly higher expression of CytB by over 100-fold
compared to that obtained from HFD-fed, vehicle-treated
mice (Fig. 5D, center panel). Similar to samples from mice
exposed to 25°C, WAT from mice treated with b-LGND2
and exposed to 18°C exhibited significantly higher ex-
pression of the mitochondrial genes, CytB and ND1 (Fig.
5D, right panel). b-LGND2 also increased UCP-1 by over
1000-fold and PGC-1 by 2.5-fold in WAT samples from
cold-exposed mice, both of which are markers of BAT
(Supplemental Fig. 9).
b-LGND2 and E2 receptor-dependently
increased mitochondrial respiration and OCR
in preadipocytes
In order to determine whether the increase in oxygen
consumption and mitochondrial activity are ER-b de-
pendent, we measured the OCR and ECAR in cells using
the Seahorse Bioanalyzer. Preadipocytes that were stably
transfected with GFP or ER-b were plated and differenti-
atedasdescribedinFig.4AinthepresenceorabsenceofE2
or b-LGND2. Ten days after differentiation, live cells were
analyzed in the Seahorse Bioanalyzer. OCR and ECAR
weresignificantlydifferentinE2andb-LGND2-treatedER-
b-expressing cells compared to E2- and b-LGND2-treated
GFP-expressing cells (Fig. 5E). These results support our in
vivo findings in the WAT samples and in animals in the
CLAMS that ER-b and its ligands appear to increase mi-
tochondrial activity.
Identification of serum biomarkers for
obesity and b-LGND2 treatment over time
Although favorable changes to body composition and
WAT were elicited by b-LGND2 treatment, identification
of serum biomarkers for obesity and ER-b-selective ligand
would advance the development of drugs and further
understand metabolites secreted in serum during these
changes. We also isolated serum from experimental ani-
mals before initiation of the experiments described in Fig.
1B to obtain information on age-related serum biomarkers
and the impact of obesity on these markers (Supplemental
Table 2). Because the experiment was conducted for a
period of 10 wk, any changes in serum metabolites over 10
wk of aging in lean, obese, and treated obese mice will
provide information on biomarkers that will be relevant in
the aging of normal and obese individuals.
PCA of serum metabolites shows that over time, the
metabolite profile of the mice is significantly altered irre-
spective of diet treatment (Fig. 6A). While the baseline
samples cluster distinctly, the other 3 groups (ND, HFD
vehicle, and b-LGND-2) clustered. Analysis of the raw
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
275
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 Figure 5. ER-b and its ligands increase oxygen consumption and mitochondrial respiration without increasing physical activity. A)
Male C57BL6/J mice (6–8 wk old; n = 8 per group) fed with HFD and treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg/d s.c. b-LGND2 were
maintained in CLAMS at 25°C for entire duration of experiment. Volume of oxygen (left panel) and ambulatory activity (right
panel) were measured constantly 24 h/d. HFD and drug treatment initiation time are indicated by arrow. B) Mice (n = 3 per
group) described in A that were maintained at 25°C for first 15 d were exposed to cold (18°C) and continued to receive HFD and
vehicle or b-LGND2 treatment. Volume of oxygen consumed was measured constantly 24 h/d. Cold exposure initiation is shown
by arrow. C) Body core temperature of mice fed with HFD and treated with vehicle or b-LGND2 at 25°C and 30°C. D)
Mitochondrial marker genes were up-regulated in WAT in animals maintained in cold and in animals treated with b-LGND2.
RNA was isolated from WAT of animals shown in A and B. Expression of mitochondrial genes was measured using real-time PCR
and normalized to large ribosomal protein (RPLPO). E) OCR and ECAR were increased by ER-b and its ligands. 3T3-L1 cells that
were stably transfected with GFP or ER-b were seeded in Seahorse plates and were differentiated in presence or absence of 10 nM
estradiol or 1 mM b-LGND2. Ten days after differentiation, mitochondrial respiration was measured with Seahorse Bioanalyzer
(n = 4). All points on E in ER-b transfected cells were significantly different compared to GFP transfected cells. *P , 0.05 vs. ND;
#P , 0.05 vs. HFD.
276
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 data indicates that most of the metabolites in the serum of
ND-fed animals were the nearest representatives of base-
line samples. This was followed by the metabolites from
the HFD-fed b-LGND2-treated animals.
This concept is represented in the heat map shown in
Fig. 6B. Although the average of the baseline samples was
greenacrossmorethan90% of themetabolites,theaverage
of the ND-fed animals showed some increased levels
(represented by red), although retaining most of the me-
tabolites at lower levels. Serum metabolites of the
b-LGND2-treated, HFD-fed animals could be rank or-
dered as next to the ND-fed animals, showing more in-
tensity in the expression of the studied metabolites. The
HFD-fed, vehicle-treated mice had the highest expression
of the serum metabolites. Two categories of metabolites
that have the highest expression in the HFD-fed, vehicle-
treated are sphingomyelin and fatty acids (Fig. 6C, D).
While it is expected that the HFD-fed animals would
significantly have higher levels of fatty acid metabolites, it
is interesting to observe an extremely high expression of
metabolites representing the sphingomyelin pathway.
While the serum metabolites of ND-fed animals look
similar to baseline samples, the metabolites of the HFD-
fed, vehicle-treated animals were higher than baseline or
ND-fedanimals.b-LGND2partiallyreducedtheintensity
of several of the metabolites belonging to the sphingo-
myelin pathway (Fig. 6C). Most, if not all, metabolites
were reduced by approximately half by treatment with
b-LGND2, and these metabolites were significantly dif-
ferent in samples from b-LGND2-treated animals com-
pared to HFD vehicle-treated animals.
Another set of metabolites that is significantly increased
intheHFD-fedanimalsisthefattyacidorlipidmetabolites.
Similar to the sphingomyelin metabolites, the level of fatty
acid metabolites was also reduced partially by b-LGND2
compared to HFD-fed, vehicle-treated levels (Fig. 6D).
DISCUSSION
Theinvitroandinvivodatawepresentherearesummarized
in the model depicted in Fig. 6E. ER-b and its selective li-
gands: reprogram MSCs to differentiate toward BAT, rather
than WAT; or increase the BAT phenotype by increasing
mitochondriogenesis and mitochondrial function. ER-
b-selective ligands bound to ER-b induce the expression of
genes that promote BAT-like characteristics and inhibit the
expressionofgenesthatblockBATformation(Fig.2).Energy
required for thermogenesis by BAT is provided by an in-
crease in glycolysis, TCA cycle, and OXPHOS, all culminat-
ing in potential ATP and energy synthesis (Fig. 3). Increases
in respiratory rate (Fig. 5) and body temperature dissipate
the energy derived from the enhanced mitochondrial bio-
genesis and biochemical processes of ATP synthesis.
The mitochondria is a unique organelle with its own
genome and potential to replicate independent of cell
division (70). It is the powerhouse of cells, and cells
depend on mitochondria for their energy needs.
Metabolomics data (Fig. 3) provide a clear picture of
the pathways involved in energy synthesis induced by
b-LGND2. BAT formation increases the energy need,
which was obtained by glycolysis and the TCA cycle.
While aerobic glycolysis promotes the formation of
pyruvate, anaerobic glycolysis leads to the formation
of lactate. In our metabolomics data, a 5-fold increase
in phosphoenoylpyruvate (Supplemental Table 1),
which is an end product of aerobic glycolysis, and less
than 2-fold increase in lactate formed by b-LGND2
indicate that aerobic glycolysis was the preferred
path of glycolysis by b-LGND2. Interestingly, a 5-fold
decreaseinphosphoenoylpyruvateformationinHFD-fed,
vehicle-treated mice indicates the absence of glycolysis
and ATP synthesis in obese mice. The pyruvate formed by
glycolysis entered TCA cycle (Supplemental Table 1) to
generate additional ATP. Oxphos is the main pathway for
ATP synthesis from glycolysis and TCA cycle. Changes in
metabolites belonging to glycolysis, TCA, and oxphos-
and insulin-dependent glucose disposal all support the
role of glycolysis and TCA in ER-b function. One of the
unknowns at this point is how much ATP was generated
by b-LGND2 by burning one molecule of glucose. Al-
though 32 ATPs can be generated from one glucose mole-
cule by glycolysis, TCA cycle, and oxphos combined, it is
difficult to achieve this maximum level. Determining the
maximum potential of ER-b ligands in this process will
help us to understand the distinction of ER-b ligands.
Another interesting observation is the high level of
sphingolipids in the serum of HFD-fed, vehicle-treated
mice, but not in ND-fed mice or b-LGND2-treated mice
(Fig. 6C). Sphingolipids have been attributed to, among
others, insulin resistance, inflammation, and carcinogen-
esis (71–73). Detection of high levels of sphingolipids in
the serum of obese animals could indicate the potential
for susceptibility to many diseases. Interestingly, these
sphingolipids were not differentially expressed in the
WAT, indicating that either they were synthesized by
WAT and secreted into serum or their tissue of origin was
different.
Some of the questions that need to be resolved are as
follows: Is ER-b expression in the adipose tissue the driv-
ing factor for the antiobesity effects of b-LGND2? Does
ER-b homodimerize or heterodimerize with ER-a to elicit
these effects? How much ATP is formed? The first 2 ques-
tions may be addressed by using an adipose-specific KO of
ER-b and ER-a. Also, these results have to be extended to
other chemical scaffolds of ER-b-selective ligands. Overall,
these studies provide evidence for the unique role for ER-b
and its ligands in adipose biology.
While estradiol, a non-isoform-selective agonist, re-
duces food consumption and subsequently body weight,
an ER-b-selective agonist such as b-LGND2 reduces body
weight without affecting food consumption. Satiety or
hyperphagia occur through cross-reactivity withtargets in
brain. Since b-LGND2 failed to affect food consumption,
we speculate that estradiol affects food intake by selec-
tively activating ER-a in brain, which is widely expressed
in brain than ER-b (74). Evidences also suggest that
estradiol regulates neuropeptide Y and a-melanocyte–
stimulating hormone (75), 2 targets important for con-
trolling food intake and energy homeostasis.
Although the functions of ERs are more pronounced
in females, the mechanistic studies we describe here were
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
277
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 Figure 6. Age-related changes in serum metabolites in lean and obese mice. Metabolites were identified in serum of animals
(n = 4 per group) shown in Fig. 1B. Serum was isolated from blood at euthanasia, and metabolites were identified. Baseline
samples (n = 4) were also obtained before initiation of experiment for comparison with end-of-experiment samples. A) PCA
shows clustering of individual samples. B) Serum metabolites are represented as heat map. C, D) Pathway-specific metabolites
belonging to sphingolipid (C) and fatty acid (D) metabolism are represented as heat maps. E) Model for action of ER-b in
adipocytes.
278
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 performed in male mice in order to eliminate the in-
terference of circulating estradiol. We earlier demon-
strated the efficacy of b-LGNDs in ovariectomy-induced
female obesity models (31). Since the studies described in
here were conducted to evaluate the mechanism of action
of ER-b and its selective ligands, circulating estradiol in
female mice that activates both ER-a and ER-b might
complicate the outcome and interpretation of the results.
To evaluate the effect of ER-b-selective ligand in female
mice, mice haveto be ovariectomized to reducecirculating
estradiol and then supplemented with an HFD in the
presence or absence of b-LGNDs. This can introduce an-
other variability of altered hormonal milieu while evalu-
ating the mechanism of action. In addition, previous
publications have described sex differences in ER-b ex-
pression, with male mouse tissues expressing higher levels
than female mouse tissues (36, 37). Future mechanistic
studies have to be conducted to explore the mechanism of
action in preclinical models of postmenopausal obesity in
female mice.
Pharmacologic intervention to increase the BAT has
been a subjectof significant interest andresearch. Agonists
of PPAR-ɣ, b3 adrenergic receptor (b3AR), and FGF-21,
inhibitors of JAK, antagonists of LXR, and agonists of FXR
have provided promising results to increase BAT or con-
vert WAT to BAT or beige fat in preclinical models (13,
76–78). ER-b-selective ligands now fall under the class of
molecules that have the potential to increase BAT or beige
fat. Because of the significant increase in oxygen con-
sumption without a concomitant increase in physical ac-
tivity, these molecules could also be classified as exercise
mimetics. One of the concerns of activating b3AR and
PPAR-ɣ is cardiovascular toxicity (76). Earlier studies have
shown that b-LGND2 through ER-b reduced cardiac hy-
pertrophy and fibrosis in angiotensin-induced hyperten-
sive models, alleviating concerns of cardiotoxicity due to
this pathway (79–81).
Functional BAT has been clearly demonstrated in hu-
mans. Five percent of women and1.3% of men recruited to
a study expressed BAT (82). Body weight of BAT-positive
individuals was approximately 5 kg lower than individ-
uals lacking BAT (82). UCP-1-expressingfunctional BAT is
stimulatedbycoldexposure.Ifpharmacologicapproaches
such as b-LGND2 could achieve this at room temperature,
many obese individuals living in tropical regions where
cold exposure cannot be achieved may benefit. Ap-
proaches such as UCP-1-expressing BAT transplant in
humans using hydrogels have been proposed to combat
obesity (83). Results from feasibility studies in mice are
encouraging. All these clearly demonstrate the impor-
tance of BAT or beige adipose tissue in combating obesity.
IfsignificantincreaseinUCP-1-expressingfunctionalBAT
or beige adipose tissue could be achieved by b-LGND2
without any adverse effects on the cardiovascular system,
ER-b and its ligands could become an important player in
the fight against obesity and metabolic diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank M. Lee Barret, M. Star, and N. Koehler
all from the University of Tennessee Health Science Center)
for their help with the animal studies. The authors also thank
R. H. Getzenberg (GTx, Inc.) for reviewing an early version of
the article. Part of the work was supported by U.S.
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Di-
abetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Grant DK107575, a
Memphis Research Consortium grant (to D.B.), and the
Quigley Award (to I.H.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S. Ponnusamy, I. Harvey, H. S. Smallwood, T. Thiyagar-
ajan, S. Banerjee, and R. D. Sullivan performed the
experiments; D. Bridges and R. Narayanan designed the
experiments; J. T. Dalton and D. D. Miller provided
reagents; D. Bridges, Q. T. Tran, and D. L. Johnson
analyzed data; R. Narayanan wrote the manuscript; and
R. Narayanan is a consultant to GTx, Inc.
REFERENCES
1.
Flegal, K. M., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., and Ogden, C. L. (2012)
Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution of body mass
index among U.S. adults, 1999–2010. JAMA 307, 491–497
2.
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., and Flegal, K. M. (2014)
Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United States,
2011–2012. JAMA 311, 806–814
3.
Shrager, B., Jibara, G. A., Tabrizian, P., Roayaie, S., and Ward, S. C.
(2012) Resection of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis–associated hepato-
cellular carcinoma: a Western experience. Int. J. Surg. Oncol. 2012,
915128
4.
Jensen, M. D., Ryan, D. H., Apovian, C. M., Ard, J. D., Comuzzie, A. G.,
Donato, K. A., Hu, F. B., Hubbard, V. S., Jakicic, J. M., Kushner, R. F.,
Loria, C. M., Millen, B. E., Nonas, C. A., Pi-Sunyer, F. X., Stevens, J.,
Stevens, V. J., Wadden, T. A., Wolfe, B. M., and Yanovski, S. Z.;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines; Obesity Society. (2014) 2013 AHA/
ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and obesity
in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Obesity
Society. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 63(25PtB), 2985–3023 . Erratum in: J. Am.
Coll. Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B), 3029–3030
5.
Bray,G.A.,andGray,D.S.(1988)Obesity.Part I—pathogenesis.West.
J. Med. 149, 429–441
6.
Madden, N. (2015)Obesityweighing down U.S. economy, study finds
[electronicversion].WashingtonTimes.RetrievedSeptember19,2016,
from http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/may/13/obe-
sity-weighing-down-us-economy-study-finds/
7.
Jones, B. J., and Bloom, S. R. (2015) The new era of drug therapy for
obesity: the evidence and the expectations. Drugs 75, 935–945
8.
Cunningham, J. W., and Wiviott, S. D. (2014) Modern obesity
pharmacotherapy: weighing cardiovascular risk and benefit. Clin.
Cardiol. 37, 693–699
9.
Patel, D. (2015) Pharmacotherapy for the management of obesity.
Metabolism 64, 1376–1385
10.
Smith, S. R., Weissman, N. J., Anderson, C. M., Sanchez, M., Chuang,
E., Stubbe, S., Bays, H., Shanahan, W. R., and Behavioral, M.;
Behavioral Modification and Lorcaserin for Overweight and Obesity
Management (BLOOM) Study Group. (2010) Multicenter, placebo-
controlled trial of lorcaserin for weight management. N. Engl. J. Med.
363, 245–256
11.
Mercken, E.M.,Carboneau, B.A.,Krzysik-Walker,S. M., and deCabo,
R. (2012) Of mice and men: the benefits of caloric restriction,
exercise, and mimetics. Ageing Res. Rev. 11, 390–398
12.
Lee, Y.K., and Cowan, C. A. (2013) Whiteto brite adipocyte transition
and back again. Nat. Cell Biol. 15, 568–569
13.
Moisan, A., Lee, Y. K., Zhang, J. D., Hudak, C. S., Meyer, C. A.,
Prummer, M., Zoffmann, S., Truong, H. H., Ebeling, M., Kiialainen,
A., G´
erard, R., Xia, F., Schinzel, R. T., Amrein, K. E., and Cowan, C. A.
(2015)White-to-brown metabolic conversion of human adipocytes by
JAK inhibition. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 57–67
14.
Roberts, L. D., Bostr¨
om, P., O’Sullivan, J. F., Schinzel, R. T., Lewis,
G. D., Dejam, A., Lee, Y. K., Palma, M. J., Calhoun, S., Georgiadi, A.,
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
279
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 Chen, M. H., Ramachandran, V. S., Larson, M. G., Bouchard, C.,
Rankinen, T., Souza, A. L., Clish,C. B., Wang, T. J., Estall, J. L., Soukas,
A. A., Cowan, C. A., Spiegelman, B. M., and Gerszten, R. E. (2014)
b-Aminoisobutyric acid induces browning of white fat and hepatic
b-oxidation and is inversely correlated with cardiometabolic risk
factors. Cell Metab. 19, 96–108
15.
Fan, W., Atkins, A. R., Yu, R. T., Downes, M., and Evans, R. M. (2013)
Road to exercise mimetics: targeting nuclear receptors in skeletal
muscle. J. Mol. Endocrinol. 51, T87–T100
16.
Narkar, V. A., Downes, M., Yu, R. T., Embler, E., Wang, Y. X., Banayo,
E., Mihaylova, M. M., Nelson, M. C., Zou, Y., Juguilon, H., Kang, H.,
Shaw,R.J.,andEvans,R.M.(2008)AMPKandPPARdeltaagonistsare
exercise mimetics. Cell 134, 405–415
17.
Bhardwaj, P., Du, B., Zhou, X. K., Sue, E., Giri, D., Harbus, M. D.,
Falcone, D. J., Hudis, C. A., Subbaramaiah, K., and Dannenberg, A. J.
(2015) Estrogen protects against obesity-induced mammary gland
inflammation in mice. Cancer Prev. Res. (Phila.) 8, 751–759
18.
Luglio, H. F. (2014) Estrogen and body weight regulation in women:
the role ofestrogen receptor alpha (ER-a) on adipocytelipolysis.Acta
Med. Indones. 46, 333–338
19.
Davis,K.E.,Carstens,E.J.,Irani,B.G.,Gent, L.M.,Hahner,L.M.,and
Clegg, D. J. (2014) Sexually dimorphic role of G protein–coupled
estrogen receptor (GPER) in modulating energy homeostasis. Horm.
Behav. 66, 196–207
20.
Cypess, A. M., Lehman, S., Williams, G., Tal, I., Rodman, D., Goldfine,
A. B., Kuo, F. C., Palmer, E. L., Tseng, Y. H., Doria, A., Kolodny, G. M.,
and Kahn, C. R. (2009) Identification and importance of brown
adipose tissue in adult humans. N. Engl. J. Med. 360, 1509–1517
21.
Wang, Y., Shoemaker, R., Thatcher, S. E., Batifoulier-Yiannikouris, F.,
English,V. L., andCassis,L.A. (2015)Administrationof17b-estradiol
to ovariectomized obese female mice reverses obesity-hypertension
through an ACE2-dependent mechanism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab. 308, E1066–E1075
22.
Salamanca, S., and Uphouse, L. (1992) Estradiol modulation of the
hyperphagia induced by the 5-HT1Aagonist,8-OH-DPAT. Pharmacol.
Biochem. Behav. 43, 953–955
23.
Musatov, S., Chen, W., Pfaff, D. W., Mobbs, C. V., Yang, X. J., Clegg,
D. J., Kaplitt, M. G., and Ogawa, S. (2007) Silencing of estrogen
receptor alpha in the ventromedial nucleus of hypothalamus leads to
metabolic syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 2501–2506
24.
Santollo, J., and Eckel, L. A. (2013) Oestradiol decreases melanin-
concentratinghormone(MCH)andMCHreceptorexpressioninthe
hypothalamus of female rats. J. Neuroendocrinol. 25, 570–579
25.
Rivera, H. M., Santollo, J., Nikonova, L. V., and Eckel, L. A. (2012)
Estradiol increases the anorexia associated with increased 5-HT(2C)
receptoractivationinovariectomizedrats.Physiol.Behav.105,188–194
26.
Dierks-Ventling, C., and Bieri-Bonniot, F. (1977) Stimulation of RNA
polymerase I and II activities by 17 beta-estradiol receptor on chick
liver chromatin. Nucleic Acids Res. 4, 381–395
27.
Kuiper, G. G., Enmark, E., Pelto-Huikko, M., Nilsson, S., and
Gustafsson, J. A. (1996) Cloning of a novel receptor expressed in rat
prostate and ovary. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 5925–5930
28.
Revankar, C. M., Cimino, D. F., Sklar, L. A., Arterburn, J. B., and
Prossnitz, E. R. (2005) A transmembrane intracellular estrogen
receptor mediates rapid cell signaling. Science 307, 1625–1630
29.
Yoshii, T., Yamada, M., Minami, T., Tsunoda, T., Sasaki, M., Kondo, Y.,
Satoh, S., and Terauchi, Y. (2015) The effects of bazedoxifene on
bone, glucose, and lipid metabolism in postmenopausal women with
type 2 diabetes: an exploratory pilot study. J. Clin. Med. Res. 7, 762–769
30.
Meyer, M. R., Fredette, N. C., Howard, T. A., Hu, C., Ramesh, C.,
Daniel,C.,Amann,K.,Arterburn,J.B.,Barton,M.,andProssnitz,E.R.
(2014)
G
protein–coupled
estrogen
receptor
protects
from
atherosclerosis. Sci. Rep. 4, 7564
31.
Yepuru, M., Eswaraka, J., Kearbey, J. D., Barrett, C. M., Raghow, S.,
Veverka, K. A., Miller, D. D., Dalton, J. T., and Narayanan, R. (2010)
Estrogen receptor-beta-selective ligands alleviate high-fat diet– and
ovariectomy-induced obesity in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 31292–31303
32.
Jungbauer, A., and Medjakovic, S. (2014) Phytoestrogens and the
metabolic syndrome. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 139, 277–289
33.
Weigt, C., Hertrampf, T., Kluxen, F. M., Flenker, U., H¨
ulsemann, F.,
Fritzemeier, K. H., and Diel, P. (2013) Molecular effects of ER alpha-
and beta-selective agonists on regulation of energy homeostasis in
obese female Wistar rats. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 377, 147–158
34.
Heine, P. A., Taylor, J. A., Iwamoto, G. A., Lubahn, D. B., and Cooke,
P. S. (2000) Increased adipose tissue in male and female estrogen
receptor-alpha knockout mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97,
12729–12734
35.
Cooke, P. S., Heine, P. A., Taylor, J. A., and Lubahn, D. B. (2001) The
role of estrogen and estrogen receptor-alpha in male adipose tissue.
Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 178, 147–154
36.
Ivanova, T., and Beyer, C. (2000) Ontogenetic expression and sex
differences of aromatase and estrogen receptor-alpha/betamRNA in
the mouse hippocampus. Cell Tissue Res. 300, 231–237
37.
Karolczak, M., and Beyer, C. (1998) Developmental sex differences
in estrogen receptor-beta mRNA expression in the mouse
hypothalamus/preoptic region. Neuroendocrinology 68, 229–234
38.
Chiang, S. H., Chang, L., and Saltiel, A. R. (2006) TC10 and insulin-
stimulated glucose transport. Methods Enzymol. 406, 701–714
39.
Foryst-Ludwig, A.,Clemenz,M.,Hohmann,S., Hartge, M., Sprang, C.,
Frost, N., Krikov, M., Bhanot, S., Barros, R., Morani, A., Gustafsson,
J. A., Unger, T., and Kintscher, U. (2008) Metabolic actions of
estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) are mediated bya negativecross-talk
with PPARgamma. PLoS Genet. 4, e1000108
40.
Burke, L. K., Doslikova, B., D’Agostino, G., Garfield, A. S., Farooq, G.,
Burdakov, D., Low, M. J., Rubinstein, M., Evans, M. L., Billups, B., and
Heisler, L. K. (2014) 5-HT obesity medication efficacy via POMC
activation is maintained during aging. Endocrinology 155, 3732–3738
41.
Thomsen, W. J., Grottick, A. J., Menzaghi, F., Reyes-Saldana, H.,
Espitia, S., Yuskin, D., Whelan, K., Martin, M., Morgan, M., Chen, W.,
Al-Shamma, H., Smith, B., Chalmers, D., and Behan, D. (2008)
Lorcaserin, a novel selective human 5-hydroxytryptamine2C agonist:
invitroandinvivopharmacologicalcharacterization.J.Pharmacol.Exp.
Ther. 325, 577–587
42.
Smith, B. M., Smith, J. M., Tsai, J. H., Schultz, J. A., Gilson, C. A.,
Estrada, S. A., Chen, R. R., Park, D. M., Prieto, E. B., Gallardo, C. S.,
Sengupta, D., Dosa, P. I., Covel, J. A., Ren, A., Webb, R. R., Beeley,
N. R., Martin, M., Morgan, M., Espitia, S., Saldana, H. R., Bjenning, C.,
Whelan,K.T.,Grottick,A.J.,Menzaghi,F.,andThomsen,W.J.(2008)
Discovery and structure-activity relationship of (1R)-8-chloro-2,3,4,5-
tetrahydro-1-methyl-1H-3-benzazepine (lorcaserin), a selective sero-
tonin 5-HT2C receptor agonist for the treatment of obesity. J. Med.
Chem. 51, 305–313
43.
An, S., Han, J. I., Kim, M. J., Park, J. S., Han, J. M., Baek, N. I., Chung,
H. G., Choi, M. S., Lee, K. T., and Jeong, T. S. (2010) Ethanolic
extracts of Brassica campestris spp. rapa roots prevent high-fat diet–
induced obesity via beta(3)-adrenergic regulation of white adipocyte
lipolytic activity. J. Med. Food 13, 406–414
44.
Ingalls, A. M., Dickie, M. M., and Snell, G. D. (1950) Obese, a new
mutation in the house mouse. J. Hered. 41, 317–318
45.
Wu, J., Bostr¨
om, P., Sparks, L. M., Ye, L., Choi, J. H., Giang, A. H.,
Khandekar,M., Virtanen, K. A., Nuutila,P.,Schaart, G.,Huang,K., Tu,
H.,vanMarkenLichtenbelt,W.D.,Hoeks,J.,Enerb¨
ack,S.,Schrauwen,
P.,andSpiegelman,B.M.(2012)Beigeadipocytesareadistincttypeof
thermogenic fat cell in mouse and human. Cell 150, 366–376
46.
Harms, M., and Seale, P. (2013) Brown and beige fat: development,
function and therapeutic potential. Nat. Med. 19, 1252–1263
47.
Virtanen, K. A., Lidell, M. E., Orava, J., Heglind, M., Westergren, R.,
Niemi, T., Taittonen, M., Laine, J., Savisto, N. J., Enerb¨
ack, S., and
Nuutila, P. (2009) Functional brown adipose tissue in healthy adults.
N. Engl. J. Med. 360, 1518–1525
48.
Wang,W.,Kissig,M.,Rajakumari,S.,Huang,L.,Lim,H.W.,Won,K.J.,
and Seale, P. (2014) Ebf2 is a selective marker of brown and beige
adipogenicprecursorcells.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA111,14466–14471
49.
Lidell, M. E., Seifert, E. L., Westergren, R., Heglind, M., Gowing, A.,
Sukonina, V., Arani, Z., Itkonen, P., Wallin, S., Westberg, F.,
Fernandez-Rodriguez, J., Laakso, M., Nilsson, T., Peng, X. R.,
Harper, M. E., and Enerb¨
ack, S. (2011) The adipocyte-expressed
forkhead transcription factor Foxc2 regulates metabolism through
altered mitochondrial function. Diabetes 60, 427–435
50.
Hao, Q., Yadav, R., Basse, A. L., Petersen, S., Sonne, S. B., Rasmussen, S.,
Zhu,Q.,Lu,Z.,Wang,J.,Audouze,K.,Gupta,R.,Madsen,L.,Kristiansen,
K., and Hansen, J. B. (2015) Transcriptome profiling of brown adipose
tissue during cold exposure reveals extensive regulation of glucose
metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 308, E380–E392
51.
Gnad, T., Scheibler, S., von K¨
ugelgen, I., Scheele, C., Kili´
c, A., Gl¨
ode,
A., Hoffmann, L. S., Reverte-Salisa, L., Horn, P., Mutlu, S., El-Tayeb,
A., Kranz, M., Deuther-Conrad, W., Brust, P., Lidell, M. E., Betz, M. J.,
Enerb¨
ack, S., Schrader, J., Yegutkin, G. G., M¨
uller, C. E., and Pfeifer,
A. (2014) Adenosine activates brown adipose tissue and recruitsbeige
adipocytes via A2A receptors. Nature 516, 395–399
52.
Liang,J.,Xu,Z.X.,Ding,Z.,Lu,Y.,Yu,Q.,Werle,K.D.,Zhou,G.,Park,
Y. Y., Peng, G., Gambello, M. J., and Mills, G. B. (2015) Myristoylation
confers noncanonical AMPK functions in autophagy selectivity and
mitochondrial surveillance. Nat. Commun. 6, 7926
280
Vol. 31
January 2017
PONNUSAMY ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
 53.
Wu, Q., Tang, S. G., and Yuan, Z. M. (2015) Gremlin 2 inhibits
adipocyte differentiation through activation of Wnt/b-catenin
signaling. Mol. Med. Rep. 12, 5891–5896
54.
Li, A., Leung, C. T., Peterson-Yantorno, K., Stamer, W. D., Mitchell,
C. H., and Civan, M. M. (2012) Mechanisms of ATP release by human
trabecular meshwork cells, the enabling step in purinergic regulation
of aqueous humor outflow. J. Cell. Physiol. 227, 172–182
55.
Guirguis, E., Hockman, S., Chung, Y. W., Ahmad, F., Gavrilova, O.,
Raghavachari, N., Yang, Y., Niu, G., Chen, X., Yu, Z. X., Liu, S.,
Degerman,E.,andManganiello,V.(2013)Aroleforphosphodiesterase
3B in acquisition of brown fat characteristics by white adipose tissue in
male mice. Endocrinology 154, 3152–3167
56.
Rup´
erez, A. I., Olza, J., Gil-Campos, M., Leis, R., Mesa, M. D., Tojo, R.,
Cañete, R., Gil, ´
A., and Aguilera, C. M. (2014) Association of genetic
polymorphisms for glutathione peroxidase genes with obesity in
Spanish children. J. Nutrigenet. Nutrigenomics 7, 130–142
57.
Catal´
an, V., G´
omez-Ambrosi, J., Rodr´
ıguez, A., Ram´
ırez, B., Silva, C.,
Rotellar, F., Gil, M. J., Cienfuegos, J. A., Salvador, J., and Fr¨
uhbeck, G.
(2009) Increased adipose tissue expression of lipocalin-2 in obesity
is related to inflammation and matrix metalloproteinase-2 and
metalloproteinase-9activitiesinhumans.J.Mol.Med.(Berl.)87,803–813
58.
Fried, S. K., and Greenberg, A. S. (2012) Lipocalin 2: a “sexy”
adipokine that regulates 17b-estradiol and obesity. Endocrinology 153,
1582–1584
59.
Gustafson, B., Hammarstedt, A., Hedjazifar, S., Hoffmann, J. M.,
Svensson, P. A., Grimsby, J., Rondinone, C., and Smith, U. (2015)
BMP4 and BMP antagonists regulate human white and beige
adipogenesis. Diabetes 64, 1670–1681
60.
Heinonen,S.,Buzkova,J., Muniandy,M., Kaksonen,R.,Ollikainen, M.,
Ismail, K., Hakkarainen, A., Lundbom, J., Lundbom, N., Vuolteenaho,
K., Moilanen, E., Kaprio, J., Rissanen, A., Suomalainen, A., and
Pietil¨
ainen, K. H. (2015) Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis in
adipose tissue in acquired obesity. Diabetes 64, 3135–3145
61.
Schmid, G. M., Converset, V., Walter, N., Sennitt, M. V., Leung, K. Y.,
Byers, H., Ward, M., Hochstrasser, D. F., Cawthorne, M. A., and
Sanchez, J. C. (2004) Effect of high-fat diet on the expression of
proteins in muscle, adipose tissues, and liver of C57BL/6 mice. Pro-
teomics 4, 2270–2282
62.
Costanzo-Garvey, D. L., Pfluger, P. T., Dougherty, M. K., Stock, J. L.,
Boehm, M., Chaika, O., Fernandez, M. R., Fisher, K., Kortum, R. L.,
Hong, E. G., Jun, J. Y., Ko, H. J., Schreiner, A., Volle, D. J., Treece, T.,
Swift, A. L., Winer, M., Chen, D., Wu, M., Leon, L. R., Shaw, A. S.,
McNeish, J., Kim, J. K., Morrison, D. K., Tsch¨
op, M. H., and Lewis,
R. E. (2009) KSR2 is an essential regulator of AMP kinase, energy
expenditure, and insulin sensitivity. Cell Metab. 10, 366–378
63.
Qian, S. W., Tang, Y., Li, X., Liu, Y., Zhang, Y. Y., Huang, H. Y., Xue,
R. D., Yu, H. Y., Guo, L., Gao, H. D., Liu, Y., Sun, X., Li, Y. M., Jia, W. P.,
and Tang, Q. Q. (2013) BMP4-mediated brown fat–like changes in
white adipose tissue alter glucose and energy homeostasis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 110, E798–E807
64.
Bag, S., Ramaiah, S., and Anbarasu, A. (2015) fabp4 is central to eight
obesityassociatedgenes:afunctionalgenenetwork–basedpolymorphic
study. J. Theor. Biol. 364, 344–354
65.
Rosen,E.D.,Hsu,C.H.,Wang,X.,Sakai,S.,Freeman,M.W.,Gonzalez,
F. J., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2002) C/EBPalpha induces adipogenesis
through PPARgamma: a unified pathway. Genes Dev. 16, 22–26
66.
Lean, M. E., and James, W. P. (1983) Uncoupling protein in human
brown adipose tissue mitochondria. Isolation and detection by
specific antiserum. FEBS Lett. 163, 235–240
67.
Ji, L., Gupta, M., and Feldman, B. J. (2016) Vitamin D regulates fatty
acid composition in subcutaneous adipose tissue through Elovl3.
Endocrinology 1, 91–97
68.
Chrysovergis, K., Wang, X., Kosak, J., Lee, S. H., Kim, J. S., Foley, J. F.,
Travlos, G., Singh, S., Baek, S. J., and Eling, T. E. (2014) NAG-1/GDF-
15 prevents obesity by increasing thermogenesis, lipolysis and oxida-
tive metabolism. Int. J. Obes. 38, 1555–1564
69.
Fink, T., and Zachar, V. (2011) Adipogenic differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 698, 243–251
70.
Chan, D. C. (2006) Mitochondria: dynamic organelles in disease,
aging, and development. Cell 125, 1241–1252
71.
Choi, S., and Snider, A. J. (2015) Sphingolipids in high fat diet and
obesity-related diseases. Mediators Inflamm. 2015, 520618
72.
Kurek, K., Mikłosz, A., Łukaszuk, B., Chabowski, A., G´
orski, J., and
˙
Zendzian-Piotrowska, M. (2015) Inhibition of ceramide de novo
synthesis ameliorates diet induced skeletal muscles insulin resistance.
J. Diabetes Res. 2015, 154762
73.
Matula, K., Collie-Duguid, E., Murray, G., Parikh, K., Grabsch, H.,
Tan, P., Lalwani, S., Garau, R., Ong, Y., Bain, G., Smith, A. D.,
Urquhart, G., Bielawski, J., Finnegan, M., and Petty, R. (2015)
Regulation of cellular sphingosine-1-phosphate by sphingosine
kinase 1 and sphingosine-1-phopshate lyase determines chemo-
therapy resistance in gastroesophageal cancer. BMC Cancer 15,
762
74.
P´
erez, S. E., Chen, E. Y., and Mufson, E. J. (2003) Distribution of
estrogen receptor alpha and beta immunoreactive profiles in the
postnatal rat brain. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 145, 117–139
75.
Rebouças, E. C., Leal, S., and S´
a, S. I. (2016) Regulation of NPY and
a-MSHexpressionbyestradiolinthearcuatenucleusofWistarfemale
rats: a stereological study. Neurol. Res. 38, 740–747
76.
Peng, X. R., Gennemark, P., O’Mahony, G., and Bartesaghi, S. (2015)
Unlock the thermogenic potential of adiposetissue: pharmacological
modulation and implications for treatment of diabetes and obesity.
Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 6, 174
77.
Miao, Y., Wu, W., Dai, Y., Maneix, L., Huang, B., Warner, M., and
Gustafsson, J. A. (2015) Liver X receptor b controls thyroid
hormone feedback in the brain and regulates browning of
subcutaneous white adipose tissue. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112,
14006–14011
78.
Fang, S., Suh, J. M., Reilly, S. M., Yu, E., Osborn, O., Lackey, D.,
Yoshihara, E., Perino, A., Jacinto, S., Lukasheva, Y., Atkins, A. R.,
Khvat,A., Schnabl, B., Yu, R. T., Brenner, D. A., Coulter, S., Liddle, C.,
Schoonjans, K., Olefsky, J. M., Saltiel, A. R., Downes, M., and Evans,
R. M. (2015) Intestinal FXR agonism promotes adipose tissue
browning and reduces obesity and insulin resistance. Nat. Med. 21,
159–165
79.
Pedram, A., Razandi, M., Korach, K. S., Narayanan, R., Dalton, J. T.,
and Levin, E. R. (2013) ERb selective agonist inhibits angiotensin-
induced cardiovascular pathology in female mice. Endocrinology 154,
4352–4364
80.
Pedram, A., Razandi, M., Narayanan, R., Dalton, J.T., McKinsey, T. A.,
and Levin, E. R. (2013) Estrogen regulates histone deacetylases to
prevent cardiac hypertrophy. Mol. Biol. Cell 24, 3805–3818
81.
Pedram, A., Razandi, M., O’Mahony, F., Lubahn, D., and Levin, E. R.
(2010) Estrogen receptor-beta prevents cardiac fibrosis. Mol. Endo-
crinol. 24, 2152–2165
82.
Wang, Q., Zhang, M., Xu, M., Gu, W., Xi, Y., Qi, L., Li, B., and Wang,
W. (2015) Brown adipose tissue activation is inversely related to
central obesity and metabolic parameters in adult human. PLoS One
10, e0123795
83.
Tharp, K. M., and Stahl, A. (2015) Bioengineering beige adipose
tissue therapeutics. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 6, 164
Received for publication July 13, 2016.
Accepted for publication September 22, 2016.
ACTIVATION OF ER-b
281
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 06, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 266-281.
