 Genome Editing in Neuroepithelial Stem Cells to
Generate Human Neurons with High
Adenosine-Releasing Capacity
DANIEL POPPE,a JONAS DOERR,a MARION SCHNEIDER,b RUVEN WILKENS,a JULIUS A. STEINBECK,a
JULIA LADEWIG,a,d,e,f ALLISON TAM,c DAVID E. PASCHON,c PHILIP D. GREGORY,c ANDREAS REIK,c
CHRISTA E. MU
¨LLER
,b PHILIPP KOCH
,a,d,e,f OLIVER BRU
¨STLEa
Key Words. Adenosine secretion • Gene-editing • Human neurons • Adenosine kinase •
Neuroepithelial stem cells
ABSTRACT
As a powerful regulator of cellular homeostasis and metabolism, adenosine is involved in diverse
neurological processes including pain, cognition, and memory. Altered adenosine homeostasis has
also been associated with several diseases such as depression, schizophrenia, or epilepsy. Based on
its protective properties, adenosine has been considered as a potential therapeutic agent for vari-
ous brain disorders. Since systemic application of adenosine is hampered by serious side effects
such as vasodilatation and cardiac suppression, recent studies aim at improving local delivery by
depots, pumps, or cell-based applications. Here, we report on the characterization of adenosine-
releasing human embryonic stem cell-derived neuroepithelial stem cells (long-term self-renewing
neuroepithelial stem [lt-NES] cells) generated by zinc finger nuclease (ZFN)-mediated knockout of
the adenosine kinase (ADK) gene. ADK-deficient lt-NES cells and their differentiated neuronal and
astroglial progeny exhibit substantially elevated release of adenosine compared to control cells.
Importantly, extensive adenosine release could be triggered by excitation of differentiated neuronal
cultures, suggesting a potential activity-dependent regulation of adenosine supply. Thus, ZFN-
modified neural stem cells might serve as a useful vehicle for the activity-dependent local therapeu-
tic delivery of adenosine into the central nervous system. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
2018;7:477–486
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
This study generated human neuroepithelial stem cell (long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial
stem cells) deficient for adenosine kinase (ADK), the most important cellular metabolizing
enzyme of adenosine. The purine nucleoside adenosine has been described to have extensive
neuroprotective properties under various pathological conditions of the brain and can counter-
act overshooting neuronal activity. The resulting cells can be efficiently differentiated into neu-
rons and astrocytes in vitro and in vivo and exhibit elevated adenosine releasing capacities.
Secretion of adenosine from neurons can be triggered by excitation, providing the basis for
ADK-deficient neurons as an attractive therapeutic tool for the local “on-demand” delivery in
epilepsy.
INTRODUCTION
The purine nucleoside adenosine has essential
roles in many biochemical processes of the
human body such as energy homeostasis or signal
transduction. Under stress conditions, adenosine
is upregulated, a response that can have extensive
protective effects in various organs, including the
cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, renal, muscular, or
immune system [1–3]. In the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS), high neuronal activity elicits an
increase in adenosine release, which acts via A1
receptors inhibiting the release probability of
presynaptic glutamate and activating postsynaptic
G protein-coupled inwardly rectifying potassium
(GIRK) channels, thereby eliciting postsynaptic
hyperpolarization [4, 5]. These responses attenu-
ate excessive neuronal activity, thereby protecting
against several pathological conditions such as
ischemic injuries, trauma, reduced oxygen supply,
pain, and in particular, epileptic seizures [6, 7]. In
this context, adenosine and pharmacological acti-
vators of its neuronal A1 receptors have been
shown to act as potent anticonvulsant drugs [8].
Due to these broad neuroprotective proper-
ties, adenosine has been considered as a potential
aInstitute of Reconstructive
Neurobiology, University of
Bonn and Hertie Foundation,
Bonn, Germany;
bPharmaCenter Bonn,
Pharmaceutical Institute,
Pharmaceutical Chemistry I,
University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany; cSangamo
Therapeutics, Richmond,
California, USA; dCentral
Institute of Mental Health,
University of Heidelberg/
Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany;
eHector Institute for
Translational Brain Research
(HITBR gGmbH), Mannheim,
Germany; fGerman Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany
Correspondence: Oliver Br€
ustle,
M.D., Institute of Reconstructive
Neurobiology, Life & Brain
Center, University of Bonn,
Medical Faculty, Sigmund-Freud-
Str. 25, Bonn 53127, Germany.
Telephone: 149 (0)228 6885
500; e-mail: brustle@uni-bonn.
de; or Philipp Koch, M.D.,
Hector Institute for Translational
Brain Research (HITBR), Central
Institute of Mental Health,
University of Heidelberg,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, J5,
Mannheim 68159, Germany.
Telephone: (149) 621 1703
6711; e-mail: philipp.koch@zi-
mannheim.de
Received June 6, 2016; accepted
for publication January 29, 2018;
first published March 28, 2018.
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.16-0272
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCom-
mercial-NoDerivs License, which
permits use and distribution in
any medium, provided the origi-
nal work is properly cited, the use
is non-commercial and no modifi-
cations or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2018;7:477–486 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2018 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR CELL-BASED CLINICAL
TRANSLATION
 therapeutic agent to treat disorders of the CNS. However, ham-
pered by its diverse systemic actions such as cardiac suppression
or vasodilation [9], its fast-metabolic breakdown and an insuffi-
cient permeability of the blood-brain-barrier [10], delivery of
adenosine to the CNS has remained challenging. In attempts to
bypass this limitation, adenosine has been delivered locally using
mini-pumps or cell free deposits of silk-polymers. These experi-
ments revealed temporary but potent anticonvulsive modulation
of epileptic activity in a kindling model of epileptogenesis [11, 12].
Adenosine is mostly metabolized by two enzymes, adenosine
deaminase (ADA) and adenosine kinase (ADK), the latter being
more efficient with a km value of 1 mM compared to 100 mM for
ADA [13]. Based on these metabolizing pathways, the concept of
generating cell populations deficient in ADK was developed for
cell-mediated adenosine delivery [14]. In this model, increased
intracellular adenosine levels result in a release of adenosine from
ADK-deficient cell populations, most likely via equilibrative diffu-
sion transporters which are widely expressed in the CNS [15–17]
(Supporting Information Fig. S1).
Indeed, knockdown or knockout of ADK has been shown to
result in cell populations with potent neuroprotective properties.
ADK deficient myoblasts or fibroblasts transplanted in encapsu-
lated polymer membranes were able to temporarily protect ani-
mals from seizures in a rat kindling model [18, 19]. In the human
system, small interfering RNA(siRNA)-mediated knockdown of
ADK in mesenchymal stem cells resulted in an 80% decrease in
enzymatic activity, leading to decreased seizure events in the
mouse kainate acid model by 35% [20]. Non-neural cells, which
have to be encapsulated, elicit their effects via a passive paracrine
and non-activity dependent mode of action and show only limited
survival times. In contrast, adenosine release from neural cells
integrated into the CNS might allow long-term supply of adeno-
sine. In the case of neurons functionally integrated into epileptic
neuronal networks, an activity-dependent release might serve as
a potent source of adenosine “on demand” in epileptic tissue. In
line with this idea, we have explored neural progenitors derived
from ADK2/2 murine embryonic stem cells. Following transplanta-
tion into a murine kindling model of epileptogenesis, transplanted
cells significantly delayed epileptogenesis and were superior to
non-neuronal BHK-AK2 hamster kidney cells [21].
With the advent of human pluripotent stem cells such as
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) or induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs), human cell populations are now available, which can
be efficiently differentiated into neural progenitors and their prog-
eny. In this context, we have recently described a population of
hESC-derived long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial stem cells
(lt-NES) [22, 23]. Similar to pluripotent stem cells, this population
exhibits strong self-renewal capacity enabling genetic modifica-
tion, subsequent clonal selection and expansion at a scale suffi-
cient for potential therapy. Independent of the passage number,
these cells consistently give rise to functional neurons [22–24].
Furthermore, they can be guided towards specific neuronal or glial
cell populations [22]. Importantly, lt-NES cell-derived transplants
exhibit excellent long-term survival and functional, synaptic inte-
gration into the hosts’ brain without the risk of teratoma forma-
tion or neural overgrowth [22, 25]. Taken together, these
properties make lt-NES cells an attractive candidate population for
gene targeting of the ADK locus and potential future cell-based
therapies.
Here, we describe that zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs-) mediated
gene disruption can be directly applied to lt-NES cells to generate
ADK-deficient human neural cells. ADK2/2 lt-NES cells and their
differentiated neuronal and glial progeny show a pronounced
increase of adenosine release. Importantly, we report that adeno-
sine release in ADK2/2 neurons can be triggered by excitation, a
property which could be particularly attractive for future cellular
therapy exploiting activity-dependent adenosine release from
grafted engineered cells to locally counteract hyperexcitation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture
lt-NES cells derived from the hESC line I3 have been generated
previously [22]. The cells were cultured in N2 media: Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)/F12 1 1% N2-supplement (all
Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany)1 1,6 mg/l D-Glucose
(Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany), supplemented with B27
supplement (1:1,000, Life Technologies), epidermal growth fac-
tor(EGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor(FGF2) (10 ng/ml each;
R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Cells were passaged every 3–4
days using trypsin, by plating 500,000 cells per 3.5 cm well. For
terminal differentiation, lt-NES cells were transferred to Geltrex
(Life Technologies)-coated cell culture dishes. Upon reaching
100% confluence, culture medium was changed to differentiation
medium (50% N2 media 1 50% Neurobasal media [Life Tech-
nologies] 1 2% B27 Supplement [Life Technologies]1 10 mM
cAMP [Sigma-Aldrich]), which was exchanged every other day. To
generate astrocyte-enriched cultures, differentiation media was
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Life Technologies)
from week 2 to 5 before switching back to FCS-free medium,
while neuronal enrichment was achieved by adding 5 mM N-[N-
(3,5-Difluorophenacetyl)-L-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine
t-butyl
ester
(DAPT, Sigma-Aldrich) for the first 5 days of culture. Cell viability
was determined with PrestoBlue reagent (Life Technologies)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the determina-
tion of growth rates, defined numbers of lt-NES cells (100,000
cells/cm2) were plated at the beginning of each passage, and total
cell numbers were counted 3 days later before plating, again,
100,000 cells/cm2 on fresh tissue culture dishes to start a new
passage. Cell numbers were cumulated along passage count tak-
ing the cell numbers at the beginning and the end of each passage
into account.
Generation of ADK Knockout lt-NES Cells
Plasmids coding for zinc fingers binding upstream and down-
stream of the desired cleavage site were generated by Sangamo
Therapeutics. ZFNs targeting the ADK gene were designed by
modular assembly using an archive of one- and two-finger mod-
ules and optimized for binding essentially as previously described
[26]. ZFN-encoding plasmids were introduced into lt-NES cells by
nucleofection (program B23; Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) using 1 mg
of each plasmid and 1 3 106 lt-NES cells. Seven days after nucleo-
fection, chemoselection with 10 mM 8-Cl-cAMP (8-chloro-adeno-
sine 30,50-cyclic monophosphate; Enzo) and 10 mM 8-Cl-Ado (8-
chloro-adenosine; Enzo Life Science, Lorrach, Germany) was
applied for 3 weeks. Emerging clones were manually picked and
expanded for sequencing. Sequencing products were generated
from
genomic
DNA
using
the
following
primer
pair:
GGGTTCCTGCGGCCGCCGTTTCTGCTTTTTAAAGCTCATGT and TATGG
ATCCACTAGTTATGTAAATACAAAC ACAGAAAACCAA.
478
Human Neurons with High Adenosine Release
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Karyotyping
Genomic DNA was prepared using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit
according to manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, Hilden, Ger-
many). Whole-genome single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
genotyping was performed at the Institute of Human Genetics at
the University of Bonn, Germany. Genomic DNA at a concentra-
tion of 50 ng/ml was used for whole-genome amplification. After-
ward, the amplified DNA was fragmented and hybridized to
sequence-specific oligomers bound to beads on an Illumina
HumanOmniExpress BeadChip 12V1.0 chip (Illumina, San Diego,
CA). Data were analyzed using Illumina GenomeStudio V2011.1
with the cnvPartition 3.2.0 plugin.
Immunocytochemical Analysis
Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 minutes at
room temperature (RT), washed twice in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) and blocked with 10% FCS and 0.1% Triton-X-100 in
PBS (blocking solution) for 30 minutes at RT. Primary antibodies
(beta III-tubulin: Biolegend (San Diego, CA) PRB-435P, 1:1,000;
DACH1: Proteintech (Rosemont, IL) 10914-1-AP, 1:500; glial fibril-
lary acidic protein (GFAP): Agilent (Santa Clara, CA) ZO334, 1:500;
MAP2ab: Sigma-Aldrich M1406, 1:1,000; Nestin: R&D Systems
MAB1259, 1:500; PLZF: EMD Millipore (Billerica, MA) OP128, 1:50;
Sox2: R&D Systems MAB 2018, 1:500; ZO-1: Life Technologies 61–
7300, 1:100) were applied overnight at 48C in blocking solution.
Cells were washed twice with PBS before secondary antibodies
(Alexa488 anti-ms, Alexa555 anti-ms, Alexa488 anti-rb, and
Alexa555 anti-rb; all 1:1,000, Life Technologies) were applied for 2
hours in blocking solution at RT. Cell nuclei were counterstained
with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), and specimens were
mounted with Mowiol. Numbers of different cell types were
quantified by counting at least 1,000 cells in randomly picked
fields (two independent experiments) at 3400 magnification.
Nuclei stained with DAPI were correlated to the perinuclear stain-
ing for the cell type-specific markers.
Western Immunoblotting
Cells were harvested in RIPA buffer (1 hour; 48C; Sigma-Aldrich)
containing protease inhibitors (cOmplete ULTRA [Roche, Basel,
Switzerland]). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (10,000g, 15
minutes, 48C) and run on a sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using standard gels (10%). Sepa-
rated proteins were blotted on MeOH-activated polyvinylidene
difluoride (PVDF) membranes, blocked with 10% Roti-Block (Carl
Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) in tris-buffered saline with Tween-20
(TBST) for 20 minutes and incubated with primary antibodies rab-
bit anti-ADK (Abcam [Cambridge, United Kingdom] ab204430;
1:50) and mouse anti-actin (EMD Millipore MAB 1501; 1:5,000)
overnight at 48C. Membranes were washed, incubated with an
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linked secondary antibody (Thermo
Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA) Goat anti-mouse Poly-HRP,
1:1,000) for 1 hour and visualized by chemoluminescence (Thermo
Fisher
Scientific
SuperSignal
West
Dura
Chemiluminescent
Substrate).
Transplantation Experiments and
Immunohistochemistry
RAG2-deficient mice of C57BL/6 background were used at an age
of 8–10 weeks (body weight 22–28 g) for stereotaxic transplanta-
tion of lt-NES cells. Animals were monitored for wound infections
and neurological deficits on a daily basis during the first 2 weeks
after transplantation and in weekly intervals thereafter. Animals
were sacrificed 16 weeks after transplantation and transcardially
perfused. Fixed brains were frozen and cut into 40 mm sections for
analysis. For immunohistochemistry, primary antibodies (rat anti-
Neurofilament-M/HO14, a gift from Virginia Lee, 1:20; mouse
anti-human-specific synaptophysin, Stressmarq, [Victoria, Canada]
SMC-178, 1:500) were applied overnight at 48C in blocking solu-
tion containing 10% FCS (Life Technologies) and 0.2% Triton in
PBS. Cells were washed twice in PBS before secondary antibodies
(Alexa488 anti-mouse, Alexa555 anti-rat; all 1:1,000, Life Technolo-
gies) were applied for 2 hours at RT in blocking solution. Cell
nuclei were counterstained with DAPI, the specimens were
mounted
with
Mowiol.
HO14-positive
neurofilaments
and
synaptophysin-positive punctae were quantified using the ImageJ
software in 10 mm thick confocal stacks using the “Analyze Parti-
cle” function with a minimal cutoff size of 0.2 (square inch) and
the “Ridge Detection” plugin (sigma 1.51; lower threshold 3.06;
upper threshold 7.99), respectively. Based on these data, the cov-
erage of synaptophysin-positive punctae per 10 mm neurofila-
ments
was
calculated.
Significance
was
determined
using
unpaired t test, p5 .6705, ns.
Ethical Statement
All animal procedures were performed in agreement with the
European Union and German guidelines and were approved by
the Government of North Rhine-Westphalia (permit number: AZ
8.87-51.04.20.09.354).
Reverse Transcriptase-PCR Analysis
Cellular RNA was extracted using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen), and
cDNA was generated using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA). Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was performed using TaqDNA Polymerase (Life Technolo-
gies). Quantitative real-time RT-PCR reactions were performed
with miScript SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen) on an Eppendorf
(Hamburg, Germany) Mastercycler. Primers were: Reference gene
RPLP0 (AGCCCAGAACACTGGTCTC; ACTCAGGATTTCAATGGTGCC),
ADA (GCCTTCGACAAGCCCAAAGTA; CTCTGCTGTGTTAGCTGGGAG),
ADK
(CAGAAGCTGCCACTTTTGCT;
GAGTTCATCTTTGGCAGGGC).
Data were normalized to RPLP0 levels and human fetal brain RNA
(Agilent). PCR products were assessed by dissociation curve and
gel electrophoresis, and normalized data were analyzed using the
DDCt method.
Quantitative Measurement of Adenosine
Adenosine levels were measured using high-pressure liquid chro-
matography (HPLC) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS). Media
was removed from the cells, cells were washed twice in PBS, and
cell buffer was added (140 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2,
2.2 mM MgSO4, 0.48 mM NaH2PO4, 2 mM sodium pyruvate,
5.5 mM D(1)-glucose, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, complemented with
100 mM of the ADA-inhibitor erythro-9-2-hydroxy-3-nonyl-adenine
[EHNA, Sigma-Aldrich]). Supernatants were collected at indicated
time points and subsequently lyophilized. The residues were dis-
solved in methanol with 1% acetic acid using sonication. After pre-
cipitation of inorganic salts by centrifugation for 1 hour at
10,000g, supernatants were directly used for HPLC-MS analysis.
Samples (5 ml) were injected at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/minute into a
HPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
coupled to a micrOTOF-Q mass spectrometer (Bruker, Billerica,
Poppe, Doerr, Schneider et al.
479
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 MA) with an electrospray ionization source. Chromatographic sep-
aration was performed on a SYNERGI 4 u POLAR-RP column (a
hydrophobic ether-bonded phenyl-phase column, Phenomenex,
Torrance, CA) at 258C. It was started with 100% H2O containing
0.1% acetic acid followed by a gradient for 4 minutes to 100% ace-
tonitrile containing 0.1% acetic acid, which was started after 2.5
minutes. The column was flushed for further 6.5 minutes with
100% acetonitrile containing 0.1% acetic acid. Positive scan MS
was observed from 50 to 1,000 m/z optimized to peak 268.1038.
For quantification, the extract ion counts 268.1038 6 0.01 was
used. Calibration curves were determined by dissolution of a
broad range of adenosine concentrations in (a) acetonitrile: water
(1:1), and (b) in the matrix (cell supernatant). The limit of detec-
tion (LOD) of the method was below 1 ng/ml for adenosine dis-
solved in the acetonitrile-water mixture. In the matrix, the LOD
was about 10-fold higher (approximately 10 ng/ml).
Glutamatergic Stimulation Experiments
Upon removal of the culture medium cells were washed twice in
PBS, and cell buffer containing 100 mM EHNA and 100 mM glycine
(both Sigma-Aldrich) was added. After 1 and 8 hours, 100 mM glu-
tamate (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 mM N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA),
or 100 mM a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid
(AMPA) (both Tocris, Bristol, United Kingdom) was applied to the
supernatant, which was collected after a total time of 24 hours
and subjected to HPLC analysis as described above. D-2-amino-5-
phosphonovalerate (D-APV) (50 mM) and NBQX (10 mM; both Toc-
ris) were applied 30 minutes before first glutamate treatment
where indicated.
Statistical Analyses
Quantitative PCR analyses were performed in two independent
experiments run as triplicates. Cell viability assays were performed
in triplicates. Measurement of adenosine release was performed
from three independent biological replicates. The data are pre-
sented as mean 1 SD. Statistical significance was analyzed by two-
tailed Student’s t test.
RESULTS
Generation of Genetically Engineered ADK2/2
Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Neural Stem Cells
As a starting population, we used lt-NES cells previously estab-
lished from the hESC line I3 [22]. During proliferation, these cells
form rosette-like structures and homogeneously express the neu-
ral stem cells markers NESTIN, SOX2 as well as the rosette-
associated markers PLZF and DACH1. As a correlate of their epi-
thelial nature, the zonula occludens protein 1 (ZO-1) is located at
the luminal, apical part of the rosette-like structures (Fig. 1A).
Upon growth factor withdrawal, lt-NES cells differentiate into a
major fraction of beta III-tubulin- and MAP2ab-positive neurons
and a minor fraction of GFAP-positive astrocytes (Fig. 1A), a differ-
entiation potential, which remains stable for at least 70 passages
in vitro [22]. In a first set of experiments, we investigated expres-
sion levels of ADK in proliferating lt-NES cells as well as following
growth factor withdrawal for 6 weeks using quantitative RT-PCR.
As reference, cDNA from commercial fetal brain RNA probes was
included in the study. Even though expression levels were lower
than in the reference probes (which consist of a mixture of neu-
rons, progenitors and non-neural cells), we detected distinct
expression of the transcript in lt-NES cells, which was increased
following differentiation (Fig. 1B). Together with the stability of lt-
NES cells, the expression data qualify these cells for gene targeting
of the ADK locus. For genetic disruption of the ADK locus, we used
ZFN-mediated targeted gene disruption. Synthetic fusion proteins
of a FokI nuclease domain and a zinc-finger-type DNA-binding
domain were designed to target exon 5 of the ADK gene,
upstream of the essential catalytic domain of the ADK gene
located in exon 10. The ZFNs are used in pairs, with one ZFN bind-
ing directly upstream of the intended cleavage site, the other one
downstream of it. After binding, the close proximity of their nucle-
ase domains leads to their dimerization and consequent activation
of double strand break-inducing activity. The cellular machinery
for nonhomologous end joining is involved in repairing the double
strand break [27], but this mechanism is error-prone and thus can
result in disruption of the target gene by for instance frame shift
mutations (Fig. 1C). In case of the ADK locus, selection for success-
ful targeting and disruption of the gene can be achieved by
administration of 8-chloro-adenosine and 8-chloro-cAMP, which
are converted to cytotoxic metabolites by functional ADK [28].
ZFNs were introduced into lt-NES cells by plasmid nucleofec-
tion [29], and selection was initiated 6 days later. Single clones sur-
viving the selection process were manually picked and expanded
for further characterization. No clones were obtained when selec-
tion was performed on untreated cells. Genomic sequencing
revealed a homozygous deletion of tyrosine at position 165 of
exon 5 in more than 80% of a total of 148 analyzed clones
(Fig. 1D). This one base pair deletion results in a frame shift and
the premature disruption of translation due to a new stop codon
located at amino acid position 162 (Fig. 1E). At lower frequencies,
we observed frame shift-causing deletions of 7 bp (4%) and 8 bp
(3.4%; Supporting Information Fig. S2). Remarkably, the vast
majority of derived clones (>90%) showed a homozygous
sequence alteration of both alleles. The remaining clones showed
either
heterozygous
alterations
as
seen
by
superimposed
sequencing signals starting at the position of the ZFN cleavage or
the monoallelic integration of large fractions of plasmid DNA
pieces as seen by long PCR amplificates (Supporting Information
Fig. S2). As the application of gene targeting by nucleases and clo-
nal selection of human cell populations might result in karyotypic
abnormalities, we assessed the karyotypic integrity of our ADK2/2
lt-NES cell lines using high-resolution SNP-based genotyping (Sup-
porting Information Fig. S3); lines displaying karyotypic abnormal-
ities were excluded from the study. ADK2/2 lt-NES cells were
indistinguishable from wild-type lt-NES cells with respect to their
morphology and marker expression during proliferation and upon
withdrawal of the growth factors. Comparable to wild-type lt-NES
cells, they exhibited expression of NESTIN, SOX2, PLZF, DACH1 as
well as polarized expression of ZO-1 (Fig. 2A). Importantly, West-
ern blot analysis confirmed the absence of wild-type ADK in tar-
geted ADK2/2 lt-NES cells (Fig. 2B).
To analyze ADK2/2 lt-NES cells in more detail, we investigated
growth rates of ADK2/2 cells in comparison to their parental wild-
type lt-NES cells and observed no significant differences both at
early and later passages (Supporting Information Fig. S4). In addi-
tion, we quantified the proportion of immunolabeled neurons
(beta III-tubulin and MAP2ab) and astrocytes (GFAP) in ADK2/2
and wild-type cells following a 4-week growth factor withdrawal.
This analysis revealed no significant differences in the differentia-
tion potential of both populations (Fig. 2C). We further assessed
whether ADK-deficiency might interfere with the cells’ ability to
480
Human Neurons with High Adenosine Release
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 differentiate into neurons and express synaptic markers in vivo. To
that end, we transplanted both populations into immunodeficient
mice and analyzed the transplants 16 weeks later. We found that
both populations differentiated into large numbers of neurons
detected by a human specific marker to neurofilament. In addi-
tion, we detected prominent expression of synaptophysin, indicat-
ing that lack of ADK does not interfere with the cells’ principal
ability to differentiate into neurons expressing proteins required
for synapse formation in vivo (Fig. 2D and Supporting Information
Fig. S5). Importantly, the density of synaptophysin-positive punc-
tae along neurofilament-positive fibers was found to be very simi-
lar in both, WT and ADK2/2 neuron populations (Fig. 2D).
Established ADK2/2 lt-NES cells lines further exhibited robust
resistance to continuous administration of 8-Cl-adenosine at con-
centrations toxic to wild-type cells, thereby providing additional
biochemical evidence for the lack of ADK enzymatic activity
(Fig. 2E). Thus, wild-type and genome-edited ADK2/2 lt-NES cells
are indistinguishable with respect to their growth and differentia-
tion properties.
ADK-Deficient Neural Stem Cells and Their
Differentiated Progeny Release Elevated Levels of
Adenosine
We next investigated whether the disruption of the ADK locus
results in increased levels of secreted adenosine in the superna-
tant of proliferating and differentiated ADK2/2 cells compared to
wild-type controls using liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS; all experiments were performed in con-
trolled detection buffer, see “Materials and Methods” section).
This analysis revealed a significant increase in ADK2/2 cells
Figure 1.
Generation of ADK-deficient neural stem cells. (A): Long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial stem cells (lt-NES cells) stably proliferate
in the presence of the growth factors FGF2 and EGF and show rosette-like morphology with expression of NESTIN, PLZF, and SOX2 as well as
polarized expression of the tight junction marker ZO-1. Following growth factor withdrawal, lt-NES cells differentiate into a major fraction of
beta III-tubulin- and MAP2ab-positive neurons and a minor fraction of GFAP-positive astrocytes. (B): Quantitative PCR analysis of adenosine
kinase (ADK) in lt-NES cells and their differentiated progeny, normalized to RPLP0 as housekeeping gene and compared to ADK expression in
human fetal brain RNA. (C): Cartoon demonstrating the zinc finger nuclease gene disruption strategy in exon 5 of the ADK gene. A pair of zinc
finger nucleases induces a targeted double strand break (red arrows) after binding to their target site (indicated by blue lines). Repair via
nonhomologous-end-joining can drive a frame shift resulting in premature disruption of translation (blue arrow). The catalytic core around
Asp316 is situated in exon 10 (of 11) at the C-terminal end of the protein. Introduction of frame shifts in front of the catalytic part leads to elimi-
nation of all enzymatic activity. (D): Sequencing of the target locus revealed a homozygous deletion of 1 bp (thymidine 165 of exon 5) in 81.7%
of the 148 analyzed clones (red arrow). (E): This frame shift leads to a stop codon (asterisk) after 161 translated amino acids, resulting in a com-
plete loss of ADK activity. Scale bars: 50 mm. Abbreviations: ADK, adenosine kinase; EGF, epidermal growth factor; FGF2, basic fibroblast growth
factor; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; lt-NES cell, long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial stem cell; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Poppe, Doerr, Schneider et al.
481
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 compared to wild-type cells after a 24 hours period (Supporting
Information Fig. S6), whereas at earlier time points, the adenosine
levels were below the detection levels (data not shown). To
increase the sensitivity of adenosine detection, we added erythro-
9-(2-hydroxy-3-nonyl)adenine (EHNA), a compound suppressing
the decay of adenosine via ADA [30], and extended the time
period for media collection. With this modification, we detected a
significant increase in the adenosine content in the ADK2/2 popu-
lations 2 hours following media change to LC-MS/MS cell buffer,
which further increased over time (Fig. 3A and Supporting Infor-
mation Fig. S6). Specifically, adenosine release from ADK2/2 lt-
NES cells increased from 73.85 6 3.25 ng (normalized to adeno-
sine content per 100,000 cells) after 2 hours to 456.186 5.73 ng
after 24 hours compared to 0.85 6 1.17 ng and 5.19 6 0.81 ng in
wild-type lt-NES cells, respectively. Following 5 weeks of differen-
tiation, we observed a comparable result with differentiated
ADK2/2 lt-NES cells releasing 67.66 6 4.42 ng after 2 hours and
364.27 6 48.39 ng after 24 hours compared to 0.87 6 0.09 ng and
0.15 6 0.23 ng in differentiated wild-type lt-NES cells (Fig. 3A). As
differentiated lt-NES cells comprise both, neurons and astrocytes,
we investigated the adenosine content of each individual subpo-
pulation. To that end we applied differentiation protocols, which
give rise to enriched neuronal or astroglial cell populations. For
the generation of enriched neurons, we applied treatment with
the gamma-secretase inhibitor N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-L-
alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester (DAPT [31]). Differentiated
populations generated this way exhibited 78.9% 6 5.8% beta III-
tubulin-positive neurons and only 8.8% 6 3.2% of GFAP express-
ing cells as well as 12.3% 6 4.7% of cells not stained with either of
both antibodies (Fig. 3B). For the generation of an astrocyte-
enriched cell population, we used longer differentiation times of 8
weeks and supplementation with fetal calf serum from week 2 to
5 of the differentiation process [24]. Resulting populations con-
tained 88.0% 6 5.1% GFAP-positive astrocytes, 2.8% 6 1.9% beta
III-tubulin-positive neurons and 9.3% 6 3.2% cells negative for
both markers. We first investigated the expression of ADK and
ADA in both cultures. While we found that ADA is expressed only
slightly higher in astrocyte-enriched cultures compared to neuron-
enriched cultures, expression of ADK was several-fold higher in
astrocytic versus neuronal cultures (Fig. 3C). This is in line with
previous reports showing that in postnatal mouse brain ADK is
substantially higher expressed in astrocytes compared to neurons
[32]. Accordingly, we observed lower basal levels of secreted
adenosine in astrocyte-enriched compared to neuron-enriched
cultures (29.13 6 19.40 ng in neurons compared to 16.43 6 10.11
ng in astrocytes). In the knockout situation, secretion of adenosine
was strongly increased especially in neuron-enriched cultures
(350.04 6 25.68 ng in neurons compared to 42.37 6 4.41 ng in
astrocyte-enriched cultures; adenosine concentrations all normal-
ized to 100,000 cells per 24 hours, Fig. 3D, left columns). Thus,
ADK2/2 lt-NES cells and their differentiated progeny robustly
secrete adenosine compared to the wild-type controls with lt-NES
cell-derived neuronal cells exhibiting the strongest adenosine
releasing capacity.
Excitation Induces Adenosine Release from Neuronal
Cultures
We previously showed that adenosine-releasing murine embry-
onic stem cell-derived neural cells are superior to adenosine-
releasing non-neuronal baby hamster kidney cells in a rat model
Figure 2.
Characterization of ADK-deficient neural stem cells. (A): Morphology and marker expression of ADK2/2 long-term self-renewing
neuroepithelial stem cells were comparable to wild-type cells with rosette-like appearance and the expression of NESTIN, PLZF, SOX2, and
polarized ZO-1 expression in the proliferating stage as well as expression of beta III-tubulin, MAP2ab and GFAP upon 5 weeks of differentiation.
Scale bars: 50 mm. (B): Absence of ADK protein was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Actin served as loading control. Mouse brain protein
served as positive control. (C): Quantitative analysis reveals comparable numbers of beta III-tubulin-, MAP2ab-, and GFAP-positive cells in dif-
ferentiated populations derived from wild-type and ADK2/2 cells. (D): Following transplantation, both populations efficiently differentiated
into neurons (detected by a human-specific antibody to neurofilaments HO14). Human synaptophysin-positive punctae were detected in neu-
ronal projection regions (enlarged regions show synaptophysin-positive dots in close vicinity to human neurofilaments marked by arrowheads).
No significant difference was detected when we compared the ratio of synaptophysin-positive punctae to the length of human neurofilament-
positive fibers, suggesting that wild-type and ADK2/2 cells exhibit comparable in vivo differentiation and integration potential (unpaired t test,
p 5 .6705; scale bars: 50 mm). (E): Relative viability of WT or ADK2/2 cells after 48 hours exposure to increasing concentrations of 8-Cl-
adenosine as assessed by PrestoBlue assay. Only ADK-deficient cells tolerated the additional chemoselection with 8-Cl-Adenosine, while wild-
type cells showed pronounced cytotoxicity. Abbreviations: ADK, adenosine kinase; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; WT, wild-type.
482
Human Neurons with High Adenosine Release
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 of epileptogenesis [21]. This beneficial effect could be due to sev-
eral reasons, including better provision of adenosine to the CNS
tissue via axonal and dendritic extensions or an activity-
dependent release from neuronal cells. If employed as cell-
mediated therapy for the treatment of epilepsy, adenosine-
releasing cells should ideally be able to deliver adenosine “on
Figure 3.
Poppe, Doerr, Schneider et al.
483
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 demand,” that is, concomitant to excess neuronal activity during
seizures or status epilepticus. In previous studies, we demon-
strated that lt-NES cell-derived neurons differentiated for >6
weeks establish functional synaptic connections, show spontane-
ous synaptic network activity and are responsive to excitatory
stimulation by neurotransmitters [22–25]. To test whether release
of adenosine from human differentiated ADK2/2 neural stem cells
could be induced by neuronal excitation, we thus treated differen-
tiated neuron-enriched and astrocyte-enriched ADK2/2 and wild-
type cultures twice with 100 mM L-glutamate 1 and 8 hours fol-
lowing media change to detection buffer [24]. Following gluta-
mate treatment, levels of secreted adenosine in wild-type cells
increased to 100.62 6 61.85 ng when stimulating astrocytes, and
to 453.41 6 74.14 ng when stimulating neurons with L-glutamate,
indicating that L-glutamate stimulation can elicit adenosine secre-
tion from differentiated neural cell populations. This effect was
much more pronounced in the ADK2/2 cells with values rising to
259.47 6 26.76
ng
in
astrocyte-enriched
cultures
and
to
1,342.55 6 106.55 ng in neuron-enriched cultures, indicating that
excitation by neurotransmitter-induced stimulation can increase
basal adenosine release nearly by fourfold in these cells (adeno-
sine concentrations all normalized to 100,000 cells per 24 hours,
Fig. 3D, right columns). A similar effect could be elicited when
stimulating the cultures with NMDA and AMPA, while glutamate-
stimulated adenosine release was strongly reduced in the pres-
ence of specific inhibitors of AMPA and NMDA receptors, that is,
D-APV and 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo[f]quinoxaline-
2,3-dione (NBQX), respectively (Supporting Information Fig. S7).
To exclude that this increase of adenosine in the supernatant is
due to toxicity exerted by glutamate treatment and potential lysis
of the cells, we measured cell viability of the cells 8 hours after
stimulation with increasing glutamate concentrations.This analysis
revealed no obvious glutamate-induced reduction of cell viability
under the glutamate exposure conditions used in this study (Sup-
porting Information Fig. S8). Together these data suggest that the
increased adenosine release observed after glutamate stimulation
is due to excitation of the cultures and not to unspecific modes of
action or general toxicity.
DISCUSSION
The role of adenosine as a potential therapeutic drug for the treat-
ment of various pathological conditions of the brain such as epi-
lepsy, stroke, depression, or pain has compelled researchers to
search for potential systems to safely deliver adenosine to the
brain. Cells deficient in the metabolizing enzyme ADK have proved
to be an attractive therapeutic tool for the local delivery of adeno-
sine. Initial experiments applied non-neural cells, which resulted
in strong but temporally limited antiepileptic activity [18–20].
Using mouse ADK-deficient embryonic stem cell-derived neural
cell populations, we demonstrated (a) strongly enhanced levels of
secreted adenosine compared to cells derived from wild-type con-
trols [33], (b) short-term protection of murine brains against
experimental epileptogenesis upon grafting encapsulated ADK-
deficient cells into the ventricles of rats subjected to kindling [34],
and (c) efficient suppression of kindling-induced epileptogenesis
and seizure severity upon direct transplantation of ADK2/2 cells
into the hippocampus of rats [21]. However, translation of these
findings to human cells was, for a long time, complicated by the
fact that homologous recombination in human cells proved to be
highly inefficient [35]. With the recent advent of genome editing
technologies such as ZFNs [36], transcription activator-like effector
nucleases [37], and CRISPR-Cas/RNA-guided nucleases [38], gene
editing has become broadly applicable to human cells. Typically,
these techniques are applied to human pluripotent stem cells,
which are then used to derive defined somatic cell types required
for the individual application. Considering that our recently
described population of lt-NES cells exhibits highly stable long-
term proliferation and differentiation capacity, we became inter-
ested in whether targeting of the ADK locus could be directly
accomplished in these human neural cells. To that end we used a
ZFN-based gene disruption approach, that resulted in the bi-allelic
knockout of the ADK gene in human lt-NES cells, thereby providing
the first reported human ADK-deficient cell population.
Targeting stable tissue-specific precursors rather than their
parental pluripotent stem cells has a number of advantages. First,
time requirements are significantly reduced because genetic mod-
ification is directly conducted in the target cell population. Sec-
ond, this approach bypasses the risk that the genetic modification
itself interferes with the maintenance and proper differentiation
of the pluripotent ancestral cells. Finally, the resulting phenotype
can be directly assessed in the target cell populations. In addition,
lt-NES cells provide advantages with respect to potential biomedi-
cal applications in that they (a) are highly homogeneous and
devoid of any remaining pluripotent cells with potential teratoma-
initiating capacity [22], (b) consistently give rise to high numbers
of neurons capable of integrating into synaptic circuits in vivo [22]
and (c) can be generated from any pluripotent cell source includ-
ing patient-specific iPSCs [24] and haplotype-matched cells from
cell banks, thereby providing prospects for avoiding the risk of
rejection and the need for immunosuppression.
Targeting the ADK locus was largely facilitated by the possibil-
ity to use chemical selection. For enrichment of correctly targeted
cells, no further genetic modification was necessary, as the
enzyme-specific antimetabolites 8-chloro-adenosine and 8-chloro-
cAMP could be used for selection. We confirmed the functional
disruption of the ADK gene by genome sequencing and Western
blotting. One prerequisite for a therapeutic application of in vitro
Figure 3.
ADK2/2 cell populations exhibit increased adenosine release. (A): Comparison of adenosine release (in ng per 100,000 cells) into
the culture media by wild-type lt-NES cells, ADK2/2 lt-NES cells and their differentiated progeny at 2, 8, and 24 hours. (B): Astrocyte- or
neuron-enriched cultures of ADK2/2 cells after differentiation stained for beta III-tubulin (neuronal marker; 5 weeks of differentiation) and
GFAP (astrocytic marker; 8 weeks of differentiation). Pie charts depict the composition of each culture (neuronal cultures: 78.9% 6 5.8% neu-
rons, 8.8% 6 3.2% astrocytes, 12.3% 6 4.7% other cells; astrocytic cultures: 2.8% 6 1.9% neurons, 88.0% 6 5.1% astrocytes, 9.3% 6 3.2%
other cells). (C): Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of ADA and ADK expression in neuron- and astrocyte-enriched cultures, compared to human
fetal brain RNA (set to 1). (D): Adenosine levels in supernatants of neuronal and astrocytic cultures of wild-type and ADK2/2 cells were meas-
ured with or without stimulation with glutamate. Glutamate generally induced an increase in adenosine efflux, which was particularly promi-
nent in ADK2/2 neuronal cultures. Scale bars: 100 mm. Statistical analysis: *, p < .05; **, p < .01; ***, p < .001; ****, p < .0001.
Abbreviations: ADA, adenosine deaminase; ADK, adenosine kinase; DAPI, 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; lt-
NES, long-term self-renewing neuroepithelial stem; RT-PCR, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; WT, wild-type.
484
Human Neurons with High Adenosine Release
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 engineered cells is the necessity to guarantee genomic integrity
and robust differentiation potential. Using high-resolution whole
genome SNP karyotyping, we show that ADK-deficient human
neural stem cells can be generated without overt karyotypic alter-
ations. These cells show growth properties comparable to their
nonmodified counterpart and maintain their ability to generate
neurons and glia over several passages. However, it is important
to note that the resolution of our SNP analyses is not sufficient to
entirely exclude off-target alterations induced by the genetic
manipulation or the selection process. While our study provides a
prove of principle for the generation of an ADK-deficient human
neural cell population, a potential clinical application of such cells
would require a much more detailed assessment of genetic integ-
rity including, for example, whole genome sequencing.
When addressing adenosine levels in the culture supernatant
of engineered lt-NES cells and their differentiated progeny by
HPLC-MS/MS we could confirm a robust induced adenosine
releasing capacity in both populations, ranging to up to over 400
ng/ml per 100,000 cells within 24 hours. Such concentrations
should be sufficient to substantially counteract epileptic activity as
previous studies with mouse-derived stem cells showed that
adenosine release between 160 and 330 ng adenosine per
100,000 cells per 24 hours was sufficient to fulfill this task, even
though detection methods for the amount of adenosine release
differ between the studies [18, 19, 34]. Adenosine release could
be further triggered by glutamate-induced excitation with adeno-
sine levels reaching up to 1,700 ng/ml per 100,000 cells per 24
hours, suggesting that once integrated into the host brain cir-
cuitry, ADK-deficient neurons might be able to directly respond to
increased seizure-associated neuronal activity by releasing adeno-
sine, thereby inhibiting further tissue damage and the process of
epileptogenesis [40]. Given the fact that lt-NES cells mainly differ-
entiate into neurons with a GABAergic neurotransmitter pheno-
type, it is tempting to speculate that ADK-deficient lt-NES cell-
derived neurons might elicit antiepileptic activity not only by
release of adenosine but synergistically via GABA-mediated inhibi-
tion of neuronal networks as previously shown in a murine pilo-
carpine model [41, 42].
Notwithstanding these biomedical prospects, extensive pre-
clinical studies will be required to determine whether and to what
extent adenosine releasing human neural cell populations can be
used as the basis for a cell-based therapy. In this context, it is
important to note that ADK expression differs in the young and
the mature brain with preferential expression in neurons and
astrocytes in the developing and mature brain, respectively [32].
This developmental shift of ADK expression suggests distinct roles
of this enzyme during brain development. Nevertheless, the
results of several studies support the notion that human neurons
in the adult brain exhibit low expression of ADK [43, 44]. Interest-
ingly, it has been reported that expression of ADK is upregulated
in the context of CNS lesions and that this reactive increase is
associated with a local adenosine deficiency in reactively altered
brain tissue [45]. Such an adenosine deficiency could be counter-
acted by engrafted ADK-deficient cells, which themselves would
be “protected” against a reactive upregulation of ADK.
In addition to the potential treatment of epilepsy and epilep-
togenesis where adenosine might not only act as an acute antiepi-
leptic drug but might also prevent upregulation of ADK in the
surrounding tissue via activation of A1-receptors in local astrocytic
populations [40], exploitation of neuroprotective effects of such
cells in cerebral hypoxia could provide another attractive
therapeutic avenue. In line with this idea, ADK-deficient embry-
onic stem cell-derived glial progenitors were demonstrated to
significantly reduce the infarcted area and improve neurological
scores in a model of ischemic brain injury [46]. In multiple sclero-
sis, adenosine has been described as a mediator promoting
oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination [39]. In chronic
and neuropathic pain, adenosine was shown to exhibit potent
analgesic actions [47], and intrathecal implants of adenosine-
releasing neural cell populations might qualify as therapeutic
modality for pain control. The ADK2/2 neural stem cells described
in this study should provide a useful asset to explore these
approaches using a highly standardized human cell system.
CONCLUSION
This study generated human neuroepithelial stem cells (lt-NES
cells) deficient for ADK, the most important cellular metabolizing
enzyme of adenosine. The purine nucleoside adenosine has been
described to have extensive neuroprotective properties under var-
ious pathological conditions of the brain and can counteract over-
shooting neuronal activity. The resulting cells can be efficiently
differentiated into neurons and astrocytes in vitro and in vivo and
exhibit elevated adenosine releasing capacities. Secretion of aden-
osine from neurons can be triggered by excitation, providing the
basis for exploiting ADK-deficient neurons as an attractive thera-
peutic tool for local “on-demand” delivery of adenosine in epi-
lepsy and other neurological disorders.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The human hESC-derived lt-NES cell line was previously gener-
ated from the hESC line I3 (hES-1), which was originally pro-
vided by Joseph Itskovitz-Eldor (Technion, Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel). We thank Virginia Lee for providing
the HO14 antibody. Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis
was performed by the Institute of Human Genetics (LIFE &
BRAIN Center). This work was supported by the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft
(SFB-TR3–05/D2)
and
the
Hertie
Foundation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.P.: conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data,
data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing; J.D., M.S.,
R.W., J.A.S., and J.L.: collection and/or assembly of data, data anal-
ysis and interpretation; A.T., D.E.P., P.D.G., and A.R.: collection
and/or assembly of data, manuscript writing; C.E.M.: data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing; P.K.: conception and
design, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and inter-
pretation, manuscript writing, final approval of manuscript; O.B.:
conception and design, financial support, data analysis and inter-
pretation, manuscript writing, final approval of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
O.B. is a cofounder and has stock in LIFE & BRAIN GmbH. A.R.,
A.T., D.E.P., and P.D.G. are current or former employees of San-
gamo Therapeutics, Inc. The other authors indicated no potential
conflicts of interest.
Poppe, Doerr, Schneider et al.
485
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 REFERENCES
1
Jacobson KA. Introduction to adenosine
receptors as therapeutic targets. In: Wilson
CN, Mustafa SJ, eds. Adenosine Receptors in
Health and Disease. 1st ed. Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 2009:1–24.
2
Karmouty-Quintana H, Xia Y, Blackburn
M. Adenosine signaling during acute and
chronic disease states. J Mol Med 2013;91:
173–181.
3
Fredholm BB. Adenosine, an endoge-
nous distress signal, modulates tissue damage
and repair. Cell Death Differ 2007;14:1315–
1323.
4
Berman RF, Fredholm BB, Aden U et al.
Evidence for increased dorsal hippocampal
adenosine release and metabolism during
pharmacologically induced seizures in rats.
Brain Res 2000;872:44–53.
5
Klaft ZJ, Hollnagel JO, Salar S et al.
Adenosine
A1
receptor-mediated
suppres-
sion of carbamazepine-resistant seizure-like
events in human neocortical slices. Epilep-
sia 2016;57:746–756.
6
Boison D. Adenosine dysfunction in epi-
lepsy. Glia 2012;60:1234–1243.
7
Masino SA, Kawamura M Jr., Ruskin DN.
Adenosine receptors and epilepsy: Current
evidence and future potential. Int Rev Neuro-
biol 2014;119:233–255.
8
Boison D, Stewart KA. Therapeutic epi-
lepsy research: From pharmacological ration-
ale to focal adenosine augmentation. Biochem
Pharmacol 2009;78:1428–1437.
9
Dunwiddie TV. Adenosine and suppression
of seizures. Adv Neurol 1999;79:1001–1010.
10
Pagonopoulou
O,
Efthimiadou
A,
Asimakopoulos B et al. Modulatory role of
adenosine and its receptors in epilepsy: Possi-
ble therapeutic approaches. Neurosci Res
2006;56:14–20.
11
Van Dycke A, Raedt R, Dauwe I et al.
Continuous local intrahippocampal delivery of
adenosine reduces seizure frequency in rats
with spontaneous seizures. Epilepsia 2010;51:
1721–1728.
12
Szybala C, Pritchard EM, Lusardi TA
et al. Antiepileptic effects of silk-polymer
based adenosine release in kindled rats. Exp
Neurol 2009;219:126–135.
13
Arch JR, Newsholme EA. Activities and
some properties of 5’-nucleotidase, adenosine
kinase and adenosine deaminase in tissues
from vertebrates and invertebrates in relation
to the control of the concentration and the
physiological role of adenosine. Biochem J
1978;174:965–977.
14
Boison D. Adenosine-based cell therapy
approaches for pharmacoresistant epilepsies.
Neurodegener Dis 2007;4:28–33.
15
Jennings LL, Hao C, Cabrita MA et al. Dis-
tinct regional distribution of human equilibra-
tive nucleoside transporter proteins 1 and 2
(hENT1 and hENT2) in the central nervous sys-
tem. Neuropharmacology 2001;40:722–731.
16
Baldwin SA, Beal PR, Yao SY et al. The
equilibrative nucleoside transporter family,
SLC29. Pflugers Arch 2004;447:735–743.
17
Baldwin SA, Mackey JR, Cass CE et al.
Nucleoside transporters: Molecular biology
and implications for therapeutic development.
Mol Med Today 1999;5:216–224.
18
Huber A, Padrun V, D�
eglon N et al.
Grafts of adenosine-releasing cells suppress
seizures in kindling epilepsy. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2001;98:7611–7616.
19
G€
uttinger M, Padrun V, Pralong WF
et al. Seizure suppression and lack of adeno-
sine A1 receptor desensitization after focal
long-term delivery of adenosine by encapsu-
lated myoblasts. Exp Neurol 2005;193:53–64.
20
Ren G, Li T, Lan JQ et al. Lentiviral RNAi-
induced downregulation of adenosine kinase
in human mesenchymal stem cell grafts: A
novel perspective for seizure control. Exp Neu-
rol 2007;208:26–37.
21
Li T, Steinbeck JA, Lusardi T et al. Sup-
pression of kindling epileptogenesis by adeno-
sine
releasing
stem
cell-derived
brain
implants. Brain 2007;130:1276–1288.
22
Koch P, Opitz T, Steinbeck JA et al. A
rosette-type, self-renewing human ES cell-
derived neural stem cell with potential for in
vitro instruction and synaptic integration. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2009;106:3225–3230.
23
Falk A, Koch P, Kesavan J et al. Capture
of neuroepithelial-like stem cells from pluripo-
tent stem cells provides a versatile system for
in vitro production of human neurons. PLoS
One 2012;7:e29597.
24
Koch P, Breuer P, Peitz M et al. Excita-
tion-induced ataxin-3 aggregation in neurons
from patients with Machado-Joseph disease.
Nature 2011;480:543–546.
25
Steinbeck JA, Koch P, Derouiche A et al.
Human embryonic stem cell-derived neurons
establish region-specific, long-range projec-
tions in the adult brain. Cell Mol Life Sci 2012;
69:461–470.
26
Urnov FD, Miller JC, Lee YL et al. Highly
efficient endogenous human gene correction
using designed zinc-finger nucleases. Nature
2005;435:646–651.
27
Bozas A, Beumer KJ, Trautman JK et al.
Genetic
analysis
of
zinc-finger
nuclease-
induced gene targeting in Drosophila. Genet-
ics 2009;182:641–651.
28
Gandhi V, Ayres M, Halgren RG et al. 8-
chloro-cAMP and 8-chloro-adenosine act by
the same mechanism in multiple myeloma
cells. Cancer Res 2001;61:5474–5479.
29
Siemen H, Nix M, Endl E et al. Nucleo-
fection of human embryonic stem cells. Stem
Cells Dev 2005;14:378–383.
30
Schaeffer HJ, Schwender CF. Enzyme
inhibitors.
26.
Bridging
hydrophobic
and
hydrophilic regions on adenosine deaminase
with
some
9-(2-hydroxy-3-alkyl)adenines.
J Med Chem 1974;17:6–8.
31
Borghese L, Dolezalova D, Opitz T et al.
Inhibition
of
notch
signaling
in
human
embryonic stem cell-derived neural stem cells
delays G1/S phase transition and accelerates
neuronal differentiation in vitro and in vivo.
STEM CELLS 2010;28:955–964.
32
Studer FE, Fedele DE, Marowsky A
et al. Shift of adenosine kinase expression
from neurons to astrocytes during postnatal
development suggests dual functionality of
the enzyme. Neuroscience 2006;142:125–137.
33
Fedele DE, Koch P, Scheurer L et al.
Engineering embryonic stem cell derived glia
for adenosine delivery. Neurosci Lett 2004;
370:160–165.
34
G€
uttinger M, Fedele DE, Koch P et al.
Suppression of kindled seizures by paracrine
adenosine release from stem cell-derived
brain implants. Epilepsia 2005;46:1162–1169.
35
Zwaka TP, Thomson JA. Homologous
recombination in human embryonic stem
cells. Nat Biotechnol 2003;21:319–321.
36
Bibikova M, Carroll D, Segal DJ et al.
Stimulation
of
homologous
recombination
through targeted cleavage by chimeric nucle-
ases. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:289–297.
37
Christian M, Cermak T, Doyle EL et al.
Targeting DNA double-strand breaks with TAL
effector nucleases. Genetics 2010;186:757–761.
38
Jinek M, East A, Cheng A et al. RNA-pro-
grammed genome editing in human cells. Elife
2013;2:e00471.
39
Tsutsui S, Schnermann J, Noorbakhsh F
et al. A1 adenosine receptor upregulation and
activation attenuates neuroinflammation and
demyelination in a model of multiple sclerosis.
J Neurosci 2004;24:1521–1529.
40
Boison D. Role of adenosine in status
epilepticus: A potential new target? Epilepsia
2013;54:20–22.
41
Cunningham M, Cho JH, Leung A et al.
hPSC-derived maturing GABAergic interneurons
ameliorate seizures and abnormal behavior in
epileptic mice. Cell Stem Cell 2014;15:559–573.
42
Hunt RF, Girskis KM, Rubenstein JL
et al. GABA progenitors grafted into the adult
epileptic brain control seizures and abnormal
behavior. Nat Neurosci 2013;16:692–697.
43
Luan G, Gao Q, Zhai F et al. Adenosine
kinase expression in cortical dysplasia with
balloon cells: Analysis of developmental line-
age of cell types. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
2015;74:132–147.
44
Uhl�
en M, Fagerberg L, Hallstr€
om BM
et al. Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the
human proteome. Science 2015;347:1260419.
45
Boison D. The adenosine kinase hypoth-
esis of epileptogenesis. Prog Neurobiol 2008;
84:249–262.
46
Pignataro G, Studer FE, Wilz A et al.
Neuroprotection in ischemic mouse brain
induced by stem cell-derived brain implants.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2007;27:919–927.
47
Lynch ME, Clark AJ, Sawynok J. Intrave-
nous adenosine alleviates neuropathic pain: A
double blind placebo controlled crossover trial
using an enriched enrolment design. Pain
2003;103:111–117.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
486
Human Neurons with High Adenosine Release
O
c 2018 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
