 Creation of disease-inspired biomaterial environments
to mimic pathological events in early calcific aortic
valve disease
Ana M. Porrasa, Jennifer A. Westlunda, Austin D. Evansa, and Kristyn S. Mastersa,b,1
aDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53705; and bDepartment of Medicine, University of
Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53705
Edited by David J. Mooney, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Rakesh K. Jain December 8, 2017 (received for
review March 20, 2017)
An insufficient understanding of calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD)
pathogenesis remains a major obstacle in developing treatment
strategies for this disease. The aim of the present study was to create
engineered environments that mimic the earliest known features of
CAVD and apply this in vitro platform to decipher relationships
relevant to early valve lesion pathobiology. Glycosaminoglycan
(GAG) enrichment is a dominant hallmark of early CAVD, but culture
of valvular interstitial cells (VICs) in biomaterial environments con-
taining pathological amounts of hyaluronic acid (HA) or chondroitin
sulfate (CS) did not directly increase indicators of disease progression
such as VIC activation or inflammatory cytokine production. However,
HA-enriched matrices increased production of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), while matrices displaying pathological levels of
CS were effective at retaining lipoproteins, whose deposition is also
found in early CAVD. Retained oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(oxLDL), in turn, stimulated myofibroblastic VIC differentiation and
secretion of numerous inflammatory cytokines. OxLDL also increased
VIC deposition of GAGs, thereby creating a positive feedback loop to
further enrich GAG content and promote disease progression. Using
this disease-inspired in vitro platform, we were able to model a
complex, multistep pathological sequence, with our findings suggest-
ing distinct roles for individual GAGs in outcomes related to valve
lesion progression, as well as key differences in cell–lipoprotein inter-
actions compared with atherosclerosis. We propose a pathogenesis
cascade that may be relevant to understanding early CAVD and
envision the extension of such models to investigate other tissue
pathologies or test pharmacological treatments.
calcific aortic valve disease | glycosaminoglycans | inflammation |
oxidized LDL
C
alcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is a prevalent aortic valve
disorder (1) for which there is no treatment other than total
valve replacement. Many investigations have focused on char-
acterizing the features of end-point stenosis (2–4), but even early
stages of CAVD are associated with an increase in cardiovascular
(5) and all-cause mortality (6). Moreover, CAVD is hypothesized
to reach a “point of no return,” beyond which pharmaceutical in-
tervention is unlikely to stop or slow its progression (7). However,
while histological analyses of native valves can provide snapshots of
disease features, they cannot tell us the order in which these
pathological events occur. Our limited knowledge of the sequence
of events in CAVD pathogenesis provides a significant obstacle in
developing treatments for this disease.
Analyses of sclerotic lesions have identified three features that
emerge early in the disease process: (i) reorganization of the
extracellular matrix (ECM), (ii) lipoprotein deposition and oxi-
dation, and (iii) infiltration of immune cells (8–14). These events
appear to precede other hallmarks, such as myofibroblastic or
osteoblastic differentiation of valvular interstitial cells (VICs)
and elevated VIC proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and cal-
cification. In this work, we aim to generate a platform that enables
us to determine the relationship between the three aforementioned
features that are found in early CAVD and to decipher their se-
quence in an in vitro context.
The ECM reorganization in early CAVD occurs in the form of
proteoglycan (PG) and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) enrichment
(12). Specifically, valve leaflets become significantly thickened
due to increased amounts of hyaluronic acid (HA)- and chon-
droitin sulfate (CS)-containing PGs throughout the leaflet (13,
15). Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL) is also prevalent
in these GAG-enriched valves (12). Examination of mildly scle-
rotic valves from pigs with familial hypercholesterolemia sug-
gests that both GAG enrichment and the deposition of oxLDL
occur before macrophage infiltration (11).
GAGs such as HA have been recognized as important ele-
ments of healthy valve function, as HA depletion is sufficient to
induce pathological outcomes (16). HA has been the only GAG
used in the construction of valve scaffolds, and VICs thrive in
biomaterial scaffolds containing HA (17, 18). However, previous
work with these materials has not focused on the role of HA in
early disease progression, nor has it tailored the HA content to
match that found in native valves. Most previous HA-containing
materials have also lacked the presence of collagen, which is the
most prevalent ECM component in the valve and essential for
maintaining a healthy VIC phenotype (19). Additionally, all
prior studies have used VICs that express a myofibroblastic or
osteoblastic phenotype, which is not consistent with the pheno-
type of VICs during early stages of CAVD (2, 20, 21); methods
Significance
Due to an insufficient understanding of the mechanisms that
drive its progression, there is currently no treatment for calcific
aortic valve disease (CAVD) other than valve replacement. In this
report, we describe the generation of engineered environments
that mimic features found in early CAVD. By combining these
engineered models of valve disease with other exogenous cues
present during CAVD, we were able to propose a previously
unidentified cascade of pathological events and identify specific
extracellular components that are critical in regulating this pro-
cess. These findings demonstrate the utility of engineered in vitro
models to perform systematic, controlled studies of events re-
lated to disease progression that may lead to future identification
of potential targets for therapeutic interventions.
Author contributions: A.M.P. and K.S.M. designed research; A.M.P., J.A.W., and A.D.E.
performed research; A.M.P., J.A.W., A.D.E., and K.S.M. analyzed data; and A.M.P. and
K.S.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. D.J.M. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial Board.
Published under the PNAS license.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: kmasters@wisc.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1704637115/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704637115
PNAS
|
Published online December 27, 2017
|
E363–E371
ENGINEERING
CELL BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 to generate VICs that express a native, quiescent phenotype have
only recently been described (22, 23).
Thus, in this work, we describe the generation of an in vitro
platform intended to mimic several characteristics of valvular le-
sions in early CAVD, with a focus on investigating the role of ECM
composition in stimulating behaviors related to disease progres-
sion. To represent the GAG enrichment that is found in early le-
sions, a hybrid biomaterial consisting of both methacrylated gelatin
and methacrylated HA or CS was constructed to provide varied
levels of GAG content with a constant collagen-based background.
These two GAGs are the most prevalent in native valves, and they
were studied independently of each other because their structural
and biological differences suggest they likely play differential roles
in CAVD progression. To approximate the VIC phenotype found
in native valves, VICs exhibiting a quiescent phenotype (qVICs)
(21, 23) were seeded on these materials. These culture platforms
were then combined with LDL or oxLDL to decipher the rela-
tionships between GAG enrichment, LDL/oxLDL deposition, and
inflammatory activity. Our findings from this disease-inspired in
vitro model revealed pathological relationships in the context of
valvular disease which we hope will ultimately advance our un-
derstanding of in vivo CAVD pathogenesis.
Results
Synthesis of Methacrylated Gelatin/GAG Hydrogel Substrates. Hydrogel
culture substrates consisting of copolymerized networks of meth-
acrylated gelatin (GelMA) and methacrylated GAGs were synthe-
sized to mimic the extracellular environment present in aortic valve
leaflets. Specifically, 5% wt/vol GelMA was mixed with methacrylated
HA or CS at either 2.4 mg/mL or 9.6 mg/mL to mimic the collagen:
HA ratio present in healthy tissues (19) and the GAG enrichment
observed in diseased valves, respectively (Fig. 1 and Fig. S1) (11).
These two GAG concentrations are referred to as “1×” and “4×”
throughout the figures and text, and the focus of subsequent ex-
periments was to understand the consequences of GAG enrich-
ment on events related to lesion progression, rather than elucidate
the factors that caused the initial ECM dysregulation. Although the
GelMA concentration remained constant for all formulations,
GelMA batches with different degrees of functionalization were
mixed to maintain the Young’s modulus at 7 ± 1 kPa.
GAG Enrichment Attenuates the Production of Inflammatory Factors.
Previous work identified the infiltration of immune cells as an early
feature of CAVD that follows GAG enrichment (11). Thus, we first
applied our biomaterial platform to determine whether GAG en-
richment is sufficient to directly enhance the inflammatory activity
of VICs. Specifically, the production of inflammatory cytokines by
VICs was measured following VIC culture on hydrogel substrates
containing 1× (“healthy”) or 4× (“diseased”) HA or CS. In general,
the presence of HA or CS was associated with decreased secretion
of inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 2 A–D). For example, relative to the
GelMA control, VIC secretion of IL-6 (Fig. 2A) remained un-
changed upon incorporation of HA or CS amounts found in healthy
valves, but was significantly reduced by pathological enrichment
of CS. VIC production of interleukin-8 (IL-8) was reduced in the
presence of either GAG and was reduced even further in envi-
ronments containing pathological levels of HA or CS (Fig. 2B).
Meanwhile, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) secre-
tion was similar across all biomaterial conditions, with the exception
of significant attenuation on 1× CS substrates relative to GelMA
alone (Fig. 2C). Finally, the production of platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF) by VICs was significantly decreased in the presence
of HA or CS compared with the GelMA control (Fig. 2D).
Fig. 1.
Fabrication of GelMA/GAG hydrogels. Shown is a schematic of the
cross-linking reaction between GelMA and GAG to yield substrates with a
healthy (1×, 2.4 mg/mL) or pathological (4×, 9.6 mg/mL) amount of GAG.
GelMA with varying degrees of methacrylate functionalization was
employed to maintain constant material stiffness upon incorporation of
increased GAG.
Fig. 2.
Impact of GAG enrichment on inflammatory and angiogenic cytokine production and VIC activation. VICs were cultured on GelMA substrates
containing HA or CS at healthy (1×) or pathological (4×) concentrations and assayed for the production of (A) IL-6, (B) IL-8, (C) MCP-1, and (D) PDGF, as well as
(E) the percentage of proliferating cells, (F) apoptosis, (G) ACTA2 expression, and (H) VEGF production. *P < 0.05 compared with GelMA control. #P < 0.05 for
comparisons shown. n = 4.
E364
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704637115
Porras et al.
 These findings indicated that neither HA nor CS enrichment
was able to initiate increased inflammatory activity by VICs; in
fact, increased levels of these GAGs appeared to suppress the
secretion of inflammatory cytokines. Therefore, we next inves-
tigated the relationship between GAG enrichment and myofi-
broblastic activation of VICs, a different pathological event that
emerges after initial ECM rearrangement and is thought to be a
prominent driver in CAVD pathogenesis (2, 3, 21). Characteristics
indicative of VIC activation are increased proliferation and apo-
ptosis, as well as expression of α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) (21).
The presence of either a healthy (1×) or a pathological (4×) amount
of CS was sufficient to increase cell proliferation compared with
GelMA substrates containing no CS (Fig. 2E). Meanwhile, pro-
liferation was unchanged relative to the GelMA control upon in-
corporation of 1× HA, but became elevated upon enrichment of HA
to a pathological concentration (4×). In contrast, a decrease in cel-
lular apoptosis was observed upon addition of either GAG relative
to the GelMA control (Fig. 2F). Although an increase in pro-
liferation can suggest VIC activation, no changes in the gene ex-
pression levels of αSMA were observed (Fig. 2G), where αSMA is
considered the defining feature of VIC activation. Thus, GAG en-
richment did not appear to directly induce either inflammatory ac-
tivity or myofibroblastic differentiation. Finally, we investigated the
relationship between GAG enrichment and VIC production of a
proangiogenic molecule, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
since angiogenesis also occurs as a later hallmark of valvular disease.
VEGF production was dramatically increased by HA enrichment,
but remained similar to the GelMA control in all other conditions
(Fig. 2H). To confirm that the quiescent VICs used in this study had
not experienced phenotypic drift, a subset of these analyses was
repeated using naive VICs that had never been subcultured. For
all markers examined (proliferation, IL-6, IL-8, and PDGF), the
response of the naive VICs was similar to that obtained using
quiescent VICs (Fig. S2).
GAG Enrichment Regulates the Availability of LDL and oxLDL. We next
sought to determine the purpose of GAG enrichment in CAVD
progression by examining whether this feature plays an indirect
role in stimulating inflammation and VIC activation by regulating
the availability of lipoproteins. As noted earlier, the earliest path-
ological features observed in CAVD have been GAG enrichment
and deposition of oxidized lipoproteins (12). GAG-containing
hydrogels were treated with fluorescently labeled LDL or oxLDL
and assayed for lipoprotein retention. Substrates enriched in HA or
CS retained significantly more LDL compared with the GelMA
control, with 4× CS hydrogels exhibiting higher levels of LDL
deposition than 4× HA hydrogels (Fig. 3A). Meanwhile, oxLDL
bound preferentially to CS-containing gels compared with GelMA-
and HA-containing substrates. Once again, the highest levels of
oxLDL retention were achieved in environments containing a
pathological amount of CS (Fig. 3B).
While Fig. 3 demonstrates that GAG enrichment can modulate
lipoprotein retention, it was not known whether LDL or oxLDL
could be responsible for stimulating downstream disease hallmarks
such as inflammatory activity or activation of quiescent VICs. Thus,
VICs were seeded on GelMA hydrogels and treated with LDL or
oxLDL at a concentration of 25 μg/mL for 48 h (Fig. 4) to de-
termine the response of VICs to LDL and oxLDL, independent of
changes in lipoprotein availability that can occur due to differential
retention by GAGs. LDL treatment had no effect on the pro-
duction of inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 4 A–D) or VIC phenotype
(Fig. 4 E–G), and VICs in these culture conditions did not exhibit
the capacity to oxidize LDL themselves (Fig. S3). In contrast,
oxLDL had a potent proinflammatory effect on VICs, as signifi-
cantly higher levels of IL-6, IL-8, MCP-1, and PDGF were detected
following oxLDL treatment of VICs (Fig. 4 A–D). Likewise,
oxLDL treatment led to an increase in VIC αSMA gene expression
(Fig. 4E), proliferation (Fig. 4F), apoptosis (Fig. 4G) compared
with the untreated control, indicating that oxLDL stimulated
myofibroblastic differentiation of VICs. However, neither LDL
nor oxLDL was found to stimulate osteogenic differentiation of
the quiescent VICs, as indicated by ALP and BMP2 gene ex-
pression (Fig. S4). Production of VEGF did not change upon
treatment with either LDL or oxLDL (Fig. 4H). A subset of these
Fig. 3.
Lipoprotein deposition on GelMA/GAG substrates. (A and B) De-
position of (A) LDL and (B) oxLDL on GelMA substrates containing HA or CS
at healthy (1×) or pathological (4×) concentrations. *P < 0.05 compared with
GelMA. #P < 0.05 for comparison shown. n = 6.
Fig. 4.
Impact of LDL/oxLDL on the production of cytokines, growth factors, and VIC activation. VICs cultured on GelMA substrates and treated with 25 μg/mL
LDL or oxLDL for 48 h were assayed for production of (A) IL-6, (B) IL-8, (C) MCP-1, and (D) PDGF, as well as (E) ACTA2 gene expression, (F) proliferation, (G)
apoptosis, and (H) VEGF production. *P < 0.05 compared with untreated control. n = 4.
Porras et al.
PNAS
|
Published online December 27, 2017
|
E365
ENGINEERING
CELL BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 analyses was repeated using naive VICs and found to yield similar
results (Fig. S2).
Effect of Combined GAG Enrichment and Lipoprotein Exposure. The
differential lipoprotein retention caused by GAG enrichment,
combined with the potency of oxLDL in stimulating inflammatory
cytokine secretion and VIC activation, gave rise to the hypothesis
that pathological levels of GAGs act to entrap LDL/oxLDL, and
the deposited oxLDL is then available to stimulate VIC dysfunc-
tion. To test this hypothesis, VICs were cultured on GelMA/GAG
substrates that had been preincubated with 200 μg/mL LDL or
oxLDL for 24 h, a concentration determined to yield retained
oxLDL in a range relevant to earlier experiments (Fig. S5). This
setup was intended to better approximate the native environment,
where VICs would interact with lipoproteins that have been dif-
ferentially retained by the matrix, rather than direct exposure to
circulating LDL and oxLDL. VICs were cultured on GelMA/GAG
substrates containing bound LDL or oxLDL for 48 h and analyzed
for a subset of disease markers indicative of inflammatory activity
or VIC activation. As shown in Fig. 5, pathological CS enrichment
supported the retention of sufficient oxLDL to significantly in-
crease VIC secretion of IL-6 (Fig. 5A) and MCP-1 (Fig. 5B) and
expression of ACTA2 (Fig. 5C) compared with culture on 4× CS
alone. A combination of CS enrichment and LDL deposition also
yielded significantly increased MCP-1 production by VICs, al-
though this was the only condition where deposited LDL was able
to effect changes in VIC behavior.
GAG Enrichment and oxLDL Deposition Participate in a Positive
Feedback Loop. Finally, we examined whether deposited lipo-
proteins could regulate GAG production by VICs, thereby cre-
ating a positive feedback loop. Treatment with LDL did not
significantly increase GAG synthesis by VICs, as measured by
expression of CS synthase-1 (CHSY1, Fig. 6A), expression of HA
synthase-3 (HAS3, Fig. 6B), secretion of sulfated GAGs (Fig.
6C), or secretion of HA (Fig. 6D). However, oxLDL did signif-
icantly increase VIC expression of CHSY1 and HAS3, as well as
HA deposition compared with the untreated control. The de-
position of total sulfated GAGs was not affected by oxLDL, al-
though this assay is not specific to CS alone.
VIC Production of Inflammatory Cytokines Precedes Macrophage Invasion
in Vivo. To validate that the production of inflammatory cytokines
observed by VICs in these in vitro experiments was relevant to the in
vivo condition, leaflets from 1-y-old wild-type (1yo WT) or Rapacz
hypercholesterolemic (1yo RFH) swine were examined for the
presence of IL-6, PDGF-BB, and macrophages. As discussed in
our previous work (11), leaflets from 1yo swine with familial
hypercholesterolemia exhibit several hallmarks of early CAVD,
such as abundant GAG enrichment, pathological leaflet thick-
ening, and deposition of oxLDL; these leaflets ultimately prog-
ress to mild sclerosis. Staining for IL-6 in WT and RFH leaflets
demonstrated minimal presence of this cytokine in WT animals,
but a fourfold elevation in mildly diseased (RFH) leaflets (Fig.
7A). Meanwhile, PDGF-BB was strongly present in leaflets from
WT animals, but still elevated by twofold in diseased leaflets
(Fig. 7B). The absence of macrophages in 1yo animals (Fig. S6A)
and cytokine presence throughout the leaflet width strongly
suggest that VICs were responsible for the significant increases
in IL-6 and PDGF present at this early disease stage. Macro-
phages were successfully detected in older (3yo) RFH animals
with valvular sclerosis (Fig. S6B) (11).
Discussion
Disarray of the highly organized ECM normally found in the
aortic valve is an important hallmark of CAVD (9, 10); specifi-
cally, GAG enrichment has been identified as a key feature
during the early stages of the disease (11–13). Similarly, lipo-
protein metabolism and inflammation have also been hypothe-
sized to play a role in the progression of aortic valve sclerosis (3,
24–27). However, the limitations of existing in vivo and in vitro
models have restricted our understanding of the order in which
these events occur. The present study sought to understand
pathological events that occur soon after early lesion develop-
ment by engineering cell culture environments that mimic the
ECM and other factors found in early CAVD. The results
reported here suggest a sequence of events that highlights the
separate contributions of individual ECM features to VIC
pathobiology (Fig. 8) and reveals interactions that potentially
Fig. 5.
VIC function in response to GAG-bound lipoproteins. VICs were cultured on GelMA/GAG hydrogels that had been pretreated with 200 μg/mL of LDL or
oxLDL and rinsed to remove unbound lipoproteins. After 48 h, cultures were assessed for production of inflammatory cytokines (A) IL-6 and (B) MCP-1 as well
as (C) myofibroblast marker ACTA2. *P < 0.05 compared with the untreated control for each substrate formulation. n = 4.
Fig. 6.
Impact of LDL/oxLDL on GAG production. VICs cultured on GelMA
substrates and treated with 25 μg/mL LDL or oxLDL for 48 h were assayed
for expression of two enzymes responsible for synthesizing CS and HA,
(A) CHSY1 and (B) HAS3, as well as the production of (C) sulfated GAGs and
(D) HA. *P < 0.05 compared with untreated control. n = 4.
E366
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704637115
Porras et al.
 differentiate valve lesion progression from that of atherosclero-
sis. Pathological levels of HA directly stimulated VIC production
of a proangiogenic factor, while pathological levels of CS were
able to trap both LDL and oxLDL. In contrast to smooth muscle
cell behavior in atherosclerotic lesions, VICs were generally
unresponsive to LDL; however, oxLDL was a potent stimulant
for the secretion of inflammatory cytokines and expression of a
myofibroblastic phenotype by VICs. Examination of mildly dis-
eased leaflets from swine with familial hypercholesterolemia
confirmed VICs as the primary source of inflammatory cytokines
during early-stage CAVD. Finally, oxLDL treatment induced an
increase in both HA and CS production to form a positive
feedback loop that may enable further lesion progression. Al-
though the role of this cascade in the progression to later-stage
events or the development of clinical CAVD has yet to be de-
termined, use of this disease-inspired platform yielded insight
into VIC behaviors that may hopefully advance us toward unraveling
CAVD pathogenesis.
The ability of GAGs to regulate inflammation has been de-
scribed for many other tissues (28–31). However, little is known
regarding the relationship between inflammatory activity and
GAGs in the context of the aortic valve. In the present study, we
found that enrichment of either CS or HA to mimic early valve
pathology was insufficient to induce an increase in the pro-
duction of inflammatory cytokines. In fact, our findings suggest
an antiinflammatory role for these GAGs in both healthy and
early-disease environments. GAG enrichment was also in-
sufficient to induce myofibroblastic differentiation of VICs; this
finding is consistent with previous studies of VICs cultured
in HA-rich environments, where VIC encapsulation in HA
hydrogels or treatment with exogenous HA led to reduced ex-
pression of myofibroblastic markers (16, 18, 32, 33). However,
one notable effect of HA enrichment in our study was a dra-
matic increase in VEGF production by VICs. This outcome was
achieved exclusively in the 4× HA condition and is consistent
with the ability of HA to stimulate VEGF production in other
cell types (34), but not previously found in the context of val-
vular disease. This increase in VEGF could play a role in
stimulating the angiogenesis seen in valve disease; valves are
normally avascular, but angiogenesis is thought to occur during
CAVD to compensate for diffusion limitations introduced by
leaflet thickening.
Based upon evidence that oxLDL deposition also appears as
an early event in CAVD and that lipoproteins are preferentially
retained in areas enriched in proteoglycans in heart valves (35)
and atherosclerotic vessels (36), we next examined whether GAG
enrichment indirectly stimulated pathological VIC behavior via
differential regulation of lipoprotein deposition. We did indeed
find that LDL and oxLDL depositions were enhanced in GAG-
enriched environments. The ability to retain LDL or oxLDL was
not equivalent across the two GAGs examined in our study, with
significantly greater LDL and oxLDL deposition occurring in
the CS-enriched platform. The oxLDL retained on CS-enriched
substrates was able to overcome the antiinflammatory properties
of the CS alone and induce an increase in the production of
inflammatory cytokines by VICs. Therefore, it appears that CS
enrichment contributes to disease progression by enabling oxLDL
deposition that, in turn, drives inflammatory activity. Although
retention of LDL was also increased by CS enrichment, it did not
stimulate increased inflammatory activity or VIC activation.
Despite the focus on targeting cholesterol and lipid metabo-
lism in the ongoing search for a CAVD treatment (27, 37, 38),
relatively little is known about the effect of lipoproteins on VIC
function. Our findings implicate oxLDL as a potent factor in
regulating pathological VIC behavior: Even in the absence of
Fig. 7.
Detection of inflammatory cytokines in diseased leaflets. (A) IL-6 and
(B) PDGF-BB were detected in leaflets from 1yo WT swine or 1yo RFH swine,
where the latter exhibit hallmarks of early CAVD. Both cytokines were sig-
nificantly elevated in the diseased leaflets. *P < 0.05 compared with 1yo WT.
n = 3 animals per condition, n = 3 samples per animal.
Fig. 8.
Schematic of proposed sequence of events in early CAVD. Our findings indicate distinct and separate roles for individual GAGs in events related to
disease progression. HA enrichment induces VIC secretion of VEGF, an angiogenic cytokine, while CS enrichment leads to increased deposition of oxidized
lipoproteins, which, in turn, induce myofibroblastic activation and the production of inflammatory cytokines. Deposited oxLDL can also further stimulate GAG
production, thereby forming a positive feedback loop for increased lipoprotein deposition and subsequent pathological events. Both HA and CS enrichment
supported unoxidized LDL deposition, but quiescent VICs were generally unresponsive to LDL and unable to oxidize it themselves.
Porras et al.
PNAS
|
Published online December 27, 2017
|
E367
ENGINEERING
CELL BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 GAG enrichment, exposure to oxLDL in our study increased
VIC production of multiple inflammatory cytokines known to be
present in diseased valves (11). For example, IL-6 is highly
expressed in calcified aortic valves and is believed to participate
in the process of osteogenic VIC transformation (39). However,
the present study demonstrates that these cytokines are both
produced by VICs and present in the early-diseased valve envi-
ronment, before the arrival of macrophages. Treatment with
oxLDL in our study also induced a VIC phenotype consistent
with myofibroblastic differentiation. Although others have not
found increased myofibroblastic VIC differentiation upon oxLDL
treatment (40), the previous study employed traditional VIC
culture methods that produce a largely myofibroblastic pop-
ulation before oxLDL administration, which would likely di-
minish their ability to further elevate myofibroblastic markers in
response to this stimulus. In contrast to previous work (40–43),
we also did not find evidence of osteogenic VIC differentiation
in response to oxLDL treatment. However, this again could be
due to a difference in the starting phenotype of the VICs, as
other studies that treated VICs with oxLDL used either tradi-
tionally cultured (i.e., myofibroblastic) VICs (40, 43) or VICs
primed with osteogenic media (41, 42). These differences can
complicate the ability to make cross-study comparisons, but they
also raise the interesting possibility that VIC responsiveness to
oxLDL is dependent upon VIC phenotype, which could have
implications for understanding the role of oxLDL in disease
progression. Regarding the source of oxLDL initially retained in
early valve lesions, the inability of either quiescent VICs or
valvular endothelial cells (VECs) to oxidize LDL (Fig. S3) leads
us to postulate that it is derived from circulating oxLDL. Addi-
tional support for this hypothesis comes from observations that
increased plasma levels of circulating oxLDL are associated with
increased fibrocalcific remodeling in CAVD (44), and conditions
with increased circulating oxLDL levels are known to be risk
factors for CAVD (45–49). LDL that is retained in the early valve
lesion may be oxidized later in the disease process by macrophages
(50) or potentially by myofibroblastic VICs, although the latter
possibility has not yet been examined. Overall, the crucial role for
oxidized lipoproteins in dictating VIC fate and coordinating the
progression of multiple features of early valve disease also supports
the recent emergence of lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] as a novel drug
target for the treatment of CAVD (51–53).
In contrast to the potent effects of oxLDL on VICs, treatment
with LDL had little effect on VIC phenotype or inflammation.
These results suggest that VICs exhibit a different response to
LDL than vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs), which is perti-
nent to understanding potential differences between lesion devel-
opment in CAVD and atherosclerosis. Our proposed sequence of
events in valvular pathology exhibits many commonalities with the
widely studied “response to retention” model of atherosclerosis
(54). However, differences in the abilities of VICs and SMCs to
interact with unoxidized lipoproteins may represent a critical point
of divergence of these two pathologies. Unlike the quiescent VICs
which populate early valve lesions, SMCs respond to LDL via in-
creased production of inflammatory factors (55, 56) and are able to
oxidize LDL themselves (57). This dissimilarity could be relevant in
understanding, for example, why statin drugs are effective at low-
ering the incidence of atherosclerosis (58, 59) (i.e., where SMCs
are responsive to LDL) but not effective at inhibiting CAVD
(60) (i.e., where VICs are not responsive to LDL and are unable
to oxidize it themselves).
In addition to increasing both inflammatory activity and VIC
activation, oxLDL increased GAG deposition, thereby creating a
positive feedback loop in this sequence of events (Fig. 7) where
GAG enrichment drives oxLDL deposition, which then drives
further GAG enrichment. Others have also reported an increase
in biglycan expression as a direct result of oxLDL treatment (43).
The present work did not seek to evaluate causes of initial GAG
dysregulation, but it is likely that CS enrichment initially pre-
cedes oxLDL deposition in the pathological cascade because
healthy substrates did not support lipoprotein retention at suf-
ficient levels to induce any of the disease features evaluated in
this study. Although further work will be necessary to confirm
the importance of the aforementioned positive feedback loop, it
emerges as a potential therapeutic target to halt CAVD progres-
sion. Others have previously proposed GAG synthesis pathways as
potential targets for the treatment of valve disease (61).
The findings in this study were enabled by the construction of
a unique platform for studying the interactions of microenvi-
ronmental changes and physiological events that are relevant to
early CAVD. Throughout this work, HA and CS exerted dif-
ferent effects on the measured outcomes: The most prominent
result of HA enrichment was an increase in VEGF production,
whereas CS was ultimately more potent in its ability to retain
oxLDL. These findings suggest distinct and separate roles for
each of these GAGs in the process of valve lesion development,
with HA directly stimulating factors that may contribute to the
angiogenesis seen in later disease stages and CS indirectly
stimulating VIC differentiation and inflammatory pathways. The
ability to dissect out the individual contributions of specific mi-
croenvironmental cues could have powerful consequences for
elucidating the complex array of mechanisms and cellular decision-
making processes that drive these pathological outcomes. This report
also describes VIC culture in a CS-based environment, which is
uncommon, despite methacrylation of CS and HA being equally
practical (62, 63). Thus, this study points to the crucial role that
CS plays in the progression of early CAVD and highlights the
importance of expanding the examination of GAGs in the aortic
valve beyond HA.
Of course, our approach is not without limitations. This work
studied only a narrow window of events related to CAVD; it did
not include investigation of factors regulating the onset of GAG
enrichment or the importance of early-stage characteristics in
progressing to later-stage events, such as fibrosis and/or calcifi-
cation. Additionally, although they are arguably the most prom-
inent features of early lesion development, the increases in HA
and CS represent only two of the changes that occur during
early CAVD. While the goal of the present work was to focus
on how these ECM cues affect subsequent pathological events,
changes in tissue mechanics may also make important contri-
butions to the cellular behaviors examined herein. Scaffold
mechanics can easily be adjusted using the GelMA/GAG ma-
terials, and future studies can expand the complexity of this
approach through simultaneous variation of ECM cues and
stiffness. With respect to mimicking other features of the early
valve lesion, one of the primary limitations on this front is our
incomplete knowledge of other early lesion characteristics. We
examined our pig model of early leaflet thickening for evidence
of TGF-β1 or TNFα, whose presence has been documented in
later-stage CAVD (64), but we did not find an increase in gene
expression (11) or deposition (Fig. S7) of these factors. Results
from our in vitro studies were consistent with this observation,
as TGF-β1 production was unaffected by either GAG enrich-
ment or LDL/oxLDL treatment (Fig. S7). The absence of TGF-
β1 elevation during early-stage events is potentially interesting
on its own, as delivery of this molecule is perhaps the most
common approach for studying VIC pathology in vitro (65), yet
our results indicate that such an approach may not be appro-
priate for mimicking the early lesion environment.
There are also limitations associated with the sources of the
biomaterials employed in this platform. This study was per-
formed using HA of one specific molecular mass range
(100 kDa) and the biological functions of HA are known to be
dependent on molecular mass (16, 66). Thus, it is possible that
different results would be observed if these studies were re-
peated with HA of a different molecular mass. Similarly, the VIC
E368
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704637115
Porras et al.
 response to CS could be affected by modifications in chain length
or sulfation patterns. The CS in this study was purchased from a
commercial source to ensure consistency and obtain the relatively
large quantities needed for biomaterial fabrication. Of course, no
in vitro system can perfectly mimic the native valve composition.
However, despite these limitations, the biomaterial and culture
environment described herein achieve increased complexity com-
pared to previous work and allowed the elucidation of relationships
that were previously unidentified in the context of VIC pathobiology.
Conclusions
We have generated a complex culture platform that mimics
multiple characteristics found in early CAVD—namely, enriched
GAGs, quiescent VICs, and presence of lipoproteins. Based
upon our findings, we propose a sequence for several critical
pathological events that have not previously been documented in
VIC cultures (Fig. 8) and evidence for initiation of the in-
flammatory response by VICs in vivo. The connection of these
events to the manifestation of clinical CAVD has yet to be de-
termined; however, this approach to engineering a diseased en-
vironment yields a tailorable and controlled platform that may
provide a basis for performing systematic studies of disease-
related outcomes and can be extended to include additional
CAVD risk factors and examine later-stage events in CAVD
pathogenesis. These engineered environments may provide us
with not only a means to decipher disease etiology, but also a
platform for testing potential pharmacological treatments.
Materials and Methods
GelMA/GAG Hydrogel Synthesis. Gelatin methacrylation was performed as
described by Loessner et al. (67). Gelatin from porcine skin (Sigma) was
dissolved in PBS (10% wt/vol) at 55 °C followed by addition of methacrylic
anhydride (Sigma) at a rate of 200 μL/min, using a peristaltic pump. The
methacrylic anhydride was added to achieve a final concentration of 2.5%,
5%, or 10% wt/vol to yield GelMA with varied degrees of methacrylate
functionalization. The methacrylation reaction was allowed to proceed
overnight at 55 °C. After this incubation period, the solution was centri-
fuged at 3,500 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant containing GelMA was
collected, diluted 1:4 in PBS, and transferred to 12- to 14-kDa MWCO dialysis
tubing (Thermo Fisher Scientific). GelMA was then dialyzed against PBS for
3 d and deionized water for 2 d, sterile filtered, and lyophilized. CS (Sigma)
was methacrylated following the same procedure, while HA (Fluka) was
chemically modified with glycidyl methacrylate according to a protocol
published by Leach et al. (68). All purified materials were stored at −20 °C.
GelMA/GAG substrates were fabricated via photopolymerization. Polymer
solutions were prepared in sterile PBS and contained 0.05% photoinitiator
lithium arylphosphonate (LAP) [synthesized as described elsewhere (69)],
5% (wt/vol) GelMA, and methacrylated HA or CS at either 2.4 mg/mL or
9.6 mg/mL. Although the GelMA concentration remained constant for all
formulations, GelMA batches with different degrees of functionalization
were mixed to maintain a constant Young’s modulus. Dynamic mechanical
analysis was performed using an MTS Insight 5 instrument. Disks 8 mm in
diameter and 2 mm thick were tested at room temperature, and the elastic
modulus was calculated from the stress–strain curve obtained at a frequency
of 1 Hz. Thus, the mechanical properties of the substrates remained constant
even when the GAG content increased.
For the remaining experiments, 15 μL of GelMA/GAG prepolymer solution
was dispensed onto a parafilm stage, and a 15-mm glass coverslip (Electron
Microscopy Sciences) was applied onto the drop in a sandwich configuration;
this assembly was exposed to UV light at 365 nm for 5 min, using a Black-Ray
XX-15L lamp (3 mW/cm2, 115 V, 60 Hz; UVP). After cross-linking, the cover-
slips were carefully peeled off the parafilm, resulting in the formation of a
thin (100–200 μm) hydrogel layer over the glass surface. Gels were allowed
to swell overnight in PBS and UV sterilized at 254 nm for 1 h before use.
VIC Isolation, Culture, and Treatment. Aortic valve leaflets were excised from
porcine hearts obtained from a local abattoir (Hoesly’s) and VICs were iso-
lated through collagenase digestion as described previously (70, 71). The
isolated cells were plated and expanded on tissue culture polystyrene in low-
glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Sigma) supplemented
with 10% heat-inactivated FCS (Sigma), 150 units/mL penicillin/streptomycin
(Sigma), and 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma). Once the VICs were ∼90% conflu-
ent, they were passaged and cultured on collagen-I–coated TCPS [2 μg/cm2;
Advanced BioMatrix (72)] in low-glucose DMEM supplemented with 2%
heat-inactivated FCS, 5.25 μg/mL insulin, 10 ng/mL FGF-2 (PeproTech),
150 units/mL penicillin/streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine. These culture
conditions produce VICs that exhibit a quiescent phenotype, which is con-
sistent with the phenotype of VICs found in native valves (71). After 9 d in
culture, VICs were seeded on either GelMA only or GelMA/GAG hydrogels in
medium containing 2% FCS, 150 units/mL penicillin/streptomycin, and 2 mM
L-glutamine. A subset of experiments was also repeated using naive VICs,
which were seeded for experimentation immediately after isolation, with-
out any prior culturing. Cells were plated at a density of 50,000 cells/cm2
with the exception of the proliferation experiments, for which VICs were
seeded at 20,000 cells/cm2. To determine the effect of lipoprotein treatment
on VIC phenotype and function, VICs seeded on GelMA hydrogels (without
GAGs) were treated with 25 μg/mL human LDL (RayBiotech) or oxLDL
(Athens Research & Technology). In all experiments, samples were collected
for analysis 72 h after cell seeding.
Evaluation of Cell Phenotype. VIC proliferation was assessed using a Click-iT EdU
Alexa Fluor 488 Imaging kit (Invitrogen). After incubation with EdU for 16 h,
manufacturer’s instructions were followed to label proliferating cells, and
fluorescent images were captured using an Olympus IX51 microscope. Using
ImageJ software for analysis, the percentage of proliferating cells was de-
termined by dividing the number of proliferating cells by the total number of
cells determined through DAPI counterstaining. Apoptosis was evaluated with
the SensoLyte Homogeneous AFC Caspase 3/7 Assay kit (AnaSpec) following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Fluorescence was quantified using a Tecan Infinite
M1000 plate reader and divided by the average number of cells in each con-
dition, as determined by DAPI staining. The level of apoptosis in each condition
was then normalized to the GelMA control for each experiment.
The extent of myofibroblastic VIC activation was evaluated through
quantification of αSMA (αSMA/ACTA2) gene expression levels via qRT-PCR.
VIC RNA was isolated with an RNEasy mini kit (Qiagen) and reverse tran-
scribed with a High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Bio-
systems). An ACTA2 Taqman Gene Expression Assay (Applied Biosystems)
was employed for qRT-PCR, using GAPDH as the endogenous control. Os-
teogenic differentiation of VICs was similarly evaluated, using Taqman kits
for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2).
Data were analyzed using the relative standard curve CT method and nor-
malized to the GelMA control for each experiment.
Quantification of Inflammatory and Angiogenic Cytokine Production. The con-
centrations of various inflammatory and angiogenic cytokines in VIC culture
supernatants were quantified through ELISAs. The production of PDGF-BB
(Peprotech), IL-6 (R&D Systems), IL-8 (R&D Systems), monocyte chemo-
attractant protein (MCP-1; RayBiotech), VEGF (R&D Systems), and TGF-β1
(R&D Systems) was assessed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and
normalized to the average number of cells in each condition determined
through DAPI staining.
Quantification of Lipoprotein Deposition. To quantify lipoprotein deposition
on GelMA/GAG hydrogels, LDL and oxLDL were fluorescently labeled using an
Alexa Fluor 488 Protein Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific). GelMA and GelMA/
GAG hydrogels were synthesized as described above and allowed to swell
overnight in PBS. At that point, 25 μg/mL of fluorescently labeled LDL or
oxLDL diluted in PBS was added to each film and incubated at 37 °C. After
48 h, the hydrogels were rinsed four times with PBS and fluorescence in-
tensity was measured at six different spots per gel, using a Tecan Infinite
M1000 plate reader. The average intensity for each substrate composition
was calculated to obtain the relative levels of lipoprotein retention.
VIC Culture on Hydrogels Containing Deposited Lipoproteins. To study the
effect of deposited lipoproteins on VICs, GelMA and GelMA/GAG hydrogels
were allowed to swell overnight and incubated in PBS containing 200 μg/mL
of unlabeled LDL or oxLDL for 24 h. To remove unbound lipoproteins, gels
were rinsed four times with sterile PBS and VICs were seeded as described
above. Inflammatory cytokine production and ACTA2 gene expression were
assessed 48 h after seeding and normalized to the no treatment control for
the corresponding GelMA/GAG formulation.
Quantification of GAG Production Following Lipoprotein Treatment. The pro-
duction of GAGs by VICs cultured on GelMA hydrogels and treated with 25 μg/mL
LDL or oxLDL was assessed. The gene expression levels of CHSY1 and HAS3 were
evaluated using Taqman primers for CHSY1 and HAS3 (Applied Bio-
systems) via qRT-PCR. The concentrations of sulfated GAGs (sGAGs) and HA
Porras et al.
PNAS
|
Published online December 27, 2017
|
E369
ENGINEERING
CELL BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 secreted into the media were also measured. Cell culture supernatants
were lyophilized and resuspended in PBS to concentrate the samples, and
the concentration of sGAGs was quantified via an alcian blue assay (73).
The HA concentration in culture supernatants was analyzed through an
HA test kit (Corgenix) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Both
sGAG and HA concentrations were normalized to the average number of
cells in each condition determined through DAPI staining.
Detection of Inflammatory Cytokines in Diseased Leaflets. IL-6 and PDGF-BB
were detected via immunohistochemical staining of formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded leaflet sections from 1yo WT swine or 1yo swine with
familial hypercholesterolemia (1yo RFH). Tissue sections were deparaffinized
and antigen retrieval was performed in citric acid buffer (pH 6.0; Vector
Laboratories) for 2 h in a water bath at 80 °C. Blocking and detection of IL-6
(10 μg/mL, mouse IgG, Clone 77830; R&D Systems) and PDGF-BB (5 μg/mL,
goat polyclonal; LifeSpan Biosciences) were performed using immunohisto-
chemical methods, following the VECTASTAIN Elite ABC Kit protocol for
mouse and goat, respectively (Vector Laboratories). Macrophages were de-
tected with an anti-pig macrophages antibody (10 μg/mL, mouse IgG, Clone
BA4D5; Bio-Rad) and fluorescent labeling using the VectaFluor DyLight
488 anti-mouse kit (Vector Labs). Bright-field and fluorescent images were
captured using an Olympus IX51 microscope (Olympus). Levels of chromagen
indicating positive staining were analyzed semiquantitatively using ImageJ
software (NIH) following the protocol outlined by Balaoing et al. (74). The
number of pixels that represent staining for an antigen was divided by
the total sample area in pixels to generate the percentage of the tissue in
the field of view that stained positively for a particular protein.
Statistics. Every experiment was conducted with n = 3–4 biological replicates,
with VICs isolated from a total of 15 porcine hearts. Data are presented as
mean ± SD. Experimental groups were compared using GraphPad Prism soft-
ware with one-way ANOVA in conjunction with Tukey’s honestly signifi-
cant difference posttest. P values less than or equal to 0.05 were considered
statistically significant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The authors acknowledge funding from the National
Institutes of Health (R01 HL093281, R21 EB019508) and the American Heart
Association (15PRE 22170006).
1. Go AS, et al.; American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics
Subcommittee (2013) Executive summary: Heart disease and stroke statistics–
2013 update: A report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 127:143–152.
2. Li C, Xu S, Gotlieb AI (2013) The progression of calcific aortic valve disease through
injury, cell dysfunction, and disruptive biologic and physical force feedback loops.
Cardiovasc Pathol 22:1–8.
3. Rajamannan NM, et al. (2011) Calcific aortic valve disease: Not simply a degenerative
process: A review and agenda for research from the National Heart and Lung and
Blood Institute aortic stenosis working group. Executive summary: Calcific aortic valve
disease-2011 update. Circulation 124:1783–1791.
4. Akat K, Borggrefe M, Kaden JJ (2009) Aortic valve calcification: Basic science to clinical
practice. Heart 95:616–623.
5. Otto CM, Lind BK, Kitzman DW, Gersh BJ, Siscovick DS (1999) Association of aortic-
valve sclerosis with cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in the elderly. N Engl J Med
341:142–147.
6. Völzke H, et al. (2010) Heart valve sclerosis predicts all-cause and cardiovascular
mortality. Atherosclerosis 209:606–610.
7. Rajamannan NM, et al. (2010) Executive summary from the NHLBI working group on
calcific aortic stenosis. Circulation 124:1783–1791.
8. Freeman RV, Otto CM (2005) Spectrum of calcific aortic valve disease: Pathogenesis,
disease progression, and treatment strategies. Circulation 111:3316–3326.
9. Chen JH, Simmons CA (2011) Cell-matrix interactions in the pathobiology of calcific
aortic valve disease: Critical roles for matricellular, matricrine, and matrix mechanics
cues. Circ Res 108:1510–1524.
10. Hinton RB, Jr, et al. (2006) Extracellular matrix remodeling and organization in de-
veloping and diseased aortic valves. Circ Res 98:1431–1438.
11. Porras AM, et al. (2015) Development of aortic valve disease in familial hypercho-
lesterolemic swine: Implications for elucidating disease etiology. J Am Heart Assoc 4:
e002254.
12. Otto CM, Kuusisto J, Reichenbach DD, Gown AM, O’Brien KD (1994) Characterization
of the early lesion of ‘degenerative’ valvular aortic stenosis. Histological and immu-
nohistochemical studies. Circulation 90:844–853.
13. Sider KL, et al. (2014) Evaluation of a porcine model of early aortic valve sclerosis.
Cardiovasc Pathol 23:289–297.
14. O’Brien KD, et al. (1996) Apolipoproteins B, (a), and E accumulate in the morpho-
logically early lesion of ‘degenerative’ valvular aortic stenosis. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol 16:523–532.
15. Stephens EH, et al. (2011) Differential proteoglycan and hyaluronan distribution in
calcified aortic valves. Cardiovasc Pathol 20:334–342.
16. Rodriguez KJ, Piechura LM, Masters KS (2011) Regulation of valvular interstitial cell
phenotype and function by hyaluronic acid in 2-D and 3-D culture environments.
Matrix Biol 30:70–82.
17. Masters KS, Shah DN, Leinwand LA, Anseth KS (2005) Crosslinked hyaluronan scaf-
folds as a biologically active carrier for valvular interstitial cells. Biomaterials 26:
2517–2525.
18. Puperi DS, et al. (2016) Hyaluronan hydrogels for a biomimetic spongiosa layer of
tissue engineered heart valve scaffolds. Biomacromolecules 17:1766–1775.
19. Rodriguez KJ, Piechura LM, Porras AM, Masters KS (2014) Manipulation of valve
composition to elucidate the role of collagen in aortic valve calcification. BMC
Cardiovasc Disord 14:29.
20. Liu AC, Gotlieb AI (2008) Transforming growth factor-beta regulates in vitro heart
valve repair by activated valve interstitial cells. Am J Pathol 173:1275–1285.
21. Liu AC, Joag VR, Gotlieb AI (2007) The emerging role of valve interstitial cell phe-
notypes in regulating heart valve pathobiology. Am J Pathol 171:1407–1418.
22. Latif N, Sarathchandra P, Chester AH, Yacoub MH (2015) Expression of smooth muscle
cell markers and co-activators in calcified aortic valves. Eur Heart J 36:1335–1345.
23. Porras AM, et al. (2017) Robust generation of quiescent porcine valvular interstitial
cell cultures. J Am Heart Assoc 6:e005041.
24. Lindman BR, et al. (2016) Calcific aortic stenosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16006.
25. Coté N, et al. (2013) Inflammation is associated with the remodeling of calcific aortic
valve disease. Inflammation 36:573–581.
26. Mohty D, et al. (2008) Association between plasma LDL particle size, valvular accu-
mulation of oxidized LDL, and inflammation in patients with aortic stenosis.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 28:187–193.
27. Parisi V, et al. (2015) The lipid theory in the pathogenesis of calcific aortic stenosis.
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 25:519–525.
28. Vallières M, du Souich P (2010) Modulation of inflammation by chondroitin sulfate.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 18:S1–S6.
29. Cuff CA, et al. (2001) The adhesion receptor CD44 promotes atherosclerosis by me-
diating inflammatory cell recruitment and vascular cell activation. J Clin Invest 108:
1031–1040.
30. Sadowitz B, Seymour K, Gahtan V, Maier KG (2012) The role of hyaluronic acid in
atherosclerosis and intimal hyperplasia. J Surg Res 173:e63–e72.
31. Jain M, et al. (1996) Role of CD44 in the reaction of vascular smooth muscle cells to
arterial wall injury. J Clin Invest 98:877.
32. Hjortnaes J, et al. (2016) Simulation of early calcific aortic valve disease in a 3D
platform: A role for myofibroblast differentiation. J Mol Cell Cardiol 94:13–20.
33. Duan B, Yin Z, Hockaday Kang L, Magin RL, Butcher JT (2016) Active tissue stiffness
modulation controls valve interstitial cell phenotype and osteogenic potential in 3D
culture. Acta Biomater 36:42–54.
34. Murphy JF, et al. (2005) Engagement of CD44 modulates cyclooxygenase induction,
VEGF generation, and proliferation in human vascular endothelial cells. FASEB J 19:
446–448.
35. Neufeld EB, et al. (2014) Decorin and biglycan retain LDL in disease-prone valvular
and aortic subendothelial intimal matrix. Atherosclerosis 233:113–121.
36. Viola M, et al. (2016) Extracellular matrix in atherosclerosis: Hyaluronan and pro-
teoglycans insights. Curr Med Chem 23:2958–2971.
37. Chan KL, Teo K, Dumesnil JG, Ni A, Tam J; ASTRONOMER Investigators (2010) Effect of
lipid lowering with rosuvastatin on progression of aortic stenosis: Results of the aortic
stenosis progression observation: Measuring effects of rosuvastatin (ASTRONOMER)
trial. Circulation 121:306–314.
38. Rajamannan NM, Greve AM, Moura LM, Best P, Wachtell K (2015) SALTIRE-RAAVE:
Targeting calcific aortic valve disease LDL-density-radius theory. Expert Rev
Cardiovasc Ther 13:355–367.
39. El Husseini D, et al. (2014) P2Y2 receptor represses IL-6 expression by valve interstitial
cells through Akt: Implication for calcific aortic valve disease. J Mol Cell Cardiol 72:
146–156.
40. Zeng Q, et al. (2014) Augmented osteogenic responses in human aortic valve cells
exposed to oxLDL and TLR4 agonist: A mechanistic role of Notch1 and NF-κB in-
teraction. PLoS One 9:e95400.
41. Nsaibia MJ, et al. (2017) OxLDL-derived lysophosphatidic acid promotes the pro-
gression of aortic valve stenosis through a LPAR1-RhoA-NF-kappaB pathway.
Cardiovasc Res 113:1351–1363.
42. Li F, Zhao Z, Cai Z, Dong N, Liu Y (2015) Oxidized low-density lipoprotein promotes
osteoblastic
differentiation
of
valvular
interstitial
cells
through
RAGE/MAPK.
Cardiology 130:55–61.
43. Song R, et al. (2012) Biglycan induces the expression of osteogenic factors in human
aortic valve interstitial cells via toll-like receptor-2. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 32:
2711–2720.
44. Côté C, et al. (2008) Association between circulating oxidised low-density lipoprotein and
fibrocalcific remodelling of the aortic valve in aortic stenosis. Heart 94:1175–1180.
45. Holvoet P, Lee DH, Steffes M, Gross M, Jacobs DR, Jr (2008) Association between
circulating oxidized low-density lipoprotein and incidence of the metabolic syn-
drome. JAMA 299:2287–2293.
46. Pandya V, Rao A, Chaudhary K (2015) Lipid abnormalities in kidney disease and
management strategies. World J Nephrol 4:83–91.
47. Katz R, et al. (2006) Features of the metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus as
predictors of aortic valve calcification in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis.
Circulation 113:2113–2119.
48. Towler DA (2013) Molecular and cellular aspects of calcific aortic valve disease. Circ
Res 113:198–208.
E370
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704637115
Porras et al.
 49. Kamath AR, Pai RG (2008) Risk factors for progression of calcific aortic stenosis and
potential therapeutic targets. Int J Angiol 17:63–70.
50. Parthasarathy S, Raghavamenon A, Garelnabi MO, Santanam N (2010) Oxidized low-
density lipoprotein. Methods Mol Biol 610:403–417.
51. Capoulade R, et al. (2015) Oxidized phospholipids, lipoprotein(a), and progression of
calcific aortic valve stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 66:1236–1246.
52. Rogers MA, Aikawa E (2015) A not-so-little role for lipoprotein(a) in the development
of calcific aortic valve disease. Circulation 132:621–623.
53. Thanassoulis G (2016) Lipoprotein (a) in calcific aortic valve disease: From genomics to
novel drug target for aortic stenosis. J Lipid Res 57:917–924.
54. Tabas I, Williams KJ, Borén J (2007) Subendothelial lipoprotein retention as the ini-
tiating process in atherosclerosis: Update and therapeutic implications. Circulation
116:1832–1844.
55. Ryoo SW, et al. (2004) Native LDL induces interleukin-8 expression via H2O2,
p38 kinase, and activator protein-1 in human aortic smooth muscle cells. Cardiovasc
Res 62:185–193.
56. Stiko-Rahm A, Hultgårdh-Nilsson A, Regnström J, Hamsten A, Nilsson J (1992) Native
and oxidized LDL enhances production of PDGF AA and the surface expression of
PDGF receptors in cultured human smooth muscle cells. Arterioscler Thromb 12:
1099–1109.
57. Morel DW, DiCorleto PE, Chisolm GM (1984) Endothelial and smooth muscle cells alter
low density lipoprotein in vitro by free radical oxidation. Arteriosclerosis 4:357–364.
58. SSSS Group (1994) Randomised trial of cholesterol lowering in 4444 patients with
coronary heart disease: The Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). Lancet 344:
1383–1389.
59. Baigent C, et al.; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration (2010) Efficacy
and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: A meta-analysis of data
from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet 376:1670–1681.
60. Zhao Y, Nicoll R, He YH, Henein MY (2016) The effect of statins on valve function and
calcification in aortic stenosis: A meta-analysis. Atherosclerosis 246:318–324.
61. Grande-Allen KJ, et al. (2007) Glycosaminoglycan synthesis and structure as targets
for the prevention of calcific aortic valve disease. Cardiovasc Res 76:19–28.
62. Abbadessa A, et al. (2016) A thermo-responsive and photo-polymerizable chondroitin
sulfate-based hydrogel for 3D printing applications. Carbohydr Polym 149:163–174.
63. Hayami JW, Waldman SD, Amsden BG (2016) Chondrocyte generation of cartilage-
like tissue following photoencapsulation in methacrylated polysaccharide solution
blends. Macromol Biosci 16:1083–1095.
64. Jian B, Narula N, Li QY, Mohler ER, 3rd, Levy RJ (2003) Progression of aortic valve
stenosis: TGF-beta1 is present in calcified aortic valve cusps and promotes aortic valve
interstitial cell calcification via apoptosis. Ann Thorac Surg 75:457–465; discussion
465–466.
65. Miller JD, Weiss RM, Heistad DD (2011) Calcific aortic valve stenosis: Methods, models,
and mechanisms. Circ Res 108:1392–1412.
66. Singleton PA (2014) Hyaluronan regulation of endothelial barrier function in cancer.
Adv Cancer Res 123:191–209.
67. Loessner D, et al. (2016) Functionalization, preparation and use of cell-laden gelatin
methacryloyl-based hydrogels as modular tissue culture platforms. Nat Protoc 11:
727–746.
68. Leach JB, Bivens KA, Collins CN, Schmidt CE (2004) Development of photocrosslinkable
hyaluronic acid-polyethylene glycol-peptide composite hydrogels for soft tissue engi-
neering. J Biomed Mater Res A 70:74–82.
69. Fairbanks BD, Schwartz MP, Bowman CN, Anseth KS (2009) Photoinitiated polymer-
ization of PEG-diacrylate with lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate:
Polymerization rate and cytocompatibility. Biomaterials 30:6702–6707.
70. Johnson CM, Hanson MN, Helgeson SC (1987) Porcine cardiac valvular subendothelial
cells in culture: Cell isolation and growth characteristics. J Mol Cell Cardiol 19:
1185–1193.
71. Latif N, et al. (2015) Modulation of human valve interstitial cell phenotype and
function using a fibroblast growth factor 2 formulation. PLoS One 10:e0127844.
72. Rodriguez KJ, Masters KS (2009) Regulation of valvular interstitial cell calcification by
components of the extracellular matrix. J Biomed Mater Res A 90:1043–1053.
73. Frazier SB, Roodhouse KA, Hourcade DE, Zhang L (2008) The quantification of gly-
cosaminoglycans: A comparison of HPLC, carbazole, and alcian blue methods.
Open Glycosci 1:31–39.
74. Balaoing LR, Post AD, Liu H, Minn KT, Grande-Allen KJ (2014) Age-related changes in
aortic valve hemostatic protein regulation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 34:72–80.
Porras et al.
PNAS
|
Published online December 27, 2017
|
E371
ENGINEERING
CELL BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
