 Comparison of algorithms for the detection of cancer-drivers at sub-gene 
resolution 
 
 
Eduard Porta-Pardo1*, Atanas Kamburov2,3,4, David Tamborero5,6, Tirso Pons7,**, Daniela Grases1, Alfonso 
Valencia8, Nuria Lopez-Bigas5,6,9, Gad Getz2,3,4 and Adam Godzik1,*** 
 
 
 
1 Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, US 
2 Department of Pathology and Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114 
3 Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 
4 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142 
5 Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain 
6 Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain 
7 Structural Biology and BioComputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain 
8 Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BSC) 
9 Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain 
 
* Current address: Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BSC) 
** Current address: Stem cells and Immunity Laboratory, National Centre for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain 
*** To whom correspondence should be addressed: adam@godziklab.org 
 
Editorial summary: 
Thirteen algorithms for the detection of cancer driver genes at the sub-gene level are assessed 
for their advantages and limitations.  
 
 
 Abstract 
 
Understanding genetic events that lead to cancer initiation and progression remains one of the biggest 
challenges in cancer biology. Traditionally, most algorithms for cancer-driver identification look for genes 
that have more mutations than expected from the average background mutation rate. However, there is 
now a wide variety of methods that look for nonrandom distribution of mutations within proteins as a 
signal for the driving role of in cancer. Here we classify and review such subgene-resolution algorithms, 
compare their findings on four distinct cancer data sets from The Cancer Genome Atlas and discuss how 
predictions from these algorithms can be interpreted in the emerging paradigms that challenge the simple 
dichotomy between driver and passenger genes.  
 
 
 Introduction 
 
Cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is driven by genomic and epigenomic abnormalities. Recent efforts 
in cancer genomics have provided us with a catalog detailing such abnormalities in tens of thousands of 
human cancers1. This catalog has significantly expanded our understanding of the molecular aspects of 
cancer. However, the mutation landscape in cancer has turned out to be extremely complex2-4, as most 
tumors have hundreds or thousands of somatic mutations which are seldom found again in other tumors. 
This apparent heterogeneity is usually interpreted within the driver-passenger paradigm, in which the few 
recurrent mutations are viewed as drivers of the oncogenic process that give cancer cells a selective 
advantage; while most mutations, especially rare ones, are viewed as passengers that have no significant 
consequences for the cell5.  
 
There are many possible ways to identify cancer-driver events. For instance, one can look for signals of 
nonrandom distribution of mutations at various levels of biological resolution, spanning from individual 
positions in the protein6 up to whole genes5 or pathways7 (Fig. 1a). Many of the recently developed 
methods aim to find driver events at the subgene level. One advantage of such higher resolution 
approaches is that they can identify cases when different mutations in the same gene lead to distinct 
phenotypes8.  
 
 
Figure 1 | Finding mutation drivers across biological scales. (a) Schematic of different levels for cancer driver 
detection and the tools used. (b) The four groups of sub-gene algorithms according to the type of regions they find 
and their number of dimensions. (c) Types of regions detected by each class of algorithm based on EGFR mutations 
in glioblastoma. 
 
While there are several reviews of cancer-driver-detection algorithms9,10, to the best of our knowledge 
none have focused on subgene-resolution algorithms, which are gaining in popularity. Here we review, 
classify and compare such algorithms, which we call subgene algorithms, and we discuss their strengths 
and weaknesses based on their results on four different cancer data sets. Note that it is not our intention 
 to determine which methods are better, as this is something that likely depends on the type of question 
being asked, but rather to inform potential users about how the different assumptions and technical 
choices of each method influence their results. Next, we show how the results of these methods can be 
integrated with other biological data to gain a deeper understanding of the consequences of mutations in 
these driver regions. Finally, we discuss the implications that the existence of such mutation clusters might 
have regarding novel ideas in cancer biology, such as expanding the drivers-passenger paradigm in favor 
of more nuanced or even continuous models11-13.  
 
Results 
 
A classification of mutation-clustering algorithms 
 
While the overall goal of all subgene driver-detection algorithms is the same—i.e., identifying nonrandom 
mutation clusters in cancer genomes—the details of their implementations and some of their assumptions 
can vary significantly. For example, some methods rely solely on protein sequences14,15; therefore, they 
can only find clusters of mutations that are linear in the primary sequence. Other methods leverage 
information from 3D protein structures and can identify spatial patterns that are discontinuous along the 
sequence6,16. Similarly, while some algorithms only use the position of the mutations (either in one or 
three dimensions) to find clusters de novo16,17, others focus on externally defined protein regions (such as 
protein domains18,19, phosphorylation sites20 or interaction interfaces21) to identify those regions enriched 
in somatic mutations. Based on these two criteria (number of dimensions and use of externally defined 
regions), it is possible to classify subgene algorithms into four different groups (Fig. 1b,c). We provide an 
overview (detailed further in Supplementary Table 1) of their implementation, statistical approaches and 
their strengths and weaknesses. 
 
Type I – De novo linear clusters 
 
This category includes methods that look for clusters along the gene sequence. The main difference 
between individual methods from this group is the specific background model they use. While there are 
methods that rely solely on statistical models15,22, most Type 1 methods are designed to integrate other 
biological signals, such as the distribution of silent mutations14,23, the ratio between the different types of 
mutations occurring in a specific gene24, the probability of each mutation given the nucleotide before and 
after the mutated position25,26 or by kernel-density estimates across multiple biologically relevant scales27.  
 
Type II – De novo three-dimensional clusters 
 
These algorithms find novel mutation clusters using information about the 3D structure of the protein 
encoded by a given gene. Their scope is more limited than that Type I algorithms, because Type II 
algorithms can only be applied to proteins whose 3D structure is either known or can be reasonably 
predicted. While experimentally determined structures are only available for approximately 6,100 human 
proteins, the structural coverage can be extended to over 13,000 proteins28 by aligning proteins to their 
close homologs with experimental structures (Supplementary Fig. 1).  
 
The biggest differences between Type II algorithm methods are in how such methods interpret structural 
data to find mutation clusters. Some tools analyze a reordered version of the protein’s sequence based 
on the distance between residues in 3D29 or use network algorithms on the graph derived from the 
structure30. However, most Type II algorithms are designed to identify 3D clusters using the protein 
structure directly and to calculate empirical P values by reshuffling the mutations in the structure31. 
 Nevertheless, the specific details of Type II algorithms can be very different, as some use spheres of 
varying radii32, while others use the closeness in the structure-derived residue network6, the Shannon 
entropy of the region17 or weighted-scoring functions16. Finally, while most methods can focus solely on 
individual proteins, others are capable of finding 3D clusters that span across protein complexes17.  
 
Type III – Linear externally-defined regions 
 
This group contains algorithms that analyze externally defined linear protein regions to identify those that 
are enriched in cancer somatic mutations. Therefore, unlike Type I algorithms, these methods can only be 
applied to proteins where at least one functional region is known, and this currently limits their scope to 
approximately 65% of the human proteome (Supplementary Fig. 1). These regions can be protein 
domains18 or post-translational modification sites20. Type III algorithms compare the number of mutations 
in the selected region with that of the rest of the protein to determine whether there is enrichment in 
somatic mutations in specific domains or regions. We also include in this category methods that align 
multiple instances of the same domain in different proteins to find commonly mutated positions19,33. 
These methods are based on the rationale that mutations in equivalent positions of the same domain will 
have the same effect on function. These analyses have revealed strikingly similar mutation patterns across 
domain families such as kinases or the EGF and FGF receptor families33.  
 
Type IV – Three-dimensional externally-defined regions 
 
Type IV algorithms find 3D externally-defined regions that are enriched in somatic mutations. To the best 
of our knowledge, this category currently includes only e-Driver3D21 and a separate module of CLUMPS16 
(not used here) that uses structurally resolved interaction data. This category is most limited in scope, 
because both structural data and defined functional regions are required for the application of Type IV 
algorithms. For example, in the case of e-Driver3D, which currently analyzes protein interaction interfaces, 
these limitations exclude all proteins that are not involved in structurally resolved complexes. In the case 
of CLUMPS, the number of proteins and structures that can be analyzed is higher, as CLUMPS uses 
information regarding interfaces with DNA, RNA, ion ligands or small molecules in addition to protein 
partners. However, methods in this category exploit most biological information and, therefore, provide 
the highest functional information on the mutation clusters they identify.  
 
Same category methods identify similar sets of genes  
 
In order to explore the strengths and limitations of each of these four categories, we compared the 
predictions of methods covering all four categories, as well as predictions of two methods that rely on 
whole-gene analysis (OncodriveFM and MutSigCV)5,34, on four different cancer genomics data sets from 
The Cancer Genome Atlas1. We aimed to assess how the specific assumptions behind each algorithm 
affect the number and type of drivers it identifies. In our analysis, we include five methods that belong to 
Type I (Hotspot35, NMC15, OncodriveCLUST14, MutSig-CL26 and iSIMPRe22), four from Type II (iPAC29, 
GraphPAC30, SpacePAC32 and CLUMPS16), three from Type III (e-Driver18, ActiveDriver20 and LowMACA19) 
and one from Type IV (e-Driver3D21).  
Our results show similarities between algorithms that belong to the same category (Fig. 2a, 
Supplementary Figs. 2–4 and Supplementary Tables 2–5). For example, most Type I, Type II and Type III 
algorithms tend to cluster together in all data sets. Nevertheless, each group seems to have its own outlier 
methods. In the case of Type I algorithms, for example, NMC does not cluster with the other methods in 
the case of BRCA, GBM and LUAD. In the case of Type II algorithms, CLUMPS predictions are very different 
from those of the family of PAC algorithms in BLCA, BRCA and GBM. Finally, ActiveDriver also seems to 
 identify different genes than the other two Type III algorithms in all data sets. The reasons why these 
algorithms behave differently from the rest of methods from the same category could be varied. For 
example, in the case of ActiveDriver, it could be because this algorithm analyzes post-translational 
modification sites, unlike the other two Type III algorithms, which focus on protein domains. Therefore, 
these tools could be finding complementary sets of genes that drive cancer through distinct mechanisms. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 | Comparison of the overall predictions of each method. (a) Principal component analysis of the predictions 
by each method in the four distinct datasets using the p-values for all the genes detected at least by one algorithm. 
(b) Predictions in the glioblastoma dataset by each method (left panel) and grouped by categories (second panel). 
Methods are clustered according to the genes they detect. Due to space limitations, we only show genes that are 
either detected by at least four different algorithms or detected by a single algorithm and that are included in the 
Cancer Gene Census as missense drivers. We also show the structural coverage of these genes (third panel), whether 
they are known driver genes (fourth panel) and whether they are oncogenes (OG), tumor suppressor genes (TSG), 
both (OG/TSG) or known cancer genes whose mode of action still needs to be determined (Unk). Finally, we also 
show the number of mutations of each gene (right panel). 
 
In terms of specific predictions, most algorithms identify the most frequently mutated cancer driver genes 
in the different cancer types. For example, all methods identify EGFR and TP53 as GBM driver genes, all 
but two find PIK3CA, and all but three identify IDH1 (Fig. 2b). However, results for other genes exemplify 
the complementarity between methods from different categories. Again, in the case of GBM, Type II 
algorithms do not detect PIK3R1, because the missense mutations are spread throughout a large 
interface. However, Type I, Type III or Type IV algorithms detect the mutation cluster PIK3R1, even if the 
clusters predicted by each method differ slightly in its exact size and position. In other cases, certain 
proteins are missed by some methods simply because the methods lack statistical power at the selected 
significance threshold. For example, BRAF, a known driver gene in various cancer types, is also detected 
 as a potential driver in glioblastoma by most subgene algorithms but, interestingly, not by the algorithms 
that work at the whole-gene level, OncodriveFM and MutSigCV. A possible explanation for this could be 
the low mutation frequency of BRAF in this cancer type (eight mutations in 363 samples), which makes it 
difficult to detect when comparing its frequency to that of other genes. Nevertheless, six of these eight 
mutations happen in the residue V600, making the cluster of mutations in BRAF amenable for detection 
with various subgene algorithms. In fact, many genes detected only by subgene algorithms, regardless of 
their category, have relatively low mutation frequencies when compared with genes identified by whole-
gene algorithms (Fig. 2b).  
  
Structure-based methods have high precision but low recall 
 
We estimated the precision and recall values for each method and category in each data set using the list 
of genes from the Cancer Gene Census (CGC)36 that are known to play a driver role in each cancer type. 
The overall results per category show that whole-gene methods have higher recall than any of the subgene 
categories in all four data sets we studied (Fig. 3a). This supports the idea that the whole-gene methods 
capture classical driver genes. In terms of precision, however, whole-gene methods show similar or lower 
values than those of the structure-based algorithms (Types II and IV).  
 
Figure 3 | Evaluating the predictions of each method and type of algorithms based on CGC data. (a) Recall (left) 
and precision (right) values for each method category in each dataset (top) and each algorithm (bottom). (b) Known 
driver role of the detected genes by each method according to CGC in each dataset. 
 
As for the individual methods, we observe a clear split in recall values between the two whole-gene 
methods and any of the subgene algorithms, with the former having higher recall values than those of the 
latter. In our opinion, there are likely two explanations for this result. The first is that whole-gene 
algorithms detect both tumor suppressors and oncogenes, whereas subgene algorithms are more likely 
to detect oncogenes (see below). The second is that, when compared to the rest of the genome, most 
genes in the gold-standard list have been defined based on their mutation recurrence—the signal that 
whole-gene methods look for. Subgene algorithms, however, are designed to detect mutation clusters 
and take into account only the mutations within a specific gene. While this gives an advantage to the 
 subgene algorithms in cases of low mutation frequencies (such as BRAF in glioblastoma), it is not how 
most cancer driver genes have been defined until now. Within subgene methods, we observe higher recall 
values for Type I algorithms than for the rest, probably because Type I algorithms can be applied to any 
gene. When analyzing the precision data, we found two groups of methods, with CLUMPS, the two e-
Driver versions and Hotspot making the group with higher precision values.  
 
Sub-gene methods identify new roles for known cancer genes 
 
Intrigued by the relatively low precision values of most subgene algorithms, we classified the genes 
identified by each method into different categories (Fig. 3b) depending on whether they are known 
somatic drivers in that specific tissue and whether they are affected by missense mutations or through 
other genomic alterations (such as copy-number variations or genomic rearrangements). As expected, 
many of the identified genes are known to be missense somatic drivers in their corresponding tissue. 
However, there are also 231 genes that are predicted to be drivers by at least one method and that, while 
they do not have any known driver roles in the tissue where they are detected, they are identified as 
drivers in other tissues. A total of 123 of these genes (53%) are missed by whole-gene methods but, 
nonetheless, are detected by subgene algorithms (Supplementary Table 6).  
 
To our surprise, subgene algorithms also detected genes whose driver role is known but are usually 
affected by copy-number variations or genomic rearrangements. For example, PDGFRB acts as a driver in 
a variety of leukemias via translocations; however, iPAC, GraphPAC, SpacePAC and MutSig-CL all detected 
PDGFRB as a potential driver in GBM due to a cluster of mutations in its kinase domain. Similarly, FGFR1 
has been linked to breast cancer when amplified and to myeloproliferative syndromes when trans- 
located. Nevertheless, both ActiveDriver and LowMACA identified a small cluster of mutations in its kinase 
domain. Another unexpected finding was that several genes known to cause cancer through germline (but 
not somatic) mutations were identified by some of the methods. The most significant example of this 
category is CDK4. Germline mutations in this gene are associated with familial melanoma, but six subgene 
algorithms identified CDK4 as a likely driver in lung adenocarcinoma. Notably, some of the somatic 
mutations affect the same amino acids as the germline variations associated with melanoma, such as 
R24L. 
 
Regarding the mode of action of the detected genes, it has previously been suggested that mutation 
clusters are more frequent in oncogenes, whereas tumor suppressor genes have more distributed 
mutation patterns17 (although this notion has been questioned by recent studies16). Our results support 
the original observation, as all the subgene algorithms, regardless of the type, identify more oncogenes 
than tumor suppressor genes (Supplementary Fig. 5). In fact, when combining the predictions from all 
four data sets, there is a statistically significant enrichment of oncogene recognition between 1.4- and 
3.7-fold in all subgene algorithms (two-sided Fisher’s test; P < 0.01). Whole-gene methods, on the other 
hand, do not seem to show such bias and detect both tumor suppressor genes as well as oncogenes.  
 
Sub-gene algorithms find mutation clusters in novel driver genes 
 
Most subgene methods identify nonrandom mutation distributions in many genes that are not part of the 
CGC (Fig. 3b). It is likely that some of these genes will be false positives, but many could be true driver 
genes that are missed by whole-gene methods. Just in the four cancer data sets that we studied, there 
are 66 genes that are not yet known to be somatic drivers and that have been detected by at least three 
different subgene methods but not by the methods that work at the gene resolution (Supplementary 
Table 7).  
 Though they are not yet part of the CGC, some of these genes have been reported to have roles in cancer 
or are likely to have them given their biological functions. For example, OncodriveCLUST, Hostpot and 
ActiveDriver all detected clusters of mutations in CSNK2A1 in lung adenocarcinoma. This protein is the 
catalytic subunit of the casein kinase II, a serine–threonine kinase involved in several pathways that are 
important in cancer, such as Wnt–CTNNB1 (ref. 37) or apoptosis38. Similarly, three algorithms detected a 
cluster of mutations in PARP4 in the breast adenocarcinoma data set (Supplementary Fig. 3). Recent 
reports suggest that germline mutations in PARP4 might increase the risk of thyroid cancer and breast 
adenocarcinoma39, thus we believe that this gene could play an important role in these cancer types. 
 
Overall, while one needs to be cautious when interpreting these gene lists, and further evidence is needed 
before the exact role of these genes and mutations in cancer is clear, we believe that subgene algorithms 
can identify valuable potential cancer driver genes missed by approaches that analyze mutation data at 
other biological scales.  
 
Toward a continuum model of cancer mutations 
 
Only a small number of cancer mutations have well-defined and confirmed functional consequences. Most 
do not, and they are usually referred to as variants of unknown significance (VUS), as their driver effects 
are unknown. Many of such VUS are part of mutation clusters recognized as drivers by subgene 
algorithms, and this immediately raises the question whether these mutations can act as drivers in the 
patients that carry them. Even though it is now possible to systematically test some of these mutations 
experimentally40, the most frequent approach to prioritize VUS in cancer-driver genes still involves 
bioinformatics tools that predict the impact of such mutations on the function of the protein41,42 or map 
them into 3D structures43,44.  
 
Subgene algorithms also provide an obvious way for researchers to predict the impact of these variants 
and prioritize them. Since most of these methods identify specific clusters of positions within the protein, 
one can hypothesize that mutations in these positions are the most likely to be carcinogenic; whereas 
mutations located in other protein regions are less likely to have any significant driver effect. The power 
of this classification has been exemplified in the analysis of EGFR mutations in glioblastoma. There is a 
correlation between the location of EGFR mutations in glioblastoma and the overall level of EGFR protein 
as well as EGFR phosphorylation levels21 (Fig. 4a–c). Samples with mutations in the dimerization interface 
have the highest EGFR protein and phosphorylation levels, suggesting a higher activation of the EGFR 
pathway, while those with mutations in other EGFR regions have an intermediate phenotype between the 
interface-mutated and the EGFR wild-type samples, a result that has recently been verified using cancer 
cell lines6. This is consistent with the role of interface and hotspot muta- tions acting as major-driver 
events and with other EGFR mutations having a different role in cancer. To the best of our knowledge, 
this phenomenon has not been widely studied and this is one of the few cases analyzed in more detail16. 
We believe that subgene algorithms will be key in exploring such effects. 
 
Another important point is that the results of these algorithms can also be interpreted as an emerging 
challenge to the driver– passenger paradigm. Interestingly, conceptual doubts about this paradigm have 
been formulated for many years. For instance, it was proposed that some drivers may play a role only in 
spe- cific circumstances—thus these drivers were dubbed as latent12 or mini-drivers13; or they were simply 
considered part of a con- tinuum of cancer-promoting mutations, each with a relatively small but additive 
effect11. Regardless of the specifics, all these models, at their core, expand on the binary driver–passenger 
paradigm to move toward a more nuanced classification in which mutations and the genes they affect can 
have different degrees of contribution to cancer growth. The results of subgene algorithms provide a 
 natural way to classify mutations in well-established cancer-driver genes as either mutations that happen 
in clusters or hotspots (and more likely to be major drivers) and those that happen in other regions of the 
same protein and are less frequently mutated (more likely to have a lower driver effect or to even be 
passengers). Subgene algorithms also identify many genes that are potential low-frequency cancer-
drivers; nevertheless, such genes could be important in specific cases, and the study of these genes could 
lead to actionable predictions as to the molecular mechanism of specific tumors they are found in.  
 
 
 
Figure 4 | Using mutation clusters to improve the definition of cancer drivers. (a) Glioblastoma mutations in EGFR 
located in the dimerization interface (in red) or in other EGFR positions (yellow). (b) Classification of glioblastoma 
samples depending on whether they have mutations in the EGFR cluster detected by each method (in red) or other 
EGFR mutations (in orange). Each row corresponds to a method and each column to a patient. (c) Comparing protein 
levels measured by RPPA of EGFR (left panel), EGFR pY992 (second panel), EGFR pY1068 (third panel) and EGFR 
pY1173 (right panel). Samples are classified according to whether they have a mutation in the EGFR-EGFR interface 
(in red), other EGFR mutations (in orange) or no EGFR mutations (in gray). 
 
Discussion 
 
Integrating the results of these algorithms with other omics data sets will likely have broad implications 
for cancer research, including, but not limited to, advancing the continuing efforts to define how 
mutations contribute to cancer onset and progression.  
 
Also, while we have not explicitly explored this issue, it would likely be possible to apply the same 
classification (de novo or externally defined and linear or 3D) to algorithms that detect clusters of 
noncoding driver mutations. In fact, some of the algorithms discussed here have also been successfully 
applied to the analysis of noncoding regions25, where they have identified several mutation clusters in 
promoters and 5ʹ UTRs, among other noncoding regions. Given the relevance of noncoding mutations in 
can- cer45, this will be an important issue as whole-genome sequencing becomes more widespread. 
 
Finally, to address the issue of long-term sustainability of the benchmarking effort initiated here, we plan 
to incorporate the methods, input, output and gold-standard data sets into the pan-European 
 bioinformatics infrastructure ELIXIR. ELIXIR is currently developing a data warehouse for hosting 
continuous automated benchmarking efforts in this and other areas of life sciences; for example, 
homology building, in close collaboration with different research communities. The current ELIXIR data 
warehouse, which includes documentation and further development plans, is accessible at 
http://elixir.bsc.es.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We would like to thank the people working at The Cancer Genome Atlas for their efforts and for making 
all the data publicly available. E.P.-P. and A.G. acknowledge the support from the Cancer Center grants 
P30 CA030199 (to our institute) and R35 GM118187 (A.G.). A.K. was supported by startup funds of G.G. 
and by a collaboration with Bayer AG. D.T. is supported by project SAF2015- 74072-JIN, which is funded 
by the Agencia Estatal de Investigacion (AEI) and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER). N.L.-B. 
acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (consolidator grant 682398). A.V. and T.P. 
acknowledge funding by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under 
grant agreement no. 305444 (RD-Connect).  
 
Author contributions 
 
E.P.-P. and A.G. conceived the project. E.P.-P., D.T. and T.P. researched the data for the article. E.P.-P., 
A.K. and D.T. analyzed the data. All authors were involved in writing the article and reviewed and edited 
the manuscript before submission.  
 
Competing financial interests 
 
The authors declare no competing financial interests. 
 
References 
 
1. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan-Cancer analysis project. Nat. Genet. , 
1113–1120 (2013).   
2. Gerlinger, M. et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. N. 
Engl. J. Med. , 883–892 (2012).   
3. Watson, I.R., Takahashi, K., Futreal, P.A. & Chin, L. Emerging patterns of somatic mutations in cancer. Nat. Rev. 
Genet., 703–718 (2013).   
4. Ortmann, C.A. et al. Effect of mutation order on myeloproliferative  neoplasms. N. Engl. J. Med. 7 , 601–612 
(2015). 
5. Lawrence, M.S. et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated genes. 
Nature 99, 214–218 (2013).   
6. Niu, B. et al. Protein-structure-guided discovery of functional mutations across 19 cancer types. Nat. Genet. 8, 
827–837 (2016).   
7. Leiserson, M.D. et al. Pan-cancer network analysis identi es combinations of rare somatic mutations across 
pathways and protein complexes. Nat. Genet. 7, 106–114 (2015).   
8. Zhong, Q. et al. Edgetic perturbation models of human inherited disorders. Mol. Syst. Biol. , 321 (2009).   
9. Ding, L., Wendl, M.C., McMichael, J.F. & Raphael, B.J. Expanding the computational toolbox for mining cancer 
genomes. Nat. Rev. Genet. , 556–570 (2014).   
10. Gonzalez-Perez, A. et al. Computational approaches to identify functional genetic variants in cancer genomes. 
Nat. Methods 0, 723–729 (2013).   
 11. Leedham, S. & Tomlinson, I. The continuum model of selection in human tumors: general paradigm or niche 
product? Cancer Res. 7 , 3131–3134 (2012).   
12. Nussinov, R. & Tsai, C.J. ‘Latent drivers’ expand the cancer mutational landscape. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. , 25–
32 (2015).   
13. Castro-Giner, F., Ratcliffe, P. & Tomlinson, I. The mini-driver model of polygenic cancer evolution. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer , 680–685 (2015).   
14. Tamborero, D., Gonzalez-Perez, A. & Lopez-Bigas, N. OncodriveCLUST: exploiting the positional clustering of 
somatic mutations to identify cancer genes. Bioinformatics 9, 2238–2244 (2013).   
15. Ye, J., Pavlicek, A., Lunney, E.A., Rejto, P.A. & Teng, C.H. Statistical method on nonrandom clustering with 
application to somatic mutations in cancer. BMC Bioinformatics , 11 (2010).   
16. Kamburov, A. et al. Comprehensive assessment of cancer missense mutation clustering in protein structures. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA , E5486–E5495 (2015).   
17. Tokheim, C. et al. Exome-scale discovery of hotspot mutation regions in human cancer using 3D protein 
structure. Cancer Res. 7 , 3719–3731 (2016).   
18. Porta-Pardo, E. & Godzik, A. e-Driver: a novel method to identify protein regions driving cancer. Bioinformatics 
0, 3109–3114 (2014).   
19. Melloni, G.E. et al. LowMACA: exploiting protein family analysis for the identi cation of rare driver mutations in 
cancer. BMC Bioinformatics 7, 80 (2016).   
20. Reimand, J. & Bader, G.D. Systematic analysis of somatic mutations in phosphorylation signaling predicts novel 
cancer drivers. Mol. Syst. Biol. 9, 637 (2013).   
21. Porta-Pardo, E., Garcia-Alonso, L., Hrabe, T., Dopazo, J. & Godzik, A. A pan-cancer catalogue of cancer driver 
protein interaction interfaces. PLoS Comput. Biol. , e1004518 (2015).   
22. Mészáros, B., Zeke, A., Reményi, A., Simon, I. & Dosztányi, Z. Systematic analysis of somatic mutations driving 
cancer: uncovering functional protein regions in disease development. Biol. Direct , 23 (2016).   
23. Jia, P. et al. MSEA: detection and quanti cation of mutation hotspots through mutation set enrichment analysis. 
Genome Biol. , 489 (2014).   
24. Van den Eynden, J., Fierro, A.C., Verbeke, L.P. & Marchal, K. SomInaClust: detection of cancer genes based on 
somatic mutation patterns of inactivation and clustering. BMC Bioinformatics , 125 (2015).   
25. Araya, C.L. et al. Identi cation of signi cantly mutated regions across cancer types highlights a rich landscape of 
functional molecular alterations. Nat. Genet. 8, 117–125 (2016).  
26. Lawrence, M.S. et al. Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types. Nature 0 , 495–
501 (2014).  
27. Poole, W., Leinonen, K., Shmulevich, I., Knijnenburg, T.A. & Bernard, B. Multiscale mutation clustering algorithm 
identi es pan-cancer mutational clusters associated with pathway-level changes in gene expression. PLoS 
Comput. Biol. , e1005347 (2017).  
28. Porta-Pardo, E., Hrabe, T. & Godzik, A. Cancer3D: understanding cancer mutations through protein structures. 
Nucleic Acids Res. , D968–D973 (2015).  
29. Ryslik, G.A., Cheng, Y., Cheung, K.H., Modis, Y. & Zhao, H. Utilizing protein structure to identify nonrandom 
somatic mutations. BMC Bioinformatics , 190 (2013).  
30. Ryslik, G.A., Cheng, Y., Cheung, K.H., Modis, Y. & Zhao, H. A graph theoretic approach to utilizing protein 
structure to identify nonrandom somatic mutations. BMC Bioinformatics , 86 (2014).  
31. Gao, J. et al. 3D clusters of somatic mutations in cancer reveal numerous rare mutations as functional targets. 
Genome Med. 9, 4 (2017).  
32. Ryslik, G.A. et al. A spatial simulation approach to account for protein structure when identifying nonrandom 
somatic mutations. BMC Bioinformatics , 231 (2014).  
33. Miller, M.L. et al. Pan-cancer analysis of mutation hotspots in protein domains. Cell Syst. , 197–209 (2015).  
34. Gonzalez-Perez, A. & Lopez-Bigas, N. Functional impact bias reveals cancer drivers. Nucleic Acids Res. 0, e169 
(2012).  
35. Chang, M.T. et al. Identifying recurrent mutations in cancer reveals widespread lineage diversity and mutational 
speci city. Nat. Biotechnol. , 155–163 (2016).  
36. Futreal, P.A. et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nat. Rev. Cancer , 177–183 (2004).  
 37. Seldin, D.C. et al. CK2 as a positive regulator of Wnt signalling and tumourigenesis. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 7 , 63–
67 (2005).  
38. Ahmad, K.A., Wang, G., Unger, G., Slaton, J. & Ahmed, K. Protein kinase CK2—a key suppressor of apoptosis. 
Adv. Enzyme Regul. 8, 179–187 (2008).  
39. Ikeda, Y. et al. Germline PARP4 mutations in patients with primary thyroid and breast cancers. Endocr. Relat. 
Cancer , 171–179 (2016).  
40. Brenan, L. et al. Phenotypic characterization of a comprehensive set of MAPK1/ERK2 missense mutants. Cell 
Rep. 7, 1171–1183 (2016). 
41. Sim, N.L. et al. SIFT web server: predicting effects of amino acid substitutions on proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 0, 
W452–W457 (2012). 
42. Creixell, P. et al. Kinome-wide decoding of network-attacking mutations rewiring cancer signaling. Cell , 202–
217 (2015). 
43. Mosca, R. et al. dSysMap: exploring the edgetic role of disease mutations. Nat. Methods , 167–168 (2015). 44. 
Vázquez, M., Valencia, A. & Pons, T. Structure-PPi: a module for the  
44. annotation of cancer-related single-nucleotide variants at protein-protein interfaces. Bioinformatics , 2397–
2399 (2015). 
45. Puente, X.S. et al. Non-coding recurrent mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Nature , 519–524 (2015).  
 
 
Online Methods 
 
Mutation data analysis and preprocessing. We compared the predictions of methods covering all four 
categories to explore the strengths and limitations of each of them. For Type I we used Hotspot35, NMC15, 
OncodriveCLUST14, MutSig-CL26 and iSIMPRe22. In Type II we included iPAC29, GraphPAC30, SpacePAC32 and 
CLUMPS16. For Type III we included e-Driver18,21, ActiveDriver20 and LowMACA19. Finally, we used one Type 
IV algorithm, e-Driver3D18,21, as well as two methods that rely on whole-gene analysis5,12. We analyzed 
four different cancer genomics data sets from The Cancer Genome Atlas: glioblastoma (GBM, n = 363)46, 
breast adenocarcinoma (BRCA, n = 982)47, bladder adenocarcinoma (BLCA, n = 137)48 and lung 
adenocarcinomas (LUAD, n = 546)49. We used Intogen50 to predict the location and impact of each 
mutation in the different protein isoforms from their genomic coordinates (Supplementary Fig. 6). 
Mutation data came from ref. 35 instead of the TCGA portal, as it had all the necessary additional 
information for each mutation in order to run the Hotspot algorithm. 
 
Algorithms. We ran all algorithms using their default settings. In the case of the Hotspot algorithm, we 
used the genomic information of each mutation provided in the original publication. For Type II methods, 
when there were multiple 3D structures that could be used as templates to map the mutations, we chose 
the structures that had the highest structural divergence as defined by PDBFlex51. This limits the impact 
of multiple-testing issues and also ensures that we captured proteins that could be affected by protein 
flexibility. In the case of ActiveDriver, we used all the post-translational-modification sites provided with 
the algorithm: phosphorylations, acetylations and ubiquitinations. For e-Driver and e-Driver3D we used 
the PFAM domains, disordered regions and protein interfaces described in the original publications. 
 
Evaluation of the results. We used the list of genes included in the Cancer Genome Census36 
(downloaded on September 12, 2016) as benchmark to compare the performance of the algorithms on 
known driver genes. We limited the list of genes to those that were defined as somatic and that had at 
least five mutations in the data set being studied. We defined a gene as predicted by an algorithm if its 
FDR value was below 0.05. The mode of action was also obtained from the CGC list. Note that known 
cancer genes that are not described as somatic (i.e., only as germline) or as drivers in other tissues in CGC 
are considered as not known for the purposes of the evaluation.  
  
Regarding the PCA analysis, for each tissue we created a matrix with all the genes detected by at least two 
algorithms and the P values obtained by each method for each gene. For the pur- poses of this analysis, 
all the missing P values (e.g., genes with no structures have no P values for Type II or Type IV algorithms) 
were assumed to be 1. We calculated the PCA with the minus logarithm of the matrix. The list of candidate 
novel driver genes identified solely by subgene methods was limited only to those genes identified by at 
least three different algorithms. This threshold was defined to minimize the risk of overfitting. This 
approach has previously proven useful in detecting cancer driver genes52.  
 
EGFR RPPA analysis. We downloaded the normalized glioblastoma RPPA data from the UCSC Cancer 
Genome Browser53 and compared the levels of EGFR-R-C (overall EGFR), EGFR_pY1068-R-V (EGFR 
phosphorylated at Y1068), EGFR_pY1173- R-C (EGFR phosphorylated at Y1173) and EGFR_pY992-R-V 
(EGFR phosphorylated at Y992) in three different groups of patients: those with mutations in the EGFR–
EGFR interface (based on the PDB coordinates file 3NJP, chains A and B), those with other EGFR mutations 
and those with no mutations in EGFR. We compared protein expression levels using a two-sided Wilcoxon 
test.  
 
Data availability statement. All the algorithms reviewed here can be downloaded from the sites indicated 
at Supplementary Table 1. The code and data used to compare the algorithms and generate Figures 2–4 
can be obtained at https://github.com/eduardporta/sub-gene_resolution.  
 
46. Brennan, C.W. et al. The somatic genomic landscape of glioblastoma. Cell , 462–477 (2013).  
47. Koboldt, D.C. et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast 
tumours. Nature 90, 61–70 (2012).  
48. Weinstein, J.N. et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of 
urothelial bladder carcinoma. Nature 07, 315–322 (2014).  
49. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular pro ling of lung adenocarcinoma. Nature, 
543–550 (2014).  
50. Gonzalez-Perez, A. et al. IntOGen-mutations identi es cancer drivers across tumor types. Nat. Methods 0, 1081–
1082 (2013).  
51. Hrabe, T. et al. PDBFlex: exploring exibility in protein structures. Nucleic Acids Res. D1, D423–D428 (2016).  
52. Tamborero, D. et al. Comprehensive identi cation of mutational cancer driver genes across 12 tumor types. Sci. 
Rep., 2650 (2013).  
53. Goldman, M. et al. The UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser: update 2015. Nucleic Acids Res. , D812–D817 (2015).  
 
 
 
