 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Introduction
The number of elderly individuals is expected to double in the next 
40 years, creating an increased burden of treatment for aging-related 
disorders, including cardiovascular disease and cancer (1–4). Aging 
of the hematopoietic system is associated with a decline in adaptive 
immunity (5), an increased incidence of anemia (6), and a predispo-
sition to myeloid neoplasms (7, 8). Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) 
show an increase in immunophenotypically defined cells with age, a 
decrease in their long-term reconstitution abilities, and a significant 
increase in myeloid-biased cell output at the expense of lymphopoie-
sis (9–15). These studies clearly describe the cell-intrinsic HSC alter-
ations that lead to aging-related hematopoietic deficiencies. While 
the cell-autonomous changes in the HSC that promote aging-related 
changes in hematopoiesis are more well defined, the contribution of 
the aged bone marrow (BM) microenvironment in promoting aged 
hematopoietic phenotypes is poorly understood (16, 17).
The adult BM microenvironment is a highly specialized cellu-
lar niche composed of vascular endothelial cells (ECs) and peri-
vascular stromal constituents that support HSC maintenance and 
hematopoietic homeostasis (18). Within the BM hematopoietic 
microenvironment, the vascular endothelium is indispensable 
for supporting HSC quiescence, self-renewal, and differentiation 
into lineage-committed progeny (19–25). The aged BM microen-
vironment has also been shown to influence hematopoietic aging 
in young HSCs (26–30). While ECs are a critical component of the 
HSC niche (19, 20, 23), the individual role of aged ECs in the pro-
cess of hematopoietic aging has not been examined (27). Here, we 
explore the idea that aged ECs are sufficient to promote aging of 
young HSCs and that the infusion of young ECs can be exploited 
to improve age-related hematopoietic deficiencies.
In this study, we used cultured BM-derived endothelium 
from young and aged mice to evaluate whether an age-dependent 
dysregulation of the BM endothelial niche is sufficient to disrupt 
the homeostatic HSC-supportive microenvironment and drive 
aging-associated hematopoietic phenotypes. Using an established 
ex vivo coculture system, we demonstrated that culturing of young 
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) on aged endo-
thelium inhibited long-term HSC repopulating activity in a com-
petitive transplantation setting and promoted a myeloid bias at the 
expense of B and T cell lymphopoiesis. Moreover, aged HSPCs cul-
tured on young endothelium showed a marked increase in hema-
topoietic reconstitution. These results extended to endothelial 
infusions in young and aged mice, in which aged BM–derived ECs 
failed to support endogenous hematopoietic recovery following 
myelosuppressive irradiation and imparted a myeloid bias in young 
mice; conversely, infusions of young ECs enhanced HSC activity 
and increased B and T cell output in young and aged animals. More-
over, young EC coinfusions enhanced aged HSC transplantation 
(HSCT) and overall survival in a limiting dilution setting through 
Age-related changes in the hematopoietic compartment are primarily attributed to cell-intrinsic alterations in hematopoietic 
stem cells (HSCs); however, the contribution of the aged microenvironment has not been adequately evaluated.  
Understanding the role of the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment in supporting HSC function may prove to be beneficial 
in treating age-related functional hematopoietic decline.  Here, we determined that aging of endothelial cells (ECs), a critical 
component of the BM microenvironment, was sufficient to drive hematopoietic aging phenotypes in young HSCs.  We used 
an ex vivo hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell/EC (HSPC/EC) coculture system as well as in vivo EC infusions following 
myelosuppressive injury in mice to demonstrate that aged ECs impair the repopulating activity of young HSCs and impart a 
myeloid bias.  Conversely, young ECs restored the repopulating capacity of aged HSCs but were unable to reverse the intrinsic 
myeloid bias. Infusion of young, HSC-supportive BM ECs enhanced hematopoietic recovery following myelosuppressive 
injury and restored endogenous HSC function in aged mice.  Coinfusion of young ECs augmented aged HSC engraftment and 
enhanced overall survival in lethally irradiated mice by mitigating damage to the BM vascular microenvironment.  These data 
lay the groundwork for the exploration of EC therapies that can serve as adjuvant modalities to enhance HSC engraftment and 
accelerate hematopoietic recovery in the elderly population following myelosuppressive regimens.
Endothelial transplantation rejuvenates aged 
hematopoietic stem cell function
Michael G. Poulos,1,2,3 Pradeep Ramalingam,1,2,3 Michael C. Gutkin,1,2,3 Pierre Llanos,4 Katherine Gilleran,4  
Sina Y. Rabbany,4 and Jason M. Butler1,2,3
1Department of Medicine, 2Department of Surgery, and 3Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. 4Bioengineering Program,  
DeMatteis School of Engineering and Applied Science, Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: March 10, 2017; Accepted: September 5, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(11):4163–4178. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI93940.
     Related Commentary: p. 3921
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
were reported to be significantly decreased within the BM of aged 
mice (27). In humans, plasma levels of SDF1 (CXCL12) are also dimin-
ished with aging, positively correlating with a phenotypic expansion 
of BM HSCs and inversely correlating with BM fat accumulation, two 
hallmarks of BM aging (41). To determine whether aged ECs have an 
aberrant expression of these critical pro-HSC factors, we performed 
gene expression analysis by reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR 
(RT-qPCR) on cultured aged ECs, which demonstrated a decrease in 
Kitl, Cxcl12, and NOTCH ligand expression (Figure 2K), suggesting 
an impaired instructive function in aged ECs.
Aged ECs promote hematopoietic aging phenotypes on cocultured 
young HSPCs. Aging of the hematopoietic system is, in part, func-
tionally defined by a decrease in HSC-repopulating activity and an 
increase in the frequency of myeloid cell output at the expense of 
lymphoid cells (8, 42). To examine the possibility that aged ECs 
play a direct role in promoting aging-related hematopoietic phe-
notypes, we used our recently described ex vivo HSPC/EC cocul-
ture system (37). This model has been used to faithfully recapitu-
late in vivo endothelial NOTCH– and NF-κB–mediated regulation 
of HSCs in the vascular niche (23, 43). By culturing isolated HSPCs 
directly on ECs in serum-free conditions, we could segregate and 
examine the instructive role played by aged ECs in maintaining 
HSPC homeostasis. To this end, CD45.2+ whole BM (WBM) was 
isolated from young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) 
mice and depleted of lineage-committed hematopoietic cells. 
The resulting young and aged HSPCs (105 lineage– cells) were 
plated on young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) ECs for 
14 days in serum-free media with supplementation of 50 ng/ml 
 
soluble KITL (sKITL). To examine hematopoietic expansion 
following ex vivo coculture, we quantified phenotypic CD45.2+ 
hematopoietic cells and CD45.2+lineage–cKIT+SCA1+ HSPCs. 
Aged ECs promoted an increase in total CD45.2+ hematopoiet-
ic cell expansion in both young and aged HSPC cocultures when 
compared with their young EC counterparts (Figure 3A). Within 
this cell population, aged ECs promoted a significant increase in 
phenotypic aged HSPC expansion, while young HSPCs displayed 
no observable differences when compared with young EC feed-
ers (Figure 3B and Supplemental Figure 1, A and B; supplemental 
material available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
jci.insight.93940DS1). To examine the long-term repopulating 
capacity of young and aged HSPCs cultured on young and aged 
ECs following 14 days of ex vivo expansion, total cocultured cells 
were collected and CD45.2+ hematopoietic cells were purified 
from EC feeders and competitively transplanted at a 1:1 ratio with 
young (3 months old) CD45.1+ WBM cells into lethally irradiated 
young (3 months old) CD45.1 recipient mice. Mice were assessed 
for long-term multilineage engraftment 4 months after trans-
plantation. To control for young and aged hematopoietic pheno-
types, pre-expansion WBM input was competitively transplanted 
at a 1:1 ratio and analyzed at 4 months to confirm hematopoietic 
engraftment deficiencies and myeloid-biased output associated 
with aging (Figure 3, C–F). Young HSPCs cocultured on aged ECs 
showed a significant decrease in engraftment when compared 
with young HSPCs cocultured on young ECs (Figure 3C and Sup-
plemental Figure 1C). Moreover, we observed that aged HSPCs 
cocultured on aged ECs were unable to competitively engraft 
in lethally irradiated animals, while aged HSPCs cocultured on 
protection of the endogenous BM vascular niche. These data lay 
the groundwork for the development of cellular therapies that can 
serve as adjuvant modalities to enhance hematopoietic recovery in 
the elderly population following myelosuppressive treatments to 
ultimately protect patients from severe morbidities and mortality 
associated with the treatment of hematological disorders.
Results
Characterization of the aged BM microvasculature. To examine poten-
tial aging-related alterations in BM endothelium, the vasculature of 
young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) C57B/6 mice was 
intravitally labeled with an EC-specific antibody raised against 
VECAD to assess endothelial morphology in the BM microenviron-
ment. Aged mice displayed distinct changes in vascular morphology, 
which appeared dilated and more discontinuous and suggested a 
potential change in vascular integrity (Figure 1A). We next examined 
vascular permeability using i.v. injection of Evans blue dye. Femurs 
from aged mice had a significant increase in vascular leakiness, as 
measured by dye extravasation (Figure 1, B and C). We observed 
that the frequency of VECAD+CD31+CD45–TER119– BM ECs was 
also significantly reduced, with a marked increase in VECAD–CD31–
CD45–TER119– pan-BM stromal cells (Figure 1, D and E). BM ECs 
from aged mice also had metabolic dysregulation, including a signif-
icant increase in ROS (Figure 1F) and hypoxic status (Figure 1, G and 
H). These observations are consistent with aging-related vascular 
dysfunction (31–36) and suggest that instructive endothelial niche 
function might also be compromised during aging.
Cultured ECs from aged mice display aging-related functional 
alterations. To examine changes in the hematopoiesis-instructive 
function of aged endothelium, we isolated BM-derived ECs from 
young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 mice, 
as previously described (37). Cultured ECs showed uniform cell- 
surface expression of VECAD by immunofluorescence (Figure 2A) 
and expressed pan-endothelial markers (VECAD+ and CD31+), as 
assessed by flow cytometry (Figure 2B). We next examined aging- 
related characteristics in young and aged BM ECs. While young 
and aged ECs did not have any differences in overall cell dimen-
sions, aged ECs showed an increase in median cellular stiffness, as 
measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Figure 2, C–E). An 
increase in vascular stiffness in vivo has been reported to be asso-
ciated with aging-related senescence and a decrease in endothelial 
angiogenic potential (38–40). However, aged EC cultures displayed 
no overt senescence-related morphology or significant changes in 
senescence-associated β-gal (SA β-gal) activity (Figure 2, A and H). 
Aged ECs had a delay in cell-cycle progression 6 hours after cell- 
cycle synchronization that was resolved by 24 hours (Figure 2, F and 
G). We next examined the angiogenic potential of aged ECs in an in 
vitro wound-healing assay. Aged ECs displayed a significant delay 
in wound healing, suggesting an age-related impairment in cell 
migration (Figure 2, I and J). Taken together, cultured BM-derived 
ECs isolated from aged mice show functional alterations in vitro 
that are consistent with aging-related phenotypes.
The BM vascular niche supports young HSC homeostasis in 
vivo through the expression of prohematopoietic factors such as Kitl, 
Cxcl12, and Jag1. Genetic deletion of these factors using EC-specific 
Tie2-Cre and Cdh5-Cre results in loss of HSC frequency and repop-
ulating activity (19, 20, 22, 23). Secreted and cellular levels of KITL 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
increase in engraftment of aged HSPCs cocultured on young ECs, 
aged HSCs maintained a bias in CD11B+GR1+ myeloid cell produc-
tion at the expense of B220+CD19+ B cells and CD8+/CD4+ T cells 
when compared with young HSPC–young EC cocultured controls 
young ECs were partially rejuvenated and displayed robust hema-
topoietic engraftment (Figure 3C and Supplemental Figure 1C). 
Taken together, these data suggest that aged ECs are significantly 
impaired in their HSC-instructive function. Despite the observed 
Figure 1. Aged BM vasculature displays functional alterations in vivo. (A) Representative longitudinal and inset images of femurs intravitally labeled with a vas-
cular-specific VECAD antibody (red), showing morphological alterations in aged vasculature (white line demarcates cortical bone). Scale bars: 100 μm (longitudinal 
images) and 50 μm (insets). (B and C) Analysis of BM vascular leakiness in young and aged femurs. (B) Quantification of Evans blue dye extravasation (n = 5 mice/
cohort). (C) Representative femurs injected with Evans blue dye. Noninjected controls were used to determine baselines (n = 5 mice/cohort). (D and E) Frequency 
of recoverable (D) VECAD+CD31+CD45–TER119– BM ECs and (E) VECAD–CD31–CD45–TER119– stroma in young and aged femurs (n = 5 mice/cohort). (F) Quantification 
of mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) and representative histogram of ROS in VECAD+CD31+CD45–TER119– ECs from young and aged femurs showing an increase in 
ROS in aged ECs (n = 3 mice/cohort). (G) MFI quantification and representative histogram of pimonidazole adducts as detected by an anti-pimonidazole antibody 
(HypoxyProbe) in VECAD+CD31+CD45–TER119– ECs from young and aged femurs, demonstrating an increased hypoxia state in aged ECs (n = 3 mice/cohort). (H) 
Representative immunofluorescence images of HypoxyProbe-stained young and aged femurs, showing local changes in hypoxia (white line demarcates cortical 
bone). Scale bar: 50 μm. Error bars represent the sample mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
infusion of young ECs into young mice following myelosuppres-
sive insult promoted rapid recovery of the hematopoietic system 
(WBC, RBC, and platelet counts), while the infusion of aged ECs 
was unable to support efficient hematopoietic recovery in young 
recipients (Figure 4B), suggesting that aged ECs have an impaired 
hematopoietic-instructive function in vivo. After allowing 28 
days for recovery, we next examined the HSC-protective poten-
tial of EC infusions in these mice. WBM isolated from EC-infused 
young cohorts (CD45.2+ donor) was transplanted with a compet-
itive dose of freshly isolated young CD45.1+ WBM at a 2:1 ratio 
into lethally irradiated young CD45.1 recipients (Figure 4A). We 
also performed competitive transplantation of WBM (CD45.2+) 
isolated from steady-state young and aged mice (nonirradiated 
and without EC infusion) to serve as baseline controls for com-
parison of aging-induced hematopoietic phenotypes (Figure 4D 
and Supplemental Figure 2). We analyzed long-term, multilin-
eage engraftment 4 months after transplantation. In agreement 
with ex vivo HSPC expansions (Figure 3C), we found that infu-
sion of aged ECs was unable to support endogenous HSC activi-
ty in young mice (Figure 4E). Interestingly, infusion of aged ECs 
also promoted a significant CD11B+/GR1+ myeloid-biased out-
put at the expense of B220+ B cell and CD3+ T cell engraftment 
when compared with young EC-infused animals (Figure 4E). 
Collectively, these data demonstrate that infusion of aged ECs 
into young recipients following myelosuppressive injury impairs 
endogenous HSC activity and imparts a myeloid bias, further 
supporting the idea that an aged vascular niche can impart aged 
hematopoietic phenotypes on a young hematopoietic system.
Young ECs enhance endogenous HSC activity in aged mice. Given 
that the elderly population responds poorly to the intensive mye-
losuppressive therapy that is often required to treat hematopoietic 
malignancies (47), we set out to test whether infusion of young ECs 
into aged recipients could provide therapeutic benefit by diminish-
ing the duration of cytopenias following myelosuppressive irradia-
tion. As observed in the young cohorts, aged mice receiving infu-
sions of young ECs following myelosuppressive TBI had increased 
recovery of WBM, RBC, and platelet cell counts in the peripheral 
blood (PB), while infusions of aged ECs failed to promote improve-
ment (Figure 4C). We next examined the HSC-rejuvenating poten-
tial of infusion of young ECs into aged mice following TBI-medi-
ated myelosuppression. As previously described, WBM isolated 
from EC-infused aged cohorts (CD45.2+ donor) was transplanted 
28 days after irradiation with a competitive dose of young CD45.1+ 
WBM at a 2:1 ratio into lethally irradiated young CD45.1 recipients 
(Figure 4A). We analyzed the long-term, multilineage engraftment 
4 months after transplantation. As previously observed in aged 
HSPC–young EC cocultures (Figure 3C), aged mice that received 
young ECs also demonstrated a marked improvement in overall 
hematopoietic engraftment (Figure 4F). Moreover, while infusions 
of young ECs could not resolve the myeloid-biased output of aged 
HSCs, young ECs were able to significantly increase the output of 
the B and T cell lineages in recipients (Figure 4F). Taken together, 
these data suggest that not only can young ECs be used to rejuve-
nate the functional output of endogenous aged hematopoietic cells 
in vivo, but they could also potentially be used to enhance exoge-
nous hematopoietic engraftment following myeloablative precon-
ditioning and BM transplantation.
(Figure 3, D–F, and Supplemental Figure 1, D–F). Conversely, 
we found that young HSPCs cocultured on aged ECs acquired a 
myeloid bias, with a decrease in B and T cell frequencies (Figure 3, 
D–F, and Supplemental Figure 1, D–F). These data, along with the 
observed decline in engraftment of young HSPCs cocultured on 
aged ECs, suggest that aged vascular endothelium, independent 
of other stromal constituents, is sufficient to impart hematopoi-
etic aging phenotypes on young HSCs. Moreover, these data also 
allow for the possibility that EC-specific intervention may provide 
a therapeutic opportunity to increase HSC function in the elderly 
population following hematopoietic injury.
Infusion of aged ECs promotes a myeloid bias in vivo. ECs gen-
erated from a number of hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic 
tissues have been used to demonstrate their therapeutic poten-
tial following irradiative hematopoietic insult (37, 44–46). We 
have previously shown that infusion of young niche-specific 
BM- 
derived ECs into young recipients following radiation- and 
chemo 
therapy-mediated myeloablative injury promotes rapid 
and efficient regeneration of the hematopoietic system by reduc-
ing the duration of pancytopenias and safeguarding HSC func-
tion (37, 43). In ex vivo coculture experiments, aged ECs were 
unable to support young HSC-repopulating activity and imparted 
a myeloid bias at the expense of B and T cell output in mice with 
long-term engraftment (Figure 3, C–F). To further examine the 
aging-related impaired instructive function of aged ECs in an in 
vivo context, we infused 5 × 105 aged ECs into young C57BL/6 
mice on 4 consecutive days following myelosuppressive total 
body irradiation (TBI) and assessed peripheral hematopoietic 
recovery weekly (Figure 4A). Young ECs were used as a positive 
control. It is important to note that in these experiments (Figure 
4), EC infusions were done in the absence of exogenous HSCT 
and addressed only endogenous hematopoietic recovery in young 
mice following myelosuppressive injury. We observed that the 
Figure 2. Characterization of cultured ECs from aged mice. (A) Representa-
tive phase-contrast and immunofluorescence images of cultured BM- 
derived ECs from young and aged mice. Scale bars: 200 μm (phase-contrast) 
and 50 μm (immunofluorescence). (B) Representative flow plots of cultured 
ECs stained for VECAD+CD31+ demonstrating highly purified EC populations. 
(C–E) AFM analysis of elasticity in cultured young and aged ECs showing an 
increase in aged EC stiffness. (C) Representative reconstructed images of 
EC monolayers. (D) Box plots of the median stiffness in cultured young and 
aged ECs (n = 3 biological replicates). (E) Normalized relative EC stiffness 
(n = 3 biological replicates). (F and G) Proliferation status of cultured young 
and aged ECs. (F) Representative histograms of Edu incorporation following 
cell-cycle synchronization. (G) Quantification of Edu incorporation demon-
strating an early inhibition of cell-cycle entry into the S phase in aged ECs 
that was resolved by 24 hours (n = 3 biological replicates). (H) Quantification 
of SA β-gal activity in young and aged ECs (n = 3 biological replicates). (I and 
J) In vitro scratch wound-healing assay showing a functional delay in cell 
migration in aged ECs. (I) Representative phase-contrast images (dashed 
lines demarcate the initial scratch wound). Scale bar: 400 μm. (J) Quantifi-
cation of EC wound healing (n = 3 biological replicates). (K) Normalized gene 
expression in cultured young and aged ECs (n = 3 biological replicates).  
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. Significance was determined using 
an unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test, with error bars representing the 
sample mean ± SEM. A nonparametric, 1-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test was 
used to compare median endothelial stiffness in D. Data are presented as 
box plots, with whiskers representing an IQR of ± 1.5. Relative endothelial 
stiffness in E was normalized to young ECs and presented as a 95% CI.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Coinfusion of young ECs enhances HSCT and promotes overall 
survival. Allogeneic transplantation of adult BM can provide a cure 
for patients with life-threatening hematological disorders. How-
ever, there is a large group of patients who do not have access to 
HLA-matched BM. Strategies to expand the number of patients 
who can use a single BM harvest by minimizing the number of BM 
cells necessary for rapid hematopoietic recovery and long-term, 
multilineage engraftment would be useful. Additionally, there are 
hematopoietic disorders, such as sickle cell disease, that could ben-
efit from autologous transplantation of the patient’s own gene-cor-
rected BM. However, many cases result in BM cell numbers that 
are suboptimal for achieving robust engraftment. To this end, we 
set out to determine whether a single-dose coinfusion of young 
ECs in the context of a limiting HSCT cell dose could enhance 
hematopoietic engraftment and promote survival. To this end, we 
transplanted 105 young or aged WBM cells into young recipients, 
with or without a single coinfusion of 5 × 105 young ECs, follow-
ing a lethal dose of TBI (9.50 Gy). Of note, transplantation of 2 × 
105 young WBM cells alone into recipient mice results in complete 
radioprotection following lethal irradiation, while a 105 WBM cell 
dose is suboptimal. We used steady-state (nonirradiated and with-
out WBM or EC infusion), young ECs alone, or PBS infused cohorts 
to establish baselines. Survival curves revealed that a single dose 
of 5 × 105 young ECs alone was unable to radioprotect mice fol-
lowing myeloablative injury (Figure 5A). Infusion of 105 WBM 
cells from either young or aged donors resulted in 70% and 50% 
survival rates, respectively, for recipient mice (Figure 5, A and B). 
However, mice that were coinfused with 105 young WBM cells and 
5 × 105 young ECs had a 100% survival rate (Figure 5A). Moreover, 
animals coinfused with 105 aged WBM cells and 5 × 105 young ECs 
achieved 90% survival rates (Figure 5B). These data demonstrate 
that coinfusion of young ECs with limited numbers of WBM from 
both young and aged donors results in increased survival following 
myeloablation, with all mice achieving long-term, multilineage 
engraftment (Supplemental Figure 3, A and B). Furthermore, coin-
fusion of young ECs and young WBM into lethally irradiated mice 
also improved short-term and long-term hematopoietic recovery 
when compared with the young WBM-alone cohort (Figure 5C), 
while young ECs coinfused with aged WBM resulted in a minimal 
increase in recovery of RBC and platelets as compared with infu-
sion of aged WBM alone (Figure 5D). We next examined whether 
young ECs conferred a radioprotective effect on coinfused HSPC 
activity by assessing splenic CFU (CFU-S) (48) and found that the 
coinfusion of young ECs with either young or aged WBM result-
ed in an increase in the number of hematopoietic colonies that 
formed in the spleen following transplantation (Figure 5, E and F, 
and Supplemental Figure 4A). This observation supports our pre-
vious data (Figure 4, E and F) suggesting that infusions of young 
ECs following myelosuppressive TBI protects endogenous HSC 
activity. Therefore, we examined the possibility that coinfusion of 
Figure 3. Aged ECs are sufficient to induce aged hematopoietic phenotypes. (A and B) Quantification of hematopoietic expansion by flow cytometry. 
(A) Total phenotypic CD45+ hematopoietic cells and (B) CD45+lineage–cKIT+SCA1+ HSPCs (n = 3 independent cocultures). (C) Quantification of CD45.2+ 
donor chimerism in PB 4 months after transplantation (Tpx), as measured by flow cytometry (n = 5 mice/cohort). Results show the ability of young ECs 
to restore hematopoietic engraftment of HSPCs following coculture, while aged ECs impaired young hematopoietic engraftment relative to that seen in 
age-matched coculture controls. Unmanipulated pre-expansion WBM cells from young or aged mice were competitively transplanted into lethally irradi-
ated recipients to confirm age-dependent hematopoietic reconstitution phenotypes (n = 5 mice/cohort). (D–F) Quantification of donor-derived lineage+ 
hematopoietic repopulation 4 months after transplantation. Frequencies of (D) CD11B+GR1+ myeloid cells, (E) B220+CD19+ B cells, and (F) CD8+ (black)/
CD4+ (gray) T cell populations in PB were determined by flow cytometry. Young HSPCs cocultured with aged ECs acquired myeloid-biased engraftment at 
the expense of lymphopoiesis, while young ECs were unable to reverse the myeloid bias in aged HSPC expansions. Error bars represent the sample mean 
± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test for like groupings.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 6 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Figure 4. Infusion of young endothelium promotes hematopoietic recovery in aged recipi-
ents following myelosuppressive injury. (A) Schematic of the EC infusion strategy. (B and C) 
Time course of PB recovery of (B) young and (C) aged mice following irradiation (6.50 Gy) and 
infusion of either young ECs, aged ECs, or PBS vehicle control (n = 5 mice/cohort). The results 
demonstrated the myeloprotective effect of young EC transplantation following hematopoiet-
ic insult in both young and aged recipients, while the result with aged EC transplantation was 
indistinguishable from that observed in the PBS vehicle-infused controls. (D–F) Quantifica-
tion of CD45.2+ donor chimerism and multilineage engraftment in PB 4 months after donor 
WBM transplantation as measured by flow cytometry (n = 5 mice/cohort). (D) Unmanipulat-
ed steady-state young and aged WBM was competitively transplanted to confirm reduced 
CD45.2+ hematopoietic engraftment and phenotypic CD11B+/GR1+ myeloid bias in the aged 
WBM transplantation cohort (n = 5 mice/cohort). (E) Young and (F) aged donors infused with 
young ECs demonstrated an increase in hematopoietic engraftment, while supporting an 
increase in B220+ and CD3+ lymphoid reconstitution. Error bars represent the sample mean ± 
SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed, Student’s t test for com-
parisons at individual time points. Steady-state and PBS controls were included as recovery 
reference points and were not included in the statistical analysis.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
and aged WBM coinfused with young ECs showed a significant, 
approximately 2-fold (young WBM; P = 0.0225) and approxi-
mately 3-fold (aged WBM; P = 0.0035) increase in hematopoietic 
repopulating activity when compared with WBM alone (Figure 5, 
G and H, and Supplemental Figure 4, B and C). The increase in 
hematopoietic reconstitution was independent of homing defects 
young ECs with WBM could increase HSC-repopulating activity. 
We performed limiting-dilution analysis (LDA) by transplanting 2 
× 105, 105, and 5 × 104 WBM cells isolated from steady-state young 
or aged mice, with or without a coinfusion of 5 × 105 young ECs, 
into lethally irradiated recipients. Survival was monitored for 6 
months and used to quantify the nonresponding fraction. Young 
Figure 5. Coinfusion of young endothelium enhances BM transplantation. (A and B) Survival curves for mice transplanted with 105 WBM cells from either 
(A) young or (B) aged animals, showing an increase in overall survival in WBM cohorts coinfused with ECs (n = 10 mice/cohort). Note: Data in A and B share 
the same steady-state, PBS, and EC-alone controls. The survival curve significance between the WBM and WBM-plus-EC cohorts was calculated using a 
log-rank test. (C and D) Time course of hematopoietic recovery in the PB of recipient mice coinfused with 105 young or aged WBM cells, with or without 
young ECs. EC-coinfused animals had a significant increase in hematopoietic recovery (n = 10 mice/cohort). (E and F) Quantification of CFU-S in mice 
transplanted with 105 WBM cells from (E) young or (F) aged donors, with or without young ECs, demonstrating an increase in hematopoietic progenitor 
activity in cohorts coinfused with ECs. CFU-S numbers were scored 8 days after irradiation (n ≥ 5 mice/cohort). (G and H) Log-fraction plot of limiting dilu-
tion analysis showing the frequency of long-term multilineage repopulation of WBM from (G) young or (H) aged mice transplanted into lethally irradiated 
recipients and coinfused or not with young ECs (n = 10 mice/cohort). Dashed lines indicate 95% CIs. Stem cell frequency and significance were determined 
using ELDA. Error bars represent the sample mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test. Steady-state, 
PBS, and EC-alone controls were reference points and were not included in the statistical analysis. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
damage (Figure 6, B, E, and F). Radioprotection of BM cellularity 
extended to early (day 4) and later (day 14) time points (Figure 7, A 
and B). Moreover, WBM-transplanted mice coinfused with young 
ECs had radioprotection of BM myeloid cells (Figure 7, C–F). 
Interestingly, a single dose of coinfused young ECs extended their 
regenerative effects to other radiosensitive tissues, including the 
spleen and intestine (Supplemental Figure 5), further expanding 
the therapeutic potential of infusions of young ECs to mitigate 
damage caused by radiation-mediated injury.
Discussion
Understanding the aging-dependent cellular changes to the BM 
microenvironment that impair HSC function and hematopoietic 
output will be critical in developing new and adjunctive therapies 
to treat age-related hematological disorders. Here, we have shown 
that physiological aging of ECs is sufficient to promote functional 
aging of young HSCs in ex vivo coculture experiments (Figure 3, 
C–F). We confirmed these ex vivo results in an in vivo model sys-
tem in which aged ECs infused into young mice following myelo-
(Supplemental Figure 4, D and E). These data demonstrate that 
coinfusion of young ECs improves the overall survival of myeloab-
lated recipients and enhances HSCT repopulating ability.
Coinfusion of young ECs radioprotects the BM sinusoidal vascular 
niche. Sinusoidal endothelium within the BM microenvironment 
undergoes significant damage in response to irradiation (49). 
Regeneration of BM sinusoidal ECs is also required for hemato-
poietic engraftment and regeneration following radiation- 
induced 
injury (50). The observed increase in HSC engraftment in coin-
fused cohorts suggests that infused ECs may protect the BM vas-
cular microenvironment. Therefore, we examined BM recovery in 
EC-coinfused cohorts following myeloablative irradiation. Coin-
fusions of young ECs in young and aged WBM groups revealed a 
significant increase in BM cellularity and CD45+ hematopoietic 
 
cell frequency 7 days after irradiation (Figure 6, A, C, and D). 
Using a VEGFR3 antibody to distinguish BM sinusoidal endotheli-
um, we next assessed the extent of vascular damage in coinfused 
mice. Young ECs mitigated BM sinusoidal endothelial damage, 
displaying a significant decrease in type I and type II endothelial 
Figure 6. Young EC coinfusion radioprotects the BM microenvironment. Lethally irradiated (9.50 Gy) mice were coinfused with either 105 young or aged 
WBM cells and 5 × 105 young BM ECs. (A) Representative H&E-stained longitudinal femur sections from coinfused mice 7 days after irradiation (n = 10 mice/
cohort). Original magnification, ×100. (B) Representative images of damaged VEGFR3+ femoral vessels, including type I hemorrhagic (asterisk), type I  
discontinuous (red arrow), and type II regressed (blue arrow), 7 days after irradiation, demonstrating radioprotection of the vascular niche (n = 10 mice/
cohort). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Original magnification, ×200. (C and D) Quantification of total BM CD45+ cells showing mitigation 
of panhematopoietic injury in cohorts coinfused with young or aged WBM and young ECs (n = 10 mice/cohort; data are related to A). (E and F) Quantification 
of type I/II damaged VEGFR3+ sinusoidal vessels in cohorts coinfused with young or aged WBM and young ECs (n = 10 mice/cohort; data are related to B). 
Error bars represent the sample mean ± SEM. ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test. Steady-state controls were used as a reference point and 
were not included in the statistical analysis.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Figure 7. Young EC coinfusion mitigates myeloablative hematopoietic injury. (A and B) Representative H&E-stained longitudinal femur time course after irradia-
tion (9.50 Gy) for mice coinfused with (A) young and (B) aged WBM plus ECs (n = 10 mice/cohort). Original magnification, ×100. Steady-state control H&E-stained 
sections are shown in the inset. (C and D) Representative contour plots of BM GM frequency in (C) young and (D) aged WBM-EC coinfusions after irradiation. (E 
and F) Time course of BM GM counts in (E) young and (F) aged WBM-EC coinfusions 7 days after irradiation. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001, by unpaired, 
2-tailed Student’s t test, for comparisons of WBM with WBM-EC coinfusion cohorts at individual time points. Steady-state controls were used as a reference point 
and were not included in the statistical analysis. FSC, forward scatter; SSC, side scatter.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
additional ex vivo and in vivo tools to dissect the molecular changes 
in aged ECs that play a role in modulating HSC activity during physi-
ological aging and elucidate the mechanisms by which dysregulation 
of the homeostatic BM vascular microenvironment leads to many 
common age-related hematopoietic disorders.
Methods
Mice. Young and aged C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice were purchased 
from the National Institute on Aging and from Taconic Biosciences. 
B6.SJL-PtprcaPepcb/BoyJ (CD45.1) mice were purchased from The 
Jackson Laboratory. All animals were maintained in specific patho-
gen–free housing. For hematopoietic recovery, reconstitution, and 
EC transplantation studies, mice were subjected to total body γ-irra-
diation (137Cs) 24 hours prior to transplantation. Transplant recipients 
were given PicoLab Mouse 20 antibiotic feed (0.025% trimethoprim 
and 0.124% sulfamethoxazole; LabDiet) 24 hours prior to irradiation 
and subsequently maintained for 28 days.
Femur IHC. Young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) mice 
were intravitally labeled for 10 minutes with 25 μg Alexa Fluor 647–
conjugated VECAD antibody (BV13; BioLegend) via retro-orbital 
injection. Following labeling, mice were sacrificed and perfused via 
intracardiac injection of PBS (pH 7.2). Femurs were fixed overnight in 
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS (pH 7.2), decalcified in 10% EDTA 
for 72 hours at room temperature, cryopreserved in 30% sucrose for 
48 hours at 4°C, and embedded in 50% OCT (Tissue-Tek) and 50% 
sucrose. Longitudinal femur sections (12-μm thickness) were cut using 
a CM 3050S Cryostat (Leica), counterstained with 1 μg/ml DAPI (Bio-
Legend), and mounted using Prolong Gold Anti-fade Solution (Life 
Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Femur sections were imaged 
on an LSM 710 confocal microscope (Zeiss).
Flow cytometry and cell sorting. Before cell staining, Fc receptors 
were blocked with a CD16/32 antibody (clone 93; BioLegend) in 
PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA for 
10 minutes at 4°C. Fc-blocked samples were stained in PBS (pH 7.2) 
containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA for 30 minutes 
at 4°C with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies, according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. Stained cells were washed in PBS (pH 7.2) 
containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA and fixed in 1% 
PFA in PBS (pH 7.2) with 2 mM EDTA for flow analysis, or resuspend-
ed in PBS (pH 7.2) with 2 mM EDTA and 1 μg/ml DAPI (BioLegend) 
for cell sorting. Samples were analyzed using an LSR II special-order 
research product (SORP) analyzer (BD Biosciences) and sorted using 
a FACSAria II SORP cell sorter (BD Biosciences). Data were collected 
and analyzed using FACSDiva 8.0.1 software (BD Biosciences).
Endothelial and stromal cell quantification. Young (3 months old) and 
aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 mice were intravitally labeled for 10 min-
utes with 25 μg Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated VECAD antibody (BV13; 
BioLegend) via retro-orbital injection. Mice were sacrificed and femurs 
crushed using a mortar and pestle, and WBM was enzymatically disas-
sociated in Hanks’ balanced salt solution (Life Technologies, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) containing 20 mM HEPES (CellGro), 2.5 mg/ml colla-
genase A (Roche), and 1 U/ml dispase II (Roche) for 15 minutes at 37°C 
with gentle agitation. Cell suspensions were filtered (40-μm), washed 
in PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and 
depleted of terminally differentiated hematopoietic cells using a murine 
hematopoietic Lineage Cell Depletion Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. To determine endothelial and stromal 
suppressive irradiation imparted a myeloid bias at the expense of 
B and T cell output, while inhibiting HSC engraftment (Figure 4E). 
These observations were independent of aging-related changes to 
other microenvironmental cellular constituents, suggesting that 
aged endothelium is sufficient to drive aging-related hematopoi-
etic defects. These results align with data demonstrating that an 
aged microenvironment can lead to aging-related hematopoietic 
outcomes (26), including reduced hematopoietic clonality (28) 
and myeloid skewing through the inflammatory cytokine Rantes 
(also known as CCL5) (51). While the decrease in expression of the 
verified pro-HSC factors Kitl, Cxcl12, and NOTCH ligands in aged 
ECs likely contributes to their impaired HSC-supportive function 
(Figure 2K), there are probably a number of additional pathways 
and factors that contribute to the observed EC-mediated aging 
phenotypes acquired in young HSCs. To our knowledge, this is the 
first evidence to demonstrate that aged endothelium can direct-
ly initiate age-related hematopoietic phenotypes, allowing for 
potential therapeutic intervention in aged vascular niches.
Our group and others have previously demonstrated the utili-
ty of ECs in enhancing hematopoietic recovery and safeguarding 
HSPCs following irradiation (37, 43–46, 52). In these experiments, 
repeated i.v. EC doses or implanted donor vasculature provides 
a significant hematopoietic radioprotective effect in young mice. 
However, it is not clear whether this protective effect extends to 
an aged hematopoietic system (11, 15). Coculture of aged HSPCs 
on young ECs could partially rejuvenate HSC activity, but failed 
to reverse the aging-related intrinsic myeloid bias (Figure 3, C–F). 
While infusion of young ECs into aged mice following subleth-
al myelosuppressive irradiation was also able to significantly 
enhance peripheral hematopoietic recovery and endogenous 
aged HSC activity (Figure 4, C and F), it was unable to revert 
the observed myeloid bias. Infusions of young ECs were able to 
enhance B and T cell output in aged mice (Figure 4F), further 
demonstrating their therapeutic potential. Following a lethal dose 
of ionizing TBI, a single coinfusion of young ECs was able to sig-
nificantly increase survival, hematopoietic progenitor activity, and 
HSC engraftment in mice transplanted with aged WBM (Figure 5, 
B, F, and H). Hematopoietic engraftment and reconstitution are 
dependent on the successful regeneration of BM sinusoidal endo-
thelium following irradiation (50). EC coinfusion significantly 
 
diminished VEGFR3+ sinusoidal EC damage by decreasing the 
prevalence of type I and type II regressed and hemorrhagic ves-
sels within the BM (Figure 6, B, E, and F), preserved BM cellularity 
(Figure 6, A, C, and D, and Figure 7, A and B), and enhanced BM 
granulocyte-macrophage (GM) populations (Figure 7, E and F). 
These results demonstrate that young ECs can act as a supportive 
cellular therapy, protecting the aged BM microenvironment fol-
lowing radiation-mediated injury and promoting the rejuvenation 
of an aged hematopoietic system.
Altogether, our data demonstrate that a young BM vascular 
niche plays a critical role in supporting homeostatic hematopoiesis 
and HSC activity and that physiological aging disrupts endothe-
lium-instructive function. This suggests that, by providing young 
endothelium via infusions, we can augment current therapies that 
rely on curative myeloablative strategies to enhance hematopoietic 
outcomes, including overall HSC engraftment efficiency, restoration 
of B and T cell frequencies, and overall survival. This study provides 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
antibodies against CD31 (390; BioLegend); CD45 (30-F11; BioLegend); 
and TER119 (TER119; BioLegend). Following cell-surface staining, cells 
were fixed and permeabilized using the BD Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit (BD 
Biosciences) and stained with a monoclonal antibody raised against 
pimonidazole adducts at a 1:100 dilution (HP-Red549; Hypoxyprobe) 
according to the manufacturer’s suggestions. EC populations were 
defined as VECAD+CD31+lineage–CD45–TER119–.
For BM immunohistochemical analysis, mice were sacrificed and 
femurs were fixed in 4% PFA in PBS (pH 7.2) overnight at 4°C, washed in 
PBS (pH 7.2), and decalcified for 72 hours in 10% EDTA in PBS (pH 7.2) 
at room temperature with gentle rocking. Next, femurs were washed 
in PBS (pH 7.2), cryopreserved in 30% sucrose for 48 hours at 4°C, and 
embedded in 50% OCT (Tissue-Tek) and 50% sucrose. Longitudinal 
femur sections (12-μm thickness) were cut using a CM 3050S Cryostat 
(Leica), permeabilized in blocking buffer (10% normal donkey serum 
[Jackson ImmunoResearch] and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, pH 7.2) 
for 30 minutes at room temperature, and incubated with a monoclo-
nal antibody raised against pimonidazole adducts at a 1:100 dilution 
in blocking buffer (HP-Red549; Hypoxyprobe Inc.) overnight at 4°C. 
Sections were washed in blocking buffer and counterstained with 1 
μg/ml DAPI (BioLegend) and mounted using Prolong Gold Anti-fade 
Solution (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Femur sec-
tions were imaged on an LSM 710 confocal microscope (Zeiss).
Akt1 lentivirus. Lentivirus (21) was generated by cotransfecting 
pCCL-myrAkt1 backbone (13 μg) with RRE (5 μg), REV (2.5 μg), and 
VSV-G (3 μg) packaging plasmids onto a 10-cm plate of 80% con-
fluent 293T/17 cells (ATCC) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Tech-
nologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Forty-eight hours after transfection, supernatants were 
processed using Lenti-X Concentrator (ClonTech) according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations. The resulting myrAkt1-express-
ing lentivirus was resuspended in 0.5 ml TNE buffer (50 mM Tris, 
pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 130 mM NaCl) and stored at –80°C. Viral titers 
were determined using the Lenti-X p24 Rapid Titer Kit (ClonTech). All 
transductions were done using 10,000 pg virus per 30,000 ECs/cm2.
EC isolation. Primary murine endothelium was generated from 
young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 mice. To 
establish stable EC cultures, long bones were denuded of excess tissue 
and crushed using a mortar and pestle, and lungs were removed and 
minced with a surgical scalpel. Tissues were enzymatically disassociated 
 
in Hanks’ balanced salt solution (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific) containing 20 mM HEPES (CellGro), 2.5 mg/ml collagenase A 
(Roche), and 1 U/ml dispase II (Roche) for 15 minutes at 37°C with gen-
tle agitation. Cell suspensions were filtered (40-μm), washed in PBS (pH 
7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and depleted 
of terminally differentiated hematopoietic cells using a murine hema-
topoietic Lineage Cell Depletion Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations. ECs were immunopurified from the 
resulting cell suspensions using Dynabeads (Life Technologies, Ther-
mo Fisher Scientific) precaptured with a monoclonal CD31 antibody 
(MEC13.3; BioLegend). Briefly, 4 × 106 sheep anti-rat IgG Dynabeads 
were incubated with 10 μg CD31 antibody (per isolation) in 0.5 ml PBS 
(pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA for 30 min-
utes at 4°C. Antibody-captured beads were washed 3 times in 1 ml PBS 
(pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. CD31 Dynabeads were then added to 
lineage-depleted cell suspensions in a final volume of 1 ml and incubated 
 
cell frequencies via flow cytometry, the resulting cell suspensions were 
stained using antibodies against CD31 (390; BioLegend), CD45 (30-F11; 
BioLegend), and TER119 (TER119; BioLegend); endothelial and stromal 
cell populations were defined as VECAD+CD31+lineage–CD45–TER119– 
and VECAD–CD31–lineage–CD45–TER119–, respectively.
Vascular permeability. To measure BM vascular integrity, Evans blue 
dye (Sigma-Aldrich) 0.5% w/v in PBS (pH 7.2) was infused via tail vein 
injection into young (3 months old) and aged (19 months old) C57BL/6 
mice at 25 mg dye/kg total body weight. Three hours after injection, 
mice were sacrificed via cervical dislocation and cardiac perfused with 
10 ml PBS (pH 7.2). Femurs were removed, denuded of excess tissue, and 
weighed. To extract Evans blue dye, the resulting femurs were crushed 
using a mortar and pestle in 600 μl formamide and incubated at 55°C 
overnight. Femurs from noninjected mice were used as baseline controls. 
Following extraction, samples were briefly vortexed and centrifuged at 
16,000 g for 5 minutes at room temperature. Supernatant absorbance 
(Abs) was recorded at 620 nm and 740 nm. Sample Abs measurements 
were corrected for heme-containing proteins [Abs620 – (1.426 × Abs740 + 
0.03)] and blanked using noninjected controls (corrected sample Abs620 
– corrected noninjected control Abs620). Total Evans blue dye was deter-
mined using a standard curve and normalized to femur weight.
ROS. To examine ROS, young (3 months old) and aged (24 months 
old) C57BL/6 mice were intravitally labeled for 10 minutes with 25 μg 
Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated VECAD antibody (BV13; BioLegend) via 
retro-orbital injection. Mice were sacrificed and femurs crushed using 
a mortar and pestle, and WBM was enzymatically disassociated in 
Hanks’ balanced salt solution (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific) containing 20 mM HEPES (CellGro), 2.5 mg/ml collagenase A 
(Roche), and 1 U/ml dispase II (Roche) for 15 minutes at 37°C with gen-
tle agitation. Cell suspensions were filtered (40-μm), washed in PBS 
(pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and deplet-
ed of terminally differentiated hematopoietic cells using a murine 
hematopoietic Lineage Cell Depletion Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cell suspensions were stained using 
antibodies against CD31 (390; BioLegend); CD45 (30-F11; BioLegend); 
and TER119 (TER119; Biolegend). Stained cell suspensions were then 
incubated with 5 μM CM-H2DCFDA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS 
at 37°C for 20 minutes, washed with PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA 
(fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and incubated at 37°C for 15 minutes. EC 
populations were defined as VECAD+CD31+lineage–CD45–TER119–. 
ROS levels were estimated using flow cytometry.
Hypoxyprobe. To evaluate BM oxygenation status, young (3 months 
old) and aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 mice were i.p. injected with 120 
mg/kg of 100 mg/ml pimonidazole HCl (Hypoxyprobe-1; Hypoxyprobe 
Inc.). After 90 minutes, mice were intravitally labeled for 10 minutes 
with 25 μg Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated VECAD antibody (BV13; Bio-
Legend) via retro-orbital injection. For BM EC analysis by flow cytom-
etry, mice were sacrificed and femurs were crushed using a mortar and 
pestle. WBM was enzymatically disassociated in Hanks’ balanced salt 
solution (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 20 
mM HEPES (CellGro), 2.5 mg/ml collagenase A (Roche), and 1 U/ml 
dispase II (Roche) for 15 to 30 minutes at 37°C with gentle agitation. 
Cell suspensions were filtered (40-μm), washed in PBS (pH 7.2) con-
taining 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and depleted of termi-
nally differentiated hematopoietic cells using a murine hematopoietic 
Lineage Cell Depletion Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions. The resulting cell suspensions were stained using 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
using EC growth media to remove any dislodged cells. Wound healing 
was monitored for 48 hours using IncuCyte ZOOM (Essen Bioscience) 
and calculated as a percentage of the original wound mask at 12-hour 
intervals. Relative wound density (RWD) was calculated using the fol-
lowing equation: percentage of RWD(t) = 100 × (w(t)– w(0))/ (c(t)– w(0)), 
where w(t) = density of the wound region at the time point (t) and c(t) = 
density of the cell region at the time point (t).
Gene expression. For gene expression analysis, total RNA from 
young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) cultured endotheli-
um was isolated using TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 
cDNA was generated from 2 μg total RNA using SuperScript III Reverse 
Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufac-
turer’s suggested protocol. RT-qPCR analysis was performed using a 
40-ng cDNA template with 1 μM gene-specific primers and 1× SYBR 
Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) on a ViiA7 Real-time PCR 
System (Applied Biosystems). The appropriate minus–reverse tran-
scriptase controls were included in all experiments. Primer sets were 
obtained from the Harvard Primer Bank or designed in-house (54–56). 
For a complete list of the primers used, see Supplemental Table 1.
Ex vivo coculture. Primary murine young (3 months old) or aged (24 
months old) HSPCs were cocultured on young or aged Akt-transduced 
endothelium in serum-free conditions with sKITL supplementation 
for 14 days. To establish cocultures, femurs and tibiae from young and 
aged C57BL/6 (CD45.2+) mice were isolated, and WBM was flushed 
using a 26.5-gauge needle with PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (frac-
tion V) and 2 mM EDTA. Isolated WBM was subsequently depleted 
 
of hematopoietic lineage–committed cells using a murine hemato-
poietic Lineage Cell Depletion Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Lineage-depleted HSPCs (105/well) were 
plated on a single well of a 12-well dish with confluent young or aged 
endothelium in 1 ml serum-free StemSpan SFEM (STEMCELL Tech-
nologies) with 50 ng/ml recombinant murine sKITL (PeproTech). 
Three independently isolated HSPC populations were tested in paral-
lel for each EC line. Cocultures were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 
for a total of 14 days. Day 2: Cocultures were supplemented with 1 ml 
StemSpan SFEM and 50 ng/ml sKITL. Day 4: Nonadherent hemato-
poietic cells were collected, pelleted (500 ×g for 5 min), resuspended 
in 3 ml StemSpan SFEM, and split 1:2 (1.5 ml/well) into the original 
and adjacent 12 wells with ECs (2 × 12 wells total). Cocultures were 
supplemented with 50 ng/ml sKITL. Day 6: Nonadherent hematopoi-
etic cells were collected and split 1:2 into 12 adjacent wells with Stem-
Span SFEM to a final volume of 1.5 ml (4 × 12 wells total). Cocultures 
were supplemented with 50 ng/ml sKITL. Day 7: Nonadherent hema-
topoietic cells were collected and depleted of lineage-committed 
 
cells using a murine hematopoietic Lineage Cell Depletion Kit. Lin-
eage-depleted HSPCs (105/well) were plated in a single well of a 
new 12-well plate with confluent young or aged endothelium in 1 ml 
StemSpan SFEM with 50 ng/ml sKITL. StemSpan SFEM (1 ml/well) 
was added back to the original 12-well plate with 50 ng/ml sKITL. 
Days 8–13: A new 12-well plate was split as described above. Stem-
Span SFEM was exchanged every 2 days and replated with 50 ng/ml 
 
sKITL on the original 12-well coculture plate. Day 14: Endothelial 
and hematopoietic cells were collected for analysis using Accutase 
(BioLegend). Cell numbers were determined using hemocytometer 
counts with trypan blue (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
for live/dead exclusion. Following coculture, total hematopoietic cell 
and HSPC frequencies were assessed using antibodies against CD45 
for 30 minutes at 4°C. CD31+ cells were captured and washed 5 times in 1 
ml PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA using 
a DynaMag-2 magnet (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific), plat-
ed, and grown on fibronectin-coated (Sigma-Aldrich) 12-well plates (Ther-
mo Fisher Scientific). ECs were cultured in EC growth media composed 
of low-glucose DMEM (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 
Ham’s F-12 (CellGro) (1:1 ratio), supplemented with 20% heat-inactivat-
ed FBS, antibiotic-antimycotic (CellGro), nonessential amino acids (Cell-
Gro), 10 mM HEPES (CellGro), 100 μg/ml heparin (Sigma- 
Aldrich), and 
50 μg/ml EC mitogen (Biomedical Technologies, Alfa Aesar). To select 
for Akt1-expressing ECs, cultures were grown for 7 days in serum- and 
cytokine-free StemSpan Serum-Free Expansion Medium (SFEM) (STEM-
CELL Technologies). Cells were maintained and cultured in EC growth 
media in humidified incubators at 37°C under 5% CO2. All EC lines were 
subsequently stained and sorted for VECAD+ (BV13; BioLegend); CD31+ 
(390; BioLegend); and CD45– (30-F11; BioLegend) cell populations to 
ensure purity. Phase-contrast images were obtained using an Evos XL 
(AMG) cell imaging system. For immuno 
cytochemistry, young and aged 
ECs were stained with an antibody raised against VECAD (BV13; BioLeg-
end), counterstained with 1 μg/ml DAPI (BioLegend), and imaged using 
an LSM 710 confocal microscope (Zeiss).
AFM. Cultured ECs from young (3 months old) and aged (24 
months old) C57BL/6 mice (as described above) were grown to 80% 
to 90% confluency on fibronectin-coated (Sigma-Aldrich) 60-mm 
dishes (Corning), fixed in 4% PFA in PBS (pH 7.2) for 15 minutes at 
room temperature, and washed in PBS (pH 7.2). Force maps were gen-
erated with an MFP-3D Bio AFM (Asylum Research) using a TR400PB 
pyramidal silicon nitride tip (k = 0.02 N/m, h = 3) with a 32 × 32 grid 
(1,024 force curves) covering 90 μm2. Force curves were taken by 250-
nm indentation with a trigger point of 200 pN at 600 nm/s; initial 
100 nm measurements were fitted to the Hertz-Sneddon model (53). 
Images were taken using an MLCT probe (Bruker) in a 90 μm2 area 
with 256 points × 256 lines resolution. Igor Pro 6.34A software (Asy-
lum Research) was used to determine the cantilever spring constant 
via thermal tune calibration. Median endothelial stiffness is presented 
as a box plot. Relative stiffness was calculated by normalizing young 
and aged ECs to young EC stiffness measurements.
Proliferation. To assess the proliferation status of young (3 months 
old) and aged (24 months old) ECs in culture, fluorescence-labeled 
EdU incorporation was quantified by flow cytometry using a Click-iT 
Plus EdU Flow Cytometry Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s recommendations. In short, subconfluent 
ECs were incubated in serum-free StemSpan SFEM (STEMCELL Tech-
nologies) overnight at 37°C 5% CO2 to synchronize the cell cycle in G0/
G1. The following day, ECs were pulsed in 10 μM EdU (Alexa Fluor 488) 
in serum-containing growth media and analyzed at 6 and 24 hours.
Senescence. To quantify senescent cells, subconfluent young (3 
months old) and aged (24 months old) EC cultures were analyzed by 
flow cytometry using the Fluorometric Quantitative Cellular Senescence 
Assay Kit (Cell BioLabs) according to the manufacturer’s suggestions.
Wound healing. Cultured ECs from young (3 months old) and aged 
(24 months old) mice were plated at 104 cells/well in a fibronectin- 
coated (Sigma-Aldrich) 96-well ImageLock tissue culture plate (Essen 
Bioscience) (n = 8 replicate wells). At approximately 90% cell conflu-
ency, a homogenous scratch of approximately 700 μm was generat-
ed using a 96-well WoundMaker (Essen Bioscience) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Wells were subsequently washed 2 times 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
histology was performed by Histoserv Inc. Briefly, tissues were fixed 
in 4% PFA in PBS (pH 7.2) overnight at 4°C, washed in PBS (pH 7.2), 
and subsequently dehydrated in 70% ethanol. Femurs were decalci-
fied for 72 hours in 10% EDTA in PBS (pH 7.2) at room temperature 
with gentle rocking prior to dehydration. Paraffin-embedded femur, 
splenic, and small intestine tissues were sectioned (6-μm thickness) 
and stained with H&E (Histoserv Inc). Paraffin-embedded femurs 
were processed for VEGFR3+ sinusoidal vessel regression analysis 
using an antibody raised against VEGFR3 (AFL4; BioLegend) and 
counterstained with hematoxylin as previously described (43). Imag-
es were taken on a BX51 (Olympus) light microscope at ×10 or ×20 
magnification. To quantify BM hematopoietic recovery, femurs were 
crushed using a mortar and pestle in PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% 
BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA and stained using antibodies raised 
against CD45 (30-F11; BioLegend); GR1 (RB6-8C5; BioLegend); 
CD115 (AFS98; BioLegend); and F4/80 (BM8; BioLegend).
Limiting dilution. Femurs and tibiae were harvested from young (3 
months old) and aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 mice and flushed using 
a 26.5-gauge needle with PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) 
and 2 mM EDTA, and then cells were counted using a hemocytometer 
and trypan blue (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for live/
dead exclusion. For limiting dilution analysis, the indicated numbers 
(Figure 5, G and H, and Supplemental Figure 4, B and C) of WBM cells 
were transplanted into lethally irradiated young (3 months old) C57BL/6 
recipients (9.50 Gy) in a noncompetitive manner (per mouse) via retro- 
orbital injection (n = 10 mice/cohort). The percentage of negative- 
responding/dead mice was monitored throughout a 4-month post-trans-
plantation period. Surviving mice were analyzed for multilineage 
engraftment in the PB using antibodies raised against GR1 (RB6-8C5; 
BioLegend); CD11B (M1/70; BioLegend); B220 (RA3-6B2; BioLegend); 
and CD3 (17A2; BioLegend). Long-term multilineage HSC frequency 
and 95% CIs were determined using extreme limiting dilution analysis 
(ELDA) software (http:/
/bioinf.wehi.edu.au/software/elda/) (57).
Hematopoietic homing analysis. Femurs and tibiae were harvested 
from young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 (CD45.2+) 
mice and flushed using a 26.5-gauge needle with PBS (pH 7.2) containing 
0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and then counted using a hemo-
cytometer and trypan blue (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
 
for live/dead exclusion. For hematopoietic homing assessment, 106 
young or aged WBM cells, with or without 5 × 105 young (3 months old) 
ECs, were infused or coinfused into young (3 months old) lethally irra-
diated (9.50 Gy) CD45.1+ (B6.SJL-PtprcaPepcb/BoyJ) recipients. Femurs 
and spleens were removed 16 hours after infusion, flushed with PBS (pH 
7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA, and lysed for 
RBC (BioLegend). The resulting cells were then stained for antibodies 
raised against CD45.1 (A20; BioLegend); CD45.2 (104; BioLegend); and 
TER119 (TER119; BioLegend). CD45.2+ hematopoietic cells were quan-
tified by flow cytometry as a frequency per total WBM or splenocytes.
Statistics. No statistical models were used to predetermine exper-
imental sample sizes. Unless otherwise noted, all bar graphs and line 
graphs are displayed as the mean ± SEM, and significance was deter-
mined using an unpaired, 2-tailed Student’s t test, with the threshold set at 
a P value of less than 0.05. Median endothelial stiffness and significance 
(Figure 2D) were determined using a nonparametric, 1-sided Wilcoxon 
rank-sum test (α = 0.001) to compare repeated force measurements. Data 
are presented as box plots, with whiskers representing an interquartile 
range (IQR) of ± 1.5. Relative endothelial stiffness (Figure 2E) was nor-
(30-F11; BioLegend); GR1 (RB6-8C5; BioLegend); CD11B (M1/70; 
BioLegend), B220 (RA3-6B2; BioLegend); CD3 (17A2; BioLegend); 
CD41 (MWReg30; BioLegend); cKIT (2B8; BioLegend); and SCA1 
(D7; BioLegend). To assess HSC-repopulating activity, cocultures 
were enriched for hematopoietic cells using murine CD45 Micro-
beads (Miltenyi Biotec); 5 × 105 CD45.2+ (C57BL/6) cocultured cells 
were transplanted into lethally irradiated (9.50 Gy) young (3 months 
old) CD45.1+ (B6.SJL-PtprcaPepcb/BoyJ) recipients with 5 × 105 young 
(3 months old) CD45.1+ competitive WBM cells (per mouse) via retro- 
orbital sinus injection. Multilineage engraftment in PB was assayed 
4 months after transplantation using antibodies raised against GR1 
(RB6-8C5; BioLegend); CD11B (M1/70; BioLegend); B220 (RA3-
6B2; BioLegend); CD19 (1D3; BD Biosciences); CD4 (GK1.5; BioLeg-
end); and CD8 at 1:100 (53-6.7; BioLegend). The antibodies used for 
hemato 
poietic engraftment were CD45.1 (A20; BioLegend); CD45.2 
(104; BioLegend); and TER119 (TER119; BioLegend).
PB analysis. PB was collected using 75-mm heparinized glass cap-
illary tubes (Kimble-Chase) via retro-orbital sinus bleeds. To assess 
hematopoietic recovery following myeloablation, CBCs were ana-
lyzed using an ADVIA 120 Hematology System (Bayer Healthcare). To 
quantify multilineage hematopoietic and HSC engraftment, PB was 
depleted of RBC (BioLegend), stained with preconjugated antibodies, 
and analyzed by flow cytometry.
EC infusions. Young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) 
C57BL/6 (CD45.2) mice were subjected to a myelosuppressive dose of 
TBI (6.50 Gy) and infused with 5 × 105 young (3 months old) or 5 × 105 
aged (24 months old) ECs via retro-orbital sinus injections on 4 succes-
sive days. PBS (vehicle) injections and steady-state mice (nonirradiated) 
were used as controls. PB CBCs were analyzed for hematopoietic recov-
ery weekly for 28 days following TBI. Preirradiated animals were bled to 
establish CBC baselines. To assess HSC activity following EC infusion, 
femurs were isolated 28 days after TBI and WBM was flushed using a 
26.5-gauge needle with PBS (pH 7.2) containing 0.5% BSA (fraction 
V) and 2 mM EDTA. Viable WBM cell counts were determined using a 
hemocytometer and trypan blue (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific).  2 x 106 CD45.2+ donor WBM cells were transplanted with 106 
competitive CD45.1+ WBM cells into lethally-irradiated (9.5 Gy) young 
(3 months old) CD45.1+ (B6.SJL-PtprcaPepcb/BoyJ) recipients via retro- 
orbital sinus injections. Multilineage engraftment in PB was assayed 4 
months after transplantation using antibodies raised against GR1 (RB6-
8C5; BioLegend); CD11B (M1/70; BioLegend); B220 (RA3-6B2; Bio-
Legend); and CD3 (17A2; BioLegend). Antibodies raised against CD45.1 
(A20; BioLegend); CD45.2 (104; BioLegend); and TER119 (TER119; 
BioLegend) were used for hematopoietic engraftment.
Coinfusions of ECs and WBM cells. Femurs and tibiae were harvest-
ed from young (3 months old) and aged (24 months old) C57BL/6 mice 
and flushed using a 26.5-gauge needle with PBS (pH 7.2) containing 
0.5% BSA (fraction V) and 2 mM EDTA and then counted using hemo-
cytometers and trypan blue (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scien-
tific) for live/dead exclusion. WBM cells (105 cells) were transplanted 
into lethally irradiated (9.50 Gy) young (3 months old) C57BL/6 recipi-
ents, with or without 5 × 105 young ECs, via retro-orbital injection. PBS 
(vehicle) and steady-state mice (nonirradiated) were used as controls. 
Hematopoietic recovery was monitored by PB CBCs. Mice were moni-
tored daily to generate survival curves. To assess CFU-S, spleens were 
removed 8 days after TBI, fixed in Bouin’s solution (Sigma-Aldrich) 
overnight, and macroscopic surface colonies quantified (48). Tissue 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Starr Foundation Tri-Institutional core 
facilities. Statistical consultation was provided by Paul Christos 
and supported by the Clinical and Translational Science Center 
(UL1-TR000457-06) in the Division of Biostatistics, Department 
of Healthcare Policy and Research of Weill Cornell Medical Col-
lege. Our work is supported by the Tri-Institutional Stem Cell Ini-
tiative (2014-004); an American Society of Hematology Scholar 
Award; the American Federation for Aging Research; the NIH 
(1R01CA204308 and 1R01HL133021); and the Leukemia and 
Lymphoma Society Quest for Cures.
Address correspondence to: Jason M. Butler, Weill Cornell Medical 
College, 1300 York Avenue, A-827A, New York, New York 10065, 
USA. Phone: 212.746.2673; Email: jmb2009@med.cornell.edu.
malized to young ECs and presented as a 95% CI. Survival curves (Figure 
5, A and B) were calculated using the log-rank test to compare WBM with 
WBM-plus-EC cohorts. Long-term multilineage HSC frequency and 95% 
CIs (Figure 5, G and H) were determined using ELDA software (57).
Study approval. All mouse experiments were performed with 
approval of the IACUC of Weill Cornell Medical College and in accor-
dance with the guidelines of the Association for Assessment and 
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care – International (AAALAC) 
and the NIH Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare (OLAW).
Author contributions
MGP, PR, MCG, and JMB performed experiments and conduct-
ed data analyses. PL, KG, and SYR performed and analyzed AFM 
experiments. MGP and JMB conceived the experiments and wrote 
the manuscript.
 1. Federal Interagency Forum On Aging Related 
Statistics. Older Americans 2016: Key Indicators 
of Well-Being. Aging Stats Website. https:/
/aging-
stats.gov/data.html. Accessed September 7, 2017.
 2. Schlitzkus LL, Melin AA, Johanning JM, Sche-
narts PJ. Perioperative management of elderly 
patients. Surg Clin North Am. 2015;95(2):391–415.
 3. North BJ, Sinclair DA. The intersection between 
aging and cardiovascular disease. Circ Res. 
2012;110(8):1097–1108.
 4. Berger NA, et al. Cancer in the elderly. Trans Am Clin 
Climatol Assoc. 2006;117:147–155; discussion 155.
 5. Dorshkind K, Swain S. Age-associated declines 
in immune system development and function: 
causes, consequences, and reversal. Curr Opin 
Immunol. 2009;21(4):404–407.
 6. Eisenstaedt R, Penninx BW, Woodman RC. Anemia 
in the elderly: current understanding and emerging 
concepts. Blood Rev. 2006;20(4):213–226.
 
7. Lichtman MA, Rowe JM. The relationship of patient 
age to the pathobiology of the clonal myeloid dis-
eases. Semin Oncol. 2004;31(2):185–197.
 8. Pang WW, Schrier SL, Weissman IL. Age-associ-
ated changes in human hematopoietic stem cells. 
Semin Hematol. 2017;54(1):39–42.
 9. Cho RH, Sieburg HB, Muller-Sieburg CE. A new 
mechanism for the aging of hematopoietic stem 
cells: aging changes the clonal composition of the 
stem cell compartment but not individual stem 
cells. Blood. 2008;111(12):5553–5561.
 10. Dykstra B, de Haan G. Hematopoietic stem 
cell aging and self-renewal. Cell Tissue Res. 
2008;331(1):91–101.
 11. Rossi DJ, et al. Cell intrinsic alterations underlie 
hematopoietic stem cell aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2005;102(26):9194–9199.
 12. Van Zant G, Liang Y. The role of stem cells in 
aging. Exp Hematol. 2003;31(8):659–672.
 13. Pang WW, et al. Human bone marrow hemato-
poietic stem cells are increased in frequency and 
myeloid-biased with age. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2011;108(50):20012–20017.
 14. Chambers SM, Shaw CA, Gatza C, Fisk CJ, Done-
hower LA, Goodell MA. Aging hematopoietic 
stem cells decline in function and exhibit epigen-
etic dysregulation. PLoS Biol. 2007;5(8):e201.
 15. Geiger H, de Haan G, Florian MC. The ageing 
haematopoietic stem cell compartment. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2013;13(5):376–389.
 16. Elias HK, Bryder D, Park CY. Molecular mecha-
nisms underlying lineage bias in aging hemato-
poiesis. Semin Hematol. 2017;54(1):4–11.
 17. Akunuru S, Geiger H. Aging, Clonality, and Reju-
venation of Hematopoietic Stem Cells. Trends 
Mol Med. 2016;22(8):701–712.
 18. Morrison SJ, Scadden DT. The bone marrow 
niche for haematopoietic stem cells. Nature. 
2014;505(7483):327–334.
 19. Ding L, Saunders TL, Enikolopov G, Mor-
rison SJ. Endothelial and perivascular cells 
maintain haematopoietic stem cells. Nature. 
2012;481(7382):457–462.
 20. Ding L, Morrison SJ. Haematopoietic stem 
cells and early lymphoid progenitors occu-
py distinct bone marrow niches. Nature. 
2013;495(7440):231–235.
 21. Kobayashi H, et al. Angiocrine factors from 
Akt-activated endothelial cells balance self- 
renewal and differentiation of haematopoietic 
stem cells. Nat Cell Biol. 2010;12(11):1046–1056.
 22. Butler JM, et al. Endothelial cells are essential for 
the self-renewal and repopulation of Notch-de-
pendent hematopoietic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 
2010;6(3):251–264.
 23. Poulos MG, et al. Endothelial Jagged-1 is neces-
sary for homeostatic and regenerative hemato-
poiesis. Cell Rep. 2013;4(5):1022–1034.
 24. Greenbaum A, et al. CXCL12 in early mes-
enchymal progenitors is required for hae-
matopoietic stem-cell maintenance. Nature. 
2013;495(7440):227–230.
 25. Himburg HA, et al. Pleiotrophin regulates the 
expansion and regeneration of hematopoietic 
stem cells. Nat Med. 2010;16(4):475–482.
 26. Donnini A, Re F, Orlando F, Provinciali M. 
Intrinsic and microenvironmental defects are 
involved in the age-related changes of Lin– c-kit+ 
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Rejuvenation Res. 
2007;10(4):459–472.
 27. Kusumbe AP, et al. Age-dependent modulation 
of vascular niches for haematopoietic stem cells. 
Nature. 2016;532(7599):380–384.
 28. Vas V, Senger K, Dörr K, Niebel A, Geiger 
H. Aging of the microenvironment influ-
ences clonality in hematopoiesis. PLoS One. 
2012;7(8):e42080.
 29. Vas V, Wandhoff C, Dörr K, Niebel A, Geiger H. 
Contribution of an aged microenvironment to 
aging-associated myeloproliferative disease. 
PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31523.
 30. Guidi N, et al. Osteopontin attenuates aging- 
associated phenotypes of hematopoietic stem 
cells. EMBO J. 2017;36(7):840–853.
 31. Claesson-Welsh L. Vascular permeability — the 
essentials. Ups J Med Sci. 2015;120(3):135–143.
 32. Pober JS, Sessa WC. Evolving functions of endo-
thelial cells in inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2007;7(10):803–815.
 33. Csiszar A, Wang M, Lakatta EG, Ungvari Z. 
Inflammation and endothelial dysfunction 
during aging: role of NF-κB. J Appl Physiol. 
2008;105(4):1333–1341.
 34. El Assar M, Angulo J, Rodríguez-Mañas L. Oxi-
dative stress and vascular inflammation in aging. 
Free Radic Biol Med. 2013;65:380–401.
 35. Mittal M, Siddiqui MR, Tran K, Reddy SP, Malik 
AB. Reactive oxygen species in inflamma-
tion and tissue injury. Antioxid Redox Signal. 
2014;20(7):1126–1167.
 36. Zhang C. The role of inflammatory cytokines 
in endothelial dysfunction. Basic Res Cardiol. 
2008;103(5):398–406.
 37. Poulos MG, et al. Vascular platform to define 
hematopoietic stem cell factors and enhance 
regenerative hematopoiesis. Stem Cell Reports. 
2015;5(5):881–894.
 38. Paneni F, Diaz Cañestro C, Libby P, Lüscher TF, 
Camici GG. The aging cardiovascular system: 
understanding it at the cellular and clinical lev-
els. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69(15):1952–1967.
 39. Tian XL, Li Y. Endothelial cell senescence and 
age-related vascular diseases. J Genet Genomics. 
2014;41(9):485–495.
 40. Brandes RP, Fleming I, Busse R. Endothelial 
aging. Cardiovasc Res. 2005;66(2):286–294.
 41. Tuljapurkar SR, et al. Changes in human bone 
marrow fat content associated with changes in 
hematopoietic stem cell numbers and cytokine 
levels with aging. J Anat. 2011;219(5):574–581.
 42. Latchney SE, Calvi LM. The aging hema-
topoietic stem cell niche: Phenotypic and 
functional changes and mechanisms that con-
tribute to hematopoietic aging. Semin Hematol. 
2017;54(1):25–32.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 1 7 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 11   November 2017
 43. Poulos MG, et al. Endothelial-specific inhibition 
of NF-κB enhances functional haematopoiesis. 
Nat Commun. 2016;7:13829.
 44. Chute JP, et al. Transplantation of vascular endo-
thelial cells mediates the hematopoietic recovery 
and survival of lethally irradiated mice. Blood. 
2007;109(6):2365–2372.
 45. Salter AB, et al. Endothelial progenitor cell infu-
sion induces hematopoietic stem cell reconstitu-
tion in vivo. Blood. 2009;113(9):2104–2107.
 46. Montfort MJ, Olivares CR, Mulcahy JM, Fleming 
WH. Adult blood vessels restore host hemato-
poiesis following lethal irradiation. Exp Hematol. 
2002;30(8):950–956.
 47. Balducci L. Myelosuppression and its conse-
quences in elderly patients with cancer. Oncology 
(Williston Park, NY). 2003;17(11 suppl 11):27–32.
 48. Till JE, McCulloch EA. A direct measurement of 
the radiation sensitivity of normal mouse bone 
marrow cells. Radiat Res. 1961;14:213–222.
 49. Li XM, Hu Z, Jorgenson ML, Wingard JR, Slay-
ton WB. Bone marrow sinusoidal endothelial 
cells undergo nonapoptotic cell death and are 
replaced by proliferating sinusoidal cells in situ 
to maintain the vascular niche following lethal 
irradiation. Exp Hematol. 2008;36(9):1143–1156.
 50. Hooper AT, et al. Engraftment and reconstitution 
of hematopoiesis is dependent on VEGFR2- 
mediated regeneration of sinusoidal endothelial 
cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2009;4(3):263–274.
 51. Ergen AV, Boles NC, Goodell MA. Rantes/
Ccl5 influences hematopoietic stem cell sub-
types and causes myeloid skewing. Blood. 
2012;119(11):2500–2509.
 52. Li B, Bailey AS, Jiang S, Liu B, Goldman DC, 
Fleming WH. Endothelial cells mediate the 
regeneration of hematopoietic stem cells. Stem 
Cell Res. 2010;4(1):17–24.
 53. Wong AK, Llanos P, Boroda N, Rosenberg SR, 
Rabbany SY. A parallel-plate flow chamber for 
mechanical characterization of endothelial cells 
exposed to laminar shear stress. Cell Mol Bioeng. 
2016;9(1):127–138.
 54. Spandidos A, Wang X, Wang H, Dragnev S, 
Thurber T, Seed B. A comprehensive collection of 
experimentally validated primers for Polymerase 
Chain Reaction quantitation of murine transcript 
abundance. BMC Genomics. 2008;9:633.
 55. Spandidos A, Wang X, Wang H, Seed B. Prim-
erBank: a resource of human and mouse PCR 
primer pairs for gene expression detection and 
quantification. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010;38(Data-
base issue):D792–D799.
 56. Wang X, Seed B. A PCR primer bank for quanti-
tative gene expression analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2003;31(24):e154.
 57. Hu Y, Smyth GK. ELDA: extreme limiting dilution 
analysis for comparing depleted and enriched 
populations in stem cell and other assays.  
J Immunol Methods. 2009;347(1–2):70–78.
