 Risk Analysis
DOI: 10.1111/risa.12625
Total Economic Consequences of an Influenza Outbreak
in the United States
Fynnwin Prager,1,2,∗ Dan Wei,2,3 and Adam Rose2,4
Pandemic influenza represents a serious threat not only to the population of the United
States, but also to its economy. In this study, we analyze the total economic consequences
of potential influenza outbreaks in the United States for four cases based on the distinctions
between disease severity and the presence/absence of vaccinations. The analysis is based on
data and parameters on influenza obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and the
general literature. A state-of-the-art economic impact modeling approach, computable gen-
eral equilibrium, is applied to analyze a wide range of potential impacts stemming from the
outbreaks. This study examines the economic impacts from changes in medical expenditures
and workforce participation, and also takes into consideration different types of avoidance
behavior and resilience actions not previously fully studied. Our results indicate that, in the
absence of avoidance and resilience effects, a pandemic influenza outbreak could result in
a loss in U.S. GDP of $25.4 billion, but that vaccination could reduce the losses to $19.9
billion. When behavioral and resilience factors are taken into account, a pandemic influenza
outbreak could result in GDP losses of $45.3 billion without vaccination and $34.4 billion
with vaccination. These results indicate the importance of including a broader set of causal
factors to achieve more accurate estimates of the total economic impacts of not just pandemic
influenza but biothreats in general. The results also highlight a number of actionable items
that government policymakers and public health officials can use to help reduce potential
economic losses from the outbreaks.
KEY WORDS: Avoidance behavior; computable general equilibrium analysis; macroeconomic conse-
quences; pandemic influenza; resilience
1. INTRODUCTION
Influenza pandemics represent a serious threat
to the U.S. population and economy. The in-
1College of Business Administration and Public Policy, California
State University, Carson, CA, USA.
2Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events
(CREATE) Homeland Security Center, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
3Sol Price School of Public Policy, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
4Sol Price School of Public Policy, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
∗Address correspondence to Fynnwin Prager, 1000 E Victoria
St., Carson, CA 90747, USA; fprager@csudh.edu, fynnprager@
gmail.com.
fluenza virus can cause symptoms ranging from mild
common-cold-like conditions through to severe con-
ditions such as nausea, vomiting, and even death. In-
fluenza spreads through personal contact, and hence
can travel swiftly across trade routes and between
countries. The United States is hence particularly
vulnerable due to the global reach of its economy and
residents. Unlike seasonal influenza, influenza pan-
demics pose a particular threat because, due to their
rarity, most people have little immunity to them, and
medical communities are generally forced to be re-
active rather than proactive in their efforts to de-
velop and administer vaccines across large popula-
tions. Moreover, while seasonal influenza outbreaks
tend to pose the greatest threat to infants and the
1
0272-4332/16/0100-0001$22.00/1 C
� 2016 Society for Risk Analysis
 2
Prager, Wei, and Rose
elderly, influenza pandemics are of particular con-
cern because young and healthy individuals are more
likely to contract and die from the disease.
The scale of impact is of most concern. Recent
influenza pandemics have killed significant numbers
of people worldwide, including H1N1, which con-
tributed to an estimated 8,870–18,300 deaths in 2009–
2010.(1) However, this is relatively small compared
to the major historical influenza outbreaks, including
the Russian Flu of 1889–1890, which killed an esti-
mated 1 million,(2) and the 1918 Flu in the United
States, which resulted in an estimated 20–100 mil-
lion deaths.(3) Such dramatic figures contribute to
major societal and governmental responses. Health
providers can be overwhelmed, both in terms of vac-
cine and care provision. Restriction on travel and
public gatherings, closures of businesses, schools, and
other public spaces, and workforce participation re-
ductions due to personal illness or caring for family
members are just some of the responses that can have
major economic consequences.
We
use
a
computable
general
equilibrium
(CGE) model to estimate the economic conse-
quences of influenza outbreaks. CGE is the state-
of-the-art approach for analyzing total economic im-
pacts of natural disasters, technological accidents,
terrorist attacks, and other threats. It has been suc-
cessfully applied to biothreats previously by mem-
bers of the research team.(4,5,7) CGE analysis has
also proven effective at modeling the two ma-
jor consequence types that have the greatest in-
fluence on our results—resilience(8,9) and behav-
ioral responses.(10,11) This analysis makes use of the
USCGE Model, which has been applied successfully
in previous studies of the economic consequences of
a broad range of disasters and countermeasures(10,12)
as well as related studies on travel behavior.(13) The
general modeling approach is similar to that of Dixon
et al.(5) as it captures the impact of changes in medical
expenditures, workforce participation, economic re-
silience, and avoidance behavior (related to interna-
tional and domestic tourism and leisure activities, ed-
ucation attendance, and public transportation use);
however, we include a broader range of consequence
types and complicating factors.
Our analysis is based on data and parameters
on influenza obtained from the Centers for Disease
Control and the general literature(14–18) and pub-
lished data on travel expenditures (see the Appendix
for a detailed discussion of all parameter values
used). We simulate both seasonal and pandemic
influenza outbreaks, compare the impact of vaccina-
tions on each, and perform various sensitivity tests.
Our results indicate that, in the absence of avoid-
ance and resilience effects, a pandemic influenza
outbreak could result in a loss in U.S. GDP of
$25.4 billion, but that vaccination could reduce the
losses to $19.9 billion. Avoidance impacts on the
downside are much greater than partially offsetting
resilience impacts on the upside. When these two fac-
tors are taken into account, the results for a pandemic
influenza outbreak could result in a loss in U.S. GDP
of $45.3 billion without vaccination and $34.4 billion
with vaccination. Thus, the total economic impacts
are nearly twice as large as those typically measured
in other studies that do not consider all of the avoid-
ance behavior and resilience included in our analysis.
This article identifies and estimates many of
the types of economic consequences associated
with pandemic events and adapts an advanced
macroeconomic model for the analysis. We estimate
the relative prominence of the various economic
consequence types and some complicating factors,
many of which have not been included in any prior
study, to illustrate the importance of a more com-
prehensive framework for accurately measuring the
macroeconomic impacts of biothreats. The modeling
in this article can be generalized to address other bio-
threats. The study is part of an endeavor to develop
an enhanced decision-support capability for the U.S.
National Biosurveillance Integration Center (NBIC).
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
The vast majority of the literature on the eco-
nomics of pandemic influenza focuses on direct im-
pacts such as vaccinations, hospitalizations, illnesses,
deaths, and business revenue or profit losses from
reduced workforce.5 Meltzer et al.(19) estimated the
5Direct impacts, also referred to as partial equilibrium effects, re-
fer to the elements of the economy immediately influenced by
the change in question. An influenza outbreak causes illness and
death, both of which directly impact the labor market. Direct re-
sponses to such labor market changes could include input substi-
tution away from labor by individual businesses. In contrast, indi-
rect effects refer to the consequential economic changes caused
by direct responses, such as effects outside a single market,
or through multiplier effects. To continue the example, the in-
creased cost of production from the input substitution will lower
the demand for each affected business’s products, which will have
the initial indirect effect of causing each of them to lower their
demand for other inputs, and this process will continue up the
supply chain as further rounds of indirect effects.
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
3
potential economic impacts of pandemic influenza in
the United States using a Monte Carlo mathematical
simulation model. The categories of impacts evalu-
ated in the study include medical cost, value of lost
lives, value of lost workdays, and net cost of vacci-
nation. The study estimated that the total economic
losses of a pandemic influenza in the United States
would be between $90 and $220 billion (in 2012
dollars), of which over 80% would come from loss
of life (measured as present value of expected future
lifetime earnings). The study did not analyze the
general equilibrium impacts of these direct impacts,
nor the resilience and behavioral impacts.
Many studies have analyzed the cost effec-
tiveness of vaccination. Meltzer et al.(19) and Prosser
et al.(20) indicated that the cost effectiveness of
vaccination depends on various factors, including the
gross attack rate of the influenza, vaccination cost,
population coverage, and vaccination effectiveness
rate. The sensitivity analyses in Prosser et al.(20)
also highlighted several other important factors that
affect the cost effectiveness of vaccination, which
include the number of vaccine doses required and
timing of vaccine delivery. The study found that in
general the H1N1 vaccination is cost effective for
children and young adults. This result also supports
the target group recommendations in the H1N1
vaccination distribution.
Using a stochastic agent-based model, Sander
et al.(21) conducted an evaluation of potential eco-
nomic impact of various mitigation strategies of pan-
demic influenza. In the absence of any intervention,
the study estimated that a pandemic with a 50%
attack rate can result in $187 per capita losses to
the economy. Although all of the three evaluated
mitigation strategies—targeted antiviral prophylaxis
(TAP), prevaccination, and school closure—can ef-
fectively reduce the total numbers of clinic cases,
TAP incurs the lowest cost to society, while school
closures result in the highest cost.
The
consequences
of
influenza
outbreaks,
as well as most other disasters, are complicated
by two major factors—resilience and behavioral
responses.(22)
Several
tactics
can
promote
eco-
nomic resilience to disasters, defined in this study
as utilizing remaining resources as efficiently as
possible to maintain functionality and dampen busi-
ness interruption (BI) losses in the aftermath of a
disaster.(8,22) However, several of these tactics are
inoperative or minimal in the case of influenza.
Substitution of other factors of production, such as
capital for labor, is likely to be minimal in the short
run. Excess capacity, in this case unemployed labor,
exists but is likely to be minimally accessed given
the very short-run nature of individual absenteeism.
Enhanced productivity of the healthy workforce is
possible, but no reliable statistics exist on this tactic.
Hence, we will confine our analysis to the major
operative
tactic—“production
recapture,”
which
refers to the ability to make up lost production by
working overtime or extra shifts as the workforce
returns to normal. No studies to date, with the
exception of Santos et al.(23) to be discussed below,
have addressed resilience in this context.
Behavioral responses refer to departures from
normal or routine conduct because of the disaster.
Foremost is the fear that stems from the social am-
plification of risk(11,24) and stigma effects.(25) In the
case of pandemics, the former are the most opera-
tive given the short-run nature of the disaster. This
primarily takes the form of “avoidance behavior,” or
minimizing close contact with other people, such as
using alternatives to public transportation, shunning
public gatherings, reductions in tourism or business
travels, staying home from work, and keeping chil-
dren home from school. Several studies have incor-
porated a limited number of these effects into their
analysis.(5,20,26,27) In our study, we analyze them all.
One other notable limitation in much of the
literature is the lack of consideration of economy-
wide impacts. These are termed multiplier, general
equilibrium, or macroeconomic impacts depending
on the level of sophistication of the model.6 In
general, they measure how the direct effects of
the pandemic ripple through the economy and cause
aggregate economic consequences of some multiple
of the direct effects. Several modeling approaches
can be used for this type of analysis. The most basic
is input–output (I–O) analysis, which is typically
a static, linear model of all purchases and sales
between sectors of an economy, based on the tech-
nological relations of production.(28) The basic I–O
model is limited because it lacks behavioral content,
omits price–quantity interactions, and does not allow
for substitution among inputs. Still, I–O can be ef-
fective in providing major insights into some aspects
of influenza consequences. Santos et al.(22) utilize the
dynamic interoperability I–O model to analyze the
impacts of a hypothetical influenza pandemic (we
use some of the same CDC data sources, yet an up-
dated version). This approach reveals how economic
6These concepts all relate to the combination of direct and indirect
impacts discussed above.
 4
Prager, Wei, and Rose
productivity losses (reduced workforce participa-
tion) and recovery affect the time path of impacts.
The I–O framework is able to capture the cascad-
ing economic effects of supply-chain interactions.
Santos and colleagues’ approach uses a combination
of demand-side and supply-side I–O modeling to
capture these interactions, but the CGE approach
to be discussed below is much more adept at doing
so. Resilience is included in relation to the recovery
of individual sectors. While this offers a valuable
general framework, it does not provide any resilience
tactics per se, apart from simply the survivors of the
pandemic returning to work. In addition, there is
no inclusion of any avoidance behavior. The Santos
et al.(22) study makes an additional contribution by
couching the analysis in a risk management frame-
work to examine the tradeoffs between minimizing
sectoral inoperability and minimizing economic loss.
Santos et al.(29) advance some of the former study
features with more detail and illustrations.
A major alternative approach is CGE analysis.
This refers to a multimarket model of the behavioral
responses of individual producers and consumers to
changes in prices, technology, and external shocks
within the limits of capital, labor, and natural
resources.(28) Like I–O, it models the economy as
a set of interconnected supply chains. However, it
overcomes the major limitations of I–O by being
nonlinear, infusing behavioral content into the
model, incorporating the role of prices and markets,
and explicitly taking account of input constraints.
Dixon et al.(5) utilize a dynamic CGE model to an-
alyze the macroeconomic impacts of a hypothetical
H1N1 epidemic in the United States. As with the
Santos model, the dynamic CGE approach is able
to trace the time path of the macroeconomic conse-
quences of the epidemic, but in this case goes further
to be able to trace the cyclical variations that take
place because of investment and employment cycles
for a few years after the epidemic has ceased. How-
ever, other than some inherent resilience relating
to input substitution and consumer spending sub-
stitution, the model does not include any resilience
effects. As to avoidance behavior, it is limited only
to international travel. Verikios et al.(27) perform a
similar study using a dynamic CGE model for the
Australian economy, again with similar limitations
regarding the breadth of causal factors. Note that
the emphasis of these two CGE-based studies differs
from ours: for them the time path is of preeminent
concern, while our study focuses on a broader set of
causal factors and their influence on the bottom-line
annual impacts. The results of these studies are pre-
sented in comparison with those of our own below.
3. SCENARIOS
We analyze the economic impacts of two in-
fluenza outbreak scenarios: a Seasonal Outbreak
scenario and a Pandemic Outbreak scenario (see
the Appendix for the health outcome parameters
used). For both scenarios, vaccinations reduce the
overall spread of the virus, and hence are expected to
reduce the magnitude of overall economic impacts.
This study, therefore, simulates four cases, as shown
in Table I, based on distinctions between disease
severity and the presence/absence of vaccinations:
(1) Case 1: No Vaccination, Seasonal Outbreak.
(2) Case 2: No Vaccination, Pandemic Outbreak.
(3) Case 3: Vaccination, Seasonal Outbreak.
(4) Case 4: Vaccination, Pandemic Outbreak.
In terms of workforce participation and medical
expenditures, vaccinations would cause fewer initial
cases of infection, consequentially reduce illnesses
and death, and thus lead to reduced absenteeism and
medical expenditures. On the other hand, vaccina-
tion would incur medical costs associated with its
production and dispensing, and will result in some
lost work hours due to time spent on travel, waiting,
and receiving the vaccination. Moreover, the impacts
of vaccination would not be proportional (e.g., half
the number of infections would not lead to half the
medical expenditures) for the following reasons:
(1) Models of flu outbreaks are nonlinear, such
that more severe outbreaks would lead to
a higher proportion of hospitalizations and
deaths.
(2) Vaccinations will have economic impacts, in
terms of increased medical expenditures and
the reduced workforce participation for work-
ers to receive vaccinations.
(3) Avoidance behavior is unlikely to be perfectly
linearly correlated with the outbreak severity.
4. MODELING APPROACHES FOR
INDIVIDUAL IMPACT CATEGORIES
Table I summarizes the modeling approaches
and direct impact values used to simulate the total
economic impacts of the influenza outbreaks. Each
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
5
Table I. Modeling Approaches and Direct Impacts of an Influenza Outbreak (2012 $)
USCGE Modeling
Scenario
Impact Category
Approach
Case
Level Impact
% Impact
Workforce participation
Reduction in labor workforce
participation
WP-1
−18.7Ma
−0.065%
WP-2
−83.3Ma
−0.393%
WP-3
−20.7Ma
−0.067%
WP-4
−68.5Ma
−0.311%
Medical expenditures
Increase household spending on
medical services
ME-1
$5.92B
0.342%
ME-2
$81.18B
4.692%
ME-3
$9.96Bb
0.576%
ME-4
$65.59Bc
3.791%
Avoidance behavior
Staying home from work
(reduction in labor workforce
participation)
AB/WPA-1
−$3.27B
−0.038%
AB/WPA-2
−$10.75B
−0.125%
AB/WPA-3
−$2.41B
−0.028%
AB/WPA-4
−$8.09B
−0.094%
Keeping children from school
(reduction in attendance of
educational facilities)
AB/E-1
−$0.30B
−0.083%
AB/E-2
−$0.60B
−0.167%
AB/E-3
−$0.23B
−0.063%
AB/E-4
−$0.45B
−0.125%
Keeping children from school
(caregiver avoidance; reduction
in labor workforce
participation)
AB/WPB-1
−$0.52B
−0.006%
AB/WPB-2
−$1.03B
−0.012%
AB/WPB-3
−$0.34B
−0.004%
AB/WPB-4
−$0.77B
−0.009%
Reduction in inbound
international travel (via
exports)
AB/II-1
−$1.95B
−2.425%
AB/II-2
−$15.93B
−19.833%
AB/II-3
−$1.46B
−1.819%
AB/II-4
−$11.94B
−14.875%
Reduction in outbound
international travel
AB/OI-1
−$0.96B
−2.425%
11AB/OI-2
−$7.89B
−19.833%
AB/OI-3
−$0.72B
−1.819%
AB/OI-4
−$5.92B
−14.875%
Reduction in domestic
travel/leisure activities
AB/DT-1
−$0.42B
−0.063%
AB/DT-2
−$20.72B
−3.125%
AB/DT-3
−$0.31B
−0.047%
AB/DT-4
−$15.54B
−2.344%
Reduction in public
transportation use
AB/T-1
−$3.77M
−0.063%
AB/T-2
−$187.12M
−3.125%
AB/T-3
−$2.81M
−0.047%
AB/T-4
−$140.36M
−2.344%
Economic resilience
Recapture production through
overtime or extra shifts
ER-1
7.5Ma
0.039%
ER-2
33.3Ma
0.236%
ER-3
8.3Ma
0.040%
ER-4
27.4Ma
0.187%
aThis represents workforce participation reductions through illness only; yet reductions due to deaths are also included in this CGE shock.
bThis comprises $5.5B due to the virus and $4.46B due to the vaccine.
cThis comprises $60.7B due to the virus and $4.89B due to the vaccine.
modeling element is discussed in detail in the follow-
ing sections.
4.1. Workforce Participation
Labor supply decreases following an influenza
outbreak due to deaths, illness, medication, and
avoidance behavior. Reduced workforce partici-
pation is estimated on the basis of disease spread
scenarios and the associated absenteeism due to
personal and familial illness. Although not captured
here, absenteeism simulations would also include
the influence of school closures and so-called pro-
phylaxis absenteeism (another form of avoidance
behavior), whereby individuals stay at home to avoid
catching or transmitting the virus.
Direct impact estimates are drawn from cal-
culations of various parameters presented in the
Appendix. Updating Dixon et al.(5) the 150 million
workers in the United States contribute 240 days in
 6
Prager, Wei, and Rose
each year period. For example, this implies a 18.7 ×
100/(150 × 240) = 0.052% reduction in labor inputs
for the 12-month period of Case 1 (No Vaccination,
Seasonal Outbreak) scenario.7
Labor supply is represented in the USCGE
model as a factor input to the production function
for each sector. One challenge here is that the labor
and capital factor supply elements are related to ac-
count balances, or “closure rule” conditions.8 In this
case, we use a short-run closure rule, whereby wages
are held constant (or “sticky”) yet labor supply is
variable. In parallel, capital supply is fixed while the
price of capital is variable. This implies that any ex-
ternal shock to the labor supply—such as the reduc-
tion due to death, illness, or other forms of workplace
absenteeism—causes an imbalance in the labor mar-
ket, or unemployment.
4.2. Medical Expenditures
Medical
expenditures
increase
following
an
influenza outbreak, and are modeled by increasing
household spending on healthcare to the direct
impact levels presented in Table I, which are
drawn from calculations of Seasonal and Pandemic
Outbreak parameters presented in Appendix A1.
Medical expenditures will increase when individuals
are infected by the influenza, but also when they
receive vaccinations. Increasing household expen-
ditures on healthcare mean that households have
less money to spend on other goods such as housing,
power, and transportation. As such, any overall eco-
nomic impacts of increases in medical expenditures
are expected to be muted by household consumption
substitutions away from all other goods, and hence
reduced production in all nonhealth sectors.
4.3. Avoidance Behavior
Following a major influenza outbreak, it is likely
that individuals would avoid activities and locations
due to the fear of catching the virus. International
and domestic tourism and leisure activities are an-
7This percentage reduction is different from that presented in Ta-
ble I. The figure described in Table I also includes workforce
reductions due to deaths, thus increasing the magnitude of the
shock to labor force from −0.052% to −0.065%.
8Closure rules are a fundamental concept in CGE modeling. They
refer to account balances and ensure that the number of inde-
pendent equations and endogenous variables are equal within the
model. Different closure rules can be used to represent different
market conditions relevant to the particular research question.
ticipated to decrease as individuals from the United
States and abroad engage in avoidance behavior.
These include reductions in foreigner tourism to the
United States, reductions in U.S. residents’ travel
abroad,9 reductions in U.S. domestic tourism and
leisure activity spending by households, businesses’
and government, reductions in public transportation
use, and reductions in attendance of educational fa-
cilities. For further discussion of these modeling ele-
ments, please see corollaries in a recent Customs and
Border Protection (CBP) Office of Field Operations
(OFO) airline wait times study.(13)
4.3.1. Reductions in International Travel—Inbound
and Outbound
Direct impacts for these cases reflect similar sce-
narios developed in the Dixon et al.(5) and Verikios
et al.(27) study of the Australian H1N1 outbreak.
While those two studies use a dynamic CGE model,
the USCGE is comparatively static; hence, we
convert the Verikios et al.(27) dynamic avoidance
behavior impacts to static parameter estimates
applied in the USCGE model (see Table AXX for
further details). Verikios et al.(27) assume that a “non-
pandemic” influenza outbreak would reduce inbound
and outbound international tourism by 7.9% in the
first quarter, 1.2% in the second quarter, and that it
would steadily return to baseline level over the next
two periods. We have assumed that the baseline level
is achieved in the fourth quarter. Verikios et al.(27)
take a similar approach in the Pandemic Influenza
Outbreak equivalent, with the return to baseline
level at an even rate over four quarters. We have
assumed that the baseline level is reached in the sixth
quarter. We have adjusted the impacts in Q1 and Q2
assumed by Verikios et al.(27)—65% reductions in in-
ternational tourism—down to the 34% level assumed
by Dixon et al.(5) We further assume that reductions
for the vaccinations cases (Cases 3 and 4), whether
during a seasonal or pandemic outbreak, are 75% of
the reductions for the equivalent “no vaccination”
cases (Cases 1 and 2; see detailed discussions on the
difference in avoidance behaviors between vaccina-
tion and no vaccination cases in Section 4.3.3).
Inbound international travel. Reductions in in-
ternational travel estimated are converted to sec-
9Aircrafts are viewed by many to be conduits for the spread
of disease given the close quarters and recirculated air; hence,
even U.S. residents traveling overseas will engage in avoidance
behavior.
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
7
toral impacts using calculations from the CBP OFO
study.(13) In 2012, there was an estimated total of
$80.3 billion spent by foreign tourists in the United
States.(30) Therefore, the Seasonal and Pandemic
Outbreak cases would result in reductions in for-
eign tourist spending of $1.9 billion and $15.9 billion,
respectively. This element of avoidance behavior is
simulated by reducing “exports” for sectors in which
foreign tourists spend money in the United States,
based on values from a related study of tourist be-
havior presented in Table AXXI.
Outbound international travel. It is assumed that
the only domestic sector negatively impacted by re-
ductions in outbound international travel is the U.S.
airline travel industry. While there would be other
sectors negatively impacted by U.S. residents travel-
ing abroad (for business or leisure purposes), such as
travel agents, local private and public transit, park-
ing, and hotels, the proportions of these sectors im-
pacted are likely to be minimal compared with the
impact to the air transport sector. In 2012, U.S. resi-
dents traveling abroad for leisure and business spent
$39.8 billion on air fares. For the Seasonal Outbreak
(Cases 1 and 3), −2.43% equates to a -$2.0 billion
“shock” to air transport output, while for the Pan-
demic Outbreak (Cases 2 and 4), −19.83% equates
to -$7.9 billion to air transport output. This is simu-
lated by adjusting the productivity factor of the air
transport sector to capture a reduction in output.
4.3.2. Domestic Tourism and Leisure Spending
We assume a 10% reduction in domestic tourism
and leisure spending from the Dixon et al.(5) study.
We further assume that reductions for the vaccina-
tions cases (Cases 3 and 4), whether during a Sea-
sonal or Pandemic Outbreak, are 75% of the re-
ductions for the equivalent “no vaccination” cases
(Cases 1 and 2). It is also assumed that reductions for
the Seasonal Outbreak are one-half of the reductions
for the Pandemic Outbreak.
Domestic tourism and leisure spending is broken
into three components: (1) resident households,
(2) business, and (3) government. The reduction of
resident household spending on domestic tourism
and leisure is simulated through the household
expenditure function, as it is with the medical expen-
diture simulations above. These shocks are grouped
together for the sector commodities presented in
Table AXXII, according to their respective house-
hold commodity groupings, i.e., food (−0.60%),
gasoline
(−3.21%),
other
household
services
(−0.51%), other transport (−5.08%), and light tran-
sit (−5.57%). The reduction in business spending
on domestic tourism and leisure is implemented by
“shocking” (simulating an exogenous expenditure
change) the level of sales of the relevant sector
commodities to all sector purchasers, by the values
presented in Table AXXII. The reduction in govern-
ment spending on domestic tourism and leisure is
implemented by shocking government expenditures
in the model according to the levels stated in Table
AXXII.
4.3.3. Other Avoidance Behaviors
Table II presents the assumptions we used
regarding other types of avoidance behaviors. These
assumptions are based on a synthesis of the literature
that is summarized in detail in Tables AXVIII and
AXIX. The first column of Table II lists the various
relevant types of avoidance behavior in response to
influenza outbreaks. The second and third columns
show the percent of people who would undertake the
avoidance responses in the Seasonal and Pandemic
scenarios (without vaccination), respectively. We use
the upper-bound values from Table A XIX for the
Pandemic scenario and the lower-bound values for
the Seasonal scenario. The duration of avoidance is
also presented in these two columns. In the next two
columns, we translate the avoidance assumptions
into direct impacts we can use as inputs in the
CGE simulations. In the following four columns, we
made two additional adjustments. First, we scaled
down estimates based on adjusting stated preference
responses in the literature to be consistent with
actual behavior. The survey results from Bults
et al.(29) indicate that the revealed (actual) avoidance
behaviors are only about 10% of people’s stated
preference. Therefore, we multiplied the numbers
in columns 4 and 5 of Table I by 10% to obtain the
CGE simulation inputs for nonvaccination cases. As
for the vaccination cases, due to a lack of empirical
evidence in the literature with respect to the impact
of vaccinations on public behaviors during influenza
outbreaks, we invoke findings on the social amplifi-
cation of risk (see, e.g., Pidgeon and Kasperson(37)),
which infer public behaviors are largely influenced
by media reports of hospitalizations and deaths. We
found that, on average, vaccination can help reduce
the numbers of hospitalization and death by about
25% in each case. Therefore, we reduce the percent
of avoidance in the nonvaccination cases by 25% for
each corresponding vaccination case.
 8
Prager, Wei, and Rose
Table II. Magnitude and Length of Avoidance Behaviors in Response to Influenza Outbreaks
Adapted Values Used in the Analysis
Literature Review
Direct Impacts Adapted
Findingsa
from the Literature
Nonvaccinationc
Vaccinationd
Avoidance
Seasonal
Pandemicb
Seasonal
Pandemic
Seasonal
Pandemic
Seasonal
Pandemic
CGE Model
Responses
Influenza
Outbreak
Influenza
Outbreak
Influenza
Outbreak
Influenza
Outbreak
Linkage
Staying home from
work
30% avoid, 3 days
60% avoid, 1 week
−0.375%
−1.250%
−0.038%
−0.125%
−0.028%
−0.094%
Labor reduction
Keeping children
from school
(education sector
impacts)
50% avoid, 3 days
60% avoid, 1 week
−0.833%
−1.667%
−0.083%
−0.167%
−0.063%
−0.125%
Reduced
compensation
from
government to
education sector
Keeping children
from school
(caregiver
avoidance)
50% avoid, 3 days
60% avoid, 1 week
−0.625%d
−1.250%e
−0.006%
−0.012%
−0.004%
−0.009%
Reduced
workforce
participation to
care for
childrene
Avoiding medical
professionals
22% avoid, 3 days
22% avoid, 1 month
−0.275%
−1.833%
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
No economic
impact; assumed
only to defer
spending
Reducing shopping
69% avoid, 3 days
69% avoid, 1 month
−0.863%
−5.750%
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
No economic
impact; assumed
that online
shopping and
deferred
activities would
recapture any
reductions
(Continued)
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
9
Table II. Continued
Adapted Values Used in the Analysis
Literature Review
Direct Impacts Adapted
Findingsa
from the Literature
Nonvaccinationc
Vaccinationd
Avoidance
Seasonal
Pandemicb
Seasonal
Pandemic
Seasonal
Pandemic
Seasonal
Pandemic
CGE Model
Responses
Influenza
Outbreak
Influenza
Outbreak
Influenza
Outbreak
Influenza
Outbreak
Linkage
Avoiding
entertainment
venues
10% avoid, 3 weeks
75% avoid, 5 months
−0.625%
−31.250%
−0.063%
−3.125%
−0.047%
−2.344%
Reduced in
domestic
travel/leisure
sector
Avoiding public
transportation
10% avoid, 3 weeks
75% avoid, 5 months
−0.625%
−31.250%
–0.063%
−3.125%
−0.047%
−2.344%
Reduced in public
transportation
sector
Rescheduling travel
plans
1% avoid, 5 months
16% avoid, 5 months
−0.417%
−6.667%
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Subsumed under
international
travel
Sources: Bults et al.,(31) Cowling et al.,(32) Del Valle et al.,(33) Kok et al.,(34) Sadique et al.,(35) and Smith et al.(36)
aWe refer the readers to Table AXVIII for the data sources for each specific parameter presented in this table.
bAll figures of one week or longer pertain only to workdays during that period.
cScaled-down estimates based on adjusting stated preference responses in the literature appear to be consistent with revealed (actual) behavior (10% of stated preference values;
see Bults et al.(29)).
dVaccination avoidance behavioral responses are assumed to be 25% lower than nonvaccination avoidance behavioral responses. Due to a lack of empirical evidence in the literature
with respect to the impact of vaccinations on public behaviors during influenza outbreaks, we invoke findings on the social amplification of risk (see, e.g., Pidgeon al.(37)), which
infer public behaviors are largely influenced by media reports of hospitalizations and deaths, both of which are 25% lower for the nonvaccination cases.
eThese numbers differ from the row above because the denominators are different (180 school days per year vs. 240 workdays per year).
fThe figures used in the analysis for caregiver avoidance are scaled down from child avoidance used in the row above to account for the fact that 37% of the population does not
have children in the household, 40% of the population does not work, half of the remaining families would still have at least one parent continue work, and half of those would have
assistance from family or neighbors.
 10
Prager, Wei, and Rose
4.4. Economic Resilience
4.4.1. Economic Resilience, Production Recapture
Lost production from labor supply reduction due
to illness could be recaptured later in the year by
working overtime or extra shifts. According to the
FEMA(38) HAZUS-MH loss estimation model, pro-
duction recapture can reduce 80–90% of the BI
losses if the disruption occurs within three months.
The production recapture potentials decline as time
passes, so we assume that the recapture factors are
reduced by 25 percentage points for each of the
subsequent three-month periods.(39) A pandemic in-
fluenza outbreak could last for over six months, im-
plying that 40% of BI losses could be reduced with
production recapture. These are applied to total im-
pacts.
5. CGE ANALYSIS
CGE analysis is the state-of-the-art approach to
macroeconomic simulation modeling. It is a multi-
market model of the behavioral responses of individ-
ual producers and consumers to changes in prices,
technology, taxes, and other external shocks, sub-
ject to the constraints on capital, labor, and natu-
ral resources.(40) Essentially, CGE characterizes the
economy as a set of integrated supply chains. It repre-
sents a significant advance over its predecessor, I–O
analysis, by maintaining I–O model strengths (full ac-
counting of all inputs, multisector detail, and focus on
interdependencies, and overcoming the limitations of
linearity, lack of behavioral content, and omission of
markets and prices).(28) CGE models have been used
extensively to model various types of biothreats,(7),
including influenza(5,27), and disasters in general.(41)
The USCGE model was developed by Oladosu
and Rose for environmental policy analysis(42) and
for terrorism consequence analysis.(10) The USCGE
model consists of 58 producing sectors, along with
multiple institutions: nine household income groups,
three government actors (two federal and one state
and local), and external agents (i.e., foreign pro-
ducers). The USCGE model represents production
activities as a series of nested constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) functions. International trade
is represented through an Armington substitution
function between imports and domestic production.
A constant elasticity of transformation function
represents the substitution between exports and
domestic sales. Input and import substitution elas-
ticity values have been sourced and checked against
the
literature
on
these
parameters.
Household
consumption is represented by a linear expendi-
ture system of aggregate commodities. Data from
IMPLAN(43) form the core social accounting matrix
in the model, and the version of the model used
in this analysis is based on 2012 data for the U.S.
economy.
The USCGE model is subject to the standard
limitations of most CGE models. First, for the most
part, it assumes the economy is in equilibrium,
though we do incorporate disequilibrium in the la-
bor market (unemployment equilibrium). Second,
the model is static, so that it does not trace the
time path of impacts, including various economic
cycles associated with employment and investment
changes. Third, model construction is based on a
deterministic approach that uses a single base year
of data (in contrast to the superior approach of
econometric models, which use time-series data and
have goodness-of-fit measures). Fourth, CGE mod-
els, while somewhat standardized across the litera-
ture, do vary in terms of core equations, the struc-
ture of these equations, and the baseline data used,
as well as the specific assumptions that are employed
for each specific context being modeled. This raises
concerns that replication of results is only achievable
under similar assumptions. Moreover, uncertainties
of particular variables—especially the elasticity pa-
rameter values that enable substitutions between
different categories of goods and services—might be
amplified through interactions within the model, cre-
ating greater uncertainties around output variables.
Still, we consider CGE modeling to be the best
alternative. It has advantages over I–O that warrant
the additional complexity and expense. Sufficient
data do not typically exist to implement a complete
macroeconometric analysis of biothreats. Another
alternative
modeling
approach—agent—based
modeling—has proven effective in modeling various
micro-level impacts of biothreats, but is limited in its
ability to estimate macro-level impacts.
6. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
6.1. Direct Impacts
We now examine direct impacts of vaccination
and its cost effectiveness. For the Seasonal Outbreak
scenario, vaccination incurs overall higher medical
expenditures and more workday losses. However,
it can help reduce the public avoidance behaviors.
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
11
Vaccination reduces medical treatment expenditures
from $5.9 billion to $4.5 billion (a $1.4 billion re-
duction); however, vaccination itself incurs a medi-
cal cost of $4.5 billion. Vaccination reduces illness-
related workday losses from 18.7 million days to
13.9 million days (a reduction of 4.8 million days);
however, 6.7 million workdays are lost due to the
time that people spend obtaining vaccinations. It is
unclear how vaccination and the reduced outbreak
magnitude will affect the avoidance behavior for the
Seasonal Outbreak. By comparing the health out-
come results presented in Tables AII and AXII, we
found that on average vaccination can help reduce
the total numbers of hospitalization and death by
about 25% in each case. Therefore, we assume vac-
cination and reduced outbreak magnitude can re-
duce the avoidance behavior by about 25% (based
on the assumption that public avoidance behaviors
are largely influenced by media reports of hospital-
izations and deaths).
For the Pandemic Outbreak scenario, vac-
cination is cost effective from the direct impact
perspective. Vaccination reduces medical treatment
expenditures from $81.2 billion to $60.7 billion
(a $20.5 billion reduction); vaccination itself only
incurs a medical cost of $4.9 billion. Vaccination
reduces illness-related workday losses from 83.3
million days to 61.1 million days (a reduction of 22.2
million days); vaccination only causes 7.4 million
days of workday losses due to the time that people
spend on getting the vaccination doses. Similar to the
Seasonal Outbreak scenario, we assume vaccination
can reduce public avoidance behaviors by 25% in
Pandemic Outbreak scenario.
We note that vaccines may be in limited supply
for a pandemic flu compared with a seasonal flu.(40)
As such, our estimates present a lower bound of pos-
sible pandemic flu impacts. If we reduce the vaccina-
tion coverage of the pandemic scenario by 50%, med-
ical expenditures (including vaccination cost) will
increase by about 12.4%, while workday losses will
increase by about 10.8%. However, from the CGE
analysis in the next section, since the medical expen-
ditures incur overall positive impact while workday
losses incur negative impacts at the macrolevel,
changes in the direct impacts of these two effects
offset each other to some extent at the macrolevel.
Another uncertainty is vaccination effectiveness.
In the base case, we used an average of vaccination
effectiveness from the 2005–2006 season to the 2012–
2013 season for both of the two influenza outbreak
scenarios. If we use the vaccination effectiveness of
Table III. Influenza Outbreak Simulation Results: GDP Impacts
on the U.S. Economy (Billions of 2012 $)
No Vaccination
Vaccination
Results
Seasonal
Pandemic
Seasonal
Pandemic
GDP impacts
(without
avoidance and
without
resilience)a
−4.95
−25.40
−4.71
−19.94
Avoidanceb impacts
−6.19
−33.39
−4.59
−25.12
Resiliencec impacts
2.22
13.47
2.31
10.63
Summationd
−8.92
−45.32
−6.99
−34.43
aThis set of results includes reduced workforce participation due
to illness, death, caring for family, or vaccination as well as medical
expenditures.
bAvoidance is individuals avoiding a particular activity due to
fear of being infected. Here, avoidance includes five elements: re-
duced inbound international tourism; reduced outbound interna-
tional tourism; reduced domestic travel and tourism (including at-
tendance of public gatherings); reduced use of public transporta-
tion; and reduced attendance of public educational facilities.
cResilience refers to production recapture or the ability of U.S.
firms to work overtime or extra shifts to make up lost production.
dIncludes resilience.
the 2009–2010 (H1N1) season for the pandemic sce-
nario, and the average of the vaccination effective-
ness of the other seasons for the nonpandemic sce-
nario, the vaccination effectiveness will increase by
about 20% for the pandemic scenario and decrease
by less than 4% for the nonpandemic scenario com-
pared to the base case. The corresponding effects
onto the direct impacts are small: for the pandemic
scenario, the gross medical expenditures (including
vaccination costs) and the workday losses will in-
crease by 4.7% and 3.3%, respectively. For the non-
pandemic (seasonal) scenario, the gross medical ex-
penditures and the workday losses will increase by
0.6% and 0.8%, respectively.
Our findings that vaccination is cost effective
from the direct impact perspective for the pandemic
scenario remain the same in both of the above sensi-
tivity cases. In other words, vaccination reduces med-
ical expenditures and lowers workday losses for the
pandemic scenario.
6.2. Total (CGE) Impacts Overview
The overview of results presented in Table III
indicates that vaccinations can result in significant
economic savings under both Seasonal and Pandemic
scenarios. The results follow intuition that the Pan-
demic Outbreaks are the most negatively impactful
 12
Prager, Wei, and Rose
to national GDP, while vaccinations soften this im-
pact in both cases. Hence, Case 2 (Pandemic, No
Vaccination) has the largest negative impacts, while
Case 3 (Seasonal, Vaccination) has the least. In the
absence of avoidance and resilience effects, a pan-
demic influenza outbreak could result in a loss in
U.S. GDP of $25.4 billion, but vaccination could
reduce the losses to $19.9 billion. Avoidance im-
pacts on the downside are much greater than offset-
ting resilience impacts on the upside, so that when
these two factors are taken into account, a pandemic
influenza outbreak could result in a loss in U.S. GDP
of $45.3 billion without vaccination and $34.4 billion
with vaccination.
One result runs counter to this pattern. That
is that the resilience impacts are larger in absolute
terms for Case 3 ($2.3 billion) than Case 1 ($2.2 bil-
lion). This can be explained by the factor of reduced
workforce participation—one of the two components
of baseline GDP impacts and the determinant of re-
silience (production recapture) impacts. Reduction
in workforce participation is influenced by the need
to miss work to obtain vaccinations. In the Seasonal
scenario, the vaccination case results in higher work-
force participation reduction than in the nonvaccina-
tion case, and thus results in a higher resilience effect.
As highlighted in Table III, for all cases, the
avoidance impacts outweigh the baseline GDP im-
pacts from the combination of reduced workforce
participation and increased medical expenditures.
Workforce participation impacts are between 90%
(for Case 1) and 126% (for Case 3) of the avoidance
impacts. Note, however, that these are offset some-
what by the positive stimulus from increased medical
expenditures.
6.3. Key General Equilibrium Impacts
Table IV presents the summation results and si-
multaneous results (detailed results across each case,
with aggregate results decomposed to identify the in-
dividual impact of each simulation component, are
presented in Table AXXIV). The former represents
the simple sum of the decomposed results, while the
latter represents the results of a single run that simul-
taneously incorporates all the direct impacts as inputs
in the CGE simulation, and thus captures their inter-
actions (synergies). It is important to note that, when
these impacts are run simultaneously, the results dif-
fer in terms of numerical levels; however, the qualita-
tive result (sign) is the same for each and the numbers
are similar. The simultaneous simulation results are
smaller than the summation results (where all indi-
vidual simulations are summed) for all the four cases,
and the differences are at most 16%. Therefore, the
decomposed results presented here provide useful in-
sights into the relative importance of each type of
impact.
For example, we can see that medical expendi-
ture impacts outweigh workforce participation im-
pacts in the direct sense, yet this balance reverses
when the impacts are simulated in the CGE model
to factor in indirect effects. The cause for this re-
versal is indicated by the implicit GDP multiplier
value. There is an implicit GDP multiplier of 1.7 for
workforce participation, which shows that those neg-
ative direct impacts ripple through economy. This
stands to reason: fewer workers at once lead to
lower production, as well as lower household income
and hence demand, thus suppressing production fur-
ther. The 0.18 value for the implicit GDP multi-
plier for medical expenditures highlights the fact that
increases in household spending on healthcare are
subject to a household budget constraint, whereby
households must also substitute by reducing spend-
ing on nonhealth goods and services. As such, the di-
rect impact boost to the medical sector is offset by
reductions in output for other sectors.
As discussed above, avoidance impacts outweigh
baseline GDP impacts (workforce participation plus
medical expenditure), and within this first set of im-
pacts, a similar “reversal” between the direct impacts
and CGE results takes place. For direct impacts,
avoidance behavior in terms of domestic travel and
leisure is the dominant factor; however, for the CGE
results, it is among the lowest in absolute terms. A
similarly low implicit GDP multiplier for domestic
travel and leisure is also explained by the same
household budget constraint mechanism described
above.
6.4. Sector Impacts
We also examined the CGE impacts by sector
for the Aggregate (Simultaneous), Case 2 (Pandemic
Outbreak/No Vaccination) scenario in terms of
sectors with the largest magnitude of impact (pos-
itive or negative). The sector impact results follow
intuition. Medical services sectors are the most
positively impacted due to the substantial increase in
household spending on medical services. Similarly,
each of the avoidance behavior simulations related
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
13
Table IV. Influenza Outbreak Simulation Aggregate Results: GDP Impacts on the U.S. Economy by Case (Billions of 2012 $)
Direct
Impacts
Total Impact on GDP
Employment (‘000s Jobs)
Direct Impact
Case
to GDP ($B)
Level ($B)
%
Level
%
Summation (no recapture)
Case 1
−4.09
−11.15
−0.068
−0.088
−0.119
Case 2
−5.64
−58.79
−0.361
−0.464
−0.563
Case 3
−0.75
−9.30
−0.057
−0.073
−0.099
Case 4
−2.33
−45.06
−0.277
−0.356
−0.432
Simultaneous (no recapture)
Case 1
−4.09
−10.15
−0.062
−0.080
−0.109
Case 2
−5.64
−54.99
−0.337
−0.434
−0.530
Case 3
−0.75
−9.10
−0.056
−0.072
−0.099
Case 4
−2.33
−42.69
−0.262
−0.337
−0.414
Summation (with recapture)
Case 1
−2.80
−8.92
−0.055
−0.070
−0.093
Case 2
2.20
−45.32
−0.278
−0.358
−0.406
Case 3
0.59
−6.99
−0.043
−0.055
−0.072
Case 4
3.88
−34.43
−0.211
−0.272
−0.308
Simultaneous (with recapture)
Case 1
−2.80
−7.47
−0.046
−0.059
−0.077
Case 2
2.20
−43.31
−0.266
−0.342
−0.391
Case 3
0.59
−6.26
−0.038
−0.049
−0.065
Case 4
3.88
−33.13
−0.203
−0.262
−0.300
to international inbound and outbound travel has its
greatest negative impact on the air transport sector.
In each case, the other most impacted sectors are sig-
nificantly less affected. These other impacted sectors
are those with strong linkages to air transport such
as entertainment, hotels and restaurants, and other
transport among those impacted by inbound and out-
bound international travel simulations. For domestic
leisure and tourism, the sectors mostly affected
in the direct impact analysis are also those mostly
affected in terms of total impacts, such as nondurable
manufacturing.
6.5. Comparison with Other Studies
Comparing our analysis with the macroeco-
nomic studies of Dixon et al.(5) and Verikios et al.(26)
provides insights into the CGE modeling approaches
in each study and their results. Dixon et al.(5) find
a −1.6% impact on GDP for the first year of
the outbreak, and a −1.3% impact on employment.
The Verikios et al.(27) results are of a lower mag-
nitude for the first year: −0.6% impact on GDP
and −0.35% on employment. Our results for the
most comparable case—No Vaccination, Pandemic
Outbreak, and No Recapture—are lower than the
Verikios et al. findings for GDP (−0.36%), yet higher
for employment impacts (−0.56%). Such differences
are due in part to the different modeling elements in-
cluded in our analysis. For example, our analysis pro-
vides more detail on the different kinds of avoidance
behaviors likely to occur during a major influenza
pandemic. However, the primary differences in GDP
levels are likely due to our more conservative esti-
mates for the direct impacts of avoidance behaviors,
as well as the substitution effects that are likely to
dampen their impacts, especially outbound inter-
national travel and domestic travel and leisure. In
contrast to the Dixon et al.(5) and Verikios et al.(27)
studies, our employment impacts are larger in per-
centage terms than GDP impacts. For our study, the
employment impacts are −0.39% (our total for all
of several drivers is −.46%), which are driven by the
reduction in workforce participation due to deaths
and illnesses. In contrast, in Verikios et al.(27) the
employment results are driven by a combination of
the reduction in workforce participation and only the
reduction in inbound tourism. At the same time, in
our study, the reduction in inbound tourism results
in a much lower impact on employment than this
other study.
Both Dixon et al.(5) and Verikios et al.(27) use
dynamic CGE models that render impacts on the
economy as they change over time with respect to
changing pandemic characteristics. For example, the
impacts of a pandemic are likely to be highest during
the first six months—both in terms of illnesses and
deaths, and behavioral responses—and then soften
 14
Prager, Wei, and Rose
gradually thereafter. Such interim dynamic aspects
are not captured in our analysis, which uses one year
as the unit of analysis. We also do not model the
impacts of the influenza in years subsequent to the
first year working through cyclical effects of employ-
ment and investment changes, as does Dixon et al.(5)
However, neither of these dynamic enhancements
are needed to illustrate the importance of including
the broader set of consequence types, resilience and
avoidance behavior, that we have demonstrated.
7. CONCLUSION
The results indicate that in the absence of avoid-
ance and resilience effects, a pandemic influenza out-
break could result in a loss in U.S. GDP of $25.4
billion, but that vaccination could reduce the losses
to $19.9 billion. Avoidance impacts on the downside
are much greater than offsetting resilience impacts
on the upside, such that when these two factors are
taken into account, a pandemic influenza outbreak
could result in a loss in U.S. GDP of $25.3 billion
without vaccination and $34.4 billion with vaccina-
tion.
This study provides decisionmakers with insights
into the potential negative impacts from influenza
outbreaks of various magnitudes. Knowledge of po-
tential economic consequences can be helpful in
early warning decision making relating to this bio-
threat. Our analysis has gone beyond other studies
of influenza outbreaks by taking into consideration
more types of avoidance behavior and more types
of resilience, which should improve the accuracy of
the economic consequence estimates. Moreover, we
have provided a framework for analyzing even more
types of both of these extenuating circumstances and
also additional types of biothreats.
The study highlights a number of actionable
items that government policymakers and public
health officials can implement to inform decision
making. First, the fact that resilience in the form of
production recapture can soften the overall impact
of influenza outbreak suggests partnering with busi-
nesses to encourage individuals to return to work
sooner and make up for lost work through flexi-
ble working hours. However, a much larger offset-
ting impact comes from public behavioral responses.
Hence, attempting to influence avoidance behav-
ior through public messaging and information cam-
paigns, so-called nudges, and other incentives may
hold the potential for greatly reducing the economic
costs of an influenza outbreak at a relatively low
cost.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the National
Biosurveillance Integration Center (NBIC) through
the National Center for Risk and Economic Analysis
of Terrorism Events under Contract No. HSHQDC-
13-J-00305.
The
authors
wish
to
thank
Julie
Waters, Natasha Hawkins, Tony Cheesebrough,
Martin Meltzer, Scott Farrow, and Zhenhua Chen
for
their
helpful
comments
on
earlier
drafts.
However, any opinions, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations in this document are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect views of the
NBIC or the University of Southern California.
REFERENCES
1. Bhandari R, Hartley TA, Lindsley WG, Fisher MA, Palmer
JE. Assessing healthcare utilization for influenza-like illness at
an emergency department and a student health service during
the 2009–2010 H1N1 pandemic. Infectious Diseases: Research
and Treatment, 2013; 6:15–23.
2. Valleron AJ, Cori A, Valtat S, Meurisse S, Carrat F, Bo¨
elle
PY. Transmissibility and geographic spread of the 1889 in-
fluenza pandemic. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA, 2010; 107(19):8778–8781.
3. Mills CE, Robins JM, Lipsitch M. Transmissibility of 1918 pan-
demic influenza. Nature, 2004; 432(7019):904–806.
4. Rose A, Beeler Asay G, Wei D, Leung B. Economic impacts
of shutting down the U.S. borders in response to a security or
health threat. Pp. 228–270 in Richardson H, Gordon P, Moore
J (eds). Global Business and Terrorism. Cheltenham, UK: Ed-
ward Elgar, 2009.
5. Dixon P, Lee B, Muehlenbeck T, Rimmer M, Rose A. Effects
on the U.S. of an H1N1 epidemic: Analysis with a quarterly
CGE model. Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency
Management, 2010; 7(1):Article 7.
6. Manheim D, Willis HH, Shelton S, Vardavas R, Rosoff H.
2016. Understanding Biosurveillance Value of Information
Using an Exploratory Tool. Final Report to the National Bio-
surveillance Integration Center, RAND Corporation, Santa
Monica, CA, forthcoming.
7. Oladosu G, Rose A, Lee B. Economic impacts of potential
foot and mouth disease agro-terrorism in the United States:
A computable general equilibrium analysis. Journal of Bioter-
rorism & Biodefense, 2013; S12:1–9.
8. Rose A, Liao S. Modeling resilience to disasters: Computable
general equilibrium analysis of a water service disruption.
Journal of Regional Science, 2005; 45(1):75–112.
9. Rose A, Oladosu G, Liao S. Business interruption impacts of
a terrorist attack on the electric power system of Los Angeles:
Customer resilience to a total blackout. Risk Analysis, 2007;
27(3):513–531.
10. Rose A, Oladosu G, Lee B, Beeler Asay G. The economic im-
pacts of the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center:
A computable general equilibrium analysis. Peace Economics,
Peace Science and Public Policy, 2009; 15:Article 6.
11. Giesecke J, Burns W, Barrett A, Bayrak E, Rose A, Slovic
P, Suher M. Assessment of the regional economic impacts of
catastrophic events: CGE analysis of resource loss and behav-
ioral effects of an RDD attack scenario. Risk Analysis, 2012;
32(4):583–600.
12. Rose A, Avetisyan M, Chatterjee S. A framework for analyz-
ing the economic tradeoffs between urban commerce and se-
curity. Risk Analysis, 2014; 34(8):1554–1579.
 Economic Consequences of Influenza
15
13. Prager F, Rose A, Wei D, Roberts B. The economywide im-
pacts of reduced wait times at U.S. international airports.
Research in Transportation Business & Management, 2015;
16:112–120.
14. Centers for Disease Crontrol and Prevention (CDC). Up-
dated CDC Estimates of 2009 H1N1 Influenza Cases,
Hospitalizations and Deaths in the United States, April
2009–April 10, 2010, 2011. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
h1n1flu/estimates_2009_h1n1.htm, Accessed July 5, 2014.
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Flu
Vaccination Coverage, United States, 2012–13 Influenza-
Season, 2013. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/
coverage-1213estimates.htm, Accessed July 5, 2014.
16. Meltzer MI. Basic Instructions and Template of Draft Report:
Using FluAid and FluSurge to estimate the potential impact of
the next influenza pandemic upon Local Y, Office of Surveil-
lance, National Center for Infectious Diseases Center for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention, Department of Health and Hu-
man Services, March 22, 2006: 1–42.
17. Molinari NAM, Ortega-Sanchez IR, Messonnier ML, Thomp-
son WW, Wortley PM, Weintraub E, Bridges CB. The
annual impact of seasonal influenza in the US: Measur-
ing disease burden and costs. Vaccine, 2007; 25(27):5086–
5096.
18. Reed C, Biggerstaff M, Finelli L, Koonin L, Beauvais D,
Uzicanin A, Plummer A, Bresee J, Redd S, Jernigan D. Novel
framework for assessing epidemiologic effects of influenza epi-
demics and pandemics. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2013;
19(1):85–91.
19. Meltzer M. The economic impact of pandemic influenza in the
United States: Priorities for intervention. Emerging Infectious
Diseases, 1999; 5(5):659–671.
20. Prosser L, Lavelle T, Fiore A, Bridges C, Reed C, Jain S,
Dunham K, Meltzer M. Cost-effectiveness of 2009 pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) vaccination in the United States. PLoS
One, 2011; 6(7):1–11.
21. Sander B, Nizam A, Garrison LP, Postma M, Halloran
E, Longini I. Economic evaluation of influenza pandemic
mitigation strategies in the United States using a stochas-
tic microsimulation transmission model. Val Health, 2009;
12(2):226–233.
22. Rose A. Macroconomic consequences of terrorist attacks: Es-
timation for the analysis of policies and rules. Pp. 172–201 in
Mansfield C, Smith VK (eds). Benefit Transfer for the Analy-
sis of DHS Policies and Rules. Cheltenham, UK: Edward El-
gar, 2015.
23. Santos J, Orsi M, Bond E. Pandemic recovery analysis using
the dynamic inoperability input-output model. Risk Analysis,
2009; 29(12):1743–1758.
24. Kasperson R, Renn O, Slovic P, Brown H., Emel J, Goble R,
Kasperson J, Ratick S. The social amplification of risk: A con-
ceptual framework. Risk Analysis, 1988; 8:177–187.
25. Slovic P. Perception of risk. Science, 1987; 236(4799):280–285.
26. Congressional Budget Office (CBO). A Potential Influenza
Pandemic: Possible Macroeconomic Effects and Policy Issues.
Washington, DC: Congress of the United States, 2006.
27. Verikios G, McCaw J, Harris A. H1N1 Influenza and the Aus-
tralian Macroeconomy, 2010. Available at: http://reservebank.
govt.nz/research_and_publications/seminars_and_workshops/
AMW2010/3956633.pdf, Accessed May 26, 2014.
28. Rose A. Input-output economics and computable general
equilibrium models. Structural Change and Economic Dy-
namics, 1995; 6(3):295–304.
29. Santos J, May L, Haimar A. Risk-based input-output analysis
of influenza epidemic consequences on interdependent work-
force sectors. Risk Analysis, 2013; 33(9):1620–1635.
30. U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Ad-
ministration. Profile of Overseas Travelers to the United
States: 2012 Inbound. Available at: http://travel.trade.gov/
outreachpages/download_data_table/2012_Overseas_Visitor_
Profile.pdf., Accessed June 24, 2014.
31. Bults M, Beaujean D, de Zwart O, Kok G, van Empelen P, van
Steenbergen J, Richardus J, Voeten H. Perceived risk, anxi-
ety, and behavioural responses of the general public during the
early phase of the influenza a (H1N1) pandemic in the Nether-
lands: Results of three consecutive online surveys. BMC Pub-
lic Health, 2011; 11(2):1–13.
32. Cowling B, Ng D, Ip D, Liao Q, Lam W, Wu J, Lau J, Griffiths
S, Fielding R. Community psychological and behavioral re-
sponses through the first wave of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1)
pandemic in Hong Kong. Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2009;
202(6):867–876.
33. Del Valle S, Mniszewski S, Hyman J. Modeling the impact of
behavior changes on the spread of pandemic influenza. Pp. 59–
77 in Manfredi P, D’Onofrio A (eds). Modeling the Interplay
between Human Behavior and the Spread of Infectious Dis-
eases. New York: Springer-Verlang, 2011.
34. Kok G, Jonkers R, Gelissen R, Meertens R, Schaalma H, de
Zwart O. Behavioral intentions in response to an influenza
pandemic. BMC Public Health, 2010; 10(174):1–19.
35. Sadique M, Edmunds W, Smith R, Meerding W, de Zwart O,
Brug J, Beutels P. Precautionary behavior in response to per-
ceived threat of pandemic influenza. Emerging Infectious Dis-
eases, 2007; 13(9):1307–1313.
36. Smith B, Kay V, Hoyt T, Bernard M. Predicting the an-
ticipated emotional and behavioral responses to an avian
flu outbreak. American Journal of Infection Control, 2009;
37(5):371–380.
37. Pidgeon N, Kasperson R. The Social Amplification of Risk.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
38. FEMA. HAZUS MR4 Earthquake Model Technical Manual,
2013. Available at: http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/
20130726-1716-25045-6422/hazus_mr4_earthquake_tech_
manual.pdf, Accessed July 14, 2014.
39. Rose A, Wei D, Wein A. Economic impacts of the ShakeOut
scenario. Earthquake Spectra, 2011; 27(2):539–557.
40. Dixon P, Rimmer M. Pp. 338. Dynamic General Equi-
librium Modelling for Forecasting and Policy: A Practical
Guide and Documentation of MONASH. Amsterdam: North-
Holland/Elsevier, 2002.
41. Rose A, Prager F, Wei D, Lahri S. Broadening Economic
Modeling for Biosurveillance Analysis. Washington, DC:
National Biosurveillance Integration Center (US) Report,
HSHQDC-13-J-00305, May 31, 2015.
42. Rose A, Oladosu G. Greenhouse gas reduction policy in the
United States: Identifying winners and losers in an expanded
permit trading system. Energy Journal, 2002; 23(1):1–18.
43. IMPLAN. Social Accounting Matrix for the U.S. National
Economy, 2012. Available at: http://implan.com/, Accessed
June 5, 2014.
44. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Final
Estimates of 2009–10 Seasonal Influenza and Influenza A
(H1N1) 2009 Monovalent Vaccination Coverage — United
States, August 2009 through May 2010, 2010. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/coverage_0910estimates.
htm, Accessed July 5, 2014.
45. Thompson W, Shay D, Weintraub E, Brammer L, Cox N,
Anderson L, Fukuda K. Mortality associated with influenza
and respiratory syncytial virus in the United States. JAMA,
2003; 289(2):179–186.
46. Kostova D, Reed C, Finelli L, Cheng P-Y, Gargiullo
PM,
Shay
PK,
Singleton
JA,
Meltzer
MI,
Lu
P-J,
Bresee JS. Influenza illness and hospitalizations averted by
influenza vaccination in the United States, 2005–2011. PLoS
One, 2013; 8(6):e66312. Available at: http://www.plosone.
org/article/info:doi/10.1371/journal.pone.0066312,
Accessed
May 10, 2014.
 16
Prager, Wei, and Rose
47. Bresee J, Reed C, Kim IK, Finelli L, Fry A, Chaves SS,
Burns E, Gargiullo P, Jernigan E, Cox N, Singleton J, Zhai
Y, O’Halloran A, Kahn K, Lu P-J, Santibanez TA. Estimated
influenza illnesses and hospitalizations averted by influenza
vaccination—United States, 2012–13 influenza season. CDC
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 2013; 62(49):997–
1000.
48. Reed C, Angulo FJ, Swerdlow DL, Lipsitch M, Meltzer MI,
Jernigan D, Finelli L. Estimates of the prevalence of pandemic
(H1N1) 2009, United States, April–July 2009. Emerging Infec-
tious Diseases, 2009; 15(12):2004–2007.
49. Prager, F. The Economic and Political Impacts of U.S. Federal
Carbon Emissions Trading Policy across Households, Sectors,
and States [dissertation]. Los Angeles: University of Southern
California, 2013.
50. BLS.
Labor
Force
Statistics
from
the
Current
Pop-
ulation
Survey,
2014.
Available
at:
http://data.bls.gov/
timeseries/LNS11300000/, Accessed June 10, 2014.
51. U.S. Census Bureau. Table 4. Families with Own Children:
Employment Status of Parents by Age of Youngest Child and
Family Type, 2012–2013 Annual Averages, 2014. Available at:
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/famee.t04.htm, Accessed July
5, 2014.
52. U.S. Census Bureau. America’s Families and Living Ar-
rangements: 2013: Adults, 2014. Available at: http://www.
census.gov/hhes/families/data/cps2013A.html, Accessed July
5, 2014.
53. National
Alliance
for
Caregiving.
Caregiving
in
the
U.S.
2009,
2009.
Available
at:
http://www.caregiving.
org/data/Caregiving_in_the_US_2009_full_report.pdf,
Ac-
cessed July 5, 2014.
54. Meltzer M, Gambhir M, Atkins C, Swerdlow D. Standardizing
scenarios to assess the need to respond to an influenza pan-
demic. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2015; 60(Suppl 1):S1–S8.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found in
the online version of this article at the publisher’s
website:
Table AI. Assumptions on Epidemic Parameters
Table AII. Health Outcome Estimates (Number of
People)
Table AIII. Per Person Lost Productivity (Days)
Table AIV. Workday Losses Due to Own Illness
(Days)
Table AV. Workday Losses Due to Caring for Sick
Family Members (Days)
Table AVI. Per Person Medical Expenditure (in
2003 $)
Table
AVII.
Medical
Expenditures
(in
Billion
2003 $)
Table AVIII. Vaccination Coverage
Table AIX. Vaccination Effectiveness
Table AX. Vaccination Cost Data
Table AXI. Per Person Vaccination Costs and Asso-
ciated Lost Work Hours
Table AXII. Health Outcome Estimates with Vacci-
nation (Number of People)
Table AXIII. Workday Losses (Days) for Own Ill-
ness (with Vaccination)
Table AXIV. Workday Losses (Days) for Caring
Sick Family Members (with Vaccination)
Table AXV. Workday Losses (Days) Due to Vacci-
nation
Table AXVI. Medical Expenditures (with Vaccina-
tion; in Billion 2003 $)
Table AXVII. Medical Expenditures Associated
with Vaccination (in Billion 2009 $)
Table AXVIII. Summary of Literature on Avoidance
Behaviors
Table AXIX. Magnitude and Duration of Avoidance
Behaviors in Response to Influenza Pandemic
Table AXX. Translation of Dynamic Avoidance
Behavior Impacts to Static Parameter Estimates
Table AXXI. Foreign Visitor Spending Changes
Table
AXXII.
Avoidance
Behavior—Domestic
Tourism and Leisure Spending Simulation
Table AXXIII. Summary of Direct Impacts of No
Vaccination versus Vaccination Scenarios
Table AXXIV. Influenza Outbreak Simulation De-
tailed Results: GDP Impacts on the U.S. Economy
by Direct Impact Categories (Billions of 2012 $)
Table AXXV. Population Infection, Medical At-
tention, Hospitalization, and Death Data Gathered
from Various Studies
Table
AXXVI.
Population
Infection
Rate
and
Medical-Treatment/Infection,
Hospitalization/Infe-
ction, and Death/Infection Ratios
Table AXXVII. Population Infection Rate and
Medical-Treatment/Population, Hospitalization/Po-
pulation, and Death/Population Ratios
Fig. B1. USCGE nesting structure.
