 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer in Nonwhite
Organ Transplant Recipients
Ellen N. Pritchett, MD, MPH; Alden Doyle, MD, MPH; Christine M. Shaver, MD; Brett Miller, MD;
Mark Abdelmalek, MD; Carrie Ann Cusack, MD; Gregory E. Malat, PharmD; Christina Lee Chung, MD
IMPORTANCE Organ transplant recipients have a higher incidence of skin cancer. This risk is
magnified over time and with continued exposure to immunosuppression. Skin cancer in
nonwhite patients is associated with greater morbidity and mortality owing to diagnosis at a
more advanced stage, which suggests that nonwhite organ transplant recipients are at even
higher risk.
OBJECTIVE To describe demographic and clinical factors and the incidence of skin cancer in
nonwhite organ transplant recipients.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS We performed a retrospective medical record review of
patients who were organ transplant recipients (154 were white and 259 nonwhite [black,
Asian, Hispanic, Pacific Islander]) seen from November 1, 2011, to April 18, 2016 at an
academic referral center.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Variables were analyzed and compared between racial
groups, including sex, age, race/ethnicity, Fitzpatrick type, type and location of skin cancer,
type of organ transplanted, time to diagnosis of skin cancer after transplantation, and history
of condyloma acuminata and/or verruca vulgaris.
RESULTS Most of the 413 patients (62.7%) evaluated were nonwhite organ transplant
recipients; 264 were men, and 149 were women. Their mean (SD) age was 60.09 (13.59)
years. Nineteen skin cancers were identified in 15 patients (5.8%) representing 3 racial/ethnic
groups: black (6 patients), Asian (5), and Hispanic (4). All squamous cell carcinomas in blacks
were diagnosed in the in situ stage, located on sun-protected sites, and occurred in patients
whose lesions tested positive for human papilloma virus (HPV) and/or who endorsed a
history of condyloma acuminata or verruca vulgaris. Most skin cancers in Asians were located
on sun-exposed areas and occurred in individuals who emigrated from equatorial locations.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Nonwhite organ transplant recipients are at risk for
developing skin cancer posttransplantation. Follow-up in a specialized transplant
dermatology center and baseline total-body skin examination should be part of
posttransplantation care in all organ transplant recipients, including nonwhite patients.
A thorough inspection of the groin and genitalia is imperative in black organ transplant
recipients. History of HPV infection, particularly in black organ transplant recipients, and sun
exposure/emigration history in Asian organ transplant recipients should be documented.
Vigilant photoprotection may be of lesser importance in the prevention of skin cancer in black
organ transplant recipients. Risk factors for nonwhite organ transplant recipients differ
between races/ethnicities and warrant further study in efforts to better counsel and prevent
skin cancer in these patients.
JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152(12):1348-1353. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.3328
Published online September 21, 2016.
Author Affiliations: Department of
Dermatology, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, Michigan (Pritchett);
Department of Internal Medicine,
Drexel University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (Doyle); Department of
Dermatology, Drexel University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (Shaver,
Miller, Abdelmalek, Cusack, Chung);
Department of Surgery, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(Malat).
Corresponding Author: Christina
Lee Chung, MD, Department of
Dermatology, Drexel University,
219 N Broad St, Fourth Floor,
Philadelphia, PA 19107
(christina.chung@drexelmed.edu).
Research
JAMA Dermatology | Original Investigation
1348
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
T
he population of immunosuppressed patients with or-
gan transplants is growing every year in the United
States, with more than 13 000 nonwhite (black, Asian,
Hispanic, Pacific Islander) individuals receiving organ trans-
plants in 2015.1 Transplant recipients have a markedly higher
incidenceofnewskincancers,andthisriskmagnifiesovertime
with continued exposure to immunosuppression.2-4 Squa-
mous cell carcinoma (SCC) is increased 65-fold, basal cell car-
cinoma (BCC) 10-fold, and melanoma 3-fold in this particular
patient cohort.4 The increased risk of skin cancer is attribut-
able to various factors that include duration and intensity of
immunosuppression, the type of organ transplanted, and
Fitzpatrick skin type, among others.4-6
Although there are data detailing the incidence of skin
cancer in patients with darker skin types, these data are lim-
ited and more sparse among nonwhite organ transplant
recipients (OTRs). When compared with their white counter-
parts, the overall incidence of skin cancer among all diag-
nosed malignant lesions in nonimmunosuppressed non-
white patients remains significantly lower because it
represents 5% of all neoplasms seen in Hispanics, 4% in
Asians, and 2% in blacks vs 40% in the white population.7 It
is also well documented that, despite the lower overall inci-
dence, skin cancer in nonwhite individuals is often diag-
nosed at a more advanced stage and associated with worse
outcomes.7-10 Thus, not only is it likely that trends regarding
type, location, morbidity, and mortality differ among races/
ethnicities in the immunosuppressed transplant population,
it is also plausible that nonwhite OTRs are at greater risk for
developing cutaneous malignant neoplasms that are associ-
ated with even higher rates of morbidity and mortality than
their immunocompetent nonwhite counterparts.
According to the 2014 US Census projections,11 50.3% of
Americanswillbecomprisedofnonwhiteminoritiesbytheyear
2044. Of the more than 120 000 patients on the waiting list
for organs, 58% are nonwhite. These changing demograph-
ics, worse skin cancer outcomes in nonwhite patients, and lim-
ited studies on skin cancer in nonwhite OTRs warrant a better
understanding of the epidemiology of skin cancer in this un-
derrepresented patient population. The objective of this study
was to describe demographic and clinical factors and the in-
cidence of histologically confirmed skin cancer in a diverse co-
hort of nonwhite OTRs through a retrospective medical
record review.
Methods
The Drexel Dermatology Center for Transplant Patients at
Drexel University College of Medicine is a multidisciplinary
medical-surgicaldermatologycenter.TheDrexelUniversityab-
dominal transplant program refers all patients who have un-
dergonesolidorgantransplantationtotheDermatologyofDer-
matology Center for Transplant Patients for a comprehensive
total-body skin examination, which includes evaluation of all
cutaneous lesions on the head, neck, chest, back, abdomen,
all extremities, and buttocks, including perianal area, groin,
and genitalia. All suspicious lesions are biopsied, with par-
ticular attention to high-risk sites, including the perianal and
genital areas in nonwhite patients. Those with histologic find-
ings suggestive of viral change are sent for human papilloma
virus (HPV) typing. All patients are counseled on self–skin
examination and photoprotection and receive introductory
educational packets containing written materials regarding
skin cancer in transplant patients. After the initial referral, all
patients are scheduled at least yearly for a total-body skin
examination.
An institutional review board–approved retrospective
medical record review of 413 OTRs referred to the transplant
center from November 1, 2011, to April 18, 2016, was per-
formed using the electronic medical record. Of the 413 pa-
tients, 264 were men, and 149 were women. Their mean (SD)
age was 60.09 (13.59) years. Patients were stratified by race/
ethnicity and included 154 white patients and 259 nonwhite
patients (black, Asian, Hispanic, Pacific Islander). According
to the US Census Bureau, people who identify as Hispanic,
Latino, or Spanish may be of any race. All Hispanic patients
were grouped together, irrespective of race, with most
patients endorsing a Fitzpatrick score of III or IV.
Amongnonwhitepatients,onlythosewithahistologically-
confirmed cutaneous malignant neoplasm that was diag-
nosed after the date of transplantation were included in the
final analysis. Demographic and clinical variables were ana-
lyzedandcomparedbetweenthegroupsandincludedsex,age,
race/ethnicity, Fitzpatrick skin type, type and location of skin
cancer, type of organ transplanted, date of transplant, time to
diagnosis of a skin cancer posttransplant, and history of clini-
cally evident condyloma acuminata or verruca vulgaris
(CA-VV). Fitzpatrick skin type was a self-reported measure de-
termined by asking patients how their skin responded to sun
exposure without sunscreen.
Results
A total of 413 OTRs were evaluated during the study period
(Table 1). Most patients (259 [62.7%]) were nonwhite. Among
those, there were 190 blacks (73.4%), 35 Asians (13.5%), 33 His-
panics (12.7%), and 1 Pacific Islander (0.4%). Most patients
(57.9%) were men, and most (83.0%) had received a kidney
Key Points
Question Should all organ transplant recipients, regardless of
race, be evaluated for skin cancer?
Findings A total of 413 transplant patients were evaluated. Most
were nonwhite (62.7%), male (57.9%), and had had a kidney
transplant (83.0%). Nineteen lesions were identified in 15 patients
(5.8%) representing all 3 racial groups: black (6 [3.2%]), Asian (5
[14.3%]), and Hispanic (4 [12.1%]).
Meaning This study underscores the importance of follow-up in a
transplant dermatology center, a baseline total-body skin
examination that includes a thorough inspection of the groin and
genitalia and counseling regarding risk factors, and
photoprotection for all organ transplant recipients.
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer in Nonwhite Organ Transplant Recipients
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
December 2016
Volume 152, Number 12
1349
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
transplant. Skin cancers were diagnosed across all transplant
types (Table 2).
Fifteen nonwhite patients (5.8%) had a total of 19 histo-
logically confirmed skin cancers (Table 3). There were 6 black
patients, 5 Asian patients, and 4 Hispanic patients. The 19 le-
sions represented 13 squamous carcinomas in situ (SCCISs),
1 SCC, 4 BCCs, and 1 sebaceous carcinoma. The mean time to
diagnosis after transplantation was 7.8 years, and the mean
duration of follow-up after diagnosis was 2.1 years.
Results by Race
Black Patients
There were 6 black patients with 9 biopsy-confirmed skin can-
cers and a median time of immunosuppression of 8 years (in-
terquartile range [IQR], 6.0-16.5 years). These lesions repre-
sented 7 SCCISs and 2 BCCs with a median time to diagnosis
of 8 years (IQR, 4.0-13.0 years) and 15.5 years (IQR, 12.8-18.8
years), respectively. All SCCISs were found on non–sun-
exposed sites including 1 on the fingertip and 6 in the groin-
genital area (Table 4). All patients with groin-genital SCCIS en-
dorsed a history of CA-VV. Two of the 3 groin-genital lesions
that were sent for HPV typing tested positive for high-risk HPV
types 16 or 18. One of the 2 BCC occurred in a patient with a
concomitant diagnosis of porphyria cutanea tarda.
Asian Patients
There were 5 Asian patients with 6 biopsy-confirmed skin can-
cers and a median time of 4 years (IQR, 2.5-5.5 years) of im-
munosuppression. Two patients were East Asian, and 3 were
Southeast Asian. The skin cancers comprised 1 SCC, 3 SCCISs,
1 BCCs, and 1 sebaceous carcinoma with a median time to di-
agnosis of 4 years (IQR, 3.0-4.0 years) for SCCIS. Five lesions
were found on sun-exposed areas. One SCCIS was located in
the groin of a patient with a history of VV.
Hispanic Patients
There were 4 Hispanic patients with 4 biopsy-confirmed skin
cancers and median time of 9 years (IQR, 2.8-16.0 years) of im-
munosuppression. There were 3 SCCISs and 1 BCCs. Three of
4 lesions were located on the lower extremity. Two patients
with SCCIS reported a history of CA-VV.
Discussion
This study population is unique in that most of the patients
evaluated (62.7%) were nonwhite OTRs. Skin cancer devel-
oped in patients of 3 racial/ethnic groups: black (6 patients
[3.2%]), Asian (5 [14.3%]), and Hispanic (4 [12.1%]). While the
cohort is small, several interesting trends can be gleaned from
these data.
Allskincancersinblackpatientswerediagnosedatanearly
stage. This finding was unexpected because skin cancer in im-
munocompetent nonwhite patients is typically diagnosed at
more advanced stages and is associated with increased mor-
bidityandmortality.Squamouscellcarcinomaisthemostcom-
mon type of skin cancer noted in the black population and
tends to occur in sun-protected sites and in areas of chronic
scarring processes and chronic inflammation, such as burn
scars, ulcers, discoid lupus erythematosus, lupus vulgaris, and
hidradenitissuppurativa.6,7,9,10TheseSCCstendtobemoreag-
gressive and are associated with a 20% to 40% risk of metas-
tasis compared with a 1% to 4% risk of metastasis for sun-
inducedcancerinimmunocompetentblackpatients.7Mortality
from SCC in African Americans is as high as 29%.10 Interest-
ingly, while the skin cancers found in black OTRs in our co-
hort were consistent in that they were found in non–sun-
exposed areas, the predominant type of malignant neoplasm
diagnosed in the present study was SCCIS. There were no black
patients with SCC. It is possible that all lesions were diag-
nosed in the in situ stage owing to the established referral sys-
tem whereby our transplant medicine counterparts send all
OTRs for screening and establishment of dermatologic care.
Hence,asapartoftheirposttransplantationtreatment,allOTRs
within our health system, including those who are nonwhite,
receive a total-body skin examination, including examina-
tion of the genitalia, and are counseled regarding risk factors
andfollowedatleastyearlyinourdermatologyclinic.Thisfind-
ing suggests that all OTRs, regardless of race, should be re-
ferred for routine skin evaluation because it may lead to
earlier diagnosis and better outcomes.
Most SCCISs in black OTRs were found in the groin-
genital area. All of these patients endorsed a history of clini-
cally evident CA-VV, and 2 of 3 lesions tested positive for high-
risk HPV types 16 or 18. In both immunocompetent and
immunosuppressed patients, HPV has been linked to the
development of SCC.12-14 One study of transplant patients de-
Table 2. Skin Cancer by Organ Transplant Type
Organ Transplant Typea
Skin Cancer Type
SCCIS
SCC
BCC
Sebaceous
Carcinoma
Kidney/kidney and pancreas
10
1
3
0
Heart/heart and kidney/heart and lung
1
0
1
0
Liver/liver and kidney
2
0
0
1
a Organ transplant type based on dominant organ transplanted.
Table 1. Demographics and Clinical Characteristics
of 259 Organ Transplant Recipients
Characteristic
No. (%)
Sex
Male
150 (57.9)
Female
109 (42.1)
Race
Black
190 (73.4)
Hispanic
33 (12.7)
Asian
35 (13.5)
Pacific Islander
1 (0.4)
Organ transplant typea
Kidney/kidney and pancreas
215 (83.0)
Heart/heart and kidney/heart and lung
20 (7.7)
Liver/liver and kidney
24 (9.3)
Mean time of immunosuppression, y
7.8 (range 2-21)
a Organ transplant type based on dominant organ transplanted.
Research Original Investigation
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer in Nonwhite Organ Transplant Recipients
1350
JAMA Dermatology
December 2016
Volume 152, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
tected HPV viruses in up to 90% of SCCs.15 Another study of
nonimmunosuppressed patients found HPV DNA in skin bi-
opsy specimens of 4.7% of controls, 90.5% of warts, 60.4% of
precancerous lesions, and 59.7% of SCCs.16 This potential as-
sociation between HPV and SCCIS warrants careful examina-
tion of the groin, genitalia, and perianal area in search of early
lesions. In addition, documentation of HPV history may help
identify those who are at risk for SCC. This finding also sug-
gests that there may be significant differences in risk factors
pertaining to the development of cutaneous malignant neo-
plasms between white and black OTRs. With the advent of the
HPV vaccine, the prevalence of cervical cancer is expected to
decrease. A concomitant decrease in CA-VV, and conse-
quently cutaneous SCC-SCCIS, may follow suit. This ques-
tions whether OTRs with a history of CA-VV or HPV should be
vaccinated in efforts to decrease their risk of SCC develop-
ment, or, perhaps, HPV vaccination should be administered
to all patients prior to transplantation. Finally, genital SCCIS
related to HPV is slow growing, taking approximately 10 years
toprogressintoinvasivedisease.17Hence,genitalSCCsorthose
of viral etiology may have different biologically aggressive-
ness behavior than those of solar etiology, which may further
explain the early diagnosis of skin cancer in the black popu-
lation in our study. Additional studies are needed to deter-
mine if SCC-SCCIS lesions harbor viral changes on a molecu-
larleveland,iftheydo,inwhatmannerthistranslatesclinically.
Two BCCs were diagnosed among black patients, and both
occurred after a decade of immunosuppression. One was an
indolent variant of BCC found on the back and diagnosed af-
ter 21 years of immunosuppression. The other lesion oc-
curred after 10 years of immunosuppression on the nasal tip
of a patient with multiple risk factors for skin cancer develop-
ment, including a photosensitizing disorder, porphyria cuta-
nea tarda, and a heart transplant, which requires the greatest
degree of immunosuppression. Because sun exposure is the
most common predisposing factor in the development of BCC,
these findings question the utility of extensive photoprotec-
tion counseling in black OTRs, particularly those with darker
skin types.9
Table 3. Demographic and Clinical Factors Among Skin of Color Organ Transplant Recipients With Skin Cancer
Race/Sex/FST
Organ
Time To Diagnosisa
Location
Type
Subtype
HPV Historyb
Black/M/VI
Kidney
13
Penile shaft
SCCIS
Bowen, HPV 16/18+
Yes
Black/M/V
Kidney
4
Penile shaft
SCCIS
Yes
8
Ventral penile shaft
SCCIS
HPV16/18+
Yes
8
Coronal sulcus
SCCIS
Yes
8
L index finger
SCCIS
Papillated
Yes
Black/M/V
Heart/Lung
2
L inguinal fold
SCCIS
Bowen
Yes
Black/M/V
Kidney
21
L mid back
BCC
Pinkus
No
Black/F/V
Heart
10
L nasal tip
BCC
Micronodular
No
Black/M/V
Kidney
20
L scrotum
SCCIS
Bowen
Yes
Hispanic/M/IV
Kidney
17
R medial ankle
SCCIS
Pigmented
Yes
Hispanic/F/III
Kidney
2
R dorsal side of hand
SCCIS
No
Hispanic/M/IV
Liver
5
R inner thigh
SCCIS
Bowen
Yes
Hispanic/F/III
Kidney
13
R shin
BCC
Basosquamous
No
Asian/F/III
Kidney
4
Dorsal nose
SCCIS
No
Asian/M/IV
Liver
4
R temple
SCCIS
No
Asian/F/III
Kidney
7
L chin
SCC
Yes
5
L lower cheek
BCC
Infiltrative
Yes
Asian/F/IV
Kidney
3
L groin
SCCIS
Bowen
Yes
Asian/F/IV
Kidney
1
Dorsal side of the nose
Sebaceous CA
Denies
Abbreviations: BCC, basal cell carcinoma; CA, carcinoma; FST, Fitzpatrick skin type; HPV, human papillomavirus; L, left; R, right; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma;
SCCIS, squamous cell carcinoma in situ.
a Time to diagnosis of skin cancer after transplantation, measured in years.
bHistory of HPV, condyloma acuminata or verruca vulgaris.
Table 4. Skin Cancer Type and Location by Race
Type
No. (%)
Black
Asian
Hispanic
SCCIS
Total No.
7
3
3
HPV associated
6 (85.7)
1 (33.3)
2 (66.7)
Sun-exposed site
0
2 (66.7)
1 (33.3)
Non–sun-exposed site
7 (100)
1 (33.3)
2 (66.7)
SCC
Total No.
0
1
0
Sun-exposed site
NA
1 (100)
NA
Non–sun-exposed site
NA
NA
NA
BCC
Total No.
2
1
1
Sun-exposed site
1 (50.0)
1 (100)
NA
Non–sun-exposed site
1 (50.0)
NA
1 (100)
Abbreviations: BCC, basal cell carcinoma; HPV, human papillomavirus; NA, not
applicable; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma.
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer in Nonwhite Organ Transplant Recipients
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
December 2016
Volume 152, Number 12
1351
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Bycontrast,mostskincancersinAsians(83.3%)werefound
on sun-exposed areas and had a shorter time to development
when compared with skin cancers in blacks. The lesions in-
cluded 1 SCC, 3 SCCISs, 1 BCC, and 1 sebaceous carcinoma, with
all lesions located on the face except for 1 SCCIS, which was
identified in the groin. The median time to skin cancer devel-
opment among Asians was conspicuously earlier than in the
black organ transplant population, at 4 years vs 8 years. Three-
quarters of the Asian patients who developed skin cancer grew
up in equatorial Southeast Asia. It has been shown that UV ra-
diation is a significant risk factor for skin cancer develop-
ment in Asians. One study18 of a Singapore Cancer Registry be-
tween 1968 and 1997 found that fairer Chinese patients had a
2-fold greater incidence of skin cancer than Malaysians and
Indians with darker skin. Another study found the incidence
of BCC to be 2 times greater among Japanese who live in Kauai,
Hawaii, secondary to intense UV exposure and greater partici-
pation in outdoor activities.19 Thus, Asian patients in the
present study had increased lifetime sun exposure from liv-
ing in areas with intense UV radiation, which may explain the
shorter time to skin cancer development.
Few conclusions can be drawn from the Hispanic pa-
tients because of the limited data. There were 2 nonmela-
noma skin cancers identified in sun-exposed locations and 2
on the lower extremities in patients with a history of VV or CA.
Additional studies with larger sample sizes are needed to
ascertain any trends or conclusions.
Although the sample size is small, a few recommenda-
tions can be made regarding posttransplant dermatologic care
for nonwhite OTRs. All patients, regardless of race, should re-
ceive,atminimum,abaselinetotal-bodyskinexaminationand
counselingregardingriskfactorsandphotoprotection.Thisex-
amination should include a thorough inspection of the geni-
talia, groin, and perianal regions, particularly among black pa-
tients. A history of HPV, CA, or VV should be obtained from
all patients. Education and counseling regarding the impor-
tance of photoprotection should be provided to all Asian
patients, especially those who grew up in equatorial locales.
Patients with any of these risk factors may warrant closer
monitoring.
This study is limited by its short duration of follow-up, ret-
rospective design, small proportion of patients with skin can-
cer as noted herein, and, thus, possible lack of generalizabil-
ity to larger populations. It raises many questions. The optimal
frequency of follow-up, the efficacy of the HPV vaccine in pre-
venting future SCCISs and SCCs, the biologic aggressiveness
of virally-induced SCCISs and SCCs compared with sun-
induced SCCISs and SCCs, and the effects of sun exposure and
utilityofphotoprotectivebehaviorsinblacks,particularlythose
with darker skin types, are still largely unknown. Future
studies are needed to address these areas.
Conclusions
This study sought to describe demographic and skin cancer
characteristics among nonwhite OTRs. A large number of
SCCISs were observed in black OTRs on sun-protected areas
whereas most nonmelanoma skin cancers occurred on sun-
exposed areas in Asians. The increased rate of SCCISs com-
pared with SCCs observed in blacks is possibly due to close
follow-up in a medical-surgical transplant dermatology cen-
ter where all OTRs are referred to dermatology and receive a
comprehensive evaluation that includes examination of the
genitalia or due to different biological aggressiveness of
genital or virally induced SCCISs. Risk factors for blacks
likely differ from those of Asians and may include a history
of HPV infection in blacks compared with sun exposure his-
tory and/or emigration from equatorial locales in Asians.
Nonwhite organ transplant patients represent a unique
group with specialized medical needs; thus, more knowl-
edge on risk factors, appropriate screening methods, and
counseling points are essential for providing comprehensive
dermatologic care for these patients.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: July 21, 2016.
Published Online: September 21, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.3328
Author Contributions: Drs Pritchett and Chung
had full access to all of the data in the study and
take responsibility for the integrity of the data and
the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Doyle, Shaver,
Abdelmalek, Cusack, Chung.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Pritchett, Doyle, Miller,
Chung.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Doyle, Shaver, Miller,
Abdelmalek, Cusack, Malat, Chung.
Statistical analysis: Pritchett, Shaver, Miller, Malat.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Pritchett, Doyle, Abdelmalek, Cusack, Chung.
Study supervision: Doyle, Shaver, Abdelmalek,
Cusack, Chung.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Additional Contributions: We thank Jennifer
Hawkins, RMA, the transplant clinical coordinator at
Drexel University, who helped log clinical
information and tracked patients, and Rohit
Nijhawan, MD, a resident at Drexel University who
was integral in helping to establish the Center for
Transplant Patients. They were not compensated
for their contributions.
REFERENCES
1. United Network for Organ Sharing. https://optn
.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/view-data
-reports/national-data/#. Accessed May 9, 2016.
2. Berg D, Otley CC. Skin cancer in organ transplant
recipients: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and
management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002;47(1):1-17.
3. Euvrard S, Kanitakis J, Claudy A. Skin cancers
after organ transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2003;
348(17):1681-1691.
4. Zwald FO, Brown M. Skin cancer in solid organ
transplant recipients: advances in therapy and
management: part I, epidemiology of skin cancer in
solid organ transplant recipients. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2011;65(2):253-261.
5. Gogia R, Binstock M, Hirose R, Boscardin WJ,
Chren MM, Arron ST. Fitzpatrick skin phototype is
an independent predictor of squamous cell
carcinoma risk after solid organ transplantation.
J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;68(4):585-591.
6. Buoy AG, Yoo S, Alam M, et al. Distribution of
skin type and skin cancer in organ transplant
recipients. Arch Dermatol. 2010;146(3):344-346.
7. Agbai ON, Buster K, Sanchez M, et al. Skin cancer
and photoprotection in people of color: a review
and recommendations for physicians and the
public. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;70(4):748-762.
8. Kailas A, Solomon JA, Mostow EN, Rigel DS,
Kittles R, Taylor SC. Gaps in the understanding and
treatment of skin cancer in people of color. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):1020-1021.
9. Battie C, Gohara M, Verschoore M, Roberts W.
Skin cancer in skin of color: an update on current
facts, trends, and misconceptions. J Drugs Dermatol.
2013;12(2):194-198.
Research Original Investigation
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer in Nonwhite Organ Transplant Recipients
1352
JAMA Dermatology
December 2016
Volume 152, Number 12
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
10. Gloster HM Jr, Neal K. Skin cancer in skin of
color. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;55(5):741-760.
11. US Census Bureau. 2010 Census data.
http://www.census.gov/2010census/data/.
Accessed April 14, 2016.
12. Karagas MR, Nelson HH, Sehr P, et al. Human
papillomavirus infection and incidence of squamous
cell and basal cell carcinomas of the skin. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2006;98(6):389-395.
13. Arron ST, Jennings L, Nindl I, et al; Viral Working
Group of the International Transplant Skin Cancer
Collaborative (ITSCC) & Skin Care in Organ
Transplant Patients, Europe (SCOPE). Viral
oncogenesis and its role in nonmelanoma skin
cancer. Br J Dermatol. 2011;164(6):1201-1213.
14. Schmidt SA, Hamilton-Dutoit SJ, Farkas DK,
Steiniche T, Sørensen HT. Human papillomavirus
and the incidence of nonmelanoma and melanoma
skin cancer using cervical conization as a surrogate
marker: a nationwide population-based Danish
cohort study. Ann Epidemiol. 2015;25(4):293-296.e2.
15. Connolly K, Manders P, Earls P, Epstein RJ.
Papillomavirus-associated squamous skin cancers
following transplant immunosuppression: one
Notch closer to control. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;40
(2):205-214.
16. Iftner A, Klug SJ, Garbe C, et al. The prevalence
of human papillomavirus genotypes in
nonmelanoma skin cancers of
nonimmunosuppressed individuals identifies
high-risk genital types as possible risk factors.
Cancer Res. 2003;63(21):7515-7519.
17. Wright TC Jr. Cervical cancer screening in the
21st century: is it time to retire the PAP smear? Clin
Obstet Gynecol. 2007;50(2):313-323.
18. Koh D, Wang H, Lee J, Chia KS, Lee HP, Goh CL.
Basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and
melanoma of the skin: analysis of the Singapore
Cancer Registry data 1968-97. Br J Dermatol. 2003;
148(6):1161-1166.
19. Chuang TY, Reizner GT, Elpern DJ, Stone JL,
Farmer ER. Nonmelanoma skin cancer in Japanese
ethnic Hawaiians in Kauai, Hawaii: an incidence
report. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995;33(3):422-426.
NOTABLE NOTES
African Scarification
Jorge Roman, BS
In Africa, scarification has served as an important element of the
culture of different groups. Scarification involves placing superficial
incisions on the skin using stones, glass, knives, or other tools to create
meaningful pictures, words, or designs. This permanent body modifi-
cationcancommunicateaplethoraofculturalexpressions.FromEthiopia
to Papua New Guinea, scarification produces scars of different sizes,
shapes, and positions to show clan identity, status within a community,
passage into adulthood, or spiritual significance.
YoungboysoftheChambritribeinPapuaNewGuineausescarification
asapartofaritualtomarkthetransitionintoadulthood.Thegenerations-
oldritualstemsfromtheChambritribebeliefinalegendinwhichhumans
evolvedfromcrocodiles.Topaytributetotheseanimalstheboysundergo
scarification to produce scars resembling those of crocodile scales.1 This
painfulprocessinthetransitiontobecomingamanisintendedtoexhibit
strength,discipline,andendurance.Thesequalitiesareofparamountim-
portanceinbecominganeffectivehunterandwarrior.Ayoungmanwho
has already experienced the feeling of his flesh being torn and cut would
belesslikelytofeartheteethofawildanimalorthetipofanenemy’
sspear.
In Sudan, girls of the Nuba undergo scarification at different stages
of their life. At the onset of puberty they receive marks on their chest,
forehead,andabdomen.Asecondsetofcutsareplacedunderthebreasts
at first menstruation. These scars are then augmented after the wean-
ingoftheirfirstchild.2TheNubascarificationdenotesmaturityinwomen
andareperceivedasmarksofbeauty.FortheNuba,scarscanalsoserve
a medicinal purpose; scars above the eyes are believed to improve
eyesight, and scars on the temples help to relieve headaches.
The motives for scarification in other parts of Africa is extremely di-
verse.TheSurimenofEthiopiascartheirbodiestoshowthattheyhave
killedsomeonefromanenemytribe.TheEkoiofNigeriabelievethatthe
scars serve as money on their way to the afterlife. In Ethiopia, the Mursi
practicescarificationforlargelyaestheticreasonsinordertoattractthe
opposite sex and enhance the tactile experience of sex.2
The scars we have can serve as mementos of life experiences both
good and bad. Whether scars are intentional or the result of a surgery,
accident,ordisease,theytellauniquestoryaboutthepersonwhoholds
them. Much like tattoos and piercings, the tradition of scarification in
Africa is just one of many ways people have figured out how to
decorate the canvas that is our skin.
Author Affiliation: The University of Texas Medical Branch School of Medicine,
Galveston.
Corresponding Author: Jorge Roman, BS, The University of Texas Medical
Branch School of Medicine, 301 University Blvd, Galveston, TX 77555
(joroman@utmb.edu).
1. Gay K, Whittington C. Body Marks: Tattooing, Piercing, and Scarification.
Brookfield, CT: Millbrook Press; 2002.
2. Pitt Rivers Museum Body Arts Scarification. Pitt Rivers Museum website. http:
//web.prm.ox.ac.uk/bodyarts/index.php/permanent-body-arts/scarification
.html. Accessed January 2016.
Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer in Nonwhite Organ Transplant Recipients
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
December 2016
Volume 152, Number 12
1353
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
