 1
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
www.nature.com/scientificreports
A smartphone-based diagnostic 
platform for rapid detection of Zika, 
chikungunya, and dengue viruses
Aashish Priye1, Sara W. Bird1, Yooli K. Light2, Cameron S. Ball1, Oscar A. Negrete1 & 
Robert J. Meagher1
Current multiplexed diagnostics for Zika, dengue, and chikungunya viruses are situated outside the 
intersection of affordability, high performance, and suitability for use at the point-of-care in resource-
limited settings. Consequently, insufficient diagnostic capabilities are a key limitation facing current 
Zika outbreak management strategies. Here we demonstrate highly sensitive and specific detection 
of Zika, chikungunya, and dengue viruses by coupling reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification (RT-LAMP) with our recently developed quenching of unincorporated amplification signal 
reporters (QUASR) technique. We conduct reactions in a simple, inexpensive and portable “LAMP box” 
supplemented with a consumer class smartphone. The entire assembly can be powered by a 5 V USB 
source such as a USB power bank or solar panel. Our smartphone employs a novel algorithm utilizing 
chromaticity to analyze fluorescence signals, which improves the discrimination of positive/negative 
signals by 5-fold when compared to detection with traditional RGB intensity sensors or the naked 
eye. The ability to detect ZIKV directly from crude human sample matrices (blood, urine, and saliva) 
demonstrates our device’s utility for widespread clinical deployment. Together, these advances enable 
our system to host the key components necessary to expand the use of nucleic acid amplification-based 
detection assays towards point-of-care settings where they are needed most.
Arthropod-borne virus infections, including Zika, dengue, and chikungunya viruses, are on the rise globally. 
Dengue virus (DENV) and chikungunya virus (CHIKV) are already established in most tropical regions, while 
Zika virus (ZIKV) is rapidly spreading throughout Central and South America. ZIKV, like DENV, is an emerging 
mosquito-borne member of the Flaviviridae family. Since its discovery in 1947, ZIKV was believed to cause only 
mild illnesses, but the 2015 outbreak in Brazil revealed a link between the virus and severe fetal abnormalities, 
including microcephaly, congenital blindness, and fetal growth restriction, collectively referred to as congenital 
Zika syndrome1. More recently, ZIKV has been linked to the neurological disorder Guillain-Barré2, which can 
strike individuals at any age, leaving many population groups at greater risk if infected. While most arboviruses 
are thought to spread exclusively between the vector and the host, ZIKV has the capability to spread via bodily 
fluids, including blood, saliva, semen, and urine3; this may help the virus spread more rapidly than previously 
thought. Confounding this is the fact that most infected individuals remain asymptomatic, which presents addi-
tional challenges for limiting the spread of the virus. As the virus has made its way to the United States and 
has spread among human and mosquito populations, the need for rapid, low-cost diagnostics is even greater. 
Thus, there has been repeated emphasis by the World Health Organization (WHO) and U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention to address the key limitations facing current infectious disease management strategies, 
especially in resource-limited settings4,5.
The current ZIKV outbreak has highlighted key limitations of existing diagnostic technologies. The fact that 
infections with Zika, dengue, and chikungunya viruses yield similar symptoms, including fever, rash, and joint 
pain, complicates differential diagnosis. Current serological and nucleic acid amplification tests are conducted 
on blood or other bodily fluids such as urine, saliva, and semen, and these tests require skilled technicians to 
extract, prepare, and load samples into complex analytical instruments6. Furthermore, systems capable of pro-
viding gold standard viral detection via nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT)—typically multiplexed quan-
titative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)—generally comprise bulky and complex 
1Department of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA, 94550, USA. 
2Department of Systems Biology, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA, 94550, USA. Correspondence and 
requests for materials should be addressed to A.P. (email: apriye@sandia.gov) or R.J.M. (email: rmeaghe@sandia.gov)
Received: 05 December 2016
accepted: 24 January 2017
Published: 20 March 2017
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
peripheral components including expensive and power-hungry thermal cyclers (for rapidly heating and cooling 
samples) with built-in fluorimeter units (for performing real-time fluorescence detection). The associated turn-
around time, complexity, form factor, power consumption, and cost of these devices make them sub-optimal for 
point-of-care applications, limiting their widespread deployment. Consequently, newly emerging NAAT devices 
are shifting from dedicated laboratory-based detection systems towards more compact, portable, and inexpensive 
field deployable systems7–10.
Reverse transcription-loop mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) has emerged as a popular isother-
mal NAAT for viral detection due to simplified thermal management and high sensitivity and specificity towards 
targeted sequences11–14. Isothermal NAATs eliminate the need for power hungry thermal cyclers, significantly 
lowering the complexity of hardware required for these tests. RT-LAMP detection of dengue15–18, chikungunya19, 
and other RNA viruses has been demonstrated previously, and at least one recent report has demonstrated 
RT-LAMP detection of Zika virus13. In most cases, these reports detect amplification with non-specific indicators 
of total DNA synthesis, such as monitoring turbidity20, observing the color-change indicator hydroxynaphtol 
blue (HNB)17, performing a post-reaction analysis involving addition of an indicator dye (e.g. SYBR Green)21, or 
performing gel electrophoresis to analyze the banding pattern11. Post-reaction analysis that requires opening the 
tube is undesirable, both for reasons of complexity and the risk of amplicon contamination, whereas non-specific 
indicators such as turbidity or HNB may be prone to detection of false-positive amplification events (a common, 
if under-reported problem with isothermal amplifications such as LAMP).
We address these issues by implementing RT-LAMP for Zika, dengue, and chikungunya in a closed-tube, 
multiplexable, target-specific format. The Zika and chikungunya assays utilize a recently developed detection 
technique that involves quenching of unincorporated amplification signal reporters (QUASR). Compared to most 
other reported LAMP detection modalities, QUASR offers very bright signals, greatly reduces the detection of 
false-positive amplifications, and offers the ability to multiplex two or more targets per reaction. These features 
reduce reagent costs and dilution when sample volume is limiting. QUASR is also fully compatible with com-
plex sample matrices such as blood (up to 10%), which can interfere with some other detection modalities (e.g., 
SYTO intercalating dyes or pH-sensitive dyes). The use of QUASR in turn enables us to carry out the assays on 
a modular, wireless smartphone-operated platform powered by a 5 V USB charger. A custom smartphone appli-
cation (app) controls a low-powered isothermal heating module and a multicolor LED excitation module via 
Bluetooth. The app also acquires images from the phone camera and processes them through a novel color and 
luminance-based detection algorithm capable of detecting multiplexed QUASR assay signals with greater accu-
racy than conventional image intensity analysis.
Results
Assay speed and sensitivity. 
We aimed to develop a rapid and reliable QUASR RT-LAMP assay for ZIKV, 
while relying on previously reported RT-LAMP assays for CHIKV and DENV17,19,22. We first set about identify-
ing an optimal primer set for ZIKV, using the LAMP-compatible SYTO intercalating dyes to perform real-time 
monitoring. We then adapted the optimal primer set to the target-specific QUASR endpoint detection technique. 
The mechanism and chemistry of QUASR-based RT-LAMP detection techniques has previously been described 
in detail22. At least one recent publication describes a different RT-LAMP assay for ZIKV utilizing leuco crystal 
violet indicator13. However, the system can only detect total amplification and is incompatible with multiplexed 
assays. Furthermore, it is not clear how these assays perform with crude human bodily fluid sample matrices 
(blood and urine) or dry reagents, which are key features to improve the clinical relevance of a NAAT. Our 
QUASR RT-LAMP methods addresses these issues to enable robust and sample preparation-free ZIKV detection.
We prepared a ZIKV RNA standard from cultured ZIKV. We quantified ZIKV RNA genome copy number 
per plaque-forming unit (PFU) by qRT-PCR, using a synthesized DNA standard, and Vero cell plaque assays. 
Vero-cultured ZIKV was utilized for evaluating RT-LAMP assays throughout this study. We developed six candi-
date RT-LAMP primer sets that each targeted regions of the virus’ positive sense RNA genome that are conserved 
across the Asian lineage of ZIKV. Candidate primer sets targeted conserved regions within the Env, NS1, NS3, 
and NS5 genes and the 3′ 
 untranslated region (3′ 
-UTR). These regions were chosen empirically, based on the 
conservation observed in sequence alignments, although the NS5 (RNA-dependent RNA polymerase) and 3′ 
- 
UTR are expected to be highly conserved. Furthermore, we have previously found viral polymerase and 3′ 
-UTR 
to be good candidates for primer design23. We evaluated these six primer sets based on the speed with which they 
amplified their extracted ZIKV RNA targets and their tendency to engender false positives (Figure S1). The fastest 
amplifying primer set was also the most resistant to false positives (0/18 no template controls amplified) during 
an extended 75-minute isothermal incubation. This primer set, denoted NS5-8640, targets the ZIKV NS5 gene 
(the RNA polymerase). The NS5-8640 primer set performs optimally at 67 °C with 10 mM MgSO4 (optimization 
data not shown), detecting sample RNA concentrations of 105-102 PFU equivalent/mL (104-101 copies/rxn) in 
10 to 15 minutes, respectively (Fig. 1). We then applied the QUASR detection method to RT-LAMP with the 
NS5-8640 primer set, labeling the BIP primer’s 5′ 
 end with Cy5 and including a short (11 bp), complementary 
quenching probe with a 3′ 
 Iowa Black RQ quencher. Upon cooling RT-LAMP reactions to room temperature, 
specific amplification of ZIKV resulted in bright fluorescence when excited by a red LED, while non-amplified 
reactions appeared completely dark. As expected, QUASR with Cy5 did not impact the speed or sensitivity of the 
NS5-8640 primer set for ZIKV, and QUASR was compatible with simultaneous real-time monitoring by SYTO 9, 
which fluoresces green upon intercalation into dsDNA. Previously described RT-LAMP assays for CHIKV and 
DENV were similarly rapid and sensitive in our hands compared to literature17,19. CHIKV RNA was detectable in 
7 to 15 minutes at concentrations of 108 to 103 PFU/mL, and RNA templates from DENV 1–4 were detectable in 
less than 40 minutes (data not shown). In summary, QUASR in RT-LAMP with the NS5-8640 primer set rapidly 
and reliably detected ZIKV RNA.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
A notable feature of LAMP and RT-LAMP is that it is possible to directly detect intact pathogens without 
first performing a nucleic acid extraction. In order to more fully characterize the sensitivity of the NS5-8640 
RT-LAMP primer set for intact ZIKV, we ran a probit analysis on intact Vero cell-cultured virus serially diluted 
into Tris buffer. We found that the assay yielded a LOD95 (limit of detection) = 
 22 PFU/mL (44 copies/rxn) and 
a LOD50 = 
 4.9 PFU/mL (9.8 copies/rxn) (Fig. 1). We hypothesized that heating the viral sample before adding 
it into the RT-LAMP reaction mixture might lower the limit of detection by further disrupting viral structure 
and releasing RNA from the viral capsid. However, we found that heating ZIKV at 75 °C for 5 minutes in 10 mM 
Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) before adding virus to RT-LAMP had little impact on the LOD (Figure S3). We concluded that 
our RT-LAMP assay was suitable for direct isothermal amplification of intact ZIKV, which significantly simplifies 
the required sample preparation.
Rapid point-of-care tests are ideally shelf-stable for distribution in the absence of a cold chain. We prepared 
shelf-stable formulations of the QUASR RT-LAMP Zika assay by drying RT-LAMP reagents (except betaine, 
magnesium, and isothermal amplification buffer) along with a proprietary stabilization mixture from Biomatrica, 
Inc. These dry assays, rehydrated with a mixture of water, isothermal amplification buffer, and added magnesium, 
performed comparably to fresh reactions containing betaine (Figure S2). Real-time monitoring demonstrated 
positive detection of ZIKV as early as 10 minutes (actual reaction ran for 40 minutes), and endpoint discrimina-
tion by QUASR provided a positive to negative discrimination by fluorescence of 5–7 to 1 without background 
subtraction. In-house testing with several different QUASR RT-LAMP assays prepared with the Biomatrica sta-
bilizers indicates that they remain stable at temperatures up to 40 °C for at least one month if protected from light 
(data not shown). The bright endpoint signal produced by QUASR permits detection by eye or simple optics, such 
as a smartphone camera. We therefore postulated that QUASR detection, coupled with assay stabilization in a dry 
format, would enable adaptation to shelf-stable assays that can be run at the point-of-care.
Specificity of ZIKV primers. 
We evaluated the strain specificity and cross-reactivity of the NS5-8640 primer 
set against three ZIKV strains isolated from different regions of Latin America, genetically similar off-target fla-
viviruses, and off-target alphaviruses. QUASR RT-LAMP detected all three strains of ZIKV with identical speed 
and sensitivity (Fig. 1, Table 1). Asian lineage strains of ZIKV have no mismatches within the regions of the NS5 
gene that the NS5-8640 primers target, so identical assay performance was expected. When QUASR RT-LAMP 
assays were tested against high levels of off-target RNA from other flaviviruses and alphaviruses, no amplifica-
tion occurred (Table 1). Note that we did not test any African isolates of ZIKV with our assay, because based on 
sequence analysis of the 1947 MR766 isolate from Uganda, we identified > 
10 mismatches within the NS5 priming 
region and would not expect this isolate to amplify. For broad coverage of highly divergent RNA viruses, degen-
erate primers or multiple primer sets targeting different lineages is sometimes necessary for RT-LAMP or other 
NAATs. CHIKV and DENV primer sets were previously tested for cross-reactivity with DENV-1-4, Japanese 
encephalitis virus, WNV, SLEV, sindbis virus, or human RNA17,19. In this study, we also tested for cross-reactivity 
of these primer sets against extracted RNA from ZIKV (Puerto Rico), CHIKV, DENV-1, and WNV, and no 
amplification occurred.
Figure 1. RT-LAMP rapidly detects Asian lineage strains of the Zika virus (ZIKV) with high sensitivity.  
(A) Positive amplification is detectable within 10 to 15 min using real time monitoring with SYTO 62, and 
reaction speed is comparable for RNA extracted from ZIKV isolates from Brazil, Honduras, and Puerto Rico 
(n = 6). (B) A plot of detection probability versus the concentration of intact ZIKV (Puerto Rico) in Tris 
buffer. Solid line represents curve fit by probit analysis, and dashed lines represent the 95% confidence interval. 
LOD95  = 2 PFU/mL, LOD50  = 4.9 PFU/mL (n = 12 to 36 replicates per dilution). Time to positivity is the Ct (cycle 
threshold) equivalent for LAMP reactions.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
Detection of ZIKV in Human Sample Matrices without Sample Preparation. 
A sample 
preparation-free assay would dramatically simplify point-of-care diagnosis of ZIKV. RT-LAMP is able to operate 
for some viruses without an RNA extraction because the reaction temperature is high enough to allow primers 
and enzymes to access the viral RNA without performing a separate lysis step prior to adding the enzymes. 
The enzymes used in RT-LAMP are also resistant to inhibition by substances in clinical sample matrices. The 
no-extraction approach is fundamentally limited by the amount of sample that can be tested, and an extraction 
is still useful for increasing the concentration of viral RNA from a low-concentration sample, although at the 
expense of a more complex procedure.
In the interest of developing the simplest possible assay protocol, we evaluated QUASR RT-LAMP’s capacity to 
detect ZIKV in crude human clinical matrices without lysis or extraction. We spiked intact Vero-cultured ZIKV 
into human urine, saliva, or blood to final concentrations of 102 and 103 PFU/ml, which are in the lower range 
of viral concentrations observed in specimens from Zika disease patients24. The ZIKV-spiked sample matrices 
were directly added at 10% (by volume) into the RT-LAMP reactions. Time to positivity, measured in real-time 
during ZIKV RT-LAMP reactions, slowed in the presence of crude matrices (Fig. 2A). However, the end point 
signal detected by QUASR clearly discriminated positives from negatives in urine, saliva, and blood (Fig. 2B). We 
detected ZIKV at or near a rate of 100% when it was present at a concentration of 103 PFU/ml in clinical matrices. 
At a ZIKV concentration of 102 PFU/ml, our detection rates in saliva and blood fell to 75% and 60%, respec-
tively (n = 
 20) (Fig. 2C). Despite the reduced fluorescence intensity in the blood matrix compared to Tris buffer 
and other sample matrices, the difference between positive and negative samples by QUASR remained obvious 
(Fig. 2D). These results suggest that the QUASR RT-LAMP ZIKV assay is ideal for clinically relevant tests with 
minimum or no sample preparation.
We note that, although flavivirus RNA is routinely detected in the cell-free fraction of blood (plasma or 
serum) it is possible that whole blood would also contain intracellular viral RNA (e.g. from immature virions 
or virus replicating within white cells). Recent studies have given differing results on the distribution of dengue 
virus RNA within the fractions of whole blood (e.g. serum versus cellular components25,26). Our simple spiked 
samples may be imperfect models of clinical specimens from flavivirus infections. Curtis et al. have demonstrated 
extraction-free RT-LAMP amplification of HIV (an RNA virus that can be found in blood as free virions or intra-
cellularly within T cells) from whole blood following a simple red blood cell lysis procedure27. Other procedures 
involving heat, buffer, or detergent-mediated blood lysis have also been demonstrated to be compatible with 
extraction-free LAMP detection of other intracellular and extracellular blood-borne pathogens28,29. Addition of 
such a procedure to our assay may improve recovery of intracellular viral RNAs (if present) with minimal added 
complexity to the protocol.
A smartphone-enabled LAMP box. 
We developed a user-friendly, inexpensive and portable LAMP 
detection platform that leverages the robustness of our optimized ZIKV assay and the versatility of smartphones 
to enable in-field diagnostics (Fig. 3A). The complete NAAT device consists of three primary components: (i) a 
heating module, (ii) an assay reaction housing module, (iii) and an optical-detection/image-analysis module. 
Thermal management systems in commercially available thermal cyclers are often complex, owing to the installa-
tion of rapid ramp rate Peltier thermal blocks required for fast and precise thermal cycling. In contrast, isothermal 
NAAT devices exploit simpler heating setups. For example, we utilized a small isothermal heater powered by an 
ordinary 5 V power source. Our heater required very little energy (~85 mWh) to maintain a sufficiently uniform 
surface temperature profile for 40 min (Fig. 3C). Thermal cyclers for qRT-PCR applications work in conjunction 
with mass-produced and conventional reaction housing systems, typically thin walled polypropylene tubes (PCR 
Virus
Strain or isolate designation
Primer reactivity
Target concentration (PFU equivalent/mL)
Flaviviruses
 Zika virus (ZIKV)
PRVABC59 (Puerto Rico)
+ 
102–105 (1)
Brazil
+ 
102–105
R103451 (Honduras)
+ 
102–105
 St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV)
KERN217
− 
105
 West Nile virus (WNV)
L-CA-04 SAC-04-7168
− 
107
 Yellow fever virus (YFV)
17D
− 
107.1
 Dengue virus serotype 1 (DENV-1)
BC-796
− 
106.4
 Dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV-2)
BC-122-94
− 
105.9
Jamaica/N.1409 accession number M20558.1
− 
Ct 24 min(2)
 Dengue virus serotype 3 (DENV-3)
BC 156-97
− 
105.5
Alphaviruses
 Chikungunya virus (CHIKV)
Ross
− 
108.5
 Western equine encephalitis virus (WEEV)
KERN 5547
− 
105
 Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV)
TC-83
− 
109.5
Table 1.  Viral RNA used for testing sensitivity and specificity of NS5-8640 RT-LAMP primers. 1We tested 
a larger range of ZIKV target concentrations in other experiments presented in this paper. 2DENV-2 isolate 
JMP1402 was not quantified by plaque assay. Extracted RNA was quantitated by RT-qPCR and used undiluted 
as a template in RT-LAMP. RT-qPCR Ct value is indicated.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
tubes). Conversely, isothermal heaters often require custom reaction housings, such as microfluidic chips or mod-
ified PCR tubes, which can complicate sample loading or supply chain management13,30. We retained reaction 
housing simplicity by using off-the-shelf PCR tubes to carry out our LAMP reactions in our isothermal heater 
(Fig. 3D). Nevertheless, our heater is also adaptable to tailored reaction housing systems, such as custom laser-cut 
assay wells (Fig. 3E). We found that these shallow wells provided a larger thermal contact area of the fluid with 
the heated surface than PCR tubes did, enabling more rapid temperature equilibration within the reaction fluid 
(Fig. 3F). The optical detection modules in commercial NAAT are typically bulky and complex fluorimeters 
consisting of an excitation source, optical lenses, and a photon detector, typically a photo multiplier tube (PMT), 
a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, or photo-diodes. These integrated detectors record the fluorescence 
signal emitted from the nucleic acid assay over time, and an inbuilt processor or a companion computer analyzes 
the fluorescence data. We have found that RT-LAMP-based amplification is more useful for yes/no end point 
determination than real-time monitoring at the point-of-care. First, real-time RT-LAMP tends to be quantitative 
over a narrower concentration range compared to qRT-PCR23. Furthermore, definitive binary end points (yes/
no) are easier for non-experts to quickly interpret than quantitative real-time data. Our device contains a com-
pact surface-mounted multicolored LED coupled with a multi-pass band filter to serve as an excitation source 
(Fig. 3B). Both the isothermal heater and the LED are actuated wirelessly (Bluetooth) via the smartphone appli-
cation called “LAMPtoGo” (Fig. 3G).
Color changes in end point fluorescence detection techniques such as QUASR can be readily monitored by 
the human eye and a colored plastic filter. However, a digital photo sensor is more quantitative because properties 
Figure 2. RT-LAMP robustly detects intact ZIKV in the presence of crude sample matrices. (A) Time 
to positivity (Ct equivalent for LAMP reactions), determined in real time by SYTO 62, is slowed in complex 
matrices. Error bars show standard deviation (n = 20). (B) QUASR detection enables clear and accurate 
endpoint discrimination in the presence of crude sample matrices, even whole blood, after cooling reactions to 
room temperature. Error bars indicate standard deviation (n = 31 to 40 per sample matrix, all positive results 
from A are pooled). While SYTO 62 signaled 1 false positive in urine no template controls (NTCs) and 7 false 
positives in saliva NTCs (n = 20 per sample matrix for NTCs), QUASR did not detect any false positives in 
NTC reactions. The criterion for a positive endpoint detection signal was determined from the NTC signals 
(Positive threshold value = Mean (NTC signals) + 3*Standard deviation (NTC signals)) which was calculated to 
be 1.06 based on the NTC values of saliva samples. (C) QUASR detection in RT-LAMP preserves sensitivity in 
crude matrices. Error bars indicate estimated standard error of proportion (n = 20). (D) Image of positive and 
negative ZIKV detection in sample matrices by QUASR RT-LAMP.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
like stereo-vision, visible color gamut, dynamic color range, and retinal photon sensitivity are parameters that 
vary from eye to eye31,32. Smartphones are ubiquitous and host a variety of sensors, including wireless technology 
(Wi-Fi, Bluetooth), global positioning system (GPS), and perhaps most significantly the CMOS (complementary 
metal-oxide semiconductor) optical sensor. The embedded camera unit coupled with advanced computing capa-
bilities has made smartphones popular in bio sensing as an alternative to microscopes and photon detectors. The 
very familiar and intuitive application environment (Apple iOS and Android) cuts down the software learning 
curve and minimizes the need for new users to familiarize themselves with instrument operations. Several efforts 
have already harnessed the small footprint and versatility of smartphones to enable microscopy33,34, spectros-
copy35, single molecule analysis36, colorimetry37–40, paper-based microfluidics41,42, and label-free detection43,44.
Our smartphone application takes advantage of the rapidly improving commercial CMOS sensor embedded 
in ordinary phones to acquire and analyze images of QUASR signals generated by our RT-LAMP assay more 
comprehensively than by the human eye. Inherent to all smartphones is the dynamic color balancing functional-
ity, which is optimized for photography and thus introduces variability in the sensor parameters to adjust to the 
dynamic ambient conditions. This is not ideal for detection of assay signals, and various color calibration charts 
and reference assay samples have supplemented smartphone detection platforms to reduce such image-to-image 
variability. A 3D-printed “LAMP box” encloses our entire system assembly, blocking any ambient light and thus 
providing reproducible LED illumination. Moreover, the LAMPtoGO app overrides the auto-adjustment of cam-
era parameters by the smartphone, granting manual control over the focal length, exposure time, and ISO of the 
CMOS sensor lens eliminating any variation in the emission signal. Once optimized for an assay, these parameters 
can be saved, allowing all subsequent assays to be performed with the same settings.
We applied our smartphone-operated LAMP box to simultaneous detection of ZIKV, CHIKV, and DENV. 
We utilized the spectral multiplexing capability of QUASR to detect ZIKV and CHIKV in a single reaction, using 
primer sets labeled with Cy5 (far red) for ZIKV, and FAM (green) for CHIKV22 (Fig. 4A–C). In parallel, we 
detected DENV using a previously-reported assay for simultaneous detection of DENV-1–417, adapted here for 
fluorescence detection with the intercalating dye SYTO 9 (Fig. 4D). We thereby demonstrated parallel detection 
of these three arboviruses with overlapping symptoms and epidemiology, and utilizing the smartphone platform 
for multiple detection modalities simultaneously (i.e. multiplexed QUASR, and non-specific intercalating dye). 
Since the CHIKV and DENV assays are based on previously published primer sets, we do not characterize them 
extensively as we did with our new ZIKV assay. We note that in multiplexing experiments with ZIKV and CHIKV, 
we were able to detect both targets when CHIKV was present in 105-fold excess relative to ZIKV and vice versa, 
suggesting that QUASR multiplexing is capable of detecting coinfections. We also note that we have demon-
strated serotype-specific detection of DENV-1 and DENV-2 using QUASR, spectrally multiplexed with ZIKV 
Figure 3. Smartphone enabled ZIKV detection. (A) Schematic of the RT-LAMP detection setup depicting the 
isothermal heater with reaction tubes, LED excitation source and Bluetooth microcontroller (Arduino Uno). 
(B) A 3 watt RGB LED coupled with an RGB multi band pass filter ensures a narrow excitation source for the 
assay reagents. (C) The isothermal heater provides a uniform surface temperature distribution within a 1 °C 
variation. The heaters can be loaded with either (D) off the shelf PCR polypropylene tubes or (E) custom made 
laser-cut reaction wells. (F) Thermal management and heat ramp rates are greatly improved with custom laser-
cut wells. (G) The smartphone app wirelessly actuates the isothermal heater and RGB LED excitation source to 
enable real time monitoring and changing of the heater temperature along with illumination of the samples with 
appropriate excitation light source. The illuminated reagents are captured by the smartphone camera equipped 
with an interchangeable emission filter and the images are analyzed subsequently.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
and CHIKV in two parallel reactions (not shown). It is not clear that distinguishing between serotypes of DENV 
is clinically useful in a point-of-care assay, versus a single assay for all DENV (such as shown here), as a patient 
with a positive test could be referred to a more sensitive and specific assay such as qRT-PCR for discrimination 
of serotypes.
For use within our smartphone system, we introduce a novel colorimetric detection algorithm, which analyzes 
the fluorescence images from the smartphone CMOS sensor. Such CMOS sensors consist of an array of pixel 
sensors coupled with a Bayer filter that passes red (R), green (G) and blue (B) light to select pixels. This type of 
RGB sensor is effective at reproducing a captured picture on the device display, but it is not ideal for colorimetric/
fluorescence detection. Until now, endpoint fluorescence detection with assays such as QUASR has relied on the 
difference in the raw RGB intensities between positive and negative signals. However, intensity of fluorophores 
with emission wavelengths between red (700 nm), green (546 nm), and blue (435 nm) can be significantly under-
represented due to the coupling of the intensity and color data in the RGB color space, yielding significantly 
lower positive/negative signal values. Thus, for multiplexed fluorescence detection, it is useful to work in a color 
space that is capable of decoupling the color and the luminance of a pixel. This is achieved by transforming 
the acquired RGB pixel values to the International Commission on Illumination (1931 CIE) color space which 
resolves the image on the basis of two chromaticity color coordinates (CIE x-y values) and a luminance value (CIE 
Y value). The x-y chromaticity coordinates enable visual and unambiguous representation of multiplexed assays 
by mapping the QUASR signals onto predefined fluorophore islands corresponding to their emission wavelength 
spectra (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, the Y value (luminance), which is now independent of the color, increases the 
detection sensitivity of the CMOS sensor by 3.2–6.4 fold in comparison to the standard RGB intensity analysis 
(Fig. 4B,C). Our smartphone LAMP box performs comparably to benchtop thermal cyclers both in terms of sen-
sitivity (detecting ZIKV at down to 100 PFU/mL) and the ability to detect ZIKV directly in a human bodily fluid 
matrix for clinical samples at realistic concentrations (Fig. 4E,F). Its small size and inexpensive design allows for 
widespread portable implementation outside the laboratory and at the point of need.
Conclusion
We have developed a point-of-care NAAT device which combines our recently developed QUASR multi-
plexed RT-LAMP assay with a novel smartphone based detection system, allowing simultaneous analysis for 
ZIKV, CHIKV, and DENV which share overlapping symptoms and epidemiology. Our NS5-8640 primer set for 
RT-LAMP detection of ZIKV targets a highly conserved sequence within the Asian lineage of ZIKV, yielding 
Figure 4. Mobile application for color sensitive multiplexed assay detection. (A) Duplex detection of ZIKV/
CHIKV by QUASR RT-LAMP. 10 PFU/μ 
L of each viral RNA was used in each reaction where indicated by a 
plus sign. No template controls are indicated with a negative sign. Samples were illuminated with Red/Blue light 
from the RGB LED and filtered images were acquired by LAMP2Go app. The analyzed images are then mapped 
over predefined fluorophore emission islands on the CIE xy chromaticity diagram, clearly distinguishing 
different viral target assays. (B) The positive to negative ratio of luminance value (CIE Y) for both FAM and CY5 
assays are 3.2–6.4 times greater than that obtained from (C) RGB intensity analysis for the same sample (The 
ratio values were calculated for image # 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 with image # 4 and 8 taken as negatives for FAM and 
CY5 respectively). (D) DENV 1 was detected in a single assay containing SYTO 9 dye and combined primers 
for DENV1, DENV2, DENV3 and DENV4, with 103.4 copies/μ 
L of DENV1 viral RNA target shown here. The 
portable LAMP assay is able to function with (E) clinically relevant sample matrix with (F) similar sensitivity as 
a benchtop NAAT device. Intact ZIKV were used as targets in these assays.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
high specificity with no cross reactivity with other genetically similar flaviviruses and alphaviruses. Our recently 
developed QUASR RT-LAMP detection chemistry coupled with the smartphone image analysis application ena-
bles unambiguous detection, yielding performance similar to benchtop NAAT devices. The ability of our LAMP 
reagents to function in dried formats eliminates cold chain requirements during shipping/storage. Our system 
can work directly with human samples (blood, saliva, urine), which minimizes the necessity for complex sample 
prep and simultaneously incorporates the versatility of an ordinary smartphone to provide an alternative to PCR 
to advance molecular diagnostics at the point of care.
Methods
Cells and Viruses. 
We found that ZIKV cultured from Vero cells had a titer of 1.6 × 
 107 PFU/mL and an RNA 
copy number of 2,000 copies/PFU. ZIKV cultured in insect (C6/36) cells had a titer (evaluated in Vero cells) of 
2.2 × 
 108 PFU/mL and an RNA copy number of 90 copies/PFU. Vero cells were maintained in Minimum Essential 
Medium alpha supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) fetal bovine serum, 100 μ 
g/ml penicillin, and 100 units/ml strep-
tomycin (Life Technologies) at 37 °C under 5% CO2.
ZIKV strains PRVABC59 (Puerto Rico) and R103451 (Honduras) were obtained from Brandy Russell (Centers 
for Disease Control, Fort Collins, CO). The Brazilian strain was provided by Michael Busch (Blood Systems 
Research Institute, San Francisco, CA). All strains were propagated in Vero cells. Briefly, cells were infected with 
virus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 and supernatant was collected after 7 days. Particle forming units 
(PFUs) were determined using a standard plaque assay consisting of an agarose overlay and crystal violet staining 
on Vero cells.
ZIKV target preparation. 
ZIKV RNA was isolated using QIAamp Viral RNA Mini extraction kit 
(QIAGEN) following manufacturer’s protocol. 140 μ 
l of viral supernatant from strain PRVABC59 was used for 
the extraction along with yeast tRNA (Thermo Fisher) as a carrier.
The ZIKV (PRVABC59) was spiked and further diluted in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) or human matrices 
(whole blood, saliva or urine) to various virus concentrations. Human sample matrices pooled from de-identified 
healthy donors were purchased from a commercial supplier (Innovative Research, Novi, MI). The matrices were 
tested by the supplier using FDA-approved methods and found negative for blood borne pathogens including 
HIV, HBV, HCV and syphilis. The supplier provides no identifying information about the donors, making our use 
of the sample matrices exempt from human subjects research regulations under US 45 CFR 46.101(b). Thus our 
study does not require a formal institutional review board approval.
RT-LAMP primer design. 
Candidate regions for primer design were identified by performing an alignment 
with complete genomes of 17 Zika virus isolates from the Asian/Latin American outbreak lineage. Alignment 
was performed with Clustal X2 software using default parameters, and scanned visually for regions of high con-
servation. LAMP Designer software (Premier Biosoft) was used to identify candidate primer sets for regions of 
high conservation (typically using an input range of 300–500 bases identified from software), using the software’s 
default parameters for primer design. For each target region, the software produces a list of candidate sequences 
ranked by quality score. For each group of candidate primers, the primers were manually subjected for further 
tests (Supplementary Information).
RT-LAMP assay. 
RT-LAMP reactions were carried out in PCR tubes or 96-well plates with 1 μ 
L of the sample 
in 9 μ 
L of RT-LAMP reaction solution. The fresh reaction mixture contained 1x Isothermal Amplification Buffer 
(20 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM (NH4)2SO4, 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgSO4, 0.1% Tween® 
 20, pH 8.8@25 °C, NEB), 700 mM 
of Betaine (Sigma), 0.14 mM of each nucleotide, 8 mM MgSO4, 2 μ 
M SYTO® 
 9 Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 
2 units of Porcine RNase Inhibitor45, 0.2 μ 
M each F3 and B3, 0.8 μ 
M each LF and LB, 1.6 μ 
M each FIP and BIP 
primers (Table S1), 3.2 units of avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV) reverse transcriptase (Life Sciences Advanced 
Technologies Inc., St Petersburg, FL), and 3.2 units of Bst 2.0 WarmStart® DNA Polymerase (NEB). To make the 
dried reagent formulation, isothermal amplification buffer, betaine and magnesium sulfate were removed. While 
rehydrating, isothermal amplification buffer and magnesium sulfate were added to reagents dried along with a 
proprietary stabilization mixture from Biomatrica Inc (Supplementary Information).
For real-time monitoring of the reaction, fluorescent intensity was collected every 1 minute through FAM 
channel during incubation at 67 °C for 40 minutes and for the end-point, fluorescent intensity was measured 
at room temperature though Cy5 channel after the incubation using CFX-96 real-time thermocycler (Bio-Rad 
Laboratories, Hercules, CA). For the RT-LAMP on the box, each laser cut custom well was loaded with mixture 
of 2.5 μ 
L of the sample and 22.5 μ 
L of the RT-LAMP reaction solution and then placed on the isothermal heating 
block at 67 °C for 40 minutes and imaged at room temperature as described below. The volume of the laser cut 
wells were designed to be 25 μ 
L to allow for a larger top cross-sectional imaging area (Dia. ~4.6 mm). The larger 
cross-sectional also served to increase the heat transfer between the reaction fluid and the isothermal heater.
Specificity and sensitivity of RT-LAMP. 
For testing specificity of the RT-LAMP primers, each Zika stain 
was serially diluted to 100, 10, 1, and 0.1 PFU/mL in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and used as a template for the 
RT-LAMP reaction described above. For testing cross-reactivity with other members of the flavivirus group and 
alphaviruses group, at least 100 PFU equivalent purified RNA from each virus was used as a template.
The sensitivity of the RT-LAMP assay for the detection of ZIKV was determined by Probit analysis. Briefly, the 
virus (PRVABC59) was tested with 2-fold serial dilution in replicates at each virus concentration. The detection 
probability with 95% confidence interval was obtained by statistical analysis using probit regression model with 
R (version 3.3.1).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
Portable LAMP box. 
The isothermal heater and RGB LED (3 W RGB tricolor; Digi-key; Part # 516-2246-
1ND) fitted with a triple-bandpass filter (Edmund Optics #87-237) were operated via an Arduino UNO R3 
microcontroller (ATmega328, assembled) which communicated to the smartphone wirelessly through a HM11 
Bluetooth low energy (BLE) module (Seeed Technology Co., Ltd). Two 10 W, 3.3 Ω ceramic wire wound resistors 
(Digi-key; Part # 3.3W-10-ND) in series functioned as heaters by converting electric current to heat. One of the 
Arduino’s digital pin provided the heater with 5 V input voltage through a N channel MOSFET (MOSFET N-CH 
60 V 55 A TO-220; Digi-key; Part # 497-6742-5-ND). A temperature sensor (Digi-key; Part # AD22100STZ-ND) 
monitored the heater temperature, and the signal was sent to one of the analog pins in the microcontroller. This 
analog reading was converted into temperature which was continuously monitored to operate the heater iso-
thermally at the desired set point via a pulse width modulation (PWM) signal. The PWM pin outputs 100% of 
its signal until the temperature of the heater reaches the set point and shuts down the current to the heater if the 
temperature exceeds the set point. The Arduino program was written and compiled in Arduino 1.6.6 integrated 
development environment (IDE). A separate function library was created to enable communication between 
the smartphone and the Arduino via the BLE module. A dark plastic enclosure for the setup (LAMP box) was 
designed using FreeCAD and 3D printed using MakerBot Replicator 2X.
The embedded Bluetooth module in the LAMP box can create a seamless communication interface between 
the device peripheral components (isothermal heater and RGB LED source) and any smartphone via our custom 
developed application called LAMPtoGo. The app is quite intuitive with a simplistic GUI consisting of three 
main screens, namely (i) control panel screen, (ii) sample selection screen and (iii) Colorimetric-Luminance 
image analysis screen (SFIG 4). Once the app is launched, the control panel screen allows the user to establish a 
Bluetooth connection with the LAMP box, set the heater temperature and monitor the real time heater temper-
ature profile. It also displays a live camera feed and allows the user to override the default smartphone camera 
parameters. This enables the users to manually tune the focal length, exposure and ISO of the camera lens inde-
pendently. The ability to digitally zoom images via the apps affine transformation framework enables a total of 6 X 
magnification without noticeable pixel degradation. Images are acquired through an array of fluorescence filters 
positioned in the box (Edmund Optics #87-777 and #62-979 for FAM and Cy5, respectively). The user can also 
actuate inbuilt smartphone flash LED at varying intensities to increase/decrease visibility within the box. After 
running the LAMP reaction and image acquisition, the user is taken to “sample selection” screen where they can 
select multiple regions of interest within the acquired images using touch gestures for post processing. After doing 
so, the results are displayed on the final “Colorimetric-Luminance image analysis” screen.
Colorimetry-luminance based image analysis. 
The raw image data from the CMOS sensor is stored as 
a bitmat data file containing 4 bits per pixel (one for each red, blue, green and alpha pixel values) corresponding 
to standard RGB (sRGB) color space. The alpha channel which measures pixel transparency is discarded as it is 
constant for all pixels. A series of transformations is applied pixel matrix to convert the sRGB values to the cor-
responding CIE xyY color space as depicted in SFIG 5. Gamma transformation is applied with a gamma value of 
2.4 to account for the non-linear intensity scale of the CMOS sensor46. The averaged chromaticity values (x, y) 
are then mapped on a 2D chromaticity diagram with predefined islands corresponding to the emission spectra of 
four spectrally different fluorophores (FAM, HEX, ROX and CY5). The boundaries of these island are determined 
by the emission wavelength of the fluorophore and the color gamut of the device. The third parameter, luminance 
(Y) contains information about the strength of signal irrespective of the color. Finally, the results can be viewed 
within the app as plots or exported as .csv files for further analysis. The time stamp and GPS location is also 
exported for each run for archival.
References
1. Coyne, C. B. & Lazear, H. M. Zika virus - reigniting the TORCH. Nature Reviews Microbiology (2016).
2. Cao-Lormeau, V.-M. et al. Guillain-Barré Syndrome outbreak associated with Zika virus infection in French Polynesia: a case-
control study. The Lancet 387, 1531–1539 (2016).
3. Chan, J. F., Choi, G. K., Yip, C. C., Cheng, V. C. & Yuen, K.-Y. Zika fever and congenital Zika syndrome: an unexpected emerging 
arboviral disease. Journal of Infection 72, 507–524 (2016).
4. Organization, W. H. Zika virus, microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome situation report (2016).
5. Fiorentino, D. & Montero, F. The Zika Virus and Pregnancy. Current Obstetrics and Gynecology Reports 5, 234–238 (2016).
6. Shukla, S., Hong, S.-Y., Chung, S. H. & Kim, M. Rapid Detection Strategies for the Global Threat of Zika Virus: Current State, New 
Hypotheses and Limitations. Frontiers in Microbiology 7, 1685 (2016).
7. Jiang, L. et al. Solar thermal polymerase chain reaction for smartphone-assisted molecular diagnostics. Scientific reports 4 (2014).
8. Priye, A. & Ugaz, V. M. In Microfluidic Methods for Molecular Biology 55–69 (Springer, 2016).
9. Yang, S. & Rothman, R. E. PCR-based diagnostics for infectious diseases: uses, limitations, and future applications in acute-care 
settings. The Lancet infectious diseases 4, 337–348 (2004).
10. Chin, C. D., Linder, V. & Sia, S. K. Commercialization of microfluidic point-of-care diagnostic devices. Lab on a Chip 12, 2118–2134 
(2012).
11. Notomi, T. et al. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of DNA. Nucleic acids research 28, e63–e63 (2000).
12. Notomi, T., Mori, Y., Tomita, N. & Kanda, H. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP): principle, features, and future 
prospects. Journal of Microbiology 53, 1–5 (2015).
13. Song, J. et al. Instrument-free point-of-care molecular detection of Zika virus. Analytical Chemistry 88, 7289–7294 (2016).
14. Tian, B. et al. Attomolar Zika virus oligonucleotide detection based on loop-mediated isothermal amplification and AC 
susceptometry. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 86, 420–425 (2016).
15. Teoh, B.-T. et al. Detection of dengue viruses using reverse transcription-loop-mediated isothermal amplification. BMC infectious 
diseases 13, 1 (2013).
16. Parida, M. et al. Rapid detection and differentiation of dengue virus serotypes by a real-time reverse transcription-loop-mediated 
isothermal amplification assay. Journal of clinical microbiology 43, 2895–2903 (2005).
17. Lau, Y.-L. et al. Colorimetric detection of dengue by single tube reverse-transcription-loop-mediated isothermal amplification. PloS 
one 10, e0138694 (2015).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
18. Dauner, A. L. et al. Development of a pan-serotype reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay for the 
detection of dengue virus. Diagnostic microbiology and infectious disease 83, 30–36 (2015).
19. Parida, M. et al. Rapid and real-time detection of Chikungunya virus by reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification assay. Journal of clinical microbiology 45, 351–357 (2007).
20. Mori, Y., Nagamine, K., Tomita, N. & Notomi, T. Detection of loop-mediated isothermal amplification reaction by turbidity derived 
from magnesium pyrophosphate formation. Biochemical and biophysical research communications 289, 150–154 (2001).
21. Iwamoto, T., Sonobe, T. & Hayashi, K. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification for direct detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
complex, M. avium, and M. intracellulare in sputum samples. Journal of clinical microbiology 41, 2616–2622 (2003).
22. Ball, C. S. et al. Quenching of unincorporated amplification signal reporters in reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal 
amplification enabling bright, single-step, closed-tube, and multiplexed detection of RNA viruses. Analytical chemistry 88, 
3562–3568 (2016).
23. Wheeler, S. S. et al. Surveillance for Western Equine Encephalitis, St. Louis Encephalitis, and West Nile Viruses Using Reverse 
Transcription Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification. PloS One 11, e0147962 (2016).
24. Musso, D. & Gubler, D. J. Zika virus. Clinical microbiology reviews 29, 487–524 (2016).
25. Klungthong, C. et al. Dengue virus detection using whole blood for reverse transcriptase PCR and virus isolation. Journal of clinical 
microbiology 45, 2480–2485 (2007).
26. Añez, G. et al. Distribution of Dengue Virus Types 1 and 4 in Blood Components from Infected Blood Donors from Puerto Rico. 
PLoS Negl Trop Dis 10, e0004445 (2016).
27. Curtis, K. A. et al. Isothermal amplification using a chemical heating device for point-of-care detection of HIV-1. PloS one 7, e31432 
(2012).
28. Hayashida, K., Kajino, K., Hachaambwa, L., Namangala, B. & Sugimoto, C. Direct blood dry LAMP: a rapid, stable, and easy 
diagnostic tool for Human African Trypanosomiasis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9, e0003578 (2015).
29. Kemleu, S. et al. A Field-Tailored Reverse Transcription Loop-Mediated Isothermal Assay for High Sensitivity Detection of 
Plasmodium falciparum Infections. PloS one 11, e0165506 (2016).
30. Priye, A. et al. Lab-on-a-drone: Toward pinpoint deployment of smartphone-enabled nucleic acid-based diagnostics for mobile 
health care. Analytical Chemistry (2016).
31. Nathans, J., Piantanida, T. P., Eddy, R. L., Shows, T. B. & Hogness, D. S. Molecular genetics of inherited variation in human color 
vision. Science 232, 203–210 (1986).
32. Deeb, S. The molecular basis of variation in human color vision. Clinical genetics 67, 369–377 (2005).
33. Breslauer, D. N., Maamari, R. N., Switz, N. A., Lam, W. A. & Fletcher, D. A. Mobile phone based clinical microscopy for global health 
applications. PloS One 4, e6320 (2009).
34. Tseng, D. et al. Lensfree microscopy on a cellphone. Lab on a Chip 10, 1787–1792 (2010).
35. Yu, H., Tan, Y. & Cunningham, B. T. Smartphone fluorescence spectroscopy. Analytical chemistry 86, 8805–8813 (2014).
36. Wei, Q. et al. Imaging and Sizing of Single DNA Molecules on a Mobile Phone. ACS Nano 8, 12725–12733, doi: 10.1021/nn505821y 
(2014).
37. Lee, S., Oncescu, V., Mancuso, M., Mehta, S. & Erickson, D. A smartphone platform for the quantification of vitamin D levels. Lab 
on a Chip 14, 1437–1442 (2014).
38. Oncescu, V., Mancuso, M. & Erickson, D. Cholesterol testing on a smartphone. Lab on a Chip 14, 759–763 (2014).
39. Oncescu, V., O’Dell, D. & Erickson, D. Smartphone based health accessory for colorimetric detection of biomarkers in sweat and 
saliva. Lab on a Chip 13, 3232–3238 (2013).
40. Shen, L., Hagen, J. A. & Papautsky, I. Point-of-care colorimetric detection with a smartphone. Lab on a Chip 12, 4240–4243 (2012).
41. San Park, T., Li, W., McCracken, K. E. & Yoon, J.-Y. Smartphone quantifies Salmonella from paper microfluidics. Lab on a Chip 13, 
4832–4840 (2013).
42. Fronczek, C. F., San Park, T., Harshman, D. K., Nicolini, A. M. & Yoon, J.-Y. Paper microfluidic extraction and direct smartphone-
based identification of pathogenic nucleic acids from field and clinical samples. RSC Advances 4, 11103–11110 (2014).
43. Gallegos, D. et al. Label-free biodetection using a smartphone. Lab on a Chip 13, 2124–2132 (2013).
44. Huang, Y.-W. & Ugaz, V. M. Smartphone-based detection of unlabeled DNA via electrochemical dissolution. Analyst 138, 
2522–2526 (2013).
45. Guo, W. et al. High level soluble production of functional ribonuclease inhibitor in Escherichia coli by fusing it to soluble partners. 
Protein expression and purification 77, 185–192 (2011).
46. Skandarajah, A., Reber, C. D., Switz, N. A. & Fletcher, D. A. Quantitative imaging with a mobile phone microscope. PloS One 9, 
e96906 (2014).
Acknowledgements
Viruses: We acknowledge Dr. Brandy Russell (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, CO) 
for the ZIKV strains PRVABC59 (Puerto Rico) and R103451 (Honduras). We acknowledge Dr. Michael Busch 
(Blood Systems Research Institute, San Francisco, CA) for the Brazilian ZIKV isolate. The following reagent was 
obtained through BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH: Genomic RNA from Dengue Virus Type 1, Hawaii, NR-4287. We 
acknowledge the group of Dr. Lark Coffey (University of California-Davis) for providing RNA from the other 
viruses in Table 1. This work was funded by a grant from Sandia National Laboratories’ Laboratory Directed 
Research and Development (LDRD) program (Project# 173111, PI: Meagher and Project# 190245)), and by a 
grant from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID grant 1R21AI120973, PI: Meagher). 
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a 
wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear 
Security Administration under Contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.
Author Contributions
R.J.M. and A.P. conceived the work. R.J.M. designed the study. A.P., S.W.B., Y.K.L. R.J.M. and C.S.B. performed 
the experiments. S.W.B. and O.A.N. developed protocols for safe handling of live viruses. All authors contributed 
to writing the paper and have approved the final version.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Priye, A. et al. A smartphone-based diagnostic platform for rapid detection of Zika, 
chikungunya, and dengue viruses. Sci. Rep. 7, 44778; doi: 10.1038/srep44778 (2017).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 7:44778 | DOI: 10.1038/srep44778
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2017
