 REVIEW
published: 04 December 2018
doi: 10.3389/fped.2018.00373
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
1
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
Edited by:
Kenneth Joseph Friedman,
The State University of New Jersey,
United States
Reviewed by:
Dinesh Upadhya,
Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, India
Anju Aggarwal,
University College of Medical
Sciences, India
*Correspondence:
Amy Proal
amy.proal@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Pediatric Neurology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Pediatrics
Received: 30 August 2018
Accepted: 14 November 2018
Published: 04 December 2018
Citation:
Proal A and Marshall T (2018) Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome in the Era of the Human
Microbiome: Persistent Pathogens
Drive Chronic Symptoms by
Interfering With Host Metabolism,
Gene Expression, and Immunity.
Front. Pediatr. 6:373.
doi: 10.3389/fped.2018.00373
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome in the Era of the
Human Microbiome: Persistent
Pathogens Drive Chronic Symptoms
by Interfering With Host Metabolism,
Gene Expression, and Immunity
Amy Proal* and Trevor Marshall
Autoimmunity Research Foundation, Thousand Oaks, CA, United States
The illness ME/CFS has been repeatedly tied to infectious agents such as Epstein Barr
Virus. Expanding research on the human microbiome now allows ME/CFS-associated
pathogens to be studied as interacting members of human microbiome communities.
Humans harbor these vast ecosystems of bacteria, viruses and fungi in nearly all
tissue and blood. Most well-studied inflammatory conditions are tied to dysbiosis or
imbalance of the human microbiome. While gut microbiome dysbiosis has been identified
in ME/CFS, microbes and viruses outside the gut can also contribute to the illness.
Pathobionts, and their associated proteins/metabolites, often control human metabolism
and gene expression in a manner that pushes the body toward a state of illness.
Intracellular pathogens, including many associated with ME/CFS, drive microbiome
dysbiosis by directly interfering with human transcription, translation, and DNA
repair processes. Molecular mimicry between host and pathogen proteins/metabolites
further complicates this interference. Other human pathogens disable mitochondria or
dysregulate host nervous system signaling. Antibodies and/or clonal T cells identified in
patients with ME/CFS are likely activated in response to these persistent microbiome
pathogens. Different human pathogens have evolved similar survival mechanisms to
disable the host immune response and host metabolic pathways. The metabolic
dysfunction driven by these organisms can result in similar clusters of inflammatory
symptoms. ME/CFS may be driven by this pathogen-induced dysfunction, with the
nature of dysbiosis and symptom presentation varying based on a patient’s unique
infectious and environmental history. Under such conditions, patients would benefit from
treatments that support the human immune system in an effort to reverse the infectious
disease process.
Keywords: microbiome, dysbiosis, holobiont, pathobiont, autoantibody, ME/CFS, molecular mimicry, gut-brain
axis
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
INTRODUCTION: ME/CFS ENTERS THE
ERA OF THE HUMAN MICROBIOME
Toward the end of a career spent studying persistent bacteria
in chronic disease, microbiologist Gerald Domingue wrote, “It
is unwise to dismiss the pathogenic capacities of any microbe
in a patient with a mysterious disease” (1). This thinking
greatly applies to the illness ME/CFS. ME/CFS is characterized
by neuroinflammation, severe fatigue, excessive post-exertional
exhaustion, disturbed sleep, flu-like episodes, cognitive problems,
sensory hypersensitivity, muscle and joint pain, headache,
bowel symptoms, and severe impairment of daily functioning
(2). Severely ill individuals are often wheelchair dependent,
bedridden, and unable to perform basic tasks of work or daily
living.
The history of ME/CFS strongly suggests that infectious
agents play a central role in driving the disease process. These
include early associations with Epstein Barr Virus (EBV)/Human
Herpes Virus 6 (HHV6), the relapsing-remitting nature of
ME/CFS symptoms and antibodies/“autoantibodies” detected in
patients with the disease (3, 4). A number of ME/CFS outbreaks
have also been reported, in which numerous people in the
same geographical location developed the illness simultaneously
(2). Indeed, many ME/CFS patients present with symptoms
after suffering from a severe bacterial or viral infection. These
infections often correlate with travel to a foreign country or
exposure to pollutants or molds, suggesting that such pathogens
take advantage of factors that compromise the host immune
system.
Chronic inflammation is a hallmark of persistent infection.
Reports of cytokine activation in ME/CFS clarify that the
disease is associated with an inflammatory response (5).
Montoya
et
al.
(6)
found
ME/CFS
cytokine
activation
increased
with
disease
severity,
suggesting
patients
may
struggle with a growing infectious burden over time. Other
ME/CFS research teams have identified various forms of
mitochondrial dysfunction in patients with the illness (7).
There are now dozens of well-characterized mechanisms
by which bacteria and viruses dysregulate mitochondrial
metabolism (8, 9).
Many research teams have searched for well-characterized
single pathogens in patients with ME/CFS. These analyses
often reveal elevated titers of IGG and IGM antibodies toward
pathogens
such
as
Epstein
Barr
Virus,
Cytomegalovirus,
Parvovirus 19 and M. pneumonia (2, 3, 10). Several teams
have also attempted to identify a single novel pathogen that
might drive the entire ME/CFS disease process. However,
the discovery of the human microbiome now allows single
microbes and viruses to be studied as members of complex
communities.
Humans
harbor
these
vast
ecosystems
of
bacteria, viruses and fungi in nearly all tissue and blood
(11–14). Organisms in the microbiome continually interact
with each other, and with the human genome, to regulate
host metabolism and gene expression in both health and
disease (15, 16).
A growing number of inflammatory disease states, including
neurological conditions and cancers, are tied to dysbiosis or
imbalance of these human microbiome communities (17–20).
Gut microbiome dysbiosis has been identified in ME/CFS (21).
This dysbiosis is characterized by changes in microbe species
composition and/or diversity. Pathogens, or groups of pathogens,
can promote dysbiosis by altering their gene expression in ways
that promote virulence, immunosuppression and dysregulation
of host genetic and metabolic pathways (22).
When seemingly disparate biomedical findings on ME/CFS
are interpreted through the lens of these microbiome-based
paradigms and platforms, a cohesive picture of the ME/CFS
disease process emerges. ME/CFS may be driven by pathogen-
induced dysfunction, with resulting microbiome dysbiosis
varying based on a patient’s unique infectious and environmental
history. Under such conditions, patients would benefit from
treatments that, like those now being developed for cancer,
support the human immune system in an effort to reverse the
inflammatory disease process.
THE HUMAN MICROBIOME PERSISTS
THROUGHOUT THE BODY
In the USA, ME/CFS cases were first formally reported to the
CDC in the 1980s (2). At the time, human microbes were
typically only detected with culture-based laboratory methods.
Then, around the year 2000, novel genome-based technologies
began to revolutionize the field of microbiology (23, 24). These
technologies identify microbes based on their DNA or RNA
signatures rather than their ability to grow in the laboratory.
The results of these genome-based analyses were remarkable: vast
communities of microbes were identified in the human body that
had been missed by the older culture-based techniques. These
extensive ecosystems of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and archaea are
collectively known as the human microbiome (25–27).
Today, so many novel microbes have been identified in
Homo sapiens that our human cells are equivalent to or even
outnumbered by those of our microbial inhabitants (28). The tens
of millions of unique genes harbored by this microbiome dwarf
the ∼20,500 genes in the human genome (12, 29). For example,
just one 2017 analysis of the human gut, skin, mouth, and
vaginal microbiomes uncovered millions of previously unknown
microbial genes (11). This has forced science to redefine the
human condition. Humans are best described as holobionts,
in which the microbial genomes and the human genome
continually interact to regulate metabolism and immunity
(15, 16).
Early human microbiome studies characterized microbial
ecosystems in the gut and on mucosal surfaces. However, the
microbiome has now been shown to extend to nearly every
human body site. These include the lungs, the bladder, the
placenta, the testes, and the uterus [(19, 30–33)]. Jakobsen et al.
(35) found that previously sterile implants removed from joints,
bones, pacemakers, and skulls of symptom-free patients were
colonized by a range of bacterial and fungal organisms. Another
study demonstrated the presence of novel tissue specific bacterial
DNA profiles in a variety of mouse organs including the brain,
heart, liver, muscle and adipose tissue (36).
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
2
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
Microbial communities also appear to persist in healthy
human blood (37–39). A DNA virome was recently identified in
healthy human blood (40). Another study reported both bacterial
and fungal communities in the blood of healthy subjects. Analysis
of these organisms was performed by microbial resuscitation of
blood culturing and microscopy in addition to next generation
DNA sequencing (41). Whittle et al. (42) recently characterized
a human blood microbiome using a range of complementary
molecular and classical molecular biology techniques. Another
study identified a larger amount of bacterial rDNA in blood
specimens from healthy individuals than in matched reagent
controls (24).
Kowarsky
et
al.
(14)
detected
over
3,000
previously
unidentified viruses, bacteria, and fungi in human blood
samples obtained from immunocompromised patients. The
study almost doubled the total number of anelloviruses found
in humans. In order to classify many of these organisms the
team was forced to add new branches to the “tree of life.” They
concluded that the newly discovered microbes “may prove to
be the cause of acute or chronic diseases that, to date, have
unknown etiology.”
The microbiome is inherited and evolves with the host. Babies
are seeded in the womb, during birth, and after birth by extensive
microbiome communities in the placenta, the vaginal canal, and
breast milk, among other body sites (43, 44). Microbes/pathogens
acquired from the external environment are further incorporated
into the microbiome over time. For example, once acquired,
Cytomegalovirus persists as a member of the microbiome—
with a significant impact on host immunity. Brodin et al. (45)
found that the lifelong need for the body to control CMV causes
approximately 10% of all T cells in CMV+ individuals to be
directed against the virus.
Immune cells and associated microbes can travel between
the human body and brain via several newly discovered
pathways that bypass the classical blood-brain barrier (46).
Benias et al. (47) documented a previously uncharacterized fluid-
filled lattice of collagen bundles that appears to connect all
human tissues. This human interstitium drains directly into
the lymph nodes. Two research teams have demonstrated the
existence of a previously undiscovered meningeal lymphatic
system (46, 48, 49). The network’s fluid pathways connect the
cerebrospinal fluid and cervical lymph nodes directly to the
brain.
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF THE HUMAN
MICROBIOME AND VIROME CONTINUES
TO EVOLVE
While great progress has been made in characterizing the
human microbiome, our understanding of the body’s microbial
ecosystems is still in its infancy. Metagenomic analyses of
the microbiome in all body sites regularly identify species or
strains of bacteria, archaea, fungi, and/or viruses not previously
understood to persist in Homo sapiens (13). For example, just
one study of the bladder microbiome identified 129 previously
unidentified viruses in subjects’ urine samples (50).
New strains of known microbes are also regularly identified.
For example, as of August 2018, the NCBI database contains
∼1,833
Lactobacillus
genomes,
with
newly
characterized
Lactobacillus genomes added on a weekly basis (51). Successful
identification of these known or novel human organisms hinges
on the careful choice of technology and methodology used
for detection purposes (26). While the majority of human
microbiome studies center on bacteria, awareness of viruses,
fungi, and archaea has increased in recent years (52). For
example, Manuela et al. (53) found an almost 1:1 ratio of
archaeal to bacterial 16S rRNA genes in human appendix and
nose samples. Identification of this archaeome abundance
and diversity required use of a very specific archaea-targeting
methodology.
Viruses are the most abundant life forms on the planet
and in the human body, but have been relatively hard to
detect until very recently (54). Viruses that primarily infect
bacteria, called bacteriophages, are particularly abundant in
human microbiome communities. Nguyen et al. (55) estimate
that ∼31 billion bacteriophages traffic human tissue and blood
on a daily basis. However, the human virome also harbors a
plethora of human-associated viruses. Newberry et al. (56) are
correct to assert that this human virome is understudied in
ME/CFS.
Paez-Espino et al. (57) at the Joint Genome Institute
have undertaken a large project called “Uncovering the
Earth’s Virome.” The Project’s goal is to better identify
known and novel viruses in Earth’s ecosystems including
the human body. Viral identification requires the use of
specific metagenomic tools, pipelines, and annotation platforms,
with findings entered in the JGI IMG/VR Database (57).
The Project is progressing at such a rapid pace that viral
diversity in IMG/VR has more than tripled since August 2016
(58), (Figure 1). Nevertheless, the vast majority of the gene
content (over 15 million genes in total) remains unknown or
hypothetical.
We must subsequently consider the possibility that as-
yet unidentified microorganisms may contribute to chronic
inflammatory conditions like ME/CFS. Failure to do so would
be akin to studying ∼2% of the animals in the rainforest and
arriving at firm conclusions about the entire ecosystem based
on that information alone. Certain members of the human
microbiome may also be difficult to detect based on their location
and/or lifestyle. For example, Chen et al. (59) found that elevated
cytokine expression in response to HSV-infected peripheral
nerve ganglia persisted even when the virus entered a latent,
non-replicating state.
While it is important to pursue identification of novel
organisms in ME/CFS blood and tissue, ample data already exists
on better-studied components of the microbiome. Microbial and
viral survival strategies, virulence mechanisms and collective
behaviors are also characterized by a high degree of functional
redundancy (60, 61). We must accept the complexity inherent
to the human microbiome and further study these common
mechanisms of survival and persistence. We must examine
microbe and viral activity, microbe and viral gene expression, and
the myriad ways in which the proteins and metabolites created by
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
3
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
FIGURE 1 | The IMG/VR database catalogs viruses in Earth’s ecosystems including the human body. Viral diversity in IMG/VR has more than tripled since August
2016.
these organisms interact with the host immune system, the host
genome, and each other.
THE HUMAN HOLOBIONT: MICROBES
AND THEIR METABOLITES MODULATE
THE ACTIVITY OF HUMAN PATHWAYS
The genes of our microbial inhabitants greatly outnumber the
∼20,500 in the human genome. It follows that the majority
of metabolites in Homo sapiens are produced or modified by
the microbiome. Wikoff et al. (62) found a large effect of
the gut microbiome on murine blood metabolites including
antioxidants, toxins and amino acids. For example, production
of the metabolite indole-3-propionic acid was completely
dependent on the presence of gut microbes and could be
established by colonization with the bacterium Clostridium
sporogenes.
Many
microbes,
viruses
and
their
corresponding
proteins/metabolites directly modulate the activity of host
metabolic, immune, and neurological pathways. In other words,
the human holobiont is controlled by the human genome,
our microbial/viral genomes and their respective metabolites
working in tandem. A growing number of studies provide
examples of this metabolic overlap. While many such studies
have been conducted in mice, their general trends carry over to
humans.
For example, ME/CFS is associated with natural killer (NK)
cell abnormalities, including reduced natural killer cell activity
(63). These findings must be interpreted to account for the fact
that NK activity is modulated by the bacterial microbiome. One
study found that bile acids modified by the gut microbiome
impacted liver cell gene expression in a manner that controlled
NK cell accumulation and anti-tumor activity (64). Similarly,
a mixture of lactic acid bacteria from kefir increased the
cytotoxicity of human NK KHYG-1 cells to human chronic
leukemia cells and colorectal tumor cells (65). The microbiome
and its metabolites also impact the activity of related immune
cells. Rothhammer et al. (66) found that tryptophan created
by the gut microbiome interacted with the AHR receptor on
microglia/astrocytes. Subsequent changes in gene expression
regulated communication between the two cell types.
Various forms of autonomic dysfunction are also common
in ME/CFS (67, 68). It is subsequently important to consider
that the microbiome may contribute to host blood pressure
regulation. Pluznick et al. (69) found that gut microbiome-
derived Short Chain Fatty Acids such as acetate and propionate
travel to the kidneys and blood vessels. There they impacted
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
4
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
activity of Olfr78 and Gpr41, two host receptors that control
circulation and blood flow.
PATHOGENS AND THEIR
PROTEINS/METABOLITES CAN
DYSREGULATE HUMAN GENETIC AND
METABOLIC PATHWAYS
Microbial
modulation
of
host
pathways
can
also
drive
inflammatory disease processes. Pathogens and their associated
proteins/metabolites control human metabolism and gene
expression in a manner that can push the holobiont toward a
state of imbalance and illness. For example, Rizzo et al. (70)
found that Human Herpes Viruses 6A/6B infected NK cells. This
infection significantly modified expression of key host miRNAs
and transcription factors. Mycobacterium leprae has been shown
to alter human gene expression in a manner that allows it
to hijack and reprogram adult Schwann cells to a stem-like
state (71). In a murine model of diabetes, Liu et al. (72) found
that eLtaS, a protein created by S. aureus, prevented insulin
from correctly binding its target receptor. This inhibited the
phosphorylation of downstream signaling proteins and caused
the mice in the study to develop impaired glucose tolerance.
The ability of pathogens to interfere with host metabolism
is tied to the dynamics of the communities in which they
persist. Like organisms in any ecosystem, human microbes
constantly interact, both directly and indirectly. The proteins
and metabolites they create are also in continual interplay.
Communities of microbes often exhibit synergistic interactions
for improved nutrient acquisition, protection from host defenses,
and survival in an inflammatory environment (73). These include
biofilm formation and cooperative signaling via quorum sensing
peptides. Humphries et al. (74) recently reported that biofilm
bacteria can additionally communicate via ion channel-mediated
electrical signaling.
Even viruses seldom act as single entities. Diversity and
equilibrium of the bacterial microbiome is regulated by
bacteriophage predator-prey dynamics (75). Pfeiffer and Virgin
(27) found that enteric viral virulence is regulated by the
activity of neighboring bacteria, fungi, and even helminths. These
processes are called “transkingdom interactions.” For example,
human norovirus can bind carbohydrate histo-blood group
antigens present on certain bacterial cells. This facilitates the
ability of norovirus to infect human B cells (76).
MICROBIOME DYSBIOSIS
Interacting microbes may contribute to dysbiosis or imbalance of
microbiome communities (77). This dysbiosis is characterized by
substantial shifts in community structure and diversity. In many
cases, pathogens proliferate to inhabit niches once occupied by
more innocuous microbes.
Most well-studied inflammatory disease states are tied to
some form of microbiome dysbiosis. These include psoriatic
arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, type 1 and 2 diabetes,
Parkinson’s disease and a growing number of cancers (34, 78,
79). The gut microbiome can initiate and promote colorectal
cancer at all stages of tumorigenesis by acting as an inducer
of DNA damage, generating epigenetic changes, regulating cell
growth, and modulating host immune responses (80). The
breast tissue microbiome of women with breast cancer has
been shown to differ substantially in composition, virulence and
diversity from that of healthy controls (81). Species composition
of the bronchoalveolar microbiome shifted toward a more
pathogenic state in patients with sarcoidosis (82). Alterations
in the enteric virome were reported prior to disease onset in
children susceptible to developing type 1 diabetes (83).
Several research teams have tied ME/CFS to bacterial gut
microbiome dysbiosis. Giloteaux et al. (21) found that gut
microbiome bacterial diversity was decreased in ME/CFS subjects
compared to heathy controls. The team also noted increases in
certain bacterial species associated with either pro-inflammatory
or anti-inflammatory activity. Nagy-Szakal et al. (84) also
analyzed the ME/CFS gut microbiome. The study detected seven
gut bacterial species whose relative abundance differed from that
of control subjects and were strongly associated with ME/CFS.
While these findings are of interest, gut microbiome
composition is additionally impacted by a host of environmental
variables that cause large shifts in the region’s microbial
ecosystems.
These
include
geographic
location,
food
consumption, and even time of day (85). Many research teams
studying inflammatory conditions have struggled to isolate
and/or replicate disease-induced gut microbiome dysbiosis
in the face of this “noise.” For example, Frémont et al. (86)
found that intestinal microbiome species composition differed
between patients with ME/CFS and healthy controls. However,
significant changes in intestinal microbiome composition were
also identified between control subjects from Norway and
controls subjects from Belgium. This variation was proposed to
arise from differences in diet between the two cultures.
Studies of the ME/CFS blood microbiome may be less
subject to this environment-induced variability. Furthermore,
identification of microbial and/or viral communities in ME/CFS
blood would allow for a broader picture of possible infectious
and inflammatory processes. For example, Giloteaux et al. (21)
found that ME/CFS subjects had higher levels of bacterial
lipopolysaccharides (LPS), LPS-binding proteins and soluble
CD14 in blood. The team suggested that these inflammatory
markers may indicate translocation of gut bacteria into the blood.
However, the markers could also reflect the presence of bacteria
in the blood itself.
The blood microbiome can be characterized if the microbial
DNA/RNA in samples is first separated from that derived
from the human genome. Olde Loohuis et al. (87) used RNA
sequencing of reads from whole blood to analyze microbial
communities in the blood of almost 200 patients with three
neurological conditions: bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and
amyoytrophic lateral sclerosis. The team identified a wide
range of bacterial and archaeal phyla in subjects with all three
disease states. They observed increased microbial diversity in
schizophrenia subjects compared to the two other groups,
and replicated the finding in an independent dataset. Stephen
Quake’s cell-free DNA shotgun sequencing technologies can also
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
5
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
characterize bacterial communities in human blood, and can be
additionally extended to identify viruses and fungi (14).
Communities of microbes and viruses may also persist in
ME/CFS brain tissue. Readhead et al. (88) recently detected
a range of persistent viruses in the Alzheimer’s brain. These
included herpesviruses, torque teno viruses, adenoviruses, and
coronaviruses. The Alzheimer’s brain has also been shown to
harbor bacterial and fungal communities (89, 90). Branton et al.
(91) identified hundreds of bacteria and bacteriophage-derived
samples in brain tissue removed from patients with epilepsy, and
in brain samples obtained from HIV/AIDS patients after autopsy.
In fact, studies of the virome provide significantly extended
context on microbiome community dynamics and disease
processes. This is because bacteriophages (phages) infect, and
subsequently modulate the activity of the bacterial microbiome
(75). For example, Duerkop et al. (92) characterized the intestinal
virome in a model of T-cell-mediated murine colitis. The
intestinal phage population changed in colitis, and transitioned
from an ordered state to a stochastic dysbiosis. Phage populations
that expanded during colitis were frequently connected to
bacterial hosts that benefit from or are linked to intestinal
inflammation. Tetz et al. (93) identified changes in the
Parkinson’s gut bacteriophage community. These included shifts
in the phage/bacteria ratio of bacteria known to produce
dopamine.
Species-level studies of the microbiome are also greatly
enhanced by analyses that provide further context on disease
activity. This is an important consideration because, in theory,
the microbiome of a patient with ME/CFS could harbor the
exact same microbial, viral and/or fungal species as that of a
healthy subject. Yet many of these organisms could be acting
very differently in patients with the disease. Species-level analyses
of the ME/CFS microbiome must subsequently be accompanied
by studies that characterize microbial and viral gene expression
and/or metabolism.
COMPOSITION OF THE HUMAN
PROTEOME AND METABOLOME REFLECT
MICROBIOME AND ACTIVITY
Since many of the proteins and metabolites in the human
holobiont are microbial in origin, composition of the ME/CFS
proteome and metabolome change with microbiome species
composition. Proteome and metabolome analyses additionally
reflect microbiome activity. This is because microbes and viruses
frequently alter their gene expression in ways that cause them
to express different proteins and metabolites over time. The
human genome and related epigenetic changes also contribute
to the metabolic diversity, although the high level of redundancy
between human and microbial metabolites can make the origin
of these associations hard to pinpoint.
Schutzer
et
al.
(94)
demonstrated
that
the
ME/CFS
cerebrospinal proteome differs substantially from that of
healthy controls (Figure 2). Indeed, 738 of 2,783 identified
proteins (26.5%) were unique to patients with ME/CFS,
providing strong evidence that ME/CFS is indeed characterized
FIGURE 2 | Venn diagram of the qualitative distribution of proteins identified in
cerebrospinal fluid from normal control subjects and ME/CFS subjects. Seven
hundred and thirty eight of 2,783 identified proteins (26.5%) were unique to
patients with ME/CFS. The numbers of proteins for each category separately is
shown outside the circles (2,630 for normal controls, 2,783 for ME/CFS) (94).
by microbiome dysbiosis in tissue and blood. Composition of the
blood metabolome has also been shown to shift in ME/CFS. One
such study reported elevated plasma levels of choline, carnitine,
and complex lipid metabolites in ME/CFS patients (84). Another
analysis demonstrated a sustained hypo-metabolic response in
patients with the disease (95). This dour-like state can be driven
by exposure to adverse environmental conditions, as would be
expected if the ME/CFS immune system struggles to manage
microbiome dysbiosis and associated pathogens.
Studies of the metabolome are often conducted in an
attempt to identify disease-specific biomarkers. However, the
metabolome can also be screened for metabolites that directly
induce or suppress biological function in patients with a given
illness. These studies help dissociate cause from effect and allow
for possible modulation of disease phenotype. For example,
Johnson et al. (96) investigated the metabolic influence of
microbial biofilms on colon cancer tissue and related cancer
occurrence. They found that up-regulation of a biofilm-derived
polyamide metabolite enhanced both biofilm formation and
cancer growth.
MICROBES ACT DIFFERENTLY
DEPENDING ON NEIGHBORING SPECIES
AND IMMUNE STATUS
Studies of microbiome activity must account for the fact
that pathogens detected in patients with ME/CFS are also
regularly identified in healthy subjects or in patients with related
inflammatory conditions. This is particularly true of studies
that have searched for EBV, HHV6, Cytomegalovirus, and other
viruses able to be identified by PCR and/or antibody testing
in ME/CFS cohorts. This same trend is likely to hold for less-
studied or unidentified human microbes and viruses. While
these “overlapping” results are often viewed as problematic, they
make sense in light of research that clarifies how differently
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
6
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
microbes act depending on host immune status, neighboring
species, and a wide range of other variables. For example,
susceptibility to HIV infection has been shown to vary based
on the species composition and activity of the bacterial vaginal
microbiome (97).
Indeed, most human microbes are pathobionts: they can
change their gene expression to act as pathogens under
conditions of imbalance and immunosuppression (98–100).
For example, S. pneumoniae can persist as a highly adapted
commensal or a virulent pathogen depending on its ability to
evade the host immune response (101). S. aureus causes a range
of illnesses, from skin infections to life-threatening diseases
such as endocarditis and meningitis. However, ∼30% of the
healthy human population harbors S. aureus as a member of
the normal nasal microbiome (102). S. aureus virulence in these
communities is determined by a number of factors, including
the signaling and competitive strategies employed by neighboring
microbes.
The same is true of Escherichia coli (E. coli), which also persists
in numerous forms. One study found that “commensal” E. coli
could evolve into virulent clones in fewer than 500 generations
(103). For most microbes, this evolution toward pathogenicity
occurs via the acquisition of new genes or alteration of the current
genome in a manner that induces gene loss (104). For example,
loss of mucA increases the ability of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to
evade phagocytosis and resist pulmonary clearance (105).
It should also be noted that every microbial species
represents many different strains, each of which may vary
in the set of genes it encodes or in the copy number of
such genes. This intra-species variation endows each strain
with distinct functional capacities, including differences in
virulence, motility, nutrient utilization, and drug resistance
(106). Greenblum et al. (106) identified extensive strain-
level copy-number variation across species in metagenomic
samples obtained from patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
This was especially true of genes tied to specific community
functions, including functions related to community lifestyle.
Differences in gene copy-number also impacted adaptive
functions linked to obesity. Yao et al. (107) found that
deletion of a single Bacteriodes gene—and the bile salt
hydrolase it expresses—altered host metabolism in a manner
that impacted weight management, circadian rhythm and
immunity.
A microbe or a virus’ location can also influence its activity.
For example, much of the human population harbors HHV-6.
However, in Alzheimer’s disease, HHV-6A was recently identified
in human brain tissue (88). There, its activity was shown capable
of regulating host molecular, clinical, and neuropathological
networks in a manner that can contribute to inflammation and
neuronal loss. VanElzakker (108) has proposed that HHV-6 may
also infect the vagus nerve in ME/CFS, resulting in altered gut-
brain axis signaling in patients with the illness.
The human immune system also plays a central role in
determining microbe and viral activity. A robust immune
response is often capable of controlling pathogen virulence.
However, if pathogens overcome the immune response, or the
immune system is suppressed by medications, chemicals, or other
environmental factors, pathobionts are more likely to alter their
gene expression in a manner that promotes disease.
PATHOBIONTS ALTER THEIR COLLECTIVE
GENE EXPRESSION TO DRIVE DYSBIOSIS
Pathobionts can subvert the human immune response by
collectively altering their gene expression. Yost et al. (100)
performed an excellent gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis
of the oral microbiome during periodontal progression. Over
the two-month study period, changes in the metagenome of
non-progressing sites were minor. However, active sites that
progressed to periodontitis were characterized by numerous
functional genomic signatures. In fact, the team reported a
complete rearrangement at the metagenome level between
baseline sites that progressed to periodontitis and those that did
not.
GO terms associated with processes including peptidoglycan
biosynthesis and potassium transport were highly enriched
at baseline sites that later progressed to periodontitis. Genes
controlling ciliary motility and CRISPR-associated proteins were
also active during initial stages of disease progression. At
the breakdown point, active sites expressed genes associated
with ferrous iron transport and response to oxidative stress.
Progression to periodontitis was also correlated with increased
expression of putative virulence factors associated with a range
of bacterial species. Mycoplasma, bacteriophage, and eukaryotic
viral activity were higher in progressing sites compared to
baseline samples.
The team concluded that periodontitis progression is driven
by the whole oral microbial community and not just a few
select pathogens. In effect, under conditions of increasing
inflammation and imbalance, the entire oral community
appeared to act together as a pathogen. Indeed, groups of bacteria
not generally considered pathogens upregulated a large number
of the putative virulence factors in active sites. These included
Veillonella parvula, a microbe almost always associated with
dental health.
INTRACELLULAR PATHOGENS DRIVE
MICROBIOME DYSBIOSIS
Community-wide shifts in microbiome virulence are often
driven
by
dominant
pathogens—organisms
that
become
established as central components of the microbiome while
suppressing commensal growth and activity (109). In other
cases, keystone pathogens promote inflammation even when
present as quantitatively minor members of the microbiome. For
example, P. gingivalis often comprises just 0.01% of periodontal
biofilms, yet drives destructive changes in host-microbe interplay
by profoundly impairing the innate immune response (110).
Pathogens able to persist inside the cells of the immune
system are uniquely positioned to drive inflammatory disease
(111). Indeed, most well-characterized pathogens, including
many connected to ME/CFS, are capable of intracellular
persistence (112). By surviving in this fashion, they can directly
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
7
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
FIGURE 3 | Intracellular pathogens and the proteins/metabolites they express can directly interfere with human transcription, translation, and DNA repair processes.
interfere with human transcription, translation, and DNA repair
processes (Figure 3). Pathogens in the cell cytoplasm may further
dysregulate the epigenetic environment (113). For example,
upon infecting a macrophage, Mycobacterium tuberculosis alters
the expression of 463 human genes (114). H. pylori infection
predisposes to genomic instability and DNA damage, including
double strand breaks (115). EBV infection of B cells can also
promote persistent damage to human DNA (116).
The thousands of metabolites and proteins expressed by
intracellular pathogens also interact with the host genome,
further modifying human gene expression in a manner that
promotes disease. Even bacterial quorum sensing peptides
can dysregulate human pathway activity. Wynendaele et al.
(117) found that quorum sensing molecules created by gram-
negative bacteria altered human gene expression in a manner
that promoted in vitro angiogeneisis, tumor growth, and
neovascularization in colon cancer.
Intracellular pathogens can also travel between cells via
recently characterized tunneling nanotubules (TNTs) (118, 119).
These cytoplasmic extensions of dendritic cells, glial cells and
related human cells allow for the intracellular transfer of
microRNAs, messenger RNAs, prions, viruses, and even whole
organelles such as mitochondria (120, 121). For example, HIV-
induced tunneling nanotubule formation appears to mediate
approximately half of HIV virus spread among monocyte-
derived macrophages (119).
MOLECULAR MIMICRY
Dysfunction driven by intracellular infection is compounded
by the fact that microbial proteins and metabolites are often
identical or similar in structure to those created by their human
hosts. The molecular mimicry or sequence homology between
these proteins and metabolites makes it increasingly difficult for
the human holobiont to recognize “foreign” from “self.”
For example, Altindis et al. (122) found that viruses
carry
sequences
with
significant
homology
to
human
insulin-like growth factors (VILPs). These VILPs can bind
human and murine IGF-1 receptors in vitro, resulting in
autophosphorylation and downstream signaling. E. coli harbors
a large, diverse network of proteins that actively promote
endogenous DNA damage in cells (123). However, at least 280 of
these DNA-damaging proteins have human homologs that also
promote DNA damage and mutagenesis in the human host.
Indeed,
redundancy
between
human
and
microbial
metabolites, proteins, and pathways is so great that the
potential for molecular mimicry to contribute to host immune
and metabolic dysfunction is semi-infinite. For example,
viral vesicles and human extracellular vesicles (EVs) share
considerable structural and functional similarity (124). These
similarities are so extensive that it is difficult to distinguish EVs
from (noninfectious) viruses.
DIFFERENT PATHOGENS EMPLOY
COMMON SURVIVAL STRATEGIES
Many pathogens employ common survival mechanisms to
persist in host cells, tissue and blood. The metabolic dysfunction
driven by these different microbes and viruses can result in
similar clusters of human inflammatory symptoms. The ability
of various pathogens to dysregulate activity of the Vitamin
D Nuclear Receptor (VDR) is an excellent example of how
different microbes can drive similar disease processes. The VDR
regulates expression of hundreds of human genes, many of which
regulate inflammatory and malignant processes (125, 126). The
receptor also controls signaling of TLR2 and several families
of antimicrobial peptides including cathelicidin (LL-37) (127).
Pathogens capable of slowing VDR activity can subsequently
facilitate
their
survival
by
slowing
the
innate
immune
response.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
8
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
FIGURE 4 | VDR activity is downregulated as much as 20 times in Epstein
Barr Virus-infected lymphoblastoid cell lines (128).
Pathogens frequently linked to ME/CFS or inflammatory
disease have evolved to survive in this fashion. VDR activity
is downregulated as much as 20 times in Epstein Barr
Virus-infected lymphoblastoid cell lines (128) (Figure 4). HIV,
M. tuberculosis Cytomegalovirus, Borrelia burgdorferi and
Mycobacterium leprae additionally dysregulate VDR activity
to various degrees (114, 129–132). The fungus Aspergillus
fumigatus secretes a gliotoxin that significantly downregulates
VDR expression (133). Because disabling the innate immune
system via the VDR pathway is such a logical survival
mechanism, other uncharacterized bacteria, viruses or fungi may
have also evolved to dysregulate receptor activity.
It follows that ME/CFS patients with similar symptoms
may not always test positive for the same mix of pathogens
and/or communities of pathobionts. Similarly, composition of
the ME/CFS microbiome, proteome and metabolome should
be expected to differ somewhat from study to study. Instead
of worrying about these inconsistencies, the ME/CFS research
community should strive to better characterize even more
common mechanisms of pathogen survival and persistence.
THE IMMUNE RESPONSE CHANGES IN
RESPONSE TO PATHOGEN ACTIVITY
The ability of pathogens to disable the host immune response
extends far beyond the VDR pathway. Pushalkar et al. (134)
identified a distinct and abundant pancreatic microbiome
associated with progressive pancreatic cancer. This dysbiotic
microbiome drove oncogenesis by suppressing macrophage
differentiation and T cell activity. Another study found that
Candida albicans’s transition from extracellular to intracellular
pathogen was accompanied by a coordinated, time-dependent
shift in gene expression for both host and fungus (135). These
gene expression changes led to a gradual decline in pro-
inflammatory cytokine activation by the host immune system.
These findings shed light on a recent ME/CFS study.
Hornig et al. (5) reported distinct alterations in plasma
immune signatures—including prominent activation of both
pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines—early in the course of
ME/CFS. However, these alterations were not observed in
subjects with a longer duration of illness. There are a number
of explanations for Hornig’s observations. ME/CFS-associated
pathogens may gradually alter their gene activity to persist in
more latent, intracellular forms less recognized by the host
immune system. Or, in early-stage ME/CFS, the immune system
may actively attempt to target a growing infectious burden. Over
time however, pathogens in the microbiome may disable the
immune response to a point where “immune exhaustion” occurs
(136, 137). Immunopathology and cytokine production would
subsequently drop. The resulting disease state could be compared
to a garden, in which healthy plants become progressively stifled
by others, such as kudzu vine.
“ACUTE” PATHOGENS CAN SURVIVE IN
PERSISTENT FORMS THAT DRIVE
CHRONIC SYMPTOMS
Many research teams are studying how “acute” pathogens
(i.e., well-characterized agents associated with known infectious
diseases) can cause chronic symptoms by persisting in latent
forms. These include Zika, Borrelia burgdorferi, influenza, and
other well-characterized viruses and bacteria (138). Zika was
shown capable of persisting in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
and lymph nodes of infected rhesus monkeys for months after
the virus had been cleared from mucosal secretions, peripheral
blood and urine (139). Viral persistence in both the lymph nodes
and CSF was correlated with upregulation of genes involved in
pro-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic pathways.
Tens of thousands of Ebola survivors have developed chronic
symptoms months or years after initial infection (140). These
“Post-Ebola Syndrome” symptoms include extreme fatigue,
severe pain, eye problems, and a host of neurological issues.
While the virus is hard to identify in the blood of such patients,
Ebola has been detected in men’s semen years after “recovery”
(141). Another study found that, up to a month after initial
infection, influenza viruses regulated the long-term expression of
inflammatory and neuron/glia-specific genes in mice (142). This
was associated with chronic neuroinflammation characterized by
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
9
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
an increase in the number of activated microglia and impairment
of spatial memory formation.
Persistent measles virus is associated with conditions such
as Paget’s disease, multiple sclerosis and Crohn’s disease (143,
144). Measles virus RNA has been detected in blood, respiratory
secretions, urine, and lymphoid tissue for weeks to months after
clearance of the “acute” infection (145). Doi et al. (146) found
that, in vitro, measles virus persistence correlated with viral
transition from a lytic to non-lytic mode that allowed the virus
to evade the host innate immune response.
Hundreds
of
studies
demonstrate
that
acute
bacterial
pathogens can transition into latent forms that lack a classical
cell wall (1). These persistent variants are referred to as L-form
bacteria. Antibiotic use can induce persistent L-form growth.
In fact, researchers create L-forms by deliberately culturing
classical bacteria in conjunction with the beta-lactam antibiotics
(147). One microarray analysis of L-form growth revealed up-
regulation of genes shared in common with persister cells and
biofilms (148). L-form bacteria have been implicated in dozens
of chronic conditions including rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis and sarcoidosis (1, 149, 150).
A better understanding of these chronic sequelae would
greatly benefit the ME/CFS community, since a similar chronic
progression of symptoms is frequently documented in ME/CFS.
At different points in history, ME/CFS has been called “Post-
Polio Syndrome,” “Chronic Mononucleosis Syndrome” and
“Post-Viral Syndrome” due to the fact that chronic symptoms are
often noted after acute infection with Polio Virus, Epstein Barr
Virus, influenza or a range of other pathogens (151–153). Chia et
al. (154) found that patients with acute enterovirus infection went
on to develop a multitude of chronic symptoms consistent with
an ME/CFS diagnosis. Years after the initial infection, enterovirus
protein and RNA were still present in these patients’ stomach
biopsies.
It is clear that novel methodologies may be required to
best identify pathogens in their latent forms. Pathogens that
persist inside human immune cells and associated tunneling
nanotubuoles have been particularly hard to detect. When
persistent Zika virus was identified in rhesus monkeys, Zika-
specific antibodies were not detected in the CSF, despite
prolonged and robust responses in peripheral blood. This
suggested an additional mechanism for viral persistence in
certain “anotomic sanctuaries.” Modern living has also increased
the likelihood that “acute” infections may generate chronic
sequelae. Before the advent of antibiotics, steroid medications
and childhood vaccines, almost half of all children under the
age of five died from acute infectious disease (45). Today,
most individuals in first-world countries survive repeated acute
infections over the course of decades.
UNIQUE INFECTIOUS HISTORY SHAPES
ME/CFS DISEASE PROGRESSION
While certain dominant or keystone pathogens may be
reliably identified in patients with ME/CFS, composition of
the ME/CFS microbiome will likely differ between patients.
Even in HIV/AIDS, where an easily detected virus dysregulates
immunity, disease symptoms reflect a mix of those driven by
HIV, and those driven by “co-infectious” agents able to take
advantage of the immunocompromised host (155). No two
patients with HIV/AIDS are expected to harbor the same mix
of these additional persistent bacteria, fungi, and viruses. The
same is true of most cancers, an increasing number of which
are now tied to severe microbiome dysbiosis (34). It is widely
accepted that no two cancers are alike, and any tumor-associated
microbiome is expected to differ somewhat among individual
study subjects (156).
This same pattern, in which unique infectious history impacts
symptom presentation may also occur in ME/CFS. A recent
study by Brodin et al. (45) demonstrated the profound impact
of infectious history on host immunity. The team performed a
systems-level analysis of 210 healthy twins between the ages of
8 and 82. They measured 204 immune parameters, including
cell population frequencies, cytokine responses, and serum
proteins, and found that 77% of these are dominated, and 58%
almost completely determined, by non-heritable environmental
influences. Many of these parameters became more variable
with age, emphasizing the cumulative influence of environmental
exposure.
The team also calculated how acquisition of just one chronic
pathogen—cytomegalovirus (CMV)—conditions the immune
response. Identical twins discordant for CMV infection showed
greatly reduced correlations for many immune cell frequencies,
cell signaling responses, and cytokine concentrations. In
general, the influence of CMV was so broad that it affected
119 of the 204 measurements dispersed throughout the
immune network. These and related findings led Brodin
and team to conclude that the immune response is “very
much shaped by the environment and most likely by the
many different microbes an individual encounters in their
lifetime.”
COULD “SUCCESSIVE INFECTION
CONTRIBUTE TO ME/CFS?”
The above suggests that ME/CFS may be driven by a process
we have termed “successive infection.” During successive
infection, an “acute” infection or “initial immunosuppressive
event” dysregulates the host immune system. This makes
it easier for microbes to subvert the immune response
by acting as polymicrobial entities. Pathobionts alter their
gene expression to better promote community-wide virulence.
Infected human cells fail to correctly express human metabolites
in the presence of pathogen-generated proteins, metabolites,
and enzymes. Dysfunction driven by molecular mimicry
increases. Certain pathogens may infect mitochondria or
central nervous system tissue. Intracellular pathogens slow
the human immune response, causing the host to more
easily acquire other infectious agents. This creates a snowball
effect in which the microbiome becomes increasingly dysbiotic
as the strength of the immune response weakens over
time.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
10
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
Eventually, the human host may present with symptoms
characteristic of ME/CFS or a related inflammatory diagnosis.
The unique symptoms any one patient develops are expected to
vary based on the species, strain, virulence, and location of the
pathogens driving dysbiosis, along with the myriad ways in which
the metabolites and proteins created by these organisms cause
dysfunction by interacting with those of the host.
Early childhood infections may predispose to dysbiosis at
a later date (157). For example, measles depletes host B and
T lymphocytes for up to 2–3 years after initial infection. This
immunosuppression can reset previously acquired immunity and
renders the host more susceptible to other pathogens (158). In
other cases, a toxic environmental exposure, infection during
surgery or the difficulty of enduring a traumatic event may
weaken the immune response to a point where previously
subclinical infections become active. ME/CFS outbreaks, in
which numerous patients developed the illness at relatively the
same time, may well represent this phenomenon at work.
The successive infectious process may even begin in the
womb. Depending on the health of the parent, founding
microbiome communities in the placenta, vagina and breast milk
may already be dysbiotic. Cabrera-Rubio et al. (159) found that
the breast milk microbiome of obese mothers tended to contain
a different and less diverse bacterial community then that of
normal-weight mothers. Pathogens in the placental microbiome
can alter methylation of human DNA in a manner that may
negatively impact the later life disease of premature babies (160).
Many aspects of modern living can additionally drive
successive infection. Antibiotic use disrupts the ecology of the
human microbiome (161). Antibiotic resistance genes from farm
animals and produce are regularly transferred into the human
food supply (162). Electromagnetic radiation has been shown to
lower immunity (163). The immunosuppressive biologics and
supplements often prescribed for inflammatory disease further
allow pathobionts in the microbiome to proliferate. For example,
Diaz et al. (164) found that the salivary bacteriome of patients
taking immunosuppressive biologics was more permissive to the
growth of oral opportunistic pathogens.
Modern society also exposes the average person to pathogens
our recent ancestors were unlikely to encounter. International
airports harbor pathogens from across the globe (165). Food
products, and the microbes they contain, are frequently imported
from foreign destinations (166). One study found a range of
opportunistic pathogens enriched in showerhead biofilms (167).
Numerous pathogens were identified in commonly smoked
cigarettes (168). Many such pathogens are capable of persisting
in human microbiome ecosystems, where the host may lack
immunity toward their presence.
ME/CFS PATIENTS SHOULD BE STUDIED
IN CONCERT WITH RELATED
INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS
ME/CFS is a spectrum disorder with a diagnostic criterion that
includes a range of physical and neurological symptoms (2).
If successive infection contributes to ME/CFS, this variability
in symptom presentation is expected. Furthermore, factoring
“unique infectious history” into the disease process helps
explain why patients with ME/CFS often suffer from a
multitude of symptoms not included in the official diagnostic
criteria.
Because patients with ME/CFS suffer from such diverse
symptoms, it has been argued that they should be grouped
into separately studied “subgroups” (169). In some cases this
makes sense. For example, studies that distinguish early-
stage/late-stage ME/CFS patients may further elucidate how the
immune response is modified by the microbiome over time.
However, if successive infection contributes to ME/CFS, future
research should also focus on better understanding the common
pathogenesis shared by all subjects.
Indeed,
successive
infection
may
contribute
to
other
conditions tied to microbiome dysbiosis, persistent infection,
and adverse environmental exposure. ME/CFS should be studied
in concert with these other conditions, which include Gulf War
Syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Chronic Lyme Disease,
and fibromyalgia among others (170–174). The high levels
of comorbidity and symptom overlap between patients with
ME/CFS and these related inflammatory diagnoses strengthens
this assumption.
“AUTOANTIBODIES” IN ME/CFS ARE
LIKELY CREATED IN RESPONSE TO
PERSISTENT PATHOGENS
A number of autoantibodies have been detected in patients with
ME/CFS (4). This has led some research teams to postulate
that ME/CFS should be regarded as an “autoimmune” disorder
(175). However, the classical “theory of autoimmunity” is
in the process of being re-evaluated (78, 176). Increasing
evidence suggests that “autoantibodies” are actually created in
response to chronic, persistent microbiome pathogens. Under
such conditions molecular mimicry or structural homology
between pathogen and host proteins can result in “collateral
damage” toward human tissue. For example, Vojdani et al. (177)
found that 25 different Alzheimer’s-associated pathogens or their
molecules could react with antibodies against amyloid beta via
molecular mimicry or the binding of bacterial toxins to amyloid
beta.
A growing body of research documents “autoantibody”
production in response to a range of bacterial, viral and
fungal pathogens/pathobionts. These pathogens are not short-
term “triggers” but persist as members of complex microbiome
communities. For example, “autoantibody” production was
recently tied to microbiome pathobiont Enterococcus gallinarum.
Manfredo et al. (178) detected E. galinarum in the mesenteric
veins, lymph nodes, spleens and livers of mice made genetically
prone to autoimmunity. In these mice, the bacterium initiated
the production of “autoantibodies,” inflammation and activated
T cells. However, this “autoantibody” production stopped when
E. gallinarum’s growth was suppressed with the antibiotic
vancomycin or with an intramuscular vaccine. In addition,
E. gallinarum–specific DNA was recovered from liver biopsies
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
11
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
of human autoimmune patients, and co-cultures with human
hepatocytes replicated the murine findings.
Indeed, many pathogens can drive the activated or clonal T
cell expansion often associated with “autoimmune” conditions.
For example, Tuffs et al. (179) found that S. aureus endotoxins
triggered uncontrolled activation of T cells. This led to a pro-
inflammatory cytokine storm that accounted for both T cell
activation and related inflammation.
THE GUT-BRAIN AXIS AND THE BRAIN
MICROBIOME
Microbes and their metabolites control bidirectional signaling
between the gut and the brain via pathways collectively known
as the gut-brain axis (180). The gut-brain axis involves various
afferent and efferent pathways including the vagus nerve, with
signaling impacting neural, endocrine, and immune processes.
The gut’s enteric nervous system contains over 100 million
neurons—more than in either the peripheral nervous system
or spinal cord (181). It follows that gut microbiome dysbiosis
may modulate brain activity. For example, Sampson et al. (79)
transplanted fecal samples from patients with Parkinson’s disease
into germ-free mice. These mice, and not controls, exhibited
physical symptoms associated with Parkinson’s.
However, there is also growing evidence that humans may
harbor a brain microbiome. Researchers at Harvard University
are characterizing this ecosystem as part of the ongoing “Brain
Microbiome Project.” In what marks a major paradigm shift,
multiple research teams have shown that both amyloid beta and
prion protein (PrP) are potent antimicrobial peptides (182, 183).
Amyloid beta exhibited antimicrobial activity against a range
of common microorganisms with a potency equivalent to, and
in some cases greater than, cathelicidin (LL-37) (184). These
pathogens included S. typhimurium, Candida albicans and, more
recently, a number of herpesviruses capable of persisting in the
Alzheimer’s brain (88, 185).
The findings strongly suggest that amyloid beta and PrP are
not useless byproducts of abnormal brain catabolism. Rather,
they appear to form a mediated response of the innate immune
system toward infectious agents in brain tissue (186). A number
of brain abnormalities have been reported in patents with
ME/CFS (187). These findings must be interpreted in light
of these novel infection-based paradigms and in concert with
emerging data on the brain microbiome.
WHAT ABOUT THE HUMAN GENOME?
In a study of aortic aneurysms, Gottlieb et al. (188) reported
that BAK1 SNP-containing alleles were detected in aortic tissue
but not in blood samples from the same patients. More recently
Ursini et al. (189) found that schizophrenia gene risk loci that
interact with early-life complications are highly expressed in
the placenta. However, these loci were differentially expressed
in placentas from women who suffered complications during
pregnancy. They were also differentially upregulated in placentae
from male compared with female offspring.
These
and
related
findings
strongly
suggest
that
the
environment can select for human genome activity. For
example, Harley et al. (190) found that in EBV infected cells,
EBNA2 and its transcription factors modulated the activity
of human genes associated with risk for multiple sclerosis,
rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes and other conditions. In
fact, nearly half of systemic lupus erythematosus risk loci were
occupied by EBNA2 and co-clustering human transcription
factors.
Studies of the human genome must also account for the full
extent of microbial DNA and RNA in human tissue and blood.
If a genomic assembler fails to account for this contamination,
chances of a false positive single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
increase significantly during analysis (191). Contamination with
even a small amount of microbial DNA/RNA—just one or two
base pairs of difference—is enough to cause significant statistical
errors in this fashion.
IMMUNOSTIMULATION IN THE
TREATMENT OF ME/CFS
If ME/CFS is driven by successive infection, treatments that
support or activate the human immune system could improve
microbiome health by allowing patients to better target
persistent pathogens. Development of such therapies should
be a priority for the ME/CFS research community. However,
most immunostimulative treatments that target pathogens are
characterized by immunopathology—a cascade of reactions in
which inflammation, cytokine release and endotoxin release
are generated as part of the immune system’s response to
microbial death (192–194). The death of intracellular pathogens
is particularly difficult for the host to manage, as the body must
deal with debris generated from apoptosis. Inflammation is also
generated in response to bacterial cell wall components including
the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide of Gram-negative strains (192).
Luckily, immunopathology-generated symptoms are generally
temporary in nature, and tend to subside as an increasing number
of pathogens are eradicated.
Temporary immunopathology resulting from antimicrobial
treatment has been documented for over a century, with
symptoms varying depending on the nature of targeted
pathogens. First referred to as the Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction,
the phenomenon was originally observed during treatment of
syphilis with mercury and penicillin (195, 196). The Jarisch-
Herxheimer reaction/immunopathology has since been noted in
a broad spectrum of chronic inflammatory conditions including
tuberculosis and Brucellosis (197). Short-term immunopathology
is also a central feature of acute infection. If a patient develops
the flu, inflammatory symptoms increase as the immune system
releases cytokines and chemokines in response to the infecting
virus.
HIV/AIDS patients undergo a form of immunopathology
called Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS)
following treatment with Combination Antiretroviral Therapy
(ART) (198). IRIS occurs as ART enables the host immune system
to better target pathogens acquired during previous periods of
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
12
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
HIV-driven immunosuppression. A range of well-characterized
pathogens have been linked to IRIS including the herpesviruses
and M. tuberculosis (193). However, the inflammatory reaction is
also noted in culture-negative patients, suggesting IRIS may also
involve novel or uncharacterized pathogens (198).
Over
the
past
decade,
in
concert
with
our
clinical
collaborators, we developed an immunostimulative therapy
used to treat patients with a range of chronic inflammatory
conditions (200). Treatment centers on the use of a putative
VDR agonist in the form of olmesartan medoxomil, with the
goal of reactivating components of innate immunity under
VDR control. In 2013, we published a series of case histories
demonstrating improvement in ME/CFS patients administered
this treatment (199). However, all ME/CFS subjects administered
the therapy experienced immunopathology and associated
inflammatory symptom increases that lasted for many years.
As a general trend, patients administered the treatment during
earlier stages of disease experienced less immunopathology,
emphasizing
the
need
for
immunostimulative
therapies
to
be
used
in
a
predictive
and
even
preventative
fashion.
While some ME/CFS physicians may feel uneasy about
the suffering induced by immunopathology, other research
communities have become accustomed to treatments that cause
temporary discomfort. Novel cancer immunotherapies also
generate immunopathology by activating patient T cells. This
allows the immune system to better target malignant tumors
(194, 201). The resulting “cytokine release syndrome” leads
to profound, temporary, symptom increases. However, these
increased symptoms are considered acceptable, as patients who
endure the reaction are more likely to enter a state of remission.
Since many forms of cancer are tied to severe microbiome
dysbiosis, at least part of the “cytokine release syndrome” may
result from the death of persistent pathogens.
DISCUSSION
The history of ME/CFS strongly suggests that infectious agents
play a central role in driving the disease process. However,
the discovery of the human microbiome has revolutionized
the
manner
in
which
persistent
infection
and
chronic
inflammation are understood and studied. Humans harbor
extensive microbiome communities of bacteria, viruses, and
fungi in nearly all tissue and blood. The hundreds of millions of
unique genes harbored by this microbiome dwarf the ∼20,500 in
the human genome. Humans are best described as holobionts,
in which these microbial genomes and the human genome
continually interact to regulate host gene expression, metabolism
and immunity.
Many inflammatory disease states, including neurological
conditions and cancers, are tied to dysbiosis or imbalance of
human microbiome communities in various body sites. While
gut microbiome dysbiosis has already been identified in ME/CFS,
distinct microbial and viral communities may additionally persist
in ME/CFS blood and brain tissue. Possible identification of
these microbiomes should be a priority for the ME/CFS research
community, but analysis requires the use of very specific
technologies and methodologies.
Pathogens and their associated proteins/metabolites control
human metabolism and gene expression in a manner that
can push the human holobiont toward a state of illness.
Studies of microbiome dysbiosis in ME/CFS must consider this
microbe and viral activity. Most human microbes can alter
their gene expression to act as pathogens under conditions of
imbalance and immunosuppression. This pathobiont behavior is
further determined by the activity and virulence of neighboring
microbes. Patients with ME/CFS may harbor many of the same
microbes and viruses as heathy individuals, yet these pathobionts
may act with increased virulence in patients with the illness.
Intracellular pathogens, including several associated with
ME/CFS, have been shown to directly interfere with human
transcription, translation, and DNA repair processes. Molecular
mimicry between host and pathogen proteins/metabolites further
exacerbates this interference. Interacting microbes can also drive
disease by changing their collective gene expression. Other
pathogens disable mitochondria, or may infect central nervous
system tissue in ways that dysregulate signaling via the gut-
brain axis. Antibodies and/or clonal T cells identified in patients
with ME/CFS are likely activated in response to many of these
persistent microbiome pathogens.
Different pathogens have evolved similar survival mechanisms
to disable the host immune response and/or host metabolic
pathways. The metabolic dysfunction driven by these different
microbes
can
result
in
similar
clusters
of
inflammatory
symptoms. ME/CFS may be driven by this pathogen-induced
dysfunction, with the nature of dysbiosis and symptom
presentation varying based on a patient’s unique infectious and
environmental history. An initial infection or environmental
exposure weakens the host immune system. This makes
it easier for pathobionts to subvert the immune response
and interfere with host gene expression and metabolism. A
snowball effect begins, in which the microbiome becomes
increasingly dysbiotic as the strength of the immune response
weakens over time. The unique symptoms any one ME/CFS
patient develops are expected to vary depending on the
location,
species,
strain
and
virulence
of
the
pathogens
driving this dysbiosis.
Thus, while certain dominant or
keystone pathogens may be identified in ME/CFS, composition
of the ME/CFS microbiome, metabolome, and proteome
should be expected to differ somewhat among individual
patients.
These
common
mechanisms
suggest
that
ME/CFS
is
best studied in concert with other chronic conditions tied
to microbiome dysbiosis, persistent infection and adverse
environmental exposure. These include fibromyalgia and Gulf
War Syndrome, but also conditions like Post-Ebola Syndrome in
which severe chronic symptoms develop after infection with an
“acute” infectious agent that is able to persist in latent forms.
Treatments that support or activate the human immune
system could allow ME/CFS patients to improve microbiome
health by better targeting pathogens over time. Like the
novel immunotherapies being developed for cancers, these
immunostimulative therapies would be expected to generate
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
13
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
temporary immunopathology. Institutional reviewers hesitant
to approve immunopathology-based therapies should consider
that ME/CFS quality of life is typically very low, with patients
demonstrating a substantial increase in mortality from suicide
(202).
It often takes patients years to receive a diagnosis of
ME/CFS. This delay wastes a valuable period during which
the immune system is most responsive to immunostimulatory
treatment. Patients treated during earlier stage disease are also
less likely to experience severe or long-lasting immunopathology.
This suggests that immunostimulative therapies should be
administered in a predictive and even preventative fashion. In
addition, interventions or treatments that might help patients
better manage the byproducts of immunopathology (bacterial
LPS etc.) should become a priority for the research community.
The overall success of ME/CFS research also hinges on
the scientific community’s willingness to embrace the concept
of the human holobiont. In ME/CFS, the immune response,
metabolism, central nervous system, and human gene expression
are all linked by the activity of the microbiome and its associated
proteins/metabolites. A greater focus on these interconnected
systems is necessary, which will require increased collaboration
between separate research teams.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AP
drafted
the
manuscript,
analyzed
and
interpreted
data, and revised the manuscript for critically important
intellectual content. TM drafted parts of the manuscript,
analyzed/interpreted data and revised the manuscript for
critically important intellectual content.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The
authors
would
like
to
acknowledge
Michael
Eason
Kirkpatrick and Janet Raty for their help with graphic design.
They also thank Sara Nicole Azevedo for her help with technical
editing of the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Domingue GJSr, Woody HB. Bacterial persistence and expression of disease.
Clin Microbiol Rev. (1997) 10:320–44.
2. Rowe PC, Underhill RA, Friedman KJ, Gurwitt A, Medow MS, Schwartz
MS, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome diagnosis
and management in young people: a primer. Front Pediatr. (2017) 5:121.
doi: 10.3389/fped.2017.00121
3. Chapenko S, Krumina A, Logina I, Rasa S, Chistjakovs M, Sultanova M, et al.
Association of active human herpesvirus-6,−7 and parvovirus b19 infection
with clinical outcomes in patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue syndrome. Adv Virol. (2012) 2012:205085. doi: 10.1155/2012/205085
4. Loebel M, Grabowski P, Heidecke H, Bauer S, Hanitsch LG, Wittke K,
et al. Antibodies to β adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors in
patients with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Brain Behav Immun. (2016) 52:32–
9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.09.013
5. Hornig M, Montoya JG, Klimas NG, Levine S, Felsenstein D, Bateman L, et
al. Distinct plasma immune signatures in ME/CFS are present early in the
course of illness. Sci Adv. (2015) 1:e1400121. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1400121
6. Montoya JG, Holmes TH, Anderson JN, Maecker HT, Rosenberg-Hasson
Y, Valencia IJ, et al. Cytokine signature associated with disease severity in
chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci. (2017) 114:E7150–8.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1710519114
7. Myhill S, Booth NE, McLaren-Howard J. Chronic fatigue syndrome and
mitochondrial dysfunction. Int J Clin Exp Med. (2009) 2:1–16.
8. Anand SK, Tikoo SK. Viruses as modulators of mitochondrial functions. Adv
Virol. (2013) 2013:738794. doi: 10.1155/2013/738794
9. Jiang JH, Tong J, Gabriel K. Hijacking mitochondria: bacterial toxins
that modulate mitochondrial function. IUBMB Life. (2012) 64:397–401.
doi: 10.1002/iub.1021
10. Seishima M, Mizutani Y, Shibuya Y, Arakawa C. Chronic fatigue
syndrome after human parvovirus B19 infection without persistent viremia.
Dermatology (2008) 216:341–6. doi: 10.1159/000116723
11. Lloyd-Price J, Mahurkar A, Rahnavard G, Crabtree J, Orvis J, Hall AB, et
al. Strains, functions and dynamics in the expanded Human Microbiome
Project. Nature (2017) 550:61–6. doi: 10.1038/nature23889
12. Gilbert JA, Blaser MJ, Caporaso JG, Jansson JK, Lynch SV, Knight R, et
al. Current understanding of the human microbiome. Nat Med. (2018)
24:392–400. doi: 10.1038/nm.4517
13. Huffnagle GB, Noverr MC. The emerging world of the fungal microbiome.
Trends Microbiol. (2013) 21:334–41. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2013.04.002
14. Kowarsky M, Camunas-Soler J, Kertesz M, De Vlaminck I, Koh W, Pan W, et
al. Numerous uncharacterized and highly divergent microbes which colonize
humans are revealed by circulating cell-free DNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
(2017) 114:9623–8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1707009114
15. Van de Guchte M, Blottière HM, Doré J. Humans as holobionts:
implications
for
prevention
and
therapy.
Microbiome
(2018)
6:81.
doi: 10.1186/s40168-018-0466-8
16. Postler TS, Ghosh S. Understanding the Holobiont: how microbial
metabolites affect human health and shape the immune system. Cell Metab.
(2017) 26:110–30. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.05.008
17. Rogers GB, Keating DJ, Young RL, Wong ML, Licinio J, Wesselingh S. From
gut dysbiosis to altered brain function and mental illness: mechanisms
and
pathways.
Mol
Psychiatry
(2016)
21:738–48.
doi:
10.1038/mp.
2016.50
18. Lerner A, Aminov R, Matthias T. Dysbiosis may trigger autoimmune diseases
via inappropriate post-translational modification of host proteins. Front
Microbiol. (2016) 7:84. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00084
19. Chen J, Domingue JC, Sears CL. Microbiota dysbiosis in select human
cancers: evidence of association and causality. Semin Immunol. (2017) 32:25–
34. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2017.08.001
20. Kell DB, Pretorius E. No effects without causes: the iron dysregulation
and dormant microbes hypothesis for chronic, inflammatory diseases.
Biol
Rev
Camb
Philos
Soc.
(2018)
93:1518–57.
doi:
10.1111/brv.
12407
21. Giloteaux L, Goodrich JK, Walters WA, Levine SM, Ley RE, Hanson MR,
et al. Reduced diversity and altered composition of the gut microbiome
in individuals with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
Microbiome (2016) 4:30. doi: 10.1186/s40168-016-0171-4
22. Proal AD, Lindseth IA, Marshall TG. Microbe-microbe and host-microbe
interactions drive microbiome dysbiosis and inflammatory processes. Discov
Med. (2017) 23:51–60.
23. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM, Knight R, Gordon
JI, et al. The human microbiome project. Nature (2007) 449:804–10.
doi: 10.1038/nature06244
24. Nikkari S, McLaughlin IJ, Bi W, Dodge DE, Relman DA. Does
blood
of
healthy
subjects
contain
bacterial
ribosomal
DNA?
J
Clin
Microbiol.
(2001)
39:1956–9.
doi:
10.1128/JCM.39.5.1956-1959.
2001
25. Zou S, Caler L, Colombini-Hatch S, Glynn S, Srinivas P. Research on the
human virome: where are we and what is next. Microbiome (2016) 4:32.
doi: 10.1186/s40168-016-0177-y
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
14
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
26. Koskinen K, Pausan MR, Perras AK, Beck M, Bang C, Mora M. First insights
into the diverse human archaeome: specific detection of archaea in the
gastrointestinal tract, lung, and nose and on skin. MBio (2017) 8:e00824–17.
doi: 10.1128/mBio.00824-17
27. Pfeiffer JK, Virgin HW. Viral immunity. transkingdom control of viral
infection and immunity in the mammalian intestine. Science (2016)
351:aad5872. doi: 10.1126/science.aad587
28. Sleator RD. The human superorganism - of microbes and men. Med
Hypotheses (2010) 74:214–5. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2009.08.047
29. Li J, Jia H, Cai X, Zhong H, Feng Q, Sunagawa S, et al. An integrated catalog
of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nat Biotechnol. (2014)
32:834–41. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2942
30. O’Dwyer DN, Dickson RP, Moore BB. The lung microbiome, immunity, and
the pathogenesis of chronic lung disease. J Immunol. (2016) 196:4839–47.
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600279
31. Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The
placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med. (2014) 6:237ra65.
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008599
32. Kenny LC, Kell DB. Immunological tolerance, pregnancy, and preeclampsia:
the roles of semen microbes and the father. Front Med. (2018) 4:239.
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00239
33. Thomas-White K, Forster SC, Kumar N, Van Kuiken M, Putonti
C, Stares MD, et al. Culturing of female bladder bacteria reveals
an interconnected urogenital microbiota. Nat Commun. (2018) 9:1557.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03968-5
34. Chen C, Song X, Wei W, Zhong H, Dai J, Lan Z, et al. The
microbiota
continuum
along
the
female
reproductive
tract
and
its relation to uterine-related diseases. Nat Commun. (2017) 8:875.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00901-0
35. Jakobsen TH, Eickhardt SR, Gheorghe AG, Stenqvist C, Sønderholm M,
Stavnsberg C, et al. Implants induce a new niche for microbiomes. APMIS
(2018) 2018:2. doi: 10.1111/apm.12862
36. Lluch J, Servant F, Païssé S, Valle C, Valière S, Kuchly C, et al.
The characterization of novel tissue microbiota using an optimized
16s metagenomic sequencing pipeline. PLoS ONE (2015) 10:e0142334.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142334
37. Gosiewski T, Ludwig-Galezowska AH, Huminska K, Sroka-Oleksiak A,
Radkowski P, Salamon D. Comprehensive detection and identification
of bacterial DNA in the blood of patients with sepsis and healthy
volunteers using next-generation sequencing method - the observation
of
DNAemia.
Eur
J
Clin
Microbiol
Infect
Dis.
(2017)
36:329–36.
doi: 10.1007/s10096-016-2805-7
38. Potgieter M, Bester J, Kell DB, Pretorius E. The dormant blood microbiome
in chronic, inflammatory diseases. FEMS Microbiol Rev. (2015) 39:567–91.
doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuv013
39. Païssé S, Valle C, Servant F, Courtney M, Burcelin R, Amar J, et al.
Comprehensive description of blood microbiome from healthy donors
assessed by 16S targeted metagenomic sequencing. Transfusion (2016)
56:1138–47. doi: 10.1111/trf.13477
40. Moustafa A, Xie C, Kirkness E, Biggs W, Wong E, Turpaz Y, et al. The
blood DNA virome in 8,000 humans PLoS Pathog. (2017) 13:e1006292.
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006292
41. Panaiotov S, Filevski G, Equestre M, Nikolova E, Kalfin R. Cultural isolation
and characteristics of the blood microbiome of healthy individuals. Adv
Microbiol. (2018) 8:406–21. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00005
42. Whittle E, Leonard MO, Harrison R, Gant TW, Tonge DP. Multi-Method
characterisation of the human circulating microbiome. bioRxiv (2018).
doi: 10.1101/359760
43. Nuriel-Ohayon M, Neuman H, Koren O. Microbial changes during
pregnancy,
birth,
and
infancy.
Front
Microbiol.
(2016)
7:1031.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01031
44. Gomez-Gallego C, Garcia-Mantrana I, Salminen S, Collado MC. The human
milk microbiome and factors influencing its composition and activity. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med. (2016) 21:400–5. doi: 10.1016/j.siny.2016.05.003
45. Brodin P, Jojic V, Gao T, Bhattacharya S, Angel CJ, Furman D, et al. Variation
in the human immune system is largely driven by non-heritable influences.
Cell (2015) 160:37–47. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014
46. Louveau A, Smirnov I, Keyes TJ, Eccles JD, Rouhani SJ, Peske JD, et al.
Structural and functional features of central nervous system lymphatic
vessels. Nature (2015) 523:337–41. doi: 10.1038/nature14432
47. Benias PC, Wells RG, Sackey-Aboagye B, Klavan H, Reidy J, Buonocore D,
et al. Structure and distribution of an unrecognized interstitium in human
tissues. Sci Rep. (2018) 8:4947. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-23062-6
48. Aspelund A, Antila S, Proulx ST, Karlsen TV, Karaman S, Detmar M.
A dural lymphatic vascular system that drains brain interstitial fluid
and macromolecules. J Exp Med. (2015) 212:991–9. doi: 10.1084/jem.201
42290
49. Da Mesquita S, Louveau A, Vaccari A, Smirnov I, Cornelison RC, Kingsmore
KM, et al. Functional aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and
Alzheimer’s disease. Nature (2018) 25. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0368-8
50. Miller-Ensminger T, Garretto A, Brenner J, Thomas-White K, Zambom A,
Wolfe AJ, et al. Bacteriophages of the urinary microbiome. J Bacteriol. (2018)
200:e00738–17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00738-17
51. Tatusova T, DiCuccio M, Badretdin A, Chetvernin V, Nawrocki EP, Zaslavsky
L. NCBI prokaryotic genome annotation pipeline. Nucleic Acids Res. (2016)
44:6614–24. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw569
52. Moissl-Eichinger C, Pausan M, Taffner J, Berg G, Bang C, Schmitz RA.
Archaea are interactive components of complex microbiomes. Trends
Microbiol. (2018) 26:70–85. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2017.07.004
53. Manuela RP, Cintia C, Georg S, Holger T, Veronika S, Elisabeth S, et al.
Measuring the archaeome: detection and quantification of archaea signatures
in the human body. bioRxiv (2018) 30. doi: 10.1101/334748
54. Paez-Espino D, Eloe-Fadrosh EA, Pavlopoulos GA, Thomas AD, Huntemann
M, Mikhailova N, et al. Uncovering Earth’s virome. Nature (2016) 536:425–
30. doi: 10.1038/nature19094
55. Nguyen S, Baker K, Padman BS, Patwa R, Dunstan RA, Weston TA, et
al. Bacteriophage transcytosis provides a mechanism to cross epithelial cell
layers. MBio (2017) 8:e01874–17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01874-17
56. Newberry F, Hsieh SY, Wileman T, Carding SR. Does the microbiome and
virome contribute to myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome?
Clin Sci. (2018) 132:523–42. doi: 10.1042/CS20171330
57. Paez-Espino D, Chen I, Palaniappan K, Ratner A, Chu K, Szeto
E,
et
al.
IMG/VR:
a
database
of
cultured
and
uncultured
DNA
Viruses
and
retroviruses.
Nucleic
Acids
Res.
(2017)
45:D457–65.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1030
58. Joint Genome Institute (2018). IMG/VR Database Triples in Size. Available
online at: https://jgi.doe.gov/img-vr-vir
59. Chen SH, Garber D, Schaffer P, Knipe DM, Coen DM. Persistent elevated
expression of cytokine transcripts in ganglia latently infected with herpes
simplex virus in the absence of ganglionic replication or reactivation.
Virology (2000) 278:207–16. doi: 10.1006/viro.2000.0643
60. Louca S, Polz M, Mazel F, Albright M, Huber J, O’Connor M, et al. Function
and functional redundancy in microbial systems. Nat Ecol Evol. (2018)
2:936–43. doi: 10.1038/s41559-018-0519-1
61. Grzadziel J. Functional redundancy of soil microbiota – does more always
mean better? Polish J Soil Sci. (2017) 50:1. doi: 10.17951/pjss/2017.50.1.75
62. Wikoff WR, Anfora A, Liu J, Schultz P, Lesley S, Peters E, et al.
Metabolomics analysis reveals large effects of gut microflora on mammalian
blood metabolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2009) 106:3698–703.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0812874106
63. Brenu
EW,
Hardcastle
S,
Atkinson
G,
van
Driel
M,
Kreijkamp-
Kaspers S, Ashton K, et al. Natural killer cells in patients with
severe chronic fatigue syndrome. Auto Immun Highlights (2013) 4:69–80.
doi: 10.1007/s13317-013-0051-x
64. Ma C, Han M, Heinrich B, Fu Q, Zhang Q, Sandhu M, et al. Gut microbiome-
mediated bile acid metabolism regulates liver cancer via NKT cells. Science
(2018) 360:eaan5931. doi: 10.1126/science.aan5931
65. Yamane T, Sakamoto T, Nakagaki T, Nakano Y. Lactic acid bacteria from kefir
increase cytotoxicity of natural killer cells to tumor cells. Foods (2018) 7:E48.
doi: 10.3390/foods7040048
66. Rothhammer V, Mascanfroni I, Bunse L, Takenaka M, Kenison J, Mayo L,
et al. Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate
astrocyte activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor. Nat Med. (2016) 22:586–97. doi: 10.1038/nm.4106
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
15
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
67. Newton J, Okonkwo O, Sutcliffe K, Seth A, Shin J, Jones D. Symptoms of
autonomic dysfunction in chronic fatigue syndrome. QJM (2007) 100:519–
26. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcm057
68. Cambras T, Castro-Marrero J, Zaragoza M, Díez-Noguera A, Alegre J.
Circadian rhythm abnormalities and autonomic dysfunction in patients with
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis. PLoS ONE (2018)
13:e0198106. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198106
69. Pluznick J, Protzko R, Gevorgyan H, Peterlin Z, Sipos A, Han J, et al.
Olfactory receptor responding to gut microbiota-derived signals plays a role
in renin secretion and blood pressure regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
(2013) 110:4410–5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1215927110
70. Rizzo R, Soffritti I, D’Accolti M, Bortolotti D, Di Luca D, Caselli E. Infection
of NK cells modulates the expression of miRNAs and transcription factors
potentially associated to impaired NK activity. Front Microbiol. (2017)
8:2143. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02143
71. Masaki T, Qu J, Cholewa-Waclaw J, Burr K, Raaum R, Rambukkana
A. Reprogramming adult Schwann cells to stem cell-like cells by
leprosy bacilli promotes dissemination of infection. Cell (2013) 152:51–67.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.014
72. Liu Y, Liu F, Guan Z, Dong F, Cheng J, Gao Y. The extracellular
domain of Staphylococcus
aureus LtaS binds insulin and induces
insulin resistance during infection. Nat Microbiol. (2018) 3:622–31.
doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0146-2
73. Irie Y, Parsek M. Quorum sensing and microbial biofilms. Curr Top Microbiol
Immunol. (2008) 322:67–84.
74. Humphries J, Xiong L, Liu J, Prindle A, Yuan F, Arjes HA, et al. Species-
independent attraction to biofilms through electrical signaling. Cell (2017)
168:200–209.e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.014
75. De Sordi L, Lourenço M, Debarbieux L. “I will survive”: a tale of
bacteriophage-bacteria coevolution in the gut. Gut Microbes (2018) 18:1–18.
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2018.1474322
76. Jones M, Watanabe M, Zhu S, Graves C, Keyes L, Grau K, et al. Enteric
bacteria promote human and mouse norovirus infection of B cells. Science
(2014) 346:755–9. doi: 10.1126/science.1257147
77. Petersen C, Round J. Defining dysbiosis and its influence on host immunity
and disease. Cell Microbiol. (2014) 16:1024–33. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12308
78. Li B, Selmi C, Tang R, Gershwin M, Ma X. The microbiome and
autoimmunity: a paradigm from the gut-liver axis. Cell Mol Immunol. (2018)
15:595–609. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2018.7
79. Sampson T, Debelius J, Thron T, Janssen S, Shastri G, Ilhan Z, et al. Gut
microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a model of
Parkinson’s Disease. Cell (2016) 167:1469–80.e12. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016
80. Wang X, Yang Y, Huycke M. Microbiome-driven carcinogenesis in colorectal
cancer: models and mechanisms. Free Radic Biol Med. (2016) 105:3–15.
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.10.504
81. Urbaniak C, Gloor G, Brackstone M, Scott L, Tangney M, Reid G. The
microbiota of breast tissue and its association with breast cancer. Appl
Environ Microbiol. (2016) 82:5039–48. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01235-16
82. Zimmermann A, Knecht H, Häsler R, Zissel G, Gaede KI, Hofmann
et
al.
Atopobium
and
Fusobacterium
as
novel
candidates
for
sarcoidosis-associated
microbiota.
Eur
Respir
J.
(2017)
50:1600746.
doi: 10.1183/13993003.00746-2016
83. Zhao G, Vatanen T, Droit L, Park A, Kostic A, Poon T, et al. Intestinal virome
changes precede autoimmunity in type I diabetes-susceptible children.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2017) 114:E6166–75. doi: 10.1073/pnas.17063
59114
84. Nagy-Szakal D, Williams BL, Mishra N, Che X, Lee B, Bateman L, et
al. Fecal metagenomic profiles in subgroups of patients with myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Microbiome (2017) 5:44.
doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0261-y
85. Caporaso J, Lauber C, Costello E, Berg-Lyons D, Gonzalez A, Stombaugh J, et
al. Moving pictures of the human microbiome. Genome Biol. (2011) 12:R50.
doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-5-r50
86. Frémont M, Coomans D, Massart S, De Meirleir K. High-throughput
16S rRNA gene sequencing reveals alterations of intestinal microbiota
in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients. Anaerobe
(2013) 22:50–6. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.06.002
87. Olde Loohuis L, Mangul S, Ori AP, Jospin G, Koslicki D, Yang
HT, et al. Transcriptome analysis in whole blood reveals increased
microbial diversity in schizophrenia. Transl Psychiatry. (2018) 8:96.
doi: 10.1038/s41398-018-0107-9
88. Readhead B, Haure-Mirande J, Funk C, Richards M, Shannon P, Haroutunian
V. Multiscale Analysis of independent Alzheimer’s cohorts finds disruption
of molecular, genetic, and clinical networks by human herpesvirus. Neuron
(2018) 99:64–82.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.05.023
89. Pisa D, Alonso R, Rábano A, Rodal I, Carrasco L. Different brain regions
are infected with fungi in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep. (2015) 5:15015.
doi: 10.1038/srep15015
90. Alonso R, Pisa D, Fernández-Fernández A, Carrasco L. Infection of fungi and
bacteria in brain tissue from elderly persons and patients with Alzheimer’s
disease. Front Aging Neurosci. (2018) 10:159. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.
00159
91. Branton WG, Ellestad KK, Maingat F, Wheatley BM, Rud E, Warren
RL, et al. Brain microbial populations in HIV/AIDS: α-proteobacteria
predominate independent of host immune status. PLoS ONE (2013)
8:e54673. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054673
92. Duerkop BA, Kleiner M, Paez-Espino D, Zhu W, Bushnell B, Hassell B, et
al. Murine colitis reveals a disease-associated bacteriophage community. Nat
Microbiol. (2018) 23. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0210-y
93. Tetz
G,
Brown
S,
Hao
Y,
Tetz
V.
Parkinson’s
disease
and
bacteriophages as its overlooked contributors. Sci Rep. (2018) 8:10812.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-29173-4
94. Schutzer SE, Angel T, Liu T, Schepmoes A, Clauss T, Adkins J, et al.
Distinct cerebrospinal fluid proteomes differentiate post-treatment lyme
disease from chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS ONE (2011) 6:e17287.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.001728
95. Naviaux RK, Naviaux JC, Li K, Bright AT, Alaynick WA, Wang L, et al.
Metabolic features of chronic fatigue syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
(2016) 113:E5472–80. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1607571113
96. Johnson CH, Dejea CM, Edler D, Hoang LT, Santidrian AF, Felding BH, et
al. Metabolism links bacterial biofilms and colon carcinogenesis. Cell Metab.
(2015) 21:891–7. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.04.011
97. Eastment MC, McClelland R. Vaginal microbiota and susceptibility
to
HIV.
AIDS.
(2018)
32:687–98.
doi:
10.1097/QAD.00000000000
01768
98. Chow J, Tang H, Mazmanian S. Pathobionts of the gastrointestinal
microbiota and inflammatory disease. Curr Opin Immunol. (2011) 23:473–
80. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2011.07.010
99. Zechner E. Inflammatory disease caused by intestinal pathobionts. Curr Opin
Microbiol. (2017) 35:64–9. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2017.01.011
100. Yost S, Duran-Pinedo AE, Teles R, Krishnan K, Frias-Lopez J. Functional
signatures of oral dysbiosis during periodontitis progression revealed
by microbial metatranscriptome analysis. Genome Med. (2015) 7:27.
doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0153-3
101. Weiser J, Ferreira D, Paton J. Streptococcus pneumoniae: transmission,
colonization
and
invasion.
Nat
Rev
Microbiol.
(2018)
16:355–67.
doi: 10.1038/s41579-018-0001-8
102. Krismer B, Weidenmaier C, Zipperer A, Peschel A. The commensal lifestyle
of Staphylococcus aureus and its interactions with the nasal microbiota. Nat
Rev Microbiol. (2017) 15:675–87. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro.2017.104
103. Miskinyte M, Sousa A, Ramiro R, de Sousa J, Kotlinowski J, Caramalho I.
The genetic basis of Escherichia coli pathoadaptation to macrophages. PLoS
Pathog. (2013) 9:e1003802. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003802
104. Hottes A, Freddolino P, Khare A, Donnell Z, Liu J, Tavazoie S. Bacterial
adaptation through loss of function. PLoS Genet. (2013) 9:e1003617.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003617
105. Cullen L, McClean S. Bacterial adaptation during chronic respiratory
infections. Pathogens (2015) 4:66–89. doi: 10.3390/pathogens4010066
106. Greenblum S, Carr R, Borenstein E. Extensive strain-level copy-number
variation across human gut microbiome species. Cell (2015) 160:583–94.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.12.038
107. Yao L, Seaton S, Ndousse-Fetter S, Adhikari A, DiBenedetto N, Mina AI, et
al. A selective gut bacterial bile salt hydrolase alters host metabolism. Elife
(2018) 7:e37182. doi: 10.7554/eLife.37182
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
16
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
108. VanElzakker M. Chronic fatigue syndrome from vagus nerve infection: a
psychoneuroimmunological hypothesis. Med Hypotheses (2013) 81:414–23.
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.05.034
109. Hajishengallis G, Darveau R, Curtis M. The keystone-pathogen hypothesis.
Nat Rev Microbiol. (2012) 10:717–25. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro2873
110. Hajishengallis G, Liang S, Payne M, Hashim A, Jotwani R, Eskan M. Low-
abundance biofilm species orchestrates inflammatory periodontal disease
through the commensal microbiota and complement. Cell Host Microbe
(2011) 10:497–506. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.10.006
111. Kell D, Potgieter M, Pretorius E. Individuality, phenotypic differentiation,
dormancy and ’persistence’ in culturable bacterial systems: commonalities
shared by environmental, laboratory, and clinical microbiology. Version 2.
F1000Res. (2015) 4:179. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.6709
112. Ercoli G, Fernandes V, Chung W, Wanford J, Thomson S, Bayliss C, et
al. Intracellular replication of Streptococcus pneumoniae inside splenic
macrophages serves as a reservoir for septicaemia. Nat Microbiol. (2018)
3:600–10. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0147-1
113. Indrio F, Martini S, Francavilla R, Corvaglia L, Cristofori F, Mastrolia S,
et al. Epigenetic matters: the link between early nutrition, microbiome,
and
long-term
health
development.
Front
Pediatr.
(2017)
5:178.
doi: 10.3389/fped.2017.00178
114. Xu Y, Xie J, Li Y, Yue J, Chen J, Chunyu L, et al. Using a cDNA microarray to
study cellular gene expression altered by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Chin
Med J. (2003) 116:1070–3.
115. Hanada K, Uchida T, Tsukamoto Y, Watada M, Yamaguchi N, Yamamoto K,
et al. Helicobacter pylori infection introduces DNA double-strand breaks in
host cells. Infect Immun. (2014) 82:4182–9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02368-14
116. Hafez A, Luftig M. Characterization of the EBV-induced persistent DNA
damage response. Viruses. (2017) 9:E366. doi: 10.3390/v9120366
117. Wynendaele E, Verbeke F, D’Hondt M, Hendrix A, Van De Wiele
C,
Burvenich
C,
et
al.
Crosstalk
between
the
microbiome
and
cancer cells by quorum sensing peptides. Peptides (2015) 64:40–8.
doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2014.12.009
118. Rustom A, Saffrich R, Markovic I, Walther P, Gerdes H. Nanotubular
highways for intercellular organelle transport. Science. (2004) 303:1007–10.
doi: 10.1126/science.1093133
119. Hashimoto M, Bhuyan F, Hiyoshi M, Noyori O, Nasser H, Miyazaki
M, et al. Potential role of the formation of tunneling nanotubes
in HIV-1 spread in macrophages. J Immunol. (2016) 196:1832–41.
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500845
120. Zhu S, Victoria G, Marzo L, Ghosh R, Zurzolo C. Prion aggregates transfer
through tunneling nanotubes in endocytic vesicles. Prion (2015) 9:125–35.
doi: 10.1080/19336896.2015.1025189
121. Haimovich G, Ecker C, Dunagin M, Eggan E, Raj A, Gerst J, et al.
Intercellular mRNA trafficking via membrane nanotube-like extensions
in mammalian cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2017) 114:E9873–82.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1706365114
122. Altindis E, Cai W, Sakaguchi M, Zhang F, GuoXiao W, Liu F, et al. Viral
insulin-like peptides activate human insulin and IGF-1 receptor signaling: A
paradigm shift for host-microbe interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2018)
115:2461–6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1721117115
123. Xia J, Chiu L, Nehring RB, Bravo Nunez MA, Mei Q, Perez M. Bacteria-to-
human protein networks reveal origins of endogenous DNA damage. bioRxiv
(2018) 26. doi: 10.1101/354589
124. Nolte-’t Hoen E, Cremer T, Gallo R, Margolis L. Extracellular vesicles and
viruses: Are they close relatives? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2016) 113:9155–61.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1605146113
125. Wang T, Tavera-Mendoza L, Laperriere D, Libby E, MacLeod N, Nagai
Y, et al. Large-scale in silico and microarray-based identification of direct
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 target genes. Mol Endocrinol. (2005) 19:2685–95.
doi: 10.1210/me.2005-0106
126. Wu S, Sun J. Vitamin D, vitamin D receptor, and macroautophagy in
inflammation and infection. Discov Med. (2011) 11:325–35.
127. Meyer V, Saccone D, Tugizimana F, Asani F, Jeffery T, Bornman L.
Methylation of the Vitamin D Receptor (VDR) gene, together with
genetic variation, race, and environment influence the signaling efficacy
of the toll-like receptor 2/1-VDR pathway. Front Immunol. (2017) 8:1048.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01048
128. Yenamandra S, Lundin A, Arulampalam V, Yurchenko M, Pettersson S, Klein
G, et al. Expression profile of nuclear receptors upon Epstein – Barr virus
induced B cell transformation. Exp Oncol. (2009) 31:92–6.
129. Nevado J, Tenbaum S, Castillo A, Sánchez-Pacheco A, Aranda A. Activation
of the human immunodeficiency virus type I long terminal repeat by
1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. J Mol Endocrinol. (2007) 38:587–601.
doi: 10.1677/JME-06-0065
130. Chan
G,
Bivins-Smith
E,
Smith
M,
Smith
P,
Yurochko
A.
Transcriptome
analysis
reveals
human
cytomegalovirus
reprograms
monocyte differentiation toward an M1 macrophage. J Immunol. (2008)
181:698–711.
131. Salazar J, Duhnam-Ems S, La Vake C, Cruz A, Moore M, Caimano M, et
al. Activation of human monocytes by live Borrelia burgdorferi generates
TLR2-dependent and -independent responses which include induction of
IFN-beta. PLoS Pathog (2009) 5:e1000444. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.10
00444
132. Liu PT, Wheelwright M, Teles R, Komisopoulou E, Edfeldt K, Ferguson B, et
al. MicroRNA-21 targets the vitamin D-dependent antimicrobial pathway in
leprosy. Nat Med. (2012) 18:267–73. doi: 10.1038/nm.2584
133. Coughlan C, Chotirmall S, Renwick J, Hassan T, Low T, Bergsson G, et
al. The effect of Aspergillus fumigatus infection on vitamin D receptor
expression in cystic fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. (2012) 186:999–1007.
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201203-0478OC
134. Pushalkar S, Hundeyin M, Daley D, Zambirinis C, Kurz E, Mishra A, et al.
The pancreatic cancer microbiome promotes oncogenesis by induction of
innate and adaptive immune suppression. Cancer Discov. (2018) 8:403–16.
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-17-1134
135. Munoz JF, Delorey T., Ford CB, Li BY, Thompson DA, Rao RP, et al.
Coordinated host-pathogen transcriptional dynamics revealed using sorted
subpopulations and single, Candida albicans infected macrophages. bioRxiv
(2018) 350322. doi: 10.1101/350322
136. McKinney EF, Lee JC, Jayne DR, Lyons PA, Smith KG. T-cell exhaustion,
co-stimulation and clinical outcome in autoimmunity and infection. Nature
(2015) 523:612–6. doi: 10.1038/nature14468
137. Sen DR, Kaminski J, Barnitz RA, Kurachi M, Gerdemann U, Yates KB, et
al. The epigenetic landscape of T cell exhaustion. Science (2016) 354:1165–9.
doi: 10.1126/science.aae0491
138. Cameron D. Proof that chronic lyme disease exists. Interdiscip Perspect Infect
Dis. (2010) 2010:876450. doi: 10.1155/2010/876450
139. Aid M, Abbink P, Larocca R, Boyd M, Nityanandam R, Nanayakkara O, et
al. Zika virus persistence in the central nervous system and lymph nodes
of rhesus monkeys. Cell (2017) 169:610–20.e14. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.
04.008
140. Wilson H, Amo-Addae M, Kenu E, Ilesanmi O, Ameme D, Sackey
S.
post-ebola
syndrome
among
ebola
virus
disease
survivors
in
Montserrado County, Liberia. Biomed Res Int. (2016) 2018:1909410.
doi: 10.1155/2018/1909410
141. Fischer W, Brown J, Wohl D, Loftis A, Tozay S, Reeves E, et al. Ebola virus
ribonucleic acid detection in semen more than two years after resolution
of acute ebola virus infection. Open Forum Infect Dis. (2017) 4:ofx155.
doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofx155
142. Hosseini S, Wilk E, Michaelsen-Preusse K, Gerhauser I, Baumgärtner W,
Geffers R, et al. Long-term neuroinflammation induced by influenza a virus
infection and the impact on hippocampal neuron morphology and function.
J Neurosci. (2018) 38:3060–80. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1740-17.2018
143. Viola M, Scott C, Duffy P. Persistent measles virus infection in vitro and in
man. Arthritis Rheum. (1978) 21(Suppl. 5):S47–51.
144. Wakefield A, Ekbom A, Dhillon A, Pittilo R, Pounder R. Crohn’s disease:
pathogenesis and persistent measles virus infection. Gastroenterology (1995)
108:911–6.
145. Griffin
D,
Lin
W,
Pan
C.
Measles
virus,
immune
control,
and
persistence.
FEMS
Microbiol
Rev.
(2012)
36:649–62.
doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2012.00330.x
146. Doi T, Kwon H, Honda T, Sato H, Yoneda M, Kai C. Measles virus induces
persistent infection by autoregulation of viral replication. Sci Rep. (2016)
6:37163. doi: 10.1038/srep37163
147. Casadesús J. Bacterial L-forms require peptidoglycan synthesis for cell
division. Bioessays (2007) 29:1189–91. doi: 10.1002/bies.20680
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
17
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
148. Glover W, Yang Y, Zhang Y. Insights into the molecular basis of L-form
formation and survival in Escherichia coli. PLoS ONE (2009) 4:e7316.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007316
149. Markova N. L-form bacteria cohabitants in human blood: significance for
health and diseases. Discov Med. (2017) 23:305–13.
150. Mattman LH.(2000). Cell Wall Deficient Forms: Stealth Pathogens. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
151. Bruno R, Creange S, Frick N. Parallels between post-polio fatigue and
chronic fatigue syndrome: a common pathophysiology? Am J Med. (1998)
105:66S−73S.
152. Straus SE. The chronic mononucleosis syndrome. J Infect Dis. (1988)
157:405–12.
153. Archer M. The post-viral syndrome: a review. J R Coll Gen Pract. (1987)
37:212–4.
154. Chia J, Chia A, Voeller M, Lee T, Chang R. Acute enterovirus infection
followed
by
myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic
fatigue
syndrome
(ME/CFS)
and
viral
persistence.
J
Clin
Pathol.
(2010)
63:165–8.
doi: 10.1136/jcp.2009.070466
155. Chang C, Crane M, Zhou J, Mina M, Post J, Cameron B, et al. HIV and
co-infections. Immunol Rev. (2013) 254:114–42. doi: 10.1111/imr.12063
156. Bedard P, Hansen A, Ratain M, Siu L. Tumour heterogeneity in the clinic.
Nature (2013) 501:355–64. doi: 10.1038/nature12627
157. Proal A, Albert P, Marshall T. Autoimmune disease and the human
metagenome. ed. Nelson KE. Metagen
Hum
Body
(2010) 231–75.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7089-3_12
158. Mina M, Metcalf C, de Swart R, Osterhaus A, Grenfell B. Long-term measles-
induced immunomodulation increases overall childhood infectious disease
mortality. Science (2015) 348:694–9. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa3662
159. Cabrera-Rubio R, Collado M, Laitinen K, Salminen S, Isolauri E, Mira
A. The human milk microbiome changes over lactation and is shaped by
maternal weight and mode of delivery. Am J Clin Nutr. (2012) 96:544–51.
doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.037382
160. Tomlinson MS, Bommarito PA, Martin EM, Smeester L, Fichorova RN,
Onderdonk AB, et al. Microorganisms in the human placenta are associated
with altered CpG methylation of immune and inflammation-related genes.
PLoS ONE (2017) 12:e0188664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188664
161. Langdon A, Crook N, Dantas G. The effects of antibiotics on the
microbiome throughout development and alternative approaches for
therapeutic modulation.Genome Med. (2016) 8:39. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-
0294-z
162. Vignaroli C, Zandri G, Aquilanti L, Pasquaroli S, Biavasco F. Multidrug-
resistant enterococci in animal meat and faeces and co-transfer of resistance
from an Enterococcus durans to a human Enterococcus faecium. Curr
Microbiol. (2011) 62:1438–47. doi: 10.1007/s00284-011-9880-x
163. Kolomytseva M, Gapeev A, Sadovnikov V, Chemeris N. Suppression of
nonspecific resistance of the body under the effect of extremely high
frequency electromagnetic radiation of low intensity. Biofizika (2002)
47:71–7.
164. Diaz P, Hong BY, Frias-Lopez J, Dupuy AK, Angeloni M, Abusleme L,
et al. Transplantation-associated long-term immunosuppression promotes
oral colonization by potentially opportunistic pathogens without impacting
other members of the salivary bacteriome. Clin Vaccine Immunol. (2013)
20:920–30. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00734-12
165. Tatem
AJ,
Rogers
DJ,
Hay
SI.
Global
transport
networks
and
infectious
disease
spread.
Adv
Parasitol.
(2006)
62:293–343.
doi: 10.1016/S0065-308X(05)62009-X
166. Jansen W, Woudstra S, Müller A, Grabowski N, Schoo G, Gerulat
B. The safety and quality of pork and poultry meat imports for the
common European market received at border inspection post Hamburg
Harbour between 2014 and 2015. PLoS ONE (2018) 13:e0192550.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192550
167. Feazel LM, Baumgartner LK, Peterson KL, Frank DN, Harris JK, Pace NR.
Opportunistic pathogens enriched in showerhead biofilms. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. (2009) 106:16393–9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0908446106
168. Sapkota AR, Berger S, Vogel TM. Human pathogens abundant in the
bacterial metagenome of cigarettes. Environ Health Perspect. (2010) 118:351–
6. doi: 10.1289/ehp.0901201
169. Twisk FN. The status of and future research into Myalgic Encephalomyelitis
and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: the need of accurate diagnosis, objective
assessment, and acknowledging biological and clinical subgroups. Front
Physiol. (2014) 5:109. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00109
170. Lantos PM. Chronic Lyme disease. Infect Dis Clin North Am. (2015) 29:325–
40. doi: 10.1016/j.idc.02.006
171. Halpin P, Williams MV, Klimas NG, Fletcher MA, Barnes Z, Ariza ME.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and gulf war illness
patients exhibit increased humoral responses to the herpesviruses-encoded
dUTPase: Implications in disease pathophysiology. J Med Virol. (2017)
89:1636–45. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24810
172. Hakim A, De Wandele I, O’Callaghan C, Pocinki A, Rowe P. Chronic fatigue
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome-Hypermobile type. Am J Med Genet C Semin
Med Genet. (2017) 175:175–80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31542
173. Castro-Marrero J, Faro M, Aliste L, Sáez-Francàs N, Calvo N, Martínez-
Martínez
A.
Comorbidity
in
chronic
fatigue
syndrome/myalgic
encephalomyelitis:
a
nationwide
population-based
cohort
study.
Psychosomatics
(2017)
58:533–43.
doi:
10.1016/j.psym.2017.
04.010
174. Treib J, Grauer MT, Haass A, Langenbach J, Holzer G, Woessner R. Chronic
fatigue syndrome in patients with Lyme borreliosis. Eur Neurol. (2000)
43:107–9. doi: 10.1159/000008144
175. Blomberg J, Gottfries CG, Elfaitouri A, Rizwan M, Rosén A. Infection
elicited autoimmunity and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue
syndrome:
an
explanatory
model.
Front
Immunol.
(2018)
9:229.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00229
176. Proal AD, Marshall TG. Re-framing the theory of autoimmunity in the
era of the microbiome: persistent pathogens, autoantibodies, and molecular
mimicry. Discov Med. (2018) 25:299–308.
177. Vojdani A, Vojdani E, Saidara E, Kharrazian D. Reaction of amyloid-β
peptide antibody with different infectious agents involved in alzheimer’s
disease. J Alzheimers Dis. (2018) 63:847–60. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170961
178. Manfredo V, Hiltensperger M, Kumar V, Zegarra-Ruiz D, Dehner C, Khan N.
Translocation of a gut pathobiont drives autoimmunity in mice and humans.
Science (2018) 359:1156–61. doi: 10.1126/science.aar7201
179. Tuffs SW, Haeryfar SM, McCormick JK. Manipulation of innate and
adaptive immunity by staphylococcal superantigens. Pathogens (2018) 7:E53.
doi: 10.3390/pathogens7020053
180. Carabotti M, Scirocco A, Maselli M, Severi C. The gut-brain axis: interactions
between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems. Ann
Gastroenterol. (2015) 28:203–9.
181. Mayer EA. Gut feelings: the emerging biology of gut-brain communication.
Nat Rev Neurosci. (2011) 12:453–66. doi: 10.1038/nrn307
182. Soscia SJ, Kirby JE, Washicosky KJ, Tucker SM, Ingelsson M, Hyman B, et al.
The Alzheimer’s disease-associated amyloid beta-protein is an antimicrobial
peptide. PLoS ONE (2010) 5:e9505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009505
183. Pasupuleti M, Roupe M, Rydengård V, Surewicz K, Surewicz WK,
Chalupka A, et al. Antimicrobial activity of human prion protein
is mediated by its N-terminal region. PLoS ONE (2009) 4:e7358.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007358
184. Kumar DK, Choi SH, Washicosky KJ, Eimer WA, Tucker S, Ghofrani J, et
al. Amyloid-β peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse and
worm models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med. (2016) 8:340ra72.
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf1059
185. Eimer WA, Vijaya Kumar DK, Navalpur Shanmugam NK, Rodriguez AS,
Mitchell T, Washicosky KJ, et al. Alzheimer’s disease-associated β-amyloid
is rapidly seeded by herpesviridae to protect against brain infection. Neuron
(2018) 99:56–63.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.06.030
186. Itzhaki RF, Lathe R, Balin BJ, Ball MJ, Bearer EL, Braak H. Microbes
and
Alzheimer’s
disease.
J
Alzheimers
Dis.
(2016)
51:979–84.
doi: 10.3233/JAD-160152
187. Zeineh MM, Kang J, Atlas SW, Raman MM, Reiss AL, Norris JL, et al.
Right arcuate fasciculus abnormality in chronic fatigue syndrome. Radiology
(2015) 274:517–26. doi: 10.1148/radiol.14141079
188. Gottlieb B, Chalifour LE, Mitmaker B, Sheiner N, Obrand D, Abraham C.
BAK1 gene variation and abdominal aortic aneurysms. Hum Mutat. (2009)
30:1043–7. doi: 10.1002/humu.21046
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
18
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
 Proal and Marshall
ME/CFS and the Human Microbiome
189. Ursini G, Punzi G, Chen Q, Marenco S, Robinson J, Porcelli A, et al.
Convergence of placenta biology and genetic risk for schizophrenia. Nat
Med. (2018) 24:792–801. doi: 10.1038/s41591-018-0021-y
190. Harley
JB,
Chen
X,
Pujato
M,
Miller
D,
Maddox
A,
Forney
C,
et
al.
Transcription
factors
operate
across
disease
loci,
with
EBNA2 implicated in autoimmunity. Nat Genet. (2018) 50:699–707.
doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0102-3
191. Proal
AD,
Albert
PJ,
Marshall
TG.
The
human
microbiome
and
autoimmunity.
Curr
Opin
Rheumatol.
(2013)
25:234–40.
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32835cedbf
192. Kell DB, Pretorius E. On the translocation of bacteria and their
lipopolysaccharides between blood and peripheral locations in chronic,
inflammatory diseases: the central roles of LPS and LPS-induced cell death.
Integr Biol. (2015) 7:1339–77. doi: 10.1039/c5ib00158g
193. Sharma SK, Soneja M. HIV & immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome
(IRIS).
Indian
J
Med
Res.
(2011)
134:866–77.
doi: 10.4103/0971-5916.92632
194. Maude S, Barrett D, Teachey DT, Grupp SA. Managing cytokine release
syndrome associated with novel T cell-engaging therapies. Cancer J. (2014)
20:119–22. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000035
195. Arando M, Fernandez-Naval C, Mota-Foix M, Alvarez A, Armegol P, Barberá
MJ, et al. The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction in syphilis: could molecular
typing help to understand it better? J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. (2018).
32:1791–5. doi: 10.1111/jdv.15078.
196. Farmer TW. Jarisch-herxheimer reaction in early syphilis. JAMA (1948)
138:480–5. doi: 10.1001/jama.1948.02900070012003
197. Meintjes G, Rabie H,., Wilkinson RJ, Cotton MF. Tuberculosis-associated
immune
reconstitution
inflammatory
syndrome
and
unmasking
of
tuberculosis by antiretroviral therapy. Clin Chest Med. (2009) 30:797–810.
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2009.08.013
198. Müller
M,
Wandel
S,
Colebunders
R,
Attia
S,
Furrer
H,
Egger
M.
IeDEA
Southern
and
Central
Africa
Immune
reconstitution
inflammatory
syndrome
in
patients
starting
antiretroviral
therapy
for
HIV
infection:
a
systematic
review
and
meta-analysis.
Lancet
Infect
Dis.
(2010)
10:251–61.
doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(10)
70026-8
199. Proal
AD,
Albert
PJ,
Marshall
TG,
Blaney
GP,
Lindseth
IA.
Immunostimulation
in
the
treatment
for
chronic
fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis. Immunol Res. (2013) 56:398–412.
doi: 10.1007/s12026-013-8413-z
200. Proal AD, Albert PJ, Blaney GP, Lindseth IA, Benediktsson C, Marshall TG.
Immunostimulation in the era of the metagenome. Cell Mol Immunol. (2011)
8:213–25. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2010.77
201. Shimabukuro-Vornhagen A, Gödel P, Subklewe M, Stemmler H, Schlößer H,
Schlaak M. Cytokine release syndrome. J Immunother Cancer (2018) 6:56.
doi: 10.1186/s40425-018-0343-9
202. Roberts E, Wessely S, Chalder T, Chang CK, Hotopf M. Mortality of people
with chronic fatigue syndrome: a retrospective cohort study in England
and Wales from the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust
Biomedical Research Centre (SLaM BRC) Clinical Record Interactive Search
(CRIS) Register. Lancet (2016) 387:1638–43. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)
01223-4
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Proal and Marshall. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
19
December 2018 | Volume 6 | Article 373
