 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 8 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
Introduction
Cancer remains a deadly disease since patients often relapse 
after surgery and adjuvant therapy, progressing to advanced 
metastatic stages (1). Recent studies have shown that cancer 
cells, beyond their genetic alterations, are heterogeneous in 
their contribution to tumor growth, metastasis, or resistance to 
therapy (2, 3). The study of the nongenetic molecular mecha-
nisms governing such heterogeneity and its clinical implications 
currently represents a conceptual and technical challenge for 
the cancer research community.
Given that most conventional and target-directed drugs elim-
inate proliferating cancer cells, one direct explanation for resis-
tance and relapse in patients could be the existence of dormant or 
slow-cycling cells within tumors. This hypothesis would implicate 
intratumoral heterogeneity at the individual cell proliferation level. 
 
In this context, a growing tumor mass could be considered as a 
dynamic ecosystem built by millions of cancer cells with differ-
ent proliferation rates where some populations would eventually 
enter a slow-cycling status or prolonged dormancy. Such a minor 
reservoir of dormant tumor cells (DTCs) would resist antiprolif-
erative drugs and retain cancer-initiating potential, fueling tumor 
regrowth after disease remission. Indeed, the existence of residual 
DTCs has been well documented in the clinic, since relapse and 
metastasis can occur years after a prolonged disease-free period 
achieved through initial curative surgery and effective treatment 
(4). However, this evidence is of little clinical utility without a clear 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing cancer 
cell dormancy or quiescence.
Most data generated on physiological quiescence derive from 
description of long-living minor cell populations in normal tissues 
such as skin, bone marrow, intestine, or breast (5–9). The descrip-
tion or isolation of these cells has mostly been based on their 
capacity to retain different labels incorporated in their genome 
(e.g., BrdU) (10) or chromatin (e.g., H2BeGFP) (5–9). Whereas 
proliferative cells diluted these marks upon cell division, quies-
Dormant or slow-cycling tumor cells can form a residual chemoresistant reservoir responsible for relapse in patients, years 
after curative surgery and adjuvant therapy. We have adapted the pulse-chase expression of H2BeGFP for labeling and 
isolating slow-cycling cancer cells (SCCCs). SCCCs showed cancer initiation potential and enhanced chemoresistance. Cells 
at this slow-cycling status presented a distinctive nongenetic and cell-autonomous gene expression profile shared across 
different tumor types. We identified TET2 epigenetic enzyme as a key factor controlling SCCC numbers, survival, and tumor 
recurrence. 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), generated by TET2 enzymatic activity, labeled the SCCC genome in carcinomas 
and was a predictive biomarker of relapse and survival in cancer patients. We have shown the enhanced chemoresistance 
of SCCCs and revealed 5hmC as a biomarker for their clinical identification and TET2 as a potential drug target for SCCC 
elimination that could extend patients’ survival.
TET2 controls chemoresistant slow-cycling cancer cell 
survival and tumor recurrence
Isabel Puig,1 Stephan P
. Tenbaum,1 Irene Chicote,1 Oriol Arqués,1 Jordi Martínez-Quintanilla,1 Estefania Cuesta-Borrás,1  
Lorena Ramírez,2 Pilar Gonzalo,3 Atenea Soto,4,5 Susana Aguilar,6 Cristina Eguizabal,7 Ginevra Caratù,8 Aleix Prat,9  
Guillem Argilés,2 Stefania Landolfi,5,10 Oriol Casanovas,6 Violeta Serra,11,12 Alberto Villanueva,13 Alicia G. Arroyo,3  
Luigi Terracciano,14 Paolo Nuciforo,15 Joan Seoane,4,5,12 Juan A. Recio,16 Ana Vivancos,8 Rodrigo Dienstmann,5,17  
Josep Tabernero,2,12 and Héctor G. Palmer1,12
1Stem Cells and Cancer Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 2Gastrointestinal and Endocrine Tumors Group, Medical Oncology Department, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Vall 
d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 3Matrix Metalloproteinases in Angiogenesis and Inflammation Group, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. 4Gene 
Expression and Cancer Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain. 5Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain. 6Tumor Angiogenesis Group, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. 7Cell Therapy and Stem Cell Group, Basque Centre for Transfusion and Human 
Tissues, Galdakao, Spain. 8Cancer Genomics Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 9Translational Genomics and Targeted Therapeutics in Solid Tumors, August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical 
Research Institute (IDIBAPS), Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Translational Genomics Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 10Department 
of Pathology, Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. 11Experimental Therapeutics Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 12Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain. 13Chemoresistance Group, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. 14Molecular Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, 
Basel, Switzerland. 15Molecular Oncology Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 16Animal Models and Cancer Laboratory, Melanoma Program, Vall d’Hebron Research Institute, 
Barcelona, Spain. 17Oncology Data Science (ODysSey) Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: July 20, 2017; Accepted: June 19, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(9):3887–3905. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI96393.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 8 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
A more detailed study of SCCCs is essential to unmask the 
cell-autonomous factors controlling their distinctive behavior 
and to reveal novel biomarkers for their clinical evaluation as 
well as drug targets for their elimination. In response, we adapt-
ed the use of histone H2B fused to enhanced GFP (H2BeGFP) 
(5) to an all-in-one lentivirus for its pulse-chase expression upon 
doxycycline (DOX) treatment in human cells. We observed that 
slow cycling is a transient state defining a constant minor pro-
portion of undifferentiated cancer cells retaining cancer-ini-
tiating potential and enhanced chemoresistance. Cells at this 
slow-cycling status presented a distinctive gene expression 
profile common across tumor types as biologically diverse as 
colorectal carcinoma, melanoma, and glioblastoma. This gene 
expression profile was cell-autonomous and was shared by 
SCCCs with cancer genomes driven by different sets of onco-
genic mutations. Their expression pattern indicated low prolif-
eration and energy metabolism and simultaneous activation of 
genes related to stemness, chemoresistance, hypoxia, or cross-
talk with immune cells and tumor vasculature.
cent populations were detected as label-retaining cells (LRCs) in 
pulse-chase experiments (11). These LRCs are responsible for tis-
sue self-renewal and regeneration upon injury, exerting all major 
functions of adult stem cells (5–7). Unfortunately, most of these 
studies have been developed with transgenic mouse models and 
only a few in human tissues, tumors in particular.
Pece et al. used a cell membrane PKH26 pulse-chase labeling 
approach to reveal a minor population of breast cancer cells with 
enhanced tumor initiation potential and a distinctive gene expres-
sion profile (12). The presence of a higher proportion of these 
slow-cycling cells correlated with tumor subtypes presenting the 
worst overall survival in breast cancer patients. A couple of stud-
ies labeled slow-cycling human cells with green fluorescent pro-
tein (GFP) expressed under the control of NES/Nestin or KDM5B/
JARID1B gene promoters in glioblastoma or melanoma cells, respec-
tively (13, 14). Although the existence of slow-cycling cancer cells 
(SCCCs) negative for the expression of NES or KDM5B genes was 
not excluded in these studies, authors described SCCCs as a reser-
voir required for long-term tumor growth and chemoresistance.
Figure 1. An H2BeGFP pulse-chase system marks 
slow-cycling cells. (A) Schematic representation 
of tetracycline-inducible lentiviral pSIN-TRE-
H2BeGFP-rtTA2 construct. H2BeGFP is expressed 
via a tetracycline response element–containing 
promoter (TRE), which is activated by the reverse 
tetracycline transactivator (rtTA) induced in the 
presence of the tetracycline derivative doxycy-
cline (DOX). RSV, constitutive promoter Rous 
sarcoma virus; RRE, Rev response element; 
cPPT, central polypurine tract; hPGK, human 
phosphoglycerate kinase promoter; WPRE, 
woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional 
regulatory element. (B) Chromatin accumulation 
of H2BeGFP in infected colon cancer cells upon 
DOX treatment. (C and D) Representative immu-
nofluorescence picture of H2BeGFP-infected 
minitumors (MTs) growing embedded in Matrigel 
for colorectal (CRC) models or in suspension for 
melanoma (MEL) and glioblastoma (GBM) cancer 
models generated from single-cell suspensions. 
Cultures were treated with a DOX pulse chase to 
evaluate SCCCs together with cellular organiza-
tion (phalloidin) (C) or proliferation (Ki67) (D). (C 
and D) Arrowheads, SCCCs. Hoechst was used as 
counterstain. (B–D) Scale bars: 100 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 8 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
doi.org/10.1172/JCI96393DS1). We then infected cells from 
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models generated from melano-
mas (MEL-MMPG3, MEL-MMLN9), glioblastomas (GBM-e216, 
GBM-e225), a colorectal carcinoma (CRC-T70), and the colon 
cancer cell line CRC-SW1222, which all preserved cell heteroge-
neity and multipotency (Supplemental Table 1) (17). We selected 
fresh-infected PDX models since they more faithfully recapitulate 
human disease than regular cell lines at all relevant levels, includ-
ing intratumoral cell heterogeneity and drug response (18, 19).
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC), glioblastoma (GBM), and mel-
anoma (MEL) cells were grown in vitro as minitumors (MTs) 
embedded in either Matrigel (CRC models) or sphere suspension 
(GBM and MEL models), or in vivo as xenografts (Xe) upon injec-
tion in NOD/SCID or nude mice. For simplicity, cells in all in vitro 
cultures were referred to as MT. After a DOX pulse-chase treat-
ment, nuclear H2BeGFP signal was progressively diluted reveal-
ing label-retaining cells (SCCCs) in all models (Figure 1, C and D; 
We identified TET2 as a key factor governing the fate of chemo-
resistant SCCCs that controls their numbers and survival. It deter 
mines 
tumor recurrence and is a potential drug target for SCCC elimination. 
TET2 is an epigenetic dioxygenase responsible for the enzymatic 
oxidation of genomic 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethyl-
cytosine (5hmC) (15, 16). We show that 5hmC was actually an epi-
genetic biomarker that predicted relapse and worse patient survival.
Results
Slow cycling is a reversible state acquired by undifferentiated cancer 
cells with tumor-initiating potential. To label human SCCCs, we 
developed a DOX-inducible all-in-one lentivirus vector to express 
H2BeGFP (Figure 1A). After a DOX pulse chase, the accumulated 
H2BeGFP signal in the chromatin was diluted with mathematical 
precision upon cell divisions in 4 different colon cancer cell lines 
(Figure 1B, Supplemental Figure 1, and Supplemental Video 1; 
supplemental material available online with this article; https:/
/
Figure 2. Slow cycling is a transient and reversible state. (A) H2BeGFP signal in subcutaneous xenograft tumors developed from colon cancer cells 
infected with H2BeGFP upon DOX (+ DOX) or after a DOX pulse-chase treatment (+/– DOX). (B–D) Representative immunofluorescence picture of H2BeGFP 
(green) and proliferation (Ki67, red) in DOX pulse-chase subcutaneous tumor xenografts (Xe) from CRC-SW1222 (B), MEL-MMLN9 (C), and GBM-e216 (D) 
cancer models infected with H2BeGFP. (E) Quantification of Ki67-positive RCCCs (blue dots) and SCCCs (green dots) in the indicated subcutaneous xeno-
grafts (n = 8). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. ***P ≤ 0.001, 2-tailed Student’s t test. (F) FACS-isolated SCCCs and RCCCs from MTs were embedded 
back into Matrigel and treated with a second DOX pulse chase. SCCCs were evaluated by immunofluorescence against GFP. Representative pictures of MT 
formation from isolated SCCCs and RCCCs are shown. Phalloidin was used as counterstain. (B–D and F) Arrowheads, SCCCs. Hoechst was used as counter-
stain. Scale bars: 100 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
H2BeGFP signal as a consequence of consecutive cell divisions, as 
rapid- 
cycling cancer cells (RCCCs). We observed that SCCCs rep-
resented up to 3% of all cells (Figure 2F and Supplemental Figure 
2G). When CRC-SW1222 SCCCs and RCCCs isolated from MTs 
were reseeded at a single-cell density, both generated MTs with 
SCCCs and RCCCs after a second DOX pulse chase, revealing 
slow cycling as a transient and reversible state as opposed to a cell 
population entity (Figure 2F). FACS-isolated SCCCs from MTs of 
different tumor types presented a slightly higher MT reinitiation 
capacity than RCCCs when seeded back in culture at single-cell 
density despite their original slow-cycling behavior (Supplemental 
Figure 2H). Similarly, FACS-isolated CRC-SW1222 SCCCs from 
xenografts showed cancer initiation potential equivalent to that of 
RCCCs upon injection at limiting numbers in the kidney capsule of 
NOD/SCID mice (Supplemental Figure 2I).
In summary, our H2BeGFP labeling approach identified a 
minor proportion of cancer cells in a transient, slow-cycling, and 
undifferentiated status that preserved cancer initiation potential 
(Supplemental Figure 2J).
Figure 2, A–D; and Supplemental Figure 2, A and B). SCCCs from 
all models were negative for the proliferation marker protein Ki67 
and, in the case of CRC, for differentiation (mucin-2 [MUC2], cyto-
keratin-20 [CK20], chromogranin-A [CGA], and lysozyme [LYZ]) 
and the senescence/DNA damage marker phospho–histone H2AX 
(pH2AX) (Figure 1D; Figure 2, B–E; and Supplemental Figure 2, 
B–D). We further confirmed that SW1222 or SW620 H2BeGFP- 
retaining cells were slow cycling in tumor xenografts by a simul-
taneous pulse-chase treatment with DOX and 5-bromo-2′-deoxy-
uridine (BrdU) or 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) (Supplemental 
Figure 2, E and F). Almost all BrdU- or EdU-retaining cells were 
also positive for H2BeGFP. Both MT and xenograft models contin-
uously treated with DOX (+ DOX) showed 2 populations by flow 
cytometry, a minor one with a background signal equivalent to 
noninfected cells and a major one with maximum H2BeGFP signal 
(Figure 2F and Supplemental Figure 2G). To gate SCCCs retain-
ing H2BeGFP after a DOX pulse-chase treatment, we used the 
same nonarbitrary gate at maximum signal (+ DOX). On the con-
trary, we defined those infected cells that significantly diluted the 
Figure 3. SCCCs show a distinctive gene expression profile. Gene expression profiles were analyzed from 29 replicates of SCCCs and 29 paired RCCCs 
isolated from 3 different cancer types: colorectal, melanoma, and glioblastoma, grown as MTs or xenografts. (A) Principal component (PC) analysis showing 
microarray data. Light-colored spheres represent mean-derived centroids. (B) Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) plots showing enrichment of the indi-
cated gene sets from all integrated cancer models. P values by 1-way ANOVA. (C) Differential expression evaluation of indicated genes by qPCR analysis in 
RCCCs (blue bars) and SCCCs (green bars). Data are represented as mean ± SD of triplicates from 3 independent experiments. n.d., not detected; r.u., relative 
units. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001; ****P ≤ 0.0001, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
General processes such as proliferation and metabolism 
were negatively enriched in SCCCs, whereas those related 
to drug detoxification, stemness, hypoxia, or crosstalk with 
the immune system were positively enriched (Figure 3, B and 
C, and Figure 4A). In addition to these common characteris-
tics, SCCCs also showed some tissue-specific features such 
as enrichment of DNA repair genes in melanoma as well as 
enrichment of neural or epithelial traits in SCCCs from GBM or 
CRC tumors, respectively (Figure 4, B and C, and Supplemen-
tal Table 2). Moreover, the PanC-SCCC signature was enriched 
Molecular profiling of SCCCs. We compared the gene expression 
profile of 58 paired replicates of SCCCs and RCCCs isolated by FACS 
from subcutaneous tumor xenografts or minitumors  that were gen-
erated from the 6 infected cancer cell models previously indicated 
(Figure 1, Supplemental Figure 2, and Supplemental Table 1). SCCCs 
showed a distinctive gene expression profile (PanC-SCCC signa-
ture) common across all models irrespectively of their intrinsic dif-
ferences according to tumor type (CRC, MEL, and GBM), individual 
patient traits, mutation repertoire, or experimental model analyzed 
(xenograft or MT) (Figure 3A and Supplemental Tables 1 and 2).
Figure 4. SCCC signature includes genes related to several biological functions. (A) Single-sample GSEA projections for each indicated MT cancer model. 
Colored boxes correspond to general functions grouping differentially enriched gene sets. Color bar legend: blue, downregulated expression; red, upregulated 
expression. ECM, extracellular matrix. (B) Venn diagrams comparing genes lowly (top) or highly (bottom) expressed in SCCCs versus RCCCs. (C) Genes more 
highly expressed in SCCCs were grouped depending on their function following the Broad Institute’s ontology. Bars represent the percentage of genes related 
to a particular function with respect to all genes more highly expressed in SCCCs that are exclusive or common to models of each cancer type as defined in 
the Venn diagram shown in B, bottom. (D and E) Normalized PanC-SCCC signature score of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) CRC (D) and GBM (E) cohorts 
with intrinsic gene expression classifier labels. Significantly higher scores in the upper quartile are marked in green dots. *P < 0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
in tumors from CRC and GBM patients subtyped as mesenchy-
mal, which have been previously associated with a poor progno-
sis (Figure 4, D and E, and refs. 20, 21).
SCCCs in CRC-SW1222 (non-hypermutant) MTs growing 
embedded in Matrigel and not exposed to mouse stroma and those 
isolated from CRC-T70 (hypermutant) xenografts in vivo presented 
 
a gene expression profile that was mostly equivalent, revealing a 
nongenetic and cell-autonomous phenotype (Figure 3C; Figure 4A; 
Supplemental Figure 3, A and B; and Supplemental Table 1).
The PanC-SCCC signature showed lower expression of cyc-
lins and cyclin-dependent kinases. This could in itself explain the 
observed accumulation of CRC-SW1222 SCCCs at the S and G2/M 
phases of the cell cycle (Supplemental Figure 3, C–E). SCCCs also 
presented a significantly lower expression of a compendium of 
genes involved in DNA replication (TOP2A and TYMS), cen-
tromere/kinetochore assembly machinery, or chromosome segre-
gation (TUBB isoforms) essential for cell division (Supplemental 
Figure 4, A–C). The product of some of these genes is the direct 
target of chemotherapeutic drugs such as topoisomerase (TOP2A) 
and microtubule polymerization (TUBB) inhibitors or 5-fluoro-
uracil (TYMS). Indeed, cancer cell lines (Cancer Therapeutics 
Research, Broad Institute) enriched in such a PanC-SCCC signa-
ture were more resistant to topoisomerase and microtubule inhib-
itors (Supplemental Figure 4D).
SCCCs present enhanced chemoresistance. We observed that 
SCCCs from CRC, MEL, or GBM were more resistant to chemo-
therapy-induced apoptosis and thus increased their proportion 
upon treatment of MTs in vitro and CRC-SW1222 xenografts 
in vivo (Figure 5, A–D). Oxaliplatin increased the proportion of 
pH2AX-positive cells presenting DNA damage in both RCCC 
and SCCC populations (Supplemental Figure 5). However, most 
H2BeGFP-retaining cells (96.6%) were negative for pH2AX, sug-
gesting that the enrichment of SCCCs upon chemotherapy was 
not due to a cell cycle arrest induced by oxaliplatin but rather was 
a consequence of their intrinsic resistance to treatment.
SCCCs from MTs showed higher expression of genes related 
to active drug detoxification (Table 1, Figure 5E, and Supplemental 
Table 2). Some drug resistance genes highly expressed in SCCCs 
were common and others exclusive to each tumor type. Inhibition 
of ABCG2 pump in CRC-SW1222 MTs with the specific inhibitor 
fumitremorgin C (22) did not significantly increase oxaliplatin- 
induced apoptosis in SCCCs (Figure 5F). Furthermore, cell lines 
enriched in our PanC-SCCC signature were also more resistant to 
standard-of-care chemotherapeutics such as paclitaxel, docetaxel, 
topotecan, or SN.38 (Figure 5G). Finally, in a cohort of CRC patients 
treated with 5-fluorouracil–based adjuvant chemotherapy, those 
classified as positive for a CRC-SCCC signature had significant-
ly shorter disease-free survival after adjustment for other known 
prognostic risk factors (Figure 5H and Supplemental Table 2).
In summary, we demonstrated that although SCCCs from dif-
ferent tumor types were all resistant to standard chemotherapy, 
the molecular mechanisms responsible for this phenotype could be 
diverse and rely on a variety of drug detoxifying enzymes and/or 
membrane pumps. Therefore, inhibition of just a single one of these 
targets (ABCG2 with fumitremorgin C) may not be effective as a 
universal therapy to sensitize resistant SCCCs to chemotherapy.
Figure 5. SCCCs present enhanced chemoresistance. (A–D) Chemoresis-
tance evaluation of SCCCs and RCCCs in indicated models. (A–C) Analysis 
of apoptosis (A and C) and proportion of SCCCs (B and C) after chemo-
therapy exposure. OX, oxaliplatin; DTIC, light-activated dacarbazine; TMZ, 
temozolomide. Apoptosis measurements: SW1222 RCCC vehicle (VEH) 
vs. SCCC OX (P ≤ 0.01); RCCC OX vs. SCCC VEH (P ≤ 0.0001); MMLN9 RCCC 
DTIC vs. SCCC VEH (P ≤ 0.0001); e216 RCCC TMZ vs. SCCC VEH (P ≤ 0.0001). 
(D) Immunofluorescence of caspase-3 (CASP3) (n = 6 per group) treated or 
not treated with oxaliplatin. Arrowheads, SCCCs; asterisk, apoptotic areas. 
Scale bar: 100 μm. (E) qPCR of indicated genes. Data are represented as 
mean ± SD of triplicates. ND, not detected; r.u., relative units. (F) Apop-
tosis flow cytometric evaluation in RCCCs and SCCCs from CRC-SW1222-
H2BeGFP cells growing as MTs. FTC, fumitremorgin C. Apoptosis measure-
ments: RCCC VEH/FTC vs. RCCC OX/OX+FTC (P ≤ 0.0001); RCCC VEH/FTC 
vs. SCCC VEH/FTC (P ≤ 0.01); RCCC VEH/FTC vs. SCCC OX+FTC (P ≤ 0.001); 
RCCC OX/OX+FTC vs. SCCC VEH/FTC/OX/OX+FTC (P ≤ 0.0001); SCCC VEH/
FTC vs. SCCC OX+FTC (P ≤ 0.0001); SCCC OX vs. SCCC OX+FTC (P ≤ 0.001). 
(G) Drug sensitivity of cancer cell lines according to PanC-SCCC signature 
scores. Adjusted Wilcoxon test. (H) Disease-free survival of chemo-treated 
high-risk stage II/III colon cancer patients (GSE39582, n = 151) according 
to CRC-SCCC signature score. HR, hazard ratio. Cox proportional hazards 
model. (A–C and F) Data are represented as mean ± SEM. (A, B, E, and F) 
Data were obtained from triplicates of 3 independent experiments. (A–C, 
E, and F) Blue bars, RCCCs; green bars, SCCCs. (A and F) 1-way ANOVA. (B, 
C, and E) 2-tailed Student’s t test. (A–C and E–G) *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; 
***P ≤ 0.001; ****P ≤ 0.0001.
Table 1. SCCCs present a distinctive expression of drug-detoxifying genes
MT-CRCA
MT-MELB
MT-GBMC
Gene
FC
P
FC
P
FC
P
Gene assignment
UGT2B11
3.10
0.03
–1.13
0.18
1.10
0.64
UDP glucuronosyltransferase, fam. 2, member B11
CYP3A5
2.21
0.00
1.33
0.06
1.20
0.01
Cytochrome P450, fam. 3, subfam. A, member 5
GSTM2
2.12
0.01
1.10
0.09
1.07
0.59
Glutathione-S-transferase mu 2
ABCG2
1.25
0.29
–1.11
0.25
–1.02
0.68
ATP-binding cassette, subfam. G, member 2
SLC22A3
1.22
0.21
–1.10
0.13
1.03
0.25
Solute carrier, fam. 22, member 3
CYP27B1
1.04
0.77
–1.13
0.11
1.28
0.00
Cytochrome P450, fam. 27, subfam. B, member 1
CYP2E1
1.01
0.87
1.12
0.19
1.35
0.02
Cytochrome P450, fam. 2, subfam. E, member 1
CYP1A1
–1.23
0.25
1.66
0.02
-1.06
0.02
Cytochrome P450, fam. 1, subfam. A, member 1
AColorectal cancer minitumor models. BMelanoma minitumor models. CGlioblastoma minitumor models. FC, fold change; fam., family; subfam., subfamily. 
Data are represented as mean of triplicates from 3 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
We observed 7 epigenetic factors recurrently highly expressed 
in SCCCs from all the different tumor types studied (Table 2, Fig-
ure 6A, and Supplemental Table 2). Four of these were described 
as general repressors of gene expression, whereas JMJD1C, 
KMT2E, and TET2 were contrarily shown to activate transcrip-
tion of target genes (24–28). JMJD1C is a histone demethylase of 
mono- and dimethylated Lys-9 that would activate gene expres-
sion by removing this repressive epigenetic mark. However, such 
enzymatic activity is controversial and has not been demonstrated 
in all cellular contexts studied (29–31). KMT2E is a histone meth-
yltransferase that specifically mono- and dimethylates Lys-4 of 
histone H3, promoting transcriptional activation of target genes 
(28). Unfortunately, in histological analyses of tumor xenografts, 
we revealed an accumulation of H3K4me1 and H3K4me2 marks 
in the nucleus of most cancer cells that was not specific to H2Be-
GFP-positive SCCCs (Supplemental Figure 6A and Isabel Puig, 
unpublished observations). Finally, TET2 promotes the oxida-
tion of genomic 5mC to 5hmC, activating the expression of target 
genes (16). 5hmC was significantly enriched in SCCCs (Figure 6, B 
and C), encouraging us to further investigate the potential role of 
TET2 as a key determinant of SCCCs’ distinctive properties.
We first confirmed that TET2 was highly expressed in SCCCs 
of different tumor types (Figure 6D). We then modified the levels 
of TET2 expression in CRC-SW1222-H2BeGFP cells by shRNA 
(knockdown, shTET2), CRISPR/Cas9 (knockout, TET2-KO), or 
overexpression (CMV-TET2) (Figure 7A and Supplemental Figure 
6B). None of these modifications significantly affected the prolif-
eration of CRC-SW1222 cells growing as MTs (Supplemental Fig-
ure 6C). However, suppression of TET2 expression in shTET2 and 
TET2 controls gene expression, number and survival of SCCCs, 
and tumor recurrence. We had by this point elaborated a detailed 
description of the biological and molecular traits of SCCCs, but 
not yet defined a strategy for their identification and elimination 
in patient tumors. To do so, we decided to address one crucial 
question: are there any key factors governing SCCC phenotype?
Different epigenetic regulators have been described to impose 
nongenetic and transient phenotypes recapitulating molecular 
features that we reveal here as distinctive of SCCCs: slow cycling, 
chemoresistance, cancer initiation potential, and a cell-autono-
mous gene expression profile (23).
Table 2. Epigenetic factors highly expressed in SCCCs
Gene
FDR
FC
Epigenetic activity
Gene expression
KMT2E
0.0000
1.389
Mono- and demethylates Lys-4 of histone H3
ActivatorA
PHC3
0.0001
1.463
Component of PcG multiprotein PRC-1 like
RepressorB
ARID4
0.0001
1.362
Recruits HDACs
Repressor
TET2
0.0002
1.202
Catalyzes 5mC oxidation to 5hmC
Activator
CIR1
0.0004
1.449
Recruits RBPJ to the Sin3-HDAC complex
Repressor
JMJD1C
0.0008
1.263
Demethylates Lys-9 of histone H3
Activator?C
KDM5A
0.0009
1.203
Demethylates Lys-4 of histone H3
Repressor
FDR, false discovery rate; FC, fold change; PcG, Polycomb group; HDAC, 
histone deacetylase. AEpigenetic factors that activate target gene 
transcription are indicated in red. BRepressor factors are in blue. CJMJD1C is 
marked in purple since its capacity to induce target gene transcription is 
currently controversial.
Figure 6. SCCCs present high TET2 
expression and 5hmC. (A) Evaluation of 
differential expression of epigenetic fac-
tors in SCCCs versus RCCCs was analyzed 
by microarrays integrating the data from 
all cancer models. Volcano plot shows epi-
genetic factors differentially expressed in 
SCCCs versus RCCCs (x axis) against their 
significance (false discovery rate [FDR], 
y axis). Upregulated and downregulated 
epigenetic factors are indicated in red and 
blue, respectively. (B and C) 5hmC levels 
in SCCCs and RCCCs were evaluated by 
immunostaining in CRC-SW1222-H2BeGFP 
xenografts (n = 8). Forty-six images per 
condition were analyzed. (B) Histological 
quantification of 5hmC content in RCCCs 
and SCCCs per picture. r.u., relative units. 
(C) Representative picture of double 5hmC 
and H2BeGFP immunostaining. White 
arrowheads, SCCCs containing 5hmC. Scale 
bar: 100 μm; high-magnification scale bar: 
20 μm. Hoechst was used as counterstain. 
(D) Expression of TET2 measured by qPCR. 
Data are represented as mean ± SD of trip-
licates from 3 independent experiments. 
Blue bars, RCCCs; green bars, SCCCs. (B 
and D) **P ≤ 0.01; ****P ≤ 0.0001, 2-tailed 
Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
ly expressed in shTET2 SCCCs but not in control SCCCs (Figure 
10, C–E), suggesting an enhanced activation of this proapoptotic 
pathway in the absence of TET2. In this sense, treatment with 
the TNF-α inhibitor pomalidomide (36, 37) partially rescued the 
increased apoptosis of shTET2 SCCCs (Figure 10F).
In summary, our results indicate that TET2 enzymatic activ-
ity determines the survival and number of SCCCs by controlling 
the expression of TNF-α signaling components and restraining its 
proapoptotic signaling. Our data unmasked TET2 as a survival factor 
for SCCCs, and thus a potential new drug target for their elimination.
The TET2 product 5hmC is a biomarker to detect chemoresistant 
SCCCs and predict relapse in patients. We first captured TET2 activity 
by defining a gene expression signature built with target genes more 
highly expressed in SCCCs from shCTRL CRC-SW1222 MTs that 
were not more highly expressed in SCCCs from shTET2 MTs, when 
compared with their paired RCCCs. We refined this list by exclud-
ing those genes that were not highly expressed in our PanC-SCCC 
signature (Supplemental Tables 2 and 3). This TET2 signature (Puig 
TET2 Sig) was positively enriched in SCCCs not only in CRC mod-
els but also in MEL and GBM (Figure 11A). More importantly, early 
stage II and III tumors from CRC patients treated with adjuvant che-
motherapy that presented enrichment in TET2 signature relapsed 
significantly earlier (Figure 11B and Supplemental Table 3).
We then confirmed by immunohistochemistry that cells accu-
mulating high 5hmC levels also presented high TET2 protein 
and observed a positive correlation between both in a cohort of 
83 CRC cases (Supplemental Figure 7, A and B). This correlation 
was validated by measurement of TET2 mRNA in an independent 
cohort of 53 CRC patients’ tumors (Supplemental Figure 7C). Fur-
thermore, shTET2 xenografts showed lower 5hmC amounts than 
controls, whereas oxaliplatin only increased this mark in shCTRL 
tumors where treatment enriched SCCC proportion (Figure 8A 
and Figure 11C). Finally, we confirmed that 5hmC-positive cells 
were negative for Ki67 proliferation marker in tumors from CRC 
patients (Figure 11D). Indeed, tumor samples with a high propor-
tion of 5hmC-positive cells were negative for Ki67 proliferation 
marker and vice versa (Figure 11E and Supplemental Figure 7D). 
These data demonstrated that 5hmC was a robust biomarker of 
TET2 activity in tumor tissue.
We then analyzed a cohort of 87 baseline stage II or III prima-
ry tumors from CRC patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy 
after curative surgery, and observed that 5hmC predicted relapse 
(Figure 11F and Supplemental Table 4). When we increased 
this CRC cohort, adding nontreated patients (n = 108), we also 
observed that 5hmC predicted shorter PFS independently of oth-
er factors relevant to patient prognosis including age, sex, tumor 
stage, tumor site, microsatellite status, KRAS or BRAF oncogenic 
mutations, and chemotherapy treatment (Supplemental Table 4).
We then evaluated the landscape of 5hmC across 656 patient 
tumor samples spanning 19 different types of cancer (Figure 12, 
A and B, and Supplemental Table 4). First, we observed that the 
proportion of cases with high accumulation of 5hmC significantly 
varied across different tumor types, ranging from 30% in diffuse 
gastric cancer to 80% in renal tumors (Figure 12B). We also detect-
ed a higher proportion of 5hmC-positive cases in liver metastases 
(38%) compared with paired primary tumors (18%) in a cohort of 
197 CRC patients (Figure 12C and Supplemental Table 5). This was 
KO cells increased apoptosis exclusively in SCCCs, reducing their 
proportion in MTs (Figure 7, B–D). When overexpressing TET2, 
MTs accumulated higher levels of SCCCs but without affecting 
their basal apoptosis. We confirmed that SCCCs presented higher 
5hmC than RCCCs in TET2-WT MTs, whereas it was undetectable 
in both populations when TET2 was knocked out (TET2-KO) (Fig-
ure 7, E and F). We also observed that apoptotic TET2-KO SCCCs 
did not accumulate 5hmC (Figure 7G).
Furthermore, shTET2 xenografts showed a significantly lower 
proportion of SCCCs that was not enriched upon oxaliplatin treat-
ment, as was the case in shCTRL tumors (Figure 8A). shTET2 also 
promoted higher apoptosis in SCCCs in tumor xenografts (Figure 
8B). We concluded that TET2 also played a direct role in SCCC 
survival in growing tumors. In addition, we observed that SCCCs 
isolated from MT shCTRL or shTET2 retained equivalent self- 
renewal capacity (Figure 8C). These data suggested that TET2 was 
relevant to SCCC survival and numbers and thus to cancer relapse 
after chemotherapy without affecting their self-renewal capaci-
ty. We observed that complete elimination of TET2 (TET2-KO) 
delayed subcutaneous tumor regrowth after an effective phase 
of oxaliplatin treatment (Figure 8D). When measuring tumor 
regrowth using adapted RECIST criteria (increase of 20% of 
tumor volume), we observed that progression-free survival (PFS) 
was significantly longer in TET2-KO tumors after releasing from 
oxaliplatin treatment (Figure 8E). We also observed that oxalipla-
tin treatment had a more rapid and potent effect stabilizing the 
growth of TET2-KO than TET2-WT tumors. This higher sensitivi-
ty is in line with the observed increase of intrinsic apoptosis in che-
moresistant SCCCs in TET2-KO tumors (Figure 8F).
In summary, our data indicate that TET2 is required for the 
survival and number of chemoresistant SCCCs in growing tumors, 
and thus it could determine the time to recurrence.
We then studied the specific contribution of TET2 enzymat-
ic activity controlling SCCC survival. First, TET2 overexpression 
increased and its knockout reduced the global levels of 5hmC in CRC-
SW1222 genomes and the expression of its target gene H19 (Figure 
9, A and B, and refs. 32, 33). Second, a cell membrane–permeable 
competitive inhibitor of TET2 enzymatic activity, TFMB-(R)-2HG, 
which blocks the capacity of TET2 to oxidize 5mC to 5hmC (34), 
reproduced SCCC-exclusive apoptosis (Figure 7B and Figure 9C). 
Third, re-expression of a full-length TET2-WT in SW1222 TET2-KO 
cells was capable of rescuing SCCC apoptosis and numbers, where-
as a TET2-HxD mutant lacking enzymatic activity did not (ref. 35; 
Figure 9, D–F; and Supplemental Figure 6, D–F). Altogether these 
data indicated that it was the enzymatic activity of TET2, oxidizing 
genomic 5mC to 5hmC, and not simply TET2 expression that was 
responsible for controlling SCCC survival.
We then analyzed the gene expression profile of FACS-isolated 
 
SCCCs and RCCCs from MT-CRC-SW1222 expressing shC-
TRL or shTET2 (Supplemental Table 3). We observed a global 
impact of TET2 on gene expression in SCCCs (Figure 10, A and 
B). TET2-modulated genes were preferentially those expressed 
more highly in SCCCs than in RCCCs and involved in a wide 
range of biological functions. We detected a positive enrichment 
of gene sets related to apoptosis and TNF-α signaling activation in 
both control and shTET2 SCCCs (Figure 10C). However, certain 
genes, such as TNF ligand and its receptor TNFRSF1B, were high-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
contrarily sustain higher expression of a panel of genes distinc-
tive of SCCCs. In fact, the activity of both epigenetic factors has 
been described as regulated by the O-linked N-acetylglucosamine 
(O-GlcNAc) transferase (OGT) in particular loci with active gene 
expression (38). Further studies will be required to clarify the 
mechanism of action of these epigenetic nodes in controlling gene 
expression in SCCCs.
Here we focused on TET2 epigenetic enzyme as a key factor 
controlling the fate of cancer cells in a slow-cycling stage within 
growing tumors. TET2 eliminates 5mC by catalyzing its consecutive 
transformation to 5hmC, 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcy-
tosine (5caC), followed by hymine-DNA-glycosylase–dependent 
(TDG-dependent) base excision repair (BER) (16, 39, 40). TET2 
can activate genes by removing 5mC from hypermethylated CpG 
islands and distant regulatory enhancers. In this sense, we observed 
that exogenous TET2 elimination reduced global genomic 5hmC 
levels and deeply altered the gene expression profile of SCCCs, 
including many genes such as H19 previously described as regulat-
ed by 5mC/5hmC marks (32, 33).
Mapping the distribution of 5mC and 5hmC in SCCC 
genomes will be crucial in linking TET2-dependent phenotypes 
with the epigenetic regulation of specific loci and thus the expres-
sion of direct target genes. Unfortunately, SCCCs represent a very 
minor proportion of cancer cells within a growing tumor (up to 3% 
H2BeGFP label–retaining cells), preventing the profiling of their 
methylome/hydroxymethylome or many of their other biochemi-
cal traits. The future establishment of protocols to map these epi-
genetic marks from very low amounts of cells and genomic DNA 
will be key in unmasking the role of TET2 in SCCC biology.
Despite these limitations, we have described TET2 as crucial 
in balancing survival and apoptosis in SCCCs by controlling the 
expression of a complete set of cell death–related genes moderat-
ing TNF-α ligand levels and its proapoptotic signaling. Abrogation 
of TET2 reduced, and its overexpression increased, SCCC propor-
tion despite its lack of effect on general growth or apoptosis. These 
data suggest that for different types of tumors, TET2 activity might 
only be critical for cancer cells when transiting to and/or consoli-
dating a slow-cycling state, sustaining their survival when exposed 
to soporiferous and/or life-threatening stimuli. In fact, SCCC 
gene expression profile indicated the activation of genes that 
respond to hypoxia or nutrient deprivation — both stimuli known 
to compromise cell survival and promote slow proliferation. In this 
manner, tumors with higher TET2 activity would be prompted to 
accumulate a higher proportion of chemoresistant SCCCs. We 
show that TET2 elimination induces SCCC apoptosis, determines 
tumor regrowth after chemotherapy, and prolongs PFS in mice. 
Indeed, we observed that CRC patients with tumors enriched in 
TET2 signature or with high 5hmC levels relapsed earlier after 
surgery and chemotherapy. We also observed that our SCCC sig-
nature was enriched in patients with glioblastomas or CRC tumors 
subtyped as mesenchymal who showed worst survival. It also pre-
dicted relapse in CRC patients treated with adjuvant chemother-
apy. In summary, our data uncovered an unpredicted oncogenic 
hue of TET2 determining numbers and survival of chemoresistant 
SCCCs, thus increasing the risk of relapse and reducing the sur-
vival of cancer patients. However, previous studies have mostly 
described TET2 as a tumor suppressor and therefore apparently 
even confirmed in a subset of 96 synchronous cases that did not 
receive treatment prior to sample collection (Figure 12D).
In summary, our data provide a general overview of 5hmC lev-
els across multiple tumor types and show their value as a biomark-
er to predict patients’ disease progression in colorectal cancer.
Discussion
With our inducible H2BeGFP strategy we revealed the existence 
of a minor proportion of SCCCs in different cancer types as bio-
logically diverse as colorectal, melanoma, and glioblastoma. More 
importantly, these chemoresistant cancer cells with cancer-initi-
ating capacity shared a core molecular identity despite their intrin-
sic disparity of mutations or epigenetic programs inherited from 
their somatic tissues of origin. Our results uncovered the existence 
of a nongenetic primitive program governing dormancy that could 
be common in slow-cycling cells across different tumor types.
Particular epigenetic codes imposed by a precise circuit of 
enzymes could coordinate such expression patterns as effective 
nongenetic mechanisms governing SCCC distinctive pheno-
type. For instance, KDM5B/JARID1B is a histone demethylase 
expressed in a minor population of SCCCs with enhanced capac-
ity to fuel long-term melanoma growth (14). Importantly, mela-
noma shows high plasticity and JARID1B-positive and -negative 
cells can originate from each other. Similarly, we observed that 
FACS-isolated colorectal SCCCs and RCCCs could generate each 
other after a second DOX pulse chase. We therefore concluded 
that slow cycling is a temporary state that proliferating cells even-
tually acquire during solid tumor growth. This could occur multi-
ple times at different anatomical parts of a solid tumor wherein 
SCCCs reside as drug-resistant seeds, triggering proliferation 
after therapy, initiating tumor regrowth and relapse in patients.
Our analyses actually revealed a group of epigenetic modu-
lators more highly expressed in SCCCs, such as PHC3, ARID4A, 
CIR1, and KDM5A, that could be responsible for the repressed 
expression of the observed compendium of genes implicated in 
cell proliferation and energy metabolism. KMT2E and TET2 could 
Figure 7. TET2 is essential for SCCC numbers and survival. (A) Expression 
of TET2 was evaluated by Western blot in the indicated cell lines. Transient 
transfection of TET2 in HEK293T cells was used as positive control. Tubulin 
was used as loading control. The lanes were run on the same gel but were 
noncontiguous. Arrowhead, TET2 protein. CTRL, control; CMV, cytomega-
lovirus promoter. (B–G) Analysis of SCCC and RCCC viability was evaluated 
in the indicated cell lines growing as MTs. (B and C) Analysis of apoptosis 
(B) and proportion of SCCCs (C) by flow cytometry. Data are represented 
as mean ± SEM of triplicates from 3 independent experiments. Blue bars, 
RCCCs; green bars, SCCCs. (D) Representative pictures of immunofluores-
cence analysis of caspase-3 (CASP3). White arrowheads, SCCCs. (E) His-
tological quantification of 5hmC content in RCCCs and SCCCs per picture 
of paraffin-embedded MTs generated from the indicated cell lines. r.u., 
relative units. (F) Representative pictures of double 5hmC and H2BeGFP 
immunostaining of paraffin-embedded TET2-WT MTs. Red arrowheads, 
SCCCs containing 5hmC; white arrowheads, RCCCs. (G) Representative 
pictures of immunofluorescence staining to detect CASP3, H2BeGFP, and 
5hmC colocalization in consecutive histological sections from paraffin- 
embedded TET2-KO MTs. White arrowheads, apoptotic SCCCs without 
5hmC content. (D, F, and G) Scale bars: 100 μm; high-magnification scale 
bar: 20 μm. Hoescht was used as counterstain. (B, C, and E) *P ≤ 0.05;  
**P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001; ****P ≤ 0.0001, 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
Figure 8. TET2 determines tumor 
recurrence. (A and B) SCCC propor-
tion (n = 4 xenografts per condi-
tion) (A) and apoptosis (n = 6–16 
xenografts per condition) (B) were 
evaluated by flow cytometry (A) 
and caspase-3 (CASP3) immuno-
staining (B) in the indicated cell 
lines growing as xenografts in mice 
treated or not treated with oxalipla-
tin (OX). Percentage of SCCC mea-
surements: shCTRL OX vs. shTET2 
VEH (P ≤ 0.0001)/shTET2 OX (P ≤ 
0.001). 1-way ANOVA. (C) MT for-
mation capacity was evaluated for 
RCCCs and SCCCs isolated from the 
indicated cell lines. Dots indicate 
the percentage of MTs grown in 
each single well. Data are repre-
sented as mean ± SEM of triplicates 
from 3 independent experiments. 
2-tailed Student’s t test. (D and 
E) Evaluation of tumor regrowth 
after chemotherapy treatment. (D) 
NOD/SCID mice with established 
subcutaneous TET2-WT and TET2-
KO xenografts were treated with 
OX. The animals received a total of 
3 doses and were maintained for 
post-treatment observation. Each 
point represents the mean ± SEM 
of 20 xenografts. (E) The survival 
curve represents progression-free 
survival (PFS) percentages showing 
the impact of OX on the regrowth 
of TET2-WT or -KO xenografts. A 
20% increase in tumor volume after 
treatment release was consid-
ered as regrowth or progression. 
Significance was calculated using 
the log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. HR, 
hazard ratio; log-rank P value. (F) 
Representative pictures of SCCC 
apoptosis evaluated by CASP3 
immunostaining in indicated 
xenografts. (B and F) Scale bars: 100 
μm; high-magnification scale bars: 
20 μm. Hoechst was used as nuclei 
counterstain. White arrowheads, 
SCCCs. (A and C) *P ≤ 0.05;  
**P ≤ 0.01; ****P ≤ 0.0001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
value per tumor, but considering the existence of minor 5hmC-pos-
itive populations as chemoresistant SCCCs responsible for relapse. 
Future studies on larger cohorts of patients with detailed clinical 
annotation and under homogeneous treatments will be required to 
confirm the value of measuring SCCC and TET2 activity as predic-
tive biomarkers of patients’ progression and survival.
The major goal of this study was to identify drug targets for 
eradicating resistant SCCCs or DTCs and thus reduce patients’ 
relapse. Unfortunately, few therapies directed against DTCs 
have proven effective thus far. The most promising results have 
been reported in hematological tumors where mobilization of 
DTCs by different factors, such as G-CSF or IFN-α, sensitizes 
them to chemotherapy (49, 50).
In solid tumors such as CRC, single cells with equivalent cancer-
ous genomes showed distinct capacities to resist chemotherapy (oxal-
iplatin) (51). These dormant and hidden genetic clones, which were 
only detectable after enrichment by oxaliplatin, could be responsible 
for relapse after therapy. In this sense, our data revealed that SCCCs 
expressed low levels of TYMS, TOP2A, or TUBB genes, which are tar-
gets of standard chemotherapies. These mechanisms could therefore 
confer SCCC passive resistance to antiproliferative drugs.
We also observed that SCCCs from different tumor types 
expressed a variety of detoxifying enzymes and pumps that would 
confer active drug resistance on them. Pharmacological inhibition 
of a single target, as we noted for ABCG2, would not be sufficient 
contradict our findings. TET2 is frequently inactivated by truncat-
ing mutations in different tumor types, leading to reduced 5hmC 
levels and promoting hyperproliferation of progenitor cancer cell 
populations (40). In this sense, most studies indicate that low 
5hmC tumoral levels correlate with worse patient survival (41–44).
Furthermore, some loss-of-function studies showed the 
capacity of TET2 in restraining general proliferation of cancer 
cells and tumor growth (45). Our data do not necessarily conflict 
with this tumor suppressor view, but would otherwise suggest 
that in some tumors TET2 could restrain proliferation in only a 
minor proportion of cells entering a slow-cycling status (SCCCs) 
as opposed to the majority of cycling cells in the tumor bulk. We 
indeed observed that 5hmC staining and Ki67 staining were mutu-
ally exclusive, marking distinctive cancer cell populations even in 
tumor samples (regions) with high enrichment of 5hmC (46–48).
In addition, the methods used to quantify 5hmC in different 
studies are quite diverse and include immunohistochemistry, ELI-
SA, mass spectrometry, and dot blot, preventing a consensus on its 
value as a biomarker in cancer. A future standardization of these 
methods will be crucial to establish a cutoff to catalog 5hmC-posi-
tive versus -negative cases and to conclude on its value as a prognos-
tic biomarker. In this sense, our new insights into intratumoral cell 
heterogeneity at the levels of proliferation and TET2/5hmC activity 
could be clinically relevant. To predict patient progression more pre-
cisely, we propose not simply evaluating 5hmC levels as an absolute 
Figure 9. SCCC survival depends on TET2 enzymatic activity. (A) Expression of H19 gene measured by qPCR. (B) Percentage of 5hmC in total genomic DNA 
from mouse brain or the indicated cell lines. (C) Evaluation of apoptosis by flow cytometry in RCCCs and SCCCs after cell-permeable 2-hydroxyglutarate 
(TFMB-2HG) exposure. Apoptosis measurements: shCTRL/shTET2 RCCC VEH/TFMB-2HG vs. shCTRL SCCC TFMB-2HG (P ≤ 0.0001); shCTRL/shTET2 RCCC 
VEH/TFMB-2HG vs. shTET2 SCCC VEH/TFMB-2HG (P ≤ 0.0001); shCTRL SCCC VEH vs. shCTRL/shTET2 SCCC TFMB-2HG (P ≤ 0.0001); shCTRL SCCC VEH vs. 
shTET2 SCCC VEH (P ≤ 0.0001); shTET2 SCCC VEH vs. shTET2 SCCC TFMB-2HG (P ≤ 0.01). (D) Expression of exogenous TET2 (TET2-WT or -HxD FLAG-tagged) 
was evaluated by qPCR in the indicated cell lines. Specific primers for TET2 (forward) and FLAG (reverse) were used. (E and F) Analysis of apoptosis (E) and 
proportion of SCCCs (F) was performed by flow cytometry in the indicated cell lines. Apoptosis measurements: TET2-KO RCCC vs. TET2-KO SCCC (P ≤ 0.001); 
TET2-KO/-HxD RCCC vs. TET2-HxD SCCC (P ≤ 0.01); TET2-KO SCCC vs. TET2-WT/-HxD RCCC (P ≤ 0.001); TET2-WT RCCC vs. TET2-HxD SCCC (P ≤ 0.001). (C, 
E, and F) Blue bars, RCCCs; green bars, SCCCs. (A–F) Data are represented as mean ± SEM (B, C, E, and F) or ± SD (A and D) of triplicates from 3 independent 
experiments. (A and B) 2-tailed Student’s t test. (C, E, and F) 1-way ANOVA. (A–C, E, and F) *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ****P ≤ 0.0001. All analyses were per-
formed in the indicated SW1222-H2BeGFP cell lines growing as MTs.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
Figure 10. TET2 controls SCCC survival by modulating TNF-α signaling. (A) Venn diagrams comparing genes highly (top) or lowly (bottom) expressed in 
SCCCs versus RCCCs isolated from the indicated cell lines. (B) Gene ontology analyses of TET2-induced (green) and TET2-repressed (blue) genes in SCCCs 
versus RCCCs. (C) GSEA plots showing enrichment of the indicated gene sets in SCCC versus RCCC expression profiles from the indicated cell lines. 1-way 
ANOVA P value. (D) Genes related to apoptosis were selected from the Molecular Signatures Database (Broad Institute). Venn diagram showing genes 
related to apoptosis and highly expressed in SCCCs versus RCCCs from the indicated cell lines. Proapoptotic (red) and antiapoptotic (black) genes are 
shown. The gene of interest is indicated in white (TNF). (E) Expression of the indicated genes was measured by qPCR. TNF mRNA measurements: shCTRL 
RCCC vs. shTET2 RCCC/SCCC (P ≤ 0.0001); shCTRL SCCC vs. shTET2 RCCC (P ≤ 0.01). TNFRSF1B mRNA measurements: shCTRL RCCC vs. shTET2 RCCC  
(P ≤ 0.0001); shCTRL SCCC vs. shTET2 RCCC (P ≤ 0.05); shTET2 RCCC vs. shTET2 SCCC (P ≤ 0.0001). (F) Evaluation of apoptosis by flow cytometry in RCCCs 
and SCCCs of the indicated cell lines after vehicle or pomalidomide (POM) treatment. Apoptosis measurements: shCTRL SCCC/RCCC VEH vs. shTET2 SCCC 
VEH/POM (P ≤ 0.0001); shTET2 RCCC VEH vs. shTET2 VEH/POM SCCC (P ≤ 0.0001); shTET2 SCCC VEH vs. shCTRL/shTET2 RCCC/SCCC POM (P ≤ 0.0001); 
shCTRL RCCC/SCCC POM vs. shTET2 SCCC POM (P ≤ 0.0001); shTET2 RCCC POM vs. shTET2 SCCC POM (P ≤ 0.0001). (E and F) Blue bars, RCCCs; green bars, 
SCCCs. Data are represented as mean ± SD (E) or ± SEM (F) of triplicates from 3 independent experiments. 1-way ANOVA. **P ≤ 0.01; ****P ≤ 0.0001. All 
analyses were performed in the indicated SW1222-H2BeGFP cell lines growing as MTs.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
the growth of TET2-KO tumors that presented intrinsic apoptosis 
of chemoresistant SCCCs. Future TET2 inhibitors, combined with 
chemotherapeutics against proliferative cancer cells, could there-
fore be effective as adjuvant therapy to clear out residual SCCCs as 
well as prevent relapse in patients. Since metastases showed high-
er levels of 5hmC, these inhibitors may also be effective in delay-
ing disease progression and the appearance of new metastatic 
 
lesions in patients with advanced disease.
to sensitize SCCCs to chemotherapy. Alternatively, we propose 
the inhibition of TET2 activity as a key regulator of their surviv-
al. We actually show that SCCC survival was rescued in TET2-KO 
cells with a full-length TET2 wild type but not TET2-HxD mutant 
without enzymatic activity. In this line, TET2 blockade by TFMB-
2HG promoted SCCC apoptosis, corroborating that its enzymatic 
activity oxidizing genomic 5mC to 5hmC is crucial for SCCC sur-
vival. Indeed, oxaliplatin treatment was more effective reducing 
Figure 11. TET2/5hmC predicts shorter 
survival in CRC patients. (A) GSEA plots 
showing enrichment of TET2 signature 
in SCCC versus RCCC expression profiles 
in the indicated models. 1-way ANOVA 
P value. (B) Disease-free survival (DFS) 
of chemo-treated high-risk stage II and 
stage III colon cancer patients (GSE39582, 
n = 151) according to TET2 signature score. 
(C) Histological quantification of 5hmC 
content in RCCCs and SCCCs per image 
from the indicated xenografts after 
vehicle or oxaliplatin treatments (n = 5 to 
6 xenografts per group). Between 8 and 
30 images per condition were evaluated. 
Data are represented as mean ± SEM.  
*P ≤ 0.05; ****P ≤ 0.0001, 1-way ANOVA. 
5hmC measurements: shCTRL RCCC 
VEH vs. shCTRL SCCC OX (P ≤ 0.0001); 
shCTRL SCCC VEH vs. shTET2 RCCC/SCCC 
VEH/OX (P ≤ 0.0001); shTET2 RCCC/
SCCC VEH vs. shCTRL RCCC/SCCC OX  
(P ≤ 0.0001); shCTRL RCCC/SCCC OX vs. 
shTET2 RCCC/SCCC OX (P ≤ 0.0001). (D) 
Immunofluorescence analysis of 5hmC 
and the proliferation marker (Ki67) in a 
colorectal cancer patient sample. Scale 
bar: 100 μm; high-magnification scale 
bar: 20 μm. (E) Dot plot correlating the 
percentage of 5hmC-positive versus 
Ki67-positive cells quantified by immuno-
fluorescence and immunohistochemistry, 
respectively, in primary tumors (n = 55) 
and liver metastases (n = 47) from CRC 
patients. Red dashed line indicates the 
cutoff value above which a sample was 
considered high for 5hmC (5%). (F) DFS of 
chemo-treated CRC (Vall d’Hebron Insti-
tute of Oncology tissue microarray cohort, 
n = 87) patients. Tumors were considered 
5hmC-high when at least 5% of tumor 
cells presented signal equal to or higher 
than that of adjacent stroma, and 5hmC-
low when fewer than 5% of tumor cells 
did. Negative tumors did not show any 
detectable 5hmC signal in cancer cells. 
Negative tumors are included as 5hmC-
low. (B and F) HR, hazard ratio. P values 
were calculated using Cox proportional 
hazards model.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
TRE-H2BeGFP-hPGK-rtTA2). Knockdown cell derivatives were gen-
erated by expression of different nontargeting shRNA (shCTRL) and 
TET2 TRC-shRNA (shTET2). After transduction, cells were selected 
with puromycin (Life Technologies) (1 μg/ml). TET2-KO and -WT 
(scramble) cell lines were generated using a CRISPR/Cas9 sys-
tem. CRC-SW1222-H2BeGFP cells were transfected with pSpCas9- 
sgRNATET2guide2-2A-GFP or pSpCas9-sgRNAscramble-2A-GFP con-
structs using linear polyethylenimine (PEI 25000, Polysciences Inc.). 
Forty-eight hours after transfection, cells were pelleted and sorted 
using FACS with a FACS Aria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences). Single 
cells were expanded to obtain individual clones. Genomic DNA was 
isolated from edited clones and nonedited CRC-SW1222-H2BeGFP 
control cells. A 100-bp fragment of exon 1 of TET2 was amplified by 
PCR using genomic DNA–specific primers (Supplemental Table 6), 
and PCR products were analyzed by next-generation sequencing (Illu-
mina HighSeq). To generate stable overexpressing cell lines, CRC-
Our results have uncovered certain molecular intricacies of 
SCCCs and expanded our understanding surrounding their dis-
tinctive behavior. They indicate 5hmC as a biomarker for detec-
tion of chemoresistant SCCCs predictive of worse survival, and 
TET2 as a potential drug target for their elimination. These two 
insights could be translated into the clinic in the future in order to 
improve cancer therapeutics and extend survival of our patients.
Methods
Cell lines and patient-derived cells. CRC-SW1222 cells were provided 
by Meenhard Herlyn (Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA). Primary 
MEL-MMLN9 and MEL-MMPG3 cells were derived from melano-
ma patients. Primary GBM-e216 and GBM-e225 glioblastoma and 
CRC-T70 colorectal models were generated as previously described 
(18, 52). All cancer models, cell lines, and patient-derived cells were 
transduced with lentiviruses expressing H2BeGFP protein (pSIN-
Figure 12. 5hmC levels across cancer types. (A and B) 
5hmC levels were evaluated by immunohistochemistry on 
a tissue microarray containing 656 patient samples from 19 
different tumor types. (A) Representative pictures showing 
high and low levels of 5hmC from 3 different cancer types. 
IDC, invasive ductal carcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carci-
noma. Arrowheads: 5hmC-positive stromal cells used as 
internal control staining. Scale bar: 100 μm. (B) Proportion 
of tumor samples with different amounts of 5hmC for each 
cancer type. Tumors were considered 5hmC-high when 
at least 5% of tumor cells presented signal equal to or 
higher than that of adjacent stroma, and 5hmC-low when 
fewer than 5% of tumor cells did. Negative (NEG) tumors 
did not show any detectable 5HmC signal in cancer cells. 
Diff, diffuse; int, intestinal; CRC, colorectal cancer; UCC, 
urothelial carcinoma; GBM, glioblastoma; SC, sebaceous 
carcinoma. (C and D) Histological quantification of 5hmC in 
paired primary tumor and liver metastases of CRC patients 
evaluated by immunofluorescence on formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded sections. (C) Proportion of 5hmC-posi-
tive (green) and -negative (blue) cases (n = 197). (D) Paired 
comparison of primary tumors and liver metastases from 
synchronous nontreated patients (n = 96) from the cohort 
analyzed in C. P value of Wilcoxon paired test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
while tumors were growing. Then doxycycline was removed (– DOX), 
allowing H2BeGFP dilution (chase) until the end of the experiment 13 
days later. Seven days after DOX removal, when H2BeGFP was dilut-
ed, we administered 10 mg/kg oxaliplatin. A second oxaliplatin dose 
was administered 10 days after DOX removal, and 3 days later mice 
were sacrificed and tumor tissues collected and fixed. Depending 
on the experiment, after mice were euthanized, whole tumors were 
used for caspase-3 evaluation, or 1 part of each xenograft tumor was 
processed to obtain cell suspensions that were analyzed for apoptosis 
and/or SCCC proportion by flow cytometry, and the other part was 
fixed for caspase-3 assessment by IHC-fluorescence. Apoptosis assays 
are detailed in Supplemental Methods.
For in vivo regrowth assays, NOD/SCID mice were injected s.c. 
in both flanks with CRC-SW1222-H2BeGFP TET2-WT or TET2-KO 
cell lines. Twenty xenografts per cell line were grown. After a DOX 
pulse-chase treatment, oxaliplatin was administered once per week by 
i.p. injection during 3 weeks. Then, xenografts were led to grow with-
out treatment until the endpoint of the experiment. Throughout the 
experiment, tumors were measured 3 times per week, and volume was 
estimated as described above.
For PFS analysis, after oxaliplatin treatment release we defined 
regrowth or progression as when s.c. tumors increased at least 20% 
in volume, taking as reference the smallest volume on study (this 
includes the baseline if that is the smallest on study).
Reverse transcription and quantitative PCR. To analyze the expres-
sion of selected genes in RCCCs and SCCCs, the resulting single- 
stranded DNA obtained from the total RNA linearly amplified for 
microarray analysis (described above) was used as input (2 ng) for 
quantitative PCR (qPCR). To analyze expression genes from other cell 
lines, RNA was extracted and used to synthesize cDNA using Super-
script III reverse transcriptase with oligo-dT and random hexamer 
primers (Life Technologies). A 7900HT qPCR System was used with 
Power SYBR-Green (Applied Biosystems) and specific pairs of prim-
ers (Supplemental Table 6) to detect the indicated transcripts. Rela-
tive gene expression was determined by the comparative CT method 
(53). We applied geNorm algorithms (54) to select TATA-binding pro-
tein (TBP) and peptidylprolyl isomerase A (cyclophilin A, PPIA) as the 
most stable reference transcripts. The geometric means of the expres-
sion values for both housekeeping genes were used to normalize the 
expression and to calculate the normalized SD of all transcripts ana-
lyzed. Relative expression levels were calculated after normalization. 
Data were represented as mean ± SD of triplicates from 3 indepen-
dent experiments.
Data deposition. The gene expression microarray data sets report-
ed in this article were deposited in ArrayExpress with accession num-
ber E-MTAB-4004.
Statistics. Data presented in figures are represented as mean ± 
SEM. For qPCR analyses, fold changes were expressed relative to the 
RCCC values unless otherwise stated, and data are represented as 
mean ± SD. A P value less than 0.05 was considered significant; *P ≤ 
0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. Statistical tests used 
are reported in the figure legends. In summary, statistical analyses 
were performed in GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc.) using 
a 2-tailed Student’s t test to compare differences between 2 groups 
or 1-way ANOVA with multiple-comparisons tests to compare 3 or 
more groups. Statistical tests used for the analyses of transcriptomes 
(microarrays and gene set enrichment analysis) were performed in 
SW1222-H2BeGFP TET2-WT and TET2-KO cells were transfected 
with pCMV6-Entry (CMV-CTRL), pCMV6-TET2 WT (CMV-TET2), 
or pCMV6-TET2 HxD (CMV-TET2 HxD) plasmids using X-treme-
GENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent (Roche) according to the man-
ufacturer’s protocol. After transfection, cells were selected with gene-
ticin (Gibco) (500 μg/ml). Plasmids used in this study are described in 
Supplemental Methods.
For doxycycline (DOX) pulse chase, cells were treated with 5 μg/
ml of DOX for at least 3 days. Next, cells continued to grow in DOX-
free medium. For each experiment, detailed description is provided in 
Supplemental Methods.
Mice, xenografts, and tumor growth. Four-week-old female NOD/
SCID (NOD.CB17-Prkdcscid/NcrCrl) and nude (Crl:NU-Foxn1nu) mice 
were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. Cells were resus-
pended in PBS, mixed 1:1 with Matrigel, and injected s.c. into both 
flanks of mice. Within 2 weeks tumors were detectable. When match-
ing endpoint criteria, mice were euthanized and parts of the xeno-
graft tumors were processed to again obtain cell suspensions as pre-
viously described (18) or fixed for histological analysis. Tumors were 
measured 3 times per week, and volume was estimated using the 
following formula: V = (length × width2)/2, where length represents 
the largest tumor diameter and width represents the perpendicular 
tumor diameter. For e225-H2BeGFP orthotopic injections, 3 × 105 
tumor cells from disaggregated patient-derived neurospheres were 
stereotactically inoculated into the corpus striatum of the right brain 
hemisphere (1 mm anterior and 1.8 mm lateral to the bregma; 2.5 mm 
intraparenchymal) of NOD/SCID mice. Tumor growth was moni-
tored by a Xenogen IVIS Spectrum system.
For DOX pulse chase, mice were treated with 2 mg/ml of DOX ad 
libitum in drinking water until tumors reached between 5 and 8 mm 
in diameter. Next, treatment was removed until the end of the exper-
iment. For each experiment, detailed description is provided in Sup-
plemental Methods.
For BrdU (5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine) and EdU (5-ethynyl-2′- 
deoxyuridine) pulse chase, mice received 2 i.p. injections of BrdU (50 
mg/kg body weight; Sigma-Aldrich) or EdU (50 mg/kg body weight; 
Invitrogen) 48 hours before and the same day as DOX removal.
In vitro and in vivo chemoresistance. For in vitro assays, minitumors 
(MTs) were grown embedded in Matrigel from CRC-SW1222 or in sus-
pension from MEL-MMLN9 and GBM-e216 cancer models infected 
with H2BeGFP. After a DOX (5 μg/ml) pulse-chase treatment, cells 
were treated with 20 μM oxaliplatin, 250 μM light-activated dacar-
bazine, or 125 μM temozolomide (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively, for an 
additional 5 days before apoptosis was measured. For fumitremorgin 
C assay, Matrigel-embedded MTs were treated with DOX (pulse) 9 
days. Then DOX was removed, and 7 days later MTs were pretreated 
with 5 μM fumitremorgin C (Sigma-Aldrich). The next day, 20 μM of 
oxaliplatin was added to MTs. Five days after treatments, single cells 
were obtained as described in Supplemental Methods, and apoptosis 
and SCCC proportion were measured by flow cytometry. Data are rep-
resented as mean ± SEM from 3 independent experiments.
For in vivo assays, nude or NOD/SCID mice were injected s.c. in 
both flanks with CRC-SW1222-H2BeGFP, shCTRL, or shTET2 cell 
lines as described above. Between 6 and 20 xenografts per cell line and 
treatment were grown (vehicle and oxaliplatin). Four days after s.c. cell 
injection, doxycycline (+ DOX) was added to the drinking water. DOX 
induced H2BeGFP expression in cancer cells during 7 days (pulse) 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
 1. Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, 
Forman D. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2011;61(2):69–90.
 2. Dieter SM, et al. Distinct types of tumor-initiat-
ing cells form human colon cancer tumors and 
metastases. Cell Stem Cell. 2011;9(4):357–365.
 3. Kreso A, O’Brien CA. Colon cancer stem cells. Curr 
Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2008;Chapter 3:Unit 3.1.
 4. Sosa MS, Bragado P, Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Mechanisms 
of disseminated cancer cell dormancy: an awaken-
ing field. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014;14(9):611–622.
 5. Tumbar T, et al. Defining the epithelial stem cell 
niche in skin. Science. 2004;303(5656):359–363.
 6. Wilson A, et al. Hematopoietic stem cells 
reversibly switch from dormancy to self- 
renewal during homeostasis and repair. Cell. 
2008;135(6):1118–1129.
 
7. Buczacki SJ, et al. Intestinal label-retaining cells 
are secretory precursors expressing Lgr5. Nature. 
2013;495(7439):65–69.
 8. Foudi A, et al. Analysis of histone 2B-GFP reten-
tion reveals slowly cycling hematopoietic stem 
cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2009;27(1):84–90.
 9. dos Santos CO, et al. Molecular hierarchy of 
mammary differentiation yields refined markers 
of mammary stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013;110(18):7123–7130.
 10. Cotsarelis G, Sun TT, Lavker RM. Label- 
retaining 
cells reside in the bulge area of pilosebaceous 
unit: implications for follicular stem cells, 
hair cycle, and skin carcinogenesis. Cell. 
1990;61(7):1329–1337.
 11. Blanpain C, Simons BD. Unravelling stem cell 
dynamics by lineage tracing. Nat Rev Mol Cell 
Biol. 2013;14(8):489–502.
 12. Pece S, et al. Biological and molecular heteroge-
neity of breast cancers correlates with their can-
cer stem cell content. Cell. 2010;140(1):62–73.
 13. Chen J, et al. A restricted cell population propa-
gates glioblastoma growth after chemotherapy. 
Nature. 2012;488(7412):522–526.
 14. Roesch A, et al. A temporarily distinct sub-
population of slow-cycling melanoma cells is 
required for continuous tumor growth. Cell. 
2010;141(4):583–594.
 15. Ponnaluri VK, Maciejewski JP, Mukherji M. A 
mechanistic overview of TET-mediated 5-meth-
ylcytosine oxidation. Biochem Biophys Res Com-
mun. 2013;436(2):115–120.
 16. Wu H, Zhang Y. Mechanisms and functions of Tet 
protein-mediated 5-methylcytosine oxidation. 
Genes Dev. 2011;25(23):2436–2452.
 17. Yeung TM, Gandhi SC, Wilding JL, Muschel R, 
Bodmer WF. Cancer stem cells from colorectal 
cancer-derived cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2010;107(8):3722–3727.
 18. Puig I, et al. A personalized preclinical model to 
evaluate the metastatic potential of patient- 
derived colon cancer initiating cells. Clin  
Cancer Res. 2013;19(24):6787–6801.
 19. Hidalgo M, et al. Patient-derived xenograft mod-
els: an emerging platform for translational cancer 
research. Cancer Discov. 2014;4(9):998–1013.
 20. Guinney J, et al. The consensus molecu-
lar subtypes of colorectal cancer. Nat Med. 
2015;21(11):1350–1356.
iments. PG, AGA, and OC designed, developed, and analyzed 
the experiments on tumor xenografts. SA helped with the design 
and cloning of the H2BeGFP-expressing lentivirus. CE contribut-
ed to analyzing TET2 target genes. AP designed gene expression 
profiles with Nanostring nCounter platform. GA helped with the 
selection and analysis of colorectal cancer samples and interpre-
tation of patients’ data. SL, PN, and LT provided cancer patients’ 
samples. VS, A Villaneuva, JS, AS, and JAR provided PDX models 
of different tumor types. A Vivancos and GC supervised the muta-
tional data on all samples genotyped. RD analyzed tumor gene 
expression data and helped with their clinical interpretation. JT 
supervised the study. HGP designed and supervised the whole 
project, compiled the manuscript, drew the figures, and developed 
the initial experiments with H2BeGFP-infected cancer cell mod-
els. HGP is a member of the EuroPDX Consortium.
Acknowledgments
We thank Meenhard Herlyn for providing the SW1222 cell line. 
We acknowledge Irene Sales and Ricardo Gonzalo for helping on 
FACS and microarray experiments, respectively. We very much 
thank Amanda Wren for her assistance preparing the English 
manuscript, and Fundación Cellex for its institutional support. 
IP was supported by Fundación Científica de la Asociación 
Española Contra el Cancer. SPT was supported by Fundación 
Olga Torres and Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa 
en Cancer (RD12/0036/0012). OA and JMQ were support-
ed by the Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca. 
Work developed by PG and AGA was supported by Ministerio 
de Economía y Competitividad SAF2014-52050-R. The project 
was funded by Instituto de Salud Carlos III through 4 consecu-
tive grants (PI08/1356, PI11/02499, PI14/00103, PI17/00945), 
CIBERONC Network, TRANSCAN-TACTIC (AC15/00064), 
and a Miguel Servet contract granted to HGP (MSII14/00037).
Address correspondence to: Héctor G. Palmer, Calle Natzaret, 115-
117, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), 08035 Barcelona, 
Spain. Phone: 34.932543450 ext. 8649; Email: hgpalmer@vhio.net.
Partek Genomic Suite software (Partek Inc.). R statistical software 
was used to determine significance differences in Figure 4, D and E; 
Figure 5, G and H; Figure 11B; Figure 12, C and D; and Supplemental 
Figure 4D. The Cox proportional hazards model was used for analyz-
ing significance in overall and disease-free survivals. Overall survival 
was calculated in GraphPad Prism 6. We used Cox proportional haz-
ards univariate and multivariate modeling with R package “survival” 
to analyze disease-free survival. Drug sensitivity of cancer cell lines 
was analyzed using Wilcoxon test. Puig PanC-SCCC signature com-
parison with CRC and GBM consensus subtypes was tested with a 
Kruskal-Wallis test. For microarray analysis, fold change statistical 
significance was calculated using parametric 2-tailed t test. One-way 
ANOVA was used for analyzing significance in gene set enrichment 
analysis. The correlation between 5hmC content and TET2 mRNA 
expression (Supplemental Figure 7C) in CRC samples was evaluated 
using a Pearson’s test.
Additional experimental procedures and more details about sta-
tistical analyses can be found in Supplemental Methods.
Study approval. Experiments with mice were conducted following 
the European Union’s animal care directive (86/609/CEE) and were 
approved by the Ethical Committee of Animal Experimentation of the 
Vall d’Hebron Research Institute (approval ID, 40/08 CEEA, 47/08 
CEEA, 06/12 CEEA, 87/12 CEEA, 17/15 CEEA, and 18/15 CEEA). 
Human tumor samples for PDX were obtained after approval from the 
Ethics Committee of the Vall d’Hebron University Hospital [approv-
al ID, PR(IR)79/2009]. Written informed consent was signed by all 
patients. The construction of tissue microarrays was performed in 
accordance with the Swiss Human Research Act (of January 2014) and 
approved by the regional ethical committee (Ethikkommission Nord-
west- und Zentralschweiz; permission number 361/12).
Author contributions
IP performed most of the experiments, helped in their design, and 
contributed to writing the manuscript. SPT cloned the H2Be 
GFP-
expressing lentivirus, helped on initial experiments for functional 
validation, and analyzed most of the gene expression data. IC, OA, 
JMQ, ECB, and LR contributed to the execution of some exper-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 9   September 2018
 21. Brennan CW, et al. The somatic genomic land-
scape of glioblastoma. Cell. 2013;155(2):462–477.
 22. Rabindran SK, Ross DD, Doyle LA, Yang W, 
Greenberger LM. Fumitremorgin C reverses 
multidrug resistance in cells transfected with 
the breast cancer resistance protein. Cancer Res. 
2000;60(1):47–50.
 23. Wilting RH, Dannenberg JH. Epigenetic mech-
anisms in tumorigenesis, tumor cell heteroge-
neity and drug resistance. Drug Resist Updat. 
2012;15(1–2):21–38.
 24. Schwartz YB, Pirrotta V. A new world of Poly-
combs: unexpected partnerships and emerging 
functions. Nat Rev Genet. 2013;14(12):853–864.
 25. Lai A, et al. RBP1 recruits both histone deacety-
lase-dependent and -independent repression 
activities to retinoblastoma family proteins. Mol 
Cell Biol. 1999;19(10):6632–6641.
 26. Hsieh JJ, Zhou S, Chen L, Young DB, Hayward 
SD. CIR, a corepressor linking the DNA binding 
factor CBF1 to the histone deacetylase complex. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96(1):23–28.
 27. Baxter E, Windloch K, Gannon F, Lee JS. Epigen-
etic regulation in cancer progression. Cell Biosci. 
2014;4:45.
 28. Tian X, et al. Histone lysine-specific methyltrans-
ferases and demethylases in carcinogenesis: new 
targets for cancer therapy and prevention. Curr 
Cancer Drug Targets. 2013;13(5):558–579.
 29. Kim SM, et al. Regulation of mouse steroidogen-
esis by WHISTLE and JMJD1C through his-
tone methylation balance. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2010;38(19):6389–6403.
 30. Brauchle M, et al. Protein complex interactor 
analysis and differential activity of KDM3 sub-
family members towards H3K9 methylation. 
PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60549.
 31. Kuroki S, et al. JMJD1C, a JmjC domain-contain-
ing protein, is required for long-term mainte-
nance of male germ cells in mice. Biol Reprod. 
2013;89(4):93.
 32. Piccolo FM, et al. Different roles for Tet1 and Tet2 
proteins in reprogramming-mediated erasure 
of imprints induced by EGC fusion. Mol Cell. 
2013;49(6):1023–1033.
 33. Bermejo-Álvarez P, et al. Tet-mediated imprint-
ing erasure in H19 locus following reprogram-
ming of spermatogonial stem cells to induced 
pluripotent stem cells. Sci Rep. 2015;5:13691.
 34. Losman JA, et al. (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate is suffi-
cient to promote leukemogenesis and its effects 
are reversible. Science. 2013;339(6127):1621–1625.
 35. Ko M, et al. Impaired hydroxylation of 5-methyl-
cytosine in myeloid cancers with mutant TET2. 
Nature. 2010;468(7325):839–843.
 36. Moreira AL, Sampaio EP, Zmuidzinas A, Frindt 
P, Smith KA, Kaplan G. Thalidomide exerts its 
inhibitory action on tumor necrosis factor alpha 
by enhancing mRNA degradation. J Exp Med. 
1993;177(6):1675–1680.
 37. Muller GW, et al. Amino-substituted thalidomide 
analogs: potent inhibitors of TNF-alpha produc-
tion. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 1999;9(11):1625–1630.
 38. Fardini Y, Dehennaut V, Lefebvre T, Issad T. 
O-GlcNAcylation: a new cancer hallmark? Front 
Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013;4:99.
 39. Huang Y, Rao A. Connections between TET pro-
teins and aberrant DNA modification in cancer. 
Trends Genet. 2014;30(10):464–474.
 40. Jeschke J, Collignon E, Fuks F. Portraits of 
TET-mediated DNA hydroxymethylation in can-
cer. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2016;36:16–26.
 41. Lian CG, et al. Loss of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine 
is an epigenetic hallmark of melanoma. Cell. 
2012;150(6):1135–1146.
 42. Zhang F, et al. 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine loss is 
associated with poor prognosis for patients with 
WHO grade II diffuse astrocytomas. Sci Rep. 
2016;6:20882.
 43. Yang Q, et al. Decreased 5-hydroxymethylcyto-
sine (5-hmC) is an independent poor prognostic 
factor in gastric cancer patients. J Biomed Nano-
technol. 2013;9(9):1607–1616.
 44. Chen Z, Shi X, Guo L, Li Y, Luo M, He J. 
Decreased 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels cor-
relate with cancer progression and poor survival: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Oncotar-
get. 2017;8(1):1944–1952.
 45. Neri F, et al. TET1 is a tumour suppressor that 
inhibits colon cancer growth by derepressing 
inhibitors of the WNT pathway. Oncogene. 
2015;34(32):4168–4176.
 46. Jin SG, et al. 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine is strong-
ly depleted in human cancers but its levels do 
not correlate with IDH1 mutations. Cancer Res. 
2011;71(24):7360–7365.
 47. Kraus TF, Kolck G, Greiner A, Schierl K, Guibourt 
V, Kretzschmar HA. Loss of 5-hydroxymethyl-
cytosine and intratumoral heterogeneity as an 
epigenomic hallmark of glioblastoma. Tumour 
Biol. 2015;36(11):8439–8446.
 48. Pfeifer GP, Xiong W, Hahn MA, Jin SG. The role 
of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in human cancer. 
Cell Tissue Res. 2014;356(3):631–641.
 49. Essers MA, et al. IFNα activates dormant 
haematopoietic stem cells in vivo. Nature. 
2009;458(7240):904–908.
 50. Vora AJ, Toh CH, Peel J, Greaves M. Use of granulo-
cyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) for mobiliz-
ing peripheral blood stem cells: risk of mobilizing 
clonal myeloma cells in patients with bone marrow 
infiltration. Br J Haematol. 1994;86(1):180–182.
 51. Kreso A, et al. Variable clonal repopulation dynam-
ics influence chemotherapy response in colorectal 
cancer. Science. 2013;339(6119):543–548.
 52. Anido J, et al. TGF-β receptor inhibitors target 
the CD44(high)/Id1(high) glioma-initiating cell 
population in human glioblastoma. Cancer Cell. 
2010;18(6):655–668.
 53. Schmittgen TD, Livak KJ. Analyzing real-time 
PCR data by the comparative C(T) method. Nat 
Protoc. 2008;3(6):1101–1108.
 54. Vandesompele J, et al. Accurate normalization of 
real-time quantitative RT-PCR data by geometric 
averaging of multiple internal control genes. 
Genome Biol. 2002;3(7):RESEARCH0034.
