 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 29 February 2016
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00222
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
1
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
Edited by:
Alexander Bucksch,
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
Reviewed by:
Monica Herrero-Huerta,
Delft University of Technology,
Netherlands
Jean-Francois Cote,
Natural Resources Canada, Canada
*Correspondence:
Eetu Puttonen
eetu.puttonen@nls.fi
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Plant Biophysics and Modeling,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Plant Science
Received: 21 November 2015
Accepted: 09 February 2016
Published: 29 February 2016
Citation:
Puttonen E, Briese C, Mandlburger G,
Wieser M, Pfennigbauer M, Zlinszky A
and Pfeifer N (2016) Quantification of
Overnight Movement of Birch (Betula
pendula) Branches and Foliage with
Short Interval Terrestrial Laser
Scanning. Front. Plant Sci. 7:222.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00222
Quantification of Overnight
Movement of Birch (Betula pendula)
Branches and Foliage with Short
Interval Terrestrial Laser Scanning
Eetu Puttonen 1, 2*, Christian Briese 3, 4, Gottfried Mandlburger 3, Martin Wieser 3,
Martin Pfennigbauer 5, András Zlinszky 6 and Norbert Pfeifer 3
1 Department of Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry, Finnish Geospatial Research Institute, National Land Survey of
Finland, Masala, Finland, 2 Department of Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry, Centre of Excellence in Laser Scanning
Research, National Land Survey of Finland, Masala, Finland, 3 Department of Geodesy and Geoinformation, Technische
Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria, 4 EODC Earth Observation Data Centre for Water Resources Monitoring, Vienna, Austria,
5 RIEGL Laser Measurement Systems, Horn, Austria, 6 Balaton Limnological Institute, Centre for Ecological Research,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Tihany, Hungary
The goal of the study was to determine circadian movements of silver birch (Petula
Bendula) branches and foliage detected with terrestrial laser scanning (TLS). The study
consisted of two geographically separate experiments conducted in Finland and in
Austria. Both experiments were carried out at the same time of the year and under similar
outdoor conditions. Experiments consisted of 14 (Finland) and 77 (Austria) individual laser
scans taken between sunset and sunrise. The resulting point clouds were used in creating
a time series of branch movements. In the Finnish data, the vertical movement of the
whole tree crown was monitored due to low volumetric point density. In the Austrian data,
movements of manually selected representative points on branches were monitored. The
movements were monitored from dusk until morning hours in order to avoid daytime
wind effects. The results indicated that height deciles of the Finnish birch crown had
vertical movements between -10.0 and 5.0 cm compared to the situation at sunset. In
the Austrian data, the maximum detected representative point movement was 10.0 cm.
The temporal development of the movements followed a highly similar pattern in both
experiments, with the maximum movements occurring about an hour and a half before
(Austria) or around (Finland) sunrise. The results demonstrate the potential of terrestrial
laser scanning measurements in support of chronobiology.
Keywords: terrestrial laser scanning, plant movement, chronobiology, circadian rhythm, time series
INTRODUCTION
Terrestrial laser scanners have gone through rapid development during the past 10 years (Dassot
et al., 2011). They produce accurate 3D point clouds of target objects often down to millimeter
resolution. Thus, the point clouds provide detailed information about the structure and spatial
properties of the targets.
In addition to structural modeling and scene mapping, terrestrial laser scanning (TLS)
data are widely used in engineering applications to monitor possible changes in the targeted
objects or in a target area. TLS-based change detection studies cover a wide range of different
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
applications. These include geodynamic processes such as
landslide detection and monitoring (Travelletti et al., 2008;
Ghuffar et al., 2013) and morphodynamic changes in coastal
beaches (Lindenbergh et al., 2011), thermal karst formations
(Barnhart and Crosby, 2013), or in riversides (Milan et al., 2007;
Vaaja et al., 2011; Saarinen et al., 2013). Short interval scans
are also used in determining dynamic structural stress (Grosse-
Schwiep et al., 2013). TLS techniques are utilized to improve
safety in quarries and mines by monitoring wall stability over
time (Abellan et al., 2011; Hu, 2013; Kovanic and Blištan, 2014).
In vegetation studies, TLS is being actively used in static forest
and forest parameter mapping (Hopkinson et al., 2004; Moskal
and Zheng, 2012; Liang, 2013), tree modeling (Fleck et al., 2004;
Hosoi and Omasa, 2006; Bucksch and Fleck, 2011; Eysn et al.,
2013; Raumonen et al., 2013), and in estimating forest biomass
(e.g., Kaasalainen et al., 2014).
Although TLS is utilized in a wide range of both temporal
and vegetation studies for scientific and engineering applications,
one field of study which has not yet gained wider interest
in the TLS community is circadian or diurnal and nocturnal
changes in vegetation. In ecology and plant physiology, these
changes in plants and their driving factors have been studied
intensively for a long time. It has been known for centuries
that plants show diurnal cycles of leaf motion, described as
“sleep” already by Darwin and Darwin (1880). It has been
observed that these motions also happen if the plant is placed
in darkness, therefore suggesting an internal mechanism for
measuring time. The molecular mechanism of this circadian
oscillator has been most extensively studied in Arabidopsis (Barak
et al., 2000), but orthologues of the Arabidopsis genes controlling
the diurnal rhythm of flowering time have been identified
in various tree species such as Poplar (Populus tremula) and
Chestnut (Castanea sativa) (Solomon et al., 2010). However, for
obvious reasons, carrying out controlled experiments or even
quantitative observations on fully grown trees is much more
difficult, therefore both the background and the effects of sleep
motions in trees are less well-understood. Circadian rhythms of
leaf motion are evident for some tree species such as Robinia
pseudoacaia. The movement of leaves is connected to changes
in turgor pressure (Holmes and Shim, 1968) which is controlled
by the osmotic state of the cells. Changes in water transport and
in the concentration of various metabolites result in changes in
osmotic flow and thus, through changes in the shape of individual
plant cells, eventual movement at the scale of individual plants
or plant parts. The literature identifies two common reasons
that drive these changes, namely plant water balance (Chapin
et al., 2002) and photoperiodism (McClung, 2006; Nozue and
Maloof, 2006; Sysoeva et al., 2010). It would be plausible that the
changes in turgor pressure resulting in a circadian rhythm of leaf
movement also apply to the branches and thus cause a circadian
rhythm of branch movements in trees. However, in an earlier case
study where quantification of diurnal movement was attempted
using height measurement of weighted lines attached to branches
in a Walnut orchard (Juglans regia), diurnal change was found
insignificant (Way et al., 1991). To our best knowledge, circadian
movement of tree branches has never been successfully quantified
before in the presented level.
Methods to monitor plant water balance at a diurnal time
scale include: (a) leaf or fruit sample collection and water
content measurements (Klepper, 1968; Acevedo et al., 1979);
(b) sap flow monitoring (Köstner et al., 1998); (c) leaf and
stem conductance measurements (García-Orellana et al., 2013);
(d) leaf and stem water potential, photosynthetic capability and
hydraulic conductivity measurements (Andrews et al., 2012);
(e) branch growth and xylem morphometry measurements
(Correia and Martins-Loucao, 1995; Correia et al., 2001). Most
of these are invasive processes that involve sampling and are
difficult (but possible) to carry out regularly in intervals of a
few hours (Chapotin et al., 2006). Therefore, in case of trees,
the most common way of observing circadian rhythms is with
a dendrograph, an instrument that measures changes in tree
diameter or circumference with sub-millimeter precision (e.g.,
Pesonen et al., 2004).
In order to monitor photoperiodism, the amount of light
received by plants can be controlled by constructing external
shading structures (Wayne and Bazzaz, 1993) or by using external
lighting setups with selected filters (e.g., Mockler et al., 2003).
Alternatively, in order to monitor the internal clock, a plant
can be placed in continuously lit or dark conditions to observe
periodic changes in its physiology.
Plant physiology measurements are localized and typically
consider selected parts of a plant. The measurements often take
place in laboratory conditions. This presents a clear challenge
when results are extrapolated to model wider areas of multiple
plants. Acquiring results also involves a significant amount of
manual labor, as experiment setups and sample collection are
hard to automatize.
TLS measurements offer a potential solution to generalize
plant physiology results on larger spatial scales, like whole
individual trees, or on orchard plot, and stand levels. Laser
scanners can measure individual targets accurately tens of
meters away with sub-centimeter point resolution. Moreover,
scanning can be performed outdoors with short intervals
between individual scans. Furthermore, as the scanners are active
measurement devices that both produce and receive the signal,
they are insensitive to varying external lighting conditions, i.e.,
available sunlight and cloudiness.
Laser
scanning
point
clouds
cannot
provide
direct
biochemical parameters from plants, but they can be used
in plant shape and dimension monitoring over time (e.g.,
branch inclination, branch, and stem swelling, leaf inclination
distribution at crown level). If a clear correlation between the
geometric changes in point clouds and laboratory or in situ
results can be established and verified, the parameterized spatial
changes can then act as proxies that estimate physiological
changes in a plant.
Puttonen et al. (2015) detected and reported birch branch
movements during a day-long classification study. The study
was carried out with the Finnish Geospatial Research Institute
(FGI) Hyperspectral Laser Scanner (HSL) (Hakala et al., 2012).
The movements were detected from the variation of the
birch Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) response
during on an observation period of ca. 26 h. A more detailed
inspection revealed a visible change in birch branch stances over
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
2
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
time. The study is to our knowledge the first to report spatial
changes in tree branch geometry over a day-long cycle. However,
the authors did not attempt to quantify the movement amplitude.
Hitherto, vegetation time series in TLS have been collected
mainly for longer scale time series analyses, typically to determine
seasonal changes in tree canopy (e.g., Hosoi and Omasa, 2009;
Nevalainen et al., 2014; Hakala et al., 2014; Portillo-Quintero
et al., 2014; Calders et al., 2015; Griebel et al., 2015).
In imaging, longer term time-series studies have been carried
out both in the field and in a laboratory with a close range
setup (e.g., more recently by Li et al., 2013; Nijland et al.,
2014). However, the use of cameras inherently limits the
experimental setup to daylight hours or requires the use of
external light sources. Additionally, radiometry measurements
and their calibration are typically rather complex. Furthermore,
even a short use of external light sources may interrupt the
plant photoperiod (e.g., Salisbury, 1981). Meanwhile, since laser
scanners are active measurement systems their working efficiency
is stable in nighttime conditions with no external light (Arslan
and Kalkan, 2013). With modern laser scanners, the laser beam
footprint up to a few centimeters in diameter illuminates only
a localized patch of the plant surface at a time. Moreover, the
footprint swipes over each spot in sub-second scale and the
typically used infrared (IR) wavelengths have strong reflectance
from green vegetation. Therefore, most of the transmitted
energy is not absorbed by the plant. Thus, we assume that
plant disturbance with a modern laser scanning system is not
significant during an individual scanning measurement.
This study now aims (i) to analyze to which degree overnight
birch branch movements can be measured with two different
TLS scanners and (ii) whether quantifications of crown/branch
movements are possible. With these goals in mind, we aim to
show that TLS data provides an effective tool to detect and to
monitor circadian changes in tree geometry with a centimeter
scale spatial and within-hour temporal resolution. As the main
focus of the study is in confirmation and quantification of
geometric changes in birch branches over time, without further
investigation of the cause or mechanism of these movements, the
measurement setups did not include comprehensive weather or
soil data.
MEASUREMENTS AND DATA
This section is structured as follows: In section Measurement
Sites and the Collected Data, descriptions of both the Finnish
and the Austrian measurement sites and data collected from
them are given. Section Object Point Cloud Delineation describes
object delineation from the scanned point clouds. Section FGI
Hyperspectral Lidar provides a detailed description of FGI HSL
and its properties. Section RIEGL VZ-4000 Long Range Laser
Scanner gives a detailed description of the RIEGL VZ-4000 laser
scanner.
Measurement Sites and the Collected Data
Measurements were carried out in two geographically different
locations, in southern Finland (Kirkkonummi, 60◦09′40′′N,
24◦32′48′′W) and in northern Austria (Horn, 48◦39′31′′N,
FIGURE 1 | The birch and reference markers at the Finnish
measurement site. Reference markers were used in monitoring the HSL
ranging stability. Reference target sizes in the figure have been emphasized for
visualization purposes. The scanner was located in the origin (0,0,0).
15◦39′48′′E). Both measurements were performed in the
middle of September close to the solar equinox to guarantee
approximately similar lengths of night at both sites (http://
www.timeanddate.com,
accessed
on
25th
February
2015).
Measurement dates were 13–14 September 2013 (Finland) and
19–20 September 2014 (Austria). In both measurements, the
test trees were measured from sunset to sunrise. In Finland, the
nighttime measurements lasted about 11 h in total, during which
14 separate scans were collected with FGI HSL. Scan intervals
were approximately 1 h. Near sunrise and sunset the scan interval
was shortened to 40 min. In Austria, data acquisitions were
repeated every 10 min for about 12 and half hours, resulting in
77 separate scans.
The Finnish measurement site was located on a shallow slope
facing southward. The size of the test site was about 7 × 20
m2. The site included the main target, a small silver birch
(Betula pendula). Low understory, a large silver birch and goat
willows (Salix caprea) were located behind the target. The site
was partially surrounded from its eastern side with a sparse, half-
open canopy of full-grown birches. The nearby FGI building was
located on the western side of the site. The shadow of the building
shaded the target site for about half an hour before the sunset.
Figure 1 illustrates the Finnish test tree and the reference markers
placed around it. The markers were used to validate the distance
measurement stability over the experiment. The measurement
setting also included an external reference plate (Spectralon R
�)
to calibrate laser radiometry during the experiment. The FGI
HSL was mounted on a solid platform and a plastic tent was
set up around the scanner to protect it from possible rain and
moisture. A heating fan was kept on whole night time inside the
tent. This guaranteed a constant airflow and prevented possible
surface condensation.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
3
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
The Austrian measurement site was located on the northern
part of an outdoor test and calibration range, an open,
cut grass field of size about 130 m by 100 m. The target
birch had four stems and it was standing about 10 m
away of a manufacturing hall. Thus, the tree was not
shaded during sunrise or sunset. The scans were taken to
the westward direction and the laser scanner was under a
protective roof. Four white polystyrene foam spheres were
attached to the birch as reference markers to detect branch
movement. Figure 2 illustrates the Austrian test tree and
the branches of which movements were followed during
the experiment. The branch point clouds were manually
selected in CloudCompare software [Available in: http://www.
cloudcompare.org/ (Girardeau-Montaut, 2014)].
The weather conditions in both measurement sites were
similar during data acquisition. The air was calm, with no wind
(qualitative observation), during the night. For this reason, the
time of sunset was selected as the initial point for monitoring
the branch movement. There was no rainfall during either
measurement. In the Finnish test site, the leaves of lower branches
were verified not to have visible moisture condensation on their
surfaces during nighttime.
Object Point Cloud Delineation
A manual workflow was used to delineate birch and reference
target point clouds spatially from the whole point cloud. The
same procedure was used for both datasets.
The differentiation was started by viewing an object (birch
or reference target) point cloud as a 2D projection from a user
selected angle and then cutting the object outline by hand with
a clear buffer zone. Points inside the outline were included and
the rest were rejected. After the cut, a new 2D projection of the
included points was taken from another angle and the manual
cutting was repeated. In total, 4–5 projections were required
to form a sufficiently accurate 3D delineation for the objects
in both cases. As the objects had no spatial overlap in either
measurement setup, there was no mixing between the object
point clouds. The buffer zones in each cut were selected so wide
that possible temporal movements within the object point cloud
and noise point fluctuations around the object edges (e.g., due
to partial hits) were captured for all measurements. All points
within the selection area were kept. Intensity-based filtering was
not performed.
FGI Hyperspectral Lidar
The FGI Hyperspectral Lidar (HSL) is a laser scanning
system that transmits hyperspectral (white) laser pulses with
a continuous spectrum of 400–2500 nm to the target. It can
measure up to eight separate wavelength bands from returning
pulses. The number of bands is limited by the spectral sensitivity
of the silicon detector, but the wavelengths are selectable within
the transmittance range. In this study, spectral information was
used only to emphasize differences between leaf and stem returns
with the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI).
FIGURE 2 | (A) The birch at the Austrian test site. The selected target branches and the three detected reference markers have specific coloring. Ground points are
presented with cyan. Reference target sizes have been emphasized in the figure for visualization purposes. The scanner was located in the origin (0,0,0). (B) A
close-up of Branch 1 at two different times. Triangles represent the manually selected representative points of which total 3D movements were followed over time.
Dark triangles represent the initial point locations at sunset (19:08), bright triangles the corresponding point locations at the time of the movement maximum (04:38).
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
4
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
The main components of the HSL system are the SM5-he
supercontinuum laser source (Leukos, Limoges, France), a 2D
scanning mechanism (Newport Corp., Irvine, CA, USA), the
wavelength separating spectrograph (Specim, Oulu, Finland),
a 16-channel high speed detector element (First Sensor AG,
Berlin, Germany), and the measurement computer with digitizer
cards (National Instruments Corp., Austin, Texas, USA). The
HSL works by sending laser pulses to the target in a sweeping
pattern and then recording returning waveforms for each
wavelength band detected. The waveforms are digitized with 1
GHz frequency, thus giving the system a nominal 15 cm range
resolution. However, individual laser pulses can be localized
to the waveforms with a de facto range resolution of a few
centimetres. The HSL can measure up to 5000 waveforms per
second and a maximum of three discrete returns are fitted in each
waveform.
A more detailed description of the HSL system, its properties,
and its measurement configuration are given in articles by Hakala
et al. (2012) and Nevalainen et al. (2014).
The properties of both the FGI HSL and RIEGL VZ-4000
scanners are compared in Table 1.
RIEGL VZ-4000 Long Range Laser Scanner
The RIEGL VZ-4000 has been developed for surveying
applications in which very long ranges are required (RIEGL,
2014). The scanner has a net measurement rate of up to 222 kHz.
The maximum measurement range of the VZ-4000 is 4 km for
targets with 90% reflectance at 23 kHz measurement rate. At
222 kHz the instrument is still capable of measuring targets with
only 20% reflectance up to 1000 m.
The RIEGL VZ-4000 works, like the HSL, by sending
laser pulses to the target, but analyses the recorded waveform
internally. The nominal ranging precision is 10 mm.
The VZ-4000 can be controlled via its built–in touch screen,
via WIFI or LAN. It has a built-in camera, GPS receiver, compass,
and tilt sensor, and there are interfaces to attach an additional
camera (e.g., IR camera) and/or a high-precision RTK GNSS.
RESULTS
Finnish Point Cloud Time Series
A total of 14 scans were selected from the Finnish point cloud
time series in order to determine the temporal variation in
the birch crown. Since the FGI HSL is a prototype device,
its relative ranging precision during the experiment was first
validated. Movements of the reference targets set around the
birch were monitored for the duration of the experiment.
Table 2 lists the reference target distances to the scanner and
their relative movements compared to the initial scan. The
target ranges and movements were calculated with respect
to the target center that was determined with a least squares
sphere fitting (MATLAB code by Alan Jennings, available in
www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/34129).
The
table shows that the reference targets were detected reliably and
with higher precision (less than 5 mm standard deviation) than
the nominal sampling frequency of the system would imply.
This assumption is valid as long as the laser returns can be
TABLE 1 | Property comparison between the laser scanners used in the
Finnish and Austrian test sites.
Laser system
FGI HSL
LEUKOS-SM-X-OEM
RIEGLVZ-4000
Laser wavelength (nm)
420–2100
1550
Average output power (mW)
41
Setting
dependent
Measurement rate (kHz)
5.3
23–222
Pulse width
≤1 ns
3 ns
Central wavelength of a detected
channel (nm)
545.5, 641.2, 675.0,
711.0, 741.5, 778.4,
978.0
1550
Channel FWHM (nm)
20
–
Collecting optics field of view
0.2◦
–
Transmit beam divergence
0.02◦
0.009◦
Transmit beam diameter (cm)
at stem distance (m)
0.7
(7.5)
1.9
(14.7)
Scanning resolution, horizontal
0.1◦
0.002◦
Scanning resolution, vertical
0.02◦
0.002◦
expected to come from a single reflection, but cannot be directly
generalized to more irregular targets, like differently positioned
leaves, or to partial hits coming from edges. Nevertheless, the
ranging stability test verified the HSL system accuracy for fixed
target distances and that the HSL point cloud did not present a
systematic drift during the measurement period.
After
the
range
precision
measurements,
points
were
manually delineated into a new individual point cloud of the
studied tree for each measurement as described in Section
Finnish Point Cloud Time Series. Then, the point cloud
was differentiated into crown and stem point clouds. The
differentiation was based on the NDVI distribution of all birch
points. The differentiation was performed using a hard NDVI
threshold of 0.2, where the points with NDVI values below
the threshold were classified as stem and thick branches. The
bounding box of the crown point clouds had dimensions of
3.7 × 3.0 × 6.6 m3 (depth, width, height) when averaged over
all measurements. The median point number for the crown
point clouds was 154,310 ± 10,030 points corresponding to 6.5%
variability in the total point number.
The goal of the division was to select the returns reflecting
from leaves and most of the branches of the birch and to
leave the trunk and the thickest branches out of the analysis.
After this, five different height percentiles were calculated for
the crown point cloud for each scan (Figure 3). The height
percentiles in the analysis were: 10th, 30th, 50th, 70th, and the
90th percentile. For example, the 90th percentile is located at the
height at which 90% of the points of the whole cloud are below it.
Height percentiles were calculated because a manual selection of
corresponding points in consecutive scans was not possible due
to the low volumetric point density. Height percentiles, on the
other hand, are robust descriptions of the measurement height
distribution and should therefore allow a reliable tracking of
vertical movements of the crown point cloud.
The results show clear and systematic temporal variation in
height statistics of the birch crown point cloud (Figures 3, 4,
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
5
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
FIGURE 3 | (A) Movement of height percentiles of birch crown points in the Finnish dataset. Height and time are reported with respect to the scan closest to sunset.
Vertical lines mark sunset (blue) and sunrise (red). (B) Maximum movement of height percentile positions overnight. Black points represent the birch crown at sunset.
Blue points represent the birch crown at the time of sunrise. Red points represent the birch stem and the thickest branches. The stem and crown points were
differentiated with NDVI thresholding. Horizontal lines represent the height percentile locations at sunset (dashed, about 19:40 o’clock) and in morning (solid, 06:40
o’clock).
Video 1). In Figure 3, all height percentiles show a declining
temporal trend about 1 h after sunset (blue vertical line). The
four highest percentiles also share another common trend: the
height percentiles after sunrise (red line) were still lower than
their sunset value. At this point, their values have decreased about
0.05 m from their sunset value. After reaching the minimum, all
four percentiles show a rapid return toward the sunset value. The
return takes about 3 h. The lowest percentile shows a differing
temporal response compared to the others. Its value declines
more slowly than the others during night, to about 0.03 m from
the sunset value. Furthermore, the lowest point is reached about
an hour later than for the other percentiles. The overall trend
of the lowest percentile is also not as clear as with the other
percentiles: the declining trend is less clear and shows more
variance.
Austrian Point Cloud Time Series
The RIEGL VZ-4000 was factory calibrated and mounted on
a solid pillar throughout the experiment, and so its ranging
properties were not inspected as with the Finnish datasets. The
bounding box around the birch had average dimensions of 6.0 ×
7.0 × 9.3 m3 (depth, width, height). The median point number
inside the bounding box was 9,388,000 ± 724,000 corresponding
to 7.7% variability in the total point number.
Manual branch point selection was carried out for three
branches. Reference target movement was measured from the
fitted sphere center. Three of the four attached reference targets
TABLE 2 | The ranging stability of the FGI HSL point cloud during the
experiment.
Ref
Ball
No.
Distance from
the scanner
(m)
Distance from
the scanner,
standard
deviation (m)
Fitted radius,
mean (m)
Fitted radius,
standard
deviation (m)
1
6.540
0.002
0.120
0.001
2
7.113
0.002
0.122
0.001
3
8.517
0.003
0.120
0.002
4
7.784
0.004
0.125
0.002
The table shows the reference target distances from the scanner and the radii fitted in
their point clouds. Both the ranges and radii were compared to the initial measurement
close to sunset. All standard deviation values were calculated from 14 scans.
were detected reliably. The fourth one was not detected due to
it being occluded from the scan position by birch branches and
leaves. Figure 5 illustrates the total movements of the selected
points on the branches and the reference target centers.
The graphs in Figure 5 show clearly how all points measured
on branches had a similar movement pattern over time. The
absolute branch point movement was limited mainly to within
2 cm, with the exception of a few points, until 5 h after the
sunset. Thereafter the movement trend began to increase,
reaching its maximum around 9–11 h after sunset. The maximum
movements varied from 5.0 to 8.5 cm for Branch 1, from 3.5 to
7.0 cm for Branch 2, and from 6.5 to 10.0 cm for Branch 3. After
the movement maximum was reached, all branches returned
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
6
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
FIGURE 4 | (A) Finnish birch point cloud profiles at the time of sunset (black) and at the time of the maximum movement around 06:40 o’clock (red). Black frames
mark zoomed in boxes in the upper (B) and in the lower (C) crown. Video 1 visualizes the geometrical change in the Finnish birch point cloud over night. It is provided
in the Supplementary Material.
rapidly toward their sunset values around sunrise (about 07:00 h
in the graph). The movement was dominated by the downwards
component, but included also a comparatively small radial
contribution.
In addition to the similar time response, the amplitude of
point movements was dependent on the point distance from
the trunk in general. For every branch, the point indexing was
selected so that the index increased when moving away from the
trunk (Figure 2). As a general trend, points with higher index
values moved more compared to points with smaller indices. The
subplots show exceptions from this rule at different times, but the
general trend is visible.
For reference targets attached to the branches, movement
of their centers showed a similar, but attenuated, temporal
trend compared to the branch points. Reference targets 1
and 3 showed relatively little movement until about 6 h after
sunset, excluding occasional noise points. Then, both reference
target centers showed a sharp movement with amplitude of
1 cm. The movement then increased until 05:30 o’clock, after
which it diminished rapidly by about an hour after sunrise.
Reference target 2 differed from the two others in that its
movement amplitude was lower and the maximum movement
occurred already around 05:00 o’clock. However, the movement
diminished in the same way as in the case of the other reference
targets.
Considerations on Result Comparability
The results show similar temporal behavior between the two
birches. This is despite the difference in location of over 12
degrees of latitude, and the difference in form of growth: the
Austrian tree was a cultivar with mainly hanging branches while
the Finnish study tree had more erect branches with only the
branchlets hanging. Growing conditions in the measurement
sites also differed from each other, the Finnish site was more
covered and in a slope, whereas the Austrian site was on an open
and flat grass field.
Although both experiments showed clear temporal correlation
in birch branch movement overnight, the absolute branch
movements cannot be compared directly. The spatial resolution
obtainable with the FGI HSL was not detailed enough to
determine individual branch points reliably between consecutive
scans. Thus, the temporal development of the Finnish birch
was treated on a crown level. The use of crown point height
percentiles shows how the different parts of the crown move with
respect to each other, but this level of detail was not sufficient to
analyze the movement amplitude of individual branches.
The RIEGL VZ-4000 point clouds were dense enough for
individual representative point monitoring. In addition, the
reference markers attached to birch branches gave another point
of reference to determine the movement amplitude. Since the
representative points on branches were picked by hand, this
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
7
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
FIGURE 5 | (A) Total movements of the representative points on Branch 1 over time. (B) Total movements of the representative points on Branch 2 over time. Branch
2 is missing the last epoch due to internal occlusion. (C) Total movements of the representative points on Branch 3 over time. (D) Total movement of reference target
centers over time. Vertical lines in all subplots mark sunset and sunrise. All values in (A–D) represent the absolute 3D movement compared to the initial point selection
at the scan closest to sunset. Manual point selection in (A–C) was performed by picking scans once per hour which was sufficient to represent the general movement
trend over time. In (D), reference centers were extracted automatically for all 77 scans. The reference spheres were attached on thicker branches and closer to the
stem than Branches 1–3. This resulted in smaller movement amplitudes in the sphere center movement than with the branches.
resulted in an uncertainty of about 1 cm. However, all manually
selected branch points showed systematic movement amplitudes
of several centimeters that was several times larger than the point
ranging uncertainty and were thus interpreted as a result of
changes in branch position. In the Finnish dataset, the thickest
lower branches adjacent to the stem were measured to be about
15 mm in diameter. In the Austrian dataset, the selected branches
were about 10–20 mm in diameter as measured from the point
clouds.
In order to better compare the results for estimating required
point densities for future measurement planning, a comparative
table of the two measurement setup is presented in Table 3. The
table sums up both the differences and the similarities between
the measurements.
The question arises, which density of the point cloud is
required for doing the first or the second type of movement
analysis, i.e., height percentiles vs. points on individual branches.
To achieve this, the point density must be quantified. This was
done by calculating the number of populated 5×5 × 5 cm3 voxels
for the point clouds, and this was further monitored through
time. The normalized cumulative number of voxels populated
with at least a given number of points is illustrated in Figure 6
for both cases. In other words, the metric shows how many voxels
contain at least n points within the voxel point cloud. This value
is normalized by dividing through the number of voxels which
have at least 1 point. The point density graphs were drawn at
three different times in order to evaluate whether scanning time
would have had a significant effect on point cloud density due to
any external factors.
In the Finnish full canopy point clouds, the Figure 5A
illustrates clearly how the cumulative point density in voxels
decreases rapidly. This means that most of the populated voxels
had only a few hits in them. Only about 35–40% of the populated
voxels have five or more laser returns localized in them. There
is also about a 5% percentage point difference between the
scans taken at sunset and at night. In the Austrian point
cloud, the corresponding number shows that over 65% of the
populated voxels have at least five hits in them and there is
no significant difference between the scans taken at different
times.
The amount of voxels with one or two laser returns is
important as they represent spatially isolated returns of which a
significant portion may consist of noise, and partial or otherwise
low quality hits on target. The graphs in Figure 6A) show that
while there is some variation in the point density on the crown
and tree level, the point densities between different scans drop
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
8
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
FIGURE 6 | Normalized cumulative number of voxels populated with at least N points. Voxel size was set to 5 × 5 × 5 cm3 in each Finnish and Austrian birch
point cloud. (A) Normalized cumulative number of voxels with at least N points calculated for the Finnish birch crown point clouds and for the full Austrian birch point
clouds. (B) Normalized cumulative number of voxels with at least N points calculated for the selected branch point clouds differentiated from the full Austrian point
clouds.
in a consistent manner for both scanners regardless of scanning
time.
The graphs in Figure 6A) showed the point density for the full
crown and tree point clouds. Thus, the inherently noisy backsides
of the point clouds with lower point densities are also included.
Therefore, similar graphs were also produced separately for the
differentiated Austrian birch branches (Figure 6B) that were
used for movement measurements to see if they would show
different point density variations compared to the full tree point
cloud. The branches were selected on the outer edge of the birch
and with clear visibility to the scanner (Figure 2). The graphs
show that about 85% of all populated voxels inside the bounding
boxes of branches 1 and 2 have five or more hits, and over
75% of the voxels have 10 or more hits. The only exception
here is the sunrise measurement of the branch 1, where the
results are several percentage points lower. Branch 3 results show
systematically lower point densities. About 80% of these voxels
have at least five hits, and about 65% of the voxels have at least
10 hits. In general, the number of multi-hit branch voxels is over
10% points higher than the number of corresponding voxels in
the whole birch point cloud.
Results on the point density variation in the Finnish and
Austrian datasets and their effect on manual branch point
selection give a rough metric to estimate required point densities
for future studies. The representative point monitoring was
possible with manual selection for all branches delineated from
the Austrian datasets, whereas for the Finnish data similar
monitoring was not possible due to lower point density. The
lowest tested branch point density here had about 80% of hits
coming from voxels with at least five points or more, which would
correspond to a point density of at least 40,000 pts/m3. Voxels
with 10 or more hits (at least 80,000 pts/m3) constituted about
65% of all voxels. In the Finnish dataset, the voxel population
ratio of over 65% was obtained only when voxels with at least
two points (16,000 pts/m3) were included. Thus, to perform a
similar point selection from a natural birch branch surface (i.e.,
without additional reflective material), the point densities should
be at least close to 40,000 pts/m3. This estimated value is not a
universal lower limit, but it gives an initial approximation for
planning new similar experiments.
Measurement settings and weather conditions were also
similar between the experiments:
i) Both experiments were carried out with a single scanner
setup. Therefore, only one side of the test trees could be
monitored over the duration of the experiments. This is
sufficient to determine individual branch movements, but
determination of the whole crown movement is not possible
and would require a minimum of two separate scans from
different positions, preferably more. Multiple scans would
allow branch movement determination around the tree to get
a better insight on possible directional movement differences
within the crown. Multiple scans would also provide better
information about effects related to growing location or sun
position.
ii) In both experiments the weather was similar, with no
observed wind and no rainfall during night. As high-
resolution laser scans require typically minute-long collection
times for tree-sized objects, this means that the measurements
are susceptible to occasional gusts of wind and need to
be accounted for in measurement planning. In order to
eliminate most wind effects from point clouds, external wind
covers would be needed or the scans should be performed in
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
9
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
an enclosed setting, for example in a greenhouse. However, in
our experiments no disturbance by wind occurred.
DISCUSSION
The Study in Context with Previous
Research
In this study we quantified a diurnal cycle of branch motion
in mature birch (Betula pendula) trees growing under natural
conditions, and therefore demonstrated the potential of TLS
point clouds to monitor diurnal branch movements in birch
trees. To our knowledge, the study is the first to report overnight
branch and crown movement with centimeter level spatial
resolution and with (less than) hourly intervals. The study
approach presented here is novel in utilizing TLS point clouds
with short interval outdoor scanning.
The study comprises two separate measurement settings with
different equipment and geographic location, namely Finland
and Austria. Target objects were individual birch trees located
in the study areas and night time movements were detected
by scanning their canopies for a period lasting from sunset to
sunrise. The results obtained from the measurements showed
that the crown movement in the Finnish and the branch
movement in the Austrian study case presented similar temporal
TABLE 3 | Comparison between the similarities and differences in the
Finnish and Austrian measurement setups.
Similarities
Type
Description
Tree species
Birch, Betula pendula
Time of the year
Finland: 13–14 of September
Austria: 19–20 of September
Weather conditions
Clear weather with some overcast
No observed wind (operator
observation)
No rainfall
No visible surface condensation
Differences
Geographic location
Separation distance: about
1500 km
Difference in latitude: about 12◦
Crown bounding box dimensions (depth ×
width × height, m3, median)
Finland: 3.7 × 3.0 × 6.6
Austria: 6.0 × 7.0 × 9.3
Total volume of the tree point cloud (sum
over populated voxels, m3, median)
Finland: 4.20
Austria: 45.23
Growing spot
Finland: Semi-open, on a slope
Austria: Open, flat field
Laser scanning systems
Finland: Experimental (FGI HSL)
Austria: Commercial (RIEGL
VZ-4000)
Year of measurement
Finland: 2013
Austria: 2014
response. Close to sunrise, the branches were hanging lower than
at the time of sunset. Detected crown and branch movement
amplitudes varied from a few centimeters up to 10 cm from
their initial locations at sunset, depending on the position of the
branch and the measurement point on it. The movements were
observed to happen systematically over a time span of several
hours, which ruled out occasional wind effects.
Both the molecular background of the circadian rhythm and
the resulting movement of various plant parts (the leaf, stem,
and flower) have been extensively described for small herbs
growing under laboratory conditions. The circadian activity
pattern of trees is also of interest, both for generalizing the
findings of experimental chronobiology and for commercial use
of tree products such as the tree sap [e.g., for the gum tree
(Hevea brasiliensis)] and the wood (which is best harvested when
it has a low water content). Understanding ecophysiological
processes of individual trees, including their diurnal water use
pattern and how this changes under water stress is becoming
increasingly important for climate research, as near-global
coverage of high-resolution remote sensing has revolutionized
the up-scaling of findings from individual tree-based models
to continental scale (Shugart et al., 2015). Until now, in situ
measurements at the scale of full trees were not possible due
to the lack of a non-invasive, non-contact method with high
spatial accuracy. Our study demonstrates that TLS satisfies these
criteria.
To our knowledge, previous and present TLS time series
literature on vegetation mainly concentrates on detecting
seasonal changes. The seasonal change studies have mainly
focused on collecting physiological parameters, like leaf or needle
chlorophyll content (Hakala et al., 2014; Nevalainen et al., 2014),
or to follow the growth and phenological changes by studying
changes in Leaf area index (LAI), plant area index (PAI), and
Plant Area Volume Density (PAVD), e.g., in Griebel et al. (2015)
and Calders et al. (2015). A study by Hosoi and Omasa (2009)
determined the seasonal changes in vertical leaf area density
(LAD) profiles. Measurement intervals in these studies vary from
daily and weekly measurements to individual seasonal scans.
These scan intervals are sufficient for detecting overall changes on
crown level, but cannot capture systematic inter—and intraday
dynamics as reported here.
Most of the TLS time series studies are performed during light
hours, mainly due to technical restrictions that require presence
of measurement staff to set up and monitor the data collection.
A change to this is a new operational system, VEGNET, that
has been developed and successfully applied for long-term forest
monitoring (Portillo-Quintero et al., 2014; Griebel et al., 2015).
The main limitation of VEGNET is its limited spatial resolution
and a fixed angle rotation plane that have been designed to
monitor overall crown structural dynamics around the system
instead of focusing on individual trees. The VEGNET operates
night time to optimize its ranging capabilities and to minimize
possible wind effects. In general, any wind or local airflows
present a significant source of noise in TLS point clouds and
have to be accounted for either during the measurement. Another
reported error source is precipitation on the scanning equipment
and on target.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
10
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
Another feasible approach to collect longer-term time series
data with high temporal resolution is short-interval photography.
Li et al. (2013) performed a plant growth analysis study
where they studied the structural changes in a pot plant in
laboratory conditions for 35 days where the same viewing
geometry was repeated every 5 min. A 4D (3D structure and
time) point cloud representation was then post processed
from the imagery to study geometrical changes in the plant.
Nijland et al. (2014) used infrared converted consumer grade
cameras to collect plant health and phenology information in
an outdoor setting for several months with 1-h interval. The
main weakness of the imaging approach is the requirement of
external lighting and comprehensive radiometric calibration to
guarantee correct radiometry between imagery taken in dynamic
lighting conditions. Li et al. (2013) applied constant lighting
on their targets, whereas Nijland et al. (2014) had to limit
their outdoor imaging sequences to light hours. Neither solution
allows studying of possible dark time dynamics in plants as
reported in this study.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
The study scope was limited to analysis and quantification of
the geometric movements in birch crown and branches. The
validation of possible mechanisms behind the movement was not
possible within the study scope and further investigations are
required. Possible mechanisms contributing to the branch and
crown movement may be related to plant water balance or to
plant photoperiodism, but their validation was out of the scope
of this article.
Circadian changes in plants have been studied extensively in
plant physiology and they can be quantified with high detail
in laboratory conditions or in-situ for individual plants and
their parts (e.g., Perämäki et al., 2001). However, extending the
results to larger areas is prohibitively laborious. We conclude
that whereas laser scanning point clouds are not able to give
as detailed information about the physiological changes in
plants as laboratory or on-the-spot measurements, they still
have a significant potential to provide additional geometrical
information that can be correlated with the physiological
measurements, and then possibly extended to cover whole plants
in their natural environment and over wider areas. Perhaps
the most important open question is whether the observed
branch movements take place under the influence of light from
sunset and sunrise, or if they are independent from light and
governed by the internal circadian clock of the plant. The fact
that some branches started returning to their daytime position
already before sunrise would suggest this latter hypothesis, but
the temporal frequency of our investigations is not sufficient for
confirming or rejecting it: ideally, measuring several full 24-h
cycles of a tree isolated from natural light would be required
for this.
To explore the potential of TLS-based sleep movement of trees
as an indicator of water use and water stress, further studies
are required with simultaneous physiological measurements of
trunk diameter, water potential, and photosynthetic activity
and reference comparisons. This will allow (i) quantification
of the limits of reliability of different terrestrial laser scanners
to detect the temporal movements in different plant and
tree species and (ii) modeling and further simulation of the
relationship between the detected geometric behavior and direct
physiological observations of plant water use and circadian
rhythms.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
EP is the main author and took part in the planning of both
experiments, collection of Finnish data, and performed the
data analysis. CB, GM, and NP planned the Austrian dataset
collection and contributed to the writing. MP planned and
arranged the collection of Austrian dataset and contributed to
writing the manuscript. MW processed the Austrian dataset
for analysis. AZ strengthened introduction and discussion from
biological and ecological perspective, and commented the whole
manuscript.
FUNDING
This article received support from Academy of Finland grants
no. 265949 and no. 272195, and from the Finnish foundations
mobility grant “Tutkijat maailmalle, osaamista Suomeen.” AZ
was supported by the OTKA grant PD 115833 of the Hungarian
Research Fund.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Sanna Kaasalainen, Teemu Hakala, Olli
Nevalainen, Mika Karjalainen, Anssi Krooks, and Kati Anttila for
their help with collecting the Finnish data, and Reinhard Plessl
for collecting the Austrian data. We also acknowledge the support
of Hermann Heilmeier, Biology and Ecology group at TU BAF in
Freiberg (Germany).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpls.2016.
00222
Video 1 | Animation of the overnight movement in the Finnish birch point
cloud from sunset to sunrise. Video is created by drawing birch point cloud of
each scan collected during night. The point cloud scanned around sunset (19:40
o’clock) is drawn with black as a reference. The laser scanner was located in
origin (0,0).
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
11
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
REFERENCES
Abellan, A., Vilaplana, J. M., Calvet, J., Garcia-Selles, D., and Asensio, E. (2011).
Rockfall monitoring by Terrestrial Laser Scanning—case study of the basaltic
rock face at Castellfollit de la Roca (Catalonia, Spain). Nat. Hazards Earth Syst.
Sci. 11, 829–841. doi: 10.5194/nhess-11-829-2011
Acevedo, E., Fereres, E., Hsiao, T. C., and Henderson, D. W. (1979). Diurnal
growth trends, water potential, and osmotic adjustment of maize and
sorghum leaves in the field. Plant Physiol. 64, 476–480. doi: 10.1104/pp.64.
3.476
Andrews, S. F., Flanagan, L. B., Sharp, E. J., and Cai, T. (2012). Variation in water
potential, hydraulic characteristics and water source use in montane Douglas-
fir and lodgepole pine trees in southwestern Alberta and consequences for
seasonal changes in photosynthetic capacity. Tree Physiol. 32, 146–160. doi:
10.1093/treephys/tpr136
Arslan, A. E., and Kalkan, K. (2013). “Comparison of working efficiency of
terrestrial laser scanner in day and night conditions,” in International Archives
of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, eds F.
Sunar, O. Altan, S. Li, K. Schindler, and J. Jiang (Antalya: International Society
for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing), 19–21. doi: 10.5194/isprsarchives-
xl-7-w2-19-2013
Barak, S., Tobin, E. M., Green, R. M., Andronis, C., and Sugano, S. (2000). All in
good time: the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Trends Plant Sci. 5, 517–522. doi:
10.1016/S1360-1385(00)01785-4
Barnhart, T. B., and Crosby, B. T. (2013). Comparing two methods of surface
change detection on an evolving thermokarst using high-temporal-frequency
terrestrial laser scanning, Selawik River, Alaska. Remote Sens. 5, 2813–2837. doi:
10.3390/rs5062813
Bucksch, A., and Fleck, S. (2011). Automated detection of branch dimensions in
woody skeletons of fruit tree canopies. Photogramm. Eng. Remote Sens. 77,
229–240. doi: 10.14358/PERS.77.3.229
Calders, K., Schenkels, T., Bartholomeus, H., Armston, J., Verbesselt, J., and
Herold, M. (2015). Monitoring spring phenology with high temporal resolution
terrestrial LiDAR measurements. Agric. For. Meteorol. 203, 158–168. doi:
10.1016/j.agrformet.2015.01.009
Chapin, F. S. I. I. I., Matson, P. A., and Mooney, H. A. (2002). Principles of
Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Chapotin, S. M., Razanameharizaka, J. H., and Holbrook, N. M. (2006). Water
relations of baobab trees (Adansonia spp. L.) during the rainy season: does
stem water buffer daily water deficits? Plant Cell Environ. 29, 1021–1032. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01456.x
Correia, M. J., Coelho, D., and David, M. M. (2001). Response to seasonal
drought
in
three
cultivars
of
Ceratonia
siliqua:
leaf
growth
and
water
relations.
Tree
Physiol.
21,
645–653.
doi:
10.1093/treephys/21.
10.645
Correia, P. J., and Martins-Loucao, M. A. (1995). Seasonal variations of leaf water
potential and growth in fertigated carob-trees (Ceratonia siliqua L.). Plant Soil.
172, 199–206. doi: 10.1007/BF00011322
Darwin, C., and Darwin, F. (1880). The Power of Movement in Plants. London, UK:
John Murray. doi: 10.5962/bhl.title.102319
Dassot, M., Constant, T., and Fournier, M. (2011). The use of terrestrial LiDAR
technology in forest science: application fields, benefits and challenges. Ann.
For. Sci. 68, 959–974. doi: 10.1007/s13595-011-0102-2
Eysn, L., Pfeifer, N., Ressl, C., Hollaus, M., Grafl, A., and Morsdorf, F. (2013).
A practical approach for extracting tree models in forest environments based
on equirectangular projections of terrestrial laser scans. Remote Sens. 5,
5424–5448. doi: 10.3390/rs5115424
Fleck, S., van der Zande, D., Schmidt, M., and Coppin, P. (2004). “Reconstructions
of tree sructure from laser-scans and their use to predict physiological
properties and processes in canopies,” in International Archives of the
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol.
XXXVI-8/W2, eds M. Thies, B. Koch, H. Spiecker, and H. Weinacker
(Freiburg), 119–123. Available online at: http://www.isprs.org/proceedings/
XXXVI/8-W2/FLECK.pdf
García-Orellana, Y., Ortuño, M. F., Conejero, W., and Ruiz-Sánchez, M. C. (2013).
Diurnal variations in water relations of deficit irrigated lemon trees during
fruit growth period. Span. J. Agric. Res. 11, 137–145. doi: 10.5424/sjar/20131
11-3153
Ghuffar, S., Székely, B., Roncat, A., and Pfeifer, N. (2013). Landslide displacement
monitoring using 3D range flow on airborne and terrestrial LiDAR data.
Remote Sens. 5, 2720–2745. doi: 10.3390/rs5062720
Girardeau-Montaut, D. (2014). CloudCompare (Version 2.6.0) [GPL Software].
Available online at: http://www.cloudcompare.org/ (Accessed on Jan 16, 2015).
Griebel, A., Bennett, L. T., Culvenor, D. S., Newnham, G. J., and Arndt, S. K.
(2015). Reliability and limitations of a novel terrestrial laser scanner for daily
monitoring of forest canopy dynamics. Remote Sens. Environ. 166, 205–213.
doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2015.06.014
Grosse-Schwiep, M., Piechel, J., and Luhmann, T. (2013). Measurement of
rotor blade deformations of wind energy converters with laser scanners,”
in International Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences, eds M. Scaioni, R. C. Lindenbergh, S. Oude Elberink, D.
Schneider, and F. Pirotti (Antalya: International Society for Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing), 97–102. doi: 10.5194/isprsannals-ii-5-w2-97-2013
Hakala, T., Nevalainen, O., Kaasalainen, S., and Mäkipää, R. (2014). Technical
note: hyperspectral LiDAR time series of pine canopy physiological parameters.
Biogeosciences 11, 15019–15035. doi: 10.5194/bgd-11-15019-2014
Hakala, T., Suomalainen, J., Kaasalainen, S., and Chen, Y. (2012). Full waveform
hyperspectral LiDAR for terrestrial laser scanning. Opt. Express. 20, 7119–7127.
doi: 10.1364/OE.20.007119
Holmes, J. W., and Shim, S. Y. (1968). Diurnal changes in stem diameter of canary
island pine trees (Pinus canariensis, C. Smith) caused by soil water stress and
varying microclimate. J. Exp. Bot. 19, 219–232. doi: 10.1093/jxb/19.2.219-a
Hopkinson, C., Chasmer, L., Young-Pow, C., and Treitz, P. (2004). Assessing forest
metrics with a ground-based scanning lidar. Canad. J. For. Res. 34, 573–583.
doi: 10.1139/x03-225
Hosoi, F., and Omasa, K. (2006). Voxel-based 3-D modeling of individual trees for
estimating leaf area density using high-resolution portable scanning lidar. IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 44, 3610–3618. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2006.881743
Hosoi, F., and Omasa, K. (2009). Detecting seasonal change of broadleaved woody
canopy leaf area density profile using 3D portable LiDAR imaging. Funct. Plant
Biol. 36, 998–1005. doi: 10.1071/FP09113
Hu, H. (2013). Deformation Monitoring and Modeling Based on LiDAR Data for
Slope Stability Assessment, Doctoral thesis (Aachen: RWTH Aachen Technical
University).
Kaasalainen, S., Krooks, A., Liski, J., Raumonen, P., Kaartinen, H., Kaasalainen,
M., et al. (2014). Change detection of tree biomass with terrestrial laser
scanning and quantitative structure modelling. Remote Sens. 6, 3906–3922. doi:
10.3390/rs6053906
Klepper, B. (1968). Diurnal pattern of water potential in woody plants. Plant
Physiol. 43, 1931–1934. doi: 10.1104/pp.43.12.1931
Köstner, B., Granier, A., and Cermák, C. (1998). Sapflow measurements in
forest stands: methods and uncertainties. Ann. Sci. For. 55, 13–27. doi:
10.1051/forest:19980102
Kovanic,
L.,
and
Blištan,
P.
(2014).
Quarry
wall
stability
assessment
using
TLS
method.
Adv.
Mater.
Res.
1044–1045,
603–606.
doi:
10.4028/www.scientific.net/amr.1044-1045.603
Li, Y., Fan, X., Mitra, N. J., Chamovitz, D., Cohen-Or, D., and Chen, B. (2013).
Analyzing growing plants from 4D point cloud data. ACM Trans. Graphics Proc.
SIGGRAPH Asia 32, 10. doi: 10.1145/2508363.2508368
Liang,
X.
(2013).
Feasibility
of
Terrestrial
Laser
Scanning
for
Plotwise
Forest Inventories, Doctoral thesis. Publications of the Finnish Geodetic
Institute
(Kirkkonummi:
Aalto
University),
150.
Available
online
at:
https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/handle/123456789/11355
Lindenbergh, R. C., Soudarissanane, S. S., de Vries, S., Gorte, B. G. H., and
de Schipper, M. A. (2011). Aeolian beach sand transport monitored by
terrestrial laser scanning. Photogramm. Rec. 26, 384–399. doi: 10.1111/j.1477-
9730.2011.00659.x
McClung, C. R. (2006). Plant circadian rhythms. Plant Cell. 18, 792–803. doi:
10.1105/tpc.106.040980
Milan, D. J., Heritage, G. L., and Hetherington, D. (2007). Application of a 3D
laser scanner in the assessment of erosion and deposition volumes and channel
change in a proglacial river. Earth Surf. Proc. Landforms. 32, 1657–1674. doi:
10.1002/esp.1592
Mockler, T., Yang, H., Yu, X., Parikh, D., Cheng, Y., Dolan, and, S., et al. (2003).
Regulation of photoperiodic flowering by Arabidopsis photoreceptors. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 2140–2145. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0437826100
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
12
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
 Puttonen et al.
Quantifying Birch Branch Displacement by TLS
Moskal, L. M., and Zheng, G. (2012). Retrieving forest inventory variables with
terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) in urban heterogeneous forest. Remote Sens. 4,
1–20. doi: 10.3390/rs4010001
Nevalainen, O., Hakala, T., Suomalainen, J., Mäkipää, R., Peltoniemi, M., Krooks,
A., et al. (2014). Fast and nondestructive method for leaf level chlorophyll
estimation using hyperspectral LiDAR. Agric. For. Meteorol. 198–199, 250–258.
doi: 10.1016/j.agrformet.2014.08.018
Nijland, W., de Jong, R., de Jong, S. M., Wulder, M. A., Bater, C. W., and
Coops, N. C. (2014). Monitoring plant condition and phenology using infrared
sensitive consumer grade digital cameras. Agric. For. Meteorol. 184, 98–106. doi:
10.1016/j.agrformet.2013.09.007
Nozue, K., and Maloof, J. N. (2006). Diurnal regulation of plant growth. Plant Cell
Environ. 29, 396–408. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2005.01489.x
Perämäki, M., Nikinmaa, E., Sevanto, S., Ilvesniemi, H., Siivola, E., Hari, P., et al.
(2001). Tree stem variations and transpiration in Scots pine: an analysis using a
dynamic sap flow model. Tree Phys. 21, 889–897. doi: 10.1093/treephys/21.12-
13.889
Pesonen, E., Mielikäinen, K., and Mäkinen, H. (2004). A new girth band
for
measuring
stem
diameter
changes.
Forestry
77,
431–439.
doi:
10.1093/forestry/77.5.431
Portillo-Quintero, C., Sanchez-Azofeifa, A., and Culvenor, D. (2014). Using
VEGNET In Situ monitoring LiDAR (IML) to capture dynamics of plant area
index, structure and phenology in aspen parkland forests in Alberta, Canada.
Forests 5, 1053–1068. doi: 10.3390/f5051053
Puttonen, E., Hakala, T., Nevalainen, O., Kaasalainen, S., Krooks, A., Karjalainen,
M., et al. (2015). Artificial target detection with a hyperspectral LiDAR over
26-h measurement. Optic. Eng. 54:013105, 1–15. doi: 10.1117/1.oe.54.1.013105
Raumonen, P., Kaasalainen, M., Åkerblom, M., Kaasalainen, S., Kaartinen, H.,
Vastaranta, M., et al. (2013). Fast automatic precision tree models from
terrestrial laser scanner data. Remote Sens. 5, 491–520. doi: 10.3390/rs5020491
RIEGL (2014). RIEGL VZ-4000: 3D Very Long Range Terrestrial Laser Scanner
with Online Waveform Processing, 2014-09-19, Datasheet. Available online at:
http://www.riegl.com/uploads/tx_pxpriegldownloads/DataSheet_VZ-4000_
2015-03-24.pdf (Accessed on Feb 10, 2015).
Saarinen, N., Vastaranta, M., Vaaja, M., Lotsari, E., Jaakkola, A., Kukko, A.,
et al. (2013). Area-based approach for mapping and monitoring riverine
vegetation using mobile laser scanning. Remote Sens. 5, 5285–5303. doi:
10.3390/rs5105285
Salisbury,
F.
B.
(1981).
Twilight
effect:
initiating
dark
measurement
in
photoperiodism
of
Xanthium.
Plant
Physiol.
67,
1230–1238.
doi:
10.1104/pp.67.6.1230
Shugart, H. H., Asner, G. P., Fischer, R., Huth, A., Knapp, N., Toan, T. L., et al.
(2015). Computer and remote-sensing infrastructure to enhance large-scale
testing of individual-based forest models. Front. Ecol. Environ. 13, 503–511. doi:
10.1890/140327
Solomon, O. L., Berger, D. K., Myburg, A. A., and Myburg, Z. (2010). Diurnal
and circadian patterns of gene expression in the developing xylem of
Eucalyptus trees. South Afr. J. Bot. 76, 425–439. doi: 10.1016/j.sajb.2010.
02.087
Sysoeva, M. I., Markovskaya, E. F., and Shibaeva, T. G. (2010). Plants
under continuous light: a review. Plant Stress 4, 5–17. Available online
at: http://www.globalsciencebooks.info/Online/GSBOnline/images/2010/PS_4
%281%29/PS_4%281%295-17o.pdf
Travelletti, J., Oppikofer, T., Delacourt, C., Malet, J.-P., and Jaboyedoff, M. (2008).
“Monitoring landslide displacements during a controlled rain experiment using
a long-range Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS),” in International Archives of the
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, eds J. Chen,
J. Jiang, and H.-G. Maas (Beijing: International Society for Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing), 485–490.
Vaaja, M., Hyyppä, J., Kukko, A., Kaartinen, H., Hyyppä, H., and Alho,
P. (2011). Mapping topography changes and elevation accuracies using
a mobile laser scanner. Remote Sens. 3, 587–600. doi: 10.3390/rs30
30587
Way, J., Paris, J., Dobson, M. C., McDonals, K., Ulaby, F. T., Weber, J. A., et al.
(1991). Diurnal change in trees as observed by optical and microwave sensors:
the EOS synergism study. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 29, 807–821. doi:
10.1109/TGRS.1991.1019466
Wayne, P. M., and Bazzaz, F. A. (1993). Birch seedling responses to daily time
courses of light in experimental forest gaps and shadehouses. Ecology 74,
1500–1515. doi: 10.2307/1940078
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Puttonen, Briese, Mandlburger, Wieser, Pfennigbauer, Zlinszky
and Pfeifer. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
13
February 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 222
