 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 10
HEALTH AND MEDICINE
Antibiotic resistance in European wastewater treatment 
plants mirrors the pattern of clinical antibiotic 
resistance prevalence
Katariina M. M. Pärnänen1*, Carlos Narciso-da-Rocha2*, David Kneis3*, Thomas U. Berendonk3, 
Damiano Cacace3, Thi Thuy Do4, Christian Elpers5, Despo Fatta-Kassinos6, Isabel Henriques7, 
Thomas Jaeger8, Antti Karkman1, Jose Luis Martinez9, Stella G. Michael6, Irene Michael-Kordatou6, 
Kristin O’Sullivan10, Sara Rodriguez-Mozaz11, Thomas Schwartz8, Hongjie Sheng12,13, 
Henning Sørum10, Robert D. Stedtfeld13, James M. Tiedje14, Saulo Varela Della Giustina11, 
Fiona Walsh4, Ivone Vaz-Moreira2, Marko Virta1†, Célia M. Manaia2†
Integrated antibiotic resistance (AR) surveillance is one of the objectives of the World Health Organization global 
action plan on antimicrobial resistance. Urban wastewater treatment plants (UWTPs) are among the most import-
ant receptors and sources of environmental AR. On the basis of the consistent observation of an increasing north-
to-south clinical AR prevalence in Europe, this study compared the influent and final effluent of 12 UWTPs located 
in seven countries (Portugal, Spain, Ireland, Cyprus, Germany, Finland, and Norway). Using highly parallel quanti-
tative polymerase chain reaction, we analyzed 229 resistance genes and 25 mobile genetic elements. This first 
trans-Europe surveillance showed that UWTP AR profiles mirror the AR gradient observed in clinics. Antibiotic use, 
environmental temperature, and UWTP size were important factors related with resistance persistence and 
spread in the environment. These results highlight the need to implement regular surveillance and control mea-
sures, which may need to be appropriate for the geographic regions.
INTRODUCTION
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB) can survive the inhibitory action 
of one or more antibiotics. These ARB reduce the success of infectious 
disease treatment, which results in important societal and economic 
costs to human well-being and health (1). ARB and their resistance 
genes are emerging and spreading globally among people, food, ani-
mals, plants, and the environment (soil, water, and air) (2, 3). The 
global action plan on antimicrobial resistance proposed by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) aims at combating antibiotic resistance 
at a global scale and across every domain of interface with humans, 
where the environment is implicitly included (1, 4). Surveillance and 
the assessment of control measures and the identification of geo-
graphical or temporal trends of antibiotic resistance distribution have 
been consistently shown to be crucial to understanding the impact of 
antibiotic resistance on human health (1, 2). However, although clin-
ical surveillance efforts are now capable of providing insightful infor-
mation on antibiotic resistance distribution (1, 5), there is a dearth of 
data concerning antibiotic resistance in the environment.
Urban wastewater treatment plants (UWTPs) have been recog-
nized as one of the most important routes for propagation of antibiotic 
resistance from humans to the environment (e.g., fresh water, soil) (2). 
The sewage entering the UWTPs combines the excreta and residues 
produced in the served area. Therefore, it is expected that the UWTP 
influents mirror, at least in part, traits of the microbiome of the human 
population served (2, 6, 7), including the presence of ARB, resistance 
genes, and associated mobile genetic elements.
This study aimed at launching the first European antibiotic re-
sistance surveillance in UWTPs, in accordance with objective 2 of the 
WHO global action plan on antimicrobial resistance: “Strengthen the 
knowledge and evidence base through surveillance and research” (4). 
The challenges of implementing reliable environmental antibiotic 
resistance surveillance efforts have been recognized, as the proce-
dures recommended for humans, animals, or food products are not 
applicable to environmental samples (2). Nevertheless, the clinical 
antibiotic resistance surveillance data stand as an important refer-
ence to assess the status of antibiotic resistance in different regions 
and environmental compartments. Therefore, the current study was 
designed on the basis of the major trends identified by the European 
Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net) cur-
rently promoted by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and 
1Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 9, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland. 2Universidade Católica Portuguesa, CBQF - Centro de Biotecnologia e 
Química Fina–Laboratório Associado, Escola Superior de Biotecnologia, Rua Arquiteto Lobão Vital, 172, 4200-374 Porto, Portugal. 3Technische Universität Dresden, Insti-
tute of Hydrobiology, Dresden, Germany. 4Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland. 5Aquantec GmbH, Pfinztalstraße 90, D-76227 
Karlsruhe, Germany. 6Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Nireas–International Water Research Centre, University of Cyprus, P.O. Box 20537, CY-1678 
Nicosia, Cyprus. 7Department of Biology and CESAM, University of Aveiro, Campus Universitário Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal. 8Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
(KIT)–Campus North, Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG), P.O. Box 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany. 9Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Calle Darwin 3, 20049 
Madrid, Spain. 10Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Food Safety and Infection Biology, Section of Microbiology, Immu-
nology and Parasitology, Post Box 8146 Dep, 0033 Oslo, Norway. 11Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA), Emili Grahit 101, 17003 Girona, Spain. 12Key Laboratory of 
Soil Environment and Pollution Remediation, Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing 210008, China. 13Department of Civil and Environmental Engi-
neering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. 14Center for Microbial Ecology, Department of Plant, Soil and Microbial Sciences, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: cmanaia@porto.ucp.pt (C.M.M.); marko.virta@helsinki.fi (M.V.)
Copyright © 2019 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License 4.0 (CC BY).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 10
Control (ECDC). This surveillance integrates data from 30 European 
countries concerning invasive blood and cerebrospinal fluid isolates 
of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
Acinetobacter spp., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, 
and enterococci (5). The 2017 EARS-Net surveillance report (5) high-
lights that, as in previous years, for the period of 2013–2016, “a north-
to-south and a west-to-east gradient is evident in Europe,” with a 
general increase of antibiotic resistance prevalence over this gradient, 
particularly for the Gram-negative bacteria surveyed. Considering 
this information, our study included seven countries distributed over 
the EARS-Net conceptual gradient represented by Portugal, Spain, 
Cyprus, Ireland, Germany, Norway, and Finland. The relative abun-
dance of different genes was compared in raw influent and final efflu-
ent of 12 UWTPs (because of restrictions in sampling authorization, 
influent samples were not available from Ireland; table S1). Our goal 
was to obtain an initial overview of the antibiotic resistance status; 
regular surveillance protocols implemented locally may support ro-
bust comparative analyses, where bias associated to sporadic events 
or regional features can be identified.
Metagenomics methods, based on shotgun high-throughput se-
quencing, have been used to analyze the presence of antibiotic resistance 
genes (ARGs) in ecosystems such as activated sludge, wastewater, and 
surface water. Whereas these studies are useful to obtain a general view 
of the most abundant genes, they are not effective for detecting low- 
abundance genes. As noted before (6), abundance does not necessarily 
correlate with risk, and in the case of antibiotic resistance, surveillance 
and risk estimation require the implementation of targeted metagenomic 
techniques (8), able to quantify those genes that are of relevance for 
human health, even when they are present in low amounts that may be 
nondetectable by using current metagenomics approaches. For these 
reasons, and also because we sought a quantitative analysis, we used a 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) array, whose appropri-
ateness as a tool for environmental surveillance has been demonstrated 
in previous research (9, 10). The array targeted sequences involved in 
gene transfer and recombination (n = 25; integrase, transposase, inser-
tion sequence, and plasmid replicon type) and antibiotic resistance, 
prevalent in bacterial pathogens (n = 229), including multidrug 
resistance genes (n = 39) (table S2). Twenty- 
four–hour composite 
samples were collected on each of three consecutive days (Tuesdays, 
Wednesdays, and Thursdays, in early autumn of 2015, early spring, and 
early autumn of 2016) at all sampling sites to mitigate biases and improve 
comparability. In addition, DNA was extracted using a common pro-
tocol (table S1), and the highly parallel qPCR analyses were all per-
formed using the same equipment and operational conditions. Of the 
384 qPCR array primer pairs, 289, targeting 259 genetic determinants, 
of which 229 were of resistance genes, 25 of mobile genetic elements, 
and 5 housekeeping genes, produced amplification in one or more of the 
analyzed samples, while 95 did not amplify (table S2 and fig. S1). The 
number of primers for each class of genetic determinants that pro-
duced amplification did not differ (P > 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) 
among countries (data not shown). The abundance of antibiotic resist-
ance and mobile genetic elements are, unless otherwise stated, all desig-
nated as ARGs. They were normalized to the 16S ribosomal RNA 
(rRNA) gene abundance within the same sample, as described in 
Materials and Methods. Because this is a measure of the abundance of ARGs 
per total bacteria, we refer to this ratio as the ARG prevalence. Multidi-
mensional scaling was used to identify the patterns in the distribution 
of ARGs in the UWTPs’ wastewater (Fig. 1). This analysis indicated 
that the relative abundance of influent ARGs supported the forma-
tion of two distinct groups: one group comprising Portugal, Spain, 
and Cyprus, and the other group Germany, Norway, and Finland. 
Although one of the Germany influent samples clustered together with 
Fig. 1. PCoA showing the distribution of resistance and mobile genetic elements using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index. (A) Influent water from European 
UWTPs. The HAC and LAC countries clustered separately (R2 = 0.37, P = 0.015). The exception was for three influent samples from German UWTPs that clustered with the 
HAC samples (DE2 in the figure). (B) Effluent water from European UWTPs. The HAC and LAC countries did not cluster together (R2 = 0.11, P = 0.181). The significance of the 
cluster separation between the HAC and LAC countries was calculated using adonis with 9999 permutations. The points represent individual samples in the ordination, 
named according to the UWTP, and latitude is indicated by the color gradient. The point size is according to the mean total antibiotic consumption in humans from 2005 
to 2015 from ECDC reports consisting of the human consumption of antibacterials for systemic use (ATC group J01) in the community (primary care sector) and the hos-
pital sector expressed as defined daily dose (DDD) per 1000 inhabitants and per day (available at https://ecdc.europa.eu/en/antimicrobial-consumption/database/
country- 
overview) (see also table S3). Countries: HAC—PT, Portugal; ES, Spain; CYP, Cyprus; IL, Ireland; LAC—DE, Germany; FI, Finland; NO, Norway.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 10
the Portugal, Spain, and Cyprus influent samples, the observed 
ARG distribution supported the conceptual EARS-Net anti 
biotic 
resistance gradient. The relative abundance of ARGs in influents from 
southern countries (Portugal, Spain, and Cyprus) and northern 
countries (Germany, Norway, and Finland) clustered separately (R2 = 
0.37, P = 0.015) (Fig. 1A). Because the UWTP influent is strongly 
influenced by human excreta, its resistome can be considered a picture 
of the general community resistome, hereafter designated “urban 
resistome.” This resistome can be influenced by, among a myriad of 
other factors, the general antibiotic resistance prevalence and anti-
biotic consumption in the community (2, 5). The distribution of 
urban resistomes based on ARG relative abundance observed in 
Fig. 1A is consistent with the human antibiotic consumption in those 
countries in the period 2005–2015 (Fig. 1 and table S3). These two 
groups of high (HAC) and low (LAC) antibiotic consumption countries 
are further compared. Because of the levels of antibiotic use in Ireland 
(Fig. 1), it was included in the HAC group.
INSIGHTS INTO THE URBAN RESISTOME
Most of the ARGs detected in the influents corresponded to genes 
with widespread environmental distribution encoding resistance 
against first-generation antibiotics. All influent samples contained 
genes conferring resistance to aminoglycosides (aadA and strB), 
-lactams (blaGES, blaOXA, and blaVEB), macrolide–lincosamide–
streptogramin B (MLSB) (ereA, ermF, and matA/mel), sulfonamides 
(sul1), tetracyclines (tetM and tetQ), and multidrug resistance 
(qacEdelta1 and qacH). Moreover, the signatures of various genetic 
elements involved in gene transfer and recombination (intI1, tnpA, 
Tp614, ISAba3, ISPps, and ISSm2) were present in all influent sam-
ples (table S2). Regarding ARGs of high concern in clinical settings 
(blaNDM-1, blaKPC, blaVIM, blaIMP, mcr-1, mecA, or vanA), blaIMP and 
vanA were sporadically detected in the influent of different coun-
tries. The blaVIM gene was detected in Portugal, Spain, Cyprus, and 
Germany influents, and blaKPC in Portugal and Spain influents and 
sporadically in effluent samples. The ARG distribution that separated 
the HAC from the LAC countries was explained by a significantly (P < 
0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) higher relative abundance of most re-
sistance classes in HAC countries (Fig. 2A). Specifically, the relative 
abundance of gene families conferring resistance to aminoglycosides, 
sulfonamides, -lactams, quinolones, amphenicols, and multidrug 
resistance was higher in the HAC countries (Portugal, Spain, Cyprus, 
and Ireland) than in the LAC countries (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney 
U test). The opposite was observed for tetracycline and MLSB resistance 
Fig. 2. Relative gene abundance observed in influent samples from HAC and LAC countries. Relative abundance of (A) resistance genes and (B) mobile genetic ele-
ments. The data refer to the sum of relative abundance of amplification (ratio ARG or MGE copy number: 16S rRNA gene copy) for a given pair of primers, organized in 
classes of “resistance” or “transfer and recombination.” In the legend, for each gene class, the country group, HAC or LAC, with significantly higher relative abundance (P < 
0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) is indicated. Samples are organized according to the sampling campaign (C2, spring 2016; C3, autumn 2016), divided by HAC and LAC. Resistance 
categories: AMG (aminoglycosides), MDR (multidrug resistance), SUL (sulfonamides), BL (-lactams), MLSB, TET (tetracycline), QUI (quinolones), AMP (amphenicols), VAN 
(vancomycin), and others. Note: Ireland data are missing because of restrictions on influent wastewater sample collection.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 10
genes (Fig. 2A). The difference in the relative abundance of deter-
minants related to gene transfer and recombination was also notice-
able. Specifically, the relative abundance of insertion sequences was 
higher in the LAC than in the HAC countries (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney 
U test) (Fig. 2B). The relative abundance of genes encoding resist-
ance to amphenicols, -lactams, sulfonamides, and integrase en-
zymes presented significantly higher daily variations over the 3 days 
of the same sampling campaign in the HAC than in the LAC countries 
(P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test). This effect might have been due to 
the comparatively smaller size of the UWTPs of the HAC group in com-
parison with those of the LAC group (≤200 versus ≥300 population- 
equivalent and <45 versus >100 m3/day) (table S4). In smaller UWTPs, 
peaks of exogenous ARGs may have a more pronounced effect. Given 
the contrasts observed between both groups of countries, we were 
interested in investigating whether wastewater treatment attenuates 
those contrasts, resulting in similar ARG abundances in all the UWTP 
effluents.
INSIGHTS INTO THE FINAL EFFLUENT RESISTOME
The comparative analyses of the final effluents aimed at assessing 
whether, irrespective of the input, the wastewater treatment could re-
duce the levels of ARGs to a similar baseline level across the different 
UWTPs examined. Similar to the influent resistomes, contrasts were 
observed between the HAC and LAC effluent samples. For most resist-
ance classes (aminoglycoside, sulfonamides, -lactams, MLSB, tetra-
cycline, quinolones, amphenicols, and multidrug resistance), the HAC 
final effluents presented significantly higher relative abundance values 
than the LAC final effluents (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) (Fig. 3A). 
This was also observed for genes encoding integrases and trans-
posases (Fig. 3B). The relative abundance of tetracycline and MLSB 
resistance genes and insertion sequences that was higher in the LAC 
than in the HAC influents (Fig. 2) became lower in the final effluents. 
The relative abundance of tetracycline and MLSB resistance genes 
changed after treatment and was significantly higher in the HAC than 
in the LAC countries (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) (Fig. 3). These 
shifts were in agreement with the differences observed in the preva-
lence decrease of different ARG classes in the LAC and HAC countries 
(Fig. 4A). The classes with sharper decreases of prevalence values in 
the LAC compared to the HAC countries were the ARGs encoding re-
sistance against tetracyclines and MLSB and the insertion sequences 
and transposase encoding genes (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test). No-
ticeably, most of these classes of genes had a higher prevalence in the 
influent in the LAC than in the HAC samples (Figs. 2 and 4). Also, in the 
Fig. 3. Relative gene abundance observed in effluent samples from HAC and LAC countries. Relative abundance of (A) resistance genes and (B) mobile genetic ele-
ments. The data refer to the sum of relative abundance of amplification (ratio ARG or MGE copy number: 16S rRNA gene copy) for a given pair of primers organized in 
classes of resistance or transfer and recombination. In the legend, for each gene class, the country group, HAC or LAC, with significantly higher relative abundance (P < 0.01, 
Mann-Whitney U test) is indicated. Samples are organized according to the sampling campaign (C1, autumn 2015; C2, spring 2016; C3, autumn 2016), divided by HAC and 
LAC. Resistance categories: AMG (amino 
glycosides), MDR (multidrug resistance), SUL (sulfonamides), BL (-lactams), MLSB, TET (tetracycline), QUI (quinolones), AMP (am-
phenicols), VAN (vancomycin), and others.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 10
Fig. 4. Variation in average ARG prevalence between influent and effluent [log10(influent − effluent)] in HAC and LAC countries. (A) Comparison of ARG log reduc-
tion values in UWTPs of the HAC and LAC countries, where zero indicates that treatment did not affect the cumulative ARG relative abundance, positive values indicate a 
reduction, and negative values indicate an increase. The classes for which HAC or LAC presented higher relative abundance in the influent (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) 
are indicated in the table at the bottom. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences between HAC and LAC log reduction values, and these cases are detailed in 
(B). (B) Comparison of average ARG relative abundance in influent and final effluent, for the classes with significantly different log reduction values in the HAC and LAC 
samples: (B1) MLSB, (B2) tetracyclines, (B3) insertion sequences, and (B4) transposase. The arrows indicate significant (P < 0.01; Welch’s t test) increases (↑) or decreases (↓) 
after treatment (C1, autumn of 2015; C2, spring of 2016; C3, autumn of 2016). WW, wastewater. 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 10
final effluent data, the richness of the MLSB genes was significantly 
different (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) in Portugal compared 
with Ireland and the LAC countries (data not shown). Although the 
relative abundance of most ARGs decreased after treatment in 
both the HAC and LAC countries, effluents from the HAC group had 
a significantly higher relative abundance of most of the ARG classes, 
with the exception of vancomycin resistance, integrase, and trans-
posase encoding genes (Fig. 4). Noticeably, the exclusion of Cy-
prus samples, apparent outsiders in the principal coordinates 
analysis (PCoA) (Fig. 1), from the analyses did not change this 
scenario, except for vancomycin resistance (data not shown). The 
prevalence values varied differently for distinct ARG classes. While 
for the HAC the prevalence of aminoglycosides, amphenicols, and 
quinolones resistance classes had higher reduction than the other 
classes, for the LAC the prevalence of amphenicols, MLSB, tetracy-
clines, and the mobile genetic elements were the most reduced (data 
not shown). In all countries, vancomycin resistance genes were ob-
served to be slightly enriched after treatment, and they sometimes 
shifted from levels below the detection limit to quantifiable amounts. 
Also, sulfonamide resistance genes were observed to be slightly en-
riched in the LAC countries (Fig. 4A).
Core wastewater ARGs, meaning those present in all wastewater 
samples analyzed, from both influent and effluent, comprised qacEdelta1 
and sul1 resistance genes and the ISSm2 insertion sequence (table 
S2). In addition, the ARGs related with resistance to aminoglyco-
sides (aadA and strB), -lactams (blaOXA), MLSB (ermF), sulfon-
amides (sul2), tetracycline (tetW), multidrug resistance (qacH), and 
mobile genetic elements, such as transposase (tnpA), integrase 
(intI1), and insertion sequences (ISAba3 and ISPps), persisted after 
treatment in >90% of the analyzed samples (table S2). Resistance 
genes considered of highest concern in clinical settings analyzed in 
this study were not detected in the final effluents examined. Spo-
radic exceptions were, e.g., mecA detected in final effluent samples 
from Cyprus or blaIMP and vanA detected in both influent and final 
effluent samples in all countries (except blaIMP in Cyprus).
INFERENCE ABOUT POSSIBLE ARGS INDICATORS  
IN WASTEWATER
Surveillance can be performed with two aims, both requiring different 
approaches and targeting distinct ARGs. One refers to the evalua-
tion of the overall ARGs burden, a measure of the degree of con-
taminant ARGs occurring in a given environment. This surveillance 
relies on the measurement of the total resistome and its quantitative 
variations and pattern fluctuations. The other, which specifically fo-
cuses on biological hazards, relies on the targeted analyses of ARGs 
of special clinical concern or emerging in the environment. These 
are normally at lower abundance than most environmental ARGs, 
and their detection may require the use of approaches that increase 
sensitivity to ensure detection at very low levels (11). Despite the im-
portance of wastewater surveillance to assess geographic trends or, at 
long-term, to measure the impacts of control measures, the monitor-
ing of a high number of ARGs may be limiting due to the cost and 
training required for analysis on a routine basis. The use of the tradi-
tional fecal bacteria enumeration to assess the microbiological water 
quality may be of limited value for resistance monitoring. We could 
not find significant correlations between the antibiotic-resistant counts 
of culturable bacteria (table S4), performed with these same samples, 
and the ARG quantification. High-throughput methods have the po-
tential to generate information from which indicators can be inferred. 
The data gathered in this study, which cover a large number of ARGs 
and geographic regions, were scanned for suitable predictors of the 
total ARG abundance in UWTP effluents (Table 1). The suggested 
indicator primers either amplified genes encoding resistance to first- 
generation antibiotics or associated to mobile genetic elements, with 
high prevalence in wastewater (Table 1). Among these were aadA, 
qacEdelta1, ermF, and intI1. Noticeably, some of these elements are 
associated with class 1 integrons, recognized as markers of anthro-
pogenic impact (12). On the basis of these data, a mini-array could 
be designed, aimed at implementing operational screening that cov-
ers major target drug classes (amphenicols, -lactam, MLSB, sulfon-
amide, and tetracycline) or functional groups (insertion sequence and 
Table 1. Candidate indicator assays for major gene classes in UWTP effluents. Assays that yielded the highest amplification in the largest number of 
samples are reported on the left. Assays with the most representative outcome in terms of correlation with the per-class mean are reported on the right  
(rho: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient). Primer pairs corresponding to the assay are listed in table S2. 
Gene class
(no. of assays)
Genes dominating the class
Most representative genes
Gene
Assay ID
% of samples
Gene
Assay ID
Rho
Aminoglycoside (24)
aadA
AY167
62.9
0.96
Amphenicol (14)
cmxA
AY129
27.1
cmlA
AY127
0.74
-Lactam (61)
blaOXA
AY44
34.5
0.76
MDR (40)
qacEdelta1
AY159
92.1
0.97
MLSB (30)
ermF
AY23
68.6
0.81
Quinolone (3)
qnrSrtF11
AY6
100.0
1.00
Sulfonamide (9)
sul1
AY363
73.0
0.82
Tetracycline (34)
tetQ
AY185
59.6
tetX
AY196
0.73
Insertion  
sequence (9)
ISPps
AY369
86.5
0.98
Integrase (7)
intI1
AY336
80.9
0.96
Transposase (10)
tnpA
AY202
79.3
0.86
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 10
transposase). Notably, the total abundance of resistance genes could 
be predicted using a subset of primers. For example, the data from 
assay AY159 (qacEdelta1) alone explain almost 90% of the variance in 
total ARG abundance. Using a linear model with three inputs, e.g., 
AY167 (aadA), AY23 (ermF), and AY337 (intI1), the predictive power 
could be moderately increased (adjusted R2 = 0.95). This information 
provides a promising direction for the future wastewater surveil-
lance with a substantial workload and cost reduction as well as ease of 
data analyses when compared with nontargeted and high-throughput 
approaches.
DISCUSSION
A major expectation of this first integrated surveillance of European 
wastewaters was to assess whether the relative abundance of urban 
wastewater resistome would follow the same trend observed in the 
prevalence of antibiotic resistance in clinical isolates, also coincident 
with antibiotic use profiles herein designated by HAC and LAC. The 
distribution of ARGs in the urban resistome showed the separation of 
the north and south countries studied, which is consistent with what 
has been shown for clinical isolates (5). The results suggest that studied 
UWTPs, based on activated sludge secondary treatment processes, 
with different configurations and, in a few cases, with a tertiary treat-
ment or simply a disinfection stage, were able to reduce the relative 
abundance of all examined ARG classes, except genes encoding re-
sistance to vancomycin (Fig. 4). However, the ARG burden after 
wastewater treatment was significantly higher in the south (HAC) 
than in the north (LAC) countries (Fig. 3). As a consequence, it is hy-
pothesized that the final effluents of the HAC countries may have a 
higher impact on the receiving environment than those of the LAC 
countries. A result that deserves future research is the basis why the 
ARG prevalence decrease is higher in some cases in the LAC coun-
tries. This observation may be related to the dynamics of the ARG 
bacterial hosts during treatment (13, 14), influenced by operational 
conditions (e.g., temperature) and microbiota composition. In addi-
tion, or alternatively, it may be a consequence of the differences in the 
wastewater treatment reactors, which are larger in the LAC countries 
than in the HAC countries (table S4). Although the diversity of ARGs 
in activated sludge samples, assessed based on metagenomics, seems 
to be fairly conserved in different wastewater treatment plants (15, 16), 
investigation of the enriched microbiota and operational conditions 
on ARG reduction seems warranted. The potential influence of the 
presence of selective pressures, particularly antibiotic residues, during 
treatment has been suggested in different studies as capable of influ-
encing the fate of antibiotic resistance (17–20). The analyses of more 
than 50 antibiotic residues in the same effluent samples used in this 
study did not show any correlation with relative abundance of ARGs 
[(Rodriguez-Mozaz et al., in preparation). Similarly, no statistically 
significant correlations could be established between the relative 
abundance of ARGs in the final effluents and country-level informa-
tion on antibiotic consumption in the primary care sector [data from 
ESAC-Net; (21)]. The influence of the treatment process or of specific 
operational conditions on ARG relative abundance was beyond the 
scope of this surveillance. However, the variations in ARG preva-
lence observed in the HAC and LAC countries revealed by this study 
are highly relevant and novel findings that deserve future research 
investigation.
The evolution and spread of antibiotic resistance is a complex pro-
cess, resulting from the interplay of different and often confounding 
variables. The HAC and LAC countries differed in the rate of antibiotic 
use in humans, but also in other, probably non-negligible factors, 
such as temperature, precipitation, or antibiotic use in pets and in 
livestock. Although the antibiotics used in livestock production are 
not discharged into the municipal sewage system, these residues may 
contribute to an overall increase of antibiotic or antibiotic resist 
ance 
load in that region. The HAC countries, excluding Ireland, also had 
higher animal antibiotic use and higher average minimal tempera-
tures (biomass, 187.2 to 425.8 mg/kg; >11°C) than the LAC countries 
(biomass, 3.7 to 179.7 mg/kg; <5°C) (fig. S2). Curiously, Ireland, with 
lower temperature and animal antibiotic use, had final effluents with 
lower relative ARG abundance (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test) than 
the other HAC countries, except Spain. Germany, on the contrary, had 
higher antibiotic animal use than the other LAC countries; however, its 
relative abundance of ARGs was not significantly different from other 
LAC countries (P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test).
Although the north-to-south clinical antibiotic resistance gradi-
ent reported by the EARS-Net was also present in the European 
wastewaters analyzed in this study, we were interested in assessing 
the possible correlation between the clinical settings and the final 
effluents of the UWTPs studied. The relative abundance of several 
ARGs was significantly correlated with the prevalence of pheno 
typic re-
sistance in clinical isolates of E. coli, K. pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, or 
S. aureus (Fig. 5). This result is interesting and supported by the 
recognized ubiquity of these bacterial groups. Ubiquity and environ-
mental fitness may be key concepts when discussing antibiotic resist 
ance 
in the environment. Among the bacterial groups surveyed by EARS-
Net, those that show an evident north-to-south gradient of resist 
ance 
prevalence are ubiquitous bacteria that can thrive in the human body 
as well as in wastewater. These bacteria have optimal growth tem-
peratures above 30°C (E. coli, 37°C; K. pneumoniae, 30° to 35°C; 
Fig. 5. Association between the relative abundance of ARGs in UWTP effluents 
(aggregated by drug classes) and country-level data on phenotypic resist-
ance of clinical isolates [data from EARS-Net,]. (31) Numbers represent Spearman’s 
rank correlations; color codes indicate statistical significance. No statistically signifi-
cant correlations were observed for Acinetobacter spp., Enterococcus faecium, or 
S. pneumoniae.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 10
P. aeruginosa, 37°C; and Acinetobacter spp., 33° to 35°C) (22). Hence, 
it is not surprising that these bacteria survive better in the environ-
ment in regions with warmer temperatures. In a recent study, 
MacFadden et al. (23) demonstrated that an increase of 10°C across 
regions coincided with higher antibiotic resistance percentage of 4.2% 
for E. coli, 2.2% for K. pneumoniae, and 2.7% for S. aureus. Together 
with antibiotic use, and eventually with higher impact than that of 
antibiotic use, temperature may be a major driver of antibiotic resist-
ance persistence and proliferation in the environment. Curiously, the 
three UWTP Germany samples that clustered with HAC influent 
samples (DE2 in Fig. 1) were from the treatment plant located in a 
region with the highest average temperature, which also presented 
higher culturable bacterial counts than the LAC countries (table S4).
This is the first European integrated antibiotic resistance surveil-
lance in wastewaters. Although this survey represents a limited num-
ber of UWTPs at the European scale, the fact that they were selected 
on the basis of the single criterion of location along the north-to-
south gradient is supportive of our conclusions. The results not 
only reinforce the strong relationship between clinical and environ-
mental antibiotic resistance but also signal the importance of taking 
societal and climate factors (e.g., temperature or precipitation) in 
design of possible strategies to control antibiotic resistance. The im-
portance of surveillance to improve antibiotic resistance control is 
also evident in this study. However, we have concluded that the use of 
traditional fecal indicators may have a limited capacity to provide reli-
able comparisons of anti 
biotic resistance status in wastewaters. Al-
though culture-dependent methods continue to have their place in 
water quality monitoring, they may lack the necessary sensitivity for 
comparative purposes. Therefore, another interesting outcome of this 
comprehensive study is the possibility of designing simplified and 
low-cost surveillance protocols. These protocols, supported by 
high-throughput data, can be feasibly used on a routine basis for 
wastewater antibiotic resistance monitoring worldwide.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sampling and sample processing
The study included seven European countries, where UWTP sam-
ples were collected over three sampling campaigns in early autumn 
2015 and 2016 and early spring 2016. Volumes between 1 and 2 liters 
were collected, in sterile flasks, and stored at 4ºC until analysis for a 
maximum of 12 hours. In each sampling campaign, were collected 
three 24-hour composite samples, one per day, over three consecu-
tive days (Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday) (table S1). Geo-
graphic, demographic, and technical characterization provided by 
the UWTPs is available in table S4. All participants followed a com-
mon protocol for sampling, sample processing, and DNA extraction.
DNA extraction and processing
All wastewater samples (n = 168) were filtered in triplicate through 
sterile polycarbonate membranes (0.22-m porosity; Whatman, UK) 
and stored at −80ºC until DNA extraction. Volumes of 25 to 50 ml 
of influent wastewater samples or of 150 to 400 ml of final effluent 
wastewater samples were filtered. Total DNA was extracted in trip-
licate, at once for the same sampling campaign, using the PowerWater 
DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories Inc., CA, USA) accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s instructions, and quantified using the 
Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). For each 
sampling date, a DNA pool from the triplicates was prepared, result-
ing in one DNA extract per day and UWTP and three extracts per 
sampling campaign. DNA extract pools were shipped to the Michigan 
State University and run using the qPCR array, as previously de-
scribed (24). Each partner kept an aliquot of the DNA pools for ad-
ditional analyses as needed.
qPCR array
The qPCR array contained 384 primer sets as previously described 
(10), including some additional primer sets: 16S rRNA gene (AY2), 
blaCTX-M (AY326 and AY360), blaOXA (AY361), blaSHV (AY272), blaTEM 
(AY3), blaVIM (AY260), mecA (AY284), qnrSrtF11 (AY6), sul1 (AY110), 
tetM (AY357), vanA (AY4; AY368), mcr-1 (AY80), and intI1 (AY45) 
(table S2). The concentration and quality of the DNA samples were 
verified using the Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
USA). Only the samples fulfilling the quality criteria were processed. The 
qPCR array uses a microfluidic SmartChip Multisample Nanodispenser 
(WaferGen at the time of the study, now Takara) to load primer sets 
and samples from 384-well plates into a SmartChip (Takara) with 5 
184-reaction wells. The same 384-well plate of primers was used for all 
experiments, and three technical replicates were run for each sample. 
Samples were diluted to have the same mass of DNA per reaction. 
Following amplification on the SmartChip Real-Time PCR cycler, 
Ct values were calculated using default parameters provided with the 
SmartChip analysis software.
Cultivable bacteria
Wastewater samples were characterized for the fecal coliform and 
enterococci counts, two groups of bacteria frequently used as microbio-
logical indicators of water quality. The bacterial enumeration was per-
formed on membrane fecal coliform agar (mFC) or on m-Enterococcus 
agar and on these culture media supplemented with one of the follow-
ing antibiotics: amoxicillin (32 mg/liter), tetracycline (TET; 16 mg/liter), 
or ciprofloxacin (1 mg/liter). A volume of 1 ml of wastewater or of 
the adequate serial dilution was filtered through cellulose nitrate 
membranes (0.22-m porosity; Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, 
Germany), placed onto the adequate culture medium and incubated 
at 30ºC for 24 hours for fecal coliforms or 48 hours for enterococci. 
Counts were done in triplicate, and the results were used as part of 
wastewater characterization provided in table S4.
Data analysis
The quality criteria used to select the qPCR array data to be used in 
the analyses were (i) samples with at least two replicates, (ii) sam-
ples with more than 5 ng of DNA, and (iii) quantifications with a 
Ct ≤ 27. A Ct value of 27 corresponded to a limit of quantification lower 
than 100 gene copies (25). The qPCR array semiquantitative analyses 
did not support estimations based on gene abundance per volume of 
water because calibration curves were not obtained for each gene. 
However, for a subset of 10 genes, calibration curves that supported 
the assessment of the relationship between relative (16S rRNA based) 
and absolute quantification (fig. S3) were obtained. Some samples 
(Portugal) used for the array were also tested by real-time qPCR for 
the quantification of selected genes (fig. S4). Those analyses allowed 
us to conclude that the overall trends are similar between the quanti-
tative qPCR and the semiquantitative qPCR array.
The 384 primer sets target 259 different genetic determinants. These 
comprised 229 ARGs organized in classes according to the class of 
antibiotics to which they confer resistance (AMG, aminoglycosides; 
SUL, sulfonamides; BL, -lactams; MLSB; TET, tetracycline; QUI, 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 10
quinolones; AMP, amphenicols; VAN, vancomycin; and others), as 
MDR (multidrug resistance) when conferring resistance to more 
than one class of antibiotics; 16 genetic transfer and recombination 
elements (integrase, transposase, and insertion sequence); 9 plasmid- 
associated genetic determinants; and 5 housekeeping genes. The 
plasmid-associated assays were excluded from the analyses because 
of the poor coverage (table S2). All the analyses were performed consid-
ering the remaining 375 primer pairs independently. The results of am-
plicons’ relative abundance were calculated using the Ct values of the 
reference gene and the genes of interest, applying the following for-
mula: (2(Ctreference gene − Cttarget gene)) (26).
The statistical analyses were performed using the R environment 
v3.4.0. To compare the average values between two groups, Mann- 
Whitney U tests (27) were performed. Correlations between the rel-
ative abundance of each gene and the sum of the relative abundance 
of all genes from the same group (Table 1) were computed using 
Spearman’s rank-based approach (28). Statistical modeling of the to-
tal abundance of ARGs involved a power transformation of the gene’s 
relative abundances and the complete removal of zero-inflated assays 
(no measurable amplification in >25% of the samples).
All reported P values were adjusted for multiple testing accord-
ing to the respective hypotheses (29). To calculate the log reduction of 
the abundance of resistance and genetic transfer and recombination 
classes, the formula log10(influent relative abundance) − log10(effluent 
relative abundance) was applied, and Mann-Whitney U test was used 
to find significant differences between HAC and LAC. PCoA was cal-
culated using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarities calculated using the 
package vegan v2.4 (30) and the cmdscale command from stats pack-
age. The latitude was defined by the latitude of the city of the UWTP. 
The data for human consumption were collected from the antimi-
crobial consumption database (available at https://ecdc.europa.eu/
en/antimicrobial-consumption/database/country-overview), consid-
ering the consumption of antibacterials for systemic use (ATC group 
J01) in the community (primary care sector) and the hospital sector 
expressed as defined daily dose (DDD) per 1000 inhabitants and per day 
using the mean from years 2005–2015.
To study the association between relative ARG abundance in 
UWTP effluents and phenotypic resistance in the primary care sec-
tor [data from EARS-Net, (31); Fig. 5], the information from the two 
sources was matched in terms of target antibiotics. Specifically, pheno-
typic resistance against penicillins, aminopenicillins, third-generation 
cephalosporins, and methicillin was classified as (and compared to) 
genotypic -lactam resistance. Phenotypic macrolide resistance was 
compared with the relative abundance of ARGs conferring resistance 
to MLSB.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/3/eaau9124/DC1
Fig. S1. Average richness values (number of positive assays) for the different influent and 
effluent wastewater samples from high (HAC) and low (LAC) antibiotic consumption countries, 
for resistance genes and mobile genetic elements.
Fig. S2. Food-producing animals’ antibiotics consumption [expressed in biomass (mg/kg), 
values for 2013] and average maximal and minimal annual temperature and precipitation 
(yellow, average Tmin >6°C; blue, average Tmax <5°C).
Fig. S3. Average abundance (copies/ml; upper bars; left-hand legend) and prevalence values 
(gene copies/16S rRNA gene copies; lower bars; right-hand legend) for the different influent 
(Inf) and effluent (Eff) wastewater samples from high (HAC) and low (LAC) antibiotic 
consumption countries, determined on the basis of qPCR array for the genes: 16S rRNA, intI1, 
blaOXA, sul1, tetM, ermF, aadA, tnpA, and qacEdelta1.
Fig. S4. Average abundance (copies/ml; upper bars; left-hand legend) and prevalence values 
(gene copies/16S rRNA copies; lower bars; right-hand legend) calculated by traditional 
real-time qPCR and qPCR array for Portuguese influent and effluent wastewater samples.
Table S1. Influent and effluent wastewater samples used in the study.
Table S2. qPCR primer sets and the percentage of samples that gave positive results for the 
influent and effluent wastewater samples.
Table S3. Consumption of antibacterials for systemic use (ATC group J01) in the community 
(primary care sector) in different European countries from 2005 to 2015 (see also Fig. 1), 
defined as daily dose per 1000 inhabitants and per day.
Table S4. Characterization of the UWTPs examined in this study, in terms of dimension, 
geographic conditions, treatment, and microbiological indicators.
Data S1. qPCR array data.
Data S2. List of samples.
Data S3. List of assays.
Reference (32)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. WHO, Global antimicrobial resistance surveillance system (GLASS) report: Early 
implementation 2016–2017 (Geneva, 2017); www.who.int/glass/resources/publications/
early-implementation-report/en/.
 2. T. U. Berendonk, C. M. Manaia, C. Merlin, D. Fatta-Kassinos, E. Cytryn, F. Walsh, 
H. Bürgmann, H. Sørum, M. Norström, M.-N. Pons, N. Kreuzinger, P. Huovinen, S. Stefani, 
T. Schwartz, V. Kisand, F. Baquero, J. L. Martinez, Tackling antibiotic resistance:  
The environmental framework. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13, 310–317 (2015).
 3. D. G. J. Larsson, A. Andremont, J. Bengtsson-Palme, K. K. Brandt, A. M. de Roda Husman, 
P. Fagerstedt, J. Fick, C.-F. Flach, W. H. Gaze, M. Kuroda, K. Kvint, R. Laxminarayan, 
C. M. Manaia, K. M. Nielsen, L. Plant, M.-C. Ploy, C. Segovia, P. Simonet, K. Smalla, J. Snape, 
E. Topp, A. J. van Hengel, D. W. Verner-Jeffreys, M. P. J. Virta, E. M. Wellington, 
A.S. Wernersson, Critical knowledge gaps and research needs related to the 
environmental dimensions of antibiotic resistance. Environ. Int. 117, 132–138  
(2018).
 4. WHO (World Health Organization), Global action plan on antimicrobial resistance (2015),  
p. 28; www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/193736.
 5. ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), Surveillance of 
antimicrobial resistance in Europe 2016. Annual report of the European Antimicrobial 
Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net). Stockholm (2017).
 6. C. M. Manaia, Assessing the risk of antibiotic resistance transmission from the 
environment to humans: Non-direct proportionality between abundance and risk.  
Trends Microbiol. 25, 173–181 (2017).
 7. L. Rizzo, C. Manaia, C. Merlin, T. Schwartz, C. Dagot, M. C. Ploy, I. Michael, 
D. Fatta-Kassinos, Urban wastewater treatment plants as hotspots for antibiotic resistant 
bacteria and genes spread into the environment: A review. Sci. Total Environ. 447, 
345–360 (2013).
 8. V. F. Lanza, F. Baquero, J. L. Martínez, R. Ramos-Ruíz, B. González-Zorn, A. Andremont, 
A. Sánchez-Valenzuela, S. D. Ehrlich, S. Kennedy, E. Ruppé, W. van Schaik, R. J. Willems, 
F. de la Cruz, T. M. Coque, In-depth resistome analysis by targeted metagenomics. 
Microbiome 6, 11 (2018).
 9. A. Karkman, T. A. Johnson, C. Lyra, R. D. Stedtfeld, M. Tamminen, J. M. Tiedje, M. Virta, 
High-throughput quantification of antibiotic resistance genes from an urban wastewater 
treatment plant. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 92, fiw014 (2016).
 10. F. Wang, R. D. Stedtfeld, O.-S. Kim, B. Chai, L. Yang, T. M. Stedtfeld, S. G. Hong, D. Kim, 
H. S. Lim, S. A. Hashsham, J. M. Tiedje, W. J. Sul, Influence of soil characteristics and 
proximity to Antarctic research stations on abundance of antibiotic resistance genes in 
soils. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 12621–12629 (2016).
 11. C. M. Manaia, J. Rocha, N. Scaccia, R. Marano, E. Radu, F. Biancullo, F. Cerqueira, 
G. Fortunato, I. C. Iakovides, I. Zammit, I. Kampouris, I. Vaz-Moreira, O. C. Nunes, Antibiotic 
resistance in wastewater treatment plants: Tackling the black box. Environ. Int. 115, 
312–324 (2018).
 12. M. R. Gillings, Class 1 integrons as invasive species. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 38, 10–15 (2017).
 13. C. Narciso-da-Rocha, J. Rocha, I. Vaz-Moreira, F. Lira, J. Tamames, I. Henriques, 
J. L. Martinez, C. M. Manaia, Bacterial lineages putatively associated with the 
dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes in a full-scale urban wastewater treatment 
plant. Environ. Int. 118, 179–188 (2018).
 14. Y. Yang, B. Li, S. Zou, H. H. P. Fang, T. Zhang, Fate of antibiotic resistance genes in sewage 
treatment plant revealed by metagenomic approach. Water Res. 62, 97–106 (2014).
 15. C. Munck, M. Albertsen, A. Telke, M. Ellabaan, P. H. Nielsen, M. O. A. Sommer, Limited 
dissemination of the wastewater treatment plant core resistome. Nat. Commun. 6,  
8452 (2015).
 16. X.-X. Zhang, T. Zhang, Occurrence, abundance, and diversity of tetracycline resistance 
genes in 15 sewage treatment plants across China and other global locations.  
Environ. Sci. Technol. 45, 2598–2604 (2011).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Pärnänen et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaau9124     27 March 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 10
 17. P. Gao, M. Munir, I. Xagoraraki, Correlation of tetracycline and sulfonamide antibiotics 
with corresponding resistance genes and resistant bacteria in a conventional municipal 
wastewater treatment plant. Sci. Total Environ. 421–422, 173–183 (2012).
 18. S. Rodriguez-Mozaz, S. Chamorro, E. Marti, B. Huerta, M. Gros, A. Sànchez-Melsió, 
C. M. Borrego, D. Barceló, J. L. Balcázar, Occurrence of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance 
genes in hospital and urban wastewaters and their impact on the receiving river.  
Water Res. 69, 234–242 (2015).
 19. J. Li, W. Cheng, L. Xu, P. J. Strong, H. Chen, Antibiotic-resistant genes and antibiotic-
resistant bacteria in the effluent of urban residential areas, hospitals, and a municipal 
wastewater treatment plant system. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 22, 4587–4596 (2015).
 20. J. Bengtsson-Palme, 
R. Hammarén, 
C. Pal, 
M. Östman, 
B. Björlenius, 
C.-F. Flach, 
J. Fick, 
E. Kristiansson, 
M. Tysklind, D. G. J. Larsson, Elucidating selection processes for antibiotic resistance in sewage 
treatment plants using metagenomics. Sci. Total Environ. 572, 697–712 (2016).
 21. ESAC, European surveillance of antimicrobial consumption; https://ecdc.europa.eu/en/tools.
 22. G. Garrity, D. J. Brenner, N. R. Krieg, J. T. Staley, Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology-
Vol 2: The Proteobacteria, Part C-The Alpha-, Beta-, Delta- and Epsilonproteobacteria 
(Springer-Verlag, 2005).
 23. D. R. MacFadden, S. F. McGough, D. Fisman, M. Santillana, J. S. Brownstein, Antibiotic 
resistance increases with local temperature. Nat. Clim. Chang. 8, 510–514 (2018).
 24. R. D. Stedtfeld, T. M. Stedtfeld, H. Waseem, M. Fitschen-Brown, X. Guo, B. Chai, 
M. R. Williams, T. Shook, A. Logan, A. Graham, J.-C. Chae, W. J. Sul, J. VanHouten, J. R. Cole, 
G. J. Zylstra, J. M. Tiedje, B. L. Upham, S. A. Hashsham, Isothermal assay targeting class 1 
integrase gene for environmental surveillance of antibiotic resistance markers.  
J. Environ. Manag. 198, 213–220 (2017).
 25. R. D. Stedtfeld, S. W. Baushke, D. M. Tourlousse, S. M. Miller, T. M. Stedtfeld, E. Gulari, 
J. M. Tiedje, S. A. Hashsham, Development and experimental validation of a predictive 
threshold cycle equation for quantification of virulence and marker genes by 
high-throughput nanoliter-volume PCR on the OpenArray platform. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
74, 3831–3838 (2008).
 26. K. J. Livak, T. D. Schmittgen, Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time 
quantitative PCR and the 2(−CT) Method. Methods 25, 402–408 (2001).
 27. H. B. Mann, D. R. Whitney, On a test of whether one of two random variables is 
stochastically larger than the other. Ann. Math. Stat. 18, 50–60 (1947).
 28. D. J. Best, D. E. Roberts, Algorithm AS 89: The upper tail probabilities of spearman’s rho. 
Appl. Stat. 24, 377–379 (1975).
 29. Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful 
approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B 57, 289–300 (1995).
 30. J. Oksanen, J. G. Blanchet, M. Friendly, R. Kindt, P. Legendre, D. McGlinn, P. R. Minchin, 
vegan: Community Ecology Package, vegan R Packag. version 2.4–4 (2017);  
https://cran.r-project.org/package=vegan.
 31. EARS-Net, European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network; www.ecdc.europa.eu/
en/activities/surveillance/EARS-Net/Pages/index.aspx.
 32. ECDC/EFSA/EMA second joint report on the integrated analysis of the 
consumption of antimicrobial agents and occurrence of antimicrobial resistance in 
bacteria from humans and food-producing animals: Joint Interagency 
Antimicrobial Consumption and Resistance Analysis (JIACRA) report. EFSA J. 15, 
e04872 (2017).
Acknowledgments: We thank all the wastewater treatment plant staff and other 
collaborators who made this work possible. Funding: This work was financed by the 
Water JPI through the national funding agencies supporting the consortium 
WaterJPI/0001/2013 STARE—“Stopping Antibiotic Resistance Evolution” (Cyprus, RPF; 
Germany, BMBF; Spain, MINECO; Finland, AKA; Ireland, EPA; Norway, RCN; Portugal, FCT). 
I.V.-M. was supported by the FCT grant SFRH/BPD/87360/2012, C.N.-d.-R. by the FCT grant 
SFRH/BD/97131/2013, and I.H. by the FCT contract IF/00492/2013. Other funders: A grant from 
the Michigan State University Center for Health Impacts of Agriculture (CHIA) and the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (21677149). Author contributions: K.M.M.P., C.N.-d.-R., 
D.K., T.U.B., D.F.-K., S.R.-M., T.S., H.Sh., R.D.S., J.M.T., F.W., I.V.-M., M.V., and C.M.M. collaborated in 
the design and/or interpretation of the reported experiments. K.M.M.P., C.N.-d.R., D.K., T.U.B., 
D.C., T.T.D., D.F.-K., T.J., A.K., S.G.M., I.M.-K., K.O.S., S.R.-M., T.S., H.Sh., H.Sø., R.D.S., J.M.T., 
S.V.D.G., F.W., I.V.-M., M.V., and C.M.M. collaborated in the acquisition and/or analysis of the 
data. C.E., I.H., J.L.M., S.G.M., I.M.-K., K.O.S., H.Sh., S.V.D.G., F.W., I.V.-M., M.V., and C.M.M. were 
responsible for the administrative, technical, or supervisory support. All authors collaborated 
in the preparation and revision of the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: qPCR array data are 
available as Supplementary Materials (data S1 to S3). Additional data related to this paper may 
be requested from the authors.
Submitted 26 July 2018
Accepted 6 February 2019
Published 27 March 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aau9124
Citation: K. M. M. Pärnänen, C. Narciso-da-Rocha, D. Kneis, T. U. Berendonk, D. Cacace, T. T. Do, 
C. Elpers, D. Fatta-Kassinos, I. Henriques, T. Jaeger, A. Karkman, J. L. Martinez, S. G. Michael, 
I. Michael-Kordatou, K. O’Sullivan, S. Rodriguez-Mozaz, T. Schwartz, H. Sheng, H. Sørum, 
R. D. Stedtfeld, J. M. Tiedje, S. V. D. Giustina, F. Walsh, I. Vaz-Moreira, M. Virta, C. M. Manaia, 
Antibiotic resistance in European wastewater treatment plants mirrors the pattern of clinical 
antibiotic resistance prevalence. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau9124 (2019).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 antibiotic resistance prevalence
Antibiotic resistance in European wastewater treatment plants mirrors the pattern of clinical
Célia M. Manaia
Sørum, Robert D. Stedtfeld, James M. Tiedje, Saulo Varela Della Giustina, Fiona Walsh, Ivone Vaz-Moreira, Marko Virta and 
Michael, Irene Michael-Kordatou, Kristin O'Sullivan, Sara Rodriguez-Mozaz, Thomas Schwartz, Hongjie Sheng, Henning
Christian Elpers, Despo Fatta-Kassinos, Isabel Henriques, Thomas Jaeger, Antti Karkman, Jose Luis Martinez, Stella G. 
Katariina M. M. Pärnänen, Carlos Narciso-da-Rocha, David Kneis, Thomas U. Berendonk, Damiano Cacace, Thi Thuy Do,
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aau9124
 (3), eaau9124.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/3/eaau9124
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/03/25/5.3.eaau9124.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/3/eaau9124#BIBL
This article cites 24 articles, 1 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
