 Hemoglobin A1c Targets for Glycemic Control With Pharmacologic
Therapy for Nonpregnant Adults With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus:
AGuidanceStatementUpdateFromtheAmericanCollegeofPhysicians
Amir Qaseem, MD, PhD, MHA; Timothy J. Wilt, MD, MPH; Devan Kansagara, MD, MCR; Carrie Horwitch, MD, MPH;
Michael J. Barry, MD; and Mary Ann Forciea, MD; for the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians*
Description: The American College of Physicians developed
this guidance statement to guide clinicians in selecting targets
for pharmacologic treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Methods: The National Guideline Clearinghouse and the
Guidelines International Network library were searched (May
2017) for national guidelines, published in English, that ad-
dressed hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) targets for treating type 2 dia-
betes in nonpregnant outpatient adults. The authors identified
guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care Excel-
lence and the Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement. In ad-
dition, 4 commonly used guidelines were reviewed, from the
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American
College of Endocrinology, the American Diabetes Association,
the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, and the U.S. De-
partment of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense. The
AGREE II (Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II)
instrument was used to evaluate the guidelines.
Guidance Statement 1: Clinicians should personalize goals for
glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes on the basis of a
discussion of benefits and harms of pharmacotherapy, patients'
preferences, patients' general health and life expectancy, treat-
ment burden, and costs of care.
Guidance Statement 2: Clinicians should aim to achieve an
HbA1c level between 7% and 8% in most patients with type 2
diabetes.
Guidance Statement 3: Clinicians should consider deintensify-
ing pharmacologic therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes who
achieve HbA1c levels less than 6.5%.
Guidance Statement 4: Clinicians should treat patients with
type 2 diabetes to minimize symptoms related to hypergly-
cemia and avoid targeting an HbA1c level in patients with a
life expectancy less than 10 years due to advanced age (80
years or older), residence in a nursing home, or chronic
conditions (such as dementia, cancer, end-stage kidney dis-
ease, or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or
congestive heart failure) because the harms outweigh the
benefits in this population.
Ann Intern Med. 2018;168:569-576. doi:10.7326/M17-0939
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at Annals.org on 6 March 2018.
D
iabetes mellitus is a leading cause of death in the
United States and is associated with microvascular
and macrovascular complications. Approximately 29.1
million persons, or 9.3% of the U.S. population, have
type 2 diabetes (1). In 2012, the total direct and indirect
costs associated with diabetes in the United States
were $245 billion (1). Markedly elevated glucose levels
can result in subacute symptoms, such as polyuria,
polydipsia, weight loss, and dehydration. Over time,
the metabolic derangements associated with diabetes
may lead to vision loss, painful neuropathy or sensory
loss, foot ulcers, amputations, myocardial infarctions,
strokes, and end-stage renal disease. Lowering blood
glucose may decrease risk for complications, but low-
ering strategies come with harms, patient burden, and
costs.
Blood glucose can be measured in various ways,
including the hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c; also called gly-
cosylated or glycated hemoglobin) level, which approx-
imates average blood glucose control over about 3
months. As with all laboratory tests, HbA1c measure-
ments are associated with variability (2) and can vary
further with race and ethnicity (3–5). Guidelines have
historically recommended initiation or intensification of
See also:
Summary for Patients. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-18
Web-Only
CME/MOC activity
* This paper, authored by Amir Qaseem, MD, PhD, MHA; Timothy J. Wilt, MD, MPH; Devan Kansagara, MD, MCR; Carrie Horwitch, MD, MPH; Michael J. Barry,
MD; and Mary Ann Forciea, MD, was developed for the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the
Clinical Guidelines Committee from initiation of the project until its approval were Mary Ann Forciea, MD† (Chair); Nick Fitterman, MD†; Kate Balzer, MSW†§;
Michael J. Barry, MD†; Cynthia Boyd, MD, MPH†; Carrie Horwitch, MD, MPH†; Linda L. Humphrey, MD, MPH†; Alfonso Iorio, MD, PhD†; Devan Kansagara, MD,
MCR†; Jennifer Lin, MD, MCR†; Scott Manaker, MD, PhD‡; Michael Maroto, JD, MBA†§; Robert McLean, MD†; Reem Mustafa, MD, PhD, MPH†; Janice Tufte†§;
Sandeep Vijan, MD, MS‡; and Timothy J. Wilt, MD, MPH†. Approved by the ACP Board of Regents on 26 March 2017.
† Author (participated in discussion and voting).
‡ Nonauthor contributor (participated in discussion but excluded from voting).
§ Nonclinician public representative.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
© 2018 American College of Physicians 569
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 pharmacologic therapy to achieve specific HbA1c tar-
gets, depending on the population in question. The
ideal target that optimally balances benefits and harms
remains uncertain.
GUIDANCE STATEMENT FOCUS AND TARGET
POPULATION
The purpose of this American College of Physicians
(ACP) guidance statement is to critically review the
available guidelines from various organizations and the
evidence included therein to assist clinicians in making
decisions about targets when using pharmacologic
therapy in adults with type 2 diabetes. Recent data sug-
gesting that newer agents reduce cardiovascular mor-
bidity and mortality in high-risk patients with type 2 di-
abetes have prompted calls for a fundamental shift in
diabetes management. Some anticipate that treatment
decisions will eventually be based more on cardiovas-
cular risk than achievement of specific HbA1c targets,
analogous to recent changes in lipid management.
However, for the foreseeable future, glycemic targets
will continue to influence management decisions by
front-line clinicians (6). This statement focuses on the
benefits and harms of targeting lower versus higher
HbA1c levels and does not cover use of specific medi-
cations outside of their use to achieve HbA1c targets.
The intended audience is all clinicians, and the target
population is nonpregnant adults with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS
The Clinical Guidelines Committee (CGC) of ACP
develops guidance statements on topics where several
conflicting guidelines are available. We provide clini-
cians with a rigorous review of the guidelines and the
evidence they include. We then adopt the clinical rec-
ommendations if we agree with their evaluation of ben-
efits and harms or adapt them if changes are needed
based on our assessment of the recommendations and
evidence.
Data Sources and Guideline Selection
We searched the National Guideline Clearing-
house and the Guidelines International Network library
(May 2017) for guidelines on recommended HbA1c tar-
gets in the treatment of type 2 diabetes in nonpregnant
outpatient adults. We included guidelines that were
developed by national organizations, were published
in English, and targeted the correct population. We re-
viewed titles and abstracts and excluded guidelines
that were modified or adapted from other organiza-
tions or addressed specific populations (such as preg-
nant women or patients with kidney disease). Our
search yielded guidelines from the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (7) and the Institute
for Clinical Systems Improvement (ICSI) (8). On the ba-
sis of the knowledge and expertise of ACP CGC mem-
bers, we also selected the following 4 guidelines not
identified in either database at the time of the search
but commonly used in clinical practice: the American
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American
College of Endocrinology (AACE/ACE) guideline (9),
the American Diabetes Association (ADA) guideline
(10), the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
(SIGN) guideline (11), and the U.S. Department of Vet-
erans Affairs and Department of Defense (VA/DoD)
guideline (12).
Quality Assessment
Six coauthors independently reviewed and as-
sessed each guideline using the AGREE II (Appraisal of
Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II) instrument
(13). This instrument asks 23 questions in the following
6 domains: scope and purpose, stakeholder involve-
ment, rigor of development, clarity of presentation, ap-
plicability, and editorial independence. The authors
scored each guideline independently, and the scores
were compared (Appendix Figure and Appendix Table
1, available at Annals.org). Authors then provided a
summary determination of whether they “would recom-
mend this guideline for use” by recording “yes,” “no,”
or “yes with modifications.”
Peer Review
The draft guidance statement was peer-reviewed
through Annals of Internal Medicine and was posted
online for comments from ACP Regents and Governors,
who represent ACP members at the regional level. The
final guidance statement incorporated comments from
peer reviewers and ACP Regents and Governors.
Public Panel Review
The development of this guidance statement also
included perspectives, values, and preferences of 2
CGC
members
who
represent
the
public
and
a
7-member public panel.
SUMMARY OF EVALUATED GUIDELINES USING
THE AGREE II INSTRUMENT
We reviewed and rated 6 guidelines (AACE/ACE
[9], ADA [10], ICSI [8], NICE [7], SIGN [11], and VA/DoD
[12]), focusing solely on sections addressing HbA1c tar-
gets in patients with type 2 diabetes. Appendix Table 1
shows the detailed scaled domain scores and average
quality ratings for each guideline, and the Appendix
Figure shows average AGREE II scores for each item in
each of the 6 domains. The fundamental difference be-
tween high- and low-scoring guidelines was methodol-
ogy. The 2 lowest-scoring guidelines, AACE/ACE and
ADA, scored lowest on stakeholder involvement, appli-
cability, editorial independence, and scientific rigor. A
systematic review is the backbone for any trustworthy
guideline, but some guidelines might not be based on
a systematic review or may not have made the review
publicly available (14, 15).
Several factors were important in considering
guideline quality. For example, although many guide-
lines described benefits, adverse effects, and the
strength and limitations of evidence or linked the evi-
dence to the recommendation, they often inadequately
described how they had considered or weighted these
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
570 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 factors in developing the final recommendations. The
guidelines frequently relied on selective reporting of
studies or outcomes and focused on relative versus ab-
solute effects and asymptomatic surrogate measures
rather than patient-centered health outcomes.
All of the reviewed guidelines recommend individ-
ualizing HbA1c targets on the basis of patient character-
istics, such as comorbid conditions and risk for hypo-
glycemia (Appendix, available at Annals.org). The ADA
and SIGN guidelines recommend a target of 7% for the
general population, whereas AACE/ACE recommends
6.5% (if it can be achieved safely). The NICE guideline
specifies 6.5% or 7%, depending on the patient'
s treat-
ment regimen. Both ICSI and VA/DoD recommend tar-
get ranges. The ICSI guideline recommends less than
7% to less than 8% based on patient factors, whereas
the VA/DoD recommends the following target ranges
based on life expectancy and comorbid conditions: 6%
to 7% for patients with a life expectancy greater than 10
to 15 years and no or mild microvascular complica-
tions; 7% to 8.5% for those with established microvas-
cular or macrovascular disease, comorbid conditions,
or a life expectancy of 5 to 10 years; and 8% to 9% for
those with a life expectancy less than 5 years, significant
comorbid conditions, advanced complications of di-
abetes, or difficulties in self-management attribut-
able to mental status, disability, or other factors (12).
All guidelines recognize that HbA1c targets can be
higher in patients with comorbid conditions and lim-
ited life expectancy.
We looked into the evidence presented in these
guidelines, specifically 5 large, long-term randomized
trials with a “treat-to-target” strategy and correspond-
ing reports on extended follow-up (16–23). We summa-
rize below the individual studies and resulting benefits
and harms. Note that recent studies evaluating the
effectiveness and safety of several newer diabetes
drugs (for example, recently approved sodium–glucose
cotransporter-2 inhibitors, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibi-
tors, and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists) were
not considered in guideline sections pertaining to HbA1c
targets because these studies were not designed to eval-
uate treat-to-target strategies. Therefore, their findings
are not described here.
BENEFITS AND HARMS OF LOWER HBA1C
TARGETS: EVIDENCE FROM CLINICAL TRIALS
Five large, long-term randomized controlled trials
investigated intensive (achieved HbA1c levels, 6.3% to
7.4%) versus less intensive (achieved HbA1c levels, 7.3%
to 8.4%) treatment target strategies in adults (average
baseline age, 53 to 66 years). They found that the main
effect of more intensive glycemic control is small abso-
lute reductions in risk for microvascular surrogate
events, such as retinopathy detected on ophthalmo-
logic screening or nephropathy defined by develop-
ment or progression of albuminuria (Appendix Table 2,
available at Annals.org) (16–23). Studies have not con-
sistently shown that intensive glycemic control to HbA1c
levels below 7% reduces clinical microvascular events,
such as loss or impairment of vision, end-stage renal
disease, or painful neuropathy, or reduces macrovascu-
lar events and death. One trial of metformin in over-
weight adults showed a reduction in all-cause and
diabetes-related death through at least 10 years (22).
In all studies, patients randomly assigned to more
intensive therapy required more antiglycemic medica-
tions at higher doses, which led to more adverse events
than in the less intensive groups. In 1 study, very inten-
sive control resulted in an increased risk for death (18).
Appendix Table 2 summarizes data from the
ACCORD (Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Di-
abetes) (18), ADVANCE (Action in Diabetes and Vascu-
lar Disease: Preterax and Diamicron Modified Release
Controlled Evaluation) (20), UKPDS (United Kingdom
Prospective Diabetes Study) (22, 23), and VADT (Veter-
ans Affairs Diabetes Trial) (17) trials.
ACCORD Trial
The ACCORD trial compared the effects of inten-
sive therapy (target HbA1c levels <6.0%) with those of
standard therapy (target HbA1c levels, 7.0% to 7.9%;
achieved levels, 6.4% vs. 7.5%). Participants had a
mean age of 62.2 years and median baseline HbA1c
level of 8.1%. The trial was terminated early (mean
follow-up, 3.5 years) because of increases in all-cause
mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.22 [95% CI, 1.01 to 1.46]),
cardiovascular-related death (HR, 1.35 [CI, 1.04 to
1.76]), and hypoglycemic events requiring assistance in
the group assigned to the lower HbA1c target. Intensive
treatment did not reduce risk for major adverse cardio-
vascular events (HR, 0.90 [CI, 0.78 to 1.04]), fatal or non-
fatal stroke, or fatal or nonfatal congestive heart failure.
Participants receiving intensive treatment had fewer
nonfatal myocardial infarctions (HR, 0.76 [CI, 0.62 to
0.92]). Intensive therapy did not reduce risk for micro-
vascular outcomes (including renal failure, doubling of
serum creatinine, visual impairment, retinal photocoag-
ulation, and neuropathy) but led to small absolute
reductions in the onset of albuminuria. Additional
follow-up through a median of 5 years confirmed the
original report'
s findings (achieved HbA1c levels: inten-
sive group, 7.2%; standard group, 7.6%) (19).
The trial was stopped early because more intensive
glycemic control was associated with a 22% increase in
all-cause mortality, a 35% increase in cardiovascular-
related death, and a 3-fold increase in risk for severe
hypoglycemia (18). More intensive treatment also re-
sulted in increased weight gain of more than 10 kg
(27.8% vs. 14.1%) and increased fluid retention.
ADVANCE Trial
The ADVANCE trial enrolled participants with a
mean baseline age of 66 years and mean baseline
HbA1c level of 7.5%. Intensive treatment (HbA1c levels:
target ≤6.5%; achieved, 6.5%) compared with standard
treatment (achieved HbA1c level, 7.3%) did not reduce
major macrovascular events (HR, 0.94 [CI, 0.84 to
1.06]), all-cause mortality (HR, 0.93 [CI, 0.83 to 1.06]), or
cardiovascular-related death (HR, 0.88 [CI, 0.74 to
1.04)]) over a median of 5 years (20). Intensive treat-
ment resulted in reduced incidence of combined mac-
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018 571
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 rovascular and microvascular events (18.1% vs. 20.0%;
HR, 0.90 [CI, 0.82 to 0.98]) and microvascular events
(9.4% vs. 10.9%; HR, 0.86 [CI, 0.77 to 0.97]) over a me-
dian of 5 years. This was primarily because of a small
absolute reduction in the incidence of nephropathy
(4.1% vs. 5.2%; HR, 0.79 [CI, 0.66 to 0.93]) mostly due
to the development of macroalbuminuria. The lower
target did not affect doubling of serum creatinine, neu-
ropathy, retinopathy, or visual deterioration. Effects
were consistent across subgroups, including those with
a history of microvascular or macrovascular disease.
More severe hypoglycemic events were seen with
intensive glycemic control (2.7% vs. 1.5%; HR, 1.86 [CI,
1.42 to 2.40]) (20). Minor hypoglycemia also occurred
more frequently, and hospitalization was more com-
mon (44.9% vs. 42.8%; HR, 1.07 [CI, 1.01 to 1.13]).
UKPDS Trials
The UKPDS trials involved 2 separate studies eval-
uating intensive glycemic control versus conventional
therapy (diet and subsequent treatments if marked hy-
perglycemia persisted) in adults (mean age, 54 years)
with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes. One third of
participants had retinopathy at baseline. The larger
UKPDS 33 trial (23) (n = 3867; mean baseline age, 54
years) compared intensive glycemic control (target fast-
ing plasma glucose level <6 mmol/L [108 mg/dL]; me-
dian attained HbA1c level, 7%) using either sulfonyl-
ureas or insulin versus less stringent control (target
fasting plasma glucose best achievable with diet; me-
dian attained HbA1c level, 7.9%) using diet and added
hypoglycemic agents if patients developed marked hy-
perglycemia. At a median follow-up of 10 years, inten-
sive control reduced any diabetes-related end point by
a relative 12% (CI, 1% to 21%) (P = 0.029). The absolute
difference was 5.1 events per 1000 patient-years. This
was largely due to a reduction in the composite out-
come of microvascular end points, which comprised
retinal photocoagulation for asymptomatic retinal find-
ings detected on screening (relative risk reduction, 25%
[CI, 7% to 40%]; P = 0.0099). The study found no
differences in diabetes-related death (relative reduc-
tion, 10% [CI, �11% to 27%]; P = 0.34), all-cause mor-
tality (relative reduction, 6% [CI, �10% to 20%]; P =
0.44), myocardial infarction, stroke, or amputation (23).
The UKPDS 34 trial (22) assessed intensive therapy
with metformin (median attained HbA1c level, 7.4%)
versus conventional therapy (median attained HbA1c
level, 8.0%), primarily in overweight adults (n = 753).
Supplementary and secondary analyses included partici-
pants from UKDPS 33 who subsequently received met-
formin for fasting plasma glucose levels that were
persistently high. Compared with the conventional
treatment group (receiving dietary advice or additional
nonintensive pharmacologic therapy if they had marked
hyperglycemia), patients initially allocated to metformin
(n = 342) had relative risk reductions of 32% (CI, 13% to
47%) (P = 0.0023) for any diabetes-related end point,
42% (CI, 9% to 63%) (P = 0.017) for diabetes-related
death, and 36% (CI, 9% to 55%) (P = 0.011) for all-cause
mortality.
This
equates
to
absolute
reductions
in
diabetes-related and all-cause mortality of approxi-
mately 5 and 7 deaths per 1000 patient-years, respec-
tively. These reductions were greater than those at-
tained with intensive therapy with sulfonylureas or
insulin. However, early addition of metformin to sulfo-
nylureas resulted in an increased risk for diabetes-
related death (P = 0.039) compared with continued
treatment with sulfonylureas alone.
On extended follow-up (median time from ran-
domization, 17 years), 3277 patients originally enrolled
in UKPDS 33 or 34 who received intensive glucose
control with sulfonylureas or insulin had a 9% relative
reduction of borderline statistical significance in any
diabetes-related end point (risk ratio, 0.91 [CI, 0.83 to
0.99]; P = 0.04) and an absolute reduction in all-cause
mortality (3.5 deaths per 1000 patient-years; P = 0.007)
(16). In the metformin-intensive therapy group, risk re-
ductions persisted for any diabetes-related end point
(risk reduction, 21%; 8.2 events per 1000 patient-years;
P = 0.01), myocardial infarction (risk reduction, 33%;
6.3 events per 1000 patient-years; P = 0.005), and all-
cause mortality (risk reduction, 27%; 7.2 deaths per
1000 patient-years; P = 0.002).
Hypoglycemic events were much more common in
the intensive than standard treatment groups of the
UKPDS trials (approximately 30% vs. 1% annually) (23).
Early addition of metformin to sulfonylureas resulted in
an increased risk for diabetes-related death (P = 0.039)
compared with continued treatment with sulfonylureas
alone.
VADT
The VADT compared patients (mean age, 60 years;
median baseline HbA1c level, 9.4%) in an intensive ther-
apy group (median achieved HbA1c level, 6.9%) with
those in a standard therapy group (median achieved
HbA1c level, 8.4%). The trial targeted an absolute
between-group difference in HbA1c level of 1.5 per-
centage points and found no reduction in major cardio-
vascular events, death, or microvascular events, except
for “any increase in albuminuria,” over a median
follow-up of 5.6 years (21). The intensive therapy group
had fewer cardiovascular events over an extended
follow-up of about 12 years (HR, 0.83 [CI, 0.70 to 0.99];
P = 0.04). However, the absolute effect was small (8.6
events per 1000 patient-years), and the outcome in-
cluded hospitalization for new or worsening heart fail-
ure and asymptomatic ejection fractions of less than
40%. The investigators found no reduction in all-cause
mortality (HR, 1.05 [CI, 0.89 to 1.25]) or cardiovascular-
related death (HR, 0.88 (CI, 0.64 to 1.20) (17).
Severe and any hypoglycemia were more common
in the intensive therapy group than the standard ther-
apy group. This included a 3-fold higher rate of epi-
sodes with impaired consciousness (9 vs. 3 episodes
per 100 patient-years). Serious adverse events were
also more common in the intensive therapy group
(24.1% vs. 17.6%; P = 0.05); dyspnea was the most
common (P = 0.006) (21).
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
572 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 GUIDANCE STATEMENTS
Guidance Statement 1: Clinicians should personal-
ize goals for glycemic control in patients with type 2
diabetes on the basis of a discussion of benefits and
harms of pharmacotherapy, patients' preferences, pa-
tients' general health and life expectancy, treatment
burden, and costs of care.
All of the assessed guidelines recommend person-
alizing HbA1c goals for individual patients (Appendix)
(7–12). The benefits and harms of more versus less in-
tensive glycemic control may be finely balanced for
many persons and vary according to expected duration
of treatment, comorbid conditions, risk factors for hy-
poglycemia, and choice of medication. The choice of
glycemic target also depends on consideration of other
variables, such as risk for hypoglycemia, weight gain,
and other drug-related adverse effects, as well as the
patient'
s age, life expectancy, other chronic conditions,
functional and cognitive impairments, fall risk, ability to
adhere to treatment, and medication burden and cost.
Guidance Statement 2: Clinicians should aim to
achieve an HbA1c level between 7% and 8% in most
patients with type 2 diabetes.
Most of the guidelines referred to 5 trials as the
rationale for their HbA1c targets of 7% or 8% (Appendix
Table 2) (19–23). Collectively, these trials showed that
treating to targets of 7% or less compared with targets
around 8% did not reduce death or macrovascular
events over about 5 to 10 years of treatment but did
result in substantial harms, including but not limited to
hypoglycemia. Our guidance statement is adapted
from and is most consistent with the ICSI guideline,
which recommends an HbA1c target range between
less than 7% and less than 8% (8). The VA/DoD guide-
line also specifies ranges rather than specific targets
and selects them according to life expectancy, comor-
bid conditions, and other factors (12). Including ranges
for recommended goals also allows for variability in in-
dividual HbA1c measurements.
The ICSI guideline highlights that efforts to achieve
HbA1c levels below 7% may increase risk for death,
weight gain, hypoglycemia, and other adverse effects
in many patients (8), and we share these concerns. Of
the 3 trials achieving an HbA1c level less than 7%, none
showed a reduction in all-cause or cardiovascular-
related death (18, 20, 21).
The guidelines recommending lower targets (be-
low 7% or below 6.5%) give the rationale that more
intensive
glycemic
control
reduces
microvascular
events over many years of treatment. Of note, however,
the evidence for reduction is inconsistent, and reduc-
tions were seen only in surrogate microvascular end
points, such as progression of proteinuria or receipt of
retinal photocoagulation. Trials did not show substan-
tial reductions in clinical microvascular events. In addi-
tion, the ACCORD trial found an increased risk for
death with an HbA1c target of less than 6.5% (18).
Most of the guidelines noted that a target in the
lower end of the range (7%) applied best to patients
with newly diagnosed diabetes and those without sub-
stantial diabetes-related complications. The rationale
for this is based on results from the UKPDS. This trial
showed that treatment to a target of about 7% with a
sulfonylurea and insulin (if needed) in adults with newly
diagnosed
diabetes
did
not
reduce
risk
for
any
diabetes-related end point or all-cause mortality after
10 years but was associated with a small absolute re-
duction in these outcomes after 17 years (16, 23). A
substudy (UKPDS 34) also showed a modest reduction
in diabetes-related end points and all-cause mortality
with metformin in overweight or obese adults (2, 12).
All laboratory measurements, including HbA1c lev-
els, are associated with variability. Therefore, a clinician
should consider the variability of HbA1c test results
when selecting goals or making therapeutic decisions.
Any benefit of more intensive glycemic control
likely requires a long time to manifest. Thus, more strin-
gent targets may be appropriate for patients who have
a long life expectancy (>15 years) and are interested in
more intensive glycemic control with pharmacologic
therapy despite the risk for harms, including but not
limited to hypoglycemia, patient burden, and pharma-
cologic costs.
Although this guidance statement focuses on phar-
macologic glycemic control, a lower treatment target is
appropriate if achievable with diet and lifestyle modifi-
cations. Clinicians should counsel patients and empha-
size the importance of lifestyle interventions, including
exercise, dietary changes, and weight loss, to achieve
good glycemic control. Smoking cessation, adequate
blood pressure control, and lipid management are
also indicated in patients with type 2 diabetes and,
for many patients, may take priority over achieving
glycemic control, especially for preventing macrovas-
cular complications.
Guidance Statement 3: Clinicians should consider
deintensifying pharmacologic therapy in patients with
type 2 diabetes who achieve HbA1c levels less than
6.5%.
No trials show that targeting HbA1c levels below
6.5% in diabetic patients improves clinical outcomes,
and pharmacologic treatment to below this target has
substantial harms. The ACCORD trial, which targeted
an HbA1c level less than 6.5% and achieved the lowest
level of the included studies (6.4%), was discontinued
early because of increased overall and cardiovascular-
related death and severe hypoglycemic events (18).
The ADVANCE study also failed to find a statistically
significant clinical benefit and had more adverse effects
with an achieved median HbA1c level of 6.4% than with
7.0%. In addition, more intensive treatment to achieve a
lower target is more costly and is associated with in-
creased patient burden. Therefore, if a patient achieves
an HbA1c level less than 6.5%, the clinician should dein-
tensify treatment by reducing the dosage, removing a
medication if the patient is receiving more than 1, or
discontinuing pharmacologic treatment.
Although other drugs have been associated with
harms, the balance between benefits and harms is un-
certain with metformin for lower HbA1c levels. Met-
formin is not associated with hypoglycemia and is gen-
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018 573
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 erally well-tolerated and low cost, but it is associated
with other known adverse effects and results in use of
additional medication with little to no benefit at HbA1c
levels below 7%. The ACP guideline on oral pharmaco-
logic treatment of diabetes (24) provides information
on metformin and other medications.
Guidance Statement 4: Clinicians should treat pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes to minimize symptoms re-
lated to hyperglycemia and avoid targeting an HbA1c
level in patients with a life expectancy less than 10 years
due to advanced age (80 years or older), residence in a
nursing home, or chronic conditions (such as dementia,
Figure. Summary of the American College of Physicians guidance statement on HbA 1c targets for glycemic control with
pharmacologic therapy in nonpregnant adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Summary of the American College of Physicians Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets for Glycemic
Control With Pharmacologic Therapy in Nonpregnant Adults With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Disease/Condition 
Type 2 diabetes
Target Audience 
All clinicians
Target Patient Population 
Outpatient nonpregnant adults with type 2 diabetes
Outcomes Evaluated
Microvascular and macrovascular outcomes, mortality
Benefits
Reduced microvascular and macrovascular outcomes, reduced mortality
Harms
Harms of achieving lower HbA1c targets with pharmacologic interventions include increased hypoglycemia
(including severe), hospitalizations, weight gain, water retention, and death.
Adverse effects associated with pharmacologic treatments for diabetes include but are not limited to 
gastrointestinal side effects, hypoglycemia, weight gain, congestive heart failure, joint pain, fractures, and
genital mycotic infections. These adverse effects increase with higher doses and greater numbers of 
medications likely required to achieve lower HbA1c levels.
Guidance Statements
Guidance Statement 1: Clinicians should personalize goals for glycemic control in patients with type 2 
diabetes on the basis of a discussion of benefits and harms of pharmacotherapy, patients’ preferences, 
patients’ general health and life expectancy, treatment burden, and costs of care.
Guidance Statement 2: Clinicians should aim to achieve an HbA1c level between 7% and 8% in most 
patients with type 2 diabetes.
 
Guidance Statement 3: Clinicians should consider deintensifying pharmacologic therapy in patients with 
type 2 diabetes who achieve HbA1c levels less than 6.5%.
Guidance Statement 4: Clinicians should treat patients with type 2 diabetes to minimize symptoms related
to hyperglycemia and avoid targeting an HbA1c level in patients with a life expectancy less than 10 years
due to advanced age (80 years or older), residence in a nursing home, or chronic conditions (such as 
dementia, cancer, end-stage kidney disease, or severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or congestive 
heart failure) because the harms outweigh the benefits in this population.
High-Value Care
Deescalation of therapy, by reducing dosage or number of drugs, is warranted in many persons with HbA1c 
levels persistently <6.5% after treatment with drugs. Persons with advanced age and lower life expectancy 
should be treated to reduce symptoms rather than strictly focusing on specific HbA1c target levels.
Clinical Considerations
Encourage a healthy lifestyle (e.g., tobacco cessation, diet and exercise, and attaining ideal body weight), 
including for risk reduction in patients with known or high risk for cardiovascular disease.
Consider individual patient-level variables, such as polypharmacy issues, limited life expectancy, extensive 
multiple comorbid conditions, and cognitive impairment.
Consider patient preference when deciding on treatment strategies and goals.
Test results for HbA1c levels can vary because of such conditions as anemia and chronic kidney disease; 
therefore, clinicians should aim for a target range rather than a specific target.
To arrive at these guidance statements, the authors reviewed guidelines from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, the Institute for
Clinical Systems Improvement, the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology, the American
Diabetes Association, the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense.
HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
574 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 cancer, end-stage kidney disease, or severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease or congestive heart
failure) because the harms outweigh the benefits in
this population.
All of the evaluated guidelines suggest relaxing
HbA1c targets for patients with multiple comorbid con-
ditions, limited life expectancy, or increased risk for hy-
poglycemia (7–11). Setting stringent targets in these
populations is not an optimal approach, and clinicians
should instead focus on treating to reduce symptoms
from both disease and treatment. The ACP guidance
statement in persons with a life expectancy less than 10
years is based on the small death or cardiovascular
benefit of lower HbA1c targets through at least 10
years, which should be balanced with treatment harms,
including but not limited to hypoglycemia and patient
views of treatment burden. For example, a modeling
study has examined how treatment burden affects the
benefits of intensive versus moderate glycemic control
in patients with type 2 diabetes (25). Authors used mi-
crovascular benefits shown in UKDPS 33, as well as re-
ductions in congenital heart disease events from obser-
vational studies and the long-term follow-up of UKPDS,
to assess lifetime benefits of glycemic targets. Even
with low estimates of treatment-related adverse effects
and patient-perceived treatment burden, achieving
more intensive target HbA1c levels of 7.5% or below
rather than 8.5% (especially if using insulin) resulted in
net harm in most patients aged 55 years or older.
The Figure summarizes the guidance statements
and clinical considerations.
MULTIPLE CHRONIC CONDITIONS:
APPLICATION TO OLDER POPULATIONS
Consideration of how this evidence base applies in
older populations is important because of the high pro-
portion of older patients with multiple chronic comor-
bid conditions, the frequency of polypharmacy and
potential for drug interactions, and the consequent
likelihood that the balance of benefits and harms is dif-
ferent in older patients. For patients with multiple co-
morbid conditions, including renal failure, liver failure,
end-stage disease complications, cognitive impair-
ment, advanced microvascular or macrovascular com-
plications, or any other conditions that limit life expec-
tancy, the harms of more intensive HbA1c targets
outweigh the benefits. Many guidelines also discuss the
role of less intensive targets for older adults. In these
patients, the goal should be to minimize symptoms
rather than achieve a specific HbA1c target.
INSUFFICIENT AREAS OF EVIDENCE
Evidence from trials included here is insufficient to
evaluate the effect of HbA1c targets between 6.5% and
7% on clinical outcomes, and further research would be
needed to close this gap.
HIGH-VALUE CARE
ACP believes that clinicians should reevaluate
HbA1c levels and revise treatment strategies on the ba-
sis of changes in the balance of benefits and harms due
to changed costs of care and patient preferences, gen-
eral health, and life expectancy. In persons who reach
HbA1c levels less than 6.5% with drug treatment, de-
escalation of therapy (by reducing dosage or number
of drugs) is warranted to reduce harms, patient burden,
and costs of treatment. Generic medications are pre-
ferred when available. ACP recently provided recom-
mendations on pharmacologic treatment of type 2 dia-
betes (24).
POLICY IMPLICATION FOR PERFORMANCE
MEASURES
ACP suggests that any physician performance mea-
sures developed to evaluate quality of care should not
have a target HbA1c level below 8% for any patient
population and should not have any HbA1c targets for
older adults (for example, aged ≥80 years) or younger
persons with limited life expectancy due to serious co-
morbid conditions.
From American College of Physicians, Philadelphia, Pennsyl-
vania (A.Q.); Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Minneapolis, Minnesota (T.J.W.); Oregon Health & Science
University and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Or-
egon (D.K.); Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, Washing-
ton (C.H.); Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massa-
chusetts
(M.J.B.);
and
University
of
Pennsylvania
Health
System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (M.A.F.).
Note: Guidance statements are “guides” only and may not
apply to all patients and all clinical situations. Thus, they are
not intended to override clinicians'judgment. All ACP guid-
ance statements are considered automatically withdrawn or
invalid 5 years after publication, or once an update has been
issued.
Disclaimer: The authors of this article are responsible for its con-
tents, including any clinical or treatment recommendations.
Acknowledgment: The CGC thanks members of the ACP
Guidelines Public Panel for their review and comments on the
paper from a nonclinician public perspective: Cynthia Appley,
Jane Eleey, Ray Haeme, James Pantelas, Missy Carson Smith,
Janice Tufte, and Lelis Vernon.
Financial Support: Financial support for the development of
this guidance statement comes exclusively from the ACP op-
erating budget.
Disclosures: Dr. Barry reports grants and personal fees from
Healthwise, a nonprofit, outside the submitted work. Authors
not named here have disclosed no conflicts of interest. Au-
thors followed the policy regarding conflicts of interest de-
scribed at www.annals.org/article.aspx?articleid=745942. Dis-
closures can also be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors
/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M17-0939. All
financial and intellectual disclosures of interest were de-
clared, and potential conflicts were discussed and managed.
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018 575
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Dr. Vijan was recused from voting on the recommendations
for an active direct financial conflict. Dr. Manaker was recused
from voting on the recommendations for an active indirect fi-
nancial conflict. A record of disclosures of interest and manage-
ment of conflicts of interest is kept for each CGC meeting and
conference call and can be viewed at www.acponline.org
/clinical_information/guidelines/guidelines/conflicts_cgc.htm.
Requests for Single Reprints: Amir Qaseem, MD, PhD, MHA,
American College of Physicians, 190 N. Independence Mall
West, Philadelphia, PA 19106; e-mail, aqaseem@acponline
.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes
Statistics Report: Estimates of Diabetes and Its Burden in the United
States, 2014. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices; 2014.
2. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, Bruns DE, Horvath AR, Kirkman
MS, et al; National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry. Guidelines and
recommendations for laboratory analysis in the diagnosis and man-
agement of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2011;34:e61-99.
[PMID: 21617108] doi:10.2337/dc11-9998
3. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, Haffner S, Kahn SE, Horton ES, et al;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Differences in A1C by
race and ethnicity among patients with impaired glucose tolerance
in the Diabetes Prevention Program. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:
2453-7. [PMID: 17536077]
4. Wolffenbuttel BH, Herman WH, Gross JL, Dharmalingam M, Jiang
HH, Hardin DS. Ethnic differences in glycemic markers in patients
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2013;36:2931-6. [PMID:
23757434] doi:10.2337/dc12-2711
5. Bergenstal RM, Gal RL, Connor CG, Gubitosi-Klug R, Kruger D,
Olson BA, et al; T1D Exchange Racial Differences Study Group. Ra-
cial differences in the relationship of glucose concentrations and
hemoglobin A1c levels. Ann Intern Med. 2017;167:95-102. [PMID:
28605777] doi:10.7326/M16-2596
6. Ismail-Beigi F, Moghissi E, Kosiborod M, Inzucchi SE. Shifting par-
adigms in the medical management of type 2 diabetes: reflections
on recent cardiovascular outcome trials. J Gen Intern Med. 2017;32:
1044-51. [PMID: 28550608] doi:10.1007/s11606-017-4061-7
7. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Type 2
diabetes in adults: management. 2 December 2015. Accessed
at www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng28/resources/type-2-diabetes
-in-adults-management-pdf-1837338615493 on 1 May 2017.
8. Redmon B, Caccamo D, Flavin P, Michels R, O’Connor P,
Roberts J, et al; Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement.
Diagnosis and Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in
Adults. 16th ed. Bloomington, MN: Institute for Clinical Sys-
tems Improvement; July 2014.
9. Handelsman Y, Bloomgarden ZT, Grunberger G, Umpierrez G,
Zimmerman RS, Bailey TS, et al. American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology—clinical
practice guidelines for developing a diabetes mellitus comprehen-
sive care plan—2015. Endocr Pract. 2015;21(Suppl 1):1-87. [PMID:
25869408] doi:10.4158/EP15672.GL
10. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in
diabetes—2017. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(Suppl 1): S48-56.
11. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of Di-
abetes: A National Clinical Guideline. SIGN Publication no. 116. Ed-
inburgh, Scotland: Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network;
2013. Accessed at www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/55/index.htm
on 1 May 2017.
12. The Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Primary Care
Work Group. VA/DoD clinical practice guideline for the manage-
ment of type 2 diabetes mellitus in primary care. Version 5.0. April
2017.
Accessed
at
www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/CD
/diabetes/VADoDDMCPGFinal508.pdf on 8 August 2017.
13. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, Burgers JS, Cluzeau F,
Feder G, et al; AGREE Next Steps Consortium. AGREE II: advancing
guideline development, reporting and evaluation in health care.
CMAJ. 2010;182:E839-42. [PMID: 20603348] doi:10.1503/cmaj
.090449
14. Graham R, Mancher M, Miller Wolman D, Greenfield S, Stein-
berg E, eds; Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can
Trust. Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2011.
15. Qaseem A, Forland F, Macbeth F, Ollenschla
¨ger G, Phillips S, van
der Wees P; Board of Trustees of the Guidelines International Network.
Guidelines International Network: toward international standards for
clinical practice guidelines. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:525-31. [PMID:
22473437] doi:10.7326/0003-4819-156-7-201204030-00009
16. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews DR, Neil HA.
10-year follow-up of intensive glucose control in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1577-89. [PMID: 18784090] doi:10.1056
/NEJMoa0806470
17. Hayward RA, Reaven PD, Wiitala WL, Bahn GD, Reda DJ, Ge L,
et al; VADT Investigators. Follow-up of glycemic control and cardio-
vascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2197-
206. [PMID: 26039600] doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1414266
18. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, Goff DC Jr, Bigger JT, Buse
JB, et al; Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study
Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2545-59. [PMID: 18539917] doi:10.1056
/NEJMoa0802743
19. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Genuth S, Ismail-Beigi F, Buse JB, Goff
DC Jr, et al; ACCORD Study Group. Long-term effects of intensive
glucose lowering on cardiovascular outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2011;
364:818-28. [PMID: 21366473] doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1006524
20. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, Neal B, Billot L, Woodward M,
et al; ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood glucose con-
trol and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2560-72. [PMID: 18539916] doi:10.1056
/NEJMoa0802987
21. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, Reda D, Emanuele N, Reaven
PD, et al; VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular compli-
cations in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:
129-39. [PMID: 19092145] doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0808431
22. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on com-
plications in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34).
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:
854-65. [PMID: 9742977]
23. Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin
compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in
patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). UK Prospective Diabetes
Study (UKPDS) Group. Lancet. 1998;352:837-53. [PMID: 9742976]
24. Qaseem A, Barry MJ, Humphrey LL, Forciea MA; Clinical
Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Oral
pharmacologic treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a clinical prac-
tice guideline update from the American College of Physicians. Ann
Intern Med. 2017;166:279-90. [PMID: 28055075] doi:10.7326/M16-
1860
25. Vijan S, Sussman JB, Yudkin JS, Hayward RA. Effect of patients'
risks and preferences on health gains with plasma glucose level low-
ering in type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:1227-
34. [PMID: 24979148] doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.2894.
CLINICAL GUIDELINE
ACP Guidance Statement on HbA1c Targets With Pharmacologic Therapy
576 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Current Author Addresses: Dr. Qaseem: 190 N. Indepen-
dence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA 19106.
Dr. Wilt: VA Medical Center 111-0, Minneapolis, MN 55417.
Dr. Barry: 50 Staniford Street, 9th Floor, Boston, MA 02114.
Dr. Horwitch: 1100 Ninth Avenue C8-GIM, Seattle, WA 98101.
Dr. Kansagara: 3710 SW US Veterans Hospital Road, Portland,
OR 97239.
Dr. Forciea: 3615 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: A. Qaseem,
T.J. Wilt, D. Kansagara, M.J. Barry, M.A. Forciea.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: A. Qaseem, T.J. Wilt,
D. Kansagara, C. Horwitch, M.J. Barry, M.A. Forciea.
Drafting of the article: A. Qaseem, T.J. Wilt, D. Kansagara, C.
Horwitch, M.A. Forciea.
Critical revision of the article for important intellectual con-
tent: A. Qaseem, T.J. Wilt, D. Kansagara, M.J. Barry, M.A.
Forciea.
Final approval of the article: A. Qaseem, T.J. Wilt, D. Kansa-
gara, C. Horwitch, M.J. Barry, M.A. Forciea.
Statistical expertise: A. Qaseem, T.J. Wilt.
Obtaining of funding: A. Qaseem.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: A. Qaseem.
Collection and assembly of data: A. Qaseem, T.J. Wilt, D. Kan-
sagara, M.J. Barry.
APPENDIX: SUMMARY AND EVALUATION OF
REVIEWED GUIDELINES
AACE/ACE
Recommendations
Glucose targets should be individualized and
take into account life expectancy, disease du-
ration, presence or absence of micro- and ma-
crovascular complications, CVD [cardiovascu-
lar disease] risk factors, comorbid conditions,
and risk for hypoglycemia, as well as the pa-
tient'
s psychological status (Grade A; BEL [best
evidence level] 1). In general, the goal of ther-
apy should be an A1C level ≤6.5% for most
nonpregnant adults, if it can be achieved
safely . . . (Grade D; BEL 4). . . .
In adults with recent onset of T2D [type 2 dia-
betes] and no clinically significant CVD, glyce-
mic control aimed at normal (or near-normal)
glycemia should be considered, with the aim of
preventing the development of micro- and ma-
crovascular complications over a lifetime, if it
can be achieved without substantial hypogly-
cemia or other unacceptable adverse conse-
quences (Grade A; BEL 1). . . . A less stringent
glucose goal should be considered (A1C 7 to
8%) in patients with history of severe hypogly-
cemia, limited life expectancy, advanced renal
disease or macrovascular complications, exten-
sive comorbid conditions, or long-standing DM
[diabetes mellitus] in which the A1C goal has
been difficult to attain despite intensive efforts,
so long as the patient remains free of polydipsia,
polyuria, polyphagia, and other hyperglycemia-
associated symptoms (Grade A; BEL 1). (9)
Comments
According to the AACE/ACE grading scheme,
“Grade A; BEL 1” indicates highest-quality evidence
with little or no effect from subjective factors on recom-
mendation (evidence mapped to recommendation)
and “Grade D; BEL 4”indicates lowest-quality evidence
with little or no effect from subjective factors on recom-
mendation (9).
This guideline is a consensus, expert-based guide-
line, with no systematic review of evidence. In general,
the methods behind the clinical recommendations
were not clearly presented. This guideline recom-
mends a very low target HbA1c level in most adults
(≤6.5%) if it can be achieved safely, although a higher
target (7% to 8%) is recommended in patients with mul-
tiple chronic conditions or shorter lifespan.
ADA
Recommendations
A reasonable A1C goal for many nonpregnant
adults is <7% (53 mmol/mol). ([Grade] A)
Providers
might
reasonably
suggest
more
stringent A1C goals (such as <6.5% [48 mmol/
mol]) for selected individual patients if this can
be achieved without significant hypoglycemia
or other adverse effects of treatment (i.e.,
polypharmacy). Appropriate patients might in-
clude those with short duration of diabetes,
type 2 diabetes treated with lifestyle or met-
formin only, long life expectancy, or no signifi-
cant cardiovascular disease. ([Grade] C)
Less stringent A1C goals (such as <8% [64
mmol/mol]) may be appropriate for patients
with a history of severe hypoglycemia, limited
life expectancy, advanced microvascular or
macrovascular
complications,
extensive
co-
morbid conditions, or long-standing diabetes
in whom the goal is difficult to achieve despite
diabetes self-management education, appro-
priate glucose monitoring, and effective doses
of multiple glucose-lowering agents including
insulin. ([Grade] B). (10)
Comments
According to the ADA grading scheme, Grade A is
“[c]lear evidence from well-conducted, generalizable
randomized controlled trials that are adequately pow-
ered.” Grade B is “[s]upportive evidence from well-
conducted cohort studies” (10).
This guideline does not clearly present methods or
details about the systematic reviews that were used to
develop the recommendations. It states that HbA1c tar-
gets should be less than 7% in most adults, even more
stringent (<6.5%) in select cases treated with lifestyle or
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 metformin alone, and less stringent (<8%) in patients
with multiple chronic conditions.
ICSI
Recommendation
A clinician should personalize goals with pa-
tients diagnosed with T2DM [type 2 diabetes
mellitus] to achieve glycemic control with a he-
moglobin A1c < 7% to < 8% depending on
individual patient factors [strong recommenda-
tion, high-quality evidence]. (8)
Comments
The ICSI clearly presents the evidence and meth-
odology behind their clinical recommendations. It
specifies that an HbA1c target of less than 8% may be
more appropriate than 7% in persons with cardiovascu-
lar disease or high cardiovascular risk, history of severe
hypoglycemia requiring assistance, polypharmacy is-
sues, limited life expectancy (<10 years), cognitive im-
pairment, or extensive comorbid conditions (renal or
liver failure or end-stage disease complications). It
highlights that efforts to achieve HbA1c levels below 7%
may increase risk for death, weight gain, hypoglycemia,
and other adverse effects in many patients.
NICE
Recommendations
Involve adults with type 2 diabetes in decisions
about their individual HbA1c target. Encour-
age them to achieve the target and maintain it
unless any resulting adverse effects (including
hypoglycaemia), or their efforts to achieve their
target, impair their quality of life. . . .
For adults with type 2 diabetes managed either
by lifestyle and diet, or by lifestyle and diet
combined with a single drug not associated
with hypoglycaemia, support the person to aim
for an HbA1c level of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%). For
adults on a drug associated with hypoglycae-
mia, support the person to aim for an HbA1c
level of 53 mmol/mol (7.0%). . . .
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if HbA1c levels
are not adequately controlled by a single drug
and rise to 58 mmol/mol (7.5%) or higher:
Y reinforce advice about diet, lifestyle and ad-
herence to drug treatment and
Y support the person to aim for an HbA1c level
of 53 mmol/mol (7.0%) and
Y intensify drug treatment. . . .
Consider relaxing the target HbA1c level . . . on a
case-by-case basis, with particular consideration
for people who are older or frail, for adults with
type 2 diabetes:
Y who are unlikely to achieve longer-term risk-
reduction benefits, for example, people with a
reduced life expectancy
Y for whom tight blood glucose control poses
a high risk of the consequences of hypoglycae-
mia, for example, people who are at risk of fall-
ing, people who have impaired awareness of
hypoglycaemia, and people who drive or oper-
ate machinery as part of their job
• for whom intensive management would not
be appropriate, for example, people with sig-
nificant comorbidities. (7)
Comments
The NICE guideline is based on a clear description
of the benefits and harms of tight glycemic control. It
encourages patients to be involved in decisions about
their HbA1c target. Target levels range from 6.5% when
only diet and exercise are used to manage diabetes,
7% when patients are treated with monotherapy associ-
ated with hypoglycemia, and 7.5% when they are treated
with combination therapy. The guideline stresses an indi-
vidualized approach in patients with multiple chronic con-
ditions or limited life expectancy, although it does not de-
fine limited life expectancy.
SIGN
Recommendations
An HbA1c target of 7.0% (53 mmol/mol) among
people with type 2 diabetes is reasonable to re-
duce risk of microvascular disease and macrovas-
cular disease. A target of 6.5% (48 mmol/mol)
may be appropriate at diagnosis. Targets should
be set for individuals in order to balance benefits
with harms, in particular hypoglycemia and
weight gain (Grade A). (11)
Comments
According to the SIGN grading scheme, grade A
corresponds to at least 1 meta-analysis, systematic re-
view, or randomized controlled trial rated as high qual-
ity and directly applicable to the target population or a
body of evidence consisting principally of studies rated
well with low risk of bias, directly applicable to the tar-
get population, and showing overall consistency of
results (11).
The SIGN guideline is based on a clear description
of the benefits and harms of tight glycemic control. It
recommends an HbA1c target less than 7%. It also rec-
ommends individualized targets with no clarity on spe-
cific target levels when individualized.
VA/DoD
Recommendations
We recommend setting an HbA1c target range
based on absolute risk reduction of significant
microvascular complications, life expectancy,
patient preferences and social determinants of
health. [Strong recommendation]
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 We recommend developing an individualized
glycemic management plan, based on the pro-
vider'
s appraisal of the risk-benefit ratio and
patient preferences. [Strong recommendation]
We recommend assessing patient characteristics
such as race, ethnicity, chronic kidney disease,
and non-glycemic factors (e.g., laboratory meth-
odology and assay variability) when interpreting
HbA1c, fructosamine and other glycemic bio-
marker results. [Strong recommendation]
We recommend an individualized target range
for HbA1c taking into account individual pref-
erences, presence or absence of microvascular
complications, and presence or severity of co-
morbid conditions. [Strong recommendation]
We suggest a target HbA1c range of 6.0-7.0%
for patients with a life expectancy greater than
10-15 years and absent or mild microvascular
complications, if it can be safely achieved.
[Weak recommendation]
We recommend that in patients with type 2
diabetes, a range of HbA1c 7.0-8.5% is ap-
propriate for most individuals with estab-
lished microvascular or macrovascular dis-
ease, comorbid conditions, or 5-10 years life
expectancy, if it can be safely achieved.
[Strong recommendation]
We suggest a target HbA1c range of 8.0-9.0%
for patients with type 2 diabetes with life ex-
pectancy <5 years, significant comorbid condi-
tions, advanced complications of diabetes, or
difficulties in self-management attributable to
e.g., mental status, disability or other factors
such as food insecurity and insufficient social
support. [Weak recommendation]
We suggest that providers be aware that
HbA1c variability is a risk factor for microvascu-
lar and macrovascular outcomes. [Weak rec-
ommendation] (12)
Comments
The VA/DoD guideline is based on a description of
the benefits and harms of glycemic control. It empha-
sizes the importance of shared decision making in set-
ting HbA1c goals and recommends target ranges based
on comorbid conditions, life expectancy, and other fac-
tors rather than setting a fixed target HbA1c level. It
emphasizes that the lower targets of 6.0% to 7.0% and
7.0% to 8.5% should be attained if they can be reached
safely.
Web-Only References
26. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, Basile J, Calles J, Cohen
RM, et al; ACCORD trial group. Effect of intensive treatment of hy-
perglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes: an
analysis of the ACCORD randomised trial. Lancet. 2010;376:419-30.
[PMID: 20594588] doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60576-4
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Figure. Mean AGREE II scores for items in each domain across the 6 reviewers.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3. Population
described
2. Health question(s)
described
1. Objective
described
Scope and Purpose
AACE/ACE
ADA
ICSI
NICE
SIGN
VA/DOD
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
6. Target user
defined
5. Target population
preferences sought
4. Relevant professional
groups in GDG
Stakeholder Involvement
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
14. Updating procedure
13. External review
before publication
12. Recommendations
explicitly linked to evidence
11. Benefits, side effects, and
risks considered
10. Methods for formulating
recommendations
9. Evidence strengths
and limitations
8. Criteria for evidence
selection
7. Systematic evidence
methods
Rigor of Development
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
17. Easily identifiable
recommendations
16. Clear options
15. Specific
recommendations
Clarity of Presentation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
21. Monitoring/
auditing
20. Resource 
implications
19. Tools for 
practice
18. Facilitators 
and barriers
Applicability
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
23. Competing
 interests addressed
22. No influence
from funding
Editorial Independence
Points
Points
Each question was rated on a Likert scale with a minimum of 1 point and a maximum of 7 points. The scores were averaged for each of the 6
reviewers. Error bars represent calculated standard deviation. AACE/ACE = American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American
College of Endocrinology; ADA = American Diabetes Association; AGREE II = Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II; GDG =
guideline development group; ICSI = Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement; NICE = National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; SIGN =
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; VA/DoD = U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 1. Scaled AGREE II Domain Scores for Each Guideline and Overall Assessment
Variable
AACE/
ACE
ADA
ICSI
NICE
SIGN
VA/DoD
Scaled domain score, %*
Scope and purpose
74
68
83
91
90
89
Stakeholder involvement
27
50
73
91
94
82
Rigor of development
42
36
70
81
82
70
Clarity of presentation
70
82
80
82
81
84
Applicability
27
50
72
65
77
55
Editorial independence
21
49
74
86
68
72
Overall guideline assessment†
Average overall quality rating‡
2.8
3.7
5.3
5.7
5.8
5.7
I would recommend this guideline for use
6 no
1 yes
4 yes with
modifications 1 no
3 yes
3 yes with
modifications§
3 yes
3 yes with
modifications§
3 yes
3 yes with
modifications§
3 yes
3 yes with
modifications§
AACE/ACE = American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology; ADA = American Diabetes Association;
AGREE II = Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II; ICSI = Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement; NICE = National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence; SIGN = Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; VA/DoD = U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of
Defense.
* Calculated as follows: (obtained score − minimum possible score) ÷ (maximum possible score − minimum possible score).
† Final overall assessment questions on AGREE II.
‡ Out of 7 possible points; average score from all raters.
§ Although this guideline scored high on the AGREE II domains and was methodologically sound, the reviewers did not fully agree with its final
recommendations and therefore recommend with modifications.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2. Study, Patient, and Outcome Characteristics of Major Type 2 Diabetes Trials Included in the Assessed Guidelines
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
ACCORD, 2008 (18)
Mean: 3.5 y
n = 10 251
62.2
10 y (35% with
prior CV event)
Median: 8.1
vs. 8.1
Median: 6.4
vs. 7.5
MACE* (first occurrence
of nonfatal MI, nonfatal
stroke, or death from
CVD): HR, 0.90 (95%
CI, 0.78 to 1.04); 6.9%
vs. 7.2%
No difference in
microvascular
outcomes (including
renal failure, creatinine
doubling, visual
impairment, retinal
photocoagulation, and
neuropathy)
All-cause mortality:
HR, 1.22 (95%
CI, 1.01 to 1.46)
Trial stopped early
due to increased
all-cause
mortality, which
did not vary by
baseline sex,
age, HbA1c level,
race, or previous
CV event
CV mortality: HR,
1.35 (95% CI,
1.04 to 1.76);
2.6% vs. 1.8%
Nonfatal MI: HR,
0.76 (95% CI,
0.62 to 0.92);
3.6% vs. 4.6%
Nonfatal stroke:
HR, 1.06 (95%
CI, 0.75 to
1.50)
Fatal/nonfatal
CHF: HR, 1.18
(95% CI, 0.93
to 1.49)
Hypoglycemia
(requiring
assistance): 10.5%
vs. 3.5%; P < 0.001
Any nonhypoglycemic
serious AEs: 2.2%
vs. 1.6%; P = 0.03
Mean weight gain: 3.5
kg vs. 0.4 kg
Weight gain >10 kg:
27.8% vs. 14.1%;
P < 0.001
Fluid retention: 70.1%
vs. 66.8%; P < 0.001
Greater use of oral
hypoglycemic drugs
and insulin
ACCORD, 2010 (26)
ACCORD, 2011 (19)
Mean extended
follow-up: 4.9 y
Median: 7.2
vs. 7.6
MACE*: HR, 0.91 (95%
CI, 0.81 to 1.03)
“First composite
microvascular
complications”
(development of renal
failure, retinal
photocoagulation, or
vitrectomy to treat
retinopathy): HR, 0.95
(95% CI, 0.85 to 1.07)
“2nd composite
microvascular
complications”(first
composite + Michigan
neuropathy screening
instrument score >2.0):
HR, 0.95 (95% CI, 0.89
to 1.01)
All-cause mortality:
HR, 1.19 (95%
CI, 1.03 to 1.38);
1.53 vs.1.27
CV mortality: HR,
1.29 (95% CI,
1.04 to 1.60);
0.74% vs. 0.57%
Nonfatal MI: HR,
0.82 (95% CI,
0.70 to 0.96);
1.18 vs. 1.42
Fatal/nonfatal
stroke: HR,
0.86 (95% CI,
0.65 to 1.13)
Fatal/nonfatal
CHF: HR, 1.09
(95% CI, 0.91
to 1.32)
Continued on following page
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2—Continued
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
ADVANCE, 2008 (20)
Median: 5 y
n = 11 140
Mean: 66.0
7.9 y (32% with
prior CVD)
Mean: 7.5
vs. 7.5
Median: 7.2
vs. 7.2
Mean: 6.5
vs. 7.3
Median: 6.4
vs. 7.0
Combined major
macrovascular and
microvascular events*:
HR, 0.90 (95% CI, 0.82
to 0.98); ARR, 1.9%;
18.1% vs. 20.0%
Results were similar
regardless of baseline
micro/macrovascular
disease status
Major microvascular
events: HR, 0.86 (95%
CI, 0.77 to 0.97); 9.4%
vs. 10.9% (primarily
due to reduction in
nephropathy incidence
[HR, 0.79 {95% CI, 0.66
to 0.93}] mostly
development of
macroalbuminuria
2.9% vs. 4.1% without
effect on doubling of
serum creatinine level
or renal replacement
therapy)
New or worsening
neuropathy or
retinopathy and visual
deterioration were not
significantly reduced
All-cause mortality:
HR, 0.93 (95%
CI, 0.83 to 1.06)
CV mortality: HR,
0.88 (95% CI,
0.74 to 1.04)
Macrovascular
events: HR,
0.94 (95% CI,
0.84 to 1.06)
Nonfatal MI:
RRR, 2% (95%
CI, −23% to
22%)
All CV events:
RRR, 2% (95%
CI, −10% to
13%)
Heart failure:
RRR, 5% (95%
CI, −14% to
21%)
Nonfatal stroke:
RRR, −2%
(95% CI,
−24% to 15%)
Severe hypoglycemia:
HR, 1.86 (95% CI,
1.42 to 2.40); 2.7%
vs. 1.5%; 0.7 vs. 0.4
per 100 patient-years
Minor hypoglycemia:
120 vs. 90 per 100
patient-years
Hospitalization: 44.9%
vs. 42.8%; HR, 1.07
(95% CI, 1.01 to 1.13)
Greater use of oral
hypoglycemic drugs
and insulin
Continued on following page
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2—Continued
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
UKPDS 33, 1998 (23)
Sulfonylurea ± insulin ±
metformin
Median: 11.1 y
n = 3867
54
Newly diagnosed
(36% with
retinopathy)
Median: 7.0
vs. 7.9
Any diabetes-related end
point* (sudden death,
death from
hyperglycemia or
hypoglycemia, fatal or
nonfatal MI, angina,
heart failure, stroke,
renal failure,
amputation, vitreous
hemorrhage,
retinopathy requiring
photocoagulation,
blindness in 1 eye or
cataract): RR, 0.88 (95%
CI, 0.79 to 0.99); 40.9
vs. 46.0 per 1000
patient-years
Results did not vary by
use of sulfonylurea or
insulin for intensive
control
Microvascular end point:
RR, 0.75 (95% CI, 0.60
to 0.93); 8.6 vs. 11.4
per 1000 patient-years
Retinal
photocoagulation: RR,
0.71 (99% CI, 0.53 to
0.96); 7.9 vs. 11.0 per
1000 patient-years
All-cause mortality:
HR, 0.94 (95%
CI, 0.80 to 1.10)
Diabetes-related
mortality: HR,
0.90 (95% CI,
0.78 to 1.11)
Fatal MI: RR, 0.94
(95% CI, 0.68 to
1.30)
Fatal stroke: RR,
1.17 (95% CI,
0.54 to 2.54)
No single
macrovascular
end point was
statistically
significant,
including
nonfatal MI,
heart failure,
angina,
nonfatal
stroke,
amputation,
renal failure;
risk
differences
were ≤2 per
1000
patient-years
Increased
hypoglycemia,
including major
hypoglycemia
Major hypoglycemic
episodes per year:
chlorpropamide,
1.0%;
glibenclamide,
1.4%; insulin, 1.8%;
and diet, 0.7%; all P
< 0.0001
Any hypoglycemic
episodes:
chlorpropamide,
16%;
glibenclamide,
21%; insulin, 28%;
diet, 10%
Hypoglycemic
episodes in patients
on diet therapy
were reactive and
occurred either
after meals or after
termination of
glucose infusions
given while in
hospital
Weight gain: 3.1 kg
(99% CI, –0.9 to 7.0
kg); P < 0.0001
Continued on following page
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2—Continued
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
UKPDS 34, 1998 (22)
Metformin
Median: 10.7 y
n = 753
Sulfonylurea or insulin
added if
hyperglycemic
symptoms developed
53
New diagnosis
(35% with
retinopathy)
Median: 7.2
Median: 7.4
vs. 8.0
Any diabetes-related end
point*: RR, 0.68 (95%
CI, 0.53 to 0.87)
(mostly clinical and
macrovascular but
includes
photocoagulation);
43.3 vs. 29.8 per 1000
patient-years
Microvascular: RR, 0.71
(95% CI, 0.42 to 1.19)
Sulfonylurea +
metformin, any DM
end point: RR, 1.04
(95% CI, 0.77 to 1.42)
Any
diabetes-related
death: RR, 0.58
(95% CI, 0.37 to
0.91); 7.5 vs.
12.7 per 1000
patient-years
All-cause mortality:
RR, 0.64 (95%
CI, 0.45 to 0.91);
13.5 vs. 20.6 per
1000
patient-years
Fatal stroke: RR,
0.75 (95% CI,
0.19 to 2.93)
Fatal MI: RR, 0.50
(95% CI, 0.23 to
1.09)
Early addition of
metformin to
sulfonylureas
resulted in
increased
all-cause
mortality: RR,
1.60 (95% CI,
1.02 to 2.52)
and
diabetes-related
death: RR, 1.96
(95% CI, 1.02 to
3.75), compared
with continued
sulfonylurea
alone
MI: RR, 1.09
(95% CI, 0.67
to 1.18)
Stroke: RR, 1.21
(95% CI, 0.58
to 2.65)
No significant
difference in
heart failure,
angina,
nonfatal
stroke,
amputation,
or renal
failure
The addition of
metformin to
sulfonylurea was
associated with a
96% increased risk
for diabetes-related
death (P = 0.039);
addition of
metformin to
sulfonylurea
therapy also
increased the risk
for death from any
cause (60%
increase; P = 0.041)
Continued on following page
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2—Continued
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
UKPDS 33, 2008 (16)
Follow-up for
sulfonylurea
Median: 16.8 y
n = 3867
Median: 7.9
vs. 8.5
Any diabetes-related end
point*: RR, 0.91 (95%
CI, 0.83 to 0.99); 48.1
vs. 52.2 per 1000
patient-years
Microvascular disease:
RR, 0.76 (95% CI, 0.64
to 0.89); 11.0 vs. 14.2
per 1000 patient-years
All-cause mortality:
RR, 0.87 (95% CI,
0.79 to 0.96);
26.8 vs. 30.3 per
1000
patient-years
Diabetes-related
mortality: HR,
0.83 (95% CI,
0.73 to 0.96);
14.5 vs. 17.0 per
1000
patient-years
MI: RR, 0.85
(95% CI, 0.74
to 0.97); 16.8
vs. 19.6 per
1000
patient-years
Stroke: RR, 0.91
(95% CI, 0.73
to 1.13)
Peripheral
vascular
disease: RR,
0.82 (95% CI,
0.56 to 1.19)
UKPDS 34, 2008 (16)
Follow-up for
metformin
Median: 17.7 y
n = 753
Median: 8.4
vs. 8.9
Any diabetes-related end
point*: RR, 0.79 (95%
CI, 0.66 to 0.95); 45.7
vs. 53.9 per 1000
patient-years
Microvascular disease:
RR, 0.84 (95% CI, 0.60
to 1.17); 12.4 vs. 13.4
per 1000 patient-years
All-cause mortality:
RR, 0.73 (95% CI,
0.59 to 0.89);
25.9 vs. 33.1 per
1000
patient-years
Diabetes-related
mortality: HR,
0.70 (95% CI,
0.53 to 0.92);
14.0 vs. 18.7 per
1000
patient-years
MI: RR, 0.67
(95% CI, 0.51
to 0.89); 14.8
vs. 21.1 per
1000
patient-years
Stroke: RR, 0.80
(95% CI, 0.50
to 1.27)
Peripheral
vascular
disease: RR,
0.63 (95% CI,
0.32 to 1.27)
Continued on following page
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2—Continued
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
VADT, 2009 (21)
Median: 5.6 y
n = 1791
Mean: 60.4
11.5 y (prior CVD:
40.7%)
Median: 9.4
Median: 6.9
vs. 8.4
Microvascular
complications: No
difference between
intensive and standard
control, including
ophthalmologic
disorder (cataract
surgery,
photocoagulation,
vitrectomy, retinopathy
[progression to
proliferative disease,
progression to
clinically significant
macular edema,
increase of 2 steps in
severity of disease,
new onset]);
neuropathy (including
any, mononeuropathy,
peripheral,
autonomic);
nephropathy (doubling
of serum creatinine;
creatinine level >3
mg/dL; GFR <15
mL/min)
Any increase in
albuminuria, 9.1% vs.
13.8%; P < 0.01
All-cause mortality:
HR, 1.07 (95%
CI, 0.81 to 1.42)
CV mortality: HR,
1.32 (95% CI,
0.81 to 2.14)
MACE* (MI;
stroke; death
from CV
causes; new
or worsening
CHF; surgical
intervention
for cardiac,
cerebrovascular,
or peripheral
vascular
disease;
inoperable
coronary
artery
disease;
amputation
for ischemic
gangrene):
HR, 0.88 (95%
CI, 0.74 to
1.05) (or any
component of
MACE)
Hypoglycemic
episode with
impaired
consciousness: 9 vs.
3 per 100
patient-years; P <
0.001
Hypoglycemia with
complete loss of
consciousness: 3 vs.
1 per 100
patient-years; P <
0.001
Hypoglycemia as
serious AE: 8.5% vs.
3.1%; P < 0.0001
With documented
glucose <50 mg/dL:
203 vs. 52 per 100
patient-years; P <
0.001
Any serious AE: 24.1%
vs. 17.6%; P = 0.05
Dyspnea: 11.0% vs.
7.2%; P = 0.006
End of study weight:
232 lb vs. 223 lb;
P = 0.01
BMI: 33.8 vs. 32.3
kg/m2; P = 0.01
Continued on following page
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
 Appendix Table 2—Continued
Study, Year
(Reference)
Mean or Median
Follow-up
Patients Enrolled
Age at
Baseline, y
Diabetes
Duration
Intensive vs. Control
HbA1c Level, %
Microvascular and
Combined
Microvascular/
Macrovascular Events
Mortality
Macrovascular
Events
AEs
Baseline
Achieved
VADT, 2015 (17)
follow-up
Median: 11.8 y
�8.2
MACE* (time to first
major CV event: heart
attack, stroke, new or
worsening CHF
[including
hospitalization with EF
<40%], amputation for
ischemic gangrene, or
CV-related death): HR,
0.83 (95% CI, 0.70 to
0.99); 44.1 vs. 52.7 per
1000 person-years
Results did not differ
between patients with
lower overall vs. higher
overall CV risk at
baseline or with
respect to a prior CV
event or baseline
HbA1c
All-cause mortality:
HR, 1.05 (95%
CI, 0.89 to 1.25)
CV mortality: HR,
0.88 (95% CI,
0.64 to 1.20)
ACCORD = Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes; ADVANCE = Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron Modified Release Controlled Evaluation; AE = adverse
event; ARR = absolute risk reduction; BMI = body mass index; CHF = congestive heart failure; CV = cardiovascular; CVD = cardiovascular disease; DM = diabetes mellitus; EF = ejection fraction;
GFR = glomerular filtration rate; HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c; HR = hazard ratio; MACE = major adverse cardiac event; MI = myocardial infarction; RR = relative risk; RRR = relative risk reduction;
UKPDS = United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study; VADT = Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial.
* Primary study outcome.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 8 • 17 April 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ on 09/01/2018
