 A brush-polymer conjugate of exendin-4 reduces blood glucose 
for up to five days and eliminates poly(ethylene glycol) 
antigenicity
Yizhi Qi1, Antonina Simakova2, Nancy J. Ganson3, Xinghai Li1, Kelli M. Luginbuhl1, Imran 
Özer1, Wenge Liu1, Michael S. Hershfield3,4, Krzysztof Matyjaszewski2, and Ashutosh 
Chilkoti1,*
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
2Department of Chemistry, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
NC, USA
4Department of Biochemistry, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA
Abstract
The delivery of therapeutic peptides and proteins is often challenged by a short half-life, and thus 
the need for frequent injections that limit efficacy, reduce patient compliance and increase 
treatment cost. Here, we demonstrate that a single subcutaneous injection of site-specific (C-
terminal) conjugates of exendin-4 (exendin) — a therapeutic peptide that is clinically used to treat 
type 2 diabetes — and poly[oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate] (POEGMA) with 
precisely controlled molecular weights lowered blood glucose for up to 120 h in fed mice. Most 
notably, we show that an exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate with an average of 9 side-chain ethylene 
glycol (EG) repeats exhibits significantly lower reactivity towards patient-derived anti-
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) antibodies than two FDA-approved PEGylated drugs, and that 
reducing the side-chain length to 3 EG repeats completely eliminates PEG antigenicity without 
compromising in vivo efficacy. Our findings establish the site-specific conjugation of POEGMA as 
a next-generation PEGylation technology for improving the pharmacological performance of 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: chilkoti@duke.edu. 
Author Contributions
Y.Q. and A.C. conceived and designed the research; Y.Q., A.S., N.J.G., X.L, I.Ö. and W.L. performed the experiments; A.S. and K.M. 
provided technical expertise in polymer chemistry; K.M.L. and W.L. contributed to the design of in vivo studies; N.J.G. and M.S.H. 
provided materials and technical expertise for the antigenicity studies; Y.Q., N.J.G., K.M.L., M.S.H., K.M. and A.C. analyzed and 
interpreted the results; Y.Q. and A.C. wrote the manuscript; and A.S., N.J.G., K.M.L., M.S.H., K.M. edited the manuscript. All authors 
discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests
A.C. and Y.Q. have a pending patent on the sortase-catalyzed C-terminal polymer conjugation technology (WO 2014194244 A1). 
M.S.H. is a co-inventor of Pegloticase (Krystexxa®) and receives royalties from sales of Pegloticase, along with his employer, Duke 
University.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available in “figshare” with the identifier doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.3976761 54.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biomed Eng. 2016 ; 1: . doi:10.1038/s41551-016-0002.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 traditional PEGylated drugs, whose safety and efficacy are hindered by pre-existing anti-PEG 
antibodies in patients.
Introduction
With more than a hundred peptides and proteins approved by the FDA to treat various 
diseases and many more in clinical and pre-clinical development, therapeutic peptides and 
proteins are an important class of drugs today 1,2. However, the clinical use of all peptides 
and most proteins (with the exception of antibodies, albumin 3 and transferrin 4) is 
challenged by their short plasma half-life, necessitating frequent injections, which can cause 
an undesirable peak-to-valley fluctuation of the drug concentration in vivo as well as reduce 
patient compliance and increase treatment cost 5. Other limitations of peptide and protein 
therapeutics may include poor stability, low solubility and immunogenicity 6. To address 
these limitations, various delivery strategies have been developed for sustained delivery of 
peptide and protein therapeutics, ranging from particulate systems, depots, to chemical 
conjugation with long circulating polymers such as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), or 
recombinant fusions with long circulating proteins such as albumin or the Fc domain of 
antibodies 7,8.
PEGylation, or the covalent conjugation of therapeutic peptides and proteins, and more 
recently nucleotide-based drugs, with the “stealth” polymer PEG, is one of the most widely 
used approaches to increase the circulation half-life and stability and to reduce the 
immunogenicity of these therapeutic biomolecules, evident from the many PEGylated drugs 
approved by the FDA, and numerous others in development 6,9,10. However, after close to 
four decades of research and over two decades of clinical use, the drawbacks of PEGylation 
have begun to emerge. Conventional methods for the synthesis of PEGylated conjugates 
have significant limitations: 1) conjugation involves the reaction between protein-repulsive 
PEG chains and biomacromolecules, so that even with a large excess of polymer, steric 
hindrance still results in a low yield of conjugate, typically in the 10–20% range 11; 2) the 
presence of a large excess of unreacted polymer makes product purification non-trivial; and 
3) conjugation typically involves reacting the chain-ends of the polymer with reactive side-
groups on lysine and cysteine residues, which are often promiscuously distributed on the 
biomolecule, thus yielding chemically heterogeneous products that can significantly 
compromise the bioactivity of the drug and greatly complicate regulatory approval 12–15.
Furthermore, the immunogenicity of PEG has recently attracted much attention. Anti-PEG 
antibodies have been induced in patients treated with some PEGylated enzymes, and in 
clinical trials of PEG-uricase 16,17 and PEG-asparaginase 18, these anti-PEG antibodies have 
markedly accelerated blood clearance, abrogated clinical efficacy, and increased the risk and 
severity of infusion reactions. Circulating anti-PEG antibodies have also been found in 
individuals naïve to PEGylated materials, possibly induced by chronic exposure to free 
PEGs present in commonly used consumer products 19,20. High levels of such pre-existing 
anti-PEG antibodies have recently been linked to serious first-exposure allergic reactions to 
a PEGylated RNA aptamer, which led to early termination of a clinical trial 21.
Qi et al.
Page 2
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To address the synthetic limitations of previous PEG conjugation methodologies, we have 
previously developed a strategy named sortase-catalyzed polymer conjugation 22. This 
strategy exploits the C-terminal native peptide ligation mechanism of the enzyme sortase A, 
derived from Staphylococcus aureus, to attach a polymerization initiator site-specifically and 
stoichiometrically (1:1) at the C-terminus of a peptide or protein, to enable grafting of the 
PEG-like brush polymer poly[oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate] (POEGMA) 
from the peptide/protein macroinitiator by in situ Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization 
(ATRP) in aqueous buffer 23,24.
Although POEGMA has been grafted from various model proteins and peptides 22,25–29, 
very few studies to date have reported POEGMA conjugates of clinically relevant biologic 
therapeutics for systematic evaluation of the therapeutic potential of this class of conjugates, 
and conjugation was either carried out post-polymerization 30 or was non-specific 31. Using 
our sortase-catalyzed polymer conjugation strategy, we grafted POEGMA site-specifically 
(C-terminal) and stoichiometrically (1:1) from exendin-4 (exendin), a peptide drug that is 
clinically used to treat type 2 diabetes 32. We show that a single subcutaneous (s.c.) injection 
of exendin-C-POEGMA reduces blood glucose for 120 h in fed mice, which is 20 times 
longer than injection of the unmodified peptide. Most intriguingly, we show that breaking up 
and appending PEG as short oligomeric side-chains of optimized length on the conjugated 
POEGMA not only retains the long circulation of the POEGMA conjugates, but equally 
importantly eliminates their reactivity toward patient-derived PEG antibodies. These results 
demonstrate that the architecture of PEG appended to a biologic drug plays an important 
role in modulating its antigenicity. This finding is of particular clinical significance given the 
growing prevalence of pre-existing anti-PEG antibodies in the general population that is 
increasingly undermining the safety and efficacy of PEGylated therapeutics. Note in this 
article, the terms “antigenicity” and “immunogenicity” are not interchangeable. 
“Antigenicity” is defined herein as the reactivity of an antigen toward pre-existing antibodies 
in patients, whereas “immunogenicity” refers to the intrinsic ability of an antigen to generate 
antibodies in the body.
Results
Sortase-catalyzed C-terminal initiator attachment to exendin
We exploited the C-terminal native peptide ligation mechanism of sortase A to site-
specifically attach the ATRP initiator N-(2-(2-(2-(2-aminoacetamido)acet-amido)acetamido) 
ethyl)-2-bromo-2-methylpropanamide (AEBMP) to the C-terminus of exendin (Fig. 1). A 
quaternary fusion protein, abbreviated as “exendin-srt-His6-ELP”, was recombinantly 
expressed to serve as the sortase A substrate (Fig. 1a). As explained in an earlier study 22, 
“srt” stands for the native sortase A recognition sequence “LPETG” 33 and ELP refers to a 
stimulus-responsive elastin-like polypeptide that was incorporated to enable easy 
purification of the fusion protein by inverse transition cycling (ITC, Supplementary Fig. 
S1a), a nonchromatographic protein purification method that we previously developed 34. 
The recognition sequence was deliberately located between the protein and the ELP, so that 
transpeptidation by sortase A not only attaches the initiator to exendin, but also conveniently 
liberates the purification tag. Sortase A with an N-terminal hexahistidine tag (His6-tag) was 
Qi et al.
Page 3
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recombinantly expressed from a plasmid constructed in the earlier study 22 and was purified 
by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC, Supplementary Fig. S1b). The ATRP 
initiator AEBMP (Fig. 1) was chemically synthesized with an N-terminal (Gly)3 motif 
serving as the nucleophile, as maximum reaction rates for sortase-catalyzed C-terminal 
ligation have been reported with two or more glycines 35.
Successful sortase-catalyzed initiator attachment (Fig. 1b) resulted in cleavage of exendin-
LPETG-His6-ELP into exendin-LPET and G-His6-ELP, followed by attachment of AEBMP 
to exendin-LPET to generate the macroinitiator product (exendin-C-Br). Sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis of the reaction mixture 
(Fig. 2a) showed > 90% conversion to exendin-C-Br, as assessed by gel densitometry. 
Similar to the previous study 22, a His6-tag was intentionally inserted between “srt” and ELP 
on the exendin-srt-His6-ELP fusion, such that upon transpeptidation by His6-sortase A, all 
the residual reactants, enzyme and side-products except the desired product —exendin-C-Br
— carried a His6-tag. Consequently, elution through an IMAC column yielded pure exendin-
C-Br (Fig. 2a) in the eluent while leaving all other unwanted species bound to the resin.
Synthesis and characterization of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates
Next, in situ Activator Regenerated by Electron Transfer (ARGET) ATRP 36 was carried out 
to graft POEGMA from exendin-C-Br (Fig. 1c). An OEGMA monomer with an average 
mass of ~500 Da or ~9 side-chain EG repeats (EG9) was used, as shown by liquid 
chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC/ESI-MS) analysis 
(Supplementary Fig. S2a). The reaction time was varied to produce EG9 exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugates with a range of MWs. Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) analysis 
of exendin-C-Br before polymerization detected by UV-vis absorbance at 280 nm (Fig. 2b) 
showed a single peak eluting at 23.7 min. After polymerization, the intensity of the 
macroinitiator peak greatly diminished, and was accompanied by the appearance of peaks at 
21.3, 19.5, 17.8, 16.5 and 15.0 min, corresponding to EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates 
with increasing MWs as the reaction time was increased. The results from UV-vis detection 
were in agreement with those from refractive index (RI) detection (Supplementary Fig. S3a). 
Integration of peak areas in the UV-vis chromatograms showed that the average conjugation 
yield was ~ 80%. As shown in Table 1, the synthesized conjugates had Mns that ranged from 
25.4 to 155.0 kDa and all conjugates had very narrow dispersities (Đ ≤ 1.15). The conjugates 
could be easily and completely purified by a single round of preparative SEC 
(Supplementary Fig. S3b).
Exendin acts by binding and activating the G protein-coupled GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R), 
which results in the release of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) as a second 
messenger in a downstream signaling cascade, ultimately leading to secretion of insulin to 
regulate blood glucose 37. The potency of native exendin and the EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugates were next assessed by quantifying intracellular cAMP release as a result of 
GLP-1R activation in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells that were stably transfected with rat 
GLP-1R. As shown in Fig. 2c and Table 1, grafting EG9 POEGMA from exendin increases 
the EC50 of the peptide in an overall MW-dependent manner, which indicates decreased 
Qi et al.
Page 4
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 receptor binding with increasing polymer MW as a result of the steric hindrance imposed by 
the appended POEGMA chain.
In vivo therapeutic efficacy of EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA
The in vivo efficacy of EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates was assessed in male 
C57BL/6J mice that were maintained on a 60 kCal% fat diet, so as to develop a diabetic 
phenotype 38,39. A dose-dependent study was first performed to determine an adequate dose. 
A 66.2 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate was administered into mice via a single 
s.c. injection at 25, 50 and 85 nmol/kg mouse body weight of the conjugate. Fed blood 
glucose levels measured at various time points post-injection revealed an overall slight 
increase in the duration of glucose reduction with increasing dose of the conjugate compared 
to phosphate buffered saline (PBS) control (Supplementary Figs. S4a and b, Table S1). A 
similar trend was observed in the mouse body weights, where the mice treated with the 
highest dose showed considerably more weight loss than the two lower doses 
(Supplementary Fig. S4c). While the weight-lowering benefit of exendin has been well 
established 40, overdosing can cause nausea, which can lead to acute weight loss in 
rodents 41. The excessive weight loss seen in mice that received the highest dose suggests 
the possibility of nausea, and all subsequent studies were hence carried out with a dose of 25 
nmol/kg.
To investigate the effect of MW on the glucose regulatory effect of EG9 exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugates, native exendin and conjugates of four different MWs (Mn = 25.4, 
54.6, 97.2 and 155.0 kDa) were tested at a single s.c. injection at 25 nmol/kg mouse body 
weight. While unmodified exendin was only able to lower blood glucose for 6 h relative to 
PBS control (Fig. 3a, full glucose profiles in Supplementary Fig. S5), modification with 
EG9 POEGMA significantly extended the glucose-lowering effect of exendin for up to 120 
h, with a MW-dependence on the onset, magnitude and duration of the effect (Figs. 3b–e, 
Supplementary Table S2). As is evident from the overlaid glucose profiles in Supplementary 
Fig. S6a (overlaid un-normalized glucose profiles in Supplementary Fig. S6b), an increase in 
MW delays the onset but prolongs the duration of glucose reduction, and the two higher 
MW conjugates showed an overall smaller magnitude of glucose reduction. This trend is 
mirrored by the weight profiles of treated animals as well (Supplementary Fig. S6c). The 
two higher MW conjugates also showed much more flat and steady glucose profiles. The 
glucose profile of the 155.0 kDa conjugate in particular resembled that of a sustained release 
depot, with no peak-to-valley effect that can cause undesirable side effects.
The in vitro cAMP results and the in vivo MW-dependent fed glucose measurements 
collectively show that an increase in MW of the conjugated polymer decreases the potency 
but increases the circulation duration of the EG9 exendin-POEGMA conjugate. Therefore, 
we hypothesize that there exists an optimal MW of the conjugate that best balances these 
two opposing effects. The area under the curve (AUC) of the fed glucose profiles with 
respect to 0% baseline signifies total glucose exposure, which accounts for both the 
magnitude and duration of glucose reduction, and is therefore a manifestation of the 
combined effect of the two opposing factors. Plotting the AUC of fed glucose levels as a 
function of conjugate Mn indeed yielded a roughly inverted bell-shaped distribution with a 
Qi et al.
Page 5
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 minimum at 54.6 kDa (Fig. 3f). This suggests that the 54.6 kDa conjugate is the optimal 
among the tested EG9 conjugates in terms of balancing receptor activation potency and 
sustained duration of action. We thus investigated the 54.6 kDa EG9 conjugate further in 
subsequent experiments.
To validate the results from the fed glucose measurements and to obtain further evidence of 
the efficacy of EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates, an intraperitoneal glucose tolerance 
test (IPGTT) was performed 24 h and 72 h after a single s.c. injection of the 54.6 kDa EG9 
conjugate or unmodified exendin at 25 nmol/kg. IPGTT confirmed the prolonged presence 
of the conjugate in circulation and its significant effect on glycemic control: at 24 h post-
injection, the AUC of blood glucose level over 2 h after glucose challenge is reduced by 
68% (P < 0.0001, Fig. 4a), and at 72 h post-injection, the AUC is reduced by 48% for 
conjugate-treated mice compared with PBS controls (P < 0.01, Fig. 4b). This is in stark 
contrast to the unmodified exendin group, which was insignificant at both time points (Figs. 
4c and d).
Antigenicity of EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates
We tested the reactivity of the 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate to anti-PEG 
antibodies in plasma samples of patients previously treated with PEGylated proteins using 
enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA). In a direct ELISA, the 54.6 kDa EG9 
exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate and various controls, including two FDA-approved drugs, 
Adagen® — a PEGylated adenosine deaminase for treating severe combined 
immunodeficiency disease (SCID) and Krystexxa® — a PEGylated uricase for treating 
chronic refractory gout, were directly coated on a plate and probed with diluent, an anti-PEG 
negative patient plasma sample or one of two anti-PEG positive patient plasma samples. As 
shown in Fig. 5a, while the EG9 exendin-C-POGEMA conjugate did show a small amount 
of binding to anti-PEG antibodies in the positive plasma samples, the extent of binding is 
significantly less than those of the two PEGylated positive controls. This result was 
confirmed by a competitive ELISA, where Krystexxa® was coated on wells, and different 
amounts of 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA and controls were added in solution to 
compete for binding to anti-PEG antibodies in an anti-PEG positive plasma sample. As can 
be seen in Fig. 5b, at all tested competing antigen amounts, 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-
POEGMA showed significantly reduced antibody binding compared to the positive control, 
Adagen®.
Exendin-C-POEGMA with shorter side-chain length
These results led us to hypothesize that the reduced PEG antigenicity of the EG9 exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugate is due to both the branched architecture and the short side-chain length 
of the conjugated POEGMA. As a minimum length of PEG is presumably needed for 
antibody recognition and binding 42, we hypothesized that optimizing the side-chain OEG 
length may further reduce or possibly eliminate the antigenicity of POEGMA conjugates to 
anti-PEG antibodies. To test this hypothesis, we next synthesized exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugates using OEGMA monomer with precisely 3 EG side-chain repeats as seen by LC/
ESI-MS (Supplementary Fig. S2b), as evidence in the literature suggests that the antigenic 
determinant of PEG may be ~6–7 EG repeats 42. Three different EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA 
Qi et al.
Page 6
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conjugates with Mns of 26.3, 55.6, and 71.6 kDa (Table 1) were synthesized. Assessment of 
conjugate potency by intracellular cAMP ELISA (Supplementary Fig. S7) showed that 
similar to the EG9 conjugates, conjugation of EG3 POEGMA to the C-terminus of exendin 
caused an increase in the EC50 (Table 1), indicating a decrease in the receptor activation of 
the conjugates, though with a less pronounced MW-dependence.
Antigenicity and efficacy of EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates
We next tested the reactivity of a 55.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate to anti-PEG 
antibodies in patient plasma samples. The 54.6 kDa EG9 conjugate was included as a 
control to confirm the repeatability of the assays. Remarkably, both direct and competitive 
anti-PEG ELISAs (Figs. 5c and d) showed that reducing the side-chain length of the 
conjugated POEGMA down to 3 EG repeats completely eliminated the reactivity of the 
conjugate toward anti-PEG antibodies present in the patient plasma samples.
As the OEG side-chains on POEGMA are largely responsible for the “stealth” behavior of 
the polymer and its conjugates, alteration on the side-chain length can thus have an impact 
on the in vivo behavior of POEGMA conjugates. Therefore, we next investigated the in vivo 
efficacy of EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA. The 55.6 kDa and 71.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugates were administered into fed mice via a single s.c. injection at 25 
nmol/kg mouse body weight. As can be seen from the post-injection glucose profiles in Figs. 
6a and b (unnormalized glucose profiles and weight profiles in Supplementary Fig. S8), both 
conjugates significantly reduced mouse blood glucose for up to 96 h compared to PBS 
control. The EG3 conjugates appear to have slightly lower magnitudes of glucose reduction 
and more flat glucose profiles compared to their EG9 counterparts.
Pharmacokinetics of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates
To further confirm the prolonged circulation of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates and to seek 
some answers to the difference between the glucose profiles of EG9 and EG3 conjugates, a 
pharmacokinetics study was performed with fluorescently labeled exendin, the 54.6 kDa 
EG9, 55.6 kDa EG3 and 71.6 kDa EG3 conjugates. Two MWs of the EG3 conjugate were 
tested, as the EG3 and EG9 conjugates have different Rhs at the same MW. The MWs were 
chosen such that the 54.6 kDa EG9 conjugate (Rh = 5.4±0.6 nm) has similar MW as the 
55.6kDa EG3 conjugate and similar Rh as the 71.6 kDa EG3 conjugate (Rh = 5.6±0.5 nm). 
The plasma concentration-time courses (Figs. 6c and d) were analyzed using a non-
compartmental fit characterizing the absorption and elimination phases of the 
pharmacokinetic profiles, to approximate the parameters shown in Table 2.
After s.c. injection, unmodified exendin had a very short residence time in circulation, with a 
rapid absorption phase (t1/2a = 0.7±0.1 h) and a short terminal elimination phase (t1/2el = 
1.7±0.2 h). In contrast, the exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates tested increased the absorption 
time by ~ 9 to 13-fold, with the two EG3 conjugates taking longer than the EG9 conjugate to 
absorb into circulation. Similarly, the 54.6 kDa EG9 conjugate prolonged the elimination 
phase of exendin by ~ 25-fold, while the two EG3 conjugates afforded a bigger increase of 
~36-fold. These differences in the pharmacokinetics resulted in ~ 20-fold increase in AUC 
for the conjugates compared to unmodified exendin, indicating that conjugation of 
Qi et al.
Page 7
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 POEGMA to the C-terminus of exendin significantly enhanced the cumulative exposure of 
the peptide in circulation. While the Cmax of the two EG3 conjugates were considerably 
lower than that of the EG9 conjugate, consistent with the lower magnitude of glucose 
reduction seen for the EG3 conjugates in the fed blood glucose studies (Figs. 6a and b), the 
AUC of the three tested conjugates were comparable given the longer absorption and 
elimination half-lives of the EG3 conjugates.
Discussion
Using our previously developed sortase-catalyzed polymer conjugation strategy 22, we 
synthesized site-specific (C-terminal) and stoichiometric (1:1) exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugates with an average overall yield of up to > 70%, which compares favorably to the 
10–20 % overall yield often seen in conventional PEGylation processes 11. The small 
fraction of unreacted exendin-C-Br in the in situ ATRP reactions is likely due to hydrolysis 
or disproportionation at the C-terminus of the macroinitiator, which are common side-
reactions of ATRP in aqueous conditions that lead to loss of the Br functionality and thus 
inactivation of the macroinitiator 43. Additionally, as a controlled radical polymerization 
technique, ATRP enabled synthesis of conjugates with a wide and tunable range of MWs 
and very narrow MW distributions. Together, our synthesis approach gives rise to polymer 
conjugates of therapeutic biomolecules that are far more homogeneous than PEGylated 
drugs currently in clinical use. This full control over site and stoichiometry of conjugation, 
and high degree of MW tunability and low dispersity are highly desirable features for 
polymer conjugates of therapeutic biomolecules, as they translate to a more predictable 
therapeutic performance.
EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates lowered blood glucose levels in fed mice for up to 20 
times longer than unmodified exendin injected at the same dose. This prolonged duration of 
therapeutic effect significantly reduces the required administration frequency, a benefit 
critical to a disease whose treatment outcomes rely heavily on patient compliance. The fed 
blood glucose study of the EG9 conjugates showed that an increase in MW was correlated 
with a slower onset of glucose reduction and the two higher MW conjugates showed an 
overall smaller magnitude of glucose reduction. These are speculated to be due in part to the 
reduced receptor binding activity and also perhaps a retarded diffusion from the 
subcutaneous space into systemic circulation affected by an increase in conjugate size.
The trends observed in fed blood glucose levels are also evident in mouse body weight 
profiles. A drop in body weight at the beginning of the study is expected for all mice 
including the PBS control group, as the mice are subjected to stress factors including 
injection and repetitive tail vein glucose measurements. This stress-induced response is also 
evident in the sharp spike in their glucose levels at the initial time points. The PBS group in 
the fed blood glucose measurement study of the 71.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugate had a more pronounced weight drop than in the other fed glucose studies. This is 
likely due to the fact that mice in these studies were fed a 60 kcal% fat diet, which makes 
them metabolically less stable and weight variations are thus more common. The slightly 
bigger weight loss of the PBS group in this particular experiment is consistent with a more 
Qi et al.
Page 8
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sustained initial increase in blood glucose, suggesting that this batch of mice reacted more 
strongly to the procedural stress.
Two critical —and opposing— features of protein-polymer conjugates that are clearly 
illustrated by this study are the inverse relationship between conjugate MW and potency 
versus circulation duration. Up to a threshold, the MW of the conjugate is expected to be 
directly proportional to the circulation duration but inversely proportional to the receptor-
binding activity of the biomolecule of interest. Indeed plotting the AUC of blood glucose 
profiles of the tested EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates as a function of conjugate Mn, 
which accounts for both the magnitude and duration of glucose reduction, gives an inverted 
bell-shaped distribution with a minimum at 54.6 kDa, suggesting that the 54.6 kDa 
conjugate is the optimal among the tested conjugates in terms of balancing receptor 
activation potency and sustained duration of action. The result also suggests that the renal 
clearance threshold for these EG9 conjugates is between 25.4 and 54.6 kDa, as although the 
25.4 kDa conjugate is more potent than the 54.6 kDa conjugate in vitro, its overall glucose 
lowering effect is smaller than that of the 54.6 kDa conjugate and its effect also diminished 
more quickly, which points to a much faster renal clearance.
The antigenicity of EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates, or their reactivity toward pre-
existing anti-PEG antibodies in patients, was of particular interest because the serious 
consequences of PEG immunogenicity have become increasingly apparent. Anti-PEG 
antibodies have been induced in patients treated with PEGylated drugs and have been shown 
to correlate with rapid clearance of these drugs 16–18. High levels of pre-existing anti-PEG 
antibodies have also been found in individuals naïve to PEGylated agents, which are 
associated with serious and sometimes life-threatening first-exposure allergic reactions 21. 
Therefore, it is of high clinical relevance to prescreen polymer conjugates of therapeutic 
peptides and proteins for antigenicity toward anti-PEG antibodies.
We found that the 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate showed significantly less 
reactivity toward anti-PEG antibodies in patient plasmas compared to two FDA-approved 
drugs, Adagen® and Krystexxa®. More intriguingly, reducing the side-chain length of the 
conjugated POEGMA to 3 EG repeats completely eliminated antibody binding. We 
speculate that the complete elimination of anti-PEG antigenicity of EG3 POEGMA has two 
potential molecular explanations. First, three ethylene glycol repeats may be shorter than the 
epitope recognized by anti-PEG antibodies, which is consistent with a pervious report that 
the antigenic determinant of PEG may be 6–7 repeat units 42. Second, distributing PEG as 
oligomeric side-chains may create a “stacking effect” that hinders antibody access. Given 
that POEGMA is not currently present in any pharmaceutical or consumer product, it is 
reasonable to speculate that humans would not have any pre-existing antibodies to the 
polymer. Thus clinically, the lack of anti-PEG antigenicity of POEGMA conjugates is 
expected to translate to complete elimination of serious and sometimes life-threatening first-
exposure allergic reactions in patients toward POEGMA conjugates of therapeutics, and 
should eliminate the accelerated blood clearance of POEGMA-drug conjugates due to pre-
existing anti-PEG antibodies in patients. We believe this is a particularly timely and useful 
finding that will address the pressing problem of increasing level of pre-existing anti-PEG 
antibodies in the general population that is compromising the safety and efficacy of FDA-
Qi et al.
Page 9
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 approved PEGylated drugs and hindering the progress of other PEG conjugates in clinical 
and pre-clinical development. Given that PEGylation remains the most widely used 
technology clinically to extend the half-life and improve the bioavailability of biologic 
drugs, a method to tackle the emerging problem of antigenicity of PEG by modulation of its 
architecture —from linear to branched—provides a new approach to solve this problem. We 
note that this study addresses the anti-PEG antigenicity of POEGMA conjugates of biologic 
drugs, but does not make any claims about their intrinsic immunogenicity. While 
immunogenicity is also a crucial aspect regarding the safety of this class of conjugates, a 
thorough investigation will involve extensive in vivo studies performed in multiple species 
that is beyond the scope of this study.
Fed glucose measurement study confirmed that elimination of antigenicity did not occur at 
the cost of in vivo efficacy. While the magnitude of glucose reduction of the EG3 conjugates 
is slightly lower than that of the EG9 conjugates, the glucose profiles resemble that of a 
sustained release depot, with no peak-to-valley effect often associated with parenteral drug 
administration that can cause unwanted side effects. Pharmacokinetic comparison of the 
55.6 kDa and 71.6 kDa EG3 conjugates with the 54.6 kDa EG9 conjugate showed that while 
the Cmax values of the EG3 conjugates were smaller than that of the EG9 conjugate, their 
longer absorption and elimination half-lives gave rise to comparable AUCs as that of the 
EG9 conjugate. This finding is consistent with the more flat and steady glucose profiles of 
the EG3 conjugates. We speculate that the relatively higher hydrophobicity of EG3 
POEGMA may cause its conjugates to remain in the s.c. space or lodge in other tissues 
during their course in circulation for more extended periods of time, thus creating a depot-
like effect.
POEGMA was polymerized from the C-terminus of exendin in this study because the N-
terminus of the peptide is important for GLP-1R binding and activation 37. We note that 
while we have demonstrated utility of the sortase-catalyzed C-terminal polymer conjugation 
strategy with exendin in this study, it is a generally applicable platform for improving the 
pharmacological performance of therapeutic proteins and peptides where the C-terminus is 
not essential for the activity of the biomolecule. For other biologics where the C-terminal 
end may be critical to its activity, we have developed a complementary N-terminal 
approach 26. In the event that both N- and C-termini of the peptide/protein are critical to its 
activity, methods developed by us and other investigators can be used for site-specific 
incorporation of an ATRP initiator at solvent-accessible sites within the primary amino acid 
sequence of the peptide or protein drug 44,45. These methods collectively offer a general 
toolbox that should enable site-specific POEGMA conjugation at any desired solvent-
accessible site on a peptide or protein.
Collectively, our results establish site-specific POEGMA conjugation as a next-generation 
PEGylation technology that is highly useful for improving the pharmacological performance 
of therapeutic biomolecules while providing a solution to the increasing levels of pre-
existing anti-PEG antibodies in patients that limit the safety and efficacy of traditional 
PEGylated drugs. While these results are promising, we believe that a deeper understanding 
of the mechanism of action, efficacy and safety of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates, 
particularly the EG3 variants, is necessary for clinical translation. Future plans include 
Qi et al.
Page 10
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 optimizing the MW of EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates to maximize efficacy, 
measuring insulin release, investigating the in vivo biodistribution of the conjugates, and 
studying long-term parameters of therapeutic efficacy such as hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), 
glycated albumin and pancreatic β-cell proliferation to understand the long-term therapeutic 
potential of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates. Furthermore, assessment of the intrinsic 
immunogenicity of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates is essential to ensure their long-term 
safety and efficacy for clinical translation.
Methods
Experimental Design
All in vitro and in vivo experiments include suitable controls; where applicable, PBS served 
as a negative control and unmodified exendin served as a positive control. The sample sizes 
for in vivo studies were chosen based on similar studies conducted previously 46,47. See 
Animal studies section below for details on the animal model used. Mice were randomly 
grouped before initiation of each experiment. The investigator was not blinded to group 
allocation. For the in vivo fed glucose measurement studies, mouse blood glucose levels 
were measured until all experimental groups no longer showed statistical significance in 
glucose reduction compared to the PBS control group. All collected data points were 
included in data analysis.
Cloning, expression and purification
All molecular biology reagents were purchased from New England Biolabs unless otherwise 
specified. The gene encoding exendin in a pMA-T vector was codon optimized and 
synthesized by Life Technologies. The first methionine residue encoding the translational 
start codon in proteins recombinantly expressed in E. coli needs to be cleaved post-
translationally for proper function and stability of the protein 48. However, the first amino 
acid of exendin is a histidine, and our past experience and reports in the literature 48 both 
suggest that having histidine as the residue immediately following methionine prevents 
proper methionine cleavage. Thus, a di-alanine leader was incorporated at the N-terminus of 
the peptide to facilitate methionine cleavage. Once in vivo, the di-alanine leader can be 
cleaved by dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4), an exopeptidase that cleaves N-terminal 
dipeptides containing proline or alanine as the second residue, to reveal the N-terminus of 
exendin for GLP-1R binding. The exendin gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), using forward and reverse primers containing NdeI overhangs and with the sequence 
for the sortase A recognition motif “LPETG” (named “srt” for brevity) followed by a His6-
tag incorporated in the reverse primer. The amplified “exendin-srt-His6” fragment was 
inserted into a modified pET-24a+ vector 49 at an NdeI restriction site immediately upstream 
of an ELP with the sequence (VPGVG)60, to yield “exendin-srt-His6-ELP”.
Expression and purification of the quaternary fusion protein followed previously described 
procedures with minor changes 22. Briefly, cells were cultured in Terrific Broth (TB, Mo Bio 
Laboratories, Inc.) supplemented with 45 μg/ml of kanamycin at 25 °C. Once the optical 
density at 600 nm (OD600) of the culture reached 0.6, temperature was lowered to 16 °C and 
isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, AMRESCO) was added to a final 
Qi et al.
Page 11
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 concentration of 0.1 mM to induce protein expression. Cells were harvested 15 h post 
induction by centrifugation at 700×g for 10 min and were lysed by sonication on a Misonex 
Ultrasonic Liquid Processer (Qsonica, LLC.) at amplitude 85 for 3 min with 10 sec on and 
40 sec off cycles. Nucleic acids were removed from the crude extract by addition of 1 vol % 
polyethyleneimine (PEI, Acros) followed by centrifugation at 4 °C and 21,000×g for 10 min. 
The ELP tag enables purification of the fusion protein by ITC, a nonchromatographic 
method that we have previously developed for the purification of ELP fusion proteins that 
takes advantage of the inverse phase transition behavior imparted by the ELP 34. After 
triggering the inverse phase transition of the fusion by addition of 0.1 M ammonium sulfate, 
the aggregated proteins were collected by centrifugation at ~30 °C and 21,000×g for 10 min. 
The pellet was then resolubilized in cold PBS and the resulting solution was centrifuged at 
4 °C and 21,000×g for 10 min to remove any remaining insoluble material. The last two 
steps were typically repeated one more time to obtain homogeneous protein, as verified by 
SDS-PAGE. In the final step, the protein was resolubilized in sortase buffer (50 mM Tris, 
150 mM NaCl, 10 mM CaCl2, pH adjusted to 7.5) in preparation for sortase-catalyzed 
initiator attachment.
The gene for sortase A with a 59 N-terminal amino acid truncation (previously shown to not 
affect its transpeptidase activity 50) and an N-terminal His6-tag in a pET15b vector was 
available from a previous study. Expression and purification of His6-sortase A were carried 
out as previously described 22.
Sortase-catalyzed initiator attachment and macroinitiator purification
The exendin-C-Br macroinitiator was synthesized and purified following procedures 
described previously with minor changes 22. Briefly, a reaction mixture consisting of 
exendin-srt-His6-ELP, His6-sortase A, and AEBMP at a 2:1:60 ratio in sortase buffer was 
incubated at 20 °C for 18 h. After reaction, a reverse His-tag purification was used to isolate 
the exendin-C-Br macroinitiator, by exploiting the fact that it is the only species in the 
mixture without a His6-tag. Purification was performed on an AKTA Purifier (GE 
Healthcare) equipped with a photodiode detector set at 280 nm and a HisTrap HP column. 
Elution through the column with PBS yielded pure exendin-C-Br in the eluent while leaving 
all other unwanted species bound to the resin. The collected exendin-C-Br was dialyzed 
overnight in PBS (pH 7.4) to remove residual free initiator.
Macroinitiator characterization
MALDI-MS was performed on a Voyager-DE Pro mass spectrometer (Life Technologies). 
Samples at ~25 μM in PBS were diluted 1:10 with 10 mg/mL sinapinic acid in 90:10 water/
acetonitrile with 0.1 vol % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as the ionization matrix. The 
instrument was operated in linear mode with positive ions generated using a N2 laser. 
Ubiquitin was used as a molecular weight standard to calibrate the instrument.
For LC/MS-MS analysis to confirm site-specificity of initiator attachment, 100 μL of ~8 uM 
exendin-C-Br in PBS was solvent exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) 
on a ZebaSpin desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by trypsin (sequencing 
grade, Promega) digestion at 37°C for 18 h directly in the column. The digestion mixture 
Qi et al.
Page 12
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was collected by centrifugation, dried by vacuum centrifugation and was then resuspended 
in 20 μL 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. 1 μL of the sample was separated on 
a NanoAquity ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC, Waters) system equipped 
with a BEH130 C18 reversed phase column (Waters) using a mobile phase consisting of (A) 
0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. A linear gradient of 5% 
B to 40% B was performed over 60 min at 400 nL/min and the separated peptides were 
ionized by electrospray ionization (ESI) followed by MS analysis on a Synapt G2 HDMS 
QToF mass spectrometer (Waters). The top four most abundant ions were selected for 
MS/MS. Mass spectra were processed with Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science) and were then 
submitted to Mascot searches (Matrix Science) against a SwissProt_Ecoli database 
appended with the custom exendin-C-Br sequence. Search results were imported into 
Scaffold (v4.0, Proteome Software) and scoring thresholds were set to yield a minimum of 
99% protein confidence for protein identification. Extracted ion chromatograms were 
performed in MassLynx (v4.1). Experimental isotope distributions of the brominated C-
terminal tryptic peptide was compared to a theoretical isotope distribution modeled in 
Molecular Weight Calculator (v. 6.49, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, ncrr.pnl.gov/
software).
In situ ARGET-ATRP
All chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received, unless 
otherwise specified. EG9 OEGMA monomer (Mn ~500 Da or ~9 side-chain EG repeats on 
average, Sigma Aldrich, #447943) and EG3 OEGMA monomer (triethylene glycol methyl 
ether methacrylate, 232 Da, Sigma Aldrich, #729841) were passed through a column of 
basic alumina to remove the inhibitors.
In a typical reaction, 216 μmol of OEGMA and 21.6 μL of a stock solution of 200 mM 
CuBr2 and 1.6 M tris(2-pyridylmethyl)amine (TPMA) pre-complexed in MilliQ water with 
5% dimethylformamide (DMF) were mixed with 1 mL of 500 μM exendin-C-Br in PBS in a 
Schlenk flask. A 3.2 mM solution of ascorbic acid in MilliQ water was prepared in a 
separate flask. The two solutions were degassed by bubbling with argon for 30 min, after 
which Activator-Regenerated Electron Transfer (ARGET) ATRP was initiated and 
maintained by continuously injecting the ascorbic acid solution into the reaction medium 
using a syringe pump at a rate of 1.6 nmol/min. Polymerization was allowed to proceed for a 
specified time at 20 °C under argon and was quenched by bubbling with air. Reactions of the 
EG3 OEGMA were done with 443 μmol of the monomer in 20 v/v% methanol in PBS while 
all other conditions remained the same. At the end of the reaction, the reaction mixture was 
dialyzed against PBS overnight to remove residual small molecule reagents in preparation 
for downstream characterization and purification.
Characterization of OEGMA monomers
Monomers diluted 1:20,000 in methanol were separated on an Agilent 1100 LC system 
equipped with a Zorbax Eclipse Plus C18 column (Agilent) using a mobile phase consisting 
of (A) 0.3% formic acid in water and (B) 0.3% formic acid in acetonitrile. A linear gradient 
of 50% B to 95% B was performed over 10 min at 50 °C. Separated samples were ionized 
by ESI followed by MS analysis on an Agilent MSD ion trap mass spectrometer.
Qi et al.
Page 13
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Physical characterization of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates
Analytical SEC was performed on a Shimadzu high performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) system equipped with a UV-vis detector (SPD-10A VP) operating at 280 nm. 50 μL 
of samples at ~2 mg/mL were separated on a Protein KW-803 column (Shodex) using 0.1M 
Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) as mobile phase at 25 °C with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. Conjugation 
efficiency of in situ ATRP from exendin was calculated by quantifying AUC of peaks 
detected at 280 nm. Sum of the AUC’s of the two peaks corresponding to the unreacted 
macroinitiator and the conjugate in each chromatogram was regarded as 100% and % 
fraction of the conjugate peak was calculated as the conjugation efficiency of that particular 
polymerization reaction.
The fluid line of the analytical HPLC system was connected downstream in series to a 
DAWN HELEOS II MALS detector followed by an Optilab T-rEX refractometer (both from 
Wyatt Technology) for conducting SEC-MALS analysis. The system was calibrated with 
toluene and normalized with 2.0 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (BSA, Pierce). Samples 
were passed through 0.1 μm filters before injection. dn/dc values of the conjugates were 
determined on an Anton Paar Abbemat 500 refractometer (Anton Paar). Data were analyzed 
in ASTRA (v. 6.0, Wyatt Technology) to compute Mw, Mn and Đ of the conjugates.
Conjugates were purified by a single round of preparative SEC on an AKTA Purifier 
equipped with a photodiode detector set at 280 nm and a HiLoad 26/600 Superdex 200 PG 
column using PBS as mobile phase at 4 °C and a flow rate of 2.0 mL/min.
DLS was performed on a DynaPro Plate Reader (Wyatt Technology). Samples were 
prepared at 25 μM and filtered with 0.1 μm filters before analysis. The instrument was 
operating at a laser wavelength of 831.95 nm, a scattering angle of 90° and at 25 °C. Data 
were analyzed in Dynals mode using Dynamics 6.12.0.3.
General biochemical analysis
Concentrations of fusion proteins were measured on a ND-1000 Nanodrop 
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) by UV-vis absorption spectroscopy. Concentration of 
exendin and conjugates for in vitro assays and in vivo studies was assessed using a 
Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA, Pierce) assay following manufacturer’s instructions. SDS-PAGE 
analysis of sortase A was performed using precast 4–20% Tris-HCl gels (Bio-Rad). SDS-
PAGE analyses of all exendin derivatives were performed using precast Tris/Tricine gels 
(Bio-Rad). Quantification of sortase reaction conversion was done by gel densitometry 
analysis using a built-in function in Image Lab (v. 4.0.1, Bio-Rad).
In vitro cAMP ELISA
Activity of native exendin and conjugates was assessed in vitro by quantifying intracellular 
cAMP release as a result of GLP-1R activation in BHK cells stably transfected with rat 
GLP-1R (a generous gift of Drucker group, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada) 51. 
Cells were allowed to reach 70–80% confluence in 24-well plates. Prior to the assay, ~20 μg 
of peptide or equivalent of conjugates were treated with 0.5 μg DPP4 (ProSpect) overnight 
to remove the di-alanine leader. On the day of the assay, cells were incubated with 3-
Qi et al.
Page 14
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 isobutyl-1-methylxanthineto (IBMX, EMD Millipore) for 1 h to prevent cAMP 
degradation 52, followed by incubation with varying concentrations (0.001–1000 nM in log-
scale increments) of exendin (Genscript) or conjugates for 10 min to trigger GLP-1R 
activation. 0.1M HCl was then added to disrupt the cells and release intracellular cAMP. 
cAMP concentration was measured by a competitive cAMP ELISA according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol (Enzo Life Sciences). Each sample was assayed in triplicate and 
data were analyzed in Igor Pro (v. 6.2, Wavemetrics) using a Hill equation fit to determine 
the EC50 of each construct 53.
Animal studies
In vivo experiments were performed with 6-week-old male C57BL/6J mice (stock no. 
000664) purchased from Jackson Laboratories. Upon arrival, mice were initiated on a 60 
kCal% fat diet (#D12492, Research Diets Inc.) to induce a diabetic phenotype. Previous 
studies have established high fat-fed C57BL/6J mice as an adequate model for type 2 
diabetes, as after one week on a high-fat diet, mice exhibit elevated blood glucose, 
progressively increasing insulin level, and severely compromised insulin response and 
glucose tolerance 38,39. Mice were housed under controlled light on a 12 h light/12 h dark 
cycle with free access to food and water. All mice were allowed to acclimate to the high-fat 
diet and the facility for 10 d before initiation of experiments. Mice used for fed glucose 
measurement study of EG3 conjugates were maintained on the high-fat diet for 3 weeks and 
used at the age of 8 weeks. All animal care and experimental procedures were approved by 
the Duke Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
In vivo fed glucose measurements
The effect of native exendin and the conjugates on fed blood glucose levels was measured 
following a single s.c. injection of each sample. Before blood glucose measurement, the tail 
was wiped with a sterilizing alcohol solution and wiped dry. A tiny incision was made on the 
mouse tail vein using a disposable lancet, and the first 1 μL drop of blood was wiped off. 
The second 1–2 μL blood drop was used for glucose measurement using a hand-held 
glucometer (AlphaTrack, Abbott). Blood glucose levels were measured 1 d before the 
experiment. On the day of injection, weights and blood glucose were measured, and a 
sample solution or PBS control of equivalent volume was injected s.c. Immediately 
following injection, mice were placed back in the cage with free access to food and water, 
and blood glucose was measured at 1, 4, 6 (exendin only), 8, 24, 48, 72, 96, 120 and 144 h 
post-injection. Weights were monitored daily. In the EG9 dose-dependent study, a 66.2 kDa 
EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate was injected into mice (n=3) at 25, 50, and 85 nmol/kg 
mouse body weight. In the EG9 MW-dependent study, EG9 conjugates of 25.4, 54.6, 97.2 
and 155.0 kDa Mns were injected into mice (n=6) at 25 nmol/kg. In the EG3 fed glucose 
study, 55.6kDa and 71.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates were injected into mice 
(n=5) at 25 nmol/kg. Blood glucose levels were normalized by the average glucose levels 
measured 24 h and immediately before injection to reflect the percent change in blood 
glucose and to correct for transient variations in glucose.
Qi et al.
Page 15
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In vivo IPGTT
Mice were randomly divided into groups (n=5 in Figs. 4a and b, n=3 in Figs. 4c and d). On 
day one, every two groups of mice received a s.c. injection of either 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-
C-POEGMA conjugate, exendin as positive control, or PBS at equivalent volume as negative 
control. Exendin and the conjugate were injected at 25 nmol/kg. 18 h after injection, one 
group of mice in each category were fasted by removal of food for 6 h. At the end of the fast 
period (24 h following injection), mice were given 1.5 g/kg glucose (10 w/v % sterile 
glucose solution, Sigma) via i.p. injection. Blood glucose levels were monitored by nicking 
the tail vein and measuring the glucose level in the blood using a glucometer at 0, 20, 40, 60, 
90, and 120 min after glucose administration. 66 h after injection, the remaining groups of 
mice were subjected to the same protocol and an IPGTT was similarly performed 72 h 
following injection.
In vivo pharmacokinetics
Exendin, 54.6 kDa EG9, 55.6 kDa EG3 and 71.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates 
were fluorescently labeled with Alexa Fluor® 488 NHS ester (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via 
their solvent accessible primary amines on lysine residues and the N-terminus, according to 
manufacturer’s protocol. Unreacted free fluorophore was removed using a ZebaSpin 
desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mice were randomly divided into four groups 
(n=3). Animals were weighed before injection. Each group of mice received a single s.c. 
injection of one of the labeled samples at 75 nmol/kg (45 nmol/kg fluorophore). 10 μL of 
blood samples were collected from the tail vein into 100 μL of a heparin solution (1kU/ml in 
PBS, Sigma Aldrich) at 40 s, 40 min, 2.5 h, 4.5 h, 8 h, 24 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h and 120 h after 
injection. Blood samples were centrifuged at 4 °C and 20,000 ×g for 10 min to extract the 
plasma for fluorescence reading at excitation 485 nm and emission 535 nm on a Victor 
multilabel plate reader (Perkin Elmer). Plasma concentrations of constructs as a function of 
time were fitted using a non-compartmental analysis (PK Solutions 2.0, Summit Research 
Services) that characterizes the absorption and elimination phases of the profiles to derive 
the pharmacokinetic parameters.
In vitro anti-PEG ELISA
In the direct ELISA, columns of a 96-well microtiter plate (CoStar) were coated with 
Krystexxa® (Crealta Pharmaceuticals), ADA (Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals), Adagen® 
(Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals), exendin (Genscript), a 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugate, a 55.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate or BSA (Sigma Aldrich). The 
antigen solutions for plate coating were prepared in PBS to yield ~2 μg of unmodified 
peptide/protein or ~5 μg of PEG/OEG in the case of polymer-modified antigens per well 
upon adding 50 μL to each well. The PEG/OEG contents of the polymer-modified antigens 
were calculated as follows: Krystexxa® consists of the tetrameric uricase enzyme (125 kDa 
total) with 10–11 lysine side-chain amino groups on each of its four subunits reacted with 10 
kDa PEG p-nitrophenyl carbonate ester 9, giving a PEG content of ~76%. Adagen® consists 
of ADA (40.8 kDa) with 11–17 of its side-chain amino groups on solvent-accessible lysines 
functionalized with 5 kDa monomethoxy succinyl PEG according to the manufacturer’s 
specifications (Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals). For our calculation, we assumed 14 PEG 
Qi et al.
Page 16
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chains per Adagen® conjugate on average, giving ~60% PEG content. In the case of the 
exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates, subtracting the poly(methyl methacrylate) backbone 
(~17% for EG9 POEGMA and ~37% for EG3 POEGMA) gives an OEG content of ~75% 
for the 54.6 kDa EG9 conjugate and ~58% for the 55.6 kDa EG3 conjugate. After overnight 
incubation of the coated plate at 4 °C, it was washed with PBS and all wells were blocked 
with 1% BSA in PBS. One patient plasma sample previously tested negative for PEG 
antibody and two that were tested positive were diluted 1:400 v/v in 1% BSA in PBS. The 
two positive patient plasma samples were from two different individuals that developed anti-
PEG antibodies during a Phase II clinical trial of Krystexxa®. Following another round of 
PBS washing, 100 μL of each diluted plasma sample and 1% BSA in PBS were added to 
replicate wells of each antigen. The plate was then incubated at room temperature for 2 h. 
Wells were again washed with PBS and 100 μL of alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat 
anti-human IgG (Sigma) diluted 1:5250 with 1% BSA in PBS was added to each well. After 
1 h incubation at room temperature, wells were washed with PBS followed by Tris-buffered 
saline. Bound alkaline phosphatase was detected by incubating with p-nitrophenyl phosphate 
(Sigma) in accordance with the directions of the supplier. The phosphatase reaction was 
stopped by adding 50 μL/well of 10% NaOH, and the absorbance at 405 nm was measured 
on a plate reader (Tecan Infinite M200 Pro, Tecan Austria).
In the competitive ELISA, a microtiter plate was coated with 50 μL of 100 μg/mL 
Krystexxa® per well by overnight incubation at 4 °C. Various amounts of ADA, Adagen®, 
exendin, a 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugate, and a 55.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugate were diluted with PBS to yield 0, 0.5, 2, 5, 10 and 20 μg of competing 
antigen per well upon adding 50 μL to each well. Dilutions of Adagen® and the exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugates were prepared such that at each competing antigen concentration, 
similar PEG/OEG contents were compared as shown in Table S3. The diluted competing 
antigens were mixed with equal volume of a patient plasma sample that tested positive for 
PEG antibody (diluted 1:200 v/v in 1% BSA in PBS) and incubated at 4 °C overnight. The 
following morning, after washing with PBS, all wells were blocked with 1% BSA in PBS. 
Wells were washed with PBS after blocking, and 100 μL of each concentration of the 
competing antigen-plasma mixtures was added in replicate wells. After incubation at room 
temperature for 2 h, alkaline phosphatase-conjugated IgG was added for colorimetric 
readout at 405 nm as described above.
Assays in Figs. 5a and 5b were performed with n=3, while those in Figs. 5c and 5d were 
performed with n=5.
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± standard errors (SEs). Blood glucose levels in fed glucose 
measurement studies (n=6) were normalized by the average glucose levels measured 24 h 
and immediately before injection. Treatment effects on fed glucose levels were analyzed 
using repeated measures two-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Dunnett’s multiple 
comparison test to evaluate individual differences between a treatment and PBS control at 
each time point. AUCs of fed glucose profiles were compared using one-way ANOVA 
followed by post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test (n=6). For evaluating AUC of IPGTT 
Qi et al.
Page 17
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (n=5), treatment and PBS were compared using an unpaired parametric two-tailed t test. 
Both direct and competitive anti-PEG ELISAs (n=3) were analyzed using two-way ANOVA, 
followed by post hoc Dunnett’s multiple comparison test to evaluate individual differences 
between exendin-C-POEGMA and the other groups for each plasma sample (direct) or 
antigen concentration (competitive). A test was considered significant if the P value was less 
than 0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 6 (GraphPad software Inc.).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. David M. Gooden at the Duke Small Molecule Synthesis Facility for synthesis of AEBMP, 
Dr. Erik J. Soderblom at the Duke Proteomics Facility for conducting LC/MS-MS, Dr. George Dubay at the Duke 
Chemistry Mass Spectrometry Facility for LC/ESI-MS support, and Dr. Mark N. Feinglos, Professor of medicine at 
Duke University, for discussion of in vivo results. BHK cells expressing GLP-1R was a generous gift of the Drucker 
group (University of Toronto, Canada). This work was supported by National Institute of Health (R01-DK092665 to 
A.C.).
References
1. Leader B, Baca QJ, Golan DE. Protein therapeutics: a summary and pharmacological classification. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2008; 7:21–39. [PubMed: 18097458] 
2. Craik DJ, Fairlie DP, Liras S, Price D. The future of peptide-based drugs. Chem Biol Drug Des. 
2013; 81:136–147. [PubMed: 23253135] 
3. Peters TJ. Serum albumin. Adv Protein Chem. 1985; 37:161–245. [PubMed: 3904348] 
4. Awai M, Brown EB. Studies of the metabolism of I-131-labeled human transferrin. J Lab Clin Med. 
1963; 61:363–396. [PubMed: 13965691] 
5. Banga, AK. Therapeutic Peptides and Proteins - Formulation, Processing, and Delivery Systems. 
CRC Press; 2015. 
6. Caliceti P, Veronese FM. Pharmacokinetic and biodistribution properties of poly(ethylene glycol)-
protein conjugates. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2003; 55:1261–1277. [PubMed: 14499706] 
7. Malik DK, Baboota S, Ahuja A, Hasan S, Ali J. Recent advances in protein and peptide drug 
delivery systems. Curr Drug Deliv. 2007; 2:141–151.
8. Werle M, Bernkop-Schnurch A. Strategies to improve plasma half life time of peptide and protein 
drugs. Amino Acids. 2006; 30:351–367. [PubMed: 16622600] 
9. Alconcel SNS, Baas AS, Maynard HD. FDA-approved poly(ethylene glycol)–protein conjugate 
drugs. Polym Chem. 2011; 2:1442–1448.
10. Nucci ML, Shorr RG, Abuchowski A. The therapeutic value of poly(ethylene glycol)-modified 
proteins. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 1991; 6:133–151.
11. Youn YS, Na DH, Lee KC. High-yield production of biologically active mono-PEGylated salmon 
calcitonin by site-specific PEGylation. J Control Release. 2007; 117:371–379. [PubMed: 
17207880] 
12. Gauthier MA, Klok H. Peptide/protein–polymer conjugates: synthetic strategies and design 
concepts. Chem Commun. 2008:2591–2611.
13. Qi Y, Chilkoti A. Growing polymers from peptides and proteins: a biomedical perspective. Polym 
Chem. 2014; 5:266–276.
14. Gaberc-Porekar V, Zore I, Podobnik B, Menart V. Obstacles and pitfalls in the PEGylation of 
therapeutic proteins. Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel. 2008; 11:242–250.
15. Veronese FM. Peptide and protein PEGylation: a review of problems and solutions. Biomaterials. 
2001; 22:405–417. [PubMed: 11214751] 
Qi et al.
Page 18
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Ganson NJ, Kelly SJ, Scarlett E, Sundy JS, Hershfield MS. Control of hyperuricemia in subjects 
with refractory gout, and induction of antibody against poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), in a phase I 
trial of subcutaneous PEGylated urate oxidase. Arthritis Res Ther. 2006; 8:R12–R22. [PubMed: 
16356199] 
17. Hershfield MS, et al. Induced and pre-existing anti-polyethylene glycol antibody in a trial of every 
3-week dosing of pegloticase for refractory gout, including in organ transplant recipients. Arthritis 
Res Ther. 2014; 16:R63. [PubMed: 24602182] 
18. Armstrong JK, et al. Antibody against poly(ethylene glycol) adversely affects PEG-asparaginase 
therapy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients. Cancer. 2007; 110:103–111. [PubMed: 
17516438] 
19. Richter AW, Akerblom E. Polyethylene glycol reactive antibodies in man: titer distribution in 
allergic patients treated with monomethoxy polyethylene glycol modified allergens or placebo, and 
in healthy blood donors. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol. 1984; 74:36–39. [PubMed: 6706424] 
20. Garay RP, El-Gewely R, Armstrong JK, Garratty G, Richette P. Antibodies against polyethylene 
glycol in healthy subjects and in patients treated with PEG-conjugated agents. Expert Opinion 
Drug Deliv. 2012; 9:1319–1323.
21. Ganson NJ, et al. Pre-existing anti-PEG antibody linked to first-exposure allergic reactions to 
Pegnivacogin, a PEGylated RNA aptamer. J Allergy Clin Immunology. 2016; 137:1610–1613. 
[PubMed: 26688515] 
22. Qi Y, Amiram M, Gao W, McCafferty DG, Chilkoti A. Sortase-catalyzed initiator attachment 
enables high yield growth of a stealth polymer from the C terminus of a protein. Macromol Rapid 
Commun. 2013; 34:1256–1260. [PubMed: 23836349] 
23. Matyjaszewski K, Tsarevsky NV. Macromolecular engineering by atom transfer radical 
polymerization. J Am Chem Soc. 2014; 136:6513–6533. [PubMed: 24758377] 
24. Matyjaszewski K, Xia J. Atom transfer radical polymerization. Chem Rev. 2001; 101:2921–2990. 
[PubMed: 11749397] 
25. Bontempo D, Maynard HD. Streptavidin as a macroinitiator for polymerization: in situ protein-
polymer conjugate formation. J Am Chem Soc. 2005; 127:6508–6509. [PubMed: 15869252] 
26. Gao W, et al. In situ growth of a stoichiometric PEG-like conjugate at a protein’s N-terminus with 
significantly improved pharmacokinetics. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2009:15231–15236. [PubMed: 
19706892] 
27. Gao W, Liu W, Christensen T, Zalutsky MR, Chilkoti A. In situ growth of a PEG-like polymer 
from the C terminus of an intein fusion protein improves pharmacokinetics and tumor 
accumulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2010; 107:16432–16437. [PubMed: 20810920] 
28. Peeler JC, et al. Genetically encoded initiator for polymer growth from proteins. J Am Chem Soc. 
2010; 132:13575–13577. [PubMed: 20839808] 
29. Lele BS, Murata H, Matyjaszewski K, Russell AJ. Synthesis of uniform protein-polymer 
conjugates. Biomacromolecules. 2005; 6:3380–3387. [PubMed: 16283769] 
30. Ryan SM, et al. PK/PD modelling of comb-shaped PEGylated salmon calcitonin conjugates of 
differing molecular weights. J Control Release. 2011; 149:126–132. [PubMed: 20946924] 
31. Magnusson JP, Bersani S, Salmaso S, Alexander C, Caliceti P. In situ growth of side-chain PEG 
polymers from functionalized human growth hormone-a new technique for preparation of 
enhanced protein-polymer conjugates. Bioconjugate Chem. 2010; 21:671–678.
32. Lovshin JA, Drucker DJ. Incretin-based therapies for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 
2009; 5:262–269. [PubMed: 19444259] 
33. Boekhorst J, de Been MW, Kleerebezem M, Siezen RJ. Genome-wide detection and analysis of 
cell wall-bound proteins with LPxTG-like sorting motifs. J Bacteriol. 2005; 187:4928–4934. 
[PubMed: 15995208] 
34. Meyer DE, Chilkoti A. Purification of recombinant proteins by fusion with thermally-responsive 
polypeptide. Nat Biotechnol. 1999; 14:1112–1115.
35. Mao H, Hart SA, Schink A, Pollok BA. Sortase-mediated protein ligation: a new method for 
protein engineering. J Am Chem Soc. 2004:126.
Qi et al.
Page 19
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36. Jakubowski W, Matyjaszewski K. Activators regenerated by electron transfer for atom-transfer 
radical polymerization of (meth)acrylates and related block copolymers. Angew Chem Int Ed. 
2006; 45:4482–4486.
37. Goke R, et al. Exendin-4 is a high potency agonis and truncated exendin-(9-39)-amide an 
antagonist at the glucagon-like peptide 1-(7-36)-amide receptor of insulin-secreting b-cells. J Biol 
Chem. 1993; 268:19650–19655. [PubMed: 8396143] 
38. Winzell MS, Ahren B. The high-fat diet-fed mouse: a model for studying mechanisms and 
treatment of impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2004; 53:S215–S219. 
[PubMed: 15561913] 
39. Surwit RS, Kuhn CM, Cochrane C, McCubbin JA, Feinglos MN. Diet-induced type II diabetes in 
C57BL/6J mice. Diabetes. 1988; 37:1163–1167. [PubMed: 3044882] 
40. Mack CM, et al. Antiobesity action of peripheral exenatide (exendin-4) in rodents: effects on food 
intake, body weight, metabolic status and side-effect measures. Int J Obes. 2006; 30:1332–1340.
41. Kanoski SE, Rupperecht LW, Fortin SM, De Jonghe BC, Hayes MR. The role of nausea in food 
intake and body weight suppression by peripheral GLP-1 receptor agonists, exendin-4 and 
liraglutide. Neuropharmacology. 2012; 62:1916–1927. [PubMed: 22227019] 
42. Richter AW, Akerblom E. Antibodies against polyethylene glycol produced in animals by 
immunization with monomethoxy polyethylene glycol modified proteins. Int Arch Allergy Appl 
Immunol. 1983; 70:124–131. [PubMed: 6401699] 
43. Tsarevsky NV, Pintauer T, Matyjaszewski K. Deactivation efficiency and degree of control over 
polymerization in ATRP in protic solvents. Macromolecules. 2004; 37:9768–9778.
44. Averick S, et al. Protein-polymer hybrids: conducting ARGET ATRP from a genetically encoded 
cleavable ATRP initiator. Eur Polym J. 2013; 49:2919–2924.
45. Bellucci JJ, Bhattacharyya J, Chilkoti A. A noncanonical function of sortase enables site-specific 
conjugation of small molecules to lysine residues in proteins. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2015; 54:441–
445.
46. Amiram M, Luginbuhl KM, Li X, Feinglos MN, Chilkoti A. Injectable protease-operated depots of 
glucagon-like peptide-1 provide extended and tunable glucose control. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2013; 
110:2792–2797. [PubMed: 23359691] 
47. Schellenberger V, et al. A recombinant polypeptide extends the in vivo half-life of peptides and 
proteins in a tunable manner. Nat Biotechnol. 2009; 27:1186–1188. [PubMed: 19915550] 
48. Liao YD, Jeng JC, Wang CF, Wang SC, Chang ST. Removal of N-terminal methionine from 
recombinant proteins by engineered E. coli methionine aminopeptidase. Prot Sci. 2004; 13:1802–
1810.
49. McDaniel JR, Mackay JA, Quiroz FG, Chilkoti A. Recursive directional ligation by plasmid 
reconstruction allows rapid and seamless cloning of oligomeric genes. Biomacromolecules. 2010; 
11:944–952. [PubMed: 20184309] 
50. Ilangovan U, Ton-That H, Iwahara J, Schneewind I, Clubb RT. Structure of sortase, the 
transpeptidase that anchors proteins to the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 
2001; 98:6056–6061. [PubMed: 11371637] 
51. Drucker DJ, Nauck MA. The incretin system: glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes. Lancet. 2006; 368:1696–1705. [PubMed: 
17098089] 
52. Baggio LL, Huang QL, Brown TJ, Drucker DJ. A recombinant human glucagon-like peptide 
(GLP)-1- albumin protein (Albugon) mimics peptidergic activation of GLP-1 receptor-dependent 
pathways coupled with satiety, gastrointestinal motility, and glucose homeostasis. Diabetes. 2004; 
53:2492–2500. [PubMed: 15331566] 
53. Goutelle S, et al. The Hill equation: a review of its capabilities in pharmacological modelling. 
Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2008; 22:633–648. [PubMed: 19049668] 
54. Qi, Y., et al. Dataset for A brush-polymer conjugate of exendin-4 reduces blood glucose for up to 
five days and eliminates poly(ethylene glycol) antigenicity. figshare. 2016. http://dx.doi.org/
10.6084/m9.figshare.3976761
Qi et al.
Page 20
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. 
Synthetic scheme of exendin-C-POEGMA. a) Recombinant expression of the sortase A 
substrate, exendin-srt-His6-ELP, and purification by ITC 34. b) Sortase-catalyzed site-
specific attachment of the ATRP initiator AEBMP to the C-terminus of exendin to generate 
exendin-C-Br. c) In situ ATRP of OEGMA from exendin-C-Br yielding exendin-C-
POEGMA. ITC: inverse transition cycling, ELP: elastin-like polypeptide, srt: sortase A 
recognition sequence “LPETG”, AEBMP: N-(2-(2-(2-(2-aminoacetamido)acet-
amido)acetamido) ethyl)-2-bromo-2-methylpropanamide.
Qi et al.
Page 21
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. 
Characterization of exendin-C-Br macroinitiator and EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates. 
a) Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE analysis of initiator attachment on exendin by sortase A. 
Lane 1: MW marker, lane 2: sortase reaction mixture after 18 h of reaction, lane 3: purified 
exendin-C-Br macroinitiator. b) SEC traces of ATRP reaction mixtures of grafting EG9 
POEGMA from exendin-C-Br carried out for 0.5 h, 1 h, 1.25 h, 2 h and 3 h, detected by UV-
vis absorbance at 280 nm. c) Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response of native 
exendin and EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates with Mns of 25.4 kDa, 54.6 kDa, 66.2 
kDa, 97.2 kDa and 155.0 kDa in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells expressing the GLP-1R. 
Results are plotted as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM), n=3. Half-maximal 
effective concentration (EC50) values are summarized in Table 1.
Qi et al.
Page 22
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. 
Assessment of MW-dependent in vivo efficacy of EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates. 
Blood glucose levels in fed mice were measured before and after a single s.c. injection of a) 
unmodified exendin, or b-e) 25.4 kDa, 54.6 kDa, 97.2 kDa, and 155.0 kDa EG9 exendin-C-
POEGMA conjugates, compared to PBS control. The peptide and conjugates were 
administered at 25 nmol/kg and PBS was injected at equivalent volume at t = 0 h. Blood 
glucose levels were normalized to the average glucose levels measured 24 h and 
immediately before injection. Data were analyzed by repeated measures two-way analysis of 
variance (ANOVA), followed by post hoc Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. f) Area under 
the curve (AUC) of blood glucose profiles (0 h to 144 h, with respect to 0% baseline) as a 
function of conjugate Mn. AUCs were compared using one-way ANOVA followed by post 
hoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test. In all panels, results are plotted as mean ± SEM, n=6, 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P <0.0001.
Qi et al.
Page 23
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. 
Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT) of an EG9 exendin-POEGMA in mice. 
Mouse blood glucose levels measured in an IPGTT performed at 24 h and 72 h after a single 
s.c. injection of a and b) the 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-POEGMA conjugate or c and d) 
unmodified exendin at 25 nmol/kg, compared to PBS of equivalent volume. Mice were 
fasted for 6 h prior to glucose challenge by an intraperotoneal (i.p.) injection of 1.5 g/kg of 
glucose. Results are plotted as mean ± SEM, n=5 in panels a and b, n=3 in panels c and d. 
AUCs of treatment and PBS were compared using an unpaired parametric two-tailed t test 
(**P < 0.01, and ****P <0.0001). Exendin was not significant at either time point.
Qi et al.
Page 24
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. 
Assessment of reactivity of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates toward anti-PEG antibodies in 
patient plasma samples. a) Direct ELISA probing 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugate, native exendin, adenosine deaminase (ADA), bovine serum albumin (BSA), 
Krystexxa® (PEG-uricase) and Adagen® (PEG-ADA) with diluent (1% BSA in PBS), an 
anti-PEG negative patient plasma sample, or one of two anti-PEG positive plasma samples. 
b) Competitive ELISA, where various amounts of exendin, 54.6 kDa EG9 exendin-C-
POEMGA, ADA and Adagen® were allowed to compete with Krystexxa® for binding with 
anti-PEG antibodies in a positive plasma sample. c and d) Direct and competitive assays 
described in panels a and b performed with a 55.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA 
conjugate. In all assays, the same unmodified peptide/protein content or similar PEG/OEG 
content in the case of polymer-modified samples per well were compared. See Methods 
section for details. Results are plotted as mean ± SEM, n=3 in panels a and b, n=5 in panels 
c and d. Data were analyzed by two-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Dunnett’s multiple 
comparison test (**P < 0.01, and ****P <0.0001).
Qi et al.
Page 25
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. 
Assessment of in vivo efficacy and pharmacokinetics of exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates. 
Blood glucose levels in fed mice measured before and after a single s.c. injection of a) 55.6 
kDa and b) 71.6 kDa EG3 exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates at 25 nmol/kg or PBS at 
equivalent volume administered at t = 0 h. Blood glucose levels were normalized to the 
average glucose levels measured 24 h and immediately before injection. Data were analyzed 
by repeated measures two-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Dunnett’s multiple 
comparison test (n=5, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ****P <0.0001). c) Exendin and d) 
exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates (54.6 kDa EG9, 55.6 kDa EG3 and 71.6 kDa EG3) were 
fluorescently labeled with Alexa Fluor® 488 and injected into mice (n=3) s.c. at 75 nmol/kg 
(45 nmol/kg fluorophore). Blood samples were collected via tail vein at various time points 
for fluorescence quantification. Data were analyzed using a non-compartmental fit (solid 
lines) to derive the pharmacokinetic parameters shown in Table 2. Results in all panels are 
plotted as mean ± SEM.
Qi et al.
Page 26
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Qi et al.
Page 27
Table 1
Physical properties and biological activity of exendin and exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates.
Species
Reaction time (h)
Mw (Da)
Mn (Da)
Đ (Mw/Mn)
Rh (nm)
EC50 (nM)
exendin
--
--
4,186.6a
1.00b
2.2 ± 0.1
0.08 ± 0.01
EG9
0.5
26,400
25,400
1.04
4.5 ± 0.4
0.84 ± 0.09
EG9
1
56,800
54,600
1.04
5.6 ± 0.5
1.91 ± 0.35
EG9
1.25
72,200
66,200
1.09
5.9 ± 0.5
2.10 ± 0.08
EG9
2
100,000
97,200
1.03
6.8 ± 0.7
6.67 ± 0.21
EG9
3
178,000
155,000
1.15
7.6 ± 0.5
7.69 ± 0.04
EG3
3
27,400
26,300
1.04
3.8 ± 0.4
3.29 ± 0.27
EG3
5.5
60,600
55,600
1.09
4.8 ± 0.5
4.17 ± 0.13
EG3
8
82,700
71,600
1.16
5.4 ± 0.6
5.11 ± 0.23
MWs and Đs were determined by size exclusion chromatography multi-angle light scattering (SEC-MALS). Rhs were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS). EC50 values of EG9 and EG3 
conjugates were derived from cAMP response curves in Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. S7, respectively. Rh and EC50 values are reported as mean ± SEM, n=10 for Rh and n=3 for EC50. Mw: weight-
average MW, Mn: number-average MW, Đ: dispersity, Rh: hydrodynamic radius, EC50: half-maximal effective concentration.
aCalculated from amino acid sequence.
bDefault value due to unimolecular nature of the peptide.
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Qi et al.
Page 28
Table 2
Pharmacokinetic parameters of exendin and exendin-C-POEGMA conjugates injected s.c. derived from data analyzed with a non-compartmental fit in 
Figs. 6c and d.
t1/2 a (h)
t1/2 el (h)
Cmax (nM)a
tmax (nM)a
AUC (h*nM)b
exendin
0.7±0.1
1.7±0.2
37.1±3.8
1.78±0.1
217.5±36.5
54.6 kDa EG9
6.2±0.5
42.4±2.9
56.4±3.9
20.1±0.4
4,795.5±440.7
55.6 kDa EG3
7.6±0.7
61.2±5.0
44.0±2.7
28.5±2.3
4,775.0±482.9
71.6 kDa EG3
9.0±1.7
61.5±3.2
37.7±5.0
32.4±3.9
4,411.2±499.6
Values are reported as mean ± SEM. t1/2 a: absorption half-life, t1/2 el: elimination half-life, Cmax: maximum plasma concentration, tmax: time to attain Cmax.
aDerived from curve fitting.
bCalculated from t = 0 to ∞ from curve fitting.
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 04.
