 Immature Midbrain Dopaminergic Neurons Derived
from Floor-Plate Method Improve Cell
Transplantation Therapy Efficacy for Parkinson’s
Disease
LIFENG QIU
,a* MEI-CHIH LIAO,b* ALLEN K. CHEN,b SHUNHUI WEI,c SHAOPING XIE,d
SHAUL REUVENY,b ZHI DONG ZHOU,d,e WALTER HUNZIKER,c,f ENG KING TAN,d,e,g
STEVE K. W. OH,b LI ZENGa,e
Key Words. Midbrain dopaminergic neurons • Floor-plate • Transplantation • Parkinson’s disease •
Differentiation • Tyrosine hydroxylase
ABSTRACT
Recent reports have indicated human embryonic stem cells-derived midbrain dopamine (mDA)
neurons as proper cell resources for use in Parkinson’s disease (PD) therapy. Nevertheless, no
detailed and systematic study has been conducted to identify which differentiation stages of mDA
cells are most suitable for transplantation in PD therapy. Here, we transplanted three types of
mDA cells, DA progenitors (differentiated in vitro for 16 days [D16]), immature DA neurons (D25),
and DA neurons (D35), into PD mice and found that all three types of cells showed high viability
and strong neuronal differentiation in vivo. Both D25 and D35 cells showed neuronal maturation
and differentiation toward TH1 cells and, accordingly, satisfactory behavioral functional recovery.
However, transplanted D16 cells were less capable of producing functional recovery. These findings
provide a valuable guideline for standardizing the differentiation stage of the transplantable cells
used in clinical cell therapy for PD. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1803–1814
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Cell replacement is considered the promising treatment for Parkinson’s disease (PD). Neverthe-
less, no detailed and systematic study has been conducted to identify which differentiation
stages of mDA cells are most suitable for transplantation in PD therapy. The present study
showed that the immature mDA neurons were with the best TH1 differentiation and able to
recover rotation behavior in PD mice. In contrast, mDA progenitors showed discouraging TH1
differentiation and no behavioral recovery.
INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurode-
generative disease that is characterized by the
loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substan-
tia nigra. This leads to the reduction of dopamine
in the striatum, resulting in the impaired control
of movements. Current pharmacological medica-
tions for PD, such as L-dihydroxyphenylalanine
(L-DOPA), can only alleviate the PD symptoms,
and there is no curative therapy for this disease
[1]. Therefore, cell replacement therapy to restore
the loss of DA neurons is considered a promising
treatment for PD [2–5]. In the past, human fetal
ventral mesencephalic (hFVM) cells have been
transplanted into PD patients’ brains, and clinical
results demonstrated that hFVM cells survived
and grew, reinnervated the denervated striatum,
and ameliorated the behavioral deficits [6].
However, ethical and practical issues limit the clin-
ical use of hFVM cells. Some patients also devel-
oped major side effects such as graft-induced
dyskinesia due to the presence of serotonergic
neurons in the hFVM [7].Therefore, it is necessary
to identify a novel source of DA neurons.With the
advance of stem cell development, the generation
of DA neurons from stem/progenitor cells, or con-
verting somatic cells into DA neurons, could be
that alternative cell source [8].
Differentiation of pluripotent stem (PS) cells
toward DA neurons has been accomplished by ini-
tial neuronal induction either by co-culture with
stromal cells or using small molecules and then
regional specification. However, only a small frac-
tion of differentiated cells became TH1 DA neu-
rons (�20%) [9, 10]. Nevertheless, the viability of
transplanted cells and the restoration of behavior
aNeural Stem Cell Research Lab,
Research Department, National
Neuroscience Institute, Singapore;
bStem Cell Group, Bioprocessing
Technology Institute, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore; cEpithelial Cell Biology
Laboratory, Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, Singapore;
dResearch Department, National
Neuroscience Institute, Singapore;
eNeuroscience & Behavioral
Disorders Program, DUKE-NUS
Graduate Medical School,
Singapore; fDepartment of
Physiology, National University of
Singapore, Singapore;
gDepartment of Neurology,
National Neuroscience Institute,
Singapore
*Contributed equally.
Correspondence: Eng King Tan,
M.D., Research Department,
National Neuroscience Institute,
Singapore 308433.Telephone:
165 6326 5003; Fax: 165 6220
3321;
e-mail: tan.eng.king@sgh.com.sg;
or Steve Oh, Ph.D., Stem Cell
Group, Bioprocessing Technology
Institute, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research,
Singapore 138668.Telephone:
165 6407 0855, Fax: 165 6478
9561;
e-mail: Steve_Oh@bti.a-star.edu.
sg; or Li Zeng, Ph.D., Neural Stem
Cell Research Lab, Research
Department, National
Neuroscience Institute, Singapore
308433.Telephone: 165 6357
7515; Fax: 165 6256 9178;
e-mail: Li_Zeng@nni.com.sg
Received November 30, 2016;
accepted for publication May 8,
2017; first published June 26,
2017.
O
c AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2017/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.16-0470
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCom-
mercial-NoDerivs License, which
permits use and distribution in
any medium, provided the origi-
nal work is properly cited, the use
is non-commercial and no modifi-
cations or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1803–1814 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 following intrastriatal transplantation of human embryonic stem
cell (hESC)-derived DA neurons in a rat PD model were first
reported in 2006 [11]. There were, however, considerable safety
concerns regarding the risk of tumor formation or neural over-
growth. Then, in 2011, Kriks et al. [12] used a floor-plate method
to generate DA neurons with midbrain identities.The viability and
function of the grafted neurons were demonstrated in animal
models of PD, and no tumorigenic potential was observed. More-
over, Grealish et al. [13] reported that hESC-derived DA neurons
(using the floor-plate method) implanted in a rat PD model pre-
sented axonal growth and long-term survival as well as functional
improvements similar to hFVM DA neurons.This shows that trans-
plantation of hESC-derived DA neurons may become feasible for
treating PD.
It is essential to determine the optimal properties of trans-
plantable cells, characterized by various developmental stages, for
grafting into PD animal models, and even more so in future PD
patients. Currently, it is feasible to generate authentic midbrain
DA (mDA) neurons in dishes. Different differentiation stages of DA
progenitors and neurons derived from hESCs have been sepa-
rately applied for cell transplantations in vivo and have been
shown to survive well and restore motor deficits [12–14]. How-
ever, there is a lack of systematic study to determine which stage
of differentiated cells (progenitors or neurons) produces the best
long-term survival and functional restoration when grafted in
vivo. Here, we performed a careful assessment of the engraftment
efficacy, long-term survival, differentiation potential, maturation,
and functional recovery of hESC-derived midbrain DA progenitors
and DA neurons in a mouse model of PD.We selected three stages
of differentiated DA cells: stage 1, mDA progenitors (day 16; char-
acterized by high expression of FOXA21/LMX1A1); stage 2, imma-
ture mDA neurons (day 25; characterized by NURR11 expression);
and stage 3, mDA neurons (day 35; characterized by extended
neurite outgrowth) for transplantation into a 6-hydroxydopamine
(6-OHDA) induced PD mouse model.
We showed that, firstly, all three developmental stages of
mDA cells can be effectively engrafted into host brains with very
high viability rates, with no sign of neural overgrowth, necrosis, or
apoptosis. Secondly, the ability of mDA progenitors (D16) to
mature and to differentiate into TH1 neurons was limited even at
3 months post-transplantation, and they therefore proved ineffec-
tive for behavioral recovery when transplanted into a 6-OHDA-
induced mouse model of PD. By contrast, D25 and D35 mDA neu-
rons showed satisfactory TH1 differentiation and behavioral
recovery. Finally, the transplanted mDA cells sent out widespread
neurites to innervate multiple brain regions. In summary, our stud-
ies provide an effective approach for determining the develop-
mental status of transplantable cells for future PD therapeutic
applications.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Use of the experimental animals was conducted with protocols
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) of the National Neuroscience Institute (Singapore). The
mice were maintained in a pathogen-free facility and exposed to a
12-hour light/dark cycle with food and water. Male NOD-SCID
IL2Rgc-null mice (12 weeks old) were purchased (InVivos Pte Ltd,
Singapore, http://www.invivos.com.sg/) and used as recipients for
the cell transplantation. Efforts were made to minimize animal
suffering and the number of animals used. Three to five recipient
mice were analyzed in each group.
Maintenance of hESCs and DA Neuron Differentiation
The hESC line HES-3 (46, XX) was obtained from ES Cell Interna-
tional. HES-3 cells were maintained and expanded in mTeSR1
(STEMCELL Technologies, CA, https://www.stemcell.com/) medium
on tissue culture plates coated with Geltrex (Thermo Fisher Scien-
tific, Singapore, https://www.thermofisher.com/sg). The cells were
passaged once weekly using mechanical/manual dissociation.
The DA neuron differentiation method was derived from a
floor plate (FP)-based protocol [12, 15, 16] and modified from Kir-
keby et al. [15]. EBs were formed and cultured in FP medium
(DMEM/F12:Neurobasal (1:1), N2 supplement (1:100), and B27
supplement without vitamin A (1:50)) in the presence of 10 lM Y-
27632 (Rock inhibitor), 10 lM SB431542 (SB), 0.2 lM LDN193189
(LDN), 100 ng/ml SHH-C24II (Shh) (R&D SYSTEM, USA), 2 lM pur-
morphamine (pur), and 0.8 lM CHIR99021 (CHIR) for the first 4
days of differentiation. On day 4, the EBs were plated onto tissue
culture plates coated with Geltrex and grown in FP medium sup-
plemented with 0.2 lM LDN193189, 2 lM purmorphamine, and
0.8 lM CHIR99021. On day 11 of differentiation, the cell clusters
were dissociated with Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
replated onto Geltrex-coated plates in droplets of 1,000,000 cells/
100 ll in ND medium (Neurobasal, B27 supplement without vita-
min A (1:50), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (10 ng/ml)
(Peprotech, US, https://www.peprotech.com), glial cell line-
derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) (10 ng/ml) (Peprotech), TGF-
b3 (1 ng/ml) (Peprotech) and ascorbic acid (200 mM) (Sigma-
Aldrich, Singapore, https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/)). Beginning
on day 13, db-cAMP (0.5 lM, Sigma-Aldrich) or DAPT (5 lM) was
added to the ND medium for terminal differentiation. All small
molecules were purchased from Selleckchem. The electrophysio-
logical recording method was as described previously [17].
Generation of Cell Aggregates for Transplantation
Different stages of differentiated DA progenitors and neurons
were harvested and formed into cell aggregates of uniform size
(5,000 cells/aggregate) by using AggreWell 800-mM plates (STEM-
CELL Technologies). Cell aggregates were 200 lm in diameter 2
days before transplantation. Approximately 20 aggregates were
delivered per transplantation.
Flow Cytometry
For the immunostaining of live cells, cells were dissociated into
single cells and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in FACS
solution (1% BSA in PBS) at 48C for 30 minutes. Diluted fluorescent
secondary antibodies were applied for conjugation of the appro-
priate primary antibodies, and they were incubated at 48C for 20
minutes. Fluorescence was measured using a flow cytometer
(GUAVA, Millipore, Singapore, https://www.merckmillipore.com/
SG). To measure the TH/TUJ1 population of differentiated cells,
cells were dissociated and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at
room temperature (RT) for 10 minutes.Then, they were permeab-
ilized with 0.3% saponin (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS and incubated
with anti-TH antibody (Pel-Freez, US, http://www.pelfreez-bio.
com/) at 48C for 30 minutes with gentle shaking platform. After
washing with washing buffer (0.03% saponin in PBS), the cells
were incubated with Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG (H1L) and Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated mouse anti-b-tubulin
1804
Determining the Optimal Dopaminergic Cells for PD Cell Therapy
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 (BD Pharmingen, Singapore, https://www.bdbiosciences.com/sg/)
at 48C for 30 minutes. After being washed with washing buffer,
cells were resuspended in PBS. Fluorescence was measured using
a flow cytometer (GUAVA, Millipore).
Gene Expression Analysis
Total RNA was isolated with the Direct-zol RNA Purification Kit
according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Zymo Research, US,
https://www.zymoresearch.com). The concentration and quality
of purified RNA were measured using a NanoDrop device (Bio-
frontier Technology, Singapore, http://biofrontiertechnology.com).
Then, 1 lg total RNA per sample was subjected to cDNA synthesis
with the Maxima First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific Fermentas). Quantita-
tive RT-PCR was performed using TaqMan Probe-Based Gene
Expression Analysis (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a 7500 Fast Real-
Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, US, http://home.applied-
biosystems.com). The TaqMan probes used in this study were
listed in supplemental online Table S1. Relative mRNA expression
levels of target genes were calculated based on 2DDCt formula
after normalization to HPRT1 values with reference to day 0 of
differentiation.
HPLC Analysis
Cultured cells were collected in 0.5N perchloric acid. The levels of
dopamine (DA) and DOPAC in the differentiated cells were meas-
ured using a Reversed-phase UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Ger-
many) with an electrochemical detector and a reversed-phase
column (DBS HYPERSIL C18, 15 cm 3 3.0 mm, 3 lm, 120 Å pore
size) and analyzed under the control of a Chromeleon 7.2 Chroma-
tography Data System. The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1 M
sodium phosphate, 10 mM sodium 1-heptanesulfonate, 0.1 mM
EDTA and 8% methanol (v/v), adjusted to pH 2.95 with 85% phos-
phoric acid. All solutions for HPLC analysis were double filtered
through 0.2 lm membranes and degassed before use. The flow
rate was 0.5 ml per minute. All chemicals were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich.
6-Hydroxydopamine Lesioning
Mice were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine and diazepam
(both from Ceva Animal Health PteLtd, Glenorie, Australia, http://
www.ceva.com/; 100 and 20 mg/kg, respectively) and placed in a
stereotaxic frame. 6-OHDA (5 lg/ll 3 2 ll in 0.9% NaCl contain-
ing 0.2 mg/ml ascorbic acid) was injected into the left striatum
(10.5 mm AP, 1.8 mm ML relative to bregma and 3 mm below
skull) more than 5 minutes. Two weeks later, the mice were
assessed for lesion efficacy using the methamphetamine-induced
rotation assay [18].
Behavioral Analysis
The methamphetamine-induced rotation assay was performed
pre-transplantation and every 4 weeks after transplantation. A
dose of 2.5 mg/kg of methamphetamine was injected intraperito-
neally (i.p.), and the rotation behavior was recorded for 40
minutes. Animals that rotated ipsilaterally in excess of 6 turns/
minute were selected for analysis [18].
Cell Transplantation
Cell transplantations were conducted one month after 6-OHDA
lesion to allow SNpc DA neurons to finish cell death process, so
that the transplanted cells won’t affect SNpc DA neuron
regeneration (supplemental online Fig. S1). The mice were anaes-
thetized with a mixture of ketamine and diazepamas described
above and then positioned in a stereotactic injection apparatus.
Suspensions of concentrated cell aggregates (1 3 105 cells in 2.5
ml) were loaded into a Hamilton microliter syringe (7105KH 5.0 ml,
Hamilton Company, Bonaduz, Switzerland, https://www.hamilton-
company.com/) and injected into the striatum (AP: 10.5 mm; ML:
62 mm; DV: 23 mm). The needle was left in place for 5 minutes
after the injection.
Immunocytochemistry and Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Staining
For immunocytochemistry staining, cell aggregates were fixed in
4% PFA (Sigma-Aldrich, Singapore), cryoprotected in 30% sucrose
solution, cut on a cryostat and mounted on glass slides. For IHC,
the mice were transcardially perfused with 4% PFA; the brains
were then removed, post-fixed overnight in 4% PFA, and cryopro-
tected in 30% sucrose. Brain sections were cut with a cryostat and
mounted on glass slides. For immunofluorescence, blocking and
antibody incubations were performed with a solution of 1% BSA
and 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, Singapore) in PBS. The sam-
ples were blocked for 1 hour at RT, incubated overnight in primary
antibody solutions at 48C, and incubated for 2 hours in secondary
antibody solutions at RT. After the primary and secondary anti-
body incubations, the sections were washed four times in PBS.
The primary antibodies used were listed in supplemental online
Table S2. Alexa Fluor 488/568 goat anti-rabbit/mouse IgG (1:400,
Invitrogen,
Singapore,
https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/
home/brands/invitrogen.html) was used as secondary antibodies
for fluorescence labeling. A peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-
mouse secondary antibody (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA,
USA, https://vectorlabs.com) was used for 3,30-diaminobenzidine
(DAB) (Vector Laboratories) labeling, and positive reactions were
detected by the avidin–biotin complex (ABC) method (Vector
Laboratories). The slices were mounted with fluorescence mount-
ing medium (Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA, www.dako.com) or
DPX (for IHC-DAB staining), and images were obtained with a con-
focal microscope (LSM710, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan, www.olympus.
com).
Stereological Quantification of Grafted mDA Cells
The total numbers of grafted mDA cells that were immunoreactive
for the human nucleus antigen (hNUC), Ki67, neuronal nuclei anti-
gen (NEUN), and TH were estimated using stereological, unbiased,
and systematic sampling method described before [19, 20].
Briefly, frozen coronal sections (16 lm thick) were cut and contin-
uously collected. Stereological quantification was carried out with
every 15th section to cover the entire graft from the rostral focal
plane in which the grafted cells started to emerge to the caudal
plane where the grafted cells disappeared. The optical images
were obtained by an Olympus microscope using a 403 oil immer-
sion objective. At least eight sections were counted for each graft.
The total numbers in the grafts were calculated according to the
optical fractionator equation (West, 1993, 1999).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were carried out by using GraphPad Prism Soft-
ware (San Diego, CA, https://www.graphpad.com/scientific-soft-
ware/prism) and performed using Student’s t test. All data are
presented as the means and the standard deviation (mean6 SD).
Qiu, Liao, Chen et al.
1805
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Statistical significance was defined at ***p < .001, **p < .01, and
*p < .05.
RESULTS
In Vitro Characterization of hESC-Derived Midbrain DA
Neurons Using a Floor Plate-Based Differentiation
Method
To generate authentic midbrain DA (mDA) neurons, we adopted
dual SMAD inhibition and FP induction protocols [12, 15, 21, 22].
The common features of these protocols are early activation of
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh and Pur) and WNT (ChIR) signaling during
neural induction from hESCs by dual inhibition of SMAD signaling
(SB431542 and LDN) (Fig. 1A). After 16 days of neural induction,
the hESC pluripotency markers TRA-1-60 (Fig. 1B) and NANOG
(Fig. 1C) were undetectable. Meanwhile, the expression of the
typical neural marker PSA-NCAM increased, indicating differentia-
tion into neural progenitors (Fig. 1B). Moreover, high expression
levels of FP markers (FOXA2, CORIN, and LMX1A) indicated the
induction of neuronal progenitor pools with mDA characteristics
on day 16 of differentiation (Fig. 1C). The co-expression of OTX2
and LMX1A revealed by immunostaining also showed that mDA
progenitors were induced on day 16 (Fig. 1F).To further differenti-
ate and mature these cells toward mDA neurons, mDA progeni-
tors were grown in the presence of BDNF, GDNF, ascorbic acid
(AA), TGF-b3, db-cAMP, and DAPT (Fig. 1A). After approximately
25 days of differentiation, the expression of NURR1 was increased,
suggesting that cells at this stage acquired mDA neuronal identity,
leading to the final steps toward postmitotic differentiation (Fig.
1C, 1F). From day 25 onward, TH (DA neuron marker) and MAP2
(pan-neuron marker) marked the DA neuron populations among
these differentiated cells (Fig. 1D). Approximately 40% of cells
were observed to be double-positive for TH and TUJ1 (Fig. 1G). By
day 42 of differentiation, electrophysiological studies showed that
differentiated neurons exhibited action potentials (Fig. 1H) and
spontaneous postsynaptic currents (Fig. 1I). Dopamine and its
metabolite DOPAC were detected in the cultures that went
through further maturation at day 51 (Fig. 1J). Our results indi-
cated that, by applying the FP-based differentiation protocol, we
could obtain a high population of hESC-derived mDA neurons, and
these cells presented functional neuronal properties (action
potentials and synaptic transmission) and were capable of produc-
ing the neurotransmitter dopamine.
To identify the optimal stage of DA neuron differentiation for
transplantation of cells for future replacement therapy in PD, we
selected the three well-characterized developmental stages
described above for transplantation into a mouse model of PD:
stage 1, day 16 (D16) mDA progenitors, marked by high expression
levels of FOXA2 and LMX1A; stage 2, day 25 (D25) immature mDA
neurons, marked by NURR1 expression; and stage 3, day 35 (D35)
mDA neurons, characterized by increased MAP21 expression (Fig.
1D) and extended neurite outgrowth (Fig. 1E). In addition, we
modified the method of cell delivery from single cells to aggregate
format. Our previous studies showed that transplanted neural
aggregates exhibited a higher survival rate than single-cell prepa-
rations and that these cells were able to differentiate further into
neurons and innervate host tissue (Qiu et al., 2015). Furthermore,
when those cell aggregates were maintained in culture in vitro,
they also presented mDA progenitor and mDA neuron identities
(Fig. 1F). Therefore, cell aggregates that comprised of 5,000 cells/
aggregate were generated 2 days in advance before cell injections
into the mouse model of PD.
Viability and Proliferation of the Three Developmental
Stages of mDA Cells 3 Months Post-Transplantation into
the Mouse Model of PD
The three developmental stages of mDA cells were transplanted
as aggregates of equal cell numbers (1 3 105 cells per recipient)
into NOD-SCID IL2Rgc-null mice with 6-OHDA lesions. Three
months after the cell transplantation, mouse brains were perfused
and sectioned. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed using
anti-human specific Neural cell adhesion molecule (hNCAM) and
anti-human specific nucleus antigen (hNuc) antibodies to assess
the survival of the transplanted mDA cells. All three types of trans-
plants
exhibited
substantial
viability
at
3
months
post-
transplantation, as indicated by the IHC-DAB staining with hNCAM
antibody (Fig. 2A) and the immunofluorescence (IF) staining with
hNuc (Fig. 2B). Necrosis was not detected (Fig. 2A). The numbers
of viable grafted cells per graft were assessed by stereologically
counting the hNuc1 nuclei. On average, approximately 2.4 3 105
cells survived per graft at 3 months post-transplantation found
with the D16 mDA progenitors (Fig. 2C). In contrast, only approxi-
mately 1.0 3 105 and 0.7 3 105 cells per graft survived in the D25
and D35 mDA neuron transplantation, respectively (Fig. 2C), signif-
icantly fewer cells than with D16 mDA progenitor transplantation.
The overall high viability rate of the transplanted cells was likely
due to our preparation of the transplantable cells as cell aggre-
gates [23–25].
To evaluate the proliferation potential of the transplanted
cells, anti Ki67 antibody was used to detect any proliferating cells
[26]. It was estimated that the D16 mDA progenitor transplants
contained approximately 1.8% proliferating cells and that the D25
and D35 mDA neuron transplants each contained approximately
0.5% proliferating cells (Fig. 2D). The percentage of proliferating
cells was not significantly different among these three types of
transplantation (Fig. 2D). An apoptosis marker, cleaved caspase 3
(C-CASP3), was occasionally (1–2 cells per graft) detected in some
grafts, but it was undetectable in most cases (supplemental online
Fig. S2). Our results indicated that, when delivered as cell aggre-
gates, all three cell types showed very high viability, no sign of
overgrowth, and no sign of cell death.
Neuronal Differentiation and Maturation of the Three
Developmental Stages of mDA Cells at 3 Months Post-
Transplantation
We subsequently examined the differentiation potential of the
transplanted cells and their capacity to mature in vivo. As shown
in Fig. 3A, immunostaining for TUJ1 in all three types of trans-
plants indicated the neuronal phenotype of the transplanted cells
(indicated by hNCAM staining) (Fig. 3A). In contrast, only a small
fraction of engrafted cells were found to be GFAP-positive astro-
cytes (supplemental online Fig. S3).
Moreover, we found that a significant fraction of the trans-
planted cells matured into NEUN-positive cells in each of the three
types of transplants (Fig. 3B). Of the engrafted D25 mDA cells,
40.5% were NEUN positive, whereas the D16 and D35 transplants
contained 29.7% and 28.9% NEUN-positive cells, respectively.
However, the differences among the three groups were not signifi-
cant (Fig. 3C). Notably, the IF intensity of the NEUN staining was
much weaker in D16 mDA progenitor transplants compared with
that in D25 and D35 mDA neuron transplants (Fig. 3B). These
1806
Determining the Optimal Dopaminergic Cells for PD Cell Therapy
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Figure 1.
Differentiation and characterization of hESC-derived mDA neurons. (A): An overview of the floor plate (FP)-based mDA neuron dif-
ferentiation protocol and stages for transplantation. (B): Flow cytometric analysis and, (C): and (D): quantitative RT-PCR analysis of gene
expression levels at different stages of differentiation. Data are shown as the mean 6 SD, n 5 3 (independent experiments). (E): Morphology
of mDA cells at different stages of differentiation. Scale bar: 50 lm. (F): Immunofluorescence images of various stages of cell aggregates on
day 16 (OTX2/LMX1A), day 25 (TH/NURR1), and day 35 (TH/MAP2). Scale bar: 50 lm. (G): Quantification of TH1 and Tuj11 cell populations
on day 25 and day 35 by flow cytometry. (H): Action potential induced by 50 pA current recorded from hESC-derived neurons on day 42. (I):
Spontaneous postsynaptic current at Vm 5 260 mV recorded from hESC-derived neurons on day 42. (J): HPLC analysis of dopamine and its
metabolite, DOPAC, from differentiated cells on day 51. Abbreviations: hESC, human embryonic stem cell; mDA, midbrain dopaminergic.
Qiu, Liao, Chen et al.
1807
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Figure 2.
The survival and proliferation of the transplanted cells 3 months post-transplantation. (A): IHC-DAB staining using human-specific
NCAM (hNCAM) antibody show the graft sizes of transplantations of the three stages of mDA cells. Red dotted lines outline coronal sections
of the right cortical hemisphere. Scale bar: 600 mm. (B): Representative images showing the survival and proliferation of three stages of mDA
cells. hNUC staining revealing the surviving transplanted cells. Ki67 staining showed the proliferating cells among the transplanted cells. Scale
bar: 100 mm. (C): Bar chart showing the quantification of the surviving transplanted cells in the three types of transplants. Data are shown as
the means 6 SD, n 5 3 animals, Student’s t test (two-tailed), *p < .05. (D): Bar chart showing the percentage of proliferating cells among the
grafted cells in the three types of transplants. Data are shown as the means 6 SD, n 5 3 animals, Student’s t test (two-tailed). Abbreviations:
IHC, Immunohistochemistry; DAB, 3,30-diaminobenzidine; mDA, midbrain dopaminergic; hNUC, Human specific nuclear antigen.
1808
Determining the Optimal Dopaminergic Cells for PD Cell Therapy
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Figure 3.
Neuronal differentiation and maturation of three types of transplants. (A): The majority of the transplanted cells (labeled with
hNCAM, red) differentiated into neurons (labeled with TUJ1, green). Scale bars: 50 mm in enlarged panel, 200 mm in other panels. (B): Repre-
sentative images showing the mature neurons (labeled with NEUN, green) derived from the transplanted D16, D25, and D35 mDA cells
(labeled with hNUC, red) 3 months post-transplantation. G: grafted cells; H: host tissue. Scale bar: 50 mm. (C): Bar chart showing the percent-
age of the mature neurons among the surviving transplanted cells in the three types of transplants. Data are shown as the means 6 SD,
n 5 3 animals, Student’s t test (two-tailed). Abbreviations: mDA, midbrain dopaminergic; hNUC, Human specific nuclear antigen.
Qiu, Liao, Chen et al.
1809
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Figure 4.
Comparison of the functional efficacy of the three types of transplants. (A): Subsets of the transplanted cells (hNUC positive, red)
could differentiate into TH1 DA neurons (green). G: graft region; H: host tissue. Scale bar: 50 mm in enlarged images, 100 lm in the other
images. (B): Bar chart showing the percentage of mDA neurons among the surviving transplanted cells for the three types of transplants.
Data are shown as the means 6 SD, n 5 3 animals, Student’s t test (two-tailed). (C): Immunofluorescence images showing the co-expression
of TH with midbrain neuronal markers, LMX1A, FOXA2, and NURR1, in the grafted D25 mDA neurons. 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
(blue) indicates cell nuclei. White arrowheads indicate the cell bodies of double-positive cells. Scale bar: 50 mm. (D): Immunofluorescence
images showing the co-expression of TH with A9 subtype marker, GIRK2, in the grafted D25 mDA neurons. DAPI (blue) indicates cell nuclei.
White arrowheads indicate the cell bodies of double-positive cells. Scale bar: 50 mm. (E): Some of the transplanted cells (hNUC positive, red)
could differentiate into GABAergic neurons (green). White arrowheads indicate GABAergic neurons. Scale bar: 50 mm. (F): Bar chart showing
the efficacy of behavioral recovery produced by the three types of transplants. Amphetamine-induced ipsilateral rotations recorded 3 months
post-transplantation were compared with rotations recorded pre-transplantation. Data are presented as percentages normalized to the pre-
transplantation recordings. The values represented means 6 SD, n 5 5 animals, Student’s t test (two-tailed), *p < .05, **p < .01. Abbrevia-
tions: mDA, midbrain dopaminergic; hNUC, Human specific nuclear antigen.
1810
Determining the Optimal Dopaminergic Cells for PD Cell Therapy
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 results indicated that although all three developmental stages of
mDA cells were able to differentiate into neurons, D25 immature
mDA neuron transplants showed the highest proportion of
mature neurons when compared to the other two groups.
Functional Efficiency of the Three Developmental
Stages of mDA Neurons in PD Mouse
We next proceeded to assess the functional efficacy of these three
developmental
stages
of
mDA
cells
3
months
post-
transplantation. TH1 neurons were found in all grafts of the three
mDA cell types. The grafted TH1 neurons were located in both
the center and periphery of the transplant regions (Fig. 4A).
Among the three transplantation groups, D25 mDA neuron trans-
plants showed the highest percentage of TH1 neurons among the
total grafted cells (12.14%). This percentage was significantly
higher than D16 mDA progenitor transplants (3.73%) and was also
somewhat but not significantly higher than that in D35 mDA neu-
ron transplants (8.85%) (Fig. 4B). For both D16 and D25 cells, the
TH1 cells were evenly distributed within the graft, whereas the
TH1 cells in D35 transplants tended to be more concentrated in
sub-regions of the grafts (Fig. 4A). The grafted TH1 cells also reli-
ably expressed midbrain neuronal marker, LMX1A, FOXA2 and,
NURR1 (Fig. 4C), and A9 DA subtype marker, GIRK2 (Fig. 4D), indi-
cating they were the functional components in the grafts. Notably,
in all three types of transplants, GABAergic neurons were
detected in subsets of the grafted cells (Fig. 4E). In contrast, we
did not observe serotonergic neurons in any of the three types of
transplants (supplemental online Fig. S4). Together, these results
demonstrated that all three types of mDA cells were capable to
differentiate into mDA neurons with D25 mDA cells achieved the
most efficient TH1 mDA neuronal in vivo differentiation efficiency.
In addition, we evaluated the ability of these three types of
transplants to rescue the amphetamine-induced rotation behavior
in Parkinsonian mice. Both the D25 and D35 mDA neuron trans-
plants were able to significantly reduce the abnormal rotations at
3 months post-transplantation (Fig. 4F). No significant difference
was observed between D25 and D35 transplants in the rescue effi-
cacy (50% reduction versus 60% reduction respectively). In con-
trast, the D16 mDA progenitor transplants did not show significant
behavioral improvement by 3 months post-transplantation (Fig.
4F). This was consistent with the above finding that D16 mDA pro-
genitors showed weaker neuronal maturation and TH1 neuron dif-
ferentiation compared to D25 and D35 transplants.
Integration of the Transplanted Cells into the Host
Tissues
One important criterion for evaluating whether transplanted cells
are suitable for clinical therapy is to assess the integration of these
cells into the host tissue [27, 28]. Given that the D25 mDA neu-
rons showed the best TH1 differentiation (Fig. 4B) and able to
recover rotation behavior in PD mice (Fig. 4F), to assess the inte-
gration of the transplanted D25 mDA neurons, we examined the
neurite targeting and migration of the engrafted cells. Three
months post-transplantation, the transplanted cells exhibited
extensive fiber outgrowth and innervated multiple regions of the
host brain. The neurite outgrowth pattern was examined in both
sagittal (Fig. 5A–5C) and coronal (Fig. 5D–5H) brain sections, as
shown by the dense hNCAM staining of the neurites of the trans-
planted cells. To target nearby areas, engrafted cells innervated
the ipsilateral striatum (Fig. 5B, 5H) and both the ipsilateral and
contralateral septum (Fig. 5E). To target remote areas, engrafted
cells sent out fibers along white matter tracts, including the cor-
pus callosum to innervate the ipsilateral and contralateral piriform
cortex (Fig. 5F, 5G) and the cerebral peduncle (Fig. 5C).
In contrast to the widespread neurite innervation, the migra-
tion of the transplanted cells was limited, with only approximately
100 mm of migration out from the transplanted core within the
striatum (the regions between the pairs of dotted lines in Fig. 5I).
Notably, there were numerous cells from the host brain present
within the transplant region (Fig. 5I), suggesting an efficient inte-
gration between the transplanted cells and the host tissue.
DISCUSSION
The transplantation of DA neurons is considered as a potential
therapeutic cell-based treatment for PD, and the DA neurons
derived from human PS cells (hPSCs) have attracted significant
interest. Prior to transplantation, three fundamental aspects must
be addressed: the identification of a transplantable stage during
DA neuron differentiation, in vivo DA neuronal survival, and func-
tional assessment [10]. Currently, efficient DA neuron generation
has been produced using FP-based methods [8, 12, 13, 15, 21,
29–31]. Different stages of DA cells have been examined individu-
ally in vivo and different conclusions have been reached [12–16].
This study, for the first time, used three differentiated stages of
cells generated by a FP-based protocol: DA progenitors (D16),
post-mitotic immature DA neurons (D25), and DA neurons (D35),
and systematically examined the competence of these cells in cell-
transplantation therapy in a mouse model of PD.
The clinical studies have indicated that midbrain DA progeni-
tors, which appear post conception week 6–9 in human [29, 31,
32], are the most therapeutically effective when transplanted to
cure PD [33]. Based on the expression curve of FOXA2 and CORIN,
the D16 mDA cells generated in this study using the FP-based dif-
ferentiation protocol are equivalent to this stage (Fig. 1B, 1C).
These progenitors were preferred in clinic because of their high
survivability compared to the more differentiated cells. This was
consistent to our finding that the number of engrafted cells from
D16 DA progenitors was significantly higher than those from the
other two groups 3 months post-transplantation (Fig. 2C). How-
ever, the DA linage differentiation and maturation were poorer for
the D16 DA progenitors and resulted in poor functional rescue of
the amphetamine-induced rotation behavior (Fig. 4). Although
D16 DA progenitors have been shown to be effective to rescue
behavioral impairment in PD mouse in previous studies [13, 15],
more recent and comprehensive study from the same research
group admitted that D16 DA progenitors are not effective to res-
cue the behavioral impairment even at 16 weeks post transplanta-
tion [34]. The effect of the D16 transplants can only be seen at
22–25 weeks post transplantation [34]. It is possible that the per-
centage of TH-positive cells among the D16 mDA progenitors
might increase and acquire functionality over a longer period of
time, which would be outside the time window described in this
study (12 weeks post transplantation). Moreover, the percentage
of TH1 cells among total transplanted cells was reported to be
around 3.7% in D16 transplants [34], which is consistent with our
current finding (Fig. 4) and much lower than the DA yield of the
D25 transplants (Fig. 4). Together, these findings undermined the
utilization value of the D16 DA progenitors.
As mentioned above, one concern for transplanting more dif-
ferentiated DA cells is their poor survivability in vivo. Strikingly, by
Qiu, Liao, Chen et al.
1811
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Figure 5.
The transplanted D25 mDA neurons innervated multiple brain regions. IHC-DAB staining using hNCAM antibody revealed the pro-
jections of the transplanted human ES-derived D25 mDA neurons. (A): Sagittal section showed that the transplanted cells residing in the
transplanted core (T) innervated the surrounding striatum (B) and projected toward the pons and cerebellum through the cerebral peduncle
(C). (D): Coronal section showed that the transplanted cells residing in the transplanted core innervated the septal nuclei (E), the ipsilateral-
piriform cortex (F), the contralateral piriform cortex (G), and the surrounding striatum (H). (I): The migration of transplanted cells from the
transplantation core to the surrounding striatum. The thick dotted line outlined the edge of the transplantation core region. The thin dotted
line indicates the frontier of the migrated transplanted cells. White arrows indicate host cells present in the transplantation core region. T:
transplanted core; Hi: hippocampus; CC: corpus callosum. Scale bars: 500 mm in (A) and (D); 50 mm in (B), (C), (E–H); 100 mm in (I). Abbrevia-
tions: IHC, immunohistochemistry; DAB, 3,30-diaminobenzidine; mDA, midbrain dopaminergic.
1812
Determining the Optimal Dopaminergic Cells for PD Cell Therapy
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 forming aggregates of post-mitotic DA neurons and transplanting
those aggregates 2 days later, we managed to achieve more than
70% survival rate in D25 and D35 mDA neuronal transplants (Fig.
2C). This modification of cell delivery [24] enabled the utilization
of more safer and authentically differentiated DA neurons, since
there is only around 0.5% proliferating cells in D25 and D35 DA
neuronal transplants (Fig. 2D). Both D25 and D35 mDA transplants
resulted in functional rescued behavior in Parkinsonian mice in
this study. However, considering that even a small number of sur-
viving TH1 cells can significantly rescue amphetamine induced
asymmetric rotation in PD mouse, histology analysis is more reli-
able to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of the transplanted cells.
Our results showed that the D35 transplants produced fewer
engrafted mature NEUN1 and TH1 cells than the D25 transplants.
This is consistent with a previous report (Doi et al., [14]) and prob-
ably due to the inherent poor survivability of mature neurons with
extensive neuritis, as has been reported [12]. Thus, current findings
synergistically indicated D25 post-mitotic immature mDA neurons
to be a favorable differentiation stage for transplantation in terms
of their survival ability, maturation, and mDA neuron differentiation.
Notably, the neurites sent out from transplanted cells inner-
vate not only the surrounding striatum but also other brain areas.
This is consistent with reported observations [35]. In this study,
dense hNCAM-stained neuronal fibers can be found in the septal
nuclei and piriform cortex. Both of these two regions receive sig-
nificant DA input from the midbrain and are important structures
involved in the reward pathway [36]. The heterogeneity of the
engrafted neurons might be the cause of the innervation of multi-
ple regions in the brain. It will be of interest to investigate
whether transplanting mDA neurons of higher purity can alleviate
the multiple region innervations.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, our study shows the importance of identifying the
most suitable cells at an appropriate differentiation stage for
achieving safe and efficacious DA neuron engraftment. We identi-
fied post-mitotic immature DA neurons (D25, high NURR1 expres-
sion) as the most suitable cell source for future PD cell therapy.
Cell types at earlier or later stages of differentiation were not suit-
able due to their immaturity and reduced in vivo survivability,
respectively. For future therapeutic application, we believe that
further research is needed to characterize the post-mitotic imma-
ture DA neurons and to develop a more scalable production
method tailored for this population to ensure the consistency, effi-
cacy, and safety of the therapy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Wei Zhang and Ms. Yu Ming Lim for technical sup-
port. This research was supported by the Singapore National
Research Foundation under its Translational and Clinical
Research Flagship Programme and administered by the Singa-
pore Ministry of Health’s National Medical Research Council.
We also acknowledge the Agency for Science Technology and
Research (A*STAR) for generous funding of this research.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
L.Q. and M.C.L.: conception and design; acquisition of data; draft
the article; A.K.C., Z.Z., S.W., S.X., and S.R.: acquisition of data;
W.H. supervise experiments and edit manuscript; E.K.T., S.K.W.O.,
and L.Z.: conception and design; analysis and interpretation of
data; supervise all experiments; edit the article. All authors read
and approved the manuscirpt.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
E.K.T.: Honoraria as an editor for European Journal of Neurology
and Parkinsonism & Related Disorders Research funding from the
National Medical Research Council. The other authors indicated
no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Nishimura K, Takahashi J. Therapeutic
application of stem cell technology toward the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Biol Pharm
Bull 2013;36:171–175.
2
Bega D, Krainc D. Long-term clinical out-
comes after fetal cell transplantation in Par-
kinson disease: Implications for the future of
cell therapy. JAMA 2014;311:617–618.
3
Lindvall O, Brundin P, Widner H et al.
Grafts of fetal dopamine neurons survive and
improve motor function in Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Science 1990;247:574–577.
4
Hallett PJ, Cooper O, Sadi D et al. Long-
term health of dopaminergic neuron trans-
plants in Parkinson’s disease patients. Cell Rep
2014;7:1755–1761.
5
Kefalopoulou Z, Politis M, Piccini P et al.
Long-term clinical outcome of fetal cell trans-
plantation for Parkinson disease: Two case
reports. JAMA Neurol 2014;71:83–87.
6
Barker RA, Barrett J, Mason SL et al.
Fetal dopaminergic transplantation trials and
the future of neural grafting in Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Lancet Neurol 2013;12:84–91.
7
Barker RA, Kuan WL. Graft-induced dys-
kinesias in Parkinson’s disease: What is it all
about? Cell Stem Cell 2010;7:148–149.
8
Zhu B, Caldwell M, Song B. Development
of stem cell-based therapies for Parkinson’s
disease. Int J Neurosci 2016;126:955–962.
9
Cho MS, Lee YE, Kim JY et al. Highly effi-
cient and large-scale generation of functional
dopamine neurons from human embryonic
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:
3392–3397.
10
Ganat YM, Calder EL, Kriks S et al. Iden-
tification of embryonic stem cell-derived mid-
brain dopaminergic neurons for engraftment.
J Clin Invest 2012;122:2928–2939.
11
Roy NS, Cleren C, Singh SK et al. Func-
tional engraftment of human ES cell-derived
dopaminergic neurons enriched by coculture
with telomerase-immortalized midbrain astro-
cytes. Nat Med 2006;12:1259–1268.
12
Kriks S, Shim JW, Piao J et al. Dopamine
neurons derived from human ES cells effi-
ciently engraft in animal models of Parkinson’s
disease. Nature 2011;480:547–551.
13
Grealish S, Diguet E, Kirkeby A et al.
Human ESC-derived dopamine neurons show
similar preclinical efficacy and potency to fetal
neurons when grafted in a rat model of Par-
kinson’s disease. Cell Stem Cell 2014;15:653–
665.
14
Doi D, Samata B, Katsukawa M et al.
Isolation of human induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived dopaminergic progenitors by cell
sorting for successful transplantation. Stem
Cell Reports 2014;2:337–350.
15
Kirkeby A, Grealish S, Wolf DA et al.
Generation of regionally specified neural pro-
genitors and functional neurons from human
embryonic stem cells under defined condi-
tions. Cell Rep 2012;1:703–714.
16
Xi J, Liu Y, Liu H et al. Specification of
midbrain dopamine neurons from primate
pluripotent stem cells. STEM CELLS 2012;30:
1655–1663.
17
Wu SM, Tan KS, Chen H et al. Enhanced
production of neuroprogenitors, dopaminergic
neurons, and identification of target genes by
overexpression of sonic hedgehog in human
embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells Dev 2012;21:
729–741.
18
Nikkhah G, Olsson M, Eberhard J et al.
A microtransplantation approach for cell sus-
pension grafting in the rat Parkinson model: A
Qiu, Liao, Chen et al.
1813
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 detailed account of the methodology. Neuro-
science 1994;63:57–72.
19
West MJ. New stereological methods
for counting neurons. Neurobiol Aging 1993;
14:275–285.
20
West MJ. Stereological methods for
estimating the total number of neurons and
synapses: issues of precision and bias. Trends
Neurosci 1999;22:51–61.
21
Chambers SM, Fasano CA, Papapetrou
EP et al. Highly efficient neural conversion of
human ES and iPS cells by dual inhibition of
SMAD signaling. Nat Biotechnol 2009;27:275–
280.
22
Gonzalez
R,
Garitaonandia
I,
Abramihina T et al. Deriving dopaminergic
neurons for clinical use. A practical approach.
Sci Rep 2013;3:1463.
23
Frisch SM, Francis H. Disruption of epi-
thelial cell-matrix interactions induces apopto-
sis. J Cell Biol 1994;124:619–626.
24
Qiu L, Lim YM, Chen AK et al. Microcar-
rier-expanded neural progenitor cells can sur-
vive, differentiate, and innervate host neurons
better when transplanted as aggregates. Cell
Transplant 2015;25:1343–1357.
25
Soto-Gutierrez A, Yagi H, Uygun BE
et al. Cell delivery: From cell transplantation
to organ engineering. Cell Transplant 2010;19:
655–665.
26
Zhang W, Zhang W, Thevapriya S et al.
Amyloid precursor protein regulates neuro-
genesis by antagonizing miR-574–5p in the
developing
cerebral
cortex.
Nat
Commun
2014;5:3330.
27
Grealish S, J€
onsson ME, Li M et al., The
A9 dopamine neuron component in grafts of
ventral mesencephalon is an important deter-
minant for recovery of motor function in a rat
model of Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2010;
133(Pt 2):482–495.
28
Mendez I, Sanchez-Pernaute R, Cooper
O et al., Cell type analysis of functional fetal
dopamine cell suspension transplants in the
striatum and substantia nigra of patients with
Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2005;128(Pt 7):
1498–1510.
29
Gale E, Li M. Midbrain dopaminergic
neuron fate specification: Of mice and embry-
onic stem cells. Mol Brain 2008;1:8.
30
Steiner D, Khaner H, Cohen M et al.
Derivation, propagation and controlled differ-
entiation of human embryonic stem cells in
suspension. Nat Biotechnol 2010;28:361–364.
31
Smidt MP, Burbach JP. How to make a
mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neuron. Nat
Rev Neurosci 2007;8:21–32.
32
Peng SP, Copray S. Comparison of
human primary with human iPS cell-derived
dopaminergic neuron grafts in the rat model
for Parkinson’s disease. Stem Cell Rev 2016;
12:105–120.
33
Singec I, Jandial R, Crain A et al. The
leading edge of stem cell therapeutics. Annu
Rev Med 2007;58:313–328.
34
Kirkeby A, Nolbrant S, Tiklova K et al.
Predictive markers guide differentiation to
improve graft outcome in clinical translation
of hESC-based therapy for Parkinson’s disease.
Cell Stem Cell 2017;20:135–148.
35
Thompson L, Barraud P, Andersson E et al.
Identification of dopaminergic neurons of nigral
and ventral tegmental area subtypes in grafts of
fetal ventral mesencephalon based on cell mor-
phology, protein expression, and efferent projec-
tions. J Neurosci 2005;25:6467–6477.
36
Hargus G, Cooper O, Deleidi M et al. Differ-
entiated Parkinson patient-derived induced pluripo-
tent stem cells grow in the adult rodent brain and
reduce motor asymmetry in Parkinsonian rats. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:15921–15926.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
1814
Determining the Optimal Dopaminergic Cells for PD Cell Therapy
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
