 www.aging‐us.com 
419 
AGING (Albany NY) 
 
 
www.aging‐us.com 
 
 
AGING 2017, Vol. 9, No. 2
Research Paper 
Epigenetic clock analysis of diet, exercise, education, and lifestyle 
factors 
 
Austin Quach1*, Morgan E. Levine1*, Toshiko Tanaka2*, Ake T. Lu1, Brian H. Chen2, Luigi 
Ferrucci2, Beate Ritz3,4, Stefania Bandinelli5, Marian L. Neuhouser6, Jeannette M. Beasley7, 
Linda Snetselaar8, Robert B. Wallace8, Philip S. Tsao9,10, Devin Absher11, Themistocles L. 
Assimes9, James D. Stewart12, Yun Li13,14, Lifang Hou15,16, Andrea A. Baccarelli17, Eric A. 
Whitsel12,18, Steve Horvath1,19 
 
1Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
2Longitudinal Studies Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, USA. Baltimore, MD 21224, USA 
3Department of Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, 
USA 
4Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
5Geriatric Unit, Azienda Sanitaria Firenze (ASF), Florence, Italy 
6Cancer Prevention Program, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA 98109, USA 
7Department of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY 10016, USA 
 
8Department of Epidemiology, University of Iowa, 145 N. Riverside Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA  
9Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
10VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto CA 94304, USA 
11HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL 35806, USA 
12 Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
NC 27599, USA 
13 Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 
14 Department of Biostatistics, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA 
15Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University Chicago, IL 60611, USA
16Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University Chicago, 
IL 60611, USA 
17Laboratory of Environmental Epigenetics, Departments of Environmental Health Sciences Epidemiology, 
Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY 10032, USA 
18Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 
19Dept. of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA 
 
Correspondence to: Steve Horvath; email:  shorvath@mednet.ucla.edu 
Keywords: diet, lifestyle, fish intake, alcohol intake, aging, epigenetic clock, DNA methylation 
Received:  November 11, 2016 
Accepted:  January 25, 2017 
Published:  February 14, 2017 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Behavioral and lifestyle factors have been shown to relate to a number of health‐related outcomes, yet there is a
need for studies that examine their relationship to molecular aging  rates.  Toward  this  end,  we  use  recent  epi‐ 
 www.aging‐us.com 
420 
AGING (Albany NY) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A number of behavioral lifestyle factors have been 
shown to relate to health, including diet, physical 
activity, 
moderate 
alcohol 
consumption, 
and 
educational attainment. For instance, diet is a 
modifiable behavior with the potential to mitigate 
chronic disease risk. Various dietary components have 
been reported to influence intermediate risk factors and 
the prevalence of age-related disease outcomes; thus 
there is a growing consensus regarding nutritional 
recommendations for maintaining optimal health. These 
dietary factors include whole grain & dietary fiber [1], 
fish & omega-3 fatty acids [2], and fruits & vegetables 
[3], all of which may be involved in reducing systemic 
inflammation [4]. Further, metabolic health has been 
established as one of the primary mechanisms through 
which diet affects health and disease [5]. Conditions 
such as, insulin resistance, hypercholesterolemia, 
hypertension, 
hypertryglyceremia, 
and 
systemic 
inflammation can be promoted by poor dietary habits 
and often coalesce, influencing a person’s risk of 
atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, and stroke [6-8].  
 
In addition to diet, other behaviors such as moderate 
alcohol consumption, increased physical activity, and 
higher educational attainment have all been linked to 
reductions in morbidity and mortality risk [9-16]. Yet, 
despite the strong evidence connecting lifestyle factors 
to health outcomes, it is still unclear whether these 
factors directly influence aging on a molecular level. In 
previous work, leukocyte telomere length (LTL) has 
been used to investigate the influence of lifestyle factors 
on replicative aging in blood [17-21]. A cross-sectional 
study of 2,284 participants from the Nurses’ Health 
Study reported that LTL was associated with BMI, 
waist circumference, and dietary intake of total fat, 
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and fiber [22]. LTL was 
also found to be  longer  among  individuals  who  were  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more physically active [23, 24], as well has those with 
higher levels of education [25].  
 
Another promising measure for investigating the 
dynamics between lifestyle and aging is the molecular 
biomarker 
known 
as 
the 
“epigenetic 
clock”. 
Chronological age has been shown to have a profound 
effect on DNA methylation levels [26-34]. As a result, 
several highly accurate epigenetic biomarkers of 
chronological age have been proposed [35-39]. These 
biomarkers use weighted averages of methylation levels 
at specific CpG sites to produce estimates of age (in 
units of years), referred to as "DNA methylation age" 
(DNAm age) or "epigenetic age". Recent studies 
support the idea that these measures are at least passive 
biomarkers of biological age. For instance, the 
epigenetic age of blood has been found to be predictive 
of all-cause mortality [40-43], frailty [44], lung cancer 
[45], and cognitive and physical functioning [46], while 
the blood of the offspring of Italian semi-super-
centenarians (i.e. participants aged 105 or older) was 
shown to have a lower epigenetic age than that of age-
matched controls [47]. Further, the utility of the 
epigenetic clock method using various tissues and 
organs 
has 
been 
demonstrated 
in 
applications 
surrounding Alzheimer's disease [48], centenarian status 
[47, 49], development [50], Down syndrome [51], 
frailty [44], HIV infection [52], Huntington's disease 
[53], obesity [54], lifetime stress [55], menopause [56], 
osteoarthritis [57], and Parkinson's disease [58]. 
 
However, relatively little is known about the 
relationship between epigenetic aging rates and lifestyle 
factors, such as diet, alcohol consumption, physical 
activity, 
and 
educational 
attainment. 
Here, 
we 
investigate these relationships by leveraging blood 
DNA methylation data from two large epidemiological 
cohorts. In our primary analysis, we use data from older 
women within the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) to 
genetic biomarkers of age that have previously been shown to predict all‐cause mortality, chronic conditions
and age‐related functional decline. We analyze cross‐sectional data from 4,173 postmenopausal female
participants from the Women's Health Initiative, as well as 402 male and female participants from the Italian
cohort study, Invecchiare nel Chianti. 
Extrinsic epigenetic age acceleration (EEAA) exhibits significant associations with fish intake (p=0.02), moderate
alcohol consumption (p=0.01), education (p=3x10‐5), BMI (p=0.01), and blood carotenoid levels (p=1x10‐5)—an
indicator of fruit and vegetable consumption, whereas intrinsic epigenetic age acceleration (IEAA) is associated
with poultry intake (p=0.03) and BMI (p=0.05). Both EEAA and IEAA were also found to relate to indicators of
metabolic syndrome, which appear to mediate their associations with BMI. Metformin—the first‐line
medication for the treatment of type 2 diabetes—does not delay epigenetic aging in this observational study.
Finally, longitudinal data suggests that an increase in BMI is associated with increase in both EEAA and IEAA.  
Overall, the epigenetic age analysis of blood confirms the conventional wisdom regarding the benefits of eating
a high plant diet with lean meats, moderate alcohol consumption, physical activity, and education, as well as
the health risks of obesity and metabolic syndrome.  
 www.aging‐us.com 
421 
AGING (Albany NY) 
examine the relationships between epigenetic age 
acceleration in blood and dietary variables, education, 
alcohol, and exercise. In our secondary analysis, we 
sought to validate the results in the Invecchiare nel 
Chianti (InCHIANTI) Study, which is a population-
based prospective cohort study of residents ages 21 or 
older from two areas in the Chianti region of Tuscany, 
Italy.  
 
Since our study revealed that metabolic syndrome is 
associated with accelerated epigenetic aging, we also 
carried out a post-hoc analysis that evaluated the effect 
of metformin, which is a widely-used medication 
against type 2 diabetes. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Sample characteristics 
 
The WHI sample consisted of 4,173 postmenopausal 
women including 2,045 Caucasians, 1,192 African 
Americans, and 717 Hispanics. Chronological age 
ranged from 50-82 years (mean=64, s.d.=7.1). The 
InCHIANTI sample was composed of 402 participants 
from a European (Italian) population, including 178 
men (44%) and 229 women (56%). We used the most 
current cross-sectional wave for this cohort, and at that  
time-point participants ranged in age from 30 to 100 
years (mean=71, s.d.=16). Additional details on 
participant characteristics can be found in the Methods 
and in Table 1. 
 
Dietary and metabolic associations with measures of 
age acceleration 
 
Here we leverage two distinct measures of epigenetic 
age acceleration which are based on different sets of 
CpGs: intrinsic epigenetic age acceleration (IEAA), and 
extrinsic 
epigenetic 
age 
acceleration 
(EEAA) 
(Methods). Epigenetic age acceleration is broadly 
defined as the epigenetic age left unexplained by 
chronological age, where intrinsic and extrinsic denote 
additional modifications to this concept. In addition to 
adjusting for chronologic age, IEAA also adjusts the 
epigenetic clock for blood cell count estimates, arriving 
at a measure that is unaffected by both variation in 
chronologic age and blood cell composition. EEAA, on 
the other hand, integrates known age-related changes in 
blood cell counts with a blood-based measure of 
epigenetic age [37] before adjusting for chronologic 
age, making EEAA dependent on age-related changes in 
blood cell composition. In essence, IEAA can be 
interpreted as a measure of cell-intrinsic aging and 
EEAA as a measure of immune system aging, where for 
both, a positive value indicates that the epigenetic age 
of an individual (organ or tissue) is higher than 
expected based on their chronological age—or that the 
individual   is  exhibiting  accelerated  epigenetic  aging.  
We find that IEAA is only moderately correlated with 
EEAA (r=0.37), and that measurements on the same 
individuals at different time points (mean difference 3.0 
years between visit dates) showed moderately strong 
correlations (IEAA r=0.70, EEAA r=0.66).  
 
We first used a robust correlation test to relate our two 
measures of epigenetic aging (IEAA and EEAA) to 
select reported dietary exposures, blood nutrient levels, 
cardiometabolic plasma biomarkers, and lifestyle 
factors, designating a Bonferroni-corrected significance 
threshold of α=7x10-4 (Figure 1). The correlation test 
results for specific racial/ethnic groups are presented in 
Supplementary 
Figure 
1 
and 
select 
marginal 
associations are shown as bar plots in Supplementary 
Figure 2. Pairwise correlations between dietary 
variables, metabolic biomarkers, and lifestyle factors 
are presented in Supplementary Figure 3. 
 
EEAA exhibits weak but statistically significant 
correlations with fish intake (r=-0.07, p=2x10-5), 
alcohol consumption (r=-0.07, p=3x10-5, Supplementary 
Figure 4), plasma levels of mean carotenoids (r=-0.13, 
p=2x10-9), alpha-carotene (r=-0.11, p=9x10-8), beta-
carotene (r=-0.11, p=3x10-7), lutein+zeaxanthin (r=-0.9, 
p=1x10-5), beta-cryptoxanthin (r=-0.11, p=3x10-7), 
gamma-tocopherol (r=0.09, p=9x10-6), triglyceride 
(r=0.7, p=6x10-6), C-reactive protein (CRP, r=0.12, 
p=2x10-10), 
insulin 
(r=0.11, 
p=3x10-12), 
HDL 
cholesterol (r=-0.09, p=2x10-8), glucose (r=0.06, 
p=2x10-4), systolic blood pressure (r=0.07, p=4x10-6), 
waist-to-hip ratio (WHR, r=0.09, p=2x10-8), BMI 
(r=0.09, p=2x10-8), education (r=-0.10, p=3x10-10), 
income (r=-0.06, p=1x10-4), and exercise (r=-0.07, 
p=2x10-5, Figure 1). In contrast, the intrinsic epigenetic 
aging rate exhibits weaker correlations with dietary 
variables and lifestyle factors: IEAA is only associated 
with BMI (r=0.08, p=1x10-6), and plasma levels of 
gamma-tocopherol (r=0.08, p=2x10-4), CRP (r=0.08, 
p=6x10-5), insulin (r=0.07, p=2x10-5), glucose (r=0.06, 
p=8x10-5), and triglyceride levels (r=0.05, p=5x10-4, 
Figure 1).  
 
Meta-analysis of multivariable linear models link 
epigenetic age acceleration to diet 
 
Associations with EEAA 
We have recently shown that ethnicity relates to 
epigenetic aging rates: e.g. Hispanics have lower levels 
of IEAA compared to other ethnic groups [59]. Given 
the potential for confounding by sociodemographic and 
lifestyle factors, we used Stouffer's method to meta-
analyze multivariate linear models, stratified by 
racial/ethnic group, in order to re-examine the 
 www.aging‐us.com 
422 
AGING (Albany NY) 
suggestive associations from our marginal correlation 
analysis. After adjusting for sex and dataset (Figure 
2A), we find that lower EEAA is significantly 
associated with greater intake of fish (tmeta=-2.92, 
pmeta=0.003), higher education (tmeta=-4.14, pmeta=3x10-
5), lower BMI (tmeta=4.86, pmeta=1x10-6), and current 
drinker  status  (tmeta=-3.23, pmeta=0.001).  However,  we  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
find no association for current smoking status, and 
poultry intake, and only a trend toward association with 
physical activity (tmeta=-1.70, pmeta=0.09). In the subset 
of WHI participants with circulating carotenoid 
measurements, we also find that mean carotenoid levels 
are associated with EEAA (tmeta=-4.34, pmeta=1x10-5, 
Supplementary Figure 5A). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Marginal correlations with epigenetic age acceleration in the WHI. Correlations (bicor, biweight
midcorrelation) between select variables and the two measures of epigenetic age acceleration are colored according
to their magnitude with positive correlations in red, negative correlations in blue, and statistical significance (p‐
values) in green. Blood biomarkers were measured from fasting plasma collected at baseline. Food groups and
nutrients are inclusive, including all types and all preparation methods, e.g. folic acid includes synthetic and natural,
dairy includes cheese and all types of milk, etc. Variables are adjusted for ethnicity and dataset (BA23 or AS315). 
 www.aging‐us.com 
423 
AGING (Albany NY) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Characteristics of the WHI and InCHIANTI samples.
  
  
  
WHI 
InCHIANTI 
  
  
  
Count 
Percent 
Count 
Percent 
Ethnic 
American Indian or Alaskan Native 
56 
1% 
  
  
Asian or Pacific Islander 
140 
3% 
  
  
Black or African-American 
1277 
28% 
  
  
Hispanic/Latino 
784 
17% 
  
  
White (not of Hispanic origin) 
2196 
49% 
  
  
Other 
37 
1% 
  
  
WHI data set 
BA23 
2098 
47% 
  
  
AS315 
2392 
53% 
  
  
Sex 
Male 
  
  
178 
44% 
Female 
  
  
229 
56% 
Current smoker 
Nonsmoker 
4027 
90% 
367 
90% 
Smoker 
439 
10% 
40 
10% 
Education 
< Primary 
43 
1% 
80 
20% 
> Primary 
154 
3% 
154 
38% 
> Lower secondary 
293 
7% 
91 
22% 
> Upper secondary 
2588 
58% 
62 
15% 
> Higher 
1393 
31% 
20 
5% 
Physical activity 
Active 
894 
20% 
329 
81% 
Inactive 
3572 
80% 
78 
19% 
  
  
  
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Diet 
Total energy, kcal 
kcal/day 
1641 
777 
2069 
573 
Carbohydrate 
% kcal 
49.0 
9.1 
52.4 
6.9 
Protein 
% kcal 
16.5 
3.3 
15.8 
2.0 
Fat 
% kcal 
34.6 
8.1 
30.9 
5.5 
Red meat 
serv/day 
0.8 
0.7 
1.1 
0.5 
Poultry 
serv/day 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
Fish 
serv/day 
0.3 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
Dairy 
serv/day 
1.6 
1.3 
2.8 
1.8 
Whole grains 
serv/day 
1.2 
0.9 
  
  
Nuts 
serv/day 
0.2 
0.3 
0.0 
0.1 
Fruits 
serv/day 
1.7 
1.3 
1.9 
0.9 
Vegetables 
serv/day 
1.9 
1.3 
1.6 
0.8 
Alcohol 
g/day 
3.6 
9.6 
12.7 
14.9 
Measurements 
IEAA 
years 
0.0 
4.7 
0.2 
4.6 
EEAA 
years 
0.0 
6.0 
-0.2 
6.5 
C-reactive protein 
mg/L 
5.2 
6.6 
3.9 
7.4 
Insulin 
mg/dL 
57.1 
115.3 
  
  
Glucose 
mg/dL 
106.3 
38.0 
93.0 
21.3 
Triglycerides 
mg/dL 
146.4 
85.6 
122.7 
81.5 
Total cholesterol 
mg/dL 
228.4 
42.7 
207.2 
36.6 
LDL cholesterol 
mg/dL 
144.9 
39.7 
125.5 
32.1 
HDL cholesterol 
mg/dL 
54.0 
14.3 
57.6 
15.7 
Creatinine 
mg/dL 
0.8 
0.2 
0.9 
0.4 
Systolic blood pressure 
mmHg 
130.0 
18.0 
129.3 
19.8 
Diastolic blood pressure 
mmHg 
75.8 
9.4 
77.2 
10.3 
Waist / hip ratio 
cm/cm 
0.8 
0.1 
0.9 
0.1 
BMI 
cm/m2 
29.7 
6.0 
27.0 
4.3 
The cohort samples are listed for each column and variables of interest are listed for each row. 
The upper portion of the table correspond to categorical variables and are described using counts 
and percentages; the lower portion of the table displays continuous variables which are described 
using means and standard deviations (SD). 
 
 www.aging‐us.com 
424 
AGING (Albany NY) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multivariate linear models were used to examine 
whether variations in cardiometabolic biomarkers 
and/or the number of symptoms for metabolic syndrome 
accounted for any of the associations between EEAA 
and lifestyle factors. The inclusion of biomarkers in an 
unstratified model shows that EEAA positively relates 
to CRP (log2, β=0.31, p=3x10-4, Figure 3A, model 3) 
and that this is accompanied by a concomitant 
diminishing in the effect size of BMI (67% decrease in 
coefficient magnitude, Figure 3A, model 2 vs. model 5), 
suggesting that higher CRP may partially explain the 
positive association between BMI and EEAA. When 
metabolic syndrome (MetS) was included in the model, 
results showed that higher EEAA is positively 
associated with the number of metabolic syndrome 
symptoms (β=0.29, p=0.002, Figure 3A, model 4). In 
the subset of participants with both biomarker  and caro- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tenoid measurements, EEAA was negatively associated 
with mean carotenoid levels (β=-1.10, p=1x10-4) while 
appearing to diminish associations with biomarkers 
(Supplementary Figure 6A, model 5).  
 
Additionally, we find that for the small subset of 
individuals for whom we have EEAA measurements at 
two time points (n=239, mean time interval = 2.7 years), 
increase in BMI (β=0.40, p=0.002) but not initial BMI 
(β=-0.01, p=0.81) is significantly associated with 
increased EEAA (higher follow-up EEAA after 
adjusting for the initial EEAA, dataset, and ethnicity). 
 
Associations with IEAA 
We conducted an analogous meta-analysis of ethnically-
stratified linear models of IEAA and found that lower 
IEAA was significantly  associated  with  poultry  intake  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Meta‐analysis of multivariable linear models of EEAA and IEAA in the WHI and InCHIANTI. EEAA (panel A) and IEAA
(panel B) were regressed on potential confounding factors, fish and poultry intake, and current drinker status for the ethnic strata with
sufficient sample sizes (n>100). Individual columns correspond to coefficient estimates (β) colored blue or red for negative and positive values
respectively, and p‐values (p) colored in green according to magnitude of significance, with the exception of the last two columns which denote
Stouffer's method meta‐t and meta‐p values. Models are adjusted for originating dataset (WHI BA23 or AS315) and for sex (InCHIANTI). 
Figure 3. Multivariate linear models of EEAA and IEAA with and without biomarkers in the WHI. EEAA (panel A) and IEAA
(panel B) were regressed on potential confounding factors, fish and poultry intake and current drinker status, and select biomarkers.
Individual columns list the corresponding coefficient estimates (β) and p‐values (p) for each fitting. Coefficients are colored according to sign
(positive = red, negative = blue) and significance according to magnitude (green). Models 1 through 5 correspond to a minimal model, a model
including dietary intake variables, a model including potential explanatory biomarkers, a model including number of metabolic syndrome
symptoms and a complete model with all of the variables above, respectively. Models are adjusted for originating dataset (BA23 or AS315). 
 
 www.aging‐us.com 
425 
AGING (Albany NY) 
(tmeta=-3.30, pmeta=0.001) and lower BMI (tmeta=4.14, 
pmeta=4x10-5), after adjusting for potential confounders 
(Figure 2B). In the subset of participants with measured 
carotenoids, IEAA was significantly associated with 
mean 
carotenoid 
levels 
(tmeta=-2.47, 
pmeta=0.01, 
Supplementary Figure 5B). When regressed on clinical 
biomarkers IEAA was significantly associated with 
triglycerides (log2, β=0.40, p=0.02, Figure 3B, model 
3). Their inclusion diminished the association between 
IEAA and BMI (60% decrease in coefficient magnitude, 
Figure 3B, model 2 vs. model 5). Number of metabolic 
syndrome symptoms was also significantly associated 
with IEAA (β=0.27, p=4x10-4, Figure 3B, model 4), and 
diminished the association between IEAA and BMI by 
50%. In the subset of WHI participants with circulating 
carotenoid measurements, we find a trend toward 
association between IEAA and mean carotenoid levels 
(β=-0.40, p=0.07, Supplementary Figure 6B, model 5). 
Finally, in the participants with epigenetic profiling at 
two time points, increase in BMI (β=0.22, p=0.03) but 
not initial BMI (β=-0.22, p=0.44) is significantly 
associated with increased IEAA (higher follow-up 
IEAA after adjusting for the initial IEAA, dataset, and 
ethnicity). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Metformin and epigenetic age acceleration 
 
Considering the significant association between our 
measures of epigenetic aging and markers of diabetes, 
we investigated the potential of metformin to modulate 
epigenetic aging. As shown in Supplementary Figure 7, 
women in the No Metformin group were the oldest, 
with mean ages around 65 years, compared to mean 
ages around 64 years for the Metformin Now group and 
62.5 years for the Metformin Future group. Those in the 
No Metformin group also appeared to have a higher 
proportion of college graduates compared to the other 
two groups, whose members tended to have lower 
educational attainment. The two Metformin groups had 
much higher proportions of Non-Hispanic blacks, and 
somewhat 
higher 
proportions 
of 
Hispanics. 
As 
expected, women who were prescribed Metformin had 
the highest fasting insulin, fasting glucose, and HOMA-
IR levels, with current Metformin users being the 
highest of all. Similarly, among Metformin users, 
fasting insulin, fasting glucose, and HOMA-IR levels 
were inversely associated with timing of Metformin 
initiation. This suggests that 1) women who had been on 
Metformin the longest at the time  of  blood  draw  were  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Pictorial summary of our main findings. The blue and red arrows depict anti‐
aging and pro‐aging effects in blood respectively. The two clocks symbolize the extrinsic
epigenetic clock (enhanced version of the Hannum estimate) and the intrinsic epigenetic clock
(Horvath 2013) which are dependent and independent of blood cell counts, respectively. 
 www.aging‐us.com 
426 
AGING (Albany NY) 
the most insulin resistant—arguably because they were 
long-time diabetics—and 2) among women who would 
use Metformin in the future, those who would receive 
prescriptions sooner—who may already have pre-
diabetes or diabetes at the time of blood draw—were 
more insulin resistant than women who were prescribed 
Metformin later.  
 
As shown in Supplementary Figure 8, when examining 
the full sample, IEAA and EEAA were highest for 
women in the Metformin Now group, although 
differences between Metformin Now and Metformin 
Future were not significant. Further, the timing of 
Metformin prescription relative to the timing of blood 
draw was not associated with either IEAA or EEAA. 
Overall, these results held for IEAA when restricting 
the sample to only Non-Hispanic whites, Non-Hispanic 
blacks, or women at least 65 years of age. Results for 
EEAA held when restricting the sample to only 
Hispanics, women less than 65 years of age, or those 
with fasting glucose levels under 126 mg/dL. 
Nevertheless, there were no strata in which women in 
the Metformin Now group had significantly lower 
IEAA or EEAA than women in either the No 
Metformin or the Metformin Future group.  
 
Given that Metformin may not be effective for all or that 
not all women prescribed Metformin may comply with 
their physician’s recommendations, we compared future 
Metformin users to current Metformin users who had 
fasting glucose levels under 140 mg/dL (Supplementary 
Figure 9). Similar to Supplementary Figure 8, no 
significant differences were found for the two metformin 
groups, and in most cases those currently on Metformin 
had somewhat higher IEAA and EEAA than those who 
would be prescribed Metformin in the future.  
 
Finally, when using women with repeat blood draws to 
compare the change in IEAA and EEAA for those who 
started Metformin between the two visits to those who 
didn’t (Supplementary Table 1), we find that, while 
those who start Metformin appear to have lower IEAA 
(β=-0.79), the difference is not significant (P=0.46). 
Results for EEAA show very little difference between 
those who start Metformin between first and second 
blood draws, and those who don’t (β=-0.003, P=0.99). 
Given that we only have 11 women who start 
Metformin, our null results, particularly for IEAA, may 
be due to a lack a power. Thus, in moving forward, this 
analysis may be worth revisiting in a randomized 
control trial or after acquiring larger sample sizes.  
 
DISCUSSION 
 
To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine 
associations between lifestyle factors and measures of 
epigenetic age acceleration in blood. Our main findings 
are summarized graphically in Figure 4. Overall, our 
dietary results are consistent with some of the current 
Dietary Guidelines for Americans [60, 61], reflecting 
potential health benefits associated with higher intake of 
fish, poultry, and fruits and vegetables. The weak 
correlations between dietary factors and epigenetic 
aging rates probably reflect that a relatively large 
proportion of the variance in aging rates (around 40 
percent) is explained by genetic factors [38, 59, 62]. We 
find that education, physical activity, low body mass 
index are associated with a slow extrinsic age 
acceleration both in univariate correlation tests (Figure 
1) and in multivariate regression models (Figure 2A, 
3A). However, consistent with our previous work, 
smoking status was not associated with epigenetic age 
acceleration [45], which highlights that not every poor 
lifestyle choice is associated with an increased 
epigenetic aging effect in blood tissue. 
 
EEAA, inflammation, and metabolic functioning 
 
The age-related changes in immune functioning and 
inflammation are believed to contribute to increased 
susceptibility of a wide range of diseases later in life, 
including diabetes, some cancers, cardiovascular, 
neurodegenerative, 
auto-immune, 
and 
infectious 
diseases [63, 64]. In our analysis, EEAA, a biomarker 
which explicitly incorporates aspects of immune system 
aging such as age-related changes in blood cell counts, 
was associated with cardiometabolic biomarkers, fish, 
fruit, vegetable, and alcohol intake. 
 
Our finding that fish intake was negatively associated 
with EEAA is consistent with prospective studies 
suggesting that fish consumption is protective against 
various age-related diseases [65-67]. The benefits of fish 
intake may be mediated in part through the omega-3 fatty 
acids, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA), which stimulate the synthesis of anti-
inflammatory cytokines [68]. This is further supported by 
our finding that CRP—a well-known marker of 
inflammation—was the most significant explanatory 
biomarker of EEAA. This suggests that one reason higher 
fish consumption may lower EEAA is because it has 
beneficial anti-inflammatory or metabolic effects. The 
consensus between these associations also appears to 
converge on MetS as a potential mediating factor; this 
was further supported by our results showing that the 
number of MetS characteristics significantly relates to 
EEAA. Though CRP is not included in most MetS 
diagnostic criteria, the association between the two has 
been previously established [69]. 
 
We also find that alcohol consumption was negatively 
associated with EEAA even after adjusting for potential 
 www.aging‐us.com 
427 
AGING (Albany NY) 
confounders such as socioeconomic status; this is 
consistent with prospective studies which have 
identified light to moderate alcohol intake as a 
protective factor against all-cause and CHD-related 
mortality [70, 71] and is supported by a recent 
publication that also found an inverse association 
between epigenetic age and alcohol intake in Caucasian 
and African American individuals (n=656, n=180, 
respectively) [72]. In our study, we find that the 
potential benefits of alcohol consumption are observed 
using a threshold of more than one serving per month, 
though the effect size of this variable was also stable 
when 
adding 
weekly 
and 
daily 
intake 
levels 
(Supplementary Figure 4A-D). The association appears 
to be driven by wine consumption though there is also a 
trend towards association with beer (Supplementary 
Figures 4E-H). This is consistent with other studies 
have suggested that wine may have added benefits 
compared to light alcohol consumption [73]. This 
finding may also be related to the anti-inflammatory 
effects of light alcohol consumption, which are 
associated 
with 
decreased 
circulating 
levels 
of 
inflammatory markers such as IL-6 and CRP [74]. 
Alternatively, this may be the result of reverse 
causation, whereby individuals suffering from health 
issues abstain from alcohol consumption [75], though 
interventional studies support a causal protective effect 
of moderated alcohol intake on cardiovascular blood 
biomarkers [76]. 
 
Though EEAA only trended toward association with 
reported fruit and vegetable intake, we find significant 
associations with blood carotenoid levels, which are 
quantitative surrogates of fruit and vegetable intake; this 
is likely a reflection of the bias and inaccuracy of self-
reported diet. This is in agreement with the wide range 
of literature supporting the protective effects of high 
fruit and vegetable intake against age-related diseases 
CHD [77, 78], stroke [79], type-2 diabetes [80], breast 
cancer[81], and all-cause mortality [82]. The association 
between fruit and vegetables with aging of the blood 
immune system may be partially mediated by anti-
inflammatory [83, 84] and cardiometabolic effects, 
however it is interesting to note that the explanatory 
power of mean carotenoid levels remained even after 
including the other explanatory factors into the model, 
suggesting the possibility of independent anti-aging 
mechanisms (Supplementary Figure 6A, model 5). 
 
Our results for EEAA also share similarities with 
previously reported findings showing that LTL relates 
to BMI [22], metabolic factors, vegetable consumption 
[85], and dietary intake of foods high in omega-3 fatty 
acids [86]. This agreement is likely a reflection of the 
shared immunological basis, which is supported by the 
weak negative correlation between EEAA and age-
adjusted LTL. In contrast, IEAA is not significantly 
associated with LTL, supporting the idea that these 
measures represent different aspects of aging. 
 
Intrinsic epigenetic aging and metabolic health 
 
Results showed that BMI has a positive association with 
IEAA (Figure 3B, model 2). The statistically significant 
but weak correlations between BMI and epigenetic age 
acceleration in blood (r<0.10) are much smaller than 
those we recently reported for human liver (r=0.42) 
[54], suggesting that associations between aging 
signatures and risk factors may vary in strength 
depending on the tissue, and may be stronger in 
organs/tissues most affected by the risk. Interestingly, 
IEAA was also associated with number of metabolic 
syndrome characteristics, suggesting a role in tracking 
metabolic aging processes (Figure 3B, model 4). 
 
We did find that reported poultry intake was negatively 
associated with IEAA, even after adjusting for potential 
confounders and explanatory factors (Figure 3B, model 
5). Given the relative inert behavior of IEAA, the 
mechanism by which poultry may affect aging is 
unclear. 
 
Lack of an effect of metformin 
 
Metformin, which is a first-line medication for the 
treatment of type 2 diabetes, has garnered substantial 
interest by aging researchers [87]. The fact that we did 
not detect an anti-aging effect of metformin in our study 
could be due to the following factors: a) it could reflect 
the limitations/biases of an observational study, b) it 
could reflect the limited sample size, or c) that 
metformin does not affect epigenetic aging rates of 
blood tissue. Future randomized controlled trials should 
revisit 
the 
question 
whether 
metformin 
affects 
epigenetic aging rates in blood or other tissues. 
 
Generalization to the InCHIANTI  
 
Our results from the InCHIANTI show some validation 
of our findings from the WHI: fish intake was related to 
EEAA, and poultry was related to IEAA. Associations 
with available biomarkers of cardiometabolic health, 
however, were not found to be validated, and in a few 
cases 
were 
reversed 
in 
directions, 
within 
the 
InCHIANTI (data not shown). 
 
The discrepancies between the WHI and InCHIANTI 
cohorts may be due to numerous differences in the 
study population (cultural, demographic, genetic, health 
status, Table 1) and data collection methodology 
(dietary assessment). Despite being younger, on 
average, US participants from the WHI had higher body 
 www.aging‐us.com 
428 
AGING (Albany NY) 
mass indexes (BMI), and worse metabolic health than 
their Italian counterparts—as indicated by their greater 
prevalence of metabolic syndrome (23% in the WHI 
versus 7.6% in the InCHIANTI). 
 
 The InCHIANTI study is also arguably underpowered 
(n=402) when it comes to detecting the weak associa-
tions with epigenetic age acceleration. According to 
sample size calculations (PASS software), we find that 
n=1820 samples are needed to provide 80% power to 
detect a correlation of r=0.08 at a two-sided significance 
level of α=0.01. Similarly, n=1163 samples are needed 
to detect a correlation of r=0.10. 
 
Limitations 
 
While our study of the WHI benefits from having a 
relatively 
large 
sample 
size, 
associations 
with 
epigenetic aging may not be detectable in smaller 
studies given the weak effect sizes observed here. This 
situation is exacerbated by self-reported lifestyle habits 
which are notorious for bias and inaccuracy, limiting 
their ability to represent true lifestyle habits and 
potentially producing false negative results. Further, as 
evidenced by our results from the ethnic strata and the 
InCHIANTI, studies conducted in different ethnic 
populations may not be entirely consistent due to 
fundamental differences in age, diet, culture, and 
demographics. There were several potential limitations 
to this study, which include the assumption of non-
confounding from unmeasured variables such as 
existing patient co-morbidities and the assumption of 
accuracy and long-term consistency of reported dietary 
habits. This is the first longitudinal study to show that 
an increase in BMI is associated with an increase in 
epigenetic age acceleration but larger longitudinal 
studies will be needed to dissect causal relationships 
between epigenetic aging rates and dietary measures, 
education, exercise, and lifestyle factors. 
 
Conclusions about epigenetic age acceleration 
 
Our large sample size (n>4500) provides sufficient 
statistical power for one of our main conclusions: diet 
has only a weak effect on epigenetic aging rates in 
blood. These findings will be valuable for researchers 
who plan to use epigenetic biomarkers in dietary 
intervention studies. The wide range of associations 
found with EEAA suggest that immune system aging 
may be closely linked to conventional notions of 
metabolic health and may be sensitive to variations in 
environment and lifestyle. In contrast, IEAA has few 
associations, which is consistent with the hypothesis 
that cell-intrinsic aging remains relatively stable, more 
likely being determined by an intrinsic aging or 
developmental process under genetic control. Further, 
using longitudinal data in the WHI, we found that 
change in both EEAA and IEAA are significantly 
associated with change in BMI, suggesting that both 
modes of epigenetic aging may respond to changes in 
lifestyle, at least with respect to change in obesity. 
Overall, our results are consistent with previous 
literature supporting the protective effects of fish, 
poultry and alcohol consumption, exercise, education, 
as well as the risk of obesity and dyslipidemia. 
 
METHODS 
 
Estimation of DNA methylation age 
 
DNAm age (also referred to as epigenetic age) was 
calculated from human samples profiled with the 
Illumina Infinium 450K platform, described in detail in 
[38]. Briefly, the epigenetic clock is defined as a 
prediction method of age based on the DNAm levels of 
353 CpGs. Predicted age, referred to as DNAm age, 
correlates with chronological age in sorted cell types 
(CD4+ T cells, monocytes, B cells, glial cells, neurons), 
tissues, and organs, including: whole blood, brain, 
breast, kidney, liver, lung, saliva [38].  
 
We also applied the Hannum measure of DNAm age 
based on 71 CpGs which was developed using DNA 
methylation data from blood [37].  
 
Despite high correlations, DNAm age estimates can 
deviate substantially from chronological age at the 
individual level, and adjusting for age we can arrive at 
measures of epigenetic age acceleration as described in 
the following. 
 
Estimation of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Epigenetic Age 
Acceleration (IEAA, EEAA) 
 
In this article, we consider two measures of epigenetic 
age acceleration. These measures, referred to as intrinsic 
and extrinsic age acceleration only apply to blood. 
IEAA is derived from the Horvath measure of DNAm 
age based on 353 CpGs [38], and is defined as the 
residual resulting from regressing Horvath DNAm age 
on chronological age and estimates of plasmablasts, 
naive and exhausted CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, 
natural killer cells, monocytes, and granulocytes. Thus, 
IEAA is independent of chronological age and most of 
the variation in blood cell composition. IEAA is meant 
to capture cell-intrinsic properties of the aging process 
that exhibits preservation across various cell types and 
organs. 
 
EEAA can be interpreted as an enhanced version of the 
Hannum measure of DNAm age based on 71 CpGs 
[37]. EEAA up-weights the contributions of age related 
 www.aging‐us.com 
429 
AGING (Albany NY) 
blood cell counts [43]. Specifically, EEAA is defined 
using the following three steps. First, we calculated the 
epigenetic age measure from Hannum et al, which 
already correlated with certain blood cell types [40]. 
Second, we increased the contribution of immune blood 
cell types to the age estimate by forming a weighted 
average of Hannum’s estimate with 3 cell types that are 
known to change with age: naïve (CD45RA+CCR7+) 
cytotoxic 
T 
cells, 
exhausted 
(CD28-CD45RA-) 
cytotoxic T cells, and plasmablasts using the Klemera 
Doubal approach [88]. The weights used in the 
weighted average are determined by the correlation 
between the respective variable and chronological age. 
The weights were chosen on the basis of the WHI data 
and the same (static) weights were used for all data sets. 
Finally, EEAA was defined as the residual variation 
resulting from a univariate model regressing the 
resulting age estimate on chronological age. Thus, 
EEAA tracks both age related changes in blood cell 
composition and intrinsic epigenetic changes.  
 
In a recent large scale meta-analysis involving over 13 
thousand subjects from 13 cohorts, we have shown that 
both IEAA and EEAA are predictive of mortality, 
independent of chronological age, even after adjusting 
for additional risk factors, and within the racial/ethnic 
groups that we examined (Caucasians, Hispanics, 
African Americans) [43]. 
 
IEAA and EEAA can be obtained from the online 
DNAm age calculator (http://labs.genetics.ucla.edu/ 
horvath/dnamage/), 
where 
they 
are 
denoted 
as 
AAHOAdjCellCounts 
and 
BioAge4HAStaticAdjAge, 
respectively. 
 
Dietary assessment in the Women's Health Initiative 
(WHI) 
 
Participants were selected from the WHI, a national 
study that began in 1993 and enrolled postmenopausal 
women between the ages of 50-79 years into either 
randomized 
clinical 
trials 
(RCTs) 
or 
into 
an 
observational study [89] (more details available in 
Supplementary Information). Participants completed 
self-administered questionnaires at baseline which 
provided personal information on a wide range of 
topics, including sociodemographic information (age, 
education, race, income), and current health behaviors 
(recreational physical activity, tobacco and alcohol 
exposure, and diet). Participants also visited clinics at 
baseline where certified Clinical Center staff collected 
blood 
specimens 
and 
performed 
anthropometric 
measurements including weight, height, hip and waist 
circumferences, and systolic and diastolic blood 
pressures; body mass index and waist to hip ratio were 
calculated from these measurements (Table 1). 
Dietary intake levels were assessed at baseline using the 
WHI Food Frequency Questionnaire [90]. Briefly, 
participants were asked to report on dietary habits in the 
past three months, including intake, frequency, and 
portion sizes of foods or food groups, along with 
questions concerning topics such as food preparation 
practices and types of added fats. Nutrient intake levels 
were then estimated from these responses. For current 
drinker, we use the threshold of more than one serving 
equivalent (14g) within the last 28 days. 
 
Estimation of blood cell counts based on DNA 
methylation levels 
 
We estimate blood cell counts using two different 
software tools. First, Houseman's estimation method 
[91], which is based on DNA methylation signatures 
from purified leukocyte samples, was used to estimate 
the proportions of CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T, natural killer, 
B cells, and granulocytes (also known as polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes). Second, the advanced analysis 
option of the epigenetic clock software [38, 52] was 
used to estimate the percentage of exhausted CD8+ T 
cells (defined as CD28-CD45RA-) and the number 
(count) 
of 
naïve 
CD8+ 
T 
cells 
(defined 
as 
CD45RA+CCR7+). We and others have shown that the 
estimated blood cell counts have moderately high 
correlations 
with 
corresponding 
flow 
cytometric 
measures [91, 92]. For example, flow cytometric 
measurements from the MACS study correlate strongly 
with DNA methylation based estimates: r=0.63 for 
CD8+T cells, r=0.77 for CD4+ T cells, r=0.67 for B 
cell, r=0.68 for naïve CD8+ T cell, r=0.86 for naïve 
CD4+ T, and r=0.49 for exhausted CD8+ T cells [92]. 
 
Blood biomarkers and DNA methylation in the WHI 
 
Two separate subsamples were aggregated for our study 
within the WHI (BA23 and AS315). Both had baseline 
blood specimens collected after an overnight fast in 
EDTA tubes and stored at -70C. These samples were 
processed at the WHI core laboratory and select nutrient 
and cardiovascular biomarkers were measured including 
lycopene, alpha- & beta-carotene, alpha- & gamma-
tocopherol, C-reactive protein, triglycerides, total, LDL, 
and HDL cholesterol. 
 
For the first subsample (BA23) consisting of 2098 
samples, DNA methylation levels were measured using 
the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip 
at the HudsonAlpha Institute of Biotechnology. This 
platform 
uses 
bisulfite 
conversion 
to 
quantify 
methylation levels at 485,577 specific CpG sites 
genome-wide. Samples were prepared according to the 
standard Illumina protocol, and β methylation values 
were calculated from the intensity ratio between 
 www.aging‐us.com 
430 
AGING (Albany NY) 
methylated and total (methylated and unmethylated) 
probe fluorescence intensities. Methylation data was 
processed as described in [38]. In order to test the 
quality of these array measurements, we perform 
correlation measures with duplicates within this dataset 
and with a "gold" standard which is an average of many 
samples previously collected. Correlation between 
duplicates and with the gold standard were high (r>0.9), 
indicative of high quality measurements. 
 
The second WHI data set is described in the following. 
 
WHI-EMPC description 
 
The 
Women’s 
Health 
Initiative 
– 
Epigenetic 
Mechanisms of PM-Mediated CVD (WHI-EMPC, 
AS315) is an ancillary study of epigenetic mechanisms 
underlying associations between ambient particulate 
matter (PM) air pollution and cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) in the Women’s Health Initiative clinical trials 
(CT) cohort. The WHI-EMPC study population is a 
stratified, random sample of 2,200 WHI CT participants 
who were examined between 1993 and 2001; had 
available buffy coat, core analytes, electrocardiograms, 
and ambient concentrations of PM; but were not taking 
anti-arrhythmic medications at the time. As such, WHI-
EMPC is representative of the larger, multiethnic WHI 
CT population from which it was sampled: n = 68,132 
participants aged 50-79 years who were randomized to 
hormone therapy, calcium/vitamin D supplementation, 
and/or dietary modification in 40 U.S. clinical centers at 
the baseline exam (1993-1998) and re-examined in the 
fasting state one, three, six, and nine years later [93]. 
 
Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip 
data from the Northwestern University Genomics Core 
Facility for WHI-EMPC participants sampled in stages 
1a (800 participants), 1b (1200 participants), and 2 (200 
participants x 2 samples each) was quality controlled 
and batch adjusted. Batch adjustment involved applying 
empirical Bayes methods of adjusting for stage and 
plate as implemented in ComBat [94]. 
 
Dietary assessment in the Invecchiare nel Chianti 
(InCHIANTI) 
 
The 
InCHIANTI 
Study 
is 
a 
population-based 
prospective cohort study of residents ages 30 or older 
from two areas in the Chianti region of Tuscany, Italy. 
Data on demographic and lifestyle factors such as 
smoking, years of education, BMI, and physical activity 
were collected during the baseline interview. Physical 
activity in the previous year was categorized as 
sedentary or active. Smoking was categorized into 
current smoker versus former or non-smokers (Table 1). 
In the InCHIANTI study, dietary intake for the past year 
was assessed using a 236 item food frequency 
questionnaire (FFQ) for the European Prospective 
Investigation on Cancer and nutrition (EPIC) study, 
previously validated in the InCHIANTI population [95]. 
The FFQ was administered by a trained interviewer and 
collected information on how frequently (weekly, 
monthly, yearly) each specific food was generally 
consumed. Participants were asked to specify the size of 
the portion usually consumed, in comparison to a range 
of portion that are shown in colored photographs. 
Nutrient data for specific foods were obtained from the 
Food Composition Database for Epidemiological 
Studies in Italy [96]. Dietary information was judged as 
unreliable and excluded from further analysis if 
reported energy intakes were <600 kcal/day or >4,000 
kcal/day and >4,200 kcal/day in women and men, 
respectively.  
 
Blood biomarkers and DNA methylation in the 
InCHIANTI 
 
Sampling and data collection procedures have been 
described elsewhere [97]. Briefly, participants were 
enrolled between 1998 and 2000 and were examined at 
three-year intervals. Serum samples obtained from 
blood collected in evacuated tubes without anti-
coagulant were centrifuged at 2000g for 10 min, and 
stored at -80 °C for measurement of glucose, total, 
LDL, and HDL, cholesterol, triglycerides, CRP, and 
creatinine. DNA methylation was assayed using the 
Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 platform for 
n=407 participants with sufficient DNA at both baseline 
(years 1998-2000) and year 9 follow-up visits (2007-
2009). 
 
Assessment of metabolic syndrome 
 
Metabolic syndrome status was assessed using the 
ATPIII NCEP 2004 criteria defined by the presence of 3 
or more of the following characteristics: waist 
circumference >88cm (if male, >102cm), systolic blood 
pressure >130mmHg or diastolic blood pressure 
>85mmHg, fasting plasma glucose >100mg/dL, HDL 
cholesterol <50mg/dL (if male, <40mg/dL), and 
triglycerides >150mg/dL. In regression models, we use 
total number of metabolic syndrome characteristics as 
an ordinal variable, ranging from 0 to 5. 
 
Statistical analyses 
 
Dietary analysis 
Biweight midcorrelation, an outlier-robust correlation 
measure, 
was 
used 
to 
assess 
marginal 
linear 
relationships between epigenetic aging measures and 
dietary, cardiometabolic, and socioeconomic factors. To 
 www.aging‐us.com 
431 
AGING (Albany NY) 
adjust for possible socioeconomic and lifestyle 
confounders, we fit ethnically-stratified multivariable 
linear models adjusting for education, exercise, BMI, 
and current drinker and smoker status. We used 
Stouffer's method to infer the meta-analytic significance 
of each variable over the different ethnic strata using the 
square-root of the sample size as the Z-score weighting 
factor. Specifically for the WHI, the age acceleration 
measures were adjusted for differences in originating 
dataset and within the InCHIANTI the measures were 
adjusted for sex. Models including regression on 
biomarkers, and number of metabolic syndrome 
symptoms were not stratified by ethnicity due to lack of 
coverage for biomarker profiling. Models were 
designed based on common prior knowledge and in 
cases where there was co-linearity between confounding 
variables, choice for adjustment was selected based on 
variable commonality in order to improve comparability 
with other studies, e.g. BMI was chosen over WHR 
because BMI is more commonly measured and reported. 
Variables with skewness >1 were log transformed 
(possibly adding +1 to avoid forming the logarithm of 
zero). Mean carotenoids was computed as the mean 
across standardized measures of lycopene, log2(alpha-
carotene), log2(beta-carotene), log2(lutein + zeaxanthin), 
and log2(beta-cryptoxanthin). Repeat measurements on 
the same individuals were omitted from the analysis. 
 
Metformin analysis 
Prescription medication use was collected at baseline 
for women in both the clinical trial and the 
observational study. Follow-up recording of new 
medication was done at years 1, 3, 6, and 9 for women 
enrolled in clinical trial and at year 3 for those enrolled 
in the observational study. At each of these waves, 
participants were asked to bring in their prescription 
medication bottles and interviewers recorded the 
National Drug Code (NDC), the product name, and 
generic name for each drug. In our analysis, those who 
took prescription drugs that fell under the Therapeutic 
Class Codes (TCCODE), 272500 or 279970 were coded 
as taking Metformin. TCCODE 272500 covered the 
following drugs: Metformin HCL, Metformin ER, 
Fortamet, Glucophage XR, Glucophage, and Riomet; all 
of which were Metformin HCL tablets. TCCODE 
279970 covered the following drugs: Glucovance, 
Glyburide/Metformin HCL, and Metaglip; the first two 
of which were Glyburide and Metformin HCL 
combination tablets, whereas the later is a Glipizide 
Metformin HCL combination tablet. In our study, 
approximately 12% (n=489) of women were reported as 
using Metformin at some time during the study. Women 
were also asked the age at which they started using 
prescribed medication. On average, women in our study 
began metformin use at age 65, with the youngest and 
oldest ages of initiation reported as 41 and 85, 
respectively.  
 
We utilized the reported age of Metformin initiation to 
estimate whether women were using metformin at the 
time of blood draw (when DNAm age was measured), 
and if so, how long they had been on the drug. For those 
women who started using Metformin after the date of 
blood draw, we were also able to calculate the time 
between blood draw and starting on Metformin. Based 
on this, we classified women in to three categories—
“No Metformin” (those who never used Metformin), 
“Metformin Now” (those on Metformin at the time of 
blood draw), and “Metformin Future” (those who began 
Metformin after blood draw). In our sample, 4,073 
women were in the No Metformin group, 139 were in 
the Metformin Now group, and 350 were in the 
Metformin Future group.  
 
Kruskal Wallis tests were used to compare the ages at 
blood draw, education levels, race/ethnicity, fasting 
glucose levels, fasting insulin levels, and degree of 
insulin resistance (measured using the Homeostatic 
Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance--HOMA_IR). 
Biweight midcorrelations were used to examine whether 
these characteristics differed as a function of the timing 
of Metformin initiation among those on Metformin at 
some point during the study. Next Kruskal Wallis tests 
and biweight midcorrelations were used to examine 
whether Metformin group classification and/or the 
timing of Metformin use was associated with IEAA or 
EEAA. For these models, both IEAA and EEAA were 
adjusted for age at blood draw, education, and 
race/ethnicity. These models were run using the full 
sample, and stratifying by age at blood draw (<65 years 
vs. 65+ years), race/ethnicity, and fasting glucose levels 
(<126 mg/dL vs. 126+ mg/dL). Next, a two group 
comparison was made for the full sample and stratifying 
by race/ethnicity between a) 47 women in the 
Metformin Now group for whom Metformin was 
potentially effective (fasting glucose < 140 mg/dL), and 
b) the 350 women in the Metformin Future group. 
Finally, there were 308 women who 1) had IEAA and 
EEAA measured during at least two separate WHI visits 
and 2) were not on Metformin at the time of their first 
blood draw. Of these women, 11 started Metformin in 
between their two blood draws. Based on this, we used 
linear models to compare the change in IEAA and 
EEAA between women who started Metformin between 
their first and second IEAA and EEAA measure and 
those who did not. Models were adjusted for age at first 
blood draw, age at second blood draw, race/ethnicity, 
education, glucose levels at first blood draw, and either 
IEAA or EEAA at first blood draw. 
 www.aging‐us.com 
432 
AGING (Albany NY) 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
Austin Quach, Morgan E. Levine, Toshiko Tanaka, 
Brian H. Chen, and Steve Horvath carried out the 
analysis. Devin Absher, Themistocles L. Assimes, Phil 
Tsao, Steve Horvath, Beate Ritz, Luigi Ferrucci, 
Stefania Bandinelli, Eric A. Whitsel, Lifang Hou, 
Andrea Baccerelli, Yun Li, James Stewart contributed 
data. Marian L. Neuhouser, Jeannette M. Beasley, Linda 
Snetselaar, Robert B. Wallace, Ake Lu helped with the 
interpretation of the findings and drafting of the article. 
Steve Horvath designed the study. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
We would like to acknowledge The WHI Investigators 
listed below: 
Program Office: (National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland) Jacques Rossouw, Shari 
Ludlam, Dale Burwen, Joan McGowan, Leslie Ford, 
and Nancy Geller. 
Clinical Coordinating Center: (Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center, Seattle, WA) Garnet Anderson, Ross 
Prentice, Andrea LaCroix, and Charles Kooperberg. 
Investigators and Academic Centers: (Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA) JoAnn E. Manson; (MedStar Health Research 
Institute/Howard University, Washington, DC) Barbara 
V. Howard; (Stanford Prevention Research Center, 
Stanford, CA).  
Marcia L. Stefanick; (The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH) Rebecca Jackson; (University of 
Arizona, Tucson/Phoenix, AZ) Cynthia A. Thomson; 
(University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY)  
Jean 
Wactawski-Wende; 
(University 
of 
Florida, 
Gainesville/Jacksonville, 
FL) 
Marian 
Limacher; 
(University of Iowa, Iowa City/Davenport, IA) Robert 
Wallace; (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA) 
Lewis Kuller; (Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC) Sally Shumaker. 
Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study: (Wake 
Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
NC) Sally Shumaker. 
 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
 
The Regents of the University of California is the sole 
owner of a provisional patent application directed at the 
invention of measures of epigenetic age acceleration for 
which SH is a named inventor. The other authors 
declare no conflict of interest. 
 
FUNDING 
 
This WHI study was supported by National Institutes of 
Health NIH/NHLBI 60442456 BAA23 (Assimes, 
Absher, Horvath) and the National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences R01ES020836 WHI-
EMPC (Whitsel, Baccarelli, Hou), R01ES021733 
(Baccarelli), and R01ES025225 (Baccarelli). The WHI 
program is funded by the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services through con-
tracts HHSN268201100046C, HHSN268201100001C, 
HHSN268201100002C, 
HHSN268201100003C, 
HHSN268201100004C, and HHSN271201100004C. 
The authors thank the WHI investigators and staff for 
their dedication, and the study participants for making 
the program possible. A full listing of WHI 
investigators can be found at: www.whi.org/researchers/ 
Documents%20%20Write%20a%20Paper/WHI%20Inve
stigator%20Short%20List.pdf. 
 
Additional 
support 
came 
from 
NIH/NIA 
5R01AG042511-02 
(Horvath), 
NIH/NIA 
U34AG051425-01 
(Horvath), 
NIH/NINDS 
T32NS048004 (Levine), and the Burroughs Wellcome 
Fund Inter-school Training Program in Chronic 
Diseases (BWF-CHIP, Quach). The funding bodies 
played no role in the design, the collection, analysis, or 
interpretation of the data. 
 
The InCHIANTI study baseline (1998-2000) was 
supported as a "targeted project" (ICS110.1/RF97.71) 
by the Italian Ministry of Health and in part by the U.S. 
National Institute on Aging (Contracts: 263 MD 9164 
and 263 MD 821336). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1.  Kaczmarczyk MM, Miller MJ, Freund GG. The health 
benefits of dietary fiber: beyond the usual suspects of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease and 
colon cancer. Metabolism. 2012; 61:1058–66. doi: 
10.1016/j.metabol.2012.01.017 
2.  Kris‐Etherton PM, Harris WS, Appel LJ, and American 
Heart 
Association. 
Nutrition 
Committee. 
Fish 
consumption, fish oil, omega‐3 fatty acids, and 
cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2002; 106:2747–
57. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000038493.65177.94 
3.  van’t Veer P, Jansen MC, Klerk M, Kok FJ. Fruits and 
vegetables in the prevention of cancer and 
cardiovascular disease. Public Health Nutr. 2000; 
3:103–07. doi: 10.1017/S1368980000000136 
4.  Giugliano D, Ceriello A, Esposito K. The effects of diet 
on inflammation: emphasis on the metabolic 
syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006; 48:677–85. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2006.03.052 
5. Mozaffarian D. Dietary and Policy Priorities for Cardio‐
vascular Disease, Diabetes, and Obesity. 2016; 133: 
 www.aging‐us.com 
433 
AGING (Albany NY) 
187–225. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.018585 
6.  Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ, Cleeman 
JI, Donato KA, Fruchart JC, James WP, Loria CM, Smith 
SC Jr, and International Diabetes Federation Task 
Force on Epidemiology and Prevention, and Hational 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, and American Heart 
Association, and World Heart Federation, and 
International 
Atherosclerosis 
Society, 
and 
International Association for the Study of Obesity. 
Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim 
statement of the International Diabetes Federation 
Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart 
Association; World Heart Federation; International 
Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association 
for the Study of Obesity. Circulation. 2009; 120:1640–
45. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192644 
7.  Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Daniels SR, Donato KA, Eckel 
RH, Franklin BA, Gordon DJ, Krauss RM, Savage PJ, 
Smith SC Jr, Spertus JA, Costa F, and American Heart 
Association, and National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute. 
Diagnosis 
and 
management 
of 
the 
metabolic 
syndrome: 
an 
American 
Heart 
Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Scientific Statement. Circulation. 2005; 112:2735–52. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.169404 
8.  Wilson PW, D’Agostino RB, Parise H, Sullivan L, Meigs 
JB. 
Metabolic 
syndrome 
as 
a 
precursor 
of 
cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Circulation. 
2005; 
112:3066–72. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.539528 
9.  Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, Monaco JH, Henley SJ, 
Heath CW Jr, Doll R. Alcohol consumption and 
mortality among middle‐aged and elderly U.S. adults. 
N 
Engl 
J 
Med. 
1997; 
337:1705–14. 
doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199712113372401 
10.  Rimm EB, Williams P, Fosher K, Criqui M, Stampfer 
MJ. Moderate alcohol intake and lower risk of 
coronary heart disease: meta‐analysis of effects on 
lipids and haemostatic factors. BMJ. 1999; 319:1523–
28. doi: 10.1136/bmj.319.7224.1523 
11.  Warburton DE, Nicol CW, Bredin SS. Health benefits 
of physical activity: the evidence. CMAJ. 2006; 
174:801–09. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.051351 
12.  González MA, Rodríguez Artalejo F, Calero JR. 
Relationship between socioeconomic status and 
ischaemic heart disease in cohort and case‐control 
studies: 1960‐1993. Int J Epidemiol. 1998; 27:350–58. 
doi: 10.1093/ije/27.3.350 
13.  Madsen M, Andersen AM, Christensen K, Andersen 
PK, Osler M. Does educational status impact adult 
mortality in Denmark? A twin approach. Am J Epide‐ 
miol. 2010; 172:225–34. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwq072 
14.  Conti G, Heckman J, Urzua S. THE EDUCATION‐
HEALTH GRADIENT. Am Econ Rev. 2010; 100:234–38. 
doi: 10.1257/aer.100.2.234 
15.  Currie J. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic 
Status, Poor Health in Childhood, and Human Capital 
Development. National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper Series. 2008; No. 13987. 
16.  Cutler 
DM, 
Lleras‐Muney 
A. 
Understanding 
differences in health behaviors by education. J Health 
Econ. 2010; 29:1–28. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.10.003 
17.  Mirabello L, Huang WY, Wong JY, Chatterjee N, 
Reding D, Crawford ED, De Vivo I, Hayes RB, Savage 
SA. The association between leukocyte telomere 
length and cigarette smoking, dietary and physical 
variables, and risk of prostate cancer. Aging Cell. 
2009; 
8:405–13. 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1474‐
9726.2009.00485.x 
18.  Boccardi V, Esposito A, Rizzo MR, Marfella R, Barbieri 
M, Paolisso G. Mediterranean diet, telomere 
maintenance and health status among elderly. PLoS 
One. 2013; 8:e62781. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062781 
19.  García‐Calzón S, Gea A, Razquin C, Corella D, 
Lamuela‐Raventós RM, Martínez JA, Martínez‐
González MA, Zalba G, Marti A. Longitudinal 
association of telomere length and obesity indices in 
an intervention study with a Mediterranean diet: the 
PREDIMED‐NAVARRA trial. Int J Obes. 2014; 38:177–
82. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.68 
20.  Brouilette SW, Moore JS, McMahon AD, Thompson 
JR, Ford I, Shepherd J, Packard CJ, Samani NJ, and 
West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study Group. 
Telomere length, risk of coronary heart disease, and 
statin treatment in the West of Scotland Primary 
Prevention Study: a nested case‐control study. 
Lancet. 2007; 369:107–14. doi: 10.1016/S0140‐
6736(07)60071‐3 
21.  Kiecolt‐Glaser JK, Epel ES, Belury MA, Andridge R, Lin 
J, Glaser R, Malarkey WB, Hwang BS, Blackburn E. 
Omega‐3 fatty acids, oxidative stress, and leukocyte 
telomere length: A randomized controlled trial. Brain 
Behav 
Immun. 
2013; 
28:16–24. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.bbi.2012.09.004 
22.  Cassidy A, De Vivo I, Liu Y, Han J, Prescott J, Hunter 
DJ, Rimm EB. Associations between diet, lifestyle 
factors, and telomere length in women. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 2010; 91:1273–80. 
doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.28947 
23.  Latifovic L, Peacock SD, Massey TE, King WD. The 
Influence of Alcohol Consumption, Cigarette Smoking, 
 www.aging‐us.com 
434 
AGING (Albany NY) 
and Physical Activity on Leukocyte Telomere Length. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016; 25:374–80. 
doi: 10.1158/1055‐9965.EPI‐14‐1364 
24.  Cherkas LF, Hunkin JL, Kato BS, Richards JB, Gardner 
JP, Surdulescu GL, Kimura M, Lu X, Spector TD, Aviv A. 
The association between physical activity in leisure 
time and leukocyte telomere length. Arch Intern 
Med. 2008; 168:154–58. 
doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2007.39 
25.  Adler N, Pantell MS, O’Donovan A, Blackburn E, 
Cawthon R, Koster A, Opresko P, Newman A, Harris 
TB, Epel E. Educational attainment and late life 
telomere length in the Health, Aging and Body 
Composition Study. Brain Behav Immun. 2013; 27:15–
21. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.08.014 
26.  Christensen BC, Houseman EA, Marsit CJ, Zheng S, 
Wrensch MR, Wiemels JL, Nelson HH, Karagas MR, 
Padbury JF, Bueno R, Sugarbaker DJ, Yeh RF, Wiencke 
JK, Kelsey KT. Aging and environmental exposures 
alter tissue‐specific DNA methylation dependent 
upon CpG island context. PLoS Genet. 2009; 
5:e1000602. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000602 
27.  Bollati V, Schwartz J, Wright R, Litonjua A, Tarantini L, 
Suh H, Sparrow D, Vokonas P, Baccarelli A. Decline in 
genomic DNA methylation through aging in a cohort 
of elderly subjects. Mech Ageing Dev. 2009; 130:234–
39. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2008.12.003 
28.  Rakyan VK, Down TA, Maslau S, Andrew T, Yang TP, 
Beyan H, Whittaker P, McCann OT, Finer S, Valdes 
AM, Leslie RD, Deloukas P, Spector TD. Human aging‐
associated 
DNA 
hypermethylation 
occurs 
preferentially 
at 
bivalent 
chromatin 
domains. 
Genome Res. 2010; 20:434–39. 
doi: 10.1101/gr.103101.109 
29.  Teschendorff AE, Menon U, Gentry‐Maharaj A, Ramus 
SJ, Weisenberger DJ, Shen H, Campan M, Noushmehr 
H, Bell CG, Maxwell AP, Savage DA, Mueller‐Holzner 
E, Marth C, et al. Age‐dependent DNA methylation of 
genes that are suppressed in stem cells is a hallmark 
of cancer. Genome Res. 2010; 20:440–46. doi: 
10.1101/gr.103606.109 
30.  Horvath S, Zhang Y, Langfelder P, Kahn RS, Boks MP, 
van Eijk K, van den Berg LH, Ophoff RA. Aging effects 
on DNA methylation modules in human brain and 
blood tissue. Genome Biol. 2012; 13:R97. doi: 
10.1186/gb‐2012‐13‐10‐r97 
31.  Numata S, Ye T, Hyde TM, Guitart‐Navarro X, Tao R, 
Wininger M, Colantuoni C, Weinberger DR, Kleinman 
JE, Lipska BK. DNA methylation signatures in 
development and aging of the human prefrontal 
cortex. Am J Hum Genet. 2012; 90:260–72. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.020 
32.  Alisch RS, Barwick BG, Chopra P, Myrick LK, Satten 
GA, Conneely KN, Warren ST. Age‐associated DNA 
methylation in pediatric populations. Genome Res. 
2012; 22:623–32. doi: 10.1101/gr.125187.111 
33.  Johansson A, Enroth S, Gyllensten U. Continuous 
Aging of the Human DNA Methylome Throughout the 
Human Lifespan. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e67378. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0067378 
34.  Day K, Waite LL, Thalacker‐Mercer A, West A, 
Bamman MM, Brooks JD, Myers RM, Absher D. 
Differential DNA methylation with age displays both 
common and dynamic features across human tissues 
that are influenced by CpG landscape. Genome Biol. 
2013; 14:R102. doi: 10.1186/gb‐2013‐14‐9‐r102 
35.  Bocklandt S, Lin W, Sehl ME, Sánchez FJ, Sinsheimer 
JS, Horvath S, Vilain E. Epigenetic predictor of age. 
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e14821. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014821 
36.  Garagnani P, Bacalini MG, Pirazzini C, Gori D, Giuliani 
C, Mari D, Di Blasio AM, Gentilini D, Vitale G, Collino 
S, Rezzi S, Castellani G, Capri M, et al. Methylation of 
ELOVL2 gene as a new epigenetic marker of age. 
Aging 
Cell. 
2012; 
11:1132–34. 
doi: 
10.1111/acel.12005 
37.  Hannum G, Guinney J, Zhao L, Zhang L, Hughes G, 
Sadda S, Klotzle B, Bibikova M, Fan JB, Gao Y, 
Deconde R, Chen M, Rajapakse I, et al. Genome‐wide 
methylation profiles reveal quantitative views of 
human aging rates. Mol Cell. 2013; 49:359–67. doi: 
10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.016 
38.  Horvath S. DNA methylation age of human tissues 
and cell types. Genome Biol. 2013; 14:R115. doi: 
10.1186/gb‐2013‐14‐10‐r115 
39.  Lin Q, Weidner CI, Costa IG, Marioni RE, Ferreira MR, 
Deary IJ, Wagner W. DNA methylation levels at 
individual age‐associated CpG sites can be indicative 
for life expectancy. Aging (Albany NY). 2016; 8:394–
401. doi: 10.18632/aging.100908 
40.  Marioni RE, Shah S, McRae AF, Chen BH, Colicino E, 
Harris SE, Gibson J, Henders AK, Redmond P, Cox SR, 
Pattie A, Corley J, Murphy L, et al. DNA methylation 
age of blood predicts all‐cause mortality in later life. 
Genome Biol. 2015; 16:25. doi: 10.1186/s13059‐015‐
0584‐6 
41.  Christiansen L, Lenart A, Tan Q, Vaupel JW, Aviv A, 
McGue M, Christensen K. DNA methylation age is 
associated with mortality in a longitudinal Danish 
twin study. Aging Cell. 2016; 15:149‐54. doi: 
10.1111/acel.12421 
42.  Perna L, Zhang Y, Mons U, Holleczek B, Saum K‐U, 
Brenner H. Epigenetic age acceleration predicts 
 www.aging‐us.com 
435 
AGING (Albany NY) 
cancer, cardiovascular, and all‐cause mortality in a 
German case cohort. Clin Epigenetics. 2016; 8:64. doi: 
10.1186/s13148‐016‐0228‐z 
43. Chen BH, Marioni RE, Colicino E, Peters MJ, Ward‐
Caviness CK, Tsai PC, Roetker NS, Just AC, Demerath 
EW, Guan W, Bressler J, Fornage M, Studenski S, et al. 
DNA methylation‐based measures of biological age: 
meta‐analysis predicting time to death. Aging (Albany 
NY). 2016; 8:1844–65. doi: 10.18632/aging.101020. 
44.  Breitling LP, Saum KU, Perna L, Schöttker B, Holleczek 
B, Brenner H. Frailty is associated with the epigenetic 
clock but not with telomere length in a German 
cohort. 
Clin 
Epigenetics. 
2016; 
8:21. 
doi: 
10.1186/s13148‐016‐0186‐5 
45.  Levine ME, Hosgood HD, Chen B, Absher D, Assimes T, 
Horvath S. DNA methylation age of blood predicts 
future onset of lung cancer in the women’s health 
initiative. Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7:690–700. doi: 
10.18632/aging.100809 
46.  Marioni RE, Shah S, McRae AF, Ritchie SJ, Muniz‐
Terrera G, Harris SE, Gibson J, Redmond P, Cox SR, 
Pattie A, Corley J, Taylor A, Murphy L, et al. The 
epigenetic clock is correlated with physical and 
cognitive fitness in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936. Int 
J 
Epidemiol. 
2015; 
44:1388–96. 
doi: 
10.1093/ije/dyu277 
47.  Horvath S, Pirazzini C, Bacalini MG, Gentilini D, Di 
Blasio AM, Delledonne M, Mari D, Arosio B, Monti D, 
Passarino G, De Rango F, D’Aquila P, Giuliani C, et al. 
Decreased epigenetic age of PBMCs from Italian semi‐
supercentenarians and their offspring. Aging (Albany 
NY). 2015; 7:1159–70. doi: 10.18632/aging.100861 
48.  Levine ME, Lu AT, Bennett DA, Horvath S. Epigenetic 
age of the pre‐frontal cortex is associated with 
neuritic plaques, amyloid load, and Alzheimer’s 
disease related cognitive functioning. Aging (Albany 
NY). 2015; 7:1198–211. doi: 10.18632/aging.100864 
49.  Horvath S, Mah V, Lu AT, Woo JS, Choi OW, Jasinska 
AJ, Riancho JA, Tung S, Coles NS, Braun J, Vinters HV, 
Coles LS. The cerebellum ages slowly according to the 
epigenetic clock. Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7:294–306. 
doi: 10.18632/aging.100742 
50.  Walker RF, Liu JS, Peters BA, Ritz BR, Wu T, Ophoff 
RA, Horvath S. Epigenetic age analysis of children who 
seem to evade aging. Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7:334–
39. doi: 10.18632/aging.100744 
51.  Horvath S, Garagnani P, Bacalini MG, Pirazzini C, 
Salvioli S, Gentilini D, Di Blasio AM, Giuliani C, Tung S, 
Vinters HV, Franceschi C. Accelerated epigenetic 
aging in Down syndrome. Aging Cell. 2015; 14:491–
95. doi: 10.1111/acel.12325 
52.  Horvath S, Levine AJ. HIV‐1 infection accelerates age 
according to the epigenetic clock. J Infect Dis. 2015; 
212:1563–73. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv277 
53.  Horvath S, Langfelder P, Kwak S, Aaronson J, Rosinski 
J, Vogt TF, Eszes M, Faull RL, Curtis MA, Waldvogel HJ, 
Choi OW, Tung S, Vinters HV, et al. Huntington’s 
disease accelerates epigenetic aging of human brain 
and disrupts DNA methylation levels. Aging (Albany 
NY). 2016; 8:1485–512. doi: 10.18632/aging.101005 
54.  Horvath S, Erhart W, Brosch M, Ammerpohl O, von 
Schönfels W, Ahrens M, Heits N, Bell JT, Tsai PC, 
Spector TD, Deloukas P, Siebert R, Sipos B, et al. 
Obesity accelerates epigenetic aging of human liver. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:15538–43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1412759111 
55.  Zannas AS, Arloth J, Carrillo‐Roa T, Iurato S, Röh S, 
Ressler KJ, Nemeroff CB, Smith AK, Bradley B, Heim C, 
Menke A, Lange JF, Brückl T, et al. Lifetime stress 
accelerates epigenetic aging in an urban, African 
American 
cohort: 
relevance 
of 
glucocorticoid 
signaling. 
Genome 
Biol. 
2015; 
16:266. 
doi: 
10.1186/s13059‐015‐0828‐5 
56.  Levine ME, Lu AT, Chen BH, Hernandez DG, Singleton 
AB, Ferrucci L, Bandinelli S, Salfati E, Manson JE, 
Quach A, Kusters CD, Kuh D, Wong A, et al. 
Menopause accelerates biological aging. Proc Natl 
Acad 
Sci 
USA. 
2016; 
113:9327–32. 
doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1604558113 
57.  Vidal L, Lopez‐Golan Y, Rego‐Perez I, Horvath S, 
Blanco FJ, Riancho JA, Gomez‐Reino JJ, Gonzalez A. 
Specific increase of methylation age in osteoarthritis 
cartilage. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016; 24:S63. doi: 
10.1016/j.joca.2016.01.140 
58.  Horvath S, Ritz BR. Increased epigenetic age and 
granulocyte counts in the blood of Parkinson’s 
disease patients. Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7:1130–42. 
doi: 10.18632/aging.100859 
59.  Horvath S, Gurven M, Levine ME, Trumble BC, Kaplan 
H, Allayee H, Ritz BR, Chen B, Lu AT, Rickabaugh TM, 
Jamieson BD, Sun D, Li S, et al. An epigenetic clock 
analysis of race/ethnicity, sex, and coronary heart 
disease. 
Genome 
Biol. 
2016; 
17:171. 
doi: 
10.1186/s13059‐016‐1030‐0 
60.  McGuire S. US Department of Agriculture and US 
Department of Health and Human Services, Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office, January 2011. Advances 
in Nutrition: An International Review Journal. 2011; 
23:293‐294. 
61.  Committee DGA. Scientific Report of the 2015 Dietary 
Guidelines Advisory Committee. Washington (DC): 
 www.aging‐us.com 
436 
AGING (Albany NY) 
USDA and US Department of Health and Human 
Services. 2015. 
62.  Lu AT, Hannon E, Levine ME, Hao K, Crimmins EM, 
Lunnon K, Kozlenkov A, Mill J, Dracheva S, Horvath S. 
Genetic variants near MLST8 and DHX57 affect the 
epigenetic age of the cerebellum. Nat Commun. 
2016; 7:10561. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10561 
63.  Castelo‐Branco C, Soveral I. The immune system and 
aging: a review. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2014; 30:16–22. 
doi: 10.3109/09513590.2013.852531 
64.  Finch CE. Evolution in health and medicine Sackler 
colloquium: Evolution of the human lifespan and 
diseases of aging: roles of infection, inflammation, 
and nutrition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010 (Suppl 1); 
107:1718–24. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0909606106 
65.  Chowdhury R, Stevens S, Gorman D, Pan A, 
Warnakula S, Chowdhury S, Ward H, Johnson L, 
Crowe F, Hu FB, Franco OH. Association between fish 
consumption, long chain omega 3 fatty acids, and risk 
of cerebrovascular disease: systematic review and 
meta‐analysis. 
BMJ. 
2012; 
345:e6698. 
doi: 
10.1136/bmj.e6698 
66.  Zheng J‐S, Hu X‐J, Zhao Y‐M, Yang J, Li D. Intake of fish 
and marine n‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and risk 
of breast cancer: meta‐analysis of data from 21 
independent prospective cohort studies. BMJ. 2013; 
346:f3706. doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3706 
67.  Farina EK, Kiel DP, Roubenoff R, Schaefer EJ, Cupples 
LA, Tucker KL. Protective effects of fish intake and 
interactive effects of long‐chain polyunsaturated fatty 
acid intakes on hip bone mineral density in older 
adults: the Framingham Osteoporosis Study. Am J Clin 
Nutr. 
2011; 
93:1142–51. 
doi: 
10.3945/ajcn.110.005926 
68.  Bannenberg GL, Chiang N, Ariel A, Arita M, Tjonahen 
E, Gotlinger KH, Hong S, Serhan CN. Molecular circuits 
of resolution: formation and actions of resolvins and 
protectins. J Immunol. 2005; 174:4345–55. doi: 
10.4049/jimmunol.174.7.4345 
69.  Ridker PM, Buring JE, Cook NR, Rifai N. C‐reactive 
protein, the metabolic syndrome, and risk of incident 
cardiovascular events: an 8‐year follow‐up of 14 719 
initially healthy American women. Circulation. 2003; 
107:391–97. 
doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000055014.62083.05 
70.  de Labry LO, Glynn RJ, Levenson MR, Hermos JA, 
LoCastro JS, Vokonas PS. Alcohol consumption and 
mortality in an American male population: recovering 
the U‐shaped curve‐‐findings from the normative 
Aging Study. J Stud Alcohol. 1992; 53:25–32. doi: 
10.15288/jsa.1992.53.25 
71.  Knott CS, Coombs N, Stamatakis E, Biddulph JP. All 
cause mortality and the case for age specific alcohol 
consumption guidelines: pooled analyses of up to 10 
population based cohorts. BMJ. 2015; 350:h384. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.h384 
72.  Beach SR, Dogan MV, Lei MK, Cutrona CE, Gerrard M, 
Gibbons FX, Simons RL, Brody GH, Philibert RA. 
Methylomic Aging as a Window onto the Influence of 
Lifestyle: Tobacco and Alcohol Use Alter the Rate of 
Biological Aging. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015; 63:2519–25. 
doi: 10.1111/jgs.13830 
73.  Grønbaek M, Becker U, Johansen D, Gottschau A, 
Schnohr P, Hein HO, Jensen G, Sørensen TI. Type of 
alcohol consumed and mortality from all causes, 
coronary heart disease, and cancer. Ann Intern Med. 
2000; 133:411–19. doi: 10.7326/0003‐4819‐133‐6‐
200009190‐00008 
74.  Volpato S, Pahor M, Ferrucci L, Simonsick EM, 
Guralnik JM, Kritchevsky SB, Fellin R, Harris TB. 
Relationship of alcohol intake with inflammatory 
markers and plasminogen activator inhibitor‐1 in 
well‐functioning older adults: the Health, Aging, and 
Body Composition study. Circulation. 2004; 109:607–
12. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000109503.13955.00 
75.  Fillmore KM, Kerr WC, Stockwell T, Chikritzhs T, 
Bostrom A. Moderate alcohol use and reduced 
mortality risk: systematic error in prospective studies. 
Addict 
Res 
Theory. 
2006; 
14:101–32. 
doi: 
10.1080/16066350500497983 
76.  Brien SE, Ronksley PE, Turner BJ, Mukamal KJ, Ghali 
WA. Effect of alcohol consumption on biological 
markers associated with risk of coronary heart 
disease: systematic review and meta‐analysis of 
interventional studies. BMJ. 2011; 342:d636. doi: 
10.1136/bmj.d636 
77.  Dauchet L, Amouyel P, Hercberg S, Dallongeville J. 
Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of coronary 
heart disease: a meta‐analysis of cohort studies. J 
Nutr. 2006; 136:2588–93. 
78.  He FJ, Nowson CA, Lucas M, MacGregor GA. 
Increased consumption of fruit and vegetables is 
related to a reduced risk of coronary heart disease: 
meta‐analysis of cohort studies. J Hum Hypertens. 
2007; 21:717–28. doi: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1002212 
79.  He FJ, Nowson CA, MacGregor GA. Fruit and 
vegetable consumption and stroke: meta‐analysis of 
cohort studies. Lancet. 2006; 367:320–26. doi: 
10.1016/S0140‐6736(06)68069‐0 
80.  Carter P, Gray LJ, Troughton J, Khunti K, Davies MJ. 
Fruit and vegetable intake and incidence of type 2 
diabetes mellitus: systematic review and meta‐
 www.aging‐us.com 
437 
AGING (Albany NY) 
analysis. 
BMJ. 
2010; 
341:c4229. 
doi: 
10.1136/bmj.c4229 
81.  Gandini S, Merzenich H, Robertson C, Boyle P. Meta‐
analysis of studies on breast cancer risk and diet: the 
role of fruit and vegetable consumption and the 
intake of associated micronutrients. Eur J Cancer. 
2000; 36:636–46. 
doi: 10.1016/S0959‐8049(00)00022‐8 
82.  Wang X, Ouyang Y, Liu J, Zhu M, Zhao G, Bao W, Hu 
FB. Fruit and vegetable consumption and mortality 
from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: 
systematic review and dose‐response meta‐analysis 
of prospective cohort studies. BMJ. 2014; 349:g4490. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.g4490 
83.  Holt EM, Steffen LM, Moran A, Basu S, Steinberger J, 
Ross JA, Hong C‐P, Sinaiko AR. Fruit and vegetable 
consumption and its relation to markers of 
inflammation and oxidative stress in adolescents. J 
Am 
Diet 
Assoc. 
2009; 
109:414–21. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jada.2008.11.036 
84.  Esmaillzadeh A, Kimiagar M, Mehrabi Y, Azadbakht L, 
Hu FB, Willett WC. Fruit and vegetable intakes, C‐
reactive protein, and the metabolic syndrome. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2006; 84:1489–97. 
85.  Ornish D, Lin J, Chan JM, Epel E, Kemp C, Weidner G, 
Marlin R, Frenda SJ, Magbanua MJ, Daubenmier J, 
Estay I, Hills NK, Chainani‐Wu N, et al. Effect of 
comprehensive lifestyle changes on telomerase 
activity and telomere length in men with biopsy‐
proven low‐risk prostate cancer: 5‐year follow‐up of a 
descriptive pilot study. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:1112–
20. doi: 10.1016/S1470‐2045(13)70366‐8 
86.  Farzaneh‐Far R, Lin J, Epel ES, Harris WS, Blackburn 
EH, Whooley MA. Association of marine omega‐3 
fatty acid levels with telomeric aging in patients with 
coronary heart disease. JAMA. 2010; 303:250–57. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2009.2008 
87.  Barzilai N, Crandall JP, Kritchevsky SB, Espeland MA. 
Metformin as a Tool to Target Aging. Cell Metab. 
2016; 23:1060–65. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2016.05.011 
88.  Klemera P, Doubal S. A new approach to the concept 
and computation of biological age. Mech Ageing Dev. 
2006; 127:240–48. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2005.10.004 
89.  The Women’s Health Initiative Study Group. Design of 
the Women’s Health Initiative clinical trial and 
observational study. Control Clin Trials. 1998; 19:61–
109. doi: 10.1016/S0197‐2456(97)00078‐0 
90.  Patterson RE, Kristal AR, Tinker LF, Carter RA, Bolton 
MP, Agurs‐Collins T. Measurement characteristics of 
the Women’s Health Initiative food frequency 
questionnaire. Ann Epidemiol. 1999; 9:178–87. doi: 
10.1016/S1047‐2797(98)00055‐6 
91.  Houseman EA, Accomando WP, Koestler DC, 
Christensen BC, Marsit CJ, Nelson HH, Wiencke JK, 
Kelsey KT. DNA methylation arrays as surrogate 
measures 
of 
cell 
mixture 
distribution. 
BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2012; 13:86. doi: 10.1186/1471‐2105‐
13‐86 
92.  Horvath S, Gurven M, Levine ME, Trumble BC, Kaplan 
H, Allayee H, Ritz BR, Chen B, Lu AT, Rickabaugh TM, 
Jamieson BD, Sun D, Li S, et al. An epigenetic clock 
analysis of race/ethnicity, sex, and coronary heart 
disease. 
Genome 
Biol. 
2016; 
17:171. 
doi: 
10.1186/s13059‐016‐1030‐0 
93.  Whitsel EA, Baccarelli A, Hou L. Epigenetic Mechanisms 
of PM‐Mediated CVD.  Research Portfo‐lio Online 
Reporting Tools. National Institutes of Health: U.S. 
Department 
of 
Health 
and 
Human 
Services: 
https://projectreporter.nih.gov/project_info_descript
ion.cfm?aid=8369149&icde=27485446). 
94.  Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. Adjusting batch effects 
in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes 
methods. 
Biostatistics. 
2007; 
8:118–27. 
doi: 
10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037 
95.  Pisani P, Faggiano F, Krogh V, Palli D, Vineis P, Berrino 
F. Relative validity and reproducibility of a food 
frequency dietary questionnaire for use in the Italian 
EPIC centres. Int J Epidemiol. 1997 (Suppl 1); 
26:S152–60. doi: 10.1093/ije/26.suppl_1.S152 
96.  Bartali B, Frongillo EA, Bandinelli S, Lauretani F, 
Semba RD, Fried LP, Ferrucci L. Low nutrient intake is 
an essential component of frailty in older persons. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2006; 61:589–93. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/61.6.589 
97.  Ferrucci L, Bandinelli S, Benvenuti E, Di Iorio A, 
Macchi C, Harris TB, Guralnik JM. Subsystems 
contributing to the decline in ability to walk: bridging 
the gap between epidemiology and geriatric practice 
in the InCHIANTI study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000; 
48:1618–25. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1532‐5415.2000.tb03873.x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
