 Research Paper
Bacterial Cytological Profiling (BCP) as a Rapid and Accurate
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing Method for Staphylococcus aureus
D.T. Quach a,d, G. Sakoulas b, V. Nizet b,c, J. Pogliano d, K. Pogliano d,⁎
a Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA
b Division of Pediatric Pharmacology & Drug Discovery, University of California, San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA
c Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Science, University of California, San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA
d Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 30 November 2015
Received in revised form 7 January 2016
Accepted 15 January 2016
Available online 18 January 2016
Successful treatment of bacterial infections requires the timely administration of appropriate antimicrobial ther-
apy. The failure to initiate the correct therapy in a timely fashion results in poor clinical outcomes, longer hospital
stays, and higher medical costs. Current approaches to antibiotic susceptibility testing of cultured pathogens have
key limitations ranging from long run times to dependence on prior knowledge of genetic mechanisms of resis-
tance. We have developed a rapid antimicrobial susceptibility assay for Staphylococcus aureus based on bacterial
cytological profiling (BCP), which uses quantitative fluorescence microscopy to measure antibiotic induced
changes in cellular architecture. BCP discriminated between methicillin-susceptible (MSSA) and -resistant
(MRSA) clinical isolates of S. aureus (n = 71) within 1–2 h with 100% accuracy. Similarly, BCP correctly distin-
guished daptomycin susceptible (DS) from daptomycin non-susceptible (DNS) S. aureus strains (n = 20) within
30 min. Among MRSA isolates, BCP further identified two classes of strains that differ in their susceptibility to
specific combinations of beta-lactam antibiotics. BCP provides a rapid and flexible alternative to gene-based
susceptibility testing methods for S. aureus, and should be readily adaptable to different antibiotics and bacterial
species as new mechanisms of resistance or multidrug-resistant pathogens evolve and appear in mainstream
clinical practice.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Antibiotic resistance
Susceptibility tests
Staphylococcus aureus
Multidrug resistant bacteria
1. Introduction
We are locked in an evolutionary race with bacteria that rapidly
become resistant to each new antibiotic, necessitating the continued
development of new treatments and diagnostic approaches. The aptly
coined “ESKAPE” pathogens (Rice, 2008) — Enterococcus faecium, Staph-
ylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter species can exhibit multi-
resistance to all first line antibacterial drugs and pose significant clinical
threats. Current therapeutic agents are losing effectiveness more rapidly
than they are being replaced, and new drug discovery has stagnated due
to high development costs coupled with a lower profit margin associat-
ed with antibiotics compared to other drug classes (Gwynn et al., 2010).
Hence, in the recent decade there has been a push for the implementa-
tion of antimicrobial stewardship, a set of strategies to reduce the
emergence and spread of resistant pathogens and to use existing anti-
microbials more effectively. Rapid susceptibility testing plays a key
role in antimicrobial stewardship by decreasing emergence of
resistance and by reserving drugs of last resort to those cases in which
they are warranted (Goff et al., 2012).
Traditional antimicrobial susceptibility tests include the disk diffu-
sion test, E-test gradient diffusion test and broth dilution susceptibility
tests. Although the tests are robust, they each rely on the growth of
the bacteria to a dense culture while being exposed to the antibiotic
panel. Consequently, these methods require 24–48 h to isolate the bac-
terium from the patient in pure culture and another 24–72 h to com-
plete susceptibility testing (Goff et al., 2012). Due to the long time
required to deliver test results compared to the tempo of infection, pa-
tients are often treated “empirically” with broader-spectrum regimens
under the assumption that the infection could be drug-resistant.
To improve susceptibility testing times there are currently a few
rapid platforms gaining acceptance in the clinical laboratory: polymer-
ase chain reaction (PCR), poly-nucleic acid fluorescence in situ hybridi-
zation (PNA-FISH), and nanosphere hybridization. PCR method detects
coding sequences of known resistance genes while PNA-FISH identifies
species and/or resistance by hybridizing synthetic oligo-nucleotide
fluorescence-labeled probes to species-specific ribosomal RNA and
mRNA. Similarly, nanosphere hybridization uses nanoparticle probes
to detect DNA, RNA or protein targets. Rapid susceptibility methods
can improve patient outcomes and decrease cost of care. In a study
EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kpogliano@ucsd.edu (K. Pogliano).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.01.020
2352-3964/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 comparing PCR to traditional methods, time required for identification
of methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) versus methicillin-resistant
S. aureus (MRSA) was reduced by 1.7 days, cost per patient decreased
from $69,737 to $48,350, and outcomes improved with 6.2 fewer days
in the hospital and 20% lower mortality (Bauer et al., 2010). Unfortu-
nately, both these current rapid methods depend on a priori knowledge
of resistance genes.
S. aureus is a prevalent Gram-positive human pathogen that is a
leading cause of bacteremia, pneumonia, skin/soft tissue infections
and endocarditis worldwide (Tong et al., 2015). Asymptomatic coloni-
zation of up to 30% of healthy individuals allows for the continual trans-
mission and proliferation of this pathogen (Wertheim et al., 2005).
S. aureus is responsible for community-acquired (CA-) and hospital-
acquired (HA-) infections in both healthy and immune-compromised
individuals, and numerous lineages of MRSA including the USA300
clone have spread throughout the US and internationally (Mediavilla
et al., 2012). Currently, rPCR is used by many clinical laboratories to de-
tect the mecA gene, which confers beta-lactam resistance in S. aureus by
encoding the low-affinity penicillin-binding protein, PBP2a (Pinho et al.,
2001). Since MSSA lack mecA, detection of this gene is considered a gold
standard for molecular identification of MRSA. However, occurrence of
oxacillin-susceptible mecA+ MRSA strains (Hososaka et al., 2007) and
emergence of a mecA variant, mecC, which encodes a protein with
b63% AA identity to PBP2a (Laurent et al., 2012; García-Álvarez et al.,
2011), highlight limitations in tests that detect only the presence of
this gene.
In recent years, rapid phenotypic susceptibility assays for S. aureus
have been proposed, but many of these assays are based solely on cell
lysis and/or growth (Price et al., 2014; Kalashnikov et al., 2012; Choi
et al., 2013; Kinnunen et al., 2012; Sinn et al., 2012). Recently, an
imaging-based single-cell morphological analysis (SCMA) focused on
early morphological changes in response to antibiotic exposure sought
to determine susceptibility of five different bacterial pathogens to a va-
riety of antibiotics within 3–4 h (Choi et al., 2014). Despite the impres-
sive scale and scope of this study, S. aureus antibiotic susceptibility
determination in this assay depended solely on cell division, similar to
standard broth microdilution assays, and had an error rate of 5.4% com-
pared to conventional testing.
Recently, we demonstrated the utility of bacterial cytological profil-
ing (BCP) to determine specific antibacterial mechanisms of action
(Lamsa et al., 2012; Nonejuie et al., 2013). BCP is based on the observa-
tion that treatment of a diverse range of bacterial species with different
antibiotics yield unique and quantifiable changes in cytological profiles.
BCP profiles are comprised of a multitude of parameters including DNA
and cell size and shape and dye intensity on a single-cell level for hun-
dreds of cells in a single run. Here, we applied BCP as a rapid method
for determining the antibiotic susceptibility of S. aureus clinical isolates
obtained from patient samples. With BCP, 100% (n = 30) of blind test
isolates were correctly categorize as MRSA and MSSA within 1 h, and
the MRSA strains were further subdivided into two groups that correlat-
ed with increased susceptibility to combinatorial drug therapy. Like-
wise, daptomycin susceptible (DS) and daptomycin non-susceptible
(DNS) S. aureus strains (n = 20) were correctly classified after 30 min
of antibiotic treatment. BCP provides a flexible alternative to current
rapid susceptibility testing methods as it doesn't require prior knowl-
edge of resistance genes and can be applied broadly to different antibi-
otics and species.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Strains and Culture Condition
The strains used in this study are listed in Table S3. MLST, spa type,
and agr group were provided from their corresponding sources. MLST
typing for cb strains were done by following published protocols (Ji,
2007). All cultures were grown in Muller-Hinton Broth (MHB)
(HiMedia, Lot #140338) supplemented with 2% NaCl, 12 mg L−1
Mg2+ and 25 mg L−1 Ca2+ to ensure that the growth conditions and
therefore the cytological profiles of the cells remained consistent for
all antibiotics. The only exception was daptomycin, since this antibi-
otic requires 50 mg/L CaCl2 for activity. Antibiotics were prepared
using the following concentrations and solvents: 10 mg mL−1
cefoxitin (H2O, Fluka Analytical), 10 mg mL−1 oxacillin (H2O, Fluka
Analytical), 10 mg mL−1 cephalexin (H2O, Sigma), 10 mg mL−1
cefotaxime (H2O, MP Biomedical LLC), 10 mg mL−1 meropenem
(H2O, Sigma,), 5 mg mL−1 daptomycin (DMSO, Cubist).
2.2. Minimal Inhibitory Concentration Determination and Synergy Assays
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) data shown in Table S1
and Figs. 2–3 were determined using microdilution method while syn-
ergy assays (Fig. 5b-c) were performed using checkerboard assays (CLSI,
2007, 2012). In both cases, cells were grown in a culture tube to an
OD600 of 0.35–0.6 and diluted to 5 × 107 CFU/mL (or 5 × 105 CFU/mL
for daptomycin MIC) in cation-adjusted MHB. Cell solution was diluted
1:10 into a 96-well plate containing different concentrations of each an-
tibiotic. Clinical isolates with an MIC for oxacillin higher than 4 μg/mL
were categorized as MRSA, and used as the training set for the initial
LDA experiments. MIC and synergy results were obtained after 24 h in-
cubation at 30 °C. MIC values reported and synergy curve shown were
calculated from the mean of triplicates (n = 3).
2.3. Growth Curves
For growth curve determination, cells were grown to OD600 of 0.2.
Cells were then either incubated with 10 μg mL−1 oxacillin or with no
antibiotic at 37 °C. OD600 readings were made every 30 min for 3 h.
The exponential slope of the growth curve was used to determine
doubling rate see in Table S3.
2.4. Fluorescence Microscopy
Exponential-phase cell cultures (OD600 ~0.2) were treated with an-
tibiotics (10 μg mL−1 oxacillin; 20 μg mL−1 cephalexin; 5 μg mL−1 dap-
tomycin) and grown at 37 °C in a roller. Samples were collected for
imaging every hour for 3 h (and at 30 min for daptomycin). Eight micro-
liters of cells was added to 2 μL of dye mix consisting of 2.5 μM SYTOX
Green, 10 μg mL−1 DAPI and 20 μg mL−1 of WGA-647 in 1×-Tbase
and transferred to an agarose pad (10% MHB, 1% agarose). Exposure
time of each wavelength was maintained constant for all images.
Three images were taken for each strain. Microscopy was performed
as previously described (Lamsa et al., 2012) except using a different
set of dyes.
For time-lapse imaging, 8 μL of cell culture (OD600 ~0.2) was added
to 2 μL of stain mix (10.25 μM SYTOX Green and 0.25 μg mL−1 FM4-
64) and transferred onto an agarose pad (10% MHB, 1% agarose,
5 μg mL−1 oxacillin). The same field was imaged at 5 min intervals for
4 h.
2.5. Blind-test
In the first blind test, which consisted of MRSA and MSSA isolates,
the test administrator reassigned thirty of the 71 isolates to BT 1–30.
Similarly, in the second blind test which contained DNS and DS isolates,
12 of the 20 isolates were renamed BT 1–12. The tester and administra-
tor were both unaware of what class (MSSA, MRSAHL, MRSALL; DNS, DS)
each isolate belonged to.
2.6. Cytological Profiling
The threshold for the deconvolved images was adjusted on FIJI
(ImageJ 2.0.0) in order to remove background and obtain shape
96
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 edges. All SYTOX and DAPI intensity measurements were performed
on nondeconvolved images. Cell measurements were made using
CellProfiler 2.0 (Kamentsky et al., 2011). Each parameter is taken as
the weighted average of three images. For each strain, three sets of
profiles (each represented by three images), were obtained in three
experiments on different days (n = 3).
2.7. Statistical Analysis
LDA analysis was completed using built-in MATLAB (R2013) func-
tion. LDA analysis was done on the triplicate data set (n = 3) of mea-
sured parameters (22 parameters per antibiotic) for each strain while
only the average data set was graph on the LDA plots. Categorization
of unknown isolates was determined based on a decision boundary of
the LDA analysis. The decision boundary was defined as the mean dis-
tance between of the centroid of the two groups. Unweighted Pair
Group Method with Arithmetic Mean (UPGMA) dendrogram based on
the MLST of each strain was made using saureus.mlst.net online tree
creation program. The UPGMA relationship is calculated based on
pair-wise differences in the allelic profiles of the seven housekeeping
genes.
3. Results
3.1. Rapid Antimicrobial Susceptibility Determination by BCP
To determine if BCP can distinguish between MSSA and MRSA, we
created cytological profiles for 71 clinical S. aureus isolates (37 MRSA
and 34 MSSA strains, with MRSA strains defined as having an MIC for
oxacillin N4 μg/mL). Isolates were cultured in MHB liquid media and
treated with one of two beta-lactam antibiotics: oxacillin or cephalexin.
After 1 or 2 h, cells were stained with fluorescent dyes and imaged
(Figs. 1 and 2a, b). For each bacterial cell, 22 different parameters
were measured to create cytological profiles for each strain in the pres-
ence or absence of antibiotic treatment. We used linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) to generate a linear classifier that could separate the pro-
files from this training set into two classes susceptible (S) and resistant
(R) (Fig. 2c–f, diamond). Linear discriminant analysis is a supervised
pattern recognition and machine learning statistical method used to
find combinations of features which separates classes of objects. We
input all the parameters measured into the LDA, and the algorithm iden-
tifies linear combinations of the parameters which maximize distances
between groups and minimize distances within groups. The first LDA
projection (LDA1) retains the most between-class variance in compari-
son to the second (LDA2). This analysis showed that better separation
between S and R control strains was generated with cephalexin treat-
ment (Fig. 2d, left) than oxacillin treatment (Fig. 2c, left). Aggregation
of the profile data from cephalexin and oxacillin treatments into a single
44 parameter combined profile also generated excellent separation be-
tween S and R strains (Fig. 2e, left).
These results suggested that BCP can be applied to rapidly (within
2 h) determine S. aureus antibiotic susceptibility. We therefore per-
formed a blinded experiment to test if BCP can accurately distinguish
between MSSA and MRSA clinical isolates by plotting the profiles for
30 blinded isolates (filled circles) on the LDA graph using the linear clas-
sifier obtained from the LDA training set (Fig. 2c–f, left). For profiles de-
rived from oxacillin or cephalexin treatment alone or in aggregate, we
correctly categorized MSSA and MRSA strains with 100% (n = 71) accu-
racy after 2 h of antibiotic exposure. When the analysis was performed
after only 1 h of antibiotic treatment, the separation between the two
groups was somewhat reduced, but the accuracy of discrimination
remained at 100% (Fig. 2f, left). LDA values strongly correlated with
the MICs for cephalexin and oxacillin and correctly predicted suscepti-
bility (Fig. 2c–f, right).
With high rates of vancomycin treatment failure (Levine, 2006;
Charles et al., 2004; Stevens, 2006), daptomycin has emerged as an
important treatment option for serious MRSA infections including bac-
teremia (Murray et al., 2013; Moore et al., 2012). Accordingly, we ap-
plied
our
method
to
daptomycin
non-susceptible
(DNS)
and
susceptible (DS) strains. Performing the same techniques described
above but with daptomycin treatment, we observed distinct differences
in bacterial cytological profiles between DS and DNS strains (n = 20)
(Fig. 3a). LDA graphs showed that we could accurately discriminate be-
tween DS and DNS strains as early as 30 min post treatment in a double
blinded test (n = 12) (Fig. 3b).
3.2. BCP Profiles can be Mined to Extract Additional Information and Detect
Patterns
While cephalexin treatment alone was sufficient to distinguish be-
tween MSSA and MRSA strains, oxacillin profiles revealed strikingly dif-
ferent responses to antibiotic treatment among MRSA strains. Principal
component analysis (PCA) of the combined profile data (aggregated
profile of oxacillin and cephalexin treatment) showed two major clus-
ters corresponding to the MSSA and MRSA groups (Fig. 4a), but large
variance within principal component 2 (PC2) hinted at the existence
Fig. 1. BCP methodology and analysis. Each antibiotic was added to exponentially growing
cells and samples were collected for imaging hourly. Changes in cytological parameters
were measured using CellProfiler. For each strain, three sets of profiles (each
represented by three images), were obtained over three different days.
97
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 of subgroups within the MRSA cohort. Further inspection of MRSA
strains at opposing ends of this range revealed two distinctive pheno-
types. LDA of the cytological profiles of oxacillin-treated MRSA strains in
the top and bottom quartiles of PC2 was used to define the LDA space
onto which all MRSA strains were plotted. This LDA parameter space
separated MRSA into two groups with distinctive profiles (MRSALL, low
lysis; MRSAHL, high lysis; Fig. 4b). When exposed to oxacillin, strains in
the MRSALL (purple) group have an elliptical cell shape and low levels
of cell lysis (average 3%, n = 24 strains), whereas MRSAHL strains
(green) are circular with a high degree of lysis (average 20%, n = 12
strains). This result was unanticipated, as previous studies suggested
that lysis alone is indicative of susceptibility (Matsuda et al., 1995;
Best et al., 1974; Memmi et al., 2012; Kalashnikov et al., 2012);
however, these clinical strains with high lysis possessed oxacillin
MICs N50 μg/mL.
Time-lapse microscopy was performed to follow the progression of
cytological profiles over time during treatment with oxacillin (Fig. 4c).
The expected response to beta-lactam treatment is that MSSA strains
halt growth and lyse while MRSA strains continue to grow with relative-
ly little cell lysis. As expected upon oxacillin treatment, MSSA halted
growth, became enlarged and began to lyse. In contrast, MRSALL strains
exhibited an initial burst of lysis but then quickly recovered, proceeding
to actively grow and divide. Interestingly, MRSAHL strains continued to
undergo cycles of growth, division and lysis for the duration of the
time-lapse experiment. Comparison of the growth rates of these three
groups (MSSA, MRSALL, MRSAHL) on agarose pads without antibiotics
revealed that MRSAHL and MSSA have comparable growth rates (gener-
ation time = 27 min) while MRSALL grew slower (generation time =
32 min) (Fig. 4d). With the addition of oxacillin, MSSA lysed, resulting
in a negative growth rate while MRSALL grew faster than MRSAHL
(Fig. 4e). In addition to a faster growth rate in the presence of oxacillin,
MRSALL recovered after an initial burst of lysis, whereas MRSAHL contin-
ued to lyse throughout the assay (Fig. 4f).
These results suggest that MRSA strains are diverse in their pheno-
typic response to beta-lactam antibiotics. High lysis strains are better
adapted for rapid growth in the absence of antibiotics, while low lysis
strains are better adapted for growth in the presence of beta-lactams.
The MRSALL fitness advantage over MRSAHL in the presence of antibi-
otics is reflected in higher MICs of low lysis strains compared to high
lysis strains (Table S1). This result parallels observations that repeated
selection for high level resistance to beta-lactams comes at a fitness
cost to growth in the absence of antibiotic (Ender et al., 2004;
Fig. 2. Discrimination of MRSA from MSSA with BCP. (a) Images of MRSA (ATCC 33591) and MSSA (ATCC 29213) after 2 h treatment either with no antibiotics, 10 μg/mL of oxacillin, or
20 μg/mL of cephalexin. In all the images, cell walls were stained with WGA-Cy5 (red), DNA was stained with DAPI (blue) and SYTOX Green (green). SYTOX Green is membrane
impermeable and only stains permeabilized cells. (b) Cartoon showing the observed cellular phenotypes. (c–e) Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) plots were calculated from a
cytological profile library consisting of 22 parameters measured for 71 isolates, 37 MRSA strains (red) and 36 MSSA strains (blue), treated with each antibiotic measured in triplicates.
The mean of BCP profiles of each of the 71 strains (diamonds) is plotted after 2 h of treatment with (c) 10 μg/mL of oxacillin, (d) 20 μg/mL of cephalexin, (e) from the combined data
from the measurements in (c) and (d). USA100 (N315; black square) and USA300 (TCH1516; black x) profiles were projected onto the MRSA/MSSA LDA plot. (f) LDA plots calculated
from BCP profiles measured after 1 h treatment with 20 μg/mL of cephalexin. Blind test profiles (filled circles; n = 30) are overlaid on LDA plots of the training set
98
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 Andersson and Levin, 1999). Although the majority of MRSALL strains
have lower growth rates than MRSAHL when grown without antibiotic
and higher growth rates than MRSAHL under antibiotic treatment, this
trend did not apply to all the strains in our collection (Table S2). Such
heterogeneity among MRSA strains explains why growth rate alone is
insufficient to distinguish between MRSALL and MRSAHL. In contrast to
growth rate measurements, BCP evaluates a multitude of parameters
allowing rapid differentiation of MSSA and MRSA strains and the identi-
fication of subgroups within MRSA isolates.
Next we performed a genetic analysis of the S. aureus clinical isolates
to determine if their cytological profiles correlated with specific geno-
types. Specifically, we questioned if the two groups of MRSA identified
as displaying distinct responses to beta-lactam antibiotics were geneti-
cally different. We classified our clinical isolates of S. aureus using a
number of genetic markers including the accessory gene regulator agr
locus, protein A, and a collection of seven housekeeping genes (Multi
Locus Sequence Type, MLST) (Table S3). From the MLST, we constructed
a dendrogram illustrating the relationship between all of the MRSA
strains in our study (Fig. 5a). We found that all of the MRSAHL strains
are closely related to each other (Fig. 5a, green) and to the
community-acquired strain USA300. A majority of the MRSAHL belong
to multilocus sequence type (MLST) ST8 (Table S3), a marker for
USA300 lineage community-acquired MRSA in the U.S. (Nimmo,
2012). However, genotyping alone could not accurately predict whether
strains would be low or high lysis. Three of the MRSALL strains were
closely related to the community-acquired strain USA300, while the 9
MRSALL strains were more closely related to the hospital-acquired strain
USA100 (Fig. 5a, purple). MRSALL isolates belonged to ST8 as well as ST5,
a sequence type associated with hospital acquired (HA) MRSA (Gordon
and Lowy, 2008; Takano et al., 2013). The three MRSALL strains with ge-
netic identities close to USA300 have high MICs and most likely repre-
sent strains that have evolved through continued antibiotic selection
to become similar to low lysis, highly antibiotic-resistant strains.
BCP profiles for USA300 (TCH1516) and USA100 (N315) showed
that the strains correctly cluster with MRSA isolates (Fig. 2e), but they
do not cluster into the same MRSA subgroups in the LDA analysis as
they do on the dendrogram (Fig. 4b). N315, a pre-MRSA, exhibits a
heterogeneous response to oxacillin exposure (Aiba et al., 2013; Ito
Fig. 3. BCP determination of daptomycin susceptibility. (a) Daptomycin non-susceptible (DNS; gs5) and daptomycin susceptible (DS; ATCC29213) cell walls were stained with WGA-Cy5
(red) while the DNA was stained with DAPI (blue) and SYTOX Green (green). Images were taken after treatment with no antibiotics or 5 μg/mL of daptomycin for 30 min. (b) LDA plots
were calculated from cytological profiles after 30 min of treatment with daptomycin where parameters were the mean of triplicates. The LDA plot consists of the mean cytological profiles 8
DNS strains (red) and 12 DS strains (blue), all of which forms the training set. Blind test profiles (filled circles; n = 12) are overlaid on the training set.
99
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 et al., 1999). The fact that N315 shows genetic similarity to MRSALL and
phenotypic similarity to MRSAHL demonstrates that genetic testing
alone is insufficient for determining phenotypic response to antibiotic
treatment. Because of the constant evolutionary pressures driving strain
evolution, phenotypic assays such as BCP paired with molecular genetic
tests can be used as a tool to track the evolution of antibiotic susceptibil-
ity patterns.
3.3. BCP Detects Groups that Respond to Different Potential Treatment
Options
The existence of a MRSA group with high lysis in the presence of a
low level (b1/10th MIC) of oxacillin led us to explore the potential of
eradicating the remaining population with a second antibiotic. Previ-
ous work showed that community-acquired strains of MRSA respond
to dual beta-lactam therapy in vitro (Memmi et al., 2008). We thus
tested each MRSA clinical isolate in synergy assays to determine if
they were susceptible to physiologically relevant combinations of
beta-lactams. We found that all of the MRSAHL strains responded
synergistically to combinations of oxacillin + cefoxitin (Fig. 5b) or
cefotaxime + meropenem (Fig. 5c). The MRSAHL strains (green)
did not grow when treated with both antibiotics at concentrations
below 1/4 Cmax (maximum IV concentration), modeling physiolog-
ically achievable antibiotic concentrations (ADD-Vantage®, 2015;
Pfizer, 2009; Novation, 2014). Strains that did not grow at or below
this cutoff are candidate responders to dual antibiotic combination
therapy. Testing of the remaining strains (MRSALL, purple) revealed
either no synergy or synergy at concentrations that were too high
to be physiologically achievable. Finally, two MRSALL strains (dotted
purple) that bordered the cutoff were not reproducibly inhibited
below 1/4 Cmax. Together these results show that BCP can detect
two distinct subgroups of MRSA and predict which strains will be
susceptible to combinations of beta-lactam antibiotics.
4. Discussion
Our study demonstrates that applications of BCP extend beyond
determination of antibiotic mechanism of action to determination of
antibiotic susceptibility and identification of optimally effective combi-
natorial therapies. This single cell phenotype-driven approach provides
a rapid susceptibility test that can be performed in parallel with tradi-
tional MIC testing, but which delivers a result within 1–2 h, rather
Fig. 4. Two classes of MRSA strains. (a) Principal component analysis (PCA) plot of training set data comprise of 37 MRSA (red) and 36 MSSA (blue) strains. (b) LDA plot showing the two
classes of MRSA strains. The transformation matrix for the LDA plot was calculated from the cytological profiles of strains in the top and bottom quartiles of PC2 and used to plot 12 MRSAHL
(green diamonds) and 24 MRSALL (purple diamonds) after 2 h of treatment with 10 μg/mL of oxacillin. Each data point represents the mean of triplicate cytological profiles for a different
clinical isolate. The BCP profiles for the blind tests (filled circles), USA300 (TCH1516; black x) and USA100 (N315; black square) were overlaid on the training set (diamonds). (c) Time-
lapse microscopy of MSSA (ATTC29213), MRSALL (ATCC33591), MRSAHL (wr7) was taken while strains were grown on agarose pads with 5 μg/mL oxacillin. (d–e) Comparison of the net
growth rates of these three groups on agarose pads (d) without antibiotics and (e) with oxacillin. (f) Cumulative lysis of different strain types on agarose pad with oxacillin.
100
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 than 1–2 days. The test is precise, yielding no major or minor errors in
our blinded tests. Rather than relying on a single parameter (such as
growth or permeability), BCP as implemented here assesses 22 different
parameters that together capture the wide array of affects antibiotics
have on bacterial cells, including changes in cell length, width, perme-
ability, and in chromosome number, compactness and shape (Lamsa
et al., 2012; Nonejuie et al., 2013). This likely explains why BCP is
more accurate (as well as more rapid) than other proposed
phenotype-driven tests (Choi et al., 2014; Ligozzi et al., 2002). Indeed,
phenotypic methods that rely only on lysis (Price et al., 2014;
Kalashnikov et al., 2012; Choi et al., 2013) would have miscategorized
the MRSAHL strains as MSSA, whereas methods that rely only on growth
would have failed to identify the two classes of MRSA strains that differ
in their susceptibility to combinatorial drug therapies.
Our mechanistic studies have demonstrated that BCP works for
all antibiotics, natural products and antimicrobial peptides tested
so far, and for all species tested (S. aureus, Escherichia coli, Bacillus
subtilis, E. faecium, Enterococcus faecalis, Streptococcus pneumoniae
and A. baumannii) (Lamsa et al., 2012; Nonejuie et al., 2013;
Sakoulas et al., 2015a, 2015b; Lin et al., 2015; Hindler et al., 2015;
Werth et al., 2014). A major strength of BCP is that, in contrast to
the rapid gene and genome-based susceptibility tests, it does not
rely on prior knowledge of the mechanism of antibiotic resistance
or prior identification of all possible genes and mutations that confer
resistance. This is critical, even for drugs that bind well-defined tar-
gets, such as the ribosome, since the number of mutations that confer
drug resistance in the clinic continues to expand (Wilson, 2014). It is
even more critical for drugs such as daptomycin, for which several
different mutations confer various levels of resistance (Diaz et al.,
2014; Mishra et al., 2014; Bayer et al., 2015, 2013; Berti et al.,
2015). The reliance of BCP on phenotype rather than genotype
makes it highly adaptable, allowing future applications to new drug
resistant pathogens and new antibiotics. BCP can be readily opti-
mized to provide a more accurate test for different species or antibi-
otics. For example, the susceptibility test reported here relies on a
different combination of fluorescent stains than used in our previous
BCP assays.
BCP provides a robust and rapid technique that is readily adapted to
identify opportunities for antibiotic treatment synergy. Such synergies
often derive from the additive effects of multiple genetic factors, making
it difficult or impossible to detect them using a gene-based technique.
This was found to be the case for the beta-lactam plus daptomycin syn-
ergy in E. faecium, which depends on multiple PBPs (Sakoulas et al.,
2015a) and for daptomycin resistance in S. aureus and E. faecium for
which multiple mutations contribute to resistance (Bayer et al., 2013)
by modifying either the cell membrane or the cell wall (Humphries
Fig. 5. Genetic characterization and susceptibility to dual-beta lactam treatment for the two MRSA subgroups. (a) Dendrogram calculated using unweighted paired-group method with
arithmetic mean (UPGMA) for the multilocus sequence typing (MLST) allelic profiles of MRSALL (purple) and MRSAHL (green). (b–c) Synergy assay curves. The position of each curve
represents the combination of antibiotic concentrations that inhibits growth. Each curve represents the average of three independent synergy checkerboard assay for a single strain.
There are 12 MRSA (green) strains that were not viable when treated with 1/4 Cmax of both antibiotics in combination; each of these was MRSAHL strains. There are 24 MRSA strains
(purple) that were viable; each corresponds to MRSALL strains. The dotted purple curves represent two strains (wr12; cb15) that were viable at 1/4 Cmax of both antibiotics in at least
one of the three independent synergy checkerboard assays.
101
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 et al., 2013). Hence we propose that BCP could be used to guide
treatment options including the usage of dual beta-lactam treatment
or the substitution or addition of different class antibiotics to lower
the chances of treatment failure. Identification of synergistic combina-
tions in vitro followed by appropriate clinical correlation studies to
determine the efficacy in vivo allows for the assessment of new treat-
ment options using existing antibiotics.
The cytological library we have developed provides a versatile refer-
ence data set for the analysis of S. aureus strains that can be expanded to
include new data from reference strains as well as new strains as they
evolve. Indeed, realizing the clinical potential of BCP as an antimicrobial
susceptibility test will require that we expand our current reference
data set to include additional clinical isolates to generate a more robust
training set that includes strains from more diverse locations. Currently
we have tested culture samples, in the future we would like to expand
our method to test directly from patient samples for a variety of bacte-
rial pathogens and antibiotics. Additionally we expect that BCP could
work for determining susceptibility in mixed cultures by categorizing
the species according to cytological variation. Rapid, mass spectrometry
based methods for species identification might also be applied, which
would help identify the appropriate species-specific BCP reference
library to determine susceptibility.
5. Conclusions
The objective of this study was to apply BCP as a rapid susceptibility
test for S. aureus. We demonstrated that BCP could be used to distin-
guish MRSA from MSSA and DNS from DS S. aureus for a set of clinical
isolates on a timescale competitive with existing rapid susceptibility
tests. BCP provided information beyond susceptibility testing and iden-
tified two subgroups of MRSA that responded differently to oxacillin
and to specific combinations of antibiotics. These subgroups were not
predicted based on the presence of commonly assessed genetic markers
(mecA), highlighting the potential power of phenotypic cell based as-
says to rapidly identify the best treatment options. Because cytological
profiles consist of tens of parameters, one could retrospectively mine
them for parameters that correlate with factors such as new sequence
types and groups corresponding to treatment failure. For every new
strain tested and added to the library, BCP data can be coupled with sus-
ceptibility information, sequence and strain type, and clinical data, such
as infection type and treatment outcome. Since sequence typing of dif-
ferent isolates is routinely performed for phylogenetic and population-
based analysis, BCP profiles that are obtained during susceptibility de-
termination can complement future epidemiological studies by serving
as an early indicator of emerging trends that require more public health
attention. Combining sequence and BCP data will also allow us to better
understand the cellular consequences of the genetic changes that occur
as bacterial pathogens adapt to the clinic and acquire resistance to new
antimicrobial agents.
Funding Sources
This research was supported by the National Institute of Health
AI113295 (to JP and KP).
Conflict of Interest Statement
JP and KP have an equity interest in Linnaeus Bioscience, Inc. (La
Jolla, CA). The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and ap-
proved by the University of California, San Diego in accordance with
its conflict of interest policies. US Patent application #13/816,471 has
been filed related to this topic. Linnaeus Bioscience, Inc. has licensed
the rights to US Patent application #13/816,471 from UCSD. GS has re-
ceived consulting and speaking honoraria fees from Merck and Actives
Pharmaceuticals and research grant funds from Actives Pharmaceuti-
cals. VN has received consulting fees from Cidara Therapeutics and
Loxbridge Research, and has laboratory sponsored research agreements
with Roche, InhibRx and Altermune Technologies.
Author Contributions
GS, JP and KP each contributed to the concept design, data inter-
pretation and writing of the paper. VN provided general counsel
and contributed to the writing of the paper. DQ contributed to the
performance of the experiments, analysis of the data and writing of
the paper.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Warren E. Rose (University of Wisconsin —
Madison) for providing the S. aureus strains used in this project. Special
thanks to Poochit Nonejuie and Anne Lamsa for many discussions and
guidance.
Appendix A. Supplementary Data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.01.020.
References
ADD-Vantage®, 2015. Oxacillin Sodium ADD-Vantage® Princeton. Sandoz Inc., NJ.
Aiba, Y., Katayama, Y., Hishinuma, T., Murakami-Kuroda, H., Cui, L., Hiramatsu, K.,
2013. Mutation of RNA polymerase β-subunit gene promotes heterogeneous-
to-homogeneous conversion of β-lactam resistance in methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57, 4861–4871.
Andersson, D.I., Levin, B.R., 1999. The biological cost of antibiotic resistance. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 2, 489–493.
Bauer, K.A., West, J.E., Balada-Llasat, J.M., Pancholi, P., Stevenson, K.B., Goff, D.A., 2010. An
antimicrobial stewardship program's impact with rapid polymerase chain reaction
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus/S. aureus blood culture test in patients
with S. aureus bacteremia. Clin. Infect. Dis. 51, 1074–1080.
Bayer, A.S., Mishra, N.N., Chen, L., Kreiswirth, B.N., Rubio, A., Yang, S.J., 2015. Frequency
and distribution of single-nucleotide polymorphisms within mprF in methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus clinical isolates and their role in cross-resistance to
daptomycin and host defense antimicrobial peptides. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
59, 4930–4937.
Bayer, A.S., Schneider, T., Sahl, H.G., 2013. Mechanisms of daptomycin resistance in
Staphylococcus aureus: role of the cell membrane and cell wall. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
1277, 139–158.
Berti, A.D., Baines, S.L., Howden, B.P., Sakoulas, G., Nizet, V., Proctor, R.A., Rose, W.E., 2015.
Heterogeneity of genetic pathways toward daptomycin nonsusceptibility in Staphylo-
coccus aureus determined by adjunctive antibiotics. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
59, 2799–2806.
Best, G.K., Best, N.H., Koval, A.V., 1974. Evidence for participation of autolysins in bacteri-
cidal action of oxacillin on Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 6,
825–830.
Charles, P.G., Ward, P.B., Johnson, P.D., Howden, B.P., Grayson, M.L., 2004. Clinical features
associated with bacteremia due to heterogeneous vancomycin-intermediate Staphy-
lococcus aureus. Clin. Infect. Dis. 38, 448–451.
Choi, J., Jung, Y.G., Kim, J., Kim, S., Jung, Y., Na, H., Kwon, S., 2013. Rapid antibiotic suscep-
tibility testing by tracking single cell growth in a microfluidic agarose channel sys-
tem. Lab Chip 13, 280–287.
Choi, J., Yoo, J., Lee, M., Kim, E.G., Lee, J.S., Lee, S., Joo, S., Song, S.H., Kim, E.C., Lee, J.C., Kim,
H.C., Jung, Y.G., Kwon, S., 2014. A rapid antimicrobial susceptibility test based on
single-cell morphological analysis. Sci. Transl. Med. 6 (267ra174).
CLSI, 2007. Performance standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing; seventeenth
informational supplement. CLSI document M100-S17. Clinical and Laboratory Stan-
dards Institute, Wayne, PA.
CLSI, 2012. Method for dilution antimicrobial susceptibility test for bacteria that grow aer-
obically; approved standard. CLSI document M07-A9, Ninth ed. Clinical and Laborato-
ry Standards Institute, Wayne, PA.
Diaz, L., Tran, T.T., Munita, J.M., Miller, W.R., Rincon, S., Carvajal, L.P., Wollam, A., Reyes, J.,
Panesso, D., Rojas, N.L., Shamoo, Y., Murray, B.E., Weinstock, G.M., Arias, C.A., 2014.
Whole-genome analyses of Enterococcus faecium isolates with diverse daptomycin
MICs. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58, 4527–4534.
Ender, M., Mccallum, N., Adhikari, R., Berger-Bächi, B., 2004. Fitness cost of SCCmec and
methicillin resistance levels in Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
48, 2295–2297.
García-Álvarez, L., Holden, M.T., Lindsay, H., Webb, C.R., Brown, D.F., Curran, M.D.,
Walpole, E., Brooks, K., Pickard, D.J., Teale, C., Parkhill, J., Bentley, S.D., Edwards, G.F.,
Girvan, E.K., Kearns, A.M., Pichon, B., Hill, R.L., Larsen, A.R., Skov, R.L., Peacock, S.J.,
Maskell, D.J., Holmes, M.A., 2011. Meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus with a
novel mecA homologue in human and bovine populations in the UK and Denmark:
a descriptive study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 11, 595–603.
102
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
 Goff, D.A., Jankowski, C., Tenover, F.C., 2012. Using rapid diagnostic tests to optimize
antimicrobial selection in antimicrobial stewardship programs. Pharmacotherapy
32, 677–687.
Gordon, R.J., Lowy, F.D., 2008. Pathogenesis of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
infection. Clin. Infect. Dis. 46 (Suppl. 5), S350–S359.
Gwynn, M.N., Portnoy, A., Rittenhouse, S.F., Payne, D.J., 2010. Challenges of antibacterial
discovery revisited. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1213, 5–19.
Hindler, J.A., Wong-Beringer, A., Charlton, C.L., Miller, S.A., Kelesidis, T., Carvalho, M.,
Sakoulas, G., Nonejuie, P., Pogliano, J., Nizet, V., Humphries, R., 2015. In vitro activity
of daptomycin in combination with β-lactams, gentamicin, rifampin, and tigecycline
against daptomycin-nonsusceptible enterococci. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 59,
4279–4288.
Hososaka, Y., Hanaki, H., Endo, H., Suzuki, Y., Nagasawa, Z., Otsuka, Y., Nakae, T.,
Sunakawa, K., 2007. Characterization of oxacillin-susceptible mecA-positive Staphylo-
coccus aureus: a new type of MRSA. J. Infect. Chemother. 13, 79–86.
Humphries, R.M., Pollett, S., Sakoulas, G., 2013. A current perspective on daptomycin for
the clinical microbiologist. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 26, 759–780.
Ito, T., Katayama, Y., Hiramatsu, K., 1999. Cloning and nucleotide sequence determination
of the entire mec DNA of pre-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus N315.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 43, 1449–1458.
Ji, Y., 2007. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) protocols. Methods in
Molecular Biology. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.
Kalashnikov, M., Lee, J.C., Campbell, J., Sharon, A., Sauer-Budge, A.F., 2012. A microfluidic
platform for rapid, stress-induced antibiotic susceptibility testing of Staphylococcus
aureus. Lab Chip 12, 4523–4532.
Kamentsky, L., Jones, T.R., Fraser, A., Bray, M.A., Logan, D.J., Madden, K.L., Ljosa, V., Rueden,
C., Eliceiri, K.W., Carpenter, A.E., 2011. Improved structure, function and compatibility
for CellProfiler: modular high-throughput image analysis software. Bioinformatics 27,
1179–1180.
Kinnunen, P., Mcnaughton, B.H., Albertson, T., Sinn, I., Mofakham, S., Elbez, R., Newton,
D.W., Hunt, A., Kopelman, R., 2012. Self-assembled magnetic bead biosensor for mea-
suring bacterial growth and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Small 8, 2477–2482.
Lamsa, A., Liu, W.T., Dorrestein, P.C., Pogliano, K., 2012. The Bacillus subtilis cannibalism
toxin SDP collapses the proton motive force and induces autolysis. Mol. Microbiol.
84, 486–500.
Laurent, F., Chardon, H., Haenni, M., Bes, M., Reverdy, M.E., Madec, J.Y., Lagier, E.,
Vandenesch, F., Tristan, A., 2012. MRSA harboring mecA variant gene mecC, France.
Emerg. Infect. Dis. 18, 1465–1467.
Levine, D.P., 2006. Vancomycin: a history. Clin. Infect. Dis. 42 (Suppl. 1), S5–12.
Ligozzi, M., Bernini, C., Bonora, M.G., De Fatima, M., Zuliani, J., Fontana, R., 2002. Evaluation
of the VITEK 2 system for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of
medically relevant gram-positive cocci. J. Clin. Microbiol. 40, 1681–1686.
Lin, L., Nonejuie, P., Munguia, J., Hollands, A., Olson, J., Dam, Q., Kumaraswamy, M., Rivera,
H., Corriden, R., Rohde, M., Hensler, M.E., Burkart, M.D., Pogliano, J., Sakoulas, G., Nizet,
V., 2015. Azithromycin synergizes with cationic antimicrobial peptides to exert
bactericidal and therapeutic activity against highly multidrug-resistant gram-
negative bacterial pathogens. EBioMedicine 2, 690–698.
Matsuda, K., Nakamura, K., Adachi, Y., Inoue, M., Kawakami, M., 1995. Autolysis of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is involved in synergism between
imipenem and cefotiam. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39, 2631–2634.
Mediavilla, J.R., Chen, L., Mathema, B., Kreiswirth, B.N., 2012. Global epidemiology of
community-associated methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA). Curr.
Opin. Microbiol. 15, 588–595.
Memmi, G., Filipe, S.R., Pinho, M.G., Fu, Z., Cheung, A., 2008. Staphylococcus aureus PBP4 is
essential for beta-lactam resistance in community-acquired methicillin-resistant
strains. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52, 3955–3966.
Memmi, G., Nair, D.R., Cheung, A., 2012. Role of ArlRS in autolysis in methicillin-sensitive
and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains. J. Bacteriol. 194, 759–767.
Mishra, N.N., Bayer, A.S., Weidenmaier, C., Grau, T., Wanner, S., Stefani, S., Cafiso, V.,
Bertuccio, T., Yeaman, M.R., Nast, C.C., Yang, S.J., 2014. Phenotypic and genotypic
characterization of daptomycin-resistant methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
strains: relative roles of mprF and dlt operons. PLoS One 9, e107426.
Moore, C.L., Osaki-Kiyan, P., Haque, N.Z., Perri, M.B., Donabedian, S., Zervos, M.J., 2012.
Daptomycin versus vancomycin for bloodstream infections due to methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus with a high vancomycin minimum inhibitory concen-
tration: a case-control study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 54, 51–58.
Murray, K.P., Zhao, J.J., Davis, S.L., Kullar, R., Kaye, K.S., Lephart, P., Rybak, M.J., 2013. Early
use of daptomycin versus vancomycin for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
bacteremia with vancomycin minimum inhibitory concentration N1 mg/L: a matched
cohort study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 56, 1562–1569.
Nimmo, G.R., 2012. USA300 abroad: global spread of a virulent strain of community-
associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18,
725–734.
Nonejuie, P., Burkart, M., Pogliano, K., Pogliano, J., 2013. Bacterial cytological profiling rap-
idly identifies the cellular pathways targeted by antibacterial molecules. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 110, 16169–16174.
NOVATION, 2014. Meropenem. Irving, Tx.
PFIZER, 2009. Cefotaxime. NY, New York.
Pinho, M.G., Filipe, S.R., De Lencastre, H., Tomasz, A., 2001. Complementation of the
essential peptidoglycan transpeptidase function of penicillin-binding protein 2
(PBP2) by the drug resistance protein PBP2A in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol.
183, 6525–6531.
Price, C.S., Kon, S.E., Metzger, S., 2014. Rapid antibiotic susceptibility phenotypic charac-
terization of Staphylococcus aureus using automated microscopy of small numbers
of cells. J. Microbiol. Methods 98, 50–58.
Rice, L.B., 2008. Federal funding for the study of antimicrobial resistance in nosocomial
pathogens: no ESKAPE. J. Infect. Dis. 197, 1079–1081.
Sakoulas, G., Kumaraswamy, M., Nonejuie, P., Werth, B., Rybak, M.J., Pogliano, J., Rice, L.B.,
Nizet, V., 2015a. Differential effects of penicillin binding protein deletion on the sus-
ceptibility of Enterococcus faecium to cationic peptide antibiotics. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother.
Sakoulas, G., Nonejuie, P., Kullar, R., Pogliano, J., Rybak, M.J., Nizet, V., 2015b. Examining
the use of ceftaroline in the treatment of Streptococcus pneumoniae meningitis
with reference to human cathelicidin LL-37. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 59,
2428–2431.
Sinn, I., Albertson, T., Kinnunen, P., Breslauer, D.N., Mcnaughton, B.H., Burns, M.A.,
Kopelman, R., 2012. Asynchronous magnetic bead rotation microviscometer for
rapid, sensitive, and label-free studies of bacterial growth and drug sensitivity.
Anal. Chem. 84, 5250–5256.
Stevens, D.L., 2006. The role of vancomycin in the treatment paradigm. Clin. Infect. Dis. 42
(Suppl. 1), S51–S57.
Takano, T., Hung, W.C., Shibuya, M., Higuchi, W., Iwao, Y., Nishiyama, A., Reva, I.,
Khokhlova, O.E., Yabe, S., Ozaki, K., Takano, M., Yamamoto, T., 2013. A new local
variant (ST764) of the globally disseminated ST5 lineage of hospital-associated
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) carrying the virulence determi-
nants of community-associated MRSA. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57,
1589–1595.
Tong, S.Y., Davis, J.S., Eichenberger, E., Holland, T.L., Fowler, V.G., 2015. Staphylococcus
aureus infections: epidemiology, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, and man-
agement. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 28, 603–661.
Werth, B.J., Steed, M.E., Ireland, C.E., Tran, T.T., Nonejuie, P., Murray, B.E., Rose, W.E.,
Sakoulas, G., Pogliano, J., Arias, C.A., Rybak, M.J., 2014. Defining daptomycin resistance
prevention exposures in vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium and E. faecalis.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58, 5253–5261.
Wertheim, H.F., Melles, D.C., Vos, M.C., Van Leeuwen, W., Van Belkum, A., Verbrugh, H.A.,
Nouwen, J.L., 2005. The role of nasal carriage in Staphylococcus aureus infections.
Lancet Infect. Dis. 5, 751–762.
Wilson, D.N., 2014. Ribosome-targeting antibiotics and mechanisms of bacterial resis-
tance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 35–48.
103
D.T. Quach et al. / EBioMedicine 4 (2016) 95–103
