 RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
The tumor microenvironment
underlies acquired resistance to
CSF-1R inhibition in gliomas
Daniela F. Quail, Robert L. Bowman, Leila Akkari, Marsha L. Quick,
Alberto J. Schuhmacher, Jason T. Huse, Eric C. Holland,
James C. Sutton, Johanna A. Joyce*
INTRODUCTION: Therapies targeted against
the tumor microenvironment (TME) repre-
sent a promising approach for treating cancer.
This appeal arises in part from the decreased
likelihood of acquired resistance through muta-
tions in target TME cells, as is frequently observed
with cancer cell–targeted therapies. Although
classical mechanisms of tumor cell–intrinsic
resistance to cytotoxic and targeted agents have
been well-defined—including aberrant drug me-
tabolism and transport, drug target mutation,
and activation of alternative survival pathways—
it still remains unclear whether resistance to
TME-directed therapies follows similar prin-
ciples. Given that TME-targeted agents are
increasingly being evaluated in the clinic, it
is becoming critical to mechanistically define
how resistance may evolve in response to
these therapies in order to provide long-term
disease management for patients.
RATIONALE: Macrophages and microglia are
of the most abundant noncancerous cell types
in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), in some
cases accounting for up to 30% of the total tumor
composition. Macrophages accumulate with GBM
progression and can be acutely targeted via
inhibitionofcolony-stimulatingfactor–1recep-
tor (CSF-1R) to regress high-grade gliomas in
animal models. However, it is currently unknown
whether and how resistance emerges in response
to sustained CSF-1R blockade in GBM. Despite
this, multiple clinical trials are currently under-
way testing the efficacy of CSF-1R inhibition in
glioma patients. Therefore, determining whether
long-term CSF-1R inhibition can stably regress
GBM by using animal models is an important
and timely question to address.
RESULTS: Using genetic mouse models of
GBM, we show that although overall survival
is significantly prolonged in response to CSF-1R
inhibition, tumors recur eventually in >50% of
mice. Upon isolation and transplantation of
recurrent tumor cells into naïve animals, gliomas
reestablish sensitivity to CSF-1R inhibition, indi-
cating that resistance is microenvironment-
driven. Through RNA-sequencing of glioma cells
and macrophages purified from treated tumors
and ex vivo cell culture assays, we found
elevated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway activity in recurrent GBM after CSF-1R
inhibition, driven by macrophage-derived
insulin-like growth factor–1 (IGF-1) and tumor
cell IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R). Consequently, com-
bining IGF-1R or PI3K blockade with continuous
CSF-1R inhibition in re-
current tumors signifi-
cantly prolonged overall
survival.Incontrast,mono-
therapy with IGF-1R or
PI3Kinhibitorsinrebound
or treatment-naïve tumors
was less effective, indicating the necessity of
combination therapy to expose PI3K signaling
dependency in recurrent disease. Mechanisti-
cally, we found that activation of macrophages
in recurrent tumors by IL4 led to elevated Stat6
and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)
signaling upstream of Igf1, and inhibition of
either of these pathways in vivo was sufficient
to significantly extend survival.
CONCLUSION: We have identified a mecha-
nism of drug resistance that can circumvent
therapeutic response to a TME-targeted therapy
and promote disease recurrence in the absence
of tumor cell–intrinsic alterations. Specifically,
we have uncovered a heterotypic paracrine sig-
naling interaction that is initiated by the TME
anddrivesresistancetoCSF-1Rinhibitionthrough
IGF-1R/PI3K signaling. Given that PI3K signal-
ing is aberrantly activated in a substantial
proportion of GBM patients, and that recent
clinical trial results show limited efficacy in re-
current (albeit very advanced) GBM, it is possible
that this pathway could similarly contribute to
intrinsic resistance to CSF-1R inhibition. Our
findings underscore the importance of bidirec-
tional feedback between cancer cells and their
microenvironment and support the notion that
although stromal cells are less susceptible to
genetic mutation than are cancer cells, a tumor
can nonetheless acquire a resistant phenotype
by exploiting its extracellular environment.▪
RESEARCH
952
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*Corresponding author. Email: johanna@joycelab.org
Cite this article as D. F. Quail et al., Science 352, aad3018
(2016). DOI: 10.1126/science.aad3018
Resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in glioma. (A) Macrophages contribute to GBM progression by
creating a protumorigenic niche associated with M2-like gene expression. CSF-1R is a critical
receptor for macrophage biology and is under clinical evaluation as a therapeutic target in glioma.
(B) Targeting CSF-1R early in gliomagenesis significantly prolongs survival in mouse models. CSF-1R
inhibition reprograms macrophages to become antitumorigenic by down-regulating M2-like genes
and enhancing phagocytosis. T
umor-derived survival factors sustain macrophage viability despite
CSF-1R blockade. (C) After prolonged treatment, a subset of GBMs acquire resistance to CSF-1R
inhibition, and tumors recur.This is driven by elevated macrophage-derived IGF-1 and high IGF-1R on
tumor cells, resulting in PI3K pathway activation and enhanced glioma cell survival and invasion.
Blocking this pathway and CSF-1R in preclinical trials yields a substantial survival benefit.
ON OUR WEBSITE
◥
Read the full article
at http:/
/dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aad3018
..................................................
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
CANCER IMMUNOTHERAPY
The tumor microenvironment
underlies acquired resistance to
CSF-1R inhibition in gliomas
Daniela F. Quail,1 Robert L. Bowman,1 Leila Akkari,1,2,3 Marsha L. Quick,1
Alberto J. Schuhmacher,1 Jason T. Huse,4 Eric C. Holland,5
James C. Sutton,6 Johanna A. Joyce1,2,3*
Macrophages accumulate with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) progression and can be
targeted via inhibition of colony-stimulating factor–1 receptor (CSF-1R) to regress high-
grade tumors in animal models of this cancer. However, whether and how resistance
emerges in response to sustained CSF-1R blockade is unknown. We show that although
overall survival is significantly prolonged, tumors recur in >50% of mice. Gliomas
reestablish sensitivity to CSF-1R inhibition upon transplantation, indicating that
resistance is tumor microenvironment–driven. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway activity was elevated in recurrent GBM, driven by macrophage-derived
insulin-like growth factor–1 (IGF-1) and tumor cell IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R). Combining
IGF-1R or PI3K blockade with CSF-1R inhibition in recurrent tumors significantly prolonged
overall survival. Our findings thus reveal a potential therapeutic approach for treating
resistance to CSF-1R inhibitors.
T
herapies targeted against the tumor micro-
environment (TME) represent a promising
approach for treating cancer. This appeal
arises in part from the decreased likelihood
of acquired resistance through mutations
in target TME cells, as is frequently observed
with cancer cell–targeted therapies. Because mul-
tiple TME-directed therapies are currently advan-
cing through different clinical trials (1, 2), this
necessitates an understanding of potential mech-
anisms of intrinsic or acquired resistance. We
have focused on addressing this issue by inves-
tigating whether resistance to a macrophage-
targeted therapy emerges during the course of
long-term trials in various preclinical models
of high-grade glioma [glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM)].
GBM is the most common and aggressive adult
primary brain tumor, and survival is only mini-
mally prolonged by current standard-of-care
treatment, including surgery, radiation, and temo-
zolomide chemotherapy (3). Accordingly, targeting
the glioma TME is emerging as a promising al-
ternative therapeutic strategy. In GBM, tumor-
associated macrophages and microglia (TAMs)
comprise up to 30% of the bulk tumor mass (4).
In many cancers, including glioma, elevated TAM
numbers are associated with high-grade and
poor patient prognosis (4–7). As such, targeting
TAMs in GBM represents an attractive therapeu-
tic approach.
Macrophages critically depend on colony-
stimulating factor–1 (CSF-1) for multiple functions;
consequently, strategies to target TAMs often
include CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R) blockade (8–10).
In clinical trials, several approaches to inhibit
CSF-1R are currently being used, including anti-
bodies and small molecules (7, 11, 12). However,
the long-term effects of these agents on clinical
outcome are still under evaluation, and thus,
gaining insight into potential mechanisms of
drug resistance and/or inefficacy is now critical.
We used a potent and highly selective small-
molecule CSF-1R inhibitor, BLZ945. We have
shown that BLZ945 blocks early gliomagenesis,
and that short-term treatment of advanced, high-
grade glioma causes robust tumor debulking
after just 7 days (8). CSF-1R inhibition has no
direct effect on glioma cell viability because these
cells do not express CSF-1R in the models we
have used. Instead, glioma TAMs remain abun-
dant and become antitumorigenic in response to
treatment, by down-regulating markers of M2-like
macrophage polarization/alternative activation
and adopting a pronounced phagocytic phenotype
(8). We address in this Research Article the un-
answered question of whether long-term CSF-1R
inhibition in aggressive late-stage GBM has a sus-
tainable antitumorigenic effect or instead leads
to acquired resistance.
A subset of GBMs develop resistance to
CSF-1R inhibition in long-term
preclinical trials
We first analyzed the kinetics of GBM response
to continuous long-term BLZ945 treatment using
a transgenic platelet-derived growth factor–driven
glioma (PDG) model (RCAS-hPDGF-B/Nestin-
Tv-a;Ink4a/Arf −/−) (Fig. 1A) (8, 13). Two weeks into
the trial, we observed maximal tumor regression,
with an average volume reduction of 62% (Fig. 1,
B and C). At this time point, 8% of animals showed
no evidence of residual tumor with magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI). In contrast, vehicle-treated
tumors exhibited a 2522% increase in volume
over the same period (Fig. 1C).
After this regression phase, all BLZ945-treated
tumors entered a dormancy phase, which lasted
for ≥4 weeks (Fig. 1B). Of treated animals, 44%
remained symptom-free and survived to the trial
endpoint of 26 weeks (P < 5 × 10−17) (Fig. 1D)
with minimal or, in some cases, no evidence of
residual tumor as determined by MRI and histology
(Fig. 1E). This is in stark contrast to vehicle-
treated GBMs, which were purposely selected
to be smaller in size upon treatment initiation
(fig. S1A), yet median survival was only 15 days
after treatment initiation (versus 93 days for
BLZ945), and no animals survived beyond 6 weeks
(Fig. 1D). After the dormancy phase observed in all
BLZ945-treated animals, however, 56% eventually
developed resistance, and tumors rebounded, de-
spite effective, continued inhibition of CSF-1R
phosphorylation in TAMs (Fig. 1, B and D, and
fig. S1B).
We next focused on understanding how resis-
tance to the CSF-1R inhibitor emerged and chose
several time points throughout the long-term
trial for comparison, including Veh [vehicle; 20%
Captisol (Captisol, La Jolla, CA) until symptomatic],
7 days (BLZ945-responsive, regressing), 28 days
(BLZ945-responsive, dormant), Reb (BLZ945-
resistant, actively rebounding), and EP (26-week
endpoint, stably regressed) (Fig. 1B). Histological
analysis showed that after 7 days of BLZ945,
tumor grade was substantially reduced. At 28 days
and EP, histological grade remained low, with
33 and 50% of mice, respectively, showing no
evidence of tumor via histology, and the remainder
ofanimalsexhibitingeitherresidualdiseaseor grade
II tumors (fig. S1, C and D). By comparison, the
majority of rebound tumors were grade III or IV
and similar in size to Veh tumors at death (fig. S1,
C to E). Both Veh and Reb tumors also exhibited a
high proliferation:apoptosis index (Ki67:CC3), in-
dicating a state of rapid growth (fig. S1F).
Glioma cells resistant to
CSF-1R inhibition in vivo exhibit
elevated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) signaling
To determine the mechanism by which tumor
cells acquire resistance, we first performed array
comparativegenomichybridization(aCGH)analyses
and found no copy number alterations in primary
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-1
1Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC), New York, NY 10065,
USA. 2Department of Oncology, University of Lausanne,
CH-1066, Lausanne, Switzerland. 3Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, University of Lausanne, CH-1066,
Lausanne, Switzerland. 4Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. 5Human Biology Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington,
WA 98109, USA. 6Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: johanna@joycelab.org
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 rebound glioma tumorsphere lines (fig. S2,
passage 1). To then assess which signaling path-
ways are altered specifically in recurrent tumors,
we first purified glioma cells (PDGFRa+) from Veh,
EP, and Reb lesions using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS), and performed RNA-sequencing
(RNA-seq). Glioma cells were isolated from EP
lesions that were stably regressed but still detec-
table with MRI. Gene ontology analysis demon-
strated that Veh and Reb tumor cells showed an
enrichment of cell cycle–related genes, compared
with EP tumor cells (fig. S3A), corroborating the
observed changes in Ki67 levels (fig. S1F) and
supporting the notion that EP tumors were in a
state of cell-cycle dormancy. To interrogate which
pathways were differentially regulated between
the three groups, we used gene set variation
analysis (GSVA) (14) for each pair-wise compari-
son. Nine gene sets in total were significantly
enriched in Reb tumor cells as compared with
EP (fig. S3B), including a PI3K gene set (Fig. 2A),
potentially explaining the robust differences
in proliferation given the importance of PI3K
signaling in cell-cycle regulation. In accord-
ance with this result, we found elevated phos-
phorylated (p)–Akt (a PI3K substrate) in Reb
tissues as compared with that in Veh and EP,
using immunofluorescence (IF) staining and
Western blotting (Fig. 2B and fig. S3, C and D).
To investigate whether PI3K signaling is
functionally important in driving recurrence,
we performed a preclinical intervention trial.
We treated PDG mice bearing high-grade
gliomas with BLZ945 and imaged via MRI until
they showed tumor rebound, at which point
we intervened with BKM120 treatment (Fig.
2C, trial design 1, and fig. S3E) at an appro-
priate dose so as to avoid reported off-target
effects (15). BKM120 was chosen because it is
a brain-penetrant pan–Class 1 PI3K inhibitor
thatiscurrentlybeingclinicallyevaluatedinGBM
patients with recurrent disease after stan-
dard therapy. Animals with rebound tumors
treated with continued BLZ945 monotherapy
led to a median survival of 13 days post-
recurrence, whereas rebound tumors treated
with BLZ945+BKM120 extended median sur-
vival to 51 days (Fig. 2D) and blocked tumor
progression after 2 weeks of treatment (fig.
S3F). In contrast, BKM120 monotherapy in
rebound tumors (discontinued BLZ945) led to
a median survival of 10 days, which was in-
distinguishable from the vehicle control (Fig.
2D). Moreover, BKM120 was only modestly
effective in treatment-naïve tumors (fig. S3,
G and H). Collectively, these results indicate
that continued CSF-1R inhibition is necessary
to expose PI3K signaling dependency in re-
bound tumors and, consequently, a heightened
sensitivity to pathway inhibition.
To determine whether recurrence could be
prevented by earlier PI3K inhibition, during
the initial dormancy phase we treated GBM-
bearing PDG mice with BLZ945 alone for
28 days, at which point we added BKM120
until the trial endpoint (Fig. 2C, trial design 2).
With this early combination, the percentage of
animals that survived to endpoint increased sub-
stantially (91% BLZ945+BKM120) as compared
with those given single-agent treatments (44%
BLZ945 alone and 0% BKM120 alone) (Fig. 2E).
Taken together, our results demonstrate that
PI3K signaling is engaged during the acquisition
of resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in the context
of continued BLZ945 treatment.
Our finding that PI3K activation underlies re-
sistance to CSF-1R inhibition was intriguing in
light of the high frequency of mutations in the
PI3K pathway in glioma patients (16). Therefore,
we also investigated whether genetic mutations
in PI3K/phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)
would similarly confer a resistance-like phenotype
in mouse models, which could potentially be in-
formative in the clinical setting. To address this
question, we compared BLZ945 efficacy in two
additionalRCAS-hPDGF-B/Nestin-Tv-a GBMmod-
els harboring distinct clinically relevant oncogenic
alterations besides Ink4a/Arf loss, including Pten
deletion (Pten KO model) or p53 knockdown (p53
KD model) (materials and methods). After 2 weeks
of treatment, we found that BLZ945 efficacy in
the p53 KD model (56% reduction of tumor vol-
ume) was comparable with that of the PDG mod-
el (62% reduction). However, CSF-1R inhibition
was less potent in the Pten KO model over the
same time period (3% reduction) (Fig. 2F). Fur-
thermore, although we did eventually observe a
significant reduction in tumor volume in the Pten
KO model after a prolonged treatment period of
4 weeks (11% reduction), this did not meet the re-
sponse evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST)
standard for a partial response (Fig. 2G) (17). These
results suggest that treatment efficacy of CSF-1R
aad3018-2
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 1. Fifty-six percent of GBMs develop resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in long-term preclinical
trials. (A) Long-term trial design for testing BLZ945 efficacy in the PDG model. High-grade PDG tumors were
treated with BLZ945 (200 mg/kg/day) or vehicle (20% Captisol) and monitored with biweekly MRI for up to
26 weeks (defined endpoint; materials and methods) or until symptomatic. (B) Tumor volume curves from
biweekly MRIs of long-term BLZ945 trials (n = 90 animals treated, 23 representative curves are shown). Four
key phases are indicated, including 7 days (regressing tumor), 28 days (dormant tumor), Reb (recurrent
tumor, evaluated on a mouse-to-mouse basis with MRI), and EP (stable regression at the 26-week endpoint).
(C) Waterfall plots showing percent change in tumor volume between 0 and 14 days in a representative subset
of animals from (D) (BLZ945, n = 71 mice; vehicle, n = 4 mice). (D) Kaplan-Meier of BLZ945-treated (n = 90)
versus vehicle-treated (n = 30) mice bearing high-grade PDG tumors (Log-rank Mantel-Cox test, P < 5 × 10−17).
Median survival for vehicle-treated animals was 15 days after treatment initiation, whereas median survival for
BLZ945-treated animals was 93 days. (E) Representative MRI images over time of one mouse with a rebounded
tumor (top row) and another mouse that had stable disease until EP (bottom row).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 inhibitors may be blunted in patients with existing
genetic alterations in the PTEN/PI3K pathway.
Resistance to CSF-1R inhibition is
mediated by the microenvironment
We next investigated how PI3K was activated in re-
bound tumors and first explored whether resistance
to BLZ945 was tumor cell–intrinsic or –extrinsic.
We previously established that BLZ945 does not
directly affect glioma cell lines in culture (8) and
demonstrate here that CSF-1R inhibition also has
no direct effect on viability of a panel of primary
cell lines derived from rebound tumors (fig. S4A).
We designed an intracranial tumor transplanta-
tion model using early-passage Reb cells in order
to address the following hypotheses: (i) Resistance
is tumorcell–intrinsic, therefore transplanted tumors
will not respond to BLZ945, or (ii) resistance is
mediated by the treatment-altered microenviron-
ment, therefore transplanted tumors will rees-
tablish sensitivity to CSF-1R inhibition in naïve
animals. Transplanted rebound tumors responded
to BLZ945 treatment in the naïve setting (Fig. 3A
and fig. S4, B to F), indicating that resistance is
likely mediated by the TME.
We analyzed the TME in recurrent disease to
determine how resistance to CSF-1R inhibition
develops. We found that rebounding tumors al-
ways emerged adjacent to regions of glial scarring,
characterized by reactive astrocytes, calcium depo-
sition, and relatively low vascularity associated
with elevated hypoxia (Fig. 3, B to D, and fig. S4,
G to I). In contrast, scarring was infrequently
observed in the 28-day and EP tumors (fig. S4I).
The scar tissue architecture was reminiscent of
gliosisinresponsetoneurodegenerationorphysical
injury (18). Given the parallels between a wound-
associated microenvironment and tumorigenesis in
epithelial tissues (19), we hypothesized that this
brain injury response may likewise be contri-
buting to a microenvironment that is potentially
triggering recurrent disease.
Rebound TAMs adopt a
wound-associated signature driven by
enhanced interleukin-4 (IL-4) signaling
During gliosis, activated macrophages play a cen-
tral role in providing growth factors and signaling
molecules to nearby astrocytes and neurons to
form a reactive barrier that limits the extent of
tissue damage in the brain (18, 20). Given that
BLZ945 is a macrophage-targeted drug, we ana-
lyzed TAM numbers and phenotype in rebound
tumors. We have previously shown that TAMs
are not depleted in the glioma TME in a 1-week
trial with BLZ945, but rather down-regulate ex-
pression of M2-like genes and increase phagocy-
tosis of tumor cells (8, 21). Consistently, we show
here that TAMs are still present in 7-day, 28-day,
EP, or Reb tumors (Fig. 3E and fig. S5A). When
we used flow cytometry to discriminate between
CD45loCD11b+ cells (putative microglia) versus
CD45hiCD11b+ cells [putative bone marrow–derived
macrophages (BMDMs)] (22–24) in Veh, EP, and
Reb tumors (materials and methods) (fig. S5B),
we found that long-term BLZ945 treatment en-
riched for CD45loCD11b+ TAMs (fig. S5, C and D).
This is potentially either a consequence of pheno-
typic mimicry between the macrophage popula-
tions or the result of one macrophage population
responding differently to CSF-1R inhibition than
the other. Costaining of CD68 or CD206 macro-
phage markers in combination with Ki67 dem-
onstrated that a subset of remaining TAMs in
rebound tumors were proliferating (fig. S5, E to
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-3
Fig. 2. Combined CSF-1R and PI3K inhibition
improves survival in the PDG model. (A) Gene
set variation analysis based on RNA-seq from FACS-
purified EP and Reb tumor cells (PDGFRa+) (fig.
S3B). Blue circles indicate gene sets significantly
enriched in Reb tumor cells, and purple circles iden-
tify those enriched in EP tumor cells.The PI3K gene
set is indicated with an arrow. Fold change is graphed
as log2(fold). Vertical dotted lines indicate fold cut-
off for significance (n = 5 or 6 samples per group).
(B) Immunoblot from snap-frozen Veh, EP
, and Reb
tumors demonstrating elevated phospho (p)–AKT
in Reb tumors compared with Veh and EP (n = 3
experiments, one representative blot is shown).
(C) Long-term trial design for evaluating BLZ945
and BKM120 combination therapy on PDG tumors.
High-grade tumors were treated with BLZ945 until
recurrent tumors developed (trial design 1) or until
dormancy (28 days, trial design 2), whereupon
BKM120 was either added (with continuous BLZ945
treatment) or switched (discontinued BLZ945).
(D) Survival of animals with recurrent tumors treated
either with BLZ945 alone (n = 33 mice), BKM120
alone (n = 9 mice), or BLZ945 in combination with
BKM120 (n = 16 mice) (Fig. 2C, trial design 1).
Combination of BLZ945+BKM120 led to an in-
crease in overall survival (Log-rank Mantel-Cox test,
P < 0.0001), and in median survival (51 days) after
recurrence compared with BLZ945 (13 days) or
BKM120 (10 days) monotherapy. (E) Survival of
animals with 28-day dormant tumors treated either
with BLZ945 alone (n = 90 mice; same cohort as
presented in Fig. 1D), BKM120 alone (n = 9 mice),
or BLZ945 in combination with BKM120 (n = 11
mice) (Fig. 2C, trial design 2). Combination of BLZ945+BKM120 led to in-
creased overall survival compared with either monotherapy. Log-rank Mantel-
Cox test was used to calculate significance. (F) Average percent change in
tumor volume (0 to 14 days) between vehicle- or BLZ945-treated tumors, in
three different RCAS-PDGFB-HA Nestin-Tv-a GBM models (termed PDG, p53
KD, and Pten KO) (materials and methods). BLZ945 efficacy in the p53 KD
model (BLZ945, n = 8 mice; vehicle, n = 6 mice) was comparable with that of
the PDG model (BLZ945, n = 71 mice; vehicle, n = 4 mice) after 2 weeks (56
and 62% volume reduction, respectively); however, BLZ945 efficacy was less
pronounced in the Pten KO model (n = 5 mice per treatment group; 3%
volume reduction). (G) Average percent change in tumor volume (0 to 28 days)
between vehicle- or BLZ945-treated Pten KO tumors (n = 5 mice per group).
BLZ945 caused 11% volume reduction after 4 weeks. Data were analyzed with
Student’s t test unless indicated otherwise.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 G). Although these results can only be formally
confirmed with lineage tracing experiments, they
at least suggest that rebound TAMs (enriched for
CD45loCD11b+ cells) may undergo a low level of
replication, presumably as a means to compen-
sate for the duress caused by prolonged CSF-1R
blockade.
To assess potential differences in activation
states, we FACS-purified TAMs from Veh, EP, and
Reb tumors and performed RNA-seq. Principal
component analysis confirmed distinct global
gene expression profiles for Veh, EP, and Reb
TAMs (fig. S6A), and differential expression anal-
ysis revealed large numbers of differentially ex-
pressed genes between the three groups (table S1).
We first focused on a subset of M2-like genes
previously identified as altered by CSF-1R inhibi-
tion (8, 25). We found that compared with Veh
TAMs, alternative activation was suppressed in
EP TAMs, whereas a subset of these genes were
highly expressed in Reb TAMs (Fig. 3F). In ac-
cordance with previous findings (8), no inverse
relationship was observed for M1-like markers
such as tumor necrosis factor–a (TNFa) across
the different treatment groups (25). Together,
these findings support our hypothesis that the
Reb TME is protumorigenic.
Given the similarities in alternative activation
between Veh and Reb TAMs according to the
M1/M2-like paradigm (26), yet clear differences
in drug response between treatment-naïve and re-
bound tumors, we next used a more fine-tuned
approach to defining macrophage phenotype. We
computationally interrogated a spectrum model
of macrophage activation, defined by gene sets
that are altered in response to different stimuli,
including interferon-g (IFN-g), IL4, TNFa, trans-
forming growth factor–b1 (TGFb1), IL1b, and two
Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists specific for TLR2
[macrophage-activating lipopeptide 2 (MALP2)]
and TLR9 [unmethylated CpG-containing oligo-
nucleotide (CPG)] (27, 28). We determined that
IL4- and TGFb1-targeted gene sets were signifi-
cantly enriched in Reb TAMs compared with
Veh TAMs (Fig. 4A) and also found a significant
enrichment of these same gene sets in Reb TAMs
versus EP TAMs (Fig. 4B). Given that IL4 is a
known mediator of alternative activation associ-
ated with a wound-healing phenotype in macro-
phages (20, 29), and the role of TGFb1 during
wound-healing and tissue turnover in multiple
contexts (30, 31), these results were consistent
with our observation of glial scarring in associ-
ation with rebound tumors. Indeed, a number of
M2-like genes expressed by macrophages involved
in wound repair and resolving inflammation
(Retnla, Chil3, and Ccl17) were enriched in Reb
TAMs (Fig. 3F). In contrast, RNA-seq analyses of
an independent set of Reb and 28-day TAM sam-
ples revealed no significant differences in expres-
sion across this same gene set (fig. S6B), suggesting
that a subset of 28-day tumors may be rebound
precursors, and that induction of M2-like gene
aad3018-4
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 3. Resistance to CSF-1R inhibition is mediated by the microenvironment
and rebound TAMs are alternatively activated. (A) Quantification of BLI from
intracranially transplanted 52Reb cells into naïve mice. Results show that 52Reb
cells, isolated from a recurrent PDG tumor that developed resistance to BLZ945
treatment in vivo, reestablish sensitivity to BLZ945 in the naïve setting (Student’s
t test day 15, P < 0.05, n = 10 mice). Representative BLI images at day 15 are
shown. (B) (Left) H&E (hematoxylin and eosin) ofa rebound tumor (T) adjacent to
glial scarring (S). Scale bar, 500 mm. (Right) Representative regions of calcification
(top), reactive astrocytic barrier (middle), and recurrent tumor (bottom). Scale
bars, 50 mm. (C) H&E,Von Kossa, and GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein) staining
onrebound tissue.Scalebars,200mm;except GFAP
, 20× = 50 mm,asindicated.(D)
AllredscorefortheastrocytemarkerGFAP
,showingahigherintensityandproportion
of GFAP+ staining in Reb tissues (n = 8 mice) compared with other treatment
groups (n = 5 mice per group). (E) Flow cytometry of TAMs (CD45+CD11b+Gr1–) in
Veh, 28-day, EP
, and Reb tumors (n = 5 to 7 tumors). Data were analyzed with a
one-way ANOVA and T
ukey’s multiple comparisons test. (F) Heatmap showing
RNA-seq expression changes of M2-like associated genes in V
eh, EP
, and Reb TAMs
(n = 5 or 6 per group).Wound-associated genes are indicated in bold with asterisks.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 expression precedes recurrence. When we inves-
tigated the ability of IL4 or TGFb1 to regulate
expression of these wound-associated genes in
BMDMs in vitro, we found that IL4 was a potent
inducer, whereas TGFb1 was not (Fig. 4C and fig.
S6, C and D), indicating the specificity of IL4 for
regulation of this particular gene set. Corrobo-
rating these findings, we confirmed increased
expression of Il4 in rebound tumors by means of
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) (Fig. 4D) and elevated
canonical downstream signaling by means of
immunofluorescent staining for phosphorylated
Stat6 (p-Stat6) in PDG tissue samples from the
long-term trials (fig. S6, E and F). These results
do not exclude the possibility that TGFb may be
playing a role in rebound tumors that is distinct
from, or indirectly connected to, alternative ac-
tivation of TAMs.
To determine the cellular source of IL4 in our
model, we used multicolor flow cytometry to im-
munoprofile Veh, EP, and Reb tumors using a
panel of myeloid [CD11b, Gr1, Ly6G, Ly6C, CD11c,
Tie2, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
II] and lymphoid (CD19, CD3, CD4, CD8, and
FoxP3) cell markers. Although we found few cell
types that were specifically enriched in rebound
tumors (fig. S7, A to G), there was a significant
increase in the proportion of CD3+ T cells in re-
bound tumors, driven by the CD8+ fraction (Fig.
4, E and F). FACS-purification of these cells from
rebound tumors along with other putative con-
tributors of IL4 [including astrocytes (Fig. 3D),
B cells (32–34), and bulk T cells] revealed that
Il4 expression was enriched in both bulk T and
CD8+ T cell fractions (Fig. 4G and fig. S7H). In
comparison, expression of Il13, a closely related
cytokine that shares the IL4Ra subunit in its
heterotypic receptor to initiate canonical Stat6
signaling, was enriched in the bulk T cell fraction
(Fig. 4G). Expression of IL4 was assessed in a
panel of human cell types and detected in CD8+
T cells as expected, in addition to monocytes, eosin-
ophils, astrocytes, and brain microvascular cells
(fig. S7I). Although additional analyses are needed
to establish the precise cellular source of these
cytokines in brain malignancies in patients, our
data are consistent with IL4 being produced by
multiple cell types.
The IGF-1/IGF-1R signaling axis is
induced in rebound gliomas
We next investigated how IL4 and wound-
associated gene expression might be connected
to PI3K signaling in rebound tumors. Differen-
tial gene expression analysis revealed that TAM-
derived Igf1 was one of the most significantly
up-regulated genes in Reb TAMs compared with
EP TAMs, which we confirmed in comparisons
with Veh TAMs or 28-day TAMs (Fig. 5, A and
B, fig. S8A, and table S1). This was particularly
interesting because Igf1 is an IL4 target gene in
macrophages (fig. S8B) (35–37), it is a known me-
diator of tissue repair and neuroprotection (38–41),
and one of its canonical downstream signaling
pathways is PI3K/Akt (42). Congruent Igf1r up-
regulation was identified in glioma cells puri-
fied from rebound tumors (Fig. 5C and table S1),
elevated p-IGF-1R was found in rebound tumors
by means of immunostaining and Western blot-
ting (Fig. 5D and fig. S8, C and D), and Igf1 up-
regulation was found in snap-frozen rebound
tissue samples by means of quantitative RT-PCR
(fig. S8E). Additionally, levels of Igf1 expression
were substantially higher in Reb TAMs than tumor
cells, whereas Igf1r expression was enriched in
tumor cells as compared with TAMs (fig. S8F).
Together, these data demonstrate elevated IGF-
1 signaling in recurrent disease.
To assay the effects of IGF-1 specific to the re-
bound setting, we used multiple approaches: First,
through Western blot analysis, we confirmed higher
baseline levels of p-IGF-1Rin early-passage rebound
tumor cell lines as compared with cell lines that
we were able to propagate from dormant tumors
in culture (materials and methods) (fig. S8G). We
determined that phosphorylationand downstream
signaling could be reduced in rebound cell lines
by using an inhibitor of IGF-1R (fig. S8G) and
thatearly-passagereboundcells weremore sensitive
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-5
Fig. 4. IL4 activates wound-associated genes in rebound TAMs and is
produced by Tcells in the rebound tumor microenvironment. (A) Spectrum
model of macrophage activation by using GSEA of transcriptional programs
regulated by the indicated cytokines (materials and methods). Reb TAMs ex-
hibit activation of programs driven by TGFb1 and IL4 compared with Veh TAMs
(n = 5 mice per group).The –log10 (P value) is plotted for each gene set (0,4, 8,
12, and >16, radially outward in gray concentric circles).The black circle indicates
a –log10 (P value) cutoff of 3. (B) GSEA as in (A), confirming that Reb TAMs
exhibit activation of programs driven by IL4 and TGFb1 compared with EP TAMs
(n = 5 or 6 mice per group). Dotted line demarcates P < 0.05. (C) Quantitative
RT-PCR analysis demonstrates that IL4 induces expression of the wound-
associated genes Retnla, Chil3, and Ccl17 in BMDMs in culture, whereas recom-
binant TGFb1 treatment does not. Bone marrow isolate was obtained from five or
more independent WTmice for replicate experiments. (D) Quantitative RT-PCR
analysis of Il4 expression in snap-frozen whole-tumor samples from Veh, EP
, or
Reb treatment groups, demonstrating elevated expression in the Reb setting
(n = 4 tumors) compared with both Veh (n = 4 tumors) and EP (n = 4 tumors).
(E) Flow cytometry of total CD3+ Tcells (n = 5 to 10 tumors) and (F) CD3+ CD8+
cytotoxic Tcells (n = 5 to 10 tumors) in Veh, EP
, and Reb tumors. (G) RNA-seq
data from a panel of cell types [GFAP+ astrocytes, CD19+ B cells, CD3+ CD8+
cytotoxic T cells (T
c), and remaining CD3+ CD8– bulk T cells] isolated from Reb
tumors by means of FACS (n = 3 tumors). Results show elevated Il4 expression in
bulk Tand T
c cells, and Il13 expression in bulk Tcells. Significance values for (C) to
(F) were calculated with one-way ANOVA and T
ukey’s multiple comparisons test.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to IGF-1R blockade than were naïve glioma cells
in vitro by using multiple pharmacological inhi-
bitors (Fig. 5E and fig. S8H).
Next, to model the effects of macrophage-
derived IGF-1 on rebound tumor cells, we de-
signed an ex vivo culture system using primary
glioma microenvironment cultures (GMECs).
GMECs contain multiple cell types from the
glioma TME when harvested at early passage,
including macrophages, T cells, and astrocytes,
among others (fig. S8I) (8). We hypothesized that
rebound GMECs would be able to stimulate pro-
duction of IGF-1 by macrophages and subsequent
growth of tumor cells. To test this, we collected
conditioned media (CM) from rebound GMECs
and applied it to wild-type (WT) BMDMs for
24 hours. After this treatment, we collected CM
from the GMEC-stimulated BMDMs (Stim CM)
aad3018-6
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 5. The IGF-1/IGF-1R axis is induced in rebound gliomas. (A) Volcano
plot showing the fold change [log2(fold)] between Reb (n = 5 tumors) and
EP (n = 6 tumors) TAMs on the x axis and the significance [–log10(P value)]
on the y axis. Blue dots indicate genes up-regulated in Reb TAMs, whereas
purple dots indicate genes down-regulated in Reb TAMs. Igf1 is labeled in the
top right quadrant. (B) RNA-seq barplot depicting Igf1 transcripts per million
(TPM) in Veh, EP
, and Reb TAMs (n = 5 or 6 tumors per group; one-way ANOVA
and T
ukey’s multiple comparisons). (C) RNA-seq barplot depicting Igf1r TPM in
Veh, EP
, and Reb tumor cells (n = 5 or 6 tumors per group; one-way ANOVA and
Tukey’s multiple comparisons). (D) Quantification of immunofluorescent
staining of phospho (p)–IGF-1R in Veh, 28-day, EP, and Reb tumor tissues.
Results show pIGF-1R is elevated in rebound tumors compared with all other
groups (n = 5 to 8 tumors per group; one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple
comparisons to Reb). (E) MTT assay demonstrating higher sensitivity of an
early-passage primary rebound PDG cell line (74Reb, blue) to IGF-1R inhibition
with OSI906 compared with a primary treatment-naïve PDG cell line (PDGC23,
gray) (n = 3 independent replicates, one representative experiment shown).
IC50 values are indicated with arrows. (F) MTT proliferation assays of 74Reb
cells (left) compared with PDGC23 cells (right), treated with conditioned media
(CM) from BMDMs that were stimulated with rebound glioma microenvironment
culture CM (fig. S8, I and J). Stimulated BMDM CM (Stim CM) induced growth
of 74Reb cells more than PDGC23 cells (130 versus 58%, respectively), and
this effect was blocked with an anti–IGF-1 neutralizing antibody (n = 4
replicate experiments). A one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple compar-
isons with Stim CM + PBS was used to calculate differences at 5 days (P <
0.0001 for all). (G) Correlation between IGF1 and CSF1R or MRC1 expression
from TCGA-GBM data. (H) Single sample GSEA for a hallmark PI3K signa-
ture was used to assign a pathway activity score (materials and methods)
across patients from the TCGA-GBM data set. PI3K signature scores were then
correlated with IGF1 expression levels as shown. (I) Linear regression analy-
sis of immunohistochemical staining for phospho (p)–AKTand MRC1 in serial
sections from GBM patient tissue (n = 18 patients). A significant correlation
between MRC1 protein levels and AKT signaling was observed. For correla-
tional analyses [(G) to (I)], a Spearman coefficient was used to assess sig-
nificance, and a line of best fit is shown (dashed red).The 95% confidence band
(dashed black) is also shown in (I).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and applied it to either rebound or naïve tumor
cell lines in an MTT assay, plus or minus a neu-
tralizing antibody against IGF-1 (experimental
design is provided in fig. S8J). We found that
Stim CM induced proliferation of rebound cell
lines more effectively than naïve cell lines, and
this effect was blocked by IGF-1 neutralization
(Fig. 5F). These results suggest that the cells with-
in a recurrent tumor are capable of stimulating
production of IGF-1 by macrophages, which in
turn gives a proliferative advantage to rebound
tumor cells.
To assess the relevance of the IGF-1/IGF-1R
axis in human malignancy, we evaluated IGF1
expression in publicly available human GBM
gene expression data sets. We found that IGF1
expression was significantly correlated with
macrophage-specific genes (CSF1R, CD68, and
AIF1) and with genes associated with an M2-like
phenotype (CD163 and MRC1) in The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) GBM samples (Fig. 5G and
fig. S9A). No such correlations were found for
genes enrichedin astrocytes (GFAP and ALDH1L1)
(fig. S9A), another key cell type in the glial scar
phenotype (18). We also confirmed that IGF1
expression was significantly correlated with a
PI3K signature score (Fig. 5H) generated from
single sample gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
for hallmarks of PI3K signaling (43). Consistent-
ly, immunohistochemistry (IHC) quantitation on
an independent set of human GBM tissue sam-
ples revealed a significant association between
p-AKT and the M2-associated protein MRC1 (Fig.
5I, fig. S9B, and table S2). Together, these data
support our hypothesis that high IGF-1 levels
translate to elevated PI3K signaling in patients,
and that this axis is associated with M2-like gene
expression.
To determine whether macrophages are the
predominant source of IGF1 in humans, we used
quantitative RT-PCR to show that macrophages
express high levels of IGF1 compared with that in
different immune cell types, astrocytes, endothe-
lial cells, and glioma cells (fig. S9C). Consistently,
we found that IGF1 expression was enriched in
TAMs compared with the tumor bulk in GBM (fig.
S9D) (44), and in mesenchymal GBM compared
with other molecular subtypes (fig. S9E) in which
high macrophage content is a hallmark histological
feature. These data corroborate our findings in the
PDG model by suggesting that macrophages are
an important source of IGF1 in human malignancy.
Last, we used publicly available data sets to
assess survival correlations in patients. We first
generated Kaplan Meier curves using a median
cutoff for IGF1 expression levels and found no
significant difference in overall survival between
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-7
Fig. 6. NFAT and Stat6 cooperate to regulate Igf1 expression in rebound
TAMs. (A) T
ranscription factor (TF) network analysis from RNA-seq data show-
ing enriched TF families (squares) connected with a line to target genes (circles).
White circles indicate genes targeted by multiple TFs. Igf1 is shown as a blue
circle connected by red lines to three regulating TF families. (B) Predicted NFAT
TF activity in Veh, EP
, and Reb TAMs, showing a high score specifically in Reb
TAMs (n = 5 or 6 tumors per group). (C) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of Igf1
in BMDMs derived from WT, Stat6−/−, or Il4ra flox; LysM-cre mice, treated ±
recombinant mouse IL4 (10 ng/ml; n = 5 independent experiments). Student’s
t test was used for pairwise comparisons within each genotype. (D) Quanti-
tative RT-PCR analysis of Igf1 in BMDMs derived from WT mice, treated ±
recombinant mouse IL4 (10 ng/ml), a Stat6 inhibitor (AS1517499, 50 nM),
and/or an NFAT inhibitor (INCA-6, 40 mM; n = 6 independent experiments). A
one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons with the +IL4 condition
was used to calculate significance. (E) Survival of PDG animals with high-
grade tumors treated first with BLZ945 alone until dormancy (28 days) and
then enrolled on combination therapy with either AS1517499 (n = 10 mice),
FK506 (NFAT inhibitor; n = 17 mice), or EtOH vehicle control (n = 9 mice).
Combination therapy with either inhibitor led to a significant increase in
overall survival (FK506, 82% survival, P < 0.0001; AS1517499, 50% survival,
P < 0.05), compared with vehicle control (22% survival). Log-rank Mantel-Cox
test was used to calculate significance. (F) Survival curve representing animals
with recurrent tumors treated either with continuous BLZ945 alone (n =
33 mice) or BLZ945+AS1517499 (n = 9 mice). Combination therapy led to
a significant increase in overall survival (Log-rank Mantel-Cox test, P < 0.05),
and in median survival after recurrence (45 days) compared with BLZ945
monotherapy (13 days). (G) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of Igf1, CD36, Arg1,
and Mrc1 levels in a subset of animals from (F). Results show a significant
reduction of Igf1 expression in rebound tumors after Stat6 inhibition (n = 5 mice
per group, P < 0.01), and a reduction of known IL4-Stat6 transcriptional targets
(CD36, P < 0.05; Arg1, P<0.05; Mrc1, P < 0.01), confirming drug efficacy in the
brain (Mann-Whitney test).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 IGF1high and IGF1low patients (fig. S9F). Given
that baseline IGF-1 signaling is critical during
normal homeostasis in the brain (41), and also
the extremely rapid progression of GBM in pa-
tients, we also surveyed the top 10% of IGF1high
patients (versus all remaining) and found a clear
decrease in overall survival (fig. S9F). When we
used this same stringent top-10% cutoff for a
macrophage marker (AIF1; also known as Iba1 in
mouse) that correlates significantly with IGF1 ex-
pression levels (fig. S9A), there was no separation
of survival curves (fig. S9F), suggesting that dif-
ferences in survival are not simply due to dif-
ferences in macrophage abundance, but rather
to differences in degree of IGF1 expression.
NFAT and Stat6 cooperate to regulate
Igf1 expression in rebound TAMs
We next used transcription factor (TF) activity
analysis to identify putative transcriptional net-
works regulating Igf1 expression in rebound tu-
mors. Seven TF families showed enriched activity
in Reb TAMs compared with EP TAMs (Fig. 6A,
fig. S10A, and table S3). Three of these were found
to regulate Igf1 [nuclear factor of activated T cells
(NFAT), MYF, and HMGB families] (Fig. 6A), of
which the NFAT family showed enriched activity
specifically in Reb TAMs compared with both EP
and Veh TAMs (Fig. 6B). These results were par-
ticularly interesting given the cooperative rela-
tionship between NFAT and Stat6 (canonical IL4
pathway) in transcriptional regulation (45). Cor-
roborating these results, we found that IL4, but
not TGFb1, induced Igf1 expression in BMDMs
in vitro, which was reduced by an NFAT inhib-
itor (fig. S10B).
To further characterize the role of IL4-induced
NFAT and/or Stat6 signaling in Igf1 regulation,
we performed a series of in vitro and in vivo
experiments. First, we confirmed that IL4 strong-
ly induced expression of Igf1 and the three repre-
sentative alternative activation/wound-associated
genes (Retnla, Chil3, and Ccl17) in WT BMDMs,
and that this capacity was reduced in BMDMs
from either Stat6−/− or Il4ra flox; LysM-cre mice
(Fig. 6C and fig. S10C). Furthermore, whereas
pharmacological inhibition of either Stat6 or NFAT
partially reversed the effects of IL4 on Igf1, Retnla,
Chil3, and Ccl17 expression, dual inhibition of these
pathways in WT BMDMs completely blocked the
effects of IL4 on this gene set (Fig. 6D and fig.
S10D). To validate the importance of these path-
ways in vivo, PDG mice with high-grade GBMs
were treated continuously with BLZ945 alone
until 28 days, at which point FK506 (a NFAT-
calcineurin inhibitor) or AS15171499 (a Stat6 in-
hibitor) was added until the trial endpoint. With
addition of either of these inhibitors, the per-
centage of animals that survived to endpoint was
significantly increased (22% BLZ945+Veh, 50%
BLZ945+AS1517499, and 82% BLZ945+FK506)
(Fig. 6E). In accordance with these results, when
we treated animals with AS1517499 in combination
aad3018-8
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 7. Combination of CSF-1R
inhibition and IGF-1R inhibition
significantly improves outcome
in preclinical models. (A) Long-
termtrialdesign for testing BLZ945
and OSI906 combination therapy
onPDGtumors.High-gradetumors
were treated with BLZ945 until
recurrent tumors developed (trial
design1)oruntildormancy(28days,
trial design 2), when OSI906 was
either added (with continuous
BLZ945) or switched (discontinued
BLZ945). (B) Survival of animals
with recurrent tumors treated either
with BLZ945 alone (n = 33 mice),
OSI906 alone (n = 13 mice), or
BLZ945in combinationwithOSI906
(n = 13 mice) (Fig. 7A, trial de-
sign 1). Combination therapy of
BLZ945+OSI906 led to an increase
in overall survival (Log-rank Mantel-
Cox test, P < 0.001), and in median
survival after recurrence (63 days)
compared with BLZ945 (13 days)
or OSI906 (12 days) monotherapy.
(C) Ki67:CC3 (cleaved caspase 3)
proliferation:apoptosis index from
immunofluorescent staining of re-
current tumors treated with BLZ945
alone versus BLZ945+OSI906 for
2 weeks (Mann-Whitney test, P <
0.01, n = 7 or 8 mice). (D) Rep-
resentative H&E and immuno-
fluorescent images corresponding
to data in (C). Scale bars, 50 mm. (E) BLI from orthotopically xenografted patient-derived tumorspheres (TS573) that were subject to 24 days of treatment with
BLZ945 (red) versus vehicle control (gray). Results demonstrate that treatment with BLZ945+OSI906 blunts outgrowth of rebound tumors compared with
BLZ945+vehicle. Mann-Whitney test was used to calculate P values for each time point (n = 5 to 20 mice). (F) Ki67:CC3 index from immunofluorescent staining of
TS573 orthotopic xenograft tissues (Mann-Whitney test, P < 0.01, n = 5 mice per group). (G) Kaplan-Meier analysis of PDG animals treated either with BLZ945
alone (n = 90 mice; same cohort as presented in Fig. 1D), OSI906 alone (n = 6 mice), or with BLZ945 in combination with OSI906 during dormancy (n = 9 mice)
(Fig. 7A, trial design 2). Combination therapy of BLZ945+OSI906 extended overall survival compared with either monotherapy. Log-rank Mantel-Cox test was
used to calculate significance. (H) BLI of orthotopically xenografted U251 cells genetically engineered to express an IGF1R-targeted dox-inducible shRNA (sh; n =
15 or 16 mice; purple lines) or a scrambled control vector (Scr; n = 4 or 5 mice; gray lines). Colored arrows indicate respective administration of dox. Graph shows
two combined shRNAs; data for individual hairpins are shown in fig. S13E. Mann-Whitney test was used to calculate significance.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 with continued BLZ945 treatment at a later
time point, during the rebound phase we were
able to extend survival (Fig. 6F), and quantitative
RT-PCR analysis of these tumors confirmed re-
duced levels of Igf1 expression along with addi-
tional known targets of IL4-Stat6 signaling (CD36,
Arg1, and Mrc1) (Fig. 6G) (27). Collectively, these
data suggest that both NFAT and/or Stat6 sig-
naling contribute to macrophage activation and
IGF-1 regulation in rebound tumors, and that
pharmacological blockade of either of these path-
ways is sufficient to reduce the incidence of dis-
ease recurrence. However, these models are limited
by their inability to distinguish cell type–specific
pathway blockade. Furthermore, although FK506
is used in multiple clinical settings, targeted
specificity of the Stat6 inhibitor in vivo is not
fully characterized. In future studies, elucidating
the effects of T cell–specific IL4 expression, or
macrophage IL4R, on BLZ945 efficacy through
the use of genetic models would provide addi-
tional insight into mechanistic communication
between different TME cell types.
Combination of CSF-1R and IGF-1R
inhibition improves outcome
To formally test our hypothesis that the IGF-1/
IGF-1R axis may underlie resistance to CSF-1R
inhibition, we targeted IGF-1R in vivo using both
pharmacological and genetic approaches. First,
we designed similar preclinical intervention trials
as for BKM120, except with an inhibitor of IGF-1R
(OSI906/Linsitinib). We treated PDG mice with
BLZ945 until they showed signs of rebound as
seen with MRI, at which point we intervened with
OSI906 (Fig. 7A, trial design 1). OSI906 was cho-
senbecauseit is currentlybeingclinically evaluated
for multiple cancer types, its effect on BMDM via-
bility in vitro was minimal compared with other
IGF-1R inhibitors tested (fig. S11A), and we con-
firmed that it is brain-penetrant in rebound tumors
by showing reduced p-IGF-1R immunostaining
(fig. S11B). In concordance
with the BLZ945+BKM120
trial results, we found that
rebound tumors treated
with OSI906 and contin-
uous BLZ945 significantly
extended median survival to
63 days (versus 13 days after
recurrence for continuous
BLZ945 monotherapy) (Fig.
7B), and markedly reduced
tumor progression and pro-
liferation:apoptosis ratios
after 2 weeks of treatment
(Fig. 7, C and D, and fig.
S11C). In contrast, OSI906
monotherapy in rebound tu-
mors (discontinued BLZ945)
led to a median survival of
just 12 days (Fig. 7B) and
was only modestly effective
in treatment-naïve tumors
(fig. S11, D and E). Together,
these results mirror those
from the BKM120 trials and
suggest that continued CSF-1R inhibition is ne-
cessary to drive IGF1R/PI3K signaling depen-
dency, rendering recurrent tumors sensitive to
pathway inhibition. Similar combination treat-
ment efficacy and mechanistic commonalities
(including IF quantification of Ki67:CC3 ratios,
CD206, and p-IGF-1R) were observed in orthotopic
xenograft trials performed with patient-derived
proneural tumorspheres and with established
human glioma cell lines (Fig. 7, E and F, and
fig. S12, A to F).
To determine whether tumor outgrowth
could be prevented by earlier IGF-1R inhibi-
tion, PDG mice with high-grade GBMs were
treated continuously with BLZ945 alone until 28
days, at which point OSI906 was added until the
trial endpoint (Fig. 7A, trial design 2). With early
combination treatment, we indeed extended over-
all survival and increased the percentage of
animals that survived to endpoint (89% BLZ945
+OSI906 versus 44% BLZ945 alone or 0% OSI906
alone) (Fig. 7G). Together, our results suggest
that targeting either IGF-1R or PI3K signaling
in GBMs resistant to CSF-1R inhibition may in-
terfere with disease progression and improve over-
all survival.
Given that pharmacological inhibition of IGF-
1R using OSI906 cannot confirm whether tumor
cell–specific blockade is sufficient to reduce re-
current disease, we used a genetic approach to
target this receptor in glioma cells. U251 glioma
cell lines were genetically engineered to express
a doxycycline (dox)–inducible short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) against IGF1R, and orthotopic xenograft
experiments were performed (trial design is pro-
vided in fig. S13A). Two independent shRNAs
targeting IGF1R were used, and a scramble-
sequence shRNA was used as a control (fig. S13,
B to D). We found that in both cases, dox-induction
of the shRNAs during the rebound phase of
the trial (day 12) mitigated tumor progression
compared with no-dox control animals (Fig.
7H and fig. S13E). These results support our
hypothesis that tumor cell–specific IGF-1R
contributes to BLZ945 resistance and disease
recurrence.
Discussion
Here, we describe the development of acquired
resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in mouse models
of GBM. Although initial therapeutic response to
CSF-1R inhibition is robust, rapid, and complete-
ly penetrant, we found that approximately half of
the animals eventually develop resistance, with
rapidly progressing rebound tumors. In light of
recent results from ongoing patient studies with
CSF-1R inhibitors in glioma (46) and other can-
cers, our findings suggest the need to prepare for
the emergence of therapeutic resistance to CSF-
1R inhibitors in GBM in the clinical setting and
determine whether brain malignancies other than
GBM will respond similarly to CSF-1R inhibition.
Although classical mechanisms of tumor cell–
intrinsic resistance to cytotoxic and targeted
agents have been well-defined—including aber-
rant drug metabolism and transport, drug target
mutation, and activation of alternative survival
pathways (47)—it still remains unclear whether
resistance to TME-directed therapies will follow
similar principles. Given that TME-targeted agents
are increasingly being evaluated in the clinic (1, 2),
it will be critical to mechanistically define how
resistance evolves in response to these therapies
in order to provide long-term disease manage-
ment for patients.
In light of this problem, we have now iden-
tified a mechanism of drug resistance that can
circumvent therapeutic response to a TME-targeted
therapy and promote disease progression in the
absence of tumor cell–intrinsic alterations. Spe-
cifically, we have uncovered a heterotypic para-
crine signaling interaction that is initiated by the
TME and drives resistance to CSF-1R inhibition.
In rebound tumors, we found that IGF-1 is up-
regulated in TAMs in re-
sponse to IL4 (possibly sup-
plied by T cells or alternative
cell types), in part via NFAT
activation. IGF-1 secretion into
the extracellular environment
results in activation of IGF-1R
and PI3K signaling in glioma
cells,supportingtumorgrowth
and malignancy (Fig. 8, mod-
el). Multiple nodes in this
signaling loop can be targeted
therapeutically by agents that
are currently used clinically—
including OSI906, BKM120,
or FK506—resulting in a sub-
stantial improvement in sur-
vival in the preclinical setting
when combined with CSF-1R
inhibition. Indeed, given that
PI3K signaling is aberrantly
activated in a substantial pro-
portion of GBM patients (16),
and that recent clinical trial
results show limited efficacy
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-9
Fig. 8. Working model for mechanism of resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in glioma.
IGF-1 is up-regulated in TAMs in response to long-term CSF-1R inhibition in GBM. IGF-1 secretion
into the extracellular environment results in activation of IGF-1R on tumor cells and downstream
PI3K signaling to support tumor regrowth during continuous BLZ945 treatment. Upstream of
IGF-1 in TAMs, NFATand/or Stat6 transcriptional activity regulate its expression.This is thought
to be initiated in response to IL4/IL4R pathway activation, feeding in from other cell types in
the TME, including Tcells (and possibly others). Multiple nodes in this signaling loop can be
targeted therapeutically—including OSI906, BKM120, AS1517499, or FK506—resulting in a
substantial improvement in survival in preclinical trials when combined with CSF-1R inhibition.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 in recurrent (albeit very advanced) GBM (46), it
is possible that this pathway could similarly
contribute to intrinsic resistance to CSF-1R
inhibition, and consequently, those patients may
benefit from combinatorial inhibition of these
pathways from the outset.
Our findings underscore the importance of
bidirectional feedback between cancer cells and
their microenvironment and support the notion
that although stromal cells are less susceptible to
genetic mutation than are cancer cells, a tumor
can nonetheless persist by exploiting its extra-
cellular environment to acquire a resistant phe-
notype. Thus, we propose that an integrated
analysis of cancer cells with their microenviron-
ment will be critical to understanding both their
parallel evolution during tumor progression
and their capacity for adaptation in the context
of therapeutic intervention and the development
of resistance.
Materials and methods
Study design
The overall objective of our study was to un-
derstand how resistance to CSF-1R inhibitors
develops in high-grade glioma by using various
in vivo and in vitro models. Within the animal
studies, mice were randomly assigned to differ-
ent therapy groups, which included treatment
with BLZ945 (a CSF-1R inhibitor) in combination
with inhibitors of putative resistance pathways
(such as IGF-1R or PI3K), versus single-agent or
vehicle controls. Survival and disease progres-
sion were monitored by using a combination of
MRI, histology, flow cytometry, and gene expres-
sion analyses throughout all trials. To power our
studies, sample size was predefined as at least
n = 3 independent experiments, replicates, or
samples for in vitro and in vivo experiments, and
up to a maximum of n = 90 mice for survival
analyses. Replicate values are indicated for each
experiment in corresponding figure legends. All
analyses were calculated in a blinded manner
through numerical coding of samples. For all
long-term survival trials, 26 weeks was selected as
a predefined endpoint because mice in the Ink4a/
Arf −/−backgrounddevelopspontaneouslymphomas
and sarcomas beginning at ~30 weeks of age. For
in vivo trials, mice were considered outliers if they
developed (i) spontaneous lymphomas (given this
disposition in the Ink4a/Arf −/− background), (ii)
early symptoms of tumor burden >1 week before
trial enrollment, or (iii) development of hydro-
cephalus before trial enrollment.
Biologicals and pharmaceuticals
BLZ945 (8) was obtained from Novartis (Basel,
Switzerland) for both in vitro and in vivo use;
6700 nM BLZ945 was used for all in vitro exper-
iments in tumor cells, versus an equal percent di-
methyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as a vehicle control. This
concentration represents 100 times the median
inhibitory concentration (IC50) for BLZ945 in macro-
phages (8). For in vivo experiments, BLZ945 was
obtained preformulated at 12.5 mg/ml. BLZ945 was
administered orally 1× daily at 200 mg/kg, and
20% Captisolwas usedas a vehicle control. BKM120
(Buparlisib; 1 mM unless indicated otherwise),
AEW541, ADW742, BMS754807, and OSI906
(Linsitinib; 10 mM unless indicated otherwise)
were purchased from Selleckchem (Houston, TX)
for in vitro use and were used up to 100 mM for
doseresponseassaysversusanequalpercentDMSO
as a vehicle control. BKM120 and OSI906 were
purchased from ChemieTek (Indianapolis, IN)
for in vivo use. BKM120 was formulated by dis-
solving 52 mg into 500 ml NMP, boiling, and
then adding 9.5 ml of PEG300. BKM120 was
administered orally 1× daily at 20 mg/kg, and
NMP:PEG300 (1:19) was used as a vehicle con-
trol. Animals were dosed at 20 mg/kg so as to
avoid off-target effects, because BKM120 binds
tubulin at concentrations above 50 mg/kg in sub-
cutaneous tumor models, but not below 40 mg/kg
(15). OSI906 was formulated daily at 4 mg/ml in
25 mM tartaric acid with shaking and sonication
for ~15 min. OSI906 was administered orally once
daily at 40 mg/kg, and 25 mM tartaric acid was
used as a vehicle control. We chose to treat at
40 mg/kg because the maximum tolerated dose
for OSI906, 75 mg/kg (48), was found to be toxic
within 4 days in our studies. For all combination
trials, BLZ945 was administered in the morning,
and BKM120 or OSI906 was administered in the
evening. The NFAT inhibitor, INCA-6, was pur-
chased from Tocris (Bristol, UK) and was used at
a concentration of 40 mM for in vitro use (49). For
in vivo inhibition of NFAT signaling, FK506 was
used to inhibit the activating interaction between
calcineurin and NFAT, at a dose of 10 mg/kg
(administered intraperitoneally every 3 days) (50).
The Stat6 inhibitor, AS1517499, was purchased
from Axon Medchem (Reston, VA) and was used
at a concentration of 50 nM for in vitro use and
dosed at 10 mg/kg for in vivo use (administered
intraperitoneally 2× weekly) (51). The vehicle
control for FK506 and AS1517499 in vivo was 10%
ethanol (EtOH) and 1% Tween-80 in phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS). For in vitro PCR assays,
recombinant mouse IL4 (R&D Systems, Minne-
apolis,MN)wasusedataconcentrationof 10ng/ml,
recombinant mouse TGFb1 (R&D Systems) was
used at a concentration of 50 ng/ml, and the TGFb1
type 1 receptor inhibitor SB431542 (Tocris) was
used at a concentration of 10 mM. For ex vivo
GMEC assays, a neutralization antibody against
IGF-1 (R&D Systems) was used at a concentra-
tion of 0.5 mg/ml. For culture of macrophages
in vitro, recombinant mouse CSF-1 was used at a
concentration of 10 ng/ml. For in vitro assays
using BMDMs, CSF-1 supplementation was ex-
cluded from all experimental conditions.
Animals
Crl:NU(NCr)-Foxn1nu immunodeficient mice were
purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Wil-
mington, MA) for orthotopic transplantation studies.
NOD/CB17-Prkdcscid immunodeficient mice were
purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar
Harbor, ME) for orthotopic implantation of human
cells. Three different transgenic mouse models ex-
pressing the avian tv-a receptor under the control
of the nestin (N) promoter in either mixed strain
or BL6 backgrounds were used (Ntv-a;Ink4a/Arf −/−,
Ntv-a, and Ntv-a;Ptenflox), all previously described
(13, 52–57) and bred within the MSKCC animal
facility. Stat6−/−, Il4raflox;LysM-cre, and WT C57BL/6
(BL6) mice were also bred within the MSKCC
animal facility and were used for bone marrow
isolations. All animal studies were approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Commit-
tee of MSKCC.
PDG mouse model
The initiation of PDGF-driven gliomas (PDGs)
with RCAS-hPDGF-B-HA in adult mice has been
previously described (8, 13, 58). Briefly, Ntv-a;
Ink4a/Arf −/− mice were fully anesthetized with
ketamine/xylazine before surgery. Pain manage-
ment included a 50-ml subcutaneous injection of
bupivacaine (0.25%) at the surgical site before
surgery, and an intraperitoneal injection of bu-
prenorphine immediately after surgery. Mice
were intracranially injected with DF-1:RCAS-
hPDGF-B-HA cells (200,000 cells/1 ml) between
5 and 6 weeks of age by using a fixed stereotactic
apparatus (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL). Injections
were made into the right frontal cortex, ~1.5 mm
lateral and 1 mm caudal from bregma, and at a
depth of 2 mm into the subventricular zone (SVZ).
In this model, injection into the SVZ induces
tumors with low latency (4 to 5 weeks), 100%
penetrance, and histological features character-
istic of patient GBM including microvascular pro-
liferation and pseudopalisading necrosis (13).
The incision was sealed by using Vetbond tissue
adhesive (3M, Maplewood, MN). Tumors were
imaged with MRI after 5 weeks, and drug inter-
vention was initiated for tumors ≥2 mm3. A total
of 90 animals were treated in long-term exper-
iments with BLZ945 alone, which represented five
independent cohorts. These data are compiled
and presented in Figs. 1D, 2E, and 7G (red lines).
p53 KD mouse model
Injections were performed as described for the PDG
mouse model above, except Ntv-a mice were used
(WT Ink4a/Arf). Mice were intracranially injected
with a 1:1 ratio of DF-1:RCAS-hPDGF-B-HA cells
and DF-1:RCAS-shp53 cells (total of 300,000 cells/
2 ml) between 5 and 6 weeks of age. Injection into
the SVZ in the p53 knockdown (KD) model induces
high-grade tumors with low latency (6 to 7 weeks),
100% penetrance, and histological features of
human GBM (13, 54, 55). Tumors were detected
by MRI after 6 to 7 weeks, at which point drug
intervention with BLZ945 was initiated (Fig. 2F).
Pten KO mouse model
Injections were performed as described for the
PDG mouse model above, except Ntv-a;Ptenflox
mice were used (WT Ink4a/Arf). Mice were in-
tracranially injected with a 1:1 ratio of DF-1:RCAS-
hPDGF-B-HA cells and DF-1:RCAS-Cre cells (total
of 300,000 cells/2 ml) between 5 and 6 weeks
of age. Injection into the SVZ in the Pten KO
model induces tumors with moderate latency
(8 to 12 weeks) and penetrance (~20 to 30%).
Tumors that form harbor key characteristics of
human GBM, including highly infiltrative his-
tology (13, 54, 56, 57). Tumors were detected with
aad3018-10
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 MRI after 8 to 12 weeks, at which point drug
intervention with BLZ945 was initiated (Fig. 2, F
and G).
Derivation of mouse primary glioma cell
lines from PDG tumors
To derive rebound or dormant cell lines from
BLZ945-treated PDG tumors, MRI was used to
confirm whether a particular tumor was in re-
boundordormancyphase.Macrodissectedrebound
or dormant lesions from the BLZ945-treated PDG
mouse model were manually dissociated and
filtered through a 40-mm-mesh filter. The cell
suspensionwaswashedtwicewithPBSandcultured
in Mouse Neural Stem Cell (mNSC) Basal Media
(Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada) con-
taining mNSC proliferation supplement, 1 mg/ml
Heparin (Stem Cell Technologies), 10 ng/ml
recombinant epidermal growth factor (rEGF;
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and 20 ng/ml recom-
binant basic-fibroblast growth factor (rbFGF;
Sigma, Bandai, Japan). To generate cell lines in
monolayer, tumorsphere cultures were expanded,
dissociated, and transferred to culture with
Dulbecco’s minimum essential medium (DMEM) +
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (59). In total, five
rebound cell lines were derived (89AReb, 89BReb,
74Reb, 48Reb, and 52Reb), and one cell line was
derived from the 28-day dormant time point. The
28-day dormant cells (fig. S8G) took several weeks
before starting to proliferate in culture, and upon
transplantation into naïve animals, the cells did
not give rise to growing tumors [biolumines-
cent imaging (BLI) signal remained stable and
was monitored up to 22 days]. Derivation of
the PDGC23 primary glioma cell line from an
untreated/naïve mixed-background PDG mouse
was described previously (8).
Human cell lines
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)
were purchased from ATCC (Manassass, VA).
Human brain microvascular endothelial cells
(HBMECs) and human astrocytes were purchased
from Sciencell (Carlsbad, CA). Astrocytes were
cultured on poly-L-lysine-coated plates, and both
HUVECs and HBMECs were cultured on gelatin-
coated plates with endothelial cell media (ECM;
Sciencell) + 10% FBS + an endothelial cell growth
factor supplement. The U251 (commercially avail-
able) and TS573 (patient-derived) cell lines were
selected on the basis of our previously published
work, which showed efficacy in response to
BLZ945 in orthotopic xenograft trials (8). The
patient-derived TS573 glioma tumorsphere line
was derived from a consenting patient under In-
stitutional Review Board (IRB)–approved protocols
for the banking of excess tumor tissue during
routine surgical resection [MSKCC IRB nos. 99-
125A(2) and 06-107], as previously described (8, 60).
Tumorspheres were maintained in Human Neural
Stem Cell (hNSC) Basal Media (Stem Cell Technol-
ogies) containing hNSC proliferation supplement,
1 mg/ml Heparin (Stem Cell Technologies), 10 ng/ml
rEGF (Invitrogen), and 20 ng/ml rbFGF (Sigma).
Tumorspheres were passaged by dissociation
with Accutase cell detachment solution (Millipore,
Billerica, MA). Characterization and molecular sub-
typingbySequenom(SanDiego,CA)andNanoString
(Seattle, WA) and aCGH were performed as pre-
viously described (8). Briefly, aCGH on primary
spheroids showed a high-level amplification of
PDGFRA and CDK6 loci and a regional chromo-
some5loss.NanoStringanalysisconfirmedPDGFRA
overexpression, and Sequenom analyses were neg-
ative for IDH1/2 mutations.
Isolation of BMDMs
To generate macrophages from bone marrow,
femurs and tibiae from Stat6−/−, Il4raflox;LysM-
cre, or WT BL6 mice were flushed and cells
harvested under sterile conditions. The isolate
was filtered through a 40-mm-mesh filter and
cultured in 30-ml Teflon bags (PermaLife PL-30)
for 5 to 7 days in DMEM + 10% FBS + 10 ng/ml
recombinant mouse CSF-1 (R&D Systems). Media
were changed every other day.
TGL infections
Cell lines were labeled with a triple-imaging vec-
tor [TK-GFP-Luc (TGL)] (61) for use in orthotopic
in vivo experiments. The TGL vector was devel-
oped to enable noninvasive in vivo imaging of
tumor growth over time. A standard protocol for
retroviral infection was used. Briefly, GP2-293T
cells were transfected with the TGL construct and
pCL-Ampho at a 1:1 ratio, using Fugene (Promega,
Madison,WI)andOptiMEM(Gibco,ThermoFisher).
Twelve hours later, media was replaced with
complete antibiotic-free DMEM and collected
for 3 consecutive days for infection of target cells.
Orthotopic transplantation experiments
TGL-labeled cells were resuspended in antibiotic-
free, serum-free DMEM for all orthotopic injections.
Mice were fully anesthetized with ketamine/
xylazine before surgery. Pain management in-
cluded a 50-ml subcutaneous injection of bupiva-
caine (0.25%) at the surgical site before surgery,
and an intraperitoneal injection of buprenorphine
immediately after surgery. Mice were intracrani-
allyinjectedwithgliomacellsbetween5and6weeks
of age by using a fixed stereotactic apparatus
(Stoelting). The number of cells injected was as
follows: mouseglioma lines, 2.5× 104 to5 × 104 cells/
2 ml; human U251 cells, 2.5 × 105 cells/2 ml; and
patient-derived TS573 cells, 5 × 104 cells/2 ml.
Injections were made to the right frontal cortex,
~1.5 mm lateral and 1 mm caudal from bregma
and at a depth of 2 mm. Hydrogen peroxide was
used to clean the hole made by the surgical drill,
and bone wax was used to close the hole. The
incision was sealed by using Vetbond tissue ad-
hesive (3M). One week after injections, mice
were randomly assigned to vehicle or BLZ945
treatment groups and dosed 1× daily by means
of oral gavage. BLI (Xenogen IVIS-200 Optical
In Vivo Imaging System) was performed every 3
to 5 days over the course of the experiment in
order to monitor tumor progression and response
to therapy. Once BLZ945-treated tumors reached
three times the volume of their lowest BLI mea-
surement, tumors were considered “resistant,”
and mice were randomly assigned to combination
treatment with BLZ945 + OSI906, or BLZ945 +
vehicle. For dox-inducible IGF1R shRNA experi-
ments with U251 cells, mice were additionally
assigned to either ± dox groups (dox hyclate diet
formulated at 2500 mg/kg; Envigo, Cambridge-
shire, UK).
Animal sacrifice and tissue harvest
Mice were euthanized at the defined 26-week
endpoint, or when symptomatic (poor grooming,
lethargy, weight loss, hunching, macrocephaly/
hydrocephalus, or seizures). We selected 26 weeks
because mice in the Ink4a/Arf−/− background
develop spontaneous lymphomas and sarcomas
beginning at ~30 weeks of age (62). Euthanasia
was performed by means of either carbon di-
oxide asphyxiation or anesthesia (avertin; 2,2,2-
tribromoethanol; Sigma) followed by cervical
dislocation. For snap freezing of whole-tumor sam-
ples, mice were euthanized 1 hour after the last
treatment dose, and tissues were collected, frozen
immediately in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80°C
for subsequent applications (such as RNA isola-
tion and protein extraction). For isolation of whole
tissues for histology, mice were fully anesthetized
with avertin, transcardially perfused with 10 ml of
PBS, followed by 10 ml of paraformaldehyde (PFA;
4% in PBS). Tissues were incubated in PFA over-
night at 4°C, rinsed in PBS, and then transferred to
sucrose (30%) for 2 to 3 days at 4°C. For hypoxia
analysis, mice were injected intraperitoneally with
60 mg/kg of pimonidazole [hypoxyprobe-1 (HPI)]
~20 min before sacrifice and tissue collection. All
tissues were embedded and frozen in Optimal
Cutting Temperature (OCT) compound (Tissue-
Tek), and 10-mm cryostat tissue sections were
used for all subsequent staining and analyses.
IF staining
For IF staining, 10-mm frozen sections were thawed
and dried at room temperature and rinsed in PBS.
Tissue sections were blocked in 0.5% Blocking
Reagent (PerkinElmer, Boston, MA) (1 hour at
room temperature or overnight at 4°C), followed
by incubation in primary antibody (2 hours at
room temperature or overnight at 4°C). All primary
antibodiesanddilutionfactors are listed intable S4.
Sections were then washed in PBS and incubated
with the appropriate fluorophore-conjugated
secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, Eugene,
OR) at a dilution of 1:500 in 0.5% PNB (1 hour at
room temperature). 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) was used as a counterstain before mount-
ing with fluorescent mounting media (Dako,
Carpinteria, CA).
IHC and Von Kossa staining
For manual IHC, tissue sections were first sub-
jected to citrate buffer–based antigen retrieval by
submerging in antigen unmasking solution (0.94%
v/v in distilled water; Vector Laboratories, Burlin-
game, CA) and microwaving for 10 min, followed
by cooling to room temperature for ≥30 min.
Endogenous peroxidases were blocked for 10 min
with Dual Endogenous Enzyme Block (Dako).
Slides were incubated with serum-free protein
block (Dako) for 1 hour at room temperature
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-11
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and then incubated with primary antibody in a
humidity chamber overnight at 4°C. The follow-
ing day, slides were washed and incubated with
horseradishperoxidase(HRP)–conjugatedsecond-
ary antibodies (Jackson Immunoresearch, West
Grove, PA) for 1 hour at room temperature, and
positive staining was detected by using diami-
nobenzidine (DAB) substrate-chromogen. Hae-
matoxylin was used as a counterstain, and slides
were mounted with VECTASHIELD mounting
media (Vector Laboratories). As an alternative to
manual staining, a Ventana autostainer was used
for staining of mouse glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), human phospho (p)–AKT, and human
MRC1, which included automated deparaffiniza-
tion, citrate buffer–based antigen retrieval, non-
specific protein and endogenous peroxidase block,
antibody incubation, and DAB detection. All
primary antibodies and dilution ratios for both
manual staining and autostaining are listed in
table S4. For visualization of calcium deposi-
tion in tissue sections, a Von Kossa staining kit
wasusedaspermanufacturer’sinstructions(Abcam,
Cambridge, UK). Briefly, tissues are treated with
a silver nitrate solution, which is deposited by
replacing calcium reduced by ultraviolet light.
Nuclearfast red was used as a counterstain(Vector
Laboratories).
Histology and grading
For analysis of tissue histology and grading of
tumor malignancy, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining was performed by using a Tissue-Tek
automated slide stainer, and slides were mounted
with VECTASHIELD mounting media (Vector).
Tissues were blindly graded by a neuropathologist
(J. Huse, MSKCC) according to standard World
Health Organization criteria (63). For central ner-
vous system tumors, this grading system is based
on a malignancy scale, in which tumors that are
minimally proliferative and infiltrative are con-
sidered grade I, whereas the most histologically
aggressive, infiltrative, and incurable tumors
(glioblastomas) are grade IV (63). GFAP quan-
tification was performed by use of the Allred
scoring method, which is the sum of a proportion
score (0 to 5) and an intensity score (0 to 3) for a
given marker (64).
Image analysis
Stained tissue sections were visualized under a
Carl Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany) Axioimager
Z1 microscope equipped with an ApoTome.2, or
a Carl Zeiss Axioimager M1 epifluorescence and
brightfield microscope. Staining analyses were
performed by using a TissueGnostics (Vienna,
Austria) slide scanning platform and TissueQuest
analysis software. This automated analysis plat-
form was used to quantify number of positive
counts, area of positive staining, and/or micro-
vascular density within stained tissue sections in
an unbiased manner (8).
Patient GBM tissue samples
Patient GBM tissue samples used for staining
and analysis (Fig. 5I and fig. S9B) were obtained
from the Brain Tumor Center, MSKCC. Eighteen
patient tissue samples were used in total. IHC
staining for MRC1 and p-AKT was performed as
described above (“IHC and Von Kossa staining,”
above), and quantitation was performed by using
the Axioimager Z1 scanning microscope (“Image
analysis,” above). Correlational analysis across
patients was performed by using GraphPad Prism
6.0 ( “Data presentation and statistical analysis,”
below). Patient information for all samples can be
found in table S2.
Protein isolation and immunoblotting
To evaluate phospho-protein status of IGF-1R and
AKT in culture, cells were seeded at 70 to 80%
confluence, serum-starved for ~12 hours, and then
treated with OSI906 for 30 min. To evaluate
phosphorylation of IGF-1R or AKT in snap-frozen
tumor samples, tissues were dissociated with a
glass homogenizer on ice in the presence of lysis
buffer. All protein lysates were prepared in radio-
immunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer supple-
mented with Halt protease inhibitor (1:100; Thermo
Scientific, Waltham, MA) and Halt phosphatase
inhibitor (1:100; Thermo Scientific), and protein
was quantified by using a BCA protein assay kit
(Pierce). Equal amounts of protein (20 mg/lane
for cell lines, and 100 mg/lane for tissue samples)
were loaded onto SDS–polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis precast gels (Invitrogen) and trans-
ferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes
for immunoblotting. Membranes were blocked
in 5% milk, incubated with primary antibodies
(table S4) for 1 hour at room temperature or
overnight at 4°C, washed with 0.1% Tris-buffered
saline and Tween 20 (TBS-T), and incubated with
HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson
Immunoresearch) for 1 hour at room temperature.
SuperSignal West Femto or Pico chemilumines-
cent substrate and CL-XPosure Film (Pierce) were
used for signal detection.
RNA isolation, reverse transcription, and
quantitative RT-PCR
RNAwasisolatedwithTRIzolanddeoxyribonuclease-
treated, and 1 mg of RNA was used for cDNA syn-
thesis by using a High Capacity cDNA Reverse
Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA). Mouse taqman probes (Applied Biosystems)
were used for quantifying expression of Igf1
(Mm00439560_m1), Chil3 (Mm00657889_mH),
Ccl17 (Mm01244826_g1), Retnla (Mm00445109_m1),
Il4 (Mm00445260_m1), Arg1 (Mm00475988_m1),
Cd36 (Mm00432403_m1), Mrc1 (Mm01329362_m1),
Ubc (Mm02525934_g1; housekeeping), and Hprt
(Mm01545339_m1; housekeeping). Human taq-
man probes (Applied Biosystems) were used for
quantifying expression of IL4 (Hs00174122_m1),
IL13 (Hs00174379_m1), IGF1 (Hs01547656_m1),
and HPRT1 (Hs02800695_m1; housekeeping).
MTT assays
Cell growth rate was determined by using a MTT
cell proliferation kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).
Briefly, cells were plated in ≥triplicate in 96-well
plates; 1 × 103 cells/well were plated for mouse
glioma cell lines, and 5 × 103 cells/well were
plated for BMDMs. For BLZ945 time course ex-
periments, cells were grown in the presence of
6700 nM of BLZ945 versus an equal percent
DMSO, media was changed every 48 hours, and
viability measurements were taken every 24 hours.
For dose response experiments, cells were grown
in the presence of an IGF-1R inhibitor (AEW541,
ADW742, BMS754807, or OSI906) versus an equal
percent DMSO atthe doses indicated ( “Biologicals
and pharmaceuticals,” above), and viability mea-
surements were taken after 24 hours. Reduction
of the MTT substrate was detected with colori-
metric analysis by using a plate reader as per the
manufacturer’s protocol. Ten microliters of MTT
labeling reagent was added to each well and then
incubated for 4 hours at 37°C, followed by the
addition of 100 ml of MTT solubilization reagent
overnight. The mixture was gently resuspended,
and absorbance was measured at 595 and 750 nm
on a spectraMax 340pc plate reader (Molecular
Devices, Sunnyvale, CA).
Ex vivo GMEC assays
GMECs are early-passage heterotypic cell cul-
tures harvested directly from PDG mouse pri-
mary tumors. Flow cytometry characterization of
these cultures revealed that passage 1 GMECs
contain a high abundance of tumor cells, astro-
cytes, and macrophages, as well as smaller pro-
portions of myeloid progenitors, T cells, and B
cells (fig. S8I). In our ex vivo assays, we derived
CM from passage 1 rebound GMECs and used
this CM to treat naïve BMDMs in vitro (exper-
imental design is provded in fig. S8J). We col-
lected CM from these GMEC-stimulated BMDMs
(Stim CM) and applied it to either rebound glioma
cell lines (highly sensitive to IGF-1R inhibition)
or naïve glioma cell lines (less sensitive to IGF-1R
inhibition), plus or minus a neutralizing anti-
body for IGF-1. An MTT assay was used to assess
changes in growth in response to each treatment
condition, as described above.
Flow cytometry and FACS on primary
mouse tissues
Mice were fully anesthetized with avertin and
transcardially perfused with 20 ml of PBS. The
brain was then isolated, and the tumor was ma-
crodissected from the surrounding normal tissue.
Tissues were mechanically dissociated and fil-
tered into a single-cell suspension. For flow cyto-
metry, cells were counted and incubated with Fc
block for 1 hour (1:100/106 cells; BD Biosciences,
East Rutherford, NJ), followed by a 30-min in-
cubation with LIVE/DEAD fixable dead cell kit
(Invitrogen) and then a 1-hour incubation with
conjugated antibodies for extracellular markers.
For FACS, cells were counted and incubated with
Fc block for 1 hour, followed by a 1-hour incu-
bation with conjugated antibodies, and then
stained with DAPI for dead-cell exclusion. All
antibodies and dilution ratios used for these
experiments are listed in table S4. OneComp
eBeads (eBioscience, San Diego, CA), ArC Amine
Reactive Compensation Beads (Invitrogen), and/
or cell suspensions from spleen were used for
compensation controls. A BD Biosciences LSR-
Fortessa was used for flow cytometry, and a
aad3018-12
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 BD Biosciences FACSAria III was used for cell
sorting.
Distinguishing between putative BMDMs
and microglia by flow cytometry
Flow cytometry was used to evaluate the pro-
portions of peripherally derived BMDMs versus
resident microglia in PDG tumors across differ-
ent treatment groups, according to published
methods (22–24). Briefly, after gating on live cells
we used cell-surface expression of CD45 and CD11b
to distinguish between the two populations, in
which CD45lo CD11b+ defined putative microglia,
whereas CD45hi CD11b+ defined putative BMDMs.
Inusingthismethod,weacknowledgeitslimitations
and recognize that these two populations cannot be
definitively distinguished without lineage-tracing
experiments that specifically label yolk sac–derived
microglia or peripherally recruited BMDMs.
FACS purification of human peripheral
immune cell types
Human buffy coats from three consenting healthy
donors were obtained from the New York Blood
Center. For isolation of neutrophils and eosino-
phils, buffy coats were directly red blood cell
lysed (BD Biosciences PharmLyse) for 15 min at
room temperature. All other cell types were isolated
from the top layer of a Ficoll gradient separation
(HistoPaque, Sigma). Cells were pelleted for 10 min
at 300g and washed twice with FACS buffer
(PBS + 2% fetal bovine serum) and Fc blocked
(Biolegend TruStain FcX). Cells were incubated
with the appropriate antibodies for 15 min (table
S4). Cells were FACS-purified on an Aria III (BD
Biosciences). For human macrophage differenti-
ation, PBMCs were isolated from buffy coats fol-
lowing a Ficoll gradient. Monocytes were further
purified from the interphase of a 70/30% Percoll
gradient. Monocytes were then washed twice
with PBS and cultured in Teflon bags (Origin) for
7 days in DMEM + 2% human serum + recombi-
nant human CSF-1 (10 ng/ml; R&D Systems). CSF-
1 and media were replaced every 48 hours.
aCGH
All sequencing and quality control was performed
at the Integrated Genomics Operation, MSKCC.
DNA was isolated from passage 1 PDG neuro-
spheres from rebound tumors or corresponding
liver tissue by using TRIzol as per manufacturer
instructions (Invitrogen). Three micrograms of
DNA was used with an Agilent (Santa Clara, CA)
standard cy5/cy3 labeling protocol. Briefly,
Agilent Mouse CGH 180k arrays were hybri-
dized at 65°C and 20 revolutions per min for
40 hours. Slides were then scanned by using the
Agilent scanner according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The raw data were extracted with
Feature Extraction by using Agilent default anal-
ysis settings. Subsequent analyses were per-
formed in R v3.1.0 by using the “DNAcopy”
package (65).
RNA-seq
Three RNA-seq experiments were performed in
total: (i) FACS-purified tumor cells (CD45–PDGFRa+)
and TAMs (CD45+CD11b+Gr1–) from Veh, EP, and
Reb tumors; (ii) FACS-purified astrocytes (CD45–
GLAST+), B cells (CD45+CD19+), Tc cells (CD45+
CD3+CD8+), and bulk T cells (CD45+CD3+CD8–)
from Reb tumors; and (iii) FACS-purified TAMs
(CD45+CD11b+Gr1–) from 28-day and Reb tumors.
RNA-sequencing and quality control was per-
formed at the Integrated Genomics Operation,
MSKCC, or Genewiz (Plainfield, NJ). In all cases,
RNA was isolated by using TRIzol as per manu-
facturer instructions (Invitrogen), and RNA integ-
rity was assessed with an Agilent Bioanalyzer
2100. RNA-seq libraries were prepared by using
the SMART-Seq library preparation kit, and 2 ×
50 or 2 × 100 base pair sequencing was performed
on an Illumina HISEq.2000. Sequencing quality
was assessed with FASTQC (www.bioinformatics.
babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc). Reads were mapped
to the mouse genome (mm10) by using STAR
2.3.0e (66) with the default parameters, a min-
imum intron length of 70 base pairs, and a
maximum of 100,000 base pairs. BAM files were
generated and sorted, and duplicate reads were
then removed by using SAMTOOLS (67). Read
counts were tabulatedwith HT-Seq by using “union”
mode and the iGenomes GFF file as a reference
(Illumina) (68).
Gene expression analyses
Raw count data from HT-Seq was imported into
R (v3.1.0) and normalized by using limma voom
(69). Principal component analysis was com-
pleted by using the princomp function on mean
centered data. A log2-fold change cutoff of 1 and
a false discovery rate of 10% were applied for all
differential gene expression analyses (table S1).
Significantly up-regulated genes from these lists
were used in gene ontology analyses by using
DAVID (70). GSVA was performed on RNA-seq
data from FACS-purified PDGFRa+ tumor cells,
using the GSVA package (14) with gene sets from
the C2 group from the Molecular Signatures
Database (MSigDB) (71). A log2-fold change
cutoff of 1 and a false discovery rate cutoff of
10% were used to determine differentially en-
riched gene sets (fig. S3B). The spectrum model
of macrophage activation was assessed with
GSEA, using the gsea function from the pheno-
Test package in R (http://rpackages.ianhowson.
com/bioc/phenoTest). A minimum P value of <1 ×
10−16 was used to represent significance values
that were reported as 0.0 and outside of the
determined distribution. Gene sets were adapted
from a previous study in which mouse macro-
phages were stimulated with IFN-g, IL-4, TNF-a,
TGF-b, IL-1b, MALP2, or CPG (27). A literature-
derived IL-4 responsive gene set was generated
through the use of QIAGEN’s Ingenuity iReport
(www.qiagen.com/ingenuity).
TF activity analysis
TF activity analysis was performed as an adap-
tation of previously published methods: ISMARA
(72) and RegulatorInference (73). Briefly, tran-
scription start sites and Motevo predictions
(74) of binding sites were downloaded from the
SwissRegulon (http://swissregulon.unibas.ch/
fcgi/sr/downloads). These were used to deter-
mine the number of predicted binding sites for
185 TF families across all mouse promoters.
Promoters were designated as 2 kb upstream
and downstream of transcription start sites.
This tabulated matrix was then used in a ridge
regression to model log2 gene expression values
generated by means of voom. Ridge regression
was performed with the glmnet function in R
(75). The regularization parameter, l, was iden-
tified for each sample through 10-fold cross
validation. The coefficients for each TF family
were z-scored and used as relative TF activity
scores in subsequent analyses. Differentially
enriched TFs were identified by using the z-scored
values in limma with a log2-fold change
cutoff of 1 and a false discovery rate of 10%
(table S3).
External data set analysis
RNA-seq expression data from the TCGA glio-
blastoma patient data set was downloaded by
using TCGA-assembler (76). For survival analy-
ses, these data were filtered for patients with
updated clinical information from the Broad
Firehose. Correlations between IGF1 and macro-
phage markers (CD163, MRC1, CSF1R, CD68, and
AIF1) or astrocyte markers (GFAP and ALDH1L1)
were assessed by using a Spearman correlation
coefficient. Normalized gene expression data for
human bulk tumor versus tumor-associated macro-
phage fraction were downloaded from the Gene
Expression Ominbus (GEO) under accession no.
GSE16119 (44). Subtype calls for patients were ob-
tained from GlioVis (http://gliovis.bioinfo.cnio.es).
PI3K signature scores were tabulated with a single-
sample gene set enrichment, as used for macro-
phage activity analysis. The gene set was from
the Hallmark collection from MsigDB, system-
atic name M5923 (43).
Data availability
All sequencing data has been deposited to the
GEO under the accession no. GSE69104 and aCGH
data under the accession no. GSE80399. All code
usedinthisprojectcanbefoundathttps://bitbucket.
org/bowmanr/joycelab-brain-tme.
Data presentation and
statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism 6.0 or R Studio was used for all
data analysis. Parametric data are presented as
mean ± standard error (SEM) and were analyzed
by means of an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t
test. For multiple comparisons, a one-way anal-
ysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s or Dennett’s
correction was used as noted in the figure legends.
Nonparametric data were analyzed by means of a
Mann-Whitney test on ranks. For survival curves,
P values were obtained by using the Log Rank
(Mantel-Cox) test. Fisher’s exact test was used for
histological tumor grading. A pairwise Spearman
correlation test was used for correlational analy-
ses. P < 0.05 was considered as statistically sig-
nificant in all cases. Principal component analyses,
correlation plots, Volcano plots, heatmaps, and
network plots were plotted in R Studio using
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-13
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 base graphics (www.R-project.org), rgl (http://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=rgl), gplots (http://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=gplots), ggplot2 (77),
and qgraph packages (78).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
D. F. Quail, J. A. Joyce, Microenvironmental regulation of tumor
progression and metastasis. Nat. Med. 19, 1423–1437 (2013).
doi: 10.1038/nm.3394; pmid: 24202395
2.
M. R. Junttila, F. J. de Sauvage, Influence of tumour micro-
environment heterogeneity on therapeutic response. Nature
501, 346–354 (2013). doi: 10.1038/nature12626;
pmid: 24048067
3.
R. Stupp et al., Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant
temozolomide for glioblastoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 352, 987–996
(2005). doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa043330; pmid: 15758009
4.
Y. Komohara, K. Ohnishi, J. Kuratsu, M. Takeya, Possible
involvement of the M2 anti-inflammatory macrophage
phenotype in growth of human gliomas. J. Pathol. 216,
15–24 (2008). doi: 10.1002/path.2370; pmid: 18553315
5.
L. Bingle, N. J. Brown, C. E. Lewis, The role of tumour-
associated macrophages in tumour progression: Implications
for new anticancer therapies. J. Pathol. 196, 254–265 (2002).
doi: 10.1002/path.1027; pmid: 11857487
6.
S. F. Hussain et al., The role of human glioma-infiltrating
microglia/macrophages in mediating antitumor immune
responses. Neuro-oncol. 8, 261–279 (2006). doi: 10.1215/
15228517-2006-008; pmid: 16775224
7.
B. Ruffell, L. M. Coussens, Macrophages and therapeutic
resistance in cancer. Cancer Cell 27, 462–472 (2015).
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.02.015; pmid: 25858805
8.
S. M. Pyonteck et al., CSF-1R inhibition alters macrophage
polarization and blocks glioma progression. Nat. Med. 19,
1264–1272 (2013). doi: 10.1038/nm.3337; pmid: 24056773
9.
S. J. Coniglio et al., Microglial stimulation of glioblastoma
invasion involves epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R) signaling. Mol.
Med. 18, 519–527 (2012). doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00217;
pmid: 22294205
10. S. Patel, M. R. Player, Colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor
inhibitors for the treatment of cancer and inflammatory
disease. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 9, 599–610 (2009).
doi: 10.2174/156802609789007327; pmid: 19689368
11. C. H. Ries et al., Targeting tumor-associated macrophages with
anti-CSF-1R antibody reveals a strategy for cancer therapy.
Cancer Cell 25, 846–859 (2014). doi: 10.1016/
j.ccr.2014.05.016; pmid: 24898549
12. W. D. Tap et al., Structure-guided blockade of CSF1R kinase
in tenosynovial giant-cell tumor. N. Engl. J. Med. 373,
428–437 (2015). doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411366;
pmid: 26222558
13. D. Hambardzumyan, N. M. Amankulor, K. Y. Helmy,
O. J. Becher, E. C. Holland, Modeling adult gliomas using
RCAS/t-va technology. Transl. Oncol. 2, 89–95 (2009).
doi: 10.1593/tlo.09100; pmid: 19412424
14. S. Hänzelmann, R. Castelo, J. Guinney, GSVA: Gene set
variation analysis for microarray and RNA-seq data. BMC
Bioinformatics 14, 7 (2013). doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-7;
pmid: 23323831
15. S. M. Brachmann et al., Characterization of the mechanism of
action of the pan class I PI3K inhibitor NVP-BKM120 across a
broad range of concentrations. Mol. Cancer Ther. 11, 1747–1757
(2012). doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-1021; pmid: 22653967
16. C. W. Brennan et al., The somatic genomic landscape of
glioblastoma. Cell 155, 462–477 (2013). doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2013.09.034; pmid: 24120142
17. P. Therasse et al., New guidelines to evaluate the response to
treatment in solid tumors. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 92, 205–216
(2000). doi: 10.1093/jnci/92.3.205; pmid: 10655437
18. J. E. Burda, M. V. Sofroniew, Reactive gliosis and the
multicellular response to CNS damage and disease. Neuron 81,
229–248 (2014). doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.034;
pmid: 24462092
19. E. N. Arwert, E. Hoste, F. M. Watt, Epithelial stem cells, wound
healing and cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 170–180 (2012).
doi: 10.1038/nrc3217; pmid: 22362215
20. F. Ginhoux, J. L. Schultze, P. J. Murray, J. Ochando,
S. K. Biswas, New insights into the multidimensional concept
of macrophage ontogeny, activation and function.
Nat. Immunol. 17, 34–40 (2016). doi: 10.1038/ni.3324;
pmid: 26681460
21. R. L. Bowman, J. A. Joyce, Therapeutic targeting of tumor-
associated macrophages and microglia in glioblastoma.
Immunotherapy 6, 663–666 (2014). doi: 10.2217/imt.14.48;
pmid: 25041027
22. G. Locatelli et al., Primary oligodendrocyte death does not elicit
anti-CNS immunity. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 543–550 (2012).
doi: 10.1038/nn.3062; pmid: 22366759
23. K. Gabrusiewicz et al., Characteristics of the alternative
phenotype of microglia/macrophages and its modulation in
experimental gliomas. PLOS ONE 6, e23902 (2011).
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023902; pmid: 21901144
24. J. D. Sedgwick et al., Isolation and direct characterization of
resident microglial cells from the normal and inflamed central
nervous system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 7438–7442
(1991). doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.16.7438; pmid: 1651506
25. F. Kratochvill et al., TNF counterbalances the emergence of M2
tumor macrophages. Cell Reports 12, 1902–1914 (2015).
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.033; pmid: 26365184
26. S. K. Biswas, A. Mantovani, Macrophage plasticity and
interaction with lymphocyte subsets: Cancer as a paradigm.
Nat. Immunol. 11, 889–896 (2010). doi: 10.1038/ni.1937;
pmid: 20856220
27. R. Ostuni et al., Latent enhancers activated by stimulation in
differentiated cells. Cell 152, 157–171 (2013). doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2012.12.018; pmid: 23332752
28. D. M. Mosser, J. P. Edwards, Exploring the full spectrum of
macrophage activation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 958–969
(2008). doi: 10.1038/nri2448; pmid: 19029990
29. A. Mantovani, S. K. Biswas, M. R. Galdiero, A. Sica, M. Locati,
Macrophage plasticity and polarization in tissue repair and
remodelling. J. Pathol. 229, 176–185 (2013). doi: 10.1002/
path.4133; pmid: 23096265
30. B. J. Faler, R. A. Macsata, D. Plummer, L. Mishra, A. N. Sidawy,
Transforming growth factor-b and wound healing. Perspect.
Vasc. Surg. Endovasc. Ther. 18, 55–62 (2006). doi: 10.1177/
153100350601800123; pmid: 16628336
31. J. Silver, J. H. Miller, Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 5, 146–156 (2004). doi: 10.1038/nrn1326;
pmid: 14735117
32. F. E. Lund, B. A. Garvy, T. D. Randall, D. P. Harris, Regulatory
roles for cytokine-producing B cells in infection and
autoimmune disease. Curr. Dir. Autoimmun. 8, 25–54 (2005).
doi: 10.1159/000082086; pmid: 15564716
33. D. P. Harris et al., Reciprocal regulation of polarized cytokine
production by effector B and T cells. Nat. Immunol. 1, 475–482
(2000). doi: 10.1038/82717; pmid: 11101868
34. B. Johansson-Lindbom, C. A. Borrebaeck, Germinal center
B cells constitute a predominant physiological source of IL-4:
Implication for Th2 development in vivo. J. Immunol. 168,
3165–3172 (2002). doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3165;
pmid: 11907068
35. O. Butovsky, A. E. Talpalar, K. Ben-Yaakov, M. Schwartz,
Activation of microglia by aggregated beta-amyloid or
lipopolysaccharide impairs MHC-II expression and renders
them cytotoxic whereas IFN-g and IL-4 render them protective.
Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 29, 381–393 (2005). doi: 10.1016/
j.mcn.2005.03.005; pmid: 15890528
36. S. J. Forbes, N. Rosenthal, Preparing the ground for tissue
regeneration: From mechanism to therapy. Nat. Med. 20,
857–869 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nm.3653;
pmid: 25100531
37. M. W. Wynes, D. W. Riches, Induction of macrophage insulin-
like growth factor-I expression by the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and
IL-13. J. Immunol. 171, 3550–3559 (2003). doi: 10.4049/
jimmunol.171.7.3550; pmid: 14500651
38. B. K. Kaspar, J. Lladó, N. Sherkat, J. D. Rothstein, F. H. Gage,
Retrograde viral delivery of IGF-1 prolongs survival in a mouse
ALS model. Science 301, 839–842 (2003). doi: 10.1126/
science.1086137; pmid: 12907804
39. W. H. Zheng, S. Kar, S. Doré, R. Quirion, Insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1): A neuroprotective trophic factor acting via the
Akt kinase pathway. J. Neural Transm. Suppl. 2000, 261–272
(2000).pmid: 11205145
40. S. Dupraz et al., The insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor is
essential for axonal regeneration in adult central nervous
system neurons. PLOS ONE 8, e54462 (2013). doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0054462; pmid: 23349896
41. A. M. Fernandez, I. Torres-Alemán, The many faces of insulin-
like peptide signalling in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13,
225–239 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nrn3209; pmid: 22430016
42. M. Pollak, Insulin and insulin-like growth factor signalling in
neoplasia. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 915–928 (2008). doi: 10.1038/
nrc2536; pmid: 19029956
43. A. Liberzon et al., The Molecular Signatures Database
(MSigDB) hallmark gene set collection. Cell Syst. 1, 417–425
(2015). doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2015.12.004; pmid: 26771021
44. A. Murat et al., Modulation of angiogenic and inflammatory
response in glioblastoma by hypoxia. PLOS ONE 4, e5947
(2009). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005947;
pmid: 19536297
45. N. Hermann-Kleiter, G. Baier, NFAT pulls the strings during
CD4+ T helper cell effector functions. Blood 115,
2989–2997 (2010). doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-233585;
pmid: 20103781
46. N. Butowski et al., Orally administered colony stimulating
factor 1 receptor inhibitor PLX3397 in recurrent glioblastoma:
An Ivy Foundation Early Phase Clinical Trials Consortium phase
II study. Neuro-oncol. 18, 557–564 (2016). doi: 10.1093/
neuonc/nov245; pmid: 26449250
47. C. Holohan, S. Van Schaeybroeck, D. B. Longley, P. G. Johnston,
Cancer drug resistance: An evolving paradigm. Nat. Rev. Cancer
13, 714–726 (2013). doi: 10.1038/nrc3599; pmid: 24060863
48. M. J. Mulvihill et al., Discovery of OSI-906: A selective and
orally efficacious dual inhibitor of the IGF-1 receptor and insulin
receptor. Future Med. Chem. 1, 1153–1171 (2009). doi: 10.4155/
fmc.09.89; pmid: 21425998
49. M. H. Roehrl et al., Selective inhibition of calcineurin-NFAT
signaling by blocking protein-protein interaction with small
organic molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 7554–7559
(2004). doi: 10.1073/pnas.0401835101; pmid: 15131267
50. K. Loser et al., FK506 controls CD40L-induced systemic
autoimmunity in mice. J. Invest. Dermatol. 126, 1307–1315
(2006). doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700185; pmid: 16470176
51. Y. Chiba, M. Todoroki, Y. Nishida, M. Tanabe, M. Misawa, A
novel STAT6 inhibitor AS1517499 ameliorates antigen-induced
bronchial hypercontractility in mice. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol.
Biol. 41, 516–524 (2009). doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0163OC;
pmid: 19202006
52. C. Dai et al., PDGF autocrine stimulation dedifferentiates
cultured astrocytes and induces oligodendrogliomas and
oligoastrocytomas from neural progenitors and astrocytes
in vivo. Genes Dev. 15, 1913–1925 (2001). doi: 10.1101/
gad.903001; pmid: 11485986
53. E. Tchougounova et al., Loss of Arf causes tumor progression
of PDGFB-induced oligodendroglioma. Oncogene 26,
6289–6296 (2007). doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210455;
pmid: 17438529
54. T. Ozawa et al., Most human non-GCIMP glioblastoma
subtypes evolve from a common proneural-like precursor
glioma. Cancer Cell 26, 288–300 (2014). doi: 10.1016/
j.ccr.2014.06.005; pmid: 25117714
55. M. Squatrito et al., Loss of ATM/Chk2/p53 pathway
components accelerates tumor development and
contributes to radiation resistance in gliomas. Cancer Cell
18, 619–629 (2010). doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.034;
pmid: 21156285
56. X. Hu et al., mTOR promotes survival and astrocytic
characteristics induced by Pten/AKT signaling in glioblastoma.
Neoplasia 7, 356–368 (2005). doi: 10.1593/neo.04595;
pmid: 15967113
57. J. T. Huse et al., The PTEN-regulating microRNA miR-26a is
amplified in high-grade glioma and facilitates gliomagenesis
in vivo. Genes Dev. 23, 1327–1337 (2009). doi: 10.1101/
gad.1777409; pmid: 19487573
58. A. H. Shih et al., Dose-dependent effects of platelet-derived
growth factor-B on glial tumorigenesis. Cancer Res. 64,
4783–4789 (2004). doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-03-3831;
pmid: 15256447
59. J. B. Jensen, M. Parmar, Strengths and limitations of the
neurosphere culture system. Mol. Neurobiol. 34, 153–161
(2006). doi: 10.1385/MN:34:3:153; pmid: 17308349
60. N. J. Szerlip et al., Intratumoral heterogeneity of receptor
tyrosine kinases EGFR and PDGFRA amplification in
glioblastoma defines subpopulations with distinct growth
factor response. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 3041–3046
(2012). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1114033109; pmid: 22323597
61. V. Ponomarev et al., A novel triple-modality reporter gene for
whole-body fluorescent, bioluminescent, and nuclear
noninvasive imaging. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 31,
740–751 (2004). doi: 10.1007/s00259-003-1441-5;
pmid: 15014901
62. M. Serrano et al., Role of the INK4a locus in tumor suppression
and cell mortality. Cell 85, 27–37 (1996). doi: 10.1016/S0092-
8674(00)81079-X; pmid: 8620534
63. D. N. Louis et al., The 2007 WHO classification of tumours
of the central nervous system. Acta Neuropathol. 114,
aad3018-14
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 97–109 (2007). doi: 10.1007/s00401-007-0243-4;
pmid: 17618441
64. D. C. Allred, J. M. Harvey, M. Berardo, G. M. Clark, Prognostic
and predictive factors in breast cancer by immunohistochemical
analysis. Mod. Pathol. 11, 155–168 (1998). pmid: 9504686
65. V. E. Seshan, A. Olshen, DNAcopy: DNA copy number data
analysis. R package version 1.44.0.
66. A. Dobin et al., STAR: Ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner.
Bioinformatics 29, 15–21 (2013). doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
bts635; pmid: 23104886
67. H. Li et al., The Sequence Alignment/Map format and
SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079 (2009).
doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352; pmid: 19505943
68. S. Anders, P. T. Pyl, W. Huber, HTSeq—A Python framework to
work with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31,
166–169 (2015). doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu638;
pmid: 25260700
69. C. W. Law, Y. Chen, W. Shi, G. K. Smyth, voom: Precision
weights unlock linear model analysis tools for RNA-seq read
counts. Genome Biol. 15, R29 (2014). doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-
2-r29; pmid: 24485249
70. G. Dennis Jr. et al., DAVID: Database for Annotation,
Visualization, and Integrated Discovery. Genome Biol. 4, 3
(2003). doi: 10.1186/gb-2003-4-5-p3
pmid: 12734009
71. A. Subramanian et al., Gene set enrichment analysis: A
knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide
expression profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
15545–15550 (2005). doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102;
pmid: 16199517
72. P. J. Balwierz et al., ISMARA: Automated modeling of genomic
signals as a democracy of regulatory motifs. Genome Res. 24,
869–884 (2014). doi: 10.1101/gr.169508.113;
pmid: 24515121
73. M. Setty et al., Inferring transcriptional and microRNA-
mediated regulatory programs in glioblastoma. Mol. Syst. Biol.
8, 605 (2012). doi: 10.1038/msb.2012.37;
pmid: 22929615
74. M. Pachkov, I. Erb, N. Molina, E. van Nimwegen, SwissRegulon:
A database of genome-wide annotations of regulatory sites.
Nucleic Acids Res. 35 (Database), D127–D131 (2007).
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkl857; pmid: 17130146
75. J. Friedman, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, Regularization paths for
generalized linear models via coordinate descent. J. Stat.
Softw. 33, 1–22 (2010). doi: 10.18637/jss.v033.i01;
pmid: 20808728
76. Y. Zhu, P. Qiu, Y. Ji, TCGA-assembler: Open-source software
for retrieving and processing TCGA data. Nat. Methods 11,
599–600 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2956;
pmid: 24874569
77. H. Wickham, ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis
(Springer, 2009).
78. S. Epskamp, A. O. J. Cramer, L. J. Waldorp, V. D. Schmittmann,
D. Borsboom, qgraph: Network visualizations of relationships
in psychometric data. J. Stat. Softw. 48, 1–18 (2012).
doi: 10.18637/jss.v048.i04
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank X. Chen and N. Shah for excellent technical support. We are
grateful to C. Brennan for generously providing the TS573 patient
tumorsphere line. We thank R. Benezra forcritically reading the manuscript
and O. Olson, P. Castel, and S. Schwartz for experimental advice. We thank
theAnimal ImagingCore, the AntitumorAssessment Core, FlowCytometry
Core, and Integrated Genomics Operation at MSKCC for assistance. The
data presented in this manuscript are tabulated in the main paper and in
the supplementary materials. All sequencing data has been deposited to
the GEO under accession no. GSE69104, and aCGH data under accession
number GSE80399. BLZ945 is available from Novartis under a material
transfer agreement with J.C.S., Novartis. D.F.Q., R.L.B., and J.A.J. are
inventors on a patent application filed by MSKCC related to the use of
combination therapies with CSF-1R inhibitors for gliomas. This research
was supported by the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) (R01CA148967,
J.A.J.), the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research (J.A.J.), fellowships from
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (D.F.Q.), NCI (F31CA167863,
R.L.B.), American Brain Tumor Association (L.A.), Obra Social Ibercaja
(A.J.S.), and the MSKCC Support Grant from the NCI (P30 CA008748).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/352/6288/aad3018/suppl/DC1
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S13
Tables S1 to S4
18 September 2015; accepted 8 April 2016
10.1126/science.aad3018
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
20 MAY 2016 • VOL 352 ISSUE 6288
aad3018-15
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 The tumor microenvironment underlies acquired resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in gliomas
James C. Sutton and Johanna A. Joyce
Daniela F. Quail, Robert L. Bowman, Leila Akkari, Marsha L. Quick, Alberto J. Schuhmacher, Jason T. Huse, Eric C. Holland,
DOI: 10.1126/science.aad3018
 (6288), aad3018.
352
Science 
, this issue p. 10.1126/science.aad3018
Science
changes and through changes in their microenvironment.
signaling in rebounding tumors prolonged survival. Thus, tumors can acquire resistance to therapy through intrinsic 
correlated with elevated PI3-K activity in tumors, driven by macrophage-secreted IGF-1. Blocking PI3-K and IGF-1
blockade prolonged survival in mouse models of GBM, more than 50% of tumors eventually recurred. Recurrence was 
 found that although CSR-1R
et al.
models of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a deadly form of brain cancer. Quail 
mouse
targeting colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R) inhibit protumorigenic macrophages and regress tumors in 
Therapies targeting the tumor microenvironment show promise for treating cancer. For example, antibodies
Another pathway to cancer resistance
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/352/6288/aad3018
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/05/18/352.6288.aad3018.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/9/441/ra82.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/5/255/ra92.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/5/214/ra19.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/6/284/ra58.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/7/353/ra112.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/6/284/ra59.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/304/304ra143.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/309/309ra163.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/328/328ra28.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/328/328ra27.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/352/6288/aad3018#BIBL
This article cites 76 articles, 13 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 3, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
