 Developmental broadening of inhibitory sensory maps
Kathleen B Quast1, Kevin Ung2, Emmanouil Froudarakis3, Longwen Huang3, Isabella 
Herman2,4, Angela P Addison5,6, Joshua Ortiz-Guzman2, Keith Cordiner3, Peter Saggau3,7, 
Andreas S Tolias3,8, and Benjamin R Arenkiel1,2,3,9
1Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
2Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
3Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
4Medical Scientist Training Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
5SMART Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA
6University of St. Thomas, Houston, Texas, USA
7Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, Washington, USA
8Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA
9Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, 
Texas, USA
Abstract
Sensory maps are created by networks of neuronal responses that vary with their anatomical 
position, such that representations of the external world are systematically and topographically 
organized in the brain. Current understanding from studying excitatory maps is that maps are 
sculpted and refined throughout development and/or through sensory experience. Investigating the 
mouse olfactory bulb, where ongoing neurogenesis continually supplies new inhibitory granule 
cells into existing circuitry, we isolated the development of sensory maps formed by inhibitory 
networks. Using in vivo calcium imaging of odor responses, we compared functional responses of 
both maturing and established granule cells. We found that, in contrast to the refinement observed 
for excitatory maps, inhibitory sensory maps became broader with maturation. However, like 
excitatory maps, inhibitory sensory maps are sensitive to experience. These data describe the 
development of an inhibitory sensory map as a network, highlighting the differences from 
previously described excitatory maps.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/reprints/index.html.
Correspondence should be addressed to B.R.A. (arenkiel@bcm.edu). 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.B.Q. and B.R.A. designed the study, performed the analysis and wrote the manuscript. K.B.Q. performed most of the experiments. 
K.U. contributed to the behavior and wide-field imaging. E.F. and A.S.T. performed the two-photon experiments. L.H. performed the 
optogenetic mapping experiments on the AOD set up designed by L.H., K.C., P.S. and B.R.A. A.P.A., J.O.-G. and I.H. assisted with 
behavior, histology and surgeries.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 February ; 20(2): 189–199. doi:10.1038/nn.4467.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Understanding the relationship between structure and function in the brain requires 
investigating the full diversity of neuronal subtypes, and mapping their circuit connections. 
Traditional mapping techniques, such as lesions, anatomical tracing, fMRI, and intrinsic 
signal imaging, have been biased toward excitatory or mixed neuronal population responses. 
This is largely due to research that has historically focused on excitatory neuron responses, 
given that excitatory neurons in the cortex outnumber inhibitory neurons five to one1. Such 
maps have been instrumental in discerning the topographical organization and stereotyped 
response patterns of brain areas and have thus provided a general understanding of 
functional connectivity.
Maps are established and aligned via multiple mechanisms, including molecular cues, 
spontaneous or sensory-dependent remodeling, and refinement2. In the somatosensory 
cortex of rodents, excitatory thalamocortical afferents undergo activity-dependent refinement 
during a critical period of development3. Initially, somatosensory maps are diffuse and 
overlapping. With time, activity sculpts this diffuse pattern into refined barrels, such that 
individual whiskers are represented by discrete segments of cortex. Similar progression of 
map refinement occurs in many areas of the brain, including well-described processes in the 
visual system4,5 and cerebellum6,7. Although our understanding of the functional relevance 
of sensory maps remains incomplete, general perception argues that they may serve critical 
roles in preserving sensory information or conveying computational advantages in the relay 
of afferent information to higher brain areas8.
Genetic and imaging strategies now exist to selectively target diverse subtypes of neurons 
and allow monitoring of their functional connectivity9,10. These tools have revealed many 
properties of individual inhibitory neurons, as well as functional contributions of established 
inhibitory networks. Studies suggest that inhibitory interneurons respond to a wide variety of 
stimuli11–13, provide blanket inhibition to surrounding neurons14, and can regulate networks 
through the propagation of oscillations15–17. In sharp contrast to experience-dependent 
refinement of excitatory neuron responses, individual parvalbumin-positive interneurons in 
mouse visual cortex are initially narrowly tuned for orientation selectivity, but then become 
more broadly tuned18. However, mouse visual cortex lacks orientation-specific 
organization19, and thus the developmental evolution of inhibitory network response 
properties, or maps, has remained elusive.
In this study, we used the mouse olfactory system to investigate the development of 
inhibitory neuron sensory maps. Inhibitory granule cells are the most numerous cell type in 
the olfactory bulb20 and are continually added through postnatal neurogenesis and integrated 
into olfactory bulb circuits. Adult-born granule cells originate in the subventricular zone and 
migrate tangentially to the olfactory bulb, where they eventually populate the superficial 
granule cell layer and continue to mature anatomically, electrically and synaptically as they 
complete radial migration21.
Unlike visual, auditory or other sensory modalities, the olfactory system detects discrete 
volatile stimuli from a large array of chemical molecules rather than a continuous sensory 
space. The olfactory bulb circuitry supports this segmentation of sensory space. Axons of 
olfactory sensory neurons that express in common an olfactory sensory receptor converge on 
Quast et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 one or two glomeruli in the olfactory bulb22–24. Mitral and tufted cells receive sensory input 
from a single glomerulus and relay this information to the piriform cortex. Initial processing 
of sensory information occurs in the bulb, via input from local inhibitory interneurons onto 
mitral and tufted cells25,26. Thus, the spatially organized pattern of glomerular activation 
creates a sensory activation map specific to a given olfactory stimulus27,28. Initial 
experiments to dissect the structure and function of olfactory sensory maps examined either 
presynaptic sensory neuron projections27 or intrinsic imaging responses of mixed cell 
populations29,30. More recently, higher resolution mapping techniques have defined 
response properties of specific neuronal subtypes from superficial interneurons in the 
glomerular layer of the bulb31. It remains unknown, however, how the vast inhibitory 
interneuron network in the granule cell layer dynamically contributes to olfactory sensory 
mapping.
Here we investigated the development of inhibitory interneuron sensory maps. We use the 
term “map” as a way to describe discrete activation domains to different odorants, whereby 
we have mapped the area (size and position) of the olfactory bulb’s inhibitory network upon 
activation by several different specific olfactory stimuli. We used viral delivery of 
conditional GCaMP6 into olfactory bulbs of either Dlx5/6-Cre or Crhr1-Cre mice, which 
genetically targets expression of this calcium indicator to early-stage or mature granule cells, 
respectively. We tracked the development of sensory maps of inhibitory granule cells during 
their integration into olfactory bulb circuitry and found that single odors produced broader 
sensory maps from mature integrated inhibitory cells than from immature, developing 
inhibitory cells. We further found that these maps were sensitive to experience 
manipulations and that olfactory-driven learning precociously expanded network responses, 
while blocking sensory experience restricted maps to an immature state. In summary, we 
describe the formation and expansion of an inhibitory sensory network map in vivo. This 
developmental broadening of an inhibitory sensory network contrasts sharply with 
previously described excitatory map pruning and refinement, but simultaneously exhibits the 
shared property of experience-dependent plasticity.
RESULTS
Genetic labeling of inhibitory granule cells at differing maturation states
With the goal of mapping sensory activation in developmental subsets of inhibitory 
interneurons within the olfactory bulb, we implemented conditional viral genetic methods to 
selectively label granule cells at different stages of maturation. We used transgenic mice that 
expressed Cre recombinase under the control of a promoter from either the inhibitory 
progenitor marker Dlx5/6 (ref. 32), to target immature adult-born granule cells, or 
corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor (Crhr1), which marks mature, integrated granule 
cells33. Using conditional viral reporters, we verified that both Cre lines labeled granule 
cells (Fig. 1a,b), but whereas GFP-labeled cells were concentrated in the middle or deep 
layers of Dlx5/6-Cre bulbs, Crhr1-targeted cells were predominantly located near the 
superficial and middle granule cell layers (Fig. 1a). This is consistent with granule cell 
migration patterns whereby early progenitors migrate from the core of the olfactory bulb to 
the superficial layer, which is enriched in mature and integrated granule cells21,34.
Quast et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In addition to the temporal specification provided by conditional viral labeling, we also 
spatially limited the injection to the center of the olfactory bulb, thereby avoiding 
neuroblasts in the rostral migratory stream and other layers of the olfactory bulb where 
inhibitory neurons reside. Thus, the vast majority of the cells labeled through conditional 
viral injections were granule cells, and we rarely observed labeled cells outside the granule 
cell layer in either Dlx5/6-Cre or Crhr1-Cre targeted mice (Fig. 1a).
To differentiate the temporal dynamics of the Dlx5/6 and Crhr1 drivers in the olfactory bulb, 
we performed 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) birth dating in combination with viral 
labeling. Dlx5/6-Cre mice were first pulsed with the proliferation marker EdU, followed by 
injections of conditional GFP virus into the olfactory bulb at time points ranging between 7 
and 60 d after EdU delivery (Fig. 1c,d top). At the earliest time points examined, 7 and 14 d 
after EdU labeling, we observed the highest ratio of GFP+EdU+/total EdU+ cells, whereas 
the amount of coexpression dropped below half of the highest ratio after 21 d, eventually 
plateauing by 40 d (Fig. 1c,e). By targeting viral delivery to the olfactory bulb and avoiding 
brain structures that harbor earlier-stage granule cell progenitors, we never observed co-
labeling ratios above 60% at the earliest time points, when many migrating neurons have not 
reached the olfactory bulb. Notably, and integral to our study design, this developmental 
expression pattern was the inverse of what we previously obtained for the temporal 
expression in Crhr1-expressing neurons33 (Fig. 1c bottom and Fig. 1e), where we noted 
colabeling in more than 50% of new granule cells 21 d after EdU labeling and where the 
ratio plateaued to near 100% by 28 d. Thus, using the Dlx5/6-Cre and Crhr1-Cre driver 
lines, combined with stereotaxic viral injections of conditional reporters into the core of the 
olfactory bulb, we isolated granule cells at distinct stages of interneuron development.
Functional maturation states of genetically labeled granule cells
We next sought to determine the functional maturation state of selectively labeled inhibitory 
granule cells via whole-cell patch clamp electrophysiology. Through visually targeted 
whole-cell recordings, we found that both Dlx5/6- and Crhr1-expressing neurons were 
active, and injected current elicited action potentials (Fig. 2a). However, although Dlx5/6-
expressing neurons were electrically functional, they displayed several indicators of a more 
immature state, including wider action potential half-width (2.691 ± 0.23 ms versus 2.02 
± 0.19 ms), higher membrane resistance (970 ± 79 MΩ versus 645 ± 57 MΩ) and lower 
capacitance (11.43 ± 0.82 pF versus 13.71 ± 1.28 pF) (Fig. 2b–d). However, we did not 
observe any differences between the two classes of granule cells in the frequency–current 
curves, resting potentials, amount of current needed to reach action potential threshold 
(14.91 ± 1.78 pA versus 18.56 ± 2.87 pA) or time to action potential peak in response to a 
current injection (49.05 ± 7.00 ms versus 62.74.70 ± 11.36 ms at 30pA) (Fig. 2e–h). In fact, 
anatomically we did not observe gross morphological differences between these 
developmentally staggered groups of granule cells (Supplementary Fig. 1).
To distinguish whether Dlx5/6-expressing cells are early stage neurons that later give rise to 
Crhr1-expressing neurons, versus a distinct neuronal subpopulation, we crossed Dlx5/6-Cre 
mice to Crhr1-GFP reporter mice and virally labeled Dlx5/6-expressing cells to track the 
conversion of Dlx5/6 neurons into Crhr1 neurons over time (Fig. 2i). We observed only a 
Quast et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 small overlap in the labeled cells 14 d after viral injection of AAV-flex-tdTomato to label 
Dlx5/6 neurons, whereas the percentage of original Dlx5/6-expressing cells that became 
Crhr1+ increased to over 80% by 60 d after injection (Fig. 2j,k). Together, these data suggest 
that the two drivers label functionally distinct stages of granule cell development, but both 
types of cells respond and fire action potentials similarly to presynaptic excitatory input, and 
both populations could actively participate in olfactory bulb circuitry.
Sensory maps of the olfactory bulb
Having established the genetic tools to label granule cells at distinct stages of maturation, we 
next sought to compare sensory-evoked spatial activation patterns formed by these 
interneuron networks. Toward this end, we targeted expression of the genetically encoded 
calcium indicator GCaMP to either Dlx5/6- or Crhr1-expressing granule cells and performed 
wide-field epifluorescence calcium imaging. We did not observe any evidence that 
expression of GCaMP changed the development of targeted cells, as there were no 
appreciable differences in intrinsic membrane properties of Dlx5/6 neurons after 2 weeks of 
viral GFP or GCaMP6m expression (Supplementary Fig. 2). We then recorded population-
level sensory activation of inhibitory neuron networks at discrete stages of maturation by 
visualizing the entire dorsal olfactory bulb through thinned skulls of anesthetized animals 
expressing GCaMP variants (Fig. 3a).
To establish a reference excitatory odor map against which to compare developing inhibitory 
odor maps, we first examined the sensory odor response maps of mitral and tufted cells in 
the glomerular layer of Thy1-GCaMP3 transgenic reporter mice35 (Fig. 3a–c). To evaluate 
the specificity of responses, we differentially presented a panel of 12 odorants, each of 
which activated a different set of glomeruli (Fig. 3c and data not shown). Although the 
precise activation patterns varied slightly between animals, the general area of activation was 
consistent and reproducible. Previous studies that implemented either intrinsic signal 
imaging29,30, imaging of synapto-pHluorin release from presynaptic olfactory sensory 
neuron terminals27 or mitral cell calcium imaging35 produced similar olfactory sensory 
maps in the olfactory bulb.
We next targeted maturing granule cells for GCaMP expression and odor response mapping. 
Conditional viral expression of the genetically encoded calcium indicator GCaMP6m36 in 
Dlx5/6-Cre or Crhr1-Cre mice allowed us to differentially detect the activation of 
populations of granule cells as a change in fluorescence of the dendrites in the external 
plexiform layer of the olfactory bub. Initially examining immature, Dlx5/6-expressing 
granule cells, we noted larger contiguous areas of activation than we observed from the 
mitral and tufted cell imaging (areas spanning several glomeruli) (Fig. 3d). This responsive 
area was located in a similar position to the activated mitral and tufted cells observed in 
Thy1-GCaMP3 mice and dynamically changed in accordance with the stimulus presented. 
However, unlike mitral and tufted cells, the apical dendrites of granule cells are not 
anatomically restricted to a single glomerulus, thus we did not see evidence of specific 
glomerular-type response, but instead observed larger, more diffuse activation patterns that 
were qualitatively distinct. The differentially activated areas were stimulus-specific and not a 
result of the viral labeling or imaging procedure, since the maps reported odor-specific 
Quast et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activation patterns across the entire dorsal surface of the bulb and were contingent upon the 
stimulus. Together, these data allowed us to begin to construct inhibitory network maps that 
largely paralleled excitatory mitral cell activation domains, albeit with qualitatively different 
and more diffuse areas.
Inhibitory sensory maps become broader with maturation
After elucidating the sensory maps of immature granule cells, we next constructed maps for 
more mature granule networks using the Crhr1-Cre driver line. Hypothesizing that inhibitory 
maps, like their excitatory counterparts, are pruned and refined as circuits mature, we 
expected sharpening in mature granule cell sensory maps. Instead, we observed that a given 
odorant activated Crhr1-expressing granule cells across wider areas of the bulb than Dlx5/6-
expressing granule cells (Fig. 3e). To quantify the area activated by a specific stimulus, we 
set the threshold for response maps at 50% maximal change in fluorescence (ΔF) (Fig. 4a–c) 
and compared the centroid of the activated area for each cell type. We found that 
overlapping activated areas across cell types were dynamic for the stimulus presented (Fig. 
4d). When we compared the consensus maps from multiple animals for the odorant 
pentanol, we noted that the Dlx5/6 map was smaller in area than the Crhr1 map, but the 
overall positioning was consistent (Fig. 4e). We analyzed both ΔF (Fig. 4) and the 
ratiometric change in fluorescence (ΔF/F) (Supplementary Fig. 3). Maximal ΔF and ΔF/F 
values were similar for the two populations of granule cells (Fig. 4f and Supplementary Fig. 
3c), suggesting that neither the maximum density of the activated cells nor the GCaMP6 
viral expression was noticeably different in the two granule cell populations. We report the 
ΔF analysis to remain consistent with olfactory bulb response maps described 
previously27,31. The area activated by pentanol (area ≥ 50% of the maximal ΔF response) 
showed significantly larger domains for the mature Crhr1-expressing granule cells compared 
to immature Dlx5/6-expressing cells, occupying more than twice the area (Fig. 4b,c,g). In 
addition to analyzing activated areas, we also compared normalized fluorescence values for 
all pixels in the non-thresholded response maps, observing a right shift toward increased 
proportion of higher ΔF values in the mature Crhr1 labeled granule cells (Fig. 4h). After 
analyzing other odorants in a similar manner, we found a comparable activated area 
expansion in mature granule cells versus younger ones across stimuli (Supplementary Fig. 
4). Thus the observed broadening of inhibitory sensory maps with developmental 
maturation, without obvious changes in maximal fluorescence levels, suggested that mature 
granule cells receive more inputs37–39.
Finally, to validate that Dlx5/6-targeted neurons follow the same developmental trajectory as 
Crhr1-expressing neurons, we conducted mapping experiments in Dlx5/6-Cre animals at 
later time points. For this, we again targeted Dlx5/6-expressing neurons for GCaMP6m 
expression, but waited 5–6 weeks after viral labeling to allow the granule cells to fully 
mature before imaging. Like Crhr1 maps, Dlx5/6 maps generated 5–6 weeks after injection 
had larger activated areas than those of the immature Dlx5/6-expressing population 
(Supplementary Fig. 5). Together, these data suggest that the observed inhibitory network 
map expansion is due to the maturation state of the granule cells and not differential 
targeting of conditional GCaMP reporters to different granule cell subtypes.
Quast et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Additional excitatory inputs with inhibitory map expansion
Having described the developmental broadening of granule cell sensory maps, we next 
sought synaptic evidence of additional inputs. We reasoned that if distant mitral cells can 
more effectively activate mature granule cells, we might expect that mature granule cells 
would receive additional and/or more diverse excitatory synapses. Using whole cell 
recordings, we assayed the synaptic inputs onto the two different populations of granule 
cells by recording miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (Fig. 5a). Consistent 
with anticipated connectivity changes that are thought to occur with neuronal maturation, we 
measured significantly more excitatory synaptic events in Crhr1-expressing cells than in 
Dlx5/6-expressing ones (Dlx5/6-Cre mEPSC frequency 0.231 ± 0.057 Hz, Crhr1-Cre 
mEPSC frequency 1.199 ± 0.297 Hz) (Fig. 5b), indicating the presence of enhanced synaptic 
connectivity in the more mature cohort. There was no change in the mean cell mEPSC 
amplitude (Dlx5/6-Cre mEPSC amplitude 1.49 ± 0.15 pA, Crhr1-Cre mEPSC amplitude 
1.757 ± 0.1874 pA) (Fig. 5c inset), but we did note a significant difference in the variance of 
all the events in the cells measured (Fig. 5c). Thus, mature Crhr1-expressing cells receive 
more synapses than immature Dlx5/6-expressing cells.
To further confirm that granule cells add inputs from distal mitral cell as they mature, we 
implemented optogenetic mapping to measure functional connections from 
channelrhodopsin (ChR2)-expressing mitral cells onto either immature or mature granule 
cells (Fig. 5d–f)40. By limiting blue light to a small, 30-μm-diameter area of illumination 
(Supplementary Fig. 6), we activated either proximal or distal mitral cells and measured the 
synaptic input onto either immature or mature neurons (Dlx5/6-Cre neurons 2–3 or 5–6 
weeks after viral injection, respectively) (Fig. 5d–f). We found that mature granule cells 
received stronger connections from distal mitral cells, whereas immature granule cells 
received little to no input from mitral cells further than 250 μm away (the approximate 
radius of the immature sensory activated maps) (Fig. 5f). Thus the expansion of the granule 
cell map is at least in part due to increased connections from distal mitral cells.
Individual granule cells become broadly tuned
We noted that, as a network, granule cell response areas became larger with maturation, but 
we also sought to explore the response properties of individual granule cells in vivo. Toward 
this end we visualized calcium transients by two-photon imaging in both mature and 
immature granule cells in response to a small panel of odorants (Fig. 6a,b). We found that 
mature neurons were more likely to respond to odor stimulation than immature neurons 
(26.3% Dlx5/6-expressing neurons responding versus 50.6% Crhr1-expressing neurons 
responding) (Fig. 6c top). Of the responsive granule cells, we found that the Dlx5/6-targeted 
cohort overwhelmingly responded to a single odor (Fig. 6c bottom) whereas Crhr1-targeted 
neurons responded to a broader range of stimuli. Whereas only 12.6% of the responsive 
Dlx5/6 neurons responded to multiple odors, 38.1% of Crhr1 neurons did so. Moreover, a 
small percentage of this more mature population responded to four or more odors. When we 
evaluated profiles to individual odors, we found that, of the responsive neurons, a similar 
percentage of the Dlx5/6 neurons responded to each of the different olfactory stimuli 
presented, including complex odors such as coffee and a mixture of eight individual 
chemicals, whereas significantly more Crhr1 neurons responded to the complex odorants 
Quast et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Fig. 6d). Thus, not only do sensory maps of granule cell networks become larger and 
broader with development, the tuning properties of individual granule cells become both 
more responsive and more broadly tuned as well.
Developing granule cell maps are susceptible to experience manipulations
A hallmark of developing excitatory sensory maps is susceptibility to experience or activity 
manipulations. To test whether inhibitory maps are likewise sensitive, we performed two 
different manipulations of the animals’ sensory experience. First we wanted to determine 
how restricting sensory experience might affect normal granule cell map maturation. To test 
this, we performed unilateral, reversible naris occlusion41 for 5–6 weeks in mice that 
expressed GCaMP in either immature (Dlx5/6) or mature (Crhr1) granule cells (Fig. 7a,b). 
Comparing the sensory maps of the occluded to the open control side (Fig. 7c,d), we found 
that decreased sensory experience prevented normal expansion of immature granule cell 
sensory maps (Fig. 7e), but had no effect on the sensory maps of the mature granule cells 
(Fig. 7f). Furthermore, the maximal ΔF did not change in either state. To determine whether 
this sensory manipulation resulted in synaptic changes, we performed whole-cell mEPSC 
analysis in both sets of neurons (Fig. 7g–k). We found a sharp and significant decrease in the 
frequency of events only in the immature cells (Fig. 7h,i), whereas more mature cells 
showed no change, suggesting that once established the number of synaptic connections 
onto granule cells is stable.
As decreased sensory experience prevented the expansion of inhibitory sensory maps, we 
next enhanced olfactory sensory experience by training mice in a Go/NoGo olfactory task 
(Fig. 8a). After habituating the mice to a training box, we labeled immature granule cells 
with the GCaMP virus and trained the mice to perform a Go/NoGo task (Fig. 8b and 
Supplementary Fig. 7a). We next imaged GCaMP response maps to the odorants used in the 
training (Fig. 8c) and analyzed the activation domains as described previously (Fig. 4). 
Compared to that in control mice that were not trained, the area of the bulb activated by the 
trained odors was significantly larger (Fig. 8d). The data suggest that this premature 
expansion of the sensory map was specific to the trained odors, since novel odors did not 
elicit a similar expansion. This effect was not due to the odor selected for training, as 
different odor pairs produced similar results (Supplementary Fig. 7b,c). Recording the 
synaptic events after training showed increased variability of event frequency 
(Supplementary Fig. 7d–f), with a trend toward increased event frequency. This is not 
surprising, since interneuron map expansion was specific to the training odors and responses 
are sparse to individual odors. Together, these data suggest that learning resulted in map 
expansion, as both rewarded and unrewarded odor maps were plastic and repeated passive 
exposure to odors without learning did not cause map expansion (Supplementary Fig. 8). 
Additionally, learning-induced sensory map expansion was limited to immature neurons, 
given that training and subsequent imaging of mature granule cells did not change either 
activation domains or synaptic properties (Supplementary Fig. 9). Thus, our findings support 
a model whereby developing granule cells may initially receive centralized connections 
located near the activated mitral cells, and with sensory experience (or normal maturation) 
they may receive additional inputs from distal mitral cells to expand the inhibitory sensory 
map (Fig. 8e,f).
Quast et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
By genetically targeting different stages of granule cell maturation for temporally defined 
and cell type–specific expression of GCaMP6, we have begun to reveal the development of 
sensory maps in an inhibitory network. Combining genetic, viral and in vivo imaging 
methods, we were able to isolate and monitor the activity of inhibitory interneuron 
populations as they become integrated into existing excitatory circuitry and further analyze 
how functional integration translates into sensory activation of a network. Notably, we found 
that, in contrast to previously described maps that show consolidation and refinement of 
excitatory connections with maturation, interneurons display a dramatic expansion and 
broadening of their patterned connectivity. Although excitatory and inhibitory cells have 
opposing functions in the brain, and as such it is reasonable that their network development 
would likewise be different, it is still surprising that inhibitory sensory map development 
was opposite.
Historically, granule cell function has been closely tied to lateral inhibition and contrast 
enhancement42. Although the dendrites of individual granule cells extend only 200 μm 
within the external plexiform layer, the lateral dendrites of mitral cells can reach over 1,000 
μm and are thought to connect distant areas of the olfactory bulb20. Consistent with this, our 
data suggest that granule cells are first innervated by common or local inputs before being 
recruited by distant, functionally distinct areas.
Intriguingly, map expansion evident in olfactory bulb granule cells may be a fundamental 
principle of inhibitory map development. If most inhibitory cells are broadly tuned or can 
respond to a wide range of stimuli, it would follow that an individual stimulus could activate 
a diverse and expansive number of inhibitory cells, thereby creating a broad map. Such a 
broad map could either be present from the earliest stages of development or, as we found, 
the map could evolve and broaden through experience and time. These types of associative 
connections that result from adding distal inputs after the establishment of initial local 
connections are ideal cellular candidates for brain state-dependent neuromodulation, 
learning, or memory.
Current theories on the importance of granule cells have suggested roles in plasticity and 
memory. Likewise, the importance of inhibitory neurons in brain plasticity is well supported. 
Previously, the search for neural correlates of learning and plasticity had focused largely on 
excitatory cells and synapses, but it is now appreciated that inhibitory interneurons also play 
an integral role in the brain’s ability to adapt and learn. Inhibitory neurons directly influence 
phases of enhanced plasticity during critical periods43, and inhibitory circuits contribute to 
both acquisition and expression of fear conditioning memory44. Thus, it is vital to better 
understand the developmental mechanisms that govern inhibitory network sensory map 
formation and function and to elucidate the contributions of inhibitory networks toward 
sensory processing.
Inhibitory input by adult-born granule cells in the olfactory circuit is a critical determinant 
of odor detection threshold, short-term olfactory memory and perceptual learning45–47. In 
turn, olfactory learning itself can increase granule cell survival48,49, demonstrating a 
Quast et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dynamic and intricate relationship between learning, circuit maintenance and granule cell 
function. Our findings that experience and learning can enhance inhibitory sensory map 
development support the importance of inhibitory cells in these behaviors. Granule cells 
initially receive excitatory inputs onto their somata and basal dendrites before they receive 
excitatory inputs on their distal dendrites37–39. These initial inputs may originate from local 
mitral cells and centrifugal inputs, whereas additional connectivity later in their development 
might come from distant mitral cells. Thus, immature inhibitory sensory maps may provide 
contextual information for early sensory processing, which is later modulated by activity-
dependent synaptogenesis. One intriguing possible biological consequence of this is that 
developmental expansion of inhibitory sensory maps may represent circuit substrates for 
associative learning.
We have also defined the later stages of granule cell maturation based on molecular markers 
instead of relying strictly on birth-dating. By focusing on genetic markers, we were able to 
differentiate late-developing granule cells from the mature, fully integrated cells and thus 
detect the different functions they may have in sensory processing and/or learning. 
Altogether, we describe here the formation and expansion of an inhibitory sensory network 
map in vivo, as well as the sensitivity of inhibitory sensory maps to experience 
manipulations. Further, we highlight the marked differences in map expansion versus 
refinement of interneurons compared to excitatory cells during development. With these 
data, it now becomes intuitive that interneuron sensory maps show this type of map 
expansion with maturation, since the main role for interneurons is to act as the refinement 
regulator of excitatory circuits. Overall, our mapping efforts have both revealed potential 
general principles of interneuron network development and reinforced the importance of 
examining multiple cell types toward better understanding how differential cell types and 
their patterns of functional connectivity contribute to brain function.
ONLINE METHODS
Experimental animals
All experimental animals were treated in compliance with the US Department of Health and 
Human Services and Baylor College of Medicine IACUC guidelines. Crhr1-Cre (ref. 9), 
Dlx5/6-Cre (ref. 50), Crhr1-EGFP (ref. 51), Thy1-ChR2 (ref. 52) and Thy1-GCaMP3 (ref. 
35) mice were previously described. All experiments were performed on mice of both sexes 
ages 7–14 weeks.
Viral injection and edU pulsing
Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) serotype DJ/8 encoding flexed-GCaMP6m36, flexed-GFP 
or flexed-tdTomato were packaged in house. 630 nL AAV (~2.5 × 1012 viral particles/mL) 
were injected into the main olfactory bulb (from bregma: ML, ± 0.9 mm; AP, 3.82 mm; and 
0.9 mm from the surface of the bulb) of Dlx5/6-Cre or Crhr1-Cre mice using glass injection 
pipettes and a Nanoject II (Drummond Scientific Company, Broomall, PA) with a rate of 63 
nL/s at 20-s intervals to obtain uniform labeling of granule cells.
Quast et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Birth-dating of neurons was performed as previously described33. Briefly, adult Dlx5/6-Cre 
or Crhr1-Cre mice received two doses of EdU (Invitrogen, 50 mg/kg) intraperitoneally 8 h 
apart. Seven, 14, 21, 28, 45 and 60 d after EdU pulsing, AAV-flex-GFP was injected into the 
Dlx5/6-Cre olfactory bulb as described above, and experimental mice were sacrificed 14 d 
after injection for imaging and colocalization analysis.
Immunohistochemistry and confocal imaging
For confocal imaging, animals were deeply anesthetized using isoflurane, followed by 
intracardial perfusion of PBS and 4% PFA. Brains were dissected, postfixed in 4% PFA at 
4 °C overnight before cryoprotection in 30% sucrose. Olfactory bulbs were coronally 
sectioned at 25 μm using a cryostat (CM1860, Leica). Free-floating sections were stained 
with rabbit anti-GFP (Synaptic Systems, Cat. No. 132 003, 1:1,000) and a Click-iT EdU 
Alexa-555 kit (Invitrogen C10338) and anti-rabbit Alexa-488 (1:500 Invitrogen A32731). 
Confocal images were obtained using a Leica TCS SPE confocal microscope. Single optical 
planes were imaged with a 20× objective. The field of view spanned all layers of the granule 
cell area. For birthdating assays, the total number of EdU-546 positive cells and number of 
GFP cells colocalizing with EdU-546 were counted blind to time point. For the timeframe 
for maturation of Dlx5/6 cells into CHRH cells, the total number of AAV-flex-tdTomato 
cells and number of AAV-flex-tdTomato cells colocalizing with Crhr1-GFP were counted 
blind.
Anatomic reconstructions of single cells were assessed from animals injected with low titer 
AAV-flex-GFP virus. 80-μm horizontal sections were stained with rabbit anti-GFP (Synaptic 
Systems, 1:1,000) and subsequently anti-rabbit Alexa-488 (1:500). Confocal z-stacks were 
obtained at 1-μm intervals covering the entire cell. Only cells without any clipping of 
dendritic arbors were analyzed. Analysis was performed blind to genotype, and granule cells 
were reconstructed using Neurolucida Software (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT).
Electrophysiology
Mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and then perfused with cold artificial 
cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF, in mM:125 NaCl, 25 glucose, 25 NaHCO3, 2.5 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 
1.25 NaH2PO4 and 1 MgCl2, pH 7.3, 310–320 mOsm). The brain was dissected, embedded 
in low melting point agarose and placed in an ice-cold sucrose-based cutting solution (in 
mM: 87 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.6 NaH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3, 75 sucrose, 10 glucose, 1.3 ascorbic 
acid, 0.5 CaCl2, 7 MgCl2). 300-μm-thick coronal olfactory bulb slices were sectioned on a 
vibratome (VT1200, Leica). Slices were then recovered in oxygenated ACSF (37 °C) for 15 
min and allowed to acclimate to room temperature for at least 15 min before recordings.
Granule cells were targeted using a combination of infrared Nomarski DIC optics and 
fluorescence microscopy (BX50WI, Olympus) and further identified by their high input 
resistance. Recordings were obtained on an Axon MultiClamp 700B amplifier and digitized 
at 10 kHz (Axon Digidata 1440A). Recording electrodes (5–8 MΩ) were fabricated from 
borosilicate glass microcapillaries (outer diameter, 1.5 mm) with a micropipette puller 
(Sutter Instruments).
Quast et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) were recorded from GFP+ or 
tdTomato+ granule cells in oxygenated ACSF containing 1 μM TTX, 10 μM APV, 20 μM 
bicuculline, using an internal solution that contained (in mM) 120 cesium methanesulfonate, 
6 CsCl, 2 MgCl2, 0.05 CaCl2, 20 HEPES, 0.02 EGTA, 10 phosphocreatine disodium salt, 4 
Mg-ATP, 0.4 Na3-GTP, 0.2% biocytin (pH 7.2 with CsOH, 290–300 mOsm). Cells were 
held at -70 mV throughout the experiment and access resistances were maintained at less 
than 30 MΩ. Signals were low pass filtered at 2 kHz and analyzed using MiniAnalysis 
(Synaptosoft) blind to cell type. mEPSC recordings for naris occlusion manipulations were 
performed after injecting AAV-flex-GFP in the right bulb and AAV-flex-tdTomato in the left 
bulb, randomly inserting the nose plug and performing the recordings blind to the occluded 
side.
Intrinsic membrane and spiking properties were recorded from GFP+ granule cells in 
oxygenated ACSF using an internal solution that contained (in mM) 120 potassium 
gluconate, 10 KCl, 10 phosphocreatine, 4 Mg-ATP, 0.3 Na-GTP, 10 HEPES and 0.15% 
biocytin (pH 7.3, 290–300 mOsm). Resting potential and compensated input resistance was 
recorded within seconds of breaking into a cell. Cells with a series resistance of <30 MΩ and 
<25% change for the duration of the experiment were used for analysis. Analysis of current-
clamp electrophysiological data was performed using pClamp10 (Molecular Devices) Single 
action potential parameters (peak amplitude, half-width and hyperpolarization anti-peak) 
were measured at threshold and action potential amplitudes and after-hyperpolarization 
potentials were measured relative to action potential threshold. To measure granule cell 
firing properties, the frequency–current relationship was calculated as the spike frequency 
after current steps from 0 pA (resting approximately −60 mV) to 100 pA were applied in 
increments of 10 pA (0.05 Hz, 1,000 ms duration).
Optogenetic mapping of mitral cell inputs onto GCs were performed on Thy1-ChR2; 
Dlx5/6-Cre mice injected with AAV-flex-tdTomato. Recordings occurred either 2 weeks 
after injections (immature GCs) or 5–6 weeks after injections (mature GCs). An acousto-
optic deflector (AOD)-based microscope system was used to optically stimulate the ChR2-
expressing mitral cells. A BLM-Series 473 nm blue laser system (Spectra Services) was 
used to generate laser beams. A neutral density filter (Thorlabs) was used to attenuate laser 
intensity. Two orthogonally mounted AODs (LS55-V, Isomet) were employed to produce an 
arbitrary random-access 2D scan pattern. To generate acoustic waves for deflectors, two 
deflector drivers (IntraAction Corp.) were implemented. Custom software in Matlab 
(MathWorks) controlling output voltages through a D/A converter (National Instruments) 
connected the deflector drivers. A scan angle magnification telescope was used to increase 
scan range to fit the objective’s field of view. Finally, the AOD scanning beam was coupled 
into the upright microscope. For circuit mapping, stimulation sites were programmed at grid 
points spaced 30 μm along the mitral cell layer in coronal olfactory bulb slices with 15 ms 
duration and 1 s intervals. To elicit action potentials in ChR2+ cells from the Thy1-ChR2 
mice with high fidelity and spatiotemporal resolution, we optimized the laser intensity (40 
mW/mm2). For connectivity mapping experiments, we considered a synaptic event as an 
evoked postsynaptic current if it met two criteria: the amplitude was over 5 pA and the onset 
of the PSC was within 20 ms after the onset of laser stimulation. Each trace was analyzed, 
and the evoked PSC amplitude and probability for each stimulation spot were calculated.
Quast et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Calcium imaging
In vivo wide-field calcium imaging was performed in anesthetized (urethane, 1.2 μg/kg) 
head-fixed animals (8–14 weeks old) through thinned skulls 14–21 d (or 5–6 weeks when 
noted) after viral injection. Animals were kept warm with a portable heating pad and a local 
anesthetic (bupivacaine, 0.5%) was applied to the incision areas. Sensory evoked responses 
were acquired with a Leica M205FA microscope at 6× magnification, a GFP filter set and a 
Leica FL6000 fluorescence light source. Optical signals were recorded for 9 s per trial at a 
464 × 346 pixel resolution. A CCD camera (DFC360 FX, Leica) captured images at a frame 
rate of 10 Hz and videos were digitized at 12 bits using Leica Application Suite software. 
Odorants were presented using a custom-made olfactometer (stimulus duration, 3 s) and 
were presented as ~1% saturated vapor, adjusted for vapor pressure. Separate lines for each 
odorant were used to prevent cross contamination. The odors were presented in a random 
order with at least three trials per odorant at interstimulus intervals ≥60 s.
For in vivo two-photon calcium imaging, anesthetized mice (IP urethane 1.2 μg/kg) were 
placed in a stereotaxic head holder (Kopf Instruments) and the temperature of the mouse was 
maintained between 36.5°C and 37.5°C using a homeothermic blanket system (Harvard 
Instruments). In the surgical procedure, part of the skin over the skull was resected, the 
wound margins were sealed with surgical glue (VetBond, 3M) and a head holder was 
secured to the skull using bone cement. Using a dental drill and carbide bur FG 1/2, a 
craniotomy was performed over one or both olfactory bulbs, and the exposed tissue was 
washed with buffer (125 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 10 mM glucose, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM 
CaCl2, 2 mM MgSO4, pH 7.4). In most animals the dura was removed, and the window was 
then sealed using a glass coverslip secured with a thin layer of surgical glue (VetBond, 3M).
We recorded calcium traces using a two-photon resonant microscope (Thorlabs) equipped 
with a Chameleon Ti-sapphire laser (Coherent) tuned to 920 nm and a 25×, 1.1 NA Nikon 
objective. The average power output of the objective was kept at less than 150 mW, and 
calcium activity was typically sampled at ~12 Hz. We recorded data from depths of 180–450 
μm below the cortical surface. We used the following odors: pentanol, anisole, 
acetophenone, isoamyl acetate and a mixture containing the previous odors plus cineol, 
isobutyric acid, methyl salicylate and (+)-carvone, diluted in mineral oil to approximately 
1%, adjusting the single odors for vapor pressure. To deliver odorants, we used a custom-
built automated eight-channel olfactometer in which the flow of each odor vial was coupled 
to a solenoid valve (Lee Company). The experiment was controlled by a custom state system 
written in LabView (National Instruments). Odorants were presented pseudorandomly for 4 
s with 10 s of air flow in between. Each odor was presented between three and six times.
Naris occlusion
We performed reversible, unilateral naris occlusion as previously described41. Briefly we 
constructed removable nose plugs from a small tapered piece of polyethylene tubing 
(PE-50/10 Warner Instruments) filled with a knotted piece of 3-0 suture silk with an attached 
hair for easy removal. Nose plugs were randomly inserted into either the right or left nostril 
of a mouse immediately after viral injection to label granule cells. Nose plugs were left in 
for 5–6 weeks and inspected every 2 d to ensure consistent occlusion. Animals with early 
Quast et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 nose plug removal were not imaged. During calcium imaging, the right bulb was always 
imaged first.
Olfactory associative learning training
Mice were water-restricted to no less than 85% of their baseline weight beginning 2 d before 
preliminary training. Water was restricted to 40 mL per kg, per day during the restriction 
period. Mice were randomly divided into control or training groups. For the training group, 
mice were trained using a Go/NoGo paradigm in a behavioral chamber with infrared nose 
pokes (Med Associates Inc.). All mice were first trained to poke their nose into the odor port 
for at least 300 ms, before moving to the side water port to retrieve water reward within 5 s. 
After preliminary training sessions (~30–60 min/d for ~5–6 d) mice received viral injections 
to label cells. After recovery for 2 d, training group mice were trained to respond to the Go 
odor stimulus (S+) (1% anisole in mineral oil for Fig. 8, 1% acetophenone in mineral oil for 
Supplementary Fig. 6) by moving to the water port for a reward and were trained to respond 
to the NoGo odor stimulus48 (1% pentanol in mineral oil for Fig. 8, 1% (+)-carvone in 
mineral oil for Supplementary Fig. 6) by refraining from poking into reward ports and 
starting a new trial. The mice needed to sample the odors for at least 100 ms before 
responding and to respond within 5 s after odor port poking. False positives (incorrect NoGo 
response) caused a 4 s timeout punishment. Go and NoGo stimuli were presented to the 
mice in random sequences during training. Mice were trained for 20 trials per block and ~20 
blocks per day. After 3–6 d of odor training, the mice performed at over 80% correct 
responses. Odors were then diluted with mineral oil to 0.1% and 0.01% to keep the mice 
actively learning until calcium imaging, which occurred 14–21 d after viral injection and 
subsequent training. Control mice were still water-restricted, but without associative learning 
training.
For passive odor exposure, tea balls containing 100 μL of 1% of either pentanol or anisole 
were hung from the lid of the home cage for exposed mice, or 100 μL of pure mineral oil for 
control mice, for 1 h per day for 14–21 d after viral labeling until wide-field calcium 
imaging occurred.
Data analysis
For wide-field calcium imaging, all data analysis was performed with custom written Matlab 
scripts, which are available upon request. Initial data processing included averaging trials 
and visually aligning the region of interest (dorsal olfactory bulb). ΔF maps were created by 
temporally averaging the entire 3-s odor stimulation period and subtracting the temporal 
average of the 2 s immediately preceding odor onset. ΔF/F maps were additionally 
normalized by the first five frames of the averaged trial. There was no appreciable 
photobleaching of the GCaMP6m signals during the experiments. For quantification, the 
maps thresholds were set at 50% of the maximum ΔF (or ΔF/F). To generate consensus 
maps, individual response maps were aligned across preparations, normalized to percent 
maximal change and then averaged. After averaging, each odor map thresholded odor map 
was set at 50% maximal amplitude and further smoothed with a mean filter, and the area 
outline was defined.
Quast et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For two-photon data processing, all analysis was performed in Matlab (MathWorks). We 
compensated for motion artifacts in the horizontal plane, and cell detection was done by 
either detecting circular regions based on minimum diameter, cell contrast, edge sharpness 
and maximum number of cells per site, with supervision and correction if necessary, or 
performed entirely manually. Calcium traces were averaged from all pixels in segmented 
cells and were normalized to ΔF/F. To estimate the responses to olfactory cues, we averaged 
the calcium activity over the first 3 s following odor onset and subtracted from that the 
average calcium activity over the last 1 s just before odor onset. Cells were classified as 
responsive if a t-test against 0 proved significant (P < 0.05).
Statistics
All data are presented as individual points with bars at mean ± s.e.m. or ± s.d. as indicated. 
No estimates of statistical power were performed before experiments; animal numbers were 
minimized to conform to ethical guidelines while accurately measuring neuronal and 
network responses, and our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous 
publications31,33,40. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software 
(GraphPad Software, Inc.), noting the variance to ensure proper statistical parameters were 
applied. Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested. 
Statistical methods used include two-tailed students t-test with Welch’s correction as 
applicable, one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s correction for multiple comparisons, two-way 
ANOVA or Kolmogorov–Smirnov test as indicated. All histology and electrophysiology 
analysis were performed blinded. Naris occlusion experiments were performed and analyzed 
blinded to occluded side. Data collection and analysis for imaging experiments were not 
performed blind to the conditions of the experiment, but the data were batch processed in 
Matlab. One Dlx5/6 trained and one Dlx5/6 control animal were excluded due to images 
being out of focus and one mature Dlx5/6 neuron for the optogenetic mapping experiment 
was excluded for membrane properties not consistent with granule cells (Cm > 24 pF and Rm 
< 400 MΩ).
A Supplementary methods checklist is available.
Data and code availability
The data that support the findings of this study and code are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank A. Herman, C. Kim, H. Lu, D. Murphey, K. Schulze and R. Sillitoe for discussion and 
critical input on this manuscript. This work was supported by the McNair Medical Institute, the Charif Souki Fund, 
IRACDA Fellowship K12 GM084897 to K.Q., NRSA F31NS089178 to K.U., NINDS grant F31NS081805 to I.G., 
NINDS R01NS078294 to B.R.A., U54HD083092 to the BCM IDDRC, and the Intelligence Advanced Research 
Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of Interior/Interior Business Center (DoI/IBC) contract number 
D16PC00003 to A.S.T. The US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental 
purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclusions contained 
Quast et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or 
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DoI/IBC or the US Government.
References
1. Markram H, et al. Interneurons of the neocortical inhibitory system. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 
5:793–807. [PubMed: 15378039] 
2. Cang J, Feldheim DA. Developmental mechanisms of topographic map formation and alignment. 
Annu Rev Neurosci. 2013; 36:51–77. [PubMed: 23642132] 
3. Iwasato T, et al. NMDA receptor-dependent refinement of somatotopic maps. Neuron. 1997; 
19:1201–1210. [PubMed: 9427244] 
4. Gordon JA, Stryker MP. Experience-dependent plasticity of binocular responses in the primary 
visual cortex of the mouse. J Neurosci. 1996; 16:3274–3286. [PubMed: 8627365] 
5. Ackman JB, Burbridge TJ, Crair MC. Retinal waves coordinate patterned activity throughout the 
developing visual system. Nature. 2012; 490:219–225. [PubMed: 23060192] 
6. Kakizawa S, Yamasaki M, Watanabe M, Kano M. Critical period for activity-dependent synapse 
elimination in developing cerebellum. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:4954–4961. [PubMed: 10864953] 
7. White JJ, et al. Cerebellar zonal patterning relies on Purkinje cell neurotransmission. J Neurosci. 
2014; 34:8231–8245. [PubMed: 24920627] 
8. Thivierge JP, Marcus GF. The topographic brain: from neural connectivity to cognition. Trends 
Neurosci. 2007; 30:251–259. [PubMed: 17462748] 
9. Taniguchi H, et al. A resource of Cre driver lines for genetic targeting of GABAergic neurons in 
cerebral cortex. Neuron. 2011; 71:995–1013. [PubMed: 21943598] 
10. Murphey DK, Herman AM, Arenkiel BR. Dissecting inhibitory brain circuits with genetically-
targeted technologies. Front Neural Circuits. 2014; 8:124. [PubMed: 25368555] 
11. Sohya K, Kameyama K, Yanagawa Y, Obata K, Tsumoto T. GABAergic neurons are less selective 
to stimulus orientation than excitatory neurons in layer II/III of visual cortex, as revealed by in 
vivo functional Ca2+ imaging in transgenic mice. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:2145–2149. [PubMed: 
17314309] 
12. Kerlin AM, Andermann ML, Berezovskii VK, Reid RC. Broadly tuned response properties of 
diverse inhibitory neuron subtypes in mouse visual cortex. Neuron. 2010; 67:858–871. [PubMed: 
20826316] 
13. Cazakoff BN, Lau BY, Crump KL, Demmer HS, Shea SD. Broadly tuned and respiration-
independent inhibition in the olfactory bulb of awake mice. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:569–576. 
[PubMed: 24584050] 
14. Fino E, Yuste R. Dense inhibitory connectivity in neocortex. Neuron. 2011; 69:1188–1203. 
[PubMed: 21435562] 
15. Nusser Z, Kay LM, Laurent G, Homanics GE, Mody I. Disruption of GABAA receptors on 
GABAergic interneurons leads to increased oscillatory power in the olfactory bulb network. J 
Neurophysiol. 2001; 86:2823–2833. [PubMed: 11731539] 
16. Lagier S, Carleton A, Lledo PM. Interplay between local GABAergic interneurons and relay 
neurons generates gamma oscillations in the rat olfactory bulb. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:4382–4392. 
[PubMed: 15128852] 
17. Sohal VS, Zhang F, Yizhar O, Deisseroth K. Parvalbumin neurons and gamma rhythms enhance 
cortical circuit performance. Nature. 2009; 459:698–702. [PubMed: 19396159] 
18. Kuhlman SJ, Tring E, Trachtenberg JT. Fast-spiking interneurons have an initial orientation bias 
that is lost with vision. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14:1121–1123. [PubMed: 21750548] 
19. Ohki K, Chung S, Ch’ng YH, Kara P, Reid RC. Functional imaging with cellular resolution reveals 
precise micro-architecture in visual cortex. Nature. 2005; 433:597–603. [PubMed: 15660108] 
20. Shepherd, GM. The Synaptic Organization of the Brain. 5. Oxford Univ. Press; 2004. 
21. Carleton A, Petreanu LT, Lansford R, Alvarez-Buylla A, Lledo PM. Becoming a new neuron in the 
adult olfactory bulb. Nat Neurosci. 2003; 6:507–518. [PubMed: 12704391] 
Quast et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Vassar R, et al. Topographic organization of sensory projections to the olfactory bulb. Cell. 1994; 
79:981–991. [PubMed: 8001145] 
23. Mombaerts P, et al. Visualizing an olfactory sensory map. Cell. 1996; 87:675–686. [PubMed: 
8929536] 
24. Belluscio L, Katz LC. Symmetry, stereotypy, and topography of odorant representations in mouse 
olfactory bulbs. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:2113–2122. [PubMed: 11245695] 
25. Isaacson JS, Strowbridge BW. Olfactory reciprocal synapses: dendritic signaling in the CNS. 
Neuron. 1998; 20:749–761. [PubMed: 9581766] 
26. Margrie TW, Sakmann B, Urban NN. Action potential propagation in mitral cell lateral dendrites is 
decremental and controls recurrent and lateral inhibition in the mammalian olfactory bulb. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2001; 98:319–324. [PubMed: 11120888] 
27. Bozza T, McGann JP, Mombaerts P, Wachowiak M. In vivo imaging of neuronal activity by 
targeted expression of a genetically encoded probe in the mouse. Neuron. 2004; 42:9–21. 
[PubMed: 15066261] 
28. Soucy ER, Albeanu DF, Fantana AL, Murthy VN, Meister M. Precision and diversity in an odor 
map on the olfactory bulb. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:210–220. [PubMed: 19151709] 
29. Rubin BD, Katz LC. Optical imaging of odorant representations in the mammalian olfactory bulb. 
Neuron. 1999; 23:499–511. [PubMed: 10433262] 
30. Spors H, Grinvald A. Spatio-temporal dynamics of odor representations in the mammalian 
olfactory bulb. Neuron. 2002; 34:301–315. [PubMed: 11970871] 
31. Wachowiak M, et al. Optical dissection of odor information processing in vivo using GCaMPs 
expressed in specified cell types of the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:5285–5300. [PubMed: 
23516293] 
32. Kohwi M, et al. A subpopulation of olfactory bulb GABAergic interneurons is derived from Emx1- 
and Dlx5/6-expressing progenitors. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:6878–6891. [PubMed: 17596436] 
33. Garcia I, et al. Local CRH signaling promotes synaptogenesis and circuit integration of adult-born 
neurons. Dev Cell. 2014; 30:645–659. [PubMed: 25199688] 
34. Garcia I, et al. Local corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) signals to its receptor CRHR during 
postnatal development of the mouse olfactory bulb. Brain Struct Funct. 2016; 221:1–20.
35. Chen Q, et al. Imaging neural activity using Thy1-GCaMP transgenic mice. Neuron. 2012; 76:297–
308. [PubMed: 23083733] 
36. Chen TW, et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature. 2013; 
499:295–300. [PubMed: 23868258] 
37. Shipley MT, Adamek GD. The connections of the mouse olfactory bulb: a study using orthograde 
and retrograde transport of wheat germ agglutinin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase. Brain Res 
Bull. 1984; 12:669–688. [PubMed: 6206930] 
38. Laaris N, Puche A, Ennis M. Complementary postsynaptic activity patterns elicited in olfactory 
bulb by stimulation of mitral/tufted and centrifugal fiber inputs to granule cells. J Neurophysiol. 
2007; 97:296–306. [PubMed: 17035366] 
39. Balu R, Pressler RT, Strowbridge BW. Multiple modes of synaptic excitation of olfactory bulb 
granule cells. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:5621–5632. [PubMed: 17522307] 
40. Huang L, et al. Task learning promotes plasticity of interneuron connectivity maps in the olfactory 
bulb. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:8856–8871. [PubMed: 27559168] 
41. Cummings DM, Henning HE, Brunjes PC. Olfactory bulb recovery after early sensory deprivation. 
J Neurosci. 1997; 17:7433–7440. [PubMed: 9295389] 
42. Shepherd GM, Chen WR, Willhite D, Migliore M, Greer CA. The olfactory granule cell: from 
classical enigma to central role in olfactory processing. Brain Res Rev. 2007; 55:373–382. 
[PubMed: 17434592] 
43. Hensch TK. Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2005; 6:877–888. 
[PubMed: 16261181] 
44. Ehrlich I, et al. Amygdala inhibitory circuits and the control of fear memory. Neuron. 2009; 
62:757–771. [PubMed: 19555645] 
Quast et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Breton-Provencher V, Lemasson M, Peralta MR III, Saghatelyan A. Interneurons produced in 
adulthood are required for the normal functioning of the olfactory bulb network and for the 
execution of selected olfactory behaviors. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:15245–15257. [PubMed: 
19955377] 
46. Moreno MM, et al. Olfactory perceptual learning requires adult neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2009; 106:17980–17985. [PubMed: 19815505] 
47. Sakamoto M, et al. Continuous postnatal neurogenesis contributes to formation of the olfactory 
bulb neural circuits and flexible olfactory associative learning. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:5788–5799. 
[PubMed: 24760839] 
48. Alonso M, et al. Olfactory discrimination learning increases the survival of adult-born neurons in 
the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:10508–10513. [PubMed: 17035535] 
49. Mandairon N, et al. Neurogenic correlates of an olfactory discrimination task in the adult olfactory 
bulb. Eur J Neurosci. 2006; 24:3578–3588. [PubMed: 17229106] 
50. Monory K, et al. The endocannabinoid system controls key epileptogenic circuits in the 
hippocampus. Neuron. 2006; 51:455–466. [PubMed: 16908411] 
51. Justice NJ, Yuan ZF, Sawchenko PE, Vale W. Type 1 corticotropin-releasing factor receptor 
expression reported in BAC transgenic mice: implications for reconciling ligand-receptor 
mismatch in the central corticotropin-releasing factor system. J Comp Neurol. 2008; 511:479–496. 
[PubMed: 18853426] 
52. Arenkiel BR, et al. In vivo light-induced activation of neural circuitry in transgenic mice 
expressing channelrhodopsin-2. Neuron. 2007; 54:205–218. [PubMed: 17442243] 
Quast et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Genetically targeting populations of granule cells in the adult olfactory bulb. (a) Diagram of 
viral targeting of granule cells showing representative cross-sections from Dlx5/6-Cre (left) 
and Crhr1-Cre (right) mice labeled with AAV-flex-GFP. GCL, granule cell layer; ML, mitral 
cell layer; EPL, external plexiform layer; GL, glomerular layer; scale bars, 50 μm. (b) 
Individual granule cells labeled with conditional virus. Scale bars, 25 μm. (c) High 
magnification view of Dlx5/6-Cre AAV-flex-GFP or Crhr1-GFP labeled olfactory bulbs 7, 
14, 21 and 28 d after EdU injection. EdU+GFP+ cells as a fraction of EdU+ cells (arrows) 
decrease with maturation in the Dlx5/6-Cre mice and increase with maturation in the Crhr1-
GFP mice. Scale bars, 15 μm. (d) Top, timeline of birthdating experiments. Green arrows 
indicate day of viral injection, when each mouse received a single injection. Gray arrows 
indicate when labeled animals were killed. Bottom, timeline for imaging and 
Quast et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electrophysiology. Mice received a single injection and then imaging or recording occurred 
between 14–21 d after viral injection unless otherwise specified. (e) Quantification of 
Dlx5/6 (top) and Crhr1 (bottom, modified from Garcia et al.33) expression data generated as 
in c in newborn neurons (data points represent averages ± s.e.m., n = 4 Dlx5/6-Cre, 3 Crhr1-
Cre, 4–6 olfactory bulbs per time point, 5 slices per olfactory bulb).
Quast et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Comparison of membrane and firing properties of functionally immature Dlx5/6 versus 
functionally mature Crhr1 granule cells. (a) Left, single action potentials in Dlx5/6-Cre 
AAV-flex-GFP+ neurons (top) and Crhr1-Cre AAV-flex-GFP+ neurons (bottom) at threshold 
current (10 pA). Scale bars 20 mV, 50 ms. Right, train of action potentials in response to 1 s 
of 50 pA current injection in Dlx5/6-expressing (top) and Crhr1-expressing (bottom) 
neurons at threshold current. Scale bars 20 mV, 50 ms. (b) Half-widths of action potentials 
in the immature Dlx5/6-expressing neurons are significantly larger than in the more mature 
Crhr1-expressing neurons (two-tailed t-test, Welch’s correction, *P = 0.0129, t = 2.66, d.f. = 
27). (c,d) Membrane resistances of Dlx5/6-expressing neurons (c) are significantly higher 
than Crhr1-expressing neurons (two-tailed t-test, Welch’s correction, **P = 0.0017, t = 3.35, 
d.f. = 42), whereas membrane capacitances (d) are significantly lower (two-tailed t-test, 
Welch’s correction, *P = 0.0241, t = 2.32, d.f. = 52). (e) Frequency–current curves for the 
two populations of granule cells for average number of spikes after 1 s depolarizing current 
injections (10 pA steps). (f–h) There was no change in the resting potential (f) (two-tailed t-
test, Welch’s correction, P = 0.4493, t = 0.76, d.f. = 36), current required to fire and action 
potential from resting potential (g) (two-tailed t-test, Welch’s correction, P = 0.2889, t = 
1.083, d.f. = 26), or time to action potential peak from threshold voltage (h) (two-tailed t-
test, Welch’s correction, P = 0.4493, t = 1.025, d.f. = 21), between Dlx5/6 and Crhr1-
expressing neurons. (i) Experimental time line to determine when immature Dlx5/6-
Quast et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expressing neurons begin to express CHRH. (j,k) Example images (j) of Dlx5/6-Cre;Crhr1-
GFP bulbs injected with AAV-flex-tdTomato at 14 d (left) and 60 d (right) after injection, 
with data quantification (k). Scale bars, 100 μm. Data points represent averages ± s.e.m.; for 
electrophysiology (a–h), n = 26 Dlx5/6 cells from 7 mice, n = 19 Crhr1 cells from 6 mice; 
for staining (j,k), n = 4 bulbs, 3–5 slices per bulb, per time point.
Quast et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Olfactory sensory maps from different populations of olfactory bulb neurons visualized 
through calcium imaging. (a) In vivo imaging of entire dorsal olfactory bulb surface (red 
rectangle) in anesthetized, head-fixed mice. Epifluorescence detects intensity changes of 
GCaMP-expressing dendrites in the olfactory bulb (right). GCL, granule cell layer; MCL, 
mitral cell layer; EPL, external plexiform layer; GL. glomerular layer. (b) Olfactory 
response sensory maps (right) are created from averaging across 3 trials (top left) per animal 
and then subtracting the temporal average of the baseline fluorescence (left) from the 
response average (middle). Scale bars, 1 mm. (c–e) Example response maps to five different 
odorants; scale bar, 1 mm. (c) Response maps (as in b) for a Thy1-GCaMP3 mouse shows 
mitral and tufted cell dendrite activation displaying glomerular activation patterns. Immature 
(d) and mature (e) granule cell maps, in a Dlx5/6-Cre AAV-flex-GCaMP6 mouse and a 
Crhr1-Cre AAV-flex-GCaMP6 mouse, respectively, show more diffuse odor-dependent areas 
of activation.
Quast et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Inhibitory sensory maps broaden with maturation. (a–c) Example sensory map for pentanol 
(top) and the area activated at 50% or more of the maximal change in fluorescence (50% 
maximal ΔF) (bottom) for mitral cells (MCs) in the Thy1-GCaMP3 (a), Dlx5/6-Cre AAV-
flex-GCaMP6 (b) and Crhr1-Cre AAV-flex-GCaMP6 (c) mice. Scale bar, 1 mm. (d) Average 
centroid location of the activated area for pentanol (orange) and anisole (purple) across the 
different neuronal populations: mitral cells (triangles), immature granule cells (circles) and 
mature granule cells (squares). (e) Consensus maps for all animals of the activated area (see 
Online Methods). (f) No change in maximal ΔF value across animals (two-tailed t-test, P = 
0.9557, t = 0.06, d.f. = 11). (g) Significant increase in the activated area (50% or more of 
maximal ΔF) for the mature granule cells (two-tailed t-test, P = 0.0004, t = 5.06, d.f. = 11). 
(h) Histogram of change in fluorescence intensity values normalized to maximal ΔF for all 
pixels from the pentanol sensory maps. Bars represent averages ± s.d. (d) or s.e.m. (f,g); n = 
6 animals for Dlx5/6-Cre, n = 7 animals for Crhr1-Cre and n = 4 animals for Thy1-GCaMP, 
minimum of 3 trials per odorant.
Quast et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Mature granule cells show recruitment over refinement of synaptic inputs. (a) Representative 
traces and average event (top insets) of mEPSCs from an immature Dlx5/6-Cre AAV-flex-
GFP neuron (left) and a mature Crhr1-Cre AAV-flex-GFP neuron (right). Scale bars: full 
trace (light bars) 20 pA, 1 s; average (heavy bars) 8 pA, 11 ms. (b) Cumulative distribution 
plot of inter-event interval. mEPSCs are significantly different between Dlx5/6 and Crhr1-
expressing neurons (KS test, P < 0.0001, D = 0.36). Inset: mean frequency of mEPSCs from 
immature Dlx5/6 and mature Crhr1 granule cells (two-sided t-test, Welch’s correction, P = 
0.0065, t = 3.20, d.f. = 13). (c) Cumulative distribution plot. Amplitudes of the mEPSCs are 
significantly different between Dlx5/6 and Crhr1 neurons (KS test, P < 0.0001, D = 0.16). 
Inset: mean amplitude of mEPSCs of immature Dlx5/6 and mature Crhr1 granule cells (n = 
13 granule cells from 5 Dlx5/6 animals and 11 granule cells from 5 Crhr1 animals). (d) Top: 
optogenetic mapping of mitral cell inputs onto granule cells. Bottom: example traces of 
laser-evoked excitatory currents onto immature neurons (right, from Thy1-ChR2; Dlx5/6-
Cre animals recorded 2–3 weeks after injection) and mature neurons (left, from Thy1-
ChR2;Dlx5/6-Cre animals recorded 5–6 weeks after injection), highlighting stimulation of 
areas either proximal (<250 μm; top) or distal (<250 μm; bottom) to the recorded cell. Scale 
bars 15 pA, 10 ms. (e) Average connection strength as a function of lateral distance from the 
granule cell. (f) Mature granule cells receive stronger input from distal connections (two-
sided t-test, * P = 0.0326, n = 8 cells per group). Bar graphs in b,c,e,f represent mean values 
± s.e.m.
Quast et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Individual granule cells respond to more odors with maturation. (a) Single frame of in vivo 
two-photon GCaMP signal from Crhr1-expressing cells imaged 350 μm deep. Scale bar, 100 
μm. (b) ΔF/F traces from neurons in a. (c) Number of odorants neurons responsive as a 
fraction of all imaged neurons within a single plane (top) or as a fraction of responsive 
neurons within a single plane (bottom). (d) Quantification of neurons responding to 
individual odors as a percentage of cells that responded to any odor (two-way ANOVA, 
Sidak’s multiple comparison correction, *P = 0.0274, t = 2.87, d.f. = 174; ***P < 0.0001, t = 
5.06, d.f. = 174). Bars are mean percent per imaging plane ± s.e.m., 2–5 planes per animal, 3 
animals each genotype injected with AAV-flex-GCaMP6 virus and imaged 2–3 weeks after 
injection.
Quast et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Decreased sensory experience prevents sensory map expansion. (a) Timeline for removable 
unilateral naris occlusion experiments. (b) Diagram of the nose plug as described by 
Cummings et al.41, made from polyethylene tubing, and photo of inserted nose plug. (c–f) 
Naris occlusion prevents expansion of the area activated (to 50% or more of max ΔF) in the 
immature (Dlx5/6-Cre AAV-flex-GCaMP6) cells (c, quantified in e; two-tailed paired t-test, 
P = 0.0111, t = 2.90, d.f. = 15), but does not change the activated area of the mature (Crhr1+ 
AAV-flex-GCaMP6) cells (d, quantified in f; two-tailed t-test, P = 0.4236, t = 0.89, d.f. = 5). 
Quast et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Naris occlusion does not change the maximal ΔF for either maturation state (e,f). Data 
points represent the occluded or control bulb from individual animals; bars show mean 
values ± s.e.m. (g) Representative traces of mEPSC recordings from Dlx5/6 (left) and Crhr1 
(right) granule cells after 5–6 weeks of naris occlusion in control or occluded bulbs. Scale 
bars: full trace (light bars) 20 pA, 1 s; average (heavy bars) 8 pA, 10 ms. (h,i) Cumulative 
distribution of inter-event interval of the mEPSCs are significantly different for the Dlx5/6-
expressing cells (KS test, P < 0.0001, D = 0.45). Insets: mean frequency of mEPSCs of 
immature Dlx5/6-expressing and mature Crhr1-expressing granule cells (two-sided t-test, 
Welch’s correction, **P = 0.0038, t = 3.58, d.f. = 12). (j,k) Cumulative distributions of 
amplitude of the mEPSCs are significantly different for the two types (KS test, j: P < 
0.0001, D = 0.23, k: P < 0.0001, D = 0.12). Inset: mean amplitude of mEPSCs of immature 
Dlx5/6 and mature Crhr1 granule cells. Bar graphs in h–k represent mean values ± s.e.m.; 
for mEPSC data: n = 13 control granule cells and 8 occluded cells from 4 animals for Dlx5/6 
and n = 12 control granule cells and 11 occluded from 4 animals for Crhr1.
Quast et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. 
Olfactory learning precociously expands inhibitory sensory maps. (a) Timeline and (b) 
experimental set up for the Go/No Go odor learning task. (c) Representative ΔF sensory map 
from Dlx5/6-Cre AAV-flex-GCaMP6 control and trained mice in response to the unrewarded 
trained odor (pentanol; S−) and a novel odor (acetophenone). Scale bar, 1 mm. (d) After 
training, the activated area (50% or more of max ΔF) is significantly increased for the 
training-associated rewarded (S+) and unrewarded (S−) odors but not novel odors (one-way 
ANOVA, Sidak’s multiple correction, *P = 0.0493, t = 2.31, d.f. = 48; **P = 0.0028, t = 
3.40, d.f. = 48; bars represent mean values ± s.e.m., n = 8 animals trained, 10 animals 
control). (e) Diagram of lateral dendrites from mitral cells activated by distant glomeruli 
synapsing (red circles) with mature granule cells (red) while immature granule cells (orange) 
receive fewer synapses (orange circles) from local cortical or proximal mitral cell synapses. 
(f) Model of activated granule cells (GCs) in animals with immature or minimal sensory 
experience (left) and mature or increased sensory experience (right). Colored neurons are 
activated by the same stimulus, which also activates the nearby glomerulus (blue circle).
Quast et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 14.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
