 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 1 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Introduction
Glucocorticoid (GC) steroids are used to treat many chronic con-
ditions ranging from lung disease to autoimmune disorders and 
muscle disease. It is estimated that more than 1% of the US popu-
lation is treated chronically with GC steroids. Although the side 
effect profile from GC steroids is extensive, muscle weakness and 
myopathy can occur in response to chronic GC steroid use and can 
be extremely debilitating (1). Curiously, chronic GC steroids are 
used to treat Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a primary 
muscle disease, and the use of steroids is associated with pro-
longed ambulation (2, 3).
The mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects of steroid 
use in muscular dystrophy are still largely unknown. In the US, the 
most commonly used agent is prednisone, while deflazacort is used 
in Europe and Asia. In muscular dystrophy, steroids are thought in 
part to act through immune system modulation, as a direct reduc-
tion in immune cell infiltration into muscle has been observed 
(4). However, GC steroids also directly affect muscle itself by 
shifting metabolism and gene expression (5). Chronic GC steroid 
use has been seen to reduce fibrosis in human DMD muscle (6). 
In mdx mice, a genetic model of DMD, deflazacort was observed 
to improve muscle regeneration and growth after injury (7, 8). An 
8-week study of prednisolone in mdx mice improved specific force 
and decreased the number of centrally nucleated myofibers (9). 
However, 3 months of daily prednisone in mdx mice resulted in 
weight loss, reduced strength, and increased fibrosis in the heart, 
suggesting that longer, chronic administration may be problematic 
(10). Recently, it has been shown that GC steroids rely on Krüppel-
like factor 15 (Klf15), a Krüppel like transcription factor, to mediate 
ergogenic muscle performance effects (11). Deletion of Klf15 in the 
mouse exacerbated the mdx muscle phenotype, and muscle-spe-
cific overexpression of Klf15 improved muscle performance in the 
mdx mouse. In addition, it is still unclear whether prednisone and 
deflazacort vary in their effects in DMD. Deflazacort is a synthetic 
oxazoline derivative of prednisolone. A recent comparative study 
in boys with DMD reported that deflazacort associated with high-
er efficacy, measured as later age at loss of ambulation, but also 
may have more side effects, although differences in dosing could 
account for these findings (2). A second recent study showed com-
parable benefit between deflazacort and prednisone, but greater 
weight gain with prednisone (12). The benefit of GC steroids on 
DMD muscle likely arises from multiple mechanisms and a bal-
ance between beneficial and detrimental effects.
One hallmark of muscle injury is disruption of the muscle plas-
ma membrane. In DMD, the sarcolemma is weakened and more 
readily disrupted, thus representing a model of chronic muscle 
injury (13). Anxa6, which encodes annexin A6, was identified as a 
genetic modifier of muscular dystrophy in mice (14), and annexins 
A1 and A6 are directly implicated in sarcolemmal repair and reseal-
ing after muscle membrane injury (15, 16). Furthermore, annexins 
are known regulators of the immune system where they are thought 
Glucocorticoid steroids such as prednisone are prescribed for chronic muscle conditions such as Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy, where their use is associated with prolonged ambulation. The positive effects of chronic steroid treatment in 
muscular dystrophy are paradoxical because these steroids are also known to trigger muscle atrophy. Chronic steroid use 
usually involves once-daily dosing, although weekly dosing in children has been suggested for its reduced side effects on 
behavior. In this work, we tested steroid dosing in mice and found that a single pulse of glucocorticoid steroids improved 
sarcolemmal repair through increased expression of annexins A1 and A6, which mediate myofiber repair. This increased 
expression was dependent on glucocorticoid response elements upstream of annexins and was reinforced by the expression 
of forkhead box O1 (FOXO1). We compared weekly versus daily steroid treatment in mouse models of acute muscle injury and 
in muscular dystrophy and determined that both regimens provided comparable benefits in terms of annexin gene expression 
and muscle repair. However, daily dosing activated atrophic pathways, including F-box protein 32 (Fbxo32), which encodes 
atrogin-1. Conversely, weekly steroid treatment in mdx mice improved muscle function and histopathology and concomitantly 
induced the ergogenic transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 15 (Klf15) while decreasing Fbxo32. These findings suggest that 
intermittent, rather than daily, glucocorticoid steroid regimen promotes sarcolemmal repair and muscle recovery from injury 
while limiting atrophic remodeling.
Intermittent glucocorticoid steroid dosing enhances 
muscle repair without eliciting muscle atrophy
Mattia Quattrocelli, David Y. Barefield, James L. Warner, Andy H. Vo, Michele Hadhazy, Judy U. Earley,  
Alexis R. Demonbreun, and Elizabeth M. McNally
Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: October 25, 2016; Accepted: March 9, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(6):2418–2432. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI91445.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 1 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
was electroporated with a plasmid to express GFP-tagged annex-
in A6 (ANXA6). Electroporation was conducted 7 days prior to 
the injury protocol in order to allow time for plasmid expression. 
Mice were treated with a single dose of steroids, either predni-
sone or deflazacort (1 μg/g body weight; ref. 20), one day prior 
to harvesting myofibers for laser injury and live-cell imaging. 
Control mice were treated with vehicle or eplerenone (100 μg/g 
body weight), an antimineralocorticoid steroid, as an additional 
pharmacological control.
FM4-64 dye accumulation, which measures the extent of 
membrane injury and resealing, was significantly lower in both 
prednisone- and deflazacort-treated myofibers compared with 
either eplerenone-treated or vehicle-treated myofibers (Figure 
1A). The area of FM4-64 fluorescence was significantly reduced 
in both prednisone- and deflazacort-treated mice, as compared 
with vehicle- or eplerenone-treated myofibers (Figure 1A). This 
smaller injury area correlated with more efficient annexin repair 
cap formation. The annexin A6 cap appeared sooner and was 
smaller in steroid-treated myofibers compared with vehicle- or 
eplerenone-treated myofibers (Figure 1B). Moreover, annexin A6 
recovery after photobleaching was significantly faster in steroid-
treated myofibers (Figure 1B). Together, these findings demon-
strate that a single pulse of GC steroids prior to injury accelerates 
and improves injury repair.
To verify the effectiveness of in vivo steroid dosing, spleno-
cytes from treated animals were isolated and analyzed for markers 
of immune cell activation. In prednisone- and deflazacort-treated 
mice, Gzmb (encoding granzyme B) and Ifng (encoding IFN-γ) 
expression levels were downregulated compared with those of 
control animals, consistent with the anticipated effect of steroids 
to promote resolution of the immune response (17). In leukocytes, 
Anxa1 is induced by GC steroids, suggesting that its upregulation is 
one mechanism by which GC steroids exert their effect (18).
Here, we compared the effect of prednisone and deflazacort 
on sarcolemmal repair in both normal and dystrophic myofibers. 
We found that a single pulse dose of either GC steroid enhanced 
sarcolemmal repair after laser injury. This effect was mediated 
by a direct upregulation of Anxa1 and Anxa6 through both direct 
transcriptional regulation and microRNA-regulated mRNA stabil-
ity. We compared weekly versus daily GC steroid administration in 
murine models of acute muscle injury and chronic muscular dys-
trophy and found that both dosing schemes enhanced sarcolem-
mal repair. However, chronic daily dosing promoted atrophy with 
suppression of Klf15 and elevated F-box protein 32 (Fbxo32, encod-
ing atrogin-1), and this atrophy program dominated any benefit 
from enhanced repair. These results point to dosing modulation 
to harness the beneficial effects of GC steroids on sarcolemmal 
repair and muscle recovery while avoiding the deleterious conse-
quences of muscle atrophy.
Results
A single pulse of GC steroids improves sarcolemmal repair after inju-
ry in normal muscle. We visualized muscle membrane repair in 
real time using high-resolution microscopy (16, 19). In this assay, 
a laser was used to disrupt the myofiber sarcolemma. Using this 
microwounding assay, it was previously shown that annexins 
assemble into a repair cap forming within seconds specifically at 
the site of laser ablation. FM4-64, a phosphatidylserine-binding 
dye, is used to mark the region of muscle injury. The flexor digito-
rum brevis (FDB) muscle of 8-week-old 129T2/SvEmsJ WT mice 
Figure 1. Pulse dosing of GC steroids improves sarcolemmal repair. Prednisone and deflazacort, both GC steroids, were given 1 day prior to injury. (A) Laser 
injury was applied to isolated muscle fibers in the presence of FM4-64, which marks sarcolemmal injury. A single dose of GC steroid reduced FM4-64 accu-
mulation. Shown is Z-stack rendering of FM4-64 dye accumulation of laser-injured sarcolemmal sites at 300 seconds after injury. Quantitation shows that 
GC pulse associated with decreased dye accumulation over time as well as a decreased area of injury. (B) Imaging of annexin A6 (ANXA6) cap formation at 
the site of sarcolemmal injury. Pulse dosing of prednisone and deflazacort associated with smaller repair caps, consistent with reduced injury and enhanced 
repair. Shown is Z-stack rendering of GFP-tagged ANXA6 cap of laser-injured sarcolemmal sites at 300 seconds after injury. Quantitation of GC dosing dem-
onstrated faster, smaller cap formation over time and faster recovery of GFP-tagged ANXA6 at injury site. FM4-64 and ANXA6-GFP pictures were acquired 
simultaneously. F/F0, average fluorescence ratio versus average fluorescence at time 0 of imaging series. n = 50 myofibers (5 mice)/group. *P < 0.05 vs. 
vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison; #P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 2-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
which the GRE sequences were ablated (Δ GRE). Plasmids were 
then electroporated into muscles of normal mice. One week fol-
lowing electroporation, animals were treated with a single dose of 
prednisone and muscles were collected for luciferase assays. Data 
were normalized to luciferase activity measured from muscles of 
vehicle-injected animals. The GRE upstream of Klf15 was used as 
positive control of GC responsiveness in muscle (11). A prednisone 
pulse induced increased luciferase activity from WT constructs as 
well as the Klf15 construct (Figure 2D). Conversely, the prednisone 
pulse failed to elicit a luminescence signal when the GRE sequenc-
es had been ablated (Figure 2D). These data are highly consistent 
with the studies conducted in C2C12 cells and document that GCs 
promote the transcription of Anxa1 and Anxa6 in muscle.
In addition to direct transcriptional activation, GR-dependent 
transactivation of Anxa1 and Anxa6 was further reinforced through 
indirect activation of forkhead box O1 (Foxo1), which encodes a 
transcriptional activator that regulates muscle growth and atrophy 
(Supplemental Figure 1B) (24). The single pulse of GC steroids, but 
not of eplerenone, increased Foxo1 expression in muscle and pri-
mary myoblasts as compared with vehicle-treated animals (Supple-
mental Figure 1C). We found the same results when primary myo-
blasts were exposed to GC steroids in culture. We isolated primary 
myoblasts from WT mice that were age- and background-matched 
with mice used in previous analyses and cultured them for 24 
hours (passage 0) in the presence of either vehicle, prednisone, or 
deflazacort (25 μg/ml). Expression of Anxa1, Anxa6, and Foxo1 was 
significantly upregulated in cells exposed to GCs as compared with 
those treated with vehicle (Supplemental Figure 1D).
Furthermore, a GRE site was identified within the first Foxo1 
intron (+55284), and FOXO1-binding sites (GTAAACA; ref. 25) were 
(Supplemental Figure 1A; supplemental material available online 
with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI91445DS1).
Increased annexin gene expression through the GR. We next 
asked whether steroid treatment influenced expression levels of 
repair cap proteins in treated muscles. Anxa1, encoding annexin 
A1, was previously reported as a downstream target of GC steroids 
in respiratory epithelial cells (21). We analyzed whole muscles as 
well as the myoblast fraction of muscle for annexin gene expres-
sion after steroid dosing. Primary myoblasts were isolated by sort-
ing for CD56 (22). Both Anxa1 and Anxa6 mRNAs were signifi-
cantly upregulated in both whole muscle and primary myoblasts 
after a single pulse of prednisone or deflazacort when compared 
with vehicle or eplerenone controls (Figure 2, A and B).
GCs act through GC receptor (GR, also known as NR3C1). 
We hypothesized that activated GR would drive Anxa1 and Anxa6 
expression in muscle (Figure 2A). We identified GR-responsive 
elements (GRE; GnACAnnnTGTnC; ref. 23) upstream of the 
Anxa1 transcriptional start site at –7610 bp and upstream of Anxa6 
at –6639 bp. We interrogated these predicted binding sites for 
occupancy by GR in C2C12 myoblasts, cultured for 24 hours in 
the presence of either vehicle, prednisone, or deflazacort (25 μg/
ml). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) using antibodies to 
GR and quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed on the predicted 
GRE sites within Anxa1 and Anxa6 genomic loci. Occupancy of 
GRE sites by GR was significantly increased after a single dose of 
prednisone or deflazacort, as compared with vehicle (Figure 2C).
To confirm the role of GCs directly inducing annexin expres-
sion in skeletal muscle, we ligated promoter regions of Anxa1 and 
Anxa6 containing GREs upstream of a luciferase reporter plas-
mid. We generated both normal reporter constructs and those in 
Figure 2. GC pulse upregulates Anxa1 and Anxa6 through increased GR binding of their GRE sites. (A) Model of transactivation pathway linking GC action 
in muscle to regulation of Anxa1 and Anxa6 expression; dashed lines, interrogated interactions. (B) Anxa1 and Anxa6 were upregulated in the skeletal 
muscle (quadriceps) and primary myoblasts (isolated from tibialis anterior) of mice 24 hours after a single pulse of GC steroids. (C) Twenty-four hours after 
a single GC pulse in C2C12 cells, ChIP-qPCR analysis showed that GRE sites of Anxa1 and Anxa6 were significantly enriched in GR occupancy as compared 
with vehicle. (D) Diagram shows experimental design of electroporation into muscles and 24 hours after i.p. prednisone pulse in WT mice. (E) Histograms 
show that prednisone pulse upregulated luciferase activity when constructs contained the GRE sites (white bars). Conversely, GC-related upregulation 
was ablated after deletion of the GRE-binding site in the constructs (black bars). Klf15 GRE was monitored as positive control. Data are expressed as fold 
change to luminescence from vehicle-treated muscles electroporated with the same plasmids (dashed line). n = 5 mice/group (B); n = 4 assays or mice/
group (C and D). *P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison (B and C); *P < 0.05 vs. WT site construct, unpaired 
2-tailed t test with Welch’s correction (D).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
by which GC steroids may contribute to Anxa6 upregulation. In 
this alternative pathway, nuclear receptor subfamily 0, group B, 
member 1 (Nr0b1), a reported target of the GR (NR3C1) in the 
adrenal cortex (26), would decrease miR-383 levels, thereby 
reducing miR-383–driven targeting of Anxa6 mRNA (Figure 3A). 
Consistent with this pathway, Nr0b1 was significantly upregu-
lated and miR-383 significantly downregulated in muscle and in 
primary myoblasts after prednisone or deflazacort pulse, but not 
control treatments (Figure 3B).
To further validate miR-383 interaction with Anxa6’s 3′ UTR 
in muscle, we electroporated WT muscles with synthetic miR-383–
mimic and anti–miR-383 and interrogated the muscles for gene 
expression and sarcolemmal repair. Experiments were controlled 
with scramble miR-mimic and anti-miR. Expression levels of miR-
383 were significantly higher after miR-mimic and lower after 
anti-miR electroporation (Figure 3C). Anxa6 mRNA was reduced 
with miR-mimic and increased after anti-miR (Figure 3C). Sar-
colemmal injury, area of injury, and rate of FM4-64 accumula-
tion were significantly greater after miR-mimic and significantly 
smaller after anti-miR electroporation (Figure 3D).
found upstream of Anxa6 (–1872 bp), Foxo1 itself (–266 bp), and in 
the 5′ UTR of Anxa1 (+628 bp). In GC-treated C2C12 myoblasts, GR 
binding to Foxo1 GRE appeared increased as compared with that in 
vehicle-treated cells (Supplemental Figure 1E). In C2C12 cells, GC 
steroids induced occupancy of FOXO sites by FOXO1 at the Anxa1, 
Anxa6, and Foxo1 loci (Supplemental Figure 1E). GC steroid activa-
tion of the Foxo1 GRE was also confirmed in intact muscle using 
luciferase assays on electroporated muscles and was dependent 
on the GRE as ablating the GRE sequence reduced reporter activ-
ity (Supplemental Figure 1F). GC steroids also induced activity of 
candidate FOXO sites in Anxa1, Anxa6, and Foxo1, and this also was 
dependent on the presence of FOXO sites (Supplemental Figure 
1G). Thus, a single steroid pulse leads to the upregulation of Anxa1 
and Anxa6 in muscle through direct GR-driven transactivation and 
this response is reinforced through upregulation of Foxo1, which in 
turn further drives annexin gene expression.
GC steroids sustain Anxa6 upregulation via miR-383 modula-
tion. In silico prediction showed a putative binding site for the 
microRNA miR-383 in Anxa6 3′ UTR (+228–247 bp from 3′ UTR 
start). This binding site was hypothesized as an additional route 
Figure 3. miR-383 contributes to GC-associated Anxa6 regulation. (A) Model of pathway linking GC uptake in muscle to regulation of miR-383 and Anxa6 
expression. Solid lines, reported interactions; dashed lines, interrogated interactions. (B) Nr0b1 and miR-383 were upregulated and downregulated, respec-
tively, in GC–pulse dosed skeletal muscle (quadriceps) and primary myoblasts. (C) Electroporation directly into muscle with targeting oligonucleotides 
altered miR-383 and Anxa6 levels. (D) miR-383 mimic correlated with worse sarcolemmal injury, whereas anti–miR-383 correlated with smaller injury. 
(Left) Z-stack rendering of laser-injured sarcolemmal sites at 300 seconds after injury; (center) quantitation of FM4-64 dye accumulation at sarcolemmal 
site after laser injury; (right) end-point area of injury. (E) Luciferase assay to validate GC-dependent regulation of Anxa6-3′ UTR targeting by miR-383 in 
skeletal muscle. Diagram depicting experimental design after introducing 3′ UTR reporter constructs into muscle followed by ex vivo Fluc measurement. 
miR-383 reduced luminescence, while 3′ UTR without the miR-383–binding site (Δ miR-383) increased luminescence. n = 5 mice/group (B); n = 3 mice 
(30 myofibers)/group (C–E). *P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison; #P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 2-way ANOVA test with 
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
4A). Injury area and macrophage infiltration were comparably 
reduced with all steroid regimens (Figure 4, B and C, and Supple-
mental Figure 2A). Serum creatine kinase (CK) was elevated at 
24 hours after injury and was significantly reduced by all steroid 
treatments (Figure 4D). By 7 days after injury, serum CK was no 
longer elevated. Injury-associated fibrosis, measured by hydroxy-
proline content and Masson’s trichrome staining, was variably 
reduced by all steroid regimens at both 7 and 14 days after injury 
(Figure 4E). All steroid treatments, including the single predose, 
reduced inflammation and fibrosis after acute injury. These data 
indicate that a pulse of GC steroids improves recovery from mus-
cle injury in vivo.
Daily GC steroid dosing drives atrophy. Chronic steroid treat-
ment has been associated with muscle atrophy (28). To under-
stand how differential GC dosing altered muscle repair, we com-
pared weekly steroid administration versus daily administration 
in WT mice after acute injury. We assessed how steroid dosing 
affected muscle performance and molecular profile. A single 
weekly steroid dose increased running distance to exhaustion, 
while daily steroid dosing reduced exercise capacity compared 
with that of vehicle controls (Figure 5A). Ex vivo muscle perfor-
mance was monitored in the tibialis anterior muscles. Consistent 
with in vivo performance, tetanic force was increased in weekly 
To confirm responsiveness of Anxa6 3′ UTR to miR-383 and 
GCs, we then tested whether mutation of the miR-383 site in 
Anxa6 3′ UTR would remove steroid-dependent modulation. The 
Anxa6 3′ UTR site with the intact or ablated miR-383 site (Δ miR-
383) was placed downstream of a luciferase (Fluc) reporter gene. 
We then electroporated the constructs into muscles and evaluated 
the luminescence levels 24 hours after prednisone pulse. In the 
presence of the miR-383 site, the prednisone pulse was associated 
with increased luminescence (Figure 3E). Conversely, ablation of 
the binding site (Δ miR-383 constructs) induced significantly high-
er luminescence levels, resulting in no difference between vehicle 
and prednisone treatments (Figure 3E). Thus, in addition to direct 
effects of steroids on Anxa6 gene expression, the GC steroid pulse 
reinforces Anxa6 upregulation by reducing miR-383–dependent 
targeting of Anxa6 3′ UTR.
GC steroids improve recovery from muscle injury. The studies 
described above demonstrate that GC steroids enhance recovery 
from laser-induced disruption of the sarcolemma by upregulating 
annexins. We next assessed whether GC steroids improved recov-
ery from acute focal in vivo injury by injuring muscles using an 
intramuscular injection of cardiotoxin (27). WT mice were given 
prednisone or deflazacort i.p. at 1 μg/g body weight 1 day before 
injury and then given daily or weekly steroids for 14 days (Figure 
Figure 4. GC steroids decrease extent of acute muscle injury in WT muscle. Acute muscle injury was induced with cardiotoxin (ctx) injection in the tibialis 
anterior muscles of normal mice. (A) Diagram depicting the treatments performed in parallel in WT mice. Colored arrows, GC steroid injection; gray arrows, 
vehicle injections. (B) GC steroid regimens comparably reduced the extent of injury 7 days after cardiotoxin injection. (Left) Representative H&E images 
of tibialis anterior muscles with prednisone treatments. The dotted lines outline the injury area, which includes necrosis, fibrosis, immune cell infiltrates, 
and centrally nucleated fibers. (Right) Injury extent quantitation (10 replicates). (C) GC regimens comparably decreased macrophage infiltration within the 
area of injury 7 days after cardiotoxin injection. Data are depicted as quantitation of F4-80+ cells/mm2 in gastrocnemius muscles by immunostaining. (D) 
GC steroid regimens comparably reduced serum CK at 24 hours after injury, with no significant changes after 7 days. (E) Fibrosis was comparably reduced 
in the presence of all GC regimens both 7 and 14 days after muscle injury. Data are depicted as quantitation of hydroxyproline content in gastrocnemius 
muscles. Gray, WT vehicle; light blue, WT prednisone predose; blue, WT prednisone weekly; dark blue, WT prednisone daily; light purple, WT deflazacort 
predose; purple, WT deflazacort weekly; dark purple, WT deflazacort daily. n = 6 mice/group. *P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s 
multiple comparison; #P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 2-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
dosed and decreased in daily dosed mice (Figure 5B). Contraction 
time to maximum force was reduced after weekly steroid dosing 
and, correspondingly, delayed in muscles from mice that received 
daily GC administration (Figure 5B). These outcomes were depen-
dent on repetitive dosing of GCs, since the predose group did not 
significantly differ from vehicle controls (Figure 5, A and B). We 
evaluated the myofiber cross-sectional area (CSA) in injured mus-
cles. We separately analyzed the CSA of myofibers within the inju-
ry area, as marked by myofibers with centrally placed nuclei, and 
those fibers remote from injury area (Supplemental Figure 2C). 
While the CSA of centronucleated myofibers did not significantly 
differ among groups, the CSA of remote myofibers was increased 
after weekly dosing and decreased after daily steroid administra-
tion (Figure 5C). To evaluate systemic effects on glucose metabo-
lism, serum glucose from peripheral blood was measured and did 
not change among groups at 14 days after injury (Supplemental 
Figure 3A). These data demonstrate that weekly steroid dosing 
enhanced muscle recovery from injury. In contrast, daily steroid 
dosing impaired muscle performance, indicating that enhanced 
sarcolemmal repair was insufficient to overcome atrophy driven 
by daily CG steroid dosing.
To better understand the differential effects of steroid-dos-
ing regimens, we examined gene expression and phosphorylated 
AKT levels in injured muscles 14 days after cardiotoxin injection. 
Both weekly and daily steroid treatments were associated with 
increased levels of Anxa1 and Anxa6 expression, accounting for 
the reduced injury response (Supplemental Figure 3B). Phosphor-
ylated AKT (Ser473; p-AKT) is a marker of hypertrophic muscle 
remodeling and is reduced when muscle mass is lost (29). p-AKT 
levels were significantly increased after weekly regimens and 
significantly reduced after daily GC dosing (Figure 5D). We ana-
lyzed Fbxo32, which encodes atrogin-1 (also known as MAFbx), 
an important mediator of muscle atrophy (30, 31). We also moni-
tored Klf15, a transcription factor that interacts with GR pathways 
and mediates steroid-dependent ergogenic effects in skeletal 
muscle (11, 32). Fbxo32 was upregulated in muscle of daily dosed 
mice, paralleling atrophic remodeling, and suppressed by weekly 
dosing. Klf15 was suppressed by daily dosing and upregulated in 
weekly dosed mice (Figure 5E). Consistent with the expression 
pattern of Klf15, genes within its downstream metabolic pathway 
were upregulated by weekly administration and downregulated by 
daily dosing 14 days after injury (Supplemental Figure 3C).
To confirm that GC-associated molecular changes derived 
from myofibers, we isolated the myofiber-enriched fraction from 
GC- and vehicle-treated injured muscles 14 days after injury (Sup-
plemental Figure 3D). qPCR of the myofiber fraction recapitulated 
the findings observed in whole muscle. Namely, these data showed 
that both daily and weekly steroid dosing was sufficient to upreg-
ulate repair pathways, but that daily dosing induced Fbxo32 and 
repressed Klf15 (Supplemental Figure 3E). Therefore, although 
daily GC steroid dosing improved repair after acute injury, this 
beneficial effect was negated by profound atrophic remodeling.
Figure 5. Weekly GC steroid dosing enhanced muscle performance, while daily GC treatments promoted atrophy in normal muscles 14 days after injury. 
(A) Weekly GC steroid dosing enhanced running distance after injury, while daily GC steroid dosing reduced performance. (B) Maximum tetanic force and 
contraction time were increased and accelerated, respectively, in tibialis anterior muscles of injured mice treated with weekly GC. Daily GC steroid dosing 
induced opposite effects. (C) CSA of myofibers remote from injury site was increased by weekly but not daily GC steroid dosing, while no significant change 
in CSA was seen within area of injury. (D) Representative blots and densitometric quantitation of p-Akt (Ser473) from duplicate blots run in parallel from 
tibialis anterior muscles 14 days after injury (3 replicates). (E) Fourteen days after injury, Fbxo32 gene expression was increased after daily GC dosing and 
reduced by weekly GC dosing. Klf15 was stimulated by weekly dosing and reduced after daily GC dosing. Daily GC steroid treatments induced opposite 
trends. Mef2a and Igf1 followed similar divergent trends. Gray, WT vehicle; light blue, WT prednisone predose; blue, WT prednisone weekly; dark blue, WT 
prednisone daily; light purple, WT deflazacort predose; purple, WT deflazacort weekly; dark purple, WT deflazacort daily. n = 6 mice/group. *P < 0.05 vs. 
vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Weekly and daily steroid treatments promote sarcolemmal repair 
in mdx dystrophic mice. Chronic daily steroid administration is 
associated with adverse effects including obesity and, in children, 
growth suppression (33). Studies of prednisone administration 
in children with DMD have suggested that weekend dosing has 
comparable beneficial effects compared with daily dosing (34). 
In the mdx model, weekly dosing was associated with a sustained 
long-term benefit compared with that in control-treated mice (35). 
However, there has been limited widespread uptake of weekly 
steroid regimens, so we investigated the effects of weekly and 
daily steroid dosing in an animal model of muscular dystrophy. 
These studies were conduced in 6-month-old mdx male mice on 
a DBA/2J background, since these mice bear a closer resemblance 
to human DMD pathology and specifically the age at which ste-
roid dosing is often initiated (36). Mice were given prednisone and 
deflazacort i.p. at 1 μg/g body weight either weekly or daily, and 
results were analyzed after 4 weeks of treatment. Sarcolemmal 
injury and repair of isolated dystrophic myofibers were improved 
comparably by both steroid-dosing treatments, with both groups 
showing reduced FM4-64 dye accumulation and area of injury 
when compared with vehicle (Figure 6A). There were no differ-
ences between prednisone and deflazacort, indicating that the 
types of GC steroid and dosing regimen were comparable in their 
effect on response to laser-induced sarcolemmal injury.
We correlated steroid-induced repair enhancement with 
serum CK levels, fibrosis, and immune infiltration within dystro-
phic skeletal muscle. Serum CK was comparably reduced by all 
steroid regimens (Supplemental Figure 4A). Fibrotic infiltrates 
were comparably reduced in gastrocnemius muscles among ste-
roid groups, as compared with vehicle controls (Figure 6B). Quan-
titation of hydroxyproline levels in quadriceps muscles revealed 
a significant reduction of hydroxyproline content in all steroid-
treated mice compared with vehicle-treated controls (Figure 6C). 
Inflammation is a prominent feature in many forms of muscular 
Figure 6. Weekly and daily GC steroid regimens enhanced sarcolemmal repair in mdx mice. Steroids were given to mdx mice daily or weekly for 4 weeks. 
(A) (Left) Weekly and daily GC steroid regimens reduced FM4-64 dye accumulation and sarcolemmal injury in myofibers. Z-stack rendering of FM4-64 dye 
accumulation at laser-injured sarcolemmal sites at 300 seconds after injury. (Right) Quantitation of FM4-64 dye accumulation at sarcolemmal site after 
laser injury and end-point area of injury. (B) Fibrotic infiltration (blue scars; arrows) was reduced after all GC regimens, as evidenced by Masson’s trichrome 
staining of gastrocnemius muscle sections (10 replicates). (C) GC steroid regimens reduced hydroxyproline content in quadriceps muscles. (D) Macrophage 
infiltrates in skeletal muscles were reduced after all GC regimens. Chart shows quantitation of infiltrating F4-80+ cells, assessed by immunostaining on 
quadriceps muscle sections. (E) Diaphragm muscles followed trends similar to those of hind limb muscles, as fibrosis (blue scars; arrows) appeared com-
parably reduced after all GC regimens (10 replicates). n = 5 mice (50 myofibers)/group. *P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple 
comparison; #P < 0.05 vs. vehicle, 2-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
controls, while daily dosed mice ran less than controls, indicating 
that weekly and daily treatments had opposing effects on muscle 
performance (Figure 7B).
These functional changes were reflected in muscle size and fiber 
type. Myofiber CSA analysis of the gastrocnemius muscle revealed a 
significant increase in myofiber size after weekly steroid treatments 
compared with vehicle-treated control. There was a corresponding 
decrease in myofiber CSA after daily steroid dosing compared with 
vehicle-treated muscles (Figure 7C). Myofiber typing of quadriceps 
muscle revealed that weekly steroid treatment was associated with 
an expansion of fast glycolytic type 2B fibers and a decrease in the 
number of fast oxidative type 2A, while daily steroid treatments 
correlated with the opposite trend compared with vehicle (Supple-
mental Figure 4, B and C). Moreover, daily steroids induced a shift 
of type 2A myofiber CSA toward lower values compared with week-
ly dosed and vehicle treated. Conversely, weekly dosing shifted 
toward larger type 2B myofibers. However, these trends were not 
significant when fiber type CSA was compared across treatments 
for both variables (Supplemental Figure 4D).
Force, fatigue, and contraction/relaxation time analyses were 
analyzed in tibialis anterior muscles in live, anesthetized mice. 
Tetanic force increased after weekly steroid treatment compared 
dystrophy, including DMD (37). Macrophage infiltration was sig-
nificantly reduced in quadriceps muscles of all steroid-treated 
mice compared with controls (Figure 6D). Fibrosis was reduced 
by all GC regimens in the diaphragm muscle (Figure 6E), which 
was analogous to what occurred in hind limb muscles. Thus, both 
weekly and daily steroid treatments enhanced sarcolemmal repair 
and reduced fibrosis and immune cell infiltration to a comparable 
extent in dystrophic muscles.
Daily steroid dosing triggers atrophy, while weekly dosing ame-
liorates muscular dystrophy features in mdx mice. To monitor for 
muscle atrophy, body weight, muscle performance, and histopa-
thology were assessed in steroid-treated mdx mice. Body weight 
significantly declined during daily steroid treatment, while mdx 
mice receiving weekly steroids did not lose body mass compared 
with vehicle controls (Figure 7A). Grip strength significantly 
increased after weekly steroid treatments compared with vehicle 
controls, while daily dosing resulted in decreased grip strength 
compared with controls (Figure 7B), although, when results were 
normalized to body weight, no differences were found among 
groups (Supplemental Table 1). To further examine muscle per-
formance, mice were subjected to incline treadmill run test until 
exhaustion. Weekly steroid-injected mdx mice ran further than 
Figure 7. Daily GC dosing elicits atrophic mdx skeletal muscles, while weekly GC dosing does not. (A) Daily, but not weekly, GC steroid dosing caused 
loss of body mass. (B) Weekly GC steroid dosing enhanced grip strength and run-to-exhaustion performance, while daily GC steroid-dosing treatments 
correlated with reduced grip strength and run performance. (C) Myofiber CSA was increased after weekly, but decreased after daily GC administration in 
gastrocnemius muscle sections. (D) Max tetanic force of tibialis anterior muscles was increased after weekly treatments and decreased after daily GC 
administration. (E) Fatigue analysis showed that tetanic force was increased over consecutive contraction bouts after weekly dosing, while daily dosing 
induced opposite trends. (F) Weekly GC regimen correlated with improved respiratory function, as assessed by WBP. Minute volume was increased and 
inspiration time was decreased in weekly GC dosing. Daily dosing reversed these beneficial trends. (G) Weekly GC treatments promoted increased CSA and 
diaphragm thickness, while daily CG dosing reduced CSA and diaphragm thickness. n = 5 mice/group. *P < 0.05 vs. mdx vehicle, 1-way ANOVA test with 
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison; #P < 0.05 vs. mdx vehicle, 2-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
in daily GC–treated mice as compared with those treated with 
vehicle control. Time of inspiration was decreased in weekly GC–
treated mice and increased in daily GC–treated mice (Figure 7F). 
Myofiber CSA and transverse diaphragm muscle thickness were 
increased after weekly GC injection and decreased after daily 
GC administration (Figure 7G). Thus, similarly to what occurred 
in hind limb muscles, weekly GC treatment resulted in improved 
respiratory function and diaphragm pathology, while daily GC 
treatment correlated with atrophy, irrespective of reduced fibrosis.
We monitored heart fibrosis and blood pressure in mdx mice to 
assess possible effects of GC steroid treatments. Histologic assess-
ment of left and right ventricle walls showed that all GC treatments 
correlated with decreased fibrosis in both ventricle walls, paralleling 
the effects observed in muscle (Supplemental Figure 5A). Myocar-
dial fibrosis associates with increased ventricle strain (38). Left ven-
tricle strain was assessed by echocardiography. Consistent with the 
reduction in fibrosis, longitudinal strain and circumferential strain 
were reduced in all steroid-treated mice compared with vehicle- 
treated mice, with no significant changes recorded between weekly 
and daily regimens (Supplemental Figure 5B). Systolic and diastol-
ic blood pressure, although variable within each cohort, did not sig-
nificantly change with treatment (Supplemental Figure 5C). Thus, 
fibrosis and strain were comparably reduced in dystrophic ventri-
cles after 4 weeks of either weekly or daily GC treatments, with no 
significant effects on blood pressure.
Gene regulation is associated with regimen-specific remodeling 
of dystrophic muscle. We next interrogated dystrophic muscles of 
treated and control mice for expression levels of candidate genes 
involved in sarcolemmal repair and atrophy. We assessed the 
expression of specific genes from whole muscle tissue as well as 
the isolated myofiber fractions from vehicle and weekly and daily 
GC steroid regimens. As in WT muscle, Anxa1 and Anxa6 were 
upregulated by all GC regimens (Supplemental Figure 6A). Fbxo32 
expression levels were significantly higher after daily steroid treat-
ments and lower after weekly steroid treatments, while Klf15 lev-
els were increased by weekly steroids and suppressed by daily ste-
roid treatment (Supplemental Figure 6A).
To gain further insight into differential regulation of these 
genes, we examined chromatin marks and GR occupancy on the 
GREs of Anxa1, Anxa6, and Klf15. Studies were conducted at 
treatment end point using the myofiber fraction of vehicle and 
treated mdx muscles. We monitored genomic elements for enrich-
ment in the repressive histone mark histone-3 tri-methyl-lysine-9 
with that in control-treated mdx mice (Figure 7D), although spe-
cific force was unchanged, indicating that this increase in force 
reflected the increase of muscle mass (Supplemental Figure 4E). 
Conversely, daily steroid treatment reduced tetanic force com-
pared with that in vehicle-treated controls, and this also reflected 
the decline in muscle mass, as specific force was not changed. 
Fatigue analysis over 25 repeated isometric contractions showed 
that curves of tetanic force were consistently higher in weekly 
treated and lower in daily treated muscles as compared with vehi-
cle treated (Figure 7E). Also, times of contraction and relaxation 
to/from maximum tetanic force were reduced after weekly dos-
ing, but increased after daily regimens (Supplemental Figure 4E).
Taken together, these data show that weekly steroid treat-
ments were associated with increased muscle mass and a propor-
tional increase in strength, with lower relative resistance to fatigue 
and faster contraction/relaxation. Conversely, daily steroid treat-
ment triggered atrophic remodeling. These data indicate that dys-
trophic muscle, like normal muscle, benefits from weekly dosing 
through enhanced sarcolemmal repair and reduction of fibrosis 
and immune infiltrate, while escaping the atrophic pathways driv-
en by daily steroid dosing.
GC steroid dosing improves cardiopulmonary function in mdx 
mice. We next assessed whether the same trends were apparent for 
respiratory function and diaphragm muscle. Respiratory function 
was measured utilizing whole-body plethysmography (WBP) on 
resting mdx mice at the end point of treatment. Respiratory min-
ute volume increased in weekly GC–treated mice and decreased 
Figure 8. Histone mark enrichment in GRE sites in gastrocnemius myofi-
bers of treated mdx mice and GR occupancy. (A) ChIP-qPCR for the repres-
sive histone mark pH3k9me3 and the active histone mark H3k27ac (active 
histone mark) revealed that GREs of Anxa1 and Anxa6 were comparably 
enriched in permissive histone signature (higher H3k27ac, lower H3k9me3) 
after all GC treatments. However, the Klf15 GRE presented a divergent his-
tone signature in response to weekly and daily regimens, consistent with 
its gene-expression trends. (B) After 4 weeks of GC treatment, ChIP-qPCR 
on the myofiber fraction from gastrocnemius muscles revealed that GRE 
sites were enriched in GR (NR3C1) binding in all steroid-treated muscles. 
GR occupancy on Klf15 was significantly higher after daily GC administra-
tion, as compared with weekly regimens, consistent with dose-dependent 
occupancy. n = 5 mice/group. *P < 0.05 vs. mdx vehicle or indicated 
sample, 1-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
a GC dose–dependent increase in NR3C1 occupancy, which was 
significantly higher after daily dosing than weekly dosing (Figure 
8B). Taken together, the expression and chromatin data demon-
strate that GC administration, irrespective of dosing, correlated 
with positive transcriptional activation of Anxa1 and Anxa6. Klf15 
chromatin marks followed regimen-specific patterns consistent 
with overall gene expression changes.
Transcriptomic profile of prednisone-treated mdx muscles. We 
conducted broad transcriptional profiling of quadriceps muscles 
from the mdx mice cohorts treated with daily or weekly predni-
sone using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) (n = 5 mice/group). Unbi-
(H3k9me3) or in the active histone mark histone-3 acetylated-
lysine-27 (H3k27ac) (39). Analysis of histone mark enrichment 
revealed that the GREs of Anxa1 and Anxa6 had high levels of 
H3k27ac and low levels of H3k9me3 after both weekly and dai-
ly regimens, consistent with upregulation of these genes under 
all dosing regimens (Figure 8A). In contrast, the Klf15 GRE was 
characterized by increased permissive marks, namely reduced 
H3k9me3 and increased H3k27ac, after weekly dosing, while dai-
ly GC dosing was associated with the opposite set of histone marks 
(Figure 8A). All GC treatments induced increased GR occupancy 
on the GREs of Anxa1, Anxa6, and Klf15. The Klf15 GRE exhibited 
Figure 9. Transcriptome profiling of prednisone-treated mdx muscles. (A) RNA-seq was conducted on GC-treated mdx quadriceps muscle (n = 5 per 
condition). Principal component analysis discriminated gene-expression profiles according to mdx vehicle and weekly and daily GC dosing. (B) Unbiased 
hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed genes also separated samples in regimen-specific groups. (C) Analysis of differentially expressed 
genes in paired comparisons for enriched GO terms. Highlighted are GO term groups of interest. Both daily and weekly GC steroids enriched for GO terms 
of membrane repair, growth regulation, immune response, and steroid metabolism. Weekly versus daily GC steroids only enriched for steroid metabolism. 
(D–F) Heat maps of annotated gene lists. Green denotes higher values, while red indicates lower values of gene mRNA quantitation, as compared with 
row mean value. n = 5 mice/group. (B–F) Adjusted P value < 0.05 for all genes and GO terms was reported using edgeR differential expression (treated vs. 
vehicle paired comparisons) and Panther GO enrichment tests (details in Supplemental Methods).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
site. GC treatment, whether daily or weekly, reduced the extent of 
injury in both WT and dystrophic muscles. GC steroids improved 
sarcolemmal repair not only in muscular dystrophy, but also after 
acute muscle injury in normal muscle.
Notably, GC steroid treatment in dystrophic muscle upregu-
lated many genes encoding proteins implicated in muscle repair 
(16); thus, the effect of GC steroids on recovery from injury is not 
just limited to annexin gene expression. Transcriptome analysis 
showed that genes including caveolin 3 (Cav3), myoferlin (Myof), 
dysferlin (Dysf), and Trim72 (encoding MG53) were all increased 
(19, 44, 45). More refined studies are needed to shed light on 
whether transcriptional regulation of those genes is directly stim-
ulated by GCs or is an indirect effect of enhanced muscle repair. 
It is also important to consider that other molecular pathways 
likely contribute to improving repair. For example, GC steroids are 
known to alter membrane lipid composition, and this altered com-
position may facilitate repair after injury (46).
Daily steroid dosing elicits atrophy, while weekly dosing does not. 
Weekly dosing of GC steroids improved muscle recovery from 
injury in both the acute setting of normal muscle and the chron-
ic setting of muscular dystrophy. We did not observe significant 
differences in the type of CG steroid in that both prednisone and 
deflazacort yielded similar results in repair assays. A recently 
published phase III clinical trial found comparable effects on the 
muscle strength of boys with DMD treated with prednisone and 
deflazacort over 12 weeks, using dose ranges that were compara-
ble to those used in our study, although prednisone was associated 
with more pronounced weight gain than deflazacort (12). Both 
weekly and daily steroid regimens induced a comparable reduc-
tion in fibrosis and ventricle strain in the heart of treated mice. 
Additional studies are needed, as GC steroid effects in DMD car-
diomyopathy are debated, with contrasting reports of beneficial 
effects in DMD patients and detrimental effects in DMD models 
(47, 48). In skeletal muscle, molecular pathways of atrophy were 
triggered by daily dosing and this was accompanied by reduced 
performance of voluntary hind limb and respiratory skeletal mus-
cles. In contrast, weekly dosing did not trigger atrophy and instead 
was associated with improved muscle performance.
Weekly GC treatment increased Klf15, while daily dosing 
suppressed Klf15. KLF15 is a known target of GR (32), and loss 
of Klf15 is known to exacerbate the skeletal muscle phenotype in 
mdx mice (11). Muscle-specific upregulation of KLF15 was shown 
to improve muscle performance in mdx mice, and it is known that 
KLF15 regulates not only glucose and amino acid use, but also 
lipid flux in muscle (11, 49). The striking divergent Klf15 transcrip-
tional pattern elicited from weekly versus daily GC steroid dosing 
was reflected in a similar pattern of KLF15-regulated genes, seen 
in both candidate gene expression and in broad transcriptional 
profiling. KLF15 has also been implicated in diurnal regulation 
of gene expression in the heart (50), and so it is notable that all 
injections in this study were performed at 7 am, when mice have 
naturally low levels of cortisol (51). This pattern is the opposite of 
that in humans, where the highest peak of cortisol is seen in the 
early morning (52), and so in translating this finding to humans, 
time-of-day dosing may be relevant.
Ergogenic factors such as KLF15 improve muscle performance 
through a number of mechanisms, including substrate use (49). 
ased clustering of samples using principal component analysis 
segregated transcriptional profiles according to dosing regimen 
(Figure 9A and Supplemental Data Set 1). Unsupervised hierar-
chical clustering confirmed clustering based on dosing regimen 
(Figure 9B). The differential gene subsets from each binary com-
parison (vehicle versus weekly, vehicle versus daily, weekly versus 
daily) were analyzed for enrichment of gene ontology (GO) terms 
of interest. Among all enriched GO terms, GO terms related to 
membrane repair, tissue growth, immune response, and steroid 
metabolism were significantly enriched when comparing pred-
nisone-treated muscles with vehicle-treated muscles (Figure 9C; 
Supplemental Data Set 2). When comparing weekly versus daily 
treated muscle to vehicle-treated muscle for the GO terms listed 
above, only the GO terms related to steroid metabolism were sig-
nificantly enriched (Figure 9C; Supplemental Data Set 2). Thus, 
both weekly and daily prednisone regimens induced gene expres-
sion changes in membrane repair and tissue growth pathways 
in muscle. However, the metabolic response to steroids differed 
between weekly and daily GC administration.
Heat maps of gene-relative increases in sequencing reads 
(reads per kilobase of transcript per million reads [RPKM]) showed 
that sarcolemmal repair genes, including Anxa1 and Anxa6, were 
upregulated in both GC-treated muscles, as compared with vehicle- 
treated muscles (Figure 9D; Supplemental Data Set 3). Genes 
associated with muscle atrophy were generally downregulated in 
weekly treated, but upregulated in daily treated muscles, includ-
ing Fbxo32 (Figure 9E; Supplemental Data Set 3) (40). Conversely, 
genes associated with the KLF15 pathway were upregulated after 
weekly administration, but downregulated after daily dosing, as 
compared with vehicle-treated muscles (Figure 9F; Supplemental 
Data Set 3). Thus, the regimen-associated trends in sarcolemmal 
repair and muscle remodeling were recapitulated in the whole-
muscle transcriptome analysis.
We compared profiles from weekly versus daily treated mdx 
muscle. No significant changes in Anxa1 and Anxa6 transcript abun-
dance were seen between weekly and daily dosing. Compared with 
weekly dosing, daily prednisone administration was associated with 
upregulation of Fbxo32 and Mstn, encoding the negative regulator 
of muscle mass myostatin (Supplemental Figure 7; Supplemental 
Data Set 4) (41). Conversely, weekly GC dosing was associated with 
upregulation of Klf15 and, to a lesser extent, Ifg1. Thus, weekly dos-
ing activates key aspects of the beneficial effects of steroids in mus-
cle and recovery from injury without triggering atrophy.
Discussion
GC steroids improve muscle repair after injury. Skeletal muscle myo-
fibers are susceptible to plasma membrane disruption, likely due 
to elongated shape and contraction-induced stress (42). Here, we 
report direct effects of GC steroids on sarcolemmal repair. We 
evaluated both prednisone and deflazacort and found that both 
stimulated annexin gene expression equally. Although it has been 
suggested that the properties of deflazacort may be associated with 
fewer metabolic adverse effects (43), we found little difference 
between prednisone and deflazacort in their ability to improve 
recovery from injury. A single pulse of GC steroids correlated with 
upregulation of annexin genes in muscle, faster formation of the 
annexin repair cap, and faster recovery of annexins to the injury 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 2 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
ml, respectively. Dosing was based on pretreatment weights (1 mg/kg 
body weight; ref. 20) in 30 μl total PBS volume for daily treatments and 
in 210 μl total saline volume for weekly treatments. Mice were injected 
daily via i.p. injection at 7 am. On injection days, stock solutions stored 
at –20°C were diluted into sterile Eppendorf tubes containing sterile 
PBS (catalog 14190, Life Technologies). Sterile BD Micro-Fine IV Insu-
lin Syringes (catalog 14-829-1A, Fisher Scientific) were used to inject 
the i.p. cavity of nonsedated animals. Mice were weighed 3 times per 
week over the course of 4 weeks at 7 am. Body mass was expressed as 
fold change from day 0. Cardiotoxin injury was performed injecting 
20 μl of a 10 μM cardiotoxin (discontinued, Sigma-Aldrich) solution 
in PBS in target muscles in sedated animals (3% isoflurane, 0.8 l/min 
O2). Cardiotoxin was released in the center of the muscle through the 
whole major axis in order to have a homogenous area of injury at the 
center of the muscle.
Grip strength, treadmill, muscle mechanics, blood drawing, and pleth-
ysmography. Forelimb grip strength was monitored using a meter (cat-
alog 1027SM, Columbus Instruments) with the investigator blinded 
to treatment group. Animals performed 10 pulls with 5 seconds rest 
on a flat surface between pulls. Mice were run on a treadmill (Exer3/6 
without electrical stimulation grills, Columbus Instruments) with a 
15° incline with a start speed of 1 m/min with 1 m/min2 acceleration. 
The assay was interrupted if the animal stopped for longer than 15 sec-
onds on the rest pad. Immediately before sacrifice, in situ tetanic force 
from tibialis anterior muscle was measured using a Whole Mouse Test 
System (catalog 1300A, Aurora Scientific) with a 1 N dual-action lever 
arm force transducer (300C-LR, Aurora Scientific) in anesthetized 
animals (3% isoflurane in 100% O2). Tetanic isometric contraction 
was induced with the following specifications: initial delay, 0.1 sec-
onds; frequency, 200 Hz; pulse width, 0.5 msec; duration, 0.5 sec-
onds; using 100 mA stimulation (59). Length was adjusted to a fixed 
baseline of 30 mN resting tension for all muscles/conditions. Fatigue 
analysis was conducted by repeating tetanic contractions every 10 
seconds until complete exhaustion of the muscle (50 cycles). Time of 
contraction was assessed as time to maximum tetanic value within the 
0.0–0.5 second range of each tetanic contraction, while time of relax-
ation was assessed as time to 90% minimum tetanic value within the 
0.5–0.8 second range of every tetanus.
Unanesthetized WBP was used to measure respiratory function 
using a Buxco FinePointe 4-site apparatus (Data Sciences Internation-
al). Individual mice were placed in a calibrated cylindrical chamber at 
room temperature. Each mouse was allowed to acclimate to the pleth-
ysmography chamber for 120 minutes before recording was initiated. 
Data were recorded for a total of 15 minutes broken into 3 consecutive 
5-minute periods. All physiological studies were conducted by investi-
gators blinded to treatment group.
Histology, immunofluorescence microscopy, and antibodies. Mac-
rophage detection used anti-F4/80 conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 
(catalog ab6640, Abcam) at a dilution of 1:100 overnight at 4°C; 
nuclei were counterstained with 0.5 μg/ml Hoechst PBS (45 minutes, 
room temperature). For fiber typing, sections were incubated with 
primary antibodies BA-F8 (1:10), SC-71 (1:30), and BF-F3 (1:10, all 
by Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank) overnight at 4°C. Then 
sections were incubated with secondary antibodies Alexa Fluor 350 
anti-IgG2b, Alexa Fluor 488 anti-IgG1, and Alexa Fluor 594 anti-IgM 
(catalog A21140, A21121, 1010111, Life Technologies). Type 1 fibers 
were stained blue, type 2A stained green, and type 2B stained red (60). 
In this work, we extend this concept to gene-encoding proteins 
essential for repair. Thus, an important aspect of muscle per-
formance includes the ability of muscle to recovery from injury, 
including exercise-induced injury. In addition to weekly GC dos-
ing increasing Klf15, upregulation of Igf1 and Mef2a was also seen. 
Thus, efficient ergogenesis likely relies on fuel substrates, growth, 
and sarcolemmal repair processes.
Regimen-associated divergence in elicited muscle response. Klf15 is 
a direct target of the GR (32, 53–55). We found divergent epigene-
tic chromatin marks on the Klf15 GRE that paralleled the change in 
gene expression elicited by differential GC steroid dosing. Inter-
estingly, GR (NR3C1) occupancy demonstrated a dose-dependent 
difference in occupancy of the Klf15 promoter, suggesting that the 
level of GR occupancy elicits differential effects. Muscle-specific 
deletion of the GR results in larger muscle mass and a reduction 
in adipose tissue, demonstrating crosstalk between these tissues 
(56). Furthermore, mTOR can counterbalance GR effects in mus-
cle and thus may also represent a means of subverting aspects of 
the atrophy pathway triggered by daily steroid dosing (55).
In summary, our data indicate that intermittent weekly dosing 
of GC steroids better harnesses the dual beneficial effects on skel-
etal muscle, i.e., (a) improved sarcolemmal repair and (b) ergogen-
ic remodeling. When chronic treatment is required, weekly dosing 
was associated with benefit without driving atrophic pathways. 
Furthermore, single pulse dosing of GC steroids in normal muscle 
improved repair by increasing repair pathways in muscle, indicat-
ing that repair pathways are relevant for the ergogenic process of 
both normal and diseased muscle.
Methods
Animals. The WT mice on a 129T2/SvEmsJ background were used for 
studies involving acute injury protocols. The mdx mice on a DBA/2J 
background were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (stock 
013141) and interbred. Male mice were used for reported experiments. 
Mice were housed in a specific pathogen–free facility.
Plasmids. GFP-tagged annexins A1 and A6 were described previ-
ously (14, 16). The 3′ UTR of Anxa6 was PCR cloned from cDNA from 
129T2/SvEmsJ skeletal muscle and ligated into the pmirGlo plasmid 
(catalog 1330, Promega) using the SacI-XhoI sites; the miR-383–bind-
ing site (5′-CUGCAUUCAACUCUGAUC-3′) was ablated by means of a 
Phusion Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (catalog F541, Thermo Scientif-
ic). Luciferase plasmids containing promoter fragments were obtained 
by cloning genomic sequences into pGL4.23 (E8411, Promega) using 
the KpnI-XhoI sites. Cloned genomic sequences from 129T2/SvEmsJ 
mice were used for GRE/FOXO site analysis (Supplemental Table 2).
Electroporation, myofiber isolation, and laser injury. FDB fibers were 
transfected by in vivo electroporation. Methods were as described pre-
viously (57) with modifications also described (58). For quantitative 
analysis of FM dye, fluorescence was measured at the site of injury in 
individual frames using ImageJ (NIH) and adjusted to baseline fluo-
rescence at time 0 calculated at the membrane prior to damage (F
/F0). 
This method allows comparisons of all strains and reduces variability 
introduced by differences in dye uptake or binding at time 0. Analysis 
was conducted with the investigator blinded to treatment group.
Drug treatments. Prednisone, deflazacort, and eplerenone (catalog 
P6254, SML0123, E6657, Sigma-Aldrich) were resuspended in DMSO 
(catalog D2650, Sigma-Aldrich) at 5 mg/ml, 5 mg/ml, and 100 mg/
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 3 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Life Technologies). Fluorescence was quantitated using the CFX96 
Real-Time System (Bio-Rad). miR-16 was used as internal control.
ChIP-qPCR and luciferase assays. ChIP-qPCR was performed 
according to a previously reported protocol (64) and adjusted condi-
tions (59). Results were expressed as percentages of raw expression 
of the respective input. ChIP-qPCR assays on isolated myofibers 
were performed as above, with the following steps before chromatin 
sonication. Freshly isolated whole gastrocnemius muscles were finely 
minced and digested in 5 ml/muscle of PBS supplemented with 1 mM 
CaCl2 and 100 U/ml collagenase II (catalog 17101, Life Technolo-
gies) at 37°C for 1 hour with shaking. The suspension was then filtered 
through a 40-μm strainer (catalog 22363547, Fisher Scientific) and the 
unfiltered fraction (enriched in myofibers) was kept for further steps. 
Separation of mononuclear fraction in the filtered fraction was con-
firmed at the microscope. Myofibers were lysed in lysis buffer, using 
700 μl per muscle, with approximately 250 μl 2.3-mm zirconia/silica 
beads (catalog 11079125z, BioSpec). Lysis buffer consisted of 10 mM 
HEPES (pH 7.3, catalog H3375), 10 mM KCl (catalog P9541), 5 mM 
MgCl2 (catalog M8266), 0.5 mM DTT (catalog 646563), and 3 μg/ml 
cytochalasin B (C6762, all reagents from Sigma-Aldrich) and protease 
inhibitor cocktail (catalog 11852700, Roche). Myofibers were them 
homogenized by means of Mini-BeadBeater-16 (catalog 607, Biospec) 
for 30 seconds, then by rotating at 4°C for 30 minutes. Samples were 
centrifuged at 3,000 g for 5 minutes at 4°C; supernatant was removed. 
The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer supplemented with 3 μg/ml 
cytochalasin B, as per reported conditions (64), and incubated on ice 
for 10 minutes. Nuclei were pelleted at 300 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and 
resuspended in 1 ml 1% PFA for 5 minutes at room temperature. Fixa-
tion was quenched with 100 μl of 1.375 M glycine (catalog BP381-5, 
Fisher Scientific). Nuclei were repelleted as before and subsequently 
processed following reported protocol (64) and the procedures men-
tioned for myoblasts, with the adjustment of adding 3 μg/ml cytocha-
lasin B into all solutions for chromatin preparation and sonication, 
antibody incubation, and wash steps.
Ex vivo luciferase assay was performed on whole, electroporated 
FDB muscles. Muscles were minced and homogenized in the lysate 
buffer, and experiments were performed according to the Dual Lucif-
erase Assay Kit (catalog 1910, Promega) instructions. Luminescence 
was recorded using the Synergy HTX Multi-Mode 96-Well Plate Read-
er (BioTek). Raw values were normalized to Renilla luciferase, then to 
protein content (MyHC), and finally either to empty pGL4.23 vector 
(unregulated negative control) and to vehicle-treated muscles with 
the same plasmids (Figure 3) or to pMiR empty vector–transfected 
muscles (unregulated, positive control) (Figure 4). For promoter site 
analysis, raw values were normalized to Renilla luciferase, protein 
content (MyHC), and empty pGL4.23-transfected muscles. Results 
are expressed as fold change to average vehicle.
RNA-seq analysis. A detailed explanation of RNA-seq protocols 
and analyses can be found in Supplemental Methods. All original 
microarray data were deposited in the NCBI’s Gene Expression Omni-
bus (65) (GEO GSE95682).
Primary myoblast isolation. Primary myoblasts were sorted as 
CD56+ cells from the mononuclear preparation obtained from tibialis 
anterior muscles, adapting previously reported conditions (22).
Statistics. Statistical analyses were performed with Prism (Graph-
Pad). Most comparisons relied on ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multi-
comparison appropriate for the variables tested (1-way ANOVA for 1 
Imaging was performed with a Zeiss Axio Observer A1 microscope, 
using 10× and 20× objectives. Brightfield pictures were acquired via 
Gryphax software (version 1.0.6.598, Jenoptik), while immunofluores-
cence pictures were acquired via ZEN 2 software (version 2011, Zeiss). 
Area quantitation, length measurement, and cell counting were per-
formed by means of ImageJ (NIH).
Hydroxyproline quantification. Hydroxyproline content was mea-
sured on 100 mg portions of frozen quadriceps muscles as previously 
described (61). Results were reported as nM hydroxyproline/mg (tissue).
Serum collection and CK analysis. After completion of the physi-
ologic analyses, serum was acquired and processed as previously 
described (19). Serum CK was analyzed in triplicate for each mouse 
using the EnzyChrom Creatine Kinase Assay (catalog ECPK-100, 
BioAssay Systems) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Results 
were acquired with the Synergy HTX Multi-Mode Plate Reader 
(BioTek). Results are expressed as U/ml.
Transcription factor–binding site prediction. Prediction of transcrip-
tion factor–binding sites was conducted by interrogating genomic 
sequences of query genes (UCSC, mm 10 assembly, including 10 kb 
upstream of TSS) for predicted binding sequences as reported by the 
JASPAR database and described previously (62). Alignments were 
conducted in both strand directions with ApE software (v2.0.47, M.W. 
Davis, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA). One mismatch 
in noncritical positions, i.e., less than 95% conserved, was allowed. 
Prediction of miRNA-binding sites was conducted using the micro-
RNA.org database (63).
Quantitative RT-PCR. Gene expression analysis was conducted on 
total RNA extracted with TRIzol (catalog 15596018, Life Technologies) 
from 30 mg tissue per the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA from the 
myofiber fraction was obtained after separating muscle tissue in myo-
fiber- and mononuclear-enriched fractions as follows. Whole muscle 
(tibialis anterior) was cut in approximately 2-mm–thick myofiber bun-
dles, following the natural myofiber orientation. Bundles were then 
incubated in collagenase II and gently mechanically dissociated, fol-
lowing the conditions used for myofiber isolation from FDB muscles 
(as detailed above). The mononuclear-enriched fraction was filtered 
out through a 40-μm cell strainer (catalog 22363547, Fisher Scientific), 
while the myofiber-enriched fraction was recovered as the unfiltered 
fraction and further processed with TRIzol. Efficient separation of the 
2 fractions was confirmed via microscopy and qPCR of dedicated dis-
tinctive markers, and 2 μg of RNA was reverse transcribed by means 
of the qScript cDNA Kit (catalog 95048, Quanta Biosciences) follow-
ing the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was diluted 1:7, and 2 μl 
was used per 10 μl qPCR reaction. Each qPCR reaction contained 100 
nM primers and 5 μl iTaq SYBR Green Mix (catalog 1725124, Bio-Rad). 
A detailed list of primers and sequences is provided in Supplemental 
Table 3. Fluorescence was quantitated using the CFX96 Real-Time 
System (Bio-Rad). miR-16 was used as internal normalizer.
miRNA expression studies. miRNA expression analyses were per-
formed from total RNA from tissue. miRNAs were reverse transcribed 
by means of the TaqMan MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit (cata-
log 4366596, Life Technologies) following the manufacturer’s proto-
col and using 4 μg of total tissue RNA. cDNA was diluted 1:15, and 2 
μl was used per 10 μl qPCR reaction. Each qPCR reaction contained 
100 nM primers and 5 μl of TaqMan Master Mix (catalog 4427788, Life 
Technologies). Both reverse transcription and qPCR reactions were 
conducted using miRNA-specific TaqMan Assays (catalog 4427975, 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 3 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
experiments and analysis. EMM conceived the study, analyzed 
data, and edited the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH U54 AR052646, NIH RO1 
NS047726, the Parent Project for Muscular Dystrophy, and the 
American Heart Association. MQ is supported by the Muscular Dys-
trophy Association and the American Association of Neuromuscular 
& Electrodiagnostic Medicine (AANEM) Foundation for Research 
& Education (development grant 479350). We acknowledge the 
outstanding support from the Center for Advanced Microscopy 
and Constadina Arvanitis and Joshua Rappoport at Northwestern 
University. Cell sorting was conducted at the Flow Cytometry Core 
Facility of Northwestern University, supported by a Cancer Center 
support grant (NCI CA060553) and the NIH (1S10OD011996-01). 
RNA sequencing was conducted at the NUSeq Core Facility (Center 
for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University).
Address correspondence to: Elizabeth M. McNally, Center for 
Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Lurie 
7-123, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. Phone: 312.503.6258; E-mail: 
elizabeth.mcnally@northwestern.edu.
variable, 2-way ANOVA for 2 variables, typically time and treatment). 
When comparing 2 groups, 2-tailed Student’s t test with Welch’s cor-
rection (unequal variances) was used. For ANOVA and t test analyses, 
a P value of less than 0.05 was considered significant. Data were pre-
sented as single values (dot plots, histograms) when the number of 
data points was less than 10. In analyses pooling larger data point sets 
per group, Tukey distribution bars were used to emphasize data range 
distribution, and histograms with error bars were used to emphasize 
shifts in average values. Analysis pooling data points over time was 
presented as marked line plots. Dot plots, histograms, and marked line 
plots depict mean ± SEM. Box plots depict the Tukey distribution of 
the data pool: interquartile distribution; lower whisker, 25th percentile 
minus 1.5 times the interquartile range; upper whisker, 75th percentile 
plus 1.5 times the interquartile range.
Study approval. The study was conducted with the approval of North-
western University’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Author contributions
MQ conducted experiments and drafted the manuscript. DYB 
conducted experiments and analysis. JLW performed experi-
ments and analysis. AHV conducted analysis. MH assisted with 
experiments. JUE performed experiments. ARD conducted 
 1. Kanda F, Okuda S, Matsushita T, Takatani K, 
Kimura KI, Chihara K. Steroid myopathy: patho-
genesis and effects of growth hormone and 
insulin-like growth factor-I administration. Horm 
Res. 2001;56(Suppl 1):24–28.
 2. Bello L, et al. Prednisone/prednisolone and 
deflazacort regimens in the CINRG Duch-
enne Natural History Study. Neurology. 
2015;85(12):1048–1055.
 3. Matthews E, Brassington R, Kuntzer T, Jichi F, 
Manzur AY. Corticosteroids for the treatment of 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev. 2016;(5):CD003725.
 4. Wehling-Henricks M, Lee JJ, Tidball JG. Pred-
nisolone decreases cellular adhesion molecules 
required for inflammatory cell infiltration in 
dystrophin-deficient skeletal muscle. Neuromus-
cul Disord. 2004;14(8–9):483–490.
 5. Fisher I, et al. Prednisolone-induced changes 
in dystrophic skeletal muscle. FASEB J. 
2005;19(7):834–836.
 6. Peverelli L, et al. Histologic muscular his-
tory in steroid-treated and untreated patients 
with Duchenne dystrophy. Neurology. 
2015;85(21):1886–1893.
 
7. Anderson JE, McIntosh LM, Poettcker R. 
Deflazacort but not prednisone improves both 
muscle repair and fiber growth in diaphragm and 
limb muscle in vivo in the mdx dystrophic mouse. 
Muscle Nerve. 1996;19(12):1576–1585.
 8. St-Pierre SJ, Chakkalakal JV, Kolodziejczyk SM, 
Knudson JC, Jasmin BJ, Megeney LA. Glucocor-
ticoid treatment alleviates dystrophic myofiber 
pathology by activation of the calcineurin/NF-AT 
pathway. FASEB J. 2004;18(15):1937–1939.
 9. Baltgalvis KA, Call JA, Nikas JB, Lowe DA. Effects 
of prednisolone on skeletal muscle contractility 
in mdx mice. Muscle Nerve. 2009;40(3):443–454.
 10. Guerron AD, et al. Functional and molecular 
effects of arginine butyrate and prednisone 
on muscle and heart in the mdx mouse model 
of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. PLoS ONE. 
2010;5(6):e11220.
 11. Morrison-Nozik A, et al. Glucocorticoids 
enhance muscle endurance and ameliorate 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy through a defined 
metabolic program. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2015;112(49):E6780–E6789.
 12. Griggs RC, et al. Efficacy and safety of 
deflazacort vs prednisone and placebo for 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Neurology. 
2016;87(20):2123–2131.
 13. Petrof BJ. Molecular pathophysiology of myofiber 
injury in deficiencies of the dystrophin-glycopro-
tein complex. Am J Phys Med Rehabil.  
2002;81(11 Suppl):S162–S174.
 14. Swaggart KA, et al. Annexin A6 modifies muscular 
dystrophy by mediating sarcolemmal repair. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(16):6004–6009.
 15. Roostalu U, Strähle U. In vivo imaging of molecu-
lar interactions at damaged sarcolemma. Dev 
Cell. 2012;22(3):515–529.
 16. Demonbreun AR, Quattrocelli M, Barefield 
DY, Allen MV, Swanson KE, McNally EM. An 
actin-dependent annexin complex mediates 
plasma membrane repair in muscle. J Cell Biol. 
2016;213(6):705–718.
 17. Perretti M, D’Acquisto F. Annexin A1 and gluco-
corticoids as effectors of the resolution of inflam-
mation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009;9(1):62–70.
 18. Coméra C, Russo-Marie F. Glucocorticoid-
induced annexin 1 secretion by monocytes 
and peritoneal leukocytes. Br J Pharmacol. 
1995;115(6):1043–1047.
 19. Demonbreun AR, et al. Enhanced muscular 
dystrophy from loss of dysferlin is accompa-
nied by impaired annexin A6 translocation 
after sarcolemmal disruption. Am J Pathol. 
2016;186(6):1610–1622.
 20. Sali A, et al. Glucocorticoid-treated mice are 
an inappropriate positive control for long-term 
preclinical studies in the mdx mouse. PLoS ONE. 
2012;7(4):e34204.
 21. Ambrose MP, Hunninghake GW. Corticosteroids 
increase lipocortin I in alveolar epithelial cells. 
Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1990;3(4):349–353.
 22. Agley CC, Rowlerson AM, Velloso CP, Lazarus 
NL, Harridge SD. Isolation quantitative immu-
nocytochemical characterization of primary 
myogenic cells fibroblasts from human skeletal 
muscle. J Vis Exp. 2015;(95):52049.
 23. Kuo T, Lew MJ, Mayba O, Harris CA, Speed TP, 
Wang JC. Genome-wide analysis of glucocorti-
coid receptor-binding sites in myotubes identifies 
gene networks modulating insulin signaling. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109(28):11160–11165.
 24. Allen DL, Unterman TG. Regulation of myostatin 
expression and myoblast differentiation by FoxO 
and SMAD transcription factors. Am J Physiol, 
Cell Physiol. 2007;292(1):C188–C199.
 25. Shin DJ, Joshi P, Hong SH, Mosure K, Shin DG, 
Osborne TF. Genome-wide analysis of FoxO1 
binding in hepatic chromatin: potential involve-
ment of FoxO1 in linking retinoid signaling 
to hepatic gluconeogenesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012;40(22):11499–11509.
 26. Gummow BM, Scheys JO, Cancelli VR, Hammer 
GD. Reciprocal regulation of a glucocorticoid 
receptor-steroidogenic factor-1 transcription 
complex on the Dax-1 promoter by glucocorticoids 
and adrenocorticotropic hormone in the adrenal 
cortex. Mol Endocrinol. 2006;20(11):2711–2723.
 27. Hardy D, et al. Comparative study of injury mod-
els for studying muscle regeneration in mice. 
PLoS ONE. 2016;11(1):e0147198.
 28. Schakman O, Gilson H, Kalista S, Thissen JP. 
Mechanisms of muscle atrophy induced by glu-
cocorticoids. Horm Res. 2009;72(Suppl 1):36–41.
 29. Lewis MI, Bodine SC, Kamangar N, Xu X, Da X, 
Fournier M. Effect of severe short-term malnutri-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 4 3 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
tion on diaphragm muscle signal transduction 
pathways influencing protein turnover. J Appl 
Physiol. 2006;100(6):1799–1806.
 30. Bodine SC, et al. Identification of ubiquitin ligas-
es required for skeletal muscle atrophy. Science. 
2001;294(5547):1704–1708.
 31. Sandri M, et al. Foxo transcription factors 
induce the atrophy-related ubiquitin ligase atro-
gin-1 and cause skeletal muscle atrophy. Cell. 
2004;117(3):399–412.
 32. Sasse SK, et al. The glucocorticoid receptor and 
KLF15 regulate gene expression dynamics and 
integrate signals through feed-forward circuitry. 
Mol Cell Biol. 2013;33(11):2104–2115.
 33. Schäcke H, Döcke WD, Asadullah K. Mechanisms 
involved in the side effects of glucocorticoids. 
Pharmacol Ther. 2002;96(1):23–43.
 34. Escolar DM, et al. Randomized, blinded trial of 
weekend vs daily prednisone in Duchenne mus-
cular dystrophy. Neurology. 2011;77(5):444–452.
 35. Keeling RM, Golumbek PT, Streif EM, Connolly 
AM. Weekly oral prednisolone improves survival 
and strength in male mdx mice. Muscle Nerve. 
2007;35(1):43–48.
 36. Coley WD, et al. Effect of genetic background on 
the dystrophic phenotype in mdx mice. Hum Mol 
Genet. 2016;25(1):130–145.
 37. Leite PE, et al. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
activation reduces skeletal muscle inflammation of 
mdx mice. J Neuroimmunol. 2010;227(1–2):44–51.
 38. Winterberg PD, Jiang R, Maxwell JT, Wang B, 
Wagner MB. Myocardial dysfunction occurs 
prior to changes in ventricular geometry in mice 
with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Physiol Rep. 
2016;4(5): e12732.
 39. Zentner GE, Tesar PJ, Scacheri PC. Epigen-
etic signatures distinguish multiple classes 
of enhancers with distinct cellular functions. 
Genome Res. 2011;21(8):1273–1283.
 40. Milan G, et al. Regulation of autophagy and the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system by the FoxO tran-
scriptional network during muscle atrophy. Nat 
Commun. 2015;6:6670.
 41. McPherron AC, Lawler AM, Lee SJ. Regula-
tion of skeletal muscle mass in mice by a 
new TGF-beta superfamily member. Nature. 
1997;387(6628):83–90.
 42. McNeil PL, Steinhardt RA. Loss, restoration, and 
maintenance of plasma membrane integrity.  
J Cell Biol. 1997;137(1):1–4.
 43. Parente L. Deflazacort: therapeutic index, relative 
potency and equivalent doses versus other corti-
costeroids. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2017;18(1):1.
 44. Cai C, et al. Membrane repair defects in muscu-
lar dystrophy are linked to altered interaction 
between MG53, caveolin-3, and dysferlin. J Biol 
Chem. 2009;284(23):15894–15902.
 45. Waddell LB, et al. Dysferlin, annexin A1, and 
mitsugumin 53 are upregulated in muscular dys-
trophy and localize to longitudinal tubules of the 
T-system with stretch. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 
2011;70(4):302–313.
 46. Van Laethem F, et al. Glucocorticoids alter the 
lipid and protein composition of membrane 
rafts of a murine T cell hybridoma. J Immunol. 
2003;170(6):2932–2939.
 47. Markham LW, Spicer RL, Khoury PR, Wong BL, 
Mathews KD, Cripe LH. Steroid therapy and car-
diac function in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 
Pediatr Cardiol. 2005;26(6):768–771.
 48. Janssen PM, et al. Prednisolone attenuates 
improvement of cardiac and skeletal contrac-
tile function and histopathology by lisinopril 
and spironolactone in the mdx mouse model 
of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. PLoS ONE. 
2014;9(2):e88360.
 49. Haldar SM, et al. Kruppel-like factor 15 regulates 
skeletal muscle lipid flux and exercise adaptation. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109(17):6739–6744.
 50. Zhang L, et al. KLF15 establishes the landscape 
of diurnal expression in the heart. Cell Rep. 
2015;13(11):2368–2375.
 51. Gong S, et al. Dynamics and correlation of serum 
cortisol and corticosterone under different physi-
ological or stressful conditions in mice. PLoS 
ONE. 2015;10(2):e0117503.
 52. Karlamangla AS, Friedman EM, Seeman TE, 
Stawksi RS, Almeida DM. Daytime trajectories 
of cortisol: demographic and socioeconomic 
differences--findings from the National Study 
of Daily Experiences. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
2013;38(11):2585–2597.
 53. Asada M, et al. DNA binding-dependent gluco-
corticoid receptor activity promotes adipogenesis 
via Krüppel-like factor 15 gene expression. Lab 
Invest. 2011;91(2):203–215.
 54. Masuno K, et al. Expression profiling identifies 
Klf15 as a glucocorticoid target that regulates 
airway hyperresponsiveness. Am J Respir Cell Mol 
Biol. 2011;45(3):642–649.
 55. Shimizu N, et al. Crosstalk between glucocorti-
coid receptor and nutritional sensor mTOR in 
skeletal muscle. Cell Metab. 2011;13(2):170–182.
 56. Shimizu N, et al. A muscle-liver-fat signalling axis 
is essential for central control of adaptive adipose 
remodelling. Nat Commun. 2015;6:6693.
 57. DiFranco M, Quinonez M, Capote J, Vergara 
J. DNA transfection of mammalian skeletal 
muscles using in vivo electroporation. J Vis Exp. 
2009;(32):1520.
 58. Demonbreun AR, McNally EM. DNA electropor-
ation, isolation imaging of myofibers. J Vis Exp. 
2015;(106):e53551.
 59. Quattrocelli M, et al. Mesodermal iPSC-
derived progenitor cells functionally regener-
ate cardiac and skeletal muscle. J Clin Invest. 
2015;125(12):4463–4482.
 60. Bloemberg D, Quadrilatero J. Rapid determina-
tion of myosin heavy chain expression in rat, 
mouse, and human skeletal muscle using multi-
color immunofluorescence analysis. PLoS ONE. 
2012;7(4):e35273.
 61. Heydemann A, et al. Latent TGF-beta-binding 
protein 4 modifies muscular dystrophy in mice.  
J Clin Invest. 2009;119(12):3703–3712.
 62. Jolma A, et al. DNA-binding specificities of human 
transcription factors. Cell. 2013;152(1–2):327–339.
 63. Betel D, Wilson M, Gabow A, Marks DS, Sander 
C. The microRNA.org resource: targets and 
expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 
36(Database issue):D149–D153.
 64. Carey MF, Peterson CL, Smale ST. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Cold Spring Harb 
Protoc. 2009;2009(9):pdb.prot5279.
 65. Edgar R, Domrachev M, Lash AE. Gene Expres-
sion Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and 
hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2002;30(1):207–210.
