 Capillary blood islet autoantibody
screening for identifying pre-type 1
diabetes in the general population:
design and initial results of the Fr1da
study
Jennifer Raab,1 Florian Haupt,1 Marlon Scholz,1 Claudia Matzke,1
Katharina Warncke,1,2,3 Karin Lange,4 Robin Assfalg,1 Katharina Weininger,1
Susanne Wittich,1 Stephanie Löbner,1 Andreas Beyerlein,1 Uta Nennstiel-Ratzel,5
Martin Lang,6 Otto Laub,7 Desiree Dunstheimer,8 Ezio Bonifacio,9,10
Peter Achenbach,1,2 Christiane Winkler,1,2 Anette-G Ziegler,1,2 the Fr1da Study
Group
To cite: Raab J, Haupt F,
Scholz M, et al. Capillary
blood islet autoantibody
screening for identifying pre-
type 1 diabetes in the general
population: design and initial
results of the Fr1da study.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-
011144
▸ Prepublication history for
this paper is available online.
To view these files please
visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-011144).
Received 14 January 2016
Revised 16 March 2016
Accepted 14 April 2016
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Anette-G Ziegler;
anette-g.ziegler@helmholtz-
muenchen.de
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Type 1 diabetes can be diagnosed at an
early presymptomatic stage by the detection of islet
autoantibodies. The Fr1da study aims to assess
whether early staging of type 1 diabetes (1) is feasible
at a population-based level, (2) prevents severe
metabolic decompensation observed at the clinical
manifestation of type 1 diabetes and (3) reduces
psychological distress through preventive teaching and
care.
Methods and analysis: Children aged 2–5 years in
Bavaria, Germany, will be tested for the presence of
multiple islet autoantibodies. Between February 2015
and December 2016, 100 000 children will be screened
by primary care paediatricians. Islet autoantibodies are
measured in capillary blood samples using a multiplex
three-screen ELISA. Samples with ELISA results
>97.5th centile are retested using reference
radiobinding assays. A venous blood sample is also
obtained to confirm the autoantibody status of children
with at least two autoantibodies. Children with
confirmed multiple islet autoantibodies are diagnosed
with pre-type 1 diabetes. These children and their
parents are invited to participate in an education and
counselling programme at a local diabetes centre.
Depression and anxiety, and burden of early diagnosis
are also assessed.
Results: Of the 1027 Bavarian paediatricians, 39.3%
are participating in the study. Overall, 26 760 children
have been screened between February 2015 and
November 2015. Capillary blood collection was
sufficient in volume for islet autoantibody detection in
99.46% of the children. The remaining 0.54% had
insufficient blood volume collected. Of the 26 760
capillary samples tested, 0.39% were positive for at
least two islet autoantibodies.
Discussion: Staging for early type 1 diabetes within a
public health setting appears to be feasible. The study
may set new standards for the early diagnosis of type
1 diabetes and education.
Ethics dissemination: The study was approved by
the ethics committee of Technische Universität
München (Nr. 70/14).
INTRODUCTION
Type 1 diabetes is one of the most common
chronic diseases of childhood with an inci-
dence that is increasing yearly in European
countries. The prevalence of type 1 diabetes
in children aged 0–20 years is 0.3–0.6%.1–3
Symptomatic type 1 diabetes is usually diag-
nosed by blood glucose measurements at the
acute life-threatening onset of this disease.
Acute disease onset requires hospitalisation,
and is characterised by severe metabolic
Strengths and limitations of this study
▪ The Fr1da study is population based and con-
ducted as public healthcare research.
▪ The study uses a novel approach of early diagno-
sis of type 1 diabetes to prevent diabetic ketoaci-
dosis and improve care.
▪ The study is performed in children at an age that
maximises the likelihood of achieving early diag-
nosis of childhood diabetes.
▪ Measurement of psychological impact of early
diagnosis will allow impact on family well-being
to be evaluated.
▪ Children positive for a single islet autoantibody
in the screening test are not followed.
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
1
Open Access
Protocol
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 decompensation, a major complication of type 1 dia-
betes.1 2 The management of metabolic decompensation,
and the adaptation of the family to the disease and its
treatment are major personal and financial burdens.1 2
Early diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in the asymptomatic
period could help to prevent acute disease onset, and
reduce the prevalence of metabolic decompensation and
associated hospitalisation.4 5 It may also open the path to
population-based disease prevention.
Early diagnosis is possible by the detection of multiple
islet autoantibodies.6 Nearly all of the children with
these biomarkers, regardless of their family history of
the disease, will develop clinical symptomatic diabetes.6
Therefore, early diagnostic tools should focus on the
first years of life, the time when multiple islet autoanti-
bodies usually emerge.7 In fact, 80% of children who
develop type 1 diabetes in childhood have multiple islet
autoantibodies before 5 years of age.6 Thus, if efficient
screening is implemented within a public health preven-
tion programme, the majority of future cases of child-
hood clinical diabetes could be identified in infancy.
Preventive teaching, education and monitoring may
allow us to prevent severe metabolic decompensation
and ketoacidosis, and prepare the children and families
for later insulin therapy. These possibilities are being
addressed in the Fr1da study.
The Fr1da study was designed as a model project in
order to introduce public health screening of multiple
islet autoantibodies (pre-type 1 diabetes)8 in Bavaria,
Germany. It is assessing 1) whether early staging (as out-
lined in ref. 8) of type 1 diabetes in the context of
regular medical checkups in early childhood is feasible
and efficient; (2) whether ketoacidosis and hospitalisa-
tion of children can be prevented; and (3) whether psy-
chological
distress
can
be
reduced
through
early
diagnosis, teaching and care. The Fr1da study is also
assessing environmental exposures. Its ultimate goal is to
introduce a trial platform for the prevention and subse-
quent management of type 1 diabetes.
Large-scale
public
health
screening
programmes
require quick and easy blood collection in capillary tubes
or dried blood spots, as well as high throughput assays
such as widely accepted newborn screening practices.
The current assays used to detect islet autoantibodies are
sensitive, specific, and standardised.9–14 However, in their
current
format, these
are not
applicable
for high
throughput population screening as they are too expen-
sive and labour intensive. Furthermore, there is limited
experience of using these assays with capillary blood.15–17
To overcome this problem, we have collaborated with
RSR Ltd., Cardiff, UK, to develop a screening assay
for one-shot detection of autoantibodies to the target
antigens
glutamic
acid
decarboxylase-65
(GAD65),
insulinoma-associated antigen 2 (IA-2) and zinc trans-
porter 8 (ZnT8) using a sample volume suitable for capil-
lary blood collection. This assay allows us to identify
children positive for at least one of these autoantibodies;
these children can then be followed through further
screening for autoantibodies to GAD65, IA-2, ZnT8 and
insulin for the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes.18
Here, we report the design of the Fr1da study “Early
diagnosis and care of type 1 diabetes” which was started in
February 2015, and provide the initial results for 26 760
children who had been screened by November 2015.
METHODS
Study population
The Fr1da study is intended to screen at least 100 000
children aged 2–5 years living in Bavaria, Germany, for
the presence of multiple islet autoantibodies. Screening
started in February 2015 and will continue for about
24 months.
Children
are
screened
only once.
The
screening is offered by primary care paediatricians who
have volunteered to participate in the Fr1da study.
The optimal age for performing one-off islet autoanti-
body screening is a compromise between the sensitivity
of detecting a large number of children who have
already developed multiple islet autoantibodies (better
with later screening) and the loss of sensitivity attributed
to the progression to clinical diabetes (better with
earlier
screening).
Islet
autoantibodies
frequently
develop within the first years of life, with a peak inci-
dence at 1–2 years.7 19 20 Therefore, the ‘U’ medical
checkups in Bavaria scheduled at times after the peak
autoantibody incidence represent the best and most
practical opportunities to identify children with presymp-
tomatic type 1 diabetes. Therefore, we have recom-
mended that screening is performed in the context of
medical checkups at 21–24 (checkup U7), 34–36 (U7a),
46–48 (U8), and 60–64 (U9) months of age, and at any
other paediatric visit within these age ranges (http://
de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kindervorsorgeuntersuchung).
By targeting several age-groups, we may facilitate the
implementation of screening into paediatric practice,
and provide sensitivity estimates for each screening age
in order to define the optimal age for population-based
islet autoantibody screening.
In Bavaria, there are around 100 000 live-births per
year and around 1000 primary care paediatricians. Over
99.5% of children attend preventive medical checkups
corresponding to almost 400 000 checkup visits per year
of children aged 2–5 years. The checkups comprise phys-
ical examinations, hearing tests, assessments of develop-
mental disorders, and allergen tests, but do not yet
include blood collection. We anticipate that about half
of the primary care paediatricians in Bavaria will partici-
pate in the Fr1da Study, and around half of the chil-
dren/families
who
are
offered
screening
by
their
paediatricians will participate. Therefore, enrolment of
100 000 children is expected to be possible over 2 years
(figure 1).
Blood sampling and screening questionnaire
Capillary
blood
samples
(200 µL)
are
collected
by
primary care paediatricians, who are reimbursed 10€ for
2
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 each child. Paediatricians can store the samples for up
to 5 days in a refrigerator, and the return shipments are
organised once weekly for each participating site. The
child’s family completes a one-page questionnaire cover-
ing demographic data, type 1 diabetes family history and
potentially relevant environmental exposures.
Determination of islet autoantibodies
Autoantibodies to GAD65 (GADA), IA-2 (IA-2A), and
ZnT8 (ZnT8A) are measured in combination using a
newly developed multiplex three-screen ELISA (RSR
Ltd., Cardiff, UK) using serum prepared from capillary
blood. If the three-screen ELISA is positive, the remain-
ing serum will be used to measure GADA, IA-2A, ZnT8A
and insulin autoantibodies (IAA) using reference radio-
binding assays (RBA).9–14 If at least two positive islet
autoantibodies
are detected by the reference RBA
assays, a confirmation venous blood sample is obtained
and the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes is made if the
confirmatory test is positive. All measurements are done
at the screening centre (Helmholtz Zentrum München).
The paediatrician who collects the blood is informed of
the diagnosis and autoantibody status, and then informs
the families.
Children positive for just one autoantibody in the
screening test are not followed, and not diagnosed with
pre-type 1 diabetes. Risk for children with single islet
autoantibodies progressing to diabetes is at a low rate
(less than 15% in 10 years),6 which we currently con-
sider too low to report to families. In addition, the
screening strategy does not detect children positive for
IAA in the absence of other autoantibodies. Adding IAA
to the screening of all 100 000 children was not consid-
ered cost-effective or necessary to identify multiple islet
autoantibody positive children. There is no disadvantage
in not testing for IAA in the initial screening test as our
aim is to identify children with two or more antibodies.
Since all children with at least one antibody in the
three-screen ELISA are tested for IAA, all children with
multiple islet autoantibodies that include IAA will be
identified.
On receipt of the capillary blood samples (collected
in Microvette 200 Z tubes) at the screening centre, the
blood samples are centrifuged at 3000 rpm to obtain
serum. Signs of haemolysis are recorded in the database.
Figure 1
Study design. GADA, glutamic acid decarboxylase autoantibodies; IAA, insulin autoantibodies; IA-2A
Insulinoma-associated antigen 2 autoantibodies; RBA, radiobinding assay; ZnT8A, zinc transporter eight autoantibodies.
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
3
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 The serum samples are stored at −20°C, and tested
within 1 week (range 0–14 days) after receipt. The
three-screen ELISA requires 25 µL serum for a single
well analysis and 50 µL for duplicates. The conventional
RBAs require 4 µL for duplicate analysis of GADA and
IA-2A, respectively, 8 µL for ZnT8A, and 20 µL for
IAA.9–14
The 3-screen ELISA assay is performed over 2 days. It
is performed using 25 µL of serum. All samples with a
three-screen ELISA signal above the 97.5th percentile
are then tested for GADA, IA-2A, ZnT8A, and IAA using
reference RBAs9–14 from the remainder of the capillary
blood sample. If there is insufficient blood sample for
this procedure, single RBAs of GADA, IA-2A and ZnT8A
are prioritised because these require smaller volumes. If
necessary, another capillary blood sample is requested
from the paediatrician.
For the reference RBAs, the cut-off for venous blood
samples corresponds to the 99th centile of values in
control children. To compare the autoantibody levels
between capillary and venous serum samples, 31 samples
from antibody positive and negative children were dir-
ectly compared before starting the Fr1da study. In add-
ition, capillary blood samples covering a range of ELISA
values above and below the 97.5th centile were tested
for GADA, IA-2A, ZnT8A and IAA in order to determine
how appropriate the RBA serum cut-offs were for the
capillary blood samples. The haemolytic status of capil-
lary samples was also considered for assessing the distri-
bution of IAA values.
Education and counselling programme
The parents of children with pre-type 1 diabetes are
invited to attend one 3–4 h educational programme
where they are instructed about urine and blood glucose
monitoring, symptoms of hyperglycaemia, pathogenesis
of type 1 diabetes, insulin action, and normal and patho-
logical blood glucose levels. The education programme
takes place close to the family’s place of residence. It is
performed by a local paediatric diabetes centre team
who have received special training in pre-type 1 diabetes
education, and thus allows the family to develop a rela-
tionship with their local paediatric diabetes centre. The
purpose of counselling is to help the families accept the
diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes, to cope with it in a posi-
tive manner, and to alleviate any anxiety that may arise.
The
families
are
provided
with
a
guidebook
(‘Fr1da-Book’), which was especially developed for the
early stages of type 1 diabetes. All families are assigned a
contact person (doctor or diabetes educator) from the
diabetes team and are able to contact this person at any
time if they have questions. We expect participation in
the education and counselling programme to be high
(>90%) and aim for full participation. At 2 weeks, 6 and
12 months after the training, the family is sent a ques-
tionnaire to assess their knowledge of diabetes in order
to evaluate the effectiveness of the training programme
(figure 1).
Staging and follow-up of children with multiple islet
autoantibodies
An oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and an HbA1c
test are performed in children with pre-type 1 diabetes
within 6 weeks after the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes
to determine their level of glucose tolerance (normal,
impaired or pathological). For all children, a monitor-
ing plan is implemented at home and with their paedia-
trician. This includes visits to the diabetes centre every
1–6 month for measurement of random blood glucose,
HbA1c, body weight and height. OGTTs are performed
every 6–12 months depending on the child’s glucose tol-
erance.8 The families are provided with urine glucose
sticks to monitor urine glucose every month, and a
blood glucose metre and diary with instructions to
measure blood glucose concentrations in children with
impaired or pathological glucose tolerance.
In the event of pathological urine or blood glucose
levels, the family is asked to immediately contact their
local paediatric diabetes centre team. If hyperglycaemia
(ADA criteria21) is diagnosed by the paediatrician, the
child is immediately referred to the local paediatric dia-
betes centre team. All primary care paediatricians, the
local paediatric diabetes centre team and the families
are asked to record the following parameters and to
inform us of the diagnosis at any time, including outside
the setting of this project: symptoms (polyuria, polydip-
sia, polyphagia, weight loss), HbA1c, blood glucose
levels (fasting, postprandial or 2-h OGTT level), blood
gas analysis (pH level, total CO2, pCO2, base deficit,
base excess, potassium, sodium, chloride, blood urea
nitrogen, plasma creatinine, β-hydroxybutyrate), urine
ketones,
duration
of
hospitalisation,
intensive
care
requirements, and the date of starting insulin therapy.
Stress assessment
A repeatedly discussed risk associated with islet autoanti-
body screening is the potential psychological stress
induced by a positive screening result, and the uncer-
tainty regarding the child’s future. If stress precedes the
symptomatic manifestation of the disease by many years
and impairs families’ well-being severely over a longer
period of time, it might offset the clinical benefits of an
early diagnosis. Very few studies have assessed the psy-
chological
impact
of
islet
autoantibody
screening.
Results of the BABYDIAB and TEDDY studies indicate
that notification of a positive autoantibody test is asso-
ciated with increased anxiety in parents that decreases
over time (TEDDY unpublished data).22–25 We expect
training and counselling to reduce psychological stress.
The
psychological
impact,
depression,
anxiety
and
burden are monitored using a standardised question-
naire (Patient Health Questionnaire26) given on the
diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes, and at 6 and 12 months
later. Families with elevated anxiety and depression
levels are referred for consultation to a local psycholo-
gist. The parents may also contact our free telephone
hotline with any questions or concerns.
4
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 Statistical considerations
Our estimate of the prevalence of pre-type 1 diabetes
(multiple islet autoantibodies) is 0.3% (300 cases per
100 000 screened children). This estimate is based on
the expected prevalence of diabetes before the age of
20 years in Bavaria (0.5%), and an expected sensitivity of
multiple islet autoantibody positivity of 60% of these
cases at 2–5 years.
The feasibility and efficiency of the Fr1da study will be
assessed in terms of the participation rates of screened
children and children with multiple islet autoantibodies
taking part in the education and counselling pro-
gramme. The study will be considered successful if
>80 000 children participate in the screening, >200 chil-
dren with pre-type 1 diabetes are identified over a
period of 2 years, and if >80% of positive children com-
plete the education and counselling sessions. We expect
that >80% of the parents will be able to recall the most
important symptoms of hyperglycaemia at 12 months
after attending the educational programme. Rates of
ketoacidosis or hospitalisation of <5% within 12 months
will be considered as indicators of success. Rates of
ketoacidosis will be also compared to rates found in the
Bavarian Register Cohort DiMelli.27
Statistical analyses will be performed on factors asso-
ciated with pre-type 1 diabetes. Anticipating that 100 000
children will be screened and 300 will be diagnosed with
pre-type 1 diabetes, factors with an exposure rate of 30%
(eg, caesarean section or factors categorised into ter-
tiles) will have 80% power for an OR of >1.4 at a two-
tailed significance level of 5%. Similarly, a factor with an
exposure rate of 2% (eg, gluten or cereal introduction
before 3 months of age) will have 80% power for an OR
>2.6 at a two-tailed significance level of 5%.
The impact of the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes will
be compared within participants over time (eg, using
paired t tests) and with respect to a reference popula-
tion
at
each
time
(eg,
using
two-sample
t
tests).
Correlations between the family’s knowledge of diabetes
and the psychological impact at the same time will be
determined to examine whether better knowledge of
the disease and its treatment is associated with a lower
psychological impact. We will also examine correlations
with other relevant factors, such as parental education
or age.
Data analysis will be performed using SAS (SAS
Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina, USA), R (http://
cran.r-project.org/),
or
SPSS
(IBM
Inc.,
Armonk,
New York, USA). Missing data will be handled using
elimination or imputation strategies, as appropriate.
There are no interim analysis planned, except for a
regular check of the current recruitment numbers. All
other analyses will be performed in 2016 and 2017.
RESULTS
Participation
The Fr1da study started enrolment in February 2015. All
1027
primary
care
paediatricians
in
Bavaria
were
informed about the start of the Fr1da study through a
one-page letter and were invited to participate. Of these,
501 expressed interest and asked for more detailed
information, and 404 (39.3%) are currently enrolling
children. As of 30 November 2015, 26 760 children
(13 713 males, 13 047 females) have undergone screen-
ing tests. The weekly participation rate ranged from 135
to 1297 children, and it was affected by school holidays
and by a postal strike in Germany which compromised
sample shipment, but participation remained relatively
constant (figure 2). There were no regional differences
in the participation rates after considering the density of
primary care paediatricians (figure 3). Overall, 3.6%
(n=962) of the children had a first degree relative with
type 1 diabetes (table 1).
Capillary blood collection
Capillary blood samples were obtained for 26 760 chil-
dren, of which 25 868 (96.7%) contained sufficient
Figure 2
Numbers of children
who underwent the islet
autoantibody screening per week
between February and November
2015.
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
5
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 volume to perform the three-screen ELISA islet autoanti-
body test. Of the remaining samples, 748 (2.8%) were
sufficient to perform the reference RBAs for GADA,
IA-2A, and ZnT8A, and to enable the results to be com-
municated to the child’s paediatrician. The other 144
(0.54%) samples were too small and the paediatricians
were asked to obtain a new sample; this was done for 48
children (table 1). Of all capillary samples received,
8912 (33.3%) had visible traces of haemoglobin.
Performance of RBA islet autoantibody detection in
capillary blood
Autoantibodies against GAD, IA-2, and ZnT8 correlated
highly with capillary and venous blood of children
(figure 4). The distribution of RBA islet autoantibodies
was examined in Fr1da capillary blood samples that
scored <97.5th centile in the three-Screen ELISA results
so as to determine whether venous serum thresholds for
positivity were appropriate for capillary blood (figure 5).
For GADA, IA-2A, and ZnT8A, the 99th centile previ-
ously defined in venous serum was very similar to the
99th centile of the capillary blood sample measure-
ments. For IAA, there was a shift to higher assay signals
if the capillary blood was visibly haemolysed. Moreover,
the venous serum threshold of 1.5 units corresponded to
the 97th centile of the non-haemolysed capillary blood
samples. For comparison, we also examined the distribu-
tion of RBA values in capillary blood samples that were
>97.5th centile in the three-Screen ELISA. At the venous
serum
established
threshold,
positive
values
were
obtained in 25.2% for IAA in non-haemolysed samples,
13.6% for GADA, 7.7% for IA-2A, 8% for ZnT8WA and
7.7% for ZnT8RA.
Prevalence of multiples islet autoantibodies and clinical
type 1 diabetes
Of the 26 760 capillary samples tested, 105 (0.39%) were
positive for at least two islet autoantibodies, and a
sample of venous blood was requested. To date, a
second sample has been received from 77 children, of
which 63 (81.8%) were positive for multiple islet auto-
antibodies, and the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes was
communicated to the families (table 1). The multiple
islet
autoantibody status
was
not
confirmed
in
14
(18.2%) children. Four children were diagnosed with
clinical type 1 diabetes by collecting the capillary sample
and the sample of venous blood.
Participation rates in the education and counselling
programme, rate of ketoacidosis and psychological
assessment
All families and their children with confirmed multiple
islet autoantibodies (pre-type 1 diabetes) were invited to
participate in the educational and counselling pro-
gramme, and in metabolic OGTT staging. Two families
refused to take part in these activities. The other
Figure 3
(A) Participation rates of primary care paediatricians per region in Bavaria (blue) and the mean number of children
screened per primary care paediatrician (red). (B) Affiliated paediatric diabetes centre in Bavaria (black squares) following the
children diagnosed with pre-type 1 diabetes. Children and families are offered an education and counselling programme following
the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes, glycaemic staging and psychological care related to the early diagnosis of diabetes.
6
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 families have either completed OGTT staging and parti-
cipated in the education and counselling programme at
1 of 16 affiliated paediatric diabetes centres in Bavaria,
or are scheduled to participate in these within 6 weeks.
Based on the OGTT results, 89% children were
normoglycaemic, 9% had impaired glucose tolerance,
and 2% had pathological glucose tolerance (clinical
type 1 diabetes). Children with normoglycaemia were
asked to measure their urine glucose every month, and
all of them adhered to the regular measurements until
today and have submitted their results (see figure 2 of
ref. 8). Children with impaired glucose tolerance were
asked to measure blood glucose every week, and all of
them adhered to the measurements and submitted their
results. Children with pathological glucose tolerance
were asked to measure their blood glucose every day,
and none have started insulin therapy to date. One
child with impaired glucose tolerance has progressed to
hyperglycaemia to date. None of the children tested in
the Fr1da study had ketoacidosis. The psychological
assessment revealed no serious distress in any of the fam-
ilies that needed immediate reaction and treatment.
Analyses of parent’s well-being at the time of early diag-
nosis revealed symptoms of anxiety and depression in
1.5% of parents which is comparable to the German
norm population.
DISCUSSION AND SIGNIFICANCE
The Fr1da study is a population-based study that was
implemented to examine the feasibility of early diagno-
sis of type 1 diabetes by islet autoantibody screening in
infants, without preselecting the target population in
terms of genetic susceptibility or family history. This
study, as a model project, has demonstrated the feasibi-
lity of collaborating with primary care paediatricians and
the introduction of a public health screening test within
the context of regular compulsory checkups, followed by
education, counselling, and follow-up assessments.
Over 10 months, a mean of 2676 children have been
screened every month. This is considerably higher than
previous screening programmes in school children,
where 200–400 children per month underwent veni-
puncture.28–31 The single capillary blood sampling pro-
cedure was efficient, and provided sufficient volume for
the diagnosis of pre-type 1 diabetes in nearly 99.5% of
children. Moreover, we have established that capillary
blood samples can be used for screening purposes.
Overall, 0.39% of children were positive for multiple
islet autoantibodies in the first capillary blood screening,
and we estimate that in approximately another 0.3% of
children this will be confirmed by a second venous
sample; however, the numbers of children with con-
firmed samples are still very small.
Participation rates in the education, counselling, and
follow-up assessment were very high. This is encouraging
because education of pre-type 1 diabetes is a novel
concept that has not been previously explored. We
expect that this tailored education will prevent children
from acquiring diabetic ketoacidosis and families’ from
psychological distress.
To date, none of the children in the Fr1da study have
been diagnosed with ketoacidosis. This finding may be
due to the screening programme and/or an increased
awareness of type 1 diabetes among paediatricians.
Approximately 900 children suffer from life-threatening
ketoacidosis at diabetes onset in Germany each year, cor-
responding to about one-third of all children with newly
diagnosed type 1 diabetes.32 Ketoacidosis at the onset of
type 1 diabetes is associated with increased mortality and
longer hospitalisation, translating into increased cost
and is less likely to be associated with partial remission
in the first year after diagnosis and after 2 years of symp-
tomatic disease. It is also associated with lower residual
β cell function, worse metabolic control, and higher
insulin requirements.33 34 Previous studies have shown
that the prevalence of diabetic ketoacidosis, HbA1c, and
the length of hospitalisation were considerably lower in
Table 1
Characteristics of the study participants as of 30 November 2015
Number (%) of
children/samples
Screened children
26 760 (13 713 males (51.2%))
Screened children with a first degree relative with type 1 diabetes
962 (3.6%)
Samples with a sufficient volume to perform the 3-screen ELISA
25 868 (96.7%)
Samples with insufficient volume for the 3-screen ELISA but sufficient for the RBA
748 (2.8%)
Samples with insufficient volume for the 3-screen ELISA or the RBA prompting a
request for a new sample
144 (0.54%)
Sample obtained again and sent to the centre
48
Children with multiple islet autoantibodies detected in the first sample
105 (0.39%)
Children with confirmed multiple islet autoantibodies (ie, pre-type 1 diabetes)
63
Children diagnosed with asymptomatic type 1 diabetes between the first and
second sample
4
Children without confirmation of multiple islet autoantibodies
14
Children pending confirmation
24
RBA, radiobinding assay.
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
7
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 children diagnosed at an early stage via islet autoanti-
body screening.4 5 35 36
Limitations of the Fr1da study design include the fact
that we do not follow children with single islet autoanti-
bodies. A minority of these children will develop dia-
betes. A second limitation with respect to sensitivity is
the cross-sectional screening at one single time point.
Repeated screening at a later age is costly, but will
increase the sensitivity of the approach. A third limita-
tion is that our study design does not address the
socioeconomic aspect of introducing such a screening
for the prevention of diabetic ketoacidosis and its com-
plications. While costs and benefits will differ between
different healthcare systems and the worth of saving lives
debated, it still will be important to formally address the
economics
of
the
prevention
of
DKA
or
type
1
diabetes.37
In conclusion, the Fr1da study, if successful, could
have a major impact on the implementation of screen-
ing for pre-type 1 diabetes in the preventive health pro-
gramme in Germany, and potentially other countries.
The study uses validated assays and a clear strategy for
identifying children with multiple islet autoantibodies so
as to help prevent diabetic ketoacidosis at a population
level, thus reducing the family’s burden and potentially
healthcare costs. We also expect to set new standards for
the early diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, as well as provide
subsequent education and counselling for children diag-
nosed with pre-type 1 diabetes. Furthermore, the Fr1da
study will provide us with the opportunity to assess the
impact of environmental exposures on pre-type 1 dia-
betes since a population-based approach is most suitable
for such analyses. These exposures include air pollution,
population density and drinking water quality data
which are available for Bavaria and have not been exam-
ined in other natural history studies. Moreover, the study
will provide an unprecedented opportunity to design
secondary prevention studies to delay or prevent the
onset of hyperglycaemia and insulin dependence at a
population-based level, and will implement this with a
relatively rapid recruitment capacity.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
The study was approved by the ethics committee of
Technische Universität München (Nr. 70/14). An infor-
mation sheet is given to the parents or the legal guar-
dians, in person, by the child’s paediatrician. The child’s
representative is given sufficient time to read the infor-
mation sheet and the opportunity to ask any questions
before completing the consent form. The parents or
legal guardians are informed that participation in the
study is voluntary and that consent can be withdrawn at
any time, without giving a reason and without any disad-
vantages. All data will be treated confidentially, and data
will be protected throughout the study in accordance
with relevant laws. The findings of the study will be disse-
minated through peer-reviewed journals, national and
international conference presentations, and to the pae-
diatricians via regular newsletters.
STUDY ORGANISATION
The
Fr1da
study
is
organised
by
the
Institute
of
Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München and
Forschergruppe
Diabetes,
Klinikum
rechts
der
Isar,
Technische Universität München, where the screening
centre is located. The screening centre includes study
coordination, data and logistic coordination, the central
Figure 4
Correlation between capillary and venous blood
levels of antibodies against GAD, IA-2, and ZnT8 in 31
children (GADA: R2 0.69, p<0.0001; IA-2A R2 0.98, p<0.0001;
ZnT8RA: R2 0.89, p<0.0001). GAD, glutamic acid
decarboxylase; GADA, glutamic acid decarboxylase
autoantibodies.
8
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 laboratory, public relations and statistical analysis. The
study is performed in collaboration with primary care pae-
diatricians (Berufsverband der Kinder und Jugendärzte e.
V., Landesverband Bayern and PaedNetz) in Bavaria who
perform the screening, and the affiliated paediatric dia-
betes centres which conduct the education programme
(see
below) and
the
psychology
team
(see
below)
responsible for the psychological assessment of the study.
The Fr1da study is being conducted in cooperation
with
the
Bayerisches
Landesamt
für
Gesundheit
und
Lebensmittelsicherheit
and
the
Bayerisches
Staatsministerium für Gesundheit und Pflege (under the
auspices of Melanie Huml, MdL).
Author affiliations
1Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, and
Forschergruppe Diabetes, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Neuherberg, Germany
2Forschergruppe Diabetes e.V., Neuherberg, Germany
3Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany
Figure 5
Cumulative frequency distribution of RBA values for islet autoantibody measurements in capillary blood samples. For
each islet autoantibody, RBA values (x axis) are plotted against the percentage of samples having equal or lower values (y axis).
Shown are samples that were <97.5 centile in 3-Screen ELISA (solid lines; n=409) and samples that were >97.5 centile in 3-
Screen ELISA (broken lines, n=568). For IAA, the distributions are shown for samples that were visibly haemolysed (red lines)
and non-haemolysed (black). The dotted lines represent the thresholds of positivity established for venous blood.
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
9
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 4Department of Medical Psychology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany
5Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Oberschleißheim, Germany
6Berufsverband der Kinder- und Jugendärzte e.V., Landesverband Bayern,
Augsburg, Germany
7PaedNetz Bayern e.V., Rosenheim, Germany
8Klinikum Augsburg, Klinik für Kinder und Jugendliche, Augsburg, Germany
9Centre for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Faculty of Medicine, Technische
Universität, Dresden, Germany
10Paul Langerhans Institute Dresden of Helmholtz Centre Munich at University
Clinic Carl Gustav Carus of Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany
Collaborators Fr1da Study Group: Screening centre—Members and roles of
the central organising team at the Institute of Diabetes Research,
Helmholtz Zentrum München—Principle investigator: Anette-G. Ziegler. Study
coordination: Jennifer Raab, Florian Haupt, Christiane Winkler, and Robin
Assfalg. Logistics and database management: Florian Haupt. Islet
autoantibody determination, sample processing, and methodology
development: Peter Achenbach, Ezio Bonifacio, Susanne Wittich, Katharina
Weininger, Marlon Scholz, Claudia Matzke, Stephanie Riethausen, Lisa
Schneider, and Rainer Fürst. Teaching, care, and follow-up of children with
pre-type 1 diabetes: Stephanie Zillmer, Katharina Warncke, Stephanie Löbner,
Annette Knopff, Elisabeth Strauss, Joanna Stock, and Claudia Ramminger.
Data analysis: Andreas Beyerlein, Ezio Bonifacio, and Peter Achenbach. Public
relations: Cordula Falk. Administrative and Scientific Management: Ramona
Puff. Dissemination, information, and public relations: Sonja Optiz, Ulrike
Koller, and Helge Siemens (Corporate Communications Department,
Helmholtz Zentrum München). Psychology team—Karin Lange and Iris Müller
(Department of Medical Psychology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany). Primary care paediatricians—Renate Abt, MD, Wendelstein;
Aderbauer/Leonhardt/Riedl, MD, Weiden; Ina Albrich, Dorfen; Stephan Arenz,
MD, Pfaffenhofen; Bernd Aulinger, MD, Burglengenfeld; Glenn Averbeck, MD,
Pfaffenhofen; Annette Bachmann-Hoschka, MD, Teisendorf; Andrea Bachmeyr,
MD, München; Baier/Baier, MD, Schwabach; Elmar Barthel, MD, Gemünden;
Marina Bascone-Fricke, MD, Aidenbach; Batz/Hubmann, MD, Zirndorf; Rolf
Bauer, MD, Roth; Yvonna Bauer, MD, Augsburg; Gunhild Bauer-Niedermaier,
MD, Zirndorf; Larissa Baumgärtner, Heilsbronn; Michael Bäzner, MD,
Sonthofen; Beck/Baier/Mussar, MD, Donauwörth; Axel Becker, MD, Haar;
Beer/Schirmer, MD, Marktredwitz; Lutz Bellingrath, MD, Bamberg; Reiner
Benckendorff, MD, Augsburg; Gertraud Bergen, MD, Haßfurt; Monika Berger,
MD, Haimhausen; Annerose Bergner, MD, München; Beste/Hosemann, MD,
Dachau; Reinhard Beuthan, MD, Dingolfing; Katrin Biebach, MD, München;
Dominique Bienert, MD, München; Matthias Bierler, MD, Amberg;
Biermann-Franke/Trinczek, MD, Erlangen; Klaus Binder, MD, Nürnberg;
Brigitte Birk, MD, Peißenberg; Maria-Magdalena Blauditschek, MD, Würzburg;
Jörg Blume, Schweinfurt; Blümel-Eiber/Rösch, MD, Nürnberg; Andreas Blüml,
Trostberg; Sabine Böhm-Vogt, MD, Ottobrunn; Karola Börzsönyi, MD,
Freising; Stephan Böse-O’Reilly, MD, München; Malte Bräutigam, MD,
Eichstätt; Walter Breiner, Marktoberdorf; Ulrike Brendel, MD, Parsberg;
Michael Brijnen von Oldershausen, MD, München; Christian Brückmann, MD,
Brannenburg; Halina Eva Buchalik, Lauf an der Pegnitz; Franz Bundscherer,
MD, Geretsried; Anna Bürcky, MD, Ochsenfurt; Barbara Capelle, MD,
Unterhaching; Mona Castrop, MD, Regensburg; Alina Cocos, MD, Markt
Schwaben; Cordes/Gebhard, MD, Nürnberg; Christoph Daffner, MD, Nürnberg;
Arcan Demircioglu, MD, München; Jost Dieckerhoff, MD, Rosenheim; Karolin
Diergarten, MD, Germering; Elmar Dietmair, MD, Bobingen; Lutz Dietrich, MD,
Hof; Maximilian Dietrich, MD, Aichach; Brigitte Dietz, MD, Taufkirchen;
Christian Döbig, MD, Erlangen; Sylvia Döpfer, MD, München; Jürgen Dörrer,
Freyung; Ragnar Dörrfuss, MD, Nürnberg; Monika Drexel, MD, Rehau; Elke
Düll-Schiller, MD, Neumarkt; Stefan Eber, MD, München; Christoph Ebert,
MD, Ebersberg; Thomas Ebert, Veitsbronn/Siegelsdorf; Christina Eder, MD,
Bayreuth; Claudia Eichwald, MD, Ingolstadt; Annette Eiden, MD, Gauting;
Claus Engelhardt, MD, Nürnberg; Anja Engelmann, MD, Dinkelscherben;
Georg Engl, MD, München; Uta Enzensberger, MD, Mering; Patricia Erlinger,
MD, Postbauer-Heng; Uwe Ermer, MD, Neuburg/Donau; Kirsten Exl,
München; Florian Fackler, MD, Erlangen; Edgar Fath, MD, München; Peter
Feiereisen, MD, München; Daniela Felsl, MD, Wolnzach; Fendel/Wieland, MD,
München; Maria Fischer, MD, Lappersdorf; Cordula Fischer-Trüstedt, MD,
München; Katrin Franke-Augustin, MD, Bayreuth; Harald Frantzmann, MD,
Memmingen; Rudolf Franz, MD, München; Claudia Frey, MD, Augsburg;
Susanne Gandenberger, MD, München; Antonia Gavazzeni, MD, München;
Christian Geißendörfer, MD, Selb; Edeltraud Gerber, MD, Kolbermoor; Martin
Gerlich, MD, Dinkelsbühl; Elke Gerlitz, MD, Herzogenaurach; Julia Gerstl, MD,
Hauzenberg; Jürgen Geuder, MD, Freilassing; Johannes Gilles, Gunzenhausen;
Rainer Gillessen, MD, Ottobrunn; Cornelia Gläßel, MD, Fürth; Judith
Glöckner-Pagel, MD, Regensburg; Hermann Gloning, MD, München; Birgit
Goldschmitt-Wuttge, MD, München; Martin Götz, MD, Elisabethzell; Wolfgang
Graser, MD, Nürnberg; Marion Grau-vom-Scheidt, MD, Nürnberg; Martin
Griebel, MD, Poing; Angelika Gruber-Müller, MD, Ingolstadt; Dietrich Grunert,
MD, Kempten; Christian Haas, MD, München; Richard Haaser, MD, Feucht;
Caroline Haberl, MD, Starnberg; Ulrich Hagen, MD, Friedberg; Verner
Hallmen, MD, München; Emma Halwas, MD, Geisenfeld; Ingrid Hartmann,
MD, Lichtenfels; Conny Hartmann, MD, Bad Wörishofen; Christian Hartnik,
Bad Staffelstein; Ulrike Haun, MD, Vilshofen; Gabi Haus, MD, München;
Rudolf Havla, MD, Hof; Wolfgang Heck, MD, Vöhringen; Heck-Buchhorn/
Willnow, MD, Kösching; Ralph Heidingsfelder, Ansbach; Anette Hein, MD,
Gerbrunn; Markus Helmreich, MD, Schweinfurt; Tanja Hemmers, MD,
Augsburg; Anna Hencz, MD, Germering; Holger Hertzberg, MD, Schwabach;
Sigrid Hesse, MD, Straubing; Daniela Heuschmann, MD, Regensburg;
Cornelia Hoegen, MD, Herrsching; Reinhard Hoffmann, MD, Landshut; Steffen
Hoffmann-Baldus, MD, Haar; Gerhard Hofmann, MD, Würzburg; Meike
Hofmann, Mitterteich; Sabina Hohn, Nürnberg; Gabriele Hopf, MD, Ingolstadt;
Jörg Horcher, MD, Straubing; Birgit Hortig-Nevelö, MD, Regenstauf; Annette
Hovestadt, MD, München; Irene Hummel, Bamberg; Peter Hußlein, MD,
Grassau; Wolfgang Hüttner, MD, Coburg; Anna Iarrapino-Demmel, MD,
München; Birgit Indlekofer, MD, Tutzing; Annelie Intemann, MD, München;
Margarete Jäger, MD, München; Peter Jakob, MD, Erlangen; Christine Janello,
MD, Neubiberg; Jarosch/Schleupner, MD, Würzburg; Stefan Jobst, MD,
Bayreuth; Janina Joiko, MD, München; Guido Judex, Regensburg; Ronny
Jung, MD, Roth; Andreas Kalmutzki, Schwabach; Lampros Kampouridis, MD,
Baldham; Michael Kandler, MD, Nürnberg; Susanne Kastl, MD, Bayreuth;
Walther Kaufmann, Nürnberg; Bernhard Keck, MD, Augsburg; Peter Kellner,
MD, Vilsbiburg; Lars Kellner, MD, Gräfelfing; Ghassan Khazim, MD,
Hammelburg; Conelia Kiani, MD, Bayreuth; Gunhild Kilian-Kornell, MD,
Starnberg; Annegret Klein, MD, Oberaudorf; Wolfgang Klein, MD, Augsburg;
Kristina Klemp, MD, Burgkunstadt; Margreth Knebel, MD, München; Norbert
Knieß, MD, Ingolstadt; Kober/Spannagel, MD, Gmund; Cornelia Komm, MD,
Waldkraiburg; Nikos Konstantopoulos, MD, München; Cosima Köring, MD,
Altötting; Renate Kramer, MD, München; Guido Krandick, MD, Deisenhofen;
Barbara Krappatsch, MD, Viechtach; Krebs/Güler, MD, Neuendettelsau; Berndt
Kreisberger, MD, Ismaning; Gerlinde Kreß-Rohrbach, MD, Stegaurach; Josef
Kriesmair, MD, München; Andreas Kronwitter, MD, München; Matthias
Krueger, MD, Klingenberg; Kubryk/Döring, MD, Aschheim; Thomas
Kuchenbauer, MD, München; Ursula Kuhnle-Krahl, MD, Gauting; Stephan
Küntzer, MD, Kitzingen; Wolfgang Künzer, MD, Regensburg; Beate Kusser,
MD, München; Werner Küstermann, MD, Veitshöchheim; Wolfgang Küver,
MD, München; Franz Lachner, MD, Ruhpolding; Wolfgang Landendörfer, MD,
Nürnberg; Christina Lang, MD, Nürnberg; Martin Lang, MD, Schwabmünchen;
Martin Lang, MD, Augsburg; Lang/Zötl, MD, Bad Tölz; Otto Laub, Rosenheim;
Peter Lautenbach, Herzogenaurach; Gerhard Legat, MD, Amberg; Karl-Heinz
Leppik, MD, Erlangen; Katrin Leuchtenberger, MD, Kelheim; Karin Leykauf,
Bayreuth; Hans Lichtenstern, MD, Pocking; Werner Lick, MD, Würzburg;
Gabriele Lieb, MD, Würzburg; Bärbel Liebezeit, MD, Mühldorf am Inn; Armin
Liebscher, MD, Eckental; Susanne Linder, MD, Grafrath; Ruth Lindner-Gajek,
MD, München; Lipinski/ Mende/Kirtscher, MD, Lindenberg; Harald Lodes,
MD, Neumarkt; Markus Loeff, MD, Landsberg am Lech; Andreas Lorenz,
Krumbach; Martin Löw, Memmingen; Anna Elisabeth Lüdtke, MD, Neu-Ulm;
Renata Lysy, MD, Möhrendorf; Eva Maas-Doyle, MD, Erlangen-Tennenlohe;
Michaela Maier, MD, Pfaffenhofen; Soyoun Maisch, MD, München; Stefanie
Marr, Ingolstadt; Martin/Schilder, MD, Schrobenhausen; Stephan Martini, MD,
München; Monika Maurus, MD, Memmingen; Barbara Meiler, Grafrath; Bettina
Meinel, MD, Regensburg; Udo Meißner, MD, Bamberg; Steffi Menzel,
München; Jürgen Messner, MD, Lohr; Roland Metzner, MD, Würzburg; Petra
Sibyl Meyer, MD, Augsburg; Oliver Michael, Murnau; Rupert Moser,
Schwandorf; Kathrin Mothes, MD, Schwandorf; Miriam Mrach, München;
Sabine Mühlbauer, MD, München; Ulrich Müller, MD, München; Herbert
Müller, MD, Kempten; Müller/ Wilken/Schürmann, MD, Naila; Müller/Wilken/
10
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 Schürmann, MD, Hof; Patrick Muzzolini, MD, Kulmbach; Sabine Nagel, MD,
Neustadt/Do.; Dieter Nagel, MD, Freyung; Karsten Naumann, Erlangen; Nicole
Nellen-Hellmuth, MD, Würzburg; Klaus Neumann, MD,
Höhenkirchen-Siegertsbrunn; Christiane Neumeir, MD, Königsbrunn;
Hans-Peter Niedermeier, MD, Erding; Jochen Noss, MD, München; Andreas
Nowack, MD, Siegsdorf; Thomas Nowotny, MD, Stephanskirchen; Stefan
Oberle, MD, Höchstadt; Osang/Pudenz, MD, München; Nicola Pape-Feußner,
MD, Berg; Parhofer/Wiß, MD, Dachau; Michael Pätzold, Marktoberdorf;
Christian Pauli, MD, Olching; Michaela Pausenberger, MD, Lauf a.d. Pegnitz;
Angela Pfeffer, MD, Regen; Bergit Pfleger, Neuendettelsau; Stefan Platzer,
MD, Osterhofen; Hermann Pöhlmann, Bayreuth; Polster/Kainzinger, MD,
Dingolfing; Pontz/Wimmer, MD, Passau; Manfred Praun, MD, Gilching; Preis/
Preis, MD, Bischberg; Preissler/Tomas/Theil, MD, Gersthofen; Verena Printz,
MD, Fürstenfeldbruck; Prinz/Sedlacek, MD, Burgau; Barbara Przyklenk, MD,
München; Georg Puchner, MD, Regensburg; Marco Ramella Pezza, MD,
Meitingen; Rampf/Lautner, MD, Freising; Jürgen Ratay, MD, Freising; Thomas
Rath, MD, Landsberg am Lech; Karla Rauschning-Sikora, MD, Mainaschaff;
Christiane Razeghi, MD, Miesbach; Anja Regenfus, MD, Nürnberg; Brigitte
Reichstein, MD, Ingolstadt; Reitz/Pawlak, MD, Rosenheim; Christian Renner,
MD, Deggendorf; Renz/Lauterbach, MD, Weiden; Tobias Reploh, MD, Bad
Tölz; Reschke/Exner, MD, Kaufbeuren; Michael Richter, MD, München;
Mustafa Rihawi, MD, Kronach; Ringert-Esmaeili/Müller-Bühl, MD, Alzenau;
Carsten Rinker, MD, München; Ingrid Rohland, MD, Erding; Herbert Rohr,
MD, Fürstenfeldbruck; Alexander Roithmaier, MD, München; Rosenthal/
Lütkemeyer, MD, Unterschleißheim; Anne Katrin Rothe, MD, München; Irene
Rühlemann, MD, München; Ramon Rümler, MD, Dachau; Monika Sachse,
Neumarkt/Opf.; Uwe Sack, MD, Würzburg; Sirin Salik, Nürnberg; Schaaff/
Höpner, MD, Eckental-Eschenau; Hans-G. Schatz, MD, Bayreuth; Hans-Ulrich
Schatz, MD, München; Carolus Schenke, MD, Neustadt a.d. Aisch; Barbara
Scherer, MD, München; Scheuerer/Eidenschink, MD, München; Ute Schindler,
MD, Kelheim; Lydia Schlak, Sulzbach-Rosenberg; Andreas Schlossbauer, Bad
Kissingen; Schmid-Seibold/Leipold, MD, Regensburg; Volker Schmidt, MD,
Kempten; Stefan Schmidt, Rosenheim; Dorothea Schmidt-Colberg, MD,
Erlangen; Stephan Schneider, Schweinfurt; Klaus Schnell, MD, Coburg;
Scholz/Scholz-Kühn, MD, Deggendorf; Monika Schömig-Spingler, MD,
Würzburg; Volker Schönecker, Kaufering; Martin Schöniger, MD, Weilheim;
Philipp Schoof, München; Franziskus Schuhböck, MD, Kirchheim; Christine
Schweikl, MD, Eggenfelden; Rosemarie Schwertner, MD, Germering; Christian
Seidel, MD, Ingolstadt; Josef Seidl, MD, Füssen; Monika Seidt, MD, München;
Seiler/Pletl-Maar, MD, Erlangen; Horst Seithe, MD, Nürnberg; Marko Senjor,
MD, Wasserburg am Inn; Manfred Singer, MD, Forchheim; Wilfried Späth,
Weißenhorn; Michael Sperlich, MD, Ampfing; Spieß/Robert, MD, Neuburg;
Spooren/Usadel, MD, Senden; Sprich/Sannig, MD, Biessenhofen; Johannes
Stadler, Gerolzhofen; Wilhelm Stechl, MD, Raubling; Wolfgang Steck, MD,
Immenstadt; Constanze Steinborn, MD, Sauerlach; Bernd Steinkirchner, MD,
Neufahrn; Stefan Stellwag, MD, München; Frank Steppberger, Oberasbach;
Anke Steuerer, MD, Augsburg; Stöckhert/Meyer, MD, Fürth; Christoph
Stöhr-Sökefeld, MD, Neubiberg; Annette Stratmann, MD, Holzkirchen;
Dominik Stricker, MD, Lappersdorf; Annette Strobel, MD, Erlangen; Michael
Strobelt, MD, Bruckmühl; Gesine Strohbach, Nürnberg; Thomas Sturm, MD,
Fürstenfeldbruck; Raphael Sturm, MD, Affing; Sturm/Mayr, MD, Memmingen;
Vita Teichler, MD, München; Günter Theurer, MD, Traunstein; Uta Tielker, MD,
Eichenau; Achim Timnik, MD, Neusäß; Michael Torbahn, MD, Nürnberg;
Regina Trammer, MD, Planegg; German Tretter, MD, Altenstdt/WN; Burkhard
Trusen, MD, Bamberg; Roland Ulmer, MD, Lauf; Stephan Unkelbach, MD,
Volkach; Reiner Valentin, MD, Grafing; Michael Veh-Hölzlein, Fürth;
Veh-Hölzlein/Richter, MD, Fürth; Oliver Viethen, MD, Traunstein; Michael
Vogel, MD, München; Victor von Arnim, MD, Roding; Eleonore von der
Schulenburg, MD, München; Patrik von Schoenaich, MD, Neusäss; Olaf
Vorbeck, Moosburg; Christoph Wachenfeld-Wahl, MD, Augsburg; Roland
Wagner, MD, Nittendorf; Edgar Waldmann, MD, Bamberg; Karin Waldmann,
Memmelsdorf; Annette Weber-Pöhlmann, MD, Selb; Claudia Wegener, MD,
München; Josef Weidinger, MD, Nabburg; Johannes Weigel, MD, Augsburg;
Weigel/Chittka/Kordowich, MD, Karlstadt; Christine Weigmann-Popp, MD,
Bamberg; Benedikt Weiß, MD, Bad Kötzting; Mathias Wendeborn, MD,
München; Wiesheu/Buckl/Paul/Popp, MD, Landshut; Wiessner-Straßer/
Eisenhut, MD, München; Hermann Wittrock, Mering; Daniela Wohlmann, MD,
Garmisch-Partenkirchen; Alexander Zeiss, MD, München; Roland Zeller,
Aschaffenburg; Stefan Zeller, MD, Kempten; Ziemer/Ziemer, MD, Nürnberg;
Ulrich Zimmer, MD, Rothenburg ob der Tauber; Mathias Zimmer, Coburg;
Lothar Zimmermann, MD, Aichach; Thomas Zimmermann, MD, Burgebrach;
Thomas Zimmermann, MD, Hirschaid; Andreas Zurmühl, MD, Penzberg;
Kristin Zwenzner, MD, Neudrossenfeld; Affiliated Diabetes Centres—
Engelsberger, MD, Katharina Warncke, MD, Kinderklinik Schwabing, Desiree
Dunstheimer, MD, Klinikum Augsburg; Horst Seithe, MD, Klinikum Nürnberg
Süd; Eva-Maria Gerstl, MD, Klinikum Dritter Orden Passau; Herbert Müller,
MD, Klinikum Kempten; Reinhard Koch, MD, Leopoldina Krankenhaus
Schweinfurt; Christian Ockert, MD, RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim; Stefanie
Tretter, MD, Klinikum Weiden; Ursula Kuhnle-Krahl, MD, Gauting; Nicole
Nellen-Hellmuth, MD, Würzburg; Uwe Ermer, MD, Kliniken St. Elisabeth
Neuburg/Donau; Susanne Bechtold-Dalla Pozza, MD, Haunersches
Kinderspital München; Antonia Gavazzeni, MD, München; Silke Christina
Schmidt, MD, Klinikum Dritter Orden München; Marina Sindichakis, MD,
Klinikum Traunstein; and Sonja Braig, MD, Klinikum Bayreuth.
Contributors AGZ, EB, PA, CW, JR, and FH designed the study and drafted
the manuscript. AB and EB developed the statistical methods and wrote the
statistical section of the protocol. MS, CM, KW, KL, RA, KW, SW, SL, DD,
UN-R, ML and OL contributed to the design of the study and reviewed the
manuscript for intellectual content.
Funding The Fr1da study is supported by grants from the
LifeScience-Stiftung, JDRF (1-SRA-2014-310-M-R), the Bavarian State
Ministry of Health and Care (Gesund.Leben.Bayern, LP00228), Deutsche
Diabetes-Stiftung, Landesverband Bayern der Betriebskrankenkassen,
B. Braun-Stiftung (BBST-D-15-00016), and Deutsche Diabetes-Hilfe.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Obtained.
Ethics approval The study was approved by the ethics committee of
Technische Universität München (Nr. 70/14).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license,
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided
the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW. Type 1 diabetes. Lancet
2014;383:69–82.
2.
IDF Diabetes Atlas, 6th edition. https://www.idf.org/sites/default/files/
EN_6E_Atlas_Full_0.pdf
3.
Ehehalt S, Dietz K, Willasch AM, et al., DIARY-Group
Baden-Wuerttemberg. Prediction model for the incidence and
prevalence of type 1 diabetes in childhood and adolescence:
evidence for a cohort-dependent increase within the next two
decades in Germany. Paediatr Diabetes 2012;13:15–20.
4.
Elding Larsson H, Vehik K, Bell R, et al. Reduced prevalence of
diabetic ketoacidosis at diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in young
children participating in longitudinal follow-up. Diabetes Care
2011;34:2347–52.
5.
Winkler C, Schober E, Ziegler AG, et al. Markedly reduced rate of
diabetic ketoacidosis at onset of type 1 diabetes in relatives
screened for islet autoantibodies. Paediatr Diabetes
2012;13:308–13.
6.
Ziegler AG, Rewers M, Simell O, et al. Seroconversion to multiple
islet autoantibodies and risk of progression to diabetes in children.
JAMA 2013;309:2473–9.
7.
Ziegler AG, Bonifacio E., BABYDIAB-BABYDIET Study Group.
Age-related islet autoantibody incidence in offspring of patients with
type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2012;55:1937–43.
8.
Insel RA, Dunne JL, Ziegler AG. General population screening for
type 1 diabetes: has its time come? Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes
Obes 2015;22:270–6.
9.
Lampasona V, Schlosser M, Mueller PW, et al. Diabetes antibody
standardization program: first proficiency evaluation of assays for
autoantibodies to zinc transporter 8. Clin Chem 2011;57:1693–702.
10.
Schlosser M, Mueller PW, Törn C, et al. Diabetes Antibody
Standardization Program: evaluation of assays for insulin
autoantibodies. Diabetologia 2010;53:2611–20.
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
11
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
 11.
Törn C, Mueller PW, Schlosser M, et al. Diabetes Antibody
Standardization Program: evaluation of assays for autoantibodies to
glutamic acid decarboxylase and islet antigen-2. Diabetologia
2008;51:846–52.
12.
Ziegler AG, Hummel M, Schenker M, et al. Autoantibody
appearance and risk for development of childhood diabetes in
offspring of parents with type 1 diabetes: the 2-year analysis of the
German BABYDIAB Study. Diabetes 1999;48:460–8.
13.
Bonifacio E, Yu L, Williams AK, et al. Harmonization of glutamic acid
decarboxylase and islet antigen-2 autoantibody assays for national
institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases consortia.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:3360–7.
14.
Achenbach P, Lampasona V, Landherr U, et al. Autoantibodies to
zinc transporter 8 and SLC30A8 genotype stratify type 1 diabetes
risk. Diabetologia 2009;52:1881–8.
15.
Wasserfall C, Atkinson M, Jodoin E, et al. Glutamic acid
decarboxylase and IA-2 autoantibodies in type 1 diabetes:
comparing sample substrates for autoantibody determinations.
Paediatr Diabetes 2000;1:10–16.
16.
Bazzigaluppi E, Bonfanti R, Bingley PJ, et al. Capillary whole blood
measurement of islet autoantibodies. Diabetes Care 1999;22:275–9.
17.
Bingley PJ, Rafkin LE, Matheson D, et al. Use of dried capillary
blood sampling for islet autoantibody screening in relatives: a
feasibility study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2015;17:867–71.
18.
Insel RA, Dunne JL, Atkinson MA, et al. staging presymptomatic
type 1 diabetes: a scientific statement of JDRF, the Endocrine
Society, and the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care
2015;38:1964–74.
19.
Parikka V, Näntö-Salonen K, Saarinen M, et al. Early
seroconversion and rapidly increasing autoantibody concentrations
predict prepubertal manifestation of type 1 diabetes in children at
genetic risk. Diabetologia 2012;55:1926–36.
20.
Krischer JP, Lynch KF, Schatz DA, et al. The 6 year incidence of
diabetes-associated autoantibodies in genetically at-risk children: the
TEDDY study. Diabetologia 2015;58:980–7.
21.
American Diabetes Association. Classification and Diagnosis of
Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38(Suppl 1):S8–16.
22.
Hummel M, Ziegler AG, Roth R. Psychological impact of childhood
islet autoantibody testing in families participating in the BABYDIAB
study. Diabet Med 2004;21:324–8.
23.
Galatzer A, Green E, Ofan R, et al. Psychological impact of islet cell
antibody screening. J Paediatr Endocrinol Metab 2001;14(Suppl 1):
675–9.
24.
Bennett Johnson S, Tercyak KP Jr. Psychological impact of islet cell
antibody screening for IDDM on children, adults, and their family
members. Diabetes Care 1995;18:1370–2.
25.
Johnson SB. Psychological impact of screening and prediction in
type 1 diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2011;11:454–9.
26.
Löwe B, Spitzer RL, Zipfel S, et al. Gesundheitsfragebogen für
Patienten (PHQ D). 2. Auflage. Karlsruhe: Pfizer, 2002.
27.
Thümer L, Adler K, Bonifacio E, et al. German new onset diabetes in
the young incident cohort study: DiMelli study design and first-year
results. Rev Diabet Stud 2010;7:202–8.
28.
Velluzzi F, Secci G, Sepe V, et al. Prediction of type 1 diabetes in
Sardinian schoolchildren using islet cell autoantibodies: 10-year
follow-up of the Sardinian schoolchildren type 1 diabetes prediction
study. Acta Diabetol 2016;53(1):73–9.
29.
Boehm BO, Manfras B, Seissler J, et al. Epidemiology and
immunogenetic background of islet cell antibody—positive
nondiabetic schoolchildren. Ulm-Frankfurt population study. Diabetes
1991;40:1435–9.
30.
Schlosser M, Strebelow M, Rjasanowski I, et al. Prevalence of
diabetes-associated autoantibodies in schoolchildren: the
Karlsburg Type 1 diabetes risk study. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2004;1037:114–17.
31.
Schatz D, Krischer J, Horne G, et al. Islet cell antibodies predict
insulin-dependent diabetes in United States school age children as
powerfully as in unaffected relatives. J Clin Invest 1994;93:
2403–7.
32.
Neu A, Hofer SE, Karges B, et al. Ketoacidosis at diabetes onset is
still frequent in children and adolescents: a multicentre analysis of
14,664 patients from 106 institutions. Diabetes Care
2009;32:1647–8.
33.
Fernandez Castañer M, Montaña E, Camps I, et al. Ketoacidosis at
diagnosis is predictive of lower residual beta-cell function and poor
metabolic control in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Metab
1996;22:349–55.
34.
Bowden SA, Duck MM, Hoffman RP. Young children (<5 year) and
adolescents (>12 year) with type 1 diabetes mellitus have low rate of
partial remission: diabetic ketoacidosis is an important risk factor.
Paediatr Diabetes 2008;9:197–201.
35.
Triolo TM, Chase HP, Barker JM., DPT-1 Study Group. Diabetic
subjects diagnosed through the Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1
(DPT-1) are often asymptomatic with normal A1C at diabetes onset.
Diabetes Care 2009;32:769–73.
36.
Barker JM, Goehrig SH, Barriga K, et al. Clinical characteristics
of children diagnosed with type 1 diabetes through intensive
screening and follow-up. Diabetes Care 2004;27:
1399–404.
37.
Meehan C, Fout B, Ashcraft J, et al. Screening for T1D risk to
reduce DKA is not economically viable. Pediatr Diabetes
2015;16:565–72.
12
Raab J, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011144. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144
Open Access
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011144 on 18 May 2016. Downloaded from 
