 Physics in Medicine & Biology
     
LETTER • OPEN ACCESS
First patients treated with a 1.5 T MRI-Linac:
clinical proof of concept of a high-precision, high-
field MRI guided radiotherapy treatment
To cite this article: B W Raaymakers et al 2017 Phys. Med. Biol. 62 L41
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
Related content
A back-projection algorithm in the
presence of an extra attenuating medium:
towards EPID dosimetry for the MR-Linac
I Torres-Xirau, I Olaciregui-Ruiz, R A
Rozendaal et al.
-
Towards fast online intrafraction
replanning for free-breathing stereotactic
body radiation therapy with the MR-linac
C Kontaxis, G H Bol, B Stemkens et al.
-
M V imaging for the MRI linac
B W Raaymakers, J C J de Boer, C Knox
et al.
-
Recent citations
Multi-object tracking in MRI-guided
radiotherapy using the tracking-learning-
detection framework
Jennifer Dhont et al
-
Realizing the potential of magnetic
resonance image guided radiotherapy in
gynaecological and rectal cancer
Ingrid M White et al
-
In vitro biological response of cancer and
normal tissue cells to proton irradiation not
affected by an added magnetic field
Peter W. Nagle et al
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 85.203.44.48 on 01/06/2019 at 23:44
 L41
Physics in Medicine & Biology
First patients treated with a 1.5 T MRI-
Linac: clinical proof of concept of a 
high-precision, high-field MRI guided 
radiotherapy treatment
B W Raaymakers1,3, I M Jürgenliemk-Schulz1, G H Bol1, 
M Glitzner1, A N T J Kotte1, B van Asselen1, J C J de Boer1, 
J J Bluemink1, S L Hackett1, M A Moerland1, S J Woodings1, 
J W H Wolthaus1, H M van Zijp1, M E P Philippens1, 
R Tijssen1, J G M Kok1, E N de Groot-van Breugel1, 
I Kiekebosch1, L T C Meijers1, C N Nomden1, G G Sikkes1, 
P A H Doornaert1, W S C Eppinga1, N Kasperts1, 
L G W Kerkmeijer1, J H A Tersteeg1, K J Brown2, B Pais2, 
P Woodhead2 and J J W Lagendijk1
1 Department of Radiotherapy, UMC Utrecht, Netherlands
2 Elekta AB, Stockholm, Sweden
E-mail: B.W.Raaymakers@umcutrecht.nl
Received 20 September 2017, revised 10 October 2017
Accepted for publication 20 October 2017
Published 14 November 2017
Abstract
The integration of 1.5 T MRI functionality with a radiotherapy linear 
accelerator (linac) has been pursued since 1999 by the UMC Utrecht in close 
collaboration with Elekta and Philips. The idea behind this integrated device 
is to offer unrivalled, online and real-time, soft-tissue visualization of the 
tumour and the surroundings for more precise radiation delivery. The proof 
of concept of this device was given in 2009 by demonstrating simultaneous 
irradiation and MR imaging on phantoms, since then the device has been 
further developed and commercialized by Elekta. The aim of this work is to 
demonstrate the clinical feasibility of online, high-precision, high-field MRI 
guidance of radiotherapy using the first clinical prototype MRI-Linac.
Four patients with lumbar spine bone metastases were treated with a 3 
or 5 beam step-and-shoot IMRT plan. The IMRT plan was created while 
Letter
Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine
Original content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain 
attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI.
3 Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
1361-6560/17/230L41+10$33.00 © 2017 Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine Printed in the UK
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41–L50
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6560/aa9517
 L42
the patient was on the treatment table and based on the online 1.5 T MR 
images; pre-treatment CT was deformably registered to the online MRI to 
obtain Hounsfield values. Bone metastases were chosen as the first site as 
these tumors can be clearly visualized on MRI and the surrounding spine 
bone can be detected on the integrated portal imager. This way the portal 
images served as an independent verification of the MRI based guidance to 
quantify the geometric precision of radiation delivery. Dosimetric accuracy 
was assessed post-treatment from phantom measurements with an ionization 
chamber and film.
Absolute doses were found to be highly accurate, with deviations ranging 
from 0.0% to 1.7% in the isocenter. The geometrical, MRI based targeting as 
confirmed using portal images was better than 0.5 mm, ranging from 0.2 mm 
to 0.4 mm.
In conclusion, high precision, high-field, 1.5 T MRI guided radiotherapy 
is clinically feasible.
Keywords: radiotherapy, MRI linac, 1.5 T MRI, first clinical treatment
(Some figures may appear in colour only in the online journal)
Introduction
The challenge in radiotherapy is delivering dose to the tumour while the dose to the sur-
rounding tissues is kept as low as possible. Image guided radiotherapy (IGRT) (Verellen et al 
2007, 2008) is the key to optimize this process as it allows the localization of the tumour 
and organs at risk (OAR) while the patient is on the treatment table. Of all available imaging 
modalities for IGRT, MRI is the most versatile and suitable candidate as it provides soft-tissue 
contrast to enable direct tumour visualization as well as OAR localization (Lagendijk et al 
2014). Moreover, it provides real-time imaging to characterize and eventually track anatomi-
cal motion (Stemkens et al 2016, Dietz et al 2017) for MRI guided radiotherapy and for dose 
reconstruction (Glitzner et al 2015) and ultimately real-time plan adaptation (Kontaxis et al 
2017).
Integrated MRI radiotherapy systems thus promise IGRT based on excellent soft-tissue 
contrast. The UMC Utrecht has initiated the research on hybrid MRI radiotherapy systems 
(Lagendijk and Bakker 2000, Lagendijk et al 2008) by investigating the integration of a 
Philips 1.5 T MRI and an Elekta 6 MV linear accelerator. The proof of concept of simultane-
ous imaging and irradiation was given in 2009 Raaymakers et al (2009). This design has been 
iteratively developed to a clinical prototype by Elekta AB (Sweden), named Unity. The unique 
feature of this system is its 1.5 T, diagnostic image quality, MRI system (Philips Ingenia 
based) combined with a linear accelerator.
Various other MRI guided radiotherapy systems are being explored; the MRIdian system 
of Viewray (USA), which consists of a 0.35 T MRI for imaging and three Cobalt-60 sources 
for irradiation, in clinical use since 2014 and many MRI based IGRT procedures have been 
performed (Mutic and Dempsey 2014). An upgraded system with a linear accelerator instead 
of the Cobalt-60 sources has been brought to the clinic in 2017. The Aurora RT system from 
MagnetTx (Canada) consists of a 6 MV linear accelerator integrated with a 0.5 T MRI (Fallone 
2014). The group in Edmonton, Canada has a non-clinical working prototype. The Australian 
MRI-Linac project (Keall et al 2014) aims to integrate a 1.0 T MRI and a 6MV linear accelera-
tor, this project is currently in the technical development phase.
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L43
This study aims to demonstrate for the first time the feasibility of high-precision, high-field 
MRI based targeting of linear accelerator based irradiation. Focus is on the targeting accuracy, 
feasibility and safety of the clinical procedures.
Methods
First-in-man (FIM) treatments
Lumbar spine bone metastases were chosen for FIM because the affected vertebral body is 
visible on MRI and also independently on the portal imager integrated in the MRI-Linac. The 
portal images allow for independent, in vivo, verification of the geometric accuracy of the 
MRI based IGRT procedure. Vertebral bone metastases are treated with a single fraction of 8 
Gy for pain relief.
An IRB approved, industry (Elekta AB, Sweden) sponsored trial aimed at treating five 
patients with painful lumbar spine bone metastases with the MRI-Linac. A single fraction 
of 8 Gy was prescribed to the target volume, defined by the entire vertebral body, with the 
following constraints V7.2 Gy  >  90%, D98%  >  6.4 Gy, D0.1CC  <  8.8 Gy while the dose to the 
spinal cord was minimized (D0.1CC  <  8.56 Gy) as was the dose to the remainder of the body 
(D0.1CC  <  8.8 Gy).
The 1
.5 T MRI-Linac system
The system is a 1.5 T MRI system with a ring-based gantry containing a 7 MV standing 
wave linear accelerator. The radiation beam is collimated via a non-rotational 160 multi-leaf 
collimator (MLC) with 7.1 mm wide leaves at isocenter plane, travelling in cranial-caudal 
direction. Maximum field size in the isocenter is 22 cm in cranial caudal and 57 cm in lat-
eral direction. The layout of the system has conceptually not changed since presented by 
Raaymakers et al (2009). The gantry ring is hidden by the Faraday cage which makes the 
appearance of the system more like a diagnostic scanner than a therapeutic device. Figure 1 
shows a photograph of the clinical prototype MRI-Linac.
The MRI-Linac table can move in cranial-caudal direction only, so the patient is set-up at a 
virtual isocenter indicated by lasers and then positioned close to the MRI-Linac isocenter. The 
patient set-up is not critical as in conventional radiotherapy practice since the actual tumour 
location is subsequently assessed using MRI and a new IMRT plan is made to accommodate 
for the latest tumour location and patient anatomy.
A dedicated acceptance and quality assurance (QA) and quality control (QC) procedure 
was developed and executed to quantify the MRI performance, linac and portal imager per-
formance, the treatment planning, the dosimetric perfomance and the geometric performance 
of the MRI-Linac.
In particular the geometric fidelity was carefully assessed for FIM treatments and was 
found to match a regular 1.5 T Philips Ingenia MRI system (Tijssen et al 2017). The MRI dist-
ortion map is heterogeneous, the maximum distortions are 1.1 mm and located at the tips of a 
star-shaped pattern in a 25 cm diameter spherical volume, while in the central area distortions 
are below 0.5 mm and this is typically the volume to localize the lumbar spinal bone metas-
tasis for FIM. A 4-element posterior coil is positioned under the table, fixed relative to the 
isocenter, both this coil and the table are accounted for in the treatment planning, i.e. Monaco 
(research version 5.19.02 Elekta AB, Sweden). The anterior 4-element coil is positioned float-
ing just above the patient, it is radiation transparent but for the FIM beam configuration, 
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L44
no beams are entering through this coil anyway. MRI interpretation during beam-on is not 
affected (Tijssen et al 2017).
The linac of the MRI-Linac is commissioned according to regular guidelines like the 
AAPM Task group 142 report (AAPM TG 142 2009) and the NCS 9 protocol (NCS 9, 1996), 
but measurement execution was adapted to be compliant with the presence of the high magn-
etic field. The performance was then assessed for the dosimetry and geometry separately.
The treatment planning system (TPS) was commissioned using regular guidelines (NCS 
report 15, NCS report 22). Patient QA was performed by measuring 20 IMRT plans (ten 
3-field plans and ten 5-field plans) using both GafChromic film(EBT3 film, Ashland ISP 
Advanced Materials, NJ, USA) and a CC04 ionisation chamber (IBA, Belgium) in a polysty-
rene slab phantom. The chamber readings were used to normalise the film dose distributions. 
An example is shown in figure 2. The mean absolute difference between the planned and 
measured doses in the isocenter was 0.5% of the planned dose (range  −1.8% to  +2.0%). The 
mean percentage of points meeting the gamma criterion of 3%/3 mm (Low et al 1998) was 
98.8% (range 92.2%–100%).
For the geometrical performance, the Alderson RANDO phantom (Radiology Support 
Devices, CA, USA) was used. A plan, including radiographic projections for the first segment 
of each treatment field, was generated as described in ‘Treatment Procedure’ below. In short, 
the MV images recorded during plan delivery were registered to the projections generated 
from the planning dataset. A 3D vector was calculated by taking the average offset between 
images along each axis for all fields. The length of the 3D vector is defined as the geometrical 
accuracy (see also figure 4 for the clinical example). It was shown that the geometrical acc-
uracy of the complete MRI-Linac procedure in phantoms is better than 0.5 mm.
T
reatment procedure
The workflow is automated while critical decisions are delegated to the operator. For this pur-
pose, an in-house developed workflow engine, the Utrecht treatment session manager (UTSM) 
was used. Central in UTSM is the Dicom database, in which all patient data relevant for the 
treatment is stored. All actions launched for the workflow are triggered by updates received by 
the server. This way, an action is always provided with the latest data and parallel processes, 
Figure 1. Photograph of the MRI-linac at the UMC Utrecht. The lasers for patient set-
up, the patient positioning devices as well as the RF receive coil are shown.
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L45
like visualization and dose calculation, can be launched. This approach ensures data integrity 
and straight-forward monitoring of the treatment progress. An in-house developed visual-
ization and contouring program (VolumeTool, Bol et al 2009) is permanently running and 
offering views and contour editing possibilities on all the data of the patient as these become 
available during the treatment: the deformed CT, online MRI, contours, dose distributions, 
gamma distributions between Monaco and OnCentra dose calculations, and dose volume his-
tograms. The procedure can be divided in a set of pre-treatment activities and a set of online 
activities.
The pre-treatment actions are:
 1. Pre-treatment CT (Brilliance CT big bore, Philips, The Netherlands) and 1.5 T MRI 
(Ingenia, Philips, The Netherlands) images are acquired for target definition and 
Hounsfield values.
 2. Two IMRT plans are generated. The IMRT plan for the MRI linac, including the presence 
of the 1.5 T transverse magnetic field, is generated using a research version of Monaco 
(v5.19.02). A second plan for a conventional linac using Monaco (v5.11.01, Elekta AB, 
Sweden) was generated as back-up plan in case it would not be possible to proceed with 
treatment on the MRI linac.
 3. Quality assurance tests were performed on the MRI linac plan as discussed above. Also, 
an independent recalculation of this plan was performed via OnCentra (Elekta AB, 
Sweden), which is based on a Collapsed Cone algorithm, and cannot directly simulate 
the effect of the magnetic field. This recalculation serves as an independent, 3D dose 
check of the Monaco dose distribution. Hackett et al (2016) showed that this procedure 
is suitable for voxel-to-voxel comparisons in the target volume for a variety of treatment 
sites. A gamma-comparison between the OnCentra and Monaco dose distributions was 
Figure 2. QA performance of the linac of the MRI-linac. 20 plans were delivered on 
polystyrene phantom twice, first with film, then with ionization chamber. The calculated 
results were compared to the measured film distributions (A) and a gamma analysis (B) 
of 3%/3 mm was performed. (C) Shows a profile comparison between the measured and 
calculated dose distribution.
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L46
performed, using a 3%/3 mm criterion. Note that this IMRT plan will not be used in the 
on-line setting, this is merely a QA check on the procedure.
For the actual MRI-Linac treatment, schematically illustrated in figure 3, a brief descrip-
tion of the steps is:
 1. The patient is positioned on the MRI-Linac and an online MRI (3D SPGR) is acquired 
and presented to the operators.
 2. The contours and the Hounsfield values are acquired by registration of the pre-treatment 
data with the online MRI using the deformable registration software ADMIRE (Version 
1.13.3) from Elekta. The results are visualized and manually checked and the contours are 
edited if deemed necessary by the radiation oncologists.
 3. Based on this data set an IMRT plan is generated in Monaco v5.19.02, this takes approxi-
mately 5 min which was considered acceptable for the FIM online planning. This plan 
is presented using Volumetool and manually reviewed by the radiation oncologists and 
medical physicists. In parallel, for online QA, the plan is recalculated using OnCentra as 
also described in step 3 of the pre-treatment activity.
 4. To check the patient stability after the contour and planning steps a MRI scan (3D SPGR) 
is repeated and the contours are overlaid on this data and visually checked for alignment 
before the radiation oncologist approves proceeding.
 5. Treatment delivery starts and the MV panel is activated to capture all portal images for 
the off-line validation of the MRI based treatment guidance. Also, during irradiation a 
seven second MRI (3D balanced SSFP) is acquired and presented every seven seconds 
for continuous patient monitoring. The intra-beam MRI is acquired as a feasibility and the 
data is monitored by the operators. There are no direct treatment consequences associated 
to the intra-fraction MRI, it merely serves as a redundant patient monitoring next to a con-
Figure 3. Online workflow of the MRI-linac treatment. The online MRI is registered 
to the pre-treatment CT to generate a warped CT and to propagate the pre-treatment 
contours. An IMRT plan is generated automatically and is validated via independent 
dose calculations and after position verification (PV) by an additional MRI, beam 
delivery is started at the MRI-linac.
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L47
ventional camera system. Also, the data are used after the treatment for proof of concept 
of time-resolved dose reconstruction, much like presented by Glitzner et al (2015) (this is 
beyond the scope of this paper).
Evaluation of the treatment accuracy
To assess the targeting accuracy of the MRI guidance, the MV projection images of the first 
segment of each field were registered to the calculated projection images from the warped CT 
using Theraview (Version 5.2.6, Cablon Medical, The Netherlands). The geometric accuracy 
was determined as described for the geometrical performance test. The calculated projections 
are based on the online MRI in which the Hounsfield values from the pre-treatment CT were 
assigned after the image registration. If the MRI targeting is correct and the intra-fraction 
motion is small, the calculated projection and the measured projections should coincide.
The dosimetric accuracy of the plan used for treatment was validated post-treatment, as 
described in step 3 of the pre-treatment activities.
Results
Patients and clinical procedures
Five patients were included, from mid-May to mid-July 2017 (with current follow-up range 
of 2–8 weeks), after they gave written informed consent. Four of the patients were treated on 
the MRI-Linac as intended. Patient 1, 65 years, target lumbar vertebra 4 (L4), patient 2, 74 
years, L4, patient 3, 61 years, L2–L3, patient 4, 70 years, L1. No unexpected adverse events 
have been reported so far. Although not a study endpoint, palliative effect was achieved in all 
treated patients, with two of them having a temporary pain flare. The fifth patient, after having 
signed informed consent, experienced severe disease progression with neurological impair-
ment the day after signing and was therefore no longer eligible for treatment within FIM. 
This rapid progression was diagnosed during the pre-treatment MRI workup and required 
emergency intervention.
Dosimetric accuracy
For each of the 4 (MRI-Linac treated) FIM patients the same QA procedures were performed 
for both the pre-treatment plan and the plan delivered on the MR-linac as discussed in step 
3 of the pre-treatment activities. The mean difference was 0.4% of the calculated dose (stan-
dard deviation 0.8%, maximum difference 1.7%). The average percentage of points satisfying 
the gamma criterion of 3%/3 mm was 97.7% (standard deviation 2.0%, minimum pass rate 
93.7%).
Geometrical accuracy
The accuracy of in vivo delivery was validated by comparing the portal images of the IMRT 
segments to the MRI based, calculated projections, as shown in figure 4. This was done for the 
first segment of each beam and close alignment was found between them, on average 0.3 mm 
with a range of 0.2 to 0.4 mm.
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L48
Timing
The individual MRI-Linac procedures were very reproducible, on average taking 41 min (range 
33–44 min) and were well tolerated by the patients. This excludes approximately 15 min of 
bringing the patient into the treatment room and set-up on the table. The time to beam-on (i.e. 
time for imaging, contour definition and online treatment planning) was on average 25 min 
(ranging from 20–28 min).
Patient stability
Patient stability was monitored during irradiation by acquiring a 3D balanced SSFP every 
7 s. Some minor position shifts of surrounding structures were seen, but no movements of the 
target volume.
Discussion and conclusion
The aim of this work is to demonstrate that high-field, 1.5 T MRI guidance is clinically fea-
sible for high-precision targeting of radiotherapy. In this first clinical study spinal vertebral 
bodies, i.e. bony structures, were targeted because this allowed independent validation of tar-
geting accuracy by using portal images and clinical gain was not intended. For these bone 
metastases, high-precision targeting is also clinically feasible with conventional cone-beam 
CT (cbCT) linacs (e.g. Guckenberger et al (2014)). Yet, MRI guidance provides targeting to 
arbitrary tumour sites due to the unrivalled soft-tissue contrast. Moreover, MRI can provide 
real-time feed-back, providing input for intra-treatment adaptations. This versatility of MRI 
opens many options for improving radiotherapy treatments (Lagendijk et al 2008, 2014). Now 
the concept of MRI-Linac has successfully been proven in the first clinical setting and reveals 
Figure 4. The measured MV portal image (on the left) and calculated projection image 
based on the warped CT (on the right). The MV images are registered on the calculated 
projections and thus the contours can be overlaid on both images for visual inspection. 
The quantitative metric is taken by the directional shift found from the registration.
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L49
an outstanding level of dosimetric and geometric accuracy of the radiation beam we will work 
towards real-time adaptive MRI guided radiotherapy using the MRI-Linac, for instance fol-
lowing the approach of Kontaxis et al (2017).
In summary, the combination of diagnostic quality MRI information of a patient on the 
treatment table and online planning facility allows making treatment decisions directly before 
and during radiation delivery. Furthermore, the whole procedure can be completed within a 
clinically acceptable timeframe. This helps to better guide the treatment to the actual anatomi-
cal situations. The MRI-Linac shows a stereotactic quality dose delivery.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to thank the Dutch Cancer Society for their financial support (Grant 
2015-0848).
References
AAPM 2009 Task Group 142 report: quality assurance of medical accelerators Med. Phys. 36 4197–212
Bol G H, Kotte A N, van der Heide U A and Lagendijk J J 2009 Simultaneous multi-modality ROI 
delineation in clinical practice Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 96 133–40
Dietz B, Yip E, Yun J, Fallone B G and Wachowicz K 2017 Real-time dynamic MR image reconstruction 
using compressed sensing and principal component analysis (CS-PCA): demonstration in lung 
tumor tracking Med. Phys. 44 3978–89
Fallone B G 2014 The rotating biplanar linac-magnetic resonance imaging system Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 
24 200–2
Glitzner M, Crijns S P, de Senneville B D, Kontaxis C, Prins F M, Lagendijk J J and Raaymakers B W 
2015 On-line MR imaging for dose validation of abdominal radiotherapy Phys. Med. Biol. 
60 8869–83
Guckenberger M et al 2014 Safety and efficacy of stereotactic body radiotherapy as primary treatment 
for vertebral metastases: a multi-institutional analysis Radiat. Oncol. 9 226
Hackett S et al 2016 SU-F-J-148: a collapsed cone algorithm can be used for quality assurance for 
monaco treatment plans for the MR-linac Med. Phys. 43 3441
Keall P J, Barton M, Crozier S and Australian MRI-Linac Program, including contributors from Ingham 
Institute, Illawarra Cancer Care Centre, Liverpool Hospital, Stanford University, Universities of 
Newcastle, Queensland, Sydney, Western Sydney, and Wollongong 2014 The Australian magnetic 
resonance imaging-linac program Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 24 203–6
Kontaxis C, Bol G H, Stemkens B, Glitzner M, Prins F M, Kerkmeijer L G W, Lagendijk J J W and 
Raaymakers B W 2017 Towards fast online intrafraction replanning for free-breathing stereotactic 
body radiation therapy with the MR-linac Phys. Med. Biol. 62 7233–48
Lagendijk J J W and Bakker C J G 2000 MRI guided radiotherapy: a MRI based linear accelerator Proc. 
ESTRO Istanbul 19th Annual Meeting (Brussels: European Society for Theraputic Radiology and 
Oncology) vol 56, suppl. 1, pp S1–S255
Lagendijk J J W, Raaymakers B W, Raaijmakers A J E, Overweg J, Brown K J, Kerkhof E M, van 
der Put R W, Hardemark B, van Vulpen M and van der Heide U A 2008 MRI/linac integration 
Radiother. Oncol. 86 25–9
Lagendijk J J, Raaymakers B W, Van den Berg C A, Moerland M A, Philippens M E and van Vulpen M 
2014 MR guidance in radiotherapy Phys. Med. Biol. 59 R349–69
Low D A, Harms W B, Mutic S and Purdy J A 1998 A technique for the quantitative evaluation of dose 
distributions Med. Phys. 25 656–61
Mutic S and Dempsey J F 2014 The ViewRay system: magnetic resonance-guided and controlled 
radiotherapy Semin. Radiat. Oncol. 24 196–9
NCS report 9 1996 Quality control of medical linear accelerators, report 9 of the Netherlands commission 
of radiation dosimetry (http://radiationdosimetry.org/ncs/documents/1996-ncs-cop-linac-qa)
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
 L50
NCS report 15 2005 Quality assurance of 3D treatment planning systems for external photon and electron 
beams, report 15 of the Netherlands commission of radiation dosimetry (http://radiationdosimetry.
org/ncs/documents/ncs-15-)
NCS report 22 2013 Code of practice for the quality assurance and control for intensity modulated 
radiotherapy, report 22 of the Netherlands commission of radiation dosimetry (http://
radiationdosimetry.org/ncs/documents/code-of-practice-for-the-quality-assurance-and-control-
for-intensity-modulated-radiotherapy)
Raaymakers B W et al 2009 Integrating a 1.5 T MRI scanner with a 6 MV accelerator: proof of concept 
Phys. Med. Biol. 54 N229–37
Stemkens B, Tijssen R H, de Senneville B D, Lagendijk J J and van den Berg C A 2016 Image-driven, 
model-based 3D abdominal motion estimation for MR-guided radiotherapy Phys. Med. Biol. 
61 5335–55
Tijssen R, Crijns S, Bluemink J, Hacket S, deVries J, Kruiskamp M, Philippens M, Lagendijk J and 
Raaymakers B 2017 Comprehensive MRI acceptance testing & commissioning of a 1.5T MR-linac: 
guidelines and results oral presentation OC 0257 Proc. ESTRO p S130 (www.thegreenjournal.com/
article/S0167-8140(17)30700-4/pdf)
Verellen D, De Ridder M, Linthout N, Tournel K, Soete G and Storme G 2007 Innovations in image-
guided radiotherapy Nat. Rev. Cancer 7 949–60
Verellen D, De Ridder M, Linthout N, Tournel K, Soete G and Storme G 2008 Innovations in image-
guided radiotherapy Nat. Rev. Cancer 8 71 (erratum)
Phys. Med. Biol. 62 (2017) L41
