 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 3, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 21 
543
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On May 31, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
Zika virus is a single-stranded RNA virus in the genus 
Flavivirus and is closely related to dengue, West Nile, Japanese 
encephalitis, and yellow fever viruses (1,2). Among flaviviruses, 
Zika and dengue virus share similar symptoms of infection, 
transmission cycles, and geographic distribution. Diagnostic 
testing for Zika virus infection can be accomplished using both 
molecular and serologic methods. For persons with suspected 
Zika virus disease, a positive real-time reverse transcription–
polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) result confirms Zika 
virus infection, but a negative rRT-PCR result does not exclude 
infection (3–7). In these cases, immunoglobulin (Ig) M and 
neutralizing antibody testing can identify additional recent 
Zika virus infections (6,7). However, Zika virus antibody test 
results can be difficult to interpret because of cross-reactivity 
with other flaviviruses, which can preclude identification of the 
specific infecting virus, especially when the person previously 
was infected with or vaccinated against a related flavivirus (8). 
This is important because the results of Zika and dengue virus 
testing will guide clinical management. Pregnant women with 
laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection should be evalu-
ated and managed for possible adverse pregnancy outcomes 
and be reported to the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry or the 
Puerto Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System for 
clinical follow-up (9,10). All patients with clinically suspected 
dengue should have proper management to reduce the risk 
for hemorrhage and shock (11). If serologic testing indicates 
recent flavivirus infection that could be caused by either Zika 
or dengue virus, patients should be clinically managed for 
both infections because they might have been infected with 
either virus.
Zika Virus Infection and Immune Response
Most Zika virus infections are asymptomatic (12). Viremia 
is expected to occur from several days before illness onset 
until a week after illness onset (6,13,14). Zika virus–specific 
IgM antibodies develop during the first week of illness (5,6). 
Data on duration of IgM antibody persistence following 
Zika virus infection are limited. However, IgM antibodies 
against West Nile virus, a closely related flavivirus, have been 
detected in asymptomatic, infected blood donors for at least 
3 months after their viremic donation, and almost half of 
tested patients with West Nile virus neuroinvasive disease had 
detectable serum IgM antibodies >1 year after illness onset 
(15,16). Neutralizing antibodies to Zika virus develop shortly 
after IgM antibodies and consist primarily of IgG antibodies. 
Neutralizing antibodies are expected to persist for many years 
after flavivirus infections and are believed to confer prolonged, 
possibly lifelong, immunity (17–19). In persons previously 
infected with a flavivirus or vaccinated against yellow fever, 
Japanese encephalitis, or tick-borne encephalitis, subsequent 
exposure to a related flavivirus can result in a rapid and brisk 
rise in neutralizing antibodies against multiple flaviviruses 
(20). In addition, the neutralizing antibody titer against a 
flavivirus to which the person previously was exposed might 
be higher than the titer against the virus with which they were 
most recently infected (20). For example, a person who was 
previously infected with dengue virus or who received yellow 
fever vaccine might respond with high levels of neutralizing 
antibodies against those viruses when later infected with Zika 
or West Nile viruses. When performing serologic testing, the 
presence of these neutralizing antibodies against multiple 
flaviviruses can preclude conclusive determination of which 
flavivirus was responsible for the recent infection.
Zika Virus Antibody Testing
An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can be 
used to detect anti-Zika virus IgM antibodies in serum or cere-
brospinal fluid; however, the Zika virus IgM ELISA can provide 
false-positive results because of cross-reacting IgM antibodies 
against related flaviviruses or nonspecific reactivity. The plaque 
reduction neutralization test (PRNT) measures virus-specific 
neutralizing antibody titers and should be performed against 
various related flaviviruses to rule out false-positive ELISA 
results. In primary flavivirus infections (i.e., the first time a 
person is infected with a flavivirus), PRNT also can be used 
to identify the infecting virus. Usually, this is determined with 
a neutralizing antibody titer ≥4-fold higher than titers against 
cross-reacting flaviviruses. Based on earlier flavivirus research 
and limited preliminary data specific to Zika virus, the histori-
cal use of a 4-fold higher titer by PRNT might not discriminate 
between anti-Zika virus antibodies and cross-reacting antibod-
ies in all persons who have been previously infected with or 
vaccinated against a related flavivirus (i.e., secondary flavivirus 
infection) (20,21). Because of the importance of appropriate 
clinical management of Zika and dengue virus infections, and 
Interim Guidance for Interpretation of Zika Virus Antibody Test Results
Ingrid B. Rabe, MBChB1; J. Erin Staples, MD, PhD1; Julie Villanueva, PhD1; Kimberly B. Hummel, PhD1; Jeffrey A. Johnson, PhD1; 
Laura Rose, MTS1; Susan Hills, MBBS1; Annemarie Wasley, ScD1; Marc Fischer, MD1; Ann M. Powers, PhD1
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
544 
MMWR / June 3, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
the risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes in women infected 
with Zika virus during pregnancy, a conservative approach 
to the interpretation of antibody test results is now recom-
mended to reduce the possibility of missing the diagnosis of 
either infection (9,11).
CDC Zika Virus Diagnostic Tests
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued 
an Emergency Use Authorization for the CDC Zika IgM 
Antibody Capture Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
(Zika MAC-ELISA) for antibody testing (3). This assay has 
been introduced and is being used in qualified public health 
and Department of Defense laboratories in the United States. 
The Zika MAC-ELISA is used for the qualitative detection 
of Zika virus IgM antibodies in serum or cerebrospinal fluid 
collected from persons meeting the clinical and epidemiologic 
criteria for suspected Zika virus disease (3,22). Results are 
reported as positive (termed “presumptive positive” to denote 
the need to perform a confirmatory PRNT), equivocal, nega-
tive, or inconclusive (i.e., results uninterpretable because of 
high background optical density). To resolve false-positive 
results that might be caused by cross-reactivity or nonspecific 
reactivity, presumptive positive results should be confirmed 
with PRNT against Zika, dengue, and other flaviviruses to 
which the person might have been exposed (3,23). In addi-
tion, equivocal and inconclusive results that are not resolved 
by retesting also should have PRNT performed to rule out a 
false-positive result.
Interpretation of Zika Virus Testing Results
For persons with suspected Zika virus disease, a positive 
rRT-PCR result confirms Zika virus infection, and no antibody 
testing is indicated (3,4,7). However, because of the decline 
in the level of viremia over time and possible inaccuracy in 
reporting of dates of illness onset, a negative rRT-PCR result 
does not exclude Zika virus infection. Therefore, serum IgM 
antibody testing for Zika and dengue virus infections should 
be performed if rRT-PCR is negative. For serum specimens 
collected <7 days after onset of symptoms, the combination of 
a negative rRT-PCR result and negative IgM antibody testing 
suggests that there was no recent infection. However, a negative 
IgM antibody test, in the absence of rRT-PCR testing, might 
reflect specimen collection before development of detectable 
antibodies and does not rule out infection with the viruses for 
which testing was performed. For specimens collected from 
7 days to 12 weeks after onset of symptoms, a negative IgM 
antibody result to both Zika and dengue viruses rules out recent 
infection with either virus.
If either the Zika or dengue virus IgM antibody testing yields 
positive, equivocal, or inconclusive results, PRNTs against Zika 
and dengue viruses (or other flaviviruses endemic to the region 
where exposure occurred) should be performed. A PRNT using 
a 90% cutoff value with a titer ≥10 (the typical starting serum 
dilution used to establish the presence of virus-specific neu-
tralizing antibodies) against Zika virus, together with negative 
PRNTs (i.e., <10) against other flaviviruses is confirmatory for 
recent infection with Zika virus (Table). A PRNT titer ≥10 for 
both Zika and dengue virus (or another flavivirus) provides 
evidence of a recent infection with a flavivirus but precludes 
identification of the specific infecting virus. A negative PRNT 
against Zika virus in a specimen that is collected >7 days after 
illness onset rules out Zika virus infection. For specimens col-
lected <7 days after onset of symptoms, the combination of a 
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Zika virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus closely related to 
dengue, West Nile, Japanese encephalitis, and yellow fever 
viruses. Diagnostic testing for Zika virus infection can be 
accomplished using both molecular and serologic methods. 
However, results of Zika virus antibody testing can be difficult to 
interpret because of cross-reactivity with related flaviviruses, 
which can preclude identification of the specific infecting virus, 
especially when the person previously was infected with or 
vaccinated against a related flavivirus. 
What is added by this report?
For persons with suspected Zika virus disease, a positive 
real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction 
(rRT-PCR) result confirms Zika virus infection, but a negative 
result does not exclude infection. In these cases, antibody 
testing can identify additional recent Zika virus infections. If 
immunoglobulin (Ig) M test results are positive, equivocal, or 
inconclusive, performing a plaque reduction neutralization test 
(PRNT) is needed to confirm the diagnosis. However, recent 
evidence suggests that a 4-fold higher titer by PRNT might not 
discriminate between anti-Zika virus antibodies and cross-
reacting antibodies in all persons who have been previously 
infected with or vaccinated against a related flavivirus. Thus, a 
more conservative approach to interpreting PRNT results is now 
recommended to reduce the possibility of missing the diagnosis 
of either Zika or dengue virus infection.
What are the implications for public health practice?
All patients with clinically suspected dengue should receive 
appropriate management to reduce the risk for hemorrhagic 
medical complications. Pregnant women with laboratory 
evidence of a recent Zika virus infection or flavivirus infection 
should be evaluated and managed for possible adverse 
pregnancy outcomes and reported to the appropriate Zika virus 
pregnancy registry. Health care providers should consult with 
state or local public health authorities for assistance in inter-
preting test results.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 3, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 21 
545
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
negative rRT-PCR and a PRNT titer <10 suggests that there 
was no infection with Zika virus. However, in the absence 
of rRT-PCR testing, a PRNT titer <10 might reflect speci-
men collection before development of detectable neutralizing 
antibodies and does not rule out infection with the viruses for 
which testing was conducted. Without confirmatory PRNTs, 
it is not possible to determine whether a presumptive positive 
IgM antibody result against Zika virus reflects recent flavivirus 
infection or a false-positive result.
For asymptomatic pregnant women residing in an area with 
local Zika virus transmission, IgM testing should be performed 
upon initiation of prenatal care, mid-second trimester, and if 
any fetal abnormalities are detected during ultrasound evalu-
ation (9). For asymptomatic pregnant women with a history 
of travel to areas where ongoing Zika virus transmission is 
occurring, Zika virus antibody testing should be performed 
on specimens collected 2–12 weeks post travel (9). Results are 
interpreted as for symptomatic persons. If a serum specimen 
was collected >12 weeks after travel, although IgM might still 
be present, it is possible that antibody levels have dropped 
below the detectable limit. Performing routine PRNTs for 
women in this group is not recommended because any result 
other than a PRNT titer <10 for Zika virus could represent 
infection with or vaccination against a flavivirus at any time in 
the past and does not provide specific evidence of Zika virus 
exposure during pregnancy.
TABLE. Interpretation of results of antibody testing for suspected Zika virus infection*,†,§,¶,** — United States, 2016
Zika virus and dengue virus IgM ELISA
Zika virus 
PRNT
Dengue virus 
PRNT
Interpretation
Positive or equivocal (either assay)
≥10
<10
Recent Zika virus infection
Positive or equivocal (either assay)
<10
≥10
Recent dengue virus infection
Positive or equivocal (either assay)
≥10
≥10
Recent flavivirus infection; specific virus cannot be identified
Inconclusive in one assay AND inconclusive or negative 
in the other
≥10
<10
Evidence of Zika virus infection; timing cannot be determined
Inconclusive in one assay AND inconclusive or negative 
in the other
<10
≥10
Evidence of dengue virus infection; timing cannot be determined
Inconclusive in one assay AND inconclusive or negative 
in the other
≥10
≥10
Evidence of flavivirus infection; specific virus and timing 
cannot be determined
Any result (either or both assays)
<10
<10
No evidence of Zika virus or dengue virus infection
Positive for Zika virus AND negative for dengue virus
Not yet performed
Presumptive recent Zika virus infection
Positive for dengue virus AND negative for Zika virus
Not yet performed
Presumptive recent dengue virus infection
Positive for Zika virus AND positive for dengue virus
Not yet performed
Presumptive recent flavivirus virus infection
Equivocal (either or both assays)
Not yet performed
Equivocal results
Inconclusive in one assay AND inconclusive or negative 
in the other
Not yet performed
Inconclusive results
Negative for Zika virus AND negative for dengue virus
Not indicated
No evidence of recent Zika virus or dengue virus infection
Abbreviations: ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; IgM = immunoglobulin M antibodies; PRNT = plaque reduction neutralization test.
 * For persons with suspected Zika virus disease, Zika virus real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) should be performed on serum 
specimens collected <7 days after onset of symptoms, and on urine specimens collect <14 days after onset of symptoms. 
 † In the absence of rRT-PCR testing, negative IgM or neutralizing antibody testing in specimens collected <7 days after illness onset might reflect collection before 
development of detectable antibodies and does not rule out infection with the virus for which testing was conducted.
 § Zika IgM positive result is reported as “presumptive positive” to denote the need to perform confirmatory PRNT.
 ¶ Report any positive or equivocal IgM Zika or dengue results to state or local health department.
 ** To resolve false-positive results that might be caused by cross-reactivity or nonspecific reactivity, presumptive positive Zika IgM results should be confirmed with 
PRNT titers against Zika, dengue, and other flaviviruses to which the person might have been exposed. In addition, equivocal and inconclusive results that are not 
resolved by retesting also should have PRNT titers performed to rule out a false-positive result.
Management of Persons with Suspected Zika or 
Dengue Virus Infection
All patients with clinically suspected dengue virus infec-
tion should receive appropriate management to reduce the 
risk for hemorrhagic complications (11). Symptomatic and 
asymptomatic pregnant women with serologic or molecular 
evidence of recent Zika virus infection should be evaluated 
and managed for possible adverse pregnancy outcomes and 
reported to the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry or the Puerto 
Rico Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance System (9,10). Among 
persons for whom serologic testing is unable to determine 
the most recent infecting flavivirus, an epidemiologic link to 
a laboratory-confirmed case of dengue or Zika virus disease 
can be considered in determining the most likely infecting 
virus (22). In addition, data on the epidemiology of viruses 
known to be circulating at the location of exposure and clini-
cal features of these viral infections should be considered. If 
serologic testing is inconclusive or there is evidence of recent 
infection with either Zika or dengue virus, patients should 
be clinically managed for both infections because they might 
have been infected with either virus. Health care providers with 
questions about test result interpretation should consult with 
state or local public health authorities for assistance.
 1Zika virus response epidemiology and laboratory teams, CDC.
Corresponding author: Ingrid B. Rabe, irabe@cdc.gov, 970-221-6400.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
546 
MMWR / June 3, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
 1. Faye O, Freire CCM, Iamarino A, et al. Molecular evolution of Zika 
virus during its emergence in the 20th century. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 
2014;8:e2636. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0002636
 2. Hayes EB. Zika virus outside Africa. Emerg Infect Dis 2009;15:1347–50. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1509.090442
 3. Food and Drug Administration. Zika virus emergency use authorization. 
Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Food and Drug Administration; 2016. http://www.fda.gov/
MedicalDevices/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm
 4. CDC. Interim guidance for Zika virus testing of urine—United States, 
2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:474. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6518e1
 5. Bingham AM, Cone M, Mock V, et al. Comparison of test results for 
Zika virus RNA in urine, serum, and saliva specimens from persons with 
travel-associated Zika virus disease—Florida, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:475–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6518e2
 6. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic and serologic properties 
of Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:1232–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1408.080287
 7. CDC. Revised diagnostic testing for Zika, chikungunya, and dengue 
viruses in US public health laboratories. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/pdfs/
denvchikvzikv-testing-algorithm.pdf
 8. Calisher CH, Karabatsos N, Dalrymple JM, et al. Antigenic relationships 
between flaviviruses as determined by cross-neutralization tests with 
polyclonal antisera. J Gen Virol 1989;70:37–43. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1099/0022-1317-70-1-37
 9. Petersen EE, Polen KND, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Update: interim 
guidelines for health care providers caring for pregnant women and 
women of reproductive age with possible Zika virus exposure—United 
States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:315–22. http://
dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e2
 
10. Simeone RM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Meaney-Delman D. Possible Zika 
virus infection among pregnant women—United States and territories, 
May 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:514–9.
 
11. World Health Organization. Dengue guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, 
prevention and control, 2009. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2009. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44188/ 
1/9789241547871_eng.pdf
 
12. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap 
Island, Federated States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med 2009;360:2536–43. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0805715
 
13. Musso D, Nhan T, Robin E, et al. Potential for Zika virus transmission 
through blood transfusion demonstrated during an outbreak in French 
Polynesia, November 2013 to February 2014. Euro Surveill 2014;19:20761. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.14.20761
 
14. Musso D, Roche C, Nhan TX, Robin E, Teissier A, Cao-Lormeau VM. 
Detection of Zika virus in saliva. J Clin Virol 2015;68:53–5. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2015.04.021
 
15. Prince HE, Tobler LH, Yeh C, Gefter N, Custer B, Busch MP
. Persistence 
of West Nile virus–specific antibodies in viremic blood donors. Clin 
Vaccine Immunol 2007;14:1228–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/
CVI.00233-07
 
16. Roehrig JT, Nash D, Maldin B, et al. Persistence of virus-reactive serum 
immunoglobulin M antibody in confirmed West Nile virus encephalitis 
cases. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:376–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid0903.020531
 
17. Whitehead SS, Blaney JE, Durbin AP
, Murphy BR. Prospects for a 
dengue virus vaccine. Nat Rev Microbiol 2007;5:518–28. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nrmicro1690
 
18. Busch MP
, Kleinman SH, Tobler LH, et al. Virus and antibody dynamics 
in acute West Nile virus infection. J Infect Dis 2008;198:984–93. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1086/591467
 
19. Poland JD, Calisher CH, Monath TP
, Downs WG, Murphy K. Persistence 
of neutralizing antibody 30–35 years after immunization with 17D yellow 
fever vaccine. Bull World Health Organ 1981;59:895–900.
 
20. Halstead SB, Rojanasuphot S, Sangkawibha N. Original antigenic sin 
in dengue. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1983;32:154–6.
 
21. Johnson BW, Kosoy O, Martin DA, et al. West Nile virus infection and 
serologic response among persons previously vaccinated against yellow 
fever and Japanese encephalitis viruses. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 
2005;5:137–45.
 
22. Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists. Zika virus disease and 
congenital Zika virus infection interim case definition and addition to the 
Nationally Notifiable Diseases list. Atlanta, GA: Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists; 2016. https://www.cste2.org/docs/Zika_
Virus_Disease_and_Congenital_Zika_Virus_Infection_Interim.pdf
 
23. Martin DA, Muth DA, Brown T, Johnson AJ, Karabatsos N, Roehrig 
JT. Standardization of immunoglobulin M capture enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays for routine diagnosis of arboviral infections. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000;38:1823–6.
