 Oncotarget
56491
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/ 
Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 35
Clinical benefit of a precision medicine based approach for 
guiding treatment of refractory cancers
Milan Radovich1,2,*, Patrick J. Kiel1,2,*, Stacy M. Nance1, Erin E. Niland1, Megan E. 
Parsley1, Meagan E. Ferguson1, Guanglong Jiang2, Natraj R. Ammakkanavar2, 
Lawrence H. Einhorn2, Liang Cheng2, Mehdi Nassiri2, Darrell D. Davidson2, 
Daniel A. Rushing2, Patrick J. Loehrer2, Roberto Pili2, Nasser Hanna2, J. Thomas 
Callaghan2, Todd C. Skaar2, Paul R. Helft2, Safi  Shahda2, Bert H. O’Neil2 and Bryan 
P. Schneider1,2
1 Indiana University Health Precision Genomics Program, Indianapolis, IN, USA
2 Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA
* These authors have contributed equally to this work
Correspondence to: Bryan P. Schneider, email: bpschnei@iu.edu
Keywords: precision medicine, personalized medicine, genomics, next-generation sequencing
Received: June 07, 2016 
Accepted: June 09, 2016 
Published: July 15, 2016
ABSTRACT
Patients and Methods: Patients with metastatic solid tumors who had progressed 
on at least one line of standard of care therapy were referred to the Indiana 
University Health Precision Genomics Program. Tumor samples were submitted 
for DNA & RNA next-generation sequencing, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and 
immunohistochemistry for actionable targets. A multi-disciplinary tumor board 
reviewed all results. For each patient, the ratio of progression-free survival (PFS) 
of the genomically guided line of therapy divided by the PFS of their prior line was 
calculated. Patients whose PFS ratio was ≥ 1.3 were deemed to have a meaningful 
improvement in PFS. 
Results: From April 2014–October 2015, 168 patients were evaluated and 101 
patients achieved adequate clinical follow-up for analysis. 19 of 44 (43.2%) patients 
treated with genomically guided therapy attained a PFS ratio ≥ 1.3 vs. 3 of 57 (5.3%) 
treated with non-genomically guided therapy (p < 0.0001). Similarly, overall PFS 
ratios (irrespective of cutoff) were higher for patients with genomically guided 
therapy vs non-genomically guided therapy (p = 0.05). Further, patients treated with 
genomically guided therapy had a superior median PFS compared to those treated 
with non-genomically guided therapy (86 days vs. 49 days, p = 0.005, H.R. = 0.55, 
95% C.I.:0.37-0.84). 
Conclusion: Patients with refractory metastatic cancer who receive genomically 
guided therapy have improved PFS ratios and longer median PFS compared to patients 
who do not receive genomically guided therapy.
INTRODUCTION
Precision medicine approaches that seek to match 
genomic aberrations to potential treatment avenues are 
rapidly reshaping treatment for cancer patients [1-3]. 
Advances in genomic technology have enabled clinical 
application of these approaches, where large scale DNA 
& RNA profiling of cancer genes from small amounts 
of archival tissue is now possible [4-6]. In patients with 
advanced cancer where treatment options are limited, 
genomic sequencing is frequently being used to identify 
targets which are potentially clinically actionable with 
FDA approved drugs or clinical trials. In many cases 
these targets would have been overlooked under standard 
clinical practice due to the rarity or novelty of the target, 
or its presence in a cancer lineage not normally associated 
with the target (e.g. HER-2 amplification in colon 
cancer). These observations and the evolution of targeted 
therapeutics have spurred a paradigm-shift that recognizes 
molecular drivers as increasingly powerful additions to 
                   Research Paper
 Oncotarget
56492
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
the traditionally dominated organ and histology-centric 
therapeutic standard. 
While several publications to date have determined 
that many cancers have targetable pathways that may 
benefit from a precision medicine approach [7], formal 
assessment of clinical benefit of these approaches has 
been lacking. Published case reports demonstrating 
exceptional responses to targeted therapy explained by 
key genomic mutations have brought promise to the field 
[8-10], but analyses of larger cohorts and randomized 
controlled clinical trials are still needed to help solidify 
the utility of cancer genomics in clinical practice. 
Survival analyses of cohorts with mixed cancer lineages 
(and mixed genomic aberrations) have been fraught 
with bias secondary to the widely varying nature of 
expected survival outcomes for different cancer types. 
In 2010, Von Hoff et al. [11], reported early experience 
with identifying molecular targets in patients’ tumors to 
direct treatment and also performed a formal analysis 
of clinical benefit by calculating the ratio of the PFS of 
the patients’ genomically-guided therapy divided by the 
PFS of their prior line of therapy. This approach took into 
account both the natural history of the patient’s individual 
cancer, as well as the fact that subsequent lines of therapy 
nearly always lead to declining PFS times. In their 
analysis, each patient was able to serve as his or her own 
control. Therefore, a PFS ratio in excess of 1.0 (or more 
conservatively, in excess of 1.3 to minimize false-positive 
fluctuations) provided a reference point of activity relative 
to the last line of therapy.
In April 2014, the Indiana University Health 
Precision Genomics Program was initiated to offer 
next-generation sequencing for patients with metastatic 
refractory or rare solid tumors in order to provide 
genomically 
guided 
treatment 
recommendations. 
Decisions regarding therapy were derived from a multi-
disciplinary advisory board with consideration given to 
strength of genomic association, co-morbidities, prior drug 
exposure, and inherited genetic variants that would predict 
increased risk from a drug. Patient demographics, tumor 
characteristics, information on duration of prior therapies, 
genomic information, and clinical follow-up were 
prospectively collected for all patients since the inception 
of the program. Herein, we report our first formal efficacy 
analysis to determine the clinical benefit of a precision 
medicine approach in patients treated with genomically-
guided therapy vs. non-genomically guided therapy.
RESULTS
Patient characteristics
Figure 1 details the Consolidated Standards of 
Reporting Trials (CONSORT) diagram demonstrating 
the disposition of the 168 patients who were referred to 
the Indiana University Simon Cancer Center (IUSCC) 
Precision Genomics Clinic. Of these, 67 were excluded 
from the final analysis: the commonest reasons being not 
receiving any therapy post genomic profiling or lost to 
follow-up (n = 40). Table 1 lists the characteristics of the 
101 patients who were referred to the Precision Genomics 
clinic and are part of the analyzed cohort. Patient 
demographics were well balanced between groups. The 
majority of patients had a diagnosis of soft tissue sarcoma, 
breast cancer, pancreatic cancer or colorectal cancer. The 
median number of previous therapeutic regimens was 4 
for both groups, and 96% of both groups had an ECOG 
Performance Status (PS) of 0 or 1. 
Molecular characteristics
DNA 
mutation, 
copy 
number 
variation, 
Immunohistochemistry (IHC), and mRNA overexpression 
findings that were considered by the Precision Genomics 
Tumor Board in determining potential therapies are 
depicted in Figure 2. The most notable observations that 
led to clinical interventions included: DNA mutations in 
IDH1 and EGFR; copy number variation in fibroblast 
growth factor and Human Epidermal Growth Factor 
Receptor-2 (HER2); IHC positivity for PD-L1 and MET; 
and mRNA overexpression for amphiregulin (AREG), 
epiregulin (EREG), E-Cadherin (CDH1), hENT1, 
Topoisomerase IIa (TOPOIIa), and Vascular Endothelial 
Growth Factor-A (VEGFA).
Progression free survival (PFS) analyses
43.2% (19 of 44) of patients treated according to 
genomic recommendations were found to have a PFS 
ratio of > 1.3 compared to 5.3% (3 of 57) of patients 
who did not receive treatment guided by genomic 
recommendations (p < 0.0001) (Figure 3A). Patients 
who did not receive treatment guided by genomic 
recommendation included the following: a lack of 
actionable genomic target, inaccessibility to treatment 
recommendation, or physician choice not to pursue 
genomic based treatment. A secondary endpoint analysis 
of PFS ratio >1 (equal to at least the previous regimen) 
occurred in 50% (22 of 44) and 19.3% (11 of 57) of 
patients who received genomically directed vs. non-
genomically directed therapy, respectively (p = 0.0011). 
Similarly, a PFS ratio >1.5 occurred in 29.5% (13 of 44) 
of patients with genomic directed therapy versus 5.3% (3 
of 57) without (p = 0.0017). When statistically comparing 
all PFS ratios, patients who received genomically directed 
therapy had higher PFS ratios compared to non-genomic 
guided therapy (mean PFS ratio: 1.34 vs 0.8, p = 0.05). 
Lastly, Kaplan-Meier PFS analysis demonstrated a median 
PFS of 86 days in the genomic therapy group vs. 49 days 
 Oncotarget
56493
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Table 1: Patient demographics and clinical characteristics
Characteristics
Genomic directed group 
(n = 44), no. (%)
Non-genomic directed 
group (n = 57), no. (%)
p-value
Male Sex 
47.7%
45.6%
0.83
Female Sex
52.3%
54.4%
Mean (+/- SD) Age, years
55.5 (12.5)
58.4 (11)
0.22
ECOG PS
 
     0
 12 (27.3)
16 (28.1)
0.93
     1
 31 (70.5)
39 (68.4)
 
     2
 1 (2.3)
2 (3.5)
 
Mean (+/- SD) time until progression on previous 
regimen, days 
122 (103)
130 (97)
0.75
No. of Prior Regimens
 
     1 to 2
15
25
0.32 
     3 to 4
21
24
 
     5 or greater 
8
8
 
     Median (range) number of  regimens
4 (2-6)
4 (2-6)
Tumor type
 
     Soft tissue sarcoma
10 (22.7)
11 (19.3)
0.67
     Breast
8 (18.2)
8 (14.0)
0.57
     Pancreas
1 (2.3)
7 (12.3)
0.13
     Colorectal
7 (15.9)
5 (8.8)
0.36 
     Bladder/Urothelial
 2 (4.5)
4 (7.0)
 
     Prostate
0
1 (1.8)
     Renal cell
1 (2.3)
0
     Cervical
1 (2.3)
0
 
     Cholangiocarcinoma
1 (2.3)
1 (1.8)
 
     Esophageal
2 (4.5)
0
 
     Head and Neck
1 (2.3)
1 (1.8)
 
     Hepatocellular
0
1(1.8)
 
     Melanoma
0 
3 (5.3)
 
     Neuroendocrine
1 (2.3)
2 (3.5)
 
     Non-small cell lung cancer, adeno     
0 
4 (7)
 
     Non-small cell lung cancer, squamous cell
0
 2 (3.5)
 
     Small cell lung cancer
1 (2.3)
1 (1.8)
     Squamous cell carcinoma, NOS
 0
1 (1.8)
 
     Unknown Primary
1 (2.3)
0
 
     Thyroid, anaplastic
1 (2.3)
0
     Adrenal Cortical Carcinoma
0
1 (1.8)
 
     Small Bowel
1 (2.3)
0
     Ampulla of Vater
0
1 (1.8)
     Chondrosarcoma
1 (2.3)
0
 
     Endometrial
1 (2.3)
0
 
     Ewing
1 (2.3)
0
 
     Glioblastoma multiforme
0
1(1.8)
 
     Ovarian
1 (2.3)
2 (3.5)
     Myoepithelial
1 (2.3)
0
 Oncotarget
56494
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
in the non-genomic therapy group (p = 0.005, H.R. = 0.55, 
95% C.I.:0.37-0.84) (Figure 3B). 
Details of responders
The PFS durations and therapies of those who 
achieved a PFS ratio ≥ 1.3 (n = 19) are detailed in Figure 
4. A number of patients with significant benefit had a 
diagnosis of sarcoma (6 cases with soft tissue sarcoma, 
1 case with chondrosarcoma, and 1 case with Ewing’s 
sarcoma). Of interest, five of our patients were continuing 
a positive response at the time of analysis. Details of the 
three patients who achieved a PFS ratio of ≥ 1.3 who did 
not receive genomically-directed therapy are as follows: 
one patient was diagnosed with NSCLC and received 
previous therapy with vinorelbine followed by therapy 
with nivolumab on a clinical trial, the second patient 
was diagnosed with squamous cancer NOS and received 
previous therapy with cetuximab followed by therapy 
with nivolumab on a clinical trial. Of note, both of these 
patients were seen in our program prior to incorporation of 
PD-L1 IHC testing as part of our panel. The third patient 
was diagnosed with metastatic colorectal cancer and was 
previously treated with regorafenib followed by the non-
genomically directed therapy of BBI503 as part of a Phase 
I clinical trial. 
DISCUSSION
Solid tumors have historically been treated based on 
the organ site of the cancer’s origin. More recently, it has 
been appreciated that some disease types have important 
molecular biomarkers that allow for therapies to be tested 
and used only in a subset of that histological disease 
subtype [12, 13]. These have been called “actionable 
targets”. For some disease types, actionable targets are 
common; for others, they are rare. In the heavily pretreated 
metastatic setting, conventional cytotoxic therapies have 
limited success [14, 15]. Many patients in this setting 
are guided to early phase trials, where novel compounds 
are being tested with the hope that a unique mechanism 
of action might provide benefit. The reality of non-
molecularly guided early phase trials is that the average 
response rate and progression free survival is limited 
[16]. Targeted therapy, conversely, has yielded some 
examples of substantial benefit when a driver target is 
appropriately disrupted. Further, these therapeutic targets 
have occasionally been found to be successful in some 
tumor types (HER2+ for both breast and gastric cancer) 
[12, 13, 17] but not others (HER2 in lung cancer) [18]. 
The incomplete dominance of a therapeutic target implies 
a complex interaction between the target itself and the 
disease type, perhaps due to convergent phenotypes or 
because of the degree of driver dependence and is a major 
hurdle that must be considered [19]. 
Figure 1: CONSORT diagram of evaluable population.
 Oncotarget
56495
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Figure 2: Oncoprint analysis detailing the genomic findings considered by the molecular tumor board for the study 
population (n = 101). Each column represents a single patient, and each row a gene that harbors a mutation, copy number gain, IHC 
(immunohistochemistry) positivity, or mRNA overexpression. 
 Oncotarget
56496
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Affordable and fast high-throughput genomic 
testing has made it possible to evaluate hundreds or 
even thousands of driver aberrancies simultaneously. 
This approach allows for the exploitation of a cadre of 
drugs including both FDA approved drugs and targeted 
agents in development in clinical trials. Several trials 
have been conducted and multiple others are underway to 
more formally explore the relative success for matching 
drugs with high throughput genomic biomarkers [20-22]. 
Although these trials will represent critical steps toward 
answering the question of the relative efficacy of this 
approach, to date, these trials have been difficult to execute 
for a variety of reasons. First, the panel of potential 
markers and drugs is ever changing and expanding. By 
the time a trial is complete, the biomarkers and targeted 
drugs are often outdated. In fact, none to date will have 
Figure 3: Progression free survival (PFS) analysis of patient population. A. Bar graph comparing the percentage of patients 
who achieved a PFS ratio equal to or greater than 1.3. 43.2% (19 of 44) of patients on genomically directed therapy achieved a PFS ratio 
of 1.3 compared to only 5.3% (3 of 57) who received non-genomically directed therapy (p < 0.0001). B. Kaplan-Meier plot of the PFS of 
the genomic-directed group (blue line) vs. non-genomic directed group (yellow line). Patients treated with genomic guided therapy had 
a superior median PFS compared to those treated with non-genomic guided therapy (86 days vs. 49 days, p = 0.005, H.R. = 0.55, 95% 
C.I.:0.37-0.84).
 Oncotarget
56497
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
comprehensively included all FDA-approved drugs and 
all drugs in development. Second, many of these trials 
have conventional exclusion criteria that don’t mirror 
the real world scenario where mild organ dysfunction 
and declining performance status are commonplace in 
advanced cancer patients. There has also been the creation 
of clinical programs, similar to that described here, with 
the goal of maximizing informed decisions. These clinical 
programs often represent a more generalizable population 
and may have access to broader selection of therapeutic 
options.
Despite the advantages highlighted in this type 
of clinical program, there are several limitations to our 
study. First, as this was not a randomized-controlled 
trial, therapeutic selections were recommended (not 
mandated) and rigorous follow-up with predefined time-
points of evaluation were not uniform. Second, targeted 
genomic sequencing might serve as a prognostic marker 
rather than a predictive marker. It may be that patients 
who don’t have actionable targets have more biologically 
aggressive or resistant disease. Alternatively, those who 
didn’t receive directed therapy may have also been those 
patients who were unable to travel to a clinical trial or 
tolerate therapy because of declining performance status. 
Lastly, a proportion of those patients not included in 
the analysis were due to the inability to completely 
quantify the duration of prior response. This is a unique 
challenge that traditional clinical trials don’t encounter 
as the primary measures of response happens during 
(ORR, PFS) or after enrollment (OS) as opposed to the 
need to accurately quantify prior duration of response 
retrospectively. Strengths of this study include the use of a 
multidisciplinary tumor board to optimize consistency of 
drug-target selection as well as having a body of experts 
to routinely review the biomarker literature and evolve as 
biomarker data and drugs/trials become available in real 
time. Another strength is the meticulously curated data 
from the previous treatment experience for each patient 
and the ability to prospectively follow outcomes. 
In our cohort of patients, we found a significant 
improvement in PFS ratio regardless of cut-point and an 
improvement in median PFS for the genomically directed 
group. These findings are congruent with those reported 
to date and support the evolving body of literature that 
demonstrates superior outcomes for patients who receive 
genomically guided therapy [23-25]. Moving forward, 
programs like ASCO’s Targeted Agent and Profiling 
Utilization Registry (TAPUR) study (http://www.tapur.
org) will likely facilitate the speed with which the cancer 
genomics community is able to determine those target/drug 
combinations with the most utility and simultaneously 
those that will be futile. Further, the complex interaction 
between successful target/drug combination and site of 
disease can be further elucidated with combined data from 
multiple collaborating groups. Given the emerging body 
of consistent data demonstrating similar relative benefits 
to those patients who have access to targeted sequencing, 
this should be discussed with appropriate patients as a 
therapeutic avenue. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study objectives
The primary objective for the study was to compare 
the frequency of a PFS ratio ≥ 1.3 between patients who 
Figure 4: Details of responders. Horizontal bar chart showing the PFS duration (days) for those patients in the genomically guided 
therapy group who achieved a PFS ratio ≥ 1.3 (n = 19). In addition, listed is the diagnosis, prior therapy (Treatment A), the genomically 
directed therapy (Treatment B), and genomic target. 
 Oncotarget
56498
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
received the precision genomics recommended treatment 
and those who did not. Utilizing the most recent therapy 
selected by molecular profiling (MP) or clinicians choice 
of a patient’s tumor (Period B) with the PFS for the most 
recent therapy on which the patient had just experienced 
progression (Period A). If the (PFS of period B/PFS of 
period A) ratio was ≥ 1.3, then the tumor board MP-
selected therapy was defined as beneficial for the patient. 
Secondary objectives included mean PFS ratio, PFS ratio 
≥ 1, PFS ratio ≥ 1.5, and median PFS between groups.
Study design
The hypothesis for this study was that using a 
multidisciplinary tumor board to provide treatment 
recommendations based on each patient’s tumor MP 
data would favorably change the clinical course for an 
individual patient. This single institution, prospective, 
cohort study was conducted in patients with refractory 
metastatic cancer to compare the PFS of patients receiving 
a genomic-guided therapy to a cohort receiving a non-
genomic guided therapy. The PFS ratio was determined 
by dividing the PFS of the new therapy (either the 
genomically guided or the non-genomically guided) by 
the PFS for the patient during their most recent regimen 
on which the patient had experienced progression. Patients 
were evaluated by the Indiana University Health Precision 
Genomics Program on a referral basis. The study was 
conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki 
and was approved by the Indiana University Institutional 
Review Board.
Patient eligibility
Eligibility criteria included the following: any 
histologic type of metastatic cancer; progression by 
RECIST criteria on at least one prior regimen for advanced 
disease; ability to undergo a biopsy or surgical procedure 
to obtain tumor or having recent tissue available; age > 18 
years; referred to the IUSCC Precision Genomics clinic 
between April 2014-October 2015; Eastern Cooperative 
Oncology Group performance status of 0 to 2; measurable 
or evaluable disease; resistance to last line of therapy 
(documented disease progression under last treatment; 
discontinued last treatment for progression); and received 
treatment following Precision Genomic assessment. 
Patients were excluded if the immediate previous therapy 
was received on a Phase I or II clinical trial as this could 
positively bias the PFS ratios if the experimental agent 
was not active. All patients who did not go on to receive 
additional therapy (i.e. died or were referred for hospice 
with best supportive care) were removed from the analysis 
as to not bias against the non-genomically guided arm and 
to be able to calculate PFS ratios that can be compared 
to the genomically guided arm. Minimum follow-up was 
defined as either disease progression, or the minimum 
amount of time for a patient to achieve a PFS ratio of 1.3. 
Molecular profiling of patient samples
Formalin-Fixed 
Paraffin 
Embedded 
(FFPE) 
blocks from tumor biopsies or surgical resections were 
sent to Paradigm Diagnostics (Ann Arbor, MI) for the 
PCDx assay. PCDx is a comprehensive next-generation 
sequencing test that has been designed to analyze most 
known clinically actionable genomic variations in cancer, 
including: mutations, gene-fusions/rearrangements, copy 
number variations, mRNA expression as well as protein 
expression by IHC. Differences in RNA expression 
were measured by comparison of tumor gene expression 
compared to a panel of lineage-matched normal tissues. 
Next-generation sequencing was performed on an Ion 
Torrent Personal Genome Machine, with an average 
coverage > 5,000X. All analyses were performed in a 
CLIA-certified laboratory. Of note, one patient in our 
study received testing using the FoundationOne test, 
whose methods are described elsewhere [26]. 
Deliberation of genomic results
A multidisciplinary tumor board of medical 
oncologists, genomic and pharmacogenomic scientists, 
oncology clinical pharmacists, an oncologist-ethicist, 
pathologists, and nurses reviewed the results of the genome 
analyses. The results were considered in the context of the 
patient’s prior treatment history, concomitant medications, 
comorbidities, and germline variants that might predict 
increased toxicity to a given therapy. Identified targets 
were chosen based on: first priority, DNA mutation or 
copy number variation or DNA fusions; second priority, 
IHC or FISH; and last priority, mRNA overexpression 
alone. Board recommendations were provided to the 
referring clinician and the patient was treated according 
to the treating physician’s standard-of-care usage of that 
agent or referred to an available clinical trial.
Statistical considerations and methods
Using estimates from prior published data [11], 
a sample size of 74 patients was required to test the 
hypothesis that the PFS ratio > 1.3 in 28% of patients 
receiving recommended MP treatment, with an α risk of 
5% and a power of 80%, compared to the assumption that 
the rate of obtaining a PFS of >1.3 without MP guided 
treatment was 5%. Time-to-event data were summarized 
using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared using 
the log-rank test; continuous data were compared using 
student’s t-test; categorical data were compared using the 
chi-squared or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate.
 Oncotarget
56499
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors do not have any conflicts of interest.
GRANT SUPPORT
We would like to thank the Walther Cancer 
Foundation for their grant support of this work (B.P. 
Schneider and P.J. Loehrer).
Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peer-
review conducted by another journal and the authors’ 
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review 
in Oncotarget.
REFERENCES
1. 
Roychowdhury S, Iyer MK, Robinson DR, Lonigro RJ, 
Wu YM, Cao X, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Sam L, Balbin 
OA, Quist MJ, Barrette T, Everett J, Siddiqui J, Kunju LP, 
Navone N, Araujo JC, et al. Personalized oncology through 
integrative high-throughput sequencing: a pilot study. 
Science translational medicine. 2011; 3:111ra121.
2. 
Garraway LA, Verweij J and Ballman KV. Precision 
oncology: an overview. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:1803-1805.
3. 
Collins FS and Varmus H. A new initiative on precision 
medicine. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:793-795.
4. 
Van Allen EM, Wagle N, Stojanov P, Perrin DL, Cibulskis 
K, Marlow S, Jane-Valbuena J, Friedrich DC, Kryukov 
G, Carter SL, McKenna A, Sivachenko A, Rosenberg 
M, Kiezun A, Voet D, Lawrence M, et al. Whole-exome 
sequencing and clinical interpretation of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tumor samples to guide precision cancer 
medicine. Nat Med. 2014; 20:682-688.
5. 
Singh RR, Patel KP, Routbort MJ, Reddy NG, Barkoh BA, 
Handal B, Kanagal-Shamanna R, Greaves WO, Medeiros 
LJ, Aldape KD and Luthra R. Clinical validation of a next-
generation sequencing screen for mutational hotspots in 46 
cancer-related genes. The Journal of molecular diagnostics. 
2013; 15:607-622.
6. 
Hovelson DH, McDaniel AS, Cani AK, Johnson B, Rhodes 
K, Williams PD, Bandla S, Bien G, Choppa P, Hyland F, 
Gottimukkala R, Liu G, Manivannan M, Schageman J, 
Ballesteros-Villagrana E, Grasso CS, et al. Development 
and validation of a scalable next-generation sequencing 
system for assessing relevant somatic variants in solid 
tumors. Neoplasia. 2015; 17:385-399.
7. 
Kandoth C, McLellan MD, Vandin F, Ye K, Niu B, Lu 
C, Xie M, Zhang Q, McMichael JF, Wyczalkowski MA, 
Leiserson MD, Miller CA, Welch JS, Walter MJ, Wendl 
MC, Ley TJ, et al. Mutational landscape and significance 
across 12 major cancer types. Nature. 2013; 502:333-339.
8. 
Wagle N, Emery C, Berger MF, Davis MJ, Sawyer A, 
Pochanard P, Kehoe SM, Johannessen CM, Macconaill 
LE, Hahn WC, Meyerson M and Garraway LA. Dissecting 
therapeutic resistance to RAF inhibition in melanoma by 
tumor genomic profiling. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:3085-
3096.
9. 
Wagle N, Grabiner BC, Van Allen EM, Amin-Mansour A, 
Taylor-Weiner A, Rosenberg M, Gray N, Barletta JA, Guo 
Y, Swanson SJ, Ruan DT, Hanna GJ, Haddad RI, Getz G, 
Kwiatkowski DJ, Carter SL, et al. Response and acquired 
resistance to everolimus in anaplastic thyroid cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2014; 371:1426-1433.
10. Wagle N, Grabiner BC, Van Allen EM, Hodis E, Jacobus 
S, Supko JG, Stewart M, Choueiri TK, Gandhi L, Cleary 
JM, Elfiky AA, Taplin ME, Stack EC, Signoretti S, Loda 
M, Shapiro GI, et al. Activating mTOR mutations in a 
patient with an extraordinary response on a phase I trial of 
everolimus and pazopanib. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:546-
553.
11. Von Hoff DD, Stephenson JJ, Jr., Rosen P, Loesch DM, 
Borad MJ, Anthony S, Jameson G, Brown S, Cantafio 
N, Richards DA, Fitch TR, Wasserman E, Fernandez C, 
Green S, Sutherland W, Bittner M, et al. Pilot study using 
molecular profiling of patients’ tumors to find potential 
targets and select treatments for their refractory cancers. J 
Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:4877-4883.
12. Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B, 
Goldhirsch A, Untch M, Smith I, Gianni L, Baselga J, 
Bell R, Jackisch C, Cameron D, Dowsett M, Barrios CH, 
Steger G, Huang CS, Andersson M, et al. Trastuzumab after 
adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2005; 353:1659-1672.
13. Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, Suman VJ, Geyer CE, 
Jr., Davidson NE, Tan-Chiu E, Martino S, Paik S, Kaufman 
PA, Swain SM, Pisansky TM, Fehrenbacher L, Kutteh LA, 
Vogel VG, Visscher DW, et al. Trastuzumab plus adjuvant 
chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive breast cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2005; 353:1673-1684.
14. Prigerson HG, Bao Y, Shah MA, Paulk ME, LeBlanc TW, 
Schneider BJ, Garrido MM, Reid MC, Berlin DA, Adelson 
KB, Neugut AI and Maciejewski PK. Chemotherapy 
Use, Performance Status, and Quality of Life at the End 
of Life. JAMA Oncol. 2015; 1:778-84. doi: 10.1001/
jamaoncol.2015.2378.
15. Longley DB and Johnston PG. Molecular mechanisms of 
drug resistance. J Pathol. 2005; 205:275-292.
16. Agrawal M and Emanuel EJ. Ethics of phase 1 oncology 
studies: reexamining the arguments and data. JAMA. 2003; 
290:1075-1082.
17. Bang YJ, Van Cutsem E, Feyereislova A, Chung HC, 
Shen L, Sawaki A, Lordick F, Ohtsu A, Omuro Y, Satoh 
T, Aprile G, Kulikov E, Hill J, Lehle M, Ruschoff J and 
Kang YK. Trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy 
versus chemotherapy alone for treatment of HER2-positive 
advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction cancer 
 Oncotarget
56500
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
(ToGA): a phase 3, open-label, randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2010; 376:687-697.
18. Gatzemeier U, Groth G, Butts C, Van Zandwijk N, 
Shepherd F, Ardizzoni A, Barton C, Ghahramani P and 
Hirsh V. Randomized phase II trial of gemcitabine-cisplatin 
with or without trastuzumab in HER2-positive non-small-
cell lung cancer. Annals of oncology. 2004; 15:19-27.
19. Ashworth A, Lord CJ and Reis-Filho JS. Genetic 
interactions in cancer progression and treatment. Cell. 2011; 
145:30-38.
20. Le Tourneau C, Paoletti X, Servant N, Bieche I, Gentien 
D, Rio Frio T, Vincent-Salomon A, Servois V, Romejon 
J, Mariani O, Bernard V, Huppe P, Pierron G, Mulot F, 
Callens C, Wong J, et al. Randomised proof-of-concept 
phase II trial comparing targeted therapy based on tumour 
molecular profiling vs conventional therapy in patients 
with refractory cancer: results of the feasibility part of the 
SHIVA trial. Br J Cancer. 2014; 111:17-24.
21. Barker AD, Sigman CC, Kelloff GJ, Hylton NM, Berry DA 
and Esserman LJ. I-SPY 2: an adaptive breast cancer trial 
design in the setting of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Clinical 
pharmacology and therapeutics. 2009; 86:97-100.
22. McNeil C. NCI-MATCH launch highlights new trial design 
in precision-medicine era. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015; 107.
23. Parker BA, Schwaederle MC, Schwab RB, Daniels GA, 
Piccioni DE, Helsten TL, Bazhenova L, Fanta PT, Lippman 
SM and Kurzrock R. Precision oncology: the UC San Diego 
Moores Cancer Center PREDICT experience. Journal of 
Clinical Oncology: 2015 ASCO Annual Meeting Abstract. 
2015; 33.
24. Wheler JJ, Yelensky R, Stephen B, Hong DS, Zinner R, 
Subbiah V, Fu SQ, Karp DD, Falchook GS, Naing A, 
Tsimberidou AM, Piha-Paul SA, Janku F, Li YL, Lee JJ, 
Miller VA, et al. Prospective study comparing outcomes 
in patients with advanced malignancies on molecular 
alteration-matched versus non-matched therapy. Journal of 
Clinical Oncology: 2015 ASCO Annual Meeting Abstract. 
2015; 33.
25. Cobain EF, Robinson DR, Wu YM, Worden FP, Smith DC, 
Schuetze S, Chugh R, Ramnath N, Schott AF, Hayes DF, 
Chinnaiyan AM and Talpaz M. Clinical impact of high-
throughput sequencing in patients with advanced cancer: 
Lessons learned from the Michigan Oncology Sequencing 
Center. Journal of Clinical Oncology: 2015 ASCO Annual 
Meeting Abstract. 2015; 33.
26. Frampton GM, Fichtenholtz A, Otto GA, Wang K, Downing 
SR, He J, Schnall-Levin M, White J, Sanford EM, An P, 
Sun J, Juhn F, Brennan K, Iwanik K, Maillet A, Buell J, et 
al. Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic 
profiling test based on massively parallel DNA sequencing. 
Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:1023-1031.
