 SPECIAL ARTICLE
LEVEL OF RECOMMENDATION
Practice guideline recommendations summary:
Disease-modifying therapies for adults with
multiple sclerosis
Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
Alexander Rae-Grant, MD, Gregory S. Day, MD, MSc, Ruth Ann Marrie, MD, PhD, Alejandro Rabinstein, MD,
Bruce A.C. Cree, MD, PhD, MAS, Gary S. Gronseth, MD, Michael Haboubi, DO, June Halper, MSN, APN-C, MSCN,
Jonathan P. Hosey, MD, David E. Jones, MD, Robert Lisak, MD, Daniel Pelletier, MD, Sonja Potrebic, MD, PhD,
Cynthia Sitcov, Rick Sommers, LMSW, Julie Stachowiak, PhD, Thomas S.D. Getchius, Shannon A. Merillat, MLIS,
and Tamara Pringsheim, MD, MSc
Neurology® 2018;90:777-788. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000005347
Correspondence
American Academy of
Neurology
guidelines@aan.com
Abstract
Objective
To develop recommendations for disease-modifying therapy (DMT) for multiple sclerosis (MS).
Methods
A multidisciplinary panel developed DMT recommendations, integrating findings from a sys-
tematic review; followed an Institute of Medicine–compliant process to ensure transparency
and patient engagement; and developed modified Delphi consensus–based recommendations
concerning starting, switching, and stopping DMTs pertinent to people with relapsing-
remitting MS, secondary progressive MS, primary progressive MS, and clinically isolated
syndromes of demyelination. Recommendations were supported by structured rationales, in-
tegrating evidence from one or more sources: systematic review, related evidence (evidence not
from the systematic review), principles of care, and inference from evidence.
Results
Thirty recommendations were developed: 17 on starting DMTs, including recommendations on
who should start them; 10 on switching DMTs if breakthrough disease develops; and 3 on stopping
DMTs. Recommendations encompassed patient engagement strategies and individualization of
treatment, including adherence monitoring and disease comorbidity assessment. The panel also
discussed DMT risks, including counseling about progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy risk
in people with MS using natalizumab, fingolimod, rituximab, ocrelizumab, and dimethyl fumarate;
and made suggestions for future research to evaluate relative merits of early treatment with higher
potency DMTs vs standard stepped-care protocols, DMT comparative effectiveness, optimal
switching strategies, long-term effects of DMT use, definitions of highly active MS, and effects of
treatment on patient-specified priority outcomes. This guideline reflects the complexity of decision-
making for starting, switching, or stopping MS DMTs. The field of MS treatment is rapidly
changing; the Academy of Neurology development process includes planning for future updates.
MORE ONLINE
Podcast
Dr. Stacey Clardy interviews
Dr. Alexander Rae-Grant
about his paper on disease-
modifying therapies for
adults with MS.
NPub.org/p5cuqd
RELATED ARTICLES
Editorial
Complexity of MS
management in the current
treatment era
Page 761
Article
Comprehensive systematic
review summary: Disease-
modifying therapies for adults
with multiple sclerosis:
Report of the Guideline
Development, Dissemination,
and Implementation
Subcommittee of the
American Academy of
Neurology
Page 789
From the Department of Neurology (A.R.-G.), Cleveland Clinic, OH; Department of Neurology (G.S.D.), Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington
University in St. Louis, MO; Department of Community Health Sciences (R.A.M.), Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada;
Department of Neurology (A.R.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences, Department of Neurology (B.A.C.C.), University of California, San Francisco; Department
of Neurology (G.S.G.), Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City; Department of Neurology (M.H.), School of Medicine, University of Louisville, KY; Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis
Centers (J.H.), Hackensack, NJ; Department of Neuroscience (J.P.H.), St. Luke’sUniversity Health Network,Bethlehem,PA; DepartmentofNeurology (D.E.J.),University of Virginia,Charlottesville;
Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis Centers (R.L.), Hackensack, NJ; Department of Neurology (R.L.), School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI; Department of Neurology (D.P.), Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California; Neurology Department (S.P.), Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser, Los Angeles; National Multiple Sclerosis Society
(C.S.), Arlington, VA; National Multiple Sclerosis Society (R.S.), New York, NY; Santa Fe (J.S.), NM; Heart Rhythm Society (T.S.D.G.), Washington, DC; American Academy of Neurology (S.A.M.),
Minneapolis, MN; and Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Psychiatry, Pediatrics and Community Health Sciences, Cumming School of Medicine (T.P.), University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
Approved by the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee on October 9, 2017; by the Practice Committee on October 21, 2017; and by the AAN
Institute Board of Directors on March 6, 2018.
Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Neurology
777
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 This article presents the recommendations and suggestions for
future research of an American Academy of Neurology (AAN)
practice guideline on the efficacy and safety of disease-
modifying therapies (DMTs) in multiple sclerosis (MS). The
complete practice guideline and references e1 through e49,
cited here, are available at links.lww.com/WNL/A458 and
links.lww.com/WNL/A377, respectively. A companion article
summarizes the systematic review findings and conclusions.
This guideline, although not a formal update to the 2002 AAN
guideline on DMTs,1 replaces that earlier guideline.
In May 2015, the AAN guideline subcommittee convened
a multidisciplinary panel to perform a systematic review and
develop guideline recommendations regarding DMT for MS.
The systematic review was completed in November 2016; its
methodology and results are described in a companion sys-
tematic review.2 The panel developed recommendations,
founded on the systematic review, concerning the starting,
switching, and stopping of DMTs. This summary article focuses
on the recommendations and does not include detailed analysis
of the systematic review. Readers are urged to review the full-
length document (links.lww.com/WNL/A458) and accompa-
nying tables (appendix e-5, links.lww.com/WNL/A376) for
a fuller assessment of this guideline.1
Much more than evidence must be considered when crafting
practice recommendations. The evidence-based conclusions
from the systematic review form the foundation of the AAN
process,3 but additional factors influence recommendation
structure. Working in teams, the panel developed rationale
statements for transparency in documenting the deductive
logic justifying each recommendation. A rationale statement
precedes each recommendation or recommendation set. Four
premise types can support recommendations: evidence-based
conclusions from the systematic review, generally accepted
principles of care, strong evidence from related conditions,
and deductive inferences from other premises. Recom-
mendations must be supported by at least one premise.
When there is sufficient evidence to support an inference for
an intervention’s use (i.e., the balance of benefits and harms
favors the intervention), the development panel assigns 1 of 3
recommendation designations: A, B, or C. Each designation
corresponds to a helping verb that denotes the level of rec-
ommendation strength. Level A is the strongest recommenda-
tion level and is denoted by use of the helping verb must. These
recommendations are rare, as they are based on high confidence
in the evidence and require both a high magnitude of benefit
and low risk. Level B corresponds to the helping verb should.
Such recommendations are more common, as the requirements
are less stringent but still based on the evidence and benefit−risk
profile. Level C, which corresponds to the helping verb may,
represents the lowest allowable recommendation level the AAN
considers useful within the scope of clinical practice and can
accommodate the highest degree of practice variation.
Other factors that need to be transparently and systematically
considered when formulating recommendations include the
relative value of the benefit compared with the risk, the fea-
sibility of complying with the intervention (e.g., the inter-
vention’s availability), the intervention’s cost, and the
expected variation in patient preferences relative to the
intervention’s risks, burdens, and benefits.
The panel assigned levels of obligation (A, B, C, or U) to the
recommendations, using a modified Delphi process that
synthesizes all the preceding factors. The panelists provided
their opinions concerning the importance of each factor
through an online questionnaire, with statistical analysis of
responses. All panelists voted online anonymously and in-
dependently on each recommendation in 3 voting rounds that
involved precisely defined rules for consensus.
Each recommendation achieved consensus, was revised, or
was not carried forward. In some cases, the panel reviewed,
revised, and revoted on recommendations on the basis of
public commentary and other input during the development
process, reflecting the dynamic nature of this process.
For the systematic review, observational data did not drive
conclusions, but the panel was not restricted in the recom-
mendation phase from reflecting such data if appropriate in
the process. In addition, longer-term safety and outcome data
are often unavailable for newer agents, and guidelines cannot
capture all the longitudinal changes in practice that may occur
on the basis of clinical experience over time.
Suggestions for future research were also developed during
the guideline development process.
Supplemental Data
Practice Guidelines
NPub.org/77nyxt
Glossary
AAN = American Academy of Neurology; AE = adverse effect; CIS = clinically isolated syndrome; DMT = disease-modifying
therapy; EDSS = Expanded Disability Status Scale; FDA = Food and Drug Administration; IFN-β = interferon-β; JCV = John
Cunningham virus; MS = multiple sclerosis; PML = progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; PPMS = primary progressive
multiple sclerosis; RCT = randomized controlled trial; REMS = risk evaluation and mitigation strategies; RRMS = relapsing-
remitting multiple sclerosis; SPMS = secondary progressive multiple sclerosis.
778
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 This guideline will be reassessed periodically for currency and
will be updated in accordance with the most currently avail-
able AAN process manual.
Starting DMT: Recommendations
Starting: Recommendation 1
Rationale
Receiving the diagnosis of MS is a stressful life event.4,5 People
receiving major diagnoses may not recall much of the in-
formation given to them at the time.6 Providing information
about DMT at a follow-up interaction is likely to allow a better
understanding of these medications and their risks and benefits.
Statement 1
Clinicians should counsel people with newly diagnosed MS
about specific treatment options with DMT at a dedicated
treatment visit (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 2
Rationale
Respecting patient preferences is an important component of
care for chronic conditions. Because of the variety of DMTs
available, evaluating patient preferences may improve accep-
tance of and adherence to DMT.
Statement 2a
Clinicians must ascertain and incorporate/review preferences
in terms of safety, route of administration, lifestyle, cost, ef-
ficacy, common adverse effects (AEs), and tolerability in the
choice of DMT in people with MS being considered for DMT
(Level A).
Statement 2b
Clinicians must engage in an ongoing dialogue regarding
treatment decisions throughout the disease course with peo-
ple with MS (Level A).
Starting: Recommendation 3
Rationale
DMTs reduce but do not eliminate MS relapses and MRI
activity. Educating people with MS about realistic expectations
regarding DMT effects is important.7 Clinicians should inform
people with MS that they may still need symptomatic treatment
in addition to DMT.8
Statement 3a
Clinicians should counsel people with MS that DMTs are
prescribed to reduce relapses and new MRI lesion activity.
DMTs are not prescribed for symptom improvement in
people with MS (Level B).
Statement 3b
Clinicians must counsel people with MS on DMTs to notify
the clinicians of new or worsening symptoms (Level A).
Starting: Recommendation 4
Rationale
Because DMT use requires commitment to ongoing therapy
and an understanding of AEs, readiness to initiate DMT and
factors causing reluctance may have an impact on adherence
to DMT use.
Statement 4
Clinicians should evaluate readiness or reluctance to initiate
DMT and counsel on its importance in people with MS who
are candidates to initiate DMT (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 5
Rationale
In people with MS, comorbid disease, such as depression,
anxiety, and vascular risk factors, and adverse health behaviors
(e.g., physical inactivity, smoking) are associated with worse
outcomes.9,10 Addressing depression before initiating DMT
may improve decision-making and adherence to DMT.
Concomitant medications may have important interactions
with DMTs.11
Statement 5
Clinicians should counsel about comorbid disease, adverse
health behaviors, and potential interactions of the DMT with
concomitant medications when people with MS initiate
DMTs (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 6
Rationale
Because DMT requires adherence to treatment to provide full
efficacy, and because that adherence to treatment may be an
issue for people with MS,12,13 discussing adherence issues
before initiating DMT is part of good clinical practice. Efforts
to increase adherence may improve outcomes.
Statement 6a
Clinicians should evaluate barriers to adherence to DMT in
people with MS (Level B).
Statement 6b
Clinicians should counsel on the importance of adherence to
DMT when people with MS initiate DMTs (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 7
Rationale
People presenting with a first demyelinating event who do not
meet the 2010 International Criteria for MS are commonly
encountered in clinical practice. Multiple prospective obser-
vational trials have consistently confirmed that people with
a single clinical demyelinating event with 2 or more brain or
spinal cord lesions remain at increased risk of a future MS
diagnosis, with the highest risk incurred within 5 years of the
initial event.14–17 Evidence from multiple Class I and II trials
confirms that DMTs are associated with a significant delay in
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
779
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 second clinical relapse or new brain MRI-detected lesions in
people with a first demyelinating event who are considered to
be at high risk for MS on the basis of brain MRI-detected
lesions. There is insufficient evidence concerning the com-
parative efficacy of specific DMTs for this purpose. Decisions
concerning the selection of specific DMTs for people pre-
senting with a first demyelinating event should abide by
prescribing principles espoused in other recommendations.
Individuals presenting with an incident demyelinating event
who have no brain lesions are at low risk of a future MS
diagnosis.
Statement 7a
Clinicians should discuss the benefits and risks of DMTs for
people with a single clinical demyelinating event with 2 or
more brain lesions that have imaging characteristics consistent
with MS (Level B).
Statement 7b
After discussing the risks and benefits, clinicians should pre-
scribe DMT to people with a single clinical demyelinating
event and 2 or more brain lesions characteristic of MS who
decide they want this therapy (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 8
Rationale
The benefit of initiating DMT has not been studied in cur-
rently untreated people with clinically isolated syndromes
(CIS) or relapsing forms of MS who have not had relapses in 2
or more years and do not have active new MRI lesion activity
on recent imaging. In such people, it is unknown what the risk
of harm is from initiating DMTs, including AEs, major AEs,
and burden of taking a long-term medication, relative to the
benefit of reducing relapse rate.
Statement 8
Clinicians may recommend serial imaging at least annually for
the first 5 years and close follow-up rather than initiating
DMT in people with CIS or relapsing forms of MS who are
not on DMT, have not had relapses in the preceding 2 years,
and do not have active new MRI lesion activity on recent
imaging (Level C).
Starting: Recommendation 9
Rationale
Multiple studies of DMTs in people with relapsing forms of
MS who have had recent relapses or MRI activity or both have
shown benefit of DMT in terms of reducing relapses and
reducing MRI activity. This includes people with a single
clinical episode who meet 2010 International Criteria for
MS.18,19
Statement 9
Clinicians should offer DMTs to people with relapsing
forms of MS with recent clinical relapses or MRI activity
(Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 10
Rationale
Lack of adherence to treatment of chronic diseases is
a wide-ranging problem. The result of poor adherence is
reduced effectiveness and increased health care costs.20–25
Regular interactions and assessments by clinicians facilitate
prompt identification and treatment of AEs, increased
tolerability of the medication, and safety monitoring.7,25
Some DMTs for MS have specific risk evaluation and
mitigation strategies (REMS) with recommendations for
follow-up frequency.26–29
Statement 10a
Clinicians should monitor for medication adherence, AEs,
tolerability, safety, and effectiveness of the therapy in people
with MS on DMTs (Level B).
Statement 10b
Clinicians should follow up either annually or according to
medication-specific REMS in people with MS on DMTs
(Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 11
Rationale
DMTs have potential risks in pregnant women30 to varying
degrees. Discussing pregnancy with women with MS before
initiating DMT is a part of good clinical practice. If women
with MS are planning pregnancy soon, DMT use may need to
be deferred until after pregnancy.31 In addition, because
DMTs vary in terms of pregnancy risks,30 DMT choice may
be influenced by plans for pregnancy.
Statement 11
Clinicians should monitor the reproductive plans of women
with MS and counsel regarding reproductive risks and use of
birth control during DMT use in women of childbearing
potential who have MS (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 12
Rationale
Chemotherapy, such as cyclophosphamide, may affect male
fertility.32 With teriflunomide treatment, there may be a risk of
teratogenicity from male sperm, which could last for 2 years
after treatment cessation if the patient is not treated with
chelation therapy.33
Statement 12
Clinicians should counsel men with MS on their reproductive
plans regarding treatment implications before initiating
treatment with teriflunomide or cyclophosphamide (Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 13
Rationale
Post approval of mitoxantrone, new evidence has shown
a high risk of cardiomyopathy, ovarian failure, male infertility,
780
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 chromosomal aberrations, and promyelocytic leukemia34–37
associated with mitoxantrone use. Other effective medications
with lower risk, which were unavailable at the time of US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of mitoxantrone,
are now available for treating MS.
Statement 13
Because of the high frequency of severe AEs, clinicians should
not prescribe mitoxantrone to people with MS unless the
potential therapeutic benefits greatly outweigh the risks
(Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 14
Rationale
MS is a heterogeneous disease and is characterized by highly
variable degrees of disease activity in the relapsing phase and
by varying rates of worsening during the progressive
phases.38,39 Definitions of highly active MS vary and can in-
clude measures of relapsing activity and MRI markers of
disease activity, such as numbers of gadolinium-enhanced
lesions.40,e1 Subgroup analyses from phase III pivotal trials of
alemtuzumab, fingolimod, and natalizumab showed a re-
duction in relapses and MRI measures in people with MS with
highly active disease.e2–e4 Compared with interferon-β
(IFN-β) therapy, treatment with these therapies resulted in
more favorable outcomes in the subgroup of people with MS
with highly active disease.e5–e8 However, the risks and benefits
of each treatment strategy need to be considered on a patient-
by-patient basis.
Statement 14
Clinicians should prescribe alemtuzumab, fingolimod, or
natalizumab for people with MS with highly active MS
(Level B).
Starting: Recommendation 15
Rationale
DMTs should be available to all people with relapsing forms
of MS. Because of disparities in health care provision in dif-
ferent settings,e9 there may be situations where approved
DMTs are not available to an individual. In these situations,
DMTs may be obtained with support from the pharmaceu-
tical industry or from organizations, such as the National
Organization of Rare Diseases, county organizations, or
government organizations. If such support is unavailable,
certain lower cost medications may become a choice for care.
Azathioprine has mixed results and evidence for which con-
fidence is low to support efficacy in relapsing forms of MS.
Cladribine has evidence of benefit for both the oral and
parenteral formulations, but currently only the parenteral
formulations are available.
Statement 15a
Clinicians may direct people with MS who are candidates for
DMTs to support programs (Level C).
Statement 15b
Clinicians may recommend azathioprine or cladribine for
people with relapsing forms of MS who do not have access to
approved DMTs (Level C).
Starting: Recommendation 16
Rationale
People with MS with a positive John Cunningham virus (JCV)
antibody test have a higher risk of developing progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) while using natalizu-
mab, particularly people with MS who have been treated for
more than 2 years or have had prior immunosuppressive
treatment. There are now other highly effective treatments that
may be used that have not been shown to have a similar
PML risk. The PML risk increases with the level of anti-JCV
antibody response (index). For example, in those using nata-
lizumab for 25–36 months with no prior use of immunosup-
pressants, the PML risk is 0.2 per 1,000 in those with an index
of 0.9 or less, 0.3 per 1,000 in those with an index of 0.9–1.5,
and 3 per 1,000 in those with an index greater than 1.5. Further
data on risk assessment is likely to become available over time
to help inform treatment decisions in this area.
Statement 16
Clinicians may initiate natalizumab treatment in people with
MS with positive anti-JCV antibody indexes above 0.9 only
when there is a reasonable chance of benefit compared with
the low but serious risk of PML (Level C).
Starting: Recommendation 17
Rationale
Ocrelizumab is the only DMT shown to alter disease pro-
gression in individuals with primary progressive MS (PPMS)
who are ambulatory. The randomized controlled trial (RCT)
of rituximab in PPMS was promising but inconclusive.e10
Although RCTs of fingolimod, glatiramer acetate, and IFN-
β-1b failed to demonstrate an effect on disability progression
in individuals with PPMS, significant effects on MRI measures
of disease activity were found with all 3 treatments.e11–e13
Clinical trials have not evaluated the benefits of DMT in
individuals with PPMS who are nonambulatory with respect
to other clinically relevant domains, including vision, cogni-
tion, and upper limb function.
Statement 17
Clinicians should offer ocrelizumab to people with PPMS
who are likely to benefit from this therapy unless there are
risks of treatment that outweigh the benefits (Level B).
Switching DMT: Recommendations
Switching: Recommendation 1
Rationale
Ongoing disease activity, measured either by clinical relapses
or new MRI-detected lesions (including unequivocally new
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
781
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 T2 or new gadolinium-enhanced lesions), could lead to
physical or cognitive worsening over time.e14−e17 Now that
several DMTs are available and have demonstrated efficacy
for the prevention of clinical relapses and new MRI-detected
lesions, physicians and people with MS often face the decision
of switching from one DMT to another because of a perceived
lack of efficacy. Such lack of response to a DMT has been
difficult to define, as most people with MS are not free of all
disease activity; investigators have considered using the
number of clinical attacks or new MRI-detected lesions in the
preceding 12 months to define lack of response.e15,e17 DMTs
take a variable amount of time to become clinically active, and
new lesion formation may occur after initiation but before the
time of full efficacy, confounding interpretation of follow-up
MRI scans.e5,e6,e18−e21 Consequently, many clinicians obtain
new baseline MRI 3–6 months after initiating DMTs to
monitor from a treated baseline.e22 The optimal interval for
ongoing monitoring is uncertain, as short-term stability as
evidenced by clinical and MRI criteria may not consistently
predict long-term stability. In addition, because of different
mechanisms of activity among the DMTs, monitoring strat-
egies may vary.
Statement 1a
Clinicians should monitor MRI disease activity from the
clinical onset of disease to detect the accumulation of new
lesions in order to inform treatment decisions in people with
MS using DMTs (Level B).
Statement 1b
Clinicians should recognize that relapses or new MRI-
detected lesions may develop after initiation of a DMT and
before the treatment becomes effective in people with MS
who are using DMTs (Level B).
Statement 1c
Clinicians should discuss switching from one DMT to an-
other in people with MS who have been using a DMT long
enough for the treatment to take full effect and are adherent to
their therapy when they experience 1 or more relapses, 2 or
more unequivocally new MRI-detected lesions, or increased
disability on examination, over a 1-year period of using
a DMT (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 2
Rationale
None of the available DMTs is completely effective against
relapses and MRI activity. When a patient shows break-
through disease activity (continued relapses, MRI activity),
trying a medication with a different mechanism or efficacy
profile may be beneficial. Although all possible clinical sce-
narios cannot be answered by drug trials, current evidence
supports higher efficacy of alemtuzumab, natalizumab, fin-
golimod, and ocrelizumab compared with previously ap-
proved self-injectable DMTs. Tolerability and likelihood of
adherence are other factors that are important in decisions
about switching DMTs. Physician judgment and patient
preferences are critical in this process.
Statement 2
Clinicians should evaluate the degree of disease activity,
adherence, AE profiles, and mechanism of action of DMTs
when switching DMTs in people with MS with breakthrough
disease activity during DMT use (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 3
Rationale
Multiple DMTs are available for MS treatment. Switching
therapies may be appropriate in people with MS who are
experiencing AEs or complications with a DMT. Adherence
to injectable DMTs is often incomplete.e23 Injection fatigue
(physical or emotional) or injection-related pain or discom-
fort may be a common reason for poor adherence.
Statement 3
Clinicians should discuss a change to noninjectable or less
frequently injectable DMTs in people with MS who report
intolerable discomfort with the injections or in those who
report injection fatigue on injectable DMTs (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 4
Rationale
Adherence to a DMT may also be affected by medication
AEs.13,25 All DMTs have common AEs that may affect ad-
herence (table e-2, links.lww.com/WNL/A376).
Statement 4a
Clinicians should inquire about medication AEs with people
with MS who are taking a DMT and attempt to manage these
AEs, as appropriate (Level B).
Statement 4b
Clinicians should discuss a medication switch with people
with MS for whom these AEs negatively influence adherence
(Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 5
Rationale
Persistent laboratory abnormalities, such as elevated liver
enzymes and decreased white blood cell counts, may prompt
a discussion about switching DMT (table e-2, links.lww.com/
WNL/A376).
Statement 5a
Clinicians should monitor laboratory abnormalities found on
requisite laboratory surveillance (as outlined in the medi-
cation’s package insert) in people with MS who are using
a DMT (Level B).
Statement 5b
Clinicians should discuss switching DMT or reducing dosage
or frequency (where there are data on different doses [e.g.,
782
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 interferons, teriflunomide, azathioprine]) when there are
persistent laboratory abnormalities (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 6
Rationale
PML is a serious safety concerne24 that may affect compliance
and necessitate consideration of a treatment switch. The PML
risk is estimated at 4 per 1,000 overall with natalizumabe25;
however, the presence and index level of JCV antibodies,
longer duration use, and prior immunosuppression increase
PML risk with natalizumab even further.e24 Recent updated
risk estimates show that the risk of developing PML is small at
antibody index values of 0.9 or less, and increases with index
values greater than 1.5 in people with MS who have been
treated with natalizumab for more than 2 years.11 There are
rare reports of PML with the use of both fingolimod and
dimethyl fumarate.e26–e29 There are reports of PML in people
with MS who are HIV-negative and using rituximab for
conditions other than MS.e30 There is a potential risk of PML
with ocrelizumab use, particularly with prior immunosup-
pressive therapies based on its similarity to other anti-CD20
antibodies.e31
Statement 6a
Clinicians should counsel people with MS considering nata-
lizumab, fingolimod, rituximab, ocrelizumab, and dimethyl
fumarate about the PML risk associated with these agents
(Level B).
Statement 6b
Clinicians should discuss switching to a DMT with a lower
PML risk with people with MS taking natalizumab who are or
become JCV antibody–positive, especially with an index of
above 0.9 while on therapy (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 7
Rationale
Immunosuppressive medications may increase the risk of
opportunistic infection and malignancy, especially with pro-
longed use. These risks are often undefined with newer
medication. Cases of cryptococcal infections have been
reported with fingolimod use.e32 Herpes family virus infec-
tions have been reported with fingolimod and natalizumab
use.e33−e35 A potential increased risk of basal cell carcinoma
was recently added to the fingolimod product label.e29
Statement 7a
Clinicians should counsel that new DMTs without long-term
safety data have an undefined risk of malignancy and infection
for people with MS starting or using new DMTs (Level B).
Statement 7b
If a patient with MS develops a malignancy while using
a DMT, clinicians should promptly discuss switching to an
alternate DMT, especially for people with MS using azathi-
oprine, methotrexate, mycophenolate, cyclophosphamide,
fingolimod, teriflunomide, alemtuzumab, or dimethyl fuma-
rate (Level B).
Statement 7c
People with MS with serious infections potentially linked to
their DMT should switch DMTs (does not pertain to PML
management in people with MS using DMT) (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 8
Rationale
Neutralizing antibodies may be produced against natalizumab
and have been associated with allergic reactions.e36,e37 These
antibodies may reduce the efficacy of the medication, espe-
cially if they are persistent.
Statement 8a
Clinicians should check for natalizumab antibodies in people
with MS who have infusion reactions before subsequent
infusions, or in people with MS who experience breakthrough
disease activity with natalizumab use (Level B).
Statement 8b
Clinicians should switch DMTs in people with MS who have
persistent natalizumab antibodies (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 9
Rationale
People with MS taking natalizumab may discontinue natali-
zumab because of fear of PML risk or for pregnancy planning.
Natalizumab discontinuation increases the risk of MRI-
detected disease activity and MS relapse within 6 months of
discontinuation, with some people with MS having an in-
crease in disease activity above their baseline activity, referred
to as rebound activity.e38 Data are limited for assessing the
appropriate choice of an alternate DMT after natalizumab
discontinuation. There is evidence that initiating fingolimod
8–12 weeks after natalizumab discontinuation reduces new
MRI-detected lesions compared with initiation 16 weeks after
natalizumab discontinuation. Initiating fingolimod 8–12
weeks after natalizumab discontinuation increases the pro-
portion of people with MS who are relapse free compared
with initiation after 16 weeks.e39,e40 Although RCT data are
unavailable, retrospective cohort data suggest that switching
from natalizumab to rituximab may result in lower rates of
clinical and radiologic disease activity compared with
switching to fingolimod.e41
Statement 9a
Physicians must counsel people with MS considering natali-
zumab discontinuation that there is an increased risk of MS
relapse or MRI-detected disease activity within 6 months of
discontinuation (Level A).
Statement 9b
Physicians and people with MS choosing to switch from
natalizumab to fingolimod should initiate treatment within
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
783
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 8–12 weeks after natalizumab discontinuation (for reasons
other than pregnancy or pregnancy planning) to diminish the
return of disease activity (Level B).
Switching: Recommendation 10
Rationale
Relapse risk is reduced during pregnancy and increases in the
postpartum period.e42 Pregnancy exposure to DMTs may
pose potential risks to the fetus to varying degrees, which vary
from severe malformations to no major increased risk of
malformations. Risks of important early-life health outcomes
such as infections, vaccination responses, asthma, and neu-
rocognitive disorders are unknown. FDA-approved medi-
cations vary in terms of FDA recommendation for pregnancy
(e.g., glatiramer acetate [“Instruct people with MS that if they
are pregnant or plan to become pregnant while taking gla-
tiramer acetate they should inform their physician”; “Women
of childbearing potential should be advised to avoid becoming
pregnant”] and teriflunomide [“Must be avoided during
pregnancy”]). Each DMT has a separate FDA statement
about pregnancy-associated risks (see individual package
inserts and attached tables). Discussing these potential risks
and how best to minimize them is a part of good clinical
practice. The majority of human safety data for exposure to
DMTs during pregnancy are derived from accidental expo-
sure early in pregnancy. There is a paucity of safety in-
formation with second- and third-trimester exposure.e43
Statement 10a
Clinicians should counsel women to stop their DMT before
conception for planned pregnancies unless the risk of MS
activity during pregnancy outweighs the risk associated with
the specific DMT during pregnancy (Level B).
Statement 10b
Clinicians should discontinue DMTs during pregnancy if
accidental exposure occurs, unless the risk of MS activity
during pregnancy outweighs the risk associated with the
specific DMT during pregnancy (Level B).
Statement 10c
Clinicians should not initiate DMTs during pregnancy unless
the risk of MS activity during pregnancy outweighs the risk
associated with the specific DMT during pregnancy (Level B).
Stopping DMT: Recommendations
Stopping: Recommendation 1
Rationale
No RCTs have directly addressed the question of whether,
when, or why to discontinue DMTs in an individual with
relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) who has no evidence of
relapses or disability progression and has stable brain imaging.
The natural history of untreated RRMS is for relapses and
disability accumulation to occur. Early studies suggest that
most individuals with RRMS ultimately advance to secondary
progressive MS (SPMS) if observed for long enough intervals,
although disease course is highly variable.e44 People with MS
who are stable on DMTs may question the continued value of
using DMTs. If people with MS on DMTs stop these medi-
cations, continued monitoring may show subclinical disease
activity or relapse activity that would indicate a possible need
for treatment resumption. In an RCT of 175 individuals
taking natalizumab who had been relapse free for 1 year and
had no gadolinium-enhanced lesions on MRI, participants
were randomized to continue natalizumab use, switch to
placebo, or switch to other therapies. Relapses occurred in 4%
of those continuing natalizumab use and in 15%–29% of those
in other treatment arms over 24 weeks. An observational
study comparing outcomes in individuals who did or did not
stop DMT after a period of at least 5 years without relapses
found a similar risk of relapses between the groups but an
increased risk of disability progression among those who
stopped DMT. Younger age and lower Expanded Disability
Status Scale (EDSS) scores were significant predictors of re-
lapse (clinical or MRI) after treatment discontinuation. Peo-
ple with MS who are on DMTs with no evidence of ongoing
disease activity may be benefiting from their DMT with dis-
ease suppression. There are no biological markers of medi-
cation efficacy that can guide decision-making in this area.
Statement 1a
In people with RRMS who are stable on DMT and want to
discontinue therapy, clinicians should counsel people re-
garding the need for ongoing follow-up and periodic reeval-
uation of the decision to discontinue DMT (Level B).
Statement 1b
Clinicians should advocate that people with MS who are
stable (that is, no relapses, no disability progression, stable
imaging) on DMT should continue their current DMT unless
the patient and physician decide a trial off therapy is warranted
(Level B).
Stopping: Recommendation 2
Rationale
People with SPMS who have relapses or active MRI-detected
new lesion formation benefit from DMT. In people with
SPMS who are ambulatory with or without assistance, IFN-β
reduces the risk of relapse but does not delay disability pro-
gression as measured by the EDSS, a measure that emphasizes
ambulation. No RCTs have directly addressed the question of
whether or when to discontinue DMTs in people with SPMS.
Clinical trials have not evaluated the benefits of DMT in
individuals with SPMS who are nonambulatory with respect
to other clinically relevant domains, including vision, cogni-
tion, and upper limb function. Relapses are associated with
more rapid disability progression in SPMS but tend to occur
in those at younger ages (younger than 55 years) and earlier in
the disease course.e45,e46 Among individuals with SPMS
(those with and those without clinical relapses) for at least 2
784
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 years at the time of treatment withdrawal, an EDSS of 6 or
greater was associated with a 50% lower risk of relapses or
MRI-detected activity after treatment discontinuation. The
benefits of therapy should outweigh the risks. The use of
ineffective therapy may pose harms to the affected individual,
society, and the health system.
Statement 2a
Clinicians should assess the likelihood of future relapse in
individuals with SPMS by assessing patient age, disease
duration, relapse history, and MRI-detected activity (e.g.,
frequency, severity, time since most recent relapse or
gadolinium-enhanced lesion) (Level B).
Statement 2b
Clinicians may advise discontinuation of DMT in people with
SPMS who do not have ongoing relapses (or gadolinium-
enhanced lesions on MRI activity) and have not been
ambulatory (EDSS 7 or greater) for at least 2 years (Level C).
Stopping: Recommendation 3
Rationale
DMTs tested in people with CIS delay progression to MS
onset. However, some people with CIS may not develop MS.
e47 Risks of active relapsing disease activity are higher in
younger people with CIS.17,e48,e49 In the absence of disease
activity, people with CIS who are on DMTs may question the
value of continuing DMTs indefinitely. There remains a gap
in knowledge about stopping DMTs in people with CIS.
Discussing the risks of continuing DMTs vs the risks of their
use being unnecessary as part of ongoing treatment is a part of
good clinical practice.
Statement 3
Clinicians should review the associated risks of continuing
DMTs vs those of stopping DMTs in people with CIS using
DMTs who have not been diagnosed with MS (Level B).
Clinical context for all evidence
This practice guideline reflects the complexity of decision-
making when considering initiating, switching, or stopping
DMT use for MS. The guideline panel has striven to reflect
a patient-centric approach incorporating assessment of atti-
tudes, readiness to start or change DMTs, therapy adherence,
patient-specific factors (e.g., comorbidities), and an ongoing
discussion of DMT use in people with MS on DMTs. The
panel reviewed both FDA-approved DMTs and medications
that have been used off-label for which efficacy data may be
analyzed. The panel engaged in a transparent process, in-
cluding extensive public review of the initial protocol, ques-
tions considered in the systematic review, and an early version
of the systematic review and recommendations.
No guideline of this complexity will satisfy all audiences. The
panel recognizes that the field of MS treatment is rapidly
changing and the recommendations presented here may re-
quire reanalysis in light of new directions in the field and new
evidence pertaining to DMT use. Issues with generalizability
of randomized trials to heterogeneous real-world populations
and extrapolation of short-term outcomes limit some of the
conclusions. The panel anticipates needing to update this
guideline in the not-too-distant future.
Suggestions for future research
Future research carried out on the following suggested topics
would greatly improve informed decision-making for DMT
use for MS.
High-quality evidence is needed concerning the effect of
DMT for MS on outcomes deemed important by clinicians
and people with MS beyond standard trials outcomes.
DMT for MS comparative efficacy studies are needed with
transparent reporting in different MS subpopulations.
Clinical trials are needed to evaluate DMT benefit in indi-
viduals with SPMS who are nonambulatory with respect to
other clinically relevant domains.
Studies are needed to examine whether initial high-potency
treatment early in the disease course, compared with other
DMTs, improves long-term outcomes.
There is a need for studies comparing highly active DMTs for
MS treatment and different DMTs for CIS treatment.
Studies are warranted to determine whether switching DMTs
vs continuing a DMT, despite continued disease activity,
results in improved long-term outcomes.
Continued research is urged to identify biomarkers that can
predict DMT efficacy in different patient subpopulations.
More research is needed to minimize risk to the pregnant
woman and her fetus. Particular concerns include determining
when DMT for MS should be stopped before conception,
whether some agents are safer than others, and which agents
might be safe enough to continue through conception and
pregnancy in people with MS with active disease. More data
are needed examining the risk of return of disease activity
during pregnancy or the postpartum period on the mother’s
long-term disability risk and quality of life with DMT discon-
tinuation during preconception, early pregnancy, or lactation.
More studies are needed to inform decisions about the pos-
sibility of DMT discontinuation, and in which circumstance, if
any, discontinuation poses little or no harm.
Trial designs such as pragmatic clinical trials in clinical pop-
ulations are needed to address treatment variation.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
785
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Author contributions
Dr. Rae-Grant: study concept and design, acquisition of
data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the
manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content, study supervision. Dr. Day: study
concept and design, analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Marrie:
study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or
interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. Dr. Rabinstein: analysis or interpretation of data,
drafting/revising the manuscript. Dr. Cree: study concept
and design, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical re-
vision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
Dr. Gronseth: analysis or interpretation of data, critical re-
vision of the manuscript for important intellectual content,
study supervision. Dr. Haboubi: study concept and design,
analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the
manuscript. J. Halper: study concept and design, drafting/
revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript
for important intellectual content. Dr. Hosey: critical re-
vision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
Dr. Jones: study concept and design, drafting/revising the
manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content. Dr. Lisak: study concept and design,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Pelletier:
study concept and design, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. Dr. Potrebic: study concept and design, acquisition
of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising
the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for im-
portant intellectual content, study supervision. C. Sitcov:
study concept and design, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. R. Sommers: drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. Dr. Stachowiak: study concept and design,
drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. T.S.D.
Getchius: study supervision. S.A. Merillat: drafting/revising
the manuscript, study supervision. Dr. Pringsheim: study
concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or in-
terpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, criti-
cal revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content, study supervision.
Acknowledgment
The authors acknowledge the North American Research
Committee on Multiple Sclerosis (NARCOMS) Registry for
its assistance in administering an outcomes survey, the
results of which were included in this practice guideline.
NARCOMS is supported in part by the Consortium of
Multiple Sclerosis Centers (CMSC) and the Foundation of
the CMSC.
Study funding
This practice guideline was developed with financial sup-
port from the American Academy of Neurology (AAN).
Authors who serve as AAN subcommittee members or as
methodologists (A.R.-G., G.S.D., A.R., G.S.G., M.H., S.P.,
T.P.), or who are or were AAN staff members (T.S.D.G.,
S.A.M.), were reimbursed by the AAN for expenses related
to travel to subcommittee meetings where drafts of manu-
scripts were reviewed. All authors on the panel were re-
imbursed by the AAN for expenses related to travel to 2 in-
person meetings.
Disclosure
A. Rae-Grant receives royalties from 2 textbooks he has
published, 1 on neurology and 1 on multiple sclerosis (MS);
organizes and receives honoraria for grand rounds and neu-
rology review courses; and is local primary investigator for
a clinical trial with MedDay Pharmaceuticals, for which he
receives no personal compensation. A. Rabinstein reports no
disclosures relevant to the manuscript. B. Cree has received
compensation for consulting from AbbVie, Biogen, EMD
Serono,
GeNeuro,
MedImmune,
Novartis,
Shire,
and
Genzyme/Sanofi Aventis; has given expert testimony and
prepared an affidavit for medical malpractice cases (1 or 2 per
year) within his area of expertise; and has acted as consultant
in a legal proceeding for Acorda and Biogen. G. Gronseth
serves as associated editor (level of evidence review) for
Neurology®; serves on the editorial advisory board for Neu-
rology Now; and is compensated by the American Academy of
Neurology (AAN) for methodologic activities. G. Day holds
stock in ANI Pharmaceuticals. M. Haboubi has received travel
reimbursement and honoraria for grand rounds presentations
in Madisonville, KY. J. Halper and J. Hosey report no dis-
closures relevant to the manuscript. D. Jones has received
personal compensation for consulting from Biogen and
Genzyme; has received honoraria from the Consortium of
Multiple Sclerosis Centers (CMSC), the Multiple Sclerosis
Association of America (MSAA), and the Pharmacy Quality
Alliance; has received institutional research support from
Biogen and the National MS Society (NMSS); has received
salary support from the CMSC; and has received travel re-
imbursement from Biogen and Genzyme and from the AAN,
Can Do MS, the CMSC, and the MSAA. R. Lisak served as the
President of the CMSC and serves as a member of the Board
of the DMC Foundation; has served on scientific advisory
boards for Mallinckrodt, Syntimmune, Celegene, and Alex-
ion; serves as chair of the adjudication committee of a clinical
trial (PAREXEL); has received funding for travel from the
CMSC, the GBS/CIDP Foundation International, the
NMSS, and Syntimmune for travel to consultants meetings;
has served as a journal editor for Clinical and Experimental
Neuroimmunology and Clinical Neuropharmacology; has re-
ceived publishing royalties from Willey for International
Neurology: A Clinical Approach; has received honoraria from
Mallinckrodt, Syntimmune, and Teva Pharmaceuticals, and
from
the
consulting
agencies
AlphaSights,
ClearView
786
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Healthcare Partners, GLC, and Insights Consulting; has
served on a speakers bureau for Teva Pharmaceuticals for talks
unrelated to pharmaceuticals; has received research support
from Mallinckrodt for investigator-initiated wet bench stud-
ies, and from Acorda, Avanir, Biogen, Chugai, Genentech,
MedImmune, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceuticals for serving
as a site investigator in multicenter trials; has given expert
testimony, prepared an affidavit, and acted as witness for Teva
Pharmaceuticals; and has acted as an expert on a patent case
for Acorda. Wayne State University has received financial
compensation from the NMSS for his salary as principal in-
vestigator for a research grant. R.A. Marrie receives research
grants from nonprofit organizations, including Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the CMSC, Crohn’s
and Colitis Canada, the NMSS, the Multiple Sclerosis Society
of Canada, the Multiple Sclerosis Scientific Research Foun-
dation, and Research Manitoba; and serves on the editorial
board of Neurology. D. Pelletier has served on scientific ad-
visory boards for Biogen, EMD Serono, Genzyme/Sanofi
Aventis, Hoffman LaRoche, and Novartis; has received re-
search support for Biogen, Genzyme, Hoffman LaRoche, and
the National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke of
the NIH; and has received honoraria for providing consulting
services at scientific advisory board meetings from Biogen,
EMD Serono, Genzyme/Sanofi Aventis, Hoffman LaRoche,
and Novartis. S. Potrebic received an honorarium from CDI
Quality Institute PLE for participation in a headache
appropriate-use criteria panel for imaging; and receives travel
reimbursement from the AAN for attending AAN Residency
In-Service Training Examination Work Group meetings,
AAN Axon Registry Committee meetings, AAN Guideline
Development,
Dissemination,
and
Implementation
Subcommittee meetings, and the Guidelines International
Network North America Evidence-based Guidelines Affecting
Policy, Practice, and Stakeholders (E-GAPPS) conference.
R. Sommers, C. Sitcov, and J. Stachowiak report no disclosures
relevant to the manuscript. T. Getchius is a former AAN
employee and reports no relevant disclosures. S. Merillat
reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. T. Pringsheim
has received research support from the CIHR and Shire Canada
Inc. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.
Disclaimer
Clinical practice guidelines, practice advisories, systematic
reviews, and other guidance published by the American
Academy of Neurology and its affiliates are assessments of
current scientific and clinical information provided as an
educational service. The information (1) should not be con-
sidered inclusive of all proper treatments, methods of care, or
as a statement of the standard of care; (2) is not continually
updated and may not reflect the most recent evidence (new
evidence may emerge between the time information is de-
veloped and when it is published or read); (3) addresses only
the question(s) specifically identified; (4) does not mandate
any particular course of medical care; and (5) is not intended
to substitute for the independent professional judgment of the
treating provider, as the information does not account for
individual variation among people with MS. In all cases, the
selected course of action should be considered by the treating
provider in the context of treating the individual patient. Use
of the information is voluntary. AAN provides this in-
formation on an “as is” basis, and makes no warranty,
expressed or implied, regarding the information. AAN spe-
cifically disclaims any warranties of merchantability or fitness
for a particular use or purpose. AAN assumes no responsibility
for any injury or damage to persons or property arising out of
or related to any use of this information or for any errors or
omissions.
Conflict of interest statement
The American Academy of Neurology is committed to pro-
ducing independent, critical, and truthful clinical practice
guidelines (CPGs). Significant efforts are made to minimize
the potential for conflicts of interest to influence the recom-
mendations of this CPG. To the extent possible, the AAN
keeps separate those who have a financial stake in the success
or failure of the products appraised in the CPGs and the
developers of the guidelines. Conflict of interest forms were
obtained from all authors and reviewed by an oversight
committee prior to project initiation. AAN limits the partic-
ipation of authors with substantial conflicts of interest. The
AAN forbids commercial participation in, or funding of,
guideline projects. Drafts of the guideline have been reviewed
by at least 3 AAN committees, a network of neurologists,
Neurology peer reviewers, and representatives from related
fields. The AAN Guideline Author Conflict of Interest Policy
can be viewed at aan.com. For complete information on this
process, access the 2011 AAN process manual, as amended.3
Received July 12, 2017. Accepted in final form February 15, 2018.
References
1.
Goodin DS, Frohman EM, Garmany GP, et al; on behalf of the American Academy of
Neurology and the MS Council for Clinical Practice Guidelines. Disease-modifying
therapies in multiple sclerosis: subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
and the MS Council for Clinical Practice Guidelines: report of the Therapeutics and
Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and
the MS Council for Clinical Practice Guidelines. Neurology 2002;58:169–178.
2.
Rae-Grant A, Day GS, Marrie RA, et al; for the Guideline Development, Dissemi-
nation, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Comprehensive systematic review summary: disease-modifying therapies for adults
with multiple sclerosis: report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and
Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology
2018;90:789–800.
3.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guideline Process Manual, 2011
ed. [online]. St. Paul, MN: American Academy of Neurology; 2011. Available at: aan.
com/policy-and-guidelines/guidelines/about-guidelines2/.
Accessed
March
12,
2016.
4.
Schofield T, Elwyn G, Edwards A, Visser A. Shared decision making. Patient Educ
Couns 2003;50:229–230.
5.
Johnson J. On receiving the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: managing the transition.
Mult Scler 2003;9:82–88.
6.
Ptacek JT, Eberhardt TL. Breaking bad news: a review of the literature. JAMA 1996;
276:496–502.
7.
Mohr DC, Goodkin DE, Likosky W, et al. Therapeutic expectations of patients with
multiple sclerosis upon initiating interferon beta-1b: relationship to adherence to
treatment. Mult Scler 1996;2:222–226.
8.
Henze T, Rieckmann P, Toyka KV, Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Consensus Group of
the German Multiple Sclerosis Society. Symptomatic treatment of multiple sclerosis:
Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Consensus Group (MSTCG) of the German Multiple
Sclerosis Society. Eur Neurol 2006;56:78–105.
Neurology.org/N
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
787
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 9.
Marrie RA, Horwitz RI. Emerging effects of comorbidities on multiple sclerosis.
Lancet Neurol 2010;9:820–828.
10.
Tettey P, Siejka D, Simpson S Jr, et al. Frequency of comorbidities and their asso-
ciation with clinical disability and relapse in multiple sclerosis. Neuroepidemiology
2016;46:106–113.
11.
EMA confirms recommendations to minimise risk of brain infection PML with
Tysabri [press release]. London: European Medicines Agency; 2016. Available at:
ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Press_release/2016/02/WC500202389.
pdf. Accessed February 26, 2016.
12.
Katsarava Z, Ehlken B, Limmroth V, et al; C.A.R.E. Study Group. Adherence and cost
in multiple sclerosis patients treated with IM IFN beta-1a: impact of the CARE patient
management program. BMC Neurol 2015;15:170.
13.
Irwin DE, Cappell KA, Davis BM, Wu Y, Grinspan A, Gandhi SK. Differences in
multiple sclerosis relapse rates based on patient adherence, average daily dose, and
persistence with disease-modifying therapy: observations based on real-world data.
Value Health 2015;18:A764.
14.
Miller D, Barkhof F, Montalban X, Thompson A, Filippi M. Clinically isolated syn-
dromes suggestive of multiple sclerosis, part 2: non-conventional MRI, recovery
processes, and management. Lancet Neurol 2005;4:341–348.
15.
Abou Zeid N, Bhatti MT. Acute inflammatory demyelinating optic neuritis: evidence-
based visual and neurological considerations. Neurology 2008;14:207–223.
16.
Optic Neuritis Study Group. Multiple sclerosis risk after optic neuritis: final optic
neuritis treatment trial follow-up. Arch Neurol 2008;65:727–732.
17.
Kuhle J, Disanto G, Dobson R, et al. Conversion from clinically isolated syndrome to
multiple sclerosis: a large multicentre study. Mult Scler 2015;21:1013–1024.
18.
Comi G, De Stefano N, Freedman MS, et al. Comparison of two dosing frequencies of
subcutaneous interferon beta-1a in patients with a first clinical demyelinating event
suggestive of multiple sclerosis (REFLEX): a phase 3 randomised controlled trial.
Lancet Neurol 2012;11:33–41.
19.
Miller A, Wolinsky JS, Kappos L, et al; TOPIC Study Group. Oral teriflunomide for
patients with a first clinical episode suggestive of multiple sclerosis (TOPIC): a rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Neurol 2014;13:977–986.
20.
Girouard N, Soucy N. Patient considerations in the management of multiple sclerosis:
development and clinical utility of oral agents. Patient Prefer Adherence 2011;5:101–108.
21.
Brandes DW, Raimundo K, Agashivala N, Kim E. Implications of real-world adherence
on cost-effectiveness analysis in multiple sclerosis. J Med Econ 2013;16:547–551.
22.
Oleen-Burkey MA, Dor A, Castelli-Haley J, Lage MJ. The relationship between al-
ternative medication possession ratio thresholds and outcomes: evidence from the use
of glatiramer acetate. J Med Econ 2011;14:739–747.
23.
Thomas NP, Curkendall S, Farr AM, Yu E, Hurley D. The impact of persistence with
therapy on inpatient admissions and emergency room visits in the US among patients
with multiple sclerosis. J Med Econ 2016;19:497–505.
24.
Singer B, Lucas S, Kresa-Reahl K, Perrin Ross A, Blake P. Review: optimizing
adherence to multiple sclerosis therapies. Int J MS Care 2008;10:113–126.
25.
Treadaway K, Cutter G, Salter A, et al. Factors that influence adherence with disease-
modifying therapy in MS. J Neurol 2009;256:568–576.
26.
Gilenya [package insert]. Gp. Basel, Sweden: Novartis Pharmaceuticals; 2014.
27.
Ocrevus [package insert]. Cp. South San Francisco: Genentech; 2015.
28.
Tysabri [package insert]. Tp. Cambridge, MA: Biogen; 2016.
29.
Zinbryta [package insert]. Zp. Cambridge, MA: Biogen; 2016.
30.
Bove R, Alwan S, Friedman JM, et al. Management of multiple sclerosis during
pregnancy and the reproductive years: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:
1157–1168.
31.
Coyle PK. Management of women with multiple sclerosis through pregnancy and
after childbirth. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 2016;9:198–210.
32.
Leroy C, Rigot JM, Leroy M, et al. Immunosuppressive drugs and fertility. Orphanet J
Rare Dis 2015;10:136.
33.
Cree BA. Update on reproductive safety of current and emerging disease-modifying
therapies for multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 2013;19:835–843.
34.
Ellis R, Boggild M. Therapy-related acute leukaemia with mitoxantrone: what is the
risk and can we minimise it? Mult Scler 2009;15:505–508.
35.
Ellis R, Brown S, Boggild M. Therapy-related acute leukaemia with mitoxantrone: four
years on, what is the risk and can it be limited? Mult Scler 2015;21:642–645.
36.
Fleischer V, Salmen A, Kollar S, et al. Cardiotoxicity of mitoxantrone treatment in
a German cohort of 639 multiple sclerosis patients. J Clin Neurol 2014;10:
289–295.
37.
Le Page E, Leray E, Edan G; French Mitoxantrone Safety Group. Long-term safety
profile of mitoxantrone in a French cohort of 802 multiple sclerosis patients: a 5-year
prospective study. Mult Scler 2011;17:867–875.
38.
Lucchinetti C, Bruck W, Parisi J, Scheithauer B, Rodriguez M, Lassmann H. Het-
erogeneity of multiple sclerosis lesions: implications for the pathogenesis of
demyelination. Ann Neurol 2000;47:707–717.
39.
Confavreux C, Vukusic S. Natural history of multiple sclerosis: a unifying concept.
Brain 2006;129:606–616.
40.
Hutchinson M, Kappos L, Calabresi PA, et al; AFFIRM and SENTINEL
Investigators. The efficacy of natalizumab in patients with relapsing multiple
sclerosis: subgroup analyses of AFFIRM and SENTINEL. J Neurol 2009;256:
405–415.
Seeking Concussion Abstracts by May 7
Submit your concussion research for presentation in general poster sessions during the 2018 Sports Concussion Conference
July 20 through 22 at the JW Marriott in Indianapolis, IN.
Visit AAN.com/view/ConcussionConference.
AAN Wants to Help You with MIPS!
MACRA and the Quality Payment Program and the 2018 Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) performance year
began January 1. The AAN is committed to your success and has tools and resources to help you successfully meet your
performance goals with minimal amount of effort. Take action today and visit AAN.com/view/QPP or email your questions
to macra@aan.com.
788
Neurology | Volume 90, Number 17 | April 24, 2018
Neurology.org/N
Copyright ª 2018 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005347
2018;90;777-788 
Neurology 
Alexander Rae-Grant, Gregory S. Day, Ruth Ann Marrie, et al. 
Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology
with multiple sclerosis: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and 
Practice guideline recommendations summary: Disease-modifying therapies for adults
This information is current as of April 23, 2018
Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/90/17/777.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Supplementary Material
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2018/04/23/90.17.777.DC2
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2018/04/23/90.17.777.DC1
Supplementary material can be found at: 
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/90/17/777.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 34 articles, 2 of which you can access for free at: 
Citations
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/90/17/777.full##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 8 HighWire-hosted articles: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/multiple_sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
Errata
 
/content/92/2/112.full.pdf
 or: 
page
next
An erratum has been published regarding this article. Please see 
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
 CORRECTION
Practice guideline recommendations summary: Disease-modifying
therapies for adults with multiple sclerosis: Report of the Guideline
Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology
Neurology® 2019;92:112. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000006722
In the Special Article “Practice guideline recommendations summary: Disease-modifying
therapies for adults with multiple sclerosis: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemi-
nation, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology” by A. Rae-
Grant et al.,1 there are errors on page 780 of the full article. The Starting: Recommendation 12
Rationale should state “With teriflunomide treatment, there may be a risk of teratogenicity from
male seminal fluid, which could last for 2 years after treatment cessation if the patient is not
treated with adsorption therapy” rather than “With teriflunomide treatment, there may be a risk
of teratogenicity from male sperm, which could last for 2 years after treatment cessation if the
patient is not treated with chelation therapy” as originally published. The authors regret the
errors.
Reference
1.
Rae-Grant A, Day GS, Marrie RA, et al. Practice guideline recommendations summary: disease-modifying therapies for adults with
multiple sclerosis: report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy
of Neurology. Neurology 2018;90:777–788.
112
Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Neurology
Copyright ª 2019 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
