 Public Policy Series
New Opportunities for Funding Dialysis-Dependent
Undocumented Individuals
Rajeev Raghavan
Abstract
The cost of dialysis for the estimated 6500 dialysis-dependent undocumented individuals with kidney failure in the
United States is high, the quality of dialysis care they receive is poor, and their treatment varies regionally. Someregions
use state and matched federal funds to cover regularly scheduled dialysis treatments, while others provide treatment
only inemergent life-threatening conditions.Nephrologistscaring for patients whoreceive emergent dialysis are tasked
with the difficult moral dilemma of determining “who gets dialysis that day.” Without a path to citizenship and by
exclusion from the federal marketplace exchanges, undocumented individuals have limited options for their treatment.
A novel opportunity to provide scheduled dialysis for this population is through the purchase of insurance off the
exchange. Plans purchased off the exchange must still abide by the 2014 provision of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act, which prohibits insurance companies from denying coverage based on a preexisting health
condition. In 2015 and 2016, >100 patients previously receiving only emergent dialysis at the two largest safety-net
hospital systems in Texas obtained off-the-exchange commercial health insurance plans. These undocumented patients
now receive scheduled dialysis treatments, which has improved their care and quality of life, as well as decompressed
the overburdened hospital systems. The long-term sustainability of this option is not known. Socially responsive and
visionary policymakers allowing the move into this bold, new direction deserve special appreciation.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 12: 370–375, 2017. doi: 10.2215/CJN.03680316
“In the long history of humankind (and animal kind,
too) those who learned to collaborate and improvise
most effectively have prevailed.” Charles Darwin
(1809–1892)
Opening Scenario: December 3, 2015
SL is a 49-year-old Kenyan woman with kidney failure
who has been dialysis dependent since 2002. She had
come to Houston in 2001 on a visitor’s visa, with her
husband and 2-year-old son. She became acutely ill
during this visit and was initiated on dialysis. Since
then and for the past 14 years, SL has presented to the
Emergency Department (ED) with uremic symptoms
at least once a week, asking to be dialyzed. Her family
drops her off by 4:30 a.m. The ED screening physician
then makes a decision based on a rudimentary phys-
ical examination and a set of basic screening tests:
serum electrolytes, blood oxygenation, and a 12-lead
electrocardiogram. If she has pronounced hyperkale-
mia (.6.1 meq/L) or hypoxia (oxygen saturation
,92%) due to volume overload, then she is considered
to qualify for one emergent dialysis treatment. Other-
wise, she is sent home and told to return another day.
For now, SL waits patiently in the ED alongside 10–15
other similar patients, all of whom are hoping for one
thing: a single dialysis treatment that day.
Background
Of the 12 million undocumented individuals living
in the United States, an estimated 6500 individuals
have kidney failure requiring chronic dialysis (1).
About 65% of practicing nephrologists in academic
and private centers provide care to these individuals;
much of this service is uncompensated or inade-
quately reimbursed (2). Nephrologists caring for
these patients face unique challenges that include: in-
adequate predialysis care, inability to obtain perma-
nent vascular access, incapability to schedule dialysis
treatments, and powerlessness to provide affordable
access to medications. Although for many patients
dialysis is a bridge to transplantation, sadly, undoc-
umented individuals are often excluded from trans-
plantation despite the fact that several of them are
excellent transplant candidates due to their better
overall health, younger age, and available potential
donors (3).
Public policies to provide health care for noncitizens
began with the Migrant Health Act, signed by President
John F. Kennedy in 1962. This authorized delivery of
health care to the 4.6 million individuals who came to
the United States to provide inexpensive labor following
the Second World War (Figure 1). This act subsequently
led to the development of Federally Qualified Health
Centers. Currently, .1000 such centers provide com-
prehensive primary care to .20 million uninsured or
undocumented individuals annually (4). Unfortunately,
when these individuals develop chronic illnesses that
fall under neither primary nor emergency health care
(such as chemotherapy, joint replacement for severe
arthritis, or dialysis), there is no uniform or rational
solution—only difficult ethical predicaments (5).
Selzman Institute for
Kidney Health and
Section of
Nephrology,
Department of
Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas
Correspondence: Dr.
Rajeev Raghavan,
Section of
Nephrology, Baylor
College of Medicine,
MS BCM 620,
Houston, TX 77030.
Email: rajeevr@bcm.
edu
www.cjasn.org Vol 12 February, 2017
370
Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology
 In 1972, Congress passed Public Law 92–603 amendment
to the Social Security Act, extending ESRD coverage to all
individuals who had (or were the spouse or dependent of
someone who had) worked long enough to qualify for
Social Security benefits (Figure 1). This singular act cover-
ing dialysis and kidney transplantation has led to longer
and more productive lives for millions of Americans. Un-
documented individuals, even those who may have con-
tributed to social security, are excluded from this coverage.
The origin of emergent dialysis stems from amendment
Section 1867 to the Social Security Act (Figure 1). This
amendment, passed in 1986 and referred to as the Emer-
gency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act, requires
that a patient who comes to an ED with an emergent med-
ical condition be provided with treatment (such as dialysis)
until stable or transferred to another hospital. It is under
this provision that undocumented individuals have quali-
fied for emergent dialysis (6).
A major and disconcerting ethical quandary is the
practice of emergent dialysis, which forces care providers
into making difficult and unjustifiable ethical decisions,
such as “who deserves treatment that day.” Nephrologists
caring for this population advocate for their patients often
by bending the rules or “working” the system (7). Pro-
viders and hospital systems are tempted to persuade pa-
tients dependent on dialysis to relocate to another state or
to their home country (repatriation). Although this is often
done with good intent, it separates patients from their
loved ones and communities, while simultaneously strain-
ing existing overburdened health care systems elsewhere.
In some states, notably California, undocumented pa-
tients receive regularly scheduled dialysis treatments that
are covered by state and matched by federal resources
(Medicaid). California chooses to provide dialysis to the
undocumented as a result of the Personal Responsibility
and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, also
referred to as the Welfare Reform Act (Figure 1), the federal
law that allows individual states to decide what outpatient
services to provide noncitizens.
Regional variation has also been influenced by legal action.
In 2002 in Arizona, a trio of undocumented dialysis-
dependent individuals filed suit to overturn a state policy
that disallowed outpatient dialysis for undocumented in-
dividuals (Figure 1). A preliminary injunction was granted,
and in 2007 Arizona restored its policy of providing regu-
larly scheduled outpatient dialysis to undocumented indi-
viduals with kidney failure (8).
Cost of Emergent Dialysis for Undocumented Patients
The cost of patients receiving emergent dialysis in
Houston is nearly four times more than those receiving
scheduled dialysis: $285,000 versus $77,000 per year (9).
Undocumented patients admitted to two safety-net hospi-
tals in New York City to initiate dialysis incurred a 29%
higher cost when compared with United States citizens ad-
mitted for the same reason (10). The Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services classifies such cases as superutiliz-
ers, defined as “a patient who accumulates large number of
ED visits and hospital admissions which might have
been prevented by relatively inexpensive early interven-
tions and primary care.” From 2011 to 2012, 3% of super-
utilizers at the primary safety-net hospital in Denver,
Colorado, accounted for 30% of total charges. Not sur-
prisingly, recipients of emergency dialysis were identi-
fied as superutilizers and their average annual cost
($400,000 per patient) was the highest of the superutilizer
subgroups (11).
In the absence of a federal policy to revise or reform
the 1996 Welfare Reform Act or ratify comprehensive im-
migration reform, nearly all dialysis-dependent undoc-
umented individuals will remain excluded from the
standard avenues of care. Given the current political climate,
the likelihood of such policy changes occurring is minimal.
It is against this backdrop of expensive, local, patchwork
solutions for providing care to a vulnerable population
that an unexpected solution has emerged: private insurance
purchased off the marketplace exchange.
Figure 1. | Timeline of pertinent legislation and events related to dialysis-dependent undocumented immigrants.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 12: 370–375, February, 2017
Insurance for Dialysis-Dependent Undocumented Individuals
371
 Health Insurance for Undocumented Individuals
Requiring Dialysis
Undocumented individuals are ineligible for all federal
insurance programs because they are not legal residents or
citizens of the United States. Approximately 29% of un-
documented individuals acquire private health insurance
through their employer. The remaining 71% comprise a
large portion of the 33 million uninsured individuals in this
country (12). Of the four states with the most undocu-
mented residents (California, Texas, Florida, and New
York), Texas has the highest rate of uninsured undocu-
mented individuals at 75%.
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA; Public Law 111–148) was adopted on March 23,
2010 (Figure 1). As it stands, the ACA marketplace ex-
changes are government sponsored and specifically dis-
allow anyone who is not a legal United States citizen to
purchase insurance. Although there have never been fed-
eral regulations prohibiting the sale of private insur-
ance to undocumented individuals, insurers previously
denied those with certain chronic illnesses from pur-
chasing a commercial insurance plan. Beginning January
1, 2014, Section 2704 of the Public Health Service Act
(added by the ACA; Figure 1), prohibited health plans
and health insurance issuers offering group or individual
health insurance coverage from imposing any preexisting
condition exclusion (13,14). It is this provision that made it
possible for dialysis-dependent undocumented individuals
to purchase insurance plans off the marketplace exchange.
Off-exchange plans can be purchased directly from a
carrier or through an agent or broker. Legal residents rarely
purchase off-exchange ACA plans, since these plans are
ineligible for the government subsidies that significantly
reduce the monthly premiums. The monthly premiums for
most off-exchange plans range from $250 to $900 per
person, a price that varies by state, individual income level,
and by tier of plan purchased. In general, this is pro-
hibitively expensive for undocumented individuals, 40% of
whom have annual incomes that are 138% below the
Federal Poverty Level of ,$16,000 for an individual or
,$34,000 for a family of four. Nearly 81% of the undocu-
mented individuals without health insurance are within
this income range (12).
The American Kidney Fund (AKF) is a publically suppor-
ted, nonprofit organization that provides financial assistance
to cover expenses related to dialysis treatment and CKD pre-
vention programs. The AKF currently assists nearly 93,000
(one in five) patients on dialysis in this country (15). Accord-
ing to their publicly available annual report, the AKF spent
$206 million on direct patient care in 2013 (15). The third
party payment system by the AKF makes it possible for
needy dialysis patients to afford the premiums and retain
their commercial insurance plan. Nearly all of the dialysis-
dependent undocumented individuals with new off-
exchange insurance plans qualify for charitable support
from the AKF due to low income levels. The AKF continues
to provide support as long as the patient remains under the
care of participating dialysis centers, which in turn are fi-
nancial supporters of the AKF. The reimbursement is sent
directly from the third party to the insurance company on
behalf of the needy patient; in some instances, the check
is sent to the patient, who uses this to pay the insurance
premium.
Starting in 2014, major insurance carriers in many
states began to reject third party insurance premium
payments, citing concerns that charitable assistance to
chronically ill individuals skews the marketplace ex-
change risk pool. If major insurance carriers deny patient
assistance from third party payers, such as the AKF, this
will have far-reaching consequences for thousands of
patients on dialysis. The Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) plan to address nonprofit pre-
mium payments in future rulemaking (16).
This occurrence of undocumented dialysis-dependent
individuals purchasing off-exchange insurance was first de-
scribed in Illinois in 2014; and in conversations with ne-
phrologists around the country, it occurs elsewhere but is
neither widely publicized nor utilized (17).
The Texas Experience with Off-Exchange Plans
Parkland Health and Hospital System in Dallas and
Harris Health in Houston represent the two largest safety-
net hospital systems in Texas, and two of the five largest in
the United States (18). Both cities have a large undocu-
mented immigrant population and an already overbur-
dened hospital system. In the Harris Health safety-net
system, undocumented individuals account for 14% of total
operating and up to 25% of uncompensated care costs (19).
Since 2002, the average monthly census of emergent dialy-
sis patients in Houston has been about 90 patients, who
account for about 16 dialysis treatments and up to 15% of
hospital admissions each day. Each patient on emergent
dialysis receives an average of three to four treatments
per month.
The Texas experience with off-exchange plans is new,
but very exciting. During the 2015 open enrollment
period (November of 2014 to February of 2015), .100
undocumented individuals dependent on emergent di-
alysis in Dallas purchased insurance off-exchange. The
purchased commercial plan was through one major in-
surance carrier, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas. Re-
markably, 1 year later, there has been no reported
defaulting on the policies of these patients. In January
of 2016, after learning of this policy, .30 undocu-
mented emergent dialysis-dependent individuals in
Houston, including SL, were enrolled in the same
plan. In both cities, all patients were placed in Fresenius
Medical Care dialysis units close to their homes. Many
of these patients, like SL, had been receiving infrequent
dialysis treatments for years. Because open enrollment
typically occurs between November and February, all
remaining emergent dialysis patients as well as new
undocumented patients that commence dialysis in
2016 will only receive emergent treatments until the
2017 open enrollment period. However, patients may en-
roll in a plan off-cycle with the occurrence of certain
life events, such as marriage or loss of current employer-
based insurance.
Table 1 details the improvement in processes of care among
the 32 Houston patients who began to receive scheduled di-
alysis between December 1, 2015 and February 1, 2016. The
significant reduction in blood transfusions, ED visits, and
372
Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology
 days admitted represent major cost savings to the county
hospital system. In personal communication with several
newly insured patients, their quality of life is now vastly im-
proved.
To cite this experience with one example: EL is a 56-year-
old man who had been on emergent dialysis since 2013. In a
3-month period between September 1, 2015 and December
1, 2015, he was admitted to the hospital three times,
incurred 26 ED visits, and received four blood transfusions.
After being enrolled in the new program in January of 2016,
he has been receiving dialysis thrice weekly at an out-
patient dialysis unit. In the 3 months following this change
(February 1, 2016 to May 1, 2016), he has had zero admis-
sions, ED visits, or blood transfusions. His current hemo-
globin level is 11.2 g/dl due to regular treatment with
erythropoietin stimulating agents. In his own words, “Tengo
mucha más energía. Por primera vez en a~
nos, me siento casi
normal” (I have so much more energy. For the first time
in years, I feel almost normal).
Approximately 90% of the patients in Dallas and
Houston who have taken advantage of this option
receive in-center hemodialysis; the remainder have
chosen peritoneal dialysis or home hemodialysis.
Some vascular surgeons in the community accept these
plans and have placed fistulas in patients previously
dialyzing with a tunneled cuffed catheter. In communi-
cation with representatives from the dialysis organiza-
tion, the negotiated reimbursement in Texas with this
policy varies between $350 and $500 per treatment. The
unadjusted published Medicare rate in 2014 was $240
per treatment (20).
Sustainability of Commercial Insurance Coverage for
this Population
Insurance coverage for the very sick is based on the prin-
ciple that large numbers of healthy individuals are in the
risk pool and pay premiums. If individuals with advanced
kidney disease disproportionately purchase a particular
insurance plan that covers dialysis, then an insurer may
stop offering, limit the product, or raise rates to cover the
costs of dialysis. The purchase of off-exchange plans by
undocumented individuals to cover dialysis services is a
novel and creative solution to the national problem but is
susceptible to market changes. Its sustainability will need to
stand the test of time.
Undocumented individuals in Texas have been able to
purchase insurance because enrollment in these specific
plans did not require any of the following documenta-
tion: a valid work visa, passport, or social security
number. Though the ACA is a federal policy, its legis-
lation was based on 2006 health reform initiated in
Massachusetts. Bulletin 2011–19 from the Division of In-
surance (DOI) in Massachusetts explicitly states, “Car-
riers shall not refuse to issue or renew coverage to an
applicant or a member solely because an applicant or
member chooses not to provide a social security num-
ber” (21). The DOI in each state regulates all fully in-
sured plans. An individual carrier has discretion in its
underwriting guidelines to change or remove a policy,
but such decision could face repercussions at the state
level by the DOI. Fully insured policies are guaranteed
for either a 6- or 12-month period; if an insurer does not
renew the policy at the conclusion of this period, the patient
is tasked with finding another policy.
For example, in 2015, the off-exchange policy purchased
by the undocumented patients in Dallas was a Preferred
Provider Organization plan. This policy was not available
for new or renewing patients in 2016. Hence, patients en-
rolled into a Health Maintenance Organization plan offered
by the same carrier that had a more limited choice in pro-
viders and services due to contractual agreements. Vigi-
lance and creativity by dialysis facility administrators and
social workers are essential for the continued coverage of
these new plans.
Administrators at these dialysis units remain appre-
hensive that these policies could be terminated at any
time. Two examples from personal experience that
Table 1.
Significant reduction in care utilization after insuring dialysis-dependent undocumented individuals in Houston, Texas
Background
September 1, 2015 to May 1, 2016
No. of patients
32
Average age (years)
43.6
Hispanic (%)
97
Men (%)
59
Time on emergent dialysis
1.4 yr (511 d)
Processes of carea
September 1 to December 1, 2015
February 1 to May 1, 2016
Emergency Department visitsb
596
5
Total days hospitalized
101
19
Number of blood transfusions
33
3
Thirty two undocumented dialysis-dependent individuals previously receiving emergent dialysis obtained commercial health in-
surance and began to receive scheduled, maintenance hemodialysis on February 1, 2016. This resulted in a statistically significant
reduction in utilization of Harris Health hospital resources. All comparisons are statistically significant (P value ,0.05) using inverted
b-binomial comparison testing.
aInsurance was obtained between December 15, 2015 and January 22, 2016. All 32 patients received only emergent dialysis for the 3
months preceding December 1, 2015.
bOnly includes Emergency Department visits related to dialysis or anemia.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 12: 370–375, February, 2017
Insurance for Dialysis-Dependent Undocumented Individuals
373
 threaten sustainability of this option for the undocu-
mented population are: (1) the policies of nine of the 32
Houston patients did not begin to pay for dialysis treat-
ments until 3 months after the enrollment date, hence,
the dialysis center absorbed the cost during this time;
and (2) if the premiums were not received by the insur-
ance company due to third party processing delays or
the patient retaining the money and not sending pay-
ment, the policy was terminated.
For now, this has been a life-changing experience for
these patients who describe feeling like they are “en un
sueno” (in a dream) from which they are afraid to wake up.
Finally, there is concern over undocumented patients’
continued purchase of commercial plans to receive sched-
uled dialysis, particularly if dialysis centers and hospital
systems currently providing charity or Medicaid-funded
treatments decide to coerce their undocumented patients
to obtain private coverage. If so, large numbers of chron-
ically ill patients enrolling in one particular off-exchange
plan could threaten its sustainability. One solution that has
been proposed to this eventuality in California is the cre-
ation of a separate exchange specifically for undocu-
mented individuals (22).
If these policies are no longer available for purchase or
renewal in the 2017 enrollment period, what will be the
ethical responsibility and moral commitment of the dial-
ysis unit to continue providing dialysis treatments to their
patient? The answer to these concerns is the reason for an
urgent, sustainable solution to this national problem.
Conclusions
The United States is a nation of immigrants. Undoc-
umented individuals are members of the community in
which they live and there is a moral and fiscal obligation
to provide them with adequate health care. As our nation
scrutinizes its health care system and wrestles with
immigration reform, the care of undocumented individ-
uals with chronic diseases epitomizes the crux of the
proposed national agendas. The burden has traditionally
been shouldered by hospital systems in large cities,
particularly those in close proximity to our southern
border. Without a path to citizenship and by exclusion
from the ACA marketplace exchanges, undocumented
individuals have limited options. Herein, the novel
ability to purchase private insurance off the marketplace
exchange shifts costs away from overburdened hospital
systems and provides a more humane way to treat
dialysis-dependent undocumented individuals. The
Texas experience has alleviated serious ethical dilemmas;
it has been positive and rewarding to both patients and
nephrologists. While economics and politics at both local
and national levels will determine the long-term sus-
tainability of this option, policymakers allowing the
move into this bold, new direction deserve special
thanks.
Closing Scenario: February 1, 2016
SL now receives scheduled hemodialysis, three times a
week at a for-profit outpatient dialysis center that is con-
veniently located near her home. As of May 1, 2016, SL has
neither visited the ED nor been hospitalized. With her new
dialysis schedule, she is now able to provide better care for
her family, intends to resume working, and now lives a life
that is closer to normalcy and not governed by her agoniz-
ing ED visits.
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Ms. Sharon Philips and Ms. Lakeesha Charles,
Licensed Master Social Worker (LMSW) of Parkland Health and
Hospital System in Dallas; and Ms. Virginia Manuel, LMSW-
Advanced Practice of Harris Health for information used in this
manuscript; and Dr. Jingbo Niu of the Baylor College of Medicine,
Section of Nephrology, for statistical analysis.
Disclosures
R.R. did not receive any financial support.
References
1. Rodriguez RA: Dialysis for undocumented immigrants in the
United States. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 22: 60–65, 2015
2. Hurley L, Kempe A, Crane LA, Davidson A, Pratte K, Linas S,
Dickinson LM, Berl T: Care of undocumented individuals with
ESRD: a national survey of US nephrologists. Am J Kidney Dis 53:
940–949, 2009
3. Linden EA, Cano J, Coritsidis GN: Kidney transplantation in un-
documented immigrants with ESRD: a policy whose time has
come? Am J Kidney Dis 60: 354–359, 2012
4. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Health Center
Program. Available at: http://bphc.hrsa.gov/index.html.
Accessed March 31, 2016
5. DuBard CA, Massing MW: Trends in emergency Medicaid ex-
penditures for recent and undocumented immigrants. JAMA 297:
1085–1092, 2007
6. Raghavan R: When access to chronic dialysis is limited: one
center’s approach to emergent hemodialysis. Semin Dial 25:
267–271, 2012
7. Berlinger N, Raghavan R: The ethics of advocacy for un-
documented patients. Hastings Cent Rep 43: 14–17, 2013
8. Arizona Disability Law: Padilla v. Biedess & Thompson. Available
at: http://www.azdisabilitylaw.org/Padilla.html. Accessed March
24, 2016
9. Sheikh-Hamad D, Paiuk E, Wright AJ, Kleinmann C, Khosla U,
Shandera WX: Care for immigrants with end-stage renal disease
in Houston: a comparison of two practices. Tex Med 103: 54–58,
53, 2007
10. Coritsidis GN, Khamash H, Ahmed SI, Attia AM, Rodriguez P,
Kiroycheva MK, Ansari N: The initiation of dialysis in un-
documented aliens: the impact on a public hospital system. Am J
Kidney Dis 43: 424–432, 2004
11. Johnson TL, Rinehart DJ, Durfee J, Brewer D, Batal H, Blum J,
Oronce CI, Melinkovich P, Gabow P: For many patients who
use large amounts of health care services, the need is
intense yet temporary. Health Aff (Millwood) 34: 1312–1319,
2015
12. Capps R, Bachmeier JD, Fix M, Van Hook JA: Demographic,
Socioeconomic, and Health Coverage Profile of Undocumented
Immigrants in the United States, Washington, DC, Migration
Policy Institute, 2013
13. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Health Care
Laws and Regulations. Available at: http://www.hhs.gov/
regulations/. Accessed on March 31, 2016
14. Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury; Employee
Benefits Securitiy Administration, Department of Labor; Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department of Health and
Human Services: Final Rules for Grandfathered Plans, Preexisting
Condition Exclusions, Lifetime and Annual Limits, Rescissions,
Dependent Coverage, Appeals, and Patient Protections Under
the Affordable Care Act. Final rules. Fed Regist 80: 72191–72294,
2015
15. American Kidney Fund: Available at: http://www.kidneyfund.
org. Accessed June 1, 2016
374
Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology
 16. Insurers Want to Limit American Kidney Fund Charitable As-
sistance to Patients: Nephrology News and Issues. Available at:
http://www.nephrologynews.com/insurers-want-to-limit-
american-kidney-fund-charitable-assistance-to-patients/.
Accessed May 10, 2016
17. Ansell D, Pallok K, Guzman MD, Flores M, Oberholzer J: Illinois
law opens door to kidney transplants for undocumented immi-
grants. Health Aff (Millwood) 34: 781–787, 2015
18. Zaman OS, Cummings LC, Laycox S: America’s Safety Net
Hospitals and Health Systems Report, Washington, DC, National
Association of Public Hospitals, 2010
19. Wallace SP
, Torres J, Sadegh-Nobari T, Pourat N, Brown
ER: Undocumented Immigrants and Health Care Reform,
Los Angeles, CA, UCLA Center for Health Policy Research, 2012
20. Center for Medicare Services: ESRD Prospective Payment System.
Available at: https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/
Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/downloads/End-
Stage_Renal_Disease_Prospective_Payment_System_ICN905143.
pdf. Accessed May 13, 2016
21. Massachusetts Division of Insurance: Bulletin 2011-19 Open
Enrollment for Individuals in Insured Health Benefit Plans, Boston,
Office of Consumer Affairs and Business Regulations, 2011.
22. Joseph TD: What health care reform means for immigrants:
comparing the affordable care act and Massachusetts health re-
forms. J Health Polit Policy Law 41: 101–116, 2016
Published online ahead of print. Publication date available at www.
cjasn.org.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 12: 370–375, February, 2017
Insurance for Dialysis-Dependent Undocumented Individuals
375
