 October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e336
BACKGROUND: Although public health programs have led to a substantial decrease 
in the prevalence of tobacco smoking, the adverse health effects of tobacco smoke 
exposure are by no means a thing of the past. In the United States, 4 of 10 school-
aged children and 1 of 3 adolescents are involuntarily exposed to secondhand 
tobacco smoke (SHS), with children of minority ethnic backgrounds and those living 
in low-socioeconomic-status households being disproportionately affected (68% 
and 43%, respectively). Children are particularly vulnerable, with little control over 
home and social environment, and lack the understanding, agency, and ability to 
avoid SHS exposure on their own volition; they also have physiological or behavioral 
characteristics that render them especially susceptible to effects of SHS. Side-
stream smoke (the smoke emanating from the burning end of the cigarette), a major 
component of SHS, contains a higher concentration of some toxins than mainstream 
smoke (inhaled by the smoker directly), making SHS potentially as dangerous as or 
even more dangerous than direct smoking. Compelling animal and human evidence 
shows that SHS exposure during childhood is detrimental to arterial function and 
structure, resulting in premature atherosclerosis and its cardiovascular consequences. 
Childhood SHS exposure is also related to impaired cardiac autonomic function and 
changes in heart rate variability. In addition, childhood SHS exposure is associated 
with clustering of cardiometabolic risk factors such as obesity, dyslipidemia, and 
insulin resistance. Individualized interventions to reduce childhood exposure to SHS 
are shown to be at least modestly effective, as are broader-based policy initiatives 
such as community smoking bans and increased taxation.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this statement is to summarize the available evidence 
on the cardiovascular health consequences of childhood SHS exposure; this will support 
ongoing efforts to further reduce and eliminate SHS exposure in this vulnerable 
population. This statement reviews relevant data from epidemiological studies, 
laboratory-based experiments, and controlled behavioral trials concerning SHS and 
cardiovascular disease risk in children. Information on the effects of SHS exposure on the 
cardiovascular system in animal and pediatric studies, including vascular disruption and 
platelet activation, oxidation and inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, increased vascular 
stiffness, changes in vascular structure, and autonomic dysfunction, is examined.
CONCLUSIONS: The epidemiological, observational, and experimental evidence 
accumulated to date demonstrates the detrimental cardiovascular consequences 
of SHS exposure in children.
IMPLICATIONS: Increased awareness of the adverse, lifetime cardiovascular 
consequences of childhood SHS may facilitate the development of innovative individual, 
family-centered, and community health interventions to reduce and ideally eliminate 
SHS exposure in the vulnerable pediatric population. This evidence calls for a robust 
public health policy that embraces zero tolerance of childhood SHS exposure.
Geetha Raghuveer, MD, 
MPH, FAHA, Chair
David A. White, PhD
Laura L. Hayman, PhD, 
FAHA
Jessica G. Woo, PhD
Juan Villafane, MD, FAHA
David Celermajer, MD, 
FAHA
Kenneth D. Ward, PhD
Sarah D. de Ferranti, MD, 
MPH
Justin Zachariah, MD, 
FAHA, Vice-Chair
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Committee on Athero-
sclerosis, Hyperten-
sion, and Obesity in the 
Young of the Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young; Behavior 
Change for Improving 
Health Factors Com-
mittee of the Council on 
Lifestyle and Cardio-
metabolic Health and 
Council on Epidemiol-
ogy and Prevention; and 
Stroke Council
Cardiovascular Consequences of Childhood 
Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure: Prevailing 
Evidence, Burden, and Racial and Socioeconomic 
Disparities
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2016 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words:  AHA Scientific 
Statement ◼ atherosclerosis  
◼ blood vessels ◼ child ◼ tobacco 
smoke pollution
AHA SCiEnTiFiC STATEmEnT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e337
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
O
ver the past 50 years, healthcare providers and 
public health professionals in the United States have 
increased awareness of the health risks associated 
with smoking tobacco. In 1964, ≈40% of adults in the Unit-
ed States were smokers, one third being women.1 Although 
the percentage of US adults who smoke tobacco has de-
creased to an estimated 18%, >45 million US adults still 
smoke cigarettes,2 with ≈500 
000 dying each year of to-
bacco smoke–related illnesses, and millions of children are 
involuntarily exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke (SHS) 
in the household or during transportation.3 Recent reports 
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show 
disparities in SHS between children and adults of different 
socioeconomic statuses (SESs).3 Youth and adults of a 
lower SES have more SHS exposure than youth and adults 
of a higher SES.3 Children 3 to 11 years old have the high-
est exposure to SHS, particularly children of minority ethnic 
backgrounds. Direct tobacco smoking in the United States 
has been estimated to result in $97 billion in medical costs 
annually,4 and SHS exposure is reported to be associated 
with up to $6.6 billion in lost productivity each year.5 Ciga-
rette smoke is a potent atherosclerosis-promoting risk fac-
tor. Atherosclerosis can begin as early as the first decade 
of life and is often mediated by risk factors such as obesity, 
dyslipidemia, hypertension, and insulin resistance, in addi-
tion to history of tobacco use.6,7 Several studies have also 
linked SHS exposure to accelerated atherosclerosis.8–13
SHS is a mixture of gases and particles that emit 
from a burning tobacco product (eg, a cigarette, cigar, 
or pipe) or from smoke that has been exhaled by an 
individual actively smoking tobacco.14,15 The scope of 
SHS exposure can span the life cycle, beginning in utero 
with exposure to maternal direct smoking or maternal 
SHS. SHS consists of hundreds of noxious particles, 
chemicals, and gases, including nicotine, total aerosol 
residue known as tar, which itself is composed of many 
volatile and semivolatile organic chemicals, carbon mon-
oxide, ammonia, dimethylnitrosamine, formaldehyde, 
hydrogen cyanide, and acrolein.16 Exposure to SHS is 
associated with an increased prevalence of respira-
tory infections, an increased frequency and severity of 
asthma exacerbations, and a greater risk of sudden in-
fant death syndrome (SIDS).14,17 Although the pulmonary 
consequences of SHS exposure are clinically apparent in 
childhood, the cardiovascular effects of SHS exposure 
are occult but long-lasting and substantial. Existing evi-
dence suggests that SHS exposure in children and youth 
is detrimental to their cardiovascular health and that 
consequences attributable to SHS exposure may persist 
into adult life.18 Although toxins in SHS-exposed environ-
ments are diluted compared with their concentration in 
inhaled (mainstream) smoke, some studies speculate 
that SHS exposure may as harmful as or more harmful to 
cardiovascular health than direct cigarette use because 
of longer exposure periods and persisting or evolving 
residual toxins than can promote inflammation, oxida-
tion, and vascular dysfunction as SHS in the environment 
ages.8,19–21 Furthermore, there is substantial evidence 
that SHS has adverse cardiovascular consequences as 
early as the first decade of life, including when the fe-
tus is exposed to maternal smoking or maternal SHS in 
utero and in children who have no other atherosclerosis-
promoting risk factors.22–24
Children of smoking parents are significantly more 
likely to be exposed to SHS25 and are more likely to 
smoke tobacco later in life. This may be associated with 
many interrelated factors, including SHS exposure it-
self,3,26,27 parental modeling,28,29 or physical sensitivities 
to SHS.30 However, recent studies suggest that SHS in 
childhood is an independent factor in susceptibility to 
smoking initiation,31 that home smoking bans may delay 
or prevent smoking initiation among children of smok-
ers,32 and conversely that SHS exposure may be a medi-
ating factor making adolescent quitting less likely within 
the context of a smoking family.25 Thus, childhood SHS 
exposure may also have indirect impacts on lifetime car-
diovascular health by increasing the likelihood that SHS-
exposed children will choose to smoke in adolescence 
and adulthood.
In the past 2 decades since the last publication of 
an American Heart Association statement concern-
ing the health of children exposed to SHS,33 there has 
been substantial evolution of epidemiological and clini-
cal research related to SHS. This statement updates 
previous statements with recent data concerning SHS 
and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk in children. This 
document emphasizes the adverse effects of SHS on 
cardiovascular health in children and includes discus-
sions on mechanisms of vascular disruption and platelet 
activation, oxidation and inflammation as noted in ani-
mal studies, human endothelial dysfunction, increased 
vascular stiffness, autonomic dysfunction, and changes 
in vascular structure. The effectiveness and limitations 
of currently available behavior modification techniques 
and smoking bans to reduce SHS exposure in children 
are also addressed. The purpose of this statement is to 
increase awareness among providers and policy makers 
of the substantial SHS exposure that continues to be 
prevalent in children and its lifetime, adverse cardiovas-
cular consequence.
EPiDEmiOLOGy OF SHS ExPOSURE
Prevalence of SHS Exposure in Children
Approximately 24 million nonsmoking children and ado-
lescents in the United States are currently exposed to 
SHS.3 Nationally representative data from 2011 to 2012 
NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur-
vey) show that nearly 41% of children 3 to 11 years of 
age and 34% of adolescents 12 to 19 years of age had 
detectable serum cotinine levels (>0.05 ng/mL), which 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e338
is consistent with exposure to SHS.3 Cotinine, a metabo-
lite of nicotine found in biological fluids, is a commonly 
used marker of tobacco smoke exposure.34 These SHS 
exposure estimates represent a substantial reduction in 
prevalence since the NHANES III survey from 1988 to 
199435 (Figure 1). The majority of this decline in SHS 
exposure in children appears to have occurred by the 
early 2000s,35,37,38 with a relative leveling off in the past 
decade.37 However, a national sample of nonsmoking 
middle school– and high school–aged adolescents who 
self-reported exposure to SHS revealed declines in SHS 
from 59% to 34% between 2000 and 2009.39 Despite 
these significant declines in children and adolescents 
exposed to SHS over the past 30 years, the prevalence 
remains strikingly high, with ≈1 in 3 children in the United 
States still exposed to SHS.
These declining trends in SHS exposure among chil-
dren, however, are not consistent worldwide. A recent 
study of SHS exposure in rural areas of China identified 
that 68% of children were exposed to SHS at home and 
that exposure prevalence was amplified in households 
with low income or low educational status of the head 
of household.40 The prevalence of adult SHS exposure is 
≈35% in Shanghai but was surprisingly higher in house-
holds with children <18 years of age.41 A 43-country 
report of the World Health Organization’s Global Youth 
Tobacco Survey of children 13 to 15 years of age was 
released in 2002.42 Home SHS exposure in this age 
group exceeded 70% in 6 sites in India, was 69% in In-
donesia, and was a median of 49% across all surveys.42 
Updated nationwide representative data from India in 
2009 were lower at 22%, but data remained high in In-
donesia in 2014 (57%).43,44 Although public smoke-free 
bans were instituted in 2007 in Hong Kong and in 2011 
in China, evidence from Hong Kong indicates that smok-
ing bans have displaced smoking from public to private 
spaces, including the home, increasing home SHS ex-
posure in children.45 Thus, childhood exposure to SHS 
both at home and in public places remains significant in 
many countries worldwide, particularly in South Asia and 
East Asia. Results from a recent systematic review of 
SHS exposure and CVD reaffirm these findings, confirm-
ing a high prevalence of SHS exposure in both low- and 
middle-income countries.46
Smoking inside the Home
It has long been recognized that parental smoking is a 
major source of SHS exposure for nonsmoking children 
and adolescents.17 Children have less control over home 
and social environments, leading to an increased likeli-
hood of involuntary, confined exposure to SHS. These 
developmental barriers, combined with physiological dif-
ferences from adults discussed later,47 reflect that non-
smoking children have significantly higher measurable 
exposure to SHS than nonsmoking adults.38
The proportion of children 3 to 11 years of age liv-
ing with someone who smokes inside the home declined 
from 38% in 1994 to 1998 to 24% in 1999 to 200435 
to 18% in 2007 to 2008,36 with similar declines seen 
among nonsmoking adolescents (35%, 20%, and 17%, 
respectively). This is consistent with the secular decline in 
overall adult smoking prevalence, as well as an increase 
in voluntary smoke-free home rules.48 These reductions 
in smoking inside the home contribute substantially to 
the overall decline in childhood SHS exposure. However, 
youth who remain in smoking home environments still 
face near-certain SHS exposure.
Epidemiological studies report that >98% of children 
and adolescents living with someone who smokes at 
home have detectable SHS exposure,36 a proportion that 
has not appreciably declined since 1988.49 However, 
when the data of at-home SHS exposure35,36,49 are com-
bined with data on overall prevalence of SHS exposure 
among children,35,36 we estimate that only 1 in 3 SHS-
exposed youth has exposure within the home environ-
ment (Figure 2A and 2B), suggesting that the majority of 
children and adolescents with detectable SHS exposure 
are exposed outside their home or in an automobile. This 
is consistent with a study of inner-city youth in which 
95% reported SHS exposure outside the home, often in 
relatives’ or friends’ homes or in cars.50 Although both in-
home and in-car smoking bans are associated with less 
SHS exposure in children,51 71% of smoking parents did 
not report having a smoke-free car policy, and only a 
third of parents who enforced a strict in-home smoking 
ban also enforced a smoking ban in the car.52 This is 
especially important because SHS in a car can be signifi-
cant, even with the windows open.53,54
Figure 1. Trends in secondhand smoke (SHS) exposure 
among US nonsmoking children and adolescents.
Data were compiled from NHANES (National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey) periodic survey data.3,35,36 Solid 
line indicates children 3 to 11 years of age; and dashed line, 
adolescents 12 to 19 years of age.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e339
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
SHS Exposure Trends, Demographics,  
and Socioeconomics
Although there has been a reduction in overall SHS ex-
posure, racial disparities persist.3 There is some indica-
tion that the metabolism of toxins derived from SHS dif-
fers by race. For a given amount of exposure, cotinine 
levels may be higher in blacks.55 NHANES data suggest 
that 31 million non-Hispanic white nonsmokers were 
exposed to SHS in 2011 to 2012, including 7 million 
children. Additionally, 12 million non-Hispanic black non-
smokers were exposed to SHS, including 3 million chil-
dren, and 6 million Hispanic nonsmokers were exposed 
to SHS, including 2 million children, during the same 
time period. Specifically, the prevalence of SHS expo-
sure declined comparably from 1999 to 2000 to 2011 
to 2012 among non-Hispanic white children (−41%) and 
Hispanic children (−39%).3 The decline observed among 
non-Hispanic black children, however, was substantially 
less (−20%; Figure 3). During 2011 to 2012, SHS expo-
sure in 3- to 11-year-old children was significantly higher 
among non-Hispanic blacks (68%) than non-Hispanic 
whites (37%) and Hispanics (30%; P< 0.05). Prevalence 
of SHS exposure in adolescents 12 to 19 years of age 
was also significantly higher among non-Hispanic blacks 
(55%) than non-Hispanic whites (36%) and Hispanics 
(17%; Figure 4).3 Thus, although cotinine metabolism 
differs by race, higher cotinine levels in blacks also may 
be attributable to increased exposure to SHS.
In addition to differences in SHS exposure by race/eth-
nicity, there are significant differences by SES. NHANES 
data from 2011 to 2012 indicate that individuals living 
below the poverty level have greater exposure to SHS 
(43%) than those living above the poverty level (21%).3 
By education, SHS exposure was highest among indi-
viduals with grade 11 or less education (28%) and lowest 
among those with a college or graduate diploma (12%). 
Exposure to SHS was higher among individuals who rent-
ed their housing (37%) than individuals who owned hous-
ing (19%). Importantly, the prevalence of voluntary home 
smoking bans was significantly lower for households 
with low income, a single parent, or lower educational at-
tainment.56 Many individuals with low SES live in multiunit 
housing where SHS can infiltrate smoke-free units and 
areas shared by others who smoke. Recent estimates 
indicate that 80 million individuals in the United States 
live in multiunit housing, and ≈25% of these individuals 
are below the poverty level.57 The living environment is 
recognized as a setting where substantial exposure to 
SHS occurs for children and youth.58 There is scientific 
evidence to support efforts designed to prohibit smok-
ing in commonly shared areas in subsidized housing.56,57
A recent systematic review generated from 41 studies 
across 21 countries adds to the NHANES findings indicat-
Figure 2. Prevalence and estimated source of secondhand smoke (SHS) exposure in nonsmoking (A) US children 
3 to 11 years of age and (B) US adolescents 12 to 19 years of age by nHAnES (national Health and nutrition 
Examination Survey) study years. 
Data for these figures were compiled from NHANES periodic survey data. Overall SHS exposure is presented as NHANES esti-
mated prevalence of SHS exposure by age group.35,36 To then estimate home-specific exposure, the proportion of nonsmoking 
children or adolescents living with a smoker at home35,36 was multiplied by the proportion of these children (0.98) with detect-
able cotinine levels36,49; the remainder of SHS exposure was assumed not to be in the home. Black indicates no SHS exposure 
(inside or outside of the home); light gray, SHS exposure in the home; and dark gray, SHS exposure outside the home.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e340
ing that parental smoking, low SES, and lower education 
are frequently and consistently associated with SHS expo-
sure in children and youth.59 The significance of sociodemo-
graphic factors is also supported by data from Denmark,60 
the United Kingdom,61 and Australia.62 More recently, longi-
tudinal studies have focused on the effects of in utero SHS 
exposure on developmental and health outcomes in child-
hood, adolescence, and young adulthood,63–65 showing that 
these adversities also are disproportionately prevalent in 
minorities and lower-SES groups. Taken together, these 
findings continue to underscore the importance of sociode-
mographic factors, including household SES, educational 
levels of parents/guardians, and the home environment, 
in increasing the likelihood of childhood SHS exposure.
influence of SHS Exposure on Childhood Obesity, 
Dyslipidemia, and the metabolic Syndrome
An area of emphasis has been the deleterious effect of in 
utero SHS exposure on body weight status. The overall 
pattern appears to be one of lower weight at birth and 
larger postnatal weight gain, which is recognized to pre-
dict future obesity. Supporting this, data show that in ute-
ro exposure to tobacco smoke has obesogenic effects.66 
Results from the longitudinal Healthy Start Study suggest 
that in utero exposure to SHS is associated with intrauter-
ine growth retardation and rapid postnatal compensatory 
growth.63 Specifically, at birth, those exposed to in utero 
SHS had reduced fat mass (P=0.007) and fat-free mass 
(P=0.02). However, at 5 months of age, exposed and un-
exposed offspring were phenotypically similar in overall 
weight, length, and body composition. After adjustment 
for birth weight, offspring exposed to in utero SHS had 
greater fat mass (P=0.04) and fat-free mass (P=0.04), 
suggesting postnatal compensatory growth.63
The National Institute of Child Health and Human De-
velopment Study, a longitudinal study that followed up a 
cohort of children from birth, examined the long-term ef-
fect of either in utero SHS resulting from maternal smok-
ing or exposure of the nonsmoking pregnant mother 
to SHS from a partner or other household member on 
obesity among offspring at adolescence, independent-
Figure 3. Decline in secondhand 
smoke (SHS) exposure prevalence 
in US children from 1999 to 2000 
to 2011 to 2012 by race (nHAnES 
[national Health and nutrition 
Examination Survey] data).
Figure 4. Secondhand smoke 
(SHS) exposure prevalence in  
US children by age and race 
(nHAnES [national Health and  
nutrition Examination Survey] 
data 2011–2012).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e341
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
ly of birth weight.65 After adjustment for maternal and 
child factors, the odds of adolescent obesity increased 
with both in utero SHS exposure (odds ratio, 1.57; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 1.03–2.39) and exposure of 
the pregnant mother to SHS (odds ratio, 1.53; 95% CI, 
1.04–2.27). Furthermore, the odds for obesity in adoles-
cence increased 2-fold among adolescents exposed to 
any in utero SHS (odds ratio, 2.10; 95% CI, 1.24–3.56) 
compared with those without in utero SHS exposure.65
The Southern California Children’s Health Study collect-
ed data on current SHS exposure and maternal smoking 
during pregnancy on 3318 children who were ≈10 years 
of age at study entry. Both in utero SHS exposure and 
current SHS exposure were associated with greater sub-
sequent body mass index over an 8-year period spanning 
from adolescence through young adulthood.67 Maternal 
smoking during pregnancy has been reported to result in 
a 60% greater chance of the child being overweight at 4 
years of age.68 A Swedish cohort study of 5- to 15-year-
old children has suggested that parental smoking is 
associated with a 3% to 4% body mass index increase 
in children compared with control subjects.69 In a large 
study of German children, SHS exposure after birth was 
significantly associated with overweight status at 6 years 
of age.64 The mechanisms behind this association are not 
well understood. Taken together, results of these studies 
suggest adverse effects of SHS exposure, including in 
utero exposure on body mass index, in children.
Although the findings are not consistent, some stud-
ies suggest that SHS exposure may have an adverse 
effect on lipid metabolism. In utero SHS exposure was 
associated with lower high-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol levels in children, even after adjustment for 
postnatal SHS exposure.70,71 Another study noted that 
apolipoprotein B was lower in SHS-exposed teenagers 
compared with control subjects.72 Furthermore, an ex 
vivo study performed in healthy nonsmokers exposed 
to SHS for 5.5 hours suggested that exposure led to 
lipid peroxidation, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-C) modification, and accumulation of LDL-C in 
macrophages.73 Research findings on the effect of 
SHS exposure on blood pressure show more inconsis-
tencies and are less well studied, although an increase 
in blood pressure in those exposed to SHS has been 
reported.22 SHS exposure is clustered with other ath-
erosclerosis-promoting risk factors and the metabolic 
syndrome in adolescents.74
Summary 
Epidemiology of childhood SHS exposure:
• Up to 4 of 10 children have detectable cotinine.
• Parental smoking is a major source of SHS expo-
sure in childhood.
• Nearly all children living with someone who smokes 
is exposed to SHS.
• SHS exposure is highest in black youth in the 
United States.
• SHS exposure is inversely linked to SES and edu-
cational status.
• In utero/postnatal SHS exposure is associated 
with obesity and cardiovascular risk factors.
ECOnOmiC imPACT OF SHS ExPOSURE
Tobacco smoke (from both smoking and SHS exposure) 
has a significant economic impact on direct healthcare 
costs and loss in productivity. Annual tobacco smoking-
related economic costs in the United States exceed 
$289 billion, and exposure to SHS caused an estimated 
$5.6 billion yearly in lost productivity over the 3-year 
period between 2009 and 2012.14 Among children, liv-
ing with at least 1 smoker is associated with a modest 
increase in emergency department expenditures75 and 
inpatient use.76 Some estimate that the additional cost 
associated with birth complications in pregnant women 
smoking tobacco or being exposed to SHS may be as 
high as $2 billion per year.77 Lightwood et al78 reported 
the health and economic benefits of smoking cessation 
during pregnancy, estimating savings of $572 million in 
direct pediatric medical expenses in 7 years.
SHS exposure has a negative economic impact on the 
education system. Children exposed to SHS have higher 
rates of adverse behavioral and cognitive effects, includ-
ing attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.79 Max et al79 
estimated that the costs to the education system from 
SHS may be 4 times higher than the annual healthcare 
cost attributable to attention-deficit/hyperactivity. Using 
school absenteeism as a surrogate measure of child 
health,80–82 Levy et al83 showed in a nationally representa-
tive sample of 6- to 11-year-olds that children living with 
adults who smoke at home are absent from school 1.5 
more days a year than children living with nonsmokers. 
Caregivers’ time tending to children absent from school 
is estimated to cost $227 million each year. The authors 
concluded that household SHS exposure is significantly 
associated with school absenteeism.83
Although there are no data quantifying the economic 
impact of SHS exposure–induced cardiovascular conse-
quences in children, the above data support the global 
adverse economic impact of SHS exposure in childhood.
Economics of Tobacco Cessation  
Programs/Efforts
The best way to reduce SHS exposure in children is to elim-
inate the source of the exposure. Thus, tobacco cessation 
programs for adults are an effective modality for decreas-
ing the prevalence of SHS exposure. Resources spent on 
education, counseling, and health promotion are highly ef-
ficient, resulting in substantial healthcare cost savings and 
public health improvements. In 2015, an estimated $25 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e342
billion in revenue from tobacco settlements and taxes was 
collected by all 50 states, with <2% of the revenue being 
spent on programs that help prevent children from smok-
ing and help smokers quit.84 These prevention programs 
are known to reduce smoking, to save lives, and to re-
duce tobacco-related healthcare costs that are estimated 
to run into hundreds of billions of dollars annually.85
Data from Washington State (2000–2009) indicated 
that tobacco cessation programs are not just a cost-ef-
fective intervention but actually have a savings multiplier 
effect, saving in excess of $5 for every dollar spent. Over 
the 10-year period, this program prevented almost 36 
000 
hospitalizations, a savings of $1.5 billion compared with 
$260 million spent on the program.86 A 2013 study con-
ducted in California, a leader in tobacco prevention, found 
that from 1989 to 2008, the state’s tobacco control pro-
grams reduced healthcare costs by $134 billion compared 
with $2.4 billion spent administering the programs.87
The economic impact of changing smoking locations 
is also substantial. For example, prohibiting smoking in all 
US subsidized and public housing is estimated to gener-
ate annual cost savings of ≈$500 million.88 These figures 
are likely an underestimate because proper accounting 
of life-course benefits cannot be modeled with currently 
available data. Thus, although the economic costs of 
smoking tobacco and SHS exposure are significant, well-
designed and well-targeted programs can minimize these 
costs, at great benefit to society. Whereas studies have 
not quantified the economic consequences of the cardio-
vascular effects of childhood SHS, we speculate that this 
is substantial in view of its persisting and lifetime impact.
Summary
Childhood SHS exposure is associated with 
• Higher emergency room visits, inpatient use, and 
medical expenses
• Negative impact on the education system
• Higher rates of behavioral and cognitive adversities
• Increased school absenteeism
CARDiOvASCULAR DySFUnCTiOn 
ASSOCiATED WiTH SHS ExPOSURE in 
CHiLDREn
Chemical Composition of SHS and Biochemical/
mechanistic Effects
The multiple gases and chemicals of SHS make the 
causal attribution to any single component challeng-
ing.16,89,90 Effects of tobacco smoke depend on wheth-
er the exposure is from direct smoking or SHS,91,92 
the distance of those exposed from source, the length 
of time from the constituents entering the environ-
ment to the individual being exposed (environmental 
SHS aging),93 and whether the SHS is mainstream or 
side-stream smoke.94 Mainstream smoke is the inhaled 
component, some of which is then exhaled, whereas 
side-stream smoke (amounting to 75% of the smoke 
generated by a cigarette95) emanates directly from the 
burning end of the cigarette (Figure 5). Thus, mitiga-
tion of CVD risk from SHS depends critically on the 
chemicals present in side-stream smoke. The precise 
composition of SHS depends on fluctuating conditions, 
including pH, ambient temperature, atmospheric gas 
composition, and degree of combustion.89,94 For ex-
ample, some constituents such as carbon monoxide 
and nicotine dissipate quickly, whereas certain organic 
chemicals persist over time. In addition, biochemical 
changes in these toxins over time may affect the com-
position of SHS. This complex milieu synergistically 
results in the adverse consequences of SHS.16,89,91 
Although interested stakeholders make much ado 
Main stream smoke
Side stream smoke
Figure 5. mainstream and side-
stream smoke.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e343
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
about filtered versus unfiltered distinctions or low-
tar varieties, emitted chemical compositions of side-
stream smoke may differ little among them. Specific 
chemical constituents present in SHS number in the 
thousands; a few of the most prominent chemicals are 
presented in the Table. Side-stream smoke, containing 
≈3 times more toxins than mainstream smoke, can be 
as dangerous as or potentially more dangerous than 
directly smoking, depending on intensity and length of 
exposure.97,98 Some studies suggest that the toxicity 
of some constituents in side-stream smoke actually 
increases over time as a result of ambient environ-
mental reactions in which certain compounds deposit 
onto surfaces, resulting in continuing exposure, and 
highly volatile gas constituents remain suspended in 
air.94,98–100 These compound-specific features further 
obscure the mechanisms of action because the de-
gree of the exposure may vary on the basis of the 
type of compound in question.97,101 Although many nox-
ious chemicals are associated with SHS exposure, the 
precise degree of exposure varies from constituent to 
constituent, and CVD-relevant effects may vary accord-
ingly. Regardless of mechanism, consensus has devel-
oped about quantifying the severity of tobacco smoke 
exposure by measuring nicotine and its metabolites or 
particulate matter.16,34,89,102
mechanisms of vascular Disruption
Cigarette smoke, both mainstream and side stream, is 
understood from in vitro, in vivo, and epidemiological 
studies to have acute and subacute effects leading to 
cardiovascular consequences. The specific mechanis-
tic domains include short-term effects on endothelial 
function, platelet function, vasoconstriction, autonomic 
function, heart rhythm, and inflammation.16,89 Subacute 
effects can include inflammation via oxidative stress, en-
dothelial dysfunction, dyslipidemia, thrombosis, and re-
duced insulin sensitivity.16,89 Although the sheer number 
of compounds precludes a full account of the mecha-
nism of each compound here, a few examples deserve 
mention. Nicotine is associated with hemodynamic al-
terations, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance.103–105 
Acrolein, a volatile organic chemical, is highly reactive, 
causes oxidative stress and inflammation, and is linked 
to hypertension, dyslipidemia, arrhythmia, and thrombo-
sis. Crotonaldehyde is an atherogenic compound that 
induces plaque instability, increases thrombosis, and 
may have negative inotropic effects.106–108 Cadmium can 
cause inflammation and facilitate atherosclerosis.109,110 
Lead exposure may cause hypertension.111,112 Various 
particulate matters are known to be arrhythmogenic and 
to precipitate CVD events.113–115
It is to be noted that exposure to carbon monoxide 
and metals is minimal through SHS.16 Nicotine expo-
sures are also quite low, in part because nicotine dissi-
pates rapidly from SHS.16 Conversely, acrolein and other 
organic chemicals persist in SHS over time, are highly 
reactive, and are known to produce oxidative stress, in-
flammation, and endothelial dysfunction and to promote 
blood clotting.16 Moreover, other substances can adhere 
to the smoking-elaborated particulate matter and en-
hance their toxicities.100
With respect to children, investigators have demon-
strated that SHS exposure markers are elevated in a 
graded fashion in concert with higher SHS exposure. 
Cotinine levels are detectable in fetal and cord blood 
serum and appear to be higher in younger children 
(compared with adults) as a result of either higher 
exposure from faster respiratory rates or inadequate 
cotinine metabolism.47,116–119 After adjustment for de-
gree of exposure, black children appear to have higher 
levels of SHS markers compared with non-Hispanic 
and Hispanic children, underscoring race/ethnicity and 
metabolic differences.49 In summary, SHS is an intri-
cately interactive vector for producing cardiovascular 
consequences.
Table.  Selected Chemicals Present in SHS and 
Their Relative Strength in Side-Stream Compared 
With mainstream Smoke
SHS Chemicals
Enrichment Ratio, Side-
Stream vs mainstream Smoke
Carbon dioxide
8–11
Carbon monoxide
2.5–4.7
Nicotine
2.6–3.3
Carbonyls
 Acrolein
8–15
 Formaldehyde
0.1–50
Hydrocarbons
 Toluene
5.6–8.3
 Benzene
5–10
 Pyridine
6.5–20
 Ammonia
40–170
 Nitrogen oxides
4–10
 Hydrogen cyanide
0.1–0.25
Particulates: tar
 Polyaromatic hydrocarbons
1.3–1.9
 Nitrosamines
0.6–100
 Polonium
1–4
 Nickel
13–30
 Cadmium
7.2
SHS indicates secondhand tobacco smoke.
Reprinted from National Research Council Committee on Passive 
Smoking96 with permission from the National Academies Press. Copyright 
© 1986, National Academy of Sciences.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e344
Summary
 The effects of SHS exposure are dependent on 
• Length of time exposed
• Intensity of exposure
• Aging of the SHS constituents in the environment
• Race and age
Cardiovascular effects of key components of cigarettes 
include
• Nicotine: hemodynamic alterations
• Acrolein: oxidation, inflammation, atherogenesis, 
hypertension, and arrhythmia
• Crotonaldehyde: plaque instability and thrombosis
• Cadmium: inflammation
• Lead: hypertension
• Particulate matter: arrhythmias and inflammation
Animal Studies Linking SHS Exposure to 
mechanistics of Atherosclerosis
Although the specific mechanisms of SHS exposure 
on cardiovascular health in humans are not well under-
stood, animal studies have helped to shed light on poten-
tial mechanistic effects. Experimental animals are differ-
ent from humans in many respects (lipoprotein profiles, 
blood pressures, patterns of breathing [eg, nose versus 
mouth], and other biological dissimilarities); however, 
there is a consistent body of evidence from a variety of 
animal species on the potential atherogenic effects of 
SHS. Most of the early work was done with SHS expo-
sure in adult animals exposed to high doses of SHS, but 
recent studies have examined environmentally plausible 
levels of SHS and their effects on vascular biology and 
atherosclerosis lesion development. It should be noted, 
however, that most such studies do not provide a bio-
chemical assessment of postexposure levels. Although 
the respiratory properties of animals are different from 
those of humans, animal studies are especially impor-
tant in studying the life-course effects of SHS exposure 
because of their shorter lifespan. Thus, animal studies 
have given sophisticated mechanistic insights into the 
possible pathogenesis of SHS exposure–related vascu-
lar disease.
Mouse Studies
In 2001, Gairola et al120 found that side-stream cigarette 
smoke accelerates atherogenesis in apolipoprotein E 
knockout mice. When these mice were maintained on 
a Western diet and exposed to relatively high dose of 
SHS, there was a duration-dependent increase in ath-
erosclerosis lesion development. In 2004, Tani et al121 
documented increased carotid artery intima-media thick-
ness (CIMT) in mice exposed to SHS compared with con-
trols. This was associated with an excessive antibody 
response to oxidized LDL-C, raising the possibility that 
SHS and high lipoprotein levels might have an additive 
proatherogenic effect. Because human studies have 
linked SHS exposure to accelerated lipid peroxidation 
and LDL-C modification, this additive effect could be 
relevant to children and young adults.73 The mechanism 
of these effects has also been studied in mice. Zhang 
et al122 documented high levels of proinflammatory cy-
tokines such as interleukin-6 in adult mice exposed to 
SHS. Knight-Lozano et al123 studied the effect of SHS 
on normal and dyslipidemic mice and documented high 
levels of oxidative stress and increased mitochondrial 
DNA damage of aortic tissue in SHS-exposed mice; this 
effect was maximal in mice with both dyslipidemia and 
SHS exposure.
Fetterman et al124 examined the effects of in utero 
and neonatal SHS exposure on both atherosclerosis le-
sion development in later life and oxidative stress and 
mitochondrial DNA damage in aortic tissue. Mice were 
exposed to 1 mg/m3 SHS (4–5 ppm carbon monox-
ide, 200–300 µg/m3 nicotine), a level frequently found 
in smoky entertainment areas for adults. Both in utero 
and early-life exposure significantly increased adult ath-
erosclerosis lesion development and resulted in notable 
alterations in the aortic tissue, mitochondria, and their 
genomes. Oxidative stress levels were also markedly in-
creased in the SHS-exposed animals.
Rat Studies
Mullick et al125 used quantitative fluorescent microscopy 
to study endothelial cell injury after SHS exposure. In 
rats, SHS exposure increased carotid artery LDL-C ac-
cumulation >4-fold compared with filtered air exposure 
and was associated with marked ultrastructural damage 
to the carotid artery endothelial cells. Biochemical stud-
ies implicated a potentially damaging role from highly 
reactive carbonyl components.125
Hutchison et al126 examined the effects of SHS on vas-
cular reactivity in newborn rats. In utero or neonatal ex-
posure to SHS resulted in enhanced vasoconstriction, re-
duced endothelium-dependent dilatation, and decreased 
sensitivity to nitroglycerin, suggesting that exposure to 
SHS might have detrimental effects on vascular endothe-
lial and smooth muscle function. Mechanistic studies in 
rats have also linked SHS exposure to increased LDL-C 
accumulation in ex vivo perfused arteries.127
Rabbit Studies
Zhu et al128 exposed cholesterol-fed rabbits to SHS, find-
ing an SHS dose–dependent increase in percent aortic 
involvement with atherosclerosis-like lesions. An increase 
in bleeding time was also seen, suggesting an acquired 
platelet dysfunction. Hutchison et al129 examined the ef-
fects of a high-cholesterol diet with or without SHS expo-
sure in rabbits, finding both endothelial dysfunction and 
increased atherogenesis, with greater impairment of en-
dothelial function in the combined high-cholesterol and 
SHS-exposed animals compared with those with high 
cholesterol only.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e345
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
Cockerel Studies
In 1993, Penn and Snyder130 exposed 6-week-old cocker-
els to side-stream smoke or filtered air, finding markedly 
increased atherosclerotic plaque in the abdominal aorta. 
In a subsequent study, Penn et al131 then decreased the 
exposure of SHS to a level often observed in a smoky 
bars and again found enhanced atherosclerosis in the 
cockerels exposed to even this lower dose of SHS.
Taken together, the data from these animal studies 
suggest that exposure to environmentally plausible levels 
of SHS in early life (including in utero) can increase athero-
sclerosis lesions later in life. Inferred mechanisms include 
increased oxidative stress, proinflammatory effects, mi-
tochondrial damage, and impaired endothelial function.
Human Studies: Changes in vascular Endothelial 
Function
The vascular endothelium plays a central role in cardio-
vascular homeostasis, making or modifying a large num-
ber of chemicals that regulate arterial tone, thrombogen-
esis, cell proliferation, leukocyte adhesion, and platelet 
interaction, among others. A healthy endothelium main-
tains a normal dilator state and antithrombotic surface, 
whereas endothelial dysfunction predisposes to vasocon-
striction, thrombosis, cell proliferation, and leukocyte ad-
hesion. These processes are thought to play a key role in 
early atherogenesis. Normal endothelial function and the 
consequences of endothelial dysfunction have been sum-
marized in detail elsewhere.132,133 Endothelial dysfunction 
has been associated with a variety of cardiovascular risk 
factors134 and predicts future cardiovascular events.
One method for assessing endothelial function in hu-
mans noninvasively is the measurement of arterial flow-
mediated dilatation (FMD) by ultrasound. This vasodilator 
response to shear stress is attributable to the endothe-
lial release of nitric oxide, a chemical entity responsible 
for vasodilatation, inhibition of leukocyte adhesion, plate-
let aggregation, and smooth muscle cell proliferation. 
The measurement of FMD was first described in 1992 
in children and young adults at risk of atherosclerosis135 
and has been shown to predict cardiovascular events.136
Acute Arterial Endothelial Dysfunction With SHS Exposure
Although the evidence on acute arterial endothelial 
dysfunction in children and adolescents is limited, 
adult studies suggest potential mechanistic changes. 
In 2001, Otsuka et al137 examined the acute effects 
of SHS on the coronary circulation in healthy young 
adults. The authors measured coronary flow velocity 
reserve in response to adenosine in young adult male 
nonsmokers compared with smokers (mean age, 27 
years) before and after a 30-minute exposure to envi-
ronmental tobacco smoke. They found that coronary 
flow velocity reserve was significantly impaired by 
exposure to SHS in both the nonsmokers and smok-
ers. This acute effect of SHS on coronary physiology 
has also been examined in women. Sumida et al138 ex-
amined the effects of SHS on endothelium-dependent 
coronary artery dilatation in 38 women 40 to 60 years 
of age, finding that acetylcholine caused coronary con-
striction in passive and active smokers and led to a 
normal dilator response in nonsmokers.
At a mechanistic level, the effects of cigarette smoke 
on endothelial function ex vivo have been examined in 
a number of studies. Cigarette smoke increases adhe-
sion molecule expression on human endothelial cells139 
and increases human monocyte adhesion to endothelial 
cells, an effect reversible by the nitric oxide precursor 
l-arginine.140 Cigarette smokers have also been shown 
to have increased tissue factor expression in atheroscle-
rotic plaques.141
Hausberg et al142 studied the effect of short-term 
SHS exposure on muscle sympathetic nerve activity in 
17 healthy young nonsmokers (age, 28±6 years). One 
smoke inhalation session increased resting muscle sym-
pathetic nerve activity by ≈20% in the SHS-exposed 
group but not in the control group. This finding could in 
part underscore the association between SHS exposure 
and blood pressure in children.22
Effects of Long-Term SHS Exposure on Arterial Endothelial 
Function
In 1996, Celermajer et al8 studied 78 healthy teenagers 
and young adults (age, 15–30 years): 26 active smok-
ers, 26 who had never smoked but had been exposed 
to SHS for at least 1 hour daily for ≥3 years, and 26 
control subjects who were not SHS exposed or actively 
smoking. Arterial FMD showed profound impairment 
in the passive and active smoking young adults. Arte-
rial dilatation induced by nitroglycerin was similar in all 
groups, localizing the defect in vascular reactivity to the 
endothelium.
This finding was later confirmed by Kallio et al9 in 
younger children. As part of a longitudinal study in Fin-
land, children had annual serum cotinine concentrations 
measured between 8 and 11 years of age to assess 
SHS exposure and had FMD assessed at age 11 years. 
Exposure to SHS as measured by cotinine was associ-
ated with impaired endothelial function in a dose-depen-
dent manner in preteenage children (Figure 6). Yang et 
al72 studied FMD in 16-year-old Tibetan school students 
and documented impaired endothelial function in those 
exposed to SHS.
Juonala et al143 examined the effects of parental smok-
ing in childhood on endothelial function in young adults 
19 to 27 years after the period of SHS exposure in the 
home. Two populations were studied, 1 from Finland and 
1 from Australia, and both groups saw reduced FMD in 
participants whose parents had smoked compared with 
those whose parents had not smoked. These findings 
suggested that SHS exposure in childhood could cause 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e346
impairment in endothelial function, observable many years 
later. However, the authors noted that arterial endothelial 
dysfunction related to passive smoking might be at least 
partially reversible in healthy young adults.143 This revers-
ibility was documented by Raitakari et al,144 who exam-
ined endothelium-dependent dilatation in those formerly 
exposed to SHS compared with those currently exposed 
to SHS who were 15 to 39 years of age. FMD was 2% in 
those currently exposed, 5% in those formerly exposed, 
and 9% in control subjects, suggesting partial reversibility 
of SHS-related endothelial dysfunction in those who were 
removed from SHS-containing environments.
In summary, there is compelling evidence that expo-
sure to SHS in children and young adults is associated 
with arterial endothelial dysfunction, a likely predispos-
ing factor to atherosclerosis and increased CVD risk in 
later life.
Mechanisms
A number of potential cellular mechanisms related to 
endothelial dysfunction have been documented in as-
sociation with SHS. Studies have documented markers 
of oxidative stress in SHS-exposed and nonsmoking, 
non–SHS-exposed groups, including increased levels of 
glutathione peroxidase and catalase in those exposed 
to SHS.145 Inflammatory markers such as C-reactive pro-
tein and oxidized LDL-C are also higher in those who 
are SHS exposed.146 The presence of such reactive 
oxygen species and inflammatory markers is known to 
reduce the production and activity of endothelial nitric 
oxide synthase.147 Following up on animal work implicat-
ing mitochondrial damage as a potential pathogenetic 
mechanism in SHS exposure, a recent review by Yang 
et al148 of fetal, childhood, and adult exposure to SHS 
and mitochondrial damage and dysfunction concluded a 
potentially important role of mitochondrial abnormalities 
in mediating CVD susceptibility.
Changes in Vascular Tone/Stiffness and Structural 
Vascular Changes
Adequate arterial function includes the transmission of 
blood flow to downstream tissue capillary beds with 
minimal energy loss and regulation of blood flow in those 
tissue beds and flow proportional to metabolic demand. 
These are determined by the structure and function of 
large conduit and small resistance arteries. Assessment 
of arterial structure includes, but is not limited to, mea-
surement of CIMT and arterial stiffness. SHS exposure 
appears to distort arterial structure. These distortions 
are of clinical relevance; recent reports indicate that pe-
ripheral artery disease is higher in adults who smoked 
cigarettes during childhood even after adjustment for 
other predictors of peripheral artery disease.149
CIMT is assessed by ultrasound imaging of the com-
mon carotid artery near the bifurcation into external and 
internal carotid arteries. CIMT captures the effect of 
accumulated cardiovascular risk factors to the arterial 
wall. With every 1-mm increase in CIMT measurement 
in adults, the hazard ratio for CVD increases by 2.5.150 
CIMT also measures localized plaque formation, which 
may have independent prognostic information.150 The 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study demonstrated 
in adults a clear association between SHS exposure and 
CIMT thickening.151 Other studies suggest that SHS expo-
sure increases CIMT in younger adults and in those with 
low levels of other CVD risk factors.152–154 In children with 
in utero SHS exposure, CIMT was thicker, whereas post-
natal SHS exposure appeared to be less predictive of a 
thicker CIMT.10 Some studies suggest a dose-dependent 
relationship between postnatal SHS exposure (Figure 7) 
and thicker CIMT, but other investigators did not find this 
relationship.70,155,156 In summary, although increased CIMT 
as a result of childhood SHS exposure is not conclusive 
of CVD, a relationship that will take decades to observe, 
this is compelling medium-term proxy evidence that indi-
cates deleterious effects of SHS on the vasculature.
Arterial stiffness, a measure of the material proper-
ties of the artery, is associated with traditional CVD risk 
factors and predicts future CVD and hypertension.157,158 
Several methods can be used to measure arterial stiff-
ness, including carotid-femoral pulse-wave velocity, the 
degree of pulse-wave reflection called augmentation 
index, or arterial distensibility, which is a change in di-
ameter of the artery from diastole to systole. In adults, 
long-term SHS exposure decreased carotid artery dis-
tensibility, including in the obese, the elderly, and those 
Figure 6. Peak flow-mediated dilatation of the brachi-
al artery in 11-year-old secondhand smoke–exposed 
children according to cotinine group. 
Values are mean±SEM. Reprinted from Kallio et al.9 Copyright 
© 2007, American Heart Association, Inc. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e347
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
with increased CIMT.159 Moreover, short-term SHS ex-
posure in adults also showed reduced aortic distensibil-
ity.160 Children with in utero SHS exposure also appear 
to have 15% less distensible arteries.10 Adolescents in 
the Special Turku Coronary Risk Factor Intervention Proj-
ect had inverse correlations between serum cotinine and 
aortic elasticity.11 However, other population-based stud-
ies did not show differences in childhood aortic stiffness 
based on in utero SHS exposure.161 Thus, although SHS 
exposure appears to consistently induce short-term and 
long-term alterations in endothelial function, the effects 
on arterial structure are not consistent and may depend 
on the nature and degree of exposure.
Arrhythmia and SHS Exposure
Acute cardiovascular effects of SHS in the young include 
tachycardia137 and an increase in blood pressure.22 An 
important potential pathway for tobacco exposure in chil-
dren is in utero. Interestingly, the effects of in utero and 
postnatal SHS exposure on autonomic function seem to 
be sex specific. Schuetz and Eiden162 examined the as-
sociation between in utero SHS exposure and neonatal 
heart rate and heart rate variability assessed at 2 to 4 
weeks of age. Neonates with in utero SHS exposure had 
higher heart rates and lower heart rate variation with 
breathing than those in the nonexposed group. For unex-
plained reasons, boys who were exposed to SHS either 
in utero or in the postnatal period had higher heart rates 
and lower heart rate variation than SHS-exposed girls.162 
A recent longitudinal study by Dixit and colleagues163 
measured the effects of SHS exposure in utero and dur-
ing childhood on arrhythmia development as an adult. 
SHS exposure in utero and during childhood was associ-
ated with atrial fibrillation later in life. SHS exposure in 
early life may be an important, potentially modifiable risk 
factor for the development of late arrhythmia.
The cardiac effects of direct smoking and SHS expo-
sure in adults are well documented and could suggest 
hypotheses for studying children exposed to SHS. Ciga-
rette smoking is associated with the release of epineph-
rine and norepinephrine.164 Thus, cigarette smoking has 
a powerful sympathetic excitatory effect influencing sym-
pathetic drive to blood vessels, skin, and the heart.165 
Supporting these theoretical concerns, long-term adult 
smokers have a blunted heart rate response to exercise 
and decreased exercise tolerance compared with non-
smokers, caused in part by downregulation of cardiac β-
adrenergic receptors.166,167 SHS exposure generates an 
autonomic system imbalance associated with increased 
cardiac vulnerability and may lead to arrhythmias such 
as atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricu-
lar fibrillation, especially in those with other pre-existing 
CVD risks.163,168–170
The pathophysiological mechanism of smoking-relat-
ed arrhythmia is complex and influenced by several of 
the major components of tobacco smoke. It includes al-
teration in autonomic function and a profibrotic effect of 
nicotine and carbon monoxide on myocardial tissue with 
consequent increased sensitivity to catecholamine.171 As 
noted above, specific components of SHS such as car-
bon monoxide may contribute to the generation of ven-
tricular arrhythmias.171–173 Nicotine, carbon monoxide, 
and oxidative stress can induce fibrosis at different car-
diac sites, resulting in a structural remodeling that can 
predispose the patient to arrhythmias.171 These cardiac 
effects, however, are likely negligible in those exposed 
to SHS because levels of nicotine and carbon monoxide 
are relatively low.
Autonomic Dysfunction and SHS Exposure
In utero or postnatal SHS exposure increases the risk 
of SIDS.1,174–187 Compared with infants who were not ex-
posed to SHS either in utero or postnatally, the risk of 
SIDS is greater in infants exposed both in utero and in 
the postnatal period (3-fold increase) and in those with 
only postnatal exposure (2-fold increase).176 Furthermore, 
the risk of SIDS increases with increasing dose of SHS 
exposure.176 In the Wales Perinatal Survey, more than half 
of the infants known to have died suddenly lived in house-
holds with SHS.186 Behm et al188 studied the association 
between a higher prevalence of smoke-free homes and 
decreasing rates of SIDS, controlling for an important risk 
factor for SIDS, supine sleep position. On a population 
basis, for every 1% absolute increase in the prevalence 
of smoke-free homes, SIDS rates decreased 0.4%.
Figure 7. maximum carotid artery intima-media 
thickness (cimT) and maximum aortic intima-media 
thickness (aimT) in healthy 13-year-old secondhand 
smoke–exposed adolescents according to tobacco 
smoke exposure levels. 
Number of adolescents in exposure groups is as follows: 
cIMT: low, n=160; intermediate, n=171; and high, n=163; 
and aIMT, low, n=159; intermediate, n=167; and high, 
n=161. Values are mean±SEM. Reprinted from Kallio et al.155 
Copyright © 2010, American Heart Association, Inc. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e348
The mechanism behind SHS exposure and SIDS may 
include effects on the normal regulation of breathing. 
Experimental data from animal studies have shown that 
exposure to SHS can have adverse effects on brain cell 
development.189–191 In addition, autonomic function is 
altered by in utero exposure to SHS. Newborns whose 
mother smoked during pregnancy have lower heart rate 
variability during quiet sleep.192 Unexposed infants dem-
onstrated increases in heart rate with head-up tilt and 
decreases in heart rate with head-down tilt, whereas 
infants exposed to SHS showed no such responses.192 
Maternal smoking induces changes in autonomic matu-
ration in infants.193 Cardiovascular stress reactivity is 
increased in newborn infants of active smokers.194 The 
resting heart rate of a smoker’s infant is lower than in 
a nonexposed control, most likely secondary to exces-
sive vagal tone.23 Vagal potentiation is considered a 
predisposing factor in SIDS.195–197 Any smoking during 
pregnancy or during the first year of the infant’s life in-
creases the risk of SIDS.186
Summary 
In utero/childhood SHS exposure can result in
• Endothelial dysfunction
• Increased arterial stiffness
• Increased CIMT
• Autonomic dysfunction
• Late onset arrhythmia
BEHAviORAL AnD COmmUniTy STRATEGiES 
TO REDUCE/ELiminATE SHS ExPOSURE in 
CHiLDREn
individual and Population-Based Approaches
Several trials over the past 25 years have evaluated in-
terventions aimed at reducing or eliminating SHS expo-
sure in children. Intervention strategies fall into 2 broad 
groups: those that directly attempt to minimize SHS 
exposure to children and those that indirectly minimize 
children’s SHS exposure by assisting parents or caretak-
ers to quit or reduce smoking. The majority of studies 
have targeted parents rather than nonparental caregiv-
ers. Interventions that directly minimized child harm from 
SHS used a variety of strategies, including counseling 
(face to face or by telephone) or provision of materials 
to encourage parents not to allow smoking in the home 
or car, not to smoke around their children, or to remove 
the child from rooms in the home or other locations 
when smoking is taking place (hygienic smoking). Other 
strategies include encouraging the use of air cleaners or 
providing biochemical feedback (as in cotinine measure-
ment) on child SHS exposure to caregivers.
Cessation/smoking reduction interventions typically 
have used behavioral counseling or pharmacotherapy 
such as nicotine replacement. A variety of outcomes 
have been assessed, including self-reported behavior 
change related to child SHS exposure (eg, enforcement 
of home smoking ban, restricting smoking to designat-
ed smoking areas), self-reported smoking cessation or 
reduction (with or without biochemical verification), bio-
chemical measures of children’s SHS exposure (typically 
cotinine assessed in urine, blood, saliva, or hair), and 
biochemical measures of ambient environmental tobac-
co smoke (usually nicotine or particulate matter) from 
rooms or other spaces where children are exposed.
Several literature reviews on this topic have been con-
ducted, including nonsystematic narrative reviews,198–200 
systematic narrative reviews,201,202 and systematic quan-
titative (ie, meta-analytic) reviews.203–206 The meta-analyt-
ic reviews include a review originally published in the Co-
chrane Collaboration database in 2003203 and updated 
in 2008204 and 2014.206 Arborelius et al198 included only 
interventions that occurred in pediatric practices, but 
other reviews did not limit the setting of interventions.
Two recent contributions205,206 were published in 
2014. The Rosen et al205 systematic review205 included 
fewer studies than the Baxi et al review206 because they 
restricted eligibility to studies that delivered interven-
tions to parents (not other family members, child care 
workers, and teachers), targeted children no older than 
6 years of age (compared with 12 years of age in the 
Baxi et al review), and focused on interventions to help 
parents decrease child SHS exposure (Baxi et al also 
included smoking cessation programs that measured 
child SHS exposure as an outcome but did not have child 
SHS reduction as an explicit goal).
Rosen et al205 combined and analyzed effects for 3 
categories of outcomes: parent-reported exposure to 
SHS of the child at follow-up and change from base-
line to follow-up, parent-reported number of cigarettes 
smoked around the child at follow-up, and measured lev-
els of cotinine in urine, blood, saliva, or hair of the child 
at follow-up.205 Parent-reported SHS exposure to child 
at follow-up was collected by 17 studies and showed a 
small, statistically significant effect favoring the interven-
tion groups compared with the control group (relative 
risk, 1.12; 95% CI, 1.07–1.18). The risk difference was 
0.07 (95% CI, 0.05–0.09), indicating that 7% of inter-
vention families benefited on average. The effect for 
parent-reported exposure to SHS was positive but not 
statistically significant when analyzed as change from 
baseline to follow-up (n=7; relative risk, 1.44; 95% CI, 
0.90–2.29; P=0.13).205
Parent-reported number of cigarettes to which chil-
dren were exposed decreased in both the intervention 
and control groups but to a greater extent in the inter-
vention group (n=8; P=0.03). Among 13 studies that 
used biomarkers of child SHS as the outcome, 8 stud-
ies showed positive trends, but statistical significance 
was reached in only 1 study. The overall risk difference 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e349
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
was −0.05 (95% CI, −0.13 to 0.20; P=0.20), showing 
a nonsignificant trend toward a small benefit of interven-
tion. No clear benefit was demonstrated in subgroup 
analyses that compared studies on the basis of whether 
biochemical feedback was provided as an intervention 
strategy, intensity of the experimental intervention, inten-
sity of the control intervention, and treatment fidelity.205
The authors concluded that interventions to reduce 
child SHS exposure showed “small benefits” when as-
sessed by parent self-report, but this effect was not 
corroborated by objective, biochemical outcomes. It is 
unclear why an effect is observed for self-reported ver-
sus objective outcomes; the reason may be related to 
greater statistical power for parent-reported outcomes 
(attributable to a greater number of studies), unreliabil-
ity of parent reports resulting from a lack of knowledge 
of their children’s exposure or intentional misreporting, 
or inadequate sensitivity of biomarkers to detect small 
changes in exposure levels.205
It is also noteworthy that many studies reported positive 
outcomes in control groups, which may be related to gener-
ally high levels of motivation in trial participants regardless 
of treatment allocation (Hawthorne effect) or to the pos-
sibility that parents reduced smoking around their children 
regardless of intervention (eg, because of social pressure 
or secular trends that make childhood SHS exposure less 
acceptable). Regardless, the overall conclusion is that avail-
able interventions produce, at best, small effects, and there 
is no empirical basis to recommend specific intervention 
strategies, intensities, or delivery formats.
Baxi et al206 reached similar conclusions. Among the 57 
studies included in their review, 16 focused directly on min-
imizing child harm from SHS by changing parent/caregiver 
behaviors or attitudes, 20 focused exclusively on helping 
parents/caregivers to quit smoking or not to relapse, and 
21 used a combination of these 2 intervention approach-
es. Effects were not quantitatively combined because of 
the heterogeneity of study design and characteristics. The 
resulting narrative review did not find evidence that any 
particular intervention strategies were more effective than 
others. Only 14 of the 57 studies found a significant inter-
vention treatment effect, and of these, 12 were judged 
to have either unknown or high risk of bias. These stud-
ies used a wide range of interventions, including intensive 
counseling or motivational interviewing, telephone coun-
seling, school-based strategies, picture books, and edu-
cational home visits. Similar to the Rosen et al report,205 
this review found reductions in SHS exposure for children 
regardless of assignment to an intervention or a control 
group. Furthermore, there was no evidence of difference 
in effectiveness according to age of the target child or 
whether targeted children were healthy or had respiratory 
or other illnesses. The authors concluded that the effec-
tiveness of interventions to reduce child SHS exposure 
has not been clearly demonstrated.
Expert Panel Recommendations
The Task Force on Community Preventive Services re-
viewed evidence for the effectiveness of community 
education to reduce exposure to SHS in the home. 
Community education approaches included enhancing 
motivation or providing skills to quit or reduce smoking 
or implementing home policies such as bans to reduce 
exposure to SHS. The task force concluded207 that there 
was insufficient evidence to make a recommendation 
about the effectiveness of community education to re-
duce SHS exposure in the home.
A more recent expert panel208 concluded that inter-
ventions in pediatric care settings to reduce children’s 
SHS exposure showed mixed results. However, because 
of the serious public health implications of SHS, the pan-
el recommended that pediatric healthcare providers rou-
tinely intervene. The expert panel encouraged providers 
to identify parents and other caregivers who smoke and 
explicitly recommend that children not be exposed to 
tobacco smoke in the home, in automobiles, and in any 
other space where exposure can occur. Furthermore, 
the expert panel concluded that parents and caregivers 
who smoke should be educated about the health con-
sequences of tobacco use for the adult, the child, and 
(when appropriate) the fetus; encouraged to quit; and re-
ferred for smoking cessation assistance. Adding routine 
biochemical screening to detect metabolites of SHS as 
part of health promotion may identify levels of exposure 
different from that reported by parents.
Effect of Smoking Bans and Taxes
Home smoking bans significantly reduce SHS exposure 
among children209 and may lower the likelihood that chil-
dren of smokers will take up smoking.32 Unfortunately, 
≈16% of smoking households did not have any restric-
tions against indoor smoking in 2006 to 2007,56 with a 
similar trend noted in 2010 to 2011,48 and children in 
these households were still likely be exposed to SHS.
The effect of smoking bans in public places and their 
effect on children’s exposure to SHS are less clear, with 
some suggesting that smoking bans could potentially 
increase SHS exposure in children by displacing paren-
tal smoking from public places to their households. An 
observational study from England in 2007 by Jarvis et 
al210 using cotinine levels in children found no evidence 
of increased household exposure after the implementa-
tion of a legislative smoking ban. Adoption of smoke-free 
homes by smoking parents increased significantly after 
this ban, suggesting that it helped reinforce an emerg-
ing social norm favoring voluntary parental smoking re-
strictions. Similar results have been seen in the United 
States, where voluntary home-smoking bans were signifi-
cantly more likely when community-wide, 100% smoking 
bans were also in effect.211
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e350
In 2010, >20 experts in economics, epidemiology, 
public policy, and tobacco control concurred on the fa-
vorable effectiveness of increased tobacco excise taxes 
and cigarette prices in reducing overall tobacco con-
sumption and improving public health, including the pre-
vention of initiation and uptake among young people.212
Summary
Interventional strategies that can decrease childhood 
SHS:
• Tobacco cessation programs are cost-effective 
and reduce healthcare costs.
• Home smoking bans and public smoking bans 
reduce childhood SHS exposure.
• Increased taxes on tobacco products reduce 
tobacco consumption.
FUTURE DiRECTiOnS
Children exposed to SHS experience both short- and 
long-term adverse effects, including not only well-known 
respiratory complications but also cardiovascular con-
sequences related to autonomic effects and vascular 
dysfunction.
Questions remain about the mechanisms by which 
SHS exposure is related to adverse effects in childhood. 
For example, infants exposed to SHS are at higher risk 
for SIDS, but the mechanism by which SHS exposure 
increases risk of SIDS is not clear. Hypotheses include 
altered breathing patterns and diminished autonomic 
variability, but more investigation is needed. Is the risk 
related more to in utero or postnatal SHS exposure, or 
are they both important? Similarly, epidemiological stud-
ies show increases in heart rate and blood pressure in 
children exposed to SHS. What is their clinical implica-
tion, if any, for an individual child and for the population? 
How do these findings integrate with the literature on 
long-term exposure to childhood stress, which may be 
an additional risk in these children? Exposure to SHS is 
related to dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome. Does 
SHS exposure cause these changes, or are there con-
founding factors that mediate these relationships? Do 
epigenetic changes play a role? What is the impact of 
concomitant lifestyle factors that may also increase the 
risk of CVD? Adults with SHS exposure are at risk for 
ventricular arrhythmias, possibly related to the release 
of catecholamines. Does this phenomenon also oc-
cur in childhood? In all these processes, are particular 
components of SHS exposure to blame? Can we further 
tease out which components of SHS cause child-specific 
toxicities, particularly long-lasting ones, with a goal of 
minimizing or eliminating them in tobacco products as a 
plausible intervention?
Questions also remain with regard to the timing and 
durability of the adverse effects of SHS exposure. What 
is reversible and what is persistent? Is there a tipping 
point after which the cardiovascular effects persist 
despite elimination of SHS exposure? Are there vulner-
able periods in which the effects are more pronounced 
or long-lasting, perhaps infancy or adolescence? What 
about a threshold effect? How many years of SHS expo-
sure are needed before the vascular changes become 
irreversible? More information is needed with regard to 
mechanisms, severity of effects, whether there are vul-
nerable periods for exposure, and if so, when they are 
and whether all effects can be reversed. Despite these 
knowledge gaps about the mechanisms and durability 
by which SHS exposure in children affects the cardiovas-
culature, the sum of existing evidence suggests that a 
reduction in or an elimination of SHS exposure in child-
hood will improve their cardiovascular health.
Therefore, innovative methods are needed to pro-
mote behavior change to reduce and ultimately to elimi-
nate SHS exposure using federal, state, and local policy 
efforts, strategies within the healthcare system, and 
interventions at the level of the individual. The concept 
of hygienic smoking, defined as a smoker being as far 
away as possible from others, has been proposed, and 
some studies suggest a benefit, mitigating long-term 
adverse vascular effects of childhood SHS exposure.18 
How exactly is hygienic smoking implemented? This will 
be important while we are perfecting prevention and 
cessation efforts directed at smoking parents and close 
contacts with children. Does banning smoking in public 
places increase exposure to SHS in children at home? 
Adolescents report that an important component of their 
SHS exposure occurs outside the home. What additional 
interventions can be brought to bear to address this 
high-risk population? Interventions to reduce SHS expo-
sure in childhood are effective when parental report is 
the measurement outcome,205,206 but the effect is quite 
small when biochemical markers of SHS are used as the 
outcome. How can we make a bigger impact? Future 
research such as SHS exposure reduction trials should 
include specific cardiovascular outcomes in children.
Future directions for policy makers, health systems 
administrators, and providers should include systematic 
change methods to promote cessation such as using 
electronic health records prompts; making cessation 
referral programs more easily available; training provid-
ers to be knowledgeable about best practices; working 
with Head Start to access parents outside the medical 
system; providing real-time feedback to parents about 
progress by way of changes in their child’s cotinine lev-
els; focusing efforts to target high-risk, minority, and 
lower-SES children living in multiunit housing; providing 
routine biochemical screening for tobacco metabolites 
in high-risk children; and continuing public health cam-
paigns to spread information about the prevailing health 
and economic effects of SHS exposure, particularly as 
they relate to children.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e351
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
COnCLUSiOnS
A half a century after the first US Surgeon General warning 
about the harmful effects of cigarette smoking, we have 
seen significant reductions in the incidence and preva-
lence of smoking and in childhood SHS exposure. Despite 
these changes, exposure to SHS in childhood remains 
high, and certain children remain especially vulnerable. 
On the basis of the epidemiological, observational, and 
experimental evidence presented here, we conclude that 
there are lifetime, detrimental cardiovascular consequenc-
es for children who are exposed to SHS. Investments have 
been made in enforcing ordinances and bans that prohibit 
smoking in certain locations, increasing taxes on tobacco 
products, and providing education and behavior modifica-
tion. Overall, these efforts have had a favorable impact on 
reducing smoking prevalence and improving awareness of 
the consequences of cigarette smoking; however, young 
and minority children remain disadvantaged.
Healthcare providers need to emphasize and promote 
heart-healthy behaviors in caretakers of children at every 
encounter and encourage parents and caretakers to cease 
smoking for their own and their child’s well-being. Interven-
tions that include mass media campaigns, cigarette price 
increases, including those that result from tax increases, 
school-based policies and programs, and statewide or 
community-wide changes in smoke-free policies are effec-
tive in reducing the initiation, prevalence, and intensity of 
smoking among youth and young adults and may substan-
tially decrease SHS exposure. The evidence presented in 
this statement calls for a robust public health policy that 
embraces zero tolerance of childhood SHS exposure.
FOOTnOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifical-
ly, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such rela-
tionships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts 
of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on 
March 16, 2016, and the American Heart Association Execu-
tive Committee on March 28, 2016. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-
2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document 
be cited as follows: Raghuveer G, White DA, Hayman LL, Woo 
JG, Villafane J, Celermajer D, Ward KD, de Ferranti SD, Zacha-
riah J; on behalf of the American Heart Association Committee 
on Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in the Young of 
the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Behavior 
Change for Improving Health Factors Committee of the Council 
on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health and Council on Epide-
miology and Prevention; and Stroke Council. Cardiovascular 
consequences of childhood secondhand tobacco smoke expo-
sure: prevailing evidence, burden, and racial and socioeconom-
ic disparities: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000443.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conduct-
ed by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA 
statements and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, 
enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not 
permitted without the express permission of the American 
Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission 
are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/
Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. 
A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears 
on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
DiSCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Geetha 
Raghuveer
Children’s Mercy  
Hospital Kansas City
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Justin  
Zachariah
Baylor College  
of Medicine
NHLBI K23 career 
development grant†
None
None
None
None
None
None
David 
Celermajer
Royal Prince Alfred 
Hospital, Sydney, Australia
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sarah  
D. de Ferranti
Children’s Hospital Boston
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e352
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Neal L. 
Benowitz
UCSF
NIH†; Flight Attendant Medical Research 
Institute†; California Tobacco Related 
Disease Research Program†
None
None
None
None
Pfizer*
None
Samuel S. 
Gidding
Alfred I. duPont 
Hospital for 
Children 
Nemours 
Cardiac Center
NIH (TODAY study  
echo reading center)†
NIH (CARDIA 
echo reading 
center)†; NIH 
(Center for 
Translational 
Research)*
None
None
None
None
None
Cuno 
Uiterwaal
University 
Medical 
Center (the 
Netherlands)
Prime Agreement No. AID-
OAA-A-11-00012 (collaborator in a 
PEER Health project, sponsored by the 
National Academy of Sciences and the 
US Agency for International Development 
[USAID], on the subject of maternal and 
offspring health effects of exposure to air 
pollution and SHS during pregnancy, to 
be initiated in Jakarta, Indonesia)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Laura L. 
Hayman
University of 
Massachusetts, Boston 
College of Nursing and 
Health Sciences
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Juan Villafane
University of Kentucky
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Kenneth D. 
Ward
University of Memphis 
School of Public Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
David A. White
Children’s Mercy Hospital 
Kansas City
Katherine Berry 
Richardson 
Foundation–Children’s 
Mercy internal 
research grant*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jessica G. Woo
Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures continued
Writing Group 
member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e353
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
REFEREnCES
 1. US Public Health Service. Smoking and Health: A Report of the 
Surgeon General. Washington, DC: US Department of Health, Edu-
cation, and Welfare; 1979.
 2. Centers for Disease Control Prevention. Vital signs: current ciga-
rette smoking among adults aged ≥18 years–United States, 
2005–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60:1207–
1212.
 3. Homa DM, Neff LJ, King BA, Caraballo RS, Bunnell RE, Babb SD, 
Garrett BE, Sosnoff CS, Wang L; Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). Vital signs: disparities in nonsmokers’ exposure 
to secondhand smoke–United States, 1999-2012. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64:103–108.
 4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Smoking-at-
tributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity 
losses–United States, 2000–2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2008;57:1226–1228.
 5. Max W, Sung HY, Shi Y. Deaths from secondhand smoke exposure 
in the United States: economic implications. Am J Public Health. 
2012;102:2173–2180. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2012.300805.
 6. Relationship of atherosclerosis in young men to serum lipopro-
tein cholesterol concentration and smoking: a preliminary report 
from the Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth 
(PDAY) Research Group. JAMA. 1990;264:3018–3024.
 7. Newman WP 3rd, Wattigney W, Berenson GS. Autopsy stud-
ies in United States children and adolescents: relationship 
of risk factors to atherosclerotic lesions. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
1991;623:16–25.
 8. Celermajer DS, Adams MR, Clarkson P, Robinson J, McCredie R, 
Donald A, Deanfield JE. Passive smoking and impaired endothelium-
dependent arterial dilatation in healthy young adults. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334:150–154. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199601183340303.
 9. Kallio K, Jokinen E, Raitakari OT, Hämäläinen M, Siltala M, Volanen 
I, Kaitosaari T, Viikari J, Rönnemaa T, Simell O. Tobacco smoke 
exposure is associated with attenuated endothelial function in 
11-year-old healthy children. Circulation. 2007;115:3205–3212. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.674804.
 
10. Geerts CC, Bots ML, van der Ent CK, Grobbee DE, Uiterwaal CS. 
Parental smoking and vascular damage in their 5-year-old children. 
Pediatrics. 2012;129:45–54. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-0249.
 
11. Kallio K, Jokinen E, Hämäläinen M, Saarinen M, Volanen I, Kai-
tosaari T, Viikari J, Rönnemaa T, Simell O, Raitakari OT. Decreased 
aortic elasticity in healthy 11-year-old children exposed to to-
bacco smoke. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e267–e273. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2008-2659.
 
12. Howard G, Burke GL, Szklo M, Tell GS, Eckfeldt J, Evans G, Heiss 
G. Active and passive smoking are associated with increased 
carotid wall thickness: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
Study. Arch Intern Med. 1994;154:1277–1282.
 
13. Guo X, Oldham MJ, Kleinman MT, Phalen RF, Kassab GS. Effect 
of cigarette smoking on nitric oxide, structural, and mechanical 
properties of mouse arteries. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2006;291:H2354–H2361. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00376.2006.
 
14. US Department of Health Human Services. The Health Conse-
quences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Sur-
geon General. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Of-
fice on Smoking and Health; 2014:17.
 
15. National Toxicology Program. NTP 12th Report on Carcinogens. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program; 2011;12:iii.
 
16. Institute of Medicine, Committee on Secondhand Smoke Expo-
sure and Acute Coronary Events. Secondhand Smoke Exposure 
and Cardiovascular Effects: Making Sense of the Evidence. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academies Press; 2010.
 
17. US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Con-
sequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report 
of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National Center 
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on 
Smoking and Health; 2006:709.
 
18. West HW, Juonala M, Gall SL, Kähönen M, Laitinen T, Taittonen 
L, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Magnussen CG. Exposure to parental 
smoking in childhood is associated with increased risk of carot-
id atherosclerotic plaque in adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk 
in Young Finns Study. Circulation. 2015;131:1239–1246. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013485.
 
19. Glantz SA, Parmley WW. Passive smoking and heart disease: epide-
miology, physiology, and biochemistry. Circulation. 1991;83:1–12.
 
20. Rubenstein D, Jesty J, Bluestein D. Differences between main-
stream and sidestream cigarette smoke extracts and nicotine 
in the activation of platelets under static and flow conditions. 
 
Circulation. 2004;109:78–83. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000108395. 
12766.25.
 
21. Rubenstein DA, Morton BE, Yin W. The combined effects of side-
stream smoke extracts and glycated serum albumin on endo-
thelial cells and platelets. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2010;9:28. doi: 
10.1186/1475-2840-9-28.
 
22. Simonetti GD, Schwertz R, Klett M, Hoffmann GF, Schaefer F, 
Wühl E. Determinants of blood pressure in preschool children: the 
role of parental smoking. Circulation. 2011;123:292–298. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.958769.
 
23. Cohen G, Jeffery H, Lagercrantz H, Katz-Salamon M. Long-term 
reprogramming of cardiovascular function in infants of active 
smokers. Hypertension. 2010;55:722–728. doi: 10.1161/ 
HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.142695.
 
24. Geelhoed JJ, El Marroun H, Verburg BO, van Osch-Gevers L, Hof-
man A, Huizink AC, Moll HA, Verhulst FC, Helbing WA, Steegers 
EA, Jaddoe VW. Maternal smoking during pregnancy, fetal ar-
terial resistance adaptations and cardiovascular function in 
childhood. BJOG. 2011;118:755–762. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-
0528.2011.02900.x.
 
25. Wang MP, Ho SY, Lo WS, Lam TH. Smoking family, secondhand 
smoke exposure at home, and quitting in adolescent smokers. 
Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:185–191. doi: 10.1093/ntr/nts109.
 
26. Seo DC, Torabi MR, Weaver AE. Factors influencing openness to 
future smoking among nonsmoking adolescents. J Sch Health. 
2008;78:328–336; quiz 356–358. doi: 10.1111/j.1746-1561. 
2008.00310.x.
 
27. Becklake MR, Ghezzo H, Ernst P. Childhood predictors of smok-
ing in adolescence: a follow-up study of Montreal schoolchildren. 
CMAJ. 2005;173:377–379. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.1041428.
 
28. Racicot S, McGrath JJ, O’Loughlin J. An investigation of social 
and pharmacological exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke as 
possible predictors of perceived nicotine dependence, smoking 
susceptibility, and smoking expectancies among never-smoking 
youth. Nicotine Tob Res. 2011;13:926–933. doi: 10.1093/ntr/
ntr100.
 
29. Wang MP, Ho SY, Lo WS, Lam TH. Smoking family, secondhand 
smoke exposure at home, and nicotine addiction among adoles-
cent smokers. Addict Behav. 2012;37:743–746. doi: 10.1016/j.
addbeh.2012.02.016.
 
30. Lessov-Schlaggar CN, Wahlgren DR, Liles S, Jones JA, Ji M, 
Hughes SC, Swan GE, Hovell MF. Sensitivity to secondhand smoke 
exposure predicts smoking susceptibility in 8-13-year-old never 
smokers. J Adolesc Health. 2011;48:234–240. doi: 10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2010.06.016.
 
31. McIntire RK, Nelson AA, Macy JT, Seo DC, Kolbe LJ. Second-
hand smoke exposure and other correlates of susceptibility to 
smoking: a propensity score matching approach. Addict Behav. 
2015;48:36–43. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2015.04.009.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e354
 
32. Mathur C, Stigler MH, Erickson DJ, Perry CL, Forster JL. 
Transitions in smoking behavior during emerging adulthood: 
a longitudinal analysis of the effect of home smoking bans. 
Am J Public Health. 2014;104:715–720. doi: 10.2105/AJPH. 
2013.301642.
 
33. Active and passive tobacco exposure: a serious pediatric health 
problem: a statement from the Committee on Atherosclerosis and 
Hypertension in Children, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the 
Young, American Heart Association. Circulation. 1994;90:2581–
2590. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.90.5.2581
 
34. Benowitz NL. Cotinine as a biomarker of environmental tobacco 
smoke exposure. Epidemiol Rev. 1996;18:188–204.
 
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Disparities in sec-
ondhand smoke exposure–United States, 1988–1994 and 1999–
2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2008;57:744–777.
 
36. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Vital signs: non-
smokers’ exposure to secondhand smoke–United States, 1999-
2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59:1141–1146.
 
37. Kit BK, Simon AE, Brody DJ, Akinbami LJ. US prevalence and 
trends in tobacco smoke exposure among children and adoles-
cents with asthma. Pediatrics. 2013;131:407–414. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2012-2328.
 
38. Pirkle JL, Bernert JT, Caudill SP, Sosnoff CS, Pechacek TF. 
Trends in the exposure of nonsmokers in the U.S. population 
to secondhand smoke: 1988-2002. Environ Health Perspect. 
2006;114:853–858.
 
39. Agaku IT, Vardavas CI. Disparities and trends in indoor exposure to 
secondhand smoke among U.S. adolescents: 2000-2009. PLoS 
One. 2013;8:e83058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083058.
 
40. Yao T, Sung HY, Mao Z, Hu TW, Max W. Secondhand smoke expo-
sure at home in rural China. Cancer Causes Control. 2012;23(sup-
pl 1):109–115. doi: 10.1007/s10552-012-9900-6.
 
41. Zheng P, Berg CJ, Kegler MC, Fu W, Wang J, Zhou X, Liu D, Fu H. 
Smoke-free homes and home exposure to secondhand smoke in 
Shanghai, China. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2014;11:12015–
12028. doi: 10.3390/ijerph111112015.
 
42. Global Youth Tobacco Survey Collaborative Group. Tobacco 
use among youth: a cross country comparison. Tob Control. 
2002;11:252. doi: 10.1136/tc.11.3.252
 
43. Gajalakshmi V, Kanimozhi C. A survey of 24,000 students aged 
13–15 years in India: Global Youth Tobacco Survey 2006 and 
2009. Tobacco Use Insights. 2010;3:23.
 
44. World Health Organization and Regional Office for South-East Asia. 
Global Youth Tobacco Survey (GYTS): Indonesia Report 2014. Ge-
neva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2015.
 
45. Ho SY, Wang MP, Lo WS, Mak KK, Lai HK, Thomas GN, Lam TH. 
Comprehensive smoke-free legislation and displacement of smok-
ing into the homes of young children in Hong Kong. Tob Control. 
2010;19:129–133. doi: 10.1136/tc.2009.032003.
 
46. Olasky SJ, Levy D, Moran A. Second hand smoke and cardio-
vascular disease in low and middle income countries: a case 
for action. Glob Heart. 2012;7:151–160.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.
gheart.2012.05.002.
 
47. Willers S, Skarping G, Dalene M, Skerfving S. Urinary cotinine 
in children and adults during and after semiexperimental expo-
sure to environmental tobacco smoke. Arch Environ Health. 
1995;50:130–138. doi: 10.1080/00039896.1995.9940890.
 
48. King BA, Patel R, Babb SD. Prevalence of smokefree home rules–
United States, 1992-1993 and 2010-2011. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2014;63:765–769.
 
49. Mannino DM, Caraballo R, Benowitz N, Repace J. Predictors of 
cotinine levels in US children: data from the Third National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey. Chest. 2001;120:718–724.
 
50. Chen X, Stanton B, Hopper J, Khankari N. Sources, locations, 
and predictors of environmental tobacco smoke exposure among 
young children from inner-city families. J Pediatr Health Care. 
2011;25:365–372. doi: 10.1016/j.pedhc.2010.04.014.
 
51. Cartmell KB, Miner C, Carpenter MJ, Vitoc CS, Biggers S, Onices-
cu G, Hill EG, Nickerson BC, Alberg AJ. Secondhand smoke expo-
sure in young people and parental rules against smoking at home 
and in the car. Public Health Rep. 2011;126:575–582.
 
52. Nabi-Burza E, Regan S, Drehmer J, Ossip D, Rigotti N, Hipple 
B, Dempsey J, Hall N, Friebely J, Weiley V, Winickoff JP. Par-
ents smoking in their cars with children present. Pediatrics. 
2012;130:e1471–e1478. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-0334.
 
53. Jones IA, St Helen G, Meyers MJ, Dempsey DA, Havel C, Jacob 
P 3rd, Northcross A, Hammond SK, Benowitz NL. Biomarkers 
of secondhand smoke exposure in automobiles. Tob Control. 
2014;23:51–57. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2012-050724.
 
54. Raoof SA, Agaku IT, Vardavas CI. A systematic review of second-
hand smoke exposure in a car: attributable changes in atmospher-
ic and biological markers. Chron Respir Dis. 2015;12:120–131. 
doi: 10.1177/1479972315575202.
 
55. Pérez-Stable EJ, Herrera B, Jacob P 3rd, Benowitz NL. Nico-
tine metabolism and intake in black and white smokers. JAMA. 
1998;280:152–156.
 
56. Zhang X, Martinez-Donate AP, Kuo D, Jones NR, Palmersheim KA. 
Trends in home smoking bans in the U.S.A., 1995-2007: preva-
lence, discrepancies and disparities. Tob Control. 2012;21:330–
336. doi: 10.1136/tc.2011.043802.
 
57. King BA, Babb SD, Tynan MA, Gerzoff RB. National and state es-
timates of secondhand smoke infiltration among U.S. multiunit 
housing residents. Nicotine Tob Res. 2013;15:1316–1321. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/nts254.
 
58. Office on Smoking Health. The Health Consequences of Involun-
tary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon Gener-
al. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2006.
 
59. Orton S, Jones LL, Cooper S, Lewis S, Coleman T. Predictors 
of children’s secondhand smoke exposure at home: a system-
atic review and narrative synthesis of the evidence. PLoS One. 
2014;9:e112690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112690.
 
60. Pisinger C, Hammer-Helmich L, Andreasen AH, Jørgensen T, 
Glümer C. Social disparities in children’s exposure to second 
hand smoke at home: a repeated cross-sectional survey. Environ 
Health. 2012;11:65. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-65.
 
61. Moore GF, Currie D, Gilmore G, Holliday JC, Moore L. Socioeco-
nomic inequalities in childhood exposure to secondhand smoke 
before and after smoke-free legislation in three UK countries. J 
Public Health (Oxf). 2012;34:599–608. doi: 10.1093/pubmed/
fds025.
 
62. Longman JM, Passey ME. Children, smoking households and 
exposure to second-hand smoke in the home in rural Austra-
lia: analysis of a national cross-sectional survey. BMJ Open. 
2013;3:e003128. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003128.
 
63. Harrod CS, Fingerlin TE, Chasan-Taber L, Reynolds RM, Glueck 
DH, Dabelea D. Exposure to prenatal smoking and early-life body 
composition: the Healthy Start Study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2015;23:234–241. doi: 10.1002/oby.20924.
 
64. Raum E, Küpper-Nybelen J, Lamerz A, Hebebrand J, Herpertz-
Dahlmann B, Brenner H. Tobacco smoke exposure before, during, 
and after pregnancy and risk of overweight at age 6. Obesity (Sil-
ver Spring). 2011;19:2411–2417. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.129.
 
65. Wang L, Mamudu HM, Alamian A, Anderson JL, Brooks B. Inde-
pendent and joint effects of prenatal maternal smoking and ma-
ternal exposure to second-hand smoke on the development of 
adolescent obesity: a longitudinal study. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2014;50:908–915. doi: 10.1111/jpc.12667.
 
66. Thayer KA, Heindel JJ, Bucher JR, Gallo MA. Role of environmental 
chemicals in diabetes and obesity: a National Toxicology Program 
workshop review. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:779–789. 
doi: 10.1289/ehp.1104597.
 
67. McConnell R, Shen E, Gilliland FD, Jerrett M, Wolch J, Chang 
CC, Lurmann F, Berhane K. A longitudinal cohort study of body 
mass index and childhood exposure to secondhand tobacco 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e355
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
smoke and air pollution: the Southern California Children’s Health 
Study [published correction appears in Environ Health Perspect. 
2015;123:A81]. Environ Health Perspect. 2015;123:360–366. 
doi: 10.1289/ehp.1307031.
 
68. Durmus B, Kruithof CJ, Gillman MH, Willemsen SP, Hofman A, Raat 
H, Eilers PH, Steegers EA, Jaddoe VW. Parental smoking during 
pregnancy, early growth, and risk of obesity in preschool children: 
the Generation R Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;94:164–171. doi: 
10.3945/ajcn.110.009225.
 
69. Khanolkar AR, Byberg L, Koupil I. Parental influences on car-
diovascular risk factors in Swedish children aged 5-14 years. 
Eur J Public Health. 2012;22:840–847. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/
ckr180.
 
70. Ayer JG, Belousova E, Harmer JA, David C, Marks GB, Celermajer 
DS. Maternal cigarette smoking is associated with reduced high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol in healthy 8-year-old children. Eur 
Heart J. 2011;32:2446–2453. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr174.
 
71. Neufeld EJ, Mietus-Snyder M, Beiser AS, Baker AL, Newburger JW. 
Passive cigarette smoking and reduced HDL cholesterol levels in chil-
dren with high-risk lipid profiles. Circulation. 1997;96:1403–1407.
 
72. Yang B, Li M, Chen B, Xu Y, Li TD. Deterioration of endothelial func-
tion and carotid intima-media thickness in Tibetan male adolescents 
exposed to second-hand smoke. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone 
Syst. 2012;13:413–419. doi: 10.1177/1470320312440901.
 
73. Valkonen M, Kuusi T. Passive smoking induces atherogenic chang-
es in low-density lipoprotein. Circulation. 1998;97:2012–2016.
 
74. Weitzman M, Cook S, Auinger P, Florin TA, Daniels S, Nguyen M, 
Winickoff JP. Tobacco smoke exposure is associated with the 
metabolic syndrome in adolescents. Circulation. 2005;112:862–
869. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.520650.
 
75. Levy DE, Rigotti NA, Winickoff JP. Medicaid expenditures for chil-
dren living with smokers. BMC Health Serv Res. 2011;11:125. 
doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-11-125.
 
76. Hill SC, Liang L. Smoking in the home and children’s health. Tob 
Control. 2008;17:32–37. doi: 10.1136/tc.2007.020990.
 
77. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Medical-
care expenditures attributable to cigarette smoking during 
pregnancy–United States, 1995. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
1997;46:1048–1050.
 
78. Lightwood JM, Phibbs CS, Glantz SA. Short-term health and eco-
nomic benefits of smoking cessation: low birth weight. Pediatrics. 
1999;104:1312–1320.
 
79. Max W, Sung HY, Shi Y. Childhood secondhand smoke exposure 
and ADHD-attributable costs to the health and education system. 
J Sch Health. 2014;84:683–686. doi: 10.1111/josh.12191.
 
80. Gutstadt LB, Gillette JW, Mrazek DA, Fukuhara JT, LaBrecque JF, 
Strunk RC. Determinants of school performance in children with 
chronic asthma. Am J Dis Child. 1989;143:471–475.
 
81. Ohlund LS, Ericsson KB. Elementary school achievement and ab-
sence due to illness. J Genet Psychol. 1994;155:409–421. doi: 
10.1080/00221325.1994.9914791.
 
82. Richards W. Allergy, asthma, and school problems. J Sch Health. 
1986;56:151–152.
 
83. Levy DE, Winickoff JP, Rigotti NA. School absenteeism among 
children living with smokers. Pediatrics. 2011;128:650–656. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2011-1067.
 
84. Xu X, Bishop EE, Kennedy SM, Simpson SA, Pechacek TF. An-
nual healthcare spending attributable to cigarette smoking: an 
update. Am J Prev Med. 2015;48:326–333. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2014.10.012.
 
85. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Other Partners. Broken Prom-
ises to Our Children: The 1998 State Tobacco Settlement Sixteen 
Years Later. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; 2014.
 
86. Dilley JA, Harris JR, Boysun MJ, Reid TR. Program, policy, and 
price interventions for tobacco control: quantifying the return 
on investment of a state tobacco control program. Am J Public 
Health. 2012;102:e22–e28. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2011.300506.
 87. Lightwood J, Glantz SA. The effect of the California tobacco con-
trol program on smoking prevalence, cigarette consumption, and 
healthcare costs: 1989-2008. PLoS One. 2013;8:e47145. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0047145.
 88. King BA, Peck RM, Babb SD. National and state cost savings as-
sociated with prohibiting smoking in subsidized and public hous-
ing in the United States. Prev Chronic Dis. 2014;11:E171. doi: 
10.5888/pcd11.140222.
 89. California Environmental Protection Agency. Proposed Identification 
of environmental tobacco smoke as a toxic air contaminant, 
Part B: Health Effects. Sacramento, CA: California Environmental 
Protection Agency; 2005.
 90. Hammond SK, Coghlin J, Gann PH, Paul M, Taghizadeh K, Skipper 
PL, Tannenbaum SR. Relationship between environmental tobac-
co smoke exposure and carcinogen-hemoglobin adduct levels in 
nonsmokers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:474–478.
 91. Guerin MR. Formation and physicochemical nature of sidestream 
smoke. IARC Sci Publ. 1987:11–23.
 92. Kritz H, Schmid P, Sinzinger H. Passive smoking and cardiovas-
cular risk. Arch Intern Med. 1995;155:1942–1948.
 93. Martins-Green M, Adhami N, Frankos M, Valdez M, Goodwin B, 
Lyubovitsky J, Dhall S, Garcia M, Egiebor I, Martinez B, Green 
HW, Havel C, Yu L, Liles S, Matt G, Destaillats H, Sleiman M, 
Gundel LA, Benowitz N, Jacob P 3rd, Hovell M, Winickoff JP, 
Curras-Collazo M. Cigarette smoke toxins deposited on surfaces: 
implications for human health. PLoS One. 2014;9:e86391. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0086391.
 94. Jenkins R, Guerin MR, Tomkins BA. The Chemistry of 
Environmental Tobacco Smoke: Composition and Measurement. 
Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers; 2000.
 95. Benowitz NL. Biomarkers of environmental tobacco smoke 
exposure. Environ Health Perspect. 1999;107(suppl 2): 
349–355.
 96. National Research Council Committee on Passive Smoking. 
Environmental Tobacco Smoke: Measuring Exposures and 
Assessing Health Effects. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 1986.
 97. Lodovici M, Akpan V, Evangelisti C, Dolara P. Sidestream tobacco 
smoke as the main predictor of exposure to polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons. J Appl Toxicol. 2004;24:277–281. doi: 10.1002/
jat.992.
 98. Schick S, Glantz S. Philip Morris toxicological experiments 
with fresh sidestream smoke: more toxic than mainstream 
smoke. Tob Control. 2005;14:396–404. doi: 10.1136/tc. 
2005.011288.
 99. Singer BC, Hodgson AT, Guevarra KS, Hawley EL, Nazaroff WW. 
Gas-phase organics in environmental tobacco smoke, 1: effects 
of smoking rate, ventilation, and furnishing level on emission fac-
tors. Environ Sci Technol. 2002;36:846–853.
 
100. Pritchard JN, Black A, McAughey JJ. The physical behavior of 
sidestream smoke under ambient conditions. Environ Technol 
Lett. 1988;9:545–552.
 
101. Benner C, Bayona JM, Caka FM, Tang H, Lewis L, Crawford 
J, Lamb JD, Lee ML, Lewis EA, Hansen LD, Eatough DJ. 
Chemical composition of environmental tobacco smoke, 2: 
particulate phase compounds. Environ Sci Technol. 1989;23: 
688–699.
 
102. National Research Council. Human Biomonitoring for Environmental 
Chemicals. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2006.
 
103. Benowitz NL. Cigarette smoking and cardiovascular disease: 
pathophysiology and implications for treatment. Prog Cardiovasc 
Dis. 2003;46:91–111.
 
104. Chelland Campbell S, Moffatt RJ, Stamford BA. Smoking 
 
and smoking cessation: the relationship between cardiovascular 
 
disease and lipoprotein metabolism: a review. Atherosclerosis. 
 
2008;201:225–235. doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008. 
04.046.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e356
 
105. Therond P. Catabolism of lipoproteins and metabolic syndrome. 
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2009;12:366–371. doi: 
10.1097/MCO.0b013e32832c5a12.
 
106. Bhatnagar A. Cardiovascular pathophysiology of environmental 
pollutants. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004;286:H479–
H485. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00817.2003.
 
107. O’Toole TE, Zheng YT, Hellmann J, Conklin DJ, Barski O, Bhatnagar 
A. Acrolein activates matrix metalloproteinases by increasing re-
active oxygen species in macrophages. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2009;236:194–201. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2009.01.024.
 
108. Smith CJ, Fischer TH. Particulate and vapor phase constituents 
of cigarette mainstream smoke and risk of myocardial infarction. 
Atherosclerosis. 2001;158:257–267.
 
109. Navas-Acien A, Selvin E, Sharrett AR, Calderon-Aranda E, 
Silbergeld E, Guallar E. Lead, cadmium, smoking, and increased 
risk of peripheral arterial disease. Circulation. 2004;109:3196–
3201. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000130848.18636.B2.
 
110. Subramanyam G, Bhaskar M, Govindappa S. The role of cad-
mium in induction of atherosclerosis in rabbits. Indian Heart J. 
1992;44:177–180.
 
111. Lustberg M, Silbergeld E. Blood lead levels and mortality. Arch 
Intern Med. 2002;162:2443–2449.
 
112. Nawrot TS, Thijs L, Den Hond EM, Roels HA, Staessen JA. An 
epidemiological re-appraisal of the association between blood 
pressure and blood lead: a meta-analysis. J Hum Hypertens. 
2002;16:123–131. doi: 10.1038/sj.jhh.1001300.
 
113. Pope CA 3rd, Burnett RT, Thurston GD, Thun MJ, Calle 
EE, 
Krewski 
D, 
Godleski 
JJ. 
Cardiovascular 
mortal-
ity and long-term exposure to particulate air pollution: epide-
miological evidence of general pathophysiological pathways 
of disease. Circulation. 2004;109:71–77. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000108927.80044.7F.
 
114. Bhatnagar A. Environmental cardiology: studying mechanistic links 
between pollution and heart disease. Circ Res. 2006;99:692–
705. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000243586.99701.cf.
 
115. Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA 3rd, Brook JR, Bhatnagar 
A, Diez-Roux AV, Holguin F, Hong Y, Luepker RV, Mittleman MA, 
Peters A, Siscovick D, Smith SC Jr, Whitsel L, Kaufman JD; on 
 
behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Epidemiology 
and Prevention, Council on the Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, 
and Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism. 
Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease: an 
update to the scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2010;121:2331–2378. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e3181dbece1.
 
116. Jauniaux E, Gulbis B, Acharya G, Gerlo E. Fetal amino acid and en-
zyme levels with maternal smoking. Obstet Gynecol. 1999;93(pt 
1):680–683.
 
117. Nafstad P, Hagen JA, Oie L, Magnus P, Jaakkola JJ. Day care 
centers and respiratory health. Pediatrics. 1999;103(pt 
1):753–758.
 
118. Irvine L, Crombie IK, Clark RA, Slane PW, Goodman KE, 
Feyerabend C, Cater JI. What determines levels of passive smok-
ing in children with asthma? Thorax. 1997;52:766–769.
 
119. Preston AM, Ramos LJ, Calderon C, Sahai H. Exposure of Puerto 
Rican children to environmental tobacco smoke. Prev Med. 
1997;26:1–7. doi: 10.1006/pmed.1996.9985.
 
120. Gairola CG, Drawdy ML, Block AE, Daugherty A. Sidestream 
cigarette smoke accelerates atherogenesis in apolipoprotein E-/- 
mice. Atherosclerosis. 2001;156:49–55.
 
121. Tani S, Dimayuga PC, Anazawa T, Chyu KY, Li H, Shah PK, 
Cercek B. Aberrant antibody responses to oxidized LDL and 
increased intimal thickening in apoE-/- mice exposed to ciga-
rette smoke. Atherosclerosis. 2004;175:7–14. doi: 10.1016/j.
atherosclerosis.2004.01.035.
 
122. Zhang J, Jiang S, Watson RR. Antioxidant supplementation 
prevents oxidation and inflammatory responses induced by 
sidestream cigarette smoke in old mice. Environ Health Perspect. 
2001;109:1007–1009.
 
123. Knight-Lozano CA, Young CG, Burow DL, Hu ZY, Uyeminami 
D, Pinkerton KE, Ischiropoulos H, Ballinger SW. Cigarette 
smoke exposure and hypercholesterolemia increase mito-
chondrial damage in cardiovascular tissues. Circulation. 
2002;105:849–854.
 
124. Fetterman JL, Pompilius M, Westbrook DG, Uyeminami D, Brown 
J, Pinkerton KE, Ballinger SW. Developmental exposure to sec-
ond-hand smoke increases adult atherogenesis and alters mito-
chondrial DNA copy number and deletions in apoE(-/-) mice. PLoS 
One. 2013;8:e66835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066835.
 
125. Mullick AE, McDonald JM, Melkonian G, Talbot P, Pinkerton KE, 
Rutledge JC. Reactive carbonyls from tobacco smoke increase 
arterial endothelial layer injury. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2002;283:H591–H597. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.01046.2001.
 
126. Hutchison SJ, Glantz SA, Zhu BQ, Sun YP, Chou TM, Chatterjee 
K, Deedwania PC, Parmley WW, Sudhir K. In-utero and neonatal 
exposure to secondhand smoke causes vascular dysfunction in 
newborn rats. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;32:1463–1467.
 
127. Roberts KA, Rezai AA, Pinkerton KE, Rutledge JC. Effect of en-
vironmental tobacco smoke on LDL accumulation in the artery 
wall. Circulation. 1996;94:2248–2253.
 
128. Zhu BQ, Sun YP, Sievers RE, Isenberg WM, Glantz SA, Parmley 
WW. Passive smoking increases experimental atherosclerosis in 
cholesterol-fed rabbits. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:225–232.
 
129. Hutchison SJ, Sudhir K, Chou TM, Sievers RE, Zhu BQ, Sun 
YP, Deedwania PC, Glantz SA, Parmley WW, Chatterjee K. 
Testosterone worsens endothelial dysfunction associated with 
hypercholesterolemia and environmental tobacco smoke expo-
sure in male rabbit aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:800–807.
 
130. Penn A, Snyder CA. Inhalation of sidestream cigarette smoke ac-
celerates development of arteriosclerotic plaques. Circulation. 
1993;88(pt 1):1820–1825.
 
131. Penn A, Chen LC, Snyder CA. Inhalation of steady-state side-
stream smoke from one cigarette promotes arteriosclerotic 
plaque development. Circulation. 1994;90:1363–1367.
 
132. Deanfield JE, Halcox JP, Rabelink TJ. Endothelial function 
and dysfunction: testing and clinical relevance. Circulation. 
2007;115:1285–1295. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106. 
652859.
 
133. Flammer AJ, Anderson T, Celermajer DS, Creager MA, Deanfield 
J, Ganz P, Hamburg NM, Lüscher TF, Shechter M, Taddei S, Vita 
JA, Lerman A. The assessment of endothelial function: from re-
search into clinical practice. Circulation. 2012;126:753–767. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.093245.
 
134. Celermajer DS. Endothelial dysfunction: does it matter? Is it re-
versible? J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30:325–333.
 
135. Celermajer DS, Sorensen KE, Gooch VM, Spiegelhalter DJ, Miller 
OI, Sullivan ID, Lloyd JK, Deanfield JE. Non-invasive detection of 
endothelial dysfunction in children and adults at risk of athero-
sclerosis. Lancet. 1992;340:1111–1115.
 
136. Matsuzawa Y, Sugiyama S, Sumida H, Sugamura K, Nozaki T, 
Ohba K, Matsubara J, Kurokawa H, Fujisue K, Konishi M, Akiyama 
E, Suzuki H, Nagayoshi Y, Yamamuro M, Sakamoto K, Iwashita S, 
Jinnouchi H, Taguri M, Morita S, Matsui K, Kimura K, Umemura 
S, Ogawa H. Peripheral endothelial function and cardiovascular 
events in high-risk patients. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2:e000426. 
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000426.
 
137. Otsuka R, Watanabe H, Hirata K, Tokai K, Muro T, Yoshiyama 
M, Takeuchi K, Yoshikawa J. Acute effects of passive smok-
ing on the coronary circulation in healthy young adults. JAMA. 
2001;286:436–441.
 
138. Sumida H, Watanabe H, Kugiyama K, Ohgushi M, Matsumura 
T, Yasue H. Does passive smoking impair endothelium-de-
pendent coronary artery dilation in women? J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1998;31:811–815.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e357
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
 
139. Shen Y, Rattan V, Sultana C, Kalra VK. Cigarette smoke con-
densate-induced adhesion molecule expression and transen-
dothelial migration of monocytes. Am J Physiol. 1996;270(pt 
2):H1624–H1633.
 
140. Adams MR, Jessup W, Celermajer DS. Cigarette smoking is as-
sociated with increased human monocyte adhesion to endothelial 
cells: reversibility with oral L-arginine but not vitamin C. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1997;29:491–497.
 
141. Matetzky S, Tani S, Kangavari S, Dimayuga P, Yano J, Xu H, Chyu 
KY, Fishbein MC, Shah PK, Cercek B. Smoking increases tissue 
factor expression in atherosclerotic plaques: implications for 
plaque thrombogenicity. Circulation. 2000;102:602–604.
 
142. Hausberg M, Mark AL, Winniford MD, Brown RE, Somers VK. 
Sympathetic and vascular effects of short-term passive smoke 
exposure in healthy nonsmokers. Circulation. 1997;96:282–287.
 
143. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Venn A, Gall S, Kähönen M, Laitinen 
T, Taittonen L, Lehtimäki T, Jokinen E, Sun C, Viikari JS, Dwyer T, 
Raitakari OT. Parental smoking in childhood and brachial artery 
flow-mediated dilatation in young adults: the Cardiovascular Risk 
in Young Finns study and the Childhood Determinants of Adult 
Health study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012;32:1024–
1031. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.243261.
 
144. Raitakari OT, Adams MR, McCredie RJ, Griffiths KA, Celermajer 
DS. Arterial endothelial dysfunction related to passive smoking 
is potentially reversible in healthy young adults. Ann Intern Med. 
1999;130:578–581.
 
145. Howard DJ, Ota RB, Briggs LA, Hampton M, Pritsos CA. 
Environmental tobacco smoke in the workplace induces oxida-
tive stress in employees, including increased production of 8-hy-
droxy-2’-deoxyguanosine. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 
1998;7:141–146.
 
146. Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Chrysohoou C, Skoumas J, 
Masoura C, Toutouzas P, Stefanadis C; ATTICA Study. Effect of 
exposure to secondhand smoke on markers of inflammation: the 
ATTICA study. Am J Med. 2004;116:145–150.
 
147. Jaimes EA, Sweeney C, Raij L. Effects of the reactive oxygen 
species hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorite on endothelial nitric 
oxide production. Hypertension. 2001;38:877–883.
 
148. Yang Z, Harrison CM, Chuang GC, Ballinger SW. The role of to-
bacco smoke induced mitochondrial damage in vascular dys-
function and atherosclerosis. Mutat Res. 2007;621:61–74. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2007.02.010.
 
149. Priest JR, Nead KT, Wehner MR, Cooke JP, Leeper NJ. Self-
reported history of childhood smoking is associated with an 
increased risk for peripheral arterial disease independent of 
lifetime smoking burden. PLoS One. 2014;9:e88972. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0088972.
 
150. Polak JF, Pencina MJ, Pencina KM, O’Donnell CJ, Wolf PA, 
D’Agostino RB Sr. Carotid-wall intima-media thickness and car-
diovascular events. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:213–221. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1012592.
 
151. Howard G, Wagenknecht LE, Burke GL, Diez-Roux A, Evans GW, 
McGovern P, Nieto FJ, Tell GS. Cigarette smoking and progres-
sion of atherosclerosis: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
(ARIC) Study. JAMA. 1998;279:119–124.
 
152. Chambless LE, Folsom AR, Clegg LX, Sharrett AR, Shahar E, 
Nieto FJ, Rosamond WD, Evans G. Carotid wall thickness is 
predictive of incident clinical stroke: the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities (ARIC) Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2000;151:478–487.
 
153. Chambless LE, Heiss G, Folsom AR, Rosamond W, Szklo M, 
Sharrett AR, Clegg LX. Association of coronary heart disease 
incidence with carotid arterial wall thickness and major risk 
factors: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study, 
1987-1993. Am J Epidemiol. 1997;146:483–494.
 
154. Juonala M, Viikari JS, Laitinen T, Marniemi J, Helenius H, Rönnemaa T, 
 
Raitakari OT. Interrelations between brachial endothelial function and 
carotid intima-media thickness in young adults: the Cardiovascular 
Risk in Young Finns Study. Circulation. 2004;110:2918–2923. 
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000147540.88559.00.
 
155. Kallio K, Jokinen E, Saarinen M, Hämäläinen M, Volanen I, 
Kaitosaari T, Rönnemaa T, Viikari J, Raitakari OT, Simell O. Arterial 
intima-media thickness, endothelial function, and apolipoproteins 
in adolescents frequently exposed to tobacco smoke. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010;3:196–203. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.109.857771.
 
156. Gall S, Huynh QL, Magnussen CG, Juonala M, Viikari JS, Kähönen 
M, Dwyer T, Raitakari OT, Venn A. Exposure to parental smok-
ing in childhood or adolescence is associated with increased 
carotid intima-media thickness in young adults: evidence from 
the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study and the Childhood 
Determinants of Adult Health Study. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2484–
2491. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu049.
 
157. Kaess BM, Vasan RS, Mitchell GF. Aortic stiffness and inci-
dent hypertension: reply. JAMA. 2013;309:30. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2012.68805.
 
158. Mitchell GF, Hwang SJ, Vasan RS, Larson MG, Pencina MJ, 
Hamburg NM, Vita JA, Levy D, Benjamin EJ. Arterial stiff-
ness and cardiovascular events: the Framingham Heart 
Study. 
Circulation. 
2010;121:505–511. 
doi: 
10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.886655.
 
159. Mack WJ, Islam T, Lee Z, Selzer RH, Hodis HN. Environmental 
tobacco smoke and carotid arterial stiffness. Prev Med. 
2003;37:148–154.
 
160. Stefanadis C, Vlachopoulos C, Tsiamis E, Diamantopoulos L, 
Toutouzas K, Giatrakos N, Vaina S, Tsekoura D, Toutouzas P. 
Unfavorable effects of passive smoking on aortic function in 
men. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128:426–434.
 
161. Taal HR, de Jonge LL, van Osch-Gevers L, Steegers EA, Hofman 
A, Helbing WA, van der Heijden AJ, Jaddoe VW. Parental smok-
ing during pregnancy and cardiovascular structures and func-
tion in childhood: the Generation R Study. Int J Epidemiol. 
2013;42:1371–1380. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyt178.
 
162. Schuetze P, Eiden RD. The association between maternal 
smoking and secondhand exposure and autonomic functioning 
at 2-4 weeks of age. Infant Behav Dev. 2006;29:32–43. doi: 
10.1016/j.infbeh.2005.07.001.
 
163. Dixit S, Pletcher MJ, Vittinghoff E, Imburgia K, Maguire C, 
Whitman IR, Glantz SA, Olgin JE, Marcus GM. Secondhand smoke 
and atrial fibrillation: data from the Health eHeart Study. Heart 
Rhythm. 2016;13:3–9. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.08.004.
 
164. Cryer PE, Haymond MW, Santiago JV, Shah SD. Norepinephrine 
and epinephrine release and adrenergic mediation of smoking-
associated hemodynamic and metabolic events. N Engl J Med. 
1976;295:573–577. doi: 10.1056/NEJM197609092951101.
 
165. Narkiewicz K, van de Borne PJ, Hausberg M, Cooley RL, Winniford 
MD, Davison DE, Somers VK. Cigarette smoking increases sym-
pathetic outflow in humans. Circulation. 1998;98:528–534.
 
166. Laustiola KE, Lassila R, Kaprio J, Koskenvuo M. Decreased beta-
adrenergic receptor density and catecholamine response in male 
cigarette smokers: a study of monozygotic twin pairs discordant 
for smoking. Circulation. 1988;78(pt 1):1234–1240.
 
167. Laustiola KE, Kotamäki M, Lassila R, Kallioniemi OP, Manninen V. 
Cigarette smoking alters sympathoadrenal regulation by decreas-
ing the density of beta 2-adrenoceptors: a study of monitored 
smoking cessation. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1991;17:923–928.
 
168. Sheps DS, Herbst MC, Hinderliter AL, Adams KF, Ekelund LG, 
O’Neil JJ, Goldstein GM, Bromberg PA, Dalton JL, Ballenger MN, 
Davis SM, Koch GG. Production of arrhythmias by elevated car-
boxyhemoglobin in patients with coronary artery disease. Ann 
Intern Med. 1990;113:343–351.
 
169. Plank B, Kutyifa V, Moss AJ, Huang DT, Ruwald AC, McNitt S, 
Polonsky B, Zareba W, Goldenberg I, Aktas MK. Smoking is 
associated with an increased risk of first and recurrent ven-
tricular tachyarrhythmias in ischemic and nonischemic patients 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Raghuveer et al
October 18, 2016 
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443
e358
with mild heart failure: a MADIT-CRT substudy. Heart Rhythm. 
2014;11:822–827. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2014.02.007.
 
170. Engström G, Hedblad B, Janzon L, Juul-Möller S. Ventricular ar-
rhythmias during 24-h ambulatory ECG recording: incidence, risk 
factors and prognosis in men with and without a history of cardio-
vascular disease. J Intern Med. 1999;246:363–372.
 
171. D’Alessandro A, Boeckelmann I, Hammwhöner M, Goette A. 
Nicotine, cigarette smoking and cardiac arrhythmia: an overview. 
Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2012;19:297–305.
 
172. Kaul B, Calabro J, Hutcheon DE. Effects of carbon monoxide on 
the vulnerability of the ventricles to drug-induced arrhythmias. J 
Clin Pharmacol. 1974;14:25–31.
 
173. Aronow WS, Stemmer EA, Wood B, Zweig S, Tsao KP, Raggio 
L. Carbon monoxide and ventricular fibrillation threshold in 
dogs with acute myocardial injury. Am Heart J. 1978;95: 
754–756.
 
174. McMartin KI, Platt MS, Hackman R, Klein J, Smialek JE, Vigorito 
R, Koren G. Lung tissue concentrations of nicotine in sudden in-
fant death syndrome (SIDS). J Pediatr. 2002;140:205–209. doi: 
10.1067/mpd.2002.121937.
 
175. Mitchell EA, Ford RP, Stewart AW, Taylor BJ, Becroft DM, 
Thompson JM, Scragg R, Hassall IB, Barry DM, Allen EM, Roberts 
AP. Smoking and the sudden infant death syndrome. Pediatrics. 
1993;91:893–896.
 
176. Schoendorf KC, Kiely JL. Relationship of sudden infant death 
syndrome to maternal smoking during and after pregnancy. 
Pediatrics. 1992;90:905–908.
 
177. Pollack HA. Sudden infant death syndrome, maternal smoking 
during pregnancy, and the cost-effectiveness of smoking cessa-
tion intervention. Am J Public Health. 2001;91:432–436.
 
178. Anderson HR, Cook DG. Passive smoking and sudden infant 
death syndrome: review of the epidemiological evidence [pub-
lished correction appears in Thorax. 1999;54:365–366]. 
Thorax. 1997;52:1003–1009.
 
179. Comstock GW, Lundin FE Jr. Parental smoking and perinatal mor-
tality. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1967;98:708–718.
 
180. Malloy MH, Kleinman JC, Land GH, Schramm WF. The association 
of maternal smoking with age and cause of infant death. Am J 
Epidemiol. 1988;128:46–55.
 
181. Rush D, Kass EH. Maternal smoking: a reassessment of the 
association with perinatal mortality [published correction ap-
pears in Am J Epidemiol. 1973;97:425]. Am J Epidemiol. 
1972;96:183–196.
 
182. Poswillo D. Report of the Scientific Committee on Tobacco and 
Health. London, UK: The Stationery Office; 1998.
 
183. Office on Smoking Health. Women and Smoking: A Report of the 
Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention; 2001.
 
184. Schramm WF. Smoking during pregnancy: Missouri longitudinal 
study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 1997;11(suppl 1):73–83.
 
185. Mathews TJ, Menacker F, MacDorman MF; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. 
Infant mortality statistics from the 2002 period: linked birth/in-
fant death data set. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2004;53:1–29.
 
186. Davis P, Price L, Heatman B, Bailey L, John N, Rolfe K. Sudden 
Unexpected Death in Infancy: A Collaborative Thematic Review 
2010–2012: Child Death Review Programme and All Wales 
Perinatal Survey. Cardiff, Wales: Public Health Wales NHS Trust; 
2015.
 
187. US Department of Health Human Services. The Health 
Consequences of Smoking for Women: A Report of the Surgeon 
General. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, Public Health Service, Office of the Assistant Secretary 
for Health, Office on Smoking; 1986.
 
188. Behm I, Kabir Z, Connolly GN, Alpert HR. Increasing prevalence of 
smoke-free homes and decreasing rates of sudden infant death 
syndrome in the United States: an ecological association study. 
Tob Control. 2012;21:6–11. doi: 10.1136/tc.2010.041376.
 
189. Slotkin TA. Fetal nicotine or cocaine exposure: which one is 
worse? J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1998;285:931–945.
 
190. Slotkin TA, Pinkerton KE, Garofolo MC, Auman JT, McCook 
EC, Seidler FJ. Perinatal exposure to environmental tobacco 
smoke induces adenylyl cyclase and alters receptor-mediated 
cell signaling in brain and heart of neonatal rats. Brain Res. 
2001;898:73–81.
 
191. Slotkin TA, Pinkerton KE, Seidler FJ. Perinatal environmen-
tal tobacco smoke exposure in rhesus monkeys: critical 
periods and regional selectivity for effects on brain cell de-
velopment and lipid peroxidation. Environ Health Perspect. 
2006;114:34–39.
 
192. Fifer WP, Fingers ST, Youngman M, Gomez-Gribben E, Myers 
MM. Effects of alcohol and smoking during pregnancy on infant 
autonomic control. Dev Psychobiol. 2009;51:234–242. doi: 
10.1002/dev.20366.
 
193. Franco P, Chabanski S, Szliwowski H, Dramaix M, Kahn A. 
Influence of maternal smoking on autonomic nervous system in 
healthy infants. Pediatr Res. 2000;47:215–220.
 
194. Cohen G, Vella S, Jeffery H, Lagercrantz H, Katz-Salamon M. 
Cardiovascular stress hyperreactivity in babies of smokers and 
in babies born preterm. Circulation. 2008;118:1848–1853. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.783902.
 
195. Harper RM. Sudden infant death syndrome: a failure of compen-
satory cerebellar mechanisms? Pediatr Res. 2000;48:140–142. 
doi: 10.1203/00006450-200008000-00004.
 
196. Neff RA, Humphrey J, Mihalevich M, Mendelowitz D. Nicotine en-
hances presynaptic and postsynaptic glutamatergic neurotrans-
mission to activate cardiac parasympathetic neurons. Circ Res. 
1998;83:1241–1247.
 
197. Huang ZG, Wang X, Dergacheva O, Mendelowitz D. Prenatal 
nicotine exposure recruits an excitatory pathway to brainstem 
parasympathetic cardioinhibitory neurons during hypoxia/hy-
percapnia in the rat: implications for sudden infant death syn-
drome. Pediatr Res. 2005;58:562–567. doi: 10.1203/01.
PDR.0000179380.41355.FC.
 
198. Arborelius E, Hallberg AC, Håkansson A. How to prevent expo-
sure to tobacco smoke among small children: a literature review. 
Acta Paediatr Suppl. 2000;89:65–70.
 
199. Klerman L. Protecting children: reducing their environmental 
tobacco smoke exposure. Nicotine Tob Res. 2004;6(suppl 
2):S239–S253. doi: 10.1080/14622200410001669213.
 
200. Wewers ME, Uno M. Clinical interventions and smoking ban 
methods to reduce infants’ and children’s exposure to envi-
ronmental tobacco smoke. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 
2002;31:592–598.
 
201. Adair CE, Patten S. A review of interventions for reduction of resi-
dential environmental tobacco smoke exposures among children. 
Paediatr Child Health. 2001;6:70–79.
 
202. Emmons KM, Wong M, Hammond SK, Velicer WF, Fava JL, 
Monroe AD, Evans JL. Intervention and policy issues related to 
children’s exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Prev Med. 
2001;32:321–331. doi: 10.1006/pmed.2000.0822.
 
203. Roseby R, Waters E, Polnay A, Campbell R, Webster P, Spencer 
N. Family and carer smoking control programmes for reducing 
children’s exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2003:CD001746.
 
204. Priest N, Roseby R, Waters E, Polnay A, Campbell R, Spencer N, 
Webster P, Ferguson-Thorne G. Family and carer smoking control 
programmes for reducing children’s exposure to environmental 
tobacco smoke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD001746.
 
205. Rosen LJ, Myers V, Hovell M, Zucker D, Ben Noach M. Meta-
analysis of parental protection of children from tobacco smoke 
exposure. Pediatrics. 2014;133:698–714. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2013-0958.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Childhood Secondhand Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Circulation. 2016;134:e336–e359. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000443 
October 18, 2016
e359
CLiniCAL STATEmEnTS 
AnD GUiDELinES
 
206. Baxi R, Sharma M, Roseby R, Polnay A, Priest N, Waters 
E, Spencer N, Webster P. Family and carer smoking con-
trol programmes for reducing children’s exposure to envi-
ronmental tobacco smoke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014;3:CD001746.
 
207. Task Force on Community Preventive Services. Recommendations 
regarding interventions to reduce tobacco use and exposure to 
environmental tobacco smoke. Am J Prev Med. 2001;20(suppl): 
10–15.
 
208. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health 
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents; National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines 
for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and 
Adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics. 2011;128(suppl 5): 
S213–S256.
 
209. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Reduced sec-
ondhand smoke exposure after implementation of a comprehen-
sive statewide smoking ban–New York, June 26, 2003-June 30, 
2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2007;56:705–708.
 
210. Jarvis MJ, Sims M, Gilmore A, Mindell J. Impact of smoke-free 
legislation on children’s exposure to secondhand smoke: coti-
nine data from the Health Survey for England. Tob Control. 
2012;21:18–23. doi: 10.1136/tc.2010.041608.
 
211. Cheng KW, Glantz SA, Lightwood JM. Association between 
smokefree laws and voluntary smokefree-home rules. Am J Prev 
Med. 2011;41:566–572. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2011.08.014.
 
212. Chaloupka FJ, Straif K, Leon ME; Working Group, International 
Agency for Research on Cancer. Effectiveness of tax and price 
policies in tobacco control. Tob Control. 2011;20:235–238. doi: 
10.1136/tc.2010.039982.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
