 Research paper
Adding Spice to the Porridge1: The development of a synthetic
cannabinoid market in an English prison
Rob Ralphsa,*, Lisa Williamsb, Rebecca Askewa, Anna Nortona
a Manchester Metropolitan University, United Kingdom
b University of Manchester, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 9 May 2016
Received in revised form 26 September 2016
Accepted 18 October 2016
Available online xxx
Keywords:
Synthetic cannabinoids
Mandatory drug tests
Prisons
New psychoactive substances
A B S T R A C T
Background: In 2014, the annual report of the Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Prisons (HMIP) for England
and Wales raised concerns regarding New Psychoactive Substance (NPS) use in custody, specifically the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids. To date, however, the use of these substances in prison
populations, and the markets that have emerged to facilitate it, have been under-researched.
Methods: Our research was conducted in an English adult male prison using multi-method techniques.
These included: in-depth interviews and focus groups with prison staff and prisoners; observations of
prisoner-led focus groups, workshops and restorative justice circles involving discussion of synthetic
cannabinoid use and markets; and analysis of routinely collected prison data measuring drug seizures,
incidents of violence and incidents of self-harm.
Results: The findings highlight: (1) the scale and nature of synthetic cannabinoid markets in a custodial
setting and the motivations for establishing them; (2) the nature and motivations for synthetic
cannabinoids use in prison; and (3) the impact synthetic cannabinoid markets in this setting have upon
prisoners, the prison system and the wider criminal justice system. The policy implications of the stated
motivations for use and reported problems are discussed in relation to both prison and community
settings, and the recently implemented Psychoactive Substance Act (2016).
Conclusion: The paper concludes that the rise in synthetic cannabinoid use in custody and the size of the
drug market are posing significant challenges to the management of offenders; including healthcare,
appropriate detection techniques, license recall and sanctions for both use and supply. We argue that the
primary motivation for consumption in this setting is the avoidance of drug use detection, and that this is
likely to supersede other motivations for consumption in the future. We propose a revision of the use of
mandatory drug tests (MDTs) both in prisons and in the management of offenders in the community.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
‘NPS [synthetic cannabinoids] have created significant
additional harm and are now the most serious threat to the
safety and security of the prison system that our inspections
identify.’ (HMIP, 2015a: 7)
Introduction
The number of new psychoactive substances (NPS) – illicit
substances designed to mimic the effects of traditional drugs –
identified 
globally 
has 
increased 
exponentially, 
with 
latest
estimates 
ranging 
between 
500–600 
substances 
(EMCDDA,
2016a; UNODC, 2015). Synthetic cannabinoids comprise the largest
group identified, representing about a third (EMCDDA, 2015;
UNODC, 2015). They mimic the effects of the main psychoactive
substance found in cannabis, Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and
attach to cannabinoid receptors in humans (UNODC, 2011). In
England, the Home Office Forensic Early Warning System routinely
analyse test purchases and seized samples. In 2015, samples
analysed from headshops, online vendors and 10 prisons found the
1 ‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his porridge’. The
term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used
to be, a common food in prison. The term is also thought to be a pun on the much
older slang word for prison, ‘stir’.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: R.Ralphs@mmu.ac.uk, robralphs@gmail.com (R. Ralphs).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.10.003
0955-3959/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Drug Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/drugpo
 most commonly identified synthetic cannabinoids were 5F-AKB-
48 and 5F-PB22 (Home Office, 2015). The majority of the
substances recorded were mixtures of more than one different
compound. In England and Wales, an initial popular brand of
synthetic cannabinoids was Spice. The original version (JWH-018)
was banned in 2009. Common brand names at the time of writing
include 
Annihilation, 
Hipster, 
Green 
Joker, 
Kronic, 
Pandora’s
Box Reborn and Vertex Space Cadet.
While the number of different NPS and synthetic cannabinoids
identified has grown rapidly, levels of consumption recorded in
general 
population 
surveys 
in 
different 
continents 
remain
relatively low (see AIHW, 2014; European Commission, 2014;
Home Office, 2012; Johnston, O’Malley, Miech, Bachman, &
Schulenberg, 2016), especially when compared with traditional
legal substances. Our current understanding of NPS consumption
and the motivations for use is largely taken from general
household populations or groups of young people and clubbers
(see, for example, AIHW, 2014; Lader, 2015; Johnston et al., 2016;
Measham, Wood, Dargan, & Moore, 2011; Measham, Moore, &
Østergaard, 2011). In this paper, we focus upon a user group – male
adult prisoners – who are absent in conventional drugs survey
research. In doing so, we document how an established and
lucrative prison drugs market provides easy access to one category
of 
NPS, 
synthetic 
cannabinoids. 
We 
describe 
the 
primary
motivations for the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids in
this setting and the impact consumption has upon users’ health,
recovery journeys and the prison regime. We argue that the
primary motivation for the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids
in prison is the avoidance of detection of drug use. We go on to
document a range of harms associated with the consumption of
synthetic cannabinoids in this environment and suggest that the
well-being of prisoners and prison staff is jeopardized by current
policies. In this respect, we recommend policy responses designed
to reduce drug-related harms in prison.
The growth in the manufacture of NPS, their wide availability
and their subsequent use have had a significant global impact on
drug policy in the past decade (for a useful review see EMCDDA,
2016b). One of the most recent policy responses occurred in the UK
on May 26th 2016 with the implementation of the Psychoactive
Substances Act. The main objective of the Act is to restrict
availability by preventing shops and websites trading in NPS or
‘legal highs’, as they are commonly referred to in the UK. The Act
follows in the footsteps of similar prohibition legislation in Ireland
and Poland. Under this legislation, the production, supply and/or
possession with the intent to supply a psychoactive substance if it
produces a psychoactive effect2 are criminalised. Possession of a
psychoactive substance is not an offence, except in a ‘custodial
institution’ 
(e.g. 
adult 
prison 
or 
young 
offender 
institute),
punishable with an additional sentence of up to two years. This
exception reflects recent concerns and debates about the extent of
use and related harms in prisons in England and Wales (see Centre
for Social Justice, 2015; HMIP, 2014, 2015a, 2015b, 2016; RAPt,
2015; User Voice, 2016). In discussing the problem in prisons, HMIP
reports use the term NPS to refer to one particular category,
synthetic cannabinoids. In prisons in England and Wales, the term
Spice or Mamba, making reference to another popular brand, Black
Mamba, are used generically to refer to a wide variety of products
containing synthetic cannabinoids. Our paper provides a case
study of the use of synthetic cannabinoids and describes an
established synthetic cannabinoids market in an adult male
English prison. We discuss the likely impact the new Act may
have upon supply and use in this setting.
We commence with a brief review of contemporary research
regarding the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids in general
populations in England and Wales. We go on to sketch out existing
knowledge on drug use in prisons in England and Wales, the
motivations for it and the harms connected to it, focusing on
synthetic cannabinoids. We argue that while there is a fledging
body of research beginning to explore the consumption of
synthetic cannabinoids among more vulnerable populations,
including the prison population, further research is required to
understand this emerging trend. Following this, we outline our
mixed methods strategy and present the findings from our
research. We assert that the consumption of synthetic cannabi-
noids presents distinctive problems for the offender population
and the management of them both within and beyond the prison
environment. We conclude with a discussion of the wider
implications of our results for criminal justice and drug policies.
Background and context
As noted, there has been an upward trend in the number of
NPS detected globally with synthetic cannabinoids being the
largest group identified (EMCDDA, 2016a; UNODC, 2015). Yet,
levels of consumption across the world are relatively low in
general population surveys (AIHW, 2014; European Commission,
2014; Home Office, 2012; Johnston et al., 2016). For instance, past
year 
prevalence 
of 
synthetic 
cannabinoids 
in 
the 
general
household population in the 2011/12 Crime Survey for England
and Wales – the last time data was collected about this substance
– stood at 0.1% for adults aged 16–59 (Home Office, 2012). In a
recent review of international research, NEPTUNE (2015) pinpoint
the main motivations among general population recreational
drug users for the consumption of all types of NPS as price, purity,
availability, desired effects and legal status (see also Home Office,
2014). One of the shortcomings of current NPS research is it has
largely drawn its samples from recreational drug using popula-
tions, including clubbers, LGBT communities and young people
(Castellanos, Singh, Thornton, Avila, & Moreno, 2011; Champion,
Teesson, & Newton, 2016; European Commission, 2011, 2014;
Measham et al., 2011; Measham & Moore, 2009; Winstock, 2011;
Wood, Measham, & Dargan, 2012; Wood, Hunter, Measham, &
Dargan, 2012), and via online or household surveys (AIHW, 2014;
Carhart-Harris, King, & Nutt, 2011; Global Drug Survey, 2015;
Home Office, 2012). Relying on data from these samples limits
existing knowledge because they exclude populations who are
more likely to be dependent or problematic users of these
substances, for example, the homeless and those incarcerated.
Moreover, the motivations for NPS consumption for these users
may differ from other user groups. For instance, researchers in
Australia and the US have found that those subject to regular
MDTs use synthetic cannabinoids because of their non-detectable
nature (see Barratt, Cakic, & Lenton, 2013; Bebarta, Ramirez, &
Varney, 2012; Perrone et al., 2013). This paper similarly focuses on
the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids and the motivations
for use within a specific subpopulation, in this case, adult male
prisoners in an English prison.
The consumption of drugs in prisons in England and Wales is
not a new phenomenon. Djemil (2008) argues it is widespread,
forming a fundamental part of prison life. Researchers have
previously found levels of drugs consumption to be extremely
high. Edgar and O’Donnell (1998), for example, reported that
75% 
of 
prisoners 
had 
taken 
drugs 
in 
prison. 
Wilkinson,
Hucklesby, Pearson, Butler, & Hill (2003) also found a similar
level of drugs consumption (70%). Drugs typically taken in prison
are 
those 
which 
provide 
depressant 
effects, 
cannabis 
and
2 Alcohol, caffeine and nicotine are exempt. The Secretary of State can make
additional exemptions after consultation with the Advisory Council on the Misuse
Drugs. Medicinal products, as defined by the Human Medicines Regulations (2012),
and drugs already controlled by the Misuse of Drugs Act (1971) are also be exempt.
2 
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 heroin, 
and 
to 
a 
lesser 
extent 
diverted 
medications 
(e.g.
Benzodiazepines, opioid analgesics) (see Edgar & O’Donnell,
1998; Penfold, Turnbull, & Webster, 2005; Singleton, Meltzer, &
Gatward, 1998; Wilkinson et al., 2003). More recently, evidence
suggests that patterns of drug use in prisons are changing from
these traditional illegal substances and diverted medications to
synthetic cannabinoids. Analysing drug seizure data from prisons
in 
England 
and 
Wales, 
the 
Centre 
for 
Social 
Justice
(2015) concluded that the number of synthetic cannabinoids
seized has increased rapidly. In 2010 there were 15 recorded
seizures, by the first seven months of 2014, this had risen to
430. Simultaneously, seizures of traditional drugs decreased.
These data suggest prison drugs markets are transforming and
that the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids is growing.
Indeed, the 2014 annual report of Her Majesties Inspectorate of
Prisons (HMIP, 2014) was unequivocal in its claim that synthetic
cannabinoids had become entrenched in the prison system in
England and Wales. Two years later, the current Inspector of
Prisons asserted they are even more prevalent and are having a
‘dramatic and destabilising effect’ on prisons and prisoners
(HMIP, 2016: 8). As we outline below, synthetic cannabinoids are
perceived to pose significant problems connected to violence,
self-harm, suicide and mental health issues. Yet, compared to
general population studies, there is a lack of research with this
population. Little is known about this new drugs market, for
example, its scale, how it is established and operates, and its
profitability. Yet, previous research suggests it is a lucrative
business. Crewe (2005), for instance, argues substances in prison
are sold for three to four times their street value. Nevertheless,
studies of any form of prison drug dealing are rare (Crewe, 2006;
Tompkins, 2016). In this respect, our research fills this knowledge
gap in providing a picture of how an established synthetic
cannabinoids market operates in an English prison.
The few studies that have been undertaken with the prison
population report that Spice is increasingly becoming the ‘drug of
choice’ for prisoners, estimating that between sixty to ninety per
cent of the prison population have used it in prison (Centre for
Social Justice, 2015; HMIP, 2015b). A recent survey of 684 male
prisoners across nine prisons in England and Wales stated ‘ . . . it
can be estimated with some confidence that over half of prisoners
in our survey had used Spice in prison.’ (User Voice, 2016: 16).
Furthermore, it has been argued many prisoners are regular users
(Baker, 2015; Centre for Social Justice, 2015; User Voice, 2016). The
User Voice report, for instance, found past month use of synthetic
cannabinoids by one in three prisoners. These levels of consump-
tion are remarkable given, at the time of writing, there are over
85,000 people residing in prisons in England and Wales (Howard
League for Penal Reform, 2016). Prevalence is substantially higher
than general population estimates. Using the figure recorded by
the 2011/12 Crime Survey for England and Wales (Home Office,
2012) approximately 36,000 (0.1%) adults aged 16–59 reported
past year use of synthetic cannabinoids. Prison research estimates
make it conceivable that there are more users of synthetic
cannabinoids in prisons in England and Wales than in the general
population. Even taking the lower end of the estimate (60%), this
equates to around 51,000 prisoners in England and Wales using
synthetic cannabinoids while in prison. Evidently, there is a
disparity between general and prison population estimates. Our
paper 
begins 
to 
explore 
this, 
describing 
how 
a 
synthetic
cannabinoids drug market operates in an English prison, and the
extent and nature of consumption, together with the motivations
for it within this setting.
Researchers have identified a range of motivations for drug use
in prisons in England and Wales (see Wheatley, 2007 for an
overview and useful typology). The most persistent and dominant
motivations are boredom and escapism, others include relaxation,
addiction and avoiding drug use detection in MDTs3 (Boys et al.,
2002; Cave, 2014; Cope, 2003; Hassan, 1996; Penfold et al., 2005;
RAPt, 2015; Swann & James, 1998; Walker, 2015; User Voice, 2016;
Wilkinson et al., 2003). Many link these motivations to the prison
environment and some argue that prison life can exacerbate drug
use (see Stark, Herrmann, Ehrhardt, & Bienzle, 2006; Swann &
James, 1998; 
Wheatley, 
2007) 
Similar 
motivations 
for 
the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids in this environment have
been found. Walker (2015: 18–19) concluded prisoners admit to
using Spice to ‘clear their mind’, ‘manipulate time’, and ‘escape the
basic confines of prison life’. These findings chime with the
pioneering work of Cohen and Taylor (1976) who discuss drug use
as a form of ‘mindscaping’ to remove oneself from a current
situation. Similar assertions are made in the recent User Voice
report ‘Bird4 Killer’ in which over half (54%) of drug users in prison
stated ‘boredom’ as a reason for consumption and many noted how
Spice ‘kills time’ and ‘makes prison life more bearable’ (User Voice,
2016). Addiction has also been identified as a key reason for the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids in prisons, with some
prisoners describing how their patterns of use were habitual, ‘like a
crack addiction’ (RAPt, 2015: 4). For example, Baker (2015)
reported that 20% of his sample of male prisoners perceived
themselves to be addicted to synthetic cannabinoids. Perhaps one
of the over-riding initial motivations for the consumption of these
substances is the avoidance of a positive MDT and the sanctions
that will be imposed. User Voice (2016) identified this as the most
widely stated motivation (69%) for the consumption of synthetic
cannabinoids in prisons. Indeed, researchers have found switching
to substances that are not detectable in MDTs to be common
practice for drug users in this setting (see Djemil, 2008; Farrell,
Singleton, & Strang, 2000; Singleton et al., 2005; Singleton, 2008).
Cannabis users, for example, have reported starting to consume
heroin in prison because opiates remain in blood, urine or saliva
samples for a much shorter period than cannabis and, therefore,
are less likely to be detected in random MDTs (see Singleton, 2008;
Woodall, 2011). It has been argued this is a key driver for synthetic
cannabinoids consumption among the prison population, as well
as their less detectable smell compared to cannabis (Home Office,
2014; NEPTUNE, 2015; RAPt, 2015; Walker, 2015). We now go on to
explore the impact of synthetic cannabinoids upon the prison
system in England and Wales.
The 2014/15 annual report of HMIP (HMIP, 2015a: 34)
recognised for the first time a link between synthetic cannabinoids
consumption and an unprecedented increase (38%) in serious
assaults in adult male prisons between 2012/13 and 2013/14:
‘The increase in the use of new psychoactive substances
[synthetic cannabinoids] was a significant factor in the increase
in violent incidents in many prisons – either directly as a result
of prisoners being under the influence of these drugs or in
increased bullying due to drug debts.’
3 MDTs were introduced in prisons in England and Wales in 1996. Under
Section 16A of the Prison Act 1952 and Prison Rule 50 YOI Rule 53, they are
implemented under five categories: 1. Prisoners selected on a strictly random basis;
2. Testing when a prison has reason to believe a prisoner has misused drugs; 3. Risk
assessment testing when a prisoner is being considered for a privilege such as
Release on Temporary Licence, or a job where a high degree of trust is to be granted;
4. Selection on a frequent testing programme due to previous drug misuse; 5.
Testing on reception. Disciplinary action may result from a positive test under
Prison Rule 51(9) or YOI Rule 55(10) (Criminal Justice and Courts Bill, 2015. Fact
sheet: Drug testing in prisons. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/322190/fact-sheet-drug-testing-in-
prisons.pdf Accessed 1st May 2016).
4 The term ‘doing Bird’ is slang for ‘doing time in prison’. It emanates from
London’s Cockney rhyming slang “bird-lime” meaning time.
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
3
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 Similar escalations in the incidents of violence have been
documented in subsequent annual reports. Most recently, the 2016
report recorded increases on the previous year of 27% for the
number of assaults and an increase of 31% for serious assaults
(HMIP, 2016). Violence in this context not only potentially affects
all prisoners, but staff too. The Ministry of Justice documented a
36% rise (from 3640 to 4963 incidents) in violence against staff
between 2015 and 2016 (Ministry of Justice, 2016a). Furthermore,
similar percentage increases have been recorded for self-harm
(25%) and suicides (27%) (see also Prisons and Probations
Ombudsman, 2015; Ministry of Justice, 2016a). All of these
increases are primarily attributed to the consumption of synthetic
cannabinoids in prisons. As we go on to demonstrate in our
findings, the development of a synthetic cannabinoids market in
the prison we studied contributed to incidents of violence in a
number of ways.
A range of health and well-being harms among general
population users, associated with acute intoxication and chronic
levels of consumption, have been identified in respect of synthetic
cannabinoids (see Barratt et al., 2013; Bebarta et al., 2012;
Castellanos et al., 2011; Every-Palmer, 2010, 2011; Harris & Brown,
2013; Hurst, Loeffler, & McLay, 2011; Thomas, Bliss, & Malik, 2012;
Van Der Veer & Friday, 2011; Zimmermann et al., 2009). They
include addiction, aggression, agitation, depression, hallucina-
tions, muscle spasms, paranoia, psychosis, self-harm, ‘fitting’,
seizures and suicidal thoughts. As Castellanos et al. (2011) note,
users report drug effects are variable and unpredictable, even
when using the same brand.5 However, there has been a lack of
research exploring how they affect users in prison, many of whom
are likely to have a history of drug dependency and existing mental
health concerns. In England and Wales, it has been estimated that
70% of prisoners are drug dependent on entering prison (House of
Commons Home Affairs Committee, 2013). Furthermore, the
Prison Reform Trust (2016) found around three-quarters of
prisoners in England and Wales have pre-existing mental health
problems with many suffering from two or more mental health
conditions, and around 20% having four or five major mental health
disorders (see also Birmingham, 2003). Moreover, levels of
psychiatric disorders among the male prison population are
estimated to be 14 times greater than in the general population
(Singleton 
et 
al., 1998). 
Given 
the 
potential 
for 
synthetic
cannabinoids to trigger mental health issues in the general
population, reports of high levels of consumption among the
prison population are a significant concern, especially because of
their propensity for addiction and pre-existing mental health
conditions. Papanti et al. provide a systematic review of the
literature regarding synthetic cannabinoids and related psycho-
pathological issues. They argue that:
‘Although a clear causal link may not be here identified, the
available evidence suggests that SC [synthetic cannabinoids]
can 
trigger 
the 
onset 
of 
acute 
psychosis 
in 
vulnerable
individuals and/or the exacerbation of psychotic episodes in
those with a previous psychiatric history.’ (Papanti et al., 2013:
379)
In summary, we have argued that our knowledge of the
prevalence, motivations and harms related to synthetic cannabi-
noids and other NPS use is largely skewed towards the general
population and recreational drug users. The prison population
represents a subgroup for which further research is required. The
small body of current prison research in England (see Baker, 2015;
Centre for Social Justice, 2015; RAPt, 2015; User Voice, 2016;
Walker, 
2015) 
suggests 
rates 
of 
consumption 
of 
synthetic
cannabinoids are much greater than in the general population,
as is the potential for harm in this setting. Previous researchers
have examined drug use, the motivations for it and to a lesser
extent drug markets in prisons in England and Wales. However, it
appears 
a 
transformation 
may 
be 
occurring 
in which 
the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids is replacing traditional
drugs (e.g. cannabis and heroin). Even though there is a small
emerging body of evidence regarding the consumption of synthetic
cannabinoids in prisons in England (see the Centre for Social
Justice, 2015; User Voice, 2016), more is necessary to contribute
further to our knowledge of levels of prevalence and patterns of
use, as well as the motivations for consumption in this setting.
Furthermore, prison drug markets appear to be changing (HMIP,
2015b) and little is known about these new markets, for example,
their magnitude, profitability and how they establish and operate.
Our paper makes an important contribution to existing knowledge
about the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids among vulnera-
ble and drug dependent populations, and in particular, our
understanding of synthetic cannabinoid markets in custodial
settings.
Methodology
The research took place in a category B6 local7 English prison for
adult males, over a six-month period between May and October
2015. The research was directly commissioned and ethically
approved by the prison.8 It was initiated as part of the prisons
wider response9 to a variety of indicators suggesting that synthetic
cannabinoids were affecting prisoners, and the management and
day to day operation of the prison. This included a substantial
growth in recorded seizures of synthetic cannabinoids and a range
of serious incidents involving prisoners and staff, perceived to be
related to these substances.
We 
employed 
a 
mixed 
methods 
strategy, 
however, 
our
approach largely generated data in the ethnographic tradition.
We analysed existing quantitative data provided by the prison
regarding recorded prison drug seizures. In addition, we undertook
5 Often brand names are retained, but the contents of products can vary. For
instance, some products may comprise different types and amounts of synthetic
cannabinoids. Regarding the latter, this may be a result of the manufacturing
process leading to 'hot spots', concentrations of synthetic cannabinoids in plant
matter.
6 Prisoner security categories in England consist of one of four classifications
assigned to every adult prisoner (aged 21 and over) for the purposes of allocating
them to an appropriate prison. The categories are based upon the severity of the
crime and the risk posed should the person escape. These categories are derived
from a combination of the type of crime committed, the length of sentence, the
likelihood of escape, and the danger to the public if they were to escape. For adult
male prisoners, there are four security categories: Category A—Prisoners whose
escape would be highly dangerous to the public or the police or the security of the
State and for whom the aim must be to make escape impossible. Category B—
Prisoners for whom the very highest conditions of security are not necessary but for
whom escape must be made very difficult. Category C—Prisoners who cannot be
trusted in open conditions but who do not have the resources and will to make a
determined escape attempt. Category D—Prisoners who present a low risk, can
reasonably be trusted in open conditions and for whom open conditions are
appropriate (see Grimwood, 2015).
7 The term ‘local’ means that this prison holds people on remand to the local
courts as well as sentenced prisoners.
8 Ethical approval was subsequently obtained from the university and local
authority research governance.
9 The prison viewed itself as leading the way in terms of innovative responses to
synthetic cannabinoids use in prisons. In addition to commissioning the research,
they were working with chemists in developing new methods of testing drug
seizures and urine samples. They had also established an ‘NPS basic wing’ for
prisoners caught in possession or ‘under the influence’ of synthetic cannabinoids.
They also developed restorative justice circles, awareness training for staff and
prisoners and a peer recovery mentoring scheme that were focused on synthetic
cannabinoid use.
4 
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 observations of the prison visiting area, viewing video footage of
‘bodycam’ recordings of prison staff dealing with prisoners under
the influence of synthetic cannabinoids, and observing and
participating in NPS awareness workshops and restorative justice
circles in which prisoners and prison staff discussed their
experiences of synthetic cannabinoids and the impact of them.
These components of the research were undertaken prior to
collection of data via individual or focus group interviews to ensure
that we were as informed as we could be about the situation and to
establish relationships with prisoners and prison staff.
We then collected further data via formal face-to-face, semi-
structured interviews with 19 prison staff (15 male, 4 female). They
were purposively sampled to ensure they incorporated a range of
different roles thereby providing a variety of perspectives. These
interviewees included duty managers and staff working in or
responsible for nursing, recovery wings, programmes and training,
prison visits, security and operations, cell searches, mandatory
drug testing and ex-prisoners employed as recovery mentors.
Semi-structured interviews were also conducted with seven
prisoners10 and a further twenty prisoners participating in four
focus groups. The number of participants in focus groups ranged
between three to six prisoners. Prisoner interviewees were aged
from the mid-20s to mid-50s; 25 were white British and two were
Black British. Participation was voluntary and participants gave
informed consent.11 Prisoners were also purposively sampled.
They were accessed through the substance use recovery teams and
the ‘NPS basic wing’.12 Staff in these teams informed prisoners on
their caseloads about the research. We asked staff to ensure anyone
referred to us was experienced in synthetic cannabinoid use and
included some who had been caught dealing or bringing synthetic
cannabinoids into the prison. We also requested that prisoners
were selected from different wings of the prison and included
those who had reported violence, debt and mental health effects
linked to the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids. One of the
four focus groups consisted of three peer recovery mentors who
were responsible for delivering many of the interventions on the
NPS basic wing, such as, awareness sessions and restorative justice
circles. 
Hence, 
they 
were 
also 
selected 
for 
their 
in-depth
knowledge. All prisoners interviewed had used synthetic canna-
binoids in custody and many of them, including all seven prisoners
who were interviewed in-depth, were or had been experienced,
dependent drug users. These interviewees had extensive drug
careers involving the consumption of a range of substances,
including heroin, crack cocaine, cocaine, cannabis, alcohol, other
stimulants and psychedelics, as well as opioid medications, such
as, 
Subutex, 
methadone, 
benzodiazepines 
and 
a variety of
sedatives and anti-psychotics.
All focus groups were conducted on the NPS basic wing. To
facilitate focus group discussion and ensure it was not dominated
by one or two participants, two members of the research team
were present in each focus group. The research team comprised of
a postgraduate student conducting her first primary research
through to three other established and experienced researchers,
each with over a decade of research experience and all having
collected data via focus groups in the past, with drug users and in
this setting. During focus groups and individual interviews,
participant’s accounts of drug use, harms and markets, including
weights, distribution routes and profit margins, were rigorously
examined and, when appropriate, challenged. The interviews and
focus groups ranged from 45 min to two hours in length. All
interviews and focus groups were recorded and transcribed in full.
These data were uploaded to NVivo, a software package for
qualitative data analysis, and analysed using a thematic strategy
allowing us to identify the extent, nature of, motivations for, and
problems associated with the consumption of synthetic cannabi-
noids in the prison. In the following section, we present our
findings from the interview data together with the primary finding
from our analysis of drug seizure monitoring data.
Markets, prevalence, motivations and consequences
It’s the new thing. It’s like the new heroin, it’s a big problem.
(Prisoner 4: Daily Spice user)
The findings presented commence with an overview of the
synthetic cannabinoids market. We draw particular attention to its
lucrative nature and the impact this has on offender management
and the prison regime. Having established the market exists, we
then turn to focus on the extent of synthetic cannabinoids
consumption and the motivations for use; and the reported effects
of synthetic cannabinoids and the impact these have upon
prisoners, the prison regime and the wider criminal justice system.
The Spice market in an English prison
Research examining prison drug markets in England and Wales
has uncovered the supply of cannabis, heroin and diverted
medications (Crewe, 2006; Djemil, 2008; Farrell et al., 2000;
Penfold et al., 2005; Singleton et al., 2005). More recent reports
have highlighted how synthetic cannabinoids’ have replaced these
traditional drugs markets (HMIP, 2014, 2015a; Home Office, 2014;
RAPt, 2015). This transformation of the prison drugs market was
supported by our analysis of drug seizure data collected by the
prison showing seizures of traditional drugs, such as cannabis and
heroin were significantly lower than synthetic cannabinoids. In the
first three months of 2015, recorded amounts of recovered
synthetic cannabinoids (973 g) far outweighed the quantities of
cannabis (15 g) and heroin (3 g) seized by the prisons’ security and
operations team, a pattern that had been established for over a
year. Nevertheless, it is only when comparing seizure data from
previous years that the enormity of the shift towards a synthetic
cannabinoids market becomes evident. By the first quarter of 2015,
the 
amount 
of 
synthetic 
cannabinoids 
seized 
had 
already
overtaken the total amount for 2014 (969 g), representing a
400% increase. In contrast, cannabis seizures had decreased by over
60%. The full scale of the change in the prison’s drug market is only
fully apparent when we look back even further. In 2005, one
month’s recorded drug seizures of cannabis was 2 kg with a further
60 g of heroin recovered.
The Centre for Social Justice (2015) suggest the main motivation
for establishing this new drugs market in prisons is profit – as well
as the low risk of being caught – estimating, in relation to Spice,
that it sells for £100 per gram in prison. Similarly, we uncovered a
lucrative and thriving synthetic cannabinoids market with huge
profit margins. At wholesale prices (purchases of 100 g or more), an
ounce (28 g) could be widely obtained for as little as £84 (£3 per
gram) outside the prison via online sellers or high street headshops
10 A total of 40 interviews were arranged and rearranged. However, disruption to
the daily prison regime often led to prisoners being unable to attend the
prearranged interview time and location.
11 We acknowledge the limitations and discourse that surrounds the extent to
which those held in criminal justice settings can provide consent (see Hodgson
et al., 2006; Klockars, 1974).
12 This dedicated NPS wing was established for prisoners who were caught in
possession or under the influence of NPS. Prisoners were initially placed on what
was known ‘NPS basic’ or ‘Mamba basic’ for four weeks which entailed being
stripped of privileges, such as, extra visits, higher rates of pay, and in-cell televisions
earned under the Incentives and Earned Privileges (IEP) scheme. However, if
prisoners fully participated in interventions to reduce their NPS use, for example,
awareness training and restorative justice circles they were eligible to return to
their original wing and regained their IEP after two weeks.
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
5
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 and resold inside the prison, typically compressed in the lid of a
soft drink for an astounding £100 per gram.13 Spice was also sold to
prisoners in ‘fifty balls’ (half a gram) or in ready rolled ‘spliffs’ or
‘joints’ to further maximise profit margins. The mark-up for
synthetic cannabinoids in this prison far exceeded those docu-
mented by Crewe (2005). His ethnography of prison drug dealing
suggested that drugs in prison cost three to four times the price in
the community.
Responding to the broad scale, lucrative synthetic cannabinoids
market, which exists both throughout and beyond the prison
estate 
presents 
a 
significant 
challenge 
for 
criminal 
justice
professionals and policymakers. In this prison, the synthetic
cannabinoids market was firmly established across all prison
wings, including the ‘drug free’ recovery wing. Prisoners also
reported similar synthetic cannabinoids use and availability
throughout the prison system in England and Wales. Some
prisoners estimated that up to a third of the wider prison
population were involved at different levels in the selling of
synthetic cannabinoids, either as distributors in specific wings of a
prison, as drug ‘runners’ selling and delivering for distributors, or
as ‘suppliers’. As we now outline, one way prisoners were involved
in supplying the market was through the system of license recall.
Flashbacks: the abuse of license recall
The establishment of this synthetic cannabinoids market also
has implications for the Probation Service and the management of
offenders in the community. In understanding how prison drug
markets establish, researchers have identified visits, prison staff
and prisoners as key supply routes (see Penfold et al., 2005). Our
analysis of security reports coupled with staff and prisoners
perspectives revealed how synthetic cannabinoids entered the
prison through a variety of traditional routes, including prison
visits, prison staff, and over the prison wall or in the post. Yet, there
were also a number of novel ways synthetic cannabinoids were
entering the prison, including via drones14 and, due to the
availability of synthetic cannabinoids in liquid form, security staff
reported detecting these substances sprayed onto books, letters
and children’s drawings. However, because the prison was a local
prison, many prison staff and prisoners noted that by far the most
widely deployed route was via new prisoners, especially those
serving short sentences on license recall15:
. . . 
because we are a local prison we get the local people
coming in and you get people coming in and out, in and out, and
you get people bringing it [synthetic cannabinoids] in with
them because it’s so cheap and available to buy in the
community. (Prison Recovery Worker, NPS Lead)
. . . everyone keeps going and coming back in on these recalls
with more drugs. (Prisoner 2: Daily Spice user)
Our research uncovered strong evidence that the license recall
system – a cornerstone of offender management, intended to act
as a deterrent and motivation for offenders to change their
behaviour – is routinely and systematically abused to bring
synthetic cannabinoids into prison:
I’d definitely say people [who] are coming in on [license] recalls
to prison and short sentences [are bringing in Spice and
Mamba] just to make some money and go back out. The lads
[prisoners] will tell you themselves, ‘I’m going to come back in.
I’m going to go out, get some Spice and Mamba and then I’m
going to come back in and I’m going sell it and make thousands
of pounds’. (Prison Recovery Worker)
Prisoners described how it was relatively easy to be recalled. As
this prisoner suggests, missing probation appointments was
sometimes enough to warrant a short return to custody.
. . . I’d not go [to my] probation [appointment] and come in
and get paid £1000 for coming in, you know what I mean, you
get paid £1000 for coming in full of Mamba for 2 week . . . I’d
probably come back if someone offered me £1000, if I needed it,
that’s a down payment for a house that, you know what I mean?
You don’t get that off no one else for cheap, unless I go out
robbing, you know what I mean? It would be the safest fucking
way coming back in here, just passing it on and think ‘Right,
well I’ve been paid, two weeks and I’ll go home’. Madness!
(Prisoner 2: Daily Spice user)
In 
concealing 
synthetic 
cannabinoids 
internally 
for 
this
purpose, prisoners discussed the practice of ‘plugging’16 using
Kinder egg toy packaging wrapped in condoms. The problem for
prisons in England and Wales is that restrictions are imposed on
intimate searching and many drugs are, therefore, brought into the
prison system in this way. It was reported that two to four ounces
(approximately 50–100 g) of synthetic cannabinoids plant matter
or powder could be compressed into each egg and three or four
eggs could be packed or ‘plugged’ by a prisoner. It is conceivable
that up to 10 ounces (280 g) with a prison value of £28,000 could be
smuggled in by a new prisoner. As the interviewee above, and other
prisoners noted, there appeared to be substantial profits to be
made which could be used as a form of currency to help an
individual complete their sentence, for down payments on
accommodation on release, or to pay off debts. These lucrative
profit margins – one prisoner claimed that another inmate had
made £100,000 dealing synthetic cannabinoids during a recent six
month jail sentence – are a key reason why synthetic cannabinoids
have taken over other traditional drugs markets in the prison.
Occasionally, it was noted how some prisoners were involved in
more organised and large-scale dealing:
When I went on A2 [prison wing] there were a kid on there
down the block with 4 ounce stuffed up him, he had two others
on the wing with four ounce as well, you know what I mean? It’s
a lot of Mamba that. (Prisoner 5: Daily Spice user).
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that these stated profits and
amounts maybe atypical and prone to exaggeration. More
typically, prisoners discussed how they or other prisoners
smuggled in one ounce of synthetic cannabinoids:
They are coming [in to prison] purposely for that oner [one
ounce] which is worth £3000. (Prisoner 3, Focus Group 4)
This 
section 
has 
outlined 
the 
profitability 
of 
synthetic
cannabinoids and the main routes by which they enter the prison.
These huge profit margins far outweigh previous profits associated
with drug dealing in prisons and provide a key explanation for why
synthetic cannabinoids have replaced traditional substances (e.g.
cannabis and heroin) in prison drugs markets. As we go on to
discuss later, recent policy changes aimed at improving offender
13 It is reasonable to speculate that a gram is less than a gram making profits
margins potentially even more lucrative.
14 A drone is a small pilotless or remote control aircraft.
15 In England and Wales, prisoners serving more than one day in prison are
released on a minimum 12 month license or parole with certain conditions attached
to their release. Offenders may be recalled if they commit and/or are charged for a
further offence or their Offender Manager (Probation Officer) believes that they are
likely to during their license period. For high-risk offenders (e.g. violent or sexual
offenders) a standard recall may result in having to serve the remainder of their
sentence. However, in the majority of cases, a fixed term recall system operates
imposing a further 28 days in custody (Offender Rehabilitation Act, 2014).
16 Plugging was the term used to describe how drugs or other proscribed items
such as mobile phones were concealed in the anus.
6 
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 rehabilitation and reducing drug harms are having the opposite
effect and are in fact sustaining the synthetic cannabinoids market
both within and beyond the prison environment in England and
Wales. Without the availability of synthetic cannabinoids in the
prison, the consumption of these substances would not occur. We
now go on to outline prevalence of use and motivations for it in this
setting.
The new drug on the block
Spice is now the dominant drug of choice. It always used to
be gear [heroin] and Subutex, but that’s all gone now, ain’t it?
It’s all Spice. (Prisoner 4: Daily Spice user)
There’s not that much gear [heroin] about anymore you know
what I mean, or weed. I’ve had one joint since I’ve been here. I’ve
been here two and a half month and had one proper spliff. You
don’t see weed, you don’t see much of anything else but Mamba.
(Prisoner 5: Daily Spice user)
Prisoners consistently discussed how traditional drugs markets
had diminished, often noting the scarcity of heroin and cannabis.
However, diverted medications, such as, Subutex, Pregabalin and
Buscopan,17 as well as anabolic steroids, were available and used,
yet not to the degree of synthetic cannabinoids. Although prisoners
used the generic terms Spice or Mamba, and substances entered the
prison without the usual branded packaging, prisoners were
knowledgeable about the different brands available to them. They
reported consuming in prison other popular brands found in
headshops and online stores, such as, Annihilation, Cherry Bomb,
Clockwork Orange and Vertex. Twenty-six of the 27 prisoners
reported first using synthetic cannabinoids in the prison system. Of
these, 20 reported daily use and a further four used several times
per week. Only the three peer recovery mentors we interviewed
had desisted from using. Estimates of the extent of consumption
among the prison population varied, with some prison staff
suggesting conservative estimates as low as a third – they
acknowledged more was likely to be occurring ‘behind cell doors’
– and prisoners consistently estimating prevalence as high as 80–
90%.
I can count on two hands, about seven lads who don’t smoke it
on our wing . . . 98 lads on the wing, do you know what I
mean? . . . It is 90% of the jail who’ll be on it. There’s only a few
lads on every wing that don’t do it. (Focus Group 3, Prisoner 1:
Ex-Spice user working as a Recovery Peer Mentor)
These higher estimates made by prisoners are consistent with
recent national estimates of synthetic cannabinoids prevalence
ranging from 60 to 90% among the prison population of England
and Wales (see Centre for Social Justice, 2015) and other studies
(see User Voice, 2016). It was even suggested in the prison where
we collected our data that around 30–40% of the population
residing in the ‘drug free’ wing were using synthetic cannabinoids.
The motivations for such high levels of use are now considered.
Motivations for synthetic cannabinoids use in the prison
The wide accessibility of synthetic cannabinoids within the
prison, along with, as we discuss below, the altered state of reality
they induce and the failure of MDTs to detect them, were primary
motivations for their consumption. Furthermore, synthetic can-
nabinoids were described as a perfect prison drug:
You get high, you don’t have to have as much in there, obviously
the piss test don’t come up, it doesn’t smell. All of the things
you’d have to be aware of while your trying to get through your
jail as quick as possible, its completely taken all that out, just by
buying Spice instead of weed [cannabis] so it’s a win–win
situation . . . If there was a piss test, I think a lot of people
might switch back to weed, only because it’s safer. (Prisoner 3:
Daily Spice user)
Pleasure, as a reason for the consumption of synthetic
cannabinoids was relatively absent in the prisoner interviewees.
Nevertheless, some did note how they ‘had a laugh’ with friends
when they used it. Furthermore, all prisoners and many staff
described how the regular practices of ‘spiking’, giving a person
Spice without their knowledge, and the ‘Mamba challenge’, being
offered synthetic cannabinoids for free if a person agrees to
smoking half a gram in a bong, of other, often vulnerable prisoners
provided entertainment and relieved boredom.
Some people who can’t pay for Mamba and they can’t afford
it . . . someone will give them a bong just to watch them go
under.18 (Prisoner 1: Daily Spice user)
This was especially the case at weekends when a combination
of no work, education or other purposeful activities, more prisoner
association and less staff on duty, created an environment in which
this could occur.
They spike people with it. You know, someone says ‘Give us a bit
of that burn [tobacco]’ and they’ve absolutely packed it out with
Mamba, and they give it to someone who’s never touched it
before. Then they buzz off it for 10 minutes just to see ‘em go
under. Half of the lads in the workshop are sat in the corner
laughing their heads off, thinking it’s hilarious! (Focus Group 3:
Prisoner 2: Ex-infrequent Spice user working as a Peer Recovery
Mentor)
As previous research has noted, the prison environment often
encourages drug use (see Penfold et al., 2005; Swann & James,
1998; Tompkins & Wright, 2012). We found similar motivations for
the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids, which revolved
around their functionality in this environment. Prisoners discussed
how synthetic cannabinoids provided an escape from the reality
and routine of prison life, what they referred to as a ‘head shift’,
‘time killer’ or ‘taking away the bars’:
. . . because you’re not working, your banged up 21 hours a
day, it’s [prison’s] gonna get to your head, no matter what, it
does. [ . . . ] If you’re smoking that, it’s like having a party or a
laugh or whatever, it’s a head change. It’s like what I said at the
beginning, it’s a day out in your head, innit. (Focus Group1:
Prisoner 1 Daily Spice user)
However, in contrast to many previous studies exploring the
motivations for drug use in prisons (see for example Penfold et al.,
2005; 
Wheatley, 
2007), 
the 
prevailing 
motivation 
for 
the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids in the prison, along with
their easy accessibility, was the inability of existing MDTs to
identify them:
NPS [synthetic cannabinoids] is one of your biggest, biggest
drugs of choice in the prison. Basically, because they know we
can’t test for it [ . . . ] they know they’ll get away with it.
(Operations Staff)
17 Buscopan is an antispasmodic medication commonly prescribed to relieve
painful aches and spasms in the bowel associated with Irritable Bowel Syndrome. In
discussing other current and emerging drug trends, several prisoners noted the use
of this prescribed drug for non-medicinal purposes and how it was consumed by
being crushed and snorted.
18 ‘Go under’ in this context refers to experiencing a negative reaction as a result of
taking a drug. These can take the form of a psychological mental and/or physical
reaction, for instance, feeling nauseous, anxious, light headed or passing out.
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
7
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 A positive MDT result for an unauthorised substance, like heroin
or cannabis, may result in loss of privileges, or affect a parole
outcome or prison categorisation decision (NOMS, 2015). These
significant 
consequences 
provided 
key 
motivations 
for 
the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids instead of detectable
drugs.
If I have a [cannabis] spliff and get tested I’m getting days
[added to my sentence]. With Mamba now, yeah, I’m getting
nothing. I can blaze [smoke] in front of whoever! (Focus Group
1: Prisoner 4 Regular Spice user)
. . . it [synthetic cannabinoids] don’t come back in urine tests.
You know when we do urine tests, they don’t test for it at the
moment. With cannabis and anything else like, heroin and
benzos [Benzodiazepines] and anything like that, you get urine
tested. (Focus Group1: Prisoner 1: Daily Spice user)
Our findings resonate with those of Perrone et al. (2013) who
found that cannabis users in California temporarily switched to
synthetic cannabinoids to avoid positive drug tests when subject to
community correctional supervision, residing in a sober living
facility, seeking employment or wanting to join the military.
However, unlike Perrone et al.’s sample, many prisoners reported
continued use beyond the prison environment due to what they
described as the potency and strength compared to cannabis, or
their perceived addictiveness, as we discuss later.
In addition to avoiding drug tests, this section has highlighted
how the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids can be more
broadly linked to prison regimes and the psychological impact of
prison life (see, for example, Stark et al., 2006; Swann & James,
1998). The situation that prisoners are released into (e.g. approved
premises, 
unemployment, 
insecure 
housing, 
etc.) 
may 
also
contribute to the continued motivation to use synthetic cannabi-
noids in the community. Prison populations are more socially and
economically disadvantaged than the general population. Fifteen
per cent are homeless before entering custody (Ministry of Justice,
2012a) and half report a history of debt (National Offender
Management Service, 2007). Moreover, in 2012, 47% left education
with no qualifications, with only 32% in employment prior to
custody, and 13% having never been employed, leading to a lack of
opportunities for work beyond the prison gates (Ministry of Justice,
2012b). These factors are likely to provide further motivation to
continue to use synthetic cannabinoids upon release from prison.
An increase in psychoactive drug use within this population
presents 
further 
challenges 
to 
rehabilitation, 
recovery 
and
resettlement.
The implications of synthetic cannabinoids markets for recovery
journeys, prisoner’s health and well-being, and prison regimes.
Historically, prisons have provided an environment for many
problematic drug users – usually those consuming heroin and/or
crack cocaine – to stop taking drugs or stabilise their consumption
(Swann & James, 1998; Tompkins, Neale, Sheard, & Wright, 2007).
An EU review suggested that periods of incarceration offer an
opportunity to reduce drug use and engage with treatment
services (EMCDDA, 2012). Indeed, Tompkins et al. (2007) found
that injecting drug users reported intentionally entering prison to
receive drug treatment. The current widespread availability of
synthetic cannabinoids in custody, coupled with their non-
detectability in MDTs, and perceived addictive qualities, were
reported to be affecting the recovery journeys of problematic
substance users. For those withdrawing from other substances,
such as heroin, synthetic cannabinoids were readily available as an
alternative:
If someone’s come in and they’ve been using a fair few
substances at a high quantity in the community, and then they
now find themselves withdrawing, people throw it [synthetic
cannabinoids] at them and know that they’ll take it. (Focus
Group 1, Prisoner 5: Daily Spice user)
Drug dependent prisoners who would normally stabilise or
abstain from drug use during their sentence, bemoaned the easy
accessibility of synthetic cannabinoids across the prison and how it
was hindering this process. The following prisoner who had used
heroin for over twenty years stated:
I would normally get myself cleaned up in here on the
[recovery] wing. Nowadays, you’re hitting the Mamba. (Prison-
er 2: Daily Spice user)
All of the prisoners involved in the research were experienced
drug users, many reported early onset of substance use, with over
half recounting a decade or more of dependent use of heroin and/
or crack cocaine. A key message they consistently emphasised was
that synthetic cannabinoids were worse than any other substance
they had experience of using. A minority further discussed how
their consumption of synthetic cannabinoids had replaced their
dependent consumption of other drugs:
I was addicted to Mamba as well on the outside and that
overtook a heroin addiction. That’s how addictive it is, it’s bad
[ . . . ] I was on £80 worth of heroin and 60 ml of methadone and
it overtook that addiction, just overtook it. (Prisoner 1: Daily
Spice user)
While a small body of research (see Brakoulias, 2012; Every-
Palmer, 2011; Zimmermann et al., 2009) has emerged suggesting
that synthetic cannabinoids cause more psychological harm than
cannabis, synthetic cannabinoids were perceived by some of our
interviewees to be more psychologically and physically addictive
compared to other substances (e.g. heroin and crack cocaine).
Withdrawal symptoms perceived to be associated with the
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids included stomach cramps,
loss of appetite, twitching limbs or sweating and/or altered mental
or emotional well-being.
. . . it is addictive, physically [ . . . ] I’ve done it where I’ve been
off it a few days and I’ve been sweating, shaking, getting
twitches and everything, when I’ve been smoking really bad in
jail and stuff. (Prisoner 1: Daily Spice user)
Continued consumption of synthetic cannabinoids reportedly
kept these withdrawal symptoms at bay. As further evidence of the
addictive nature of these substances, both prison staff and
prisoners noted how users sold items, such as their clothing, to
raise money to buy synthetic cannabinoids.
Prisoners also often discussed the potency of synthetic
cannabinoids:
You only need a little bit. These guys that are new to it, they
build one the same way they would a normal spliff and ‘bang’!
They’re gone. Even me yeah, I’ve been smoking and using all
sorts for years, but sometimes two drags now, yeah, and I’m
gone, have to stub it out and lie down in my pad for a couple of
hours. (Prisoner 6: Daily Spice user)
Nevertheless, 
many 
reported 
quickly 
building 
tolerance.
They described their patterns of consumption as addictive
leading to some prisoners reporting smoking as much as five
grams per day and staff frequently recounting how prisoners
owed drug debts of £10,000 or more. With an average prison wage
of £9 per week, payment was typically made via telephone or
online banking or using ‘quick cash’ scratch cards available
through some bookmakers. Debts incurred through smoking
synthetic cannabinoids led to violent assaults on prisoners, or
threatening texts, phone calls and personal visits to family
members. Furthermore, prisoners and family members were
pressured to assist in bringing synthetic cannabinoids in via visits
or prison recall.
8 
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 . . . they’re all doing it because it is big bucks, it’s massive
bucks, or they’re in massive debt. . ‘Here’s a way to clear your
debt, take some in, get it in to ‘such-a-body’, and then, your
debts cleared’. (Operations Staff)
Others were coerced into holding synthetic cannabinoids for
prison dealers.
In addition to these adverse experiences, many prisoners also
discussed how the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids had
negatively impacted upon their mental health. A review of NPS
identified a range of psychopharmacological effects associated
with synthetic cannabinoids including anxiety, severe depression,
self-harm, paranoia and psychosis (Home Office, 2014). Our
findings support this identifying a similar range of mental health
effects that staff and prisoners attributed to the consumption of
synthetic 
cannabinoids. 
All 
prisoner 
interviewees 
reported
experiencing anxiety or depression, while others recounted bouts
of paranoia during or after consuming these substances
Recent reports from the Inspectorate of Prisons for England and
Wales (HMIP 2014, 2015a) and Ministry of Justice (2016a) have
linked the rise in self-harm and suicides in custodial settings with
an increase in seizures and consumption of synthetic cannabi-
noids. Our findings provide further evidence for this association.
Prisoners described to us episodes of self-harm or suicidal
thoughts after consuming synthetic cannabinoids:
I slashed myself all over. I thought my veins were snakes
wrapping themselves around me so I sat there in my cell
slashing them all. (Prisoner 5: Daily Spice user)
Do you know what I’m surprised at, what’s not a regular
occurrence about Mamba is suicides? . . . a few times when
I’ve gone under I’ve started thinking proper negative thoughts
about myself like ‘why have I turned out this way?’, ‘why am I
here?’, ‘why am I in jail again?’, but magnified, do you know
what I mean, times ten . . . (Prisoner 7: Daily Spice user)
Others discussed how they believed their consumption of
synthetic cannabinoids induced psychosis:
It ended up giving me psychosis, the doctors said ‘that Mamba’s
give you psychosis, it’s messing your head up’. So I was hearing
voices and all sorts and I thought it was normal. (Focus Group 1,
Prisoner 5: Ex-daily user of Spice, now occasional)
Castellanos 
et 
al. 
(2011) 
report, 
compared 
to 
cannabis,
hallucinations are five times more likely to occur after consuming
synthetic cannabinoids. Prison staff associated acts of violence,
usually towards them, or self-harming, with prisoners experienc-
ing psychotic episodes or hallucinations after consuming synthetic
cannabinoids. They recalled how prisoners lashed out at them and
the research team reviewed video footage of prisoners in psychotic
states:
A prison officer was stabbed in the face with a key because there
was someone who had taken NPS and was in the middle of the
yard. He’s gone out to see him, and this guy was hallucinating
thinking that the rest of the inmates on the yard were ants
trying to get away from him, but he was a monster going to him.
So as he’s gone to him and said ‘Are you alright?’, he’s just got
his key out and stabbed him. (Prison Custody Officer)
Some prison staff were concerned about the long-term
psychological impact synthetic cannabinoids appeared to have
upon some prisoners:
It’s quite frightening [ . . . ] There are some extreme reactions. .
And there’s lads that we’ve known for years, they’ve changed.
I’m not sure what type of research has been done on the long-
term effects, I’m guessing there’s not much at the moment, but
psychologically they’ve changed these lads. (First Response
Team)
Although infrequent, violent and psychotic incidents had a
particularly traumatic impact on the staff and prisoners who
experienced and witnessed them, and, in turn, created a climate of
apprehension and fear within the prison workforce:
. . . there’s been an increase in staff being worried about
dealing with an incident because we see them so often. I would
presume that, you don’t know what you’re going to deal with
once you get there, so it’s quite daunting coming into work to
think, you don’t know what’s going to happen and you’ve seen
some quite bad experiences. (Prison Recovery Worker)
Responding to incidents like those described impacted upon
staff resources. In an episode involving violence, three officers are
required to attend and restrain a prisoner. If a prisoner is
hospitalised – such a regular occurrence following seizures, acute
respiratory problems, psychosis or coma that ambulances have
been renamed ‘Mambulances’ by prisoners – two staff are required
to stay with them until they are discharged (see also Centre for
Social Justice, 2015). An increase in these incidents impacts on the
ability to undertake other daily duties, whether that is healthcare,
or supervision and monitoring of a prison wing, especially as
officers may be called from across the prison to respond to an
incident. Consequently, it affects the overall prison regime, safety
and security, as the following prison officer noted:
I think it impacts upon everybody, health care staff, it can
impact upon the regimes of the jail, they’re called ‘daily
regimes’, because if we’ve got an incident at 8 o’clock in the
morning, those staff have to deal with it. It can put the daily
regime 20–30 min behind, which means obviously people are
restricted for their times at work. If we’ve got visitors coming in
for appointments and things like that, it can impact upon them
as well. It can impact upon your legal visits, if there’s a delay
then they can’t take their legal visits on time. So it’s a domino
effect really, you have to take staff out of certain areas to deal
with that incident, it means that they can’t be doing their daily
job at that time. (Security Team)
The impact of synthetic cannabinoids related incidents in
restricting the ability of staff to get prisoners safely to and from
education, 
training 
and 
other activities, 
together 
with 
the
implications of this for a reform programme based on enhancing
prisoner education in rehabilitation and resettlement, was noted in
the most recent HMIP Report (HMIP, 2016).
In summary, we found that there was an established and
profitable synthetic cannabinoids market in the prison making
access to these substances easy. Consequently, levels of consump-
tion were high and use was perceived to be widespread. In line
with the 2015 HMIP Report and User Voice (HMIP, 2015b; User
Voice, 2016), the main motivations for their use were their non-
detectability, in particular, the avoidance of a positive MDT, as well
as the functions they provided in the prison environment as a form
of escapism or relieving boredom (see also User Voice, 2016). The
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids also appeared to be
affecting recovery journeys of prisoners, particularly when these
substances were available on drug recovery wings. Furthermore,
the widespread consumption of synthetic cannabinoids impacted
upon the physical and mental health of prisoners, as well as their
financial circumstances. Staff were increasingly required to
respond to immediate issues associated with anxiety, depression
and in some extreme cases, violence and psychotic episodes,
which, in turn, created a culture of apprehension among prison
staff. The findings offer support for the suggestion that the recent
steep rises in serious violence, self-harm and suicide in prisons in
England and Wales can be attributed, at least in part, to the parallel
growth in the consumption of synthetic cannabinoids (see HMIP,
2014, 2015a, 2015b, 2016; Ministry of Justice, 2016a; RAPt, 2015).
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
9
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 We now consider the implications of these findings for prison, drug
and criminal justice policies, and future research agendas.
Twenty years of taking the piss: MDTs and false positives
MDTs were first introduced in UK prisons in 1996. Since that
time there appears to have been a 72% decline in positive drug tests
among prisoners, from 24.4% in 1996 (HM Prison Service, 2007) to
6.9% in 2014/2015 (Ministry of Justice, 2016b). Furthermore, over
two-thirds of prisons reported no drug misuse, as measured by
positive random MDTs, in at least one month of 2014/15 (Ministry
of Justice, 2016b). These results suggest a decline in drug
consumption in prison and are ostensibly evidence of MDTs
success. However, in a systematic review of international evidence
on criminal justice interventions aimed at reducing drug-related
crime, Holloway, Bennett, and Farrington (2005) questioned the
effectiveness of MDTs. Likewise, our findings challenge their
effectiveness, with evidence of an emerging synthetic cannabi-
noids epidemic within an English prison that is driven by current
MDT policies. The widespread availability and accessibility of
synthetic cannabinoids compared sharply to the scarcity of other
drugs within this prison. A lucrative synthetic cannabinoids
market had established itself and displaced the traditional drug
markets within this setting. A further striking finding from our
research was that prisoners had substantially higher rates of
consumption of synthetic cannabinoids compared to general
population estimates (see Home Office, 2012); a finding replicated
in recent studies of other prison populations in England and Wales
(see Baker, 2015; Centre for Social Justice, 2015; HMIP, 2014, 2015a,
2015b, 2016; User Voice, 2016). Prisoner interviewees estimated
that up to 80–90% of the inmate population had consumed
synthetic cannabinoids while in prison. The majority reported
daily use, with some consuming as much as 5–6 g per day, with
many other users consuming synthetic cannabinoids regularly/
intermittently on a weekly basis. Overall levels of drug use might
not be significantly higher than they were prior to the emergence
of synthetic cannabinoids (see Edgar & O’Donnell, 1998; Penfold
et al., 2005; Singleton et al., 1998; Wilkinson et al., 2003), however
current levels are still troubling due to the additional harms
attributed to synthetic cannabinoid use.
Prisoners and staff recounted a wide spectrum of negative
effects upon prisoners and the prison regime; these were
perceived to be associated with synthetic cannabinoids. Such
effects included quickly building-up tolerance and dependency,
leading to addiction, acute withdrawal symptoms, debt, violence
and aggression, self-harm, seizures and fitting. The propensity for
synthetic cannabinoids to induce or exacerbate mental disorders
in users (e.g. anxiety, depression, paranoia, psychosis) was
frequently discussed. These findings contribute to a growing
body 
of 
literature 
regarding 
the 
adverse 
consequences 
of
synthetic cannabinoids (see Barratt et al., 2013; Bebarta et al.,
2012; Castellanos et al., 2011; Every-Palmer, 2010, 2011; Hurst
et al., 2011; Papanti et al., 2013; Thomas et al., 2012; Van Der Veer
& Friday, 2011; Zimmermann et al., 2009). Given the range of
negative effects identified by our participants, and the possibility
that many of these may be experienced simultaneously and/or
acutely, we assert that prisoners are being subjected to new risks
and harms within the prison environment that are not associated
with drugs once-widely available in this setting (e.g. cannabis and
heroin). In this respect, it is particularly concerning that almost all
of the prisoners (26/27) reported trying synthetic cannabinoids
for the first time within the prison setting. Moreover, when we
factor in the high levels of pre-existing mental health disorders
among 
the prison population 
(Prison Reform 
Trust, 
2016;
Singleton et al., 1998), and the propensity for the prison
environment to induce mental health problems (see Birmingham,
2003), the widespread availability of synthetic cannabinoids in
this environment has created a dangerous recipe for prisoner
well-being, the safety of prisoners and prison staff, and the prison
regime.
So how should prisons and wider drug policies respond to this
problem? The avoidance of positive MDTs was a principal
motivator for synthetic cannabinoids consumption, which were
chosen primarily for their non-detectability (e.g. in MDTs and to a
lesser extent because of their lack of smell) (see also, User Voice,
2016). It has been suggested new MDTs may be developed to detect
synthetic cannabinoids or other NPS (Centre for Social Justice,
2015); however forensic early warning systems indicate that the
compounds in synthetic cannabinoids are constantly changing. As
Hammersley (2010) predicted, manufacturers simply replace
banned chemicals with other, often stronger, more dangerous
ones. The latest update from the European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction identifies 160 new strains of synthetic
cannabinoids in Europe alone since the original Spice was banned
in the UK in 2009 (EMCDDA, 2016a). Thus, it is doubtful MDTs will
keep pace with newly formed chemical structures. The investment
in the development of MDTs capable of detecting synthetic
cannabinoids and other NPS is, therefore, a flawed and expensive
strategy.
In addition to easy access, many of the other motivations for the
use of synthetic cannabinoids reflect those for the consumption of
other substances in prisons (see Boys et al., 2002; Cope, 2003;
Crewe, 2006; Penfold et al., 2005; Swann & James, 1998) and the
wider society (see Cohen & Taylor, 1976; Williams, 2013). In
particular, synthetic cannabinoids were being used as a coping
mechanism to deal with boredom and the realities of prison life
(see also User Voice, 2016). This suggests the prison regime
requires reform, reducing long periods of lock-up and unstructured
activities, and replacing them with increased opportunities for
personal development through positive and engaging education
work and training. Yet addressing this is a challenge due to
continued funding cuts and staff shortages. Perhaps, a more
tangible aim, as Tompkins (2016) notes, is prison drug policy
reform focused upon reducing the harms and violence associated
with drug use in this setting. As we have argued, synthetic
cannabinoids are generating a new set of harms for prisoners.
Moreover, three successive HMIP annual reports have emphasised
how the consumption of these substances is contributing to record
levels of serious violence (against prisoners and staff), self-harm
and suicides (HMIP, 2014, 2015a, 2015b, 2016). It seems reasonable
to speculate that the market for synthetic cannabinoids, with all
the harms it entails, and the levels of consumption we have found,
may not have emerged to the magnitude it has, if prisoners were
not subject to MDTs. Indeed, since the introduction of MDTs, the
practice of prisoners avoiding drug use detection by changing their
patterns of consumption has been found. For example, some
prisoners switch from cannabis to a less easily detectable and
potentially more harmful substance, heroin (Singleton et al., 2005;
Woodall, 2011). Given prison drug strategies are designed to
prevent harm to prisoners (HM Prison Service, 1998), the
established synthetic cannabinoids drugs market and the harms
identified in connection with their use, directly contradict this aim.
We can only conclude, then, that the policy of testing prisoners for
drug use, designed to reduce harms and improve prisoner well-
being, has patently failed.
It is imperative that MDT policies are revised—we recommend
an approach rooted in harm reduction. An alternative solution, and
one within our grasp, is the removal of MDTs among those in
custody, at a minimum, for cannabis detection—a drug others have
previously found to be commonly used in prisons in England and
Wales (see, for example, Edgar & O’Donnell, 1998; Wilkinson et al.,
2003). This policy change recognises that drug use in prisons is
10 
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 unlikely to be eliminated completely. However, the removal of
MDTs has the potential to significantly lessen the demand for
synthetic cannabinoids as a replacement for other detectable
substances, and thus significantly diminish the market and
associated harms. In doing so, users of synthetic cannabinoids
may instead consume cannabis, a drug that has the potential to
cause far less harm to users and those around them.19 Indeed, in a
study undertaken soon after the introduction of MDTs in England
and Wales, Edgar and O’Donnell (1998) found strong support from
prisoners (82%) and prison staff (44%) for the tolerance of the
consumption of cannabis in prisons, emphasising there were no
negative effects to discipline and order. This proposed reform
should also be applied to the offender population beyond the
prison environment. An increasing number of convicted offenders
are subject to MDTs as part of community drug sentences or upon
their released on licence from prison while on licence. In some
cases, positive drug test results for those on licence from prison
create a revolving prison door.
Our finding that the central motive for use of synthetic
cannabinoids was the avoidance of detection has wider policy
implications. Since the emergence of NPS in the late 2000s, their
availability (e.g. online and in headshops), legal status, price and
purity have consistently been cited as key motivations for use (see
Home Office, 2014). In the UK, policy responses have attempted to
restrict availability and close legal loopholes, firstly through the
introduction of the Temporary Class Drug Orders and more
recently through the implementation of the 2016 Psychoactive
Substance Act. This latest policy development will impact upon
these motivations. For example, it is likely that restricting
availability will lead to the development of an illegal market in
which purity decreases and price increases. What we have
highlighted is that – at least among some user groups – the
motivation to use synthetic cannabinoids and other forms of NPS in
order to avoid drug use detection will remain. We predict this
motivation will become more prominent in the future, especially if
drug testing policies continue to be implemented and extend
further beyond the offender population to the general public. The
temptation to replace detectable substances with less or non-
detectable substances to avoid incurring sanctions may be
extremely high (see Bebarta et al., 2010, 2012; Loeffler, Hurst,
Penn, & Yung, 2012; Perrone et al., 2013; Richardson, St. Vil, Wish,
& Cooper, 2016).
These findings have implications for future research agendas.
Our study was relatively small scale and focused on a local category
B English adult male prison. Future studies should include different
custodial settings (e.g. different types of prisons—high security,
open, etc.), other demographics (females and young offenders) and
countries. Beyond the prison walls, the motivation to avoid drug
use detection – as we have identified here – warrants further
attention in other non-criminal justice institutions, such as mental
health establishments, the military, and other occupations where
MDTs are routinely employed. Our research was undertaken in the
months leading up to the introduction of the Psychoactive
Substances Act. Future research should assess its impact on drug
dealing, availability and use in this setting.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
AIHW (2014). National drug strategy household survey detailed report: 2013. Drug
statistics series no. 28. Cat. no. PHE 183. Canberra: AIHW.
Baker, S. (2015). An examination of the reasons that prisoners use spice (synthetic
cannabinoids). University of Cambridge Retrieved 27th February 2016 from:
http://www.crim.cam.ac.uk/alumni/penology/theses/Sam%20Baker.pdf.
Barratt, M. J., Cakic, V., & Lenton, S. (2013). Patterns of synthetic cannabinoid use in
Australia. Drug Alcohol, 32(2), 141–146.
Bebarta, V. S., Varney, S., & Sessions, D. (2010). Spice: A new legal herbal mixture
abused by young active duty military personnel. Clinical Toxicology, 48, 632.
Bebarta, V. S., Ramirez, S., & Varney, S. M. (2012). Spice: A new ‘legal’ herbal mixture
abused by young active duty. Substance Abuse, 33, 191–194.
Birmingham, L. (2003). The mental health of prisoners. Advances in Psychiatric
Treatment, 9(3), 191–199.
Boys, A., Farrell, M., Bebbington, P., Brugha, T., Coid, J., Jenkins, R., et al. (2002). Drug
use and initiation in prison: Results from a national prison survey in England
and Wales. Addiction, 97, 1551–1560.
Brakoulias, V. (2012). Products containing synthetic cannabinoids and psychosis.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 46(3) .
Carhart-Harris, R., King, L., & Nutt, D. (2011). A web-based survey on mephedrone.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 118(1), 19–22.
Castellanos, D., Singh, S., Thornton, G., Avila, M., & Moreno, A. (2011). Synthetic
cannabinoid use: A case series of adolescents. Adolescent Health, 49(4),
347–349.
Cave, B. M. (2014). HMP/YOI Forest Bank Manchester. Annual report. Retrieved 20th
July 2015 from: http://www.imb.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/forest-
bank-2012-13.pdf.
Centre for Social Justice (2015). Drug in prison. Retrieved 10th January 2016 from:
http://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/UserStorage/pdf/Pdf%20reports/
CSJJ3090_Drugs_in_Prison.pdf.
Champion, K. E., Teesson, M., & Newton, N. C. (2016). Patterns and correlates of new
psychoactive substance use in a sample of Australian high school students. Drug
and Alcohol Review, 35, 338–344.
Cohen, S., & Taylor, L. (1976). Escape attempts: The theory and practice of resistance to
everyday life. London: Allen Lane.
Cope, N. (2003). It’s no time or high time: Young offenders’ experiences of time and
drug use in prison. Howard Journal, 42(2), 158–175.
Crewe, B. (2005). Prisoner society in the era of hard drugs. Punishment and Society, 7
(4), 457–481.
Crewe, B. (2006). Prison drug dealing and the ethnographic lens. The Howard Journal
of Criminal Justice, 45(4), 347–368.
Djemil, H. (2008). Inside out: How to get drugs out of prison. Centre for Policy Studies
Retrieved 16th January 2016 from: http://www.cps.org.uk/files/reports/origi-
nal/111026174106-INSIDEOUT.pdf.
Edgar, K., & O’Donnell, I. (1998). Mandatory drug testing in prisons: An evaluation,
research findings No. 75. London: Home Office.
EMCDDA (2012). Prisons and drugs in Europe: The problem and responses. Retrieved
24th April 2016 from: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/selected-
issues/prison.
EMCDDA (2015). New psychoactive substances in Europe. An update from the EU Early
Warning System. Luxembourg: European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug
Addiction. Publications Office of the European Union Retrieved 26th February
2016 from: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/2015/new-psychoac-
tive-substances.
EMCDDA (2016a). Perspectives on drugs: Legal approaches to controlling new
psychoactive substances (Updated 31st May 2016). Available at: http://www.
emcdda.europa.eu/topics/pods/controlling-new-psychoactive-substances.
EMCDDA (2016b). Perspectives on drugs: Legal approaches to controlling new
psychoactive substances (last updated 30 May 2016). Retrieved September 20th
2016 from: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/topics/pods/controlling-new-psy-
choactive-substances.
European Commission (2011). Flash Eurobarometer 330: Youth attitudes on drugs.
Retrieved 28th April 2016 from: http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/
fl_330_en.pdf.
European Commission (2014). Flash Eurobarometer 401: Young people and drugs.
Retrieved 28th April 2016 from: http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/
flash_arch_404_391_en.htm.
Every-Palmer, S. (2010). Warning: Legal synthetic cannabinoid-receptor agonists
such as JWH-018 may precipitate psychosis in vulnerable individuals. Addiction,
105(10), 1859–1860.
Every-Palmer, S. (2011). Synthetic cannabinoid JWH-018 and psychosis: An
explorative study. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 117, 152–157.
Farrell, M., Singleton, N., & Strang, J. (2000). Drugs and prison: A high risk and high
burden environment. Drug Use and Prisons: An International Perspective
203–213.
Global Drug Survey (2015). The Global Drug Survey 2015. Retrieved 22nd April 2016
from 
http://www.globaldrugsurvey.com/the-global-drug-survey-2015-find-
ings/.
Grimwood, G. (2015). Categorisation of prisoners in the UK. House of Commons
Library. Briefing Paper Number 07437, 29 December 2015.
Hammersley, R. (2010). Dangers of banning spice and the synthetic cannabinoid
agonists. Addiction, 105, 373.
Harris, C. R., & Brown, A. (2013). Synthetic cannabinoid intoxication: A case series
and review. Journal of Emergency Medicine, 44(2), 360–366.
19 See Brakoulias (2012) for a comparison of psychopathological syndrome
occurrence in cannabis and synthetic cannabis users.
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
11
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 Hassan, P. (1996). Drugs and imprisonment: Challenging misconceptions and some
general observations. Prison Service Journal, 107, 2–6.
HM Inspectorate of Prisons (2014). HM Chief Inspector of Prisons for England and
Wales: Annual report 2013–14. Retrieved 8th February 2016 from: https://www.
justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprisons/wpcontent/uploads/sites/4/2014/10/
HMIP-AR_2013-14.pdf.
HM Inspectorate of Prisons (2015a). HM Chief Inspector of Prisons for England and
Wales: Annual report 2014–15. Retrieved 8th February 2016 from: https://www.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/444785/
hmip-2014-15.pdf.
HM Inspectorate of Prisons (2015b). Changing patterns of substance misuse in adult
prisons and service responses: A thematic review by HM Inspectorate of Prisons.
Retrieved 20 January 2016 from: https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/
hmiprisons/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2015/12/Substance-misuse-web-
2015.pdf.
HM Inspectorate of Prisons (2016). HM Chief Inspector of Prisons for England and
Wales: Annual report 2015–16. Retrieved 20th August from: https://www.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/538854/hmip-
annual-report.pdf.
HM Prison Service (1998). Tackling drugs in prison: The prison service drug strategy.
HM Prison Service1998.
HM Prison Service (2007). Annual report and accounts April 2006–March 2007.
London: HM Prison Service.
Hodgson, P., Parker, A., & Seddon, T. (2006). Doing drug research in the criminal
justice system. Addiction Research and Theory, 14(3), 253–264.
Holloway, K., Bennett, T., & Farrington, D. (2005). The effectiveness of criminal justice
and treatment programmes in reducing drug-related crime: A systematic review.
Home Office online report 26/05. London: Home Office.
Home Office (2012). Drug misuse declared: Findings from the 2011/12 Crime Survey for
England and Wales (2nd ed.) Retrieved 7th January 2016 from: https://www.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/147938/drugs-
misuse-dec-1112-pdf.pdf.
Home Office (2014). New psychoactive substances review: Report of the expert panel.
Home Office Retrieved 20th February 2016 from: https://www.gov.uk/govern-
ment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/368583/NPSexpertRe-
viewPanelReport.pdf.
Home Office (2015). Annual report on the Home Office Forensic Early Warning System
(FEWS). A system to identify New Psychoactive Substances (NPS) in the UK. Home
Office.
House of Commons Home Affairs Committee (2013). Drugs: Breaking the cycle ninth
report of session 2012–13. Retrieved 30th April 2016 from: http://www.
publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmhaff/184/184.pdf.
Howard League for Penal Reform (2016). Latest prison population figures. Retrieved
21st April 2016 from: http://www.howardleague.org/weekly-prison-watch/.
Human Medicines Regulations (2012). Norwich: The Stationery Office.
Hurst, D., Loeffler, G., & McLay, R. (2011). Synthetic cannabinoid agonist induced
psychosis a case series. Retrieved 17th March 2015 from: http://www.ncis.navy.
mil/PI/CRP/Documents/Spice%20APA%20poster.pdf.
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Miech, R. A., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E.
(2016). Monitoring the future national survey results on drug use, 1975–2015:
Overview, key findings on adolescent drug use. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social
Research, The University of Michigan.
Klockars, C. B. (1974). Professional researchers and prisoner subjects: some ethical
problems and practical solutions. The Prison Journal, 54, 34–42.
Lader, D. (2015). Drug misuse: Findings from the 2014/15 Crime Survey for England and
Wales, 2nd ed. Home Office Retrieved 27th January 2016 from: https://www.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/462885/
drug-misuse-1415.pdf.
Loeffler, G., Hurst, D., Penn, A., & Yung, K. (2012). Spice, baths salts, and the U.S.
military: The emergence of synthetic Cannabinoid receptor agonists and
Cathinones in the U.S. Armed forces. Military Medicine, 17, 1041–1048.
Measham, F., & Moore, K. (2009). Repertoires of distinction: Exploring patterns of
weekend polydrug use within local leisure scenes across the English night time
economy. Criminology and Criminal Justice, 9(4), 437–464.
Measham, F., Wood, D., Dargan, P., & Moore, K. (2011). The rise in legal highs:
Prevalence and patterns in the use of illegal drugs and first and second
generation ‘legal highs’ in south London gay dance clubs. Journal of Substance
Use, 16(4), 263–272.
Measham, F., Moore, K., & Østergaard, J. (2011). Mephedrone, ‘bubble’ and
unidentified white powders: The contested identities of synthetic ‘legal highs’.
Drugs and Alcohol Today, 11(3), 137–147.
Ministry of Justice (2012a). Research summary 3/12, accommodation, homelessness
and reoffending of prisoners. London: Ministry of Justice.
Ministry of Justice (2012b). The pre-custody employment, training and education
status of newly sentenced prisoners. London: Ministry of Justice.
Ministry of Justice (2016a). Safety in Custody Statistics England and Wales Deaths in
prison custody to March 2016 Assaults and Self-harm to December 2015. Statistics
Bulletin 28th April 2016. Ministry of Justice. Retrieved 30th April 2016 from:
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/519425/safety-in-custody-march-2016.pdf.
Ministry of Justice (2016b). Offender Management Statistics Bulletin, England and
Wales Quarterly October to December 2015—Annual January to December 2015.
Ministry of Justice. Retrieved 30th April 2016 from: https://www.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/519437/offender-
management-statistics-quarterly-bulletin-oct-dec-2015.pdf.
Misuse of Drugs Act (1971). London: Her Majesties Stationary Office.
National Offender Management Service (2007). Signposting Offenders to Financial
Capability Training, Debt Advice and Financial Services. London: Ministry of
Justice.
NEPTUNE (2015). Guidance on the Clinical Management of Acute and Chronic Harms of
Club Drugs and Novel Psychoactive Substances. Retrieved 30th September 2015
from: 
http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/attachements.cfm/att_236560_EN_U-
K10_NEPTUNE%20NPS%20guidance%20(2015).pdf.
NOMS (National Offender Management Service) (2015). Drug Testing and Drug
Appointment Licence and Post-Release Supervision Conditions. Guidance on
Supporting Integrated Delivery. July 2015 (Version 2). London.
Offender Rehabilitation Act (2014). Section 11—Drug testing. Retrieved 23rd
February 2016 from http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/11/section/11/
enacted.
Papanti, D., Schifano, F., Botteon, G., Bertossi, F., Mannix, J., Vidoni, D., et al. (2013).
Spiceophrenia: A systematic overview of Spice-related psychopathological
issues and a case report. Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental,
28, 379–389.
Penfold, C., Turnbull, P., & Webster, R. (2005). Tackling prison drug markets: An
exploratory qualitative study. Home Office Retrieved 10th March 2016 from:
http://www.antoniocasella.eu/archila/Tackling_39_05.pdf.
Perrone, D., Helgesen, R. D., & Fischer, R. G. (2013). United States drug prohibition
and legal highs: How drug testing may lead cannabis users to Spice. Drugs,
Education, Prevention and Policy, 20(3), 216–224.
Prison Reform (2016). Trust care not custody. Prison Reform Retrieved 30th April
2016 from: http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/WI%20Care%20not
%20Custody_10th%20Aug.pdf.
Prisons and Probations Ombudsman (2015). New psychoactive substances: A factor in
some prisoner deaths, says Ombudsman. Retrieved 14th February 2016 from:
http://www.ppo.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/NPS-bulletin-news-re-
lease.pdf.
Psychoactive Substance Act (2016). Retrieved 14th September 2016 from: https://
www.gov.uk/government/collections/psychoactive-substances-bill-2015.
RAPt (2015). RAPt research and policy briefing series No. 4—Tackling the issue of new
psychoactive substance in prisons. Rehabilitation for Addicted Prisoners Trust
Retrieved 14th January 2016 from: http://www.rapt.org.uk/sites/default/files/
16/RAPt%20Research%20and%20Policy%20Briefing%20Number%204%20v10%
20AW%20edit%20-%20(1.9.2015).pdf.
Richardson, J. B., St. Vil, C., Wish, E., & Cooper, C. (2016). On papers: Perceptions of
synthetic 
cannabinoid 
use 
among 
black 
males 
under 
criminal 
justice
supervision. Health and Justice, 4, 1.
Singleton, N., Meltzer, H., & Gatward, R. (1998). Psychiatric morbidity among prisoners
in England and Wales, Office for National Statistics. London: The Stationery Office.
Singleton, N., Pendry, E., Simpson, T., Goddard, E., Farrell, M., Marsden, J., et al.
(2005). The impact of mandatory drug testing in prisons. Home Office Report 03/05.
Retrieved 15th March 2016 from: http://www.dldocs.stir.ac.uk/documents/
rdsolr0305.pdf.
Singleton, N. (2008). Policy forum: The role of drug testing in the criminal justice
system. Drugs and Alcohol Today, 8(3), 4–8.
Stark, K., Herrmann, U., Ehrhardt, S., & Bienzle, U. (2006). A syringe exchange
programme in prison as prevention strategy against HIV infection and hepatitis
B and C in Berlin, Germany. Epidemiology and Infection, 134(4), 814–819.
Swann, R., & James, P. (1998). The effect of the prison environment upon inmate
drug taking behaviour. The Howard Journal of Criminal Justice, 37, 252–265.
Thomas, S., Bliss, S., & Malik, M. (2012). Suicidal ideation and self-harm following K2
use. Oklahoma State Medical Association, 105(11), 430–433.
Tompkins, C. N. E. (2016). There’s that many people selling it: Exploring the nature,
organisation and maintenance of prison drug markets in England. Drugs:
Education, Prevention and Policy, 23(2), 144–153.
Tompkins, C. N. E., & Wright, N. M. J. (2012). ‘I wanted a head change’: Motivations
and influences on men’s illicit drug use in prison. In M. Wouters, J. Fountain, & D.
J. Korf (Eds.), The meaning of high: Variations according to drug, set, setting and
time (pp. 149–163).Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers.
Tompkins, C. N. E., Neale, J., Sheard, L., & Wright, N. M. J. (2007). Experiences of
prison among injecting drug users in England: A qualitative study. International
Journal of Prisoner Health, 3(3), 189–203.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2011). Synthetic cannabinoids in herbal
products. Retrieved 15th July 2015 from: http://www.unodc.org/documents/
scientific/Synthetic_Cannabinoids.pdf.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) (2015). World drug report 2015.
United Nations Publication, Sales No. E.15. XI.6.
User Voice (2016). Spice: The bird killer—what prisoners think about the use of spice
and other legal highs in prison. Retrieved 24th August 2016 from: http://www.
uservoice.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/User-Voice-Spice-The-Bird-Killer-
Report-Low-Res.pdf.
Van Der Veer, N., & Friday, J. (2011). Persistent psychosis following the use of Spice.
Schizophrenia Research, 130, 285–286.
Walker, D. F. (2015). The informal economy in prison. Criminal Justice Matters, 99(1),
18–19.
Wheatley, M. (2007). Drugs in prison. In Y. Jewkes (Ed.), Handbook on prisons (pp.
399–422).Cullompton: Willan Publishing.
Wilkinson, C., Hucklesby, A., Pearson, Y., Butler, E., Hill, A., & Hodgkinson, S. (2003).
Management of drug-using prisoners in Leicestershire. In M. Ramsay (Ed.),
Prisoners’ drug use and treatment: Seven research studies. Home Office Research
Study 267London: Home Office.
Williams, L. (2013). Changing lives, changing drug journeys: Drug taking decisions from
adolescence to adulthood. London: Routledge.
12 
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
 Winstock, A. (2011). The 2011 Mixmag drugs survey. Mixmag49–59.
Wood, D., Measham, F., & Dargan, P. (2012). Our favourite drug: Prevalence of use
and preferences for mephedrone in the London night-time economy 1 year after
control. Journal of Substance Use, 17, 91–97.
Wood, D., Hunter, L., Measham, F., & Dargan, P. (2012). Limited use of novel
psychoactive substances in South London nightclubs. QJM, 105(10),
959–964.
Woodall, J. (2011). Social and environmental factors influencing in-prison drug use.
Health Education, 112(1), 31–46.
Zimmermann, U. S., Winkelmann, P. R., Pilhatsch, M., Nees, J. A., Spanagel, R., &
Schulz, K. (2009). Withdrawal phenomena and dependence syndrome after the
consumption of ‘Spice Gold’. Deutsches A
¨rzteblatt International, 106(27),
464–467.
R. Ralphs et al. / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
13
G Model
DRUPOL 1854 No. of Pages 13
Please cite this article in press as: R. Ralphs, et al., Adding Spice to the Porridge11‘Porridge’ is British slang for a prison sentence. E.g. ‘Doing his
porridge’. The term is most commonly thought to be an allusion to the fact that porridge is, or used to be, a common food in prison. The term is
