 679
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 4 
April 15, 2018
The diagnosis and effective treatment of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in adults is an urgent health priority. Positive airway pressure (PAP) therapy remains 
the most effective treatment for OSA, although other treatment options continue to be explored. Limited evidence citing small pilot or proof of concept studies 
suggest that the synthetic medical cannabis extract dronabinol may improve respiratory stability and provide benefit to treat OSA. However, side effects such 
as somnolence related to treatment were reported in most patients, and the long-term effects on other sleep quality measures, tolerability, and safety are still 
unknown. Dronabinol is not approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of OSA, and medical cannabis and synthetic 
extracts other than dronabinol have not been studied in patients with OSA. The composition of cannabinoids within medical cannabis varies significantly 
and is not regulated. Synthetic medical cannabis may have differential effects, with variable efficacy and side effects in the treatment of OSA. Therefore, it 
is the position of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) that medical cannabis and/or its synthetic extracts should not be used for the treatment 
of OSA due to unreliable delivery methods and insufficient evidence of effectiveness, tolerability, and safety. OSA should be excluded from the list of chronic 
medical conditions for state medical cannabis programs, and patients with OSA should discuss their treatment options with a licensed medical provider at an 
accredited sleep facility. Further research is needed to understand the functionality of medical cannabis extracts before recommending them as a treatment 
for OSA.
Keywords: medical cannabis, obstructive sleep apnea, PAP therapy, long-term effects
Citation: Ramar K, Rosen IM, Kirsch DB, Chervin RD, Carden KA, Aurora RN, Kristo DA, Malhotra RK, Martin JL, Olson EJ, Rosen CL, Rowley JA; 
American Academy of Sleep Medicine Board of Directors. Medical cannabis and the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea: an American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine position statement. J Clin Sleep Med. 2018;14(4):679–681.
INTRODUCTION
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) is the 
leading professional society dedicated to promotion of sleep 
health. The AASM promotes sleep health and fosters high-
quality, patient-centered care through advocacy, education, 
strategic research, and practice standards. The AASM endeav-
ors to advance sleep health policy that improves the health and 
well-being of the general public.
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a sleep-related breathing 
disorder that is characterized by repetitive episodes of complete 
or partial upper airway obstruction during sleep.1 Untreated, 
OSA is a potentially lethal disease that increases the risk of 
numerous health complications including hypertension, con-
gestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, 
stroke and type 2 diabetes.2 Data show that untreated OSA is 
associated with an increased risk of all-cause and cardiovascu-
lar mortality, and that this risk can be reduced with effective 
SPECIAL ARTICLES
Medical Cannabis and the Treatment of Obstructive Sleep Apnea: 
An American Academy of Sleep Medicine Position Statement
Kannan Ramar, MD1; Ilene M. Rosen, MD, MS2; Douglas B. Kirsch, MD3; Ronald D. Chervin, MD, MS4; Kelly A. Carden, MD5; R. Nisha Aurora, MD6; 
David A. Kristo, MD7; Raman K. Malhotra, MD8; Jennifer L. Martin, PhD9,10; Eric J. Olson, MD1; Carol L. Rosen, MD11; James A. Rowley, MD12; American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine Board of Directors
1Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center for Sleep Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 2Division of Sleep Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 3Carolinas Healthcare Medical Group Sleep Services, Charlotte, North Carolina; 4University of Michigan Sleep Disorders 
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 5Saint Thomas Medical Partners - Sleep Specialists, Nashville, Tennessee; 6School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; 
7University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 8Washington University Sleep Center, St. Louis, Missouri; 9Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, North 
Hills, California; 10David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, California; 11Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, University 
Hospitals - Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio; 12Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
pii: jc-18-00146 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.7070
treatment.3,4 Therefore, the diagnosis and effective treatment of 
OSA in adults is an urgent health priority.
CANNABIS AND SLEEP
The flower from the cannabis plant has nearly 100 different 
active compounds called cannabinoids that work on the human 
endocannabinoid system through two main receptors, the CB1 
and CB2 receptors. The two extensively researched cannabi-
noids are delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol 
(CBD). THC is the primary psychoactive component of canna-
bis that results in euphoria, hallucinations, anxiety, and tachy-
cardia by acting on the CB1 receptor, while CBD counteracts 
the THC effects and has potential medicinal value of analgesia, 
neuroprotection, and anti-inflammatory action by acting on the 
CB2 receptor. To maximize the potential therapeutic applica-
bility of medical cannabis, synthetic-based cannabis products 
 680
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 4 
April 15, 2018
K Ramar, IM Rosen, DB Kirsch, et al. 
Position Statement: Medical Cannabis and the Treatment of OSA
have been developed such as synthetic THC (dronabinol, 
nabilone), CBD, and nabiximols (1:1 THC/CBD combination). 
Some of these synthetic cannabis products are approved by the 
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for certain 
medical indications.
The effects of medical cannabis on sleep vary depending 
on acute versus chronic use, withdrawal after chronic use, the 
type of cannabinoids based on their effects on the CB1 ver-
sus CB2 receptors, and the types of synthetic extracts. Early 
animal studies demonstrated that cannabinoid agonists such as 
dronabinol improved respiratory stability through peripheral 
serotonergic antagonism activity, and thereby provide thera-
peutic benefit to treat OSA.5 This led to human studies that 
assessed the effectiveness of dronabinol in pill form of differ-
ent strengths from 2.5 to 10 mg to treat patients with OSA.6–8 
Prasad et al. reported a significant improvement in apnea-
hypopnea index (AHI) of 32% at 3 weeks compared to baseline 
(−14.1 ± 17.5; P = .007). Side effects related to treatment were 
reported in most patients, and somnolence was reported in 
29% to 50% of patients. A recent placebo-controlled random-
ized trial in people with moderate or severe OSA found a simi-
lar response after 6 weeks of treatment using a 10-mg dose of 
dronabinol that reduced AHI by 33 percent with no change in 
the Maintenance of Wakefulness Test (MWT) latency scores. 
Eight percent of patients reported sleepiness and drowsiness.8
Importantly, the long-term use of these products on other 
sleep quality measures, their tolerability, and safety are still 
unknown. Dronabinol is not FDA approved for treatment 
of OSA. Medical cannabis and synthetic extracts other than 
dronabinol have not been studied in patients with OSA. Addi-
tionally, the safety and efficacy of other delivery methods (eg, 
vaping, liquid formulation, oral capsule) have not been studied. 
Medical cannabis and other synthetic extracts may not only 
have differential effects on the CB1 and CB2 receptors; their 
delivery methods might also create differential effects. There-
fore, further research is needed to understand their functional-
ity before recommending them as a treatment for OSA.
POSITION
It is the position of the AASM:
• That medical cannabis and/or its synthetic extracts 
should not be used for the treatment of OSA due 
to unreliable delivery methods and insufficient 
evidence of treatment effectiveness, tolerability, 
and safety, and OSA should be excluded from the 
list of chronic medical conditions for state medical 
cannabis programs.
• That patients with OSA should be advised to discuss 
their treatment options with a licensed medical 
provider at an accredited sleep facility.
DISCUSSION
Most states in the United States do not have laws legalizing the 
use of cannabis. However, certain states have laws that legalize 
it for medical and recreational use. At least one state has an-
nounced that OSA will be added to the list of medical indica-
tions for the use of medical cannabis.9 This is concerning as the 
announcement was based on limited evidence citing pilot or 
proof of concept studies with small sample sizes. Additionally, 
the duration of these studies was only 3–6 weeks, and therefore 
the long-term effects of use of these medical cannabis products 
and the effect on OSA is unknown at this time. Also, treatment 
with the use of medical cannabis has shown adverse effects 
such as daytime sleepiness and may lead to unintended con-
sequences such as motor vehicle accidents. Most studies only 
evaluated a specific synthetic cannabis extract (ie, dronabinol). 
The effects of other medical cannabis products for treatment of 
OSA are unknown currently.
PAP therapy remains the most effective treatment option for 
OSA.10 Adherence with PAP therapy is optimized by a patient-
centered approach that includes pretreatment education and 
ongoing follow-up.11
Dronabinol is one of the many synthetic medical cannabis 
extracts. The composition of cannabinoids within medical can-
nabis varies significantly and is not regulated. Therefore, syn-
thetic medical cannabis may have differential CB1 and CB2 
receptor effects, with variable efficacy and side effects in the 
treatment of OSA.
There is a need for increased funding and further research 
on the use of synthetic medical cannabis extracts to treat OSA. 
We need a better understanding of the pathophysiologic mech-
anisms on how synthetic medical cannabis extracts work dif-
ferentially on the CB1 and CB2 receptors peripherally to help 
patients with OSA. This may also identify other potential syn-
thetic extracts with higher efficacy and lesser side effects to 
treat OSA. Because of the potential for misuse and increased 
costs, the lack of evidence on beneficial effects, and risk of side 
effects including increased daytime sleepiness, which might 
lead to more harm than benefit, the AASM takes the position 
that medical cannabis should not be used for the treatment of 
OSA at this time.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on the available evidence, it is the position of the AASM 
that medical cannabis should not be used for the treatment 
of OSA. The AASM also advises state legislators, regulators 
and health departments that OSA should not be included as 
an indication for their medical cannabis programs. Further re-
search is needed to better understand the mechanistic actions 
of medical cannabis and its synthetic extracts, the long-term 
role of these synthetic extracts on OSA treatment, and the 
harms and benefits.
REFERENCES
1. American Academy of Sleep Medicine. International Classification of Sleep 
Disorders. 3rd ed. Darien, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2014.
2. Punjabi NM. The epidemiology of adult obstructive sleep apnea. 
Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2008;5(2):136–143.
 681
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 4 
April 15, 2018
K Ramar, IM Rosen, DB Kirsch, et al. 
Position Statement: Medical Cannabis and the Treatment of OSA
3. Young T, Finn L, Peppard PE, et al. Sleep disordered breathing and 
mortality: eighteen-year follow-up of the Wisconsin sleep cohort. Sleep. 
2008;31(8):1071–1078.
4. Fu Y, Xia Y, Yi H, Xu H, Guan J, Yin S. Meta-analysis of all-cause and 
cardiovascular mortality in obstructive sleep apnea with or without continuous 
positive airway pressure treatment. Sleep Breath. 2017;21(1):181–189.
5. Carley DW, Pavlovic S, Janelidze M, Radulovacki M. Functional role for 
cannabinoids in respiratory stability during sleep. Sleep. 2002;25(4):391–398.
6. Prasad B, Radulovacki MG, Carley DW. Proof of concept trial of dronabinol in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Front Psychiatry. 2013;4:1.
7. Carley DW, Prasad B, Reid KJ, et al. Dronabinol reduces AHI and daytime 
sleepiness in patients with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome [abstract #0558]. Sleep. 2017;40:A207–A208. 
8. Carley DW, Prasad B, Reid KJ, et al. Pharmacotherapy of apnea by 
cannabimimetic enhancement, the PACE Clinical Trial: effects of dronabinol in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep. 2018;41(1).
9. Minnesota Department of Health. Obstructive sleep apnea. Issue brief on 
obstructive sleep apnea. MDH website. http://www.health.state.mn.us/
topics/cannabis/rulemaking/sleepapneabrief.pdf. Published September 2017. 
Accessed January 5, 2018.
10. Epstein LJ, Kristo D, Strollo PJ Jr, et al. Clinical guideline for the evaluation, 
management and long-term care of obstructive sleep apnea in adults. 
J Clin Sleep Med. 2009;5(3):263–276.
11. Wickwire EM, Lettieri CJ, Cairns AA, Collop NA. Maximizing positive 
airway pressure adherence in adults: a common-sense approach. Chest. 
2013;144(2):680–693.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The board of directors thanks AASM staff members who assisted with the 
development of this position statement.
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication March 19, 2018
Submitted in final revised form March 19, 2018
Accepted for publication March 19, 2018
Address correspondence to: Kannan Ramar, MD, American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine, 2510 N. Frontage Road, Darien, IL 60561; Tel: (630) 737-9700; Fax: (630) 
737-9790; Email: contact@aasm.org
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
This position statement was developed by the board of directors of the AASM to help 
physicians and other health care providers make decisions about the appropriate 
treatment of patients with OSA. It is published by the AASM as an advisory that is to 
be used for educational and informational purposes only.
