 Article
Neuronal Representation of Numerosity Zero in the
Primate Parieto-Frontal Number Network
Highlights
d VIP neurons encode empty sets more as a distinct, non-
numerical category
d In contrast, PFC cells integrate empty sets in the numerical
continuum
d Prefrontal encoding of empty sets is more abstract and
behaviorally relevant
d Empty sets are translated into an abstract representation of a
zero-numerosity category
Authors
Araceli Ramirez-Cardenas, Maria
Moskaleva, Andreas Nieder
Correspondence
andreas.nieder@uni-tuebingen.de
In Brief
In behaving monkeys, Ramirez-Cardenas
et al. report neuronal empty-set
representations that become steadily
more abstract and gradually positioned
into a numerical continuum along the
parieto-frontal network. These findings
elucidate how the brain transforms the
absence of countable items, nothing, into
an abstract numerosity zero category.
Ramirez-Cardenas et al., 2016, Current Biology 26, 1285–1294
May 23, 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.052
 Current Biology
Article
Neuronal Representation of Numerosity Zero
in the Primate Parieto-Frontal Number Network
Araceli Ramirez-Cardenas,1 Maria Moskaleva,1 and Andreas Nieder1,*
1Animal Physiology Unit, Institute of Neurobiology, Department of Biology, University of Tu
¨ bingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tu
¨ bingen,
Germany
*Correspondence: andreas.nieder@uni-tuebingen.de
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.052
SUMMARY
Neurons in the primate parieto-frontal network repre-
sent the number of visual items in a collection, but it
is unknown whether this system encodes empty sets
as conveying null quantity. We recorded from the
ventral intraparietal area (VIP) and the prefrontal cor-
tex (PFC) of monkeys performing a matching task
including empty sets and countable numerosities
as stimuli. VIP neurons encoded empty sets predom-
inantly as a distinct category from numerosities. In
contrast, PFC neurons represented empty sets
more similarly to numerosity one than to larger nu-
merosities, exhibiting numerical distance and size ef-
fects. Moreover, prefrontal neurons represented
empty sets abstractly and irrespective of stimulus
variations. Compared to VIP, the activity of numeros-
ity neurons in PFC correlated better with the behav-
ioral outcome of empty-set trials. Our results suggest
a hierarchy in the processing from VIP to PFC, along
which empty sets are steadily detached from visual
properties and gradually positioned in a numerical
continuum. These findings elucidate how the brain
transforms the absence of countable items, nothing,
into an abstract quantitative category, zero.
INTRODUCTION
The number of elements in a set, its numerosity, is an abstract
property that can be quickly and directly assessed [1–4]. Human
mathematical abilities are thought to be, at least in part,
grounded in this sense of number [5, 6]. Several lines of evidence
suggest that this capacity is not unique to humans, but deeply
rooted in our ancestry [7, 8]. The neural system necessary to pro-
cess quantity information resides in a dedicated parieto-frontal
brain network [9–13]. Studies in nonhuman primates have iden-
tified neurons selectively tuned to the number of visual items
contained in a set in the ventral intraparietal area (VIP) of the in-
traparietal sulcus of the posterior parietal cortex and the lateral
prefrontal cortex (PFC) [14–17].
Over the past 15 years, the neuronal representation of numer-
osities in the parieto-frontal brain network has been intensively
investigated. Still, whether numerosity zero finds a place in
the neuronal number line has been barely explored, probably
because zero is a late achievement, both in history and individual
cognitive development [18, 19]. However, recent behavioral
studies have shown that young children can position empty
sets in the context of other small numerosities before they
comprehend the symbolic zero [20]. Even nonhuman primates
can recognize and assess empty sets as numerically significant
[21, 22]. In tasks involving the discrimination and ordering of
visually displayed sets of dots, rhesus monkeys spontaneously
treated empty sets as the void quantity they represent [23].
Such behavioral studies suggest that empty sets may be en-
coded in the primate parieto-frontal magnitude system as part
of the numerical continuum.
Previously, PFC neurons were shown to encode the perceived
presence or absence of a visual stimulus [24, 25]. In addition, re-
sults from one monkey suggested that VIP neurons signal the
lack of countable items in empty sets [26]. The present study
was specifically designed to explore whether single neurons
and neuronal populations in the parieto-frontal network repre-
sent empty sets as conveying a null quantitative value. If that is
the case, empty-set representations should reflect the cardinal
relationships between numbers and therefore exhibit a numeri-
cal distance effect (an improvement in discriminability of two
quantities as the numerical difference between them increases)
or a numerical size effect (a worsening in the discriminability of
two numbers as their magnitude increases) [10, 27, 28]. In addi-
tion, numerical representations are expected to be abstract (i.e.,
invariant to appearance and low-level stimulus properties) and,
when numerosity is behaviorally relevant, correlate with sub-
jects’ performance.
In the current study, we simultaneously recorded single-
neuron activity in VIP and PFC of two monkeys performing a nu-
merosity discrimination task. We describe the tuning of parietal
and prefrontal selective neurons to empty sets and test their
behavioral relevance. In addition to single-cell coding, we inves-
tigate neuronal dynamics at the population level and clarify the
respective contributions of VIP and PFC. Our results show that
prefrontal representations of empty sets better meet the criteria
of a primitive correlate of numerosity zero.
RESULTS
Behavior
Two monkeys performed a delayed match-to-numerosity task to
discriminate visual numerosities from 0 (empty sets) to 4 (Fig-
ure 1A) in standard and control protocols controlling for low-level
visual features (Figure 1B) (see the Experimental Procedures for
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Ltd.
1285
 a detailed description of stimuli). A total of 49 behavioral ses-
sions for monkey X and 54 sessions for monkey S were analyzed.
Behavioral tuning curves (Figures 1C and 1D) show how often
animals judged test stimuli as equal in quantity to each sample
numerosity. Curve peaks depict the percentage of correct match
trials, whereas non-peak values correspond to errors in non-
match trials. As previously observed for countable numbers
[9, 14, 27], performance declined as the difference between
sample and non-match numerosities decreased (numerical dis-
tance effect). Even though the monkeys made few mistakes in
judging empty sets, a distance effect was evidenced by errors
made by monkeys when empty sets were presented as sample
stimuli (Figures 1C and 1D, red curves). Both monkeys mistak-
enly matched empty sets to numerosity 1 more frequently than
to numerosity 2 (monkey S: 12.5% ± 1.3% versus 1.3% ±
0.4%, p < 0.001; monkey X: 4.8% ± 1.3% versus 2.0% ±
0.7%, p = 0.001; Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
In addition, the behavioral tuning curves became wider (i.e.,
less selective) with increasing sample number (numerical size
effect), an effect a non-linearly compressed number line could
account for. We explored whether behavioral performance
curves could be better described on a linear or nonlinearly com-
pressed number line. For that purpose, we fitted the behavioral
curves per session with a standard symmetric peak function
(Gaussian function) when plotted on either a linear or a logarith-
mic (log2(n + 1)) numerical scale. The goodness-of-fit (r2) values
were taken as a measure of which scaling scheme describes
better the data. For each monkey, the fittings were significantly
better on a logarithmically compressed number line (both mon-
keys: r2 = 0.98) than on a linear scale (versus r2 = 0.94 in monkey
S and r2 = 0.95 in monkey X; p < 0.001 in both subjects; Wilcoxon
signed-rank test). Thus, as predicted by the Weber-Fechner
law, skewed behavioral curves became more symmetric when
plotted on a logarithmic scale.
Neuronal Numerosity Tuning in VIP and PFC
While the monkeys performed the task, we simultaneously re-
corded 861 neurons in VIP of the intraparietal sulcus (431 from
monkey X and 430 cells from monkey S) and 476 single neurons
in the dorsolateral PFC (279 neurons from monkey X and 197
cells from monkey S) (Figure 2A). Many neurons were strongly
modulated by sample numerosity and discharged as a function
of numerical distance between the stimuli. Figure 2 shows three
example neurons from VIP (Figures 2B–2D) and PFC (Figures
2E–2G). As with countable numerosities, many neurons dis-
charged maximally to empty sets (empty sets as preferred nu-
merosity) (Figures 2B and 2E) or responded least to them
(least-preferred numerosity) (Figures 2C, 2D, 2F, and 2G).
To verify neuronal activity differences during the sample
period, we tested all neurons with a three-way ANOVA (with
main factors of number, shape, and protocol; evaluated at
p < 0.01; see the Experimental Procedures). A considerable pro-
portion of VIP neurons (19%; 163/861) and PFC neurons (39%;
185/476) were selective for main factor number and encoded
the numerosity presented to the monkeys. Table S1 shows the
proportions of cells that were selective for the different main
factors and interactions between main factors. Neurons that
only showed a significant main effect for factor number and no
significance for any other main factor or factor interactions
were identified as exclusive number-selective neurons. In
the whole population, 8% (70/861) of VIP neurons and 16%
(78/476) of PFC neurons belonged to this most conservatively
determined subpopulation. Example neurons depicted in Fig-
ures 2B–2G are exclusively number-selective neurons.
Neurons tuned to each of the sample numerosities were found
among the exclusive selective population, with empty-set-pre-
ferring neurons as the most-abundant class, both in VIP (Fig-
ure 3B) and PFC (Figure 3D). Figure S1 shows the individual
Figure 1. Delayed Match-to-Numerosity Task and Example Stimuli
(A) Fixating monkeys were presented with a sample numerosity ranging from
0 to 4 for 500 ms. The monkeys had to memorize the numerosity for a 1 s delay
period and match it to a subsequent test stimulus (either the first or the second
test stimulus was correct) by releasing a lever. For each sample numerosity, all
four possible non-match numerosities were shown.
(B) Example stimuli for the different conditions. Numerosities 0 to 4 (factor
numerosity) were shown in standard and control protocols (factor protocol) on
a circular or square background (factor shape).
(C and D) Behavioral tuning curves derived from the monkeys’ performance (C,
monkey S; D, monkey X) when different stimuli were presented as samples
(empty sets [ES] and 1–4). The functions reflect the probability that a monkey
judged displays in the test period as containing the same number of items as
the sample numerosity (indicated in various colors). The peak data point of
each colored curve indicates the correct performance in match trials for the
different sample numerosities. Data points to the left and right of the peak
reflect performance in non-match trials (i.e., when the first test numerosity was
smaller or larger than the sample). Error bars indicate the SEM.
1286
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
 tuning curves of empty-set-preferring neurons. We constructed
population tuning functions of exclusive selective neurons in
VIP (Figure 3A) and PFC (Figure 3C) by normalizing the firing
rates of individual neurons to the different sample stimuli
and then averaging according to their respective preferred
numerosity.
Next, we investigated which scaling scheme (linear of logarith-
mic) accounted better for the neuronal data. In VIP, a logarithmic
scaling did not result in better fittings of selective neurons’ tuning
functions (r2 = 0.79 for both scaling schemes; p = 0.83, Wilcoxon
signed-rank test; n = 70). In numerosity-selective PFC neurons,
however, the goodness-of-fit values were significantly higher in
a logarithmic scaling (r2 = 0.82) than in a linear scaling (r2 =
0.80) (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test; n = 78). This indicates
that, in agreement with the behavioral data, numerical magni-
tudes in PFC are best represented on a non-linearly compressed
scale.
VIP Neurons Discriminate Empty Sets More
Categorically than PFC Cells
The tuning curves of neurons preferring countable numerosities
in VIP (Figure 3A) and PFC (Figure 3C) showed a clear distance
effect, i.e., a progressive drop-off of activity with increasing nu-
merical distance from the preferred numerosity. However, a dis-
tance effect seemed to be absent in the average tuning curve of
parietal empty-set neurons (red curve in Figure 3A), whereas
PFC empty-set neurons exhibited a graded decline in firing rates
with increasing numerosity (Figure 3C).
To quantify the differences in the tuning to empty sets, we used
several parameters. First, we compared the responses of empty-
set neurons to numerosity 1 and 2. These numerosities elicited
similar levels of activity in VIP empty-set neurons (mean 0.32
for numerosity 1 versus 0.23 for numerosity 2; p = 0.12; n = 28;
Wilcoxon signed-rank test). In contrast, PFC empty-set neurons
responded more to numerosity 1 (mean 0.46) than to numerosity
2 (0.23) (p < 0.001; n = 24), thus coding empty sets as part of a nu-
merical continuum. Second, we linearly fitted the firing rates for
numerosity 1 to 4 and derived the slopes as a measure of firing
rate decline with numerical distance. The slopes of the fits in
VIP (mean –0.03) were not significantly different from 0 (one-sam-
ple t test against 0, p = 0.07; n = 28), whereas the slopes of the fits
in PFC (mean –0.08) differed from 0 (p < 0.001; n = 24). More
Figure 2. Recording Sites and Neuronal Responses to Numerosity
(A) Lateral view (right) of the right hemisphere of a monkey brain indicating the
topographical relationships of cortical landmarks and coronal section (left) at
the level of the dotted line in the lateral view reconstructed from a structural
MRI scan. The red region on the frontal lobe and blue region in the fundus of the
IPS mark the recording areas in PFC and VIP, respectively. ips, intraparietal
sulcus; ls, lateral sulcus; sts, superior temporal sulcus.
(B–D) Example numerosity-selective neurons in VIP. A VIP neuron showing
maximum responses to empty sets (zero) in the sample phase is shown in (B).
The example neurons in (C) and (D) exhibited maximum suppression to empty
sets. The top panel shows dot-raster histograms (each dot represents an
action potential); the bottom panel depicts averaged spike density functions
(activity averaged in a sliding 150 ms window). The first 500 ms represent the
fixation period, followed by the sample and delay periods. Colors of dot his-
togram and spike density functions correspond to the numerosity of the
sample stimulus. The inset in the spike density plot shows the neuron’s tuning
function (i.e., discharge rates as a function of the number of presented items)
during the gray-shaded sample period.
(E–G) Example numerosity-selective neurons in PFC, showing maximum
excitation (E) or strongest suppression by empty sets (F and G).
See also Table S1.
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
1287
 importantly, the slopes were more negative in PFC compared to
VIP (Mann-Whitney U test, p = 0.019). Third, we fitted the tuning
curves of empty-set neurons (linear scale) with a Gaussian and
derived the bell-curve width, sigma (s). The sigma (s) values for
VIP empty-set neurons were smaller (mean 0.86) compared to
PFC empty-set cells (0.94) (Mann-Whitney U test, p = 0.028).
Finally, an exponential function was fitted to the empty-set
tuning curves to measure the firing rate decay via the constant
tau (t). VIP empty-set neurons showed smaller tau (t) values
(mean 0.73) compared to PFC cells (mean 1.14) (Mann-Whitney
U test, p = 0.039), indicating that the firing rate decays more
steeply with number in VIP empty-set neurons. Collectively,
these results confirm that parietal neurons implement a more bi-
nary (nothing versus something) representation of the different
sample stimuli.
Behavioral Relevance of Empty-Set and
Numerosity-Selective Neurons
To investigate the behavioral relevance of exclusive numerosity-
selective neurons in either VIP or PFC, we analyzed sample ac-
tivity in error trials and compared it to responses in correct trials.
First, we explored whether the firing rate of empty-set tuned neu-
rons correlated with successful completion of the task. If the re-
sponses of these neurons to empty sets (their preferred stimulus,
i.e., eliciting maximal responses) were relevant for trial out-
comes, lower firing rates would be expected in failed empty-
set trials. Indeed, the responses of VIP (Figure 4A) and PFC (Fig-
ure 4B) empty-set neurons were reduced in erroneous empty-set
trials (VIP: 6.33 ± 1.26 Hz versus 5.03 ± 0.10 Hz, n = 15, p < 0.05;
PFC: 13.04 ± 3.94 Hz versus 7.58 ± 2.34 Hz, p < 0.05; n = 10;
Wilcoxon signed-rank test; note that only cells with a sufficient
number of error trials were considered for analysis). This result
suggests that the activity of empty-set neurons in both VIP and
PFC is relevant for the outcome of trials in which an empty set
was presented as sample.
Does the activity of empty-set neurons also correlate with the
performance in countable numerosity trials? In correct trials,
countable numerosities were encoded with low firing rates by
empty-set neurons. If this low activity were relevant for perfor-
mance, higher firing rates to the non-preferred numerosities of
empty-set neurons might lead to errors. We compared the firing
rates of empty-set neurons to their least-preferred stimulus (a
countable numerosity) in correct and error trials. Empty-set neu-
rons in VIP (Figure 4A) and PFC (Figure 4B) exhibited higher firing
rates to their least-preferred numerosity in error compared to
correct trials (VIP: 2.61 ± 0.63 Hz versus 3.01 ± 0.63 Hz, for cor-
rect and error trials, p < 0.05, n = 24, Wilcoxon signed-rank test;
PFC: 6.54 ± 2.5 Hz versus 7.67 ± 2.74 Hz, for correct and error
trials, p < 0.05, n = 23, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Thus, the
activity of empty-set neurons in both cortical areas was also
correlated with the outcome of trials in which countable numer-
osities were presented as sample.
Finally, is the activity of countable-numerosity neurons, in turn,
correlated with performance in empty-set trials? In this case, we
analyzed the error-trial activity of countable-numerosity neurons
which fired the least for empty sets in correct trials. The activity of
countable-numerosity neurons in VIP (Figure 3C) did not differ in
error and correct empty-set trials (4.51 ± 1.60 versus 4.73 ± 1.7,
p = 0.86; n = 14). In countable-numerosity PFC neurons (Fig-
ure 3D), however, the activity during the sample period increased
in erroneous empty-set trials (4.33 ± 0.80 versus 8.49 ± 2.35,
p = 0.04; n = 9; Wilcoxon signed-rank test). So, only the activity
of PFC countable-numerosity neurons during the sample period
is correlated with the outcome of empty-set trials.
Neuronal Population Dynamics in VIP and PFC
Next, we explored how VIP and PFC neuronal populations, irre-
spective of selectivity status or stimulus preference [29, 30],
encoded empty sets. We analyzed the coding capacity and dy-
namics of population responses as a whole by performing a
multidimensional state space analysis (Gaussian-process factor
analysis, GPFA) [31] on similarly sized pseudo-populations of
neurons in VIP and PFC (377 and 364 neurons, respectively).
This approach extracts trajectories from the spiking activity of
a neuronal population in individual trials. Such trajectories reflect
the instantaneous firing rate of the respective neuronal popula-
tion as they evolve over time. Figures 5A and 5B depict average
population trajectories for the different sample stimuli in a space
defined by the top-three most-meaningful dimensions.
To evaluate the population numerical tuning, we measured
Euclidian distances between trial trajectories corresponding to
different samples. In VIP, parietal population dynamics did not
exhibit a distance effect for empty sets (Figure 5C). The inter-tra-
jectory distances between empty sets and different countable nu-
merosities(0–1,0–2,0–3,and0–4)werecomparableforallnumer-
ical distances (time-defined Kolmogorov-Smirnov permutation
Figure 3. Average Tuning Curves and Stim-
ulus Preference
(A and C) Population tuning curves obtained by
averaging the normalized tuning curves of VIP (A)
and PFC (C) neurons with the same preferred
stimulus. The average tuning curve of empty-set-
preferring neurons is shown in red. Error bars
indicate the SEM.
(B and D) Proportion of neurons in VIP (B) and PFC
(D) responding maximally to each of the stimulus
types.
See also Figure S1.
1288
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
 test comparing the distributions of inter-trial distances for the
differentpairsofstimulus,1,000randompermutations,alphalevel
0.05; Figure 5E).
In contrast, in the ordered layout formed by prefrontal trajec-
tories (Figure 5B), a population distance effect could be identi-
fied. The closer two numerosities were in the numerical contin-
uum, the more similar were their patterns of population activity,
and vice versa. This held true for empty sets. The distance be-
tween population trajectories in empty-set trials and other trials
increased with the sample magnitude of the latter (Figure 5D,
inset). Indeed, all inter-trajectory distance comparisons that
defined a distance effect for empty sets surpassed their signifi-
cant threshold in PFC (Figure 5F) during the sample period. As
expected, both areas segregated the two classes when average
trajectories were calculated for empty sets versus all countable
numerosities (Figures S2A–S2D). Finally, the whole analysis
was performed with the exclusive selective population of neu-
rons (Figures S3A–S3F). Results exhibited the same patterns: a
distance effect was not significant in VIP exclusive number-se-
lective neurons but was clearly present in PFC exclusive num-
ber-selective neurons.
Population Decoding
We trained a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to discrim-
inate numerosity on the spiking activity of either VIP or PFC
neurons [32] (see the Experimental Procedures). Preference-
balanced pseudo-populations of 200 neurons were assembled
per cortical area. Figures 6A and 6B show the temporal cross-
training performance of the VIP and PFC classifiers, i.e., their
accuracy to identify the correct numerosity when tested on the
activity from a certain trial time period after being trained on other
time bin. With a chance performance of 20% (for five classes),
the classifier accuracy was higher in prefrontal than in parietal
neurons throughout the sample phase (VIP: 50.1% ± 7.7%;
PFC: 67.8% ± 7.1%; mean ± SD over resamples; training and
testing in the same time bin). In addition, classification perfor-
mance reflected the effects described in behavior: accuracy
decreased along the diagonal of the confusion matrix with
increasing numerosities (size effect), and the probability of
misclassification of trials increased the closer two classes are
in the numerical space (distance effect) (Figures 6C and 6D).
The confusion matrix in Figure 6C shows a robust accuracy for
empty sets and numerosity 1 but weaker accuracy for other nu-
merosities in VIP neurons (see also the resulting flat performance
curves derived from the confusion matrix in the top panel of Fig-
ure 6C). In contrast, classification performance with PFC neurons
was robust for all stimulus classes (Figure 6D), which was also re-
flected by sharp performance curves (Figure 6D, top panel).
Next, we assessed the ability of the classifier to discriminate
each class (sample stimulus) from all others (Figures 7A and
Figure 5. Population Dynamics in VIP and PFC
(A and B) Average whole-population state-space trajectories in VIP (A) and
PFC (B) in trials with different sample stimuli.
(C and D) Average distances between trials with different sample numerosities
in the whole population of VIP neurons (C) and PFC neurons (D).
(E and F) Statistical comparison of pairs of inter-trajectory distances that
define a distance effect for empty sets in the whole population of VIP neurons
(E) and PFC neurons (F). The distributions of trial inter-trajectory distances
were compared with a Kolmogorov-Smirnov permutation test per time bin. The
significance threshold for each comparison, evaluated at an alpha level of
0.05, is marked with a dotted line and a lateral colored arrow.
See also Figures S2 and S3.
Figure 4. Error Trial Analysis
(A and B) Behavioral relevance of empty-set neurons in empty-set trials
(preferred stimulus) (A) and countable numerosity trials (least-preferred stim-
ulus) (B). The neuronal firing rates in the sample period are compared between
correct and error trials.
(C) Firing rates of VIP and PFC countable numerosity neurons in correct and
erroneous empty-set trials.
Error bars indicate the SEM.
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
1289
 7B; evaluated with AUROC [area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve], chance level 0.5). If magnitude classes
were ordered along a numerical continuum, we would expect a
graded decrease of discriminability with increasing numerical
magnitude as a signature of the numerical size effect. In VIP,
the average AUROC values during the sample period were
0.94 ± 0.04 for empty sets, 0.81 ± 0.09 for numerosity 1, and
0.68 ± 0.07 for larger numerosities (mean ± SD over resamples).
Note that the classifier’s capacity to discriminate numerosity 1
was similar to the discriminability of larger numerosities (Fig-
ure 7A). This indicates only a mild size effect in VIP neurons for
countable numerosities. In contrast, the classifier’s discrimina-
bility function for empty sets showed higher values compared
to the discriminability of all countable numerosities. This decod-
ing pattern again suggests that empty sets in VIP are treated
more as a category different from other stimuli.
In PFC, however, a gradation of discriminability values from
empty sets to higher numerosities was present (Figure 7B).
Numerosity 1 was discriminated much better than other count-
able classes and slightly worse than empty sets (empty
sets: 1.0 ± 0.01; numerosity 1: 0.95 ± 0.04; other numerosities:
0.80 ± 0.06; mean ± SD over resamples). Note the graded decre-
ment in the discriminabilityof empty sets,numerosity1, and larger
numerosities in PFC (Figure 7B). This pattern evidences a numer-
ical size effect at the population level and provides further evi-
dence that prefrontal neurons integrate empty sets as part of
the numerosity continuum. As expected from previous results,
Figure 6. Decoding Numerosity from VIP
and PFC Population Activity with a SVM
Classifier
(A and B) Temporal cross-training classification
accuracy in VIP (A) and PFC (B) populations.
(C and D) Confusion matrices for VIP neurons (C)
and PFC neurons (D) derived from the sample
period when training and testing were performed
on activity from the same time bin. Performance
curves for each true class are shown at the top of
the confusion matrix. Each curve represents the
frequency with which the activity elicited by a
certain stimulus class was assigned different la-
bels by the classifier.
See also Figures S4 and S5.
both classifiers did well in the binary
discrimination of empty sets versus all
other countable numerosities (Figure S4).
A population of only tuned PFC neurons
encoded numerosity better compared
to a population of PFC and VIP cells
(Figure S5).
Level of Abstraction of Empty-Set
Representations
To directly address the level of abstrac-
tion of empty-set representations at the
whole-population level, we tested the ef-
fects of protocol and background shape
with a decoding approach. We trained
the SVM classifier on circle-background
trials and tested it on square-background trials, and vice versa
(shape generalization). We also tested generalization across pro-
tocols, with different background gray levels. Interestingly, the
discriminability of empty sets by VIP neurons (0.94 ± 0.04,
mean ± SD over resamples) dropped by 19.7% (0.85 ± 0.04)
when training and testing were implemented in trials with
different protocols. Similarly, discriminability decreased by
22% (0.84 ± 0.05) in shape generalization (Figure 7C). Parietal
representations of empty sets are thus influenced to some de-
gree by visual stimulus features.
Classification performance based on PFC neurons, however,
fully generalized across sample appearance (Figure 7D). The
classifier’s ability to discriminate empty sets (1.0 ± 0.01) was
not affected by training and testing on trials from different
conditions. Discriminability decreased by only 0.2% in protocol
generalization and by 0.8% in shape generalization. Thus, PFC
representation of empty sets is invariant to background shape
and gray level. This result points to a more abstract representa-
tion of empty sets in PFC, detached from stimulus appearance
and low-level properties.
DISCUSSION
Monkeys Treat Empty Sets as Conveying a Null
Numerical Value
The performance of both monkeys suggested that empty sets
were positioned closer to numerosity 1 than to numerosity 2 on
1290
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
 the monkeys’ mental number line. This finding, a behavioral dis-
tance effect, signals a representational continuity between
empty sets and countable numerosities and corroborates the
conclusions of previous studies in primates [21–23]. Interest-
ingly, behavioral findings in monkeys are reminiscent of the
way pre-school children treat empty sets [20]. Moreover, a dis-
tance effect for empty sets has also been shown in adult
numerate humans [20]. Humans and non-human primates treat-
ing empty sets similarly points to a common primitive and non-
symbolic representation of null quantity.
Neuronal Representations of Numerosity Zero in VIP
In addition to neurons tuned to countable numerosities [3, 9,
14–17],weidentifiedarelativelyhighproportionofneuronsthatre-
sponded maximally to empty sets. Recently, Okuyama et al. [26]
reported VIP neurons that were tuned to the absence of countable
stimuli in one monkey. This monkey was trained to assess the nu-
merosity of a target display (that could show no items) and add or
subtract items in a second display to match the target numerosity.
These authors classified neurons that responded maximally to
empty sets into two distinct groups: exclusive/discrete types
that showed no modulation to numerosities 1 to 4 (based on an
ANOVA) and continuous types that exhibited a significant
response to numerosity 1. Two-thirds of the empty-set neurons
that they recorded in VIP were classified as a discrete type and
the rest as a continuous type. No further statistical tests were
applied to explore whether these cells belonged to two distinct
classes. In our recordings from two monkeys, we found an even
higherproportionof93% VIPselectiveempty-setneuronsthatbe-
longed to the discrete type class according to the definition of
Okuyama et al. [26]. However, the values of tau (t) derived from
exponential decay functions fitted to empty-set tuning functions
did not result in bimodal distributions (p = 0.81, Hartigan dip
test; n = 28). Thus, we found no evidence for two strict classes
of empty-set neurons in VIP, but rather a continuum of more-
discrete to more-continuous empty-set detectors. Task differ-
ences could account for this discrepancy, even though in both
studies the neuronal recordings were derived from an initial target
phase, when the numerosity the monkey had to match at the end
of the trial was displayed. At this initial point of the trial, the task
demands seem comparable. Rather, differences in stimulus pro-
tocols and data processing might account for the observed dis-
crepancies. In particular, we controlled for the effect of visual
stimulus features on neuronal numerosity responses. As discus-
sed below, we found that VIP neurons represent empty sets pri-
marily as separate category distinct from countable numerosities.
Differential Encoding of Empty Sets in VIP and PFC
A differential tuning for empty sets emerged between parietal
and frontal lobes. Empty-set neurons in VIP barely discriminated
countable numerosities and failed to exhibit a strong neuronal
distance effect. Empty sets seem to be encoded as a separate
category, different from all other numerosity stimuli. The resulting
binary-like tuning profile can be better described as signaling the
presence or absence of countable items. Population analyses
showed that this type of tuning is present in VIP neurons, irre-
spective of their selectivity and stimulus preference.
In contrast, empty-set neurons in PFC showed a gradual drop-
off of activity with increasing numerosity. Moreover, at the whole-
population level, the positioning of empty sets with respect to
other numerosities was evidenced by a significant distance
effect in the state space analysis. Complementing these findings,
a size effect emerged in the discriminability of different samples
by the classifier in PFC. These results suggest that PFC does
integrate numerosity zero as the lower end of the numerical
continuum.
The analysis of error trials also points to a differential integra-
tion of empty sets in VIP and PFC. Although the activity of empty-
set neurons in both cortices was behaviorally relevant, only
the activity of prefrontal countable-numerosity neurons during
empty-set presentation affected trial outcomes. This finding
suggests that prefrontal neurons integrate empty sets into the
range of numerosities. In addition, as for behavioral performance
functions, a logarithmic number line accounted better for the tun-
ing curves of numerosity-selective neurons in PFC, but not in
VIP. Thus, neuronal activity in PFC shows a stronger correlation
with behavior than parietal activity.
Figure 7. Numerosity Discriminability and Generalization Perfor-
mance in VIP and PFC
(A and B) Discriminability of each sample numerosity versus others by the multi-
class SVM classifier, evaluated with AUROC values. Numerosity was decoded
from the firing activity of parietal (A) and prefrontal (B) general populations.
(C and D) Generalization performance of the SVM classifiers for VIP neurons
(C) and PFC neurons (D) across different conditions. The discriminability of
empty sets is depicted in solid lines, whereas dotted lines represent the dis-
criminability of countable numerosities. Performance when training and testing
were implemented in trials from different protocols (standard and control) is
depicted in blue. Yellow represents generalization performance across
different background shapes (circle and squares). The bars in the insets show
the average discriminability of empty sets by the classifier during the sample
period, when the stimulus is visually available to the subject. The performance
achieved across different conditions is compared to the base performance
(black lines and bars), when both training and testing were performed on mixed
datasets, including trials from all conditions.
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
1291
 Level of Invariance of Empty-Set Representations to
Stimulus Features
Some degree of abstraction is required from any neural correlate
of numerosity. Therefore, we would expect a neural representa-
tion of empty sets to be invariant to image-like and low-level fea-
tures of the stimuli. In our task, we varied background shape and
controlled for luminance. Neurons sensitive to these non-numer-
ical parameters were excluded from single-neuron analyses.
Moreover, at the population level, a decoding approach allowed
us to explore the invariance of empty-set representations in VIP
and PFC. We found that the discrimination of empty sets by pa-
rietal neurons was reduced across stimulus features. This finding
could be explained by a mixture of visual and numerical selec-
tivity in VIP. In contrast, PFC represented empty sets abstractly,
as evidenced by high decoding performance across stimulus
properties.
Previously, the idea of abstract number representations was
deemed premature based on some behavioral and human
functional imaging studies [33]. In recent years, however, neu-
rons indiscriminant to spatiotemporal and cross-modal number
variations have been found, particularly in PFC [3, 9, 14–16].
Recent human imaging studies also report that the extraction
of numerosity is only minimally influenced by the processing
of physical stimulus features [4, 34]. These findings suggest
that at least some neurons in association cortices represent
numerosities abstractly. Of course, abstract number informa-
tion could also be extracted from population activity [35], as
evidenced by the analyses presented in the current study.
Whether PFC neurons encode empty sets in different formats
(across modalities and spatiotemporal presentation) requires
further investigation.
Hierarchical Processing of Empty Sets from VIP to PFC
In the context of previous studies, our results suggest a pro-
gressive transformation of empty-set representations from VIP
to PFC. Empty sets become detached from visual properties
and gradually positioned in a numerical continuum. Supporting
this interpretation, simultaneous recordings have repeatedly re-
ported that parietal neurons respond earlier to number than PFC
cells [3, 9]. Moreover, PFC is known to host higher-level repre-
sentations of magnitude. For example, it has been shown that
PFC neurons, but not VIP neurons, respond supramodally to
numerosity [16]. In addition, PFC neurons signify symbol-numer-
osity associations, whereas IPS neurons do not [36]. Finally,
PFC sorts relevant from distracting information [37, 38] and pro-
cesses magnitudes according to quantitative rules [39–42].
Numerosity Zero in a Labeled-Line Code for Number
Several computational models of numerosity detection operate
with intermediate-stage summation units that show monotoni-
cally increasing or decreasing discharges as a function of num-
ber (also found in area LIP [43]) before giving rise to peak-tuned
numerosity detectors at the output stage [44, 45]. Due to the
truncation of the number line, empty-set cells show decreasing
rate functions reminiscent of decreasing summation units. On
average, however, their tuning curves were too selective (i.e.,
narrow) to render them suitable graded summation units over a
range of numerosities. This suggests that empty-set-preferring
neurons are better considered as detectors tuned to numerical
value 0. Conversely, the class of frequent neurons tuned to nu-
merosity 4 may mirror increasing summation units. However,
this class could include neurons preferring higher numerosities
whose tuning curves has not been completely sampled. When
broader ranges of numerosities (1 to 30) are tested, numerosity
tuning preference becomes evenly distributed [46], supporting
the notion that numerosity-selective cells in VIP and PFC are
essentially tuned to specific numerical values (see also [26]).
Numerosity Zero in a Non-linearly Compressed
Number Line
We have previously reported that behavioral and neuronal repre-
sentations of numerosity in monkeys [27, 28, 46] and crows [47,
48] are best described on a non-linearly compressed, logarith-
mic number scale. This finding is confirmed in the current study
with a new set of data. The logarithmic scheme accounts for the
decrease in the discrimination of two stimuli when their magni-
tude increases (as predicted by Weber-Fechner psychophysical
law). A non-linearly compressed scaling of numerosity has the
advantage of providing scale-invariance and preference-inde-
pendent neuronal variability. Even though the logarithm of 0 is
not defined, the differences between numerical values can still
be represented on a log scale. Note that the Weber-Fechner
law is concerned with the perception of differences, rather
than absolute magnitudes. Starting with the interval between nu-
merosity 0 (n) and numerosity 1 (n + 1), all differences between
higher numbers can be represented on a log scale. Representa-
tions of cardinality 0 would therefore not dispute the notion of a
nonlinearly compressed scaling.
From Nothing to Zero
Sense organs have evolved to encode the intensity of a stimulus.
Then, how can the absence of stimulation be detected? In order
to make use of this information, the nervous system needs to
encode it actively. Indeed, it has been shown that neurons in
the frontal lobe increase their discharge rate to the categorical
absence of a stimulus [24, 25]. Zero is an example of information
conveyed by the lack of a signal. In this case, the brain generates
a quantitative representation (zero) from the absence of a behav-
iorally relevant sensory signal (nothing), a process that would
require a high level of cognitive control. In this context, it may
not be surprising that neurons in PFC are particularly engaged
in the representation of null quantity.
It has been argued that the conceptual demands imposed by
representing nothing as a numerical category may explain the
delayed discovery of zero in human history [49]. Zero first ap-
peared as a placeholder symbol in notational systems. Only
later, Indians used zero also as a numeral signifying null quantity
in mathematics [50]. This cultural delay is mirrored in ontogeny:
children seem to master the cardinal and ordinal properties of
small numbers before they can deal with zero [18]. Still, it has
been suggested that pre-school children understand the numer-
ical value of numerosity 0 and position empty sets in the context
of other small numerosities before they have developed a
concept of symbolic zero [20]. These results suggest that the
representation of empty sets as non-symbolic carriers of null
quantity can be grasped by children and some animals. Our re-
sults suggest that a humble precursor of the non-symbolic zero
can be identified in the primate PFC.
1292
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Subjects and Surgery
Two adult rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) were implanted with two
recording chambers each, centered over the principal sulcus in the dorsolat-
eral PFC and the VIP in the posterior parietal cortex. All procedures were per-
formed in accordance with the guidelines for animal experimentation
approved by authorities (Regierungspra
¨ sidium Tu
¨ bingen, Germany) (see the
Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Stimuli
Numerosity stimuli were presented on an LCD screen and consisted of multiple-
dot patterns against a gray background. To ensure that the monkeys solved the
task by judging discrete quantity, we controlled low-level visual features in two
stimulus protocols. In the standard protocol, black solid dots appeared at ran-
domized locations and their diameter was pseudo-randomly varied. In the con-
trolprotocol,overalldotarea,dotdensity,andtotalstimulusluminancewerekept
constant across countable numerosities (1–4). Background luminance was var-
ied across and between protocols to control for luminance differences that may
occur for the empty set and to detect their effect on neuronal responses. For
testing of how invariant the neuronal representation of empty sets is to image-
like features, both stimulus protocols (standard and control) were shown either
with a circular background (Figure 1B, left) or a square background (Figure 1B,
right) (see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Behavioral Protocol
Monkeys were required to grab a bar and keep fixation in order to start a trial.
Then, a green square or circle background appeared on the screen during a
500 ms fixation period. Subsequently, a sample stimulus consisting of a gray
backgroundcontaining zero to four dotswas shown for 500ms.After a 1 s delay,
during which the green background was again shown, a test stimulus appeared
andthemonkeyswere expectedtoreleasethebar ifitmatched thesamplestim-
ulusin quantity. That was the casein 50% of the trials, referred to as match trials.
Otherwise, in non-match-trials, a 300 ms second delay was followed by a sec-
ond test stimulus (500 ms) that always matched the sample stimulus in number.
The green fixation and delay background displays framed the sample epoch.
This background was chosen to match in luminance with the gray level dis-
playedinthetrial samplestimulus.Background shape was keptconstant across
the different epochs of a single trial, i.e., all displays in the circle-shape trials pre-
sented a circle as background, whereas all displays in the square-shape trials
showed a square as background. Correct responses were rewarded with water
(see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Behavioral Data Analysis
For each session, behavioral performance functions were derived from the
percent of correct responses to all possible stimulus combinations. Behavioral
curves per session were fitted with a Gaussian function when plotted either on
a linear or a logarithmic numerical scaling (log2(n + 1)), and goodness-of-fit
values (r2) were derived. Overall performance tuning functions were obtained
by averaging behavioral tuning functions over sessions (see the Supplemental
Experimental Procedures for details).
Neurophysiological Recording
In each session, arrays of up to eight glass-coated tungsten microelectrodes
were inserted in each recording chamber using a grid with 1 mm spacing. Neu-
rons were selected at random, as no attempt was made to preselect neurons
according to response properties. Waveform sorting was performed off-line
(see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Neuronal Data Analysis
Selectivity and Tuning Analysis
Neurons that had a minimum average firing rate of 1 Hz and at least three stim-
ulus repetitions per specific condition (20 specific conditions from five sample
numerosities 3 two types of protocol 3 two background shapes) were
analyzed. For determination of numerosity selectivity, activity during the sam-
ple phase was derived from a 500 ms interval after stimulus onset. To account
for differences in the response latencies between brain areas, we shifted the
analysis window by 50 ms after sample onset for VIP and 100 ms for PFC neu-
rons. This differential shift captured the intervals after physical stimulus onset
when neurons are responsive to the sample stimulus [3, 9]. To determine nu-
merosity selectivity of individual neurons, we ran a three-way ANOVA with fac-
tors number (five sample numerosities), protocol (standard and control),
and shape (circle and square). Significance was evaluated for each factor at
p < 0.01. For creation of neuronal filter functions, activity rates were normalized
by setting, for each neuron, the firing rate to the most-preferred numerosity as
1 and to the least-preferred numerosity as 0. The normalized individual tuning
curves were then averaged across neurons with the same preferred numeros-
ity. The responses of individual empty-set neurons to countable numerosities
(1 to 4) were fitted with a linear function to derive a slope. The tuning curves of
empty-set neurons were also fitted with an exponential decay function to
derive the time constant tau (t) as a measure of the decrease in firing rates
as a function of number. Finally, the tuning curves of all selective neurons
were fitted by a Gaussian function to evaluate tuning width (sigma, s) and
derive goodness-of-fit values (r2) in different numerical scalings (see the Sup-
plemental Experimental Procedures for details).
Error Trial Analysis
For comparison of firing rates in error and correct trials, we included selective
neurons with at least three non-correct trials per involved stimulus. Because
mistakes were rare, especially in trials involving small sample numerosities,
a reduced number of neurons was included in the comparisons of correct
and error trials.
Population Analyses
A GPFA [31] was used to extract low-dimensional neuronal trajectories in state
space from the spiking activity of similarly sized pseudo-populations of neu-
rons in both cortical areas (see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures
for more information). In addition, a multi-class linear SVM classifier [32] was
trained and tested on trial firing rates to discriminate sample numerosity. We
evaluated the decoding performance of the classifier in balanced VIP and
PFC pseudo-populations of neurons (see the Supplemental Experimental Pro-
cedures for details).
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
five figures, and one table and can be found with this article online at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.052.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.N. and A.R.-C. designed the research; A.R.-C. performed the research; M.M.
assisted with experiments; A.R.-C. analyzed the data; A.N. provided analytical
guidance; and A.N. and A.R.-C wrote the paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by DAAD Research Scholarship 91540420 to A.R.-C.
and by DFG grant NI 618/8-1 to A.N. We thank J.F. Ramirez-Villegas for
insightful comments on decoding methods and P. Viswanathan for proof-
reading the manuscript.
Received: December 13, 2015
Revised: March 10, 2016
Accepted: March 24, 2016
Published: April 21, 2016
REFERENCES
1. Burr, D., and Ross, J. (2008). A visual sense of number. Curr. Biol. 18,
425–428.
2. Dehaene, S. (1997). The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates
Mathematics (Oxford University Press).
3. Viswanathan, P., and Nieder, A. (2013). Neuronal correlates of a visual
‘‘sense of number’’ in primate parietal and prefrontal cortices. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 11187–11192.
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
1293
 4. Park, J., DeWind, N.K., Woldorff, M.G., and Brannon, E.M. (2016). Rapid
and direct encoding of numerosity in the visual stream. Cereb. Cortex
26, 748–763.
5. Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M.M., and Feigenson, L. (2008). Individual differ-
ences in non-verbal number acuity correlate with maths achievement.
Nature 455, 665–668.
6. Starr, A., Libertus, M.E., and Brannon, E.M. (2013). Number sense in in-
fancy predicts mathematical abilities in childhood. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 110, 18116–18120.
7. Brannon, E.M., and Terrace, H.S. (1998). Ordering of the numerosities 1 to
9 by monkeys. Science 282, 746–749.
8. Nieder, A. (2005). Counting on neurons: the neurobiology of numerical
competence. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 177–190.
9. Nieder, A., and Miller, E.K. (2004). A parieto-frontal network for visual nu-
merical information in the monkey. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 7457–
7462.
10. Piazza, M., Izard, V., Pinel, P., Le Bihan, D., and Dehaene, S. (2004). Tuning
curves for approximate numerosity in the human intraparietal sulcus.
Neuron 44, 547–555.
11. Nieder, A., and Dehaene, S. (2009). Representation of number in the brain.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 32, 185–208.
12. Harvey, B.M., Klein, B.P., Petridou, N., and Dumoulin, S.O. (2013).
Topographic representation of numerosity in the human parietal cortex.
Science 341, 1123–1126.
13. Eiselt, A.K., and Nieder, A. (2016). Single-cell coding of sensory, spatial
and numerical magnitudes in primate prefrontal, premotor and cingulate
motor cortices. Exp. Brain Res. 234, 241–254.
14. Nieder, A., Freedman, D.J., and Miller, E.K. (2002). Representation of the
quantity of visual items in the primate prefrontal cortex. Science 297,
1708–1711.
15. Nieder, A., Diester, I., and Tudusciuc, O. (2006). Temporal and spatial
enumeration processes in the primate parietal cortex. Science 313,
1431–1435.
16. Nieder, A. (2012). Supramodal numerosity selectivity of neurons in primate
prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109,
11860–11865.
17. Viswanathan, P., and Nieder, A. (2015). Differential impact of behavioral
relevance on quantity coding in primate frontal and parietal neurons.
Curr. Biol. 25, 1259–1269.
18. Wellman, H.M., and Miller, K.F. (1986). Thinking about nothing: develop-
ment of concepts of zero. Br. J. Dev. Psychol. 4, 31–42.
19. Menninger, K. (1969). Number Words and Number Symbols (MIT Press).
20. Merritt, D.J., and Brannon, E.M. (2013). Nothing to it: precursors to a zero
concept in preschoolers. Behav. Processes 93, 91–97.
21. Beran, M.J. (2012). Quantity judgments of auditory and visual stimuli by
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process.
38, 23–29.
22. Biro, D., and Matsuzawa, T. (2001). Use of numerical symbols by the chim-
panzee (Pan troglodytes): Cardinals, ordinals, and the introduction of zero.
Anim. Cogn. 4, 193–199.
23. Merritt, D.J., Rugani, R., and Brannon, E.M. (2009). Empty sets as part of
the numerical continuum: conceptual precursors to the zero concept in
rhesus monkeys. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 138, 258–269.
24. Merten, K., and Nieder, A. (2012). Active encoding of decisions about stim-
ulus absence in primate prefrontal cortex neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 109, 6289–6294.
25. Merten, K., and Nieder, A. (2013). Comparison of abstract decision encod-
ing in the monkey prefrontal cortex, the presupplementary, and cingulate
motor areas. J. Neurophysiol. 110, 19–32.
26. Okuyama, S., Kuki, T., and Mushiake, H. (2015). Representation of the
Numerosity ‘zero’ in the Parietal Cortex of the Monkey. Sci. Rep. 5, 10059.
27. Nieder, A., and Miller, E.K. (2003). Coding of cognitive magnitude: com-
pressed scaling of numerical information in the primate prefrontal cortex.
Neuron 37, 149–157.
28. Merten, K., and Nieder, A. (2009). Compressed scaling of abstract numer-
osity representations in adult humans and monkeys. J. Cogn. Neurosci.
21, 333–346.
29. Mante, V., Sussillo, D., Shenoy, K.V., and Newsome, W.T. (2013). Context-
dependent computation by recurrent dynamics in prefrontal cortex.
Nature 503, 78–84.
30. Raposo, D., Kaufman, M.T., and Churchland, A.K. (2014). A category-free
neural population supports evolving demands during decision-making.
Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1784–1792.
31. Yu, B.M., Cunningham, J.P., Santhanam, G., Ryu, S.I., Shenoy, K.V., and
Sahani, M. (2009). Gaussian-process factor analysis for low-dimensional
single-trial analysis of neural population activity. J. Neurophysiol. 102,
614–635.
32. Chang, C.-C., and Lin, C.-J. (2011). LIBSVM: a library for support vector
machines. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 2, 1–27.
33. Cohen Kadosh, R., and Walsh, V. (2009). Numerical representation in the
parietal lobes: abstract or not abstract? Behav. Brain Sci. 32, 313–328,
discussion 328–373.
34. Leibovich, T., Vogel, S.E., Henik, A., and Ansari, D. (2016). Asymmetric
Processing of Numerical and Nonnumerical Magnitudes in the Brain: An
fMRI Study. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 28, 166–176.
35. Tudusciuc, O., and Nieder, A. (2007). Neuronal population coding of
continuous and discrete quantity in the primate posterior parietal cortex.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 14513–14518.
36. Diester, I., and Nieder, A. (2007). Semantic associations between signs
and numerical categories in the prefrontal cortex. PLoS Biol. 5, e294.
37. Lennert, T., and Martinez-Trujillo, J. (2011). Strength of response suppres-
sion to distracter stimuli determines attentional-filtering performance in
primate prefrontal neurons. Neuron 70, 141–152.
38. Jacob, S.N., and Nieder, A. (2014). Complementary roles for primate fron-
tal and parietal cortex in guarding working memory from distractor stimuli.
Neuron 83, 226–237.
39. Bongard, S., and Nieder, A. (2010). Basic mathematical rules are encoded
by primate prefrontal cortex neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107,
2277–2282.
40. Vallentin, D., Bongard, S., and Nieder, A. (2012). Numerical rule coding in
the prefrontal, premotor, and posterior parietal cortices of macaques.
J. Neurosci. 32, 6621–6630.
41. Eiselt, A.K., and Nieder, A. (2013). Representation of abstract quantitative
rules applied to spatial and numerical magnitudes in primate prefrontal
cortex. J. Neurosci. 33, 7526–7534.
42. Ott, T., Jacob, S.N., and Nieder, A. (2014). Dopamine receptors differen-
tially enhance rule coding in primate prefrontal cortex neurons. Neuron
84, 1317–1328.
43. Roitman, J.D., Brannon, E.M., and Platt, M.L. (2007). Monotonic coding of
numerosity in macaque lateral intraparietal area. PLoS Biol. 5, e208.
44. Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J.P. (1989). A simple model of prefrontal cor-
tex function in delayed-response tasks. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 1, 244–261.
45. Verguts, T., and Fias, W. (2004). Representation of number in animals and
humans: a neural model. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16, 1493–1504.
46. Nieder, A., and Merten, K. (2007). A labeled-line code for small and large
numerosities in the monkey prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 27, 5986–5993.
47. Ditz, H.M., and Nieder, A. (2015). Neurons selective to the number of visual
items in the corvid songbird endbrain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112,
7827–7832.
48. Ditz, H.M., and Nieder, A. (2016). Numerosity representations in crows
obey the Weber-Fechner law. Proc. Biol. Sci. 283, 20160083.
49. Butterworth, B. (1999). The Mathematical Brain (Macmillan Press).
50. Ifrah, G. (1998). Universal History of Numbers: From Prehistory to the
Invention of the Computer (The Harvill Press).
1294
Current Biology 26, 1285–1294, May 23, 2016
