 1
Scientific REPORTS |  (2018) 8:5536  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23914-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Earliest Animal Cranial Surgery: 
from Cow to Man in the Neolithic
Fernando Ramirez Rozzi1 & Alain Froment2
The earliest cranial surgery (trepanation) has been attested since the Mesolithic period. The meaning of 
such a practice remains elusive but it is evident that, even in prehistoric times, humans from this period 
and from the Neolithic period had already achieved a high degree of mastery of surgical techniques 
practiced on bones. How such mastery was acquired in prehistoric societies remains an open question. 
The analysis of an almost complete cow cranium found in the Neolithic site of Champ-Durand (France) 
(3400-3000 BC) presenting a hole in the right frontal bone reveals that this cranium underwent cranial 
surgery using the same techniques as those used on human crania. If bone surgery on the cow cranium 
was performed in order to save the animal, Champ-Durant would provide the earliest evidence of 
veterinary surgical practice. Alternatively, the evidence of surgery on this cranium can also suggest that 
Neolithic people practiced on domestic animals in order to perfect the technique before applying it to 
humans.
Evidence of cranial surgery in human history exists as early as the Mesolithic period before spreading even further 
during the Neolithic1–3. It is well represented throughout the world, and its use has been documented in skeletal 
remains from every continent; most of them from the Mesolithic to the present time2–17 (http://www.holeinthe-
headmovie.com). The most ancient example of a trepanation is described by Samuel George Morton18, in his 
famous book Crania Americana published in 1839: a skull from South America displayed a hole that Morton did 
not recognize as a trepanation, but as a wound attributed to a blunt instrument. The purpose of such a practice 
to treat functional disorders or as part of a magical-religious ritual has long been discussed without arriving at a 
conclusive answer14. The purpose of such a practice, we suppose, most probably depends on the societies and/or 
the period in question. Independently of the reasons that led humans to carry out trepanations, one cannot but 
be amazed by prehistoric man’s knowledge and mastery of the techniques of cranial surgery. Indeed, the oldest 
crania with evidence of trepanation reveal the use of the same techniques as those used in historic times with the 
same degree of accuracy19. Similar techniques are recorded all over the world. The bone was scraped or cut or 
drilled preventing any break of the inner table of the skull bone so as not to compromise the health and integrity 
of the brain.
How people involved in this cranial surgery acquired the training to practice the operation on humans is 
unknown. It is possible that they practiced on the skulls of the dead, but in that case the gestures could not have 
been fully assessed. That is to say, gestures developed on the crania of cadavers could lead to brain damage when 
practiced on living patients and it would be difficult to recognize dangerous gestures on anyone but live patients. 
It is also possible that they trained on live animals. A wild boar cranium (Sus scrofa) probably from a Neolithic site 
in Roquefort, France shows signs of a surgical operation20. Unfortunately, complete skulls of animals are rarely 
found in archeological sites since they were eaten and the skulls were most probably broken to extract the tongue 
and the brain.
The Neolithic site of Champ-Durand, Vendée, France, situated at around 40 km from the Atlantic coast, on the 
northern border of the Poitevin marshes, was a fortified locality with three series of ditches and described as an 
important trade center for local populations specialized in salt production and trade as well as in cattle slaughter 
in 5000 BP21,22 (Supplementary Information). Archeological excavations of the ditches carried out from 1975 to 
1985 enabled researchers to find important quantities of faunal remains. Cut-marks on bones and burned bones 
indicate that domestic animals such as cows, pigs, sheep and goats were the principal source of meat23. Similarly 
to other neighboring Neolithic sites, the cow (Bos taurus) is the species most represented and corresponds to 
54% of animal remains. An almost complete cow cranium, lacking only the anterior part of the maxilla and the 
extremities of the horns, shows a hole in the right frontal bone. In a previous work, the hole was interpreted as 
1AMIS UMR 5288 CNRS. Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, 1 rue Maurice Arnoux, 92120, Montrouge, France. 2IRD - 
Musée de l’Homme, 17 place du Trocadéro, 75116, Paris, France. Correspondence and requests for materials should 
be addressed to F.R. (email: fernando.ramirez-rozzi@cnrs.fr)
Received: 14 November 2017
Accepted: 9 March 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific REPORTS |  (2018) 8:5536  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23914-1
resulting from goring by another cow23, however a quick visual inspection of the bone surface shows some fea-
tures that seem to indicate that the hole may be related to human activity. The aim of this work is to assess if the 
hole in the cow cranium is the result of human intervention.
Results
The hole shows an anterior-posterior orientation measuring 64.5 mm long and 46.5 mm wide at the outer table 
(Fig. 1). It becomes smaller internally with a length of 40 mm and a width of 30 mm at the inner table. Change 
in size results from the fact that the outer table was more extensively removed than the inner table in the front 
area of the hole. The borders of inner and outer tables are irregular indicating that the bone was not cut. There 
is no other sign of trauma on any part of this cranium. There is a complete lack of evidence to support a violent 
origin for this trauma such as goring by another cow. A blow causing an injury of this shape would need to be 
struck almost perpendicularly to the bone surface. It seems reasonable to suggest that such a blow would produce 
fracturing either in stellate or comminuted form in and around the wound. No evidence of such a fracture, either 
internally or externally can be seen. Furthermore, if the hole was produced by a shock, internally orientated 
bone splinters should be observed. However, 3-D reconstruction from X-scan projections and SEM analyses fail 
to show internally orientated splinters but does show a continuous surface of endocranium all around the hole 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). The bone surfaces are not smooth, the edges of the hole are sharp and the diploeic pores 
are easily visible. Radiological studies confirm the lack of any healing processes in the bone tissue around the hole. 
Therefore the animal did not survive the injury or was killed shortly afterwards or the trauma occurred once the 
animal was already dead.
Holes in skull bones can also be related to infectious diseases, like syphilis or tuberculosis, local benign or 
malignant tumors, metastases, congenital defects, or taphonomic events like the action of gnawing animals, 
insects, or selective erosion. In our case the regularity of the hole, and the lack of periostal inflammation, does 
not favor an origin such as a tumoral or infectious lesion, unless the margins of the initial lesion had been cut 
out and removed during the surgical process. Internal orifices accompanying areas of trepanation have a regular 
appearance: they are smooth and seem to correspond to the pneumatization of the sinuses or other cavities in a 
normal skull.
Marks consistent with any form of scraping are apparent around the hole. Indeed, in the posterior border, 
groups of cut-marks showing a different orientation suggest that the bone was intensively scraped (Figs 2a–c and 
3g). In the anterior border, cut-marks are also observed but with a lesser density. Therefore, the almost square 
appearance of the hole, the lack of any mark indicating pressure exerted by an exterior force, the lack of any 
defects of the cranial vault associated with any illness and the presence of cut-marks all around the hole suggest 
that the injury derived from some form of surgical procedure typical of the trepanation process. The type and 
density of cut-marks on the cow cranium are similar to those observed in human skulls following cranial surgery 
by scraping (Figs 2d,e and 3f, see i.e. ref.5 Fig. 10.3, ref.10, Figs 5 and 7). Indeed, scraping was used to expose soft 
tissues in the cow, similar to the technique recorded for humans.
Discussion
Bone remodeling following an injury starts several days later24. The lack of healing at histological level means that 
cranial surgery would have been practiced at a pre-mortem or a peri-mortem stage without the survival of the 
individual or alternatively that it occurred when the animal was already dead (post-mortem stage).
If cranial surgery on the cow employing the same techniques used on humans was indeed practiced in a 
pre-mortem or peri-mortem stage, it can be argued that the surgical intervention was carried out in order to save 
the animal. However, no abnormality or symptom of illness is observed in the cranium. Trauma is the most com-
mon cause for cranial surgery in some regions10. In a previous rapid survey of faunal remains on this site, it was 
suggested that goring by the horn of another animal caused the hole in the cow’s cranium23. However, there is no 
fracture near the trepanation or any indication of a shock to the cranium (Supplementary Fig. 1). Cranial surgery 
Figure 1. External and internal view of the cow cranium showing the hole on the right frontal bone. Bar 
corresponds to 10 cm.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific REPORTS |  (2018) 8:5536  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23914-1
could remove any evidence of trauma25, but evidence of trauma most often disappears by healing26. Surgical 
intervention probably followed seizures or epilepsy or some other alteration of behavior. If such an intervention 
was carried out for the survival of the animal, it is worth noting that as early as the Neolithic period, these kinds of 
symptoms were already linked to brain physiology and/or activity revealing that a particular disorder in behavior 
was directly related to brain function. However, it is not clear what the interest would be in saving an animal of a 
species that was most commonly consumed for food. Archeological evidence reveals intensive economic activity 
around cattle and discards the notion that the cow was part of a ritual practice. If the Neolithic surgeon was not 
just practicing on the cow, or acting to treat it, removing a roundel for making an amulet, or performing a magical 
ritual, is of course unclear, but it is reasonable to suppose that any of those actions would have had greater value, 
practical or symbolic, if performed on a human being rather than on a common animal.
Cranial surgery may have been carried out when the cow was dead. Trepanation in this case would suggest 
that Neolithic man honed the techniques of cranial surgery on domestic animals before treating and caring for 
humans. Indeed, cranial surgery requires great manual dexterity and a complete knowledge of the anatomy of 
the brain and vessel distribution. It is possible that the mastery of techniques in cranial surgery shown in the 
Mesolithic and Neolithic periods was acquired through experimentation on animals. Cranial surgery as a practice 
could also have been performed on live animals; the lack of healing in the cow analyzed here could reveal a failure 
of the surgical intervention.
Figure 2. Cranial surgery in cow (a–c) compared with two human crania from the Neolithic period in 
France ((d) [28217bis], (e) [17144]). The cranial surgery in the cow cranium does not appear different to 
cranial surgery practiced on human crania. The use of a low magnification approach with either hand lenses 
or binoculars is more practical for identifying complete assemblages of cut-marks than a scanning electronic 
microscope27. More of the cut-marks appear in groups crossing between them and are obliquely orientated 
to the border of the perforation (white arrows). Parallel long cut-marks produced by a single tool in a unique 
gesture can be seen in cow as in human crania (black arrows). Other cut-marks with similar orientation show 
a large space between them and are almost parallel to the border of perforation; these cut-marks are probably 
associated with cutting more than with grasping (chevrons). Bar corresponds to 1 cm.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific REPORTS |  (2018) 8:5536  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23914-1
In conclusion, if cranial surgery observed on the cow was performed in order to save the animal, 
Champ-Durant provides the earliest evidence of veterinary surgical practice. Alternatively, if trepanation was 
used to practice techniques, the cow from Champ-Durand would provide the earliest evidence of surgical exper-
imentation on an animal indicating that this practice already existed in 4000 BC.
Materials and Methods
In order to evaluate the nature of the hole in the cow cranium, direct observation of the bone surface was per-
formed with a stereomicroscope Wild M8 coupled with a Spot Idea camera. High-quality epoxy resin replicas of 
Figure 3. The SEM image of the detail of trepanation in a human cranium ((f) [17144]) enables to distinguish 
characteristic long, straight, multiple parallel cut-marks (white arrows) from short, irregular and rounded 
orifices of vascular channels (yellow arrows) predominant in the lower part of the picture. In the cow cranium 
(g), cut marks (white arrows) appear with their typical aspect: straight, multiple parallel, v-shaped and with 
micro-striations along the groove27, close to the border of the cranial surgery, whereas vascular channels are 
visible far from it (yellow arrows). Orientation, aspect, and packing of cut-marks reveal the same gestures in 
the crania analyzed, thus suggesting that the technique used on the cow cranium was the same as that used on 
human crania. Bar corresponds to 1 mm.
NUMBER
TYPE
REGION
LOCALITY
SITE
12471
parietal
Oise
Belle-Haie
dolmen of Belle-Haie
17144
cranium
Lozère
Saint-Pierre-des-Tripiez
cave of Homme Mort
17148
cranium, fragment
Lozère
Aiguières
dolmen of Aiguières
17176
cranium
Lozère
Roussec
dolmen of Roussec
17352
cranium, fragment
Lozère
Aiguières
dolmen of Aiguières
17356
cranium, fragment
Lozère
Aiguières
dolmen of Aiguières
17357
cranium, fragment
Lozère
Aiguières
dolmen of Aiguières
17363
piece from trepanation
Lozère
20973
cranium
Marne
Petit Morin
24442
cranium
Lozère
Saint-Pierre-des-Tripiez
cave of Homme Mort
24901
calvaria
Yvelines
Les Mureaux
dolmen of Mureaux
25264-1
cranium, fragment
Yvelines
Les Mureaux
dolmen of Mureaux
25265
cranium, fragment
Yvelines
Les Mureaux
dolmen of Mureaux
25266
piece from trepanation
Yvelines
Les Mureaux
dolmen of Mureaux
28217
cranium
Seine-et-Marne
Vendrest
dolmen of Belleville
28217-bis
cranium
Seine-et-Marne
Vendrest
dolmen of Belleville
28816
cranium
Oise
Feigneux
34956
calvaria
Val-d’Oise
Ménouville
Table 1. Human skulls with trepanation from French Neolithic sites housed at Musée de l’Homme used to 
compare the cow cranium.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific REPORTS |  (2018) 8:5536  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-23914-1
the bone close to the trepanation were obtained from hydrophobic vinyl polysiloxane (Coltène®) impressions. 
Replicas were later covered with gold-palladium to be observed under the SEM. In addition, a 3D X-scan of 
the whole cranium was obtained to assess damage to the bone and close-up radiographs were taken around the 
hole with a NOMAD, a handheld x-ray machine (Aribex), coupled with a digital x-ray sensor RSV2 (Visiodent). 
Similar analyses were performed on eighteen trepanned human crania from French Neolithic sites (Table 1).
References
 1. Lillie, M. C. Cranial surgery dates back to Mesolithic. Nature 391, 854 (1998).
 2. Alt, K. W. et al. Evidence for Stone Age cranial surgery. Nature 387, 364 (1997).
 3. Crubézy, E. et al. The antiquity of cranial surgery in Europe and in the Mediterranean basin. C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris 332, 417–423 (2001).
 4. Margetts, E. Trepanation of the skull by the medicine-men of primitive cultures, with particular reference to present-day native East 
African practice. In Diseases in Antiquity (Brothwell, D. & Sandison, A. T. eds), Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, IL, pp. 673–701 
(1967).
 5. Houghton, P. Trephination in Oceania. J. Polynesian Soc. 8, 265–269 (1977).
 6. Furnas, D., Sheikh, M. A., Hombergh, V. D., Froeling, F. & Nunda, I. M. Traditional craniotomies of the Kisii tribe of Kenya. Ann 
Plast Surg 15, 538–556 (1985).
 7. Webb, S. G. Two possible cases of trephination from Australia. Am J Phys Anthropol. 75, 541–548 (1988).
 8. Finger, S. & Clower, W. T. Victor Horsley on “trephining in pre-historic times”
. Neurosurgery 48, 911–918 (2001).
 9. Watters, D. A. Skull trepanation in the Bismarck archipelago. P N G Med J. 50, 20–24 (2007).
 
10. Andrushko, V. A. & Verano, J. W. Prehistoric trepanation in the Cuzco region of Peru: a view into an ancient andean practice. Am. J. 
Phys. Anthropol. 137, 4–13 (2008).
 
11. Mogliazza, S. An example of cranial trepanation dating to the Middle Bronze Age from Ebla, Syria. J Anthropol Sci. 87, 187–192 
(2009).
 
12. Qureshi, M. M. & Oluoch-Olunya, D. History of neurosurgery in Kenya, East Africa. World Neurosurgery 73, 261–263 (2010).
 
13. Brothwell, D. & Sandison, A. T. (eds) Diseases in Antiquity. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, IL (1967).
 
14. Arnott, R., Finger, S. & Smith C. U. Trepanation: History, discovery, theory. Swets & Zeitlinger. Lisse, The Netherlands (2003).
 
15. Verano, J. W. Trepanation in prehistoric South America: geographic and temporal trends over 2000 years. In Trepanation: History, 
discovery, theory (Arnott, R., Finger, S. & Smith, C. U., eds), Leiden, Swets and Zeitlinger. p 223–236 (2003).
 
16. Verano, J. Holes in the Head: The Art and Archaeology of Trepanation in Ancient Peru. Dumbarton Oaks Pre-Columbian Art and 
Archaeology Studies Series (2016).
 
17. Bedoya, F. & Podgorny, I. Trepanaciones peruanas. Buenos Aires: Fundación Espigas (2016).
 
18. Morton, S.G. Crania Americana; or, A Comparative View of the Skulls of Various Aboriginal Nations of North and South America: To 
which is Prefixed an Essay on the Varieties of the Human Species. Philadelphia: J. Dobson (1839).
 
19. Campillo, D. Les trepanacions prehistoriques. In: Campillo D., editor. Quaranta anys de Paleopatologia en el Museu d’Arqueologia de 
Catalunya. Museu d’Arqueologia de Catalunya Monografias 12, Barcelona, p 245–276 (2008).
 
20. Lambert, J. Le sanglier néolithique trépané et mutilé de Roquefort (AlpesMaritimes). Bulletin de la Société Préhistorique Française 
45, 201–205 (1948).
 
21. Joussaume, R. Le Néolithique de l’Aunis et du Poitou occidental dans son cadre atlantique. Travaux du Laboratoire d’Anthropologie-
Préhistoire-Protohistoire et Quaternaire armoricains de l’Université de Rennes I. Rennes (1981).
 
22. Joussaume, R. (dir.) L
’enceinte Néolithique de Champ-Durand à Nieul-sur-l’Autise (Vendée). Mémoire XLIV
, Conseil Régional Vendée (2012).
 
23. Braguier, S. La faune du Rocher à Villedoux (Charente-Maritime) et de Champ-Durand à Nieul-sur-l’Autize (Vendée). Bulletin de la 
Société Préhistorique Française 96, 409–418 (1999).
 
24. Ericksen, E., Mosekilde, L. & Melsen, F. Trabecular bone remodeling and balance in primary hyperparathyroidism. Bone 7, 213–221 
(1986).
 
25. Finger, S. & Fernando, H. R. E. George Squier and the discovery of cranial trepanation: a landmark in the history of surgery and 
ancient medicine. J Hist Med Allied Sci 56, 353–381 (2001).
 
26. MacCurdy, G. G. Human skeletal remains from the highlands of Peru. Am J Phys Anthropol 6, 217–329 (1923).
 
27. Domínguez-Rodrigo, M., de Juana, S., Galán, A. B. & Rodríguez, M. A new protocol to differentiate trampling marks from butchery 
cut marks. J. Arch. Sc. 36, 2643–2654 (2009).
Acknowledgements
Many thanks to S. Ordureau and colleagues of Useful Progress who produced the 3-D reconstruction of the cow 
cranium and C. Rausch for SEM. Thanks to D. Turbon, A. Romero and H. Dabernat for a valuable discussion on 
trepanation. We thank J. Brown and Venetia Bell for helping us with the English.
Author Contributions
F. Ramirez Rozzi: Designed research and performed research, analyzed data, wrote the paper. A. Froment: Acces 
to material, designed research, analyzed data.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-23914-1.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
