 500
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018
mano: A Wearable Hand Exoskeleton for Activities
of Daily Living and Neurorehabilitation
Luca Randazzo
, I˜
naki Iturrate, Serafeim Perdikis, and J. d. R. Mill´
an
Abstract—Hand sensorimotor impairments are among the most
common consequences of injuries affecting the central and periph-
eral nervous systems, leading to a drastic reduction in the quality of
life for affected individuals. Combining wearable robotic exoskele-
tons and human–machine interfaces is a promising avenue for the
restoration and substitution of lost and impaired functions for these
users. In this study, we present a novel hand exoskeleton, mano,
designed to assist and restore hand functions of people with motor
disabilities during activities of daily living (ADL) and in neurore-
habilitative scenarios. Compared to state-of-the-art devices, our
system is fully wearable, portable, and minimally obtrusive on the
hand. The exoskeleton can actively control flexion and extension
of all fingers, while allowing natural somatosensorial interactions
with the environment surrounding the users. We evaluated the
device from four different perspectives. A mechanical characteri-
zation, showing that the exoskeleton can cover more than 70% of
healthy hand workspace and it can achieve forces at the finger-
tips sufficient for ADL. A functional characterization, where we
showed how two users who suffered from spinal cord injuries were
able to perform several ADL for the first time since their accidents.
Third, we evaluated the system from a neuroimaging perspective,
showing that the device can elicit EEG brain patterns typical of nat-
ural hand motions. We finally exemplified the control of the hand
exoskeleton within an exemplar framework, a brain–machine in-
terface scenario, showing that motor intention can be decoded for
a continuous control of the device. Overall, our results showed that
the device represents an ecological solution for use both in ADL
and in scenarios aimed at promoting sensorimotor recovery.
Index
Terms—Prosthetics
and
exoskeletons,
rehabilitation
robotics, wearable robots, brain-machine interface.
I. INTRODUCTION
O
UR hands play a fundamental role throughout the course
of our lives, mediating some of the most distinctive skills
of humans: the ability to interact and shape the world around
us. Hand motor and sensory functions, though, can be severely
impaired due to injuries affecting the central and peripheral
nervous systems and the musculoskeletal apparatus, such as
cerebrovascular accidents, spinal cord injuries and myopathies.
Manuscript received May 24, 2017; accepted October 3, 2017. Date of pub-
lication November 8, 2017; date of current version December 11, 2017. This
letter was recommended for publication by Associate Editor F. Chen and Editor
A. M. Okamura upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was
supported by the Swiss NCCR Robotics. The work of I. Iturrate was supported
by the “EPFL Fellows” program. (Corresponding author: Luca Randazzo.)
The authors are with Defitech Chair in Brain-Machine Interface, Center for
Neuroprosthetics, Ecole Polytechnique F´
ed´
erale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015,
Switzerland (e-mail: luca.randazzo@epfl.ch; inaki.iturrate@epfl.ch; serafeim.
perdikis@epfl.ch; jose.millan@epfl.ch).
This
paper
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LRA.2017.2771329
Fig. 1.
The mano exoskeleton. The device consists of two main parts: a chest-
pack (which hosts the actuation, energy storage and control units) and artificial
tendons (which transmit the motion from the actuators to the fingers of the
wearer). All the exoskeletal structures are placed on the hand dorsal part not to
hamper somatosensation on palm and fingertips during use.
Hence, deficits in arms and hand functioning have a big im-
pact on the overall quality of life and independence of affected
individuals.
In recent years, the combined use of wearable robotic systems
and human-machine interfaces has been proposed as a tool
for complementing and restoring impaired functions in users
with motor disabilities. By acting as transparent extensions of
human bodies, these systems can translate movement intentions
into control signals for wearable robotic devices, for the sake of
providing motor assistance or promoting recovery of functions
[1], [2].
However, despite these approaches are commonly used in
research laboratories and highly-specialized centers, they still
2377-3766 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 RANDAZZO et al.: mano: A WEARABLE HAND EXOSKELETON FOR ADL AND NEUROREHABILITATION
501
suffer from an important limitation: their adoption by users on a
daily basis is limited because of complexity, poor usability and
high costs. Indeed, the translation of these systems to domes-
tic settings could enable intensive and continuous use during
meaningful activities of daily living (ADL), ultimately improv-
ing their effectiveness [3].
In this study, we present a novel hand exoskeleton, mano (see
Fig. 1), aimed at overcoming these limitations and at represent-
ing a viable solution for the assistance and restoration of hand
motor functions. Section II presents the design process of the
device, its characterization in terms of kinematics and achiev-
able forces, and the results of qualitative tests with two users
who suffered from spinal cord injuries. In Section III, we present
a characterization of the exoskeleton from a neuroimaging per-
spective and the results of use within an exemplar framework, a
brain-machine interface (BMI) scenario. Finally, in Section IV,
we discuss the limitations of the current study as well as several
possible future directions.
II. MANO
The mano device was designed with the main purpose of en-
abling intensive use during ADL by a wide range of users with
motor disabilities, while preserving as much as possible pat-
terns of natural interactions with these settings. Several studies
have highlighted how ecological interactions with meaningful
and relevant environments can lead to increased acceptance of
assistive devices and to a better recovery with respect to ther-
apies performed in hospital settings [4], [5]. To this end, we
aimed at developing a device intensively usable in ADL, both
for assistive and neurorehabilitative purposes.
A. Related Work
Many exoskeletal systems have been proposed for hand
rehabilitation and assistance (see [6]–[9] for comprehensive
reviews). Here, we present a short overview of the devices we
identified as possibly complying with requirements of use in
ADL. In particular, in accordance with criteria related to wear-
ability, wide usability and comfort, we focused on soft and
lightweight exoskeletons, excluding systems based on hard or
bulky structures on the hand and non-portable devices. The first
were excluded because they are poorly adaptable to different
hand sizes and tasks and because they tend to get entangled
with external objects, tear clothes, etc., presenting serious limi-
tations for viable daily use. Non-portable devices were excluded
because they cannot be easily displaced and they are therefore
incompatible with many ADL.
Reference systems emulate the natural functioning of human
fingers by adopting tendon-driven mechanisms. These designs
enable the self-alignment of the exoskeletal structure(s) to the
user’s hand without the use of complex mechanisms while al-
lowing the remote placement of the actuation units with respect
to the hands, to the benefit of soft and lightweight profiles on
the arms. For example, the NASA RoboGlove [10] and Soft
Extra Muscle [11] devices exploit artificial tendons to actively
control fingers flexion. Similar concepts are used in the Soft
Robotics Exoskeleton [12], in the Exo-Glove [13], and in the
Exo-Glove Poly [14]. Although lightweight on the hands, these
devices mainly suffer from hindering natural somatosensation
on palms and fingertips or from the lack of control over both
flexion and extension of fingers.
Several concepts have been proposed for preserving natu-
ral somatosensation during use. Polygerinos et al. [15] devel-
oped hydraulic-actuated soft muscles capable of controlling fin-
gers flexion from the hand’s dorsal side. Although relatively
lightweight on the hand (∼285 g), the actuation and control
units of this system are rather heavy (∼3.3 kg), limiting the
overall portability and usability in ADL. The Gloreha glove
[16] is a commercial device which exploits bowden cables in a
push-pull configuration to control both flexion and extension of
fingers from the hand’s dorso. Similarly to the previous device,
this system has the advantage of being lightweight on the hand
(∼50 g) but relies on bulky actuation and control units (∼5 kg)
which make it non-portable. Additionally, due to the anchor-
ing points of the exoskeletal structures, these systems hamper
natural somatosensation on the fingertips.
Due to the limitations of these devices and the identified
requirements, we targeted the development of a fully wearable
and portable exoskeleton, that can control flexion and extension
of fingers without hampering natural somatosensation on palms
and fingertips, and as lightweight and soft as possible to enable
comfortable and intensive use at home.
B. Design
Throughout the development phase of the device, we iter-
atively designed, tested and improved several concepts by in-
tegrating feedback acquired in functional tests with final users,
healthcare therapists and physicians. All the tests and interviews
were conducted at the SuvaCare-Clinique Romande de Radap-
tation (Sion, Switzerland), and at users’ homes.
1) Design Requirements: According to the feedback we col-
lected and based on previous literature research [4], [5], [17], the
tasks which were identified as fundamental for regaining inde-
pendence in ADL were: eating, drinking, toileting and using de-
vices for communication (such as smartphones and computers).
Many of these tasks can be performed through the combination
of a restricted set of hand motions: power grasp (using all fin-
gers, e.g. when holding glasses), precision grasp (using thumb,
index and medium fingers, e.g. holding a pen) and lateral grasp
(using thumb in opposition with respect to the other fingers, e.g.
holding a toothbrush) [18]. During typical ADL, the ranges of
motion for fingers’ joints are usually in the range [−10, 100]◦
and forces at the fingertips are within the range [0, 10] N [8].
These tasks do not impose strict requirements on the movements
of single phalanxes, but rather require hand compliance in order
to allow adaptation to different objects and shapes. Additionally,
assistive devices should take less than 10 minutes to be donned
or doffed, have a reduced weight to limit fatigue and their over-
all profiles, as well as the number of their hard parts, should be
minimized for enabling comfortable use and transparent inter-
actions with the environments surrounding the wearer [19].
2) Design Choices: For the mano device, we adopted a de-
sign that exploits bowden cables in a dual manner, as artificial
 502
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018
tendons for motion transmission and as structural elements for
the exoskeletal fingers. This choice had a double benefit. On
the one hand, it allowed the remote placement of the actua-
tion units with respect to the arm of the wearer, to the benefit
of lightweight and low-profile structures on the limbs. On the
other hand, it allowed to enable soft and fully compliant struc-
tures on the fingers, to the benefit of comfort and functionality.
The exoskeletal fingers have been anchored on the dorsal side
of the hand in order to free palm and fingertips from exter-
nal mechanisms and to fully preserve natural somatosensation
during interactions with external objects and tools.
Only one active degree of actuation for same-finger phalanxes
is used. Similarly to state-of-the-art robotic grippers and to com-
putational models for robust grasping [20], [21], the device ex-
ploits under-actuation and the physiological coupling between
phalanxes in order to allow the objects under manipulation to
shape the hand of the user. This induces natural and comfort-
able grasps without the independent actuation of all phalanxes
or the intervention of complex closed-loop algorithms. The arti-
ficial tendons are used for bi-directional force transmission from
the actuators, with compressive forces causing fingers flexion
and tractive forces causing extension. Abduction and adduction
of fingers cannot be actively controlled by the device; how-
ever, thanks to the passive auto-alignment of the exoskeletal
structures, users can freely exert these degrees of freedom with-
out any limitation resulting from wearing the exoskeleton. The
thumb, index and medium fingers are independently actuated,
whereas the ring and little fingers are jointly actuated, enabling
three types of grasps: power, precision and lateral.
Based on feedback from final users, we placed the actuation,
control and energy storage units inside a chest-pack (rather than
in a back-pack, as in similar state-of-the-art devices). This allows
users sitting on a wheelchair to comfortably rest their backs and
shoulders against the backseats of their wheelchairs, enabling
comfortable use of the system for prolonged periods.
Finally, in order to limit the cost of the system, we only
used off-the-shelf components and parts that can be sourced
from typical shops for hobby modeling. The custom mechani-
cal components were designed to be easily manufacturable by
means of 3D printers and laser-cutters.
C. Overview
The mano system (see Fig. 1) consists of two main parts, a
chest-pack and actuated exoskeletal tendons-fingers. The chest-
pack, wearable by means of adjustable belts, hosts the actuation,
control and energy storage units. Its size is: 200 × 210 × 33
[width × length × height] mm. The artificial tendons consist
of bowden cables (1.6 mm, Shimano, Japan), actuated by linear
servomotors (L16 R, Actuonix Motion Devices Inc., Canada).
Bowden cable sheaths (5 mm, Shimano, Japan) route the tendons
from the actuators to the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints on
the hand. The ends of the sheaths are fixed on the MCPs by
means of soft elastic threads which loop around the fingers of
the wearer. From the MCPs, the artificial tendons are routed and
held in place onto the fingers by means of hooks-and-loops rings.
The ends of the tendons are fixed using hooks-and-loop rings
on the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints, in order to free the
fingertips from any external structure. No soft or hard structures
are placed on the palm of the wearer.
The sheaths are held on the user’s arm and wrist by means
of two adjustable fabric bands and custom 3D printed sheath-
guides. The fabric bands are worn and unworn by means of
commercial side-release buckles.
The control unit consists of a microcontroller (Arduino Mega
2560 R3, Arduino, Italy) that runs the firmware of the sys-
tem, and of a custom printed-circuit board hosting a Bluetooth
radio (HC-06, Guangzhou HC, China) for wireless communica-
tion with external devices. The linear actuators provide a stan-
dard 3-wired interface for radio-controlled servomotors, allow-
ing the implementation of closed-loop position-control through
the sending of pulse-width modulated (PWM) references by
the microcontroller. The system is powered by a LiPo battery
(H2B180, Hy-Line, Switzerland) that provides an autonomy of
up to 3 hours in continuous operation mode (continuous opening
and closing of five fingers).
The cover of the chest-pack and the sheath-guides were man-
ufactured by means of 3D printing (HP DesignJet 3D, Strata-
sys, US and EOSint P395, EOS, Germany, respectively), the
chest-pack backplate was cut from a 3 mm MDF panel using a
laser-cutter (ProLF 90 W, Full Spectrum Laser, US).
The exoskeleton can be donned or doffed in less than seven
minutes. The overall weight on the arm of the wearer is below
50 g, the weight of the chest-pack is 930 g.
Table I presents a comparison between the mano device and
the state-of-the-art systems discussed in Section II-A. Compared
to these devices, our approach has the unique advantage of
enabling, within a single wearable and portable device, active
control of fingers flexion and extension while preserving natural
somatosensation on palms and fingertips.
D. Mechanical Characterization
We characterized the mano system in terms of ranges of mo-
tion (ROM) and achievable forces at the fingertips. The char-
acterization was performed on a human participant rather than
on experimental test benches in order to allow capturing the
non-linearities deriving from the soft and underactuated design
of the device and from the non-linear couplings, during use, be-
tween the exoskeleton, the hand of the wearer and the external
environment.
1) Ranges of Motion: The ROM of the index finger were
characterized in three different tasks: hand closing, hand open-
ing and precision grasp of an object. For each task two different
conditions were compared:
1) No Exoskeleton: Hand motions were performed by the
user, without assistance from the exoskeleton.
2) Exoskeleton: Hand motions were performed by the ex-
oskeleton, without contribution from the user.
During all the tasks and conditions, the subject was sitting
on a chair, resting the right elbow on a table and holding the
right hand at about 20 cm distance from the edge of the table.
Each task was repeated 10 times (trials) for each condition. In
the Exoskeleton trials, the device was worn on the right hand
 RANDAZZO et al.: mano: A WEARABLE HAND EXOSKELETON FOR ADL AND NEUROREHABILITATION
503
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE mano DEVICE (FIRST ROW) TO STATE-OF-THE-ART HAND EXOSKELETONS
Device
Degrees of freedom
Force [N]
Weight [g]
Somatosensation
Actuated fingers
Function
Main unit
Forearm
Palm
Fingertips
Randazzo et al.
All
Flexion, extension
20
930
50
Full
Full
Diftler et al. [10]
All
Flexion
n/a
(see Forearm)
770
Absent
Absent
Ingvast et al. [11]
Thumb, medium, ring
Flexion
12
∼650
∼50
Absent
Limited
Nycz et al. [12]
All
Flexion, extension
n/a
n/a
∼50
Absent
Absent
In et al. [13]
Thumb, index, medium
Flexion, extension
20
n/a
194
Absent
Absent
Kang et al. [14]
Thumb, index, medium
Flexion, extension
29.5
1630
∼50
Absent
Limited
Polygerinos et al. [15]
All
Flexion
40
3300
285
Full
Absent
Varalta et al. [16]
All
Flexion, extension
n/a
5000
∼50
Full
Absent
The force values refer to the sum of the maximum forces across all the fingertips. Note: Several references lacked information related to the weight of the device on forearms;
in order to allow a fair comparison with our system, we supposed these devices to have approximately the same weight as ours.
Fig. 2.
Comparisons of kinematics of the index finger in No Exoskeleton and Exoskeleton conditions: (Left) Trajectories averaged across hand closing trials,
(Middle) operational workspaces, (Right) trajectories averaged across precision grasp trials. The No Exoskeleton and Exoskeleton conditions are shown, respectively,
in dashed-red and solid-blue. The origins correspond to the MCP joints.
and the subject was instructed to restrain any voluntary hand
motion in order to let the exoskeleton autonomously implement
the task. During the experiment, the beginning and the end of
each trial were signaled by graphical cues on a computer screen.
Subsequent trials were separated by rest periods of random du-
rations (in the range [3, 6] s). At each trial, the actuation of
the device was started and terminated by a computer. Instruc-
tions on the tasks were provided before the beginning of the
experiment.
The hand closing (opening) task consisted in finger flexion
(extension), from a hand-open (hand-closed) position to a hand-
closed (hand-opened) position; no objects were grasped for these
tasks. The precision grasp task aimed at comparing ROM during
a functional movement; in this case, the subject started from a
hand-open position and performed a precision grasp by holding
the thumb still and closing the index on a cylindrical object (a
whiteboard marker, diameter: 1.75 cm).
Motion of the joints was tracked using an eight-camera mo-
tion capture system (Vicon, Oxford Metrics Ltd, UK). Accord-
ing to the model proposed in Metcalf et al. [22], four spheri-
cal reflective markers for motion tracking were placed on the
metacarpophalangeal (MCP), proximal interphalangeal (PIP)
and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints and on the distal head of
the distal phalanx (FT) of the index finger (see Fig. 2).
The three-dimensional (3D) joint trajectories were averaged
across trials belonging to the same task and condition. Principal
component analysis (PCA) was applied on the averaged trajec-
tories to identify the planes where flexion/extension motions
occurred and to discard spurious abduction/adduction move-
ments. The 3D data was then projected on the two first principal
components (which carried around 97% of the total variance),
resulting in two-dimensional joints trajectories.
Fig. 2(Left) shows the trajectories of the MCP, PIP, DIP and
FT joints, averaged across hand closing trials, for the No Ex-
oskeleton and Exoskeleton conditions. The kinematics of the
joints are similar across the two conditions during the first part
of the task (checkpoint A to B), but they present differences
in the last part (checkpoint B to D). Similar results were ob-
tained for the hand opening task (results not shown). Based on
the ROM of the joints, we computed the operational workspace
of the device (see Fig. 2, Middle). Results showed that the ex-
oskeleton can cover more than 70% of the workspace observable
in normal hand closing motions.
Fig. 2(Right) shows the trajectories of the MCP, PIP, DIP and
FT joints, averaged across precision grasp trials. For this task,
the ROM of the joints were similar across the Exoskeleton and
No Exoskeleton conditions, showing how the soft underactuation
can enable functional and natural grasps.
2) Force at the Fingertips: During this experiment, the sub-
ject was sitting on a chair, resting the right elbow on a table
and holding the right hand at about 20 cm distance from the
edge of the table with the hand’s dorsal side facing the floor. An
exoskeletal finger was worn on the index finger.
In subsequent steps, weights were attached to the FT of the
index by means of a nylon rope, and the exoskeletal finger was
actuated in order to lift them. At each step, a 50 g weight was
 504
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018
added to the total weight, covering the overall range [0,700] g.
The subject was instructed to restrain any voluntary hand motion
throughout the lifting phases in order to let the exoskeleton
bear all the weight. For each step, the device performed 10
lifting motions. Instructions on the task were provided before
the beginning of the experiment.
The maximum weight the exoskeletal finger was able to lift in
a repeatable and reliable manner (i.e. completing, consistently
across repetitions, 10 lifting motions) was 500 g. For heavier
weights, the exoskeleton tended to lose alignment with respect to
the joints of the subject, resulting in inconsistent finger motions
across repetitions.
These results translate into a maximum continuous force
achievable at the fingertip of around 5 N. For the exoskeleton
configuration presented in Section II-B (with independently-
actuated thumb, index and medium and coupled-actuation for
ring and little fingers), the maximum force across all the finger-
tips is around 20 N.
E. Functional Tests With Spinal-Cord Injured Users
The device was tested in typical ADL and functional tasks
with two users who suffered from spinal cord injuries. Both
users, 30-years-old S1 injured in May 2003 and 48-years-old
S2 injured in December 1989, sustained complete lesions at
the level C5-C6 and scored “A” in the ASIA scale (Complete
injury–No motor or sensory function preserved in the sacral seg-
ments S4 or S5). S1 and S2 lack control of their lower limbs and
have limited control of the upper limbs; they can perform reach-
ing movements but have limited force at the proximal level and
almost none in grasping and holding. Users gave their written
consent to participate to the tests and the experimental protocols
were approved by the local ethical committee.
All tests reported here were performed at users’ homes. Dur-
ing the trials, we used a version of the device which equipped
the thumb, index and medium finger modules. The ring and little
fingers modules were not used because a three-fingered configu-
ration already ensured stable and reliable grasps for both S1 and
S2. Each test lasted around 1 hour. A total of 3 and 2 sessions
were performed for S1 and S2, respectively. The tests consisted
of two parts. In the first part, subjects grasped, displaced and
released the following objects: A glass, a bottle, a fork, a knife,
a salt-and-pepper dispenser, a highlighter, a sheet of paper, a
pen, a lighter, and a toothbrush. In the second part, subjects per-
formed exemplar ADL, namely: eating using cutlery, cleaning
teeth by using a toothbrush and drinking from a glass of water.
During the tests, users provided instructions on which fingers
to actuate and to which degree to an experimenter, who was in
turn controlling the device through a smartphone. The outcome
of the tests was determined by the attainment or not of each of
the tasks, as evaluated directly by the users.
Thanks to the mano system, S1 and S2 were able to regain
some capabilities they had lost since their disabling accidents.
In particular, we demonstrated the restoration of functions re-
quiring both power and precision grasps. Subjects were capable
to grasp and hold bottles weighing up to 1 kg by only using their
fingertips (no weight was borne by their palms), autonomously
drink from a glass full of water and use objects which require
a coordinated exchange of forces between their fingers and the
environment, such as using a knife and writing with a pen (see
Supplementary Video). High satisfaction was reported by both
subjects, who expressed a marked interest towards the possibil-
ity of using the system during ADL. The main features of interest
were, according to them, the extremely reduced and lightweight
profile of the system on their hands and the ability to sense
the manipulated objects through the residual somatosensation
at their fingertips. As reported by both users, these features al-
lowed not to hamper the residual range of motions and forces
of their shoulders, elbows and hands, and to confidently per-
ceive when an exoskeleton-assisted grasp was safe and stable
before performing a manual task. Overall, these results strongly
support the usability of the mano exoskeleton in typical ADL.
III. BRAIN-MACHINE INTERFACING
In order to evaluate the usability of our exoskeleton within
a neurorehabilitative framework, we exemplified its use in a
brain-machine interface scenario.
Several studies have shown that manual tasks induce changes,
with respect to baseline states, in the spectral power of senso-
rimotor cortex areas, for two characteristic frequency bands: μ
([8, 12] Hz) and β ([16, 32] Hz). Such results have been con-
firmed in invasive [23] and non-invasive [24] studies. It has also
been shown that passive hand mobilizations induce similar brain
patterns as those observable in active manual tasks [25]. In a first
analysis, we studied EEG rhythms during exoskeleton-induced
motions in order to evaluate whether the device could elicit such
characteristic brain patterns.
Similarly to what observed in active and passively-induced
limb movements, it has also been shown that motor imagery
(MI), the mental process of imagining and recalling body move-
ments, induces changes in the spectral power of the μ and β
bands [26]. Indeed, the possibility of voluntarily modulating
specific brain patterns through MI has been widely used as a
control input for artificial devices [27]. In many of these studies
control commands are delivered to devices on largely granular
time-scales. It is however believed that, in neurorehabilitative
scenarios, the possibility of providing patients with a real-time
feedback about their ongoing cortical activity might be a more
effective strategy for triggering brain plasticity and promoting
motor recovery through practice-and-reward Hebbian processes
[28], [29]. Despite continuous control of a hand exoskeleton
through EEG-decoded MI and electrooculography (EOG) has
been demonstrated [2], the feasibility of such type of control us-
ing EEG alone is still unknown. Indeed, while the use of EOG
as a control channel could be a feasible option for assistive ap-
plications, it might not be an ecological approach for promoting
motor recovery. Therefore, this study also aimed at investigating
whether a hand exoskeleton could be continuously controlled
by exploiting MI commands decoded only from EEG.
A. Experimental Design
Nine right-handed subjects (mean age 23 ± 5, 2 women),
with no known history of neurological abnormalities or
 RANDAZZO et al.: mano: A WEARABLE HAND EXOSKELETON FOR ADL AND NEUROREHABILITATION
505
musculoskeletal disorders, participated in the experiment. Dur-
ing the experiment, subjects were sitting on a chair resting their
elbows on a table and wore the exoskeleton on their right hands.
EEG activity was recorded at 512 Hz from 16 active electrodes
distributed over the scalp following the 10/20 international sys-
tem (FZ, FC3, FC1, FCz, FC2, FC4, C3, C1, Cz, C2, C4, CP3,
CP1, CPZ, CP2, CP4), using a g.USBamp (gTec Medical Engi-
neering GmbH, Austria). Each participant was asked to perform
four tasks:
1) Resting (REST): Subjects were asked to relax.
2) Exoskeleton-induced hand motions (EXO): subjects were
asked to relax while the exoskeleton closed their hands.
3) Right hand motor imagery (MI): subjects performed
kinesthetic motor imagery of closing their right hand; no
exoskeleton-induced hand motions were performed.
4) Exoskeleton-induced hand motions plus motor imagery
(MIEXO): subjects performed kinesthetic motor imagery
of closing their right hand while the exoskeleton closed
their hands.
Tasks were repetitively performed in 4-s intervals (trials).
Each subject performed at least 9 experimental blocks. Each
block comprised 15 REST trials and 15 trials of one of the
3 other conditions. For the sake of minimizing any learning
effect, the order of the trials within a block, as well as the order
of the blocks was randomized for each subject. Approximately
50 trials per task were recorded for each subject. Before starting
the experiment, the hands of the subjects were moved by means
of the exoskeleton in order to allow them to get used to the
EXO and MIEXO tasks. In the EXO and MIEXO trials, the
exoskeleton was controlled by a computer to start from an open
position and to reach hand closing at the end of the trial. Each
experiment lasted, on average, 1.5 hours per subject. Instructions
on the tasks were provided to each subject before the beginning
of the experiment.
B. Analysis
EEG data were re-referenced using a laplacian spatial filter
[30]. Then, the power spectral densities (PSD) of each electrode
were extracted for the frequency range [6, 32] Hz, using a Short-
Time Fourier Transform (computed in 1 s-long windows, with
93.75% overlap between consecutive windows). PSD values
were used as features for all the analyses reported here. A feature
is therefore the power spectral density of one electrode at one
specific frequency.
First, we evaluated the existence of discriminable neural cor-
relates of the exoskeleton task (EXO) with respect to the REST
task. To this end, information on the discriminant power (DP)
of features was assessed at the single-subject level via signed
point-biserial correlation (signed-r2).
We further analyzed whether the brain correlates of different
tasks could be discriminated using pattern recognition tech-
niques. Linear discriminant classifiers were built for the fol-
lowing comparisons: MI vs REST, EXO vs REST, MIEXO vs
REST, and MIEXO vs EXO. The accuracy of each classifier
was evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation. Classifiers were
trained on the 10 most discriminant features (best r2 score)
Fig. 3.
Discriminant power (DP) map of PSD features for the EXO vs REST
comparison, averaged across all subjects. DP are reported as signed point-
biserial correlation (signed-r2). Negative values imply a desynchronization, i.e.
the PSD in the EXO condition was lower than the PSD in the REST condition.
X and Y axes represent, respectively, frequencies and electrodes.
of the respective training folds. Non-parametric signed rank
statistical tests were performed for comparing results across
comparisons at the population level, and the obtained p-values
were Bonferroni-corrected. Additionally, all the accuracies were
compared against the chance level at 95% confidence, estimated
at 58% from the available number of trials (N = 50) using the
binomial cumulative distribution [31].
Finally, we evaluated the most discriminant features for each
comparison by using topological heatmaps. These maps were
obtained by counting how many times features in the senso-
rimotor frequency bands were selected, for each EEG elec-
trode, during the cross-validated construction of the respective
classifiers.
C. Neuroimaging of Exoskeleton-Induced Hand Motions
Fig. 3 reports the DP of PSD features for the EXO vs REST
comparison, computed at the single subject level and, then, aver-
aged across all subjects. Exoskeleton-induced hand motions led
to a spectral power decrease compared to rest. Coherently with
previous literature [25], [32], this pattern was mostly centered
on electrodes located over the motor cortex. The desynchroniza-
tion was largely bilateral and, mostly, confined over the μ and
low-β frequency bands. These results confirm that the exoskele-
ton can induce, in a repeatable manner across all subjects, EEG
patterns of natural hand motions.
D. Single-Sample Classification
Fig. 4a reports the classification accuracies for the four differ-
ent comparisons. Accuracies were averaged across the 10-folds
for each subject and, then, averaged across all subjects. On av-
erage, the performance of all the active conditions (MI, EXO,
MIEXO) vs REST was above chance level: 63.02 ± 5.91%,
69.64 ± 5.74% and 72.19 ± 6.57%, respectively. Both EXO vs
 506
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 1, JANUARY 2018
Fig. 4.
Classification results averaged across all subjects. Panel A reports the accuracies for the four different comparisons. The dashed line indicates the chance
level computed from a binomial distribution. Panel B shows the topographic heatmaps of features importance, averaged across the sensorimotor frequency bands
(μ: top row, low-β: bottom row). The importance of a given feature is computed as the total number of times it was selected in the training folds of the respective
cross-validation (a value of 100% indicates that the feature was selected in all the training folds, for all subjects).
REST and MIEXO vs REST comparisons were significantly
better than MI vs REST (two-tailed signed rank test, Bonferroni
corrected p < 0.05), indicating the potential use of exoskeleton-
guided MI training as a way of improving the accuracy of the
BMI system.
Importantly, the MIEXO vs EXO classification accuracy was
also significantly above chance level (69.91 ± 9.86%), indi-
cating the feasibility of discriminating between passively in-
duced movements and motor imagery coupled with exoskeleton-
induced movements, a key issue in order to avoid biasing during
continuous control of the device.
Fig. 4b shows, in a topographic heatmap, the importance of
features for the different comparisons. In line with literature
[33], MI features were mostly selected over the contralateral
motor cortex within the μ rhythm and, to a lower extent, in the
β frequency range. Interestingly, however, the MIEXO vs REST
comparison also presented discriminant features over the ipsilat-
eral hemisphere. This hemisphere is indeed the most important
for differentiating MIEXO and EXO tasks. These results are in
line with previous works which showed that active movements
induce larger desynchronizations over ipsilateral regions than
MI [33] and passive movements [32].
IV. DISCUSSION
In this work, we presented a novel hand exoskeleton, mano,
designed for use both in assistive and neurorehabilitative scenar-
ios. The device has the unique advantage of combining, within
a wearable and portable system, features as functionality, re-
duced bulk and comfortability, which could enable intensive
use by users with motor disabilities in a wide range of settings,
including home-based rehabilitation.
The results obtained in the experimental characterizations
and in tests with two users who suffered from spinal cord
injuries strongly support the usability of the device in typi-
cal ADL. Due to its modular design, the device can be easily
customized to meet the needs of a wider population of users,
such as children affected by cerebral palsy, users who expe-
rienced cerebrovascular accidents or suffering from muscular
weakness.
However, one of the main limitations of the current system is
its limited usability by subjects suffering from hypertonia and
spasticity, some of the most common consequences of motor
disorders affecting the central and peripheral nervous systems.
For these users, the continuous and unsupervised use of wear-
able robotic devices can be difficult or, even, counterproduc-
tive because of the resistance opposed by the hypertonic limbs.
In such cases, robotic devices could be coupled to techniques
aimed at reducing muscular tone (e.g. pharmaceutical drugs
or functional electrical stimulation) for the sake of performing
continuous motions and limiting the occurrence of limbs con-
tractures due to excessive immobilization [5]. Other important
issues to be considered for unsupervised use in ADL are also
related to safety and acceptance [3]. Although our system does
not achieve yet a level of maturity to address such problematics,
we are continuing the tests with final users in order to identify
the issues that could limit the adoption of such a device in home
settings.
Our results also demonstrated that the hand mobilization pro-
vided by the system can reliably mimic natural hand movements,
both in terms of physical motions and in terms of electrophys-
iological patterns elicited in the brain. In the future, we plan
to perform equivalent evaluations with users who suffered from
spinal cord injuries and brain stroke. Our findings could be pos-
sibly expanded by coupling exoskeleton-provided motions and
brain imaging techniques for the sake of evaluating the integrity
of the corticospinal pathways in users with disabilities.
Interestingly, we also showed that the use of the exoskeleton
may have aided the subjects to better perform motor imagery
tasks. However, further studies are needed to confirm whether
the increase in performance is only due to the exoskeleton-
induced motions or it is indeed due to improved embodiment
through the rich and coherent feedback provided by the de-
vice. By showing how subject-dependent classifiers were able to
 RANDAZZO et al.: mano: A WEARABLE HAND EXOSKELETON FOR ADL AND NEUROREHABILITATION
507
uncover discriminable patterns between pure passive motions
and exoskeleton-assisted motor imagery, this work started to
tackle several open questions regarding continuous control ex-
ploiting only EEG signals. As an alternative, we have recently
shown that other neural correlates could be used for the control
of similar systems [34], [35].
Despite promising, many state-of-the-art techniques for
human-machine interaction (HMI) still fail in meeting the high
requirements that would allow unsupervised and reliable use
at home. Nonetheless, recent progresses have shown great
promises towards enabling transparent interfaces with the cen-
tral and peripheral nervous systems through the combination
of various electrophysiological signals (e.g. electroencephalog-
raphy, electromyography, electrooculography) [36]. An inter-
esting approach could aim at further combining these signals to
voice commands or widespread smartphone-based interfaces. In
this regard, it is important to notice that the mano exoskeleton
is independent from the HMI control-layer. The user interface
and the related control signals can be therefore adapted to the
residual capabilities of the targeted subjects, their needs and the
specific scenario of application.
Altogether, the results of this work show that the mano ex-
oskeleton can provide an ecological way for inducing natural
hand motions. By coupling the device to transparent control
interfaces, the system could be used to translate motor inten-
tion into real hands motions, which in turn provide a rich and
coherent proprioceptive feedback to the wearer, allowing to
(re-)establish closed sensorimotor loops for its users. These ap-
proaches represent promising venues both for triggering neu-
roplasticity and recovery in people with motor disabilities and
for enabling transparent human-machine interactions in daily
scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Takahashi et al., “Robot-based hand motor therapy after stroke,” Brain,
vol. 131, no. 2, pp. 425–437, 2007.
[2] S. Soekadar et al., “Hybrid EEG/EOG-based brain/neural hand exoskele-
ton restores fully independent daily living activities after quadriplegia,”
Sci. Robot., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 32–96, 2016.
[3] G. Turchetti, N. Vitiello, L. Trieste, S. Romiti, E. Geisler, and S. Micera,
“Why effectiveness of robot-mediated neurorehabilitation does not neces-
sarily influence its adoption,” IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 7, pp. 143–153,
2014.
[4] J. Krakauer, “Motor learning: Its relevance to stroke recovery and neu-
rorehabilitation,” Current Opinion Neurology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 84–90,
2006.
[5] B. Dobkin, “Strategies for stroke rehabilitation,” Lancet Neurology, vol. 3,
no. 9, pp. 528–536, 2004.
[6] R. Bos et al., “A structured overview of trends and technologies used in
dynamic hand orthoses,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 62–87,
2016.
[7] P. Heo et al., “Current hand exoskeleton technologies for rehabilitation
and assistive engineering,” Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., vol. 13, no. 5,
pp. 807–824, 2012.
[8] P. Maciejasz et al., “A survey on robotic devices for upper limb rehabili-
tation,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 807–824, 2014.
[9] C. Pacchierotti, S. Sinclair, M. Solazzi, A. Frisoli, V. Hayward, and D.
Prattichizzo, “Wearable haptic systems for the fingertip and the hand:
Taxonomy, review, and perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, 2017, doi:
10.1109/TOH.2017.2689006.
[10] M. Diftler et al., “RoboGlove: A Robonaut derived multipurpose assistive
device,” Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2014, pp. 78–84.
[11] M. Nilsson, J. Ingvast, J. Wikander, and H. von Holst, “The soft extra
muscle system for improving the grasping capability in neurological re-
habilitation,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2012,
pp. 412–417
[12] C. Nycz, M. Delph, and G. Fischer, “Modeling and design of a tendon
actuated soft robotic exoskeleton for hemiparetic upper limb rehabilita-
tion,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2015,
pp. 3889–3892.
[13] H. In, B. Kang, M. Sin, and K.-J. Cho, “Exo-Glove: Soft wearable robot
for the hand using soft tendon routing system,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag.,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 97–105, Mar. 2015.
[14] B. Kang, H. Lee, H. In, U. Jeong, J. Chung, and K.-J. Cho, “Development
of a polymer-based tendon-driven wearable robotic hand,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., 2016, pp. 3750–3755.
[15] P. Polygerinos
et al., “Soft robotic glove for combined assistance
and at-home rehabilitation,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 73, pp. 135–143,
2015.
[16] V. Varalta et al., “Effects of contralesional robot-assisted hand training
in patients with unilateral spatial neglect following stroke: A case series
study,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 97–105.
[17] K. Anderson, “Targeting recovery: Priorities of the spinal cord-injured
population,” J. Neurotrauma, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 741–754, 2009.
[18] M. Santello, M. Flanders, and J. Soechting, “Postural hand synergies for
tool use,” J. Neurosci., vol. 18, no. 23, pp. 10105–10115, 1998.
[19] B. Brewer, S. McDowell, and L. Worthen-Chaudhari , “Poststroke upper
extremity rehabilitation: A review of robotic systems and clinical results,”
Top. Stroke Rehabil., vol. 14, pp. 22–44, 2007.
[20] R. Balasubramanian and A. Dollar, “A framework for studying un-
deractuation in the human hand,” in Proc. Annu. Meeting Amer. Soc.,
2010, pp. 89–91.
[21] A. Bicchi and V. Kumar, “Robotic grasping and contact: A review,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2000, vol. 1, pp. 348–353.
[22] C. Metcalf et al., “Validation and application of a computational model for
wrist and hand movements using surface markers,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 22–44, 2007.
[23] M. Branco et al., “Decoding hand gestures from primary somatosensory
cortex using high-density ECoG,” NeuroImage, vol. 147, pp. 130–142,
2017.
[24] S. H´
etu
et al., “The neural network of motor imagery: An ALE
meta-analysis,” Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 930–949,
2013.
[25] T. Mima
et al., “Brain structures related to active and passive finger
movements in man,” Brain, vol. 122, no. 10, pp. 1989–1997, 1999.
[26] A. Solodkin et al., “Fine modulation in network activation during motor
execution and motor imagery,” Cerebral Cortex, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1246–
1255, 2004.
[27] J. d. R. Mill´
an et al., “Combining brain–computer interfaces and assistive
technologies: State-of-the-art and challenges,” Frontiers Neurosci., vol. 4,
pp. 162–177, 2010.
[28] A. Ramos-Murguialday et al., “Brain-machine interface in chronic stroke
rehabilitation: A controlled study,” Ann. Neurology, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 100–
108, 2013.
[29] B. Dobkin, “Brain-computer interface technology as a tool to aug-
ment plasticity and outcomes for neurological rehabilitation,” J. Physiol.,
vol. 579, no. 3, pp. 637–642, 2007.
[30] D. McFarland et al., “Spatial filter selection for EEG-based communica-
tion,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 386–
394, 1997.
[31] S. Waldert et al., “Hand movement direction decoded from MEG and
EEG,” J. Neurosci., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1000–1008, 2008.
[32] C. Weiller et al., “Brain representation of active and passive movements,”
NeuroImage, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 105–110, 1996.
[33] D. McFarland
et al., “Mu and beta rhythm topographies during mo-
tor imagery and actual movements,” Brain Topography, vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 177–186, 2000.
[34] L. Randazzo, I. Iturrate, R. Chavarriaga, R. Leeb, and J. d. R. Milln,
“Detecting intention to grasp during reaching movements from EEG,” in
Proc. 37th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2015, pp. 1115–
1118.
[35] I. Iturrate et al., “Decoding of two hand grasping types from EEG,” in
Proc. 6th Int. BCI Meeting, 2016, p. 66.
[36] D. Borton, S. Micera, J. d. R. Mill´
an, and G. Courtine, “Person-
alized neuroprosthetics,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 5, no. 210, 2013,
Art. no. 210rv2.
