 Clinical Therapeutics/Volume 39, Number 5, 2017
Brief Report
An In-home Advanced Robotic System to Manage
Elderly Home-care Patients’ Medications: A Pilot
Safety and Usability Study
Pekka Rantanen, MD, PhD1; Timo Parkkari, RN2; Saija Leikola, PhD3;
Marja Airaksinen, PhD4; and Alan Lyles, ScD, MPH5
1Validia Rehabilitation, Helsinki, Finland; 2Clinius Ltd., Helsinki, Finland; 3Pharmac Finland Oy, Vantaa,
Finland; 4Clinical Pharmacy Group, Division of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; and 5School of Health and Human Services, College of Public
Affairs, University of Baltimore; Docent, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
ABSTRACT
Purpose: We examined the safety profile and
usability of an integrated advanced robotic device
and telecare system to promote medication adherence
for elderly home-care patients.
Methods: There were two phases. Phase I aimed to
verify under controlled conditions in a single nursing
home (n ¼ 17 patients) that no robotic malfunctions
would hinder the device’s safe use. Phase II involved
home-care patients from 3 sites (n ¼ 27) who were on
long-term medication. On-time dispensing and missed
doses were recorded by the robotic system. Patients’
and nurses’ experiences were assessed with structured
interviews.
Findings: The 17 nursing home patients had 457
total days using the device (Phase I; mean, 26.9 per
patient).
On-time
sachet
retrieval
occurred
with
97.7% of the alerts, and no medication doses were
missed. At baseline, Phase II home-dwelling patients
reported difficulty remembering to take their medi-
cines (23%), and 18% missed at least 2 doses per
week. Most Phase II patients (78%) lived alone. The
device
delivered
and
patients
retrieved
medicine
sachets for 99% of the alerts. All patients and 96%
of nurses reported the device was easy to use.
Implications: This trial demonstrated the safety
profile and usability of an in-home advanced robotic
device and telecare system and its acceptability to
patients and nurses. It supports individualized patient
dosing schedules, patient–provider communications,
and on-time, in-home medication delivery to promote
adherence. Real time dose-by-dose monitoring and
communication with providers if a dose is missed
provide oversight generally not seen in home care.
(Clin Ther. 2017;39:1054–1061) & 2017 The Au-
thors. Published by Elsevier HS Journals, Inc.
Key words: aged, home-care services, medication
adherence, medication therapy management, robotic
system.
INTRODUCTION
Elderly home-care (HC) patients with complex medica-
tion regimens1 are at high risk of reduced adherence,2
medication-related problems, and medication errors.3 The
concomitants of aging, such as impaired hearing, vision,
cognitive skills, isolation, difficulty communicating with
health care professionals,4 and accessing health services5
increase these risks. An estimated 7% of US home-
dwelling persons Z65 years of age require assistance
with their medicines.6 Of Finnish statin users, just 60%
were found to be adherent with their regimen after 4
years.7
Poor
medication
adherence
may
result
in
unplanned hospitalizations, adverse clinical outcomes,
and increased costs.8
Home health care involves multiple steps in the
transfer of information and medicines from the
Accepted for publication March 22, 2017.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2017.03.020
0149-2918/$ - see front matter
& 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1054
Volume 39 Number 5
 prescriber to a patient and subsequent actions by that
patient. Each step poses a risk of service lapse and
information gaps that can cause errors and can reduce
medication adherence. In Finland, nurses or visiting
nurses obtain medicines for HC patients from a
private community pharmacy and manually dispense
them to the HC patient’s doset as a week’s supply of
medicine. Sometimes the HC patients are able to take
their medicines by themselves, but usually the visiting
nurse must come to the home, retrieve the medicines
from the dosets, and give them to the patient. For
some patients, the medicines are prepacked in unit
doses.9 This multistep process permits delays in
identifying and resolving medication nonadherence.
In 2015, 12% of Finns aged Z75 years used regular
home-help services or home nursing.10 These visits are
intended to extend the patient’s time at home and to
delay
transition
to
institutional
care.
Medication
management is an important aspect of these visits,
and often the medication schedule is the main reason
for multiple daily home visits by practical nurses.
A well-engineered in-home robotic device and
system could improve the coordination of patient
communications with care providers. Current app-
roaches to improving adherence, however, tend to
focus on individual aspects of medication use, such as
reminders, electronic monitoring and text-messaging,
automated dose dispensing (ADD) systems that pro-
vide medicine sachets to patients and automatic
prescription refills.11–15 Multiple companies and di-
verse systems are in practice in Finland because some
companies use sachets and others may use cardboard
boxes, and internationally, procedures can differ.16
This pilot study was conducted in Finland, where
the advanced robotic device and telecare system for
managing medications of home-care persons on long-
term pharmacotherapy was developed.1
Finnish Medical Device legislation follows European
Medical Device Directive 93/42/EEC.17 The approval
process
for
a
device
depends
on
the
product’s
classification under European guidelines. Consequently,
the advanced robotic device and the telecare system are
classified as Class I Medical Devices in the European
Union. The directive contains essential requirements for
the medical device’s performance. A clinical study is used
to assess the device’s safety profile, clinical performance,
and suitability for intended purpose. Before initiating a
clinical investigation, the manufacturer ensures that there
is no issue that could place the patient’s safety in danger.
For a Class I product, when the manufacturer has ensured
regulatory compliance and successfully passed the clinical
investigation, the manufacturer signs the declaration of
conformity and applies the CE mark to the product.
Consistent with the European Medical Device
guidelines, the objectives of this device and telecare
system’s usability trial were to assess its safety profile
and clinical performance and to evaluate its usability
for its intended purpose.
METHODS
This brief report concerns a safety profile and usability
trial of an advanced robotic device and telecare system
(Evondos E300 and Evondos Telecare System, Salo,
Finland) that integrate distributing medicines, sup-
porting individualized dosing schedules, providing
patient reminders, and communicating with providers
(eg, the practical nurse will receive an automatic alert
if scheduled doses are not taken; Figure 1). This
system is designed to promote medication adherence
for persons on long-term medication regimens.
A device failure is a “failure to deliver the sachet.”
For example, if the robotic device could not detect the
seam between the sachets or if the sachets become
stuck in the delivery mechanism, then the device will
first send an alarm to the technical surveillance, and
an attempt is made to fix the sachet delivery remotely.
As a worst case, if this remote action is not successful,
a person would go to the patient’s home and deliver
Figure 1. Evondos E300 Medicine Dispensing
Robot with Multidose Sachets (Salo,
Finland). The matchbox is included
to indicate relative size. It measures
2.2 inches in height and 1.4 inches
in width.
P. Rantanen et al.
May 2017
1055
 the sachet within the time window of 1 hour before or
up to 2 hours after the scheduled dose.
Intervention
The usual HC model begins with the physician’s
orders to the pharmacy, then the medicines are sent to
the care unit and from the care unit to the patient
(Figure 2). Beyond baseline, the intervention in this
study added an in-home advanced robotic system
(Figure 1) into the usual HC model for managing all
enrolled patient’s on-time medication use (Figure 2). HC
patients
vary
in
their
visual
and
auditory
acuity.
Consequently, a spoken reminder message, a sound
signal, a light signal in the dose button, and written
instructions on the device’s display are activated at
individually predetermined dosing times. These remind
the patient to access their medicines by pressing a dose
button on the device’s front panel. Reminders are also
generated for medicines not in the robotic unit (eg, insulin
and inhalers). When the patient presses the device’s
dispenser button, the device delivers a sachet containing
the medicine(s). If a patient misses a sachet, the telecare
system passes that information to the HC unit for action.
According to the patient’s needs and medicines, a nurse
can contact the patient or come to the home and give
the dose(s). The device sequesters unused dose(s) in a
locked canister if the sachet is not retrieved within a
predetermined time.
The telecare system records data on sachets dispensed
or sequestered and tracks alarms. If a problem is
encountered in obtaining a sachet, the device sends that
information to the telecare system where there is a chain
of emergency contacts. The telecare system ensures
responsibility for addressing the alarm and is coordinated
through successive levels of oversight. The alarm remains
activated until the event causing it has been resolved.
The device is secure, monitored to detect tamper-
ing, and always connected to a central telecare system
through a wireless connection. For enhanced safety,
monitoring and design redundancies ensure against
down time. Sachet dimensions and the information
displayed varies by manufacturer. The device is
ADD Unit
Pharmacy
Care unit
Physician
Patient
Prescription
Medicines
Medicines
Pharmacy
Care unit
Physician
Patient with 
the advanced 
robotic 
device
Prescription
Medicines in 
ADD sachets
Medicines in 
ADD sachets
Information if medicines 
are not taken
Information on 
drug regimen
Medicines in 
ADD sachets
Medication review
USUAL CARE
CARE WITH ADD 
AND THE ADVANCED 
ROBOTIC SYSTEM
Figure 2. (Left) Usual home-care pharmacotherapy for elderly patients and (right) an integrated system, including
medication review, automatic dose dispensing, an advanced robotic device, and telecare system. ADD
unit ¼ automated dose dispensing; the manufacturing unit that fills and labels the sachets.
Clinical Therapeutics
1056
Volume 39 Number 5
 designed to bypass the lack of international data field
and display standardization, and it is capable of
reading the sachet’s display and recording the pa-
tient’s information and medication dispensing times.
Study Design and Methods
This two-phase prospective usability study was
performed in Espoo, a part of Finland’s capitol area,
in 2013 to 2014. All patients received baseline
medication reviews before initiating ADD, so the
sachets sent to the pharmacy and then to the robotic
unit started with a clinically validated baseline. Before
the intervention, all Phase I and II patients were
interviewed using a structured questionnaire to deter-
mine their experiences with the ease and regularity of
taking their prescribed medicines as scheduled.
Under the controlled conditions of a single nursing
home, Phase I (n ¼ 17) was conducted to verify that there
were no robotic malfunctions that would hinder the
device’s unsupervised, safe use in patient’s homes.
Throughout Phase I corrections and improvements were
made to the robotic device and associated software.
Examples of such improvements include, for example,
reliability enhancements for the logic of handling the
sachets and rules for exceptions, and enhancements in
communication between the robot and the telecare
system. These improvements decreased the number of
failures to deliver the medicine sachets and enhanced the
robotic unit’s autonomous operation.
Phase II studied the device in the less-controlled
setting of the patient’s home (n ¼ 27). It assessed (1)
the device’s performance in giving participants their
medicine sachets according to their individual treat-
ment plan and (2) patients’ and nurses’ perceptions on
whether the device helped patients take their medi-
cines regularly, on the device’s usability, and their
willingness to recommend the device.
The investigator on duty engaged in active and passive
monitoring. Passive monitoring was continuous, and
alerts arose from the telecare system’s function that sends
an alarm (1) if the medicine sachet could not be delivered
or (2) if the patient did not retrieve the medicine sachet
from their robotic device within a predetermined time
period (the “active window”). Investigators used the
telecare system to remotely but actively monitor the
scheduled medication dosing intervals, detecting whether
HC patients were obtaining their medicine sachets on
their individualized, prescribed schedule. Investigators
were also regularly in direct communication with the
HC patients by telephone call or Short Message Service.
In addition, investigators were in contact with the care
organization who visited the HC patients, typically daily
by call or short message service.
Study data consisted of the documentation electroni-
cally saved by the system (alerts, number of times a
patient responded to the alert by pressing the button,
whether the sachet was removed from the device),
observations made by the investigators about its technical
functioning, and feedback from the study participants
and their primary nurses before and after the study. The
structured interview was developed by the research group
before the research plan was approved. Questions in the
structured interview were selected to determine reliability,
usability, suitability for intended use, and possible adverse
effects of the advanced robotic system. Consequently,
both closed and open-ended questions were used. A
clinically trained investigator used a structured question-
naire to interview patients and their nurses about their
experiences with the device.
Nurses/practical nurses recruited participants to be
representative of each location’s typical HC patients.
Participants had to be able to give their informed
consent for the study. If their voluntary participation
was uncertain, they were excluded. When the robotic
device did not deliver the sachet, the investigator on
duty gave the medicines to the patient within 1 to 2
hours of the alarm being sent by the telecare system.
Phase I comprised 17 patients in a single nursing
home. Before Phase I, the nursing home had used an
ADD service from a local community pharmacy, with
the nurse giving the medicine sachet to the resident at
the correct times (Figure 2). In Phase I, the advanced
robotic device was placed in each resident’s room,
and, when reminded, the resident removed the sachet
and took his or her medicines themselves.
Phase II participants were home-dwelling patients of
three HC units. They were (1) on long-term daily tablet
or capsule medicines, (2) native Finnish speakers, (3) at
least 18 years of age, and (4) assessed by a nurse to be
committed to treatment and to taking their medicines.
Mild cognitive impairments did not preclude participa-
tion; 3 subjects had early-stage dementia, and 2 other
subjects were diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Data Analysis
In both phases of this trial, data were recorded on
(1) the number of times a patient was reminded to
press the dispenser button to receive a medicine
P. Rantanen et al.
May 2017
1057
 sachet, (2) the number of times a patient then pressed
the dispenser button and retrieved the sachet, (3) the
number of times the medicine sachet was not taken (a
patient, not a device-related issue), (4) the number of
times a medicine sachet was not delivered, (5) the
aggregate number and mean days of device use, and
(6) mean number of times medicines were to be taken
per day (Table).
Responses to the patient and nurse questionnaires
were coded and entered into Excel (Microsoft, Red-
man, Washington). Descriptive statistics (i.e., frequen-
cies, percentages, and means) were computed from
both data sources.
Ethics Approval and Device Approval According
to the European Union Regulation
The research protocol has the approval of Helsinki
University Hospital Coordinating Ethics Committee
(March 25, 2013), permission for study was granted
by the City of Espoo Social and Health Services (May
20, 2013), and the National Supervisory Authority for
Welfare and Health Valvira (May 30, 2013) notified
the researchers that it had no objections (June 2, 2013).
The advanced robotic automated system and telecare
system have CE-marking according to the European
Union Medical Device Directive 93/42/EEC.17
RESULTS
Patients in Phase I were predominantly men (65%),
but most Phase II patients were women (59%). Ages
were similar for each phase (73.0 versus 75.3 years).
Phase I patients took medicines an average of 3.5
times per day and Phase II patients 2.9 times per day.
Most Phase II patients (78%) lived alone at home, and
52% of them required from 2 to 3 HC visits per week
to at least once daily, with 22% of them requiring at
least one daily visit.
More than 20% of patients in both phases (24% in
Phase I, 22 % in Phase II) reported that remembering
to take their medicines according to the prescription or
treatment plan was difficult. At baseline, all Phase I
nursing home residents took their medicines regularly,
because the medicines were given by the nurses.
However, at baseline 18% of Phase II home-dwelling
patients reported missing doses at least 2 times a week.
Three participants began but did not complete the
study. In Phase I, 1 participant died after being in the
study for 5 days. In Phase II, 1 participant, who
participated for 1 day, discontinued because of lack of
trust, and another, who participated for 7 days,
withdrew
because
of
fear
of
technology.
These
patients are not included in the 17 participants in
Phase I, or the 27 participants in Phase II.
Table. Dispensing and removal of medicine sachets as documented by the robotic device, by study phase.
Variable
Phase I (n ¼ 17)
Phase II (n ¼ 27)
Number of daily dosing times
Mean (SD)
3.5 (1.5)
2.9 (0.8)
Range
2–8
1–5
Study patients’ days of use of the robotic device per patient
Mean (SD)
26.9 (24.9)
26.9 (4.6)
Range, n
5–104
17–40
Aggregate days the robotic device was used, n
457
727
Alerts to press the dispenser button to receive a medicine sachet, n
1,371
2,090
Patient pressed the dispenser button and a sachet was delivered, n (%)
1,344 (98.0)
2,075 (99.3)
Patient did not remove the sachet, n
5
12
Failure to deliver the sachet,* n (%)
27 (1.97%)
15 (0.72%)
On-time medicine sachet removal %†
97.7
98.7
*In these cases, the investigator on duty responded to the alarm given by the telecare system and gave the patient their
medicines within 1 to 2 hours.
†Determined as [(pressed dispenser button and a sachet was delivered) – (sachet not removed)]/(total number of alerts to
press the dispenser button to receive a medicine sachet).
Clinical Therapeutics
1058
Volume 39 Number 5
 Phase I: Verification of the Robotic Function to
Assure the Device’s Unsupervised, Safe Use in
Patients’ Homes
The 17 nursing home patients had 457 total days
using the device in Phase I (mean, 26.9 per patient)
(Table). They responded to the device’s reminder and
successfully pressed the dispenser button 98.0% of the
time (1344 presses/1371 alerts), but on 5 occasions
they did not remove the medicine sachet. On-time
sachet retrieval occurred in 97.7% of the alerts.
Technical malfunctions that prevented the sachet from
being ejected from the device occurred with 1.97% of
the alerts (27 of 1371). The nurses unanimously
reported that the remote care system, and its func-
tions, did not cause an actually dangerous or near
dangerous situation for any patient. These failures to
deliver a medicine sachet were not dangerous because
in every case of a technical malfunction (i.e., the
device did not deliver the sachet) the patient still
received their medicines (because the telecare system
immediately sent information about the malfunction
and the sachet was removed manually). Thus, no
medication doses were missed, just the time to take
them was delayed maximally by 1 to 2 hours.
Phase II: Device’s Performance in Assisting
Participants to Take Their Medicines According
to Their Individual Treatment Plan and the
Device’s Ease of Use
The device was used for 727 days by 27 patients
(mean, 26.9 days per patient). The device’s dispenser
button was pressed successfully 99.3% of the time (2075
presses/2090 alerts), and 98.7% of the alerts resulted in
on-time medicine sachet retrievals by the patients. Failure
to deliver the medicines sachet declined by 63% from
Phase I to Phase II (1.97% to 0.72%).
All but one of the Phase II patients reported that the
device functioned reliably. That one respondent stated
that the device functioned “reliably, except for the
sound function.”
HC nurses regarded the machine as safe, except in two
cases: (1) the medication was not taken by the patient
because the machine’s audio instructions stopped, and (2)
one psychiatric patient was afraid of the machine’s sound.
All patients and 96% of the nurses found the device to be
easy for the patients to use. The one nurse who stated the
devices use not to be easy, responded that the patient had
said “I need a human being, not a machine.” In Phase II,
89% of patients and 88% of nurses would recommend
or probably recommend this device for further use. The
patient who responded that he probably would not
recommend the device wanted the device to be smaller.
DISCUSSION
This pilot study demonstrates the device and telecare
system’s (1) reliability, (2) device-mediated communi-
cations, and (3) among motivated HC patients, patient
and nurse satisfaction with the device.
Steadily increasing need and costs for HC services
make them a major unresolved issue for Finland’s
social service and health care system. The in-home
advanced robotic device and telecare system in this
pilot study directly addresses a critical aspect of this
concern: the quality and costs of in-home pharmaco-
therapy for aged patients. Sequestering medicines in a
tamper-proof robotic device and delivering them on
predetermined individually optimal dosing schedules
focuses on the patient's clinical need rather than on a
caregiver’s schedule. The system is a new approach to
organizing HC services and assuring on-time home
medicine use without the direct assistance of a nurse.
For optimal outcomes, the patient's medications and
dosing times are reviewed before enrolling the patient
in the robotic service. The medication review assures
that clinically optimal medicines and schedules are
customized to the patient's daily routines.
Reliability
The device and system have been engineered to
remove steps in the medicines use process in which
human and system errors can occur. Accidental
medicine use and missed doses are minimized, and
potential adherence is improved. Automating clerical
tasks also reduces the administrative burden of assur-
ing adherence to a drug regimen, which then increases
the proportion of a nurse’s patient contact time that
can be focused on higher quality patient interactions
and observation of their condition(s).
Device-mediated Communications
Real-time dose-by-dose monitoring and communica-
tion serve not only as a medicine schedule reminder and
delivery system but also as a mode for communication
with the often isolated elderly HC patient (78% in this
study lived alone). The system provides bidirectional
communications between the HC patient and his or her
provider. The device proved to be reliable with a high
P. Rantanen et al.
May 2017
1059
 percentage of doses taken at the correct times without
assistance from an in-home visit by the nurse. Because the
patient was reminded to take the medicine, retrieved the
sachet from the device, and no remaining medicines were
in the retrieved sachets, it is assumed that the medicine
was taken when the sachets were retrieved.
Satisfaction
In this study the HC patients were satisfied with the
device and willing to use a robotic system, and the
nurses’ opinions were positive.
This kind of device could further reduce the need for
nurses to visit HC patients’ homes if the purpose is solely
to give medicines. Instead, their home visits could be
planned and focused on educating patients about their
conditions and medicine use, including a review of their
medications. On a population level, the increase in
efficiency of use of professional personnel is substantial.
This could also improve quality of care as one of the
current major problems in geriatric care is inappropriate
medication use.18,19
A larger clinical trial to study the device’s effects on
clinical care end points is planned. Current plans and
future plans focus on expanding communications be-
tween patients and their providers, performing a longer
outcomes trial of health and humanistic outcomes after
improved medication adherence to individualized regi-
mens, and use by patients who have poorer motivation
and baseline adherence. The communication feature can
be developed to provide even more detailed and custom-
ized verbal instructions for each of the medicines in use.
Communication through the device can be easily ex-
tended to cover the wanted and unwanted effects of each
of the medicines taken. HC patients in this study were
committed to treatment. Future studies should address (1)
those who are less committed because they may benefit
even more than the present study group, and (2) whether
patients with cognitive decline may benefit from this kind
of easy-to-use robotic system.
Study Limitations
This pilot clinical safety and usability study has
limitations: (1) small sample size, (2) short duration,
(3) no direct observation of medicine consumption
(patients were selected by nurses based on their assess-
ment that the potential participant was motivated to take
their medicines), and (4) data were missing on the
frequency of home visits by nurses at baseline in Phase
II. Failure to deliver the medicines sachet declined by
63% from Phase I to Phase II (1.97.0% to 0.72%).
Engineering will continue to address improvements to
lower this experience. Because the device is part of a
system, redundant backup features alert caregivers so
that they are able to respond in time to ensure that no
patient misses his or her scheduled medicine delivery.
CONCLUSIONS
This trial reported the safety profile and usability of an
in-home advanced robotic device and telecare system
and its acceptability to patients and nurses. It supports
individualized patient dosing schedules, patient–provider
communications, and on-time, in-home medication de-
livery to promote high adherence. Missed doses were
reported and followed-up in real time, and unretrieved
doses were sequestered to prevent later misuse.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The contributions of technical advisors Mikko Hagström
and Mika Apell and study nurses Pasi Kyllönen, RN,
and Anja Siitonen, LPN, are greatly appreciated.
All authors had full access to all of the data, with
independence
of
interpretation,
conclusions
and
manuscript submission: concept and design (P. Ran-
tanen), preforming the trial (P. Rantanen, T. Park-
kari), acquisition of data (P. Rantanen, T. Parkkari),
analysis and interpretation of data (P. Rantanen,
T. Parkkari, S. Leikola, M. Airaksinen, A. Lyles),
clinical report (P. Rantanen, T. Parkkari), literature
review (M. Airaksinen, A. Lyles), manuscript draft
(S. Leikola, M. Airaksinen, A. Lyles), critical revisions
of the manuscript for important intellectual content
(P. Rantanen, T. Parkkari, S. Leikola, M. Airaksinen,
A. Lyles), data analysis (P. Rantanen, T. Parkkari,
S. Leikola, M. Airaksinen, A. Lyles), and conceptual-
ization and construction of the figure (S. Leikola,
M. Airaksinen).
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The clinical usability study, its analysis, and publication
were funded by Evondos Oy, Salo, Finland. None of the
authors is an employee of Evondos Ltd. P. Rantanen was
Medical Head at Espoo City Hospital, and T. Parkkari is
an employee of Clinius Ltd., a contract research organ-
ization (CRO) that provides support and services for
medical device industry. P. Rantanen , T. Parkkari, and
M. Airaksinen received no additional compensation for
Clinical Therapeutics
1060
Volume 39 Number 5
 this study. A. Lyles received compensation for participa-
tion on this project. S. Leikola works for an automated
dose dispensing (ADD) firm and received compensation
from Evondos for contributing to coordinating the
writing of this manuscript. The authors have indicated
that they have no other conflicts of interest regarding the
content of this article.
REFERENCES
1. Libby AM, Fish DN, Hosokawa PW, et al. Patient-level
medication regimen complexity across populations with
chronic disease. Clin Ther. 2013;35:385–398. e1.
2. Pasina L, Brucato AL, Falcone C, et al. Medication non-
adherence among elderly patients newly discharged and
receiving polypharmacy. Drugs Aging. 2014;31:283–289.
3. Johnson A, Guirguis E, Grace Y. Preventing medication
errors in transitions of care: a patient case approach. J Am
Pharm Assoc (2003). 2015;55:e264–e274. quiz e275–6.
4. Wolff JL, Roter DL, Barron J, et al. A tool to strengthen
the older patient-companion partnership in primary care:
results from a pilot study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62:312–
319. Epub 2014 Jan 13.
5. L Reed R, Isherwood L, Ben-Tovim D. Why do older
people with multi-morbidity experience unplanned hospi-
tal admissions from the community: a root cause analysis.
BMC Health Serv Res. 2015;15:525.
6. Jamerson BD, Fillenbaum GG, Sloane R, Morey MC. A
new method for identifying characteristics of needing help
to take medicines in an older representative community-
dwelling population: the Older Adults Medication Assist
Scale. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64:1195–1202.
7. Aarnio E, Korhonen MJ, Huupponen R, Martikainen J. Cost-
effectiveness of statin treatment for primary prevention in
conditions of real-world adherence–estimates from the Fin-
nish prescription register. Atherosclerosis. 2015;239:240–247.
8. Marcum ZA, Pugh MJ, Amuan ME, et al. Prevalence of
potentially preventable unplanned hospitalizations caused by
therapeutic failures and adverse drug withdrawal events among
older veterans. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2012;67:867–874.
9. Sinnemäki J, Saastamoinen LK, Hannula S, et al. Starting an
automated dose dispensing service provided by community
pharmacies
in
Finland.
Int
J
Clin
Pharm.
2014;36:
345–351.
10. National Institute for Health and Welfare 2016: Home-
care clients in November 2015. https://www.thl.fi/fi/web/
thlfi-en/statistics/statistics-by-topic/social-services-older-
people/count-of-regular-home-care-clients-on-30-november
Accessed April 13, 2017.
11. Vervloet M, Linn AJ, van Weert JC, et al. The effectiveness
of interventions using electronic reminders to improve
adherence to chronic medication: a systematic review of the
literature. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012;19:696–704. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3422829/.
12. Reeder B, Demiris G, Marek KD. Older adults’ satisfaction
with a medication dispensing device in home care. Inform
Health Soc Care. 2013;38:211–222.
13. Sutton S, Kinmonth AL, Hardeman W, et al. Does
electronic monitoring influence adherence to medication?
Randomized controlled trial of measurement reactivity.
Ann Behav Med. 2014;48:293–299.
14. Hou MY, Hurwitz S, Kavanagh E, et al. Using daily text-
message reminders to improve adherence with oral con-
traceptives: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol.
2010;116:633–640.
15. Lester CA, Mott DA, Chui MA. The influence of a
community pharmacy automatic prescription refill pro-
gram on Medicare Part D adherence metrics. J Manag Care
Spec Pharm. 2016;22:801–807.
16. Hersberg KE, Boeni F, Arnet I. Dose-dispensing service as
an intervention to improve adherence to polymedication.
Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2013;6:413–421.
17. European Commission. Medical Devices: Council Direc-
tive 93/42/EEC. http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-mar
ket/european-standards/harmonised-standards/medical-
devices/. Accessed July 21, 2016.
18. Leikola S, Dimitrow M, Lyles A, et al. Potentially inappro-
priate medication use among Finnish non-institutionalized
people aged Z65 years: a register-based, cross-sectional,
national study. Drugs Aging. 2011;28:227–236.
19. Saastamoinen LK, Verho J. Register-based indicators for
potentially inappropriate medication in high-cost patients
with excessive polypharmacy. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf.
2015;24:610–618.
Address correspondence to: Alan Lyles, ScD, MPH, RPh, School of Health
and Human Services, College of Public Affairs, University of Baltimore,
1420 North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21201. E-mail: calyles
@ubalt.edu
P. Rantanen et al.
May 2017
1061
