 Pathogen-mediated inhibition of anorexia promotes host 
survival and transmission
Sheila Rao1, Alexandria M. Palaferri Schieber1, Carolyn P. O’Connor2, Mathias Leblanc3, 
Daniela Michel1, and Janelle S. Ayres1,4,*
1Nomis Center for Immunobiology and Microbial Pathogenesis, The Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037
2Flow Cytometry Core Facility, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037
3Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037
Summary
Sickness-induced anorexia is a conserved behavior induced during infections. Here, we report that 
an intestinal pathogen, Salmonella Typhimurium, inhibits anorexia by manipulating the gut-brain 
axis. Inhibition of inflammasome activation by the S. Typhimurium effector, SlrP, prevented 
anorexia caused by IL-1β mediated signaling to the hypothalamus via the vagus nerve. Rather than 
compromising host defenses, pathogen-mediated inhibition of anorexia increased host survival. 
SlrP-mediated inhibition of anorexia prevented invasion and systemic infection by wild-type S. 
Typhimurium, reducing virulence while increasing transmission to new hosts, suggesting there are 
trade-offs between transmission and virulence. These results clarify the complex and contextual 
role of anorexia in host defense and suggest that microbes have evolved mechanisms to modulate 
sickness-induced behaviors to promote health of their host and their transmission at the expense of 
virulence.
Graphical abstract
*Correspondence to: jayres@salk.edu.
4Lead Contact
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
J.S.A conceived and designed the study. S.R. and J.S.A. designed and oversaw all experiments. S.R., A.M.P.S. and J.S.A. performed 
experiments. C.P.O. provided consultation, technical and analytical assistance for experiments involving flow cytometry. M.L. 
performed the pathology analysis. D.M. designed and conducted breeding and helped with germ free mouse experiments. S.R. and 
J.S.A analyzed the data. S.R. and J.S.A. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 January 26; 168(3): 503–516.e12. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.006.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
sickness-induced anorexia; pathogen transmission; virulence; Salmonella; inflammasome; IL-1β; 
vagus nerve
Introduction
Infections trigger stereotypical behavioral changes in the host including anorexia, fever, 
sleep disturbances, social withdrawal and changes in grooming, collectively referred to as 
“sickness behaviors” (Dantzer, 2009; Hart, 1988). These behaviors have been proposed to be 
adaptive strategies to increase the chance of survival from acute illness (Exton, 1997; Hart, 
1988; Kyriazakis et al., 1998). Animal studies have suggested that any benefits conferred by 
anorexia caused by infection are context dependent. In mice systemically infected with 
Listeria monocytogenes, animals that were force fed succumbed to infection more rapidly 
than animals that were allowed to develop the anorexic response (Murray and Murray, 
1979). However, in Drosophila, anorexia was maladaptive for surviving an L. 
monocytogenes systemic infection (Ayres and Schneider, 2009). Because many biomedical 
practices interfere with sickness-induced behaviors, it is important to understand the 
mechanisms that lead to the induction of these behaviors and the contexts in which they are 
beneficial or detrimental for the host.
Whether sickness-induced anorexia is beneficial for the host is largely dependent on how the 
fasted state functionally influences host resistance and tolerance defenses (Medzhitov et al., 
2012; Schneider and Ayres, 2008). Acute starvation and diet restriction studies have 
primarily focused on how nutrition influences resistance mechanisms (Bedoyan et al., 1992; 
Dunn et al., 1994). In contrast to expectations, food restriction had a negative impact on the 
outcome of infection for the host (Burger et al., 2007; Kristan, 2007; Libert et al., 2008; Ritz 
et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2001). However, in a fruit fly model, Drosophila that developed 
anorexia or were diet restricted during systemic Salmonella infection lived significantly 
Rao et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 longer despite equivalent pathogen levels compared to infected flies fed a normal diet (Ayres 
and Schneider, 2009). More recently, anorexia promoted tolerance in mice infected with L. 
monocytogenes, indicating that in these contexts, the fasted state promoted tolerance 
defenses (Wang et al., 2016).
Pathogens and the microbiota are dependent on energy intake of their hosts during infection. 
Whether anorexia will have a beneficial effect on host outcome will also likely be 
determined by how microbial virulence is affected under fasted states. The effects of 
anorexia on pathogen virulence have been most theorized as creating a less hospitable niche, 
starving pathogens from essential nutrients required for replication (Hart, 1988). Although 
anorexia may have some positive and undefined effects on inhibiting pathogen growth, it is 
equally plausible that the fasted state may trigger increased virulence by altering microbial 
behavior independent of any effects on microbial growth. Microbes vary in their metabolic 
capacity and foraging strategies to adjust to situations in which nutrients are scarce (Ayres, 
2016). Acute starvation in humans is associated with an increased risk of invasive bacterial 
infections (Page et al., 2013). While this increased risk has been assumed to be dependent on 
the poor immune status of the patient due to malnutrition (Gordon et al., 2012), it is possible 
that the increased invasiveness and virulence may potentially reflect an adaptive strategy of 
certain microbes under nutrient limiting conditions. Thus, the discrepancies shown in 
previous studies regarding any benefits afforded by sickness-induced anorexia for the host 
may in part be due to microbe-induced behavioral changes caused by food restricted 
conditions that lead to increased virulence of infecting pathogens, the resident microbiota or 
both.
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (ST) is a gram-negative bacterium that causes 
enteric and systemic typhoid-like diseases in diverse animal models and humans. Upon oral 
infection in mice, ST penetrates the gut epithelial layer typically by invasion of specialized 
epithelial cells called M cells (Monack et al., 2004). Once in the lamina propria (LP), 
bacteria are engulfed by innate immune cells including neutrophils and macrophages, and 
infection induces the infiltration of T and B cells (Monack et al., 2004). The SPI-I type 3 
secretion system (T3SS) and associated effectors are important for the gut stage of ST 
infection (Galan, 1996). In adapted salmonellosis such as typhoid fever, with the aid of a 
second T3SS, SPI-2 and associated effectors (Hensel et al., 1998), the bacteria disseminate 
via the lymphatics and bloodstream to systemic organs, including the spleen and liver. The 
gut phase of salmonellosis in mice induces an anorexic response in the host (Schieber et al., 
2015), and this pathogen can be transmitted to new mice via the fecal-oral route. As ST has 
evolved mechanisms to manipulate diverse physiological aspects of the mouse, a natural host 
of ST, it is an excellent pathogen to dissect the relationship among anorexia, host health, 
pathogen virulence and transmission.
Here we examined how sickness-induced anorexia affected infection-induced lethality in a 
transmissible model of infection. We found that the ST effector, Salmonella leucine rich 
repeat protein (SlrP) negatively regulated virulence and promoted survival of the host by 
inhibiting the infection-induced anorexic response. We found that SlrP inhibited 
inflammasome activation and IL-1β maturation in the small intestine (SI), preventing the 
anorexic feeding program in the hypothalamus that is dependent on the vagus nerve. Failure 
Rao et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to inhibit IL-1β and the anorexic response resulted in increased extra-intestinal 
dissemination and increased virulence of the pathogen but at the expense of pathogen 
transmission to new hosts. Our study provides mechanistic aspects for how local tissue 
response to microbes can signal to the brain to induce anorexia and demonstrates that 
microbes have evolved anti-virulence strategies that inhibit sickness-induced anorexia to 
promote host survival and pathogen transmission.
Results
A Salmonella effector promotes survival of its host
In ongoing efforts to identify microbial factors that promote host health, we tested the 
importance of the ST effector, SlrP, in regulating host health during oral infection. SlrP is a 
member of the novel E3 ubiquitin ligases (NEL) class, a class of ubiquitin ligases that are 
encoded by some bacteria (Maculins et al., 2016; Miao et al., 1999; Tsolis et al., 1999). The 
function of NELs and other prokaryotic ubiquitin ligases is traditionally thought to promote 
virulence during infection (Maculins et al., 2016). However because commensal bacteria and 
microbes that can colonize the host asymptomatically, including Salmonella species (Boyer 
and Lemichez, 2004), also encode mechanisms to interact with the host ubiquitin system, we 
hypothesized that SlrP may be important for negatively regulating virulence. Specific 
pathogen free (SPF) C57Bl/6 (B6) mice orally infected with a ST SL1344 strain deficient in 
slrP (ΔslrP) exhibited faster death kinetics than mice infected with the parental ST SL1344 
strain (wildtype, wt) (Figure 1A). ΔslrP-infected animals exhibited a median time to death of 
seven days post-infection, while ~70% of mice infected with the parental strain were alive at 
day 10 post-infection (Figure 1A). The increased death kinetics of ΔslrP-infected mice was 
associated with increased weight loss (Figure 1B, C). We previously showed that ST 
infection in B6 mice causes wasting of lean and fat stores (Schieber et al., 2015). We found 
that while ΔslrP-infected mice had slightly higher lean body mass (Figure 1D), they 
exhibited significantly more wasting of adipose tissue stores compared to wt-infected mice 
(Figure 1E). These data suggest that SlrP function is necessary for controlling ST virulence 
and sustaining health of the host during infection in vivo of B6 mice.
Inhibition of the sickness-induced anorexia response controls virulence
We performed an in-depth metabolic characterization of infected animals using the 
Comprehensive Laboratory Animal Monitoring System (CLAMS) and found that mice 
infected with the ΔslrP strain exhibited differences in the rate of oxygen consumption (VO2, 
Figure S1A) and CO2 production (VCO2, Figure S1B), resulting in a decreased respiratory 
exchange ratio (RER) compared to mice infected with wt ST (Figure 2A). In agreement with 
increased wasting of adipose tissue, lower RER suggests that ΔslrP-infected mice 
preferentially utilize fat as an energy substrate resulting in increased lipid oxidationat and 
depletion of fat stores, while wt-infected mice with higher RER use carbohydrates as the 
preferential fuel source (Schmidt-Nielsen, 1997).
We hypothesized that nutrient availability may be compromised in ΔslrP-infected mice due 
to the development of a more severe anorexic response in the absence of SlrP function. 
Consistent with our previous findings (Schieber et al., 2015), we found that mice infected 
Rao et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with wt ST exhibited an anorexic response (Figure 2B). However, we found that ΔslrP-
infected mice exhibited a more severe anorexic response compared to wt-infected mice that 
was apparent within the first 24hrs post-infection and became more severe by 24–48hrs post-
infection (Figure 2B). Between 0–24hrs post-infection, ΔslrP-infected mice consumed ~6% 
less food compared to wt infected animals and this difference increased to ~20% less food 
by 24–48hrs post-infection (Figure 2B). Expression of a wt copy of slrP under the native 
promoter in the ΔslrP mutant protected from infection induced anorexia (Figure S1C–D). 
These data raise the possibility that the more severe anorexic response results from increased 
pathogen burden, indicating the ΔslrP strain may grow faster and/or is cleared less efficiently 
than the parental strain. However, we found that at both 0–24 and 24–48hrs post-infection, 
the timeframes in which we observe the onset of the more severe anorexic response in ΔslrP-
infected mice (Figure 2B), that the pathogen burdens in wt- and ΔslrP-infected mice were 
comparable in all target tissues of this pathogen (SI, cecum, colon, Peyer’s patches [PP], 
MLN, liver and spleen) (Figure 2C). We further found at 48hrs post-infection the percentage 
of hosts with an extraintestinal dissemination event to be identical between ΔslrP- and wt-
infected B6 mice (Figure 2D). Another possibility is that ΔslrP infection induces 
perturbations in the intestinal microbiota, resulting in a more pathogenic microbiota that 
leads to increased anorexia. Similar to our findings with SPF mice, germ-free mice 
monoinfected orally with ΔslrP exhibited a more severe anorexic response compared to 
germ-free mice that were monoinfected orally with the parental strain (Figure 2E), 
consuming approximately 50% less food within the first 24hrs post infection. Thus the more 
severe anorexic response observed in ΔslrP-infected mice is not due to increased pathogen 
burdens, differences in pathogen tissue tropism, dissemination or differential responses of 
the intestinal microbiota.
To determine if the host nutrient status was related to pathogen virulence, we compared 
infection of food-restricted wt-infected animals to that of wt-infected mice that were fed ad 
libitum. Food-restricted wt-infected mice exhibited increased wasting that was associated 
with increased death kinetics compared to wt-infected mice that were fed ad libitum (Figure 
2F, G). This was specific to infection, as uninfected food-restricted animals exhibited no 
mortality (Figure S1E–F). We next tested whether force feeding could dampen ΔslrP 
virulence in B6 mice. ΔslrP-infected mice force fed a liquefied diet during infection were 
protected from weight loss and had increased survival comparable to that of wt-infected B6 
mice fed ad libitum (Figure 2H, I). Taken together, our data suggest that reduced nutrient 
intake leads to increased virulence of ST oral infection. Since the protection against anorexia 
mediated by SlrP was neither due to regulation of pathogen burdens nor regulation of the 
pathogenicity of the intestinal microbiota, we hypothesized that SlrP interacts directly with 
host physiologies that negatively regulate the sickness-induced anorexic response and in 
doing so, regulates ST virulence.
SlrP prevents anorexia and regulates virulence through the inhibition of IL-1β
Protection from anorexia without a change in pathogen infection levels suggests that SlrP 
can negatively regulate ST virulence through 1) the inhibition of host processes that promote 
the anorexic response or 2) through the induction of a disease tolerance mechanism that 
promotes feeding. To distinguish between these two possibilities, we asked how the absence 
Rao et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of SlrP function during ST infection influences the canonical mediators of sickness-induced 
anorexia. Using the CLAMS monitoring system, we found equivalent activity levels between 
ΔslrP- and wt-infected mice indicating that ΔslrP-infected mice are not more anorexic 
because they are less mobile (Figure 3A). Although we found no difference in the systemic 
levels of pathogen between mice infected with either strain at the onset of the more severe 
anorexic response (0–24 and 24–48hrs), we considered the hypothesis that the absence of 
SlrP rendered ST more stimulatory of an anorexic response. However, systemic challenge of 
B6 mice with either ΔslrP or wt ST resulted in an equivalent degree of anorexia (Figure 3B), 
indicating that ΔslrP is not more stimulatory of an anorexic response when systemic. 
Consistent with this and our burden analyses (Figure 2C), we found no significant difference 
in the extent of tissue pathology in ST target tissues liver, spleen and SI, between mice 
infected with wt or ΔslrP ST (Figure 3C and S2A). Thus SlrP does not inhibit anorexia by 
alleviating tissue damage in target organs of this pathogen. SlrP has been shown in in vitro 
assays to inhibit dendritic cell (DC) migration (McLaughlin et al., 2014). We found no 
difference in the levels of DCs or other immune cells associated with ST infection or 
intestinal inflammation in the LP, MLNs, liver or spleen between 0–24 and 24–48hrs post-
infection, indicating that SlrP does not inhibit anorexia by limiting immune cell infiltration 
(Figure 3D, E and S2B–H). Additionally, levels of TNFα and IL-6, cytokines that can 
modulate sickness-induced behavioral changes, (Dantzer, 2009), in ST target tissues were 
not higher in ΔslrP-infected mice at 24 and 48hrs post-infection (Figure 3F, G, S2I and data 
not shown). Taken together, these data suggest that SlrP does not inhibit the anorexic 
response by alleviating the primary cause of disease (tissue damage), inhibit the induction of 
TNFα or IL-6, nor inhibit immune cell infiltration during infection.
Systemic IL-1β is believed to be the predominant mediator of sickness-induced anorexia 
(Dantzer, 2009). We did not detect any differences in the levels of serum, liver or spleen 
IL-1β between ΔslrP- and wt-infected mice within the first 48hrs of infection (Figure 4A, 
S3A). We did, however, find significantly increased levels of IL-1β in the SI of ΔslrP-
infected mice compared to wt-infected mice within the first 48hrs of infection, which 
correlates with the onset of the more severe anorexic response observed in these mice 
(Figure 4A). This increased IL-1β was specific to the SI because IL-1β levels of other 
tissues of the digestive tract including the stomach, cecum, colon, pancreas, PP and MLN 
were not significantly different between wt and ΔslrP-infected mice (Figure S3B and data 
not shown). Expression of a wt copy of slrP under the native promoter in the ΔslrP mutant 
prevented increased levels of IL-1β in the SI of infected mice (Figure S1D and S3C).
Testing the importance of IL-1β in mediating the anorexic response and its relationship to 
ST virulence, we found that Il1β/− mice orally infected with ΔslrP were protected from 
developing anorexia compared to B6 mice infected with ΔslrP ST (Figure 4B). This 
protection from anorexia was associated with reduced wasting and increased survival 
(Figure 4C, D). Protection was independent of the microbiota as both Il1β−/− mice that were 
co-housed with B6 mice or left separately housed were protected from anorexia and the 
associated morbidity and mortality when orally infected with ΔslrP ST (Figure 4B–D and 
S3D–F). Infection of Il1β−/− mice with wt ST resulted in similar mortality as wt-infected B6 
mice (Figure S3G, H). Injection of wt-infected B6 mice with rIL-1β during infection 
resulted in anorexia and increased morbidity compared to vehicle-injected/wt-infected B6 
Rao et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice (Figure 4E, F), demonstrating that IL-1β was sufficient to induce anorexia in these 
mice. Together, these findings suggest that SlrP antagonizes sickness-induced anorexia 
through the inhibition of IL-1β in the SI, resulting in reduced virulence. While our data 
strongly support that slrP inhibition of IL-1β in the SI prevents anorexia, inhibition of the 
anorexic signal in another tissue remains formally possible.
Salmonella SlrP regulates IL-1β levels by inhibiting inflammasome activation
Our data support a model in which IL-1β levels, rather than the response to IL-1β, are 
regulated by SlrP. Upon oral infection, ST invades intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). Once the 
bacteria cross the epithelial barrier, ST infects leukocytes residing in the LP (Ruby et al., 
2012). Infection in both cell types induces the expression of pro-IL-1β. Upon activation of 
the inflammasome, multiprotein cytosolic complexes that lead to the cleavage and activation 
of Caspase-1, pro-IL-1β is cleaved into its active form, IL-1β (von Moltke et al., 2013). 
Yersinia pestis encodes a SlrP homolog (YopM) that has been shown to antagonize 
Caspase-1 activity and IL-1β secretion (LaRock and Cookson, 2012). We found that the 
increased level of IL-1β in the SI within the first 48hrs of infection was associated with 
increased Caspase-1 cleavage in LP leukocytes from ΔslrP-infected mice (Figure 4G). By 
contrast, we detected no Caspase-1 cleavage in IECs from mice infected with either strain of 
ST (Figure 4G and S3I, J). We found no difference in pro-IL-1β expression in LP leukocytes 
or IECs from mice infected with either strain of ST (Figure 4H), suggesting that SlrP 
regulates IL-1β levels by impacting Caspase-1 activation. Consistent with these 
observations, in vitro ΔslrP infection of myeloid cells resulted in increased secretion of 
IL-1β compared to wt-infected cells, which was dependent on Caspase-1. Furthermore, in 
vitro ΔslrP infection of viable B6 and Il1β−/− myeloid cells resulted in increased Caspase-1 
cleavage compared to wt-infected cells (Figure S3K–N). Thus, the regulation of SI IL-1β 
levels was associated with regulation of inflammasome activation (either directly or 
indirectly by SlrP) in LP myeloid cells.
Salmonella regulates the anorexic response and virulence via the gut-brain axis
We hypothesized that the increased IL-1β in the SI of ΔslrP-infected mice directly regulates 
the anorexic response. We determined how food restriction affected ΔslrP virulence in 
Il1β−/− mice, which did not develop anorexia and were less susceptible to ΔslrP infection 
(Figure 4B–D and S3D–F). Under food restricted conditions, ΔslrP ST was more virulent in 
Il1β−/− mice compared to ΔslrP infection in Il1β−/− mice that were fed ad libitum (Figure 
5A, B, and S4A). The increased morbidity and mortality of the food-restricted animals was 
specific to the infected state as food-restricted, uninfected Il1β−/− mice exhibited less weight 
loss and no mortality (Figure S4B–C) Since food restriction in the absence of IL-1β is 
sufficient to increase virulence of the ΔslrP strain, it suggests that ST virulence is regulated 
by the direct actions of IL-1β on modulating feeding behavior of the host.
To understand the mechanism by which IL-1β regulates the anorexic response during ST 
oral infection, we considered that the behavioral changes that are triggered by IL-1β are 
mediated by its actions on the central nervous system (Pavlov and Tracey, 2012). Gene 
expression analysis of the hypothalamus revealed a cohort of genes involved in feeding and 
metabolism that were differentially regulated by the two different strains in B6 mice (Figure 
Rao et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 5C–D, S4D, Table S1). Analysis of gene expression patterns in the hypothalamus of ΔslrP-
infected Il1β−/− mice revealed that a subset of these genes are regulated by IL-1β during 
infection including Npy, Il1β, Egr1, Plin4 and cFos, all of which are involved in appetite 
regulation or neuronal activation (Figure 5D and S4D). These data indicate that mice 
infected with ΔslrP ST have dysregulation of the hypothalamic feeding and satiety network 
in an IL-1β dependent manner.
Sickness behaviors and anorexia induced by peripheral administration of LPS or IL-1β are 
abolished in mice in which the visceral afferent nerves have been severed (Goehler et al., 
1999; Hansen et al., 2001; Pavlov and Tracey, 2012). Visceral afferent vagus nerve endings 
are likely necessary for transmitting information about distal inflammatory states to the 
brain when local levels of cytokines are present at low levels, but this has not been 
experimentally shown (Hansen et al., 2001; Pavlov and Tracey, 2004). Because we only 
observed IL-1β differences in the SI of ΔslrP-infected mice compared to wt-infected mice, 
we hypothesized that the vagus nerve was required for mediating the anorexic response and 
associated gene expression in the hypothalamus of ΔslrP-infected mice. To test our 
hypothesis, we infected vagotomized mice in which afferent nerves in the abdominal cavity 
were severed and surgical sham mice with ΔslrP and measured the anorexic response. 
Hepatic vagotomy results in vagal deinnervation of the SI, distal stomach, pancreas and 
liver, leaving the cecum and colon innervation intact. Feeding was equivalent between the 
vagotomized and sham mice under homeostatic conditions (Figure S5A). However, despite 
infection with ΔslrP ST, mice with a severed vagus nerve did not develop an anorexic 
response, while the infected sham mice did (Figure 5E). The IL-1β-dependent gene 
expression of the hypothalamus exhibited by ΔslrP-infected mice (specifically Il1β, Egr1, 
Plin4 and cFos) was also dependent on the vagus nerve (Figure 5F and S5B). Vagotomy did 
not however affect SI IL-1β activation during infection (Figure 5G). As we only detected 
IL-1β differences in the SI of ΔslrP-infected mice and not in other tissues affected by 
vagotomy (Figure 4A, S3A, B), our findings strongly suggest that the anorexic response and 
associated anorexic gene expression program in the hypothalamus requires IL-1β-dependent 
signaling via the vagus nerve from the gut to the brain during ΔslrP infection.
Anorexia creates trade-offs between pathogen virulence and transmission
In humans, complications of severe acute malnutrition (SAM) are invasive bacterial 
infections and sepsis (Page et al., 2013). Salmonella species are commonly isolated from the 
blood of SAM patients with invasive bacterial infections (Page et al., 2013). We 
hypothesized that the increased virulence resulting from anorexia and food restriction in our 
infection models was due to increased invasion and extra-intestinal dissemination of ST. We 
found that the percentage of hosts with a disseminated infection in liver, spleen, PP and 
MLN was significantly higher during ΔslrP infection compared to wt infection of B6 mice 
(Figure 6A, C, D and S6B–G). Ruling out that ΔslrP replicates more efficiently when 
systemic, we found that i.p. infection with wt or ΔslrP ST resulted in similar burden in the 
spleen and liver, indicating that ΔslrP disseminates to systemic sites more during oral 
infection (Figure S6A). The increased dissemination began at 72hrs post-infection (Figure 
2C, D, 6A and S6B–G), indicating that dissemination occurred secondary to the more severe 
anorexic response seen in ΔslrP-infected mice, suggesting that anorexia leads to increased 
Rao et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pathogen dissemination. In support of this, food restriction of wt-infected B6 mice increased 
the incident of disseminated infection in liver, spleen, PP and MLN, compared to wt-infected 
mice fed ad libitum (Figure 6A and S6B–G). Conversely, force feeding of ΔslrP-infected B6 
mice decreased the incident of dissemination to systemic sites (Figure 6A and S6B–G). Like 
the anorexic response, dissemination was also dependent on IL-1β because administration of 
rIL-1β was associated with increased dissemination to systemic sites in wt-infected B6 mice 
(Figure 6A and S6B–G). Furthermore, the increased morbidity and mortality of food-
restriction was associated with increased dissemination incident in ΔslrP-infected Il1β−/− 
mice (Figure S6H, I). Analyses of gut pathology and markers of barrier integrity showed that 
the increased dissemination was not due to a leaky gut, suggesting that the behavior of ST 
changes under food restricted conditions (Figure 3C, S6J and S2A). Thus, ST negatively 
regulates virulence by inhibiting IL-1β induced anorexia to prevent extra-intestinal 
dissemination.
A fundamental question is why ST would maintain a trait that negatively regulates virulence 
through the inhibition of the sickness-induced anorexic response? Evolutionary theory 
predicts that the selection pressures on pathogens to maximize their transmission determines 
their optimal host exploitation strategies and thus their virulence. While the primary 
perspective in evolutionary medicine is that virulence increases with horizontal transmission 
(Alexander, 1981; Ewald, 1996), we reasoned that the absence of SlrP function and the 
resulting host anorexic response and increased pathogen virulence may come at a cost to ST 
transmission. Upon examination of all our experimental groups, we found that the fraction 
of hosts that shed at least one CFU of pathogen within the first 72hrs of infection was higher 
in experimental groups that had a lower fraction of hosts with a dissemination event (wt-
infected B6 and force fed ΔslrP-infected B6, Figure 6A, B, S6B, E and data not shown). 
Additionally, individuals with at least one shedding event at 72hrs post-infection had lower 
levels of pathogen burden at extraintestinal tissues. These data also show that mice with a 
dissemination event had lower levels of shedding compared to individuals without 
dissemination (Figure 6C, D, S6C, D, F, G).
We next employed a horizontal transmission model in which we co-housed an infected 
mouse challenged with wt or ΔslrP ST (primary host) at the time of infection with an 
uninfected mouse (secondary host) and monitored shedding, wasting and mortality of the 
secondary host over the course of the infection. We detected that approximately 75% of the 
wt-secondary hosts shed pathogen in their feces, while approximately 10% of the ΔslrP-
secondary hosts showed evidence of fecal shedding over the course of the experiment 
(Figure 6E). Interestingly, 60% of wt-secondary hosts succumbed to infection within one 
month after exposure to the wt-infected primary host. By contrast only 10% of ΔslrP-
secondary hosts died within this same time frame (Figure 6F). Thus, the inhibition of 
anorexia afforded by SlrP function is associated with increased fecal shedding of ST and 
transmission to new hosts, creating a trade-off between virulence (extra-intestinal 
dissemination) and transmission (Figure 6G).
Rao et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
The purpose of a physiological response during infection is often confounded by the 
complexities of counter-adaptation strategies by microbes. The purpose of the current study 
was to determine if there is a physiological role of sickness-induced anorexia for host 
defenses, how this response regulates pathogen virulence using a transmissible model of 
infection and the mechanism by which localized tissue responses to microbes can induce 
anorexia. Our finding that the ST effector SlrP promotes host health and transmission during 
infection by inhibiting anorexia via the gut-brain axis permits several conclusions: (1) that 
anorexia may have evolved as a mechanism to protect the host population rather than the 
individual host, (2) anorexia can increase pathogen virulence, (3) where increased virulence 
compromises transmission there will be tradeoffs, (4) local inflammatory responses in the 
intestine can signal to the brain via the vagus nerve to induce anorexia and (5) microbes can 
inhibit sickness-induced anorexia and directly modulate host feeding behavior.
NELs encoded by bacteria are believed to be important for virulence by mediating 
antagonistic manipulation of host processes by the microbe (Maculins et al., 2016). We 
discovered that the NEL SlrP, encoded by ST is important for dampening virulence during 
interactions with the host in vivo by directly antagonizing a host response that induces 
sickness-induced anorexia. In Balb/c mice, infection with a slrP mutant strain on the IR715 
background had a higher lethal dose 50 (LD50) compared to infection with a parental strain 
(Tsolis et al., 1999). In an in vivo competition assay, this slrP mutant exhibited a 
colonization defect in PP but not in spleen (Tsolis et al., 1999). The phenotypic differences 
between this previous study and the one reported here may be explained by the different 
strains of ST in which SlrP function was tested, microbiota differences, housing and diet 
differences of the mice or the strain of mice used.
We showed that the ability of SlrP to regulate IL-1β in the SI was associated with inhibition 
of Caspase-1 cleavage. Several studies have shown a protective role for Caspase-1 during 
oral infection of mice with ST. However, if SlrP inhibits inflammasome function, why are 
mice infected with ΔslrP not more resistant to this strain compared to mice infected with a 
functional SlrP? By focusing on later stages of infection (Broz et al., 2010; Lara-Tejero et 
al., 2006; Muller et al., 2009; Raupach et al., 2006), prior studies identified an important role 
for the inflammasome for providing resistance in later stages of infection at extraintestinal 
sites but did not provide insight as to how ST-inflammasome interactions within specific 
populations of the gut in the early stages of infection influence the anorexic response, 
pathogen loads or host health. Additionally, our study focused on the function of SlrP 
inhibition of inflammasome activation within the intestine, and understanding how SlrP 
functions at systemic sites remains to be determined. A recent study showed that the NAIP/
NLRC4 inflammasome is required for mediating resistance against ST in IECs in a murine 
model of enterocolitis (Sellin et al., 2014). It is worth noting, however, that we did not 
employ an enterocolitis model, and we observed no differences in the intestinal levels of wt 
or ΔslrP ST in our system. Nevertheless, these observations suggest that studies in 
inflammasome-deficient animals might be difficult to interpret. These considerations 
prompted our use of Il1β−/− mice.
Rao et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 It has been proposed that the vagus nerve is responsible for sensing local production of 
inflammatory cytokines in organs to relay messages to the brain to induce sickness behaviors 
(Pavlov and Tracey, 2012). However, we were unable to identify studies that provide 
evidence for these claims. Here our data strongly suggest that IL-1β from myeloid cells 
within the SI signals to the brain via the vagus nerve to induce the anorexic response during 
infection and that a microbe has evolved a trait to manipulate this pathway. As of yet, we do 
not know specifically which changes in the hypothalamus trigger the anorexic response, but 
we have identified likely candidates. We found SlrP to regulate cFos, Il1β, Egr1 and Plin4 
expression levels in the hypothalamus in both an IL-1β and vagus nerve dependent manner. 
Distinct neuronal populations express cFos in response to hunger and satiety signals 
(Johnstone et al., 2006). IL-1β in the brain is sufficient to induce anorexia in rodent models 
(Pavlov and Tracey, 2012). Both Egr1 and perilipins (Plin4) have complex roles in regulating 
feeding and metabolic homeostasis (de Lartigue et al., 2010; Martinez-Botas et al., 2000). It 
is likely that SlrP-mediated regulation of all these genes alters the feeding networks to 
prevent anorexia during infection. Further, our studies show that the inflammasome 
contributes to sickness-induced behavior, adding to the evidence that this sensor is important 
for the control of homeostasis, tissue repair, and tolerance defenses (Ayres, 2013).
Sickness-induced behaviors have been theorized as evolved host behavioral strategies to 
promote survival upon challenge with infectious diseases (Dantzer, 2009; Exton, 1997; Hart, 
1988). With the exception of social withdrawal, any benefits afforded by sickness-induced 
behaviors including anorexia have been viewed from the perspective of the individual host 
level, rather than that of the host population. By using a transmissible model and a loss-of-
function mutant of ST, we determined how the host anorexic response influences individual 
host health and infection susceptibility at the population level. We found that while anorexia 
was maladaptive for the individual host in the context of a ST infection, the development of 
the anorexic response in a primary host spared the population from contracting the infection. 
While we found no difference in pathogen levels between hosts that developed the anorexic 
response and those that did not, at the population level, sickness-induced anorexia confers a 
negative impact on microbial fitness resulting in decreased transmission. Many infections 
induce anorexia in the host, and it is unlikely that the metabolic alterations that occur during 
this fasted state will be compatible for host defense against all infection types. Given our 
findings, we do suggest however, that in prior studies in which fasting increased morbidity 
during infection, the effects on transmission at the host population level would be of interest.
Microbes and their hosts share a wide range of resources that are required to support normal 
growth and metabolism. In the mouse, ST depends on a wide array of nutrients that are 
available in scarce amounts in host tissues (Steeb et al., 2013). In our study we show that 
reduced feeding of the host triggers virulence of a pathogen by promoting its invasion of 
extra-intestinal tissues. Our findings are supported by a recent study demonstrating that 
under specific conditions, LPS-induced anorexia can trigger pathogenicity of the microbiota 
(Pickard et al., 2014). How a reduction in food consumption changes the behavior of ST to 
become invasive is unknown. One possibility is that in an extra-intestinal niche, ST faces 
less competition than when competing for resources with other microbes inhabiting that 
particular niche in the intestine. It will be interesting to determine how invasion and 
virulence differ between wt and ΔslrP strains in gnotobitoic models.
Rao et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Increased virulence has been proposed to benefit microbes by promoting transmission and, 
thus this benefit would be expected to drive the selection of traits in microbial populations 
that inhibit tolerance defenses or promote virulence (Alexander, 1981). (Ewald, 1996; 
Wickham et al., 2007). We found that there was an inverse correlation between ST virulence 
and transmission, suggesting that the selective pressures host anorexia places on pathogen 
transmission create trade-offs between these two traits. Trade-offs between virulence and 
transmission have been reported in animal models of malaria in which transmission success 
was inversely correlated with host mortality (Mackinnon et al., 2008; Paul et al., 2004). It 
has been proposed that microbes will evolve mechanisms to promote tolerance in their host 
so long as transmission of the microbe is not negatively affected by the increased tolerance 
(Ayres, 2013, 2016). Indeed, an intestinal microbe inhibited infection-induced muscle 
wasting through the induction of a tolerance mechanism in mice (Schieber et al., 2015). 
Anti-virulence strategies that inhibit pathological responses by the host without negatively 
affecting microbial fitness are phenotypically and evolutionarily analogous to such tolerance 
mechanisms. We provide evidence that there is also a selection of traits in microbial 
populations that act as anti-virulence strategies. Such relationships in the context of 
infection-induced anorexia have not been previously revealed as most studies rely on models 
in which transmission is not considered such as the systemic injection of immune elicitors 
that cause anorexia.
Anorexia and catabolism of energy stores are common co-morbidities of acute and chronic 
illnesses (Fearon et al., 2011). In these diseases, decreased energy intake and increased 
energy expenditure result in depletion of muscle and fat stores, or wasting (cachexia). 
Efforts to correct the nutritional deficits with force feeding have been met with little success 
clinically. Thus, therapeutic interventions that can modulate a patient’s physiology to 
promote appetite would be most desirable in combating these morbidities in critically ill 
patients. In patients with anorexia nervosa, efforts have been focused on treating the illness 
from a psychological perspective. Our work suggests that modulating local responses within 
the intestine by microbes may provide a therapeutic means to such illnesses.
STAR Methods
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information or requests for reagents may be directed to the corresponding author 
Janelle S. Ayres (jayres@salk.edu).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Mice—Male mice were used for all experiments. C57Bl/6 (B6) mice were obtained from 
room 15 at Jackson Laboratories at 5 weeks of age and housed in our AALAC-certified 
vivarium. The whole body Il1b−/− knock-out mice were provided by Russell Vance (UC 
Berkeley) and were bred and maintained in our barrier facility. Vagotomized and sham B6 
mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories. Mice were specific pathogen free, 
maintained under a 12-hour light/dark cycle and given standard chow diet ad libitum unless 
otherwise stated. Mice were used for experimentation at 6–8 weeks of age. For germ-free 
mice, B6 mice were bred and maintained in our germ free mouse facility in sterile semi-
Rao et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 flexible isolators and screened for bacterial, fungal, and viral contamination (Schieber et al., 
2015). For shared bedding experiments, bedding from cages of B6 and Il1b−/− mice were 
mixed three times per week for two weeks prior to experimentation to control for floral 
differences. All animal experiments were done in accordance with The Salk Institute Animal 
Care and Use Committee.
Salmonella strains—The ΔslrP mutant was generated on the Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium SL1344 background (Brandt et al., 2004). Gene deletion was confirmed by 
PCR and sequencing using primers listed in Table S2 that have been previously reported 
(McLaughlin et al., 2014). The parental SL1344 strain was used for wildtype (wt) control for 
all of our experiments described. For preparation of Salmonella stocks for infection, single 
colonies of ΔslrP or wt ST that were struck out on LB agar plates supplemented with 
100μg/mL streptomycin were grown overnight at 37 degrees C in 5mL liquid broth 
containing 100μg/mL streptomycin. After overnight growth, 1mL of liquid cultures was 
diluted in 49mL liquid broth containing streptomycin. Cultures were incubated in a 37-
degree shaker for approximately 1–2 hours. Optical density was determined (0.9), and 
cultures were transferred to a 50mL conical tube and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 4000rpm. 
Bacterial pellet was washed three times with PBS. After final wash, bacterial pellet was 
resuspended in PBS containing 25% glycerol to a concentration of 5×108 CFU/ml and 
frozen at −80 degrees. Prior to infection, glycerol stocks were thawed and diluted in sterile 
PBS to a concentration of 1×10ˆ8 CFU/ml, and mice were gavaged with 100μl (1×10ˆ7 
CFU). Inoculums were confirmed for every experiment by plating dilutions on agar plates 
and quantifying CFUs. Infections with fresh cultures of each strain were also done to 
validate that the phenotypes are the same as what we report with the glycerol stock 
preparations.
Methods Details
Mouse infection models
Mice were orally infected with 10ˆ7 CFU of either wt Salmonella Typhimurium strain 
SL1344 or a mutant SlrP (ΔslrP) strain. For systemic infections, mice were injected through 
the intraperitoneal cavity (IP) with 150 CFU wt or ΔslrP Salmonella. For experiments 
investigating the effects of IL-1β, wt-infected mice were given IP injections of 0.05μg IL-1β 
(eBioscience) per gram mouse. For food-restriction experiments, at 24 hours post-infection, 
wt-infected mice were given an amount of food equivalent to that of ΔslrP-infected mice at 
the start of their anorexic response (see Figure 2E). Every 24 hours after, the amount of food 
given to the food-restricted group was sequentially reduced. For force feeding experiments, 
ΔslrP-infected mice were gavaged twice daily with 200ul of liquid diet (TestDiet, LD101). 
Briefly, 2.5g powder was blended in 7mL dH20 using a TissueRupture (Qiagen). 
Undissolved powder was pelleted by centrifugation at 900rpm for 5 minutes. Remaining 
“liquefied” food (approximately 200 calories per 200μl) was used for gavage. For 
gnotobiotic infections, mice were infected with 10ˆ6 of either strain. Inoculum was plated on 
LB/agar containing streptomycin after all experiments to confirm infecting concentration.
Rao et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For horizontal transfer experiments, two mice were housed per cage. One mouse per cage 
was infected with either wt or ΔslrP Salmonella (primary infection) and the second mouse 
was the uninfected secondary host. Both mice were monitored for weight loss, and survival. 
The incidence of fecal shedding of pathogen was also determined for primary and secondary 
hosts. We measured fecal shedding in the primary hosts every day (beginning with day 1 
post-infection) until all the slrP infected primary hosts died. We did not continue to count 
shedding in the primary hosts of wt Salmonella infected mice after all the primary slrP mice 
died. The indexes provided indicate the fraction of hosts that shed at least one CFU of 
Salmonella at any point during that time frame. No host is ever included in the shedding 
indexes in Figure 6 twice – once assigned a “1” it remains scored as a host that shed at least 
one CFU at one time point during that time frame, even if we never detect a shedding event 
in that mouse again.
For the secondary hosts, we measured shedding every day until the termination of the 
experiment on day 30 post-infection, beginning with day 1 post-infection of the primary 
host. The indexes provided indicate the fraction of hosts that shed at least one CFU of 
Salmonella at any point during that time frame. No host is ever included in the shedding 
indexes in Figure 6 twice – once assigned a “1” it remains scored as a host that shed at least 
one CFU at one time point during that time frame, even if we never detect a shedding event 
in that mouse again.
For experiments analyzing the relationship between fecal shedding and dissemination 
(Figure 6), mice were singly housed during infection with the appropriate strain of bacteria. 
For calculating the dissemination index, the liver, spleen, PP and MLNs were dissected at 72 
hrs postinfection and organs were homogenized and plated for CFU quantification as 
described below and mice were assigned a binary score of either 0 or 1. A score of 1 
indicates that there is at least one CFU in the relevant systemic tissue. A score of 0 indicates 
no CFU above the limit of detection was detected in the relevant systemic tissues. The 
average of the scores for each experimental group was determined and plotted as the fraction 
of hosts with a dissemination event. The total amount of CFUs was also quantified for each 
tissue. For fecal shedding, a fresh fecal pellet was collected at the indicated time point. Fecal 
matter for each mouse was weighed, homogenized in PBS/1% triton, diluted and plated. 
Animals were then assigned a shedding score of 1 or 0. A score of 1 indicates that a 
particular animal shed at least 1 CFU at the time point indicated. A score of 0 indicates that 
the animal did not shed at least one CFU above the limit of detection at the time point 
indicated. CFUs were also quantified and normalized to amount of feces to determine the 
amount of CFU shed per gram of feces at the indicated time point. We provide scatter plots 
examining dissemination CFUs (spleen, liver, PP and MLN) vs incidence of fecal shedding 
at 72 hrs post infection. We also provide fecal shedding CFUs vs incidence of dissemination 
(spleen, liver, PP and MLN). Because of the binary nature of the phenotypes, data were 
plotted this way to allow for statistical analyses. We look at 72 hrs because this is the 
relevant time point at which the dissemination occurs in response to the more severe 
anorexic response. These data demonstrate that individuals with a shedding event have lower 
dissemination levels at all extraintestinal sites examined compared to individuals without 
shedding. Furthermore, these data show that individuals with a dissemination event have 
lower levels of shedding compared to individuals without a dissemination event. Finally, 
Rao et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 these data show that slrp-infected B6 fed ad libitum, wt infected B6 mice treated with rIL1B 
and food restricted wt-infected B6 mice have more dissemination and less shedding than wt-
infected B6 and force fed slrp-infected B6 mice.
Survival assay
Time to moribund was used for survival experiments, and morbidity was defined as animals 
being unable to move when gently touched or unable to right themselves when placed on 
their side.
Quantification of Salmonella in mouse tissues
Liver, spleen, cecum, colon, and small intestine from infected mice were homogenized in 
1mL PBS containing 1% triton X-100 using a Power Lyzer 24 bench top bead-based 
homogenizer (MoBio). MLNs and PPs were homogenized in 600μl solution. Organ 
homogenates were serially diluted and plated on LB/agar or brilliant green agar containing 
streptomycin to quantify bacterial burden.
Metabolic analysis
Infected mice were singly housed in metabolic cages, and O2 consumption, CO2 production 
and activity data were collected by CLAMS. EchoMRI machine was used to assess lean and 
fat mass, which were normalized to MRI readings taken prior to infection on day 0 for each 
animal. For whole body weight, animals were weighed daily using a scale and normalized to 
their respective weight at day 0 just prior to infection. For feeding assays, animals were 
given a known amount of chow and every 24 hrs, the amount of chow was measured. 
Measurements were taken at the same time of day.
Histological analysis
Ileum from infected mice was isolated, inflated with PBS and fixed in 10% formalin for 24 
hours before transfer to 70% ethanol. The ileum was swiss rolled, embedded in paraffin, 
sectioned at 5μm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Inflammation, submucosal edema 
and epithelial damaged were assessed by a blinded pathologist. Liver and spleens were 
harvested, fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin. Multiple, stepwise, four (4) 
millimeter sections were stained with H&E and analyzed by the pathologist who was 
blinded for groups. The entire liver surface was scored for inflammation and necrosis on a 
scale of 0 to 4 (0: absent; 1: focal to multifocal, portal, lobular and perivascular 
inflammation without necrosis; 2: multifocal to widespread inflammation associated with 
minimal necrosis; 3: multifocal to widespread inflammation associated with focally 
extensive necrosis; 4: multifocal to widespread inflammation associated with multifocal and 
coalescing necrosis). Spleen sections were scored for inflammation, necrosis/abscess 
formation, and thrombus formation. Each parameter was scored on a score of 0 to 4 (0: 
absent; 1: mild; 2: moderate; 3: severe; 4: severe). Thrombi were scored as follows: 0: no 
thrombi; 1: 1–4 thrombi; 2: 5–9 thrombi; 3: 10–15 thrombi; 4: more than 15. The maximum 
total spleen inflammation score was 12.
Rao et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cytokine measurements
Serum and organ homogenates were used for cytokine measurements determined by ELISA. 
The blood from euthanized mice was obtained by cardiac puncture and centrifuged for 20 
minutes at 8000rpm to separate serum. Organ homogenates were centrifuged for 5 minutes 
at 1200rpm. IL-1β was detected using an anti-mouse purified IL-1β clone (B122) and a 
biotin-conjugated anti-mouse IL-1β clone. IL-6 was detected using an anti-mouse purified 
IL-6 clone (MP5-20F3) and a biotin-conjugated anti-mouse IL-6 antibody (MP5-32611). 
TNFα was measured with an anti-mouse purified TNFα antibody (1F3F304) and a biotin-
conjugated anti-mouse TNFα antibody (XT3/XT22). All antibodies were purchased from 
eBioscience. For immobilization of TNFa, IL-1β and IL-1a, anti-mouse purified IL-1β clone 
(B122), anti-mouse purified TNFα antibody (1F3F304) and anti-mouse IL-1α clone 
(ALF-161) were used.
IL-1β bioassay
HEK-Blue-IL1R reporter cell line (Invivogen) was used to measure production of 
biologically active IL-1β. This reporter cell line stably expressed mouse IL-1 receptor and a 
secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) reporter gene under the control of a minimal IFN-β 
promoter fused to NFκB and AP-1 binding sited. Cells were maintained according to 
manufacturer’s protocol in growth medium containing DMEM, 4.5 g/L glucose (Life 
Technologies), 2mM L-glutamine (Life Technologies), 10% FBS (Life Technologies), 50 
U/ml penicillin (Life Technologies), 50 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies), 100 μg/ml 
Normocin (Invivogen), 200 μg/ml hygromycin B gold (Invivogen), 1 μg/ml puromycin 
(Invivogen) and 100 μg/ml Zeocin (Invivogen). Tissue homogenates or supernatants from in 
vitro infection assays were diluted in PBS (Life Technologies), and 20 μl of dilutant was 
added to a flat bottom 96 well plate. In separate wells, 20 μl of a positive control rmIL1-β 
and a negative control human rTNFα were added. As these cells also respond to murine 
IL-1α and TNFα, as controls, an aliquot of each sample was incubated on plates coated with 
a mouse anti IL-1α, mouse anti-TNFα or mouse anti-IL-1β to immobilize any IL-1α, TNFα 
or IL-1β in the samples. The samples were then subjected to the HEK blue assay as follows: 
180 μl of HEK cell suspension (~50,000 cells) resuspended in test medium (same as growth 
medium without hygromycin, puromycin and zeocin) were added to each well. Cells were 
incubated with samples overnight at 37°C in 5% CO2. The next day, 20 μl of media from 
each well was added to a new 96 well plate. 180 μl of resuspended QUANTI-Blue reagent 
was then added to each well. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes after which 
plates were read on a spectrophotometer at 650 nm. As secondary mode of validation, we 
performed ELISAs on the samples to measure TNFα, IL-1β and IL-1α concentrations.
Intestinal cell preparations and Western blot analysis
Western analysis was performed on lysates obtained from intestinal epithelial cells and 
intestinal lamina propria cells. Briefly, small intestine was incubated in epithelial strip buffer 
(PBS containing 5mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, 5% fetal bovine serum, and antibiotic) at 37 
degrees with gentle shaking. Epithelial cells were isolated from solution by spinning in a 
Percoll gradient for 20 minutes at 600g. The remaining intestinal tissue was digested for 30 
minutes at 37 degrees with gentle shaking in digest buffer (RPMI 10% fetal bovine serum, 
Rao et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 antibiotic, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 20mM HEPES, 1mg/ml Collagenase VIII [Sigma] and 
20ug/ml DNase I [Roche]). The solution of digested tissue was filtered, subjected to Percoll 
gradient, and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 600g for isolation of lamina propria leukocytes. 
Epithelial cells and leukocytes were pelleted and lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 
50mM Tris, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% triton X-100, and protease inhibitor cocktail 
[Sigma]) for 20 minutes on ice. Lysates were centrifuged at 4 degrees for 10 minutes at 
10,000rpm and subjected to Western analysis of CASPASE-1 (Adipogen) and β-actin (Cell 
Signaling).
Gene expression analysis
RNA was extracted from bead-beaten hypothalamus and from epithelial and lamina propria 
cells using the Qiagen All Prep RNA/DNA Mini Kit. Briefly, sample was lysed in 600μl 
RLT buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol and centrifuged for 3 minutes at 6,000rpm in a 
microcentrifuge. Supernatant was transferred to an AllPrep DNA column and centrifuged for 
30 seconds at 10,000rpm. Supernatant was mixed with 70% ethanol and transferred to an 
RNeasy spin column and centrifuged for 15 seconds. The supernatant flow-through was 
discarded, and the column containing RNA was washed with 350μl RW1 buffer. Flow-
through was discarded, and column was incubated for 15 minutes with DNaseI solution. 
Column was washed with RW1 buffer, and flow-through was discarded. Column was 
washed twice with 500μl RPE buffer. After final wash, column was placed in a new 
Eppendorf tube, and RNA was eluted with 40μl RNase-free water. cDNA was synthesized 
using the SuperScript III kit (Invitrogen) from 350ng RNA. Real-time quantitative PCR was 
performed using iTaq SYBR Green Mix (BioRad) on a ViiA7 RT PCR Machine (Applied 
Biosystems). The comparative Ct method was used to analyze gene expression relative to an 
uninfected control. β-actin was used as the endogenous control for hypothalamus samples, 
and rps17 was used for intestinal samples. See Table S2 for primer sequences. For RNA-seq, 
libraries were prepared using a strand-specific protocol and sequenced on an Illumina 
HiSeq2500 Instrument. For each sample, at least 22.5 million 51-bp single-end reads were 
produced. The reads were mapped to mm10 reference genome using STAR 2.3.0e, resulting 
in at least 20 million uniquely mapped reads per sample. Differential gene expression was 
calculated using Cufflinks 2.2.1 with UCSC mm9 genome annotation from Illumina’s 
iGenomes collection. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes was 
carried out using DAVID.
Organ preparations for flow cytometric analysis
Spleen, liver, and MLNs from infected animals were mashed through a 70μM mesh filter 
using the plunger from a 1-mL syringe. Cells were washed with complete media (DMEM, 
10% fetal bovine serum, antibiotic, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 20mM HEPES) and centrifuged 
for 5 minutes at 1500rpm. Pelleted liver was resuspended in 15mL of 35% Percoll. Solution 
was underlaid with 75% Percoll and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 1000g. Leukocytes were 
harvested from the interphase, washed with complete media, and centrifuged for 5 minutes 
at 1500rpm. Red blood cells were lysed for 2 minutes with ACK lysing buffer. Remaining 
leukocytes were washed, centrifuged, and counted.
Rao et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Flow cytometric analysis
Lamina propria, liver, MLN, and spleen leukocytes isolated from infected mice were 
incubated in a 96-well V-bottom plate with Zombie-UV (diluted 1:800 in PBS) for 20 
minutes. Cells were washed with FACS buffer (PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum) and 
incubated for 15 minutes with Fc blocking reagent (24G2, diluted 1:200 in FACS buffer). 
Following Fc block, cells were stained for 20 minutes with the following conjugated 
antibodies: Ly6G-FITC (1A8), Ly6C-PerCP/Cy5.5 (HK1.4), CX3CR1-BV421 (SA011f11), 
MHCII-BV510 (M5/114.15.2), CD11b-BV785 (M1/70), CD103-APC (2E7), CD45.2-
AF700 (104), CD3-APC/Cy7 (145-2C11), CD19-APC/Cy7 (6D5), CD64-PE (X54-5/7.1), 
F4/80-APC (BM8), and CD11c-PE/Cy7 (N418). Antibodies to CD11c, F4/80, and CD45.2 
were diluted 1:100 in FACS buffer. The remaining antibodies were diluted 1:200. All steps 
were performed at 4 degrees. Antibodies were purchased from BioLegend. Cells were 
analyzed on a LSR II (BD) using FACSDiva software, and data were analyzed using Flowjo 
software (TreeStar).
In vitro infection
Lamina propria leukocytes were isolated and combined from naïve B6, Il1β−/−, Nlrc4−/−, or 
Caspase1/11−/− mice and stained with antibodies to CD45.2, CD3, and CD19. Live (DAPI 
negative) myeloid cells were isolated (CD45.2+CD3−CD19−) on a BD Influx™ cell sorter 
(100μm nozzle, sheath pressure set to 17.5 PSI). After sorting, cells were plated in a 96-well 
round-bottom plate in RPMI media containing 10% fetal bovine serum, antibiotic, 1mM 
sodium pyruvate, and 20mM HEPES and allowed to rest overnight. Cells were infected with 
MOI 1 of wt or ΔslrP Salmonella by centrifuging for 10 minutes at 1400rpm at room 
temperature and were returned to 37 degrees for 6 hours. Supernatant was harvested for 
IL-1β analysis by ELISA, and cells were lysed in RIPA buffer for CFU analysis or for 
Western blot analysis. We also measured TNFα levels by ELISA on infected cells at 6 hrs 
post-infection. TNFα was induced at comparable levels in cells infected with either ST 
strain (data not shown due to space constraints).
Complementation of S. Typhimurium ΔslrP mutant
The ThermoFisher GeneArt Gene Synthesis and subcloning technology was used to generate 
a low copy vector containing the wildtype copy of slrP along with its native promoter for our 
complementation analyses. A 3067 bp piece of DNA containing the wildtype copy of 
SL1344 slrP along with its native promoter flanked by SalI and SphI restriction sites was 
synthesized. The fragment was ligated into the multiple cloning site of the pMA Gene Art 
cloning vector, which contains ampicillin resistance. Competent E. coli were transformed 
with the pMA-slrP construct and positive transformants were confirmed by sequencing. The 
plasmid was extracted and digested using the endonucleases SalI and SphI, which cut solely 
in the 5′ and 3′ regions flanking the gene and its regulatory regions, ensuring the restriction 
enzymes did not cut within the gene and disrupt functionality. The digested fragments were 
ligated into the low copy number plasmid pACYC184, which was also double-digested with 
SalI and SphI. Ligation reactions were transformed into competent E. coli. The recombinant 
plasmid was sequenced to verify the gene of interest was present and in the correct 
orientation. The plasmid was extracted from transformed E. coli and transformed by 
Rao et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electroporation according to established protocols into the ΔslrP mutant to generate the 
strain ΔslrP -pACYC184-slrP. As a control, self-ligated pACYC184 vectors were similarly 
electroporated into the ΔslrP mutant to generate the strain ΔslrP-pACYC184-Empty. Positive 
transformants were selected for on brilliant green agar supplemented with streptomycin (100 
μg/ml), kanamycin (40 μg/ml) and chloramphenicol (25 μg/ml). Prior to in vivo analysis, 
plasmids were extracted from positive S. Typhimurium transformants. The presence of the 
slrP gene within the vector (or absence for empty vector) was confirmed by restriction digest 
analysis and sequencing of the plasmid from the 5′ and 3′ ends.
We determined whether the ΔslrP -pACYC184-slrP and ΔslrP-pACYC184-Empty were 
maintained during an in vivo infection. B6 mice were orally infected with 1×107 CFU of 
ΔslrP-pACYC184-Empty or ΔslrP-pACYC184-slrP. Every 24 hrs the small intestine, cecum, 
colon, liver, spleen, PPs and MLNs were harvested, homogenized, serially diluted and plated 
on brilliant green agar supplemented with Streptomycin (100 μg/ml) and Kanamycin (40 μg/
ml). The dilutants were also plated on brilliant green plates supplemented with streptomycin 
(100 μg/ml), kanamycin (40 μg/ml) and chloramphenicol (25 μg/ml). The fraction of 
pathogen containing plasmid was determined by normalizing the amount of CFUs quantified 
on strep/kan/chlor plates to the amount of CFUs quantified on strep/kan plates. Comparable 
levels of pathogen containing either the pACYC184-Empty or pACYC184-slrP vectors were 
recovered within the first 48 hrs post-infection. By 72 hrs post-infection, there was no 
detectable vector in either strain, and we therefore focused our complementation analyses on 
phenotypes within the first 48 hrs of infection – anorexia and levels of IL-1β as follows: B6 
mice were orally infected with 1×107 CFU of wt SL1344, ΔslrP-pACYC184-Empty or ΔslrP 
-pACYC184-slrP. Food consumption was measured every 24hrs post-infection as described 
above. At 24 and 48 hrs post-infection, tissues were harvested, homogenized and subjected 
to CFU analysis and bioactive IL-1β analyses as described above. We found that 
complementation effectively enabled the ΔslrP strain to inhibit IL-1β maturation in the small 
intestine and the anorexic response.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Statistical tests were done using Prism version 6.0. The statistical test used, sample sizes and 
p values are indicated for each figure. All experiments were repeated at least twice. Data 
shown are either a single representative experiment or data are combined from independent 
experiments and are indicated in the figure legends.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank R. Evans and B. Collins for use of the CLAMS equipment; M. Montminy for use of the EchoMRI; C. 
Fitzpatrick for help with FACS; G. Sulli for reagents; M. Abt for technical advice. This work was supported by NIH 
grant R01AI114929 (J.S.A), The Nomis Foundation, the Searle Scholar Foundation (J.S.A), the Ray Thomas 
Edward Foundation (J.S.A.), CA014195 and a Nomis Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship (S.R.).
Rao et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Alexander M. Why microbial predators and parasites do not eliminate their prey and hosts. Annu Rev 
Microbiol. 1981; 35:113–133. [PubMed: 7027898] 
Ayres JS. Inflammasome-microbiota interplay in host physiologies. Cell host & microbe. 2013; 
14:491–497. [PubMed: 24237695] 
Ayres JS. Cooperative Microbial Tolerance Behaviors in Host-Microbiota Mutualism. Cell. 2016; 
165:1323–1331. [PubMed: 27259146] 
Ayres JS, Schneider DS. The role of anorexia in resistance and tolerance to infections in Drosophila. 
PLoS biology. 2009; 7:e1000150. [PubMed: 19597539] 
Bedoyan JK, Patil CS, Kyriakides TR, Spence KD. Effect of Excess Dietary Glucose on Growth and 
Immune-Response of Manduca-Sexta. J Insect Physiol. 1992; 38:525–532.
Boyer L, Lemichez E. Targeting of host-cell ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like pathways by bacterial factors. 
Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004; 2:779–788. [PubMed: 15378042] 
Brandt SM, Dionne MS, Khush RS, Pham LN, Vigdal TJ, Schneider DS. Secreted Bacterial Effectors 
and Host-Produced Eiger/TNF Drive Death in aSalmonella-Infected Fruit Fly. PLoS biology. 2004; 
2:e418. [PubMed: 15562316] 
Broz P, Newton K, Lamkanfi M, Mariathasan S, Dixit VM, Monack DM. Redundant roles for 
inflammasome receptors NLRP3 and NLRC4 in host defense against Salmonella. Journal of 
Experimental Medicine. 2010; 207:1745–1755. [PubMed: 20603313] 
Burger JM, Hwangbo DS, Corby-Harris V, Promislow DE. The functional costs and benefits of dietary 
restriction in Drosophila. Aging Cell. 2007; 6:63–71. [PubMed: 17266676] 
Dantzer R. Cytokine, sickness behavior, and depression. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2009; 
29:247–264. [PubMed: 19389580] 
de Lartigue G, Lur G, Dimaline R, Varro A, Raybould H, Dockray GJ. EGR1 Is a target for 
cooperative interactions between cholecystokinin and leptin, and inhibition by ghrelin, in vagal 
afferent neurons. Endocrinology. 2010; 151:3589–3599. [PubMed: 20534729] 
Dunn PE, Bohnert TJ, Russell V. Regulation of antibacterial protein synthesis following infection and 
during metamorphosis of Manduca sexta. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1994; 712:117–130. [PubMed: 
8192326] 
Ewald PW. Evolution of infectious disease. Response. J Hist Behav Sci. 1996; 32:234–235.
Exton MS. Infection-induced anorexia: active host defence strategy. Appetite. 1997; 29:369–383. 
[PubMed: 9468766] 
Fearon K, Strasser F, Anker SD, Bosaeus I, Bruera E, Fainsinger RL, Jatoi A, Loprinzi C, MacDonald 
N, Mantovani G, et al. Definition and classification of cancer cachexia: an international consensus. 
Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:489–495. [PubMed: 21296615] 
Galan JE. Molecular genetic bases of Salmonella entry into host cells. Mol Microbiol. 1996; 20:263–
271. [PubMed: 8733226] 
Goehler LE, Gaykema RPA, Nguyen KT, Lee JE, Tilders FJH, Maier SF, Watkins LR. Interleukin-1 
beta in immune cells of the abdominal vagus nerve: a link between the immune and nervous 
systems? Journal of Neuroscience. 1999; 19:2799–2806. [PubMed: 10087091] 
Gordon JI, Dewey KG, Mills DA, Medzhitov RM. The Human Gut Microbiota and Undernutrition. Sci 
Transl Med. 2012; 4
Hansen MK, O’Connor KA, Goehler LE, Watkins LR, Maier SF. The contribution of the vagus nerve 
in interleukin-1 beta-induced fever is dependent on dose. Am J Physiol-Reg I. 2001; 280:R929–
R934.
Hart BL. Biological basis of the behavior of sick animals. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 
1988; 12:123–137. [PubMed: 3050629] 
Hensel M, Shea JE, Waterman SR, Mundy R, Nikolaus T, Banks G, Vazquez-Torres A, Gleeson C, 
Fang FC, Holden DW. Genes encoding putative effector proteins of the type III secretion system of 
Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 are required for bacterial virulence and proliferation in 
macrophages. Mol Microbiol. 1998; 30:163–174. [PubMed: 9786193] 
Rao et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Johnstone LE, Fong TM, Leng G. Neuronal activation in the hypothalamus and brainstem during 
feeding in rats. Cell Metab. 2006; 4:313–321. [PubMed: 17011504] 
Kristan DM. Chronic calorie restriction increases susceptibility of laboratory mice (Mus musculus) to 
a primary intestinal parasite infection. Aging Cell. 2007; 6:817–825. [PubMed: 17973970] 
Kyriazakis II, Tolkamp BJ, Hutchings MR. Towards a functional explanation for the occurrence of 
anorexia during parasitic infections. Anim Behav. 1998; 56:265–274. [PubMed: 9787017] 
Lara-Tejero M, Sutterwala FS, Ogura Y, Grant EP, Bertin J, Coyle AJ, Flavell RA, Galan JE. Role of 
the caspase-1 inflammasome in Salmonella typhimurium pathogenesis. Journal of Experimental 
Medicine. 2006; 203:1407–1412. [PubMed: 16717117] 
LaRock CN, Cookson BT. The Yersinia virulence effector YopM binds caspase-1 to arrest 
inflammasome assembly and processing. Cell host & microbe. 2012; 12:799–805. [PubMed: 
23245324] 
Libert S, Chao Y, Zwiener J, Pletcher SD. Realized immune response is enhanced in long-lived puc 
and chico mutants but is unaffected by dietary restriction. Mol Immunol. 2008; 45:810–817. 
[PubMed: 17681604] 
Mackinnon MJ, Gandon S, Read AF. Virulence evolution in response to vaccination: the case of 
malaria. Vaccine. 2008; 26(Suppl 3):C42–52. [PubMed: 18773536] 
Maculins T, Fiskin E, Bhogaraju S, Dikic I. Bacteria-host relationship: ubiquitin ligases as weapons of 
invasion. Cell Res. 2016; 26:499–510. [PubMed: 26964724] 
Martinez-Botas J, Anderson JB, Tessier D, Lapillonne A, Chang BH, Quast MJ, Gorenstein D, Chen 
KH, Chan L. Absence of perilipin results in leanness and reverses obesity in Lepr(db/db) mice. 
Nat Genet. 2000; 26:474–479. [PubMed: 11101849] 
McLaughlin LM, Xu H, Carden SE, Fisher S, Reyes M, Heilshorn SC, Monack DM. A microfluidic-
based genetic screen to identify microbial virulence factors that inhibit dendritic cell migration. 
Integr Biol (Camb). 2014; 6:438–449. [PubMed: 24599496] 
Medzhitov R, Schneider DS, Soares MP. Disease tolerance as a defense strategy. Science. 2012; 
335:936–941. [PubMed: 22363001] 
Miao EA, Scherer CA, Tsolis RM, Kingsley RA, Adams LG, Baumler AJ, Miller SI. Salmonella 
typhimurium leucine-rich repeat proteins are targeted to the SPI1 and SPI2 type III secretion 
systems. Mol Microbiol. 1999; 34:850–864. [PubMed: 10564523] 
Monack DM, Mueller A, Falkow S. Persistent bacterial infections: the interface of the pathogen and 
the host immune system. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004; 2:747–765. [PubMed: 15372085] 
Muller AJ, Hoffmann C, Galle M, Van Den Broeke A, Heikenwalder M, Falter L, Misselwitz B, 
Kremer M, Beyaert R, Hardt WD. The S. Typhimurium Effector SopE Induces Caspase-1 
Activation in Stromal Cells to Initiate Gut Inflammation. Cell Host & Microbe. 2009; 6:125–136. 
[PubMed: 19683679] 
Murray MJ, Murray AB. Anorexia of Infection as a Mechanism of Host Defense. Am J Clin Nutr. 
1979; 32:593–596. [PubMed: 283688] 
Page AL, de Rekeneire N, Sayadi S, Aberrane S, Janssens AC, Rieux C, Djibo A, Manuguerra JC, 
Ducou-le-Pointe H, Grais RF, et al. Infections in Children Admitted with Complicated Severe 
Acute Malnutrition in Niger. Plos One. 2013; 8
Paul REL, Lafond T, Muller-Graf CDM, Nithiuthai S, Brey PT, Koella JC. Experimental evaluation of 
the relationship between lethal or non-lethal virulence and transmission success in malaria parasite 
infections. Bmc Evol Biol. 2004; 4
Pavlov VA, Tracey KJ. Neural regulators of innate immune responses and inflammation. Cell Mol Life 
Sci. 2004; 61:2322–2331. [PubMed: 15378203] 
Pavlov VA, Tracey KJ. The vagus nerve and the inflammatory reflex-linking immunity and 
metabolism. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2012; 8:743–754. [PubMed: 23169440] 
Pickard JM, Maurice CF, Kinnebrew MA, Abt MC, Schenten D, Golovkina TV, Bogatyrev SR, 
Ismagilov RF, Pamer EG, Turnbaugh PJ, et al. Rapid fucosylation of intestinal epithelium sustains 
host-commensal symbiosis in sickness. Nature. 2014; 514:638–641. [PubMed: 25274297] 
Raupach B, Peuschel SK, Monack DM, Zychlinsky A. Caspase-1-mediated activation of interleukin-1 
beta (IL-1 beta) and IL-18 contributes to innate immune defenses against Salmonella enterica 
Rao et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 serovar typhimurium infection. Infection and Immunity. 2006; 74:4922–4926. [PubMed: 
16861683] 
Ritz BW, Aktan I, Nogusa S, Gardner EM. Energy restriction impairs natural killer cell function and 
increases the severity of influenza infection in young adult male C57BL/6 mice. J Nutr. 2008; 
138:2269–2275. [PubMed: 18936230] 
Ruby T, McLaughlin L, Gopinath S, Monack D. Salmonella’s long-term relationship with its host. 
FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2012; 36:600–615. [PubMed: 22335190] 
Schieber AM, Lee YM, Chang MW, Leblanc M, Collins B, Downes M, Evans RM, Ayres JS. Disease 
tolerance mediated by microbiome E. coli involves inflammasome and IGF-1 signaling. Science. 
2015; 350:558–563. [PubMed: 26516283] 
Schmidt-Nielsen, K. Animal physiology : adaptation and environment. 5th. Cambridge England; New 
York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press; 1997. 
Schneider DS, Ayres JS. Two ways to survive infection: what resistance and tolerance can teach us 
about treating infectious diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:889–895. [PubMed: 18927577] 
Sellin ME, Muller AA, Felmy B, Dolowschiak T, Diard M, Tardivel A, Maslowski KM, Hardt WD. 
Epithelium-Intrinsic NAIP/NLRC4 Inflammasome Drives Infected Enterocyte Expulsion to 
Restrict Salmonella Replication in the Intestinal Mucosa. Cell Host & Microbe. 2014; 16:237–248. 
[PubMed: 25121751] 
Steeb B, Claudi B, Burton NA, Tienz P, Schmidt A, Farhan H, Maze A, Bumann D. Parallel 
Exploitation of Diverse Host Nutrients Enhances Salmonella Virulence. Plos Pathogens. 2013; 9
Sun D, Muthukumar AR, Lawrence RA, Fernandes G. Effects of calorie restriction on polymicrobial 
peritonitis induced by cecum ligation and puncture in young C57BL/6 mice. Clin Diagn Lab 
Immunol. 2001; 8:1003–1011. [PubMed: 11527818] 
Tsolis RM, Townsend SM, Miao EA, Miller SI, Ficht TA, Adams LG, Baumler AJ. Identification of a 
putative Salmonella enterica serotype typhimurium host range factor with homology to IpaH and 
YopM by signature-tagged mutagenesis. Infection and immunity. 1999; 67:6385–6393. [PubMed: 
10569754] 
von Moltke J, Ayres JS, Kofoed EM, Chavarria-Smith J, Vance RE. Recognition of bacteria by 
inflammasomes. Annual review of immunology. 2013; 31:73–106.
Wang A, Huen SC, Luan HH, Yu S, Zhang C, Gallezot JD, Booth CJ, Medzhitov R. Opposing Effects 
of Fasting Metabolism on Tissue Tolerance in Bacterial and Viral Inflammation. Cell. 2016; 
166:1512–1525 e1512. [PubMed: 27610573] 
Wickham ME, Brown NF, Boyle EC, Coombes BK, Finlay BB. Virulence is positively selected by 
transmission success between mammalian hosts. Current biology : CB. 2007; 17:783–788. 
[PubMed: 17442572] 
Rao et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Feeding status of host regulates pathogen virulence and transmission
•
Pathogen inhibition of IL-1β prevents anorexia via the gut-brain axis
•
Pathogen inhibition of anorexia promotes host survival and pathogen 
transmission
•
Sickness-induced anorexia creates trade-offs between virulence and 
transmission
Pathogens can interfere with the gut-brain circuits that control host anorexia during 
infection to promote survival while facilitating disease transmission
Rao et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. A Salmonella effector promotes survival of its host
(A) Survival of B6 mice orally infected with wt (n=20) or ΔslrP (n=20) ST. Data represent 2 
independent experiments combined.
(B–C) Weight loss of B6 mice orally infected with wt or ΔslrP ST on days 1–3 (B) and day 6 
(C) post-infection. n=18/group. Data represent 3 independent experiments combined
(B). n=12 wt-infected and n=17 ΔslrP-infected mice (C).
(D–E) MRI analysis of lean (D) and fat mass (E) of B6 mice orally infected with wt (n=9) or 
ΔslrP (n=10) ST for 72hr. Measurements at 72hr are normalized to those taken on day 0 for 
each mouse. Data represent 2 independent experiments combined.
*** indicates p < 0.001, ** indicates p < 0.01, * indicates p<0.05 by unpaired student’s t test 
or Log rank analysis (survival). Error bars +/− SEM.
Rao et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Inhibition of the sickness-induced anorexia response controls virulence
(A) RER at 72hr post-infection of B6 mice orally infected with wt or ΔslrP ST. Black bar 
indicates dark/night cycle, and white bar indicates light/day cycle. n=5/group.
(B) Food consumption of B6 mice orally infected with wt or ΔslrP ST. Quantification is 
expressed as a ratio of grams of food per animal at each timepoint to that of vehicle (PBS)-
gavaged animals. 0–24hr: n=30 mice/group; 24–48hr: n=30 mice/group; 48–72hr: n=15 
mice/group. Data represent 3 experiments combined.
Rao et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C) CFU in indicated tissues of B6 mice orally infected with wt or ΔslrP ST for 24hr (top) 
and 48hr (bottom). n=10–16 mice/group. Data represent 2 independent experiments 
combined. Dotted line indicates limit of detection and mice with no CFU detected are 
indicated by symbols below this line. ND indicates none detected.
(D) Animals from (C) were assigned a dissemination score of “1” (at least 1 CFU at the 
level of detection in indicated systemic organ) or “0” (no CFU detected in indicated 
systemic organ) 48hr post-infection. n=10/group
(E) Food consumption of germ-free B6 mice orally infected with wt (n=12) or ΔslrP (n=14) 
ST for 24hr. Grams of food per animal normalized to uninfected consumption value of 
germ-free mice. Data combined from 2 independent experiments.
(F) Weight loss from days 1–3 of wt ST infection (n=14), ΔslrP ST infection (n=15), and wt 
ST infection during which food consumption was restricted (n=15) as indicated in table. 
Right graph shows weight loss on day 3 post-infection from left graph. Data represent 2 
independent experiments combined.
(G) Survival of mice from (F). ***indicates p=0.0006 between wt-infected and wt-infected 
food-restricted mice by Log rank analysis.
(H) Weight loss from days 1–3 of wt ST infection (n=19), ΔslrP ST infection (n=30) and 
ΔslrP ST infection during which mice were force fed twice daily in addition to ad libitum 
feeding (n=29). Right graph shows weight loss on day 3 post-infection from left graph. Data 
represent 3 independent experiments combined.
(I) Survival of mice from (H). ***indicates p=0.0012 between ΔslrP-infected mice and 
ΔslrP-infected force fed mice by Log rank analysis.
****p<0.0005, ***p<0.01, **p<0.05 by unpaired student’s t test. Error bars indicate +/
−SEM. See Figure S1.
Rao et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Canonical mediators of sickness-induced anorexia are equivalent between wt and ΔslrP 
ST
(A) Activity of B6 mice orally infected with wt or ΔslrP ST. Black bar indicates dark/night 
cycle, and white bar indicates light/day cycle. n=6 mice/group.
(B) B6 mice were infected i.p. with wt or ΔslrP ST, and food consumption was measured 
every 24hrs post-infection and normalized to consumption of uninfected animals. Grams of 
food per animal consumed within the first four days of infection shown. n=6/group.
Rao et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C) H&E staining and histological scoring of spleen, liver, and ileum 24hr after oral 
infection of B6 mice with wt or ΔslrP ST. ND indicates pathology above limit of detection 
not detected. NS indicates not significant. Scale bar indicates 200μm. n=5/group.
(D) Total cellularity of MLN and SI LP 48hr after oral infection of B6 mice with wt or ΔslrP 
ST. n=12–13/group. Data represent 3 independent experiments combined.
(E) Numbers of inflammatory cell populations 48hr after oral infection of B6 mice with wt 
or ΔslrP ST. LP: T/B lymphocytes (P1, n=8–9/group), neutrophils (P2, n=13/group), 
phagocytic macrophages (P3, n=8–9/group), inflammatory monocytes (P4, n=8–9/group); 
MLN: migratory DCs (P5, n=8/group). Data represent 3 independent experiments combined.
(F–G) ELISA measurements of TNFα (F) and IL-6 (G) in indicated tissues 48hr after oral 
infection of B6 mice with wt or ΔslrP ST. n=4–10/group. ND denotes Not Detected. Vehicle 
indicates PBS. Error bars indicate +/− SEM. See Figure S2.
Rao et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. ST SlrP prevents anorexia and regulates virulence through the inhibition of IL-1β
(A) Levels of mature IL-1β were determined by IL-1R reporter assay of whole organ 
homogenates in liver, spleen and serum of B6 mice 48hr post-infection (left, n=4–10/group) 
and in SI (right; n=7 vehicle-gavaged, n= 24 wt-infected and n= 24 ΔslrP-infected mice). 
Graph shown depicts reporter fluorescence (arbitrary units), indicative of active IL-1β. Data 
represent 2 experiments combined.
(B–D) Food consumption (B), weight loss (C), and survival (D) during ΔslrP infection of B6 
(n=6–20) and Il1β−/− (n=7–15) mice. (B) Grams of food per animal was normalized to 
Rao et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consumption of uninfected animals of appropriate genotype. Data represent 2 experiments 
combined.
(E–F) B6 mice were injected with PBS (n=10–20 wt-infected mice; n=10–20 ΔslrP-infected 
mice) or rIL-1β (0.05μg/gram mouse, n=15 wt-infected mice). Food consumption (E) and 
weight loss (F) were measured. (E) Data represent 2–3 experiments combined.
(G) Western blot analysis of CASPASE-1 cleavage (p20) in IECs (top) and LP leukocytes 
(bottom) isolated from infected mice. Leukocytes were combined from 5 wt-infected mice 
and from 5 ΔslrP-infected mice at 24hr and 48hr post-infection.
(H) Quantitative PCR analysis of Il1β expression in IECs and LP leukocytes 48hr after oral 
infection of B6 mice with wt or ΔslrP ST. n=5/group.
****p<0.0001, ***p<0.001, ** p<0.01, *p<0.05 by unpaired student’s t test or Log rank 
analysis for survival. NS indicates not significant by unpaired student’s t-test. ND indicates 
none detected above limit of detection. Error bars indicate +/− SEM. See Figure S3.
Rao et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Salmonella regulates the anorexic response and virulence via the gut-brain axis
(A–B) Il1β−/− mice orally infected with ΔslrP were fed ad libitum (n=6) or given restricted 
amounts of food (n=6). ΔslrP-infected B6 mice (n=5) were fed ad libitum. Weight loss (A) 
and survival (B) were measured.
(C) Heat map of differentially expressed genes in the hypothalamus of wt (n=3) and ΔslrP 
(n=3) infected B6 mice 48hr post-infection.
Rao et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D) Quantitative PCR analysis of genes identified in (C) in the hypothalamus of B6 mice 
infected with wt (n=4) or ΔslrP (n=4) and Il1β−/− (n=10) mice infected with ΔslrP ST for 
48hr.
(E) Feeding of ΔslrP-infected vagotomized or sham B6 mice. Values normalized to feeding 
amounts of uninfected mice. n=9–10/group. Data represent 2 independent experiments 
combined.
(F) Quantitative PCR analysis of genes identified in (C) in the hypothalamus of ΔslrP-
infected vagotomized or sham B6 mice at 48hrs post-infection. n=4–5/group.
(G) Levels of mature IL-1β were determined by IL-1R reporter assay 48hr post-infection in 
SI of ΔslrP-infected vagotomized or sham B6 mice. Graph shown depicts reporter 
fluorescence (arbitrary units), indicative of active IL-1β. n=4–5/group.
****p<0.0001, ***<0.01, **p<0.05, *p=0.05. Unpaired student t-test, one-sample t test, or 
Log rank analysis for survival. Error bars indicate +/− SEM. Il1β for (D) is from 
hypothalamus from 48hr and 72hr. See Figure S4 and S5.
Rao et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Anorexia creates tradeoffs between virulence and transmission
(A) Animals were assigned a liver dissemination score of “1” or “0” at 72hr post-infection. 
n=10/group
(B) Animals from (A) were assigned a score of “1” or “0” to determine fecal shedding index 
at 72hr post-infection.
(C) CFU in liver of mice from (A) was plotted against fecal shedding index (B) for each 
individual mouse. “−“ denotes mice with no fecal shedding, and “+” denotes mice with fecal 
burden.
Rao et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D) CFU detected in feces of mice from (A) was plotted against liver dissemination index 
(C) for each individual mouse. “−“ denotes mice with no liver dissemination, and “+” 
denotes mice with liver burden.
(E) B6 mice were orally infected with wt or ΔslrP ST (wt-primary or ΔslrP-primary) and co-
housed with an uninfected B6 mouse (wt-secondary or ΔslrP-secondary). Fecal samples 
were collected every 24hrs post-infection from primary and secondary hosts for CFU 
analysis. Mice were assigned a score of “1” or “0” n=8–15 mice/group. Data combined from 
2 experiments.
(F) Survival of mice from (E). 8–10 mice/group. ** represent statistical significance 
between both primary groups or both secondary groups.
(G) Model of how wt and ΔslrP ST regulate anorexia, virulence and transmission.
****p<0.0001, ***p<0.01, **p<0.05. unpaired student t-test, one way ANOVA with tukey 
post-test or Log rank analysis. Dotted line indicates limit of detection, and mice with no 
CFU detected in indicated tissue are indicated by symbols below this line. See Figure S6.
Rao et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
