 Low Rates of Pregnancy Screening in Adolescents Before 
Teratogenic Exposures in a National Sample of Children’s 
Hospitals
Pooja Rao, MD, MSCE1, Yimei Li, PhD1, Kelly D. Getz, PhD, MPH1,3, Tamara P. Miller, MD, 
MSCE1, Yuan-Shung Huang, MS3, Jennifer J. Wilkes, MD, MSCE1,3,4, Alix E. Seif, MD, 
MPH1,5, Rochelle Bagatell, MD1,5, Brian T. Fisher, DO, MSCE2,3,5,6, Clarisa Gracia, MD, 
MSCE2,7, and Richard Aplenc, MD, PhD1,2,3,5
1Division of Oncology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
2Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
3Center for Pediatric Clinical Effectiveness, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania
4Leonard Davis Institute of Healthcare Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania
5Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
6Division of Infectious Diseases, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
7Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania
Corresponding author: Pooja Rao, MD, MSCE, Division of Oncology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3501 Civic Center 
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104; raop@email.chop.edu.
Dr. Rao’s current affiliation: Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Penn State Health Children’s Hospital, 500 University 
Drive, P.O. Box 850, Hershey, PA 17033; Fax: (717) 531-4789; prao2@hmc.psu.edu
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Alix E. Seif reports grants from Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation, the American Cancer Society, and the Hyundai Hope on Wheels 
Foundation outside the submitted work. Brian T. Fisher receives research funding from Pfizer and Merck unrelated to this project.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Pooja Rao: Responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis; study concept and design; acquisition, 
analysis, or interpretation of data; drafting of the manuscript; critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content; 
statistical analysis; and funding. Yimei Li: Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data; critical revision of the manuscript for 
important intellectual content; and statistical analysis. Kelly D. Getz: Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data; critical revision 
of the manuscript for important intellectual content; and statistical analysis. Tamara P. Miller: Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation 
of data and critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Yuan-Shung Huang: Acquisition, analysis, or 
interpretation of data and critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Jennifer J. Wilkes: Acquisition, 
analysis, or interpretation of data and critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Alix E. Seif: Critical 
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Rochelle Bagatell: Critical revision of the manuscript for important 
intellectual content and administrative, technical, or material support. Brian T. Fisher: Critical revision of the manuscript for important 
intellectual content and administrative, technical, or material support. Clarisa Gracia: Study concept and design; acquisition, analysis, 
or interpretation of data; drafting of the manuscript; critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content; and study 
supervision. Richard Aplenc: Responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis; study concept and 
design; acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data; drafting of the manuscript; critical revision of the manuscript for important 
intellectual content; funding; administrative, technical, or material support; and study supervision.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer. 2016 November 15; 122(21): 3394–3400. doi:10.1002/cncr.30225.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
BACKGROUND—Adolescents with cancer engage in sexual behaviors and are exposed to 
teratogenic chemotherapy. There are no data regarding pregnancy screening patterns for 
adolescents before chemotherapy exposure.
METHODS—A cross-sectional study of leukemia and emergency room (ER) admissions in the 
Pediatric Health Information System from 1999 to 2011 was conducted. Females who were 10 to 
18 years old and 1) had newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) or acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) or 2) had ER visits with computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen/pelvis were 
included. The exposure was a hospital visit with either chemotherapy or an abdominal/pelvic CT 
scan. The main outcome was a pregnancy test billed on the same day or before the teratogenic 
exposure within the same index admission. Log-binomial regressions were used to compute 
prevalence ratios and 95% confidence intervals comparing pregnancy screening in the leukemia 
and ER cohorts.
RESULTS—A total of 35,650 admissions were identified. The proportion of visits with an 
appropriately timed pregnancy test was 35%, 64%, and 58% in the ALL (n5889), AML (n = 127), 
and ER cohorts (n = 34,634), respectively. Patients with ALL were significantly less likely to have 
a pregnancy test than the ER cohort (adjusted prevalence ratio, 0.71; 95% confidence interval, 
0.65–0.78), but there was no significant difference between the AML and ER cohorts (adjusted 
prevalence ratio, 1.12; 95% confidence interval, 0.99–1.27). There was substantial hospital-level 
variation in pregnancy screening patterns.
CONCLUSIONS—Adolescents with acute leukemia and ER visits have low rates of pregnancy 
screening before teratogenic exposures. Standardized practice guidelines for pregnancy screening 
among adolescents may improve screening rates.
Keywords
acute lymphoblastic leukemia; acute myeloid leukemia; adolescent; cross-sectional studies; 
pregnancy tests
INTRODUCTION
Although the epidemiology of pregnancy in adolescents with acute leukemia is poorly 
defined, the United States consistently has one of the highest adolescent pregnancy rates in 
the world.1 Furthermore, nearly all chemotherapy agents used for childhood/adolescent 
leukemia belong to Food and Drug Administration pregnancy category C (animal studies 
have shown an adverse effect on the fetus, although there are no adequate or well-controlled 
studies in pregnant women) or D (adequate studies have demonstrated a human fetal risk).2 
This combination of factors has the potential for catastrophic outcomes for pregnant 
adolescents with leukemia. Moreover, identifying pregnancy in adolescents before 
chemotherapy initiation has challenges. Clinicians typically are not adept at identifying risky 
sexual behaviors among youth with chronic illnesses, including cancer.3–11 Pregnancy can 
also be easily overlooked, particularly in adolescence, because the symptoms are often 
nonspecific.
Rao et al.
Page 2
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Because of the potential clinical significance of pregnancy in adolescent cancer patients, 
routine pregnancy screening before chemotherapy initiation seems reasonable. However, 
there are no clear guidelines regarding pregnancy screening in adolescents with cancer. 
Recent Children’s Oncology Group clinical trial protocols for acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) include guidelines for pregnancy screening 
before chemotherapy initiation, but they are written in a general manner with varied and 
nonspecific wording.
In emergency medicine, pregnancy screening protocols exist for adolescents before the 
receipt of radiation via imaging studies because of the known teratogenic risks of radiation. 
These institutional protocols are based on the recommendations of radiology societies such 
as the American College of Radiology.12 Although these guidelines exist, one study suggests 
that adolescents exposed to computed tomography (CT) radiation have lower than expected 
rates of pregnancy screening.13 This study has not been confirmed by other reports.
Given this lack of data, we sought to investigate pregnancy screening patterns among 
adolescents with ALL and AML versus adolescents with an emergency room (ER) visit who 
received a CT scan of the abdomen and/or pelvis; we used data from the Pediatric Health 
Information System (PHIS) database. We also performed a subanalysis that investigated 
whether enrollment in Children’s Oncology Group clinical trial AAML0531 was associated 
with pregnancy screening for patients with AML.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design and Data Source
Data for this study were obtained from PHIS, an administrative database that contains 
inpatient, emergency department, ambulatory surgery, and observation encounter– level 
billing data from not-for-profit, freestanding pediatric hospitals in the United States.14,15 
The hospitals included in this study were primarily urban, academic hospital centers 
affiliated with major medical centers. The PHIS hospital size varies from 100 to 500 beds. 
These hospitals are affiliated with the Children’s Hospital Association (Overland Park, Kan). 
Data quality and reliability are ensured through a joint effort between the Children’s 
Hospital Association and participating hospitals. Portions of the data submission and data 
quality processes for the PHIS database are managed by Truven Health Analytics (Ann 
Arbor, Mich). For the purposes of external benchmarking, participating hospitals provide 
discharge/encounter data, including demographics, diagnoses, and procedures. Nearly all of 
these hospitals also submit resource utilization data (eg, pharmaceutical, imaging, and 
laboratory data) to PHIS. Data are deidentified at the time of data submission, and data are 
subjected to a number of reliability and validity checks before they are included in the 
database. For this study, data from 43 hospitals were included.
Human Patient Protection
According to the institutional review board of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, this 
study was not considered human subjects research.
Rao et al.
Page 3
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cohort Selection
There were 3 distinct cohorts established with PHIS admission-level data. The first 2 were 
acute leukemia cohorts that included female adolescents with newly diagnosed ALL or 
AML who were receiving induction chemotherapy during their index admission. Patients 
with ALL or AML were identified with a combination of International Classification of 
Diseases, Ninth Revision, diagnosis codes and a manual review of induction chemotherapy 
exposures, as previously validated.14,15
The third cohort was composed of female adolescents with ER site visits undergoing a CT 
scan of the abdomen and/or pelvis. Because of radiology department institutional protocols 
requiring pregnancy screening before radiation exposure, the ER cohort was thought to 
represent the best available patient population for comparing pregnancy screening in an 
acute leukemia cohort. PHIS billing codes for radiology imaging were used to capture CT 
scans of the abdomen and/or pelvis.
Patients within the 3 cohorts who were 10 to 18 years old and had admission dates between 
January 1, 1999 and September 30, 2011 were eligible for inclusion. The lower end of the 
age range used for cohort assembly was chosen to ensure the inclusion of patients at the 
normal age of menarche.16,17
Patients with acute leukemia who received a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, or pelvis 
anytime during the induction chemotherapy admission were excluded because of the 
difficulty in determining whether these patients received a pregnancy test on account of the 
CT scan or chemotherapy initiation. Patients with duplicate medical record numbers 
between cohorts were excluded (Fig. 1).
Exposure
The exposure was a hospital visit with a teratogenic exposure for patients with newly 
diagnosed ALL or AML or an ER visit with a CT scan of the abdomen and/or pelvis.
Outcome
The primary outcome was an appropriately timed pregnancy test, which was defined as a 
pregnancy test billed on the same day as or before the first chemotherapy exposure (for the 
leukemia cohorts) or a CT scan of the abdomen and/or pelvis (for the ER cohort) within the 
same index admission. The outcome was defined with PHIS Clinical Transaction 
Classification (CTC) codes for pregnancy testing.
Covariates
The covariates included the cohort type, which was categorized as ER, ALL, or AML. 
Patient age was analyzed as a dichotomous variable (10–13 vs 14–18 years) in descriptive 
analyses and as a categorical variable by the unit of year (10–18 years) in regression models. 
Race was categorized as white, black, or other (Asian, American Indian, multiple/other, 
unknown, or missing). The insurance type was categorized as private, public, or other (self-
pay, other, or missing). The admit year was analyzed as a categorical variable by the unit of 
year (1999–2011). The hospital center was analyzed as a categorical variable.
Rao et al.
Page 4
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In a subanalysis of patients with AML, AAML0531 clinical trial enrollment was analyzed as 
a covariate to determine the association of enrollment with pregnancy screening.18 The 
probabilistic merge of AAML0531 has been described previously.19
Statistical Analysis
Patient demographics were summarized by frequencies and proportions for each cohort and 
were compared with chi-square tests. Log-binomial regressions were used to compute 
unadjusted and adjusted prevalence ratios comparing pregnancy screening in the leukemia 
cohorts with pregnancy screening in the ER cohort. Results were summarized as prevalence 
ratios and 95% confidence intervals. The generalized estimating equation (GEE) method 
was used to account for hospital center clustering. Models were adjusted via the GEE 
method and for any confounding covariate in the univariate analysis. The evaluated 
covariates included age, race, insurance, and admit year. Each covariate was added 
independently to the unadjusted model, and the change in the prevalence ratio for the 
primary exposures of interest (ALL or AML vs ER) was assessed. A change ≥ 10% was 
considered evidence of meaningful confounding, and covariates exhibiting such a change 
were retained in the final adjusted model.
Trends in cohort-specific pregnancy screening prevalences by admit year and age were 
evaluated graphically. To determine whether screening differences between cohorts were 
modified over the study period, prevalence ratio comparisons were evaluated within strata of 
the admit year. A chi-square test was used to compare pregnancy screening proportions by 
the AAML0531 enrollment status.
Because point-of-care (POC) pregnancy testing would not be captured in PHIS, a bias 
analysis was performed to evaluate the potential impact of unobserved POC pregnancy 
testing. Corrected prevalence ratios were estimated for a range of sensitivities in the 
ascertainment of pregnancy screening among the compared cohorts, with the ER cohort used 
as the reference.
Statistical analyses were performed with Stata 12 (StataCorp LP, College Station, Texas). A 
2-sided P value less than .05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Between January 1, 1999 and September 30, 2011, 35,650 patient admissions were captured 
in the 3 cohorts. Table 1 presents baseline demographic characteristics for the 3 cohorts. The 
3 cohorts differed significantly with respect to age and race. Patients with ALL were 
younger and more likely to be white in comparison with AML and ER patients.
The proportion of visits with an appropriately timed pregnancy test was 35%, 64%, and 58% 
in the ALL, AML, and ER cohorts, respectively. The unadjusted prevalence ratios 
comparing pregnancy screening rates with respect to the ER cohort were 0.60 (95% 
confidence interval, 0.55–0.65) for the ALL cohort and 1.09 (95% confidence interval, 0.96–
1.24) for the AML cohort. In the AML subanalysis, no association was found between 
Rao et al.
Page 5
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AAML0531 clinical trial enrollment and appropriately timed pregnancy screening (63.6% 
screening for enrolled patients vs 64.9% screening for unenrolled patients; P = .9).
Figure 2 illustrates the difference in the proportions of appropriately timed pregnancy tests 
by patient age for each cohort. Although overall screening increased in all 3 cohorts with 
increasing age, the ALL cohort had a lower proportion of appropriately timed pregnancy 
tests in comparison with the ER and AML cohorts for nearly all ages. Figure 3 illustrates 
hospital center–specific proportions of pregnancy screening for the 3 cohorts. There was 
considerable center-level variability in the proportions of pregnancy screening. In addition, 
the intracenter screening prevalences were not consistent across the 3 cohorts.
In a GEE model adjusted for hospital clustering and patient age (a confounder in the 
univariate analysis), patients with ALL were still significantly less likely to have an 
appropriately timed pregnancy test in comparison with the ER cohort (adjusted prevalence 
ratio, 0.71; 95% confidence interval, 0.65–0.78). In a GEE model adjusted for hospital 
clustering, patients with AML were more likely to have an appropriately timed pregnancy 
test in comparison with the ER cohort, although the results did not achieve statistical 
significance (adjusted prevalence ratio, 1.12; 95% confidence interval, 0.99–1.27).
In evaluating trends in cohort-specific screening by the admit year, we found that screening 
in the ALL cohort appeared to increase over time, whereas the prevalence of screening in the 
AML and ER cohorts was relatively stable from 2008 onward (Fig. 4). Both the ALL and 
ER cohorts appeared to have greater screening overall for all ages in contemporary years 
versus earlier admit years (Supporting Figs. 1 and 2 [see online supporting information]). To 
determine whether differences in screening between cohorts were modified over the study 
period, prevalence ratio comparisons were evaluated within strata of the admit year. In 
comparison with the ER cohort, the admit year– specific prevalence ratios for the ALL 
cohort appeared to increase in contemporary years versus earlier years, although AML admit 
year–specific prevalence ratios did not appear to follow such a trend (Supporting Table 1 
[see online supporting information]).
POC pregnancy testing was assumed to cause decreased ascertainment of pregnancy 
screening by PHIS pregnancy-test billing data (Supporting Tables 2 and 3 [see online 
supporting information]). Across multiple scenarios in which POC testing was assumed to 
occur more frequently in the ER cohort than either the ALL or AML cohort, the results of 
the bias analyses suggested that the observed prevalence ratios comparing pregnancy testing 
in the ALL and AML cohorts with the ER cohort were biased upward. Specifically, an 
adjustment for such differential underascertainment demonstrated that the magnitude of the 
actual relative difference in the frequency of pregnancy testing between the leukemia and ER 
cohorts was generally more extreme than observed, with both the ALL and AML cohorts 
being less likely to have an appropriately timed pregnancy test than the ER cohort.
DISCUSSION
This study found low proportions of pregnancy screening among adolescents with ALL, 
AML, and ER visits with abdominal/pelvic CT radiation exposures in a nationally 
Rao et al.
Page 6
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 representative sample of patients at freestanding pediatric hospitals. Remarkably, the 
prevalence of appropriately timed pregnancy tests across these 3 patient groups ranged from 
30% to 60%. In particular, adolescents with ALL were 30% less likely to have an 
appropriately timed pregnancy test than their ER counterparts. No statistical difference 
between proportions of appropriately timed pregnancy tests was found between the AML 
and ER cohorts.
The reason for the difference in ALL and AML pregnancy screening prevalences versus ER 
screening prevalences is not known. Because ALL therapy is less intensive than AML 
therapy, physicians may omit pregnancy screening in patients with ALL, even though both 
ALL chemotherapy and AML chemotherapy are Food and Drug Administration pregnancy 
category C or D. Although increasing age is associated with increased screening, regardless 
of cohort, patient age does not seem to be a factor in explaining the higher screening in the 
AML cohort versus the ER cohort.
Although previously reported in the literature, the low rate of pregnancy screening in 
adolescents before abdominal radiation exposure was surprising. A study by Goyal et al13,20 
found that only 37% of adolescents were screened for pregnancy before CT and that the 
proportions of pregnancy screening in women of reproductive-age exposed to teratogenic 
medications in the ER setting were low. Our work corroborates these findings in a larger, 
more contemporary patient sample with a more inclusive adolescent age range. This study 
indicated that although the proportion of screening was higher in the ER cohort compared 
with the ALL cohort, only 58% of ER patient visits had pregnancy screening. Notably, 
secular trends in testing for both cohorts have increased in recent years (Supporting Table 1 
and Supporting Figs. 1 and 2 [see online supporting information]), and this may represent 
increased adherence to guidelines or perhaps an increased willingness on the part of 
physicians and adolescent patients to discuss sexual health practices. Regardless, our results 
highlight a need to improve pregnancy screening not only among adolescents with leukemia 
but also among adolescents in other clinical settings where teratogenic exposures exist.
The hospital center–level variation in pregnancy screening was another notable finding (Fig. 
3). Variation in pregnancy screening existed not only between hospitals but also within a 
hospital by cohort type (ALL, AML, and ER). Although earlier studies suggested regional 
variation in pregnancy screening13,21 and practice variation across centers has also been 
described for supportive-care measures such as analgesia administration in pediatric cancer 
patients,22,23 to our knowledge, no prior reports have demonstrated different intracenter 
practice variation in pregnancy screening. Future work should focus on elucidating the 
factors responsible for both intercenter and intracenter variation in pregnancy screening, 
such as academic hospital status, hospital volume, affiliation with an adult hospital, and 
hospital environment (urban vs rural).
Our findings highlight a need for standardized pregnancy screening practices for adolescent 
patients exposed to teratogens, including those with acute leukemia. Although pregnancy 
screening guidelines before chemotherapy initiation exist in some recent Children’s 
Oncology Group protocols, these recommendations are vague and inconsistent. This 
inconsistency may have contributed to the interhospital and intrahospital screening variation 
Rao et al.
Page 7
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 observed in our data (Fig. 3). Because of challenges in identifying pregnant adolescents by 
history alone, routine, standardized pregnancy testing is clinically imperative. Improvements 
in pregnancy screening adherence may be facilitated by standardized institutional supportive 
care guidelines addressing pregnancy screening guidelines. Such guidelines would require a 
thoughtful discussion of the possible benefits and disadvantages of testing. For example, 
although mandated monthly pregnancy screening in adolescents before chemotherapy 
exposure would minimize teratogenic risk, this strategy may not be cost-effective, 
particularly for patients with long hospital stays. Regardless of the final recommendation, 
the presence of such a recommendation may reduce the marked practice variability observed 
in our data.
Importantly, the low rate of pregnancy testing may bespeak a reluctance to have discussions 
surrounding sexual health between pediatric oncology providers and adolescent patients. 
This reluctance may be due to physician discomfort as well as hesitancy on the part of the 
patient to disclose this information. Parental presence may also be a barrier to allowing such 
conversations to happen. We hope that the discussion of standardized screening guidelines 
would encourage dialogue about sexual health. The increased prevalence of pregnancy 
testing in contemporary years in the ALL cohort may also be an indication of an 
improvement in such conversations happening. Pediatric oncologists are well positioned to 
have discussions about sexual health with patients because of the frequent, longitudinal 
course of visits that accompanies oncologic treatment; this creates time for trust to develop 
between the patient and the provider. Communication training may aid in initiating 
discussions about sexual practices in a way that also fits into the context of a busy oncology 
clinic visit. Sexual health discussions between physicians and patients also have implications 
beyond identifying high-risk sexual behaviors. National statistics indicate that 
nonconsensual sexual activity occurs not infrequently,24 and this further increases the 
importance of open communication regarding sexual experiences in adolescent oncology 
patients.
Although the large sample size and national representation of this study are substantial 
strengths, several weaknesses must be acknowledged. First, because of cohort data 
availability, this study was restricted to admit years 1999–2011. Thus, current pregnancy 
screening trends could not be assessed. Second, because this study was limited to PHIS-
contributing centers, the results may not be generalizable to pediatric practices embedded 
within adult institutions. Although such embedded pediatric practices may have smaller 
clinical volumes, the close proximity to medical services treating adults may heighten the 
awareness of pregnancy issues. Lastly, outcome ascertainment was a limitation because POC 
pregnancy tests are not captured in PHIS. The reduced sensitivity of PHIS billing data was 
hypothesized to be a greater concern for the ER cohort because of the larger volume of 
pregnancy tests performed in an ER versus an oncology floor. However, the bias analysis 
results are supportive of the observed prevalence ratios being biased upward for both the 
ALL and AML cohorts in comparison with the ER cohort (Supporting Tables 2 and 3 [see 
online supporting information]).
In conclusion, our data suggest that adolescents exposed to teratogens in the health care 
setting are not consistently screened for pregnancy. This can lead to undetected pregnancies 
Rao et al.
Page 8
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with serious downstream consequences for the adolescent mother and fetus. These findings 
support the need for standardized pregnancy screening guidelines among adolescents with 
acute leukemia and those exposed to ionizing radiation to ensure consistent testing.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Leah Sack for proofreading the manuscript.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This study was supported by the following grants from the National Institutes of Health: T32 HD007440 and 
R01CA165277.
References
1. Sedgh G, Finer LB, Bankole A, Eilers MA, Singh S. Adolescent pregnancy, birth, and abortion rates 
across countries: levels and recent trends. J Adolesc Health. 2015; 56:223–230. [PubMed: 
25620306] 
2. Lexicomp Online®. Pediatric & Neonatal Lexi-Drugs®. Hudson, Ohio: Lexi-Comp, Inc; 2016. 
3. Forman SF, Woods ER. Youth, risks, and chronic illness. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011; 23:365–366. 
[PubMed: 21602680] 
4. Louis-Jacques J, Samples C. Caring for teens with chronic illness: risky business? Curr Opin 
Pediatr. 2011; 23:367–372. [PubMed: 21602681] 
5. Suris JC, Michaud PA, Akre C, Sawyer SM. Health risk behaviors in adolescents with chronic 
conditions. Pediatrics. 2008; 122:e1113–e1118. [PubMed: 18977960] 
6. Choquet M, Du Pasquier Fediaevsky L, Manfredi R. Sexual behavior among adolescents reporting 
chronic conditions: a French national survey. J Adolesc Health. 1997; 20:62–67. [PubMed: 
9007661] 
7. Klosky JL, Foster RH, Li Z, et al. Risky sexual behavior in adolescent survivors of childhood 
cancer: a report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Health Psychol. 2014; 33:868–877. 
[PubMed: 24364376] 
8. Valencia LS, Cromer BA. Sexual activity and other high-risk behaviors in adolescents with chronic 
illness: a review. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2000; 13:53–64. [PubMed: 10869964] 
9. Carpentier MY, Mullins LL, Elkin TD, Wolfe-Christensen C. Prevalence of multiple health-related 
behaviors in adolescents with cancer. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008; 30:902–907. [PubMed: 
19131776] 
10. Murphy D, Klosky JL, Termuhlen A, Sawczyn KK, Quinn GP. The need for reproductive and 
sexual health discussions with adolescent and young adult cancer patients. Contraception. 2013; 
88:215–220. [PubMed: 23040131] 
11. Zaidi A, Johnson LM, Church CL, et al. Management of concurrent pregnancy and acute 
lymphoblastic malignancy in teenaged patients: two illustrative cases and review of the literature. J 
Adolesc Young Adult Oncol. 2014; 3:160–175. [PubMed: 25538861] 
12. American College o Radiology. [Accessed October 6, 2015] ACR-SPR practice parameter for 
imaging pregnant or potentially pregnant adolescents and women with ionizing radiation. http://
www.acr.org/~/media/9e2ed55531fc4b4fa53ef3b6d3b25df8.pdf
13. Goyal M, Hersh A, Luan X, et al. Frequency of pregnancy testing among adolescent emergency 
department visits. Acad Emerg Med. 2013; 20:816–821. [PubMed: 24033625] 
14. Kavcic M, Fisher BT, Torp K, et al. Assembly of a cohort of children treated for acute myeloid 
leukemia at free-standing children’s hospitals in the United States using an administrative 
database. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013; 60:508–511. [PubMed: 23192853] 
Rao et al.
Page 9
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 15. Fisher BT, Harris T, Torp K, et al. Establishment of an 11-year cohort of 8733 pediatric patients 
hospitalized at United States free-standing children’s hospitals with de novo acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia from health care administrative data. Med Care. 2014; 52:e1–e6. [PubMed: 22410405] 
16. Chumlea WC, Schubert CM, Roche AF, et al. Age at menarche and racial comparisons in US girls. 
Pediatrics. 2003; 111:110–113. [PubMed: 12509562] 
17. Anderson SE, Dallal GE, Must A. Relative weight and race influence average age at menarche: 
results from two nationally representative surveys of US girls studied 25 years apart. Pediatrics. 
2003; 111(4 pt 1):844–850. [PubMed: 12671122] 
18. Gamis AS, Alonzo TA, Meshinchi S, et al. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin in children and adolescents 
with de novo acute myeloid leukemia improves event-free survival by reducing relapse risk: results 
from the randomized phase III Children’s Oncology Group trial AAML0531. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 
32:3021–3032. [PubMed: 25092781] 
19. Aplenc R, Fisher BT, Huang YS, et al. Merging of NCI-funded cooperative oncology group data 
with an administrative data source to develop a more effective platform for clinical trial analysis 
and comparative effectiveness research: a report from the Children’s Oncology Group. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2012; 21(suppl 2):37–43. [PubMed: 22552978] 
20. Goyal MK, Hersh AL, Badolato G, et al. Underuse of pregnancy testing for women prescribed 
teratogenic medications in the emergency department. Acad Emerg Med. 2015; 22:192–196. 
[PubMed: 25639672] 
21. Schuur JD, Tibbetts SA, Pines JM. Pregnancy testing in women of reproductive age in US 
emergency departments, 2002 to 2006: assessment of a national quality measure. Ann Emerg Med. 
2010; 55:449–457.e2. [PubMed: 19931941] 
22. Green CR, Anderson KO, Baker TA, et al. The unequal burden of pain: confronting racial and 
ethnic disparities in pain. Pain Med. 2003; 4:277–294. [PubMed: 12974827] 
23. Fisch MJ, Lee JW, Weiss M, et al. Prospective, observational study of pain and analgesic 
prescribing in medical oncology outpatients with breast, colorectal, lung, or prostate cancer. J Clin 
Oncol. 2012; 30:1980–1988. [PubMed: 22508819] 
24. Finkelhor D, Shattuck A, Turner H, Hamby S. The lifetime prevalence of child sexual abuse and 
sexual assault assessed in late adolescence. J Adolesc Health. 2014; 55:329–333. [PubMed: 
24582321] 
Rao et al.
Page 10
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Cohort creation flowchart. ALL indicates acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute 
myeloid leukemia; CT, computed tomography; ER, emergency room.
Rao et al.
Page 11
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Cohort-specific prevalence of appropriately timed pregnancy tests by patient age. ALL 
indicates acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acutemyeloid leukemia; ER, emergency 
room.
Rao et al.
Page 12
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Cohort-specific prevalence of appropriately timed pregnancy tests by hospital center. The 
centers are organized in the order of increasing screening based on the ER cohort. ALL 
indicates acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; ER, emergency 
room.
Rao et al.
Page 13
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Cohort-specific prevalence of appropriately timed pregnancy tests by admit year. ALL 
indicates acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; ER, emergency 
room.
Rao et al.
Page 14
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Rao et al.
Page 15
TABLE 1
Patient Demographics for Each Cohort
Demographic
ER Cohort
(n = 34,634)
ALL Cohort
(n = 889)
AML Cohort
(n = 127)
P (χ2)
Age, No. (%)
<.0001
  10–13 y
13,474 (39)
511 (57)
56 (44)
  14–18 y
21,160 (61)
378 (43)
71 (56)
Race, No. (%)
<.0001
  White
24,011 (69)
668 (75)
80 (63)
  Black
6,211 (18)
78 (9)
15 (12)
  Othera
4,412 (13)
143 (16)
32 (25)
Insurance, No. (%)
.07
  Private
14,388 (42)
374 (42)
55 (43)
  Public
11,890 (34)
333 (37)
47 (37)
  Otherb
8,356 (24)
182 (21)
25 (20)
Abbreviations: ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; ER, emergency room.
aOther includes Asian, American Indian, multiple/other, unknown, and missing.
bOther includes self-pay, other, and missing.
Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 06.
