 Rasch, L.J. and Martin, K.J. and Cooper, R.L. and Metscher, B.D.
and Underwood, Charlie J. and Fraser, G.J. (2016) An ancient dental
gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth
in sharks. Developmental Biology , ISSN 0012-1606.
Downloaded from: http://eprints.bbk.ac.uk/14460/
Usage Guidelines
Please
refer
to
usage
guidelines
at
http://eprints.bbk.ac.uk/policies.html
or
alternatively
contact lib-eprints@bbk.ac.uk.
 An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous
regeneration of teeth in sharks
Liam J. Rasch a, Kyle J. Martin a, Rory L. Cooper a, Brian D. Metscher b, Charlie J. Underwood c,
Gareth J. Fraser a,n
a Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom
b Department of Theoretical Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna A-1090, Austria
c Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 30 October 2015
Received in revised form
11 January 2016
Accepted 29 January 2016
Keywords:
Shark dentition
Tooth development
Dental regeneration
Dental lamina
Evo-devo
Vertebrate evolution
a b s t r a c t
The evolution of oral teeth is considered a major contributor to the overall success of jawed vertebrates.
This is especially apparent in cartilaginous fishes including sharks and rays, which develop elaborate
arrays of highly specialized teeth, organized in rows and retain the capacity for life-long regeneration.
Perpetual regeneration of oral teeth has been either lost or highly reduced in many other lineages in-
cluding important developmental model species, so cartilaginous fishes are uniquely suited for deep
comparative analyses of tooth development and regeneration. Additionally, sharks and rays can offer
crucial insights into the characters of the dentition in the ancestor of all jawed vertebrates. Despite this,
tooth development and regeneration in chondrichthyans is poorly understood and remains virtually
uncharacterized from a developmental genetic standpoint. Using the emerging chondrichthyan model,
the catshark (Scyliorhinus spp.), we characterized the expression of genes homologous to those known to
be expressed during stages of early dental competence, tooth initiation, morphogenesis, and regenera-
tion in bony vertebrates. We have found that expression patterns of several genes from Hh, Wnt/β-
catenin, Bmp and Fgf signalling pathways indicate deep conservation over �450 million years of tooth
development and regeneration. We describe how these genes participate in the initial emergence of the
shark dentition and how they are redeployed during regeneration of successive tooth generations. We
suggest that at the dawn of the vertebrate lineage, teeth (i) were most likely continuously regenerative
structures, and (ii) utilised a core set of genes from members of key developmental signalling pathways
that were instrumental in creating a dental legacy redeployed throughout vertebrate evolution. These
data lay the foundation for further experimental investigations utilizing the unique regenerative capacity
of chondrichthyan models to answer evolutionary, developmental, and regenerative biological questions
that are impossible to explore in classical models.
& 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
There is currently a need to better understand the mechanism
of tooth regeneration in an attempt to design more appropriate
therapies targeted at human tooth loss (Jussila and Thesleff, 2012;
Ohazama, 2005; Ohazama et al., 2004; Thesleff and Tummers,
2008; Zhang et al., 2005). Ultimately, the field of translational
dental research aims to uncover what factors govern the transition
from a single or restricted set of teeth to the development of
multiple generations (Tucker and Fraser, 2014). Conversely, for a
phylogenetic template, research should focus on the mechanisms
associated with tooth generational loss for more restricted and
derived dentitions (Juuri et al., 2013). A deeper understanding of
the extreme regenerative potential of diverse vertebrate dentitions
may forward these goals. Mammals, e.g. mice, are currently well-
known models for tooth development; however they have rela-
tively limited regenerative capacity (Harada et al., 1999), and form
complex tooth cusps within the primary teeth (Jernvall and The-
sleff, 2012; Ohazama et al., 2010; Tucker and Sharpe, 2004), re-
stricting their potential as complete models for odontogenesis,
including complete replacement.
The process of tooth development is highly conserved among
bony vertebrates (osteichthyans), from teleost fishes to mammals
(Fraser et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2015). Developmental genetic data
associated with tooth development and regeneration is growing
rapidly in non-mammalian vertebrate taxa. This is particularly
apparent in species within the teleost fish lineage e.g. trout (Fraser
et al., 2004, 2006b), medaka (Debiais-Thibaud et al., 2007; Gibert
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/developmentalbiology
Developmental Biology
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038
0012-1606/& 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
n Corresponding author.
E-mail address: g.fraser@sheffield.ac.uk (G.J. Fraser).
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
 et al., 2010), cichlids (Fraser et al., 2008, 2013, 2009; Streelman and
Albertson, 2006; Streelman et al., 2003), pufferfish (Fraser et al.,
2012), and the zebrafish (Jackman et al., 2004; Jackman and Stock,
2006; Stock et al., 2006). These data offer tantalizing insights into
the developmental diversity and evolution of osteichthyan denti-
tions (Smith, 2003; Tucker and Fraser, 2014). In teleost fishes with
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
2
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 multiple generations of teeth (polyphyodonty; e.g. cichlids), the
successional regeneration of teeth follows a generational pattern
from simple to complex tooth shape (Sire et al., 2002), with adult
tooth shapes developing only after several rounds of tooth re-
placement (Fraser et al., 2013). It has been reported that this shift
in dental complexity follows a general trend in tooth morpho-
genesis evolution (Handrigan and Richman, 2011) and in some
species this increased plasticity of tooth phenotype could be
governed through the process of regeneration, especially in poly-
phyodont species (Fraser et al., 2013; Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012).
Despite diversity in form and function, a major finding of this
wider research is that the molecular basis of tooth development,
including the reciprocal interactions between odontogenic (neur-
al-crest derived) mesenchyme and a competent epithelium, and
many of the genes involved in this coordinated cross-talk (Thesleff
and Sharpe, 1997; Tucker and Sharpe, 2004; Zhang et al., 2005) is a
highly stable process; this conservation has been maintained for
approximately 450 million years of vertebrate evolution (Fraser
et al., 2004; Hariharan et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2015). This deep
developmental conservation of morphogenetic mechanisms and
gross evolutionary stability of a dental gene regulatory network
suggests that diversity in vertebrate dentitions, whether tooth
shape, number, or regenerative potential must be related to re-
peated regulatory ‘tinkering’ (Jacob, 1977; Lieberman and Hall,
2007) of the same core conserved gene network in different
lineages (Bei, 2009; Fraser et al., 2013; Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012).
Sharks and their dental characteristics have been discussed and
documented for centuries. Owen (Owen, 1840–1845, 1866) was
one of the first prominent scientists to appreciate the regenerative
capacity of the distinctive predatory shark dentition, describing it
as “numerous teeth ever marching slowly forward in rotary pro-
gress”. The dentitions of sharks (and rays) are well known for their
ability to regenerate in a continuous conveyor-belt manner
throughout life, another example of polyphyodontism (Smith,
2003; Smith et al., 2009a; Smith et al., 2009b; Tucker and Fraser,
2014; Underwood et al., 2015). Importantly, evidence from the
fossil record suggests that polyphodonty is not only plesiomorphic
within chondrichthyans (Botella, 2006; Botella et al., 2009) but is
also the ancestral condition of all vertebrate dentitions (Maisey
et al., 2014; Rucklin et al., 2012). Tooth regeneration in chon-
drichthyans (cartilaginous fishes) can therefore be directly com-
pared with polyphodont bony vertebrates to determine ancestral
versus derived characteristics of the dentition in each lineage and
to develop a more complete picture of tooth development and
regeneration in the ancestor of all extant vertebrates. Whilst in-
dispensable for ancestral state reconstructions, elasmobranch
dentitions also exhibit several derived characteristics (Botella,
2006). Extant holocephalans have dispensed with iterative tooth
replacement in favour of the development of more derived, fused
tooth plates (Finarelli and Coates, 2012). The sharks and rays
(elasmobranchs) however, exhibit a huge diversity with respect to
both craniofacial morphology and the dentition (Cappetta, 2012).
Furthermore, although polyphyodonty is the plesiomorphic con-
dition in sharks as in all vertebrates, the dentition of elasmo-
branchs exhibits regenerative coordination and capacity to a de-
gree unlike any other vertebrate group with the rapid, synchro-
nous production of new teeth from multiple families simulta-
neously, ahead of functional need (Fig. 1; Luer et al., 1990; Reif
et al., 1978). In some species, each round of tooth replacement can
be as rapid as 9 (Nurse shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum) to 38 days
(Leopard shark, Trikias semifasciata) (Luer et al., 1990; Reif et al.,
1978; Smith et al., 2009a). Therefore, sharks likely possess the
most productive and rapid dentition of all vertebrates. Shark teeth
are patterned in multiple distinct tooth families (Fig. 1) with nu-
merous teeth formed ahead of function, giving sharks their no-
torious rows of backward pointing teeth. In sharks, a more rudi-
mentary first generation dentition is thought to form during em-
bryogenesis (Fig. 1) prior to more adult-like tooth morphologies
that develop after several rounds of tooth replacement, (Reif et al.,
1978; Smith et al., 2009a). This appears to confirm the condition
from the majority of current evidence in other vertebrates, which
suggests that complex tooth shapes can be formed and functional
from first generation teeth in many groups.
Given recent experimental advances in working with chon-
drichthyans (Coolen et al., 2008; Gillis et al., 2012; O'Shaughnessy
et al., 2015), increasing availability of genome-scale data (Mulley
et al., 2014; Richards et al., 2013; Takechi et al., 2011; Venkatesh
et al., 2014; Wyffels et al., 2014) and the wealth of knowledge on
conserved genes that regulate tooth development among verte-
brate clades (Fraser et al., 2004; Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012; Smith
et al., 2015; Tucker and Fraser, 2014) it is surprising how little is
known about tooth development and regeneration in chon-
drichthyans, which includes sharks, skates and rays (elasmo-
branchs) as well as chimaerids (holocephalans). Chondrichthyan
fishes are the sister group to the bony vertebrates (actinopter-
ygians plus sarcopterygians) and although they have historically
been considered primitive compared to the bony vertebrates, this
is not a plausible conclusion given recent palaeontological data
(Brazeau and Friedman, 2015; Davis et al., 2012; Giles et al., 2015).
Recently, the first chondrichthyan genome – that of the elephant
shark Callorhinchus milli (Holocephali) – was sequenced, revealing
extensive conservation of genomic architecture and an extremely
slowly evolving proteome compared with bony vertebrates (Ven-
katesh et al., 2014). Genome sequencing projects of other mem-
bers of the chondrichthyan clade will be published soon (Coolen
et al., 2008; Wyffels et al., 2014) with representative coverage
from both the sharks and rays (elasmobranchs). The dissemination
of genomic data from these important vertebrates will accelerate
their use as models in the study of evolutionary developmental
biology.
This study focuses on the catshark (Scyliorhinus spp.), an ovi-
parous (Fig. 1) genus that has been widely studied (Coolen et al.,
Fig. 1. The hatchling and adult catshark dentition. A, B. Rendered X-ray computerized tomography (microCT) scans of an adult male Scyliorhinus canicula. A. Lateral view of
the head; unmineralised tissues are rendered transparent to show jaw cartilages and teeth, with dermal denticles and weakly mineralized chondrocranium also visible. B.
Occlusal view of the lower jaw dentition showing multiple rows of teeth and diversity of tooth morphology. C, D Rendered high-contrast (with Phosphotungstic acid; PTA)
X-ray microCT images of the hatchling S. canicula head (C), and a section of the lower jaw showing the emerging and functional dentition (D, green), showing multicuspid
and adult-like tooth shape anteriorly. E-H, Cleared and alizarin red stained hatchling shark (S. canicula) lower jaws, showing the maturity and functionality of the earliest
shark dentition. E and F, dorsal view of the lower jaw (dentary) showing the numbered tooth positions inclusive of symphyseal tooth positions (F). G, H, Positional shifts in
early tooth morphology is noted along the jaw, from more adult-like tooth shape (three defined cusps, with central cusp first to mineralize, arrowheads) in anterior positions,
including the medial positions of symphyseal teeth (G) compared to the lack of defined shape in the more distal regions of the jaw (H, although T2, T3 replacements do show
the typical three cusps with the central cusp first to form, white arrowhead). This distal most region of the jaw (H) is a dynamic region where serially added new first
generation tooth positions are formed in concert with the growth of the jaw. Positions are numbered to reflect positions in the jaw, increasing distally. Tooth generations are
numbered in lingual order (T1, T2, etc. S, symphyseal teeth; Ps, parasymphyseal teeth). I, Sagittal thick section (cleared and alizarin red stained) through a juvenile shark (S.
canicula) lower jaw (Mc, Meckel's cartilage) showing a mature set of at least 6 teeth of the same family. Replacement teeth are in various stages of development with the
youngest replacement teeth in the distal most region (arrowhead) of the dental lamina (DL). Developing teeth are covered by the dental lamina until they erupt at the jaw
margin and so contact the region of the external skin with dermal denticles present. J, the developing shark embryo (arrowhead) with associated yolk sac (y) in its clear
fluid-filled collagen egg case highlighting the accessibility of this species for developmental biology. Scale Bars in E and F ¼ 1 mm. Scale bars in G and H ¼ 200 μm.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
3
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
4
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 2008; Debiais-Thibaud et al., 2007, 2011; Freitas and Cohn, 2004;
Freitas et al., 2007; Gillis et al., 2012, 2013; O'Neill et al., 2007; Reif,
1980; Smith et al., 2009a) and for which, due to the relative ease of
egg-case collection and culture in laboratory aquaria, all embryo-
nic stages of tooth development and regeneration can be ma-
nipulated. In this report we outline the emergence, development
and primary rounds of regeneration of the dentition in the shark
(Scyliorhinus spp.) and characterize for the first time the expres-
sion patterns of key members of gene regulatory networks and
signalling pathways known to be important in the development of
osteichthyan dentitions. We ask if tooth development is conserved
from a developmental genetic standpoint, both between os-
teichthyan and chondrichthyan dentitions, and also between
subsequent tooth generations of the regenerating conveyor-belt
dentition of sharks. We further address the question of whether
there is an ontogenetic shift in tooth cusp morphology in sharks
that is linked to both the maturation and regenerative potential of
the developing dental lamina (Smith et al., 2009b), and whether
this process is conserved across the other vertebrate lineages
(Tucker and Fraser, 2014). We have therefore examined the mor-
phology of the earliest generations of the catshark dentition, and
compared these first tooth generations with the mature dentition
to ask if first teeth in sharks are rudimentary and simple in form
compared to more complex tooth phenotypes in adult forms. We
hypothesize that for a continued process of tooth regeneration, a
dental lamina is necessary and associated with the lifelong
maintenance of a putative stem cell population. However, the
dental lamina is not necessary for teeth, per se, as the first gen-
eration dentition in several vertebrates, albeit rudimentary and
superficial, can form prior to dental lamina formation. We infer
that the key character for a highly regenerative dentition, such as
that observed in the shark, is a continuous dental lamina, with a
non-restricted (not attached to a bony jaw) dentition. Furthermore
the rapid regeneration of teeth afforded to the sharks allows more
morphogenetic plasticity, formation of diverse tooth phenotypes,
and rapid developmental turn-over, which has been essential to
the success of this diverse group of cartilaginous fishes.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Fish husbandry
The species of shark used in this study include the small (lesser)
spotted catshark, Scyliorhinus canicula, and the large (greater)
spotted catshark, Scyliorhinus stellaris. The large spotted catshark (S.
stellaris) was used in this study due to availability of the earliest
stages of tooth competence, and to account for the issues in ac-
quiring the correct stages in S. canicula. Animals were collected and
supplied by the Native Marine Centre, UK (S. stellaris) and Station
Biologique de Roscoff, France (S. canicula). Shark embryos in egg
cases (Scyliorhinus spp. is oviparous; Fig. 1) were collected from
gravid females and kept and raised to the desired developmental
stages (Ballard et al., 1993; Reif, 1980) in a saltwater aquarium at the
University of Sheffield, Department of Animal and Plant Sciences at
12 °C. Prior to analysis catshark embryos were anesthetized with
MS-222 (tricaine) before fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
overnight followed by graded dehydration into MeOH.
2.2. Clearing and staining
Embryos previously fixed in PFA were washed with DEPC-H2O
for thirty minutes. Specimens were then placed into a 1% trypsin
solution for one hour. After protein digest, calcified tissues were
stained using Alizarin red S solution (1 g/50 mL KOH). Staining
averaged 30 min, with larger specimen requiring a longer stain
time. Embryos were moved to a 2% KOH solution for a period of
24 h. Cleared and stained fishes were then graded into 100% gly-
cerine, with thymol as a biocide
2.3. Serial thin sectioning
Embryonic shark heads were fixed in PFA 4% and transferred
through a graded series of MeOH (25%, 50%, 75%, 100%) before
being transferred to paraffin grades for embedding. Thin serial
sections were cut from whole heads at a thickness of 10–14 μm
with a Leica Microtome. Thin sections were washed in Histoclear
(National Diagnostics) or Xylene before rehydration through gra-
ded EthOH washes to PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) for im-
munohistochemical and in situ hybridisation analyses.
2.4. Immunohistochemistry
Embryos were fixed (4% PFA/PBS) for 24 h, followed by dehy-
dration through a graded series of ethanol. Specimens were then
further processed through a graded series of ethanol, chloroform
and hot wax, prior to final embedding in paraffin. Specimens were
then sectioned at 14 μm using a microtome (Leica RM2145). Par-
affin section immunohistochemistry was carried out using an anti-
PCNA antibody (ab29; Abcam) and peroxidase-labelled anti-mouse
IgG (DAKO). The colour reaction was carried out using DAB (DAKO)
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Tissue sections
were counterstained using methyl green or DAPI, and cleared and
mounted using DePeX mounting medium (VWR). Sections were
imaged using an Olympus BX51 Upright Compound Microscope and
Olympus DP71 Universal digital camera attachment.
2.5. In situ hybridisation
Digoxigenin-labelled antisense riboprobes were designed using
partial skate (Leucoraja erinacea) and catshark (sometimes referred
to as dogfish; Scyliorhynus canicula or Scyliorhinus torazame) EST
Fig. 2. The stages of tooth development and replacement in the shark. A-E, Haemotoxilin and eosin stained thin section paraffin histology (sagittal plane) of upper jaw tooth
development and regeneration in the catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula). F-J, Haemotoxilin and eosin stained thin section paraffin histology (sagittal plane) of lower jaw tooth
development and regeneration in the catshark (S. canicula). K, schematic diagrams of the 4 stages of early tooth development in the shark lower jaw. A, Upper and F, lower
jaw histology; Stage 1 indicates the point at which the epithelial odontogenic band thickens (arrowheads) to start the tooth development cascade, with the underlying
mesenchyme beginning to condense at tooth competent regions. B and G, the thickened odontogenic band proliferates to become the early dental lamina (arrowheads). The
first tooth (T1) starts to form at this stage (Stage 2) with responsive underlying condensing mesenchyme (speckled pink in K) between the dental epithelium and the jaw
cartilages (blue). Stage 3 (C and H) is the phase of development where the fist tooth in the dentition takes shape, during the differentiation and subsequent morphogenetic
period of odontogenesis. While the first tooth starts the process of mineralization, the lingual aspect of the dental lamina (free end, successional lamina) continues to grow
and proliferate into the underlying mesenchyme (arrowhead). Stage 4 (G and I) marks the phase of odontogenesis where tooth replacement matures and a number of tooth
generations (three generations in the lower jaw, I; T1-3) are formed from the free end (successional lamina) of the permanent dental lamina (arrowheads). There is a
pronounced junction within the surface oral epithelium (arrow) that combines cells that will be recruited into the dental lamina with superficial cells of the taste bud
territory (tb). Stage 5 marks the time point (hatching stage 34) where teeth of the first generation become functional and erupt through the oral epithelium (T1). At least
5 tooth generations are present at this stage (T1-5) with new teeth initiating from the deep successional lamina (arrow). Teeth are anchored by root-bases to the stratified
fibrous cells of the connective tissue envelope that surrounds the jaw cartilages (dark pink in K). Scale bars¼100 μm. mc, Meckel's cartilage; pq, Palatoquadrate. Orientation
axes, D, dorsal; V, ventral; A, anterior; P, posterior.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
5
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 Fig. 3. Formation of the odontogenic band preceding tooth initiation in the lower jaw of the catshark (S. canicula). Conserved epithelial and mesenchymal markers of
vertebrate tooth development can be observed demarcating the odontogenic band (OB) in the lower jaw of stage 29 catshark embryos (Ballard et al., 1993). Whole mount
in situ hybridization followed by vibratome sectioning revealed weaker epithelial and stronger mesenchymal expression of bmp4 (A, B) and weak mesenchymal expression of
lef1 (C, D), underlying the competent OB. Epithelial expression of pitx1 (E, F), pitx2 (G, H), shh (I, J), and β-catenin (K, L) marks the diffuse competent odontogenic band (OB).
Interestingly, pitx2, a marker of epithelial dental competence in several vertebrates is expressed here in the shark in both epithelial and mesenchymal domains (H). shh and
pitx2 are markers of tooth competence in other vertebrates (Fraser et al., 2008, 2012, 2004; Jackman et al., 2004; Jussila and Thesleff, 2012; Wu et al., 2013), suggesting deep
conservation of these core dental markers. Scale bars: (K) 200 μm, (L) 100 μm.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
6
 assemblies (Wyffels et al., 2014) (SkateBase; skatebase.org) and
the Vertebrate TimeCapsule (VTcap; transcriptome.cdb.riken.go.jp/
vtcap). The riboprobes used in this study were cloned from S. ca-
nicula cDNA using the following primer sequences, sequence da-
tabases and in some cases published genbank accession numbers:
β-catenin, (forward GGTGAAAATGCTTGGGTCT and reverse GGA-
CAAGGGTTCCTAGAAGA; genbank accession number: AF393833.1,
(Tanaka et al., 2002), bmp4 (forward TGTTGGAGTTCACCGAATTG
and reverse GATTCCTGGTAACCGAATGC; SkateBase), fgf3 (forward
CTTGCTCAACAGTCTTAAGTTATGG and reverse CGGAGGAGGCTC-
TACTGTG; SkateBase), fgf10 (forward TGAAGAGTGCTGAAGGTGGTC
and reverse ATTGGACTAATGCTTCAGGTGTG; SkateBase), lef1 (for-
ward GGGCTTTCTGCTGACTGATG and reverse CGTAAGGAGCGG-
CAACTTC;
VTcap),
midkine
(MK;
forward
GA-
CAGGGTCCTCTGAAGCTG and reverse TTAGGGTTCCATTGCGAGTC;
VTcap), pax9, (forward GCTCCATCAGCAGAATCCTC and reverse
TGCCATCACACTTCTTGCTC;
genbank
accession
number:
KC507188.1 (Onimaru et al., 2015), patched2 (ptc2; forward
GCGTCGCTGGAGGGTACTT
and
reverse
ATGTCTGTAAGGCA-
CAGCCCA; genbank accession number: EU814484.1 (Sakamoto
et al., 2009), pitx1 (forward GGTCGGGTGAAAGCAGAG and reverse
GATGTTGCTGAGGCTGGAG;
SkateBase),
pitx2
(forward
GACG-
GAAGCTGGAAACAGTC and reverse TTTGCAAACTGGGTGTCAAG;
genbank accession number AB625610.1 (Takechi et al., 2011), sonic
hedgehog (shh; forward AGTGGCAGATACGAAGGGAAG and reverse
AGGTGCCGGGAGTACCAG;
genbank
accession
number:
HM991336.1 (Gillis et al., 2011), and sox2 (forward GGAGTTGT-
CAGCCTCTGCTC
and
reverse
TGTGCTTTGCTGCGTGTAG;
Skate-
Base). Whole mount in situ hybridisation (WISH; modified for thin
section SISH) was performed according to previously published
protocols (Fraser et al., 2008; 2013). Digoxigenin-labelled anti-
sense riboprobes were generated using the Riboprobe System Sp6/
T7 kit (Promega). APconjugated anti-dig antibodies were visua-
lized at the end of colour reaction (BM purple; Sigma) using light/
Fig. 4. Shark tooth site pre-patterning with ancient core markers of dental competence. bmp4, pitx2 and shh expression patterns (false colour, magenta, in situ hybridization)
in the shark odontogenic band (S. stellaris). A-C, bmp4 is expressed primarily in the condensing mesenchyme, both in the upper and lower jaws. Localisation of bmp4 to this
mesenchyme, directly underlying the thickened epithelium, in both the upper (C) and lower (B) jaws, implies a role in regulating early odontogenic mesenchymal induction.
This is therefore in partial agreement with bmp4 expression in the mammalian dentition, which at similar tooth stages localises to both the epithelium and mesenchyme
(Vainio et al., 1993). D-F, during early priming of odontogenic tissues, pitx2 expression is localised to the odontogenic epithelium, in addition to underlying expression of the
early reciprocal condensing mesenchyme. Expression is comparatively stronger in the thickened epithelium in both the upper (F) and lower (E) jaws, implying both epithelial
induction and concomitant transfer of odontogenic potential to the underlying prospective dental mesenchyme, possibly to define the future position of the dental lamina.
This is most apparent in the comparatively deepened expression domains of pitx2 in the lower jaw (E). G-I, shh is one of earliest markers of dental competence in vertebrates
and here defines the epithelial odontogenic band, shown by the equivalent expression domains in the presumptive dental epithelium of the upper and lower jaws (H and I).
shh is expressed in the same restricted region of thickened epithelium in the upper (I) and lower jaws (H), further suggesting a role for Hedgehog signalling in early priming
of prospective dental tissues. Nuclear counterstain, white is DAPI.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
7
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
8
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 confocal microscopy.
2.6. Whole mount in situ hybridisation (WISH)
Whole Mount In Situ Hybridisation (WISH) was carried out in
accordance with Fraser et al. (2013). Samples were rehydrated
through a graded series of methanol and PBS, and treated with
Proteinase K (1 ml/mg ProK for 60 min), to facilitate probe pene-
tration. Next, samples were re-fixed in 4% PFA in PBS and in-
cubated in prehybridization buffer for 1 h at 61 °C. For the hy-
bridization stage, samples were placed in a shaker incubator
overnight at 61 °C in 2 ml tubes (Eppendorf) containing 1 ml ali-
quots of hybridization buffer and DIG-labelled antisense RNA
probe. Samples were then washed in Saline Sodium Citrate with
0.1% Tween-20 (SSCT), before incubation in Blocking Reagent
(Roche). Antibody labelling occurred overnight at 4 °C in Maleic
Acid Buffer with Tween-20 (MABT), using anti-DIG-ALP (0.2 ml/ml)
(Roche). This was followed by a series of washes and 48 h in-
cubation in MABT at 4 °C. For the colour reaction, BM Purple
(Roche) was applied at room temperature, until the staining was
sufficiently strong to accurately represent gene expression. Sam-
ples were stored and imaged in 10% EtOH in PBS. After whole
mount in situ hybridisation and imaging, embryos were embedded
in chick albumin with gelatin cross-fixed with 2.5% gluteraldehyde
and post-fixed with 4% PFA. A Leica Microsystems VT1000 vi-
bratome was used to cut sections at 15–25 μm. Vibratome sections
were then mounted with glycerol and imaged at 10–63 � using a
Nikon SMZ1500 Stereomicroscope.
2.7. Section in situ hybridisation (SISH)
Specimens were first processed to paraffin and sectioned as
previously described. Thin serial paraffin sections were re-hy-
drated from MeOH and ISH was carried out on paraffin sections
with solutions described in WISH. Tissue sections were treated
with pre-hybridisation buffer, followed by overnight incubation
with probe. Sections were then subject to post-hybridisation wa-
shes and incubated with an AP-conjugated anti-dig antibody
overnight. Sections were then subject to post-antibody washes
and the colour reaction carried out using BM Purple (Roche).
Sections were then counterstained using haematoxylin (or DAPI)
and images taken as previously described.
2.8. X-ray microtomography
A fixed and air dried head of an adult male Scyliorhinus canicula
(Fig. 1A and B) was scanned using the Metris X-Tek HMX ST 225 CT
scanner at the Imaging and Analysis Centre, Natural History Mu-
seum, London, and rendered using VG studio max 2.0. High-re-
solution X-ray microCT images of hatchling S. canuicula specimens
were made at the University of Vienna, Department of Theoretical
Biology imaging lab using the soft-tissue contrast methods of
Metscher (Metscher, 2009a, 2009b). S. canicula specimens were
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, then prepared as follows: Specimen
in Fig. 1C (108 mM TL) was dehydrated to ethanol and stained with
Phosphotungstic acid (1% w/v in abs. ethanol) for 3 days. specimen
in Fig. 1D (105 mM TL) was washed in water and stained several
days in IKI (2% potassium iodideþ1% I2 in aqueous solution).
specimen in Fig. 8A and B (55 mM TL) was dehydrated to ethanol
and stained with I2E (1% I2 in 96-10% ethanol). low-resolution
overview scans were made with A SkyScan 1174 system (bruker-
microCT.com), and high-resolution images of the lower jaws were
made with the Xradia MicroXCT (www.xradia.com). Tomographic
images were reconstructed using the SkyScan NRecon program or
the Xradia XMReconstructor software and exported as TIFF or PNG
image stacks. 3D volume renderings were made using the free
software Drishti (github.com/AjayLimaye/drishti). Reconstructed
isotropic voxel sizes are 32.2 mm (Fig. 1C), 8.0 mm (Fig. 1D), and
4.8 mm (Fig. 8A and B).
3. Results
3.1. Establishing the dentition in sharks
The shark (catshark; Scyliorhinus) dentition initiates at ap-
proximately Stage 28-29, depending on temperature of develop-
ment (Ballard et al., 1993; Debiais-Thibaud et al., 2011; Smith et al.,
2009a) from a layer of superficial epithelial cells that make up the
odontogenic band (OB; Figs. 2A, F, and 3). The OB is a field of
epithelial cells that marks a region from which the teeth, coin-
cident dental lamina, and other supporting structures form in
sharks, including the closely associated rows of taste buds
(Figs. 1C, D, and 2). The wider field of epithelial cells associated
with the OB, which encompasses adjacent cells that contribute to
developing taste buds (Figs. 2H, I and 3) could be considered an
‘odonto-gustatory band’ due to their closely linked development.
The underlying mesenchymal cells pool and condense beneath the
dental competent epithelium to facilitate the proliferation and
development of the tooth buds (Figs. 3B, H and 4A–F). These
morphogenetic movements, which accompany tooth site initiation
from within the OB, are highly conserved among vertebrates
(Smith et al., 2009b), and in sharks the dentition is similarly in-
itiated. In the early dentition of the catshark we have examined
the expression of a number of genes known to be important to
odontogenic band formation and tooth site specification in bony
vertebrates. We have found that a number of conserved markers of
OB formation are expressed in both the epithelium and underlying
mesenchyme in the catshark in a similar manner to other verte-
brates (Figs. 3 and 4). We cloned partial catshark mRNA transcripts
of six odontogenic epithelial markers and examined their expres-
sion in developing catshark jaws in situ. We found that bmp4, lef1,
pitx1, pitx2, shh, and β-catenin are expressed within the epithelium
of the OB preceding tooth initiation (Figs. 3 and 4). Both shh and
pitx2 are among the earliest epithelial markers of tooth compe-
tence known in bony vertebrates (Fraser et al., 2008, 2012, 2004;
Fig. 5. Tooth initiation and dental lamina emergence in the early shark dentition. Gene expression patterns during shark (S. canicula) tooth initiation. A, C, E, G, I, J, lower jaw;
B, D, F, H, upper jaw. During development of the dental lamina from a thickened epithelium (lower jaw, LJ), β-catenin (β-cat) is strongly expressed in the epithelium of first
tooth placode (A, arrow) and a cluster of epithelial cells at the DL-oral surface interface via an extension of the ODE (A, arrow). In the upper jaw (B), β-catenin is also strongly
expressed in the thickened odontogenic band epithelium (B, arrow) and weakly in the neighbouring oral epithelium (B, dotted line). A, In the lower jaw, lef1 is expressed
primarily in the epithelium of the first tooth placode (arrow), coincident with β-cat expression (A), and in the upper jaw, the early first dental thickening (D, arrow). pitx1 is
expressed throughout the DL, inclusive of the site of the first tooth placode (E, arrow), extending into the lingual DL and adjoining dental epithelium (E, dotted line).
Expression is similar in the upper jaw, localised to the early dental epithelial thickening/DL (F, arrow) and extending to within the medial valve (finger-like projection, in F
and H) via the epithelium (F, dotted line). pitx2 is expressed in a similar pattern in the dental epithelium (G, black arrowheads), however; in addition, expression extends to
the underlying dental mesenchyme in both the upper and lower jaw (G-H, red arrows). I and J, sox2 gene expression in the shark lower jaw is limited to the non-tooth site
epithelial dental lamina at the first tooth emergence. lef1 (in C and J) as a marker of tooth placode initiation is expressed adjacent to sox2 in the emerging dental lamina. J, the
expression of lef1 and sox2 shows the exclusive sites of each marker, lef1 (false colour, magenta) in the dental epithelium (first tooth initiation site) and sox2 in neighbouring
non-tooth specific and proliferative dental lamina (false colour green, and predictive growth of the DL shown as green arrow). White nuclear stain is DAPI. Mc, Meckel's
cartilage. Pq, palatoquadrate cartilage. Scale bar in A, 50 μm and I, 100 μm.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
9
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 Jackman et al., 2004; Jussila and Thesleff, 2012; Wu et al., 2013),
and in the catshark lower jaw, these genes are expressed in an
equivalent pattern (Figs. 3 and 4). However, there is a significant
difference in the expression of pitx2 in the catshark compared to
osteichthyans during odontogenesis, with expression observed in
a mesenchymal domain directly underlying the sites of epithelial
Fig. 6. Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) Immunohistochemistry of lower jaw tooth development in the shark. A-B, S. stellaris; C-H, S. canicula. In the lower jaw oral
margin (A, boxed area), PCNA immunoreactivity marks initial epithelial thickening and associated mesenchymal condensation to define early dental competence (odon-
togenic band) (B, dotted line). Development of the primary dental lamina, PCNA continues to mark epithelial in-folding into the condensing dental mesenchyme, biased to
the lingual aspect (C, arrow). D, development of first generation teeth, PCNA marks the first tooth placode, accompanied by further extension of the dental lamina (arrow). E,
the first tooth germ forms from epithelial cells of the dental lamina and the in-pushing of the condensing dental mesenchyme (arrow). During morphogenesis, epithelial-
mesenchymal cells differentiate to ameloblasts and odontoblasts, marked by reduced PCNA immunoreactivity in the apical tooth (F, arrow 1). The first replacement tooth
placodes (G, arrow) develop in the continuously proliferating successional lamina, lingual to advancing first generation teeth (T1). Emergence of tooth replacement, PCNA
immune-reactivity in the successional lamina marks third generation teeth (T3, early morphogenesis), progressively reducing in preceding generations undergoing advanced
morphogenesis (T2-1). Throughout tooth development and replacement, a continuous connection is maintained between the dental lamina/successional lamina and the
surface oral epithelium via the dental epithelium, terminating in a distinct spherical cluster of non-proliferative cells at the junction of the dental lamina and the oral taste
territories (F, arrow 2) and (H, dotted line). Scale bars: (A) 1 mm, (B) 100 μm (C-G) 100 μm, (H) 200 μm.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
10
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 Fig. 7. Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) Immunohistochemistry of upper jaw tooth development in the shark. A-B, S. stellaris; C-H, S. canicula. In the upper jaw,
PCNA immuno-reactivity further defines localised thickening of the oral epithelium and condensing mesenchyme to mark onset of dental competence (A, boxed area). A
restricted band of thickened columnar epithelial cells mark the odontogenic band, and future position of the prospective dental lamina (B, dotted line). Sustained PCNA
immuno-reactivity marks formation of the early dental lamina as this epithelium, continuous with the medial valve, in-folds into the underlying dental mesenchyme (C,
dotted line). Development of the first tooth bud is defined by outgrowth of columnar ODE cells, associated with underlying mesenchymal condensates (D, arrow 1). The
dental epithelium is also continuous with the basal epithelium of the medial valve, defined by early taste bud papillae (D, arrow 2). During first tooth morphogenesis, PCNA
immuno-reactivity continues to show sustained condensation of the underlying dental mesenchyme and early epithelial growth polarity (E). During advanced morpho-
genesis, reduced PCNA immuno-reactivity in the apical inner dental epithelium and dental mesenchyme of the tooth further implies cell differentiation in advance of matrix
deposition (F, arrow). PCNA continues to label the outer dental epithelium and dental lamina during replacement tooth morphogenesis (G, boxed area T2; arrows highlight
taste buds on the medial valve), with a corresponding reduction in immuno-reactivity during advanced morphogenesis (T1), accompanied by associated deposition of
mineralised tissue. In the basal dental mesenchyme of the papilla, sustained PCNA immuno-reactivity marks continued cell proliferation concomitant with basal plate
formation (G, arrow 1), while continuing to define a connection between the dental and oral epithelium (G, arrow 2). During replacement tooth morphogenesis, a nested
cluster of cells in the apical epithelial tip (H, arrow) lacks PCNA immuno-reactivity, compared with the surrounding inner dental epithelium and dental mesenchyme. Their
implied withdrawal from the cell cycle suggests a functional requirement distinct from surrounding epithelial cells. Similar developmental patterns in the mammalian,
osteichthyan and reptilian dentitions imply a deeply conserved functional role in the shark dentition (Fraser et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2009b; Juuri et al., 2013; Gaete and
Tucker, 2013). This is particularly apparent in the non-proliferative epithelial tip, which in the mammalian dentition lacks similar cell proliferation due to activation of the
enamel knot, a conserved signalling centre regulating tooth cusp morphogenesis (Jernvall et al., 1994; Vaahtokari et al., 1996). Scale bars: (A) 1 mm, (B, D, E, F) 100 μm (C, G)
200 μm.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
11
 tooth competence (Figs. 3G, H and 4D–F). This expression overlaps
with that of mesenchymal bmp4 (Fig. 4A–C). These data suggest
that core components of the gene regulatory network required for
the initial establishment of the OB have been conserved in verte-
brates for approximately 450 million years. Therefore, we suggest
that vertebrates have utilized this dental pre-pattern since the
appearance of the first dentition. In concert with the expression of
these initiatory factors in the OB, a number of mesenchymal
markers, i.e. bmp4, pitx2 and lef1, concurrently label the conden-
sing mesenchyme that will delineate the ‘mesenchymal dental
field’ (Figs. 3 and 4) and the future mesenchymal papillae of the
developing teeth.
3.2. Emergence of the shark dental lamina
The dental lamina (DL) is required for the development of re-
generative multi-generational dentitions in a range of poly-
phyodont vertebrates, including reptiles, which retain a perma-
nent, thin successional lamina deeply embedded in the jaw
(Handrigan et al., 2010; Juuri et al., 2013). Even diphyodont
mammals such as ferret (Juuri et al., 2013), and human (Olley et al.,
2014) retain an invaginated DL before it eventually degrades after
production of the second tooth generation (Buchtová et al., 2012).
In contrast, in some polyphyodont fishes, for example the rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), a deep DL has been shown not to be
required for the production of multiple generations of teeth, and
replacement teeth can develop from a set of dental cells linked to
the outer dental epithelium (ODE) (Fraser et al., 2006a), in asso-
ciation with differentiation of cells of the predecessor teeth. These
ODE cells could be interpreted as a basic ‘lamina’, lying deep to the
predecessor for continued tooth production in a ‘one-for-one’
manner, similar to the replacement system observed in cichlids
(Fraser et al., 2013). It is currently uncertain whether oral teeth in
the vertebrate ancestor were initiated from a permanent deep DL
as observed in polyphyodont amniotes, or from a transitory epi-
thelial thickening, as observed in some ray-finned fishes. In the
catshark, a deep permanent DL is formed within which teeth of
the first, and all subsequent replacement generations develop
(Fig. 2B–E and G–K). The catshark DL first emerges as a highly
dynamic epithelial structure that forms after the proliferation of
superficial epithelial cells of the OB. The DL is comprised of a
monolayer of distinctly columnar basal epithelial cells (future in-
ner dental epithelium), and an overlying (5-6 cell thick) layer of
squamous/cuboidal epithelial cells (future ODE) (Fig. 2).
β-catenin, sox2 and pitx1-expressing cells label the early
emerging DL, lingual to the cells that contribute to the superficial
first tooth (Fig. 5A, E, I and J). The highly proliferative nature of the
emerging dentition and the development of the DL is highlighted
by PCNA (Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen) immunohistochemistry
(Figs. 6 and 7). PCNA marks several phases of the cell division
sequence from late G1 through to mitosis (Kurki et al., 1986). The
primary stages of first generation tooth initiation and the expan-
sion of the early DL are marked by high rates of proliferation
(PCNA; Figs. 6 and 7). Prior to DL invagination, strong PCNA im-
munoreactivity uniformly marks all cells of the thickening oral
epithelium comprising the OB including basal columnar and su-
perficial squamous cells of the presumptive/emerging DL (Figs. 6B
and 7B). This apparent proliferative population of epithelial cells
could potentially feed the DL as it invaginates and grows into the
underlying jaw mesenchyme (Figs. 6C–E and 7C–F), toward the
underlying cartilages of both the upper and lower jaw. The un-
derlying jaw mesenchyme is also highly proliferative at this stage;
however, prior to DL invagination (Fig. 8) there is a notable
asymmetry in cell proliferation, with presumptive dental me-
senchyme on the labial side of the DL exhibiting a greater density
of cells that show proportionally greater PCNA immunoreactivity
(Figs. 6C–E, 7D–E). This asymmetry persists into the DL invagina-
tion stages (Figs. 6C and 7C). The mesenchymal expression of pax9,
pitx2, and bmp4 is specific to a deep lying and condensing cluster
of mesenchymal cells (Fig. 9), and demarcates the labio-lingual
border of the mesenchymal ‘path’ into which the subsequent
dental lamina will grow as the epithelium proliferates and in-
vaginates toward the jaw cartilages (lower, Meckel's and upper,
palatoquadrate; Figs. 5–7). This deep mesenchymal cell con-
densation extends along with the continuous dental lamina
around the arc of each jaw. The initial dental lamina is a jaw wide
thickening of epithelium that aggregates from the OB and con-
tinues to grow as a dynamic sheet of proliferative epithelia from
which new tooth generations form at the distal free-end or suc-
cessional lamina (Figs. 2, 5, and 8).
In the catshark, we observe that the first tooth buds develop
superficially prior to the invagination of the deep DL, which only
begins to invaginate into underlying mesenchyme after the in-
itiation of the first tooth (Figs. 5, 6D and 7D–F). The site of first
generation tooth initiation coincident with the DL is specifically
identified by the epithelial expression of β-catenin, and lef1,
overlapping in the epithelial portions of the broader expression
domains of both pitx1 and pitx2, which encompass the whole DL
(Fig. 5). PCNA immunohistochemistry reveals a high level of cell
proliferation maintained at this stage in both the epithelium and
mesenchyme of the nascent tooth bud, and also throughout the
whole dynamic region of the developing jaw-length DL (Figs. 6D
and 7D). Subsequently, high proliferative activity continues in both
the successional lamina and the surrounding, condensing cells of
Fig. 8. Soft tissue contrast rendered microCT scan of the pre-hatchling shark lower jaw. Prehatching stage 32 (Ballard et al., 1993); 55 mm TL, Scyliorhinus canicula lower jaw,
dorsal view, showing the emerging tooth positions of the first generation (T1-4) adjacent to more lingual tooth bud territories (TBs) closely linked to the epithelial cells of the
dental lamina that link surface epithelia with deep lying cells of the lamina (B). B, a virtual (microCT) cross section (sagittal plane, red line) of the lower jaw developing
dentition with false coloured enhanced soft tissue. Tooth germs are superficial to the epithelium of the dental lamina (pink) that grows toward the underlying jaw cartilage
(green, Mc, Meckel's cartilage).
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
12
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 the underlying odontogenic mesenchyme during lamina extension
and replacement tooth development stages. Meanwhile pro-
liferation tapers off in the surrounding non-odontogenic me-
senchyme and terminally differentiated ameloblasts of morpho-
genetic-stage teeth (Figs. 6F, G and 7F–H). Within the condensing
mesenchyme, underlying the extending DL, we observed the weak
expression of β-catenin and lef1, in addition to stronger expression
of bmp4, pitx2 and pax9 (Figs. 5 and 9). These expression patterns
are mostly consistent with the variety of vertebrates studied to
date, with a similar expression of mesenchymal markers, regard-
less of replacement potential. Interestingly, although sox2 is ex-
pressed in the epithelial OB (data not shown), it is also expressed
in the dorso-lingual and non-tooth region during the initial
thickening/growth phase of DL development (Fig. 5I and J). This
suggests that sox2 might be associated with patterning tooth
competent epithelium (OB and DL) and expansion of the DL, as
reported in other vertebrates (Juuri et al., 2013) rather than in-
itiation and development of the tooth itself. The expression of lef1
at the same stage of odontogenesis (Fig. 5J) within the tooth-
specific epithelial cells of the thickened DL shows the contrast of
tooth-site expression with sox2-positive adjacent lamina cells. The
establishment of this embryonic shark dentition not only sets up
the functional dentition that the hatchling shark (Stage 32–34;
Fig. 1; Ballard et al., 1993) will rely on immediately after emerging
from the egg case (Fig. 1D and E), but will also set the programme
of tooth replacement that continues throughout adult life. We
predict that this continuously active DL will continue to retain
proliferative activity at varying levels throughout the lifetime of
the shark to regenerate an unlimited supply of precisely arranged
tooth families along the jaws.
3.3. The formation of the first teeth in the catshark
The first generation of teeth in the catshark dentition functions
Fig. 9. Development of the first tooth and progression of the dental lamina in the
shark (S. canicula). Lower jaw (left) and upper jaw (right) sagittal thin sections
(14 μm paraffin sections); dotted lines demarcate the boundary between the basal
epithelium and the underlying mesenchymal cells. A and B, β-catenin is expressed in
both the inner dental epithelium of the developing first tooth and outer dental
epithelium in the region of the successional lamina where new tooth replacements
will form (arrowhead). β-catenin is also expressed in the dental papillary mesench-
yme of the developing first tooth (arrow). C and D, bmp4 has a restricted expression
pattern in apical cells of the inner dental epithelium of cap-shaped developing teeth
in all generations (arrowheads). bmp4 is also expressed in condensing mesenchyme
associated with new tooth germs of the first and subsequent generations (arrows)
and in the maturing dental papilla. E and F, fgf3 expression marks the enamel knot-
like (EK) cells (arrowhead) associated with tooth morphogenesis and shape in sharks
and other vertebrates. In addition, fgf3 expression labels dental papillary mesench-
yme directly underlying the EK and the inner dental epithelium. The permanent
dental lamina is connected to the surface epithelium at a junction that expressed a
small set of fgf3 expressing cells (asterisk in F). G and H, the heparin-binding growth
factor midkine (MK) is co-localised with fgf3 expression, limited to the enamel knot-
like cell cluster (arrowhead) of the inner dental epithelium of the first generation
teeth, in addition to the underlying mesenchymal papilla (arrow). I and J, pax9 is an
early marker of the dental mesenchyme, and is expressed in the condensing me-
senchyme that surrounds the proliferating dental lamina in both the emerging upper
and lower dentition; as tooth germs develop pax9 expression is present in the pa-
pillary dental mesenchyme. pax9 expression demarcates the mesenchymal cells
between the developing teeth and the underlying cartilages (arrows; Mc, lower and
Pq, upper). pitx1 and pitx2 have overlapping gene expression patterns in the dental
and successional lamina (K-N; arrowheads). Weak expression of pitx1 in the majority
of the dental lamina is contrasted with the strong expression in the first generation
teeth during morphogenesis (K) and in intermediate epithelial cells of the succes-
sional lamina related to new subsequent tooth formation, co-expressed with pitx2
(arrowheads). pitx2 in the shark has an alternative expression pattern to other ver-
tebrates studied with expression in cells of the dental mesenchyme co-localised with
the expression of pax9 (I and J), with expression in the dental papilla and basal
mesenchyme adjacent to the underlying developing jaw cartilages (arrows) and close
to the successional lamina. Mc, Meckel's cartilage; Pq, palatoquadrate; epi, epithe-
lium; mes, mesenchyme. Scale bars in A and D ¼ 100 μm (same magnification for
A-F, H, K). Scale bars in G, L, and N ¼ 100 μm.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
13
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 as place-markers for the emergence of subsequent generations
within each tooth family. These families will eventually form the
fully functional dentition comprised of multiple rows of erupted
teeth once the permanent regenerative lamina is established. In
the catshark (Scyliorhinus), we observe medio-lateral initiation of
teeth (Tooth position 2; Figs. 1 and 8; e.g. Smith et al., 2009a), with
the first teeth forming on either side of the symphysis with one
central cusp (first to form; Fig. 1D and G) plus additional cusps that
show morphogenesis toward becoming tricuspid. More lateral
teeth along the first generation row show more irregular shape:
the central cusp is sometimes pointed, and the accessory cusps are
generally not pointed, if present at all (Fig. 1E–H). The extreme
examples of this are observed in tooth positions closest to the
upper/lower jaw joint showing basic triangular cusps or amor-
phous teeth overlying the dentine root-base (Fig. 1H), contrasting
with the obviously multicuspate teeth seen in this position in
adults (Fig. 11). Furthermore, up to the hatching period, even
subsequent generations (G2, G3 at least) produce exactly 3 defi-
nitive cusps, whereas in a juvenile/adult most teeth are penta-
cuspid (5 definitive cusps; Fig. 11). However, the exceptions are the
minuscule symphysial teeth and the very newest tooth families
that are added to the distal margins of the jaw as the shark grows.
These teeth are each tricuspid, as in the embryo/hatchling
(Fig. 1G). These data show that the teeth of the first generation in
Scyliorhinus are rudimentary and irregularly shaped, with mostly
incomplete morphogenesis compared to subsequent generations
of teeth. Even subsequent generations (G2, G3) form fewer cusps
(tricuspid) than a juvenile/adult (pentacuspid) (Figs. 1 and 11).
Regeneration is therefore necessary in the catshark not only later
in life for functional tooth replacement, but also in early devel-
opment to progressively establish the adult-type functional tooth
morphology.
At hatching, the full regenerative dentition of S. canicula is
comprised of up to 5 generations of teeth in the medio-lateral
lower jaw tooth region. Up to three of these generations are under-
Fig. 10. Genetic conservation during continuous tooth regeneration from the deep
dental lamina in sharks. Stages represent the two-three tooth generation phase of
development. A, C, E, G, I, K, M, O, show images of the lower jaw dentition, while B,
D, F, H, J, L, N, P, show images of the upper jaw dentition in S. canicula. False colour
(magenta) in situ hybridization analyses from DIG-BM purple colour reaction;
white cells are DAPI labelled, and the blue (false) colour highlights the definition of
the dental lamina epithelium. A and B, β-catenin expression in epithelial and
condensing mesenchymal cells (green arrow) of the successional lamina, and in
early cap-stage replacement teeth. B, β-catenin is expressed in the maturing re-
placement tooth in cells of the inner dental epithelium and the dental papillary
mesenchyme. C and D, bmp4 expression restricted to the dental papilla at mature
stages of tooth morphogenesis (green arrow in D); at stages of replacement in-
itiation bmp4 is expressed in the apical cap epithelium (IDE; yellow arrowhead in
C), and in the directly underlying condensing mesenchymal cells of the early papilla
(green arrow in C). E and F, fgf3 expression is restricted to mesenchymal cells
(green arrows) in the early cap-stage replacement teeth at the end of the dental
lamina (successional lamina), at this time fgf3 is also expressed in the presumptive
primary EK-like apical cells in a small subset of the inner dental epithelium (IDE;
yellow arrowheads). G and H, fgf10 has a similar epithelial gene expression pattern
to fgf3, and is specific to the few cells of the EK-like cells of the IDE (yellow ar-
rowheads), at several stages of early replacement tooth formation. I and J, lef1
expression is present in both epithelial and mesenchymal cells of the developing
replacement teeth; stronger lef1 expression is observed in epithelial cells at the
onset of tooth replacement at the successional lamina (newest teeth), and more
diffuse expression in both the cap-stage IDE and underlying mesenchymal cells of
the papilla. K, pitx1 expression in the lower jaw dental lamina and replacement
tooth epithelium, and the successional lamina (yellow arrowhead). L, pitx2 ex-
pression in the upper jaw replacement teeth, in the dental papilla during stages of
morphogenesis (green arrow), and in cells of the successional lamina epithelium
(yellow arrowhead). M and N, ptc2 is expressed in both mesenchymal (green ar-
row) and epithelial cells (yellow arrowhead) of the developing replacement teeth.
Expression shows polarity in early cap-stage teeth (M); however, like shh (O, P)
expression of ptc2 is not present at the limit of the successional lamina (red asterisk
in M, O and P), and therefore is not associated with replacement tooth initiation. O
and P, shh expression is observed in the IDE, associated with the primary EK-like
signalling centre (yellow arrowheads). shh is associated with tooth morphogenesis
and not replacement tooth initiation (red asterisk). Mc (green colour), Meckel's
cartilage.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
14
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 going mineralization, while the youngest tooth generations are in
the morphogenesis, or bud stage. The entire first generation tooth
row erupts prior to the hatching phase of development, thus
hatchling sharks emerge fully prepared to feed (Figs. 1 and 11). It
has previously been shown that in some vertebrates, including
teleost fishes (Fraser et al., 2012), the process of rudimentary tooth
formation ahead of the fully regenerative and functional DL might
be
conserved
among
some
polyphyodont
vertebrates,
i.e.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
15
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 actinopteryians (Fraser et al., 2006a). Interestingly, a rudimentary
placeholder generation of teeth is not observed in mammals,
which generally form a maximum of two (diphyodont) tooth
generations (Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012). Although, it has been
shown that pre-lacteal teeth in incisor regions can form in the
mouse (Hovorakova et al., 2011), and this could provide contrary
evidence of a mammalian rudimentary generation.
The first-generation teeth in the shark emerge concurrently with
the formation of the DL as thickenings of the OB that contort to
become
shallow cap-shaped
tooth
buds
at
the
jaw
margin
(Figs. 2 and 9). However, the first generation teeth in sharks are
superficial and rudimentary, forming basic cusps of dentine and
enameloid (Figs. 1, 2 and 11). Mineralised tooth cusps overlay large
and initially amorphous (osteodentin) root-bases that are ankylosed
to connective tissues surrounding the jaw cartilages (Reif, 1980;
Smith et al., 2009a; Figs. 1, 2 and 11). The first teeth to develop in
the catshark (Scyliorhinus spp.) are irregular with variable cusp
numbers (1–3, depending on the jaw position of the tooth; Figs. 1E–
H and 11) and sizes compared to the subsequent generations.
3.4. The continuously regenerative dentition of the catshark develops
from a permanent, deep dental lamina
Probably the most distinctive character of the shark (and ray)
dentition is the propensity for continuous regeneration of multiple
formidable rows of teeth, within which multiple generations of
teeth may be simultaneously functional (Figs. 1 and 11). The cat-
shark arrives at this impressive dental phenotype via the con-
tinuous redeployment of key tooth developmental genes in both
the epithelial cells of the permanent DL, and underlying odonto-
genic mesenchyme (Fig. 10), which must each retain a degree of
pluripotency (stemness) throughout the adult life of the shark. The
permanent DL of the catshark is a continuous jaw-length epithelial
structure nestled within the recesses of the jaw cartilages (Fig. 2).
Within this DL new teeth are initiated and undergo morphogen-
esis before finally becoming functional upon eruption as the whole
‘conveyor-belt’ of teeth at different developmental stages moves
labially towards the edge of the jaws (Figs. 9–11). The DL forms
through proliferative growth (Figs. 6 and 7) coincident with the
initiation of the first generation tooth sites and sets up the pre-
cisely timed development of subsequent generations in distinct
tooth families in both the upper and lower jaws (Fig. 8). Following
first generation initiation, the controlled outgrowth of the shark
DL retains its general shape and cellular boundary integrity with a
well-defined basement membrane surrounding the successional
lamina (Figs. 9 and 10). The successional lamina is the distal extent
(free-end) of the DL (Fig. 2) and is the site of new replacement
tooth initiation (Fig. 10).
Genes associated with the Bmp, Fgf, Wnt/B-catenin, and
Hedgehog signalling families are expressed within cells related to
all stages of tooth regeneration in the shark dentition, from the
early DL (Fig. 5) to the regenerative successional lamina (Figs. 10
and 12). Within the successional lamina the inner cells emerge to
form the tooth cap; the outer epithelial cells that form the lingual
extent of the DL surround a core intermediate lamina cell set that
expresses a number of markers including pitx1 and pitx2 (Fig. 10).
This expression somewhat overlaps with expression domains of β-
catenin, (Fig. 10A and B) and it has been hypothesized (Smith et al.,
2009b; Tucker and Fraser, 2014) that one of two proposed pockets
of epithelial stem/progenitor cells reside in this intermediate
successional lamina region (Figs. 9 and 10, asterisk in Fig. 10M, O,
and P). The second proposed region of epithelial stem cell main-
tenance necessary for tooth regeneration may reside in more su-
perficial cells at the junction between oral epithelial cells that are
on the cusp of becoming lamina epithelium and oral taste terri-
tories (Figs. 2, 5 and 9F, asterisk). These potential sites of epithelial
stem cell activity are in accordance with other polyphyodont
vertebrates e.g. reptiles (Gaete and Tucker, 2013; Handrigan et al.,
2010; Handrigan and Richman, 2010b; Wu et al., 2013). The re-
lationship between these sites and the expression of stem cell
markers are currently being investigated (Martin and Fraser, un-
published). At the free end of the DL (successional lamina) a
number of genes are expressed to induce tooth replacement in-
itiation including β-catenin, lef1, and pitx1 (Figs. 10 and 12). In-
terestingly, shh, known to be expressed in sites marking initiation
of the first tooth generation, is not expressed in initiatory sites of
tooth replacement emergence (Fig. 10O and P, asterisk). This is
confirmed in the polyphyodont snake (Handrigan and Richman,
2010a) and cichlid (Fraser et al., 2013).
The ability of elasmobranchs to produce this highly productive
and deep lying DL has been key to their success as a major ver-
tebrate lineage. Maintenance of this structure is absolutely ne-
cessary for the continued regeneration of teeth. It is plausible that
mesenchymal factors are necessary for the maintenance and re-
ciprocal signalling required for growth of this dynamic lamina.
pax9 (Fig. 9I and J) and pitx2 (Fig. 9M and N) are two mesenchymal
markers in the shark that appear to surround the successional
lamina during at least the initiation of the second tooth generation
(Fig. 9); it will be important to focus research efforts on the role of
mesenchymal factors that either help maintain DL integrity or
maintain a population of stem-like cells necessary for tooth re-
generation (Kaukua et al., 2014).
Fig. 11. Generational heterodonty and changes in tooth morphology during development and growth in Scyliorhinus canicula. A, Schematic illustration of the S. canicula
lower jaw dental formula in hatchling (right) and juvenile/adult (left) animals based on cleared and alizarin red stained specimens. Tooth morphology varies both with jaw
position and with developmental timing in S. canicula. B, In the adult dentition, both symphysial (S) and parasymphysial (Ps) midline tooth positions invariable exhibit a
tricuspid phenotype as exemplified by an advanced cusp mineralization stage parasymphysial T(Ps) replacement tooth of unknown generation (gþ) in with cusp positions
demarcated by asterisks (*), in white for main cusp, and in black for accessory cusps. In advanced cusp mineralization stage replacement teeth, a clear boundary can be seen
between the hyper-dense enameloid caps (transparent, white arrowhead) and alizarin-red positive dentine (red, black arrowhead). Within the lateral tooth fields, tooth
morphology varies with jaw position with the largest teeth generally more proximate to the midline, and reducing in size towards the jaw margins. C, Cusp number and
configuration also varies with jaw position with the teeth closer to the midline exhibiting a pentacuspid morphology with a single prominent main cusp (white asterisk) and
2 pairs of accessory cusps (black asterisks) characterizing tooth families 1–13, as exemplified by the high magnification image of unknown replacement generation of tooth
family T6. D, More lateral tooth positions exhibit progressively reduced prominence of the central cusp (white asterisk) and increased prominence of 3 accessory cusps (black
asterisks) coupled with the loss of the final accessory cusp most distal from the midline (black ‘x’) and exhibit a quatrocuspid morphology, as exemplified by tooth T18-gþ
and characteristic of tooth families 14–19 at this stage. Younger replacement generations at early cusp mineralization stage exhibit light alizarin red staining of the enameloid
in the emerging cusps (white arrow), prior to dentine mineralization and enameloid hypermineralization, which will eventually exclude alizarin red. E, As the individual
grows, additional tooth families are added to the distal jaw margins (T19, T20) beyond the complement present in hatchling-stage animals (A, right hand side), and the most
recent tooth family added (T20) exhibits a tricuspid morphology with one central cusp (white asterisk) and two accessory cusps (black asterisks) reminiscent of the
symphysial and parasymphysial teeth, and is significantly smaller than adjacent lateral tooth families. F, In hatchling stage animals, which possess 18 lateral tooth families
tooth development is staggered with even-numbered tooth families showing up to 3 mineralization-stage generations, while odd-numbered tooth families exhibit only up to
2 mineralization stage generations. Tooth families more distal from the midline have initiated progressively fewer replacement generations and the very last tooth family to
initiate (T18) only comprises of 1 generation exhibiting mineralization at hatching. G, Cusp morphology of the first generation (g1) dentition in S. canicula is variable and
rudimentary compared with subsequent replacement generations usually with only a single definitive central cusp (white asterisk) and 1 or 2 rounded, irregularly shaped
accessory cusps (black asterisks), exemplified by T8-g1.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
16
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 3.5. Signalling centres for tooth cusp morphogenesis are conserved
between sharks and bony vertebrates
The teeth of sharks are highly diverse in both shape and cusp
ornament, from blade-like cutting teeth, with or without serra-
tions, to broad, pavement-like crushing teeth (Cappetta, 2012). The
teeth of Scyliorhinus spp. are sharp, elongated, non-serrated units
with a larger main (central) cusp and up to two pairs of accessory
cusps (Ellis and Shackley, 1995; Figs. 1 and 11). In mammals, the
enamel knot (EK) is an important signalling centre directing the
formation of definitive cusps (Jernvall et al., 1994; Jernvall and
Thesleff, 2012; Vaahtokari et al., 1996). During morphogenetic
stages of catshark tooth development, we observe a signalling
centre at the apex of the emerging central cusp, which bears both
positional and genetic similarities to the mammalian primary EK,
and is therefore likely to be homologous (Figs. 6, 7 and 9). Al-
though, histologically this apical epithelial structure in the shark is
not ‘knot-shaped’ and thickened as observed in mammalian EKs, it
does show a distinct clustered, columnar set of inner dental epi-
thelial cells that express a set of markers that include bmp4, fgf3,
-10, midkine, ptc2 and shh (Figs. 9 and 10). With both positional
and genetic clues to the nature of this signalling centre, we also
observe the non-dividing characteristic of the shark primary EK, in
both first generation and in subsequent generations of tooth re-
placement. PCNA assays offer evidence that the shark EK is a non-
dividing population of epithelial cells with an obvious lack of PCNA
in the apical cells (Figs. 6F and 7F–H). Thus, the cessation of mitotic
activity in these restricted regions of the developing dental epi-
thelium might infer control of shark tooth shape, as is the role of
the likely homologous signalling centres in other vertebrates, in-
cluding mammals (Jernvall et al., 1994; Vaahtokari et al., 1996). In
mammals, the distinct and limited cluster of non-dividing apical
epithelial cells in the cap-stage tooth making up the EK partici-
pates in reciprocal molecular interactions with the underlying
mesenchymal cells during cap-bell stage tooth morphogenesis
through the expression of secreted signalling factors (Jernvall and
Thesleff, 2000). In the catshark, as morphogenesis begins at the
early cap-stage of tooth development, the apical cells of the inner
dental epithelium (Figs. 6 and 7), which mark the tip of the pri-
mary cusps, express several of the same secreted signalling factors
as the EK of mice including fgf3, fgf10, bmp4, and shh (Fig. 10). This
subset of secreted signalling factors are also expressed in epithelial
cells of mammalian EK signalling centres (Jernvall and Thesleff,
2000), demonstrating the remarkable conservation of key genetic
components of tooth signalling centres between sharks and
mammals. The first indication of primary EK-like epithelial cells in
Scyliorhinus occurs during the formation of the first generation
teeth, at the cap stage of tooth development (Figs. 6 and 7). In
terms of expression of knot markers, there is little change in ex-
pression from the rudimentary first generation teeth to the second
and further generations of more adult-like teeth (Figs. 9 and 10).
fgf3 is expressed both in the EK-like cells of the epithelium and the
papillary mesenchymal cells directly underlying the EK (Fig. 9E, F
and 10E, F). fgf10 is only expressed in a small number of cells and
limited to the EK-like apical epithelial cells of shark teeth at most
stages of tooth morphogenesis (Fig. 10G, H and 12). bmp4 is
Fig. 12. A core dental gene network for tooth initiation, and regeneration in sharks.
Schematic diagram summarizing the gene expression profiles during shark odon-
togenesis. A, the thickened dental epithelium starts the development and growth
(black arrow) of the dental lamina toward the underlying cartilage (MC). The deep
epithelial site at which the first tooth will emerge (red) expresses lef1, and not sox2
(dark blue). The underlying mesenchyme condenses and marks the region (light
blue, dotted) where the dental lamina will invaginate. B, the first tooth begins its
development and forms a contorted, superficial cap-shaped structure with papil-
lary mesenchyme and a enamel knot-like unit (pink circle), expressing the char-
acteristic markers fgf3, fgf10 and shh. During first tooth formation the dental lamina
continues its growth and proliferation (black arrow) into the underlying conden-
sing mesenchyme (dotted green) that surrounds the future successional lamina
(red asterisk). C, next (second) generation teeth begin to emerge from the suc-
cessional lamina, as a cap-shaped unit with inner dental epithelium (red) expres-
sing β-catenin, bmp4, fgf3, and lef1. The outer dental epithelium of the successional
lamina (dark blue) will continue to proliferate to form future tooth generations
(black arrow). The maturing first tooth retains an apical unit similar to the mam-
malian enamel knot (pink). Ep, epithelium; Mes, mesenchyme; MC, Meckel's
cartilage.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
17
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 expressed in both the early mesenchymal papilla and the inner
dental epithelial cells of the early cap-stage tooth in the first and
subsequent generations of teeth in Scyliorhinus (Fig. 9C, D and 10C,
D). bmp4 expression in these two adjacent cell compartments is
similar to known expression in the mammalian molar during
morphogenesis where these tissues interact (Jernvall et al., 1998),
and here shark teeth show equivalent co-expression of fgf3, β-
catenin and the canonical Wnt pathway read-out transcription
Table 1
Core gene expression among major clades of toothed vertebrate, with the addition of the shark. Comparative expression of core genes in the dental epithelium (E, pink) and
dental mesenchyme (M, blue) during tooth development and replacement (in the Shark, Bony Fish, Reptile, and Mammal (presence of expression denoted by þ, and absence
of expression denoted by �). Bony Fish: (1, Metriaclima zebra; Fraser et al., 2013; 2; Fraser et al., 2009); Reptile (3, Python regius; Handrigan and Richman, 2010b); Reptile
(various) and Mammal (various; 4, Juuri et al. 2013); Reptile (5, (*A), Crocodylus siamensis; pax9 expressed in oral mesenchyme of early forming tooth regions (Tokita et al.,
2012), although expression in A. mississippiensis at later stages is shown to be present in the dental lamina (epithelium) however, this is not clear; Weeks et al., 2013);
Mammal: (6, Mustela putorius furo; Jussila et al., 2014); Mammal (7, Mus musculus; St Amand et al., 2000); Mammal (8, (*B), Monodelphis domestica; fgf10 is predominantly
expressed in dental mesenchyme (e.g. in Mus musculus, 9, Kettunen et al., 2000), however, some expression data suggests fgf10 is also associated with primary enamel knot
epithelium in e.g. M. domestica; Moustakas et al., 2011). (?, question mark denotes unknown expression patterns during tooth development and replacement.
 
Shark 
Bony Fish 1,2 
Reptile 3-5 
Mammal 6-9 
 
E 
M 
E 
M 
E 
M 
E 
M 
β-cat 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
bmp4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
fgf3 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
? 
? 
+ 
+ 
fgf10 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
(-)*B 
lef1 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
pitx2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
pitx1 
+ 
- 
? 
? 
? 
? 
+ 
- 
pax9 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
? 
?*A 
- 
+ 
shh 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
sox2 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
Fig. 13. Comparative phylogeny of tooth replacement modes in toothed vertebrate clades. A. the shark dentition (elasmobranchs) continuously regenerates throughout life
(polyphyodont) with a many-for-one mechanism (many teeth made in advance of function for each functional tooth position in the jaw). B. Bony fishes offer a diverse range
of tooth replacement mechanisms, with continuous replacement with a one-for-one system (e.g. cichlid fishes, in B (Fraser et al., 2013); one replacement tooth made in
advance of function for each functional position), although a many-for-one system is observed in many bony fish species. C. Reptiles show a range of diverse mechanisms for
tooth replacement with a continuous polyphyodont system in some species e.g. the snake, in C (with some species showing a more restricted dentition without replacement
(monophyodont; e.g. chamealeon; Buchtová et al. 2013). D. The mammalian dentition also offers a range of diverse replacement or renewal phenotypes from monophyodont
mammals e.g. mice, where the only regenerative potential is observed in the continuously growing incisor (Di), and molars are never replaced. In most mammals the
dentition is diphyodont with two tooth generations e.g. humans (D). A phylogenetic reduction of tooth generations are generally observed toward more higher vertebrates
i.e. mammals.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
18
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 factor, lef1 (Figs. 9 and 10). This expression pattern, both in the
apical epithelial cells of the presumptive primary EK-like structure
in the shark, and the directly underlying dental papillary cells, is
highly similar to the molar tooth of the mouse (Jernvall et al., 1994;
Vaahtokari et al., 1996). The genetic and morphological conserva-
tion of both initiation and growth of the tooth is relatively un-
changed in vertebrates, and perhaps surprisingly the signalling
centre
that
directs
cusp
morphogenesis
has
been
retained
throughout vertebrate evolution. This highlights the stable de-
velopmental genetic cascade and cellular response in this process.
An inner enamel epithelium-derived signalling centre therefore
acts as an organizational centre in both bony fishes (at least the
primary EK) (Jernvall and Thesleff, 2000) and cartilaginous fishes
and has likely directed tooth shape and cusp morphogenesis since
the first vertebrate tooth
4. Discussion
4.1. A tooth by any other name… Highly diverse dentitions utilize the
same developmental toolkit
Gene expression during stages of tooth development in the
shark highlights the highly conserved genetic mechanism that
forms the basis to the core ‘odontode’ unit: tooth-like structures
including teeth, skin denticles and other skin ornaments com-
posed of dentine and enamel-like tissues (Debiais-Thibaud et al.,
2011; Donoghue, 2002; Fraser et al., 2010). Vast diversity and
complexity can arise from these forms. Core markers of tooth
competence and development are present in all dentitions from
sharks to mammals, a 450 million year conservation of a core
dental network. Even the earliest core components of the dental
developmental programme, albeit latent, exist in toothless verte-
brates e.g. Aves (Chen et al., 2000), highlighting the early com-
petence of an odontogenic pre-pattern in, at least, the oral epi-
thelium prior to subsequent loss of tooth initiatory competence
thought to be associated with loss of reciprocal ectomesenchymal
signalling (Chen et al., 2000; Mitsiadis et al., 2006, 2003). This
further suggests that an early core dental network exists in most
vertebrates, and likely all vertebrate clades. A derived loss of either
all teeth or just the tooth regeneration programme can occur via
developmental restriction through loss of compartmental signal-
ling (developmental tinkering). Similarly, the enhancement of the
dentition to form a continuous supply of teeth without restriction
is governed by the maintenance of these factors capable of tooth
competence and concurrent modification of the timing, shape and
regenerative potential. Both restriction and enhancement of den-
tition and replacement is a product of both gene network tinkering
and stability of the core genetic components. Sharks (and elas-
mobranchs more generally, including the rays) are a particularly
important set of models for the complete understanding of the
tooth development and dental regenerative programmes.
Overall, this examination of tooth initiation, development and
regeneration in the shark offers insights into the basal characters
of the vertebrate dentition, and importantly highlights the high
level of conservation of these core dental genes in vertebrate tooth
development (Table 1; Fig. 13). These data suggest that the broad
spectrum of vertebrate odontogenesis must retain this core set of
genes, regardless of type and phenotypic restriction of the specific
system. Some elements that show significant differences between
sharks and all other vertebrates could emphasize more basal
components of the earliest vertebrate dentition. In the developing
shark
pitx2
has
a
unique
expression
pattern,
present
pre-
dominantly in dental mesenchymal cells throughout odontogen-
esis (in addition to dental epithelial expression; Figs. 3–5, 9 and
10; Table 1). This is an uncommon expression pattern among
vertebrates and could suggest an ancestral character and a po-
tential mesenchymal role for pitx2 in the formation of the shark
dentition, and likely the earliest dentitions of basal vertebrates. In
other vertebrates that have been documented (teleost fishes,
reptiles and mammals; Table 1) Pitx2 is exclusively expressed in
dental epithelial cells, a pattern not so restricted in the shark. It is
intriguing that sharks (i.e. Scyliorhinus) therefore have retained (or
acquired) a mesencymal expression pattern for pitx2 in early tooth
site regionalisation (prior to tooth initiation; Figs. 4D–F and 5G, H)
through morphogenesis and even during dental regeneration
(Fig. 9M, N and 10L), which could be related to an ancestral me-
senchymal role for Pitx genes, lost in most vertebrates. Therefore,
these data could suggest a potential mesenchymal role for pitx2 as
a distinctive character for basal vertebrate dentitions.
It is thought that sharks retain a set of basal vertebrate dental
characters and that at the dawn of toothed, jawed vertebrates, a
continuous production of teeth was commonplace. We suggest
that for this basal dental system of continuous tooth regeneration,
a dental lamina was and is absolutely necessary, and equivalent to
that seen in the extant shark (Figs. 10–12). To maintain a con-
tinuous tooth regenerative programme or even a limited but
multi-generational dentition, an extension of the dental epithe-
lium (dental lamina) must have the ability to continue prolifera-
tion from a stock of stem-like progenitor cells to form new tooth
generations (Tucker and Fraser, 2014). To function, this lamina
must be capable of receiving the inductive signals necessary to
maintain the reciprocal signalling with the surrounding me-
senchyme. Additionally, these competent epithelial cells should
have some ability to respond to potential signals originating from
mesenchymal stem-like cells that likely persist in some form of
latent state (Kaukua et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2014).
4.2. Formation of the odontogenic band-a cellular pre-pattern for
tooth initiation
The early epithelial gene calibration and the onset of tooth
competent cells demarcating the odontogenic band (OB) is a
fundamental character of the developing vertebrate jaw. We
therefore suggest that for teeth to appear from a seemingly
homogeneous oral cell condensation in vertebrates, an OB must be
a prerequisite. The process of tooth development is evolutionarily
stable, a conserved process that can undergo minor shifts in the
deployment of genes during morphogenesis that can alter dental
morphology; however the overall core dental network remains
set, governed by stable vertebrate pathways (Hariharan et al.,
2015). The stability of these dental pathways unites diverse den-
titions from the emergence of tooth competent cells within the OB
through tooth development and replacement. If tinkering with the
core genetic pathways for tooth development alters shape and
creates diverse phenotypes, then the same conserved programme
must exist for tooth replacement, where genetic tinkering (Jacob,
1977; Lieberman and Hall, 2007) could facilitate a reduction or
expansion of the capacity for tooth replacement (Fraser et al.,
2013; Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012). This may suggest that slight
genetic alterations could be the difference between a limited,
mammalian replacement supply and an unlimited dentition as
presented here in the shark. This is a promising opportunity for
the future of tooth regenerative biology, and sharks could play an
important role in the discovery of new methods and key markers
for continuous tooth regeneration.
4.3. Development of a dental lamina, not necessary for odontogen-
esis but essential for dental regeneration
The first generation dentition in sharks is superficial and ru-
dimentary, and this process is conserved among most vertebrates
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
19
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 except mammals. First rudiments develop superfically and with-
out the need for a ‘dental lamina’ proper. Interestingly, the dental
lamina seems to be a highly dynamic structure that is required for
the developments of multi-generation dentitions (Smith et al.,
2009b). However, among the great diversity of fishes, some spe-
cies have retained the ability to develop continuously replacing
teeth without a ‘standard’ dental lamina, e.g. salmonids; instead
their repeated dentition arises from epithelial cells associated with
the development of predecessor teeth (Fraser et al., 2006a;
Huysseune and Witten, 2008). This could be characterized as a
basic lamina, from cells lying deep to the predecessor tooth for the
continued production of tooth replacements in a one-for-one
manner. A ‘one-for-one’ tooth replacement state could be con-
sidered atypical of polyphyodont vertebrates and could relate to
why some teleosts such as the salmonids (Fraser et al., 2006a;
Huysseune and Witten, 2008) are able to replace their teeth
without the need for a true dental lamina, whereas, species with a
‘many-for-one’ replacement system must do so with a dental la-
mina. Sharks and their relatives (including the rays), however,
continuously regenerate their dentition with a ‘many-for-one
system’ (many teeth within a single family/file for a single func-
tional position (Figs. 1, 11 and 13; Tucker and Fraser, 2014), where
individual functional teeth at the jaw edge are followed by many
lingual tooth replacements that develop ahead of function within
the deep epithelial dental lamina. The ‘many-for-one’ poly-
phyodont dental system is observed in many vertebrates outside
the elasmobranchs, including reptiles (Fig. 13; Gaete and Tucker,
2013; Handrigan et al., 2010; Handrigan and Richman, 2010b).
The dental lamina is an essential requirement for multiple
tooth generations in vertebrates. The dental lamina as an exten-
sion of the dental epithelium, associated with the predecessor
tooth, is a vital vertebrate character for polyphyodonty (Fraser
et al., 2013; Gaete and Tucker, 2013; Handrigan et al., 2010; Jern-
vall and Thesleff, 2012) and enables the variable regenerative ca-
pacity for new teeth. The degradation of the dental lamina in some
vertebrates after the first or second-generation dentition coincides
with limited potential for regeneration, e.g. in mammals including
the mouse (Jarvinen et al., 2006), ferret (Juuri et al., 2013), and
human (Volponi et al., 2010; Fig. 13). Here we show the shark as an
extreme example of dental lamina diversity with an expanded
dental lamina housing several generations of teeth in advance of
function, in association with the chondrichthyan character of un-
ique cartilaginous jaws (Fig. 13). Without the dental lamina tooth
regeneration would likely be severely disrupted, and we predict
only first generation teeth would form, at least in the shark. This
hypothesis is eminently testable and future experiments on elas-
mobranch models will prove the influence of the dental lamina as
essential for continuous and rapid tooth regeneration. It is intri-
guing that higher vertebrates that have a greatly reduced denti-
tion, in terms of replacement, also fail to retain the dental lamina.
Typically replacement fails to occur after the break down or loss of
the dental lamina in mammals (Buchtová et al., 2012).
The shark dental lamina importantly houses epithelial cells that
likely have stem-like properties (Martin and Fraser, unpublished),
as reported in several vertebrates with a polyphyodont dentition
(Gaete and Tucker, 2013; Handrigan et al., 2010; Juuri et al., 2013).
This is a crucial role for the dental lamina and one that suggests a
dental lamina is essential for the continued production of tooth
replacements. The exact location of putative stem cells within this
distinctive regenerative character in the shark is yet to be con-
firmed (Martin and Fraser, unpublished), however it has been
hypothesized that stem/progenitor cells could exist in one of two
locations of the dental lamina (Smith et al., 2009a): either the
distal successional lamina (Figs. 10 and 12) in the intermediate
cells of the middle epithelium (Huysseune and Thesleff, 2004) or
within a pocket of superficial epithelia linking the dental lamina to
the taste bud-dense oral epithelium (Figs. 2 and 8).
The occurrence of supernumerary teeth in humans and other
mammals suggests some aberrant or anomalous genetic me-
chanisms that can lead to a shift, albeit, rare, in the development
of the human/mammalian dentition (Wang and Fan, 2011). This
hints at a possible dormant availability of potential material for
stimulated extension of the limited dentition. A number of reports
offer genetic association e.g. Wnt/β-catenin (Jarvinen et al. 2006;
Wang et al. 2009), Lef1 (Zhou et al., 1995) and Runx2 (Wang and
Fan, 2011), and genes associated with these perturbations are ex-
pressed in the shark dentition (shark runx2 data not shown) at
sites of replacement potential. With this model system it will
useful to design manipulation experiments based on evidence
gathered from expression of genes involved specifically in the
expansion, maintenance or elaboration of the dental lamina to
investigate further in mammals.
4.4. The enamel knot-like signalling centre – a vertebrate
innovation?
Based on these gene expression (Figs. 9 and 10) and im-
munohistochemical data (Figs. 6 and 7), we suggest that all teeth
share a mechanism for tooth shape that is governed by enamel
knot-like signalling centres (Jernvall et al., 1994). However, the
defining characteristics of the EK apoptotic mechanism in the
shark dentition have yet to be confirmed. We suggest that the first
teeth to emerge during the evolution of vertebrates utilized a
common set of genes for tooth morphogenesis and to establish
cusp shape, whether forming simple unicuspid teeth or multi-
cuspid forms in sharks (Figs. 1 and 11) or more complex dental
phenotypes for example molar teeth of mammals (Jernvall and
Thesleff, 2000, 2012; Thesleff and Sharpe, 1997).
Interestingly, cusp morphogenesis in some vertebrates (e.g.
squamates (Handrigan and Richman, 2011) and the alligator
(Weeks et al., 2013)) show contrasting evidence for cusp signalling
centres throughout vertebrates. These reptiles show expression of
shh and fgf4 in all inner dental epithelial cells rather than in a
defined subset of apical cells suggestive of an EK. Thus it has been
suggested that the EK is a possible mammalian innovation (Weeks
et al., 2013). However, we observe a structure similar to the pri-
mary EK in the shark (Figs. 9, 10 and 12), and others have noted
this structure in several species of ‘lower’ vertebrates, which have
unicuspid and mutlicuspid dentitions, even during the first and
second-generation teeth (Fraser et al., 2008, 2013). Therefore we
suggest that at least the primary EK is a highly conserved signal-
ling centre for tooth morphogenesis and shape diversity, and is a
vertebrate innovation. However, if key markers and cellular in-
tegrity of a ‘standard’ primary EK are not present in apical inner
dental epithelial cells (as recently purported in the Alligator and
other reptiles) then it is likely that the EK can be modified or lost.
Potential loss of the EK (either the primary EK or subsequent EKs)
as a derived character highlights the diversity of odontogenesis.
Those vertebrates with a simple dentition (e.g. unicuspid homo-
donts) could exhibit simplified tooth morphogenesis secondary to
EK loss; further investigation will certainly uncover modifications
and enhancements of EK-like cells in more derived groups of
vertebrates.
Due to the lack of sequence data from shark libraries, orthologs
of mammalian genes e.g. fgf4 and fgf9 were not cloned for gene
expression analysis. However, the discrepancy in gene expression
observed between the shark and mouse tooth development (Ta-
ble 1) could reflect shifts in differential gene expression associated
with EK-like signalling, for example fgf10 expression in the EK-like
cells of the shark (Fig. 10). Although, Fgf10 is expressed in the
presumptive dental epithelium of mouse molar regions at E10
(Kettunen
et
al., 2000), it becomes
down-regulated in the
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
20
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 epithelium and only expressed in the dental mesenchyme in de-
veloping teeth from mouse E11. However, it has been reported
(Moustakas et al., 2011) that Fgf10 is expressed in the primary
enamel knot in developing opossum (Monodelphis domestica)
teeth, in addition to expression in the dental mesenchyme
(equivalent to the mesenchymal expression observed in mice;
Kettunen et al., 2000). The presence of Fgf10 in the primary EKs of
opossum teeth has been suggested to promote rapid growth of the
epithelium providing the characteristic pointed crowns in M. do-
mestica (Moustakas et al., 2011). This observation fits with both the
expression pattern and tooth cusp characteristics of S. canicula
with rapid tooth growth and sharp blade-like cusps. It will be
intriguing to investigate the cellular dynamics and genetic me-
chanisms of tooth development and cusp morphogenesis in flat-
cusp teeth in alternative elasmobranchs, such as the ray (Raja spp.;
Underwood et al., 2015).
Shifts in gene expression might be expected given the vast
phylogenetic distance between sharks and mammals, as already
documented in this analysis for other genes, e.g. mesenchymal
expression of pitx2 (Figs. 7G, H, and 9M, N). We therefore hy-
pothesize that EK-like signalling centres themselves are highly
conserved among vertebrates, with similar cellular characteristics
and signalling pathways in operation (e.g. Fgfs), even if only some
elements of the specific genetic repertoire are equivalent. Here we
have documented genetic and cellular conservation in the pre-
sumptive shark primary EK-like structure, however, complex tooth
shapes arise from the formation of secondary and subsequent EK-
like structures, at least in the mouse molar (Kettunen et al., 2000).
These data further emphasize the diversity of tooth shape and
the mechanisms responsible for shape shifting among vertebrate
clades (Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012). Genetic factors involved in
tooth shape are common elements of the tooth developmental
cascade and have also been shown to be associated with the
cooption of signals for tooth regeneration in a range of vertebrates
(Fraser et al., 2013; Jernvall and Thesleff, 2012). Sharks show a
huge diversity of tooth shapes from flattened molariform cusps to
sharp, blade-like teeth with or without accessory cusps and ad-
ditional serrations (Cappetta, 2012). The first teeth, however, share
basic morphological characters with subsequent teeth within
elasmobranchs; in Scyliorhinus spp. the initial dentition is multi-
cuspate and their form is comparable to teeth of adults. This is
similar to lamniform sharks (Shimada, 2002), in which these first
teeth, albeit peg-like and rudimentary, may be functional for a
considerable period prior to birth and used for intrauterine oo-
phagy and even embryophagy (‘intrauterine cannibalism’) (Gil-
more, 1993).
The teeth of Scyliorhinus develop and pattern cusps in a similar
manner to other multicuspid species, with the central cusp
forming ahead of the accessory cusps, followed by the right lateral
then left lateral cusp (Figs. 1 and 11). This observation suggests
that tooth shape must follow conserved genetic mechanisms that
have been retained throughout the evolution of vertebrates, and
similar tooth shapes can be generated regardless of regenerative
capacity. The shark (Scyliorhinus) shows that a standard mutli-
cuspid tooth shape can form from the emerging first generation
dentition (Fig. 11). Sharks do offer an example of how continuous
tooth regeneration mechanisms can permit a plastic dental system
with respect to tooth shape. With rapid tooth turnover, adult
Scyliorhinus show plasticity in sexually dimorphic tooth shape
seasonally (Ellis and Shackley, 1995), allowing a shift in tooth
shape via the process of regeneration to correspond to breeding
seasons. This mechanism of tooth shape transition can only be
observed in species with continuous tooth regeneration. Tooth
shape-shifting in sharks and dental sexual dimorphism suggests
that vertebrates with multiple generations can be relatively
‘plastic’ with respect to tooth morphogenesis (Kajiura and Tricas,
1996). Therefore rapid turnover of tooth replacements may give
some vertebrates an advantage in altering mating behaviour or
shifting their diet seasonally.
4.5. Collaboration between the cartilaginous jaws and tooth devel-
opment facilitate the continuous conveyor belt-like dental regenera-
tion in sharks
The characteristic shark jaw cartilages enable the regulation
and precise cyclical nature of tooth regeneration in a ‘conveyor-
belt’ system (Figs. 1, 2, and 11). Teeth in sharks are capable of
physical movement (the mechanism of which is currently un-
known) through the dental lamina toward functionality without
the constraints of tooth to bone attachment observed in os-
teichthyan and sarcopterygians. Instead, the shark utilizes a set of
connective tissues (Fig. 2) that envelop the oral surface of the jaw
cartilages and attach to the root elements of the teeth (Figs. 1 and
2). This soft-tissue attachment allows both the functional reten-
tion of tooth units and the plasticity to facilitate movement of the
teeth through the epithelial dental lamina. The teeth become se-
cure and functional at the jaw margin and then lost when suc-
cessor teeth of the same family force the predecessor over the jaw
margin out of the oral cavity where they are eventually exfoliated
(Figs. 1 and 2).
What makes the shark dentition unique is the ability for pre-
cisely timed continuous tooth regeneration. The dynamic and
continuous dental lamina facilitates the development of multiple
teeth in quick succession to form in the extended and deeply in-
vaginated epithelia. All the teeth in the shark dentition, including
all the newly forming replacement teeth are linked within the
same set of dental epithelial cells of the lamina. The teeth are
further linked together via connective tissues (Reif, 1980; Shellis,
1982) that support the basal tissues of the roots (bone of attach-
ment), forming the quintessential conveyor-belt dentition that lies
tightly associated with the surface of the jaw cartilages (dorso-
lingual Meckel's and ventro-lingual palatoquadrate; Figs. 1 and 2).
The fact that tooth regeneration in sharks does not involve bony
attachment and instead utilizes the connective tissues as a foot-
hold for the tooth roots enable a certain plasticity to the dental
system allowing ‘movement’ of the tooth families in a labial
(rostral) progression toward functionality and later physical ex-
foliation (or damage). The lack of restriction of teeth to fixed
points on the jaw in sharks also allows the evolution of dentitions
within which several teeth originating from within the same
section of dental lamina are simultaneously functional, resulting in
the extremely high morphological and functional diversity of
shark dentitions. Furthermore, the continuous nature of the shark
dental lamina and the lack of lamina restriction (a bony crypt re-
striction of the successional lamina is observed in other fishes with
a polyphyodont dentition) (Fraser et al., 2013; Huysseune and
Thesleff, 2004; Tucker and Fraser, 2014), permits the shark den-
tition an extremely rapid turn over of tooth units throughout life.
5. Conclusion
With these data, we integrate the genetic coordination of three
main processes in the development of the characteristic shark
dentition (Fig. 12); (i) tooth initiation and the formation of the
distinctive dental lamina from which all future teeth are born, (ii)
tooth morphogenesis and the conservation of a signalling centre
(primary enamel knot) for tooth shape regulation, and (iii) the
genetics of continuous tooth regeneration. This collection of dental
characters in a tractable developmental genetic model, the cat-
shark, will facilitate the expansion of experimental progress in the
study of dental evolution, development and regeneration. Given
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
21
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 the extensive conservation at all levels of the odontogenic pro-
gramme, presented here, the study of diverse organisms is
therefore essential for both phylogenetic context and for further
insights into the mechanisms of dental regenerative biology. These
data report that the shark dentition is formed and patterned via
highly conserved signals that are utilized by all toothed verte-
brates; therefore sharks must be a definitive model for the com-
plete understanding of general vertebrate tooth development as
well as a unique model for the study of tooth regeneration. From
the large scale patterning events to the smaller scale cellular
mechanics, the shark shows great conservation of genetic ex-
pression, and therefore these early vertebrates offer an opportu-
nity for further evolutionary and developmental knowledge on the
origins of the vertebrate dentition.
The shark represents a key model for developmental di-
versity and the expansion of the functional dentition, with a
distinct, continuously maintained dental lamina for cyclical life-
long tooth regeneration. Based on the fact that genetic factors in
tooth development and dental regeneration are both highly
conserved and diverse among all toothed vertebrates, the in-
formation gleaned from this valuable developmental model will
allow the translational progression of this field of regenerative
biology. Future research will take advantage of the unique cyclic
regeneration of the shark dentition to study mechanisms gov-
erning maintenance of potential mesenchymal and epithelial
stem cells and replenishment of regenerative mechanisms in
dentitions of limited supply.
Funding
This research was supported by the following research grants:
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) standard grant, NE/
K014595/1 (to GJF); NERC Ph.D. studentship (LJR); NE/K014293/1
(to CJU); the Leverhulme Trust Research Grant, RPG-211 (to GJF).
Acknowledgements
We thank Moya Smith, and Zerina Johanson and members of
the Fraser Lab for stimulating discussions associated with these
data. We are grateful to Serina Akhtar, and Ben Evans for lab as-
sistance, and Constance Rich for image-editing assistance. We also
thank Phil Young for husbandry and aquarium maintenance (Dept.
Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield), Xavier Bailey
and members of the Centre de Ressources Biologiques Marines of
the Station Biologique de Roscoff for providing shark embryos,
France; John Mulley (University of Bangor), and Ashley Tweedale,
in memoriam, for the supply and collection assistance of S. canicula
embryos during the early development of this work. We also thank
the Native Marine Centre (UK) for the supply of both S. canicula
and S. stellaris, used in this study. For microCT assistance (to CU)
and CT rendering assistance we thank Dan Sykes and Farah Ahmed
at the Imaging and Analysis Centre at the Natural History Museum,
London. For the animal artwork used in Fig. 13 we thank Catherine
Hamilton and Chris Amemiya for the gift of these files.
References
Ballard, W.W., Mellinger, J., Lechenault, H., 1993. A series of normal stages for de-
velopment of Scyliorhinus canicula, the lesser spotted dogfish. J. Exp. Zool. 267,
318–336.
Bei, M., 2009. Molecular genetics of tooth development. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 19,
504–510.
Botella, H., 2006. The oldest fossil evidence of dental lamina in sharks. J. Vertebr.
Paleontol. 26, 1002–1003.
Botella, H., Valenzuela-Rios, J.I., Martinez-Perez, 2009. Tooth replacement rates in
early chondrichthyans: a qualitative approach. Lethaia 42, 365–376.
Brazeau, M.D., Friedman, M., 2015. The origin and early phylogenetic history of
jawed vertebrates. Nature 520, 490–497.
Buchtová, M., Stembírek, J., Glocová, K., Matalová, E., Tucker, A.S., 2012. Early re-
gression of the dental lamina underlies the development of diphyodont den-
titions. J. Dent. Res. 91, 491–498.
Buchtová, M., Zahradníček, O., Balková, S., Tucker, A.S., 2013. Odontogenesis in the
Veiled Chameleon (Chamaeleo calyptratus). Arch. Oral Biol. 58 (2), 118–133.
Cappetta, H., 2012. Mesozoic and Cenozoic elasmobranchii: teeth. Chondrichthyes.
In: Schultze, H.P. (Ed.), Handbook of palaeoichthyology. Verlag, München,
p. 512.
Chen, Y., Zhang, Y., Jiang, T.X., Barlow, A.J., St Amand, T.R., Hu, Y., Heaney, S., Francis-
West, P., Chuong, C.M., Maas, R., 2000. Conservation of early odontogenic sig-
naling pathways in Aves. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 10044–10049.
Coolen, M., Menuet, A., Chassoux, D., Compagnucci, C., Henry, S., Lévèque, L., Da
Silva, C., Gavory, F., Samain, S., Wincker, P., Thermes, C., D’Aubenton-Carafa, Y.,
Rodriguez-Moldes, I., Naylor, G., Depew, M., Sourdaine, P., Mazan, S., 2008. The
Dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula: a reference in Jawed Vertebrates. Cold Spring
Harb. Protoc . http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/pdb.emo111.
Davis, S.P., Finarelli, J.A., Coates, M.I., 2012. Acanthodes and shark-like conditions in
the last common ancestor of modern gnathostomes. Nature 486, 247–250.
Debiais-Thibaud, M., Borday-Birraux, V., Germon, I., Bourrat, F., Metcalfe, C.J., Ca-
sane, D., Laurenti, P., 2007. Development of oral and pharyngeal teeth in the
medaka (Oryzias latipes): comparison of morphology and expression of eve1
gene. J. Exp. Zool. B: Mol. Dev. Evol. 308, 693–708.
Debiais-Thibaud, M., Oulion, S., Bourrat, F., Laurenti, P., Casane, D., Borday-Birraux,
V., 2011. The homology of odontodes in gnathostomes: insights from Dlx gene
expression in the dogfish, Scyliorhinus canicula. BMC Evol. Biol. 11, 307.
Donoghue, P.J.C., 2002. Evolution of development of the vertebrate dermal and oral
skeletons: unraveling concepts, regulatory theories, and homologies. Paleo-
biology 28, 474–507.
Ellis, J.R., Shackley, S.E., 1995. Ontogenic changes and sexual dimorphism in the
head, mouth and teeth of the lesser spotted dogfish. J. Fish Biol. 47, 155–164.
Finarelli, J.A., Coates, M.I., 2012. First tooth-set outside the jaws in vertebrate. Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. 279, 775–779.
Fraser, G.J., Berkovitz, B.K., Graham, A., Smith, M.M., 2006a. Gene deployment for
tooth replacement in the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss): a develop-
mental model for evolution of the osteichthyan dentition. Evol. Dev. 8,
446–457.
Fraser, G.J., Bloomquist, R.F., Streelman, J.T., 2008. A periodic pattern generator for
dental diversity. BMC Biol. 6, 32.
Fraser, G.J., Bloomquist, R.F., Streelman, J.T., 2013. Common developmental path-
ways link tooth shape to regeneration. Dev. Biol. 377, 399–414.
Fraser, G.J., Britz, R., Hall, A., Johanson, Z., Smith, M.M., 2012. Replacing the first-
generation dentition in pufferfish with a unique beak. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
109, 8179–8184.
Fraser, G.J., Cerny, R., Soukup, V., Bronner-Fraser, M., Streelman, J.T., 2010. The
odontode explosion: The origin of tooth-like structures in vertebrates. BioEs-
says, 32.
Fraser, G.J., Graham, A., Smith, M.M., 2004. Conserved deployment of genes during
odontogenesis across osteichthyans. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 271,
2311–2317.
Fraser, G.J., Graham, A., Smith, M.M., 2006b. Developmental and Evolutionary
Origins of the Vertebrate Dentition: Molecular Controls for Spatio-temporal
Organisation of Tooth Sites in Osteichthyans. J. Exp. Zool. B: Mol. Dev. Evol. 306,
183–203.
Fraser, G.J., Hulsey, C.D., Bloomquist, R.F., Uyesugi, K., Manley, N.R., Streelman, J.T.,
2009. An ancient gene network is co-opted for teeth on old and new jaws. PLoS
Biol. 7, e31.
Freitas, R., Cohn, M.J., 2004. Analysis of EphA4 in the lesser spotted catshark
identifies a primitive gnathostome expression pattern and reveals co-option
during evolution of shark-specific morphology. Dev. Genes Evol. 214, 466–472.
Freitas, R., Zhang, G., Cohn, M.J., 2007. Biphasic Hoxd gene expression in shark
paired fins reveals an ancient origin of the distal limb domain. PLoS ONE 2,
e754.
Gaete, M., Tucker, A.S., 2013. Organized emergence of multiple-generations of teeth
in snakes is dysregulated by activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. PloS One
8, e74484.
Gibert, Y., Bernard, L., Debiais-Thibaud, M., Bourrat, F., Joly, J.S., Pottin, K., Meyer, A.,
Retaux, S., Stock, D.W., Jackman, W.R., Seritrakul, P., Begemann, G., Laudet, V.,
2010. Formation of oral and pharyngeal dentition in teleosts depends on dif-
ferential recruitment of retinoic acid signaling. FASEB J.
Giles, S., Friedman, M., Brazeau, M.D., 2015. Osteichthyan-like cranial conditions in
an Early Devonian stem gnathostome. Nature 520, 82–85.
Gillis, J.A., Modrell, M.S., Baker, C.V., 2012. A timeline of pharyngeal endoskeletal
condensation and differentiation in the shark, Scyliorhinus canicula, and the
paddlefish, Polyodon spathula. J. Applied Ichthyol. 28, 341–345.
Gillis, J.A., Modrell, M.S., Baker, C.V., 2013. Developmental evidence for serial
homology of the vertebrate jaw and gill arch skeleton. Nat. Commun. 4, 1436.
Gillis, J.A., Rawlinson, K.A., Bell, J., Lyon, W.S., Baker, C.V., Shubin, N.H., 2011. Ho-
locephalan embryos provide evidence for gill arch appendage reduction and
opercular evolution in cartilaginous fishes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108,
1507–1512.
Gilmore, R.G., 1993. Reproductive biology of lamnoid sharks. Environ. Biol. Fishes
38, 95–114.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
22
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 Handrigan, G.R., Leung, K.J., Richman, J.M., 2010. Identification of putative dental
epithelial stem cells in a lizard with life-long tooth replacement. Development
137, 3545–3549.
Handrigan, G.R., Richman, J.M., 2010a. Autocrine and paracrine Shh signaling are
necessary for tooth morphogenesis, but not tooth replacement in snakes and
lizards (Squamata). Dev. Biol. 337, 171–186.
Handrigan, G.R., Richman, J.M., 2010b. A network of Wnt, hedgehog and BMP sig-
naling pathways regulates tooth replacement in snakes. Dev. Biol. 348,
130–141.
Handrigan, G.R., Richman, J.M., 2011. Unicuspid and bicuspid tooth crown forma-
tion in squamates. J. Exp. Zool. Part B Mol. Dev. Evol. 316, 598–608.
Harada, H., Kettunen, P., Jung, H.S., Mustonen, T., Wang, Y.A., Thesleff, I., 1999. Lo-
calization of putative stem cells in dental epithelium and their association with
Notch and FGF signaling. J. Cell Biol. 147, 105–120.
Hariharan, I.K., Wake, D.B., Wake, M.H., 2015. Indeterminate growth: could it re-
present the ancestral condition??. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol., a019174
Hovorakova, M., Prochazka, J., Lesot, H., Smrckova, L., Churava, S., Boran, T., Kozmik,
Z., Klein, O., Peterkova, R., Peterka, M., 2011. Shh expression in a rudimentary
tooth offers new insights into development of the mouse incisor. J. Exp. Zool.
316B, 347–358.
Huysseune, A., Thesleff, I., 2004. Continuous tooth replacement: the possible in-
volvement of epithelial stem cells. Bioessays 26, 665–671.
Huysseune, A., Witten, P.E., 2008. An evolutionary view on tooth development and
replacement in wild Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Evol. Dev. 10, 6–14.
Jackman, W.R., Draper, B.W., Stock, D.W., 2004. Fgf signaling is required for zeb-
rafish tooth development. Dev. Biol. 274, 139–157.
Jackman, W.R., Stock, D.W., 2006. Transgenic analysis of Dlx regulation in fish tooth
development reveals evolutionary retention of enhancer function despite organ
loss. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 19390–19395.
Jacob, F., 1977. Evolution and tinkering. Science 196, 1161–1166.
Jarvinen, E., Salazar-Ciudad, I., Birchmeier, W., Taketo, M.M., Jernvall, J., Thesleff, I.,
2006. Continuous tooth generation in mouse is induced by activated epithelial
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 18627–18632.
Jernvall, J., Aberg, T., Kettunen, P., Keranen, S., Thesleff, I., 1998. The life history of an
embryonic signaling center: BMP-4 induces p21 and is associated with apop-
tosis in the mouse tooth enamel knot. Development 125, 161–169.
Jernvall, J., Kettunen, P., Karavanova, I., Martin, L.B., Thesleff, I., 1994. Evidence for
the role of the enamel knot as a control center in mammalian tooth cusp for-
mation: non-dividing cells express growth stimulating Fgf-4 gene. Int. J. Dev.
Biol. 38, 463–469.
Jernvall, J., Thesleff, I., 2000. Reiterative signaling and patterning during mamma-
lian tooth morphogenesis. Mech. Dev. 92, 19–29.
Jernvall, J., Thesleff, I., 2012. Tooth shape formation and tooth renewal: evolving
with the same signals. Development 139, 3487–3497.
Jussila, M., Thesleff, I., 2012. Signaling networks regulating tooth organogenesis and
regeneration, and the specification of dental mesenchymal and epithelial cell
lineages. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4, a008425.
Jussila, M., Crespo Yanez, X., Thesleff, I., 2014. Initiation of teeth from the dental
lamina in the ferret. Differentiation 87 (1–2), 32–43.
Juuri, E., Jussila, M., Seidel, K., Holmes, S., Wu, P., Richman, J., Heikinheimo, K.,
Chuong, C.M., Arnold, K., Hochedlinger, K., Klein, O., Michon, F., Thesleff, I.,
2013. Sox2 marks epithelial competence to generate teeth in mammals and
reptiles. Development 140, 1424–1432.
Kajiura, S., Tricas, T., 1996. Seasonal dynamics of dental sexual dimorphism in the
Atlantic stingray Dasyatis sabina. J. Exp. Biol. 199, 2297–2306.
Kaukua, N., Shahidi, M.K., Konstantinidou, C., Dyachuk, V., Kaucka, M., Furlan, A., An,
Z., Wang, L., Hultman, I., Ahrlund-Richter, L., Blom, H., Brismar, H., Lopes, N.A.,
Pachnis, V., Suter, U., Clevers, H., Thesleff, I., Sharpe, P., Ernfors, P., Fried, K.,
Adameyko, I., 2014. Glial origin of mesenchymal stem cells in a tooth model
system. Nature 513, 551–554.
Kettunen, P., Laurikkala, J., Itäranta, P., Vainio, S., Itoh, N., Thesleff, I., 2000. Asso-
ciations of FGF-3 and FGF-10 with signaling networks regulating tooth mor-
phogenesis. Dev. Dyn. 219, 322–332.
Kurki, P., Vanderlaan, M., Dolbeare, F., Gray, J., Tan, E.M., 1986. Expression of pro-
liferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)/cyclin during the cell cycle. Exp. Cell Res.
166, 209–219.
Lieberman, D.E., Hall, B.K., 2007. The evolutionary developmental biology of tin-
kering: an introduction to the challenge. In: Bock, G., Goode, J. (Eds.), Tinkering:
The Microevolution of Development. Wiley, United States, pp. 1–19.
Luer, C.A., Blum, P.C., Gilbert, P.W., 1990. Rate of tooth replacement in the nurse
shark, Ginglymostoma cirratum. Copeia 1, 182–191.
Maisey, J.G., Turner, S., Naylor, G.J., Miller, R.F., 2014. Dental patterning in the ear-
liest sharks: Implications for tooth evolution. J. Morphol. 275, 586–596.
Metscher, B.D., 2009a. MicroCT for comparative morphology: simple staining
methods allow high-contrast 3D imaging of diverse non-mineralized animal
tissues. BMC Physiol. 9, 11.
Metscher, B.D., 2009b. MicroCT for developmental biology: a versatile tool for high-
contrast 3D imaging at histological resolutions. Dev. Dynamics: Off. Publ. Am.
Assoc. Anat. 238, 632–640.
Mitsiadis, T.A., Caton, J., Cobourne, M., 2006. Waking-up the sleeping beauty: re-
covery of the ancestral bird odontogenic program. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol.
306, 227–233.
Mitsiadis, T.A., Cheraud, Y., Sharpe, P., Fontaine-Perus, J., 2003. Development of
teeth in chick embryos after mouse neural crest transplantations. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 6541–6545.
Moustakas, J.E., Smith, K.K., Hlusko, L.J., 2011. Evolution and development of the
mammalian dentition: Insights from the marsupial Monodelphis domestica. Dev.
Dyn. 240, 232–239.
Mulley, J.F., Hargreaves, A.D., Hegarty, M.J., Heller, R.S., Swain, M.T., 2014. Tran-
scriptomic analysis of the lesser spotted catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula) pan-
creas, liver and brain reveals molecular level conservation of vertebrate pan-
creas function. BMC Genom. 15, 1074.
O’Neill, P., McCole, R.B., Baker, C.V., 2007. A molecular analysis of neurogenic pla-
code and cranial sensory ganglion development in the shark, Scyliorhinus ca-
nicula. Dev. Biol. 304, 156–181.
O’Shaughnessy, K.L., Dahn, R.D., Cohn, M.J., 2015. Molecular development of
chondrichthyan claspers and the evolution of copulatory organs. Nat. Commun.
6, 6698.
Ohazama, A., 2005. The possibility of tooth regenerative therapy. Clin. Calcium 15,
81–85.
Ohazama, A., Blackburn, J., Porntaveetus, T., Ota, M.S., Choi, H.Y., Johnson, E.B.,
Myers, P., Oommen, S., Eto, K., Kessler, J.A., Kondo, T., Fraser, G.J., Streelman, J.T.,
Pardinas, U.F., Tucker, A.S., Ortiz, P.E., Charles, C., Viriot, L., Herz, J., Sharpe, P.T.,
2010. A role for suppressed incisor cuspal morphogenesis in the evolution of
mammalian heterodont dentition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 92–97.
Ohazama, A., Modino, S.A., Miletich, I., Sharpe, P.T., 2004. Stem-cell-based tissue
engineering of murine teeth. J. Dent. Res. 83, 518–522.
Olley, R.C., Xavier, G.M., Seppala, M., Volponi, A.A., Geoghegan, F., Sharpe, P.T., Co-
bourne, M.T., 2014. Expression analysis of candidate genes regulating succes-
sional tooth formation in the human embryo. Front. Physiol. 5, 445.
Onimaru, K., Kuraku, S., Takagi, W., Hyodo, S., Sharpe, J., Tanaka, M., 2015. A shift in
anterior-posterior positional information underlies the fin-to-limb evolution.
eLife 4.
Owen, R., 1840. Odontography; or a Treatise on the Comparative Anatomy of the
Teeth; their physiological relations, mode of development, and microscopic
structure in the vertebrate animals. Hippolyte Bailliere, London.
Owen, R., 1866. Anatomy of Vertebrates. Vol. 1: Fishes and Reptiles. Longmans,
Green and Co., London.
Reif, W.-E., McGill, D., Motta, P., 1978. Tooth replacement rates of the sharks Triakis
semifasciata and Ginglymostoma cirratum. Zool. Jahrb. Abt. Anat. Ontog. Bd. 99,
151–156.
Reif, W.E., 1980. Development of dentition and dermal skeleton in embryonic
Scyliorhinus canicula. J. Morphol. 166, 275–288.
Richards, V.P., Suzuki, H., Stanhope, M.J., Shivji, M.S., 2013. Characterization of the
heart transcriptome of the white shark (Carcharodon carcharias). BMC Genom.
14, 697.
Rucklin, M., Donoghue, P.C., Johanson, Z., Trinajstic, K., Marone, F., Stampanoni, M.,
2012. Development of teeth and jaws in the earliest jawed vertebrates. Nature
491, 748–751.
Sakamoto, K., Onimaru, K., Munakata, K., Suda, N., Tamura, M., Ochi, H., Tanaka, M.,
2009. Heterochronic shift in Hox-mediated activation of sonic hedgehog leads
to morphological changes during fin development. PloS One 4, e5121.
Shellis, R.P., 1982. Evolution and comparative anatomy of tooth attachment. In:
Berkovitz, B.K. (Ed.), The Periodontal Ligament in health and disease, pp. 3–24.
Shimada, K., 2002. Teeth of embryos of lamniform sharks (Chondrichthyes: Elas-
mobranchii). Environ. Biol. Fishes 63, 309–319.
Sire, J.Y., Davit-Beal, T., Delgado, S., Van Der Heyden, C., Huysseune, A., 2002. First-
generation teeth in nonmammalian lineages: evidence for a conserved ances-
tral character? Microsc. Res. Tech. 59, 408–434.
Smith, M.M., 2003. Vertebrate dentitions at the origin of jaws: when and how
pattern evolved. Evol. Dev. 5, 394–413.
Smith, M.M., Fraser, G.J., Chaplin, N., Hobbs, C., Graham, A., 2009a. Reiterative
pattern of sonic hedgehog expression in the catshark dentition reveals a phy-
logenetic template for jawed vertebrates. Proc. Biol. Sci./R. Soc. 276, 1225–1233.
Smith, M.M., Fraser, G.J., Mitsiadis, T.A., 2009b. Dental lamina as source of odon-
togenic stem cells: evolutionary origins and developmental control of tooth
generation in gnathostomes. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 312B, 260–280.
Smith, M.M., Johanson, Z., Butts, T., Ericsson, R., Modrell, M., Tulenko, F.J., Davis, M.
C., Fraser, G.J., 2015. Making teeth to order: conserved genes reveal an ancient
molecular pattern in paddlefish (Actinopterygii). Proc. Biol. Sci./R. Soc., 282.
St Amand, T.R., Zhang, Y., Semina, E.V., Zhao, X., Hu, Y., Nguyen, L., Murray, J.C.,
Chen, Y., 2000. Antagonistic signals between BMP4 and FGF8 define the ex-
pression of Pitx1 and Pitx2 in mouse tooth-forming anlage. Dev. Biol. 217 (2),
323–332.
Stock, D.W., Jackman, W.R., Trapani, J., 2006. Developmental genetic mechanisms of
evolutionary tooth loss in cypriniform fishes. Development 133, 3127–3137.
Streelman, J.T., Albertson, R.C., 2006. Evolution of novelty in the cichlid dentition. J.
Exp. Zool. B: Mol. Dev. Evo.l 306, 216–226.
Streelman, J.T., Webb, J.F., Albertson, R.C., Kocher, T.D., 2003. The cusp of evolution
and development: a model of cichlid tooth shape diversity. Evol. Dev. 5,
600–608.
Takechi, M., Takeuchi, M., Ota, K.G., Nishimura, O., Mochii, M., Itomi, K., Adachi, N.,
Takahashi, M., Fujimoto, S., Tarui, H., Okabe, M., Aizawa, S., Kuratani, S., 2011.
Overview of the transcriptome profiles identified in hagfish, shark, and bichir:
current issues arising from some nonmodel vertebrate taxa. J. Exp. Zool. Part B
Mol. Dev. Evol. 316, 526–546.
Tanaka, M., Munsterberg, A., Anderson, W.G., Prescott, A.R., Hazon, N., Tickle, C.,
2002. Fin development in a cartilaginous fish and the origin of vertebrate limbs.
Nature 416, 527–531.
Thesleff, I., Sharpe, P., 1997. Signalling networks regulating dental development.
Mech. Dev. 67, 111–123.
Thesleff, I., Tummers, M., 2008. Tooth organogenesis and regeneration. In:
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
23
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
 Community, E. (Ed.), StemBook, 2010/07/09 ed.. Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
United States
Tokita, M., Chaeychomsri, W., Siruntawineti, J., 2013. Developmental basis of
toothlessness in turtles: insight into convergent evolution of vertebrate mor-
phology. Evolution 67, 260–273.
Tucker, A., Sharpe, P., 2004. The cutting-edge of mammalian development; how the
embryo makes teeth. Nat. Rev. Genet. 5, 499–508.
Tucker, A.S., Fraser, G.J., 2014. Evolution and developmental diversity of tooth re-
generation. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 25–26, 71–80.
Underwood, C.J., Johanson, Z., Welten, M., Metscher, B., Rasch, L.J., Fraser, G.J.,
Smith, M.M., 2015. Development and evolution of dentition pattern and tooth
order in the skates and rays (batoidea; chondrichthyes). PloS One 10, e0122553.
Vaahtokari, A., Aberg, T., Jernvall, J., Keranen, S., Thesleff, I., 1996. The enamel knot
as a signaling center in the developing mouse tooth. Mech. Dev. 54, 39–43.
Vainio, S., Karavanova, I., Jowett, A., Thesleff, I., 1993. Identification of BMP-4 as a
signal mediating secondary induction between epithelial and mesenchymal
tissues during early tooth development. Cell 75, 45–58.
Venkatesh, B., Lee, A.P., Ravi, V., Maurya, A.K., Lian, M.M., Swann, J.B., Ohta, Y.,
Flajnik, M.F., Sutoh, Y., Kasahara, M., Hoon, S., Gangu, V., Roy, S.W., Irimia, M.,
Korzh, V., Kondrychyn, I., Lim, Z.W., Tay, B.H., Tohari, S., Kong, K.W., Ho, S.,
Lorente-Galdos, B., Quilez, J., Marques-Bonet, T., Raney, B.J., Ingham, P.W., Tay,
A., Hillier, L.W., Minx, P., Boehm, T., Wilson, R.K., Brenner, S., Warren, W.C., 2014.
Elephant shark genome provides unique insights into gnathostome evolution.
Nature 505, 174–179.
Volponi, A.A., Pang, Y., Sharpe, P.T., 2010. Stem cell-based biological tooth repair and
regeneration. Trends Cell Biol. 20, 715–722.
Wang, X.P., O’Connell, D.J., Lund, J.J., Saadi, I., Kuraguchi, M., Turbe-Doan, A., Ca-
vallesco, R., Kim, H., Park, P.J., Harada, H., Kucherlapati, R., Maas, R.L., 2009. Apc
inhibition of Wnt signaling regulates supernumerary tooth formation during
embryogenesis and throughout adulthood. Development 136 (11), 1939–1949.
Wang, X.P., Fan, J., 2011. Molecular genetics of supernumerary tooth formation.
Genesis 49 (4), 261–277.
Weeks, O., Bhullar, B.A., Abzhanov, A., 2013. Molecular characterization of dental
development in a toothed archosaur, the American alligator Alligator mis-
sissippiensis. Evol. Dev. 15, 393–405.
Wu, P., Wu, X., Jiang, T.X., Elsey, R.M., Temple, B.L., Divers, S.J., Glenn, T.C., Yuan, K.,
Chen, M.H., Widelitz, R.B., Chuong, C.M., 2013. Specialized stem cell niche en-
ables repetitive renewal of alligator teeth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110,
E2009–E2018.
Wyffels, J., King, B.L., Vincent, J., Chen, C., Wu, C.H., Polson, S.W., 2014. SkateBase, an
elasmobranch genome project and collection of molecular resources for
chondrichthyan fishes. F1000Research 3, 191.
Zhang, Y.D., Chen, Z., Song, Y.Q., Liu, C., Chen, Y.P., 2005. Making a tooth: growth
factors, transcription factors, and stem cells. Cell Res. 15, 301–316.
Zhao, H., Feng, J., Seidel, K., Shi, S., Klein, O., Sharpe, P., Chai, Y., 2014. Secretion of
shh by a neurovascular bundle niche supports mesenchymal stem cell home-
ostasis in the adult mouse incisor. Cell Stem Cell 14, 160–173.
Zhou, P., Byrne, C., Jacobs, J., Fuchs, E., 1995. Lymphoid enhancer factor 1directs hair
follicle patterning and epithelial cell fate. Genes Dev. 9, 700–713.
L.J. Rasch et al. / Developmental Biology ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎–∎∎∎
24
Please cite this article as: Rasch, L.J., et al., An ancient dental gene set governs development and continuous regeneration of teeth in
sharks. Dev. Biol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.01.038i
