 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 11
IMMUNOLOGY
Maternal immunity and antibodies to dengue virus 
promote infection and Zika virus–induced 
microcephaly in fetuses
Abhay P. S. Rathore1,2*, Wilfried A. A. Saron1*, Ting Lim1, Nusrat Jahan1, Ashley L. St. John1,2,3†
Zika virus (ZIKV), an emergent flaviviral pathogen, has been linked to microcephaly in neonates. Although the risk 
is greatest during the first trimester of pregnancy in humans, timing alone cannot explain why maternal ZIKV in-
fection leads to severe microcephaly in some fetuses, but not others. The antigenic similarities between ZIKV and 
dengue virus (DENV), combined with high levels of DENV immunity among ZIKV target populations in re-
cent outbreaks, suggest that anti-DENV maternal antibodies could promote ZIKV-induced microcephaly. We 
demonstrated maternal-to-fetal ZIKV transmission, fetal infection, and disproportionate microcephaly in immuno-
competent mice. We show that DENV-specific antibodies in ZIKV-infected pregnant mice enhance vertical ZIKV 
transmission and result in a severe microcephaly-like syndrome, which was dependent on the neonatal Fc receptor, 
FcRN. This novel immune-mediated mechanism of vertical transmission of viral infection is of special concern 
because ZIKV epidemic regions are also endemic to DENV.
INTRODUCTION
Zika virus (ZIKV) belongs to the family of Flaviviridae, which in-
cludes other arboviruses, such as dengue virus (DENV), Japanese 
encephalitis virus (JEV), and West Nile virus (1). ZIKV unexpect-
edly surfaced recently as a major public health concern because of 
the ongoing and spreading epidemic in South and Central America 
and the realization that it could cause birth defects and neurological 
complications (2, 3). In a recent study, the rate of neurologic and oc-
ular defects in fetuses born to ZIKV-infected mothers was calculated 
to be ~7% (4). Rarely, adults experience ZIKV-induced Guillain- 
Barré 
syndrome (5), but the congenital Zika syndrome in infants that in-
cludes a spectrum of neurological defects, including microcephaly, is 
the most devastating and pressing aspect of ZIKV infection (6). It has 
been suggested that the risk of microcephaly is higher in the fetus 
when mothers are exposed to ZIKV during the first trimester of preg-
nancy (3, 4). Some studies have reported the direct effects of ZIKV 
infection on neuronal tissue damage (7, 8). However, not all ZIKV 
infections during pregnancy appear to result in brain abnormality 
during embryonic development, and the mechanisms that lead to 
microcephaly in some fetuses but not others are not yet understood.
ZIKV epidemic regions are often also endemic for other Flavivirus 
infections, particularly DENV. Because of the structural similarities 
between ZIKV and DENV (9, 10), antibodies raised against one of 
the viruses are able to cross-react with the others (10, 11), possibly 
leading to antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of infection 
(12). In vitro assays (11) have demonstrated that the binding of 
human anti-DENV antibodies to ZIKV does not neutralize ZIKV 
and enhances ZIKV infection in cell cultures. These kinds of studies 
have raised the possibility that DENV antibodies might also induce 
ADE of ZIKV in vivo, in DENV-immune patients infected with ZIKV. 
Thus far, however, the evidence for ADE of ZIKV infection in animal 
models has been less clear. ADE is apparent in immunocompromised 
mice (13), but experiments on primates showed conflicting results. 
There is no enhancement, or only very moderate enhancement, of 
ZIKV infection in DENV-immune primates (14–15), although ZIKV 
immunity has been shown to cause ADE of DENV both in primates 
and in vitro (16–18). However, it has not been experimentally ad-
dressed whether DENV cross-reactive antibodies can influence ver-
tical transmission of ZIKV infection. Because maternal antibodies 
are also passed from mother to fetus during pregnancy in a mecha-
nism dependent on the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRN) (19, 20), which is 
expressed on the embryonic yolk sac, the fetal vascular endothelium, 
and syncytiotrophoblast cells (21, 22), we hypothesized that DENV 
antibodies might enhance translocation of the virus to the develop-
ing fetus.
RESULTS
Using the ZIKV strain H/PF/2013 (23), we characterized ZIKV infec-
tion in female C57BL/6 mice to determine whether immunocompetent 
mice would experience replicating ZIKV infection with this strain. After 
intraperitoneal infection of mice with ZIKV, ZIKV RNA could be 
detected within 24 hours in the cells of the peritoneum (Fig. 1A) and in 
lymphoid tissues, including the spleen (Fig. 1B) and mesenteric 
and iliac lymph nodes (Fig. 1, C and D). Detection of ZIKV persisted 
beyond 7 days at the site of infection and in lymphoid tissues of immu-
nocompetent mice (Fig. 1, A to D). Infectious ZIKV was also detected 
in the serum of mice by using a focus-forming assay that allows detec-
tion of ZIKV non-structural antigens in target cells exposed ex vivo 
to serum from ZIKV-infected animals (Fig. 1E and fig. S1). We also 
observed splenic hypertrophy, consistent with an inflammatory re-
sponse (Fig. 1F). However, in adult mice, we did not detect any ZIKV 
RNA in the brain (Fig. 1G), which is consistent with our understand-
ing that ZIKV causes only a mild febrile illness in most adult human 
patients (1). Our polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data showing that 
ZIKV RNA could be detected at the site of infection and in lymphoid 
tissues for at least 1 week supported the view that ZIKV infection 
persists long enough in immunocompetent mice to allow assessment 
of its influence on fetal development during pregnancy.
1Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke–National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore. 2Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA. 3Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin 
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: ashley.st.john@duke-nus.edu.sg
Copyright © 2019 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 11
Fig. 1. Sustained ZIKV infection in female immunocompetent mice. ZIKV infection was quantified in peripheral tissues in (A) the cells isolated from the peritoneal 
cavity, (B) the spleen, (C) the mesenteric lymph node (LN), and (D) iliac lymph nodes, each day for 1 week following infection of female mice with 1 × 106 plaque-forming 
units (PFU) of ZIKV, strain H/PF/2013. (E) Serum from uninfected or ZIKV-infected dams was harvested 72 hours after infection and absorbed onto BHK-21 cells for 
focus-forming assays to show replicating virus. Many cells appear infected, staining above baseline levels of uninfected serum, with ZIKV-infected serum diluted 
1:2. Individual foci of infection (red circles) surrounded by a few single infected cells can be observed at higher 1:5 dilution of ZIKV serum. Additional images from multiple 
time points are provided in fig. S1. (F) ZIKV genome copies in the spleen are plotted with the splenic mass. (G) ZIKV was not detected (ND) in the brain of any animals by 
PCR. n = 5 female mice per group. Error bars represent the SEM.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 11
To address the question of whether maternal DENV immunity 
could increase embryonic neural complications, we infected mice of 
varying Flavivirus-immune status during pregnancy at embryonic 
day 7 (E7) with ZIKV (Fig. 2A). Although mouse and human develop-
mental time points differ, this day was chosen because of its relative 
equivalence to the first trimester of fetal development in humans 
and because it represents a time point when the mouse placenta has 
begun to develop, which starts around E5.5 (24, 25). We also as-
sumed that using a time point for inoculation, where the placenta 
had not completely formed, might facilitate vertical transmission of 
infection, while the fact that decidualization has begun by this time 
point (26) would allow us to address the potential of fetal endothe-
lial cells to promote antibody transport into the fetus. DENV induces 
a mild replicating infection in immunocompetent mice that induces 
Flavivirus cross-reactive antibodies (27, 28). Pregnant dams were 
either naïve (to both ZIKV and DENV), immune to DENV2 after 
clearing infection that preceded pregnancy by 3 weeks, or passively 
transferred the monoclonal antibody 4G2, which was raised against 
DENV2 but is Flavivirus cross-reactive (29). Passive transfer of 4G2 
was used to identify the contributions of preexisting cross-reactive 
antibodies alone (as a component of immunity) to ZIKV pathogenesis. 
DENV-immune mice were verified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
Fig. 2.  Maternal DENV immunity increases ZIKV microcephaly in fetuses. (A) Schematic of the experimental time course showing that female naïve mice or mice that were 
infected with DENV2 3 weeks before or mice that were passively transferred the monoclonal antibody 4G2 (50 g, intraperitoneally) were each crossed to male mice. Dams 
were infected on E7 after conception, and the fetal development was assessed on E18. (B) ELISAs were performed against equivalent concentrations of DENV or ZIKV antigen 
using serum isolated 21 days after DENV infection. Serum from DENV-immune animals binds significantly more to DENV than to ZIKV. Graph represents the geometric mean 
titer twofold over naïve controls, and the error bars represent the SEM. Significance was determined by comparing endpoint dilutions by Student’s paired t test (P = 0.001). IgG, 
immunoglobulin G. (C) Representative images of fetal mice on a 1-mm2 grid are provided to show that the DENV2-immune and 4G2-injected groups were visually smaller than 
controls. (D) Cross-sections of embryos stained with toluidine blue to reveal the reduced size of fetuses of naïve, DENV2-immune, and 4G2-injected ZIKV-infected dams. Additional 
representative images are presented in fig. S3. (E) Mass and (F) head circumference of fetal mice on E18 are presented. (G) Incidence of mice having microcephaly, defined as 
a head size in the third percentile or less, calculated from the SD of fetuses from naïve dams without ZIKV infection. For (E) and (F), **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001, 
by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparison test. Error bars represent the SEM. Variances do not differ significantly. For (E), n = 22 
(naïve-uninfected), n = 28 (naïve-ZIKV), n = 15 (DENV2-ZIKV), n = 18 (4G2-ZIKV). For (F), n = 17 (naïve-uninfected), n = 18 (naïve-ZIKV), n = 15 (DENV2-ZIKV), n = 11 to 18 (4G2-ZIKV). 
Groups contain the combined data from all fetuses of three independent dams. (Photo credit: Wilfried A. A. Saron, Duke-NUS Medical School)
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 11
assay (ELISA) to have DENV-specific antibodies that bind weakly to 
ZIKV (Fig. 2B), although virus neutralization tests showed that they 
were only neutralizing for DENV and not ZIKV (fig. S2). At E18, near 
full term, dams were euthanized and the fetal mice were examined. A 
gross analysis of the fetuses showed that mice that were previously in-
fected with DENV had pups with stunted growth (Fig. 2, C and D, and 
fig. S3). Quantification of the fetal mass showed a significant decrease 
in the mass of fetuses of naïve ZIKV-infected dams compared to those 
of naïve uninfected controls (Fig. 2E). This reduced body size was con-
sistent with previous reports of ZIKV infection in mice (30, 31). How-
ever, ZIKV-infected DENV2-immune and 4G2-injected dams had 
fetuses that were even smaller than the naïve ZIKV-infected dams 
(Fig. 2, C to E). We examined the circumference of the fetal head, the 
primary measure used to define microcephaly in humans, and ob-
served that DENV-naïve ZIKV- 
infected dams had fetuses with slightly 
but significantly smaller heads compared to healthy controls (Fig. 2F). 
However, 4G2-injected and DENV2- 
immune dams that were infected 
with ZIKV had fetuses with head sizes that were substantially smaller 
than both naïve uninfected mice and DENV-naïve ZIKV-infected 
mice (Fig. 2F). No significant differences in the range of phenotypes 
were observed litter to litter within experimental groups, and fetal 
demise was not observed. Additional control experiments were also 
performed concurrently, showing that no abnormalities were observed 
after control injection of 4G2 before pregnancy without maternal ZIKV 
infection and that isotype control (IC) antibodies did not influence 
fetal size or head circumference in ZIKV-infected dams (fig. S4). 
Furthermore, DENV- 
immune dams with no ZIKV infection have 
normal pups without any reported fetal abnormalities (32, 33), and we 
did not observe any reduction in fetal size when 4G2-injected dams 
were given a challenge of DENV2 rather than ZIKV at E7 (fig. S4). 
Next, we looked at the frequency of reduced head circumference in the 
fetuses born to ZIKV-infected dams (defined as a head size in the third 
percentile or less for normal fetuses) and noted that, while 30% of 
fetuses from naïve mice infected at E7 with ZIKV could be assessed 
as having a phenotype consistent with microcephaly, >90% of the 
fetuses of DENV2- 
immune or 4G2-injected dams qualified as having 
microcephaly (Fig. 2G). These data support the hypothesis that ma-
ternal immunity or Flavivirus cross-reactive antibodies can enhance the 
severity and incidence of reduced head size during ZIKV infection.
Because of the prominence of interferon (IFN)–deficient models 
for studying Flaviviruses, we also investigated whether IFN-deficient 
mice could be used to study ZIKV infection at time points develop-
mentally analogous to the first trimester of human infection. How-
ever, even with a 2-log lower inoculating dose than we used for 
wild-type (WT) mice, the infection was too severe in both the naïve 
and DENV-immune dams. Most dams died before E18 (fig. S5A), 
and the surviving mouse had fetuses displaying early developmental 
arrest (fig. S5B). This supported that our immunocompetent model 
more clearly recapitulated the outcomes of human ZIKV maternal 
and fetal infection than the IFN-deficient mouse model system.
To further characterize the impact of ZIKV infection, with and 
without maternal antibodies on the development of the fetal brain in 
Fig. 3. Impaired cortical development in ZIKV fetuses is enhanced by maternal DENV immunity. (A) Images of embryonic brain sections showing reduced cortical 
thickness in ZIKV-infected embryos. Tissue sections were cut to 15-m thickness and Nissl-stained using cresyl violet before imaging by light microscopy. Labels indicate the 
lateral ventricle (LV) and cortical regions: ventricular zone (VZ), subventricular zone (SVZ), intermediate zone (IZ), cortical plate (CP), and marginal zone (MZ). Additional 
representative images are included in fig. S6. (B) Quantification of cortical thickness from images. Error bars represent the SEM of average cortical thickness for individual 
fetuses obtained from three independent pregnancies; n = 5 (naïve-uninfected), n = 6 (naïve-ZIKV), n = 7 (DENV2-ZIKV), and n = 8 (4G2-ZIKV). (C) Normalized ratio of cortical 
thickness to body mass for fetal mice. Additional controls are provided in fig. S7. (D) Relative expression of transcriptional factors critical for neuronal growth in the fetal 
mouse brains (normalized to Actin) as determined by real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR). Error bars represent the SEM and n = 5 fetuses per group. For (B) to (D), 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001, as determined by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparison test. Variances do not differ among groups.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 11
the WT mouse model, we examined the brains by histology (Fig. 3A 
and fig. S6). The DENV2-immune group showed a profound reduction 
in cortical thickness and loss of integrity of the expected cortical 
layers (Fig. 3A). In particular, there appeared to be reductions in the 
size of the ventricular zone, intermediate zone, and cortical plate 
compared to fetuses from naïve uninfected dams and naïve ZIKV- 
infected dams (Fig. 3A). Quantification of cortical thickness from 
multiple litters showed that these reductions were significant and 
consistent for fetuses with both DENV2-immune and 4G2-injected 
dams compared to fetuses of naïve uninfected dams and naïve ZIKV- 
infected dams (Fig. 3B). The cortical thickness was also moderately 
reduced in the fetuses of naïve ZIKV-infected dams compared to 
fetuses of healthy controls (Fig. 3B), although the cortical layers were 
intact and discernable (Fig. 3A). Because we had observed that the 
fetal mass was smaller in all ZIKV-infected groups compared to 
controls (Fig. 2E), we also questioned whether the reduced cortical 
thickness was disproportionately small relative to the body mass or 
proportional to the body mass. Fetuses born to ZIKV-exposed preg-
nant mothers have been described as displaying both proportional 
and disproportional microcephaly in humans (2). The ratio of the 
cortical thickness compared to the body mass for all groups showed 
that, for ZIKV-infected mice, the cortex was disproportionately re-
duced compared to control animals (Fig. 3C and fig. S7), indicating 
a presentation consistent with disproportionate microcephaly.
The transcription factor Brain 1 (Brn1) is used as a marker of 
cortical development in mice (34); thus, we measured levels of Brn1 
in the brains of E18 embryos from all groups. We observed that levels 
of Brn1 mRNA were reduced in fetuses from DENV2-immune or 
4G2-injected dams (Fig. 3D), which was correlated with the impaired 
cortical thickness. We also measured levels of additional genes asso-
ciated with early cortical neurogenesis, including forkhead box G1 
(Foxg1), empty spiracles homologue 2 (Emx2), and paired box 6 
(Pax6). Expression of these genes allows differentiation and prolif-
eration of ventricular zone progenitors as well as expansion of the 
subventricular zone (35, 36). ZIKV infection resulted in reduced 
expression of both Pax6 and Foxg1, suggesting that early brain de-
velopment was stunted because of ZIKV infection, although Emx2 
was not significantly influenced (Fig. 3D). Brain 2 (Brn2) and ortho-
denticle homeobox protein family genes, Otx1 and Otx2, along 
with Brn1, aid the differentiation and migration of neurons (34, 37) 
as well as the development of neuronal layers in the cortex and cer-
ebellum (38). ZIKV infection also suppressed the expression of both 
Brn2 and Otx family genes. For Pax6, Brn1, and Brn2, fetuses of 
DENV-immune dams showed greater deficits than those of naïve 
dams (Fig. 3D). Suppressed levels of selected cortical markers 
were verified at the protein level by immunohistochemistry (fig. S8). 
Together, these results show visually striking and quantifiable defects 
in the development of the cerebral cortex during ZIKV infection re-
sulting in a phenotype consistent with disproportionate microcephaly, 
supported by evidence that cerebral cortex–associated transcription 
factors are reduced in the fetuses of DENV2-immune dams.
On the basis of these findings and the potential of the antibody 
4G2, which is DENV directed but ZIKV cross-reactive, to cause 
an enhanced microcephaly-like phenotype in the fetuses of ZIKV- 
infected dams, we expected that antibodies might promote increased 
translocation of ZIKV into the fetus; therefore, we quantified ZIKV 
genome copies in the fetuses on E10, 3 days after the dams had been 
infected. This 3-day period was chosen to allow sufficient time for 
replication of ZIKV in the mother and for potential translocation of 
ZIKV into the fetus; it is also a time point at which placentation has 
already begun (24). We first confirmed that true replication of ZIKV 
occurs in this model by comparing infection levels in the dams and 
fetuses in mice injected with live ZIKV compared to ultraviolet light- 
inactivated ZIKV. This experiment demonstrated that the injected 
virus is detected only at very low levels in the dam’s spleen (Fig. 4A), 
and not detected at all in either the placenta (Fig. 4B) or the embryos 
(Fig. 4C). The viral burden did not differ in pregnant mice compared 
to nonpregnant mice (fig. S9). Furthermore, the virus negative strand, 
which is produced only during genome replication, was detectable 
by PCR in the dams’ spleens, the placentas, and the embryos (Fig. 4, 
D and E), confirming ZIKV replication. These findings support the 
fact that fetal ZIKV infection in this model relies on replication of 
ZIKV in vivo.
Our results examining the potential of maternal DENV immunity 
to influence fetal ZIKV infection showed that maternal antibodies 
to DENV or monoclonal antibody 4G2 each enhanced infection of 
the embryo compared to ZIKV infection of naïve dams (Fig. 4F). 
ZIKV RNA was detectible in approximately 50% of the embryos of 
naïve ZIKV-infected dams at E10 but in 100% of the embryos of 
DENV2-immune dams and in 80% of 4G2-injected dams (Fig. 4F). 
By E18, although brain development was impaired (Fig. 3), ZIKV 
RNA was undetectable in the brains of all fetuses by PCR; however, 
immunohistochemistry staining of E18 brain sections for ZIKV pro-
teins NS2b and M showed positive staining, indicating that antigen 
persisted in the cortex (fig. S10). Enhanced detection of these antigens 
was observed in tissue sections from the fetuses of DENV- 
immune 
or 4G2-injected dams (fig. S10). DENV immunity also enhanced 
ZIKV RNA in the dam’s spleen, consistent with other reports that 
DENV antibodies can cause ADE, and we confirmed that this can 
occur in vivo in our model (Fig. 4G). In contrast to the mother’s 
spleen, previous DENV immunity did not significantly enhance the 
viral burden in the placenta at E10 (Fig. 4H). To confirm that this 
enhancement occurs in vivo, we performed flow cytometry stain-
ing for the ZIKV envelope (E) protein in single-cell suspensions of 
placentas at E10, after E7 infection of dams. We observed that ZIKV 
E protein could be detected intracellularly in fetal endothelial cells, 
defined by vimentin staining (Fig. 4, I and J), and in syncytiotropho-
blast cells, defined by the marker cytokeratin, increased over baseline 
staining of cells from uninfected control placentas (Fig. 4, K and L). 
Furthermore, the percentage of placental fetal endothelial cells and 
syncytiotrophoblasts that contained ZIKV E protein was significantly 
increased in the placentas of DENV-immune compared to naïve dams 
(Fig. 4, I to L). These results indicated that heterologous immunity 
enhances ZIKV infection in both the pregnant dam and the fetus and 
enhances detection of the ZIKV structural protein, E, in placental cells.
Because antibodies are translocated into the fetus with a mecha-
nism dependent on FcRN, and we observed enhanced staining of E 
protein in the placentas of DENV-immune dams in two cell types 
that are known to express FcRN, we examined whether FcRN con-
tributes to fetal ZIKV infection in DENV-immune mice. However, 
because there are conflicting statements in the literature regarding 
the time of onset of FcRN expression in the fetus, we first verified that 
FcRN could be detected in fetal mice. Immunostaining of the mouse 
placenta at E10 (the time point when virus was detectable in mouse 
embryos by positive- and negative-strand PCR; Fig. 4, C, E, and F) 
revealed colocalization of FcRN with the fetal endothelial cell marker 
vimentin (Fig. 5A) and the syncytiotrophoblast marker cytokeratin 
(Fig. 5B). We next isolated mouse placentas from uninfected and 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 11
Fig. 4. Enhanced ZIKV infection of fetuses in DENV-immune dams. (A to C) ZIKV genome copies were quantified by PCR after injection of ultraviolet (UV) inactivation of the 
virus compared to injection of live virus in tissues including the (A) dams’ spleens (**P = 0.0047), (B) placentas, or (C) fetuses on E10, 3 days after infection. Input UV-ZIKV could 
be detected only in the dam’s spleen but at significantly lower genome copy numbers than live virus. PCR specific for the ZIKV negative strand was performed using tissue 
(D) from the mother’s spleen days 1 and 3 after infection and (E) from embryos or placentas on E10, 3 days after infection. For (D) and (E), uninfected and ZIKV-infected vero 
cell lysates were used as negative and positive controls, and uninfected tissues were used as negative controls. Expected band size is 188 base pairs (bp). The gels confirm active 
ZIKV replication in mother and fetal mice. (F) Real-time RT-PCR was used to quantify the ZIKV genome copies in the mouse fetuses of DENV-naïve uninfected dams (n = 10), 
DENV-naïve ZIKV-infected dams (n = 12), DENV2-immune ZIKV-infected dams (n = 17), and 4G2-injected ZIKV-infected dams (n = 10) derived from two to three independent 
experiments. Fetuses were harvested on E10 (3 days after maternal infection) or on E18 (11 days after maternal infection) for RNA isolation. Fetuses from DENV2-immune and 
4G2-injected dams showed significant increases in ZIKV compared to those of naïve dams by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparison test (*P < 0.01, **P < 0.001). 
(G) Quantification of ZIKV infection in the spleen of dams 3 days after infection when the fetuses were harvested on E10 (n = 3 per group). *P < 0.05. Error bars represent the 
SEM. (H) Quantification of ZIKV infection in the placentas at E10. ns, not significant. (I) Representative flow cytometry plots showing intracellular staining for ZIKV E protein in 
vimentin+ fetal endothelial cells from the placenta at E10, following maternal ZIKV infection at E7. FSC, forward scatter. (J) ZIKV E protein was detectable in a significantly larger 
proportion of vimentin+ cells in the placentas from DENV-immune compared to naïve dams infected with ZIKV (n = 5 per group). (K) Representative flow cytometry plots showing 
intracellular staining for ZIKV E protein in cytokeratin+ syncytiotrophoblast cells from the placenta at E10, following maternal ZIKV infection at E7. (L) E protein was detectable in 
a significantly larger proportion of cytokeratin+ cells in the placentas from DENV-immune compared to naïve dams infected with ZIKV (n = 5 per group). (J) and (L): ****P < 0.0001.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 11
Fig. 5. Maternal DENV immunity leads to FcRN-dependent enhancement of fetal ZIKV infection. Placenta tissue sections from E10 were stained for FcRN, DNA (4′,6- 
diamidino-2-phenylindole), and either (A) the fetal endothelial cell marker vimentin or (B) the syncytiotrophoblast marker cytokeratin and were imaged by confocal 
microscopy. Both cytokeratin and vimentin colocalized with FcRN. Scale bars, 50 m. Images are representative of three independent experiments. (C) FcRN mRNA expression 
in E8 and E10 mouse placentas. (D) Detection by flow cytometry of FcRN on cells from E8 placentas, gated on vimentin (left) or cytokeratin (right) from uninfected or ZIKV- 
infected dams, 24 hours after infection at E7. (E) Average mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of FcRN on cells from E8 placentas, relative to levels on uninfected control endo-
thelial cells (vimentin+); n = 5 per group. (F) Detection by flow cytometry of FcRN on cells from E10 placentas, gated on vimentin (left) or cytokeratin (right) from uninfected 
or ZIKV-infected dams, 72 hours after infection at E7. (G) Average MFI of FcRN on cells from E8 placentas, relative to levels on uninfected control endothelial cells (vimentin+); 
n = 5 per group. Flow cytometry gating strategy for (D) to (G) is provided as fig. S11. (H) Schematic showing experimental setup of transwells, where FcRN-expressing 
HULEC-5a cells were plated on transwell inserts to form a tight monolayer, and trophoblast placenta cells were plated on the bottom chamber. ZIKV or ZIKV + antibody 4G2 
were added to the top chamber. (I) Permeability of the monolayers 24 hours after addition of ZIKV or ZIKV with various concentrations of antibodies was measured by 
quantitating fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–dextran leakage. No differences in leakage were observed compared to uninfected controls. (J) Addition of antibody 4G2 
significantly increased the amounts of infection in trophoblast target cells, in a dose-dependent manner, on the opposite side of the transwell insert 24 hours after exposure 
to ZIKV. (K) Addition of antibody 4G2 significantly increased the detection of ZIKV associated with trophoblast target cells 6 hours after exposure. (L) Addition of DENV- 
immune human serum (1:500 dilution) with ZIKV promoted enhanced translocation of the virus, determined by plaque assay using supernatants on the opposite side of 
transwells, 24 hours after exposure. (M) No significant difference was observed in serum endpoint titers fourfold over naïve against DENV2 between WT and FcRN−/− female 
mice 21 days after infection. P = 0.32 by Student’s unpaired t test; n = 5 per group. (N) Quantification of ZIKV in DENV2-immune (n = 17) or DENV2-naïve (n = 12) WT and 
DENV2-immune (n = 15) or DENV2-naïve FcRN−/− (n = 21) embryos on E10 derived from three to four independent dams per group. (O) Proportions of PCR-positive embryos 
for each group in (N). Significance was determined by Fisher’s exact test (*P = 0.01, ns for P = 0.736). (P) Comparison of ZIKV titers for ZIKV+ fetuses alone shows enhanced viral 
burden in the embryos of DENV2-immune dams for both WT and FcRN−/− groups, determined by one-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparison test; *P = 0.0119. 
n = 6 (DENV-naïve WT), n = 17 (DENV2-immune WT), n = 9 (DENV-naïve FcRN−/−), and n = 8 (DENV2-immune FcRN−/−), corresponding to the PCR-positive embryos from (N). 
For (N) to (P), all fetal measurements were derived from three to four independent dams. KO, knockout. (Q and R) Blocking antibody against FcRN (4C9) or IC antibodies were 
injected therapeutically into DENV-immune pregnant mice (n = 3 dams) before ZIKV infection on E7. Head circumference of the fetal mice was measured on E18. (Q) Head 
circumferences and (R) cortical thicknesses were significantly increased in 4C9-treated fetal mice compared to those given IC (P < 0.0001). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, 
and ****P < 0.0001.
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 11
ZIKV-infected mice at E8 and E10 to represent early time points, 24 
and 72 hours after maternal infection. We detected FcRN expression 
in infected and uninfected placentas at both E8 and E10 by PCR 
(Fig. 5C). Maternal ZIKV infection led to increased FcRN mRNA 
expression in E10 embryos compared to controls (Fig. 5C). This 
finding was confirmed by flow cytometry at E8 and E10, where near-
ly all fetal endothelial cells (vimentin+) and syncytiotrophoblasts 
(cytokeratin+) expressed FcRN (Fig. 5, D to G). Similar to PCR de-
tection, a slight but significant increase in FcRN protein was ob-
served on the vimentin+ cells of placentas from ZIKV-infected dams 
on E8 compared to uninfected controls (Fig. 5, D and E). This induc-
tion of FcRN was more dramatic by E10 and apparent on both fetal 
endothelial cells and syncytiotrophoblasts (Fig. 5, F and G). These 
results demonstrate that FcRN is present in the placenta during and 
preceding the E10 time point when antibody-dependent enhanced 
detection of ZIKV is observed in the fetus (Fig. 4F).
To determine whether ZIKV infection could be enhanced across 
a monolayer of FcRN-expressing endothelial cells in an antibody- 
dependent fashion, we used a transwell system. Human endothelial 
cells were cultured above a monolayer of human trophoblast cells, 
and supernatants containing ZIKV or ZIKV and various concentra-
tions of 4G2 antibody were applied to the top chamber (Fig. 5H). 
After incubation for 24 hours, we assessed the permeability of the 
endothelial cell monolayers and observed no significant increase in 
permeability, measured by transendothelial resistance (Fig. 5I). How-
ever, we did observe an antibody dose-dependent increase in infection 
of the trophoblast target cells on the opposite side of the transwell 
insert (Fig. 5J). Increased ZIKV levels were detectable on the opposite 
side of the transwell insert as early as 6 hours of incubation, indicating 
that increased translocation occurs because this time point is insuf-
ficient for virus replication (Fig. 5K). In addition, DENV-immune 
human serum could enhance the translocation of ZIKV across the 
human FcRN-expressing endothelial cells, resulting in a higher titer 
of ZIKV on the opposite side of transwell inserts (Fig. 5L), support-
ing the role of antibodies in the process and the potential of human 
antibodies to induce this phenomenon. These results indicate that 
antibodies enhance translocation of ZIKV across FcRN-expressing 
endothelial monolayers and that ZIKV remains viable and able to 
infect target cells following translocation.
We next aimed to determine whether FcRN plays a functional 
role in enhancing ZIKV infection in fetal mice. First, we validated 
that FcRN−/− mice were able to induce anti-DENV antibodies at a 
similar titer to WT mice and observed no significant difference in 
the polyclonal anti-DENV response (Fig. 5M). We then compared 
viral titers in fetuses of both naïve and DENV2-immune FcRN−/− 
dams to WT controls. Overall, fetuses of DENV2-immune FcRN−/− 
mice showed reduced levels of ZIKV RNA at E10 compared to the 
fetuses of WT mice (Fig. 5N). Furthermore, ZIKV RNA levels were not 
significantly higher in the fetuses of DENV2-immune dams compared 
to naïve dams (Fig. 5N), in contrast to the significant enhancement 
of ZIKV infection observed in the context of DENV2 maternal im-
munity in WT animals (Fig. 5N). In FcRN−/− DENV2-immune dams, 
only 50% of the fetal mice showed ZIKV infection compared to 
100% of the fetuses of WT DENV2-immune dams (Fig. 5O). This 
proportion was significantly lower than the proportion of infected 
fetuses in WT mice and not significantly different from ZIKV- 
infected naïve WT or naïve FcRN−/− mice (Fig. 5O) and suggests 
that FcRN-mediated translocation of immune complexes increases 
the likelihood of vertical transmission. Yet, antibodies may still have 
a role in enhancing titers in an FcRN-independent manner, because 
DENV2-immune FcRN−/− fetuses that were ZIKV+ showed higher 
viral titers than the DENV2-naïve FcRN−/− fetuses that were ZIKV+ 
(Fig. 5P). Similarly, the fetuses of dams that were DENV2 immune 
showed higher levels of ZIKV than naïve animals (Fig. 5P), suggest-
ing that DENV2 antibodies also result in enhanced levels of ZIKV if 
the fetus becomes infected by a mechanism independent of FcRN. 
To confirm the contributions of FcRN by an alternate mechanism, 
we also injected dams with a blocking antibody against FcRN to 
neutralize its function in the translocation of immune complexes 
across the placenta. We observed that fetal head circumference was 
increased with FcRN blockade compared to IC injection (Fig. 5Q). 
Similarly, the cortical thickness, measured from brain sections, was 
also significantly increased after FcRN blocking compared to IC treat-
ment (Fig. 5R). IC treatment was verified to have no influence on head 
circumference or cortical thickness in uninfected animals (fig. S12). 
These results support the conclusion that both a novel mechanism of 
FcRN- 
mediated immune complex translocation into the fetus and 
ADE can contribute to enhanced ZIKV infection in fetal mice.
DISCUSSION
Many viruses in the Flavivirus genus are neurotropic, but no others 
have been identified to cause microcephaly. Neurological complica-
tions occur only rarely with DENV (39), the most closely related 
known human pathogen to ZIKV, and have entirely different clinical 
presentation in the context of JEV and West Nile virus (1), involv-
ing encephalitis in adults and children. Some studies have reported 
neuronal tissue damage during ZIKV infection in humans and mice, 
involving infection of neural progenitor cells (7, 8). Immunocom-
promised mice develop severe fetal abnormalities (31), which are 
not necessarily consistent with the much lower rates of microcephaly 
that are observed in humans (40). Immunocompetent mice infected 
with high doses of ZIKV during slightly later stages of pregnancy 
than our model also have fetal abnormalities, including reduced fetal 
size that corresponded with a reduced cortical thickness (41). Here, 
using a model of maternal infection at a time point of mouse fetal 
development corresponding to the first trimester of pregnancy in 
humans and a moderate ZIKV inoculating titer of a strain epidemio-
logically associated with microcephaly, we report that vertical trans-
mission of ZIKV occurs. Furthermore, maternal antibodies enhance 
transplacental infection of mouse fetuses and lead to an exacerbated 
phenotype consistent with microcephaly. This involves reduced 
cortical thickness, substantial loss of certain cortical layers, and im-
paired induction of transcriptional profiles key for brain development. 
Microcephaly in humans resulting from ZIKV infection has been 
described as both proportionate and disproportionate to the body 
mass (2). In our model, we observe a phenotype resembling dispro-
portionate microcephaly relative to the reduction in overall fetal 
mass, which is enhanced by maternal DENV immunity. Infection was 
undetectable by PCR in E18 fetal brains, while the signs of damage 
to the cortex and ZIKV antigens remained.
Head size alone did not indicate the full severity of reduced cor-
tical thickness in mice, nor could this effect be interpreted from the 
pregnant dam’s viral burden, although ADE in the dams was evi-
denced by a higher ZIKV burden in DENV-immune compared to 
naïve pregnant mice. Our results also indicate that FcRN mediates 
a significant amount of the antibody-enhanced effects of disease be-
cause FcRN−/− animals have a reduced percentage of embryonic mice 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 11
infected with ZIKV in utero. This finding is likely due to the essen-
tial role of FcRN in mediating transcytosis of immune complexes 
across the placenta from mother to fetus (42, 43) or across the syn-
cytiotrophoblast cells before full placentation (24). FcRN mediates 
transcytosis within recycling endosomes that are only weakly acidic 
(pH ~6.6) (44), and release of the antibody from FcRN occurs at 
neutral pH (45, 46); therefore, transcytosis of ZIKV-immune com-
plexes is not expected to inactivate ZIKV because Flaviviruses, in-
cluding ZIKV, are not fully inactivated until a pH of <3.0 to 4.0 is 
achieved (47, 48). Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed en-
hanced infection of target trophoblasts in the presence of antibodies 
when ZIKV was exposed to the opposite side of an FcRN-expressing 
endothelial cell monolayer. Although it is possible that FcRN could 
act in a traditional ADE mechanism, promoting infection of FcRN- 
bearing target cells rather than merely translocation, the fact that 
enhanced levels of ZIKV can be detected crossing monolayers after 
short time periods that are insufficient for virus replication supports 
the view that translocation is a major component of the enhanced 
infection response. We also confirmed the contributions of FcRN to 
induction of reductions in cortical thickness in the fetuses of ZIKV- 
infected DENV-immune dams by using an alternate method where 
FcRN was targeted with a monoclonal neutralizing antibody. In 
addition to supporting the role of FcRN in the antibody-enhanced 
phenotype in fetal mice, this experiment suggests the possibility of 
therapeutic targeting of FcRN to limit severe pathologies in the sub-
set of mothers that are Flavivirus immune. This possibility is consist-
ent with a recently published study where targeting FcRN reduced 
ZIKV infection in human placental explants (49). However, FcRN 
cannot account for all of the antibody-enhanced effects because 
embryos of DENV-immune dams that are infected have higher levels 
of ZIKV than naïve dams (with WT and FcRN−/− mice showing the 
same trends), indicating a contribution of ADE to enhanced fetal 
infection. In humans, maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG) is present 
in the fetus during the first trimester of human pregnancy (50), but 
fetal concentrations of IgG are lower in the early (compared to late) 
stages of pregnancy (50, 51). Thus, it will be important to determine 
whether certain stages of human pregnancy are susceptible to antibody- 
enhanced translocation of the virus and augmented microcephaly and 
whether the presence of Flavivirus cross-reactive antibody is a factor 
in extending the period of fetal susceptibility to ZIKV beyond the 
first trimester when most cases have been shown to occur (2). Addi-
tional studies are required to determine whether DENV immunity 
is a risk factor for microcephaly during maternal ZIKV infection in 
humans because of the inherent physiological and immune func-
tional differences between humans and mice. A recent study exam-
ining this question found no association between the incidence of 
total abnormal pregnancy outcomes and positive tests for DENV- 
reactive IgG (52). However, because approximately 90% of the pa-
tients in that study were determined to be IgG positive, further studies 
are needed with a larger sample size of DENV IgG-negative patients 
to fully assess this question and to examine the effects of DENV im-
munity on specific manifestations of ZIKV congenital syndrome, such 
as microcephaly. Addressing whether DENV immunity enhances 
severity of human ZIKV congenital syndrome is further complicated 
by the fact that ZIKV- and DENV-specific antibodies in serum cross- 
react to a large degree (53), making it difficult to distinguish between 
immunity to ZIKV and DENV if a blood sample is not taken early 
enough after ZIKV infection to exclude the presence of DENV cross- 
reactive ZIKV antibodies. Genetic differences between Flaviviruses 
also play a strong role in the ability of antibodies raised against unique 
viruses to enhance versus neutralize a heterologous infection, as do the 
concentrations of virus-specific or cross-reactive antibodies. Thus, 
future studies are also needed to examine the potential of multiple 
strains and serotypes of DENV to enhance ZIKV-induced micro-
cephaly because the incidence of microcephaly in humans is not 
high enough to suggest that 100% of the fetuses of DENV-immune 
mothers develop microcephaly. This study provides important con-
siderations for microcephaly screening, raises novel therapeutic 
targets to limit severe disease, informs our understanding of mech-
anisms that could influence the severity of ZIKV presentation, and 
establishes a novel mechanism of vertical transmission of infection.
METHODS
Female mice that were DENV naïve or DENV immune [3 weeks after 
infection with 1 × 106 plaque-forming units (PFU) of Eden2 strain] 
were bred and infected with ZIKV (1 × 106 PFU of H/PF/2013 strain) 
on E7. This route of infection was chosen to initiate uniform sys-
temic infection in the dams to specifically study the process of ver-
tical transmission. The SingHealth Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee approved all animal protocols. Detailed methods 
are provided in the Supplementary Materials.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/2/eaav3208/DC1
Supplementary Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Infectious ZIKV can be detected in the serum at multiple time points after infection  
in mice.
Fig. S2. DENV-immune serum neutralizes DENV but not ZIKV.
Fig. S3. Reduced fetal size during ZIKV infection enhanced by DENV immunity.
Fig. S4. Additional control groups demonstrate the requirement of cross-reactive antibodies 
and ZIKV for enhanced microcephaly.
Fig. S5. Immunocompromised dams die during pregnancy because of ZIKV infection.
Fig. S6. Reduced cortical thickness in ZIKV-infected mice enhanced by maternal DENV 
immunity.
Fig. S7. Normalized ratio of cortical thickness to body mass for fetal mice.
Fig. S8. Confirmation of protein-level reduction of BRN1 and PAX6 in fetal brains during 
maternal ZIKV infection.
Fig. S9. ZIKV viral genome copies in pregnant versus nonpregnant female mice.
Fig. S10. ZIKV antigens detected in the fetal cortex.
Fig. S11. Flow cytometry gating strategy to identify syncytiotrophoblasts and fetal  
endothelial cells.
Fig. S12. IC antibody injection does not affect brain development in uninfected mice.
References (54, 55)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. D. Musso, D. J. Gubler, Zika virus. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 29, 487–524 (2016).
 2. P. Brasil, J. P. Pereira Jr., M. E. Moreira, R. M. Ribeiro Nogueira, L. Damasceno, 
M. Wakimoto, R. S. Rabello, S. G. Valderramos, U.-A. Halai, T. S. Salles, A. A. Zin, D. Horovitz, 
P. Daltro, M. Boechat, C. Raja Gabaglia, P. Carvalho de Sequeira, J. H. Pilotto,  
R. Medialdea-Carrera, D. Cotrim da Cunha, L. M. Abreu de Carvalho, M. Pone, 
A. Machado Siqueira, G. A. Calvet, A. E. Rodrigues Baião, E. S. Neves, 
P. R. Nassar de Carvalho, R. H. Hasue, P. B. Marschik, C. Einspieler, C. Janzen, J. D. Cherry, 
A. M. Bispo de Filippis, K. Nielsen-Saines, Zika virus infection in pregnant women in Rio 
de Janeiro. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 2321–2334 (2016).
 3. S. Cauchemez, M. Besnard, P. Bompard, T. Dub, P. Guillemette-Artur, D. Eyrolle-Guignot, 
H. Salje, M. D. van Kerkhove, V. Abadie, C. Garel, A. Fontanet, H.-P. Mallet, Association 
between Zika virus and microcephaly in French Polynesia, 2013-15: A retrospective 
study. Lancet 387, 2125–2132 (2016).
 4. B. Hoen, B. Schaub, A. L. Funk, V. Ardillon, M. Boullard, A. Cabié, C. Callier, G. Carles, 
S. Cassadou, R. Césaire, M. Douine, C. Herrmann-Storck, P. Kadhel, C. Laouénan, Y. Madec, 
A. Monthieux, M. Nacher, F. Najioullah, D. Rousset, C. Ryan, K. Schepers,  
S. Stegmann-Planchard, B. Tressières, J.-L. Voluménie, S. Yassinguezo, E. Janky, 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 11
A. Fontanet, Pregnancy outcomes after ZIKV infection in French territories in the 
americas. N. Engl. J. Med. 378, 985–994 (2018).
 5. V. M. Cao-Lormeau, A. Blake, S. Mons, S. Lastère, C. Roche, J. Vanhomwegen, T. Dub, 
L. Baudouin, A. Teissier, P. Larre, A. L. Vial, C. Decam, V. Choumet, S. K. Halstead, 
H. J. Willison, L. Musset, J. C. Manuguerra, P. Despres, E. Fournier, H. P. Mallet, D. Musso, 
A. Fontanet, J. Neil, F. Ghawché, Guillain-Barré syndrome outbreak associated with Zika 
virus infection in French Polynesia: A case-control study. Lancet 387, 1531–1539  
(2016).
 6. J. Mlakar, M. Korva, N. Tul, M. Popović, M. Poljšak-Prijatelj, J. Mraz, M. Kolenc, 
K. Resman Rus, T. Vesnaver Vipotnik, V. Fabjan Vodušek, A. Vizjak, J. Pižem, M. Petrovec, 
T. Avšič Županc, Zika virus associated with microcephaly. N. Engl. J. Med. 374, 951–958 
(2016).
 7. K.-Y. Wu, G.-L. Zuo, X.-F. Li, Q. Ye, Y.-Q. Deng, X.-Y. Huang, W.-C. Cao, C.-F. Qin, Z.-G. Luo, 
Vertical transmission of Zika virus targeting the radial glial cells affects cortex 
development of offspring mice. Cell Res. 26, 645–654 (2016).
 8. M. Culjat, S. E. Darling, V. R. Nerurkar, N. Ching, M. Kumar, S. K. Min, R. Wong, L. Grant, 
M. E. Melish, Clinical and imaging findings in an infant with Zika embryopathy.  
Clin. Infect. Dis. 63, 805–811 (2016).
 9. V. A. Kostyuchenko, E. X. Y. Lim, S. Zhang, G. Fibriansah, T.-S. Ng, J. S. G. Ooi, J. Shi, 
S.-M. Lok, Structure of the thermally stable Zika virus. Nature 533, 425–428 (2016).
 10. G. Barba-Spaeth, W. Dejnirattisai, A. Rouvinski, M.-C. Vaney, I. Medits, A. Sharma, 
E. Simon-Lorière, A. Sakuntabhai, V.-M. Cao-Lormeau, A. Haouz, P. England, K. Stiasny, 
J. Mongkolsapaya, F. X. Heinz, G. R. Screaton, F. A. Rey, Erratum: Structural basis  
of potent Zika–dengue virus antibody cross-neutralization. Nature 539, 314 (2016).
 11. W. Dejnirattisai, P. Supasa, W. Wongwiwat, A. Rouvinski, G. Barba-Spaeth, 
T. Duangchinda, A. Sakuntabhai, V.-M. Cao-Lormeau, P. Malasit, F. A. Rey, 
J. Mongkolsapaya, G. R. Screaton, Dengue virus sero-cross-reactivity drives antibody-
dependent enhancement of infection with zika virus. Nat. Immunol. 17, 1102–1108 
(2016).
 12. S. B. Halstead, Biologic evidence required for Zika disease enhancement by dengue 
antibodies. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 23, 569–573 (2017).
 13. S. V. Bardina, P. Bunduc, S. Tripathi, J. Duehr, J. J. Frere, J. A. Brown, R. Nachbagauer, 
G. A. Foster, D. Krysztof, D. Tortorella, S. L. Stramer, A. García-Sastre, F. Krammer, J. K. Lim, 
Enhancement of Zika virus pathogenesis by preexisting antiflavivirus immunity.  
Science 356, 175–180 (2017).
 14. P. Pantoja, E. X. Pérez-Guzmán, I. V. Rodríguez, L. J. White, O. González, C. Serrano, 
L. Giavedoni, V. Hodara, L. Cruz, T. Arana, M. I. Martínez, M. A. Hassert, J. D. Brien, 
A. K. Pinto, A. de Silva, C. A. Sariol, Zika virus pathogenesis in rhesus macaques is 
unaffected by pre-existing immunity to dengue virus. Nat. Commun. 8, 15674 (2017).
 15. M. K. McCracken, G. D. Gromowski, H. L. Friberg, X. Lin, P. Abbink, R. De la Barrera, 
K. H. Eckles, L. S. Garver, M. Boyd, D. Jetton, D. H. Barouch, M. C. Wise, B. S. Lewis, 
J. R. Currier, K. Modjarrad, M. Milazzo, M. Liu, A. B. Mullins, J. R. Putnak, N. L. Michael, 
R. G. Jarman, S. J. Thomas, Impact of prior flavivirus immunity on Zika virus infection in 
rhesus macaques. PLOS Pathog. 13, e1006487 (2017).
 16. W. G. Valiant, Y.-J. S. Huang, D. L. Vanlandingham, S. Higgs, M. G. Lewis, J. J. Mattapallil, 
Zika convalescent macaques display delayed induction of anamnestic cross-neutralizing 
antibody responses after dengue infection. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 7, 130 (2018).
 17. W. G. Valiant, T. Lalani, H. C. Yun, A. Kunz, T. H. Burgess, J. J. Mattapallil, Human serum 
with high neutralizing antibody titers against both Zika and dengue virus shows delayed 
in vitro antibody-dependent enhancement of dengue virus infection. Open Forum Infect. 
Dis. 5, ofy151 (2018).
 18. J. George, W. G. Valiant, M. J. Mattapallil, M. Walker, Y.-J. S. Huang, D. L. Vanlandingham, 
J. Misamore, J. Greenhouse, D. E. Weiss, D. Verthelyi, S. Higgs, H. Andersen, M. G. Lewis, 
J. J. Mattapallil, Prior exposure to Zika virus significantly enhances peak dengue-2 viremia 
in rhesus macaques. Sci. Rep. 7, 10498 (2017).
 19. J. J. Osborn, J. Dancis, B. V. Rosenberg, Studies of the immunology of the newborn infant. 
III. Permeability of the placenta to maternal antibody during fetal life. Pediatrics 10, 
450–456 (1952).
 20. E. J. Israel, V. K. Patel, S. F. Taylor, A. Marshak-Rothstein, N. E. Simister, Requirement for a 
beta 2-microglobulin-associated Fc receptor for acquisition of maternal IgG by fetal and 
neonatal mice. J. Immunol. 154, 6246–6251 (1995).
 21. N. E. Simister, C. M. Story, H.-L. Chen, J. S. Hunt, An IgG-transporting Fc receptor expressed 
in the syncytiotrophoblast of human placenta. Eur. J. Immunol. 26, 1527–1531 (1996).
 22. J. L. Leach, D. D. Sedmak, J. M. Osborne, B. Rahill, M. D. Lairmore, C. L. Anderson, Isolation 
from human placenta of the IgG transporter, FcRn, and localization to the 
syncytiotrophoblast: Implications for maternal-fetal antibody transport. J. Immunol. 157, 
3317–3322 (1996).
 23. C. Baronti, G. Piorkowski, R. N. Charrel, L. Boubis, I. Leparc-Goffart, X. de Lamballerie, 
Complete coding sequence of Zika virus from a French polynesia outbreak in 2013. 
Genome Announc. 2, e00500-14 (2014).
 24. E. D. Watson, J. C. Cross, Development of structures and transport functions in the mouse 
placenta. Physiology 20, 180–193 (2005).
 25. J. L. Sones, R. L. Davisson, Preeclampsia, of mice and women. Physiol. Genomics 48, 
565–572 (2016).
 26. T. Iguchi, N. Tani, T. Sato, N. Fukatsu, Y. Ohta, Developmental changes in mouse placental 
cells from several stages of pregnancy in vivo and in vitro. Biol. Reprod. 48, 188–196 (1993).
 27. J. Morrison, A. P. S. Rathore, C. K. Mantri, S. A. B. Aman, A. Nishida, A. L. St. John, 
Transcriptional profiling confirms the therapeutic effects of mast cell stabilization in a 
dengue disease model. J. Virol. 91, e00617-17 (2017).
 28. W. A. A. Saron, A. P. S. Rathore, L. Ting, E. E. Ooi, J. Low, S. N. Abraham, A. L. St. John, 
Flavivirus serocomplex cross-reactive immunity is protective by activating heterologous 
memory CD4 T cells. Sci. Adv. 4, eaar4297 (2018).
 29. A. J. Johnson, D. A. Martin, N. Karabatsos, J. T. Roehrig, Detection of anti-arboviral 
immunoglobulin G by using a monoclonal antibody-based capture enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. J. Clin. Microbiol. 38, 1827–1831 (2000).
 30. C. Li, D. Xu, Q. Ye, S. Hong, Y. Jiang, X. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Shi, C.-F. Qin, Z. Xu, Zika virus 
disrupts neural progenitor development and leads to microcephaly in mice. Cell Stem Cell 
19, 120–126 (2016).
 31. J. J. Miner, B. Cao, J. Govero, A. M. Smith, E. Fernandez, O. H. Cabrera, C. Garber, M. Noll, 
R. S. Klein, K. K. Noguchi, I. U. Mysorekar, M. S. Diamond, Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy in mice causes placental damage and fetal demise. Cell 165, 1081–1091 (2016).
 32. J. M. Martinez Gomez, L. C. Ong, J. H. Lam, S. A. B. Aman, E. A. Libau, P. X. Lee, 
A. L. St. John, S. Alonso, Maternal antibody-mediated disease enhancement in type I 
interferon-deficient mice leads to lethal disease associated with liver damage.  
PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10, e0004536 (2016).
 33. J. K. Ng, S. L. Zhang, H. C. Tan, B. Yan, J. M. M. Gomez, W. Y. Tan, J. H. Lam, G. K. X. Tan, 
E. E. Ooi, S. Alonso, First experimental in vivo model of enhanced dengue disease severity 
through maternally acquired heterotypic dengue antibodies. PLOS Pathog. 10, e1004031 
(2014).
 34. Y. Sugitani, S. Nakai, O. Minowa, M. Nishi, K. Jishage, H. Kawano, K. Mori, M. Ogawa, 
T. Noda, Brn-1 and Brn-2 share crucial roles in the production and positioning of mouse 
neocortical neurons. Genes Dev. 16, 1760–1765 (2002).
 35. L. Muzio, A. Mallamaci, Foxg1 confines Cajal-Retzius neuronogenesis and hippocampal 
morphogenesis to the dorsomedial pallium. J. Neurosci. 25, 4435–4441 (2005).
 36. L. Muzio, B. Di Benedetto, A. Stoykova, E. Boncinelli, P. Gruss, A. Mallamaci, Conversion  
of cerebral cortex into basal ganglia in Emx2−/− Pax6Sey/Sey double-mutant mice.  
Nat. Neurosci. 5, 737–745 (2002).
 37. R. J. McEvilly, M. O. de Diaz, M. D. Schonemann, F. Hooshmand, M. G. Rosenfeld, 
Transcriptional regulation of cortical neuron migration by POU domain factors. Science 
295, 1528–1532 (2002).
 38. G. D. Frantz, J. M. Weimann, M. E. Levin, S. K. McConnell, Otx1 and Otx2 define layers and 
regions in developing cerebral cortex and cerebellum. J. Neurosci. 14, 5725–5740 (1994).
 39. F. J. Carod-Artal, O. Wichmann, J. Farrar, J. Gascón, Neurological complications of dengue 
virus infection. Lancet Neurol. 12, 906–919 (2013).
 40. M. A. Johansson, L. Mier-y-Teran-Romero, J. Reefhuis, S. M. Gilboa, S. L. Hills, Zika and the 
risk of microcephaly. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 1–4 (2016).
 41. F. R. Cugola, I. R. Fernandes, F. B. Russo, B. C. Freitas, J. L. M. Dias, K. P. Guimarães, 
C. Benazzato, N. Almeida, G. C. Pignatari, S. Romero, C. M. Polonio, I. Cunha, C. L. Freitas, 
W. N. Brandão, C. Rossato, D. G. Andrade, D. de P Faria, A. T. Garcez, C. A. Buchpigel, 
C. T. Braconi, E. Mendes, A. A. Sall, P. M. de A Zanotto, J. P. S. Peron, A. R. Muotri, 
P. C. B. Beltrão-Braga, The Brazilian Zika virus strain causes birth defects in experimental 
models. Nature 534, 267–271 (2016).
 42. D. C. Roopenian, G. J. Christianson, T. J. Sproule, A. C. Brown, S. Akilesh, N. Jung, 
S. Petkova, L. Avanessian, E. Y. Choi, D. J. Shaffer, P. A. Eden, C. L. Anderson, The MHC class 
I-like IgG receptor controls perinatal IgG transport, IgG homeostasis, and fate of 
IgG-Fc-coupled drugs. J. Immunol. 170, 3528–3533 (2003).
 43. L. Mathiesen, L. K. Nielsen, J. T. Andersen, A. Grevys, I. Sandlie, T. E. Michaelsen, 
M. Hedegaard, L. E. Knudsen, M. H. Dziegiel, Maternofetal transplacental transport of 
recombinant IgG antibodies lacking effector functions. Blood 122, 1174–1181 (2013).
 44. T. Taguchi, Emerging roles of recycling endosomes. J. Biochem. 153, 505–510 (2013).
 45. J. Huotari, A. Helenius, Endosome maturation. EMBO J. 30, 3481–3500 (2011).
 46. B. T. Walters, P. F. Jensen, V. Larraillet, K. Lin, T. Patapoff, T. Schlothauer, K. D. Rand, 
J. Zhang, Conformational destabilization of immunoglobulin G increases the low pH 
binding affinity with the neonatal Fc receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 291, 1817–1825 (2016).
 47. S. Jindadamrongwech, C. Thepparit, D. R. Smith, Identification of GRP 78 (BiP) as a liver cell 
expressed receptor element for dengue virus serotype 2. Arch. Virol. 149, 915–927 (2004).
 48. J. A. Muller, M. Harms, A. Schubert, S. Jansen, D. Michel, T. Mertens, J. Schmidt-Chanasit, 
J. Münch, Inactivation and environmental stability of Zika virus. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 22, 
1685–1687 (2016).
 49. M. G. Zimmerman, K. M. Quicke, J. T. O'Neal, N. Arora, D. Machiah, L. Priyamvada, 
R. C. Kauffman, E. Register, O. Adekunle, D. Swieboda, E. L. Johnson, S. Cordes, L. Haddad, 
R. Chakraborty, C. B. Coyne, J. Wrammert, M. S. Suthar, Cross-reactive dengue virus 
antibodies augment Zika virus infection of human placental macrophages. Cell Host 
Microbe 24, 731–742.e6 (2018).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathore et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaav3208     27 February 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 11
 50. E. Jauniaux, D. Jurkovic, B. Gulbis, C. Liesnard, C. Lees, S. Campbell, Materno-fetal 
immunoglobulin transfer and passive immunity during the first trimester of human 
pregnancy. Hum. Reprod. 10, 3297–3300 (1995).
 51. A. Malek, R. Sager, P. Kuhn, K. H. Nicolaides, H. Schneider, Evolution of maternofetal 
transport of immunoglobulins during human pregnancy. Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 36, 
248–255 (1996).
 52. U.-A. Halai, K. Nielsen-Saines, M. L. Moreira, P. C. de Sequeira, J. P. P. Junior, 
A. de Araujo Zin, J. Cherry, C. R. Gabaglia, S. L. Gaw, K. Adachi, I. Tsui, J. H. Pilotto, 
R. R. Nogueira, A. M. B. de Filippis, P. Brasil, Maternal Zika virus disease severity, virus load, 
prior dengue antibodies, and their relationship to birth outcomes. Clin. Infect. Dis. 65, 
877–883 (2017).
 53. M. P. A. van Meer, R. Mögling, J. Klaasse, F. D. Chandler, S. D. Pas, A. A. van der Eijk, 
M. P. G. Koopmans, C. B. E. M. Reusken, C. H. GeurtsvanKessel, Re-evaluation of routine 
dengue virus serology in travelers in the era of Zika virus emergence. J. Clin. Virol. 92, 
25–31 (2017).
 54. R. S. Lanciotti, O. L. Kosoy, J. J. Laven, J. O. Velez, A. J. Lambert, A. J. Johnson, 
S. M. Stanfield, M. R. Duffy, Genetic and serologic properties of Zika virus associated with 
an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 14, 1232–1239 (2008).
 55. Y. Ben Suleiman, M. Yoshida, S. Nishiumi, H. Tanaka, T. Mimura, K. Nobutani, 
K. Yamamoto, M. Takenaka, A. Aoganghua, I. Miki, H. Ota, S. Takahashi, H. Matsui, 
M. Nakamura, R. S. Blumberg, T. Azuma, Neonatal Fc receptor for IgG (FcRn) expressed in 
the gastric epithelium regulates bacterial infection in mice. Mucosal Immunol. 5, 87–98 
(2012).
Acknowledgments: We thank the European Virus Archive for providing the ZIKV H/PF/2013 
strain. Funding: This study was funded by the National Research Foundation of Singapore 
(NRF2016NRF-CRP001-063) and Duke–National University of Singapore (NUS) Medical School. 
Author contributions: Animal experiments were performed primarily by W.A.A.S. with some 
experiments performed by A.P.S.R., T.L., and N.J. The animal protocols were written by A.L.S. 
and T.L. A.L.S. and A.P.S.R. conceived the study, interpreted the data, and wrote the 
manuscript. A.L.S. provided supervision and funding. All authors contributed to data analysis 
and discussions and reviewed/revised the manuscript. Competing interests: A.L.S. is an 
inventor on a provisional patent application filed by NUS that is related to this work 
(publication no.: WO/2018/208231; publication date: 15 November 2018; international 
application no.: PCT/SG2018/050228; international filing date: 10 May 2018). The authors 
declare no other competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed  
to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary 
Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 5 September 2018
Accepted 22 January 2019
Published 27 February 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aav3208
Citation: A. P. S. Rathore, W. A. A. Saron, T. Lim, N. Jahan, A. L. St. John, Maternal immunity and 
antibodies to dengue virus promote infection and Zika virus–induced microcephaly in fetuses. 
Sci. Adv. 5, eaav3208 (2019).
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 microcephaly in fetuses
induced
−
Maternal immunity and antibodies to dengue virus promote infection and Zika virus
Abhay P. S. Rathore, Wilfried A. A. Saron, Ting Lim, Nusrat Jahan and Ashley L. St. John
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aav3208
 (2), eaav3208.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaav3208
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/02/25/5.2.eaav3208.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/2/eaav3208#BIBL
This article cites 55 articles, 16 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 3, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
