 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
1 of 11
CELL DEATH
Chemical disruption of the pyroptotic pore-forming 
protein gasdermin D inhibits inflammatory  
cell death and sepsis
Joseph K. Rathkey1, Junjie Zhao2, Zhonghua Liu1, Yinghua Chen3, Jie Yang1,3,  
Hannah C. Kondolf1, Bryan L. Benson1, Steven M. Chirieleison1, Alex Y. Huang1,4,  
George R. Dubyak3, Tsan S. Xiao1, Xiaoxia Li2, Derek W. Abbott1*
Dysregulation of inflammatory cell death is a key driver of many inflammatory diseases. Pyroptosis, a highly in-
flammatory form of cell death, uses intracellularly generated pores to disrupt electrolyte homeostasis and exe-
cute cell death. Gasdermin D, the pore-forming effector protein of pyroptosis, coordinates membrane lysis and 
the release of highly inflammatory molecules, such as interleukin-1, which potentiate the overactivation of the 
innate immune response. However, to date, there is no pharmacologic mechanism to disrupt pyroptosis. Here, we 
identify necrosulfonamide as a direct chemical inhibitor of gasdermin D, the pyroptotic pore-forming protein, 
which binds directly to gasdermin D to inhibit pyroptosis. Pharmacologic inhibition of pyroptotic cell death by 
necrosulfonamide is efficacious in sepsis models and suggests that gasdermin D inhibitors may be efficacious 
clinically in inflammatory diseases.
INTRODUCTION
Dysregulation of the inflammatory response is a key driver of many 
debilitating and costly diseases including sepsis and inflammatory 
bowel disease. Two distinct forms of cell death are important drivers 
of this inflammatory response. Pyroptosis and necroptosis rely on 
macromolecular cytosolic complexes to coordinate the formation 
of destructive membrane pores. These pores accumulate in the cell 
membrane and disrupt cellular electrochemical potential, causing cell 
death. Lysis of the cell results in the release of inflammatory mole-
cules that recruit immune effector cells and activate a larger inflam-
matory response.
In necroptosis, formation of a receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 
(RIPK1)/RIPK3/mixed lineage kinase domain-like pseudokinase 
(MLKL) complex, termed the necroptosome, coordinates RIPK3 
phosphorylation of MLKL. This phosphorylation causes MLKL oligo-
merization and formation of the necroptotic pore (1–3). In contrast, 
pyroptotic cell death is initiated by cytosolic danger signals that stimu-
late receptors such as NACHT, LRR, and PYD domains– 
containing 3 
(NLRP3), pyrin, and NLR family CARD domain–containing protein 4 
(NLRC4), resulting in the formation of the inflammasome. The in-
flammasome subsequently coordinates the cleavage and activation 
of caspase-1. Active caspase-1 cleaves the pore-forming protein, gas-
dermin D (GSDMD), ultimately resulting in oligomerization of the 
N-terminal portion of GSDMD (4–10). In the resting state, GSDMD 
oligomerization is autoinhibited by the intramolecular binding be-
tween the N and C termini (11, 12). However, cleavage by an in-
flammatory caspase relieves this autoinhibition and allows large 
pyroptotic pores, composed of N-terminal p30-GSDMD oligomers, 
to form. These N-terminal p30-GSDMD pores then perforate the 
outer cellular membrane and individual organelle membranes, re-
sulting in outer membrane failure and mitochondrial permeabiliza-
tion (4, 5, 11, 13, 14). Because GSDMD is a central effector protein 
of an inflammatory insult, it is essential to inflammatory disease. A 
small-molecule inhibitor of GSDMD would be important not only 
for the study of pyroptosis but also to establish GSDMD target vali-
dation in inflammatory diseases as diverse as inflammatory bowel 
disease, inflammatory arthritis, and sepsis.
In this work, we show that necrosulfonamide (NSA) directly binds 
to GSDMD and inhibits p30-GSDMD oligomerization. NSA blocks 
pyroptotic cell death and interleukin-1 (IL-1) release in both primary 
murine and immortalized human and murine monocytes/ 
macrophages. 
NSA does not inhibit other innate immune pathways such as Toll-like 
receptor (TLR) signaling and gasdermin E (GSDME)– 
mediated cell 
death and does not interfere with formation of the inflammasome. 
Furthermore, NSA treatment decreases inflammatory cytokine release 
and substantially prolongs survival in a murine model of sepsis. To-
gether, our findings demonstrate that NSA directly binds to GSDMD 
and inhibits p30-GSDMD pore formation, providing a basis for the 
development of future therapeutics in inflammatory disease.
RESULTS
NSA inhibits pyroptotic cell death in immortalized murine 
macrophages and human monocytes
Screening of small-molecule inhibitors of necroptotic cell death in 
HT29 cells resulted in the discovery of NSA (Fig. 1A) (15). NSA 
potently inhibits necroptosis through binding to MLKL and disrupt-
ing disulfide bonds formed by Cys86 of human MLKL (15). Murine 
MLKL lacks a cysteine at this location, and thus NSA is unable to 
inhibit necroptosis in mice. Although distinct from MLKL in some 
aspects of structure and regulation, disulfide linkages are critical for 
the oligomerization of p30-GSDMD and the formation of pyroptotic 
pores (9). Therefore, we asked whether NSA could also inhibit 
GSDMD oligomerization and pyroptotic cell death. In immortalized 
bone marrow–derived macrophages (iBMDMs) constitutively 
1Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. 2Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. 3Department of Physiology and Bio-
physics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA. 4Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Case 
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: dwa4@case.edu
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim  
to original U.S. 
Government Works
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
2 of 11
Fig. 1. NSA inhibits pyroptotic cell death in immortalized murine macrophages. (A) Chemical structure of NSA. (B to E) Cells were primed with LPS, followed by NSA 
treatment 30 min before stimulation with nigericin (NG) or ATP. Pyroptotic pore formation was measured kinetically through the uptake of PI, and cell lysis was measured by 
LDH release. PI uptake is taken from four experiments each with technical duplicates. LDH release is from three independent experiments, each done in technical dupli-
cate. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. (F) Measurement of pyroptotic pore formation assessed by PI uptake with simultaneous administration of NSA with nigericin 
stimulation. Data represent four experiments each with two technical replicates. (G) Bright-field and epifluorescent microscopy images of iBMDM cells with or without 
NSA treatment before and after treatment with 10 M nigericin. Scale bars, 100 m. All cells were primed with LPS (1 g/ml) for 4 hours. (B to F) PI and LDH data show 
means ± SE. Tx, treatment.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
3 of 11
expressing NLRP3 and apoptosis-associated speck-like protein con-
taining a CARD (ASC), incubation with NSA after lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) priming, but before nigericin addition, inhibited the formation 
of pyroptotic pores, as measured by propidium iodide (PI) uptake, 
and cell death, as measured by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release 
(Fig. 1, B and C). Similar suppression of pyroptotic pore formation 
and cell death by NSA was seen using adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP), 
a separate activator of the NLRP3 inflammasome (Fig. 1, D and E). 
NSA was also able to inhibit pyroptotic pore formation with simul-
taneous administration of NSA and nigericin, albeit to a lesser extent 
than with the short NSA pretreatment. This feature is likely due to the 
rapid (within minutes) induction of pyroptotic cell death (Fig. 1F). 
Bright-field and epifluorescent microscopy of iBMDM cells revealed 
large bubbles resulting from separation of the plasma membrane from 
the cytoskeleton in the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)–treated cells 
after treatment with LPS and nigericin as well as the uptake of PI 
in nearly every cell. Cells treated under the same conditions in the 
presence of NSA displayed normal morphology and a lack of PI up-
take, indicating an absence of pyroptotic cell death (Fig. 1G). Using an 
internal mNeonGreen tag located in the p30 fragment of GSDMD, 
Gsdmd−/− iBMDMs were stably reconstituted and the activity of 
GSDMD was monitored using live cell confocal imaging (16). In 
cells stimulated with LPS and nigericin, treatment with NSA inhibited 
aggregation of p30-mNeon- 
GSDMD, the formation of membrane 
bubbles, and pyroptotic cell death (Fig. 2A). NSA also inhibited GSDMD- 
mediated IL-1 release after inflammasome stimulation, demonstrat-
ing complete suppression of IL-1 even 60 min after stimulation 
(Fig. 2B). To then test other inflammasomes, we used Salmonella 
Typhimurium because S. Typhimurium initiates pyroptosis through 
activation of the NLRC4 inflammasome. NSA also suppressed pore 
formation in cells treated with S. Typhimurium (Fig. 2C), thus demon-
strating efficacy across multiple inflammasome pathways. To deter-
mine whether NSA is also effective at inhibiting pyroptosis in human 
cells, we next tested NSA for its ability to inhibit pyroptotic cell 
death in human THP-1 monocytes. NSA inhibited formation of the 
pyroptotic pore and cell death in a dose-dependent manner in THP-1 
cells as measured by PI uptake and LDH release (Fig. 2, D and E). 
Together, these data suggest that NSA blocks GSDMD pore formation 
in murine and human cells across multiple inflammasomes, consist-
ent with GSDMD being the target of NSA in pyroptosis.
NSA inhibits NLRP3- and pyrin-mediated pyroptotic cell 
death in primary cells
To test whether NSA also inhibited pyroptosis in primary macro-
phages, we cultured bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMDM) 
from C57BL/6J mice. After priming with LPS, the NLRP3 inflam-
masome was activated using nigericin. NSA inhibited PI uptake, as 
visualized by epifluorescent microscopy, and cell death, as measured 
by LDH release at 5 M concentrations (Fig. 3, A and B). Greater 
suppression was seen in these primary macrophages relative to the 
immortalized cell line likely due to the fact that these primary cells 
had not been genetically modified to be highly pyroptotic. To ensure 
that the inhibition of pyroptotic cell death was not NLRP3-dependent, 
we tested the ability of NSA to inhibit pyroptosis downstream of 
activation of the pyrin inflammasome. After priming with LPS, primary 
macrophages were stimulated with Clostridium difficile toxin B. Once 
again, NSA inhibited PI uptake and cell death at 5 M concentrations 
(Fig. 3, C and D). These findings again suggest that NSA inhibits 
pyroptosis downstream of multiple inflammasomes and further sug-
gest that as the common pore-forming protein downstream of the 
pyrin, NLRP3, and NLRC4 inflammasomes, GSDMD is the molecu-
lar target of NSA.
NSA does not inhibit other innate immune pathways  
or other cell death pathways
Many known inflammasome inhibitors work by inhibiting up-
stream of other innate immune pathways or upstream nuclear factor 
B signaling. Therefore, it is also important to rule out an effect on 
other inflammatory cell death pathways like necroptosis. To this 
end, we tested the effect of NSA on necroptosis in murine cells. Mu-
rine iBMDMs, in which MLKL lacks the critical cysteine residue for 
NSA attachment, were treated with tumor necrosis factor– (TNF-), 
Z-VAD-fmk (zVAD), and the Smac-mimetic GDC-0152 in the pres-
ence or absence of NSA. No inhibition of necroptotic cell death was 
seen with NSA (Fig. 4A), consistent with previous findings that NSA 
does not inhibit necroptosis in murine cells (15). The impact of NSA 
on the TLR induction of inflammatory gene transcription was then 
tested. In unstimulated iBMDM cells, NSA did not alter the basal 
levels of IL-6, TNF-, or CXCL10 (Fig. 4B). In response to stimula-
tion with the TLR1/2 agonist, Pam3CSK4, or the TLR4 agonist, LPS, 
NSA did not inhibit induction of inflammatory genes (Fig. 4C). We 
further asked whether, by inhibiting pyroptotic cell death, NSA could 
preserve the inflammasome-independent innate immune response 
for secondary infection. To determine whether this is the case, iBMDM 
cells were challenged with S. Typhimurium. As predicted, NSA en-
hanced the production of other inflammatory signaling molecules 
as demonstrated by increased levels of CXCL10 and IL-6 through 
inhibiting the initial pyroptotic cell death (Fig. 4D). The other gas-
dermin family member known to execute inflammatory cell death is 
GSDME, which is activated by apoptotic caspase-3 and caspase-7 (17). 
To test whether NSA was specific to GSDMD-mediated pyroptosis 
or also inhibited GSDME-mediated necrosis, the ability of NSA to 
inhibit etoposide-induced cell death was tested. NSA did not inhibit 
GSDME cleavage or cell death after etoposide treatment (Fig. 4E and 
fig. S1, A and B). Together, these demonstrate that NSA is selective 
for GSDMD even among the most similar inflammatory pathways. 
We then wanted to see whether NSA inhibition of pyroptosis was 
common to all reducing agents. NSA, but not iodoacetamide, dithio-
threitol (DTT), or tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), inhibited 
pyroptotic cell death, demonstrating that NSA is unique in its ability 
to inhibit pyroptosis (Fig. 4F). We then asked whether NSA inhibited 
inflammasome assembly. To this end, the ability of mCerulean-ASC–
expressing iBMDMs to form ASC specks in response to LPS and 
nigericin was assessed. ASC oligomers were not inhibited by 5, 10, 
or 20 M NSA (Fig. 4G). In all, these results suggest that NSA does 
not inhibit TLR signaling, GSDME-meditated cell death, murine 
necroptosis, or inflammasome assembly and further suggest that 
GSDMD is a direct target of NSA.
NSA binds directly to GSDMD via Cys191 on GSDMD
While the above results are suggestive of a direct effect of NSA on 
GSDMD, we aimed to determine the step at which GSDMD was in-
hibited and whether NSA binds GSDMD directly. As NSA inhibits 
pyroptotic cell death downstream of the inflammasome (Fig. 4G), the 
effect of NSA on GSDMD cleavage was tested. Cleavage of GSDMD 
occurred normally in NSA-treated iBMDMs with higher levels of 
p30-GSDMD in NSA-treated cells likely due to diminished cell death 
in the treated cells (Fig. 5A), implying that NSA does not inhibit 
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
4 of 11
caspase-1 at these concentrations. Because NSA appeared to be work-
ing at the level of p30-GSDMD, the ability of NSA to inhibit GSDMD- 
mediated cell death downstream of GSDMD cleavage was tested. 
The cleaved p30 fragment of GSDMD was expressed in human em-
bryonic kidney (HEK)–293T cells with and without exposure to NSA. 
In this experiment, NSA inhibited cell death induced by expression 
of the p30 fragment of GSDMD in HEK-293T cells (Fig. 5B), again 
suggesting that NSA inhibits GSDMD directly. To next determine 
whether this inhibition was due to the ability of NSA to inhibit 
oligomerization of p30-GSDMD, we tested the presence of GSDMD 
Fig. 2. NSA inhibits pyroptotic cell death downstream of multiple inflammasomes in human and murine cells. (A) mNeon-GSDMD was stably reconstituted into 
Gsdmd−/− iBMDM cells. Cells were primed with LPS (1 g/ml), treated with DMSO or NSA, and activated with 10 M nigericin. Live cell imaging was conducted on an inverted 
confocal microscope 90 min after stimulation. (B) IL-1 release from iBMDM cells stimulated with LPS and nigericin with DMSO, 10 M NSA, or 20 M NSA. IL-1 concentration 
was determined by sandwich ELISA 30 and 60 min after stimulation. **P < 0.01 and ****P < 0.0001. (C) Pore formation as measured by PI uptake in iBMDM cells treated with 
S. Typhimurium. iBMDMs were primed for 4 hours followed by activation of the NLRC4 inflammasome with log phase S. Typhimurium. (D and E) THP-1 cells were primed with 
LPS, followed by NSA treatment 30 min before stimulation with nigericin (NG). Pyroptotic pore formation and cell death were assessed through PI uptake and LDH release, 
respectively. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001. (B to E) PI and LDH data are means ± SE and are representative of ≥3 experimental replicates.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
5 of 11
oligomers. NSA completely inhibited the formation of oligomers but 
permitted the formation of p30-GSDMD dimers (Fig. 5C), suggesting 
that GSDMD inhibits the oligomerization of GSDMD dimers but not 
the cleavage of GSDMD or the initial dimerization of GSDMD.
All of these biochemical characteristics of NSA suggest that it 
binds directly to GSDMD. To test this directly, we purified recombi-
nant, human GSDMD from Escherichia coli (fig. S2A). Immunopre-
cipitation of recombinant GSDMD demonstrated the direct binding 
of biotin-conjugated NSA (NSA-biotin) to GSDMD (Fig. 5D and 
fig. S2B). The same was true of the reciprocal experiment using pull-
down with NSA-biotin (Fig. 5E). Competitive binding assay demon-
strated that this binding between GSDMD and NSA-biotin could be 
inhibited by the addition of excess non-
biotinylated NSA (Fig. 5F). Using surface 
plasmon resonance, the binding affinity 
of GSDMD to NSA was demonstrated to 
be 32.0 ± 3.8 M (Fig. 5G). However, in the 
cellular context of cleaved p30-GSDMD, 
with an intact lipid membrane, the af-
finity may be even higher.
As NSA inhibits MLKL by covalently 
binding to a unique human cysteine resi-
due and as NSA inhibits p30-GSDMD 
pore formation in human and murine 
cells, we then searched for conserved hu-
man and murine cysteines within the 
p30-GSDMD fragment (fig. S3) (15). 
Cysteine-to-alanine mutations were made 
at the three conserved cysteines, and 
oligomerization assays showed that C191A 
and, to a lesser extent, C38A showed a 
decreased ability to oligomerize (Fig. 6A). 
This was especially pronounced in the 
increased amount of C191A monomer 
relative to the amount of wild-type (WT), 
C38A, or C56A monomer, suggesting a 
less efficient oligomerization process with 
C191A (Fig. 6A). This feature is in agree-
ment with a previous study that showed 
that these residues were important for 
oligomerization (9). Mutation of this cys-
teine residue on GSDMD was accom-
panied by a decrease in cell death with 
expression of the C191A p30-GSDMD 
mutant relative to WT (Fig. 6B). Given 
these results and the alkylating nature of 
NSA, we then tested whether C191A was 
required for NSA binding. In precipita-
tion experiments, a decrease in binding 
of the NSA to C191A GSDMD was seen, 
with no decrease in binding noted with 
the other cysteine mutants (Fig. 6C). As 
the C191A mutation decreased oligomeri-
zation, cell death, and binding to NSA, 
we asked whether the C191A mutant al-
tered the ability of NSA to inhibit pyro-
ptotic cell death. WT p30-GSDMD or 
C191A p30-GSDMD was then expressed 
in HEK-293 cells with and without NSA 
addition. While WT p30-GSDMD was able to be inhibited by NSA, 
C191A showed a statistically insignificant inability to be inhibited 
by NSA (Fig. 6D). Structural modeling based on the solved crystal 
structure of GsdmA3 demonstrates that Cys191 lies in close proximity 
to the second autoinhibitory interface, an area known to be critical 
for the pyroptotic function of p30-GSDMD (Fig. 6E). Collectively, 
these results suggest that NSA binds GSDMD directly and that Cys191 is 
important for this interaction.
NSA treatment increases survival in murine sepsis
The role of NSA as a therapy in the initial inflammatory response was 
then tested in vivo in a murine model of sepsis. NSA has not been 
Fig. 3. NSA inhibits pyroptosis in primary macrophages. Primary macrophages were isolated from C57BL/6J mice. 
(A to D) After priming with LPS (1 g/ml) for 4 hours, cells were treated with increasing doses of NSA for 30 min before 
activation of the inflammasome with either 10 M NG or C. difficile toxin B (TCDB) (0.4 g/ml). One hour after activa-
tion, cells were visualized using bright-field and epifluorescent microscopy. PI was used at 1 g/ml. Cell death was 
measured by LDH. (A to D) Data are representative of ≥3 experimental replicates. Scale bars, 100 m. LDH data show 
means ± SE. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
6 of 11
Fig. 4. NSA does not inhibit other innate immune pathways. (A) iBMDM cells were treated with TNF-, zVAD-fmk, and GDC-0152 for 24 hours in the presence or absence 
of 20 M NSA. Cell death was measured by LDH release. (B and C) The impact of NSA on TLR pathways was assessed using RT-PCR of inflammatory gene transcripts after 
stimulation of TLR1/2 with Pam3CSK or TLR4 with LPS in the presence or absence of 20 M NSA. (D) qRT-PCR was used to measure CXCL10 and IL-6 expression after infection 
with S. Typhimurium. Log phase S. Typhimurium was used to infect iBMDM cells at an MOI of 50:1 with induction of IL-6 and CXCL10 genes measured after 0 and 2 hours. 
Relative induction was based off of GAPDH as the housekeeping reference gene. Data are taken from technical triplicates and are representative of three independent ex-
periments. **P < 0.01. (E) Cell death as measured by LDH assay in macrophages treated for 8 hours with 100 M etoposide and DMSO, 10 M NSA, or 20 M NSA. **P < 0.01. 
(F) Pyroptotic pore formation as assessed by PI uptake in iBMDM cells after activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome with LPS and nigericin and treatment with 20 M NSA, TCEP, 
iodoacetamide, or DTT. (G) iBMDM cells expressing mCerulean-ASC that form specks upon activation of the inflammasome were stimulated with LPS and nigericin in the 
presence of DMSO or NSA. Formation of specks was visualized using epifluorescent microscopy. Scale bars, 100 m. (A to F) Data are means ± SE. n.s., not significant.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
7 of 11
optimized for pharmacokinetic parame-
ters or for in vivo stability, and after test-
ing, we first determined that the maximal 
nontoxic dose of NSA was 20 mg/kg. 
Survival curves in mice given a lethal 
dose of LPS (25 mg/kg) demonstrated 
the therapeutic effect of NSA, wherein a 
single dose of 20 mg/kg NSA adminis-
tered 30 min before LPS increased me-
dian survival by 6 hours (P = 0.009, fig S4). 
This therapeutic effect was even more 
pronounced in a second cohort treated 
with two doses of DMSO or NSA, once 
30 min before LPS administration and 
once 10 hours after LPS administration. 
Serum taken from these two groups 
demonstrated a significant decrease in 
the release of IL-1 and IL-6 in mice 
treated with NSA (Fig. 7, A and B). In 
these mice treated with two doses of ei-
ther NSA or DMSO, NSA increased me-
dian survival by 9 hours (P < 0.0001, 
Fig. 7C). On the basis of our data from 
the murine sepsis models, it is possible 
that optimized derivatives of NSA might 
be of use in the treatment of acute in-
flammatory diseases.
DISCUSSION
Here, the data demonstrate that NSA in-
hibits formation of the pyroptotic pore 
in human and murine cells through di-
rect inhibition of the GSDMD pyroptotic 
pore both in vitro and in vivo (fig. S5). In 
murine immortalized and primary macro-
phages, NSA inhibits pyroptotic pore for-
mation, cell death, and release of IL-1 
downstream of the pyrin, NLRP3, and 
NLRC4 inflammasomes. This inhibitory 
ability translates to human monocytes as 
well, where NSA inhibits pyroptotic pore 
formation and cell death. Mechanistically, 
we found that NSA binds to GSDMD, in-
hibiting oligomerization of p30-GSDMD, 
leading to an inability to form the pyro-
ptotic pore and an absence of pyroptotic 
cell death. NSA does not inhibit dimeriza-
tion of GSDMD, but rather inhibits the 
assembly of those dimers into higher- 
order oligomers. In vitro experiments 
demonstrated that NSA binds directly to 
full-length GSDMD with 32 M binding 
affinity. This affinity may, in fact, be higher 
within the cellular context with a lipid 
membrane and cleaved p30-GSDMD. 
Through the inhibition of oligomerization, 
NSA also inhibits release of IL-1 and 
other pore-mediated signaling molecules, 
Fig. 5. NSA directly interacts with GSDMD. (A) LPS-primed iBMDM cells were stimulated with 10 M nigericin in the 
presence or absence of NSA for 1 hour. Cleavage of full-length (FL)–GSDMD was assessed by Western blot. (B) The 
ability of NSA to inhibit formation of the pyroptotic pore was tested by transient expression of NTAP–p30-GSDMD in 
HEK-293T cells using calcium phosphate transfection. Four hours after transfection, medium was changed and DMSO or 
NSA was used to treat the cells. Twenty-four hours after transfection, LDH release was measured. Data are means ± SE 
taken from three technical replicates and are representative of three independent experiments. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 
0.001. (C) Oligomerization with transient expression of GFP–p30-GSDMD expressed in HEK-293T cells was assessed 
by Western blot under nonreducing conditions after treatment with DMSO or 20 M NSA. (D and E) Reciprocal in vitro 
binding assays of GSDMD to NSA-biotin using pulldown of biotin by streptavidin or pulldown of GSDMD with GSDMD 
antibody and analysis by Western blot. (F) Competitive binding assay of NSA with NSA-biotin and GSDMD. GFP-GSDMD 
was expressed in HEK-293T cells using calcium phosphate transfection. The in vitro competitive binding assay between 
NSA and NSA-biotin at a 5:1 ratio was conducted for 2 hours with analysis of binding by Western blot. (G) Surface 
plasmon resonance with recombinant GSDMD (immobilized) and NSA demonstrated a binding affinity of 32.0 ± 3.8 M. 
IP, immunoprecipitation.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
8 of 11
which are responsible for inflammatory disease. NSA specifically in-
hibits pyroptotic cell death downstream of inflammasome activation 
while leaving other innate signaling pathways, such as TLR signaling 
and GSDME-mediated cell death, intact and functional. In vivo, the 
role of NSA as an inhibitor of cell death was demonstrated with sin-
gle and double doses of NSA, both of which significantly increased 
median survival in the LPS model of sepsis.
No inhibitors that directly inhibit GSDMD while conserving 
inflammasome-independent innate immune function have been re-
ported. Given the role of pyroptotic cell death and IL-1 release in 
both acute and chronic inflammation and its known role in inflam-
matory diseases as diverse as atherosclerosis, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and sepsis, this compound allows us to separate its role in 
cytokine function from its role in inflam-
matory cell death (18–22). As an alkylat-
ing compound likely targeting cysteine 
residues, GSDMD and MLKL are not 
likely to be the only proteins altered by 
NSA. While our findings do show that 
Cys191 is crucial for NSA binding and that 
mutation to alanine disrupts this bind-
ing, it is curious that the C191A muta-
tion affects death to a much smaller 
extent than exposure to NSA. It is possi-
ble that binding of a large chemical like 
NSA is able to disrupt oligomerization 
to a greater extent than the removal of a 
single thiol group. On the basis of the fact 
that NSA targets GSDMD by targeting a 
cysteine, it is conceivable that NSA might 
target free cysteines in other molecules 
at higher concentrations. Further studies 
comparing pharmacologic and genetic 
deletion of GSDMD are needed to better 
understand the specificity of NSA- 
dependent targeting of GSDMD. None-
theless, our findings suggest that NSA 
can directly target GSDMD under pyro-
ptotic conditions, and we propose that 
NSA could be used as a lead compound 
to develop more potent inhibitors of 
GSDMD. This is demonstrated by the 
identification of the targeted region of 
GSDMD (surrounding Cys191), the direct 
binding of GSDMD to NSA as shown 
by binding assays, surface plasmon res-
onance assays, and the inhibition of p30- 
GSDMD toxicity in overexpression assays. 
In addition, as a chemical probe, NSA al-
lows us to better understand the biophysics 
of GSDMD pore formation in a man-
ner that cannot be easily measured using 
in vitro assays. By halting GSDMD pore 
formation post-GSDMD cleavage and only 
after GSDMD dimer formation, NSA in-
hibition shows not only that caspase-1 
is functionally intact but also that p30- 
GSDMD dimers likely form before oligo-
merization into larger pores. Thus, while 
the alkylating nature of NSA likely causes off-target effects, its dis-
covery as a GSDMD inhibitor shows that targeting of GSDMD not 
only is therapeutically feasible but also allows us to better under-
stand the biophysical mechanism of pyroptotic pore formation.
Through a variety of in vitro and in vivo experiments, we demon-
strate that NSA binds directly to GSDMD and can ameliorate GSDMD- 
driven mortality in murine sepsis. The identification of a tool compound 
in which the biochemistry of pyroptotic pore formation can be studied 
is important for the field. NSA represents the most distal inhibitor of 
inflammasome-mediated cell death and IL-1 release yet found. It 
provides the proof of principle that GSDMD pore formation can be in-
hibited and validates GSDMD as a viable pharmaceutical target. The 
therapeutic efficacy of inhibiting the inflammasome-pyroptosis axis 
Fig. 6. Inhibition by NSA differs between MLKL and GSDMD. (A) Oligomerization of p30-GSDMD cysteine-to-alanine 
mutants conserved between mice and humans was tested in nonreducing conditions. (B) The cytotoxicity of p30-GSDMD 
cysteine-to-alanine mutants, expressed in HEK-293T cells by calcium phosphate transfection, was assessed by LDH 
release. (C) In vitro binding assays between GFP-GSDMD cysteine-to-alanine mutants and NSA-biotin with analysis by 
Western blot. (D) HEK-293T cells were transfected with either WT p30-GSDMD or C191A p30-GSDMD and either left 
untreated or treated with NSA. While NSA decreased WT p30-GSDMD–mediated cell death, the decrease in C191A 
p30-GSDMD was not statistically significant. (E) Models for the full-length human and murine GSDMDs showing the 
location of the conserved Cys residues that may engage NSA and are important for oligomerization. The N-terminal 
domains for human GSDMD and murine GSDMD are shown in ribbons and colored salmon and blue-green, respec-
tively. The C-terminal domains are shown in surface and gray ribbons. Residues Cys191 (human GSDMD) and Cys192 
(murine GSDMD) and two surrounding residues are shown as ball-and-stick models, which demonstrate that, while the 
surrounding residues engage in the N- and C-domain interface, the Cys residues are exposed to the solvent. Approxi-
mate locations of the interface (top) in the full-length GSDMD structures are marked in red on the bottom. (B and D) 
LDH data are means ± SE. Ab, antibody. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
9 of 11
has already been demonstrated clinically with the efficacy of IL-1 re-
ceptor antagonists to treat inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis and the cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes. Recently, two 
more studies have supported the importance of inhibiting this cascade 
as the IL-1 antagonist, anakinra, has been shown to reduce mortality in 
a subset of sepsis patients, and another IL-1 antagonist, canakinumab, 
has been shown to significantly reduce cardiovascular events in patients 
(23, 24). Therefore, there is high therapeutic potential in chemically in-
hibiting two forms of inflammatory cell death, pyroptosis and necro-
ptosis, in tandem, in human patients during inflammatory disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines, plasmids, and reagents
HEK-293T cells [American Type Culture Collection (ATCC)] were 
cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 15% 
SuperCalf Serum (Gemini BioProducts) with 1% antibiotic/antimycotic 
(Invitrogen). Murine nlrp3−/− iBMDMs constitutively expressing 
FLAG-NLRP3 and mCerulean-ASC were a gift from E. Latz (Uni-
versity of Bonn). iBMDMs were cultured in 10% SuperCalf Serum 
with 1% antibiotic/antimycotic and puromycin (3 g/ml) (InvivoGen). 
THP-1 cells (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI with 10% fetal bovine 
serum (Gemini BioProducts) with 1% antibiotic/antimycotic and 
l-glutamine. Murine macrophages (Alnemri macrophages) used in 
assays of GSDME cell death were a gift from E. Alnemri (Jefferson 
College of Biomedical Sciences) and were cultured in DMEM with 
10% SuperCalf Serum with 1% antibiotic/antimycotic.
Human GSDMD was cloned into the pNTAP-B or pEGFP vector 
using Gibson Assembly Cloning with no linking region between GSDMD 
and epitope tag. NTAP–p30-GSDMD and GFP–p30-GSDMD were 
created using site-directed mutagenesis (primers designed using 
PrimerX) introducing a stop codon at Gly276. Cysteine-to-alanine 
mutants were generated using site-directed mutagenesis on the 
NTAP–p30-GSDMD vector.
Gibson assembly cloning of the Gsdmd reconstitution vector was 
conducted using the following primer sets: insert: forward, 5′-AG-
ATGTCGAAGAGaatCCTGGACCGATGGGGTCGGCCTTT-
GAGC-3′; reverse, 5′-AGAGGTTGATTGTCGAC 
TTAACGC 
GT 
CT 
- 
A 
GTGGGG 
CTCCTGGCTC-3′; backbone: forward, 5′-GAGCCA-
GG 
AG 
 
CCCC 
AC 
TA 
GACGCGTTAAGTCGACAATCAACCTCT-3′; 
reverse, 
5′-GCTC 
AAA 
GGCCGACCCCATCGGTCCAGGATTCT-
CTTCGACATCT-3′. Gibson Assembly cloning of the pNTAP-GSDMD 
vector was conducted using the following primer sets: insert: forward, 
5′-GGGCTGCCCGGGCGGATCCATGGGGTCGGCCTTT-
GAGC-3′; reverse, 5′-GAGCCAGGAGCCCCACTAGG 
GAT 
CCTAA-
GGTA 
CCA 
GG 
TAAGTGTACCCAATTCGC-3′; backbone: forward, 
5′-GAGCCAGGAGCCCCACTAGGGATCCTAAGGTACCAGG-
TAAGTGTACCCAATTCGC-3′; reverse, 5′-GCTCAAAGGCCGA-
CCCCATGGATCCGCCCG 
GGCAGCCC-3′. The rational design 
and cloning of mNeonGreen GSDMD (used only in Fig. 2A) were 
previously described (16). All cloning and mutagenesis were veri-
fied using Sanger sequencing. Alignment of human and murine 
GSDMD amino acid sequences was conducted using Clustal Omega 
with formatting in ENDscript (ESPript 3.0) (25). Gsdmd−/− iBMDM 
cells were generated using clustered regularly interspaced short pal-
indromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) and 
individually cloned out, with loss of GSDMD expression validated 
using Western blot as previously described (26, 27).
Assays of cell death
PI assays were conducted as previously described in cells primed with 
LPS (1 g/ml) for 4 hours (16, 26, 28). Before the addition of NSA or 
DMSO, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 
cultured in a basal salt solution containing PI (1 g/ml) (Molecular 
Probes), 120 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 1.5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM magnesium 
chloride, 25 mM Hepes, 5 mM glucose, and 0.1% bovine serum al-
bumin (BSA) at pH 7.4. Cells were stimulated and read kinetically on 
a SpectraMax i3x Multimode microplate reader (Molecular Devices) at 
533/617 nm (excitation/emission) at 37°C. Maximum fluorescence was 
obtained using 1% Triton X-100. Relative PI uptake was calculated 
on the basis of the background and maximum fluorescence in each 
well and was calculated as relative PI uptake = (sample-background)/
(maximum- 
background).
Cell death was measured by LDH release assay (Invitrogen). For 
p30-GSDMD cytotoxicity, HEK-293T cells were transfected with the 
NTAP–p30-GSDMD construct. Four hours after transfection, me-
dium was changed and NSA or DMSO was added (if applicable). 
Twenty-four hours after the transfection, LDH release was measured. 
For cell death in iBMDM, THP-1, or murine macrophages for GSDME 
experiments, cells were plated at 100,000 cells per well in a 24-well 
plate. Cells were stimulated with ultrapure LPS (1 g/ml) (InvivoGen) 
for 4 hours for GSDMD-mediated cell death. Cells were stimulated 
with 100 M etoposide (Sigma) for 8 hours for GSDME-mediated 
cell death. Cells were then washed once in PBS and the medium was 
exchanged for the basal salt solution. One hour after stimulation, 
LDH release was measured.
Necroptotic cell death was induced by treating iBMDM cells with 
TNF- (10 ng/ml), 20 M zVAD-fmk (ApexBio), and GDC-0152 
Fig. 7. NSA treatment extends survival in the LPS model of sepsis. (A to C) 
C57BL/6J mice (9 or 10 per group) were injected with LPS (25 mg/kg) and with NSA 
or DMSO (20 mg/kg) 30 min before and 10 hours after LPS administration. Volume 
per injection of NSA or DMSO was about 25 l per mouse. Serum levels of IL-6 and 
IL-1, measured by sandwich ELISA, were taken 6 hours after the administration of 
LPS. Cytokine data are means ± SE. Survival curves were analyzed by log-rank (Mantel- 
Cox) test demonstrating an increase in median survival of 9 hours in the NSA treat-
ment group (P <0.0001). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
10 of 11
(MedChemExpress) for 24 hours in the presence or absence of 
20 M NSA. Cell death was analyzed by the relative release of LDH. 
Two-tailed t tests with  set at 0.05 were used for statistical analyses 
of LDH measurements of cell death.
Cell harvest, SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, 
protein purification, and Western blot
For assessing the cleavage of GSDMD, iBMDM cells were primed 
with LPS and then stimulated with 10 M nigericin for 1 hour. For 
assessing cleavage of GSDME, Alnemri macrophages were treated 
with etoposide for 8 hours. Cells were harvested in 8 M urea with 
5% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), phenylmethane 
sulfonyl fluoride, and calyculin (LC Labs). Samples were passaged 
five times through a 25-gauge needle, combined with SDS contain-
ing sample buffer and boiled. Harvesting of samples in nonreducing 
conditions used 0.5% NP-40 buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail 
and calyculin. Samples were combined 1:1 with sample buffer in the 
absence of any reducing agents. Purified protein with molecular 
weight marker was run on an SDS–polyacrylamide gel electropho-
resis (SDS-PAGE) gel and then fixed and stained with Coomassie 
brilliant blue in 50% methanol and 5% acetic acid.
E. coli expressing a 6×His-small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)– 
GSDMD construct were cultured overnight. Bacteria were diluted 
1:50 with overnight culture and then induced with isopropyl- 
-d-
thiogalactopyranoside at an OD600 (optical density at 600 nm) of 
0.7. Cells were harvested in tris-HCl and NaCl, sonicated, centri-
fuged, and purified using a Ni column. On the column, 6×His-SUMO- 
GSDMD was washed twice and eluted using 500 mM imidazole. 
The 6×His-SUMO tag was cleaved using ULP-1 and removed using 
dialysis followed by a Ni column. Purified protein was verified by 
SDS-PAGE with Coomassie brilliant blue staining. In vitro binding 
assays with recombinant protein were conducted using 10 g of re-
combinant protein incubated with or without biotin-conjugated 
NSA (Abcam). For pulldown with streptavidin beads (Sigma), beads 
were blocked in 5% BSA in tris buffer, while protein was precleared 
with beads that were subsequently discarded. After incubation with 
50 M NSA-biotin, beads were washed five times with tris buffer, 
combined with sample buffer and -mercaptoethanol, and boiled. 
For GSDMD pulldown, recombinant protein G beads (Invitrogen) 
with mouse anti- 
GSDMD antibody (64-Y, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) 
were incubated with 10 g of recombinant protein. After incubation, 
beads were washed five times with tris buffer, combined with sam-
ple buffer containing -mercaptoethanol, and boiled. GSDMD was 
detected using a rabbit anti-GSDMD antibody (HPA044487, Sigma), 
and biotin was detected using a horseradish peroxidase–conjugated 
antibiotin antibody (Cell Signaling Technology).
Surface plasmon resonance
NSA binding with GSDMD was measured in PBS buffer with 0.05% 
(v/v) P20 (pH 7.4) by surface plasmon resonance using a Biacore 
T200 System (GE Healthcare) at 25°C. The S series sensor chip 
CM5 (GE Healthcare) was preconditioned at 100 l/min with suc-
cessive 20-l pulses of 50 mM NaOH, 100 mM HCl, 0.1 mM SDS, 
and 0.085% (v/v) H3PO4. Recombinant GSDMD was immobilized 
on the sensor chip at high density, and an NSA concentration series 
ranging from 1.95 to 62.5 M were injected over the surface. Each 
concentration was repeated twice, and affinity constant was calcu-
lated by BIAevaluation3 software (GE Healthcare). For steady-state 
analysis, the responses at 5 s after the injection were plotted.
Cytokine assays
The IL-1 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was run 
from supernatants from iBMDMs that were plated at 100,000 cells 
per well in a 24-well plate. Cells were primed for 4 hours with LPS 
(1 g/ml), followed by pretreatment with DMSO, 10 M NSA, or 20 M 
NSA. Cells were activated with 10 M nigericin for 30 or 60 min. 
Supernatants were removed and cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 
rpm for 1 min. IL-1 in the supernatant was quantified by sandwich 
ELISA (BioLegend) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was 
performed on samples following challenge with S. Typhimurium, 
Pam3CSK (1.0 g/ml), or LPS (1.0 g/ml). Overnight cultures of 
S. Typhimurium were diluted to 1:40 and grown for 2 hours. Cells were 
then infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 50:1. qRT-PCR of 
samples was conducted using primers for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (forward, 5′-AGGCCGGTGCTGAGTAT-
GTC-3′; reverse, 5′-TGCCTGCTTCACCACCTTCT- 3′), IL-6 (forward, 
5′-GCCTTCTTGGGACTGATGCT-3′; reverse, 5′-TGCCATTGCA-
CAACTCTTTTCT-3′), TNF- (forward, 5′-GGTGCCTATGTCTCAG-
CCTCTT-3′; reverse, 5′-GCCATAGAACTGATGAGAGGGAG-3′), 
and CXCL10 (forward, 5′-TCCTTGTCCTCCCTAGCTCA-3′; reverse, 
5′-ATAACCCCTTGGGAAGATGG-3′). Statistical analyses of IL-1 
release and gene transcription levels were carried out using two-tailed 
t tests with  set at 0.05.
LPS-induced model of sepsis in mice
For the LPS murine model of sepsis, mice (n = 10 DMSO control and 
n = 9 or 10 NSA-treated, C57BL/6J 8-week-old female mice) were in-
jected with LPS (25 mg/kg) (O111:B4; Sigma, catalog # L2630) and 
either one or two doses of NSA or DMSO (20 mg/kg). Total volume of 
injected NSA or DMSO was about 25 l per mouse per dose adminis-
tered via intraperitoneal injection with an insulin syringe 30 min 
before the per dose administration of LPS (one dose) or 30 min be-
fore LPS administration and 6 hours after administration (two doses). 
Survival curves were analyzed using a log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test in 
GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software Inc.). Serum cytokines were 
measured by ELISA 6 hours after treatment with LPS.
Imaging
For confocal imaging, eight-well #1.5 chambered coverglasses (Nunc) 
were coated with collagen I (Corning) at 50 g/ml in 1% acetic acid 
for 1 hour in a 37°C incubator, washed with PBS, and then seeded 
with iBMDM cells at 100,000 per well. Phase contrast and epifluo-
rescent images were acquired on a Leica DMIL light-emitting diode 
microscope. Live cell confocal imaging was performed on a Leica 
DMI 6000B inverted microscope within a custom-made environment 
box, held at 37°C using an AirTherm ATX heater (World Precision 
Instruments). The objective was a Leica 506375 HC FLUOTAR 25×/0.95 
water immersion objective with 0.17-mm glass correction. An argon 
488-nm laser line was used for excitation, and 8-bit photomultiplier 
tubes were used for detection. Deconvolution was performed with 
Huygens Professional 17.10 using CMLE with SNR 3. Visualization was 
performed using maximum intensity projections in Imaris (Bitplane). 
The brightness of the DMSO image was increased relative to the other 
images for display purposes in Fig. 2A.
Structural modeling
The full-length human GSDMD and murine GSDMD structural mod-
els were created using the Multiple Mapping Method (MMM) server 
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rathkey et al., Sci. Immunol. 3, eaat2738 (2018)     24 August 2018
SCIE N C E I M M U NO LO GY | R ESEA R CH  ARTICL E
11 of 11
(http://manaslu.fiserlab.org/MMM/) with the full-length mGSDMA3 
structure (Protein Data Bank code 5b5r) as a template (29).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
immunology.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/3/26/eaat2738/DC1
Fig. S1. Etoposide-induced cell death in macrophages is independent of NSA.
Fig. S2. Purification of human GSDMD.
Fig. S3. Conserved cysteine residues between human and murine GSDMD in the p30-GSDMD 
fragment.
Fig. S4. Single-dose NSA prolongs survival in the LPS model of sepsis.
Fig. S5. NSA inhibits p30-GSDMD pore formation and cell death.
Table S1. Raw data sets.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. D. Huang, X. Zheng, Z.-a. Wang, X. Chen, W.-t. He, Y. Zhang, J.-G. Xu, H. Zhao, W. Shi, 
X. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Han, The MLKL channel in necroptosis is an octamer formed by 
tetramers in a dyadic process. Mol. Cell Biol. 37, e00497–16 (2017).
 2. S. Liu, H. Liu, A. Johnston, S. Hanna-Addams, E. Reynoso, Y. Xiang, Z. Wang, MLKL forms 
disulfide bond-dependent amyloid-like polymers to induce necroptosis. Proc. Natl.  
Acad. Sci. 114, E7450–E7459 (2017).
 3. H. Wang, L. Sun, L. Su, J. Rizo, L. Liu, L. F. Wang, F. S. Wang, X. Wang, Mixed lineage kinase 
domain-like protein MLKL causes necrotic membrane disruption upon phosphorylation 
by RIP3. Mol. Cell 54, 133–146 (2014).
 4. J. Shi, Y. Zhao, K. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Zhuang, T. Cai, F. Wang, F. Shao, 
Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. Nature 
526, 660–665 (2015).
 5. N. Kayagaki, I. B. Stowe, B. L. Lee, K. O’Rourke, K. Anderson, S. Warming, T. Cuellar, 
B. Haley, M. Roose-Girma, Q. T. Phung, P. S. Liu, J. R. Lill, H. Li, J. Wu, 
S. Kummerfeld, J. Zhang, W. P. Lee, S. J. Snipas, G. S. Salvesen, L. X. Morris, 
L. Fitzgerald, Y. Zhang, E. M. Bertram, C. C. Goodnow, V. M. Dixit, Caspase-11 
cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signalling. Nature 526, 
666–671 (2015).
 6. J. Ding, K. Wang, W. Liu, Y. She, Q. Sun, J. Shi, H. Sun, D.-C. Wang, F. Shao, Pore-forming 
activity and structural autoinhibition of the gasdermin family. Nature 535, 111–116 
(2016).
 7. R. A. Aglietti, A. Estevez, A. Gupta, M. G. Ramirez, P. S. Liu, N. Kayagaki, C. Ciferri, 
V. M. Dixit, E. C. Dueber, GsdmD p30 elicited by caspase-11 during pyroptosis forms 
pores in membranes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 7858–7863 (2016).
 8. L. Sborgi, S. Rühl, E. Mulvihill, J. Pipercevic, R. Heilig, H. Stahlberg, C. J. Farady, D. J. Müller, 
P. Broz, S. Hiller, GSDMD membrane pore formation constitutes the mechanism of 
pyroptotic cell death. EMBO J. 35, 1766–1778 (2016).
 9. X. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Ruan, Y. Pan, V. G. Magupalli, H. Wu, J. Lieberman, Inflammasome-
activated gasdermin D causes pyroptosis by forming membrane pores. Nature 535, 
153–158 (2016).
 10. E. Latz, T. S. Xiao, A. Stutz, Activation and regulation of the inflammasomes.  
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 397–411 (2013).
 11. S. Kuang, J. Zheng, H. Yang, S. Li, S. Duan, Y. Shen, C. Ji, J. Gan, X.-W. Xu, J. Li, Structure 
insight of GSDMD reveals the basis of GSDMD autoinhibition in cell pyroptosis. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 10642–10647 (2017).
 12. Z. Liu, C. Wang, J. K. Rathkey, J. Yang, G. R. Dubyak, D. W. Abbott, T. S. Xiao, Structures of 
the Gasdermin D C-terminal domains reveal mechanisms of autoinhibition. Structure 26, 
778–784.e3 (2018).
 13. W.-t. He, H. Wan, L. Hu, P. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Huang, Z.-H. Yang, C.-Q. Zhong, J. Han, 
Gasdermin D is an executor of pyroptosis and required for interleukin-1 secretion.  
Cell Res. 25, 1285–1298 (2015).
 14. L. DiPeso, D. X. Ji, R. E. Vance, J. V. Price, Cell death and cell lysis are separable events 
during pyroptosis. Cell Death Discovery 3, 17070 (2017).
 15. L. Sun, H. Wang, Z. Wang, S. He, S. Chen, D. Liao, L. Wang, J. Yan, W. Liu, X. Lei, X. Wang, 
Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein mediates necrosis signaling downstream of 
RIP3 kinase. Cell 148, 213–227 (2012).
 16. J. K. Rathkey, B. L. Benson, S. M. Chirieleison, J. Yang, T. S. Xiao, G. R. Dubyak, A. Y. Huang, 
D. W. Abbott, Live-cell visualization of gasdermin D-driven pyroptotic cell death.  
J. Biol. Chem. 292, 14649–14658 (2017).
 17. C. Rogers, T. Fernandes-Alnemri, L. Mayes, D. Alnemri, G. Cingolani, E. S. Alnemri, 
Cleavage of DFNA5 by caspase-3 during apoptosis mediates progression to secondary 
necrotic/pyroptotic cell death. Nat. Commun. 8, 14128 (2017).
 18. G. R. Robbins, H. Wen, J. P.-Y. Ting, Inflammasomes and metabolic disorders: Old genes in 
modern diseases. Mol. Cell 54, 297–308 (2014).
 19. G. Doitsh, N. L. K. Galloway, X. Geng, Z. Yang, K. M. Monroe, O. Zepeda, P. W. Hunt, 
H. Hatano, S. Sowinski, I. Muñoz-Arias, W. C. Greene, Cell death by pyroptosis drives CD4 
T-cell depletion in HIV-1 infection. Nature 505, 509–514 (2014).
 20. C. Bauer, P. Duewell, C. Mayer, H. A. Lehr, K. A. Fitzgerald, M. Dauer, J. Tschopp, S. Endres, 
E. Latz, M. Schnurr, Colitis induced in mice with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) is mediated 
by the NLRP3 inflammasome. Gut 59, 1192–1199 (2010).
 21. J. von Moltke, N. J. Trinidad, M. Moayeri, A. F. Kintzer, S. B. Wang, N. van Rooijen, 
C. R. Brown, B. A. Krantz, S. H. Leppla, K. Gronert, R. E. Vance, Rapid induction of 
inflammatory lipid mediators by the inflammasome in vivo. Nature 490, 107–111 (2012).
 22. F. Martinon, V. Pétrilli, A. Mayor, A. Tardivel, J. Tschopp, Gout-associated uric acid crystals 
activate the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature 440, 237–241 (2006).
 23. P. M. Ridker, B. M. Everett, T. Thuren, J. G. MacFadyen, W. H. Chang, C. Ballantyne, 
F. Fonseca, J. Nicolau, W. Koenig, S. D. Anker, J. J. P. Kastelein, J. H. Cornel, P. Pais, D. Pella, 
J. Genest, R. Cifkova, A. Lorenzatti, T. Forster, Z. Kobalava, L. Vida-Simiti, M. Flather, 
H. Shimokawa, H. Ogawa, M. Dellborg, P. R. F. Rossi, R. P. T. Troquay, P. Libby, R. J. Glynn; 
CANTOS Trial Group, Antiinflammatory therapy with canakinumab for atherosclerotic 
disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 1119–1131 (2017).
 24. B. Shakoory, J. A. Carcillo, W. W. Chatham, R. L. Amdur, H. Zhao, C. A. Dinarello, R. Q. Cron, 
S. M. Opal, Interleukin-1 receptor blockade is associated with reduced mortality in sepsis 
patients with features of the macrophage activation syndrome: Reanalysis of a prior 
Phase III trial. Crit. Care Med. 44, 275–281 (2016).
 25. X. Robert, P. Gouet, Deciphering key features in protein structures with the new 
ENDscript server. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 320–324 (2014).
 26. H. M. Russo, J. Rathkey, A. Boyd-Tressler, M. A. Katsnelson, D. W. Abbott, G. R. Dubyak, 
Active caspase-1 induces plasma membrane pores that precede pyroptotic lysis and are 
blocked by lanthanides. J. Immunol. 197, 1353–1367 (2016).
 27. S. M. Chirieleison, R. A. Marsh, P. Kumar, J. K. Rathkey, G. R. Dubyak, D. W. Abbott, 
Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) signaling defects and cell death 
susceptibility cannot be uncoupled in X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP)-driven 
inflammatory disease. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 9666–9679 (2017).
 28. M. A. Katsnelson, L. G. Rucker, H. M. Russo, G. R. Dubyak, K+ efflux agonists induce NLRP3 
inflammasome activation independently of Ca2+ signaling. J. Immunol. 194, 3937–3952 (2015).
 29. B. K. Rai, A. Fiser, Multiple mapping method: A novel approach to the sequence-to-
structure alignment problem in comparative protein structure modeling. Proteins 63, 
644–661 (2006).
Acknowledgments: We thank the Abbott, Li, Xiao, Ramakrishnan, Dubyak, Huang, and Adoro 
laboratories for thoughtful discussions and scientific insights. We also thank J. Stamler (Case 
Western Reserve University) for technical advice and critical analysis. We appreciate the help 
of F. Allen and J. Myers in isolating BMDM cells. Funding: J.K.R., B.L.B., H.C.K., and S.M.C. were 
supported by NIH grant T32 GM007250. B.L.B. was additionally supported by F31 NS 096857, 
T32NS077888, and TL1 RR024991. G.R.D. was supported by R01-EY014362 and National 
Muscular Dystrophy Association grant NMSS RG5130A2/1. X.L. was supported by NIH grant 
P01HL029582 and a grant from the National Multiple Sclerosis Society (RG-1707-28180). This 
work was further supported by NIH grants P01091222 and R01086550 and a Harrington 
Discovery Institute fellowship to D.W.A. Author contributions: J.K.R. conceived, designed, 
and performed experiments; analyzed and interpreted data; performed statistical analyses; 
and wrote the manuscript. J.Z., J.Y., Z.L., H.C.K., Y.C., and S.M.C. performed experiments, 
performed statistical analyses, and critiqued the manuscript. B.L.B. and A.Y.H. performed 
confocal microscopy. G.R.D. and X.L. designed experiments and critiqued the manuscript. 
T.S.X. and Z.L. performed structural modeling, assisted with protein purification, and critiqued 
the manuscript. D.W.A. conceived the project, interpreted data, and wrote the manuscript. 
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 9 February 2018
Resubmitted 8 May 2018
Accepted 28 June 2018
Published 24 August 2018
10.1126/sciimmunol.aat2738
Citation: J. K. Rathkey, J. Zhao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Yang, H. C. Kondolf, B. L. Benson, S. M. Chirieleison, 
A. Y. Huang, G. R. Dubyak, T. S. Xiao, X. Li, D. W. Abbott, Chemical disruption of the pyroptotic 
pore-forming protein gasdermin D inhibits inflammatory cell death and sepsis. Sci. Immunol. 3, 
eaat2738 (2018).
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cell death and sepsis
Chemical disruption of the pyroptotic pore-forming protein gasdermin D inhibits inflammatory
Chirieleison, Alex Y. Huang, George R. Dubyak, Tsan S. Xiao, Xiaoxia Li and Derek W. Abbott
Joseph K. Rathkey, Junjie Zhao, Zhonghua Liu, Yinghua Chen, Jie Yang, Hannah C. Kondolf, Bryan L. Benson, Steven M.
DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.aat2738
, eaat2738.
3
Sci. Immunol. 
based molecule to be an inhibitor of GSDMD.
−
independently report a pyrazolo-oxazepine scaffold
 
.
et al
potent inhibitors of GSDMD, an important goal for the treatment of septic shock. In the same issue, Sollberger 
cysteine 191 and inhibits the oligomerization of GSDMD dimers. NSA could be used as a template to develop more 
to
necrosulfonamide (NSA) to be an inhibitor of GSDMD and GSDMD-mediated pyroptosis. They propose that NSA binds 
. report
et al
cleavage, GSDMD oligomerizes to form pores that facilitate pyroptotic cell death. Here, Rathkey 
dependent pyroptosis. Upon activation and caspase-dependent proteolytic
−
lipopolysaccharide-driven, caspase-11
 
dependent and
−
Gasdermin D (GSDMD) is a key downstream effector in inflammasome-driven, caspase-1
Targeting gasdermin D
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/content/3/26/eaat2738
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/08/21/3.26.eaat2738.DC1
REFERENCES
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/content/3/26/eaat2738#BIBL
This article cites 29 articles, 9 of which you can access for free
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
a registered trademark of AAAS.
 is
Science Immunology
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2470-9468) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200
Science Immunology 
 by guest on August 27, 2018
http://immunology.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
