 Infection Prevention and Control 
in Pediatric Ambulatory Settings
Mobeen H. Rathore, MD, FAAP, 
a Mary Anne Jackson, MD, FAAP, 
b COMMITTEE ON INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Since the American Academy of Pediatrics published its statement titled 
“Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric Ambulatory Settings” in 2007, 
there have been significant changes that prompted this updated statement. 
Infection prevention and control is an integral part of pediatric practice in 
ambulatory medical settings as well as in hospitals. Infection prevention and 
control practices should begin at the time the ambulatory visit is scheduled. 
All health care personnel should be educated regarding the routes of 
transmission and techniques used to prevent the transmission of infectious 
agents. Policies for infection prevention and control should be written, readily 
available, updated every 2 years, and enforced. Many of the recommendations 
for infection control and prevention from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention for hospitalized patients are also applicable in the ambulatory 
setting. These recommendations include requirements for pediatricians to 
take precautions to identify and protect employees likely to be exposed to 
blood or other potentially infectious materials while on the job. In addition 
to emphasizing the key principles of infection prevention and control in this 
policy, we update those that are relevant to the ambulatory care patient. 
These guidelines emphasize the role of hand hygiene and the implementation 
of diagnosis- and syndrome-specific isolation precautions, with the exemption 
of the use of gloves for routine diaper changes and wiping a well child’s nose 
or tears for most patient encounters. Additional topics include respiratory 
hygiene and cough etiquette strategies for patients with a respiratory tract 
infection, including those relevant for special populations like patients with 
cystic fibrosis or those in short-term residential facilities; separation of 
infected, contagious children from uninfected children when feasible; safe 
handling and disposal of needles and other sharp medical devices; appropriate 
use of personal protective equipment, such as gloves, gowns, masks, 
and eye protection; and appropriate use of sterilization, disinfection, and 
antisepsis. Lastly, in this policy, we emphasize the importance of public health 
interventions, including vaccination for patients and health care personnel, 
and outline the responsibilities of the health care provider related to prompt 
public health notification for specific reportable diseases and communication 
with colleagues who may be providing subsequent care of an infected patient 
to optimize the use of isolation precautions and limit the spread of contagions.
abstract
To cite: Rathore MH, Jackson MA, AAP COMMITTEE ON 
INFECTIOUS DISEASESAAP COMMITTEE ON INFECTIOUS DISEASES. 
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric Ambulatory 
Settings. Pediatrics. 2017;140(5):e20172857
aUniversity of Florida Center for HIV/AIDS Research, Education and 
Service (UF CARES) and Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Wolfson 
Children’s Hospital, Jacksonville, Florida; and bDivision of Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of Missouri–Kansas 
City School of Medicine and Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, 
Missouri
Drs Rathore and Jackson were each responsible for all aspects of 
writing and editing the document and reviewing and responding to 
questions and comments from reviewers and the Board of Directors, 
and both authors approved the final manuscript as submitted.
This document is copyrighted and is property of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and its Board of Directors. All authors have 
filed conflict of interest statements with the American Academy 
of Pediatrics. Any conflicts have been resolved through a process 
approved by the Board of Directors. The American Academy of 
Pediatrics has neither solicited nor accepted any commercial 
involvement in the development of the content of this publication.
Policy statements from the American Academy of Pediatrics benefit 
from expertise and resources of liaisons and internal (AAP) and 
external reviewers. However, policy statements from the American 
Academy of Pediatrics may not reflect the views of the liaisons or the 
organizations or government agencies that they represent.
The guidance in this statement does not indicate an exclusive course 
of treatment or serve as a standard of medical care. Variations, taking 
into account individual circumstances, may be appropriate.
All policy statements from the American Academy of Pediatrics 
automatically expire 5 years after publication unless reaffirmed, 
revised, or retired at or before that time.
DOI: https:// 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1542/ 
peds. 
2017- 
2857
Address correspondence to Mobeen H. Rathore, MD, FAAP. E-mail: 
mobeen.rathore@jax.ufl.edu
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017:e20172857
From the AmericAn AcAdemy oF PediAtrics
Organizational Principles to Guide and Define the Child Health Care System 
and/or Improve the Health of all Children
POLICY STATEMENT
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 In the ambulatory setting, infection 
prevention and control (IPC) are 
essential practices to ensure patient 
safety by preventing the transmission 
of infectious agents to patients 
and accompanying people, health 
care personnel (HCP), and other 
employees. IPC should start at the 
time an ambulatory visit is scheduled 
and is important in every patient 
encounter. In general, standards 
for IPC are the same in all health 
care delivery settings, whether 
inpatient or outpatient and hospital 
or freestanding ambulatory facility. 
Recommendations for IPC practices 
in hospitals are well documented and 
are updated on a regular basis.1 
–5 
Because most patient encounters are 
in ambulatory settings, prevention 
of the transmission of infection in 
ambulatory settings is important.6, 
 
7  
In addition to the risk of health 
care–associated infection during 
medical evaluation and treatment, 
the reception and waiting areas 
of ambulatory facilities present 
opportunities for the transmission 
of infectious agents among patients, 
accompanying people, and staff.8 
The transmission of measles, 
9, 
10 
tuberculosis (TB), 
11, 
 
12 other airborne 
infections, 
9 
–11 hepatitis B and C, 
13 
– 
15  
and other infectious diseases have 
been traced to ambulatory medical 
encounters.6, 
16 Most disease 
outbreaks reported in ambulatory 
medical facilities were associated 
with nonadherence to recommended 
IPC procedures.16
In this statement, we provide 
practical information that updates 
the 2007 Policy Statement17 
regarding IPC procedures as applied 
to ambulatory medical settings. Major 
changes include the endorsement of 
mandatory influenza immunization 
for HCP, the inclusion of a section on 
patients with cystic fibrosis, guidance 
during outbreaks of infectious 
diseases, communication with other 
health care facilities, considerations 
for short-term residential 
facilities, and an update on the 
immunization of HCP. Additional IPC 
recommendations not covered in this 
statement may be necessary for other 
ambulatory medical settings, such 
as dialysis centers, chemotherapy 
centers, procedure suites (eg, for 
endoscopy), emergency centers, and 
outpatient surgery suites.6, 
 
18 
– 
23
MODes Of TransMIssIOn Of 
InfecTIOus agenTs
Knowledge about modes of 
transmission of infectious agents is 
critical to understanding IPC.1, 
 
6, 
 
7, 
 
24 
Overall, contaminated hands are the 
predominant mode of transmission 
of infectious agents, underscoring 
the importance of appropriate hand 
hygiene (ie, use of alcohol-based 
hand rub or hand washing with soap 
and water) before and after contact 
with each patient or his or her 
immediate environment.
IPC strategies are based on the 
following 4 routes of transmission 
of pathogens: (a) the airborne 
route, (b) by direct contact with 
body fluids, (c) by indirect contact 
through fomites or hands of HCP 
(both contact), or (d) by droplets. 
The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) provides guidance 
for each type of transmission-based 
precaution.19 Respiratory tract 
secretions can become airborne in 
small-particle aerosols (airborne 
transmission) and carry some viruses 
(eg, rubeola [measles virus], varicella 
virus) and bacteria (Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis) over longer distances 
and remain suspended in the air for 
a long period of time. In general, the 
particles that are ≤5 µm can travel 
in the air as far as 3 to 6 feet and 
spread by airborne transmission. 
Respiratory tract secretions can 
also transmit some pathogens over 
a shorter distance (usually <3 feet) 
through the air via droplets that 
are >5 µm (droplet transmission), 
including some viruses (eg, influenza 
virus, adenovirus) and bacteria (eg, 
Bordetella pertussis). Body fluids 
precautions intend to prevent the 
transmission of potential pathogens 
in blood and other body fluids and 
discharges. Bloodborne pathogens 
(eg, hepatitis B and C viruses and 
HIV) can be spread via contaminated 
needles and other sharp instruments 
if the recommended procedures 
to prevent exposure to blood or 
blood-containing body fluids are 
not implemented and followed. 
Transmission via direct contact 
(direct contact transmission) occurs 
with body fluids (including blood, 
urine, stool, discharge from infected 
wounds, and respiratory tract 
secretions), when the infectious 
agent is transferred directly from 
an infected person to a susceptible 
person (or more commonly via 
indirect contact transmission), 
or when the infectious agent is 
transferred through a contaminated 
intermediate object, such as a 
stethoscope, a countertop, a door 
handle, or a person’s contaminated 
hands. Examples of pathogens 
transmitted via the contact route 
include gastrointestinal tract 
pathogens, such as Clostridium 
difficile and norovirus, and 
respiratory tract pathogens, such as 
influenza and respiratory syncytial 
virus. Fomites, such as toys and 
ambulatory facility equipment, have 
been implicated in the transmission 
of some pathogens.25 
– 
27 For some 
emerging infections for which 
modes of transmission have not 
been clearly defined, more than one 
type of isolation precaution may be 
necessary, such as for Middle East 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
(MERS-CoV), which requires both 
contact and airborne isolation.
guIDelInes fOr PrevenTIOn Of 
The TransMIssIOn Of InfecTIOus 
agenTs
As with hospitalized patients, HCP 
should observe the “Standard 
Precautions” 
1 with every patient 
encounter in the ambulatory setting. 
“Standard Precautions” refers to a 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
2
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 single set of precautions that should 
be followed for all patients regardless 
of their diagnosis or presumed 
infection status and is predicated on 
the principle that every patient may 
harbor an unrecognized infectious 
agent that can be transmitted by 
blood or body fluids or via their  
skin or mucous membranes (Table 1).  
The Standard Precautions are 
supplemented with “Transmission-
Based Precautions” 
1 when additional 
measures are needed to reduce the 
risk of airborne, contact, and droplet 
transmission. Transmission-based 
precautions may require additional 
equipment or special areas in the 
health care facility; few ambulatory 
care settings will have the latter. 
Special equipment may include 
masks (procedure or surgical 
masks), respirators (special masks 
that require individual-fit testing 
and education for safe and effective 
use), gowns, gloves, and protective 
eyewear such as face shields or 
goggles.
hand hygiene
Hand hygiene (using alcohol-
based hand rubs or washing with 
soap and water) is the single most 
important method of preventing the 
transmission of infectious agents 
(Table 1).1, 
 
3, 
 
31– 
33 The World Health 
Organization’s recommendation 
of 5 moments when hand hygiene 
should be performed include 
the following: before touching 
a patient, before cleaning and 
aseptic procedures, after body 
fluid exposure and/or risk, after 
touching a patient, and after 
touching patient surroundings.
The use of alcohol-based hand rubs 
is the preferred method of hand 
hygiene in most situations because 
this method is convenient, acts 
rapidly, and is highly effective in 
inactivating microbes. Hands are 
decontaminated by applying the 
amount of product recommended by 
the manufacturer to the palm of one 
hand and rubbing the hands together, 
covering all of the surfaces of the 
hands and fingers, until the hands 
are dry.3, 
 
4 Alcohol-based hand rubs 
should be used (or hands should be 
washed with soap and water) before 
and after each contact with patients; 
between dirty and clean procedures 
on the same patient; before donning 
and after removing gloves; and 
before and after performing invasive 
procedures. Repetitive use of alcohol-
based hand rubs can be less drying 
to the skin than repetitive use of 
soap and water. Hands should be 
washed with soap and water instead 
of using an alcohol-based hand rub 
whenever they are visibly soiled or 
contaminated with blood or other 
body fluids, if exposure to spores (eg, 
C difficile) and certain viruses (eg, 
norovirus) is likely to have occurred, 
34  
before eating, and after using the 
toilet.
Hand washing should consist of  
the following steps: (1) wet hands 
with warm (not hot) water; (2) 
apply soap to hands; (3) vigorously 
rub the hands together for at least 
15 seconds, covering all of the 
surfaces of the hands and fingers; 
(4) rinse the hands with warm 
water; (5) dry the hands with a 
disposable towel; and (6) use the 
towel to turn off the faucet.3, 
 
4, 
 
35  
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
3
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
TaBle 1  
Standard Precautions
Use standard precautions, as recommended by the CDC for hospitalized patients and modified by the AAP for all children in the ambulatory setting. Major 
features are as follows:
Hand hygiene
 • Hands should be disinfected with an alcohol-based hand rub or washed with soap and water before and after each patient encounter or an encounter 
with the patient’s immediate environment.
 • Hands and other body surfaces should be washed with soap and water if visibly soiled or contaminated with blood or other body fluids or if exposure to 
spores (eg, C difficile) or certain viruses (eg, norovirus) is likely to have occurred.
 • Hands should be disinfected with an alcohol-based hand rub or washed with soap and water before donning and after removal of gloves.
Barrier precautions to prevent skin and mucous membrane exposure
 • Gloves should be worn for contact with blood, all body fluids, secretions and excretions, mucous membranes, nonintact skin, and items or surfaces 
contaminated with body fluids. Gloves need not be used for the routine care of well children, including changing diapers and wiping the nose or eyes of 
children, except when required as part of contact precautions.17, 
 
28
 • Gloves should be worn when performing venipuncture and other vascular access procedures.
 • Gloves are not routinely required when administering injections, including immunizations, unless the person administering the injection is likely to come 
into contact with body substances or has open lesions on his or her hands.
 • Appropriate masks and protective eyewear or face shields should be used during procedures that are likely to generate droplets of blood or body fluids 
or risk of splashes.
 • Fluid-impermeable gowns or aprons should be worn during procedures that are likely to generate splashes of blood or other body fluids.
Respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette (see Table 2 and text)29, 
 
30
Handling of sharp instruments to minimize risk of injury (see text “Prevention of Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens, Blood, and Body Fluids and Management 
of Injuries by Needles and Other Sharp Instruments”)
Resuscitation equipment
 • Equipment should be available for use in areas in which the need for resuscitation is predictable.
 • Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation should be avoided.
Adapted from Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L; Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. 2007 guideline for isolation precautions: preventing transmission 
of infectious agents in healthcare settings. Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
pdf/ 
guidelines/ 
isolation- 
guidelines. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 Disposable towels are preferred 
for hand drying and always should 
be available and within easy 
reach by HCP. Recently, the role of 
antimicrobial soap versus plain soap 
in promoting antimicrobial resistance 
has been raised.2, 
36, 
 
37 The Society for 
Healthcare Epidemiology of America 
(SHEA) recommends using plain 
soap for hand hygiene when soap 
and water are indicated.31 If used, 
hand lotions should be available in 
containers that are not refilled but 
are replaced frequently to avoid 
extrinsic contamination.31 Hand 
lotions should not be petroleum 
based because petroleum can cause 
deterioration of latex material and 
reduce the effectiveness of latex 
gloves.
Hand hygiene before performing 
procedures (such as incision 
and drainage, joint aspirations, 
tympanocentesis, etc) should consist 
of prewashing with soap and water 
and thorough drying followed by 
the use of an alcohol-based surgical 
scrub with persistent activity or 
washing with an antimicrobial 
surgical scrub agent (such as 
chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine) 
for the length of time specified by 
the manufacturer, usually 2 to 6 
minutes.3 Additionally, nails need 
to be kept trimmed and cleaned 
with soap and water, paying special 
attention to the undersides of 
nails.28 Employees who perform 
direct patient care activities in 
ambulatory surgery settings or 
practices that include patients at 
high risk of infection or those who 
are immunocompromised should 
keep fingernails short and avoid 
wearing jewelry, artificial nails, and 
extenders because these have been 
shown to harbor microorganisms 
that are not easily removed by hand 
hygiene.3
Information specific to the Pediatric 
ambulatory setting
Although standard precautions 
should be used for patient encounters 
in the ambulatory setting and include 
the performance of hand hygiene 
before and after patient contact 
and the use of gloves for blood, 
body fluid, secretion, excretion, and 
contact with items contaminated 
by such fluids (Table 1), for well-
child care, the American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP) modifies “Standard 
Precautions” by indicating that 
although hand hygiene should be 
performed, gloves do not need to be 
worn for routine procedures such 
as changing a diaper or wiping the 
nose or eyes of a well-child, except 
when required as part of the “Contact 
Precautions.” 
17, 
 
38, 
 
39 Gloves are 
not required when administering 
vaccines unless the health care 
professional has open hand lesions 
or will come into contact with 
potentially infectious body fluids.40, 
 
41 
When gloves are used, hand hygiene 
should be performed before donning 
the gloves and after the gloves are 
removed because contamination 
can occur during removal or from 
microscopic breaks in the glove.29, 
 
31  
Alcohol is preferred for skin 
antisepsis before immunization 
and routine venipuncture. In 
cases in which skin may be incised 
or sutured or a blood culture is 
collected, skin preparation should 
include either 2% chlorhexidine 
gluconate (CHG) in 70% isopropyl 
alcohol–based solutions (for children 
older than 2 months) or iodine 
(1% or 2% tincture of iodine, 2% 
povidone-iodine).
Respiratory hygiene and cough 
etiquette30, 
 
42 are integral parts of 
the Standard Precautions to prevent 
the transmission of influenza and 
potentially other pathogens causing 
respiratory tract infection in reception 
areas, common waiting areas, and 
examination rooms in ambulatory 
care facilities (Table 2).1, 
30, 
 
42  
The full implementation of this 
strategy requires the education of 
patients and accompanying people 
at the time they enter the facility 
and the provision of necessary 
resources to contain respiratory 
secretions. Visual alerts should 
be posted that emphasize the 
importance of (1) covering the 
nose and mouth when coughing 
or sneezing, (2) coughing and 
sneezing into the elbow rather 
than hand, (3) the appropriate 
use and disposal of tissues, (4) 
performing hand hygiene whenever 
hands have been in contact with 
respiratory secretions, and (5) 
maintaining a separation of at 
least 3 feet in most cases (for 
patients with cystic fibrosis, the 
recommended separation is 6 feet) 
between symptomatic patients 
and others in common waiting 
areas, as recommended by the CDC 
and SHEA. Resources to enable 
patients and families to adhere 
to respiratory hygiene and cough 
etiquette principles must also be 
provided. These include resources 
to perform hand hygiene, masks 
for use by coughing patients and 
family members, and tissues and 
trash receptacles for disposing 
of used tissues. The effectiveness 
of cough etiquette strategies for 
reducing transmission of influenza 
or other respiratory pathogens 
in the ambulatory setting has not 
been evaluated, but both covering 
a cough or sneeze and wearing 
a mask have been shown to 
prevent dispersion of respiratory 
droplets into the air.43 
–46 Although 
respiratory hygiene and cough 
etiquette were designed primarily 
to reduce transmission of influenza 
(including pandemic influenza 
strains), they may also reduce 
the transmission of additional 
respiratory pathogens. Some 
features of respiratory hygiene and 
cough etiquette may be difficult to 
implement. For example, in many 
ambulatory settings, supplying 
masks for patients with suspected 
respiratory tract infection may 
not be feasible, and ensuring 
effective use of these masks in 
young children may not be possible. 
Respiratory hygiene and cough 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
4
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 etiquette should be stressed year 
round. However, during periods of 
increased prevalence of respiratory 
infections in the community, the 
availability of and use of masks 
to enhance respiratory etiquette 
should be considered.
HCP should observe the “Droplet 
Precautions” that include the use 
of masks for HCP and patients 
with symptoms of influenza or 
other respiratory tract infection 
symptoms before being placed in 
an examination room. Masks (a 
surgical-grade mask as either a 
procedure mask with elastic loops 
to secure the mask over the ears or 
a surgical mask with 2 sets of ties to 
secure the mask) and face shields or 
protective eyewear, such as goggles, 
should be worn if splashing of body 
fluids is anticipated. Skin surfaces 
contaminated with blood or other 
body fluids should be washed 
immediately and thoroughly with 
soap and water.
For the health care provider, a 
mask is indicated and is adequate 
for protection from respiratory 
tract pathogens transmitted by 
respiratory droplets, such as 
influenza virus or Bordetella 
pertussis. However, guidelines 
from the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA) 
require the use of special particulate 
respirators (eg, National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health 
[NIOSH]–approved N95 or higher 
respirators) when caring for 
patients with infections such as 
pulmonary TB, which is transmitted 
via the airborne route in small-
particle aerosols47; the use of 
these respirators requires medical 
screening, individual-fit testing, and 
education to ensure proper use. It is 
important not to confuse the use of 
a surgical or procedure mask with 
the use of a particulate respirator 
that may have a similar appearance 
to some masks. A need for the use 
of such respirators in pediatric 
ambulatory facilities is uncommon. 
It is, therefore, not expected that 
these respirators would be available 
to staff in an ambulatory setting, 
especially because almost all 
children younger than 12 years with 
TB are not contagious. However, 
an adult with contagious TB may 
be in a child’s household and may 
be accompanying the child for 
his or her health care visit.48 It 
is, therefore, acceptable to use a 
regular mask if respirators are not 
available. Ideally, anyone suspected 
to have contagious TB should not 
be permitted in the ambulatory 
facility because they pose a hazard 
to patients, accompanying people 
in the ambulatory facility, and 
staff. However, if an accompanying 
adult or adolescent suspected of 
having pulmonary TB is present in 
an ambulatory facility, a surgical 
mask should be provided to and 
worn by that individual and those 
adults accompanying the patient, 
and a referral should be made to 
a facility capable of appropriately 
isolating, evaluating, and treating 
TB. Reasonable attempts should be 
made that such an individual not 
stay in a common waiting area and 
be moved to a room immediately 
while awaiting and determining 
disposition. The facility to which 
the patient is being referred should 
be alerted of the potential risk (see 
“Communication With Other Health 
Care Facilities”).
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
5
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
TaBle 2  
Respiratory Hygiene and Cough Etiquette to Minimize Transmission of Influenza and Other Respiratory Tract Pathogens
In reception and common waiting areas of ambulatory medical facilities, the implementation of some or all components of respiratory hygiene and cough 
etiquette should be implemented for patients with suspected influenza or other respiratory tract pathogens. Influenza or another respiratory tract 
pathogen is suspected in patients with a new onset of cough or increased respiratory tract secretions, especially in the presence of a fever.
Components:
 1. Visual alerts for patients at the entrance to ambulatory facilities instructing patients and accompanying persons to inform staff of symptoms of a 
respiratory tract infection when they first register for care and to practice respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette.
 2. Respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette for patients and accompanying individuals with suspected respiratory virus infection
  • Cover the nose and mouth when coughing or sneezing. Cough or sneeze into the elbow rather than a hand.
  • Use tissues to contain respiratory tract secretions and dispose of them in the nearest waste receptacle after use.
  • Perform hand hygiene (ie, use of alcohol-based hand rub, hand washing with soap and water, or use of an antiseptic handwash) after having contact 
with respiratory tract secretions and contaminated objects and materials.
  • If tolerated and feasible, consider providing a size-appropriate mask for the patient to wear to prevent respiratory droplet dispersal while in common 
reception and waiting areas.
 3. Components of respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette for staff
  • Educate patients and accompanying people on the need for and components of respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette.
  • In reception area, have tissues and no-touch receptacles for used tissue disposal available.
  • If feasible, provide conveniently located dispensers of alcohol-based hand rub with instructions for use (or have a sink available with consistently 
available soap and disposable towels).
  • When space and chair availability permit, cluster chairs for a coughing patient and accompanying people at least 3 feet away from other patients.
  • Consider having masks available for distribution to symptomatic patients by staff.
  • In addition to hand hygiene before and after patient contact, health care personnel should consider wearing a mask when examining an ambulatory 
patient with suspected influenza.
Adapted from Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L; Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. 2007 guideline for isolation precautions: preventing transmission 
of infectious agents in healthcare settings. Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
pdf/ 
guidelines/ 
isolation- 
guidelines. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017; Quade D. Cough Etiquette. 
2009. Available at: https:// 
www. 
youtube. 
com/ 
watch? 
v= 
UNEp5U_ 
TCOM. Accessed March 6, 2017; and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette in 
healthcare settings. Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
flu/ 
professionals/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
resphygiene. 
htm. Accessed March 6, 2017
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 considerations for Patients With 
cystic fibrosis
Patients with cystic fibrosis 
constitute a special group who are 
at risk for increased morbidity and 
mortality if infected with several 
types of respiratory pathogens, 
including often multidrug-resistant 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Burkholderia cepacia complex. 
Patients with cystic fibrosis can also 
be a source of resistant pathogens 
that could spread to other patients 
with cystic fibrosis. The Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation commissioned a 
group of experts to update the 2003 
guidelines for IPC49 specifically for 
patients with cystic fibrosis, and the 
updated guideline was published 
in 2014.50 Although most patients 
with cystic fibrosis are followed by 
experts in cystic fibrosis centers, 
these patients also receive care in 
other ambulatory medical facilities. 
In general, in ambulatory medical 
settings, standard IPC guidelines 
should be followed. In addition, when 
caring for patients with cystic fibrosis, 
HCP should follow the “Contact 
Precautions, 
” and all patients with 
cystic fibrosis should wear a mask 
throughout their visit except when in 
an examination room, as outlined in 
the 2014 guideline.50 The guideline 
specifically outlines measures to 
reduce the risk of people with cystic 
fibrosis from either spreading or 
acquiring pathogens from one 
another at gatherings, such as cystic 
fibrosis events, or in public places, 
such as waiting rooms. Therefore, 
patients with cystic fibrosis should 
not share space in the waiting area 
and instead should be placed directly 
in an examination room.51 
– 
54
Basic patient-related IPC measures 
include informing and educating 
patients and families regarding 
cough etiquette and meticulous 
hand hygiene before and after the 
use of a spirometer or any other 
handheld device. Pulmonary function 
studies, airway clearance procedures, 
and sputum collections should be 
performed in well-ventilated rooms, 
away from other patients. HCP should 
follow the “Contact Precautions” 
and pay extra attention to avoid 
contamination of the hands and 
clothing. Clinic equipment, surfaces, 
and apparatuses should be cleaned 
between patients per standard IPC 
policy for the ambulatory facility. 
Cross contamination could occur 
from toys, books, and computers, 
among other fomites in the waiting 
room or in the clinic examination 
rooms. It is therefore recommended 
that practices have policies in place 
addressing the method and frequency 
of cleaning toys. Furry and plush toys 
such as stuffed animals are difficult 
to clean and can harbor germs and 
should generally be avoided in clinic 
waiting areas and game rooms. Parents 
can also be encouraged to bring their 
child’s own toy for the office visit.
general health considerations  
for staff
As employers, pediatricians are 
required by OSHA to institute 
procedures to protect staff from 
blood and other potentially infectious 
materials, including procedures 
to minimize the risk of sharp 
instrument-related injuries and 
infections and to minimize exposure 
to TB while on the job. Although 
most ambulatory practices caring 
for children may not have a trained 
IPC professional on staff, access 
to such an individual at a referral 
hospital would be an option. OSHA 
has published guidelines called the 
“Bloodborne Pathogens Standard” for 
the protection of HCP from bloodborne 
agents.55, 
 
56 Guidance on compliance 
with OSHA regulations, including 
education of personnel, writing a 
bloodborne pathogen exposure control 
plan, sharp injuries and prevention, 
TB exposure, emergency procedures, 
emergency preparedness, hazardous 
chemical safety, and general facility 
safety, can be found the OSHA Web site, 
and a checklist is available on the CDC 
Web site.57, 
 
58
Prevention of exposure to 
Bloodborne Pathogens, Blood, and 
Body fluids and Management of 
Injuries by needles and Other sharp 
Instruments
There are 9 measures to minimize 
risk of injuries by needles and 
other sharp instruments and 
of transmission of bloodborne 
pathogens to HCP or other patients.
1. Educate personnel. Establish 
policies for annual training 
for education on bloodborne 
pathogens and safe disposal of 
infectious materials. At the time 
of orientation, all employees 
should receive and review 
information regarding IPC 
policies and procedures, including 
precautions to minimize the risk 
of transmission of bloodborne 
pathogens. Annual education 
regarding the OSHA Bloodborne 
Pathogens Standard is required.48 
Furthermore, regularly scheduled 
educational sessions for all staff 
members are important to ensure 
that the levels of hand hygiene and 
IPC awareness remain high.59, 
 
60 
Policies for IPC should be written 
and easily accessible to all staff. 
All staff members should be aware 
of and motivated to follow these 
policies;61;
2. Prepare a written policy for the 
prevention of needlestick injuries;
3. Implement a practice not to recap, 
bend, or break needles or remove 
needles from a syringe by hand;
4. Evaluate safer medical devices 
designed to reduce the risk of 
needlestick injuries with the 
input of staff members who use 
needles, and implement the use of 
devices likely to improve safety. 
Evaluation (with input from staff 
members) and implementation 
of needle safety devices is a 
requirement of the US Department 
of Labor (OSHA)57 as well a 
number of states62;
5. Provide impermeable and 
puncture-proof disposal 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
6
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 containers in areas where needles 
or other disposable sharps are 
used. Such containers should 
be out of the reach of children, 
replaced when filled to three-
quarters of their capacity, and 
stored and disposed of according 
to local policies;
6. Prepare and follow policies 
consistent with state and local 
regulations for removal and 
incineration or sterilization;
7. Place reusable sharp instruments 
in puncture-resistant containers 
for transport to reprocessing 
areas;
8. Use a sterile, single-use, 
disposable needle and syringe 
for each injection given. Use 
single-dose medication vials and 
prefilled syringes if available. 
Alcohol is preferred for skin 
antisepsis before immunization 
and routine venipuncture. Skin 
preparation for incision, suture, 
and collection of blood for culture 
requires either 2% CHG in 70% 
isopropyl alcohol–based solutions 
(for children older than 2 months) 
or iodine (1% or 2% tincture of 
iodine, 2% povidone-iodine); and
9. Develop a bloodborne pathogens 
exposure control plan for 
management of contaminated 
sharp object injuries and other 
potential exposures to blood 
or body fluid–borne pathogens 
that includes written policies, is 
readily available to all staff, and is 
reviewed regularly. A workbook 
is available through the CDC63 
for designing, implementing, 
and evaluating a sharps injury–
prevention program.
Policies for management of 
needlestick injuries, as described in 
 
Table 3, should address potential 
exposures to hepatitis B, hepatitis C,  
and HIV64, 
 
65 and should be 
understood by employees. OSHA 
requirements for management of 
sharps injuries and education of 
employees on the management of 
sharp instrument–related injuries 
should be followed, including the use 
of postexposure chemoprophylaxis 
for high-risk encounters (eg, 
needlestick exposure from an HIV-
infected patient or chronic carrier of 
hepatitis B in a nonimmune health 
care provider). Skin surfaces that 
are contaminated with blood or 
other body fluids should be washed 
immediately and thoroughly with 
soap and water. HCP with direct 
contact with patients should receive 
hepatitis B immunization if they have 
not been immunized previously.
Personnel Illness
In recent studies, researchers confirm 
that HCP often work while ill, posing 
a risk of infection transmission to 
patients and other personnel if they 
have a communicable disease.66 
Written policies, therefore, should 
exist regarding the exclusion of staff 
members with contagious illnesses, 
and communication should occur 
with occupational health providers 
or ICP leadership within the practice 
if a health care worker is absent from 
work because of a communicable 
infection.67 Such policies should not 
be punitive, and practices should be 
supportive and understanding of staff 
members who do not come to work 
when they are ill. Recommended 
work restrictions for HCP with 
selected infections are listed in 
 
Table 4. Respiratory tract infections 
without fever (eg, common cold) may 
not be a reason to exclude personnel, 
but precautions should be taken with 
an emphasis on hand hygiene before 
every patient contact, and the use of 
a mask should be considered when 
having direct patient contact. The 
inability to contain secretions and 
to control coughing and sneezing is 
an indication to exclude personnel 
from patient contact. Additionally, 
symptomatic HCP should avoid 
contact with immunosuppressed 
patients.
Immunizations and screening for 
TB for health care Providers in 
ambulatory settings
Policies should be established 
regarding immunization of all 
individuals performing any duties in 
an ambulatory care setting (including 
employees, volunteers, students, and 
resident physicians) against vaccine-
preventable infections (Table 5).29, 
 
68 
–70 
 
Immunization records should be 
maintained for all employees. The 
immunization recommendations for 
HCP are as follows:
1. A 3-dose series of hepatitis 
B vaccine (at no cost to the 
employee) is mandated by OSHA 
and must be offered to all people 
whose job category, specified 
in the bloodborne pathogen 
exposure control plan for the 
facility, indicates likely exposure 
to bloodborne pathogens. One to 2 
months after the third dose in the 
series, antibody testing should be 
performed, and if an inadequate 
response to vaccine is noted (<10 
mIU/mL), an additional 3-dose 
series should be given. If there 
is an inadequate response to the 
second series, the HCP should 
be regarded as nonimmune and 
advice from an infectious disease 
expert should be obtained if the 
HCP is subsequently exposed;55, 
 
56;
2. Employees should be immunized 
against measles, mumps, rubella, 
and varicella unless immunity is 
documented by serologic testing 
or there is documentation of 
immunization (Table 5);
3. All employees should be 
immunized once using tetanus and 
diphtheria toxoids and pertussis 
vaccine designed for adolescents 
and adults and every 10 years 
thereafter with a tetanus and 
diphtheria toxoids vaccine69, 
 
70; and
4. Health care facilities should 
provide an influenza vaccine 
annually to all HCP at no 
cost.71 The AAP and other 
professional organizations 
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
7
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 recommend mandatory influenza 
immunization for all HCP.71, 
 
72 The 
choice of influenza vaccine used 
is guided by age and underlying 
host factors of the individual HCP 
as well as the availability of the 
product from the manufacturer 
and the health care facility. In 
more recent studies, researchers 
confirm that the immunization of 
an individual with an egg allergy, 
including anaphylaxis, can be 
performed safely with any of 
the available influenza vaccines, 
although a recombinant vaccine is 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
8
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
TaBle 3  
Management of Potential Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens
A written policy should be developed, available, and followed.
The definition of exposure that might place HCP at risk for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, or HIV infection is as follows: a percutaneous injury (eg, needlestick or cut 
with a sharp object) or contact of mucous membrane or nonintact skin (eg, exposed skin that is chapped, abraded, or afflicted with dermatitis) with blood, 
tissue, or other body fluids that are potentially infectious. Body fluids that are potentially infectious include those contaminated with visible blood, semen, 
vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid. Feces, nasal secretions, saliva, 
sputum, sweat, tears, urine, and vomitus are not considered potentially infectious for these pathogens unless they contain blood; the risk of transmission of 
these pathogens from these fluids and materials is extremely low.
The exposed employee should immediately follow these steps:
 • Wash needlestick site or cut with soap and water.
 • If splashes to the nose, mouth, or skin occur, flush involved area with water.
 • If splashes to the eye occur, irrigate eyes with clean water, saline, or sterile irrigants.
 • Report the incident to your supervisor and immediately seek medical treatment.
 • Document the type of injury including the involvement of blood, the source of the blood, and the extent of the injury (eg, deep injection, blood spill onto 
intact skin).
In all cases, the physician should do the following:
 1. Document the type of injury, including the involvement of blood.
 2. Identify the source patient, if possible, and make a judgment of the likelihood that the source patient may have HIV, hepatitis B, or hepatitis C infection.
 3. Determine if the source patient’s HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C infection status is documented in the patient’s medical records.
 4. Have an established policy for the management of an exposure such as described below or an arrangement for immediate referral to a person or 
location with expertise in the management of such exposures, such as the emergency department of a specific hospital or the occupational health 
department of a large health care organization.
 5. Ensure follow-up for the potentially exposed employee.
 6. Ensure that all employees know how to access this policy.
Management includes the following steps:
 Step 1: Determine the infection status of the source patient. If this is not possible, base actions on the likelihood of exposure considering source of needle 
and type of exposure. If the source is known, obtain permission consistent with local statutes and determine the serologic status of the source for 
hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and HIV.
 Step 2: Determine the immunity of the employee. Was a hepatitis B vaccine received? Was the employee tested for antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs)? If response 
to immunization is unknown, obtain blood to test for anti-HBs. Test for antibody to hepatitis C. Obtain consent and test for antibody to HIV.
 Step 3: Hepatitis B. Follow the steps outlined below for hepatitis B prophylaxis after percutaneous or permucosal exposure.
  A. If exposed person is unimmunized against hepatitis B:
   • Source HBsAg-positive: administer HBIG (0.06 mL/kg; maximum dose: 5 mL) intramuscularly and begin hepatitis B vaccine series
   • Source HBsAg-negative: begin hepatitis B vaccine series
   • Source not tested or unknown: begin hepatitis B vaccine series
  B. If exposed person was immunized and responded:
   • No treatment necessary
  C. If exposed person immunized but did not adequately respond (anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL)
   • Source HBsAg-positive: HBIG immediately and in 1 mo or HBIG and initiate reimmunization
   • Source HBsAg-negative: no treatment
   • Source not tested or unknown: if high-risk source, consider HBIG or HBIG and HBV reimmunization as for HBsAg-positive source
  D. If exposed person was immunized and not tested for a response or response is unknown
   • Source HBsAg-positive: test exposed for anti-HBs; if positive, no treatment; if negative, 1 dose of HBIG and 1 dose of vaccine, retest exposed for anti-
HBs 4–6 mo later
 Step 4: Consider prophylaxis against HIV.64, 
 
65 Antiretroviral prophylaxis should be initiated as soon as possible within hours and not days after exposure. 
Thus, clinicians in ambulatory settings should be prepared to arrange for urgent consultation with a specialist in the management of HIV infection who 
will prescribe antiretrovirals and provide follow-up care of the employee. There are 2 postexposure HIV prophylaxis regimens: the “basic regimen, 
” a 
4-wk course of 1 of several regimens containing 2 anti-HIV drugs and an “expanded regimen” containing 3 anti-HIV drugs for exposures with an increased 
risk of transmission.56 Updated information can be found at AIDSinfo (http:// 
aidsinfo. 
nih. 
gov/ 
) or the National HIV/AIDS Clinician’s Postexposure 
Prophylaxis Hotline at 1-888-448-4911. The PEPline provides consultation 24 h a day, 7 d a week for questions about managing occupational exposures to 
HIV, hepatitis B and C, and other bloodborne pathogens.
 Step 5: Use this opportunity to educate the exposed person regarding risks of exposure, safe handling of sharps, immunization, standard precautions, and 
safe work habits.
 Step 6: If the initial serologic test results for hepatitis C and HIV are negative, repeat these at 6 mo after potential exposure. Repeat serologic testing for 
hepatitis B (HBsAg and anti-HBs) at 6 mo if the exposed person was not previously documented to be anti-HBs–positive.
Adapted from Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Bloodborne pathogens and needlestick prevention: overview. Available at: www. 
osha. 
gov/ 
SLTC/ 
bloodbornepathoge 
ns/ 
index. 
html. Accessed March 6, 2017. anti-HB, hepatitis B surface antibody; HBIG, hepatitis B immune globulin.
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
9
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
TaBle 4  
Work Restriction Policies for Employees
Infection
Restriction
Length of Restriction
Conjunctivitis
Restrict from direct patient care
Until discharge resolves
Gastroenteritis
Restrict from direct patient care and food preparation
Until symptoms resolve or person is deemed 
noncontagious
Hepatitis A
Restrict from direct patient care
Until 1 wk after onset of jaundice
Hepatitis B
Nonea
—
Hepatitis C
Nonea
—
Herpes simplex
 Orofacial
None (cover lesion if feasible)
—
 Whitlow
Restrict from direct care of newborn infants
Until lesions are crusted
HIV
Nonea
—
Measles
Exclude from ambulatory facility
Until 4 d after onset of rash
Mumps
Exclude from ambulatory facility
Until 5 d after onset of parotitis
Pertussis
Exclude from ambulatory facility
Until treated for 5 d with appropriate antimicrobial 
therapy
Rubella
Exclude from ambulatory facility
Until 5 d after onset of rash
Staphylococcal skin infection
Restrict from direct patient care
Until treated for 24 h with an agent active against of 
the isolate
Streptococcal group A pharyngitis
Restrict from direct patient care
Until treated for 24 h
TB, active
Exclude from ambulatory facility
Until proven noninfectious
Varicella
Exclude from ambulatory facility
Until lesions crusted (usually 6 d after the onset of 
rash)
Zoster
If lesions covered, may have contact with patients 
(other than immunocompromised patients and 
newborn infants); if lesions cannot be covered, 
restrict from patient care
Until lesions crusted
—, not applicable.
a HCP with these infections should avoid performing procedures considered to be at risk for transmission of blood from HCP to patient.
TaBle 5  
Immunizations for Ambulatory Care Staff
All staff members should receive the following immunizations:
 • Meningococcal vaccines
  Generally not indicated for HCP.
  Standard recommendation for all who are asplenic (functional or anatomic) or have complement deficiency.
 • MMR vaccine
  All HCP born after 1956 should have documentation of 2 doses of an MMR vaccine. Because birth before 1957 is only presumptive evidence of immunity to 
measles, mumps, and rubella, 1 dose of MMR vaccine for unimmunized workers born before 1957 who do not have laboratory evidence of immunity to 
these viruses is recommended. Some experts recommend serologic screening for all employees to ensure immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella.
 • Hepatitis B vaccine
  Hepatitis B vaccine should be strongly recommended for any employee who may come in contact with blood. OSHA requires that a hepatitis B vaccine 
must be offered to all employees who may be at risk for bloodborne exposures on the basis of the job categories determined by the organization’s 
bloodborne pathogen exposure control plan. If the employee refuses immunization, this should be documented in the employee’s file; the OSHA 
declination form is useful for this purpose.
 • Varicella vaccine
  Proof of varicella immunity is recommended. This may include either verified history of varicella or herpes zoster, laboratory confirmation of immunity, 
or documentation of 2 doses of varicella vaccine.
  If the employee has a medical contraindication to varicella vaccine or refuses immunization, this information should be placed in the employee’s file.
 • Influenza vaccine
  Vaccine use should be mandated and offered free of charge yearly to all employees.
 • Adolescent-adult Tdap
  This vaccine is recommended by the CDC to be given once to all HCP with direct patient contact.
Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases. Prevention of pertussis among adolescents: recommendations for use of tetanus toxoid, reduced 
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine. Pediatrics. 2006;117(3):965–978; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated recommendations for use of tetanus 
toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(1):13–15; 
American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases. Influenza immunization for all health care personnel: keep it mandatory. Pediatrics. 2015;136(4):809–819; Infectious 
Diseases Society of America; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America; Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society. Joint policy statement on mandatory immunization of health care 
personnel according to the ACIP-recommended vaccine schedule. 2013. Available at: https:// 
www. 
idsociety. 
org/ 
uploadedFiles/ 
IDSA/ 
Policy_ 
and_ 
Advocacy/ 
Current_ 
Topics_ 
and_ 
Issues/ 
Immunizations_ 
and_ 
Vaccines/ 
Health_ 
Care_ 
Worker_ 
Immunization/ 
Statements/ 
IDSA_ 
SHEA_ 
PIDS%20 
Policy%20 
on%20 
Mandatory%20 
Immunization%20 
of%20 
HCP. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 
2017; and Dheda K, Udwadia ZF, Huggett JF, Johnson MA, Rook GA. Utility of the antigen-specific interferon-gamma assay for the management of tuberculosis. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 
2005;11(3):195–202. MMR, measles-mumps-rubella; Tdap, tetanus, diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccine.
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 an option. One egg-free influenza 
vaccine that uses recombinant 
technology is approved by the US 
Food and Drug Administration 
and available in the United 
States (Flublok; Protein Sciences 
Corporation, Meriden, CT).
In HCP, screening for TB should 
be performed before employment 
to ensure that people with a 
tuberculous infection are detected 
early and, if necessary, treated. 
Screening may have to be repeated 
in certain situations in which 
the HCP has been exposed to TB. 
This testing should be performed 
by using an interferon-γ release 
assay (IGRA) for Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (eg, QuantiFERON-TB 
Gold In-Tube assay [Cellestis Limited, 
Carnegie, Australia], T-SPOT.TB 
[Oxford Immunotec, Abingdon, 
United Kingdom]) or the tuberculin 
skin test (TST).73, 
 
74 If a TST is used, 
the result is considered positive in 
a health care staff member who is 
otherwise healthy if the transverse 
diameter of the area of induration is 
at least 10 mm. For new employees 
who do not have a previously 
documented positive TST result, 
who have not had a TST performed 
within the past year, or who do not 
have a history of previously treated 
latent TB infection (LTBI) or TB 
disease, a 2-step TST (ie, placement 
of a second TST 1–3 weeks after the 
initial skin test) is recommended. 
The second TST will boost the size of 
the induration in an individual with 
remote LTBI whose initial reading 
was <10 mm.75 For employees 
with an immunocompromising 
condition (such as HIV infection or 
therapy with immunosuppressive 
medications) or those who were 
in close contact with a person with 
active TB, an induration of 5 mm or 
more is considered a positive result.76 
An IGRA for M tuberculosis measures 
γ-interferon release by T cells after 
incubation of whole blood with 2 M 
tuberculosis–specific antigens. The 
advantages of an IGRA include that 
it only requires 1 visit, it eliminates 
the need for 2-step testing, and it 
has increased specificity compared 
with the TST (it does not cross-
react with the BCG vaccine or with 
the most common nontuberculous 
mycobacteria). In contrast to a TST, 
there is no need for a second IGRA 
test if the initial result is negative. 
An IGRA is the preferred test in 
adults who have received bacille 
Calmette-Guérin for vaccination or 
cancer treatment.77 The limitations 
of IGRAs include insufficient data 
for the interpretation of conversions 
and reversions when used for serial 
testing and issues related to low-level 
positive results.77 
– 
79 For ambulatory 
settings classified as having a low 
risk of TB transmission, additional 
screening of employees is not 
necessary unless an exposure to M 
tuberculosis occurs.75 If the TST or 
IGRA result is positive, the employee 
should be referred for evaluation 
and appropriate management. The 
risk of developing TB disease is 
greatest during the 2 years after 
TB infection. In some individuals, 
treatment of LTBI is recommended 
after an evaluation. The treatment of 
LTBI should be encouraged among 
HCP; however, it is not mandatory. 
Such individuals will continue to 
have a positive test result after 
treatment, and repeated regular TB 
testing is not indicated. Repeat chest 
radiographs are only indicated if 
the person develops any symptoms 
and signs suggestive of TB, followed 
by appropriate investigation, as 
indicated. Employees with active 
pulmonary or laryngeal TB should 
be excluded from work until they 
are effectively treated and are no 
longer contagious.16, 
 
77 HCP who 
have documentation that they have 
been adequately treated for active 
TB will require evidence of ongoing 
monitoring by a physician.
communication With Other health 
care facilities
Patients seen in ambulatory care 
settings may require a referral 
to other health care facilities for 
additional inpatient or outpatient 
services, including admission 
to the hospital, referral to the 
emergency department, and referral 
to radiologic, laboratory, or other 
services. When transporting a 
patient with a contagious infection, 
communication with health care 
providers at other facilities should 
include the appropriate information 
related to the diagnosis and isolation 
needs to avoid transmission of 
a contagion at points of access 
for services and to ensure that 
appropriate personal protective 
equipment is provided to and used 
by the patient and, when appropriate, 
accompanying people (eg, TB). The 
most common case scenario would 
be using a mask for prevention of 
possible respiratory transmission 
of pathogens such as M tuberculosis 
and B pertussis and providing the 
appropriate alert to the referral 
facility regarding isolation needs 
(eg, airborne precautions for 
measles). When appropriate, the 
patient should be asked to wear a 
regular surgical mask during a visit 
and until evaluation and a plan is 
implemented.44, 
 
45 An exposure to 
a patient subsequently identified 
as contagious can result in a labor-
intensive and expensive search 
for contacts who may be at an 
increased risk. Educating parents 
and caregivers to inform health care 
providers that their child is colonized 
with a resistant organism that may 
require additional precaution is also 
important.
communication With Patients, 
families, and visitors During 
seasonal Increases, Outbreaks, 
high-risk situations, or emergencies 
of contagious Diseases
Risk assessment for possible 
contagious diseases should be 
conducted year round and started 
at the time of scheduling a patient 
appointment and continued through 
the signing in and triage process 
to the assessment within the 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
10
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 examination room.80 Ambulatory 
care practices might consider the 
use of informational alert notices 
prominently placed at the entrances 
and reception area for patients, 
families, and visitors to inform the 
staff immediately on arrival if the 
criteria on the alert are met. Practices 
using online scheduling or digital 
communications with their patients 
and families may also have such 
alerts on digital media.81
During the regular winter season 
or annual influenza season in 
the community and on the basis 
of recommendations from local 
public health departments and the 
CDC, travel- or symptom-based 
questions should be asked of 
patients and/or parents at the time 
of scheduling the appointment and 
on arrival.82 Also on the basis of 
current recommendations from local 
public health departments and the 
CDC, practices may also consider 
questioning patients about recent 
travel (eg, to countries with active 
cases of emerging infections, such as 
Ebola or Zika viruses, or to countries 
with endemic infections, such as 
measles)83 
– 
85 that might signify the 
patient or an accompanying person 
has a contagious infection (Table 2).
During an infectious disease 
outbreak, special procedures may 
be necessary in ambulatory settings 
to prevent the transmission of 
pandemic or epidemic pathogens. 
These procedures may include the 
following:
1. Staff education, including 
instruction on the appropriate 
personal protective equipment 
use, is essential;
2. Posting special signs where they 
are most likely to be more easily 
visible to anyone entering the 
ambulatory practice, such as the 
entrance points, reception area, 
waiting areas, and examination 
rooms. These signs inform 
patients and families regarding 
the concern about the possible 
infectious disease as well as the 
history and signs and symptoms 
that may suggest the infection. 
Patients and families should be 
advised to inform staff if there is 
a consistent history or signs and 
symptoms;
3. Staff receiving calls from 
patients and families should also 
be trained to ask appropriate 
questions and perform triage 
when scheduling appointments. 
This will facilitate patient 
placement on arrival such that 
patients with a contagious 
disease are promptly and 
appropriately placed. In rare 
cases, patients may be initially 
evaluated and triaged in 
alternative locations outside of 
the facility. If possible, a separate 
temporary triage area may also 
need to be designated within the 
ambulatory space. In such cases, 
provisions should be made to 
ensure that patients evaluated 
in the alternative site are 
stable and those who warrant 
immediate care are promptly 
evaluated in an emergency 
department setting. Provisions 
should allow for examination, 
testing, and disposition of 
the patient and for the same 
infection control precautions 
that would be used in the 
primary emergency department 
to be implemented;
4. A room in the facility should be 
identified to directly move any 
potentially contagious patient 
without waiting in the common 
areas. Appropriate cleaning and 
disinfection of such a room and 
appropriate disposal of waste 
should also be planned;
5. A plan for transfer of potentially 
contagious patients to hospital or 
other health care facilities should 
be in place;
6. Adequate supply of appropriate 
personal protective equipment 
should be assured;
7. A plan to communicate with local 
public health authorities should be 
in place, including easy access to 
contact information of appropriate 
public health authorities;
8. A restricted policy for clinic visits 
may be implemented by the 
ambulatory clinic IPC leadership 
in the event of certain outbreak 
scenarios, such as restricting 
children not immunized against 
measles (by choice or because 
of younger age) in the midst of a 
measles outbreak;
9. In a disaster, IPC procedures 
may be interrupted. Advance 
preparedness planning can 
mitigate risk. The AAP offers 
comprehensive guidance to 
pediatricians to prepare for 
disasters (http:// 
pediatrics. 
aappublications. 
org/ 
content/ 
early/ 
2015/ 
10/ 
13/ 
peds. 
2015- 
3112);
Medicolegal considerations related 
to IPc to Minimize the likelihood of 
liability to Third Parties
A number of third-party liability 
cases involve infectious diseases 
(ie, cases alleging that a physician is 
liable for injury to a third party as 
a result of exposure to a contagious 
patient seen by the physician). A 
third party might include a family 
member or another close contact of a 
patient. An example is a needlestick 
injury sustained when a child has 
access to a sharps container. Third-
party liability can occur not only 
from failing to warn or protect the 
third party but also from failing to 
diagnose the disease in the patient 
or negligently advising the third 
party that there was no danger of 
infection. Therefore, physicians 
should be aware that they often 
bear responsibilities to third parties 
and should enact and document 
appropriate measures to minimize 
risks. These responsibilities include 
the following: (1) informing the 
patient and other facilities about the 
potential contagious nature related 
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
11
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 to the exposure; (2) informing 
the patient about postexposure 
prevention or treatments, potential 
risk to third parties, and advice 
about preventing the spread 
of the infection; (3) reporting 
communicable diseases on the basis 
of state statutes (while recognizing 
that reporting alone may not be 
sufficient to satisfy the physician’s 
duty to protect the third party); 
and (4) informing the patient of any 
action the physician intends to take 
to protect third parties at risk for 
contact with the patient.86
communication With local and state 
health authorities
State and local health authorities 
determine which diseases should 
be reported. Physicians and staff in 
ambulatory care facilities must be 
aware of the rules and regulations 
in their municipalities and develop 
a process that allows for timely 
and appropriate public health 
notification. Policies and procedures 
for communication with local and 
state health authorities regarding 
reportable diseases and in times 
of outbreak should be established 
while adhering to current regulations 
of the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 
The Privacy Rule permits covered 
entities to disclose protected health 
information, without authorization, 
to public health authorities who are 
legally authorized to receive such 
reports for the purpose of preventing 
or controlling disease, injury, or 
disability.87
Infection control Issues related to 
residential facilities
Short-term residential facilities 
(such as the Ronald McDonald 
House) that accommodate patients 
and their families are becoming 
more commonplace and meet an 
important need for patients and 
families. Although not health care 
or long-term care facilities, they 
are potential sources of contagious 
exposures to other patients and staff 
in ambulatory settings. Recently, 
SHEA developed guidance for such 
short-term residential facilities.88 
Recommendations include screening 
of all guests (including patients), 
visitors, and staff members for 
any exposures or potential for 
contagiousness and informing the 
ambulatory care facility of any such 
situation. Patients residing in these 
short-term residential facilities are 
often at high risk for infection because 
of their underlying conditions, and 
staff should inquire about specific 
restrictions outlined by their primary 
provider. Special populations 
for which restrictions may be 
appropriate include neonates, those 
with immunodeficiency conditions, 
those receiving immunosuppressive 
medications, those with cystic fibrosis, 
and any pregnant woman. If therapy 
animals or pets are brought to the 
residential facility, policies governing 
such visits should be available to 
guide staff taking into consideration 
the health and temperament of such 
animals.89, 
 
90
The SHEA guidance encourages that 
guests have access to an influenza 
vaccine if not already immunized 
and that all staff receive appropriate 
vaccines, including varicella and 
influenza vaccines. Immunizations 
in these settings are especially 
important because many of the 
patients in these facilities may 
not be able to receive an influenza 
vaccine, or if they receive it, they may 
not be able to mount an adequate 
immune response because of their 
underlying medical condition. 
Close communication with the local 
hospital IPC department should 
be encouraged for disease-specific 
exposures.
ambulatory facility Design, 
Procedures, and Patient flow
Waiting and Reception Areas
Measures to prevent the transmission 
of contagious infectious agents in 
ambulatory facilities begin at the 
time the visit is scheduled. For 
example, during a telephone call 
request for an urgent visit for an ill 
child, the staff person may inquire, 
among other things, whether the 
child has a fever and/or skin rash. 
Parents of a child suspected of being 
contagious should register with the 
receptionist immediately on arrival; 
in some cases, the child may be asked 
to use a separate entrance to avoid 
the waiting area and may be escorted 
directly into an examination room or 
triaged and evaluated in the patient’s 
vehicle in the parking area.
Waiting rooms and reception areas 
offer the opportunity for child-to-
child interaction with concomitant 
child-to-child transmission of 
infectious agents. Waiting rooms are 
similar to child care settings, where 
contamination of the environment 
and transmission of infectious agents 
occur at an increased rate compared 
with the home setting. Efforts should 
be made to limit the transmission 
of infectious agents by specifically 
designing waiting areas, avoiding 
crowding, shortening wait times, and 
minimizing the sharing of toys. To the 
extent feasible, respiratory hygiene 
and cough etiquette guidelines 
(Table 2), including the use of tissues 
and hand hygiene products (which 
should be supplied by the ambulatory 
medical facility), should be followed 
by children and adults with 
respiratory tract symptoms. Infected 
children who are symptomatic should 
be segregated from well children 
as quickly as possible. However, no 
research documents the need for or 
benefit of separate waiting areas for 
well and ill children.8 Accompanying 
adults, if sick, should be encouraged 
not to come to the office with the 
child if possible. If such adults do 
come with the child, they may need 
to wear a mask. Sick adults should be 
discouraged from spending time in 
waiting areas. 
Pathogenic bacteria have been 
recovered from toys in ambulatory 
waiting areas, 
26, 
 
91 and contaminated 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
12
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 toys used for water play have been 
implicated in an outbreak of P 
aeruginosa infection in a hospital.92 
A suggestion can be made to parents 
to bring along their child’s personal 
book and toys for the office visit to 
minimize sharing of toys. Toys in 
ambulatory medical facilities and 
waiting areas should be disposable 
or washable and of appropriate sizes 
and shapes to avoid aspiration or 
other injuries. Furry and plush toys 
are less desirable because of the 
inability to clean them effectively. 
The value of antibacterial agents 
incorporated within toys is unproven. 
Ideally, toys should be cleaned 
between uses to avoid transfer 
of infectious agents.93 However, 
cleaning toys at the end of the day 
is acceptable. Toys contaminated 
with body fluids should be removed 
until cleaned. Toys should be cleaned 
by washing with soap and water 
and then disinfecting (by using a 
freshly prepared 1:100 dilution 
of household bleach or a product 
that meets the standards of the 
Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) for “hospital-grade” germicide 
that is nontoxic for children), rinsing, 
and air drying or by cleaning in a 
dishwasher designed to sanitize 
dishes.
general hOusekeePIng 
recOMMenDaTIOns fOr an 
aMBulaTOry MeDIcal facIlITy
sterilization and Disinfection of 
Patient care equipment
Sterilization eliminates or destroys 
all forms of microbial life, including 
spores. Disinfection reduces but 
does not eliminate the microbial 
burden. The extent of disinfection 
depends on the type of disinfectant 
and its concentration, the resistance 
of the microbes, contact time, and 
amount of organic material. Cleaning 
with detergent to remove organic 
material from medical instruments 
and other devices is a prerequisite 
to sterilization and disinfection. 
Antisepsis refers to the process used 
to decontaminate the skin of a patient 
or health care professional.
All patient care equipment should 
be cleaned at least daily while in 
use or when visibly contaminated 
and should be stored where it 
will not become contaminated. 
Reusable equipment having contact 
with mucous membranes requires 
high-level disinfection whereas 
instruments that penetrate skin or 
sterile body cavities must be sterile 
(Table 6).94 
– 
96
Sterilization
The appropriate availability and 
proper utilization of sterilization is 
critically important for ambulatory 
facilities that perform invasive 
procedures and should be 
accomplished by exposure to high-
temperature steam or dry heat or 
chemical sterilizing agents.94 
– 
96 
Items must be cleaned manually with 
soap and water to remove organic 
debris before autoclaving. Steam 
autoclaving uses distilled water that 
must reach a temperature of 121 to 
132°C. The time for exposure of items 
and temperature depend on the 
type of sterilizer and what is being 
sterilized. Dry heat sterilization in 
an oven is used only for items that 
cannot be sterilized by autoclaving. 
The oven temperature should be 
170°C for an exposure time of 1 hour. 
For sterilizing specific instruments, 
the manufacturer’s instructions must 
be followed. Unwrapped instruments 
should be used immediately or 
aseptically transferred to a sterile 
container.
A chemical indicator should be 
included with the equipment to be 
sterilized to ensure that sterilization 
has occurred. Instrument indicators 
ensure that a machine reaches the 
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
13
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
TaBle 6  
Sterilization, Disinfection, and Antisepsis
Instrument
Level of Disinfection
Methods (Examples)
Critical instrument or device: any instrument 
that enters tissue (eg, needles, surgical 
instruments, urinary catheters, some 
semicritical items)
Sterilization
Steam, low-temperature gas plasma, immersion in liquid chemical 
sterilants, ethylene oxide gas
Semicritical instrument or device: any 
instrument that contacts mucous membranes 
but does not enter tissue (eg, laryngoscope)
High-level disinfection
Wet pasteurization at 70°C for 30 min, chemical sterilants, liquid 
chemical high-level disinfectants (eg, >2% glutaraldehyde, 0.55% 
OPA, 7.5% hydrogen peroxide alone or in combination with 
peracetic acid)
Noncritical instruments or devices: instruments 
that touch only intact skin (eg, stethoscopes, 
blood pressure cuffs), including those with 
visible blood
Intermediate-level disinfection
1:50 dilution sodium hypochlorite (1000 ppm chlorine), 70%–90% 
isopropyl and ethyl alcohol, phenolic germicidal detergent 
solution, iodophor germicidal detergent solution
Environmental surfaces: knobs, handles, carts, 
or tabletops (with no visible blood)
Soap and water or low-level 
disinfection
EPA-approved disinfectants labeled for use against hepatitis B 
virus and/or tuberculocidal activity (eg, quaternary ammonium 
compounds), 1:500 dilution sodium hypochlorite (100 ppm 
chlorine)
Adapted from Wendt C, Frei R, Widmer AF. Decontamination, disinfection and sterilization. In: Jorgensen JH, Pfaller MA, Carroll KC, et al, eds. Manual of Clinical Microbiology. 11th ed. 
Washington, DC: American Society of Microbiology; 2015:183–216; Rutala WA. APIC guideline for selection and use of disinfectants. 1994, 1995, and 1996 APIC Guidelines Committee. 
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Am J Infect Control. 1996;24(4):313–342; and Rutala WA, Weber DJ; Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facilities, 2008. Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
pdf/ 
guidelines/ 
disinfection- 
guidelines. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017. OPA, ortho-phthalaldehyde.
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 correct temperature and pressure. 
Chemical indicators are useful in 
showing that the wrapped package 
has been through the sterilization 
process. However, the procedure 
recommended by the manufacturer 
to document that sterility has been 
achieved should be performed at 
least weekly, and the results should 
be recorded.
Packs that have been sterilized 
should be appropriately identified 
and stored in clean, dry areas to 
minimize recontamination. As long as 
the integrity of the sterile packaging 
is clean and intact, researchers 
have shown that the sterility of the 
product has no expiration date. 
Written policies and procedures for 
sterilization should be prepared, 
distributed to staff, and reviewed 
at regular intervals to ensure that 
policies are followed.
Disinfection
For this statement, the terms for 
disinfection are taken from standards 
for sterilization, disinfection, and 
antisepsis used in hospitals.94 
– 
96
High-level disinfection is used for 
instruments having contact with 
mucous membranes or nonintact 
skin. High-level disinfection is 
most often achieved by using 
liquid chemicals. Chemical 
disinfection is accomplished 
with several chemicals or 
combination of chemicals, 
including glutaraldehyde, 
0.55% ortho-phthalaldehyde, or 
stabilized hydrogen peroxide (a 
combination of hydrogen peroxide 
and peracetic acid). The solution 
should be prepared according to 
manufacturer’s instructions and 
applied for the specified contact 
time, which varies with the 
chemical and the concentration. 
Activated glutaraldehyde solutions 
are most commonly used; however, 
these products have potential 
toxicity if proper ventilation is 
not ensured. After disinfection, 
instruments are rinsed with sterile 
water, dried, and stored in a 
clean, dry place to avoid extrinsic 
contamination.
Intermediate-level disinfection 
is accomplished with 70% ethyl 
or isopropyl alcohol, iodine and 
iodophors, or a 1:50 dilution of 
sodium hypochlorite.
Low-level disinfection is appropriate 
for equipment that does not touch 
mucous membranes; examples 
include blood pressure cuffs, 
crutches, stethoscopes, and tabletops. 
Low-level disinfectants include 
phenolic compounds, quaternary 
ammonium compounds, and a 1:500 
dilution of sodium hypochlorite.
Written policies and procedures for 
disinfection should be prepared, 
distributed to staff, and reviewed 
at regular intervals to be sure that 
policies are being followed.
Antisepsis
Antiseptics are chemical agents 
intended for use on skin or tissue. 
Skin preparation agents include 
isopropyl alcohol, CHG, iodine, 
and iodophors. The preferred skin 
preparation agent for immunization 
and venipuncture for routine blood 
collection (except obtaining blood 
for culture) is 70% isopropyl alcohol. 
Most skin preparation agents must 
be allowed to dry before surface 
bacteria are killed. For children 2 
months and older, a preparation 
containing 2% CHG in 70% 
isopropyl alcohol is the preferred 
skin preparation agent for invasive 
procedures, including the placement 
of central venous catheters.97 
– 
99 
Although CHG use is becoming more 
common even in infants <2 months, 
the Food and Drug Administration 
labeling recommends for CHG to be 
used with care in preterm infants or 
those younger than 2 months.97– 
99 
Tincture of iodine and povidone 
iodine are acceptable alternatives, 
may be used for infants younger 
than 2 months, and are routinely 
used for obtaining blood for culture. 
The contamination of antiseptics 
has been associated with outbreaks 
of infections and pseudoepidemics 
attributable to false-positive blood 
culture results.100 To prevent 
contamination, bottles of antiseptics 
should be dated, should not be 
refilled, and should be inspected and 
discarded if not used within 28 days 
after opening. Alcohol pads, CHG, and 
iodine products prepared in single-
use packaging are preferred and 
eliminate the need for multiple-use 
bottles of these antiseptics. Attention 
should also be paid to antiseptic 
wipes in multidispense containers. 
The lids on these containers should 
be kept closed at all times to prevent 
drying, and expiration dates should 
be noted for replacement.
general housekeeping
All areas in ambulatory facilities 
should be cleaned on a regular 
basis and kept visibly clean. 
Examination rooms and frequently 
used equipment should be cleaned 
daily. Surfaces in examination 
rooms and patient waiting areas 
should be cleaned with a detergent 
and low-level disinfectant, such as 
a disinfectant-grade quaternary 
ammonium compound “registered” 
by the EPA (ie, EPA approved). 
Linoleum and sealed wood floors 
are optimal floor surfaces and are 
preferred over carpeting because 
they can be cleaned without 
difficulty. Furniture made of 
nonporous materials offers a similar 
advantage compared with furniture 
with cloth upholstery.
Spills and Environmental 
Contamination
Gloves should be worn during 
cleaning of contaminated 
environmental surfaces. Surfaces 
should be cleaned with a detergent, 
then treated with a freshly prepared 
(ie, within the past 24 hours) 1:100 
dilution of household bleach with 
contact time of at least 1 minute or 
a proprietary germicidal product 
on the EPA list E (registered 
antimicrobial products effective 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
14
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 against Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
HIV-1, and hepatitis B virus).101 
For spills with blood or body fluids 
contaminated by blood, visible 
organic matter should be removed 
with absorbable material (eg, paper 
towels) and discarded into a leak-
proof, properly labeled container 
before cleaning and decontaminating. 
Chlorine, the active agent in 
household bleach, can be inactivated 
by blood and other organic material, 
and full-strength solution or a 1:10 
dilution of bleach is required if 
the surface is not cleaned before 
disinfection.
Examination Rooms
Provision of alcohol-based hand 
rub easily accessible inside each 
examination room is important. 
A properly functioning sink with 
an adjacent liquid soap dispenser 
and disposable towels should be 
accessible to examination rooms 
in a pediatric ambulatory care 
setting. Installation of solid-surface 
sinks with continuous countertops 
and backsplashes may offer fewer 
opportunities for water trapping 
in seams. Empty soap containers 
should be replaced and not refilled to 
avoid any chance of contamination. 
Bar soaps are less desirable because 
bars frequently are wet and easily 
contaminated with potential 
pathogens; if used, small bars of 
soap and soap racks that facilitate 
the drainage and drying of the soap 
should be used. Faucet aerators 
should not be used because they 
often become contaminated by 
Pseudomonas species and other 
waterborne organisms.
Equipment that makes physical 
contact with the patient is preferably 
cleaned after each use. Although 
furniture in the room generally is 
not a major concern for transfer of 
infectious agents, examination tables 
should be covered with disposable 
paper or linen that is changed 
between patients to decrease the 
risk of transmission of microbes. 
More thorough cleaning should be 
performed if contamination (such 
as soiling from a diaper change) is 
visible. In such cases, a detergent 
should be used to remove visible 
soil followed by an application of a 
freshly diluted solution of household 
bleach (1:100) applied for 1 minute 
to disinfect the surface, rinsing 
with water, and allowing to dry 
or using an EPA-approved low-
level disinfectant disposable wipe 
indicated to inactivate M tuberculosis 
and/or hepatitis B virus. If reusable 
patient linens and gowns are used, 
their careful handling in a manner 
that minimizes the contamination 
of the environment is important. A 
new class of “active barrier” fabrics 
that have been designed with fluid-
repellent qualities on the outside 
and embedded with antimicrobial 
agents are now available.102 
– 
104 The 
benefit of these fabrics in ambulatory 
settings has not been evaluated. 
Soiled linens should be contained 
or placed in a soiled linen bag at the 
point of use.2 Provisions should be 
made for the laundering of soiled 
linen.
Restrooms
Restrooms for use by staff and 
patients should be cleaned daily and 
whenever visibly soiled. A diaper-
changing area with disposable paper 
and a closed receptacle for soiled 
linens, diapers, and paper should be 
provided.
Airflow
Certain infectious agents, including 
varicella-zoster and measles virus 
and M tuberculosis, are transmitted 
by the airborne route. Unfortunately, 
the number of air exchanges in 
buildings that house ambulatory 
medical facilities often is low, and the 
air is recirculated frequently.
Physicians should be aware of 
airflow patterns to limit transmission 
of airborne pathogens. Special 
arrangements are recommended for 
patients considered to be contagious 
with an airborne pathogen, including 
the following: (1) making efforts 
to see these patients at the end of 
the day, (2) placing a mask on the 
patient (and when appropriate, 
on accompanying people) and 
quickly triaging these patients out 
of common waiting areas, and (3) 
closing the door of the examination 
room and limiting access to the 
patient by visitors and staff members 
who are not immune to the suspected 
disease. In some practices, it may be 
feasible for the clinician to perform 
a “car visit, 
” evaluating the patient 
in the family vehicle in the parking 
area of the ambulatory facility. The 
duration of time airborne pathogens 
remain in a room depends on air 
exchange rates. For example, in 
hospitals where air exchange rates 
are 6 to 8 per hour, several air 
exchanges occur within 30 minutes. 
Recommended air exchange rates 
depend on the stated use of a room. 
Recommendations and guidelines 
for design and construction of 
hospitals and health care facilities are 
made by the American Institute of 
Architects and the Facility Guidelines 
Institutes with guidance from the US 
Department of Health and Human 
Services.105 These guidelines are 
adopted in whole or in part as 
regulations in nearly all states and 
enforced by The Joint Commission. 
Another nonregulatory resource 
is the American Society of Heating, 
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers (ASHRAE). The current 
recommended air exchange rate for 
a medical examination room is 6 air 
changes per hour, with 2 outside air 
exchanges per hour.
Diagnostic and Personal Equipment
The role of stethoscopes and other 
examining devices in transmitting 
infectious agents is unclear; however, 
researchers have shown stethoscopes 
can be contaminated with viral and 
bacterial agents, including bacteria 
that are resistant to multiple 
antimicrobial agents.106 
– 
108 A 
reasonable means of decreasing 
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
15
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 contamination is to wipe the bell and 
diaphragm of the stethoscope as well 
as the handle and body of otoscopes 
or ophthalmoscopes regularly and, 
whenever they become soiled, use 
an EPA-approved disinfectant wipe 
labeled effective against hepatitis 
B or a 70% isopropyl alcohol wipe. 
Disposable ear curettes may be 
preferred. If not disposable, ear 
curettes should be cleaned with 70% 
isopropyl alcohol after each use and, 
if grossly contaminated by blood 
and/or body substances, should 
be cleaned and then disinfected by 
using a sodium hypochlorite (bleach) 
solution.
In most cases, blood pressure cuffs 
are placed on intact skin; therefore, 
the risk of transmission of infectious 
agents is minimal. These reusable 
cloth cuffs should not be placed 
in direct contact with damaged or 
nonintact skin.
Whenever economically and 
medically feasible, disposable 
supplies should be used. Electronic 
thermometers have single-use 
shields, but care must be taken to 
avoid contaminating the housing of 
the thermometer. The “box” and the 
probe handle should be wiped with a 
low-level EPA-approved disinfectant 
whenever soiled. Care should be 
taken to avoid contamination of 
pulse oximetry and tympanometry 
equipment with any type of body 
secretions, and equipment should be 
cleaned according to manufacturer 
recommendations after each 
use. Other equipment, such as 
electrocardiography machines and 
kits used for developmental testing 
(which generally contain toys and 
other reusable testing material), 
should be cleaned and disinfected 
with an intermediate-level 
disinfectant whenever they become 
soiled or contaminated by patient 
secretions.
Ballpoint pens, patient charts, 
computer mouse and keyboard, and 
personal mobile handheld devices 
(eg, smart phones, tablets) can be 
contaminated with infectious agents 
that can be transmitted by hands 
to other environmental sources.109 
Because these items are not cleaned 
after each use, hand hygiene before 
and after contact with the patient or 
immediate environment is necessary 
to minimize the potential transfer of 
bacteria and viruses from equipment 
to patients. A daily cleaning schedule 
using an EPA-approved low-level 
disinfectant is recommended for 
such items as computer mouse and 
keyboard, computer screens, blood 
pressure cuffs, and other commonly 
touched items in the patient’s 
environment.
Disposal of Medical Wastes
The federal OSHA standard as 
well as local and state regulations 
dictate the proper disposal of 
medical wastes, including dressings, 
needles, sharps, and body fluid 
samples.2, 
 
110 All physicians should 
be aware of the policies in their 
state and municipality and ensure 
that regulated wastes are disposed 
of appropriately. Basic principles 
include defining which items 
constitute infectious waste and which 
do not; appropriately separating, 
labeling, storing, and transporting 
items in these 2 categories; 
instructing staff on how to handle 
infectious waste; and developing 
plans for managing spills and 
inadvertent exposures.
Judicious use of antimicrobial 
agents and emergence of 
antimicrobial-resistant Bacteria
The diagnosis of infection and 
institution of antimicrobial therapy, 
when indicated, complements 
good IPC practices. Inappropriate 
use of antimicrobial agents in 
hospitals and in ambulatory 
settings has contributed to the 
emergence of antimicrobial-resistant 
microorganisms and confers an 
increased risk of adverse events for 
patients unnecessarily treated with 
antibiotics. The CDC and the AAP 
have provided guidelines for the 
judicious use of antimicrobial agents 
that emphasize 4 key strategies:
1. Eliminating antibiotic prescribing 
for those with viral upper 
respiratory infection;
2. Using stringent clinical diagnostic 
criteria for acute otitis media 
and acute bacterial sinusitis and 
consideration of patients who 
may be appropriate candidates for 
watchful waiting;
3. Appropriate testing for group A 
β-hemolytic Streptococcus (rapid 
diagnostic testing for those 3 
years and older with a sore throat 
without viral symptoms) and the 
use of antibiotics only for those 
with positive test results;
4. Collecting and testing appropriate 
urine specimens for all patients 
with a suspected urinary tract 
infection, with urine culture for all 
patients with abnormal urinalysis 
results; and
5. Using narrow-spectrum 
antimicrobial agents that are most 
effective for the major pathogens 
causing acute otitis media or 
acute bacterial sinusitis (high-
dose amoxicillin), streptococcal 
pharyngitis (once-daily 
amoxicillin), and urinary tract 
infection (eg, cephalexin, cefdinir). 
In patients with treatment 
failure or other risk for antibiotic 
resistant pathogens, alternative 
therapy is indicated.111 
– 
118
Guidelines have been published for 
the isolation and precautions for 
hospitalized children and adults 
who acquire resistant flora.119 
– 
121 
Patients may continue to harbor 
antimicrobial-resistant bacteria 
as part of their skin, respiratory 
tract, or gastrointestinal tract 
flora. These organisms include 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, vancomycin intermediately 
susceptible S aureus (glycopeptide 
intermediately susceptible S aureus), 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
16
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus 
species, and extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase (ESBL)–producing 
organisms, carbapenem-resistant 
Enterobacteriaceae, and other 
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative 
bacteria. Many patients harboring 
these bacteria will not be identified 
because the bacteria may not cause 
symptoms. Hand hygiene before 
and after contact with colonized 
children, with or without the use of 
gloves, is appropriate. No guidelines 
for management of these patients 
in ambulatory settings have been 
published, except for patients with 
cystic fibrosis (see “Consideration 
for Patients With Cystic Fibrosis”). 
However, these resistant bacteria 
could contaminate the environment; 
thus, if a patient is known to have 
been infected or colonized with 
multidrug-resistant bacteria, has 
a draining wound, or is in diapers, 
contact precautions should be 
undertaken, hand hygiene should 
be performed by using an alcohol-
based hand gel or washing with 
antimicrobial soap and water, 
and surfaces in the examination 
room with which the patient had 
contact should undergo appropriate 
disinfection, depending on the 
pathogen involved. Parents should 
also be advised to inform the HCP if 
their child has been identified to have 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
suMMary Of IPc POlIcIes
1. Written policies and procedures 
concerning IPC should be 
developed, incorporated into 
the ambulatory practice safety 
program, available at all times to 
office staff, and reviewed at least 
every 2 years;
2. Educational programs for 
staff concerning IPC should be 
implemented, reinforced, and 
evaluated on a regular basis. 
All staff should be required to 
review the policies at the time of 
employment;
3. Annual influenza immunization 
should be mandatory for staff 
as well as immunization or 
documentation of immunity 
against other vaccine-
preventable infections (including 
pertussis, measles, mumps, 
rubella, varicella, and hepatitis 
B) that can be transmitted in an 
ambulatory care setting;
4. All HCP should perform hand 
hygiene using an alcohol-based 
hand rub or hand washing with 
soap and water before and 
after patient contact or contact 
with the patient’s immediate 
environment;
5. Standard Precautions (Table 1)  
should be used in every 
interaction with a patient.
6. In waiting rooms of ambulatory 
care facilities, the use of 
respiratory hygiene and cough 
etiquette should be encouraged 
for patients and accompanying 
people, especially those with 
suspected respiratory infection;
7. Patients with potentially 
contagious diseases and 
immunocompromised children 
should be promptly triaged. 
Contact between contagious 
children and uninfected children 
should be minimized. Policies 
to deal with children who 
present with highly contagious 
infections (such as varicella, 
measles, pertussis, influenza, 
mumps, and TB) should be 
devised and implemented; travel, 
immunization, and exposure 
history is key to identify patients 
who may be at increased risk for 
such infections;
8. Alcohol is preferred for skin 
antisepsis before immunization 
and routine venipuncture. Skin 
preparation for incision, suture, 
and collection of blood for 
culture requires either 2% CHG 
in 70% isopropyl alcohol–based 
solutions (for children older than 
2 months) or iodine (1% or 2% 
tincture of iodine, 2% povidone-
iodine). Most skin preparation 
agents must be allowed to dry 
before surface bacteria are 
killed;
9. Physicians should be aware of 
requirements of government 
agencies, such as OSHA, as 
they relate to the operation of 
ambulatory facilities;
10. Needles and sharps should be 
handled with great care. Safer 
needle-disposal units that are 
impermeable and puncture-
proof should be available next 
to the areas used for injection 
or venipuncture. The containers 
should be used only until filled 
to three quarters of capacity 
and should be kept out of reach 
of young children. Procedures 
should be established for the 
removal and incineration or 
sterilization of contents. Needle 
devices with safety features 
should be evaluated periodically 
with input from staff members 
who use needles, and the 
use of devices that are likely 
to improve safety should be 
implemented;
11. A written bloodborne pathogens 
exposure control plan that 
includes written policies for the 
management of contaminated 
sharp object injuries should be 
developed, readily available to 
all staff, and reviewed annually;
12. Standard guidelines for 
sterilization, disinfection, and 
antisepsis should be followed;
13. Policies and procedures should 
be developed for communication 
with local and state health 
authorities regarding reportable 
diseases and suspected 
outbreaks;
14. A policy for communicating 
with other health care facilities 
when referring potentially 
contagious patients should be 
established;
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
17
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 15. Policies should be established 
for communicating with patients 
and families in case of infectious 
disease outbreaks, emergencies, 
and seasonal increases of 
infections (such as influenza or 
respiratory syncytial virus); and
16. Antimicrobial agents should 
be used appropriately, and 
Standard Precautions (Table 1)  
should be observed to limit 
the emergence and spread of 
antimicrobial-resistant bacteria.
leaD auThOrs
Mobeen H. Rathore, MD, FAAP
Mary Anne Jackson, MD, FAAP
cOMMITTee On InfecTIOus DIseases, 
2016–2017
Carrie L. Byington, MD, FAAP, Chairperson
Yvonne A. Maldonado, MD, FAAP, Vice Chairperson
Elizabeth D. Barnett, MD, FAAP
James D. Campbell, MD, FAAP
H. Dele Davies, MD, MS, MHCM, FAAP
Ruth Lynfield, MD, FAAP
Flor M. Munoz, MD, FAAP
Dawn Nolt, MD, MPH, FAAP
Ann-Christine Nyquist, MD, MSPH, FAAP
Sean O'Leary, MD, MPH, FAAP
Mobeen H. Rathore, MD, FAAP
Mark H. Sawyer, MD, FAAP
William J. Steinbach, MD, FAAP
Tina Q. Tan, MD, FAAP
Theoklis E. Zaoutis, MD, MSCE, FAAP
ex OffIcIO
David W. Kimberlin, MD, FAAP – Red Book Editor
Michael T. Brady, MD, FAAP – Red Book Associate 
Editor
Mary Anne Jackson, MD, FAAP – Red Book 
Associate Editor
Sarah S. Long, MD, FAAP – Red Book Associate 
Editor
Henry H. Bernstein, DO, MHCM, FAAP – Red Book 
Online Associate Editor
H. Cody Meissner, MD, FAAP – Visual Red Book 
Associate Editor
lIaIsOns
James Stevermer, MD – American Academy of 
Family Physicians
Amanda Cohn, MD, FAAP – Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention
Karen M. Farizo, MD – US Food and Drug 
Administration
Marc Fischer, MD, FAAP – Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention
Bruce G. Gellin, MD, MPH – National Vaccine 
Program Office
Richard L. Gorman, MD, FAAP – National Institutes 
of Health
Natasha Halasa, MD, MPH, FAAP – Pediatric 
Infectious Diseases Society
Joan L. Robinson, MD – Canadian Paediatric Society
Jaime Deseda-Tous MD, FAAP – Sociedad 
Latinoamericana de Infectologia Pediatrica
Geoffrey R. Simon, MD, FAAP – Committee on 
Practice Ambulatory Medicine
Jeffrey R. Starke, MD, FAAP – American Thoracic 
Society
sTaff
Jennifer M. Frantz, MPH
aBBrevIaTIOns
AAP:  
American Academy of 
Pediatrics
CDC:  
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention
CHG:  
chlorhexidine gluconate
EPA:  
Environmental Protection 
Agency
HCP:  
health care personnel
IGRA:  
interferon-γ release assay
IPC:  
infection prevention and 
control
LTBI:  
latent TB infection
OSHA:  
Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
SHEA:  
Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America
TB:  
tuberculosis
TST:  
tuberculin skin test
references
 1.  
Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, 
Chiarello L; Healthcare Infection 
Control Practices Advisory Committee. 
2007 guideline for isolation 
precautions: preventing transmission 
of infectious agents in healthcare 
settings. Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
pdf/ 
guidelines/ 
isolation- 
guidelines. 
pdf. Accessed 
March 6, 2017
 2.  
Sehulster L, Chinn RY; CDC; HICPAC. 
Guidelines for environmental infection 
control in health-care facilities. 
Recommendations of CDC and the 
Healthcare Infection Control Practices 
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 
Recomm Rep. 2003;52(RR-10):1–42
 3.  
Boyce JM, Pittet D; Healthcare Infection 
Control Practices Advisory Committee; 
HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene 
Task Force; Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America/Association 
for Professionals in Infection Control/
Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Health-
Care Settings. Recommendations 
of the Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee and the 
HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene 
Task Force. MMWR Recomm Rep. 
2002;51(RR-16):1–45, quiz CE1–CE4
 4.  
World Health Organization. Guidelines 
on hand hygiene in health care. 
2009. Available at: http:// 
apps. 
who. 
int/ 
iris/ 
bitstream/ 
10665/ 
44102/ 
1/ 
9789241597906_ 
eng. 
pdf. Accessed 
March 6, 2017
 5.  
O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, 
et al; Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee 
(HICPAC). Guidelines for the 
prevention of intravascular catheter-
related infections. Clin Infect Dis. 
2011;52(9):e162–e193
 6.  
Nihill DM, Lundstrom T. Infection 
prevention and control in the 
outpatient setting. In: Lautenbach E, 
Woeltje KF, Malani PN, eds. Practical 
Healthcare Epidemiology. 3rd ed. 
Chicago, IL: Society for Healthcare 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
18
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
Copyright © 2017 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
fInancIal DIsclOsure: The authors have indicated they have no financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.
funDIng: No external funding.
POTenTIal cOnflIcT Of InTeresT: The authors have indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 Epidemiology of America, by 
the University of Chicago Press; 
2010:356–371
 7.  
Jackson MM. Ambulatory care 
facilities. In: Abrutyn E, Goldmann DA, 
Scheckler WE, eds. Saunders Infection 
Control Reference Service. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co; 
2001:139–150
 8.  
Lobovits AM, Freeman J, Goldmann 
DA, McIntosh K. Risk of illness after 
exposure to a pediatric office. N Engl J 
Med. 1985;313(7):425–428
 9.  
Bloch AB, Orenstein WA, Ewing WM,  
et al. Measles outbreak in a pediatric 
practice: airborne transmission 
in an office setting. Pediatrics. 
1985;75(4):676–683
 10.  
Davis RM, Orenstein WA, Frank JA Jr,  
et al. Transmission of measles in 
medical settings. 1980 through 1984. 
JAMA. 1986;255(10):1295–1298
 11.  
Askew GL, Finelli L, Hutton M, et 
al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
transmission from a pediatrician to 
patients. Pediatrics. 1997;100(1): 
19–23
 12.  
Moore M, Schulte J, Valway SE, 
et al. Evaluation of transmission 
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
in a pediatric setting. J Pediatr. 
1998;133(1):108–112
 13.  
Williams IT, Perz JF, Bell BP. Viral 
hepatitis transmission in ambulatory 
health care settings. Clin Infect Dis. 
2004;38(11):1592–1598
 14.  
Branch-Elliman W, Weiss D, Balter S, 
Bornschlegel K, Phillips M. Hepatitis C 
transmission due to contamination 
of multidose medication vials: summary 
of an outbreak and a call to action. 
Am J Infect Control. 2013;41(1):92–94
 15.  
Samandari T, Malakmadze N, Balter 
S, et al. A large outbreak of hepatitis 
B virus infections associated with 
frequent injections at a physician’s 
office. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2005;26(9):745–750
 16.  
Goodman RA, Solomon SL. 
Transmission of infectious diseases in 
outpatient health care settings. JAMA. 
1991;265(18):2377–2381
 17.  
American Academy of Pediatrics 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Infection prevention and control 
in pediatric ambulatory settings. 
Pediatrics. 2007;120(3):650–665
 18.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Recommendations for 
preventing transmission of infections 
among chronic hemodialysis 
patients. MMWR Recomm Rep. 
2001;50(RR-5):1–43
 19.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Basic infection control 
and prevention plan for outpatient 
oncology settings. 2011. Available at: 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
hai/ 
pdfs/ 
guidelines/ 
basic- 
infection- 
control- 
prevention- 
plan- 
2011. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017
 20.  
American Society for Gastrointestinal 
Endoscopy. Multisociety guideline on 
reprocessing flexible gastrointestinal 
endoscopes: 2016 update. Available 
at: www. 
asge. 
org/ 
uploadedFiles/ 
Publications_ 
and_ 
Products/ 
Practice_ 
Guidelines/ 
Multisociety%20 
guideline%20 
on%20 
reprocessing%20 
flexible%20 
gastrointestinal. 
pdf. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 21.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Infection control 
assessment of ambulatory surgical 
centers. Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
injectionsafety/ 
pubs- 
IC- 
Assessment- 
Ambulatory- 
Surgical- 
Centers. 
html. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 22.  
APIC. APIC implementation guide: guide 
to infection prevention in emergency 
medical services. 2013. Available 
at: http:// 
apic. 
org/ 
Resource_/ 
EliminationGuideF 
orm/ 
e1ac231d- 
9d35- 
4c42- 
9ca0- 
822c23437e18/ 
File/ 
EMS_ 
Guide_ 
web. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 
2017
 23.  
Liang SY, Theodoro DL, Schuur JD, 
Marschall J. Infection prevention in the 
emergency department. Ann Emerg 
Med. 2014;64(3):299–313
 24.  
Ostrowsky B. Epidemiology of 
healthcare associated infections. 
In: Jarvis WR, ed. Bennett and 
Brachman’s Hospital Infections. 
6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams and Wilkins; 2007:1–20
 25.  
Rogers M, Weinstock DM, Eagan J, 
Kiehn T, Armstrong D, Sepkowitz KA. 
Rotavirus outbreak on a pediatric 
oncology floor: possible association 
with toys. Am J Infect Control. 
2000;28(5):378–380
 26.  
Avila-Aguero ML, German G, Paris MM, 
Herrera JF; Safe Toys Study Group. 
Toys in a pediatric hospital: are they a 
bacterial source? Am J Infect Control. 
2004;32(5):287–290
 27.  
Akhter J, al-Hajjar S, Myint S, Qadri SM. 
Viral contamination of environmental 
surfaces on a general paediatric ward 
and playroom in a major referral 
centre in Riyadh. Eur J Epidemiol. 
1995;11(5):587–590
 28.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Nail hygiene. Available at: 
https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
healthywater/ 
hygiene/ 
hand/ 
nail_ 
hygiene. 
html. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 29.  
Olsen RJ, Lynch P, Coyle MB, 
Cummings J, Bokete T, Stamm WE. 
Examination gloves as barriers to hand 
contamination in clinical practice. 
JAMA. 1993;270(3):350–353
 30.  
Quade D. Cough Etiquette. YouTube. 
2009. Available at: https:// 
www. 
youtube. 
com/ 
watch? 
v= 
UNEp5U_ 
TCOM. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 31.  
Ellingson K, Haas JP, Aiello AE, et al; 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology 
of America (SHEA). Strategies to 
prevent healthcare-associated 
infections through hand hygiene. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014;35(8): 
937–960
 32.  
Sprunt K, Redman W, Leidy G. 
Antibacterial effectiveness of 
routine hand washing. Pediatrics. 
1973;52(2):264–271
 33.  
Lowbury EJ, Lilly HA, Bull JP. 
Disinfection of hands: removal of 
transient organisms. Br Med J. 
1964;2(5403):230–233
 34.  
Blaney DD, Daly ER, Kirkland KB, 
Tongren JE, Kelso PT, Talbot EA. Use 
of alcohol-based hand sanitizers as a 
risk factor for norovirus outbreaks in 
long-term care facilities in northern 
New England: December 2006 to 
March 2007. Am J Infect Control. 
2011;39(4):296–301
 35.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Wash your hands (:30). 
Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
cdctv/ 
healthyliving/ 
hygiene/ 
hands- 
together- 
hygiene. 
html. Accessed March 6,  
2017
 36.  
Infection Control Today. FDA issues 
proposed rule to determine safety 
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
19
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 and effectiveness of antibacterial 
soaps. Available at: https:// 
www. 
infectioncontrolt 
oday. 
com/ 
news/ 
2013/ 
12/ 
fda- 
issues- 
proposed- 
rule- 
to- 
determine- 
safety- 
and- 
effectiveness- 
of- 
antibacterial- 
soaps. 
aspx. Accessed 
March 6, 2017
 37.  
Aiello AE, Larson EL, Levy SB. Consumer 
antibacterial soaps: effective or just 
risky? Clin Infect Dis. 2007;45(suppl 
2):S137–S147
 38.  
American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Infection control and prevention in 
hospitalized children. In: Kimberlin 
DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, Long SS, 
eds. Red Book: 2015 Report of the 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American 
Academy of Pediatrics; 2015:161–175
 39.  
American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Infection control and prevention in 
ambulatory settings. In: Kimberlin 
DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, Long SS, 
eds. Red Book: 2015 Report of the 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American 
Academy of Pediatrics; 2015:175–176
 40.  
American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Vaccine administration. In: Kimberlin 
DW, Brady MT, Jackson MA, Long SS, 
eds. Red Book: 2015 Report of the 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
30th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American 
Academy of Pediatrics; 2015:26–30
 41.  
National Center for Immunization 
and Respiratory Diseases. General 
recommendations on immunization 
— recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP) [published correction appears 
in MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011;60:993]. 
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011;60(2):1–64
 42.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Respiratory hygiene/
cough etiquette in healthcare 
settings. Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
flu/ 
professionals/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
resphygiene. 
htm. Accessed March 6, 
2017
 43.  
Thomas CG. Efficiency of surgical 
masks in use in hospital wards. Guys 
Hosp Rep. 1961;110:157–167
 44.  
Capps JA. Measures for the 
prevention and control of respiratory 
infections in military camps. JAMA. 
1918;71(6):448–451
 45.  
Johnson DF, Druce JD, Birch C, Grayson 
ML. A quantitative assessment of the 
efficacy of surgical and N95 masks to 
filter influenza virus in patients with 
acute influenza infection. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2009;49(2):275–277
 46.  
MacIntyre CR, Wang Q, Rahman B, et al. 
Efficacy of face masks and respirators 
in preventing upper respiratory tract 
bacterial colonization and co-infection 
in hospital healthcare workers. Prev 
Med. 2014;62:1–7
 47.  
US Department of Health and Human 
Services, Public Health Service, 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health. TB 
respiratory protection program in 
health care facilities. 1999. Available 
at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
niosh/ 
docs/ 
99- 
143/ 
pdfs/ 
99- 
143. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 
2017
 48.  
American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Tuberculosis. In: Kimberlin DW, Brady 
MT, Jackson MA, Long SS, eds. Red 
Book: 2015 Report of the Committee 
on Infectious Diseases. 30th ed. Elk 
Grove Village, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2015:805–831
 49.  
Saiman L, Siegel J; Cystic Fibrosis 
Foundation. Infection control 
recommendations for patients with 
cystic fibrosis: microbiology, important 
pathogens, and infection control 
practices to prevent patient-to-patient 
transmission. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol. 2003;24(suppl 5):S6–S52
 50.  
Saiman L, Siegel JD, LiPuma JJ, et al; 
Cystic Fibrous Foundation; Society for 
Healthcare Epidemiology of America. 
Infection prevention and control 
guideline for cystic fibrosis: 2013 
update. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2014;35(suppl 1):S1–S67
 51.  
Clifton IJ, Fletcher LA, Beggs CB, 
Denton M, Conway SP, Peckham DG. 
An aerobiological model of aerosol 
survival of different strains of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated 
from people with cystic fibrosis. J Cyst 
Fibros. 2010;9(1):64–68
 52.  
Festini F, Taccetti G, Galici V, et al. A 
1-m distance is not safe for children 
with cystic fibrosis at risk for 
cross-infection with Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Am J Infect Control. 
2010;38(3):244–245
 53.  
Wainwright CE, France MW, O’Rourke 
P, et al. Cough-generated aerosols 
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
other Gram-negative bacteria from 
patients with cystic fibrosis. Thorax. 
2009;64(11):926–931
 54.  
Clifton IJ, Peckham DG. Defining 
routes of airborne transmission of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in people 
with cystic fibrosis. Expert Rev Respir 
Med. 2010;4(4):519–529
 55.  
Department of Labor, Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration. 
Occupational exposure to bloodborne 
pathogens; needlestick and other 
sharps injuries; final rule. Available 
at: https:// 
www. 
osha. 
gov/ 
laws- 
regs/ 
federalregister/ 
2001- 
01- 
18. Accessed 
March 6, 2017
 56.  
Department of Labor; Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration. 
Bloodborne pathogens and needle 
stick prevention: general guidance. 
Available at: https:// 
www. 
osha. 
gov/ 
SLTC/ 
bloodbornepathoge 
ns/ 
gen_ 
guidance. 
html. Accessed March 6, 2017
 57.  
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration. Bloodborne pathogens 
and needlestick prevention: overview. 
Available at: www. 
osha. 
gov/ 
SLTC/ 
bloodbornepathoge 
ns/ 
index. 
html. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 58.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Infection prevention 
checklist for outpatient settings: 
minimum expectations for safe care. 
Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
HAI/ 
settings/ 
outpatient/ 
checklist/ 
outpatient- 
care- 
checklist. 
html. Accessed March 6, 2017
 59.  
Lohr JA, Ingram DL, Dudley SM, Lawton 
EL, Donowitz LG. Hand washing in 
pediatric ambulatory settings. An 
inconsistent practice. Am J Dis Child. 
1991;145(10):1198–1199
 60.  
Goldmann D, Larson E. Hand-washing 
and nosocomial infections. N Engl J 
Med. 1992;327(2):120–122
 61.  
Campbell B. Power and motivation: 
important concepts for infection 
control practitioners. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol. 1991;12(2):122–124
 62.  
National Institute of Occupational 
Safety and Health. Overview of state 
needle safety legislation. Available at: 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
niosh/ 
topics/ 
bbp/ 
ndl- 
law. 
html. Accessed March 6, 2017
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
20
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
  63.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Workbook for designing, 
implementing, and evaluating a sharps 
injury prevention program. 2004. 
Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
sharpssafety/ 
pdf/ 
sharpsworkbook_ 
2008. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017
 64.  
Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for 
Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines 
for the use of antiretroviral agents in 
HIV-1-infected adults and adolescents. 
2016. Available at: https:// 
aidsinfo. 
nih. 
gov/ 
guidelines/ 
html/ 
1/ 
adult- 
and- 
adolescent- 
treatment- 
guidelines/ 
0. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 65.  
Kuhar DT, Henderson DK, Struble 
KA, et al; US Public Health Service 
Working Group. Updated US Public 
Health Service guidelines for the 
management of occupational 
exposures to human immunodeficiency 
virus and recommendations for 
postexposure prophylaxis [published 
correction appears in Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol. 2013;34(11):1238]. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2013;34(9):875–892
 66.  
Szymczak JE, Smathers S, Hoegg C, 
Klieger S, Coffin SE, Sammons JS. 
Reasons why physicians and advanced 
practice clinicians work while sick: a 
mixed-methods analysis. JAMA Pediatr. 
2015;169(9):815–821
 67.  
Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, 
Pearson ML, Shapiro CN, Deitchmann 
SD; Hospital Infection Control Practices 
Advisory Committee. Guideline for 
infection control in healthcare 
personnel, 1998. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol. 1998;19(6):407–463
 68.  
Kim DK, Bridges CB, Harriman KH; 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC); Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices (ACIP); 
ACIP Adult Immunization Work Group. 
Advisory committee on immunization 
practices recommended immunization 
schedule for adults aged 19 years or 
older–United States, 2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64(4):91–92
 69.  
American Academy of Pediatrics 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Prevention of pertussis among 
adolescents: recommendations 
for use of tetanus toxoid, reduced 
diphtheria toxoid, and acellular 
pertussis (Tdap) vaccine. Pediatrics. 
2006;117(3):965–978
 70.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Updated recommendations 
for use of tetanus toxoid, reduced 
diphtheria toxoid and acellular 
pertussis (Tdap) vaccine from the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2011;60(1):13–15
 71.  
American Academy of Pediatrics, 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Influenza immunization for all health 
care personnel: keep it mandatory. 
Pediatrics. 2015;136(4):809–819
 72.  
Infectious Diseases Society of America; 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America; Pediatric Infectious Diseases 
Society. Joint policy statement on 
mandatory immunization of health 
care personnel according to the ACIP-
recommended vaccine schedule. 2013. 
Available at: https:// 
www. 
idsociety. 
org/ 
uploadedFiles/ 
IDSA/ 
Policy_ 
and_ 
Advocacy/ 
Current_ 
Topics_ 
and_ 
Issues/ 
Immunizations_ 
and_ 
Vaccines/ 
Health_ 
Care_ 
Worker_ 
Immunization/ 
Statements/ 
IDSA_ 
SHEA_ 
PIDS%20 
Policy%20 
on%20 
Mandatory%20 
Immunization%20 
of%20 
HCP. 
pdf. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 73.  
Dheda K, Udwadia ZF, Huggett JF, 
Johnson MA, Rook GA. Utility of the 
antigen-specific interferon-gamma 
assay for the management of 
tuberculosis. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 
2005;11(3):195–202
 74.  
Jensen PA, Lambert LA, Iademarco 
MF, Ridzon R; CDC. Guidelines for 
preventing the transmission of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-
care settings, 2005. MMWR Recomm 
Rep. 2005;54(RR-17):1–141
 75.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Essential components of 
a tuberculosis prevention and control 
program. Recommendations of the 
Advisory Council for the Elimination of 
Tuberculosis. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 1995;44(RR-11):1–16
 76.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Screening for tuberculosis 
and tuberculosis infection in high-risk 
populations. Recommendations of the 
Advisory Council for the Elimination of 
Tuberculosis. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 1995;44(RR-11):19–34
 77.  
Mazurek GH, Jereb J, Vernon A, LoBue 
P, Goldberg S, Castro K; IGRA Expert 
Committee; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC). Updated 
guidelines for using interferon 
gamma release assays to detect 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection 
- United States, 2010. MMWR Recomm 
Rep. 2010;59(RR-5):1–25
 78.  
Pai M, O’Brien R. Serial testing for 
tuberculosis: can we make sense of T 
cell assay conversions and reversions? 
PLoS Med. 2007;4(6):e208
 79.  
Fong KS, Tomford JW, Teixeira L, et 
al. Challenges of interferon-γ release 
assay conversions in serial testing of 
health-care workers in a TB control 
program. Chest. 2012;142(1):55–62
 80.  
Association for Professionals in 
Infection Control and Epidemiology 
(APIC). Infection prevention for 
ambulatory care centers during 
disasters. 2013. Available at: 
https:// 
apic. 
org/ 
Resource_/ 
TinyMceFileManage 
r/ 
Emergency_ 
Prep/ 
2013_ 
Ambulatory_ 
Care_ 
during_ 
Disasters_ 
FINAL. 
pdf. Accessed March 
6, 2017
 81.  
Public Health Ontario, Provincial 
Infectious Diseases Advisory 
Committee. Infection prevention 
and control for clinical office 
practice. 2015. Available at: www. 
publichealthontar 
io. 
ca/ 
en/ 
eRepository/ 
IPAC_ 
Clinical_ 
Office_ 
Practice_ 
2013. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017
 82.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Severe acute respiratory 
syndrome. In the absence of SARS-CoV 
transmission worldwide: guidance for 
surveillance, clinical and laboratory 
evaluation, and reporting version 2. 
2004. Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
sars/ 
surveillance/ 
absence. 
pdf. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 83.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. First confirmed cases of 
Middle East respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) infection in 
the United States, updated information 
on the epidemiology of MERS-CoV 
infection, and guidance for the 
public, clinicians, and public health 
authorities - May 2014. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(19):431–436
 84.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Infection prevention 
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
21
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 and control recommendations 
for hospitalized patients under 
investigation (PUIs) for Ebola virus 
disease (EVD) in U.S. hospitals. 
Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
vhf/ 
ebola/ 
healthcare- 
us/ 
hospitals/ 
infection- 
control. 
html. Accessed March 6, 2017
 85.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Outpatient settings policy 
options for improving infection 
prevention. Available at: www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
hai/ 
pdfs/ 
prevent/ 
Outpatient- 
Settings- 
Policy- 
Options. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 
2017
 86.  
Berger J. All practitioners held to same 
standard of care: proper supervision 
of students, residents minimizes 
liability. AAP News. 1999. Available 
at: http:// 
www. 
aappublications. 
org/ 
content/ 
15/ 
4/ 
17? 
sso= 
1& 
sso_ 
redirect_ 
count= 
1& 
nfstatus= 
401& 
nftoken= 
00000000- 
0000- 
0000- 
0000- 
000000000000& 
nfstatusdescripti 
on= 
ERROR%3 
a+No+local+token
 87.  
US Department of Health and Human 
Services. Health information privacy. 
Available at: https:// 
www. 
hhs. 
gov/ 
hipaa/ 
index. 
html/ 
. Accessed March 6, 
2017
 88.  
Guzman-Cottrill JA, Ravin KA, Bryant 
KA, Zerr DM, Kociolek L, Siegel JD; 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology 
of America. Infection prevention and 
control in residential facilities for 
pediatric patients and their families. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2013;34(10):1003–1041
 89.  
Pickering LK, Marano N, Bocchini JA, 
Angulo FJ; Committee on Infectious 
Diseases. Exposure to nontraditional 
pets at home and to animals in public 
settings: risks to children. Pediatrics. 
2008;122(4):876–886
 90.  
Murthy R, Bearman G, Brown S, et al.  
Animals in healthcare facilities: 
recommendations to minimize 
potential risks. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol. 2015;36(5):495–516
 91.  
Merriman E, Corwin P, Ikram R. Toys 
are a potential source of cross-
infection in general practitioners’ 
waiting rooms. Br J Gen Pract. 
2002;52(475):138–140
 92.  
Buttery JP, Alabaster SJ, Heine RG, 
et al. Multiresistant Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa outbreak in a pediatric 
oncology ward related to bath toys. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17(6):509–513
 93.  
Geyer SA. Guidelines for processing 
toys. J Healthc Mater Manage. 
1986;4(3):52–53
 94.  
Wendt C, Frei R, Widmer AF. 
Decontamination, disinfection and 
sterilization. In: Jorgensen JH, Pfaller 
MA, Carroll KC, et al, eds. Manual 
of Clinical Microbiology. 11th ed. 
Washington, DC: American Society of 
Microbiology; 2015:183–216
 95.  
Rutala WA. APIC guideline for selection 
and use of disinfectants. 1994, 1995, 
and 1996 APIC Guidelines Committee. 
Association for Professionals in 
Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. 
Am J Infect Control. 1996;24(4):313–342
 96.  
Rutala WA, Weber DJ; Healthcare 
Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. Guideline 
for disinfection and sterilization in 
healthcare facilities, 2008. Available at: 
https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
pdf/ 
guidelines/ 
disinfection- 
guidelines. 
pdf. Accessed March 6, 2017
 97.  
Tamma PD, Aucott SW, Milstone AM. 
Chlorhexidine use in the neonatal 
intensive care unit: results from a 
national survey. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol. 2010;31(8):846–849
 98.  
Milstone AM, Elward A, Song X, 
et al; Pediatric SCRUB Trial Study 
Group. Daily chlorhexidine bathing 
to reduce bacteraemia in critically 
ill children: a multicentre, cluster-
randomised, crossover trial. Lancet. 
2013;381(9872):1099–1106
 99.  
Quach C, Milstone AM, Perpête C, 
Bonenfant M, Moore DL, Perreault T. 
Chlorhexidine bathing in a tertiary 
care neonatal intensive care unit: 
impact on central line-associated 
bloodstream infections. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol. 2014;35(2):158–163
 
100.  
Panlilio AL, Beck-Sague CM, 
Siegel JD, et al. Infections and 
pseudoinfections due to povidone-
iodine solution contaminated with 
Pseudomonas cepacia. Clin Infect Dis. 
1992;14(5):1078–1083
 
101.  
US Environmental Protection Agency. 
List E: EPA’s registered antimicrobial 
products effective against 
mycobacterium tuberculosis, human 
HIV-1 and hepatitis B virus. Available 
at: https:// 
www. 
epa. 
gov/ 
pesticide- 
registration/ 
list- 
e- 
epas- 
registered- 
antimicrobial- 
products- 
effective- 
against- 
mycobacterium. Accessed 
March 6, 2017
 
102.  
Bearman G, Bryant K, Leekha S, et al.  
Healthcare personnel attire in non-
operating-room settings. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014;35(2): 
107–121
 
103.  
Bearman GM, Rosato A, Elam K, et al.  
A crossover trial of antimicrobial 
scrubs to reduce methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus burden 
on healthcare worker apparel. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
2012;33(3):268–275
 
104.  
Hardwick M, Walsh T, Cotton M. Fabric 
challenge assays: new standards for 
the evaluation of the performance 
of textiles treated with antimicrobial 
agents. 2013. Available at: http:// 
vestagen. 
com/ 
wp- 
content/ 
uploads/ 
2014/ 
12/ 
Fabric- 
Challenge- 
Assays- 
new- 
standards- 
for- 
the- 
evaluation- 
of- 
the- 
performance- 
of- 
textiles- 
treated- 
with- 
antimicrobial- 
agents_ 
PAPER. 
pdf. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
 
105.  
Facilities Guidelines Institute. 2014 FGI 
Guidelines for Design and Construction 
of Hospitals and Outpatient Facilities. 
Chicago, IL: American Hospital 
Association; 2014
 
106.  
Wright IM, Orr H, Porter C. Stethoscope 
contamination in the neonatal 
intensive care unit. J Hosp Infect. 
1995;29(1):65–68
 
107.  
Blydt-Hansen T, Subbarao K, Quennec 
P, McDonald J. Recovery of respiratory 
syncytial virus from stethoscopes 
by conventional viral culture and 
polymerase chain reaction. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J. 1999;18(2):164–165
 
108.  
Zaghi J, Zhou J, Graham DA, Potter-
Bynoe G, Sandora TJ. Improving 
stethoscope disinfection at a 
children’s hospital. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol. 2013;34(11):1189–1193
 
109.  
Brady RR, Verran J, Damani NN, Gibb 
AP. Review of mobile communication 
devices as potential reservoirs of 
nosocomial pathogens. J Hosp Infect. 
2009;71(4):295–300
 
110.  
Keene JH. Regulated medical 
waste. In: Abrutyn E, Goldmann DA, 
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
22
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 Scheckler WE, eds. Saunders Infection 
Control Reference Service. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co; 
2001:859–882
 
111.  
Dowell SF, Marcy SM, Phillips WR, 
Gerber MA, Schwartz B. Principles of 
judicious use of antimicrobial agents 
for pediatric upper respiratory tract 
infections. Pediatrics. 1998;101(suppl 
1):163–165
 
112.  
Dowell SF, Marcy SM, Phillips WR, 
Gerber MA, Schwartz B. Otitis 
media—principles of judicious use 
of antimicrobial agents. Pediatrics. 
1998;101(suppl 1):165–171
 
113.  
Schwartz B, Marcy SM, Phillips WR, 
Gerber MA, Dowell SF. Pharyngitis—
principles of judicious use of 
antimicrobial agents. Pediatrics. 
1998;101(suppl 1):171–174
 
114.  
Wald ER, Applegate KE, Bordley C, et al;  
American Academy of Pediatrics. 
Clinical practice guideline for the 
diagnosis and management of acute 
bacterial sinusitis in children aged 1 
to 18 years. Pediatrics. 2013;132(1). 
Available at: www. 
pediatrics. 
org/ 
cgi/ 
content/ 
full/ 
132/ 
1/ 
e262
 
115.  
O’Brien KL, Dowell SF, Schwartz B, 
Marcy SM, Phillips WR, Gerber MA. 
Cough illness/bronchitis—principles 
of judicious use of antimicrobial 
agents. Pediatrics. 1998;101(suppl 
1):178–181
 
116.  
Rosenstein N, Phillips WR, Gerber MA, 
Marcy SM, Schwartz B, Dowell SF. The 
common cold—principles of judicious 
use of antimicrobial agents. Pediatrics. 
1998;101(suppl 1):181–184
 
117.  
Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree 
T, et al. The diagnosis and management 
of acute otitis media [published 
correction appears in Pediatrics. 
2014;133(2):346]. Pediatrics. 
2013;131(3). Available at: http:// 
pediatrics. 
aappublications. 
org/ 
content/ 
131/ 
3/ 
e964
 
118.  
Hersh AL, Jackson MA, Hicks LA; 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 
Principles of judicious antibiotic 
prescribing for upper respiratory tract 
infections in pediatrics. Pediatrics. 
2013;132(6):1146–1154
 
119.  
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). Interim guidelines 
for prevention and control of 
Staphylococcal infection associated 
with reduced susceptibility to 
vancomycin. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 1997;46(27):626–628, 635
 
120.  
Hospital Infection Control Practices 
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). 
Recommendations for preventing 
the spread of vancomycin resistance 
[published correction appears 
in Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 
1995;16(9):498]. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol. 1995;16(2):105–113
 
121.  
Siegal JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, 
Chiarello L, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, The Healthcare 
Infection Control Practices Advisory 
Committee. Management of multidrug-
resistant organisms in healthcare 
settings, 2006. Available at: https:// 
www. 
cdc. 
gov/ 
infectioncontrol/ 
pdf/ 
guidelines/ 
mdro- 
guidelines. 
pdf. 
Accessed March 6, 2017
PEDIATRICS Volume 140, number 5, November 2017
23
Rathore et al
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric 
Ambulatory Settings
2017
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2857
5
Pediatrics
ROUGH GALLEY PROOF
November 2017
140
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2017-2857 originally published online October 23, 2017; 
2017;140;
Pediatrics 
DISEASES
Mobeen H. Rathore, Mary Anne Jackson and COMMITTEE ON INFECTIOUS
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric Ambulatory Settings
Services
Updated Information &
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/140/5/e20172857
including high resolution figures, can be found at: 
References
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/140/5/e20172857#BIBL
This article cites 80 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at: 
Subspecialty Collections
b
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/infectious_diseases_su
Infectious Disease
ous_diseases
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/committee_on_infecti
Committee on Infectious Diseases
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/current_policy
Current Policy
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
Permissions & Licensing
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/Permissions.xhtml
in its entirety can be found online at: 
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures, tables) or
Reprints
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml
Information about ordering reprints can be found online: 
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2017-2857 originally published online October 23, 2017; 
2017;140;
Pediatrics 
DISEASES
Mobeen H. Rathore, Mary Anne Jackson and COMMITTEE ON INFECTIOUS
Infection Prevention and Control in Pediatric Ambulatory Settings
 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/140/5/e20172857
located on the World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
1073-0397. 
ISSN:
60007. Copyright © 2017 by the American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved. Print 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, 141 Northwest Point Boulevard, Elk Grove Village, Illinois,
has been published continuously since 1948. Pediatrics is owned, published, and trademarked by 
Pediatrics is the official journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. A monthly publication, it
 by guest on June 3, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
