 The tracks of my years: Personal significance contributes
to the reminiscence bump
Clare J. Rathbone1 & Akira R. O’Connor2 & Chris J. A. Moulin3
Published online: 26 August 2016
# Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2016
Abstract Two studies investigated the role of the self in the
reminiscence bump (heightened retrieval for events from
young adulthood). Participants over the age of 40 years were
presented with top-grossing films and songs, and were asked
to select the five that were most personally significant. Study 1
produced reminiscence bumps for personally significant
songs, when measured by both participants’ age at release
(AaR) and age when songs were reported as most important
(AaI). This effect was not shown for films. In Study 2, partic-
ipants again selected their personally significant songs but
also rated all songs for whether they were known, remem-
bered (e.g., associated with an episodic memory), or not
known. Personally significant songs were significantly more
likely to be associated with episodic memories, compared to
personally non-significant songs. Again, only personally sig-
nificant songs formed a reminiscence bump. Findings under-
line a critical role of personal significance in the reminiscence
bump, which we argue is consistent with the formation of
identity in this lifetime period.
Keywords Autobiographical memory . Self . Identity .
Episodic memory . Remember/Know
What influences the things we remember in later life, and from
which time period do we remember best? A predominant con-
temporary view is that our preferences and memories are
accessed via a cognitive structure which can be described as
the self (Conway, 2005). There are several illustrations of the
influence of self in memory (such as the self-reference effect;
Rogers, Kuiper & Kirker, 1977) but one interesting extension
of the idea that the self is a cognitive structure is that we may
see meaningful patterns in the distribution of preferences for
films and songs (for example) across the lifespan. That is, our
preferences are determined by the things we are exposed to at
a critical time in our personal development: the reminiscence
bump.
The reminiscence bump is a robust phenomenon whereby
events and information encountered in late adolescence and
early adulthood tend to be remembered better than those from
any other period in life (Rubin, Rahaal, & Poon, 1998; Rubin,
Wetzler, & Nebes, 1986). The reminiscence bump is formed
between the ages of 15 and 30 years, and has been demon-
strated across a range of domains, including episodic autobio-
graphical memory (Rubin, Wetzler, & Nebes, 1986), semantic
autobiographical memory (Rybash & Monaghan, 1999), pub-
lic events (Janssen, Murre, & Meeter, 2008; Koppel, 2013),
and flashbulb memories (Denver, Lane, & Cherry, 2010), as
well as in the distributions of favorite films, books, and songs
(e.g., Holbrook & Schindler, 1989; 1996; Janssen, Chessa, &
Murre, 2007; Schulkind et al., 1999; Sehulster, 1996; Smith,
1994). Self-based theories of the reminiscence bump propose
that this period of the lifespan is remembered best because
these years are central to the formation of an enduring adult
identity, and preferential accessibility of this time-period pro-
motes a stable sense of self later in life (e.g., Conway, 2005;
Fitzgerald, 1988; Rathbone, Moulin, & Conway, 2008).
Several different, non-self explanations for the reminis-
cence bump have also been proposed (for a detailed review,
* Clare J. Rathbone
crathbone@brookes.ac.uk
1
Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University, Gipsy Lane,
Oxford OX3 0BP, UK
2
School of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of St Andrews,
St Andrews, UK
3
LPNC, CNRS UMR 5015, Université Grenoble Alpes,
Grenoble, France
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
DOI 10.3758/s13421-016-0647-2
 see Rubin, Rahhal, & Poon, 1998). One possibility is that
events from this time are remembered best due to a peak in
neurobiological processes (e.g., a biological account). This
account is supported by studies that have shown similar rem-
iniscence bump patterns across participants from a range of
different cultures and nationalities (Conway et al., 2005). The
novelty account proposes that this period of life typically in-
volves many new events and first-time experiences (e.g., first
job, first relationship, moving away from home) and so mem-
ories from this time are encoded at a deeper level (e.g.,
Robinson, 1992). An alternative explanation is that the bump
reflects typically occurring events. The life script hypothesis
(Berntsen & Rubin, 2004) is supported by studies showing
that reminiscence bump memories tend to consist of positive
rather than negative events (Rubin & Berntsen, 2003) and that
people structure their life stories around culturally normative
events from the bump period such as graduation and weddings
(Berntsen & Rubin, 2004).
These different accounts are not necessarily mutually ex-
clusive (Rubin et al., 1998; Janssen, Rubin, & Conway, 2012).
Recent studies have sought to pinpoint specific mechanisms in
the formation of the reminiscence bump. For example,
Janssen, Rubin, and St. Jacques (2011) investigated partici-
pants’ ratings of re-living and vividness and found that
memories from the reminiscence bump period did not differ
in these features compared to memories from other periods in
the lifespan. They suggested that such phenomenological
features are not responsible for the formation of the
reminiscence bump. Such a finding does not fall in favor of
any one of the proposed accounts above. More recently,
Koppel and Berntsen (2015) have shown that according to
the types of cues used to generate autobiographical memories
and the retrieval processes used, there are differences in the
reminiscence bumps produced. Rubin (2015, p.87) states
BSuch differences in the location of the peak cannot be ex-
plained purely in terms of encoding, which is one class of
explanation we have suggested (Rubin et al., 1986, 1998)
and the main theoretical mechanism in many other theories
especially those that view adolescence and early adulthood as
times of identity formation or increased cognitive ability.^
Our previous work (Rathbone, Moulin, & Conway, 2008)
has shown that memories that are particularly self-defining
(cued by participant-generated self-images) tend to cluster
around periods of identity formation. Whilst this provides
some support for the idea that periods of life that involve
change in the self are associated with more accessible auto-
biographical memories (the core of the self account of the
reminiscence bump), there was no Bnon-self^ control condi-
tion in our study. It therefore seems to us that to test the self
account of the reminiscence bump, one needs to compare the
distributions of self-relevant compared to non-self-relevant
material. We should expect that self-relevant (i.e., personally
significant) materials should show a reminiscence bump,
whereas non-self-relevant materials should not. For instance,
for the biological account to hold, we should expect all infor-
mation encoded in the reminiscence period to be better
retained, regardless of how self-relevant it was.
Thus, the present two studies were designed to investigate
the relationship between the self and the reminiscence bump,
by exploring the distributions of personally significant and
personally non-significant films and songs. At a broader level,
the self (or identity) is conceptualized as a multifaceted and
complex set of self-related processes and schema (e.g.,
Conway, 2005; Markus, 1977; McAdams, 2003; Power,
2007). The study of the self has roots in personality theory,
as well as aspects of social, clinical, and cognitive psychology.
Our specific interest is in the role that self-related processes
may play in shaping our understanding of memory (e.g.,
Conway, 2005). Thus, in this paper we have operationalized
the self by asking participants to consider the personal signif-
icance of particular songs and films and examined the
distributions of these items across the lifespan. Of relevance,
Janssen and Murre (2008) previously examined ratings of
importance (which we assume measure personal significance)
for autobiographical memories from across the lifespan. They
found reminiscence bumps for unimportant as well as impor-
tant events, suggesting that the reminiscence bump is not nec-
essarily shaped by distributions of personally significant
events. A number of previous studies have found reminis-
cence bumps in the lifespan distributions of favorite songs
and films (e.g., Holbrook & Schindler, 1989; 1996; Janssen,
Chessa, & Murre, 2007; Schulkind et al., 1999; Sehulster,
1996; Smith, 1994). Recent work by Krumhansl and
Zupnick (2013) even revealed the presence of Bcascading^
reminiscence bumps for music that was popular during partic-
ipants’ parents’ early adulthood. In line with the self function
of the reminiscence bump, several researchers have proposed
that our musical preferences and music-related memories bol-
ster a sense of personal identity (Lonsdale & North, 2009;
Rentfrow & Gosling, 2003, 2006; Sloboda & O’Neill, 2001;
Smith 1994). Previous studies have also demonstrated the
links between emotional memories and specific items of mu-
sic (e.g., Baumgartner, 1992; Janata, Tomic, & Rakowski,
2007; Schulkind, Hennis, & Rubin, 1999; Sloboda &
O’Neill, 2001), and show that people can readily identify par-
ticular films that Bdefine their era^ (Sehulster, 1996).
Studies that examine lifespan distributions of remem-
bered films and songs typically take one of two methodo-
logical approaches. In the first approach (what we will call
Bself-generated cue studies^), participants are asked to
generate their own personally significant films or songs,
and are then asked to rate them for details such as age when
encountered, number of times encountered, and details of
the memories evoked, such as vividness and imagery spec-
ificity (e.g., Baumgartner, 1992; Janssen et al., 2007;
Sehulster, 1996). For example, Baumgartner (1992) asked
138
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
 participants to give examples of specific pieces of music
that were associated with episodic autobiographical mem-
ories. The memories generated were high in self-relevance,
typically associated with past or present boy/girlfriends, or
events involving family and friends. Furthermore, these
memories tended to be rated as highly emotional and con-
taining vivid imagery, and there was a strong bias towards
remembering positive events. Using similar self-generated
cues, Sehulster (1996) asked participants to list five or
more favorite films, and five or more era-defining films,
and date the age at which they first saw each film generat-
ed. In addition, participants gave a range of ages that they
felt Bdefined their era.^ Participants’ era-defining films
tended to have been watched during their early 20s (mean
age 21.85 years) and their favorite films during their late
20s (mean age 27.6 years) – both within the boundaries of
the reminiscence bump range of 10 to 30 years (Rubin,
Wetzler, & Nebes, 1986). These results indicate that people
recall encountering favorite films during the reminiscence
bump period, but they cannot speak to the issue of whether
this reflects a self-related process. To argue that high ac-
cessibility in memory reflects high self-relevance is circu-
lar. Thus, in order to examine the effects of the self, one
needs to compare items with high self-relevance with items
of low self-relevance. This is better suited to tasks based on
recognition, rather than recall, paradigms.
An alternative methodological approach is based on
experimenter-generated cues, which is akin to a recognition
paradigm. In these studies, ratings are collected for songs or
films that have been pre-selected by the experimenter (e.g.,
Bartlett & Snelus, 1980; Holbrook & Schindler, 1989, 1996;
Janata et al., 2007; Schulkind et al., 1999). The advantage of
using a pre-selected list is that one can control for factors such
as year of release and popularity. For example, Janata, Tomic,
and Rakowski (2007) used extracts of songs selected from the
Billboard pop and R&B charts that were released during par-
ticipants’ childhood years, and examined whether memories
elicited were event-specific (e.g., episodic) or general (e.g.,
semantic) in nature. Results showed that both episodic and
semantic memories were generated by music from
adolescence and childhood. Similarly, Janssen, Rubin, and
Conway (2012) designed an elegant experiment that demon-
strated a reminiscence bump in the distribution of participants’
favorite football players. Janssen and colleagues presented
participants with a list of the 190 best football players in the
world, and asked them to select the five they considered to be
the best of all time. The players were all associated with a
concrete date (the mid-point of their career), much like the
release date of a film or song. When these footballer dates
(for the five selected players) were plotted relative to the age
of the participants they showed a clear reminiscence bump.
Thus, football players who were at the mid-point of their ca-
reer when participants were adolescents tended to be those
who were considered the best of all time; the age at which
you encountered the player determined your preference.
In designing the present study we took advantage of the
fact that reminiscence bumps are produced even when
reporting preferences and not merely for retrieval from mem-
ory (e.g., Janssen et al., 2012; Janata et al., 2007; Schulkind
et al., 1999). Use of experimenter-selected cues overcomes the
circularity raised above. By adopting a recognition paradigm
with experimenter-generated cues, research has shown that
reminiscence bumps in distributions of favorite items are not
easily explained merely by raised accessibility; something else
causes participants to preferentially select items from young
adulthood (e.g., Sehuslter, 1996).
Our aim then, was to compare the reminiscence bumps of
items that were and were not rated as personally significant. If
the reminiscence bump is driven by personal significance, we
should see it for items rated as personally significant, but not
for the other items. To do this, we examined the distributions
of selected films and songs based on their release dates. Most
reminiscence bump studies are based on participant-generated
memory dates (i.e., participants report their age at the recalled
event). However, we directly compared the temporal distribu-
tions of age at release (AaR: participant age in the year of
release for films and songs – like the mid-point of the players’
career, discussed above) and age at importance (AaI: the
participant-generated age when a particular film or song was
most personally significant). The use of these objective (AaR)
dates is critical for our main aim: we cannot measure the AaI
for a song or film that someone has forgotten, and so we
cannot plot a reminiscence bump. The use of objective release
(AaR) dates as compared to participant-generated dates was
one of the main issues we address in Study 1. It addressed this
question by presenting participants with an experimenter-
generated list of the top hit songs and Best Picture Oscar
winning films from the last 55 years, and asking them to select
those that were most personally significant. We tested whether
such release dates still produce the reminiscence bump for
films and songs (thereby extending Janssen et al.’s [2012]
method for the mid-points of footballers’ careers) chosen for
their personal significance. We also compared the distribu-
tions of AaR dates for songs and films that were and were
not selected as personally significant. In Study 2, this para-
digm was developed further to examine the specific memory
processes that might underlie these choices. We were interest-
ed in whether the reminiscence bump effect was driven by
associations between particular songs and rich, event-
specific episodic memories, by using the widely used
remember/know (R/K) paradigm. The R/K paradigm assesses
recollective experience: the subjective state that characterizes
episodic Bremembering^ as opposed to semantic Bknowing^
(Tulving, 1985). Previous studies using this task have sug-
gested that autobiographically significant famous names
may be more likely to be associated with recollective
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
139
 experience (i.e., rated as remembered rather than known) com-
pared to less autobiographically significant famous names
(Westmacott et al., 2003). Thus, Study 2 adopted the R/K
paradigm to enable a more detailed exploration of the relation-
ship between recollective experience and personal significance.
Study 1
The first aim of Study 1 was to compare the distributions of
AaR dates for personally significant songs and films, with the
AaI – dates when these significant songs and films were most
important to the participant. Our prediction was that both dis-
tributions would form reminiscence bumps, as previous stud-
ies have shown bump effects for non-participant generated
dates (e.g., Janssen et al., 2012) and participant-generated
dates (e.g., Sehulster, 1996). To our knowledge this study is
the first to compare these two types of distribution directly.
More importantly, establishing whether AaR dates formed
reminiscence bumps in this task laid the foundations for us
to investigate our second, more novel aim: to examine wheth-
er personally significant films and songs would form more
pronounced reminiscence bumps than non-selected
(personally non-significant) items. We assessed this by plot-
ting the distributions of AaR dates for selected compared to
non-selected films and songs. We predicted that personally
significant films and songs would show a reminiscence bump,
in contrast to personally non-significant films and songs,
which would show a flatter distribution.
Method
Participants The online questionnaire was active between
2007 and 2010, and was accessed 2979 times.1 Participants
were only included in the analysis if they had complied with
instructions and provided their date of birth and selected five
films, five songs, and given AaI for each selected song and
film. This left a group of 1,538. As standard for reminiscence
bump research we excluded participants aged under 40 years
in order to examine lifespan distributions of past events (e.g.,
Elnick, Margrett, Fitzgerald, & Labouvie-Vief, 1999;
Rathbone et al., 2008). This left a sample of 172 participants
(mean age = 49.97 years, SD = 8.92, range 40–80).
Materials and procedure Participants were presented with a
pseudo-randomized list of the 56 movie titles that won an
Oscar for Best Picture at the Academy Awards each year from
1950 to 2005 inclusive. Their instructions were to select the
five films that Byou most identify with, e.g., those you find
most personally important, and that you might feel played a
significant part in your life.^ They were then presented with a
pseudo-randomized list of the song title and artist for the 56
most successful singles (measured by number of weeks at
number one) from the UK music charts for each year from
1950 to 2005 inclusive, and asked to choose their five most
personally significant using the same instruction wording as
for films. Participants were then re-presented with their five
film choices, and asked to report the approximate calendar
year when they most vividly remember watching that film.
They were told that if they had seen a particular film many
times, they should write down the year in which they felt the
film was most significant to them personally. After they had
generated these five AaI dates, they were asked to repeat the
process for their five selected songs. Finally, participants were
asked for their own year of birth and thanked for their
participation.
Results and discussion
All participants selected five films and five songs and
generated AaI dates for each selection, thus the results
below are based on data for 860 song-related and 860
film-related data points. For each film/song selected, we
were able to analyze by AaI (e.g., the year that the
film/song was personally significant to the participant)
or by AaR. Both AaR and AaI dates were reformulated
relative to the participants’ ages. For example, if a partic-
ipant born in 1960 selected BGladiator^ (released in 2000)
as one of their significant films, and generated the year
2004 as their AaI date, the AaI would be reformulated as
44 (AaI date minus year of birth, e.g., 2004 – 1960) and
the AaR date would be reformulated as 40 (release date
minus year of birth, e.g., 2000 – 1960). Using these
reformulated dates, we were able to plot the distributions
of both AaR and AaI according to participant age.
Figure 1 shows these frequency distributions for personally
significant films. The data plotted are normalized propor-
tions. To ensure the reminiscence bump was not an
artefact of age, the frequency data for each year were
normalized according to the age of the sample, since
someone born in 1950 would not be able to have a mem-
ory for seeing a film from before 1950, for instance.
Normalization was carried out by identifying the possible
range for each participant and restricting the frequency of
values for each year accordingly: if only ten people could
contribute data about songs from 15 years before their
birth, the denominator for the proportion became 10, for
instance.
There is no clear reminiscence bump for films, in either
AaI or AaR distributions. Given the mean age of the sam-
ple, 50 years old, these results look more like a recency
effect; people tend to select films as personally significant
1 Thanks to the following sites for hosting a link to the questionnaire:
www.socialpsychology.org/expts.htm and http://psych.hanover.
edu/research/exponnet.html
140
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
 that were released when the participant was between 35
and 45 years old. For AaI there is a suggestion that the
maximal frequency is earlier, and within the reminiscence
bump period (age 25–19 years), but the data to not pro-
duce a very defined reminiscence bump. The same distri-
butions were plotted for frequencies of personally signif-
icant songs (see Fig. 2). The song distributions show a
more pronounced reminiscence bump. For both AaR and
AaI, the highest frequency of personally significant songs
were encountered (or released) in participants’ teenage
years. Also, in contrast to the data for films, there was
less distance between the peak dates of AaI and AaR for
personally significant songs. Whilst the peak in distribu-
tions for films’ AaI generally came a decade or more after
the release date, for songs the AaI data were distributed in
a more similar pattern to AaR. This suggests that songs
became personally significant for participants at, or soon
after, the time of their release. We analyze this possibility
in an ANOVA, below.
Having established that the distribution of release dates
for personally significant songs form a reminiscence bump,
we were able to compare the distributions of AaR dates for
personally significant (i.e., selected) items compared to
personally non-significant (i.e., unselected) items.
Figure 3 shows this data for films (3A; upper panel) and
songs (3B; lower panel).
For Figs. 3 and 5, 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) were
estimated using Monte-Carlo case-resampling bootstrapping
procedures (see Mooney & Duval, 1993). Participants’ com-
plete datasets were sampled with replacement until the
Fig. 1 Age at which personally significant films were released (AaR) and dated as personally significant (AaI) – Study 1. The y-axis shows age-
normalized proportions
Fig. 2 Age at which personally significant songs were released (AaR) and dated as personally significant (AaI) – Study 1. The y-axis shows
age-normalized proportions
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
141
 number of participants in the original experiment was reached.
This was repeated for 10,000 simulated experiments, and the
lower and upper CIs were estimated based on the distributions
of items falling in each of the 5-year bins plotted in the figures.
The data show more pronounced reminiscence bumps for per-
sonally significant (compared to personally non-significant)
films and songs. These results, on which we expand in
Study 2, suggest that personal significance plays an important
role in shaping the reminiscence bump.
To confirm statistically the pattern shown in Figs. 1, 2 and
3, we examined the temporal distribution using within-subject
ANOVAs. In this study, participants selected five songs or
films. For each participant we thus calculated the mean and
median ages for these five selections. A 2 (film vs. song) x 2
(AaR vs. AaI) repeated measures ANOVA on the mean ages
of participants showed a main effect of media type (F[1,171] =
46.79, p < .001, partial η2 = .21), with the songs (M = 23.58)
having been from a period approximately 4 years before the
films (M = 27.56). There was also a main effect of age type,
with the AaR (M = 21.56) ages being significantly earlier than
the AaI ages (M = 29.54) (F[1,171] = 283.89, p < .001, partial
η2 = .62). There was also a significant interaction (F[1,171] =
16.76, p < .001, partial η2 = .09). The means show that the
temporal distance between the two ages (AaR and AaI) was
greater for the films than for the songs. A parallel analysis was
carried out but using the median of the five ages given, which
gave exactly the same pattern: A main effect of media type
(F[1,171] = 39.35, p < .001, partial η2 = .19), a main effect of
age type (F[1,171] = 198.07, p < .001, partial η2 = .54) and a
significant interaction (F[1,171] = 35.43, p < .001, partial η2 =
.10). Again the means of the participants’ medians indicated
that songs were encountered earlier than films, that AaI was
later than AaR, and that there was a larger difference between
AaI and AaR for films than for songs. In short, the within-
subject analyses confirm that there exist systematic differ-
ences between AaI and AaR values and songs and films,
Fig. 3 Lifespan distribution of AaR dates for personally significant (i.e.,
selected) and personally non-significant (i.e., non-selected) films (upper
panel; A) and songs (lower panel; B) – Study 1. Bounded areas (gray
lines) around central lines represent bootstrapped 95 % CIs. Non-
overlapping areas can be considered as significantly different
142
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
 and that a typical age to encounter personally significant songs
and films is in one’s 20s.
Study 1 showed that lifespan distributions of personally
significant songs produce reminiscence bumps regardless of
whether data is plotted as participant-generated AaI memory
dates or objective AaR dates. This result, in line with our
predictions, is further support for the idea that the reminis-
cence bump itself is not an artefact of other more general
memory factors; a bump is produced even when simply plot-
ting the release dates of personally significant songs.
In support of our second prediction, the figures show that
items selected as personally significant demonstrated a more
pronounced reminiscence bump than non-selected items.
However, we did not know how many of the songs and films
that were not selected as personally significant were actually
known to each participant. It is thus problematic to compare
directly personally significant items with non-selected items.
To allow for this comparison in Study 2, we asked all partic-
ipants to rate each item for whether it was known, remem-
bered (e.g., associated with an episodic event) or not known.
This allowed us to compare personally significant items with
those that were known to the participant but not rated as per-
sonally significant. It also allowed us to examine the
recollective experience ratings for personally significant com-
pared to personally non-significant items.
There were a number of unexpected differences between
distributions of films and songs. First, both the AaR and AaI
data show less pronounced bumps for films compared to
songs. This finding contrasts with previous work showing
clear reminiscence bumps for favorite films (e.g., Janssen,
Chessa, & Murre; 2007; Sehulster, 1996). Second, the peak
for AaI lags several years behind the peak for AaR – a pattern
that was more marked for films than songs (shown graphically,
but also in the means in Table 1). Of course, the fact that
participants could not hear songs or watch films released be-
fore their birth until after their own birth goes some way to
explaining this lag, but as this would apply to both songs and
films it is interesting that we found a greater lag for films
compared to songs. People seem to identify with films such
that their memories of first watching these films tend to peak
after their release. Thus it is not simply a case of encoding
whatever films are released during young adulthood as being
self-defining and personally significant – there is a difference
between distributions of AaI and AaR data.
The difference between AaI and AaR for films and songs is
possibly related to the ways we encounter films and pieces of
music (cf. Janssen et al., 2007). A Number 1 hit song typically
involves frequent broadcasts which are clustered during the
period that the song features in the charts. As music can be a
background activity, it is understandable that certain songs
will become associated with events that unfolded during the
period of that song’s release and airing (e.g., Baumgartner,
1992). Films are encountered in a different manner, with less
repetition, and may be watched on DVD or television several
years after release. This greater lag between film release and
viewing, compared to between song release and listening, may
explain the greater difference between AaR and AaI found for
films compared to songs. As such, the release date of a film is
not an ideal objective measure to be compared to a subjective
AaI measure, as it may be irrelevant if the participant did not
see the film until television release. However, the benefit of
examining AaR dates is that one can compare distributions of
items that are and are not recognized by participants in a way
that would be impossible for standard free-recall memory
paradigms.
The fact that we find different distributions using different
cueing methods reflects recent developments in the reminis-
cence bump literature. Koppel and Berntsen’s (2015) review
compared temporal peaks for memory distributions cued by
most important memories and word-cued memories. They
found that the shape and dates of the reminiscence bump were
affected by the type of memory task employed, for example,
the bump is earlier for word-cued memories than for important
memories. The comparison of personally important and per-
sonally less important songs and films in the present study is,
in some ways, similar to the comparison of personally impor-
tant and word-cued (i.e., personally less important) memories
in the studies reviewed by Koppel and Berntsen. It is interest-
ing then, that the word-cued memory studies reviewed by
Koppel and Berntsen consistently produce a reminiscence
bump, while the equivalent less personally significant items
in the present study did not. One explanation for this differ-
ence is the nature of the cues and dating process used in the
present study. Whilst word-cued studies involve the free recall
of participant-dated memories, the present study used a recog-
nition paradigm and, instead of participant dating, used age at
song/film release (AaR) to plot temporal distributions. Thus,
the cognitive processes that may underlie the organization of
memories cued by words are less likely to be evident when
examining the distributions of release dates for items that were
personally non-significant (i.e., not selected) in the present
study. Moreover, the Koppel and Bernsten conclusion is
Table 1
Means (and standard deviations) for the mean and median age
at release (AaR) and age at importance (AaI) for the participants’ selected
films and songs, Studies 1 and 2
Mean age (y)
Median age (y)
AaR
AaI
AaR
AaI
Study 1
Films
22.87 (9.91)
32.25 (9.75)
23.17 (11.61)
33.12 (11.63)
Songs
20.25 (9.14)
26.90 (9.50)
20.19 (10.37)
26.23 (11.07)
Study 2
Songs
17.11 (7.31)
22.36 (6.51)
17.02 (8.52)
21.65 (7.63)
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
143
 derived from comparisons across studies using different meth-
odologies rather than the experimental manipulation of con-
trolled stimuli within subjects, as we report here. Here we
show that the bump is clearly demonstrated (both in AaR
and AaI) when you ask participants for their most significant
songs, but we do not see it so clearly when plotting partici-
pants’ most significant films.
Study 2
In Study 1 participants generated a year in which each of their
selected films and songs were of most personal significance.
Study 2 aimed to explore the memory mechanisms that un-
derlie this dating process. The key questions were: (1) whether
only songs rated as personally significant would show a rem-
iniscence bump, in contrast to recognized songs that were not
rated as personally significant; (2) whether feelings of person-
al significance were associated with episodic re-experiencing
(e.g., a Proustian moment of recollection, in which a song
triggers a feeling of the self in the past, e.g., Wheeler et al.,
1997; Tulving, 1985). To address these questions we adopted
a Remember/Know (RK) paradigm (e.g., Gardiner, 1988;
Gardiner, Ramponi, & Richardson-Klavehn, 1998; 2002).
One might consider that certain films or songs become
personally significant by virtue of their association with par-
ticularly salient autobiographical memories. The idea that
some songs and films might hold particular Bautobiographical
significance^ was proposed by Westmacott and Moscovitch
(2003; Westmacott et al., 2003). They showed that famous
names rated as high in autobiographical significance were
remembered better, and responded to faster, compared to
those rated as low in autobiographical significance.
Famous names were assigned ratings of high or low auto-
biographical significance based on participants’ R
(remember) and K (know) responses using an R/K task
(e.g., Gardiner et al., 2002). In their study, Westmacott
et al. presented participants with famous names and, for
each name, asked them to give an R response if they could
recall a specific event linked with that name, and a K re-
sponse if the name was familiar but not associated with any
specific events in the participant’s life. Westmacott et al.
proposed that the names associated with R responses were
likely to be higher in autobiographical significance as they
evoked personal memories, and suggested that autobio-
graphical significance helped to organize long term mem-
ory for both semantic and episodic information. This con-
ceptualization of autobiographical significance informed
the development of the present studies. By Westmacott
et al.’s view it is possible that the personal significance
ratings in Study 1 are achieved by the participant consid-
ering access to autobiographical memories for the given
film or song, that is, the reminiscence bump is due to the
recollection of items on our list.
However, previous work has shown that the reminiscence
bump consists of memories for both episodic and semantic
information. Rybash and Monaghan (1999) asked participants
to date AMs generated using a standard cue-word task, and
then to rate whether the memories were known (K) or remem-
bered (R). When memories were plotted across the lifespan,
results showed that reminiscence bumps were present for both
R and K memories, showing that both semantic and episodic
information is preferentially accessible from the reminiscence
bump period.
Finally, by asking participants to generate R/K ratings in
Study 2, we were able to examine the memory status of items
that were not selected as personally significant. In Study 1, we
did not know whether the selection of personally significant
items was driven by a lack of knowledge of songs from out-
side of the reminiscence bump period. If people only recog-
nize music from young adulthood, we would find a reminis-
cence bump regardless of any effects of personal significance.
Study 2 therefore enabled us to establish whether participants
had knowledge of songs released in periods beyond the rem-
iniscence bump, ruling out the possibility that the personal
significance effect was driven by selective recognition for
items from young adulthood.
As songs showed the clearest reminiscence bump pattern in
Study 1, we opted to only use the list of 56 song titles for
Study 2. First, in line with self-based accounts of the reminis-
cence bump (e.g., Fitzgerald, 1988; Conway & Haque, 1999;
Rathbone et al., 2008) and in replication of Study 1, we pre-
dicted that the reminiscence bump would be more pronounced
for personally significant songs compared to those not select-
ed as personally significant. Second, following the work of
Westmacott and Moscovitch (2003), we predicted that songs
selected as personally significant would be more likely to be
rated as associated with specific episodic events (e.g., rated
‘R’). Third, we investigated the distributions of personally
significant songs associated with R compared to K memories.
Previous studies based on recollection paradigms have shown
similar temporal distributions for semantic and episodic auto-
biographical memories (e.g., Rathbone, Moulin, & Conway,
2009; Rybash & Monaghan, 1999). For the first time here, we
explored the lifespan distributions of personally significant
songs assigned R and K ratings.
Method
Participants The online questionnaire was active between
2008 and 2010, and was accessed 2,733 times. As in Study
1, we only included data from participants who completed the
questionnaire and were aged 40 years or above. The sample
comprized 151 participants (30 male) aged 40–65 years (mean
age 46.98, SD = 5.73).
144
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
 Materials and procedure Study 2 had two sections. The first
consisted of a replication of Study 1, in which participants had
to select their five most personally significant songs from a list
and then generate dates of personal significance (i.e., AaI).
The song list was identical to that used in Study 1; however,
in order to reduce questionnaire length, participants saw one
of two versions of the task, each only listing 28 of the 56 song
titles (Version 1 consisted of all even year song titles, e.g.,
1950, 1952; whilst Version 2 used odd year song titles). As
in Study 1, all song titles were presented pseudo-randomly.
Participants were then asked for year of birth and gender. In
section 2, participants were told that this part of the study was
about two different ways of thinking about memory: remem-
bering and knowing. They were re-presented with the 28 song
titles shown in section 1 (including the five they had rated as
personally significant) and asked to make an R/K judgment
for each song. Participants were instructed to select
Remember if Byou can re-experience a particular memory in
which you watched, listened to, or heard about this song, or if
reading about the title of this song triggers some other specific
personal memory^; Know if Byou know of this song but can-
not recall a specific memory involving this song^; or N if Byou
do not recognize this song title at all.^ Instructions were based
on Westmacott and Moscovitch (2003), with the word ‘epi-
sode’ replaced with ‘memory’. The order of sections 1 and 2
were counterbalanced, so that half of the participants complet-
ed the R/K task (e.g., section 2) first, and half completed it
second.
Results and discussion
Every participant selected five personally significant songs
and generated dates of personal significance for each. This
totalled 755 AaI (ages of personal significance) and 755
AaR (ages at year of song release). As in Study 1, all song
dates were reformulated relative to participants’ ages, thus a
song released in 1990 would be reformulated as 20 for a par-
ticipant born in 1970 (and again, for this graph, the results
were normalized for age). First we replicated the findings in
Study 1 by demonstrating a reminiscence bump in late
childhood/early adulthood for both AaR and AaI for songs
(shown in Fig. 4).
As in Study 1, because all 56 songs were associated with a
release date, we were able to compare the distributions of
personally significant songs (e.g., the five selected by each
participant) with songs that were not selected as personally
significant. Figure 5 shows the lifespan distribution of AaR
dates for personally significant songs compared to those not
selected as personally significant. As the number of songs in
each group was not equal (five personally significant songs
compared with up to 23 personally non-significant songs per
participant), all data were converted into proportions. For a
better-matched comparison, we excluded personally non-
significant songs that had been marked as Bnot known^ from
this dataset. Thus, each participant’s set of personally non-
significant songs reflect the release dates of songs that were
known by the participant (either rated as R or K) but not
selected as personally significant.
A pattern similar to a reminiscence bump is demonstrated
for personally significant song release dates, with a peak in
participants’ early teenage years. This relatively early peak
(between ages 10 and 14 years) is in line with a number of
studies reviewed by Koppel and Berntsen (2015) that show
early bumps, particularly for word-cued memories. A broader
and flatter distribution is shown for songs that were not select-
ed as personally significant, with a peak that extends from
10 years before birth to age 39 years. This key finding, repli-
cating Study 1, suggests that personal significance may play a
role in shaping the reminiscence bump.
As with the previous study, we sought to confirm the pat-
tern of results shown in the aggregate lifespan retrieval curves
using repeated measures ANOVAs on participants’ mean and
median AaIs and AaRs. For the mean ages, there was a sig-
nificant difference between AaI and AaR (F[1,150] = 116.05,
p < .001, partial η2 = .436), with the AaR being significantly
earlier (M = 17.11) than the AaI (M = 22.35). Likewise, the
median values yielded the same significant effect (F[1,150] =
75.19, p < .001, partial η2 = .33). In this study the participants’
ages given were in the late teens and the early 20s.
We were interested in whether participants’ judgments
of recollective experience differed for personally signifi-
cant compared to personally non-significant songs. Each
participant had five personally significant songs and 23
songs that were not selected as personally significant.
All 28 songs were assigned an R, K, or N judgment.
For each participant we calculated the proportion of per-
sonally significant songs that were assigned an R, K, and
N (R and K proportions were calculated from the total of
R and K responses – excluding number of N responses –
whilst N was calculated from the total of R, K, and N
responses). Participants’ proportional scores were then av-
eraged, as shown in Table 2.
Table 2 shows that personally significant songs were asso-
ciated with a far higher proportion of Remember responses
(78 %) than Know responses (22 %). This pattern was re-
versed for personally non-significant songs, where only
35 % of songs were rated as R, and K ratings accounted for
the majority of responses (65 %). Table 2 also shows a very
small proportion of responses (1 %) were N for personally
significant songs, whilst over half of personally non-
significant songs were rated N. The proportional data for R
and K responses for personally significant and personally non-
significant songs were entered into a repeated measures 2
(personal significance) x 2 (judgment type) ANOVA. As pro-
portions of R and K totalled 1, main effects of personal sig-
nificance were not calculated, however, there was a significant
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
145
 main effect of judgment type (F [1,150] = 13.12, p < .0001,
partial η2 = .08) and a highly significant interaction between
judgment type and personal significance (F [1,150] = 203.69,
p < .0001, partial η2 = .58). These results suggest that partic-
ipants were significantly more likely to associate specific ep-
isodic memories with personally significant songs, compared
to personally non-significant songs. Furthermore, because the
design of this study involved counterbalancing the order of
presentation for (a) selection of personally significant songs,
and (b) judgments of recollective experience, this pattern is
not simply a result of order effects.
Finally, we examined the lifespan distribution of both
R and K memories associated with personally significant
songs. Because this set of personally significant songs
demonstrated a pronounced reminiscence bump (e.g.,
Fig. 5) we did not expect to see great differences between
R and K memories, however it was possible that R-rated
memories (which accounted for 78 % of this set of mem-
ories) were responsible for driving the shape of the distri-
bution. To test this, we analyzed all the AaIs for person-
ally significant songs, and grouped them on whether they
were rated R or K. As there were many more R song dates
(n = 568) than K (n = 160), these data were converted into
proportions to allow them to be compared directly (see
Fig. 6).
Figure 6 demonstrates that songs that are associated
with remembered events (R) are distributed in a similar
pattern to songs that are not associated with specific mem-
ories. We also examined the mean and median AaR using
within subjects ANOVAs in order to compare the different
Fig. 4 Age at which personally significant songs were released (AaR) and dated as personally significant (AaI) – Study 2. The y-axis shows age-
normalized proportions
Fig. 5 Lifespan distribution of release dates for personally significant
(i.e., selected) and personally non-significant (i.e., non-selected) songs –
Study 2. Bounded areas (gray lines) around central lines represent
bootstrapped 95 % CIs. Non-overlapping areas can be considered as
significantly different
146
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
 ages for R and K responses for the five significant songs.
As suggested by Fig. 6, there was no difference in the
mean (F < 1) or median (F < 1) ages for R and K values
– the songs which we experienced as R and K did not
have a different distribution across the lifespan.
In Study 2, we examined the relationship between rat-
ings of personal significance and the reminiscence bump.
We replicated the effect in Study 1, showing reminiscence
bumps in the distribution of songs measured by both AaI
and AaR. Furthermore, we showed again that only per-
sonally significant songs formed a reminiscence bump,
with songs that were not personally significant (but still
known to the participant) organized in a flatter distribu-
tion across the lifespan. Results also indicated that per-
sonally significant songs were significantly more likely to
be associated with specific episodic events (e.g., rated as
remembered), compared to songs that were known but not
selected as personally significant. Finally, replicating pre-
vious work by Rybash and Monaghan (1999), we showed
that distributions of personally significant songs rated as
both remembered and known exhibited reminiscence
bumps. These findings lend support to self-based accounts
of the reminiscence bump (e.g., Conway, 2005;
Fitzgerald, 1988; Rathbone et al., 2008) and suggest sev-
eral avenues for future research.
General discussion
In two studies, participants selected and dated their most per-
sonally significant films (Study 1) and songs (Studies 1 and 2).
In Study 2 they also rated songs for whether they were simply
known, associated with a sense of recollective experience, or
not known. In line with our predictions, distributions of per-
sonally significant songs formed reminiscence bumps, with
most significant songs released and recalled in participants’
teenage years and early 20s. In contrast, personally significant
films did not form a reminiscence bump pattern; instead they
showed recency effects. Across both studies we showed that
only personally significant items formed a reminiscence
bump. Finally, Study 2 found that personally significant songs
were more likely to be associated with episodic recollection
compared to personally non-significant songs.
These findings move the field of reminiscence bump re-
search forward in several key ways. We have shown for the
first time that items in memory that are more connected to the
self (in this case, songs rated as high in personal significance)
are organized in a reminiscence bump distribution, in contrast
to items in memory that are recognized but not connected to
the self. This finding supports the idea that the self plays an
important role in the formation of the reminiscence bump
(Conway, 2005; Fitzgerald, 1988; Rathbone et al., 2008).
Fig. 6 Lifespan distribution of AaI for personally significant R and K rated songs – Study 2. Bounded areas (gray lines) around central lines represent
bootstrapped 95 % CIs. Non-overlapping areas can be considered as significantly different
Table 2
Mean proportions (and standard deviations) of R/K/N judgements for personally significant and personally
non-significant songs - Study 2
Remember (R)
Know (K)
Not recognized (N)
Personally significant
0.78 (0.30)
0.22 (0.30)
0.01 (0.04)
Personally non-significant
0.35 (0.28)
0.65 (0.28)
0.54 (0.20)
NB: R and K proportions are calculated from total number of R and K responses, while N proportions are calculated from total number of R, K, and N
responses
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
147
 Furthermore, the highly significant relationship between per-
sonal significance and ratings of recollective experience sug-
gests that increased self-relevance is associated with greater
episodic re-experiencing. Our findings support the work of
Westmacott and Moscovitch (2003; Westmacott et al.,
2003), who suggested that items (in their case, famous people)
can develop heightened significance through their association
with salient episodic memories. The idea that particular songs
can trigger specific memories has been shown in previous
studies (e.g., Baumgartner, 1992; Janata, Tomic, &
Rakowski, 2007; Schulkind, Hennis, & Rubin, 1999;
Sloboda & O’Neill, 2001) and is probably a familiar sensation
for all. Music can be a particularly evocative direct retrieval
cue (Conway, 2005), such that the first few chords of a certain
song can transplant the self back to a previous time and place –
the hallmarks of episodic recollection (Wheeler, Stuss,
&Tulving, 1997). However, the present research is (to our
knowledge) the first to demonstrate that personally significant
songs (compared to other known songs) are far more likely to
be associated with episodic recollection.
At first glance this seems to contradict the work of
Janssen et al. (2011), who suggested that the reminiscence
bump did not feature memories that were particularly
unique in terms of episodic richness. Janssen and col-
leagues analyzed ratings of vividness and re-experiencing
in memories within and outside of the reminiscence bump
period, and found no significant differences. However, our
findings did not involve this comparison. We were moti-
vated by an interest in the comparison of distributions for
different types of memories (e.g., those associated with
AaI versus AaR, and those associated with personally sig-
nificant and personally non-significant songs). Our find-
ings suggest that personally significant songs are associat-
ed with episodic recollection, and that the reminiscence
bump is strongest for songs that are personally significant,
but it does not indicate that only episodically rich events
feature in the bump period. In fact, personally significant
songs associated with both R and K ratings formed remi-
niscence bumps (as in Rybash & Monaghan, 1999), al-
though a far higher proportion of personally significant
songs were associated with R ratings.
Although personally significant songs were associated with
higher ratings of recollective experience, it would be interest-
ing to know more about the features of the memories associ-
ated with these songs. Westmacott and Moscovitch (2003)
suggested that the preferential retrieval of personally signifi-
cant over non-significant items might be a result of several
factors, including emotional salience, specific temporal-
spatial context and a form of self-reference effect, in that in-
formation associated with the self tends to be remembered
best (Rogers, Kuiper, & Kirker, 1977). Future studies could
therefore include a wider range of measures for all songs pre-
sented to participants, allowing examination of the
relationship between personal significance, dating (i.e., AaI),
emotionality and temporal-spatial context.
We found that participants rated the memories associated
with personally significant songs as more episodic than those
associated with personally non-significant songs. This raises
the question of circularity, as we cannot ascertain whether
songs were selected as personally significant because they
were associated with specific memories, or whether high per-
sonal significance of a given song makes one more likely to
associate it with specific events from the time of hearing it.
Thus, even though both studies used a recognition paradigm,
it is still possible that recollection processes played a role in
the selection and dating of personally significant films and
songs. This complex casual relationship reflects the bi-
directionality that is central to models of memory and the self
(e.g., the Self Memory System; Conway & Pleydell-Pearce,
2000). Ultimately, it seems clear that personal significance
plays a role in shaping the reminiscence bump. Whether this
personal significance is driven by recollection, or causes it, we
find for the first time that only songs that are personally sig-
nificant form a reminiscence bump.
Finally, although our results support the self-account of the
reminiscence bump, they do not necessarily contradict other
accounts. For example, we cannot rule out the possibility that
personally significant songs were associated with memories
for cultural life script events (e.g., Rubin & Berntsen, 2003)
such as relationships, moving house, or starting university.
One interesting possibility in future work might be to compare
what is of significance to the individual with what is signifi-
cant culturally to whole cohorts of people. Indeed, our data
cannot discriminate between personal identity as reflected
in personal film and song choices, and a Bculture-wide
importance.^ It is also possible that the memories triggered
by songs were of particularly novel events. Our results do
suggest, however, that the biological account is not an ade-
quate explanation for the reminiscence bump. If age-related
optimal encoding was the only mechanism at play, one would
not expect personally significant items to form a more robust
reminiscence bump than personally non-significant items.
Fundamentally, the reminiscence bump is an empirical obser-
vation of human behavior and as such one might expect it to
have multiple causes at different levels. Thus, although the
self may play a role in shaping the bump, this identity mech-
anism could be associated with more basic cognitive process-
es. For example, rehearsal has been suggested to help shape
the reminiscence bump (e.g., Janssen, Chessa, & Murre, 2007)
and this may, in part, explain self-related effects as people tend to
share and rehearse memories that are personally meaningful
(e.g., Singer & Salovey, 1993). Cognitive accounts based on
novelty and lack of proactive interference have also been pro-
posed to explain the bump (e.g., Schrauf & Rubin, 1998). Such
explanations may underlie self-related effects, as development of
the self (argued to play a role in organizing autobiographical
148
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
 memory e.g., Conway, 2005; Rathbone et al., 2008) often
involves periods of rapid change as opposed to periods of stabil-
ity. Finally, we cannot rule out the possibility that neural devel-
opment combines with other factors, such as a cultural bias to
focus on events from young adulthood (e.g., Koppel & Berntsen,
2014), to play a role in shaping the bump. Koppel and Berntsen
(2015) show that different shapes of reminiscence bump are
produced according to how the memory system is interrogated,
emphasizing that retrieval mechanisms are critical in producing
the reminiscence bump, and suggesting that the reminiscence
bump is caused by a fixed period in which events which are
encoded are preferentially retrieved later. We agree that given
the effects of factors at retrieval on the distribution of memories
across the lifespan, we should begin to think of how retrieval
operations which are constrained or modified by access to per-
sonally significant or self-relevant information influence the rem-
iniscence bump. Future research into the specific features of
memories cued by personally significant songs will enable us
to start unravelling and comparing these theoretical explanations.
Conclusions
Our studies support the growing body of work showing that
items and events with the most personal significance tend
to be encountered in young adulthood. We found that the
songs encountered during the period of young adulthood in
each generation are those that retain a lasting personal
significance. As recently suggested by Koppel and Berntsen
(2014) there seems to be a Byouth bias^ for events and expe-
riences in early adulthood. Our findings suggest that this bias
may be driven by the increased personal significance that is
associated with encounters from this period of life.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Economic and
Social Research Council (ES/K000918/1) and data collection was carried
out at the University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. CM acknowledges the support
of the Institut Universitaire de France. We are grateful for the comments
of David Rubin and one anonymous reviewer on a previous draft of this
manuscript.
References
Bartlett, J. C., & Snelus, P. (1980). Lifespan memory for popular songs.
American Journal of Psychology, 93, 551–560.
Baumgartner, H. (1992). Remembrance of things past - music, autobio-
graphical memory, and emotion. Advances in Consumer Research,
19, 613–620.
Berntsen, D., & Rubin, D. C. (2004). Cultural life scripts structure recall
from autobiographical memory. Memory & Cognition, 32, 427–442.
Conway, M. A. (2005). Memory and the self. Journal of Memory &
Language, 53, 594–628.
Conway, M. A., & Haque, S. (1999). Overshadowing the reminiscence
bump: Memories of a struggle for independence. Journal of Adult
Development, 6(1), 35–44.
Conway, M. A., & Pleydell-Pearce, C. W. (2000). The construction of
autobiographical memories in the self-memory system.
Psychological Review, 107(2), 261–288.
Conway, M. A., Wang, Q., Hanyu, K., & Haque, S. (2005). A cross-
cultural investigation of autobiographical memory—on the univer-
sality and cultural variation of the reminiscence bump. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 36, 739–749.
Denver, J. Y., Lane, S. M., & Cherry, K. E. (2010). Recent versus remote:
Flashbulb memory for 9/11 and self-selected events from the remi-
niscence bump. International Journal of Aging &Human
Development, 70(4), 275–297.
Elnick, A. B., Margrett, J. A., Fitzgerald, J. M., & Labouvie-Vief, G.
(1999). Benchmark memories in adulthood: Central domains and
predictors of their frequency. Journal of Adult Development, 6(1),
45–59.
Fitzgerald, J. M. (1988). Vivid memories and the reminiscence phenom-
enon: The role of a self narrative. Human Development, 31, 261–
273.
Gardiner, J. M. (1988). Functional aspects of recollective experience.
Memory & Cognition, 16, 309–313.
Gardiner, J. M., Ramponi, C., & Richardson-Klavehn, R. (1998).
Experiences of remembering, knowing, and guessing.
Consciousness and Cognition, 7, 1–26.
Gardiner, J. M., Ramponi, C., & Richardson-Klavehn, A. (2002).
Recognition memory and decision processes: A meta-analysis of
remember, know, and guess responses. Memory, 10, 83–98.
Holbrook, M. B., & Schindler, R. M. (1989). Some exploratory findings
on the development of musical tastes. Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 119–124.
Holbrook, M. B., & Schindler, R. M. (1996). Market segmentation based
on age and attitude toward the past: Concepts, methods, and findings
concerning nostalgic influences on customer tastes. Journal of
Business Research, 37, 27–39.
Janata, P., Tomic, S. T., & Rakowski, S. K. (2007). Characterisation of
music-evoked autobiographical memories. Memory, 15, 845–860.
Janssen, S. M. J., Chessa, A. G., & Murre, J. M. J. (2007). Temporal
distribution of favorite books, movies, and records: Differential
encoding and re-sampling. Memory, 15(7), 755–767.
Janssen, S. M. J., & Murre, J. M. J. (2008). Reminiscence bump in
autobiographical memory: Unexplained by novelty, emotionality,
valence and importance. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61, 1847–1860.
Janssen, S. M. J., Murre, J. M. J., & Meeter, M. (2008). Reminiscence
bump in memory for public events. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 20(4), 738–764.
Janssen, S. M. J., Rubin, D., & Conway, M. (2012). The reminiscence
bump in the temporal distribution of the best football players of all
time: Pelé, Cruijff or Maradona? Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 65(1), 165–178.
Janssen, S. M. J., Rubin, D., & St. Jacques, P. (2011). The temporal
distribution of autobiographical memory: Changes in reliving and
vividness over the life span do not explain the reminiscence bump.
Memory & Cognition, 39(1), 1–11.
Koppel, J. (2013). The reminiscence bump for public events: A review of
its prevalence and taxonomy of alternative age distributions. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 27(1), 12–32.
Koppel, J., & Berntsen, D. (2014). Does everything happen when you are
young? Introducing the Youth Bias. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 67(3), 417–423.
Koppel, J., & Berntsen, D. (2015). The peaks of life: The differential
temporal locations of the reminiscence bump across disparate cueing
methods. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition,
4(1), 66–80.
Krumhansl, C. L., & Zupnick, J. A. (2013). Cascading
Breminiscence bumps^ in popular music. Psychological
Science, 24(10), 2057–2068.
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
149
 Lonsdale, A. J., & North, A. C. (2009). Musical taste and in-group
favouritism. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 12(3), 319–327.
Markus, H. (1977). Self-Schemata and processing information about self.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(2), 63–78.
McAdams, D. P. (2003). Identity and the life story. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Mooney, C.Z. & Duval, R.D. (1993). Boostratpping: A nonparametric
approach to statistical inference. Sage University Paper series on
Qualitative Applications in the Social Sciences, 07-095. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Power, M. J. (2007). The multistory self: Why the self is more than the sum
of its autoparts. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 63(2), 187–198.
Rathbone, C. J., Moulin, C. J. A., & Conway, M. A. (2008). Self-centred
memories: The reminiscence bump and the self. Memory &
Cognition, 36, 1403–1414.
Rathbone, C. J., Moulin, C. J. A., & Conway, M. A. (2009).
Autobiographical memory and amnesia: Using conceptual knowl-
edge to ground the self. Neurocase, 15(5), 405–418.
Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The Do Re Mi’s of everyday life:
The structure and personality correlates of music preferences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(6), 1236–1256.
Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2006). Message in a ballad: The role of
music preferences in interpersonal perception. Psychological
Science, 17(3), 236–242.
Robinson, J. A. (1992). First experience memories: Contexts and function
in personal histories. In M. A. Conway, D. C. Rubin, H. Spinnler, &
W. A. Wager (Eds.), Theoretical perspectives on autobiographical
memory (pp. 223–239). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S. (1977). Self-reference and
encoding of personal information. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 35, 677–688.
Rubin, D. C. (2015). One bump, two bumps, three bumps, four? Using
retrieval cues to divide one autobiographical memory reminiscence
bump into many. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and
Cognition, 4(1), 87–89.
Rubin, D. C., & Berntsen, D. (2003). Life scripts help to maintain auto-
biographical memories of highly positive, but not highly negative,
events. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1–14.
Rubin, D. C., Rahhal, T. A., & Poon, L. W. (1998). Things learned in
early adulthood are remembered best. Memory & Cognition, 26(1),
3–19.
Rubin, D. C., Wetzler, S. E., & Nebes, R. D. (1986). Autobiographical
memory across the lifespan. In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical
memory (pp. 202–221). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rybash, J. M., & Monaghan, B. E. (1999). Episodic and semantic con-
tributions to older adults’ autobiographical recall. Journal of
General Psychology, 126(1), 85–96.
Schrauf, R. W., & Rubin, D. C. (1998). Bilingual autobiographical mem-
ory in older adult immigrants: A test of cognitive explanation of the
reminiscence bump and the linguistic encoding of memories.
Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 437–457.
Schulkind, M. D., Hennis, L. K., & Rubin, D. C. (1999). Music, emotion,
and autobiographical memory: They’re playing your song. Memory
& Cognition, 27(6), 948–955.
Sehulster, J. R. (1996). In my era: Evidence for the perception of a special
period of the past. Memory, 4(2), 145–158.
Singer, J. A., & Salovey, P. (1993). The remembered self: Emotion and
memory in personality. New York: Free Press.
Sloboda, J. A., & O’Neill, S. A. (2001). Emotions in everyday listening to
music. In N. P. Juslin & J. A. Sloboda (Eds.), Music and emotion:
Theory and research (pp. 415–429). Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Smith, T. W. (1994). Generational differences in musical preferences.
Popular Music and Society, 18, 43–59.
Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychology,
26, 1–12.
Westmacott, R., Black, S. E., Freedman, M., & Moscovitch, M. (2003).
The contribution of autobiographical experience to semantic mem-
ory: Evidence from Alzheimer’s disease, semantic dementia and
amnesia. Neuropsychologia, 42, 25–48.
Westmacott, R., & Moscovitch, M. (2003). The contribution of autobio-
graphical experience to semantic memory. Memory & Cognition,
31, 761–774.
Wheeler, M. A., Stuss, D. T., & Tulving, E. (1997). Toward a theory of
episodic memory: The frontal lobes and autonoetic consciousness.
Psychological Bulletin, 121(3), 331–354.
150
Mem Cogn (2017) 45:137–150
