 JCB: Article
JCB
433
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 214 No. 4 433–444
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201512077
Introduction
Ca2+ flux from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to mitochondria 
has emerged as an important regulator of mitochondrial oxida-
tive phosphorylation (Cárdenas et al., 2010) and apoptosis pro-
gression (Boehning et al., 2004, 2005). This ion flux is caused by 
Ca2+ release from the ER through various Ca2+ channels (Raturi 
et al., 2014). Subsequently, Ca2+ either reenters the ER through 
the sarco-ER Ca2+ transport ATPase (SER 
CA; Waldeck-Wei-
ermair et al., 2013) or transfers over to mitochondria via the 
mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter (MCU; Patron et al., 2013). This 
bidirectional Ca2+ flux between the ER and mitochondria occurs 
at the mitochondria-associated membrane (MAM; Vance, 1990; 
Rizzuto et al., 1998; Csordás and Hajnóczky, 2009). Here, Ca2+ 
handling proteins tune their activity to match the amount of un-
folded proteins within the ER. Upon ER stress, the interaction 
between the ER and mitochondria increases, which results in an 
increased MAM-associated Ca2+ flux and enhanced ATP pro-
duction (Csordás et al., 2006; Bravo et al., 2011).
The connection between ER protein folding and mito-
chondrial Ca2+ influx is highlighted by regulatory, redox-sen-
sitive interactions of ER chaperones and oxidoreductases with 
Ca2+ handling proteins (Simmen et al., 2010). Two examples are 
ERp44, which interacts with inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate recep-
tor type 1 (IP3R1), and calnexin, which interacts with SER 
CA2b 
(Higo et al., 2005; Lynes et al., 2013). Through this function, 
ER chaperones and other redox-sensitive proteins may play an 
important role for normal mitochondrial metabolism (Csordás 
et al., 2006; Bravo et al., 2011). Consistent with this, the activity 
of calnexin on SER 
CA2b results in a reduction of ER–mito-
chondrial Ca2+ cross talk that determines mitochondrial bioen-
ergetics (Cárdenas et al., 2010), as shown by two very different 
approaches (Roderick et al., 2000; Lynes et al., 2013).
In this study, we aimed to gain further insight into how 
MAM-localized folding enzymes influence ER–mitochondria 
Ca2+ flux. We focused on the ER-localized thioredoxin-related 
transmembrane protein 1 (TMX1) that targets to the MAM in 
a palmitoylation-dependent manner (Roth et al., 2009; Lynes 
et al., 2012). This protein disulfide isomerase (PDI)–related 
protein can retain misfolded major histocompatability complex 
The flux of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to mitochondria regulates mitochondria metabolism. Within tumor 
tissue, mitochondria metabolism is frequently repressed, leading to chemotherapy resistance and increased growth of 
the tumor mass. Therefore, altered ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux could be a cancer hallmark, but only a few regulatory 
proteins of this mechanism are currently known. One candidate is the redox-sensitive oxidoreductase TMX1 that is 
enriched on the mitochondria-associated membrane (MAM), the site of ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux. Our findings 
demonstrate that cancer cells with low TMX1 exhibit increased ER Ca2+, accelerated cytosolic Ca2+ clearance, and re-
duced Ca2+ transfer to mitochondria. Thus, low levels of TMX1 reduce ER–mitochondria contacts, shift bioenergetics 
away from mitochondria, and accelerate tumor growth. For its role in intracellular ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux, TMX1 
requires its thioredoxin motif and palmitoylation to target to the MAM. As a thiol-based tumor suppressor, TMX1 in-
creases mitochondrial ATP production and apoptosis progression.
TMX1 determines cancer cell metabolism as a thiol-
based modulator of ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux
Arun Raturi,1* Tomás Gutiérrez,1* Carolina Ortiz-Sandoval,1 Araya Ruangkittisakul,2 Maria Sol Herrera-Cruz,1 
Jeremy P. Rockley,1 Kevin Gesson,1 Dimitar Ourdev,1 Phing-How Lou,3 Eliana Lucchinetti,3 Nasser Tahbaz,1 
Michael Zaugg,3 Shairaz Baksh,4,5,6,7 Klaus Ballanyi,2 and Thomas Simmen1
1Department of Cell Biology, 2Department of Physiology, 3Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, 4Department of Pediatrics, 5Department of Biochemistry, and 
6Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G2H7, Canada
7Alberta Inflammatory Bowel Disease Consortium, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G2H7, Canada
Copyright © 2016 Raturi et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the 
publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms). After six months it is available under a 
Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, 
as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
*A. Raturi and T. Gutiérrez contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Thomas Simmen: thomas.simmen@ualberta.ca
A. Raturi’s present address is Dept. of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmon-
ton, Alberta T6G2H7, Canada.
K. Gesson’s present address is Max F. Perutz Laboratories, 1030 Vienna, 
Austria.
Abbreviations used: AMPK, adenosine monophosphate–activated protein ki-
nase; BAP 
TA-AM, 1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid; 
KD, knockdown; KO, knockout; LAR-ER-GECO, low-affinity ER R-GECO; MAM, 
mitochondria-associated membrane; MCU, mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter; MEF, 
mouse embryonic fibroblast; NAC, N-acetyl cysteine; R-GECO, red fluorescent 
genetically encoded Ca2+ indicator for optical imaging; ROS, reactive oxygen 
species; SER 
CA, sarco-ER Ca2+ transport ATPase; WT, wild type.
T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y
on June 1, 2019
jcb.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201512077
Published Online: 8 August, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 4 • 2016
434
class I variants (Matsuo et al., 2009) and preferentially inter-
acts with transmembrane ER substrates (Pisoni et al., 2015). 
Both findings are consistent with the observation that most of 
TMX1 is found in its reduced form within the ER (Matsuo et 
al., 2009; Roth et al., 2009).
Our results expand the repertoire of functions for TMX1 
by demonstrating that it interacts with SER 
CA2b under oxi- 
dizing conditions in a thiol-dependent manner to decrease 
SER 
CA activity and, thus, the ER Ca2+ load. Conversely, low 
levels of TMX1 achieved via knockout (KO) and knockdown 
(KD) lead to increased retention of Ca2+ within the ER and, 
hence, reduced ability of the ER to direct Ca2+ toward mito-
chondria. The reduced Ca2+ flux associated with low levels of 
TMX1 exacerbates the block of mitochondria activity in tumor 
cells (Warburg effect), a determinant of the growth of tumors 
(Ward and Thompson, 2012).
Results
TMX1 binds to SER 
CA2b in a calnexin-
dependent manner
Our finding that TMX1 is a MAM-localized oxidoreductase 
(Lynes et al., 2012) suggested that it could perform a role in 
the regulation of ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux. To test this hy-
pothesis, we first examined the ability of TMX1 to interact with 
ER Ca2+ handling proteins. Although we were unable to detect 
stable interaction with IP3Rs (not depicted), we could detect 
interaction between TMX1 and SER 
CA2b when immunopre-
cipitating myc-tagged SER 
CA2b from A375P melanoma and 
HeLa cell lysates and probing for endogenous TMX1 (Fig. 1 A 
and not depicted). Next, given TMX1 can interact with cal-
nexin (Pisoni et al., 2015), we aimed to determine whether 
TMX1 and calnexin could cross-influence their interactions 
with SER 
CA2b. To test this, we first expressed FLAG-tagged 
TMX1 in HeLa cells, leading to approximately twice as much 
TMX1 (Fig. 3 A) and again immunoprecipitated myc-tagged 
SER 
CA2b. Under these conditions, we were unable to detect a 
change in the amount of calnexin that associated with the Ca2+ 
pump (Fig. 1 B). Next, we cotransfected wild-type (WT) mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) or calnexin KO MEFs with myc-
tagged SER 
CA2b and FLAG-tagged TMX1. This experiment 
demonstrated that calnexin KO cells showed more robust in-
teraction of the oxidoreductase with SER 
CA2b (Fig. 1 C). We 
next decided to generate TMX1 KD cell lines in WT HeLa and 
A375P melanoma cells (Fig. 1 D). We complemented our inves-
tigation on the function of TMX1 using the CRI 
SPR/Cas9 KO 
strategy, which led to heterozygous TMX1 KO clones (subse-
quently called TMX1 KO) in HeLa, which exhibited undetect-
able levels of TMX1 (Fig. 1 D). Interestingly, TMX1 KO cells 
showed more calnexin coimmunoprecipitating with SER 
CA2b 
than control HeLa cells (Fig. 1 E). Together, our results showed 
that although TMX1 was not able to reduce calnexin binding to 
SER 
CA2b below a threshold level, the absence of either TMX1 
or calnexin boosted interaction with SER 
CA2b for the other.
Loss of TMX1 activates SER 
CA-mediated 
Ca2+ import into the ER
Our findings so far indicated that TMX1 could modulate SER 
CA 
activity similar to calnexin to control ER Ca2+ homeostasis. We 
tested this hypothesis by quantifying the ability of the ER to take 
up Ca2+ with an aequorin-based approach (Alvarez and Montero, 
2002). This demonstrated that both TMX1 KD and KO clones 
generated in HeLa or A375P cells were able to import 30–70% 
more Ca2+ into the ER (Fig. 1 F and Fig. S1 A). We repeated this 
experiment under more physiological conditions with ER-tar-
geted low-affinity genetically encoded Ca2+ indicators for op-
tical imaging (Wu et al., 2014). When Ca2+-depleted HeLa WT 
and TMX1 KO cells were incubated in Ca2+-containing medium, 
KO cells were able to take up >50% more Ca2+ than WT HeLa 
cells (Fig. 1 G). Likewise, when shifting the cells to Ca2+-free 
medium containing the SER 
CA inhibitor 2,5-di(tert-butyl)-1, 
4-benzo-hydroquinone (tert-BuBHQ), TMX1 KO cells exhibited 
an over 50% larger drop of the ER-localized, Ca2+-connected flu-
orescence when compared with WT HeLa cells (Fig. 1 H).
Together, our results indicated that expression of TMX1 
inhibits SER 
CA activity. Consistent with this, the reduction of 
TMX1 protein levels results in increased Ca2+ content inside 
the ER, which is opposite to the lower Ca2+ entry into the ER in 
MEFs lacking calnexin (Lynes et al., 2013), a known controller 
of ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux.
Low expression of TMX1 impairs ER–
mitochondria Ca2+ flux
To further test the phenotype and consequences of low TMX1 
expression, we analyzed how the observed increased ER Ca2+ 
retention impacted global Ca2+ homeostasis. To do so, we again 
used control HeLa and TMX1 KO cells and opened up their 
IP3Rs using histamine. As previously observed by others (De 
Marchi et al., 2011), we surmised that improved Ca2+ uptake 
and higher ER Ca2+ content in TMX1 KO cells should mani-
fest in lower relative Ca2+ drop, as measured via ER-targeted 
low-affinity genetically encoded Ca2+ indicators for optical im-
aging. Indeed, the proportional drop in fluorescence signal in 
TMX1 KO cells was only ∼60% of the one found in WT HeLa 
cells (Fig. 2 A). We next investigated the consequences of this 
phenotype for cytosolic Ca2+ availability and clearance in WT 
HeLa or TMX1 KO or KD HeLa cells. In the presence of ex-
tracellular Ca2+, this was reflected by a minor reduction of the 
FURA-2 peak by 20% in TMX1 KO and 30% in TMX1 KD 
HeLa cells, when compared with control (Fig. 2 B). Next, we 
incubated WT and TMX1 KO HeLa cells in Ca2+-free medium 
and released an aliquot of the remaining Ca2+ through IP3Rs. 
Although we did not detect significantly different amounts of 
Ca2+ released by TMX1 KO cells into the cytosol, they cleared 
this Ca2+ faster than WT HeLa cells (Fig. 2 C), except when co-
incubated with the irreversible SER 
CA-inhibitor thapsigargin 
(Fig. S1 B), indeed confirming that TMX1 influences the ER 
Ca2+ content by activating SER 
CA.
Next, we analyzed Ca2+ transfer from the ER to mito-
chondria using mitochondrially targeted red fluorescent genet-
ically encoded Ca2+ indicator for optical imaging (R-GECO; 
Wu et al., 2014). Consistent with the increased retention of 
ER Ca2+ (Fig. 2, A and C), we detected a roughly 50% de-
crease in the relative availability of Ca2+ within mitochondria 
upon histamine-mediated Ca2+ release in TMX1 KO and KD 
cells (Fig. 2, D and E), regardless of the presence of Ca2+ in 
the culture medium. Given the importance of Ca2+ transfer 
from the ER to mitochondria for ER–mitochondria apposition 
(Csordás et al., 2010; Qi et al., 2015), we next investigated 
whether contacts between the two organelles were altered 
upon TMX1 KO. Indeed, we found that the average length 
of tight ER–mitochondria contacts (<50 nm) decreased from 
172 nm to 127 nm (a reduction of over 25%, Fig. 2 F). To-
 TmX1 determines er–mitochondria Ca2+ flux • raturi et al.
435
gether, our results demonstrate that cells with low expression 
of TMX1 retain Ca2+ better within the ER and transfer less 
Ca2+ less to mitochondria, concomitant with reduced ER–
mitochondria apposition.
MAM-localized TMX1 is a thiol-dependent 
modulator of ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux
Next, we tested whether the TMX1-SER 
CA2b interaction is lo-
calization and thiol dependent and if so, whether the manipulation 
of these two properties of TMX1 could impact on Ca2+ flux. Our 
experiments also aimed to answer whether TMX1 overexpression 
increases ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux, opposite to TMX1 KD or 
KO. To use mutant TMX1, we transfected TMX1 KO cells with 
WT TMX1 and its mutants or naturally low-expressing A375P 
cells (Lynes et al., 2012), which led to a doubling of the amounts 
of TMX1 in A375P when compared with control cells (Fig. 3 A).
As a first test for redox sensitivity of the TMX1–SER 
CA2b 
pair, we examined whether cellular oxidation by buthionine 
sulfoximine, known to increase ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux 
(Hawkins et al., 2010; Redpath et al., 2013), leads to increased 
interaction between SER 
CA2b and TMX1. Indeed, buthionine 
sulfoximine promoted the interaction, whereas glutathione ester 
that increases cellular reduction of glutathione decreased it (Fig. 
S1 C). In addition, oxidation resulted in a relative shift of TMX1 
toward the MAM portion of the ER, whereas glutathione ester 
reversed this shift (Fig. S1 D). We next decided to mutagenize 
the redox-responsive, highly conserved thioredoxin motif of 
TMX1 and altered the two cysteines of the CXXC active site 
to serines (SXXS mutant). We tested TMX1 and this mutant for 
their oxidoreductase activity by incubating wild type and mu-
tant TMX1 with dieosin glutathione disulfide, which fluoresces 
70-fold more upon reduction of its disulfide bond (Raturi and 
Figure 1. TMX1 thioredoxin and palmitoylation 
motifs regulate interaction with SER 
CA2b. (A) TMX1-
SER 
CA2b coimmunoprecipitation. A375P cells were 
transfected with mycSER 
CA2b. DSP cross-linked ly-
sates (5% inputs, left) and myc immunoprecipitates 
(IP) were analyzed for calnexin (CNX) and coim-
munoprecipitating endogenous TMX1. The signal 
of TMX1 immunoprecipitated together with mycSER 
CA2b was expressed relative to the background. n 
= 3; ***, P = 0.001 (standard error expressed vs. 
Mock). (B) TMX1 does not disrupt calnexin–SER 
CA2b 
interaction. Control and TMX1-transfected HeLa cells 
were transfected with mycSER 
CA2b. DSP-cross-linked 
lysates (5% inputs, left) and myc immunoprecipitates 
were analyzed for calnexin and coimmunoprecipitat-
ing endogenous TMX1. (C) TMX1-SER 
CA2b interac-
tion depends on calnexin. Calnexin WT and KO MEFs 
were transfected with mycSER 
CA2b and FLAG-tagged 
TMX1 as indicated. DSP cross-linked lysates (5% in-
puts, left) and myc immunoprecipitates were analyzed 
for coimmunoprecipitating FLAG-tagged TMX1. n = 
4; **, P = 0.0114 for immunoprecipitation (standard 
error expressed vs. wild type). (D) Analysis of TMX1 
heterozygous KO and shTMX1-transfected HeLa and 
A375P lysates. TMX1 heterozygous KO HeLa cells 
were generated with the CRI 
SPR/Cas9 method. Their 
lysates and control lysates were probed with our an-
ti-TMX1 antibody. For KD, HeLa and A375P cells were 
stably transfected with shTMX1 and probed with an 
anti-TMX1 antibody. (E) Calnexin-SER 
CA2b interac-
tion depends on TMX1. TMX1 WT and KO HeLa cells 
were transfected with mycSER 
CA2b. DSP cross-linked 
lysates (5% inputs, left) and myc immunoprecipitates 
were analyzed for coimmunoprecipitating calnexin. 
n = 3; **, P = 0.005 (standard error expressed vs. 
HeLa). (F) Measurement of global ER Ca2+ uptake. 
HeLa heterozygous KO cells were cotransfected 
with a plasmid encoding ER-targeted aequorin. Lu-
minescence was plotted from three independent 
experiments. *, P = 0.02 (standard error expressed 
vs. HeLa). (G) ER Ca2+ uptake in intact cells. HeLa 
heterozygous KO cells were cotransfected with a 
plasmid encoding LAR-ER-GECO. Ca2+ was depleted 
with reversible tert-BuBHQ and Ca2+ was added back 
at 1 mM in tert-BuBHQ–free medium. Relative fluor- 
escence increase was plotted and quantified from 
four independent experiments (P = 0.06; standard 
error expressed vs. HeLa). (H) ER Ca2+ leak in intact 
cells. HeLa heterozygous KO cells were cotransfected 
with a plasmid encoding LAR-ER-GECO. Ca2+ was 
depleted with reversible tert-BuBHQ. Relative fluor- 
escence decrease was plotted and quantified from 
seven independent experiments (*, P = 0.03; stan-
dard error expressed vs. HeLa).
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 4 • 2016
436
Mutus, 2007). We indeed detected reductase activity for wild 
type TMX1 (Fig. 3 B), consistent with previous studies (Matsuo 
et al., 2004), but not with the TMX1 SXXS mutant, as expected.
To address the role of TMX1 localization, we used a 
mutant where two cytosolic cysteines have been changed to 
alanines (CCAA), which abolishes palmitoylation and MAM 
enrichment of TMX1 (Figs. 3 C and S1 E). With TMX1 mutants 
compromised for MAM localization and reductase activity in 
hand, we were able to determine that both are required for the 
interaction of TMX1 with SER 
CA2b (Figs. 3 D and S1 F).
We next measured whether increasing TMX1 expression 
decreases ER Ca2+ uptake. We found that the overexpression 
of WT TMX1 led to an over 50% reduction of ER Ca2+ that 
was not observed to the same extent with thioredoxin-mutated 
TMX1 SXXS. Conversely, the TMX1 mutant most defective in 
MAM enrichment (CCAA; Fig. 3 E) exhibited an intermediate 
phenotype. We also tested whether the overexpression of ER- 
restricted TMX1 and its mutants improved mitochondrial Ca2+ 
uptake. Indeed, this was the case, as higher levels of TMX1, 
but not of its mutants increased relative histamine-controlled 
Ca2+ transfer to mitochondria, as measured using mitochon-
drially targeted R-GECO (Fig. 3, F and G), as well as Rhod2 
(Fig. S2 A). Therefore, our overexpression studies confirmed 
that TMX1 increased ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux in a thiol- and 
localization-dependent manner.
TMX1 determines mitochondria metabolism 
from the ER
Our findings so far had identified TMX1 as a regulator of ER–
mitochondria Ca2+ flux and ER–mitochondria apposition, and 
we next aimed to determine whether it also impacts mitochon-
drial bioenergetics. We first determined the respiratory capacity 
of HeLa (Fig. 4, A and B) and A375P cells (Fig. 4 C), where we 
had manipulated TMX1 expression levels. Our results showed 
that the mitochondrial capacity of HeLa cells with low TMX1 
expression was reduced by almost 50% (Fig. 4, A and B). Con-
versely, we observed a 20% increase in mitochondrial capacity 
in A375P cells, where we had achieved the doubling of TMX1 
expression (Fig. 4 C) and, in contrast, a reduction of oxygen 
consumption by 30% in A375P cells transfected with TMX1 
siRNA, respectively. To examine how these changes impacted 
cellular bioenergetics, we measured the cellular ATP content. 
Figure 2. Decreased expression of TMX1 inhibits 
ER-derived Ca2+ flux. (A) Measurement of ER Ca2+ 
content change after histamine-mediated ER calcium 
release. HeLa control and heterozygous KO cells were 
transfected with LAR-ER-GECO. Ca2+ was released 
with histamine, and probe fluorescence was recorded 
before and after 50 µM histamine treatment by fluor- 
escence microscopy. Relative fluorescence decrease 
was plotted and quantified from three independent 
experiments (P = 0.017; standard error expressed 
vs. HeLa). (B) Measurement of cytosolic Ca2+ con-
centration after histamine-mediated ER Ca2+ release. 
Representative FURA-2-derived curves from TMX1 
heterozygous KO and KD cells are plotted and quan-
tified from five independent experiments; standard 
error expressed versus HeLa or scrambled control 
(*, P = 0.02 for WT vs. KO). (C) Measurement of 
cytosolic Ca2+ clearance after histamine-mediated ER 
calcium release. HeLa control and heterozygous KO 
cells were loaded with FURA-2. Ca2+ was released 
with histamine and probe fluorescence was recorded 
before and after 50 µM histamine treatment on a fluor- 
imeter. Data were derived from four independent ex-
periments (*, P = 0.014; standard error expressed 
vs. HeLa). (D) Measurement of mitochondrial Ca2+ 
after histamine-mediated ER Ca2+ release. HeLa and 
TMX1 heterozygous KO HeLa cells were transfected 
with mitochondrial R-GECO1 and treated with 50 µM 
histamine, followed by probe fluorescence recording. 
Results are summarized as a graph representing max-
imum response. Data were derived from six indepen-
dent experiments for with Ca2+ (*, P = 0.01) and from 
three independent experiments for without Ca2+; stan-
dard error expressed versus HeLa. (E) Measurement 
of mitochondrial Ca2+ after histamine-mediated ER 
Ca2+ release. HeLa and A375P cells transfected with 
shTMX1 plasmids and mitochondrial R-GECO1 were 
treated with 50 µM histamine, and probe fluorescence 
was recorded. Results from three independent experi-
ments each are summarized as a graph representing 
maximum response. **, P = 0.001 for with Ca2+; *, 
P = 0.05 for without Ca2+. (F) Electron micrograph 
analysis of control and TMX1 heterozygous KO HeLa 
cells. One representative electron micrograph, respec-
tively, is shown. Analysis and quantification of the dis-
tance of 595 MAMs for WT and 648 MAMs for KO is 
shown as a bar graph; standard error indicated (***, 
P = 0.0001). Bars, 150 nm.
 TmX1 determines er–mitochondria Ca2+ flux • raturi et al.
437
Consistent with our results on mitochondrial oxygen consump-
tion, we detected a reduction of the cellular ATP content in 
TMX1 HeLa KO and KD cells by >25% (Figs. 4 D and S2 B). 
We also detected a reduction of the cellular ATP content by 30–
40% in HeLa and A375P cells stably transfected with TMX1 
RNAi but almost 20% higher ATP levels in cells stably trans-
fected with WT TMX1 cDNA (Fig. S2 B). To test whether this 
change in ATP production was indeed tied to a loss of redox-sen-
sitive ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux in TMX1 KO cells, we treated 
control and KO cells with the Ca2+ chelator 1,2-bis(o-amino-
phenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (BAP 
TA-AM) and 
the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine (NAC). We found evidence 
for our hypothesis by showing that reduced ATP levels reached 
in TMX1 KO cells could not be significantly further reduced by 
either BAP 
TA-AM or NAC treatment (Fig. 4 F).
We next assayed for potential changes in the mitochon-
drial proteome that could cause the changes that we had ob-
served with altered TMX1 expression levels. However, we were 
unable to detect changes in the mitochondrial proteome, includ-
ing enzymes catalyzing mitochondrial oxidative phosphoryla-
tion (mitochondrial complex II and mitochondrial cytochrome 
c) or peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor c coactivator 
1 α (PGC-1α; Austin and St-Pierre, 2012), that could explain 
our findings via other mechanisms (Fig. S2 C) or the MCU (not 
depicted; Filadi et al., 2015). In contrast, we were able to de-
tect significant increases in the phosphorylation of 5′ adenosine 
monophosphate–activated protein kinase (AMPK; Fig. 4 G). 
Therefore, low levels of TMX1 reduce mitochondrial respi-
ration and ATP levels that subsequently activate the AMPK 
signaling machinery, whereas increased levels of TMX1 show 
the opposite phenotype.
We next asked how cells with low TMX1 survive, given that 
cell lines such as HeLa normally exhibit robust mitochondrial 
energy production (Reitzer et al., 1979; Jouaville et al., 1999; 
Favre et al., 2010). To answer this question, we glucose-starved 
transfectants with low or high levels of TMX1 generated in HeLa 
(Fig. 5, A and B) or A375P cells (Fig. 5 C). This condition demon-
strated that cells with low levels of TMX1 are dependent on the 
presence of glucose. Whereas TMX1 KO cells show a slightly 
elevated level of cell death, this increases almost threefold in the 
Figure 3. Increased expression of TMX1 inhibits ER 
Ca2+ uptake but promotes ER-derived Ca2+ flux. (A) 
Analysis of TMX1-transfected A375P lysates. A375P 
cells were stably transfected with TMX1 constructs as 
indicated and probed with our anti-TMX1 antibody. 
(B) TMX1 redox activity. TMX1 disulfide reduction 
activity was measured by adding immunoprecipi-
tated TMX1 or its mutants (TMX-SXXS or TMX-CCAA) 
to 100 nM Di-E-GSSG in the presence of 5 µM DTT. 
The graph plots the increase in fluorescence versus 
nontransfected control immunoprecipitate. The gel on 
top shows lysates from a typical experiment analyzed 
for the FLAG-TMX1 content via Western blot. **, P < 
0.01; standard error indicated. (C) TMX1 and TMX1 
mutant distribution among microsomes (containing 
ER, endosomes, and lysosomes), mitochondria, and 
the MAM. HeLa homogenates from cells transfected 
with pcDNA3 or plasmids expressing FLAG-tagged 
WT TMX1 or the CCAA or SXXS mutants were frac-
tionated via the Percoll fractionation protocol into 
cytosol, microsomes, pure mitochondria, and MAM, 
as indicated on the right side. Equal cell equivalents 
have been loaded, and TMX1 was detected via its 
FLAG tag. (D) TMX1-SER 
CA2b interaction depends 
on TMX1 redox activity and localization. A375P 
cells were transfected with mycSER 
CA2b and FLAG-
tagged TMX1 mutants as indicated. DSP cross-linked 
lysates (5% inputs, left) and myc immunoprecipitates 
were analyzed for coimmunoprecipitating FLAG-
tagged TMX1. n = 3; ***, P = 0.000197 for TMX 
WT versus SXXS. ***, P = 0.000013 and 0.000011 
for immunoprecipitation; standard error indicated. (E) 
Measurement of ER Ca2+ content. A375P cells were 
transfected with TMX1 constructs as indicated and 
cotransfected with a plasmid encoding ER-targeted 
aequorin. Luminescence was plotted from three in-
dependent experiments. *, P = 0.01; standard error 
expressed versus A375P. (F) Measurement of mito-
chondrial Ca2+ after histamine-triggered Ca2+ release. 
A375P cells transfected with TMX1 and mitochondrial 
R-GECO1 were treated with 50 µM histamine, and 
probe fluorescence was recorded. Results from three 
independent experiments are summarized as a graph 
representing maximum response. Experiments were 
done in the presence and absence of extracellular Ca2+. Differences are not statistically significant with Ca2+ but significant without Ca2+ (*, P = 0.01; 
standard error expressed vs. A375P). (G) Measurement of mitochondrial Ca2+ after histamine-triggered Ca2+ release in heterozygous TMX1 KO HeLa cells 
rescued with TMX1 or its mutants. TMX1 KO HeLa cells rescued with TMX1 or its mutants (identified via fluorescence signal derived from pIRES-EGFP) were 
transfected with mitochondrial R-GECO1 and treated with 50 µM histamine in the absence of extracellular Ca2+, and probe fluorescence was recorded. 
Results from three independent experiments are summarized as a graph representing maximum response and slope of the signal increase (*, P = 0.03 for 
FLAG-TMX1; standard error expressed vs. HeLa).
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 4 • 2016
438
absence of glucose for 24 h (Fig. 5 A). After 48 h, transfection of 
TMX1 siRNA led to even more marked reductions of survival in 
these culture conditions, whereas its overexpression had the re-
verse effect (Fig. 5, B and C). Interestingly, the low expression of 
TMX1 also increased reactive oxygen species (ROS; Fig. 5 D), 
especially in TMX1 KO cells, but did not result in ER stress 
(Fig. S2 D). We were also unable to detect any changes in the 
autophagy markers p62 or LC3-II levels (Fig. S2 E). Consistent 
with the increased presence of dying cells (Fig. 5 A) and their 
increased levels of ROS (Fig. 5 D), TMX1 KO and KD cells 
showed reduced growth that resulted in a roughly 100% increase 
of their doubling times (Figs. 5 E and S2 F). Finally, we tested 
whether TMX1 KD potentially promotes aerobic glycolysis, 
as suggested by their decreased oxygen consumption (Fig. 4, 
A–C), and their glucose addiction (Fig. 5, A–C). Therefore, we 
analyzed cellular lysates of HeLa and A375P cells with altered 
TMX1 expression for the presence of hexokinases I and II, the 
latter being a marker for tumor cells that exhibit high levels of 
aerobic glycolysis (Pastorino and Hoek, 2003). Although our cell 
lines had increased levels of hexokinase II when TMX1 was low 
(Fig. 5 F), the removal of glucose did not reproducibly reduce 
cellular ATP content any further than what we observed in TMX1 
WT cells (not depicted). Collectively, our results demonstrate 
that TMX1 controls cellular metabolism and in particular mi-
tochondrial bioenergetics. The reduction of TMX1 expression 
results in cell lines becoming increasingly glucose addicted and 
characterized by high levels of ROS.
TMX1 determines tumor growth in vivo
Our previous results led to the hypothesis that TMX1 could in-
fluence tumor growth via its role in mitochondria metabolism. 
We tested this hypothesis from three angles: first, by examining 
whether tumor tissue has lower TMX1 levels than healthy tis-
sue; second, by further analyzing growth properties of TMX1 
shRNA clones; and third, by mouse xenograft assays.
As an exploratory experiment, we homogenized tissue 
obtained from metastatic melanoma patients. When comparing 
the protein amounts of TMX1, we noticed that TMX1 expres-
sion was lower compared with normal skin (Fig. S2 G). For the 
remaining experiments, we used shTMX1, rather than TMX1 
KO HeLa cells, because the latter showed ongoing cell death 
(Fig. 5 A). Our previous results indicated that low TMX1 leads 
to glucose addiction, suggesting that their mitochondria might 
be less critical for survival. Indeed, shTMX1 HeLa cells showed 
less susceptibility to the mitochondrial poisons rotenone and 
antimycin (Fig. 6 A). Because low mitochondrial activity con-
tributes to growth medium acidification, we found that shTMX1 
indeed also leads to this effect (Fig. 6 B).
Next, we injected the HeLa and A375P cell lines sub-
cutaneously into nude mice. This set-up led to the visible 
appearance of tumor masses in <50 d with HeLa cells stably ex-
pressing TMX1 shRNA, compared with 85 d with control HeLa 
cells (Fig. 6 C). In the case of A375P cells, after tumor growth 
for 35 d, we detected an almost twofold growth increase for 
A375P cells stably expressing TMX1 shRNA, but less than half 
for A375P cells overexpressing TMX1 (Fig. 6 D).
Therefore, consistent with our in vitro results, we demon-
strate that TMX1 can also control tumor growth properties in 
vivo. The reduction of TMX1 expression increases the speed 
of tumor growth, whereas higher levels of TMX1 expres-
sion lead to a slowdown.
Discussion
Our previous work had demonstrated that the ER-restricted, 
palmitoylated PDI family protein TMX1 localizes to the MAM 
(Lynes et al., 2012). This localization suggests that despite 
the presence of a thioredoxin domain, the primary function of 
Figure 4. TMX1 regulates mitochondrial energy production. (A) Mea-
surement of the mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate, expressed as the 
maximal respiration ETC capacity (picomoles of O2 per second per citrate 
synthase (CS) activity, see Materials and methods) in control HeLa cells 
and TMX1 heterozygous KO HeLa cells. Results from three independent 
experiments are summarized as a graph (*, P = 0.026; standard error 
indicated). (B) Measurement of the mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate 
(picomoles O2 per second per CS activity, see Materials and methods) in 
control HeLa cells and cells transfected with siTMX1. Results from three 
independent experiments are summarized as a graph (*, P = 0.014; stan-
dard error indicated). (C) Measurement of the mitochondrial oxygen con-
sumption rate (picomoles O2 per second per CS activity) in control A375P 
cells and cells transfected with FLAG-tagged TMX1 or siTMX1. Results from 
three independent experiments are summarized as a graph (*, P = 0.018; 
standard error indicated). (D) Measurement of cellular ATP content (see 
Materials and methods) in control HeLa and heterozygous TMX1 KO HeLa 
cells. Results from three independent experiments are summarized as a 
graph (n = 9; **, P = 0.042; standard error indicated). (E) Measurement 
of cellular ATP content in control HeLa and heterozygous TMX1 KO HeLa 
cells treated with 10 µM BAP 
TA-AM and 10 mM NAC. Results from three 
experiments are summarized. **, P = 0.001 for WT BAP 
TA-AM, 0.05 for 
KO BAP 
TA-AM; **, P = 0.001 for WT NAC, 0.12 for KO NAC; standard 
error expressed versus HeLa. (F) Analysis of HeLa control and TMX1 KO 
and A375P lysates transiently transfected as indicated with RNAi against 
TMX1. Lysates were probed for phospho-AMPK and normalized to total 
AMPK. Representative gels are shown. The graph plots the levels of phos-
phorylated AMPK in cells transfected with TMX1 RNAi versus control cells 
transfected with scrambled RNAi (n = 3; **, P = 0.003 for HeLa; *, P = 
0.02 for A375P; standard error expressed vs. scrambled controls).
 TmX1 determines er–mitochondria Ca2+ flux • raturi et al.
439
TMX1 may lie elsewhere than in protein folding, which oc-
curs on the rER (Lynes and Simmen, 2011). Indeed, our results 
show that TMX1 is a regulator of cellular Ca2+ flux. TMX1 
normally augments Ca2+ release at the MAM, which can then 
migrate to mitochondria to stimulate oxidative phosphorylation. 
To do so, TMX1 interacts with SER 
CA2b in a redox-depen-
dent manner (Fig. 1, A and B). Accordingly, we showed that 
the ER Ca2+ content of cells overexpressing TMX1 was 50% 
lower than control cells. No such effect could be detected for 
TMX1, where we had mutated the CXXC active site to SXXS 
(Fig. 3 E). Conversely, the nonpalmitoylated TMX1 CCAA mu-
tant showed partial activity.
We observed the opposite effect when we reduced TMX1 
expression: these cells had 30–70% higher Ca2+ content within 
the ER (Fig. 1, F and G; and Fig. S1 A). This led to increased Ca2+ 
loss from the ER upon SER 
CA inhibition, and faster cytosolic 
Ca2+ clearance (Figs. 1 H and 2 C). Our results are consistent 
with TMX1 acting as an inhibitor of SER 
CA2b, reducing the im-
port of cytosolic Ca2+ into the ER. Importantly, when interfering 
with TMX1 via mutagenesis, KO or reduction of its expression, 
the effects are not limited to the ER. Instead, its activity fans 
out and determines Ca2+ flux to mitochondria (Figs. 2 and 3). 
This flux is now recognized as a determinant of mitochondrial 
bioenergetics (Cárdenas et al., 2010). Therefore, when we inter-
fered with TMX1, we observed multiple changes in mitochon-
dria metabolism, including oxygen consumption rate (Fig. 4, 
A–C) and ATP production (Fig. 4 D). These changes were Ca2+ 
flux and redox dependent (Fig. 4, D and F), consistent with our 
model, where TMX1 acts as a thiol- and palmitoylation-depen-
dent modulator of cytosolic Ca2+ availability for mitochondria.
One area that requires further attention is how TMX1 ex-
ecutes this modulatory activity on SER 
CA2b. One possibility is 
that TMX1 acts as a reductase on the luminal cysteine bond of 
SER 
CA2b (Appenzeller-Herzog and Simmen, 2016), but it is 
Figure 5. Altered mitochondria metabolism increases 
ROS and glucose dependence in cells expressing low 
amounts of TMX1. (A) Quantification of surviving cells 
upon 24-h glucose deprivation. HeLa cells and TMX1 
heterozygous KO HeLa cells were incubated in glu-
cose-free medium (supplemented with galactose) or 
control condtions (C) and subsequently analyzed for 
positive Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) signals. 
The amount of dead cells was normalized to controls, 
and results from three independent experiments were 
graphed. P > 0.05 for all; standard error indicated. 
(B) Quantification of surviving HeLa cells upon glu-
cose deprivation. Cells were transfected with RNAi 
against TMX1. After 48 h, cells were incubated in 
glucose-free medium (supplemented with galactose) 
and subsequently analyzed for positive Annexin V 
and PI signals. The amount of dead cells was nor-
malized to the scrambled siRNA controls, and results 
from three independent experiments were graphed. 
***, P < 0.000001; standard error indicated. (C) 
Quantification of surviving A375P cells upon glu-
cose deprivation. Cells were transfected with RNAi 
against TMX1, as well as a plasmid encoding for 
FLAG-tagged TMX1. After 48 h, cells were incubated 
in glucose-free medium (supplemented with galactose) 
and subsequently analyzed for positive Annexin V 
and PI signals. The amount of dead cells was normal-
ized to the scrambled siRNA controls, and results from 
three independent experiments were graphed. ***, 
P = 0.001679 for FLAG-TMX1; **, P = 0.01947 for 
siTMX1; standard error indicated. (D) Measurement of 
the cellular ROS production via DCF in control HeLa 
and TMX1 heterozygous KO cells (left). ROS-depen-
dent fluorescence was determined via flow cytometry. 
Results from three independent experiments are sum-
marized as a graph (*, P = 0.01; standard error ex-
pressed vs. HeLa). Measurement of the cellular ROS 
production via HyPer in control HeLa and A375P cells 
and cells transfected with FLAG-tagged TMX1 as well 
as siTMX1 (right). ROS-dependent fluorescence was 
determined via flow cytometry. Results from three in-
dependent experiments are summarized as a graph 
(**, P = 0.00038 for HeLa and 0.0027 for A375P; 
standard error expressed vs. HeLa and A375P con-
trols). (E) Growth curve for HeLa WT and heterozy-
gous TMX1 KO cells. Cells were seeded at 100,000 
per well, and cells were quantified 24, 48, 72, and 
96 h after seeding; standard error indicated. (F) As-
sessment of glycolytic enzymes. Analysis of HeLa con-
trol and TMX1 heterozygous KO and A375P lysates 
transfected as indicated with FLAG-tagged TMX1 or 
siTMX1. Lysates were probed for hexokinases I and II 
and normalized to actin.
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 4 • 2016
440
probably less likely to interact in the cytosol, where oxidation 
of cysteines determines SER 
CA activity in a bell-shaped man-
ner (Adachi et al., 2004).
The changes in cellular metabolism observed upon inter-
ference with TMX1 raise the interesting question of how the 
cell copes with them. One critical observation in cells with re-
duced levels of TMX1 is a reduction of ER–mitochondria con-
tacts (Fig. 2 F), known to occur in tumor tissues for over 60 yr 
(Howatson and Ham, 1955). Interestingly, the TMX1 KD phe-
notype is strikingly similar to cells with low mitofusin-2 expres-
sion, which also have increased SER 
CA activity accompanied 
with compromised MAM (de Brito and Scorrano, 2008) and 
increased xenograft growth (Rehman et al., 2012).
Another way that cancer cells with low levels of TMX1 
could compensate is by increasing their glycolytic phenotype, but 
that does not occur in this case (Fig. 4 F), potentially explaining 
why low levels of TMX1 result in increased amounts of ROS 
(Fig. 5 D), a mild increase in constitutive cell death in KO cells 
(Fig. 5 A), and decreased growth under laboratory culture condi-
tions (Fig. 5 E). This latter observation is, however, not unusual 
for a tumor-promoting mutation or deletion, as shown by the ex-
ample of Bak/Bax double KO cells (Jones et al., 2007), which are 
interestingly also defective for ER Ca2+ mobilization. Moreover, 
we were unable to create a homozygous KO in HeLa and A375P 
tumor cell lines, consistent with the recently identified dependence 
of tumor cells on ER–mitochondria Ca2+ flux (Cárdenas et al., 
2016). Our results suggest that low TMX1 expression enhances 
the Warburg phenotype (Warburg, 1956), consistent with a resis-
tance of TMX1-depleted cells to mitochondrial poisons (Fig. 6 A) 
and their ability to acidify the growth medium (Fig. 6 B).
This important insight prompted us to investigate a po-
tential tumor-suppressing role of TMX1, as also supported by 
the observation of reduced levels of TMX1 upon breast can-
cer progression and upon asbestos exposure of lung cells (Ny-
mark et al., 2007; Lagadec et al., 2012). In short, our results 
have identified a novel, thiol-dependent mechanism based on 
tumor suppressing TMX1.
Materials and methods
Antibodies and reagents
All chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, except OptiPrep 
(Axis-Shield), DCF (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and Percoll (GE 
Healthcare). Antibodies were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich against 
TMX1 and LC3 (rabbit antihuman); from EMD Millipore against 
 
SER 
CA2b (mouse antihuman) and against total as well as phosphor-
ylated AMPK (rabbit antihuman); from Thermo Fisher Scientific 
against PDI, CHOP, and actin (mouse antihuman); from BD against 
BiP/GRP78 and p62 (mouse antihuman); from Abcam against FACL4 
(goat antihuman), mitochondrial complex II (mouse antihuman), and 
PGC-1α (rabbit antihuman); and from Cell Signaling Technology. The 
antibodies against anti-myc (Invitrogen) and the FLAG tag (Rockland) 
were purchased as indicated. We thank L. Berthiaume (University of 
Alberta, Alberta, Canada) for the goat anti–human cytochrome c. The 
affinity-purified rabbit anti-TMX1 antiserum was generated by 21st 
Century Biochemicals using a peptide corresponding to amino acids 
251–271 (AES 
KEG 
TNK 
DFP 
QNA 
IRQ 
RSL). The rabbit anti–calnexin 
antibody has been previously described (Myhill et al., 2008). HeLa 
cells were from ECA 
CC, and A375P cells were from E. Sviderskaya 
Figure 6. Low TMX1 expression accelerates tumor 
growth in vivo. (A) Quantification of surviving cells 
upon interference with mitochondria metabolism. 
HeLa cells and TMX1 heterozygous KO HeLa cells 
were incubated in medium supplemented with ro-
tenone or antimycin and subsequently analyzed for 
positive Annexin V and propidium iodide signals. The 
amount of dead cells was normalized to the scram-
bled siRNA controls, and results from three indepen-
dent experiments were graphed. n = 3; **, P = 0.02 
for rotenone. n = 3; ***, P = 0.00 for antimycin. 
Standard error expressed versus scrambled Mock con-
trol. (B) Determination of medium acidification. HeLa 
cells and TMX1 heterozygous KO HeLa cells were 
plated into 24-well dishes, and the pH of the medium 
was determined after 24 and 48 h of culture (n = 
3). Standard error expressed versus scrambled day 1.  
(C) Tumor growth of TMX1 HeLa KD clones in vivo. 
HeLa clones stably transfected with pcDNA3 or TMX1 
shRNA (clones 4 and 7) were injected subcutaneously 
into the right and left flanks of athymic nude mice. 
The images show representative euthanized mice with 
their tumors marked on the side, and the graph sum-
marizes the results of three animals each; standard 
error indicated. (D) Tumor growth of TMX1 A375P KD 
and overexpression (OE) clones in vivo. A375P clones 
stably transfected with pcDNA3, FLAG-tagged TMX1, 
or TMX1 shRNA were injected subcutaneously into the 
right and left flanks of athymic nude mice. The images 
show representative euthanized mice with their tumors 
marked on the side, and the graph summarizes the re-
sults of three animals each; standard error indicated.
 TmX1 determines er–mitochondria Ca2+ flux • raturi et al.
441
(St. George’s, University of London, London, England, UK). Mela-
noma tissue samples were purchased from the Alberta Tumor Bank.
Expression vectors, RNAi, and mutagenesis
FLAG-tagged TMX1 was generated by PCR using oligos TS470, 
TS244, TS363, TS364 and TS368 (Fig. S3 A) on a human IMA 
GE 
TMX1 EST clone (Invitrogen) by inserting the FLAG-coding se-
quences to generate a signal peptide cleavage site after glycine 20. 
The full-length product was cloned into pcDNA3 and pIRES2-EGFP 
(Takara Bio Inc.) plasmids using the 5′ Kpn1 or the 5′ Nhe1 site, re-
spectively, and the 3′ Xho1 sites. Mutant TMX1 constructs were gener-
ated by PCR-based splicing by overlap extension using oligos TS369, 
TS370 (CCAA) and TS435, TS436 (SXXS). In brief, primary PCR 
products generated using TMX1 5′ (TS470) and 3′ oligos (TS368) 
with the mutagenizing upstream and downstream oligos were isolated. 
Subsequently, a secondary PCR yielded the full-length, mutated cDNA 
using just the 5′ and 3′ TMX1 oligos. This product was cloned into 
pIRES-EGFP using the Nhe1–Xho1 sites. The shTMX1 GFP construct 
(HSH-019885.4-CH1 in psi-H1, target sequence 5′-TCG 
TGC 
CAA 
GCA 
ATA 
AGAT-3′) was purchased from Genecopoiea. Stealth RNAi 
HSS129875 (sequence 5′-TGC 
ACA 
ACC 
TTT 
GAA 
AAA 
AGT-3′) as 
well as control Stealth RNAi (Medium GC content control siRNA 
12935–300) for transient expression were purchased from Invitrogen. 
The myc-tagged SER 
CA2b expression plasmid was obtained from 
U. Petäjä-Repo (University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland).
TMX1 CRI 
SPR/Cas9 KO
TMX1 gene KO was performed with the KN206187 plasmid (Ori-
Gene), closely following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 
HeLa cells were transfected and passaged nine times before applying 
the puromycin antibiotic. After isolation of colonies on 15-cm dishes, 
clones were subcloned on 96-well dishes. Quantitative PCR deter-
mined the KO as heterozygous. KO was verified for the duration of the 
experiments by Western blot and flow cytometry for the EGFP signal. 
Further validation was performed by isolating genomic DNA with the 
QIAamp DNA Mini kit (QIA 
GEN), followed by PCR amplification of 
KO construct DNA that showed insertion of an EGFP sequence into the 
genomic TMX1 DNA (Fig. S3 B).
Lysate immunoblotting analysis
For the analysis of cellular proteomes, cells were plated in 150 mm cul-
ture dishes and lysed using lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1% 
NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 
1 mM PMSF, 1 µg/ml leupeptin, aprotinin, and pepstatin, 1 mM NaF, 
and 1 mM Na4VO3). Lysates were centrifuged at 800 g for 10 min at 
4°C, and supernatants were subsequently analyzed by Western blot-
ting with the antibodies indicated, after loading equalization with actin 
or tubulin, as indicated.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments
Cells were washed twice with PBS++ and incubated for 30 min at room 
temperature with or without 2 mM Dithiobis (succinimidyl proprionate; 
Thermo Fisher Scientific) in PBS++, as indicated. This cross-linker will 
not maintain connections in the presence of reducing sample buffer. The 
cells were then washed twice more and incubated in 10 mM NH4Cl in 
PBS++ for 10 min to quench the cross-linking reaction. The cells were 
then washed a final time in PBS++ and harvested in CHA 
PS lysis buffer 
(1% CHA 
PS, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA) 
containing Complete protease inhibitors (Roche). Postnuclear superna-
tants were obtained by centrifuging the lysates for 5 min at 4°C at 800 g 
and were subsequently incubated with the indicated antibodies for 1 h 
at 4°C on a rocker. Protein A Sepharose beads were then added and the 
lysates incubated for a further hour. The beads were then washed three 
times in CHA 
PS buffer, resuspended in Laemmli buffer, and analyzed 
by SDS-PAGE and Western blot.
OptiPrep gradient fractionation
Postnuclear membranes of HeLa and A375P cells were fractionated 
via OptiPrep as follows: Cells were washed twice in PBS++ and col-
lected in mitochondria homogenization buffer (10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 
250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM EGTA). The cell suspension 
was passed 15 times through an 18-µM clearance ball bearing homoge-
nizer (Isobiotech). The cells were subsequently centrifuged for 10 min 
at 800 g at 4°C to pellet nuclei and unbroken cells. The supernatant 
was layered over a 10–30% continuous gradient of OptiPrep density 
gradient medium (Axis-Shield) and centrifuged in an SW55 Ti rotor 
(Beckman Coulter) for 3 h at 32,700 rpm. Six fractions were taken from 
the top of the gradient and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot.
Monitoring TMX1 reductase activity
DiEGS 
SG was prepared as described before (Raturi and Mutus, 2007). 
In brief, 100 µM GSSG was incubated with 10-fold molar excess of 
1 mM eosin isothiocyanate in phosphate buffer (100 mM potassium 
phosphate and 2 mM EDTA, pH 8.8) at RT (25°C) and purified using 
G-25 columns (100 × 10 mm) in phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. TMX1 
disulfide reduction activity was measured by adding immunoprecip-
itated TMX1 or its mutants (TMX-SXXS or TMX 
CCAA) to 100 nM 
DiEGS 
SG in the presence of 5 µM DTT. The increase in fluorescence 
was monitored at 545 nm with excitation at 525 nm using an 814 pho-
tomultiplier detection system (PTI).
Measurement of calcium content and flux
ER Ca2+ uptake was measured with pHSVerAEQ (a gift from J. Alva-
rez, Universidad de Valladoid, Valladolid, Spain). WT, KD, and KO 
cells were transfected with this plasmid (and constructs expressing 
TMX1, as indicated) and processed for measurements 24 h after trans-
fection as described previously (Alvarez and Montero, 2002). In brief, 
ER Ca2+ was depleted in buffer 1 (145 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM 
MgCl, 10 mM glucose, and 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4) containing 0.5 mM 
EGTA and 60 µM of the reversible SER 
CA inhibitor 2,5-di-tert-butyl- 
benzohydroquinone (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at 37°C. Subse-
quently, aequorin was reconstituted in the dark by incubating in buffer 1 
 
containing 5 µM coelenterazine hcp (Sigma-Aldrich) for another 30 
min. Uptake was determined as the rise of luminescence on a Lumat 
luminometer (Berthold) from before to after Ca2+ perfusion with 
1 mM CaCl2 in buffer 1, expressed relative to control cells. Maximum 
response was elicited subsequently by adding 0.1% Triton X-100 to 
check that luminescence had not been depleted during the experiment.
To measure ER Ca2+ release into the cytosol, we used Fura-2. 106 
cells (as indicated in the experiments) were seeded in 35-mm plates. 
The next day, cells were washed with HBSS buffer (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) containing 140 mg/l Ca2+, 100 mg/l Mg2+ and 0.1% BSA 
(HBSS/Ca/Mg/BSA) and then incubated with 1 ml 1 µM Fura-2 in 
HBSS/Ca/Mg/BSA for 30 min at RT in the dark. Next, we replaced 
the loading medium with HBSS/Ca/Mg/BSA and incubated for a fur-
ther 15 min in the dark. After trypsinization and quenching with 1 ml 
DMEM/10% FBS, cells were washed twice with 1 ml HBSS/Ca/Mg/
BSA. Cells were then resuspended in HBSS/Ca/Mg/BSA and trans-
ferred into a cuvette containing a stirring bar, followed by the mea-
suring of 505 nm emission with 340/380 nm excitation on an 814 
photomultiplier detection system (PTI), upon establishment of a 200-s 
baseline. Drugs (50 µM histamine or 10 µM thapsigargin) were added 
as 100 µl of a 200× stock solution prepared in HBSS/Ca/Mg/BSA. 
The Ca2+ response was determined as the relative ratiometric signal 
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 4 • 2016
442
obtained from the baseline and after adding drugs. For the decay calcu-
lation, we fit a line into the data derived from the peak until 30 s later. 
Data were analyzed using the LibreOffice Spreadsheet software.
To measure ER and mitochondrial Ca2+, 50,000 cells were 
grown for 1 d in 35-mm glass-bottom dishes (MatTek Corporation) 
and transfected with 0.5 µg of the Ca2+ indicator plasmids low-af-
finity ER R-GECO (LAR-ER-GECO) or mitochondrial R-GECO 
(Wu et al., 2014) using 2.5 µg Metafectene (Biontex) and following 
the manufacturer’s protocol. On the day of the experiment, the per-
fusion system was equilibrated with the appropriate HBSS solution 
(HBSS/Ca/Mg or HBSS−; 0.1 mM EGTA, 1.75 mM MgCl2, and 
0.41 mM MgSO4), as indicated. 30 s after the start of the experiment, 
the medium was changed to the stimulus as indicated for a duration 
of 5–10 min, followed by continuing the run of the experiment for 
10 min using HBSS/Ca/Mg or HBSS−, respectively. For these sin-
gle-cell experiments, as indicated in figure legends, n refers to num-
ber of experiments, each consisting of multiple numbers of cells (at 
least 5 to typically 12).
Microscopy and image acquisition
All microscopy experiments were performed on an FV1000 laser-scan-
ning confocal microscope (Olympus) using a 20× objective (XLU 
MPL 
ANFL, NA 1.0; Olympus), equipped with perfusion systems using a 
peristaltic pump (for the FV1000 system, Watson-Marlow Alitea-AB; 
Sin-Can). Live-cell images were taken every second with a 559 nm laser 
excitation and a 575–675 nm band-pass emission filter using a PL-A686 
6.6 megapixel camera (Capture-se software; PixeLINK). Temperature 
in the recording chamber was kept at 25–27°C (TC-324B; Harvard Ap-
paratus). Cells were incubated in tissue culture medium supplemented 
with drugs as indicated. Fluorochromes were used as indicated. Acqui-
sition occurred with the Olympus Fluoview software, and image quan-
tification was performed with the Fiji distribution of ImageJ.
ATP content
Cellular ATP content was determined using the ATP Determina-
tion kit (Molecular Probes; emission ∼560 nm at pH 7.8) as per 
the manufacturer’s instruction manual (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
Readings were normalized to the number of viable cells using try-
pan blue exclusion method.
Apoptosis measurements, medium acidification, and ROS content
Apoptosis of cells in glucose-free medium was assayed as follows: 
Cells (as indicated) were seeded at 500,000 into 6-well dishes. The 
next day, the normal growth medium was exchanged to DMEM con-
taining 2 mM glutamine. 48 h later, cells were processed for Annexin V 
 
staining using the Annexin V-Cy3 Apoptosis detection kit (Biovision). 
In brief, cells were trypsinized and resuspended in PBS containing 1% 
BSA. They were then incubated with 5 µl Annexin V-Cy3 in 500 µl 
binding buffer (following the manufacturer’s instructions) and sorted 
on an LSR Fortessa (BD). Medium acidification was measured as fol-
lows: 250,000 cells were plated per well in a 12-well plate. The con-
ditioned growth medium was removed after 24 and 48 h, and the pH 
was measured using a Mettler pH meter. To measure cellular ROS, 
cells were cotransfected with HyPer plasmid for 24 h (Evrogen) or 
loaded for 30 min with 5 µM dichlorofluorescein, and ROS was mea-
sured by flow cytometry.
Mitochondrial oxygen consumption
The respiratory capacity of the mitochondrial electron transport chain 
was measured in intact cells using high-resolution respirometry (Oxy-
graph-2K; Oroboros) at 37°C, as previously described (Lucchinetti et 
al., 2012). Cultured cells were trypsinized, centrifuged at 100 g for 5 
min, resuspended in the same media and immediately assessed for O2 
consumption in a single protocol designed to assess basal respiration; 
ATP turnover respiration (after addition of the ATP synthase inhibi-
tor oligomycin), and maximal respiration (or electron transfer system 
capacity, after addition of the protonophoric uncoupler carbonyl cya-
nide-4-[trifluoromethoxy]phenylhydrazone). Data were normalized to 
citrate synthase activity (Srere, 1969).
In vivo tumor xenograft
WT TMX1 cDNA and shRNA clones generated in A375P or HeLa (as 
indicated) were trypsinized. 10 × 106 cells were injected subcutaneously 
into the right and left flanks of athymic nude mice (#NCR 
NU-M, CrTac 
:NCr 
-FoxN1Nu; Taconic). Mice were monitored weekly until tumors 
appear and then twice a week thereafter. Once tumors exceeded 20 mm 
in diameter ((length × width2)/2), mice were euthanized and tumors 
excised and measured. All animal experiments were conducted as per 
the guidelines of the University of Alberta Animal Policy and Welfare 
Committee and the Canadian Council on Animal Care Guidelines. The 
approval for use of animals in research was granted by the Animal 
Care and Use Committee for Health Sciences, a University of Alberta 
ethics review committee.
Preparation and analysis of electron micrographs
Cell monolayers were fixed for 20 min using 2% paraformaldehyde 
and 2% glutharaldehyde in 100 mM sodium cocadylate buffer, pH 
7.4. Cells were scraped from the plates and pelleted. Secondary fix-
ation was in osmium tetroxide 1% followed by quick rinses in water 
and staining in 1% aqueous solution of uranyl acetate. Dehydration 
was in increasing concentrations of ethanol followed by incubation 
in propylene oxide at RT. Pellets were then infused with Embed 812, 
and blocks were hardened at 60°C for a minimum of 48 h. We used 
an Ultracut E (Reichert-Jung) for sectioning and imaged the sam-
ples using a CCD camera (iTEM; Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions) 
mounted on a 410 transmission electron microscope (Philips). On the 
images, we identified ER tubules in the proximity of mitochondria 
and determined their distance in nanometers. We recorded apposed 
ER tubules per mitochondrion (distance <50 nm) and quantified their 
distance and length for control and KO conditions. Average distance 
was 20 µm, and no significant differences in length were seen for con-
tacts >30 nm in distance. Data were derived from over 100 images 
for HeLa WT and KO cells each, covering n = 595 MAMs for WT 
and n = 648 MAMs for KO.
Statistical analysis
Unless specified otherwise, all the data are expressed as mean ± stan-
dard deviation from a minimum of three determinations. Bar graphs 
include standard errors. Statistical significance of differences between 
various samples was determined by analysis of variance. P < 0.05 was 
considered significant. Statistical analysis was performed using the Li-
breOffice Calc software.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 provides characterization of ER Ca2+ uptake in RNAi 
clones and TMX1 behavior upon redox modulation, as well as 
coimmunoprecipitation of TMX1 mutants without cross-linker and 
their fractionation on an OPT 
IPR 
EP gradient. Fig. S2 provides Rhod2 
data from TMX1 mutant-transfected A375P cells and ATP content 
of transiently transfected cells, as well as proteomic analysis of key 
proteins and a growth curve of RNAi stably transfected cells. Fig. S3 
provides nucleotide and CRI 
SPR/Cas9 genomic information. Online 
supplemental material is available at http 
://www 
.jcb 
.org 
/cgi 
/content 
/
full 
/jcb 
.201512077 
/DC1.
 TmX1 determines er–mitochondria Ca2+ flux • raturi et al.
443
Acknowledgments
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Yvonne Dierauer. 
We thank Ing-Swie Goping, Geert Bultynck, Christian Appenzeller-Her-
zog, Edgar Yoboue, and Roberto Sitia for helpful discussions. We 
thank Gary Eitzen for the use of the fluorimeter. We thank Lars-Oliver 
Klotz for additional compounds and helpful discussions.
Research in the Simmen laboratory was supported by Canadian Can-
cer Society Research Institute grant 2010-700306 and Cancer Re-
search Society grant 18325. A. Raturi was supported by an Alberta 
Innovates - Health Solutions fellowship. The Zaugg laboratory was 
supported by grants from the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Alberta, 
Northwest Territories, and Nunavut (Canada) and the Mazankowski 
Alberta Heart Institute. The Baksh laboratory was supported by grants 
from Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation, Alberta Heritage Founda-
tion for Medical Research, and Alberta Innovates - Health Solutions 
and a Department of Pediatrics/The Stollery Children’s Foundation 
Hair Massacure grant generously donated by the MacDonald family. 
The Ballanyi laboratory was supported by an Alberta Heritage Foun-
dation for Medical Research/Alberta Innovates - Health Solutions Sci-
entist award, the Canada Foundation of Innovation, and Alberta 
Advanced Technology and Education.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Submitted: 23 December 2015
Accepted: 15 July 2016
References
Adachi, T., R.M. Weisbrod, D.R. Pimentel, J. Ying, V.S. Sharov, C. Schöneich, 
and R.A. Cohen. 2004. S-Glutathiolation by peroxynitrite activates SER 
CA during arterial relaxation by nitric oxide. Nat. Med. 10:1200–1207. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1119
Alvarez, J., and M. Montero. 2002. Measuring [Ca2+] in the endoplasmic 
reticulum with aequorin. Cell Calcium. 32:251–260. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0143416002001860
Appenzeller-Herzog, C., and T. Simmen. 2016. ER-luminal thiol/selenol-
mediated regulation of Ca2+ signalling. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 44:452–459. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1042 
/BST20150233
Austin, S., and J. St-Pierre. 2012. PGC1α and mitochondrial metabolism-
-emerging concepts and relevance in ageing and neurodegenerative 
disorders. J. Cell Sci. 125:4963–4971. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.113662
Boehning, D., R.L. Patterson, and S.H. Snyder. 2004. Apoptosis and calcium: 
new roles for cytochrome c and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Cell Cycle. 
3:252–254. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4161 
/cc 
.3 
.3 
.705
Boehning, D., D.B. van Rossum, R.L. Patterson, and S.H. Snyder. 2005. A peptide 
inhibitor of cytochrome c/inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor binding 
blocks intrinsic and extrinsic cell death pathways. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 102:1466–1471. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0409650102
Bravo, R., J.M. Vicencio, V. Parra, R. Troncoso, J.P. Munoz, M. Bui, C. Quiroga, 
A.E. Rodriguez, H.E. Verdejo, J. Ferreira, et al. 2011. Increased 
ER-mitochondrial coupling promotes mitochondrial respiration and 
bioenergetics during early phases of ER stress. J. Cell Sci. 124:2143–
2152. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.080762
Cárdenas, C., R.A. Miller, I. Smith, T. Bui, J. Molgó, M. Müller, H. Vais, 
K.H. Cheung, J. Yang, I. Parker, et al. 2010. Essential regulation of cell 
bioenergetics by constitutive InsP3 receptor Ca2+ transfer to mitochondria. 
Cell. 142:270–283. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2010 
.06 
.007
Cárdenas, C., M. Müller, A. McNeal, A. Lovy, F. Jaňa, G. Bustos, F. Urra, 
N. Smith, J. Molgó, J.A. Diehl, et al. 2016. Selective vulnerability of 
cancer cells by inhibition of Ca2+ transfer from endoplasmic reticulum 
to mitochondria. Cell Reports. 15:219–220. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2016 
.03 
.045
Csordás, 
G., 
and 
G. 
Hajnóczky. 
2009. 
SR/ER-mitochondrial 
local 
communication: calcium and ROS. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1787:1352–
1362. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.bbabio 
.2009 
.06 
.004
Csordás, G., C. Renken, P. Várnai, L. Walter, D. Weaver, K.F. Buttle, T. Balla, 
C.A. Mannella, and G. Hajnóczky. 2006. Structural and functional 
features and significance of the physical linkage between ER and 
mitochondria. J. Cell Biol. 174:915–921. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.200604016
Csordás, G., P. Várnai, T. Golenár, S. Roy, G. Purkins, T.G. Schneider, T. Balla, 
and G. Hajnóczky. 2010. Imaging interorganelle contacts and local 
calcium dynamics at the ER-mitochondrial interface. Mol. Cell. 39:121–
132. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2010 
.06 
.029
de Brito, O.M., and L. Scorrano. 2008. Mitofusin 2 tethers endoplasmic 
reticulum to mitochondria. Nature. 456:605–610. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature07534
De Marchi, U., C. Castelbou, and N. Demaurex. 2011. Uncoupling protein 3 
(UCP3) modulates the activity of Sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-
ATPase (SER 
CA) by decreasing mitochondrial ATP production. J. Biol. 
Chem. 286:32533–32541. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M110 
.216044
Favre, C., A. Zhdanov, M. Leahy, D. Papkovsky, and R. O’Connor. 2010. 
Mitochondrial 
pyrimidine 
nucleotide 
carrier 
(PNC1) 
regulates 
mitochondrial biogenesis and the invasive phenotype of cancer cells. 
Oncogene. 29:3964–3976. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/onc 
.2010 
.146
Filadi, R., E. Greotti, G. Turacchio, A. Luini, T. Pozzan, and P. Pizzo. 2015. 
Mitofusin 2 ablation increases endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria 
coupling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 112:E2174–E2181. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1504880112
Hawkins, B.J., K.M. Irrinki, K. Mallilankaraman, Y.C. Lien, Y. Wang, 
C.D. Bhanumathy, R. Subbiah, M.F. Ritchie, J. Soboloff, Y. Baba, et 
al. 2010. S-glutathionylation activates STIM1 and alters mitochondrial 
homeostasis. J. Cell Biol. 190:391–405. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201004152
Higo, T., M. Hattori, T. Nakamura, T. Natsume, T. Michikawa, and K. Mikoshiba. 
2005. Subtype-specific and ER lumenal environment-dependent 
regulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 by ERp44. Cell. 
120:85–98. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2004 
.11 
.048
Howatson, A.F., and A.W. Ham. 1955. Electron microscope study of sections of 
two rat liver tumors. Cancer Res. 15:62–69.
Jones, R.G., T. Bui, C. White, M. Madesh, C.M. Krawczyk, T. Lindsten, 
B.J. Hawkins, S. Kubek, K.A. Frauwirth, Y.L. Wang, et al. 2007. The 
proapoptotic factors Bax and Bak regulate T Cell proliferation through 
control of endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ homeostasis. Immunity. 27:268–
280. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.immuni 
.2007 
.05 
.023
Jouaville, L.S., P. Pinton, C. Bastianutto, G.A. Rutter, and R. Rizzuto. 1999. 
Regulation of mitochondrial ATP synthesis by calcium: evidence for a 
long-term metabolic priming. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 96:13807–
13812. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.96 
.24 
.13807
Lagadec, C., C. Dekmezian, L. Bauché, and F. Pajonk. 2012. Oxygen levels do 
not determine radiation survival of breast cancer stem cells. PLoS One. 
7:e34545. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0034545
Lucchinetti, E., A.E. Awad, M. Rahman, J. Feng, P.H. Lou, L. Zhang, L. Ionescu, 
H. Lemieux, B. Thébaud, and M. Zaugg. 2012. Antiproliferative effects 
of local anesthetics on mesenchymal stem cells: potential implications for 
tumor spreading and wound healing. Anesthesiology. 116:841–856. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1097 
/ALN 
.0b013e31824babfe
Lynes, E.M., and T. Simmen. 2011. Urban planning of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER): how diverse mechanisms segregate the many functions of the ER. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1813:1893–1905. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.bbamcr 
.2011 
.06 
.011
Lynes, E.M., M. Bui, M.C. Yap, M.D. Benson, B. Schneider, L. Ellgaard, 
L.G. Berthiaume, and T. Simmen. 2012. Palmitoylated TMX and calnexin 
target to the mitochondria-associated membrane. EMBO J. 31:457–470. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/emboj 
.2011 
.384
Lynes, E.M., A. Raturi, M. Shenkman, C. Ortiz Sandoval, M.C. Yap, J. Wu, 
A. Janowicz, N. Myhill, M.D. Benson, R.E. Campbell, et al. 2013. 
Palmitoylation is the switch that assigns calnexin to quality control or 
ER Ca2+ signaling. J. Cell Sci. 126:3893–3903. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.125856
Matsuo, Y., Y. Nishinaka, S. Suzuki, M. Kojima, S. Kizaka-Kondoh, N. Kondo, 
A. Son, J. Sakakura-Nishiyama, Y. Yamaguchi, H. Masutani, et al. 2004. 
TMX, a human transmembrane oxidoreductase of the thioredoxin family: 
the possible role in disulfide-linked protein folding in the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 423:81–87. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.abb 
.2003 
.11 
.003
Matsuo, Y., H. Masutani, A. Son, S. Kizaka-Kondoh, and J. Yodoi. 2009. Physical 
and functional interaction of transmembrane thioredoxin-related protein 
with major histocompatibility complex class I heavy chain: redox-based 
protein quality control and its potential relevance to immune responses. 
Mol. Biol. Cell. 20:4552–4562. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1091 
/mbc 
.E09 
-05 
-0439
 JCB • Volume 214 • NumBer 4 • 2016
444
Myhill, N., E.M. Lynes, J.A. Nanji, A.D. Blagoveshchenskaya, H. Fei, 
K. Carmine Simmen, T.J. Cooper, G. Thomas, and T. Simmen. 2008. The 
subcellular distribution of calnexin is mediated by PACS-2. Mol. Biol. 
Cell. 19:2777–2788. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1091 
/mbc 
.E07 
-10 
-0995
Nymark, P., P.M. Lindholm, M.V. Korpela, L. Lahti, S. Ruosaari, S. Kaski, 
J. Hollmén, S. Anttila, V.L. Kinnula, and S. Knuutila. 2007. Gene 
expression profiles in asbestos-exposed epithelial and mesothelial lung 
cell lines. BMC Genomics. 8:62. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1471 
-2164 
-8 
-62
Pastorino, J.G., and J.B. Hoek. 2003. Hexokinase II: the integration of energy 
metabolism and control of apoptosis. Curr. Med. Chem. 10:1535–1551. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2174 
/0929867033457269
Patron, M., A. Raffaello, V. Granatiero, A. Tosatto, G. Merli, D. De Stefani, 
L. Wright, G. Pallafacchina, A. Terrin, C. Mammucari, and R. Rizzuto. 
2013. The mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU): molecular identity 
and physiological roles. J. Biol. Chem. 288:10750–10758. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.R112 
.420752
Pisoni, G.B., L.W. Ruddock, N. Bulleid, and M. Molinari. 2015. Division of labor 
among oxidoreductases: TMX1 preferentially acts on transmembrane 
polypeptides. Mol. Biol. Cell. 26:3390–3400. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1091 
/
mbc 
.E15 
-05 
-0321
Qi, H., L. Li, and J. Shuai. 2015. Optimal microdomain crosstalk between 
endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria for Ca2+ oscillations. Sci. Rep. 
5:7984. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/srep07984
Raturi, A., and B. Mutus. 2007. Characterization of redox state and reductase 
activity of protein disulfide isomerase under different redox environments 
using a sensitive fluorescent assay. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 43:62–70. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.freeradbiomed 
.2007 
.03 
.025
Raturi, A., C. Ortiz-Sandoval, and T. Simmen. 2014. Redox dependence of endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) Ca2+ signaling. Histol. Histopathol. 29:543–552.
Redpath, C.J., M. Bou Khalil, G. Drozdzal, M. Radisic, and H.M. McBride. 
2013. Mitochondrial hyperfusion during oxidative stress is coupled to a 
dysregulation in calcium handling within a C2C12 cell model. PLoS One. 
8:e69165. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0069165
Rehman, J., H.J. Zhang, P.T. Toth, Y. Zhang, G. Marsboom, Z. Hong, R. Salgia, 
A.N. Husain, C. Wietholt, and S.L. Archer. 2012. Inhibition of 
mitochondrial fission prevents cell cycle progression in lung cancer. FAS 
EB J. 26:2175–2186. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1096 
/fj 
.11 
-196543
Reitzer, L.J., B.M. Wice, and D. Kennell. 1979. Evidence that glutamine, not 
sugar, is the major energy source for cultured HeLa cells. J. Biol. Chem. 
254:2669–2676.
Rizzuto, R., P. Pinton, W. Carrington, F.S. Fay, K.E. Fogarty, L.M. Lifshitz, 
R.A. Tuft, and T. Pozzan. 1998. Close contacts with the endoplasmic 
reticulum as determinants of mitochondrial Ca2+ responses. Science. 
280:1763–1766. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.280 
.5370 
.1763
Roderick, H.L., J.D. Lechleiter, and P. Camacho. 2000. Cytosolic phosphorylation 
of calnexin controls intracellular Ca2+ oscillations via an interaction with 
SER 
CA2b. J. Cell Biol. 149:1235–1248. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.149 
.6 
.1235
Roth, D., E. Lynes, J. Riemer, H.G. Hansen, N. Althaus, T. Simmen, and 
L. Ellgaard. 2009. A di-arginine motif contributes to the ER localization 
of the type I transmembrane ER oxidoreductase TMX4. Biochem. 
J. 425:195–205. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1042 
/BJ20091064
Simmen, T., E.M. Lynes, K. Gesson, and G. Thomas. 2010. Oxidative protein 
folding in the endoplasmic reticulum: tight links to the mitochondria-
associated membrane (MAM). Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1798:1465–1473. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.bbamem 
.2010 
.04 
.009
Srere, P.A. 1969. [1] Citrate synthase [EC 4.1.3.7. Citrate oxaloacetate-lyase 
(CoA-acetylating)]. Methods Enzymol. 13:3–11. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0076 
-6879(69)13005 
-0
Vance, J.E. 1990. Phospholipid synthesis in a membrane fraction associated with 
mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 265:7248–7256.
Waldeck-Weiermair, M., A.T. Deak, L.N. Groschner, M.R. Alam, C. Jean-
Quartier, R. Malli, and W.F. Graier. 2013. Molecularly distinct routes 
of mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake are activated depending on the activity of 
the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (SER 
CA). J. Biol. Chem. 
288:15367–15379. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M113 
.462259
Warburg, O. 1956. On the origin of cancer cells. Science. 123:309–314. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.123 
.3191 
.309
Ward, P.S., and C.B. Thompson. 2012. Metabolic reprogramming: a cancer 
hallmark even Warburg did not anticipate. Cancer Cell. 21:297–308. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2012 
.02 
.014
Wu, J., D.L. Prole, Y. Shen, Z. Lin, A. Gnanasekaran, Y. Liu, L. Chen, H. Zhou, 
S.R. Chen, 
Y.M. Usachev, et al. 2014. Red fluorescent genetically encoded 
Ca2+ indicators for use in mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. 
Biochem. J. 464:13–22. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1042 
/BJ20140931
