 e604
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
ABSTRACT: Non–vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOACs) are now widely 
used as alternatives to warfarin for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation 
and management of venous thromboembolism. In clinical practice, there 
is still widespread uncertainty on how to manage patients on NOACs who 
bleed or who are at risk for bleeding. Clinical trial data related to NOAC 
reversal for bleeding and perioperative management are sparse, and 
recommendations are largely derived from expert opinion. Knowledge 
of time of last ingestion of the NOAC and renal function is critical to 
managing these patients given that laboratory measurement is challenging 
because of the lack of commercially available assays in the United States. 
Idarucizumab is available as an antidote to rapidly reverse the effects of 
dabigatran. At present, there is no specific antidote available in the United 
States for the oral factor Xa inhibitors. Prothrombin concentrate may be 
considered in life-threatening bleeding. Healthcare institutions should adopt 
a NOAC reversal and perioperative management protocol developed with 
multidisciplinary input.
A
s the US population ages, the burden of atrial fibrillation (AF) and venous throm-
boembolic disease is expected to increase, and prescriptions for long-term 
anticoagulation will climb. Anticoagulated patients are vulnerable to spontane-
ous, traumatic and perioperative bleeding. Warfarin is a vitamin K antagonist (VKA) 
that has been used for decades to prevent and treat arterial and venous thromboem-
bolism (VTE). More recently, 4 non–vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants (NOACs) 
have been approved in the United States as alternatives to warfarin for prevention 
of stroke resulting from nonvalvular AF (NVAF), and prevention and treatment of VTE. 
These are dabigatran etexilate (Pradaxa, Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany); rivaroxa-
ban (Xarelto, Bayer HealthCare AG, Leverkusen, Germany), apixaban (Eliquis, Pfizer 
and Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, NY) and edoxaban (Savaysa, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Tokyo, Japan). Direct oral anticoagulants has been proposed as alternative nomen-
clature for these class of agents.1 NOACs are associated with comparable or lower 
risk of stroke, systemic embolism, major bleeding, and death compared with warfa-
rin for NVAF.2–5 In contrast with warfarin, NOACs have a more predictable therapeutic 
effect, do not require routine monitoring, have fewer potential drug-drug interactions 
and no restriction on dietary consumption of vitamin K–containing food. However, 
universal adoption of NOACs has been stunted by the lack of specific antidotes 
and measurement assays. This scientific statement reviews the literature and offers 
practical suggestions for providers who manage patients who are actively bleeding 
and who are at risk for bleeding in the acute care and periprocedural setting. This 
statement focuses on interpreting available data rather than providing specific man-
Amish N. Raval, MD, 
FAHA, Chair
Joaquin E. Cigarroa, MD
Mina K. Chung, MD, FAHA
Larry J. Diaz-Sandoval, 
MD, FAHA
Deborah Diercks, MD
Jonathan P
. Piccini, MD, 
MHS, FAHA
Hee Soo Jung, MD
Jeffrey B. Washam, 
PharmD, FAHA
Babu G. Welch, MD
Allyson R. Zazulia, MD, 
FAHA
Sean P
. Collins, MD, MSc, 
FAHA, Co-Chair
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Clinical Pharmacology 
Subcommittee of the 
Acute Cardiac Care 
and General Cardiology 
Committee of the Coun-
cil on Clinical Cardiol-
ogy; Council on Car-
diovascular Disease in 
the Young; and Council 
on Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research
Management of Patients on Non–Vitamin K 
Antagonist Oral Anticoagulants in the Acute Care 
and Periprocedural Setting
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ acute care  
◼ anticoagulants ◼ non–vitamin K 
antagonist ◼ periprocedural
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e605
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
agement recommendations in under-studied populations 
such as oncology patients.
Members of this American Heart Association (AHA) 
writing group were selected for their diverse expertise 
in cardiovascular medicine, emergency medicine, critical 
care, neurology, surgery, and pharmacology. A system-
atic search of the literature for each subtopic was per-
formed in PubMed and Ovid and was supplemented by 
review of bibliographies as well as manual searches of 
key articles. Each of the following search terms were in-
cluded individually and in combination: dabigatran, apix-
aban, rivaroxaban, edoxaban, anticoagulation, reversal, 
antidote, atrial fibrillation, venous thromboembolism, 
bleeding, intracranial, cardioversion, catheterization, 
cardiac implantable devices, kidney injury, transition, 
switching, pharmacology, andexanet alfa, idarucizumab, 
ciraparantag, gastrointestinal, trauma, surgery, percu-
taneous coronary intervention, neuraxial anesthesia, 
stroke, and overdose. Writing group members were 
instructed to write subtopic sections aligned with their 
experience. Members were instructed to cite contempo-
rary guidelines and scientific statements where appropri-
ate. The writing group did not assign formal classes of 
recommendation/level of evidence per the AHA Scien-
tific Document Development Process recommendation 
that went into effect September 1, 2015. Sections were 
then reviewed by another writing group member. Sec-
tion drafts were submitted to the writing group chair and 
co-chair and compiled into a single document. Web and 
teleconferences were convened to review and edit the 
full draft. The final document was submitted for indepen-
dent peer review and approved for publication by the 
AHA Manuscript Oversight Committee on April 29, 2016.
PHARMACOLOGY OF NOACS
NOACs act through direct inhibition of thrombin or inhi-
bition of factor Xa (Figure 1). Dabigatran etexilate me-
sylate is a competitive direct thrombin inhibitor. Rivar-
oxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban inhibit factor Xa and 
prothrombinase activity, thus inhibiting the conversion of 
prothrombin to thrombin. Thrombin catalyzes the con-
version of fibrinogen to fibrin; activates factors V, VIII, 
XI, and XIII; and activates platelets. Therefore, inhibiting 
thrombin decreases thrombus formation. In contrast 
with warfarin, NOACs have a rapid onset of action, a 
shorter half-life, and more predictable pharmacokinet-
ics. Routine therapeutic monitoring was not done in the 
major NOAC efficacy trials and is at present not recom-
mended in usual clinical practice. Information pertaining 
to NOAC dose, time to peak effect, and time to offset of 
effect is outlined in Table 1.
NOACs are substrates for P-glycoprotein (P-gp) trans-
port and apixaban and rivaroxaban are substrates for 
CYP 3A4 metabolism. Therefore, concomitant medica-
tions that are inducers or inhibitors of these pathways 
should be evaluated for the potential to interact (Table 2). 
Macrolides and nondihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers are 2 commonly prescribed classes of medica-
tions that impact therapeutic levels of NOACs, although a 
post hoc analysis of ROCKET AF (Rivaroxaban Once Daily 
Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared with Vitamin K 
Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial 
in Atrial Fibrillation) showed no evidence of differential 
outcomes between rivaroxaban and warfarin in patients 
treated with ≥1 combined P-gp and CYP 3A4 inhibitors.6 
Edoxaban exists in a predominantly unchanged form 
Figure 1. Clotting cascade 
and anticoagulants.  
VKA indicates vitamin K 
antagonist.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e606
Table 1. Comparison Among NOACs
 
Dabigatran
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Edoxaban
Approved indications
Nonvalular AF
  
↓ Risk of stroke and 
systemic embolism
Nonvalular AF
  
↓ Risk of stroke and  
systemic embolism
Nonvalular AF
  
↓ Risk of stroke and 
systemic embolism
Nonvalular AF
  
↓ Risk of stroke and 
systemic embolism. 
  
Limitation: should not 
use in patients with  
CrCl >95 mL/min 
as a result of ↑ risk 
of ischemic stroke 
compared with 
warfarin at 60 mg
DVT, PE
  
Treatment after 5–10 d  
parenteral AC
  
↓ Recurrence 
Prophylaxis after hip  
replacement
DVT, PE
 Treatment 
  
↓ Recurrence 
Prophylaxis after hip or 
knee replacement
DVT, PE
 Treatment
  
↓ Recurrence 
Prophylaxis after hip 
replacement
DVT, PE
  
↓ Recurrence  
Treatment after 5–10 
d initial parenteral AC
Mechanism of action
Direct thrombin inhibitor
Factor Xa inhibitor
Factor Xa inhibitor
Factor Xa inhibitor
Time to peak
1 h; delayed to 2 h
with food
2–4 h
3–4 h
1–2 h
Bioavailability
3%–7%
10-mg dose: 80%–100%
~50%
62%
20-mg dose: 66%
↑ With food
Plasma protein binding
35%
92%–95%
~87%
55%
Volume of distribution
50–70 L
50 L
21 L
107 L
Plasma t1/2
12–17 h
5–9 h
~12 h (8–15 h)
10–14 h
Elderly 14–17 h
Elderly 11–13 h
Mild to moderate renal 
impairment 15–18 h
Severe renal impairment 28 h
Metabolism
Hepatic and plasma 
hydrolysis to active 
dabigatran
Hepatic: oxidation by 
CYP3A4/5, CYP2J2; 
hydrolysis to inactive 
metabolites (51%)
Hepatic: 25% mainly by 
CYP3A4/5; lesser by CYP1A2, 
CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, 
CYP2J2; O-demethylation and 
hydroxylation
Minimal CYP3A4 
hydrolysis, conjugation, 
oxidation
Hepatic glucuronidation to 
active metabolites (<10%)
P-gp substrate
No active circulating 
metabolites
Active metabolite (M-4, 
<10% of parent)
P-gp substrate
No major or active 
circulating metabolites
Substrate of CYP3A4, P-gp, 
BCRP
P-gp substrate
Substrate of P-gp and 
ABCG2 (BCRP)
Excretion
Renal (~80%) after IV 
administration
Renal (66%): 36% active, 
30% inactive metabolites
Renal (27%)
Renal (~50%): primarily 
as unchanged drug
After oral, 7% recovered in 
urine, 86% in feces
Feces (28%): 7% active, 
21% inactive metabolites
Biliary and direct intestinal 
excretion
Metabolism and biliary/
intestinal excretion 
accounts for the rest
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e607
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Dosing
 Nonvalvular AF
CrCl >30 mL/min: 150 mg 
BID
CrCl >50 mL/min: 20 mg 
daily with evening meal
5 mg BID
CrCl >50 to ≤95 mL/min: 
60 mg daily
CrCl 15–30 mL/min: 75 mg 
BID
CrCl 15–50 mL/min:  
15 mg daily with evening 
meal
2.5 mg BID, if 2 of 3 
characteristics: Cr ≥1.5 mg/dL, 
age ≥80 y, weight ≤60 kg
CrCl 15–50 mL/min:  
30 mg daily
CrCl <15 mL/min or on 
dialysis: Not recommended
Not recommended for 
CrCl <15 mL/min or on 
dialysis in patients with AF
 
NOT recommended for 
CrCl >95 mL/min
CrCl 30–50 mL/min with 
concomitant P-gp inhibitors: 
75 mg BID
CrCl <30 mL/min with 
concomitant P-gp inhibitors: 
Avoid coadministration
  
DVT or PE  
treatment
CrCl >30 mL/min: 150 mg 
BID after 5-10 d parenteral 
anticoagulation
15 mg BID with food first 
21 d for initial treatment, 
then 20 mg once daily 
with food
10 mg BID x 7 d, then 5 mg 
BID
60 mg once daily
CrCl ≤30 mL/min or on 
dialysis: Not recommended
Not recommended for 
CrCl <30 mL/min in 
patients with DVT or PE
 
CrCl 15–50 mL/min or 
weight ≤60 kg or on 
certain P-gp inhibitors: 
30 mg once daily
  
↓ in recurrent  
DVT/PE
CrCl >30 mL/min: 150 mg 
BID after 5–10 d parenteral 
anticoagulation
20 mg daily with food
2.5 mg BID
CrCl ≤30 mL/min or on 
dialysis: Not recommended
  
DVT, PE  
prophylaxis after  
hip or knee  
replacement
After hip replacement surgery:
  
CrCl >30 mL/min after 
achievement of hemostasis: 
If given day of surgery,  
110 mg 1–4 h postop; after 
day of surgery 220 mg 
once daily x 28–35 d
  
CrCl ≤30 mL/min or on 
dialysis: Not recommended
  
CrCl <50 mL/min 
with concomitant 
P-gp inhibitors: Avoid 
coadministration
Initial dose 6–10 h 
after surgery provided 
hemostasis established
2.5 mg BID x 35 d after hip 
replacement surgery or x 12 d 
after knee replacement surgery
10 mg daily with or 
without food x 35 d for 
hip replacement, x 12 d 
for knee replacement
  
Additional dosing  
comments
Avoid use with patients 
with moderate-severe 
hepatic impairment (Child-
Pugh class B/C) or hepatic 
disease with coagulopathy
Not recommended in 
patients with severe hepatic 
impairment (Child-Pugh  
class C)
Not recommended with 
CrCl <15 mL/min
15-20 mg taken with 
food; 10 mg with or 
without food
Not recommended 
in patients with 
moderate-severe hepatic 
impairment (Child-Pugh 
class B/C)
Table 1. Continued
 
Dabigatran
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Edoxaban
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e608
in plasma with minimal metabolism through hydrolysis, 
conjugation, and oxidation by CYP 3A4.
LABORATORY MEASUREMENT OF NOAC 
EFFECT
One advantage of NOACs over warfarin is more rapid on-
set and offset of action with predictable pharmacokinet-
ics and anticoagulant effect. This eliminates the necessi-
ty for routine therapeutic monitoring except for periodic 
assessment of renal function.7 Laboratory measurement 
of NOAC level or effect may be necessary in certain 
acute care or perioperative settings, particularly when 
there is uncertainty about the timing of last ingestion, 
renal function, and gastrointestinal absorption. However, 
the lack of US Food and Drug Administration–approved 
NOAC laboratory assays complicates the management 
of NOAC overdose, NOAC-associated life-threatening 
bleeding, and the scheduling of urgent surgical proce-
dures.8 All NOAC agents affect routine coagulation tests 
but not in a manner that allows for a predictable and 
quantitative measurement of anticoagulation effect. Spe-
cific NOAC agents are subsequently discussed.
Dabigatran
This agent is known to prolong the activated partial 
thromboplastin time, prothrombin time, and thrombin 
time. The package insert recommends using partial 
thromboplastin time for measurement; however, there is 
no defined partial thromboplastin time therapeutic range 
for dabigatran and the assay is relatively insensitive to 
different plasma concentrations of direct thrombin inhibi-
tors. Furthermore, the partial thromboplastin time can-
not be used in patients with lupus anticoagulant or an 
intrinsic clotting factor deficiency because its prolonga-
tion from these conditions would mask the anticoagulant 
effect of dabigatran. Thrombin time is far more sensi-
tive, and prothrombin time is less sensitive to dabigatran. 
A normal partial thromboplastin time or thrombin time 
most likely excludes therapeutic levels of dabigatran, 
whereas a normal prothrombin time may not. Quantita-
tive assessments of dabigatran levels can be obtained 
with the dilute thrombin time, the ecarin clotting time, or 
the ecarin chromogenic assay. Thrombin time and ecarin-
based assays show excellent linearity across on-therapy 
drug concentrations and may be used for drug quantifica-
tion. However, the US Food and Drug Administration has 
not approved these latter assays for measuring levels of 
dabigatran or other direct thrombin inhibitors.8
Rivaroxaban, Apixaban, Edoxaban
At present, there are no US Food and Drug Administra-
tion–approved assays or calibration reagents to measure 
the effect of direct oral factor Xa inhibitors. Rivaroxaban 
and apixaban affect activated clotting time and chro-
mogenic anti–factor Xa assay; however, no therapeutic 
range exists. Prothrombin time is less sensitive (espe-
cially for apixaban), and a normal prothrombin time may 
not exclude clinically relevant levels. Partial thromboplas-
tin time demonstrates insufficient sensitivity and linearity 
for quantification.9 Studies using spiked plasma samples 
suggest using prothrombin time for a qualitative assess-
ment of direct oral factor Xa inhibitors or chromogenic 
anti–factor Xa assay for a quantitative assessment of 
direct oral factor Xa inhibitors.8–10 Anti-Xa activity is linear 
over a wide range of drug levels and may be used for 
drug quantification. Undetectable anti-Xa activity likely 
excludes clinically relevant drug concentrations.
In summary, although routine NOAC monitoring is 
unnecessary, measurement of NOAC effect may assist 
clinical management in certain acute care and peripro-
cedural settings. In most situations, the time of last drug 
ingestion combined with a recent assessment of creati-
nine clearance (CrCl) should enable appropriate clinical 
decision making.
Therapeutic measurement
Routine not required
Routine not required
Routine not required
Routine not required
To detect presence: aPTT, 
ECT (if available), TT
To detect presence: 
PT, aPTT, antifactor Xa 
activity
To detect presence: PT, aPTT, 
antifactor Xa activity
Prolongs PT, aPTT, 
antifactor Xa activity
aPTT >2.5 times control may 
indicate overanticoagulation
Renal function, CBC 
periodically, at least 
annually; hepatic function
Renal function, CBC 
periodically, at least annually
Renal function, CBC 
periodically, at least 
annually
Renal function, CBC 
periodically, at least annually
AC indicates anticoagulant; AF, atrial fibrillation; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; BID, twice daily; CBC, complete blood count; CrCl, creatinine 
clearance; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; ECT, ecarin clotting time; IV, intravenous; NOACs, non–vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants; PE, pulmonary 
embolism; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; PT, prothrombin time; and TT, thrombin time.
Table 1. Continued
 
Dabigatran
Rivaroxaban
Apixaban
Edoxaban
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e609
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 2. NOAC Drug Interactions
NOAC
Interacting Medications
Effect on NOAC
Labeled Guidance; Comments
Dabigatran
P-gp inducer: rifampin
↓ Dabigatran exposure
Concomitant use should generally be 
avoided.
P-gp inhibitors: ketoconazole, dronedarone
↑ Dabigatran exposure if 
concomitant moderate renal 
impairment
If moderate renal impairment (CrCl 
30–50 mL/min) ↓ to 75 mg BID during 
concomitant use
P-gp inhibitors: ketoconazole, dronedarone, 
verapamil, amiodarone, quinidine, 
clarithromycin, ticagrelor
↑ Dabigatran exposure if 
concomitant severe renal 
impairment
If severe renal impairment (CrCl 15–30 mL/
min) avoid concomitant use
Apixaban
Strong dual P-gp and CYP3A4 inducers: 
rifampin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, St. 
John’s wort
↓ Apixaban exposure
Avoid concomitant use
Strong dual P-gp and CYP3A4 inhibitors: 
ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, 
clarithromycin
↑ Apixaban exposure
In patients on 5 mg or 10 mg BID, ↓ dose 
by 50% when coadministered
Avoid coadministration on 2.5 mg BID
Rivaroxaban
Combined P-gp and strong CYP3A4 
inducers: rifampin, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, St. John’s wort
↓ Rivaroxaban exposure
Avoid concomitant use; may decrease 
rivaroxaban efficacy
Combined P-gp and strong CYP3A4 
inhibitors: ketoconazole, itraconazole, HIV 
protease inhibitors (ritonavir, lopinavir/
ritonavir, indinavir), conivaptan
↑ Rivaroxaban exposure
Avoid concomitant use
Combined P-gp and moderate CYP3A4 
inhibitors: diltiazem, verapamil, amiodarone, 
dronedarone, erythromycin
↑ Rivaroxaban exposure in 
patients with renal impairment
In patients with CrCl 15 to <80 mL/min,  
rivaroxaban should not be used 
concomitantly unless the potential benefit 
justifies the potential risks
No evidence of interaction observed in 
ROCKET AF between treatment assignment 
and outcomes in patients using ≥1 
combined P-gp and moderate 3A4 
inhibitors (including amiodarone, diltiazem, 
and verapamil)6
Edoxaban
P-gp inducer: rifampin
↓ Edoxaban exposure
Avoid concomitant use
Strong P-gp inhibitors: ritonavir, nelfinavir, 
saquinavir, indinavir, cyclosporine
↑ Edoxaban exposure
Avoid concomitant use in patients taking 
edoxaban for treatment of VTE
P-gp inhibitors: verapamil, quinidine, 
azithromycin, clarithromycin, itraconazole, 
ketoconazole
↑ Edoxaban exposure
↓ to 30 mg daily during concomitant 
administration for patients taking edoxaban 
for the treatment of VTE
Dose reduction is not recommended for AF 
indications
In ENGAGE AF, a ↓ dose of edoxaban as 
a result of concomitant P-gp inhibitor use 
(verapamil, quinidine, dronedarone) was 
associated with ↓ edoxaban exposure and 
a relative ↑ in risk of stroke or systemic 
embolism with edoxaban relative to 
warfarin176
AF, atrial fibrillation; BID, twice daily; CrCl, creatinine clearance; ENGAGE AF, Effective Anticoagulation With Factor Xa Next Generation in Atrial Fibrillation 
trial; NOAC, non–vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant; P-gp, P-glycoprotein; ROCKET AF, Rivaroxaban Once Daily Oral Direct Factor Xa Inhibition 
Compared with Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation; and VTE, venous thromboembolism.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e610
NOAC REVERSAL
This AHA writing group suggests hospital systems adopt 
anticoagulation reversal protocols with multidisciplinary 
representation from emergency medicine, critical care, 
cardiology, hematology, gastroenterology, neurology, 
neurosurgery, trauma, acute care surgery, cardiotho-
racic surgery, vascular surgery, pharmacy, and nursing. 
An example of a NOAC reversal protocol is shown in 
Figure 2.
Dabigatran
For minor bleeding, supportive care and careful obser-
vation are suggested. For major bleeding, intravenous 
idarucizumab (Praxbind, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Germa-
ny) at a dose of 5 grams (2 consecutive intravenous infu-
sions of 2.5 g each) will reverse the anticoagulant effect 
of dabigatran within minutes.11 Idarucizumab is a mono-
clonal antibody fragment that binds dabigatran with an 
affinity 350 times that of thrombin. The RE-VERSE AD 
(Reversal Effects of Idarucizumab on Active Dabigatran) 
was a prospective cohort study that showed that ida-
rucizumab administration reversed anticoagulation as 
evidenced by the normalization of the dilute thrombin 
time and ecarin clotting time within minutes among sub-
jects suffering a serious hemorrhage or who required 
an urgent procedure.11 Early hemostasis was achieved 
in bleeding subjects, and a low rate of perioperative 
bleeding events was observed in subjects undergoing 
urgent surgery. However, the strength of these clinical 
observations is limited by the nonrandomized nature of 
this study.
Several studies have investigated the efficacy of pro-
thrombin complex concentrates (PCCs), recombinant fac-
tor VII activated, and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) in animal 
models; however, human data are mixed. One random-
ized, placebo-controlled trial in healthy men treated with 
dabigatran showed that 4-factor PCC did not reverse the 
dabigatran effect on partial thromboplastin time, endoge-
nous thrombin potential lag time, thrombin time, or ecarin 
clotting time.12 Case reports of patients with life-threat-
ening bleeding associated with dabigatran therapy have 
demonstrated mixed results with the use of FFP, recombi-
nant factor VII activated, PCCs, fibrinogen, and platelets.8
Hemodialysis may remove 49% to 57% of dabigatran 
within 4 hours given that the drug is only 35% bound to 
plasma proteins.13,14 Hemodialysis may be considered 
if the CrCl is chronically below 30 mL/min or in acute 
kidney injury. For major ingestion, there is some evi-
dence to support the use of activated charcoal therapy if 
dabigatran was consumed within 1 to 2 hours; however, 
care must be taken to prevent aspiration in patients with 
decreased level of consciousness.7,8 Furthermore, acti-
vated charcoal induced vomiting could have deleterious 
effects by increasing intracranial pressure in patients 
with intracranial hemorrhage (ICH).
In summary, the AHA writing group suggests com-
pression when possible, supportive measures, and up-
front idarucizumab in the event of dabigatran-associated 
major bleeding.
Rivaroxaban and Apixaban
Similar to dabigatran, activated charcoal may prevent 
absorption of rivaroxaban and apixaban if administered 
Figure 2. Example of a “Serious 
Bleeding on a NOAC” protocol.  
BUN indicates blood urea nitrogen; 
CBC, complete blood count; IU, 
international units; IV, intravenous; 
NOAC, non–vitamin K antagonist oral 
anticoagulants; PCC, prothrombin 
complex concentrate; PRBC, packed 
red blood cells; PTT, partial thrombo-
plastin time; and TT, thrombin time. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e611
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
within 1 to 2 hours after NOAC ingestion. Rivaroxaban 
and apixaban are highly bound to plasma proteins; 
therefore, dialysis is ineffective in clearing these drugs. 
Andexanet alfa is a recombinant modified human fac-
tor Xa decoy protein that serves as a specific reversal 
agent to neutralize the anticoagulant effects of direct 
and indirect factor Xa inhibitors. This drug is admin-
istered as an initial intravenous bolus followed by an 
infusion for up to 2 hours. A recent study revealed that 
andexanet alpha reversed the laboratory assessed 
anticoagulant activity of rivaroxaban and apixaban in 
older healthy individuals within minutes of administra-
tion.15 At present, the single arm, open-label ANNEXA-4 
(Andexanet Alfa for Acute Major Bleeding Associated 
with Factor Xa Inhibitors) trial is under way to confirm 
the clinical benefit of this drug in patients on apixaban, 
rivaroxaban, edoxaban, or enoxaparin who present with 
an acute major hemorrhage. An interim analysis of 67 
patients revealed an 89% and 93% reduction in anti–
factor Xa activity for those on rivaroxaban and apixaban 
respectively.16 Of the entire cohort, 47 patients were 
followed for clinical hemostasis. Of these, 37 (79%; 
95% confidence interval [CI], 64–89) were adjudicated 
as having excellent or good clinical hemostasis. The 
dosing protocol in this study was as follows: (1) for 
patients who had taken apixaban, or rivaroxaban >7 
hours prior, andexanet alfa was given as a bolus dose 
of 400 mg followed by an infusion of 480 mg over 2 
hours; and (2) for patients who had enoxaparin, edoxa-
ban, or rivaroxaban <7 hours prior or at an unknown 
time, the bolus dose and infusion dose amount was 
doubled (800-mg bolus, 960-mg infusion over 2 hours). 
At present, andexanet alfa is not approved in the United 
States or elsewhere.
A randomized placebo-controlled study of young, 
healthy volunteers treated with 20 mg of rivaroxaban 
dosed twice daily found that administration of a 4-factor 
PCC led to normalization of the prothrombin time and 
the endogenous thrombin potential.12 In contrast, an in 
vitro study using human plasma obtained from healthy 
donors found that recombinant factor VII activated was 
superior to a 4-factor PCC at normalizing laboratory co-
agulation studies.17 Case reports of using FFP or PCC 
to treat excess rivaroxaban ingestion have shown mod-
est success in improving laboratory coagulation param-
eters.18–20 However, the correction of coagulation tests 
by PCC, FFP, or recombinant factor VII activated does 
not imply the reversal of the clinical anticoagulation ef-
fect of the drug. There is no evidence that FFP or PCC 
controls NOAC-associated bleeding in humans.
Edoxaban
Four-factor PCC showed dose-dependent reversal of 
edoxaban effect with complete reversal of bleeding 
duration after skin punch biopsy in volunteers and par-
tial reversal of prothrombin time after a 50-IU/kg dose 
administration.21 However, the clinical relevance of this 
finding is uncertain.
Ciraparantag (PER977) is a small synthetic, water-
soluble, cationic molecule designed to specifically bind 
to unfractionated heparin and low-molecular-weight hep-
arin through noncovalent hydrogen bonding and charge-
charge interactions. It also binds in a similar way to di-
rect Xa inhibitors and direct thrombin inhibitors. It has 
been shown to normalize whole blood clot time within 10 
to 30 minutes of administration.22,23 Ciraparantag is still 
being investigated in early clinical trials as an antidote 
for edoxaban associated bleeding. It remains unknown 
whether andexanet alfa will have greater, equal, or less-
er clinical efficacy for edoxaban reversal compared with 
ciraparantag.
MANAGEMENT OF LIFE-THREATENING 
BLEEDING
All patients with life-threatening bleeding should be man-
aged with similar basic resuscitation principals, irrespec-
tive of what type of anticoagulant they may be on. Imme-
diate management of the patient’s airway, breathing, and 
circulation with attempts to control hemorrhage is vital. 
When life-threatening bleeding occurs in a compressible 
area of the body, direct pressure along with selective 
use of tourniquets can be life-saving. Similarly, immedi-
ate resuscitation and stabilization with intravenous flu-
ids, packed red blood cells and plasma may be required 
in the unstable patient. NOAC reversal as indicated in 
NOAC Reversal should be considered. These concepts 
apply to blunt and penetrating trauma, massive gastro-
intestinal, retroperitoneal, pericardial hemorrhage, and 
other forms of major bleeding.
Specific Scenario: ICH
A meta-analysis of studies that have tested NOACs for 
ischemic stroke prevention in NVAF have estimated a 
pooled incidence of hemorrhagic stroke of 0.4%.2–5,24 
Overall, this represents a >50% relative reduction in ICH 
rate from the 0.9% observed with warfarin. Past VKA 
studies suggest that ICH is 11 times more likely to result 
in mortality compared with extracranial hemorrhage.25 
The reduction in ICH rate coupled with consistent non-
inferiority compared with VKAs in preventing thrombotic 
events has produced a steady increase in the use of 
NOACs to prevent stroke in patients with NVAF.
Uniform recommendations do not exist regarding man-
agement of patients on NOACs who suffer ICH primarily 
because no consistent approach to their management was 
undertaken in the NOAC trials. Factors to consider include 
availability of reversal agents, the timing of urgent neurosur-
gery, risk of thromboembolic events during the period off 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e612
the anticoagulant, and reinstitution of anticoagulant therapy 
after the ICH event or after surgery. The presence of ICH 
creates a unique circumstance because of the noncom-
pressible location of the hemorrhage and poor tolerance of 
the brain to continued bleeding. The AHA/American Stroke 
Association “Guidelines for the Management of Spontane-
ous Intracerebral Hemorrhage” recommends prompt cre-
ation of a hemostatic environment to limit extension of the 
hemorrhage and before surgical treatment.26
Any acute neurological change in a patient on NOAC 
therapy should be presumed to be vascular in origin. 
A baseline severity score should be performed as part 
of the initial evaluation.26,27 Computed tomography (CT) 
is widely available, detects acute hemorrhage with high 
sensitivity, and defines the extent of the injury on the sur-
rounding parenchyma. Contrast-enhanced CT may iden-
tify patients at high risk of ICH expansion on the basis 
of the presence of contrast within the hematoma, also 
known as the spot sign.28,29 Detailed vascular imaging 
may identify predisposing vascular lesions such as an-
eurysm, arteriovenous malformation, and dural fistula.
Concurrent with reversing the NOAC effect, blood 
pressure needs to be intensively managed. Many studies 
associate elevated systolic blood pressure with greater 
hematoma expansion, neurological deterioration, and 
death and dependency after ICH.30,31 The INTERACT2 tri-
al (Intensive Blood Pressure Reduction in Acute Cerebral 
Hemorrhage Trial 2) showed that acute blood pressure 
reduction to <140 mm 
Hg systolic was safe and resulted 
in a trend toward improvement in functional recovery de-
spite no significant reduction in the rate of hematoma 
growth.32 No patients with NOAC use were included in 
this trial. However, recent results from ATACH-2 (Antihy-
pertensive Treatment of Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage-II) 
suggest aggressive lowering of systolic blood pressure 
to 110 to 139 mm Hg may not confer benefit.32a
The safety of resuming a NOAC regimen after ICH is 
a common clinical dilemma. Decisions about whether to 
resume anticoagulation after ICH must take into account 
the patient’s underlying thromboembolic risk and the risk 
for ICH recurrence. Embolic stroke risk versus bleeding 
risk stratification schemes such as the CHA2DS2-VASc 
and HAS-BLED scores may help guide treatment after 
ICH.30,31 The HAS-BLED score has been validated in a 
wide range of patients (AF and non-AF, VKA and non-VKA) 
and is the only bleeding risk scheme that is predictive 
of ICH.33 However, a high HAS-BLED score should not 
be the sole consideration in clinical management. The 
presence of a recent ICH should prompt closer evalua-
tion of other factors related to ICH reoccurrence.24,34,35 
Factors that are suggested to increase ICH risk include 
older age, poor blood pressure control, lobar ICH loca-
tion, presence of microbleeds on gradient echo magnetic 
resonance imaging, concurrent aspirin use, and the pres-
ence of apolipoprotein E ε2 or ε4 alleles. AHA/American 
Stroke Association guidelines provide a class IIb recom-
mendation for anticoagulation to be considered only after 
nonlobar ICH; however, this recommendation is based on 
warfarin-associated ICH data.34 Whether NOACs can be 
safely administered in this population is still unknown.
There is no clinical trial evidence to guide the man-
agement of patients with traumatic brain injury while on 
anticoagulants. An initial head CT is typical; however, the 
role of repeated CT or inpatient observation with neuro-
logical assessment remains controversial when the initial 
head CT is negative. Until further data become available, 
NOAC reversal for traumatic ICH should be considered 
similar to nontraumatic ICH.
In summary, the AHA writing group suggests that trau-
matic and nontraumatic ICH patients on dabigatran who re-
quire NOAC reversal receive idarucizumab. ICH patients 
on rivaroxaban, apixaban, or edoxaban should receive 
PCC until more specific antidotes become available.
Specific Scenario: Trauma
The prevalence of NOAC use in the trauma population 
is unknown. To compare, the prevalence of warfarin use 
in the trauma population in 2006 was 4% with a 1.7% 
absolute rate increase over the previous 4 years.36 Pa-
tients should be encouraged to carry information cards 
or bracelets that would alert emergency medical provid-
ers regarding oral anticoagulation use.
Apart from a few case reports, there are limited data 
to guide the management of NOACs in the setting of 
trauma.37–42 The American College of Surgeons Advance 
Trauma Life Support course43 recommends obtaining 
a brief, focused history during the initial evaluation of 
traumatically injured patients. This should include iden-
tifying the specific NOAC, timing of last ingestion, and 
the underlying reason for NOAC use. Laboratory testing 
of renal function and coagulation parameters described 
in Laboratory Measurement of NOAC Effect may help 
with treatment decisions. Thromboelastography and 
rotational thromboelastometry to detect NOAC activity 
in isolated trauma cases has been reported; however, 
routine use cannot be recommended until further data 
becomes available.44,45
NOACs may be held during the period of clinic as-
sessment or until hemostasis has been achieved in 
trauma patients without bleeding and with mild bleeding, 
or bleeding from easily controllable foci. Maintaining ade-
quate urine output and specific NOAC reversal strategies 
(NOAC reversal) should be considered in trauma patients 
with moderate or severe bleeding, or suspected bleed-
ing that requires further evaluation.
Specific Scenario: Gastrointestinal Bleeding
In major trials, dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, rivaroxa-
ban, and edoxaban 60 mg once daily were associated 
with a 1.5-fold increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e613
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
compared with warfarin; apixaban and dabigatran 110 
mg twice daily had similar gastrointestinal bleeding risk; 
and edoxaban 30 mg once daily had significantly lower 
risk.2,3,5 Factors associated with gastrointestinal bleed-
ing with NOAC use are anemia, previous gastrointestinal 
bleeding, long term aspirin use or baseline nonaspirin 
antiplatelet use, age, diastolic hypertension, smoking, 
sleep apnea, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pre-
vious proton pump inhibitor use, renal dysfunction, and 
male sex.46 Although gastrointestinal bleeding accounts 
for nearly 90% of major extracranial hemorrhages in 
NVAF patients on therapeutic anticoagulation,47 clinical 
data specifically pertaining to NOAC reversal are lacking. 
Of the 3.3% of patients in the Dresden registry who expe-
rienced major bleeding while on rivaroxaban, the majority 
of patients were managed conservatively without requir-
ing surgery.48 As in the case of trauma, general resuscita-
tion principles of airway, intravenous fluid, blood transfu-
sion, and maintaining adequate urine output should be 
applied. A Blakemore tube for bleeding from esophageal 
varices may be considered. Immediate NOAC reversal 
should be considered in the unstable patient.
Reinitiating NOAC therapy after gastrointestinal bleed-
ing should take into account the patient’s underlying risk 
of bleeding and thrombosis risk. In a retrospective study 
of >4600 patients with NVAF who suffered gastrointes-
tinal bleeding on anticoagulation (primarily warfarin), re-
sumption of a single anticoagulant was associated with 
the lowest risk of mortality and thromboembolism com-
pared with nonresumption of antithrombotic treatment. 
The risk of recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding was also 
low in the anticoagulated patients. Patients on NOACs 
comprised a very small subset of the entire cohort; 
therefore, it remains uncertain whether NOAC resump-
tion after gastrointestinal bleeding would be similarly 
linked to these favorable outcomes.49
MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS ON NOACS WHO 
ARE AT RISK FOR BLEEDING
Management of Patients Who Overdose on 
NOACs
Data regarding the prevalence of overdoses or unpre-
scribed exposures to NOACs are largely based on ob-
servational data from poison control centers and case 
reports.13,14,18,19,50–61 Stevenson et al reported that be-
tween January 2011 and July 2013, there were 49 calls 
to a single poison control center regarding dabigatran 
and rivaroxaban.18 Of these, only 4 cases were a result 
of self-harm, and only mild bleeding was reported in 1 
case. The majority of bleeding events were noted in pa-
tients on long-term treatment and not acute ingestions, 
and there was no association with coagulation abnor-
malities and risk of bleeding. Conway et al reported dab-
igatran exposures from a national poison control center 
and noted that adverse outcomes occurred in only 5% 
of all calls, and only 1.3% were considered intentional.50 
An observational study from poison control centers in 
9 states showed that among 223 NOAC exposure calls 
related to rivaroxaban and apixaban ingestions, 42% 
had abnormal coagulation studies and no patient had 
bleeding.51 Unfortunately, there is limited information 
to guide management of patients with NOAC overdose 
with and without bleeding. Collection of information on 
the type of NOAC, the ingested dose, time of ingestion, 
concomitant renal/liver disease, and relevant medica-
tion coingestion is critically important in the acute pe-
riod. Therapeutic management strategies in the acute 
care setting have largely been developed on the basis 
of clinical experience and an understanding of the phar-
macology rather than trial data.
Management of Patients With Acute Kidney 
Injury on NOACs
The risk of acute kidney injury is high in the patient pop-
ulation who are frequently prescribed NOACs. Andreu-
Cayuelas et al performed an observational study of 162 
patients with NVAF after hospitalization for acute heart 
failure. Creatinine was measured during follow-up to de-
termine the need for dose adjustment of the hypotheti-
cal NOACs.62 The investigators reported 44% of patients 
would have needed dabigatran dosage adjustment, 35% 
would have needed rivaroxaban adjustment, and 29% 
would have needed apixaban dosage adjustment. The 
patients with a baseline CrCl of <60 mL/min or age >75 
years were at greatest risk of needing a dose adjust-
ment during follow-up.62
VKA-associated nephropathy has recently been de-
scribed as acute kidney injury with supratherapeutic in-
ternational normalized ratio (INR) values with and without 
hematuria.63–65 Alternatively, NOACs do not appear to be 
associated with kidney injury. In a meta-analysis conduct-
ed by Caldeira et al, NOACs did not increase the risk of 
renal failure (relative risk [RR], 0.96; 95% CI, 0.87–1.07; 
I2= 
17.8%; 6 randomized controlled trials) when com-
pared with a VKA.63 A recent analysis of ROCKET AF re-
vealed a small but statistically significant decline in mean 
CrCl± standard deviation among patients receiving war-
farin (−4.3±14.6 mL/min) compared with patients re-
ceiving rivaroxaban (−3.5±15.1 mL/min; P<0.001).66 A 
post hoc analysis of the RE-LY (Randomized Evaluation 
of Long-Term Anticoagulation Therapy) trial similarly re-
vealed greater declines in CrCl with warfarin compared 
with dabigatran.67
Administering a NOAC in a patient with acute kidney 
injury increases the risk of bleeding.  All NOACs should 
be used with caution in patients on hemodialysis, given 
the limited data available. Although a dosing recommen-
dation for apixaban is provided for such patients in the 
product monograph, this recommendation is based on 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e614
pharmacokinetic data in fewer than 20 patients. There 
are no efficacy or safety data in this patient population. 
Until these data become available, close measurement 
or switching to an alternative anticoagulant is suggested 
for patients who develop acute kidney injury as a result 
of acute illness or injury.
Management of Patients With Ischemic Stroke 
on NOACs
Whereas NOACs represent a major advance in stroke 
prevention, it is still anticipated that acute ischemic 
stroke (AIS) will occur in 1% to 2% of individuals with 
NVAF treated with these agents each year.2–5 Their use 
presents a number of challenges for clinicians managing 
patients with AIS, including appropriate measurement of 
anticoagulant activity in neurovascular emergencies, the 
role of thrombolysis and endovascular therapy in AIS, 
and timing of reinstitution of oral anticoagulation after 
AIS. Thrombolytic therapy with intravenous recombinant 
tissue-type plasminogen activator within 4.5 hours of 
symptom onset is an established treatment in AIS68,69 
but is associated with a >5-fold increase in the rate of 
ICH.70 Because of the danger of further increasing ICH, 
therapeutic anticoagulation is considered a contraindica-
tion to thrombolytic therapy in AIS. AHA guidelines and 
observational data support intravenous thrombolysis in 
warfarin-treated patients provided the INR is no greater 
than 1.7.71,72 The data on safety of thrombolysis in the 
presence of low levels of anticoagulation with warfarin 
raises hope that the same may apply to NOACs.
Determining appropriate treatment for AIS patients re-
ceiving NOACs must balance the anticoagulant effect of 
these agents and the ICH risk associated with reperfusion 
strategies. As has been mentioned previously, routinely 
performed blood coagulation studies do not reliably ex-
clude a significant plasma concentration of the NOACs. 
Another difficulty in a time-sensitive setting is that the 
more sensitive blood tests are either not routinely avail-
able or have an unacceptably long delay to results. In 
experimental studies, pretreatment with dabigatran or 
rivaroxaban did not increase the rate of thrombolysis-
associated ICH.72,73 Data on the safety and efficacy of 
intravenous thrombolysis in AIS patients receiving NO-
ACs are limited to approximately 2 dozen case reports 
and a retrospective multicenter cohort study. Among the 
case reports, ICH and poor outcome were rarely report-
ed when recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator 
was administered minutes to 24 hours after the last an-
ticoagulant dose.74,75 The cohort study76 comprised 78 
NOAC-treated patients undergoing intravenous throm-
bolysis or intra-arterial therapy a median of 13 hours 
after the last NOAC dose compared with 441 warfarin-
treated patients and 8938 on no anticoagulants. After 
propensity score matching, there was no significant dif-
ference in rate of any ICH, symptomatic ICH, or death 
among the groups. In the absence of immediately avail-
able blood tests sensitive to the presence of NOACs, 
determining which patients taking these agents might be 
appropriate candidates for thrombolysis requires con-
sideration of time from last dose, half-life of the agent 
used, and presence of impaired renal function that may 
reduce drug clearance. A new recommendation in the 
AHA “Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients 
With Acute Ischemic Stroke” is that recombinant tissue-
type plasminogen activator should not be administered 
to patients who take NOACs unless sensitive laboratory 
tests are normal or the patient has not received a dose 
of these agents for >48 hours.71
Data guiding the use of endovascular therapy in AIS 
patients who take NOACs are even more limited. Among 
the pivotal trials that established the safety and efficacy 
of mechanical thrombectomy in patients with AIS and 
large vessel occlusion, patients receiving NOACs were 
either excluded77 or not specifically reported.78–81 A 
handful of case reports suggest safety of endovascular 
therapy in patients on dabigatran and rivaroxaban even 
in the setting of abnormal coagulation studies.82–87 In the 
previously described cohort study, none of the 33 pa-
tients who underwent endovascular therapy with or with-
out intravenous thrombolysis experienced a symptom-
atic ICH. Reflecting the paucity of data in this area, the 
AHA’s guidelines provide no recommendations regarding 
mechanical thrombectomy in patients whose use of anti-
coagulant medications excludes them from intravenous 
thrombolysis.88
The optimal timing of restarting anticoagulation after 
AIS presents another challenge to healthcare profession-
als managing this population. Meta-analysis of 7 trials 
of parenteral anticoagulation started within 48 hours of 
cardioembolic ischemic stroke89 and systematic review 
of 24 trials involving 23 
748 participants with AIS90 test-
ing various parenteral and oral anticoagulants each con-
cluded that while early anticoagulation is associated with 
a reduced risk of recurrent ischemic stroke, this benefit 
is entirely offset by an increased risk of symptomatic ICH 
with no reduction in risk of death or dependency.
The decision of when to restart oral anticoagulation 
must balance the competing risks of recurrent thrombo-
embolic events and of hemorrhagic transformation. Con-
sideration is given to the type of event (transient isch-
emic attack versus cerebral infarct), time from stroke 
onset, and presence of factors associated with increased 
hemorrhage risk (large infarct size, uncontrolled blood 
pressure, hyperglycemia, thrombocytopenia, previous 
hemorrhagic stroke, and thrombolytic treatment).70,91 
Hemorrhagic transformation of ischemic brain tissue 
is a relatively common occurrence that is often asymp-
tomatic or minimally symptomatic and uncommonly pro-
gresses in extent in the absence of predisposing fac-
tors.92,93 Assuming the hemorrhagic transformation is 
asymptomatic and remains stable, case series support 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e615
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
the safety of starting or continuing warfarin in carefully 
selected patients with a compelling indication.94 Whether 
optimal timing of resumption of oral anticoagulation with 
NOACs should follow similar recommendations is un-
known. Differences in the pharmacological properties of 
warfarin and the NOAC must be considered, notably the 
more rapid time to anticoagulant effect with the NOACs 
(a few hours compared with 4 to 5 days for warfarin). In 
experimental models of ischemic stroke, neither dabiga-
tran pretreatment nor continued administration of dabi-
gatran after stroke onset significantly increased the risk 
or volume of hemorrhagic transformation after middle 
cerebral artery occlusion.95,96 Clinical data are anecdotal 
only. The phase III trials establishing the role of NOACs 
for stroke prevention in NVAF excluded patients within 7 
to 30 days of stroke.2–5,97 In general, guidelines support 
withholding oral anticoagulation until 1 to 2 weeks after 
stroke among individuals with NVAF, with shorter times 
for those with transient ischemic attack or small, nondis-
abling strokes and longer times for moderate to severe 
strokes.98–100 In NOAC-treated patients who have an AIS, 
compliance with NOAC therapy should be established 
and alternative causes for the stroke investigated. There 
are no data to indicate that increasing the intensity of 
anticoagulation, adding an antiplatelet agent, or switch-
ing to another oral anticoagulant provides additional pro-
tection against future ischemic events. Because of the 
short half-lives of NOACs and rapid decline of protective 
anticoagulation that occurs with missed doses, patients 
with poor compliance might be more appropriately man-
aged with the longer-acting warfarin.
TRANSITIONING BETWEEN NOACS AND OTHER 
ANTICOAGULANTS IN THE ACUTE CARE 
SETTING
Indications that require considerations for the transition-
ing of anticoagulants in the acute care setting include 
the occurrence of a new clinical event (eg, myocardial 
infarction) in patients on established oral anticoagulant 
regimens, the development of a new or worsening co-
morbid medical condition (eg, renal failure) that neces-
sitates an anticoagulant transition and the need for an 
invasive procedure. In the United States, the current la-
beled prescribing information for each NOAC provides 
guidance for the transition to and from NOAC agents 
to other anticoagulants; however, these suggestions 
are not specific for patients in the acute care setting 
(Table 3).33,43,101,102
Temporary interruptions in oral anticoagulation are 
commonly encountered in the acute care setting. On the 
basis of trial observations from NOAC agents in patients 
with AF, approximately one third of AF patients will ex-
perience the need for a temporary interruption over the 
course of 2 years.103–105 The association of temporary 
interruptions in oral anticoagulant therapy with the risk 
for clinical events has been reported in 3 of the clinical 
trials comparing NOAC agents to VKAs in patients with 
AF.103–105 In addition, a meta-analysis using data from 
trials comparing the risk of thromboembolic events as-
sociated with temporary discontinuation found no sta-
tistically significant differences in the NOAC versus VKA 
randomized groups (RR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.68–1.49).106 
Whereas the majority of the temporary interruptions in 
the trials were around procedures, the use of peripro-
cedural bridging regimens varied on the basis of pa-
tient characteristics and trial protocols. Only 6% and 
11.7% of patients with temporary oral anticoagulation 
interruption received bridging in ROCKET AF and the 
ARISTOTLE trial (Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and 
Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation), re-
spectively.104,105
Much of the clinical outcome data regarding the 
switching or transitioning between NOAC agents and 
other anticoagulants comes from the clinical trials in pa-
tients with NVAF. Observations from trials reported the 
risk of embolic and bleeding events in the NOAC and VKA 
treatment groups associated with the transitions at the 
beginning and end of the trials have been published. A 
post hoc analysis of ROCKET AF reported an increased 
risk of stroke in the rivaroxaban treatment group during 
the end-of-study transition to the open-label therapy pe-
riod.107 Patients who received rivaroxaban compared with 
those who received warfarin were observed to have an 
increased incidence of stroke during the period of transi-
tion (3 to 30 days after the end of the study) to open-
label therapy (n=22 versus n=6; hazard ratio [HR], 3.72; 
95% CI, 1.51–9.16) as well as a greater proportion of 
major bleeding events (n=25 versus n=7; HR, 3.62; 95% 
CI, 1.56–8.36).107,108 In addition, during the end-of-study 
transition period, the median time to first therapeutic INR 
was 3 days in the warfarin treatment group compared 
with 13 days in the rivaroxaban treatment group.108 Simi-
lar observations of an increased risk of clinical events 
in those assigned to NOAC therapy have been reported 
from the ARISTOTLE trial end-of-study open-label transi-
tion period.109 At the end of ARISTOTLE, a 2-day bridging 
period with apixaban or apixaban placebo was recom-
mended during the initiation of open-label VKAs. During 
the first 30 days after stopping blinded study drug, 21 
stroke or systemic embolism events were noted in the 
apixaban group versus 5 in the warfarin group (adjust-
ed HR, 4.10; 95% CI, 1.54–10.86). An excess in major 
bleeding events was also observed during this period in 
the apixaban versus warfarin groups (n=26 versus n=10; 
adjusted HR, 2.56; 95% CI, 1.23–5.30). On the basis of 
these observations, an end-of-study transition plan was 
designed for patients enrolled in the ENGAGE AF (Effec-
tive Anticoagulation With Factor Xa Next Generation in 
Atrial Fibrillation) trial.110 In brief, for patients who were 
planned to transition to open-label NOAC therapy, mea-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e616
surement of INR was conducted and the open-label NOAC 
was initiated when the INR was <2.0. For patients transi-
tioning to a VKA, a 14-day kit was provided that included 
a VKA algorithm and a modified dose of edoxaban, which 
was to be continued until day 14 or an open-label INR 
≥2.0, whichever occurred first. Within 30 days of study 
drug discontinuation, strokes were observed to occur 
in 7 patients in each of the 3 study treatment groups 
with major bleeding events noted in 11 patients in the 
warfarin group, 10 patients in the edoxaban high-dose 
Table 3. Overview of US-Labeled Guidance for NOAC Anticoagulant Transitions
NOAC
VKA
Intravenous Anticoagulant
LMWH/Other NOAC
Apixaban
Apixaban→warfarin: Discontinue apixaban 
and begin a parenteral anticoagulant and 
warfarin at the time the next scheduled 
apixaban dose would have been taken
Apixaban→parenteral anticoagulant: 
Discontinue apixaban and begin the new 
anticoagulant at the usual time of the next 
dose of apixaban
Apixaban→LMWH/other NOAC: 
Discontinue apixaban and begin the 
LMWH/other NOAC at the usual time of 
the next dose of apixaban
Warfarin→apixaban: Discontinue warfarin 
and start apixaban when INR <2.0
LMWH/other NOAC→apixaban: 
Discontinue current NOAC/LMWH and 
begin apixaban at the usual time of the 
next dose of the other NOAC/LMWH
Dabigatran
Dabigatran→warfarin:
  
For CrCl ≥50 mL/min, start warfarin 3 d 
before discontinuing dabigatran
  
For CrCl 30–50 mL/min, start warfarin 
2 d before discontinuing dabigatran
  
For CrCl 15–30 mL/min, start warfarin 
1 d before discontinuing dabigatran
Dabigatran→parenteral anticoagulant: 
Wait 12 h (CrCl ≥30 mL/min) or 24 h (CrCl 
<30 mL/min) after last dabigatran dose 
before initiating a parenteral anticoagulant
Dabigatran→LMWH: Wait 12 h (CrCl >30 
mL/min) or 24 h (CrCl <30 mL/min) after 
last dabigatran dose before initiating a 
parenteral anticoagulant
Warfarin→dabigatran: Discontinue 
warfarin and start dabigatran when INR 
<2.0
UFH→dabigatran: Start dabigatran at the 
time of continuous infusion discontinuation
LMWH→dabigatran: Start dabigatran 0–2 
h before the time that the next LMWH 
dose would have been given
Edoxaban
Edoxaban→warfarin:
  
Oral option: Reduce daily edoxaban 
dose by 50% and begin taking warfarin 
concomitantly. Measure INR at least 
weekly just before daily edoxaban dose. 
Once a stable INR ≥2.0 is achieved, 
discontinue edoxaban and continue 
warfarin
  
Parenteral option: Discontinue 
edoxaban and administer a parenteral 
anticoagulant and warfarin at the time 
of the next scheduled edoxaban dose.
Edoxaban→parenteral anticoagulant: 
Discontinue edoxaban and start the 
parenteral anticoagulant at the time of the 
next scheduled dose of edoxaban
Edoxaban→LMWH/other NOAC: 
Discontinue edoxaban and start the 
LMWH/other NOAC at the time of the next 
scheduled dose of edoxaban
Warfarin→edoxaban: Discontinue warfarin 
and start edoxaban when the INR is <2.5
UFH→edoxaban: Discontinue UFH infusion 
and start edoxaban 4 h later
LMWH/other NOAC→edoxaban: 
Discontinue current NOAC/LMWH and 
start edoxaban at the time of the next 
scheduled other NOAC/LMWH dose
Rivaroxaban
Rivaroxaban→warfarin: Discontinue 
rivaroxaban and begin a parenteral 
anticoagulant and warfarin at the time the 
next scheduled rivaroxaban dose would 
have been taken
Rivaroxaban→UFH: Discontinue 
rivaroxaban and initiate the parenteral 
anticoagulant at the time the next 
rivaroxaban dose would have been taken
Rivaroxaban→LMWH/other NOAC: 
Discontinue rivaroxaban and start the 
LMWH/other NOAC at the time of the next 
scheduled dose of rivaroxaban
Warfarin→rivaroxaban: Discontinue 
warfarin and start rivaroxaban as soon as 
INR <3.0
UFH→rivaroxaban: Stop UFH infusion and 
administer rivaroxaban at the same time
LMWH/other NOAC→rivaroxaban: 
Start rivaroxaban 0–2 h before the next 
scheduled evening LMWH/other NOAC 
dose and omit administration of the 
LMWH/other NOAC
CrCl indicates creatinine clearance; INR, international normalized ratio; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; NOAC, non–vitamin K antagonist oral 
anticoagulant; UFH, unfractionated heparin; and VKA, vitamin K antagonist.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e617
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
group, and 18 patients in the edoxaban low-dose group. 
No statistically significant differences were observed in 
primary efficacy or safety events among the 3 treatment 
groups in patients transitioning to open-label VKAs or in 
those transitioning to open-label NOACs.110 It is notable 
that in patients transitioning to open-label VKAs, 85% had 
at least 1 INR ≥2 by day 14.
Registry data on the outcomes of ambulatory AF pa-
tients transitioning from a VKA to a NOAC (dabigatran 
or rivaroxaban) have also been published.111,112 In a 
matched-cohort study of AF patients, there was no as-
sociation of transitioning from a VKA to either dabigatran 
or rivaroxaban compared with remaining on VKA therapy 
for embolic or bleeding events at a median follow-up of 
10 months.112 Data from a large regional prospective 
registry showed clinical events were relatively infrequent 
in the 30-day period after VKA to NOAC transitions de-
spite only 75% of patients having an INR measurement 
before NOAC initiation.
Although clinical decisions regarding the transition 
between anticoagulants in the acute care setting are 
likely to be affected by a number of factors, careful 
consideration should be given to strategies that mini-
mize prolonged durations of both subtherapeutic and 
excessive anticoagulation during the transition periods. 
Given the relatively infrequent use of periprocedural 
bridging strategies during temporary interruptions in 
the clinical trials, clinical consideration should be given 
to managing patients experiencing temporary inter-
ruptions without bridging, as outlined in the individual 
NOAC trials.
PERIPROCEDURAL MANAGEMENT OF 
PATIENTS WHO TAKE NOACS
Each year, ≈10% of patients on any long-term oral antico-
agulation require surgery or other invasive procedures.113 
Approximately 20% of patients on warfarin undergo sur-
gery that has an extremely low risk of bleeding such as mi-
nor dental, dermatologic, or ophthalmologic procedures 
where anticoagulation may be safely continued without 
interruption.114 It is recommended that warfarin be held 
for 5 days before surgery when significant bleeding is 
anticipated and then reinitiated postoperatively when he-
mostasis is secured.115 Pre- and postoperative bridging 
using low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended for 
those patients with high thrombosis risk, such as those 
with certain mechanical valve prostheses or recent pul-
monary embolism. In patients at low to intermediate risk 
of thrombosis, bridging low-molecular-weight heparin 
does not prevent thrombotic events and increases bleed-
ing events116 (Figure 3). Therefore, bridging anticoagula-
tion is not necessary in this subgroup of patients.
The limited data available pertaining to patients on 
NOAC therapy who require surgery suggest that the 
perioperative bleeding risk is low for nonurgent sur-
gery. The Dresden NOAC registry prospectively evalu-
ated 2179 patients taking NOACs, of which 595 pa-
tients (27.3%) underwent 863 invasive procedures; 
most were not urgent.48 Invasive procedures were cat-
egorized as major or minor, and a bleeding event was 
categorized as major, clinically relevant nonmajor, or 
minor per the International Society of Thrombosis and 
Figure 3. Periprocedural management of patients on NOACs (non–vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants).  
CrCl indicates creatinine clearance; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; PT, prothrombin time; SVT, supraventricular tachy-
cardia; TE, thromboembolic event; TIA, transient ischemic attack; and VTE, venous thromboembolism.
*Bridging may be considered in patients with a history of systemic embolus in the last 6 weeks.110a
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e618
Haemostasis definition.117 Of the entire cohort, only 46 
patients (5.3%) experienced any bleeding complication 
up to 30±5 days after the procedure. Major bleeding 
occurred in 10 of 863 (1.2%) procedures. Clinically 
relevant nonmajor bleeding occurred in 29 patients 
(3.4%) and minor bleeding occurred in only 7 patients 
(0.8%). Periprocedural bleeding was studied in a sub-
group analysis of the RELY trial which compared war-
farin to dabigatran for stroke prevention in NVAF.103 
Procedures were classified as being associated with 
a low (coronary angiography, defibrillator implantation) 
or high risk of bleeding (cardiac, abdominal, and neu-
rosurgery, or procedures requiring spinal anesthesia). 
There was no significant difference in the rates of peri-
procedural major bleeding between patients who re-
ceived dabigatran 110 mg (3.8%), dabigatran 150 mg 
(5.1%), or warfarin (4.6%); dabigatran 110 mg versus 
warfarin: RR, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.59 to 1.17; P=0.28; 
dabigatran 150 mg versus warfarin: RR, 1.09; 95% 
CI, 0.80 to 1.49; P=0.58. Among patients who had ur-
gent surgery, major bleeding was increased, occurring 
in 17.8% with dabigatran 110 mg, 17.7% with dabi-
gatran 150 mg, and 21.6% with warfarin: dabigatran 
110 mg: RR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.48 to 1.41; P=0.47; 
dabigatran 150 mg: RR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.50 to 1.35; 
P=0.44. Tailoring periprocedural NOAC management 
to the type of invasive procedure may mitigate against 
bleeding. Common clinical scenarios are subsequently 
discussed.
Cardiac Catheterization and Percutaneous 
Coronary Intervention
Patients with AF commonly have coexisting coronary 
artery disease with an estimated 20% requiring per-
cutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).118 The 2012 
American College of Cardiology/Society for Cardovas-
cular Angiography and Interventions consensus docu-
ment recommends that elective coronary angiography 
for patients on long-term warfarin be deferred until the 
INR is 1.8 for femoral artery access or <2.2 for radial 
artery access.119 Unfortunately, there are very limited 
data that address the management of patients on a 
NOAC who require cardiac catheterization or PCI. Pre-, 
 
peri-, and postprocedural considerations are subse-
quently discussed.
Preprocedural Considerations
Patients with stable ischemic heart disease with ischemic 
symptoms despite medical therapy or with intermediate- or 
 
high-risk features on stress testing are often referred for 
coronary angiography and possible PCI. Patients with stable 
ischemic heart disease on a NOAC and who are not at high 
thrombosis risk should have the NOAC held until the antico-
agulation effect is dissipated before undergoing coronary 
angiography and PCI. From the prescribing information, 
dabigatran should be held for at least 24 hours if CrCl ≥50 
mL/min; for at least 72 hours if CrCL <50 mL/min; rivar-
oxaban, apixaban and edoxaban should be held for at least 
 
24 hours.33,43,101,102
In the absence of high risk features, patients should 
not be bridged with a heparin before or after the proce-
dure.116 The decision to resume antithrombotic therapy 
after the procedure should be guided by the throm-
boembolic risk as assessed by the CHA2DS2-VASc 
score.120 Clinicians need to consider which antithrom-
botic and antiplatelet agents to resume and the du-
ration of antiplatelet therapy, balancing ischemic and 
thrombotic events while minimizing the hemorrhagic 
complications.
Patients presenting with an acute coronary syn-
drome (ACS) often undergo coronary angiography 
and revascularization to reduce their risk of recurrent 
events, especially if they have an elevated Thromboly-
sis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) risk score.121 Where-
as patients with unstable angina or a non–ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction do not require im-
mediate angiography, patients presenting with a ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction require emer-
gency coronary angiography and revascularization of 
the infarct related artery.122 For the unstable angina/
non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction pa-
tient, appropriate dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) 
and heparin therapy should be started upstream, the 
NOAC should be discontinued and the patient should 
be scheduled for an urgent catheterization. In the ab-
sence of electrical or hemodynamic instability, it is 
reasonable to wait for the effects of the NOAC to dissi-
pate and then perform the procedure through a radial 
artery approach.
Periprocedural Considerations
Patients on NOACs undergoing coronary angiography 
or PCI will have an increased risk of hemorrhagic com-
plications, and therefore, careful attention should be 
made to choice of vascular access site and use of ad-
junctive anticoagulants. Patients should undergo radial 
artery access, unless there is a contraindication, be-
cause the risk of bleeding and vascular complications 
is reduced as compared with a femoral approach.123 If 
a femoral approach is required, one should consider 
using ultrasonography and fluoroscopy to guide vas-
cular access. A micropuncture needle technique may 
decrease the probability of a retroperitoneal bleed. 
Although no data exist, it may be reasonable to use 
a vascular closure device to assist with postproce-
dure hemostasis if the patient has amenable vascular 
anatomy. Venous access should be avoided unless 
absolutely required. All patients undergoing PCI re-
quire antiplatelet therapy coupled with either heparin 
or bivalirudin to reduce the periprocedural thrombotic 
complication rates, irrespective of background use of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e619
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
VKAs or NOACs.124 The use of intravenous glycoprotein 
agents should be discouraged and reserved for bailout 
scenarios. For patients who receive intravenous hepa-
rin, one should use low-dose heparin regimens with an 
activated clotting time goal of ≈250 seconds to re-
duce hemorrhagic complications.125
Postprocedural Considerations
The clinician should consider the  patient’s  risk of recur-
rent myocardial infarction, stent thrombosis, thromboem-
bolic risk, and hemorrhagic complications when selecting 
anticoagulants. It is helpful to use the CHA2DS2-VASc risk 
score to estimate the thromboembolic risk and the HAS-
BLED risk score to estimate the hemorrhagic risk and in-
clude the patient in a shared decision regarding the selec-
tion of DAPT versus triple therapy as well as the duration 
of therapy. Several themes have emerged. The standard 
of care to reduce coronary ischemic events post-PCI and 
post-ACS is DAPT. The duration of DAPT is directly impact-
ed by the stent type (bare metal stent versus drug-eluting 
stent) and whether the patient underwent PCI for stable 
ischemic heart disease or ACS.126 However, oral anti-
thrombotic agents (not antiplatelet agents) are required to 
prevent NVAF related stroke or VTE. Therefore, the clini-
cian is faced with the consideration of DAPT, DAPT plus 
warfarin (triple therapy), DAPT plus a NOAC (triple therapy) 
or warfarin plus single antiplatelet therapy.
In a phase II study, triple therapy with dabigatran in 
patients with ACS was associated with an increased 
risk of bleeding complications and planned phase III 
trials were not pursued.127 In a randomized clinical 
trial of patients with ACS, apixaban increased bleeding 
without reducing ischemic event in patients on either 
DAPT or aspirin alone. Intracranial bleed rates were in-
creased in patients treated with apixaban. Because of 
concerns regarding safety without a signal of efficacy, 
the trial was terminated.128 Rivaroxaban was studied 
in the ATLAS ACS-TIMI 51 (Anti-Xa Therapy to Lower 
Cardiovascular Events in Addition to Aspirin With or 
Without Thienopyridine Therapy in Subjects With Acute 
Coronary Syndrome—Thrombolysis in Myocardial In-
farction) trial, which compared rivaroxaban or placebo 
in addition to standard ACS therapies. Compared with 
placebo, rivaroxaban (2.5 mg twice daily and 5.0 mg 
twice daily) decreased the rates of the composite pri-
mary end point including cardiovascular death, myo-
cardial infarction or stroke (10.7% versus 8.9%) while 
increasing the rates of bleeding (non–coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery) and ICH.129 Only rivaroxaban cou-
pled with DAPT has been demonstrated to reduce isch-
emic events at a cost of increased bleeding. However, 
the studied doses of rivaroxaban are not the doses 
proven to reduce the risk of thromboembolic events 
secondary to AF.
European and Canadian guidelines suggest NOACs 
are preferred over warfarin when it comes to triple ther-
apy. However, these recommendations are based on 
observational data and post hoc analysis of warfarin vs. 
NOAC studies with limited number of patients. For ex-
ample, in ROCKET AF, only 1% of patients underwent PCI 
during the trial.130 Until further prospective, randomized 
trial data become available on the subject, the AHA writ-
ing group suggests that clinicians use good judgment, 
weighing the risk/benefits of NOACs in the context of 
triple therapy for their patients.
Proton pump inhibitors decrease the rates of upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with DAPT and in pa-
tients with DAPT and antithrombotic therapy.131 Patients 
should be advised to avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammato-
ry medications as the risks of myocardial infarction and 
hemorrhagic complications are increased. Ongoing ran-
domized trials (Pioneer AF-PCI [Open-Label, Randomized, 
Controlled, Multicenter Study Exploring Two Treatment 
Strategies of Rivaroxaban and a Dose-Adjusted Oral Vi-
tamin K Antagonist Treatment Strategy in Subjects with 
Atrial Fibrillation who Undergo Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention],132 RE-DUAL PCI [Evaluation of Dual Therapy 
With Dabigatran vs. Triple Therapy With Warfarin in Pa-
tients With AF That Undergo a PCI With Stenting], RT-AF 
[Rivaroxaban in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation and Coro-
nary Artery Disease Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention],133 SAFE-A [Safety and Effectiveness Trial of 
Apixaban Use in Association With Dual Antiplatelet Thera-
py in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Undergoing Percuta-
neous Coronary Intervention]134 and AUGUSTUS [A Study 
of Apixaban in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation, Not Caused 
by a Heart Valve Problem, Who Are at Risk for Thrombo-
sis (Blood Clots) Due to Having Had a Recent Coronary 
Event, Such as a Heart Attack or a Procedure to Open the 
Vessels of the Heart]) will assess the efficacy of a NOAC 
coupled with antiplatelet therapy in patients undergoing 
PCI. Until these trials are completed and published, the 
writing group makes the following suggestions:
1. For patients with a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 0 or 1 
treated with PCI, it is reasonable to omit anticoagu-
lant therapy and treat with DAPT.
2. For patients who require DAPT or triple therapy, 
use low-dose aspirin, 81 mg daily.
3. For stable ischemic heart disease patients who 
require anticoagulant therapy and treatment with 
PCI, discontinuation of P2Y12 inhibitor therapy after 
3 months may be reasonable.126
4. For ACS patients requiring anticoagulant therapy 
and treatment with PCI (bare metal stent or drug-
eluting stent), continuation of aspirin 81 mg daily 
for 1 year and discontinuation of P2Y12 therapy 
after 6 months may be reasonable.126
5. For patients with a moderate to high risk of 
bleeding, as assessed by the HAS-BLED score, 
a shortened duration of triple therapy or warfarin 
plus clopidogrel may be considered based on the 
exploratory WOEST (What Is the Optimal Antiplatelet 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e620
and Anticoagulant Therapy in Patients With Oral 
Anticoagulation and Coronary Stenting) trial.135
6. Prasugrel and ticagrelor should not be used in 
conjunction with NOACs, as a result of excessive 
bleeding risk.
7. At present, there are limited data to recommend 
the routine use of NOACs, coupled with clopidogrel 
alone or DAPT after PCI. Of note, in clinical prac-
tice, it can be challenging to reach and maintain 
therapeutic warfarin levels in certain patients. In 
these patients, it may be reasonable to combine a 
NOAC and clopidogrel after PCI.
Cardioversion of AF
Post hoc analyses from pivotal NOAC clinical trials have 
not shown significant differences in outcomes after car-
dioversion in those treated with NOACs compared with 
warfarin.136–138 Meta-analysis of events across random-
ized trials appears to confirm these results, finding 
no significant difference in stroke/systemic embolism 
(odds ratio, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.31–1.72) or major/non-
major clinical relevant International Society on Throm-
bosis and Haemostasis bleeding events (odds ratio, 
1.41; 95% CI, 0.87–2.28) after cardioversion.139,140 
Moreover, there is 1 randomized clinical trial of car-
dioversion in patients treated with a factor Xa inhibitor 
versus warfarin. More than 1500 patients undergoing 
early (target period of 1 to 5 days after randomiza-
tion with transesophageal echocardiography [TEE]) or 
delayed (3 to 8 weeks) cardioversion were random-
ized in a 2:1 fashion to rivaroxaban or warfarin. The 
primary efficacy end point (composite of stroke, tran-
sient ischemic attack, peripheral embolism, myocardial 
infarction, and cardiovascular death) occurred in 0.51% 
of the rivaroxaban patients versus 1.02% of the VKA-
treated patients (RR, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.15–1.73) with no 
significant difference in bleeding observed.141
Observational data from clinical practice demonstrate 
similar findings. Data from a large nationwide cohort study 
demonstrated no difference between outcomes in those 
treated with dabigatran versus warfarin. In 1230 patients un-
dergoing cardioversion, the cumulative incidence of stroke, 
bleeding or death at 30 weeks was 2.0% in those treated 
with warfarin and 1.0% in those treated with dabigatran (ad-
justed HR, 1.33; 95% CI, 0.33–5.42).142 High-volume single-
center data (>4600 cardioversions) have also failed to iden-
tify any difference in postcardioversion thromboembolic or 
bleeding events across warfarin and NOAC agents.143
The ENSURE-AF trial (Edoxaban Versus Enoxaparin-
Warfarin in Patients Undergoing Cardioversion of Atrial 
Fibrillation) randomized 2199 patients to either edoxaban 
or enoxaparin/warfarin during TEE or non-TEE guided 
electrical cardioversion.144 For TEE-guided cardioversion, 
randomization occurred <3 days from cardioversion and 
study treatment was continued for at least 28 days. For 
non–TEE-guided cardioversion, study treatment was initiat-
ed at least 21 days before cardioversion and extended for 
at least 28 days. The primary efficacy end point (compos-
ite of stroke, systemic embolic event, myocardial infarc-
tion, and cardiovascular mortality) and the primary safety 
end point (major and clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding) 
occurred at a statistically similar frequency. Edoxaban may 
be an effective and safe alternative to enoxaparin/warfarin 
for patients with NVAF requiring cardioversion.
Several practical considerations must be weighed when 
cardioverting patients on NOAC therapy with AF duration 
>24 hours. Similar to recommendations with warfarin, pa-
tients should be anticoagulated for a minimum of 3 weeks 
before elective cardioversion. If not, then a TEE should be 
performed to exclude the presence of left atrial append-
age or left atrial thrombus. Similarly, if a given patient’s 
adherence to therapy is suboptimal (≥2 missed doses) 
or in question, then a TEE should be considered. If a pa-
tient has been on a properly dosed NOAC with 3 weeks 
of therapy and is found to have left atrial appendage or 
left atrial thrombus, then consideration should be given to 
switching to an alternate anticoagulant with special atten-
tion to consistent anticoagulant use during the transition.
Catheter Ablation of AF
Catheter ablation is an increasingly used treatment option 
for rhythm control in NVAF. Because of the risks of peri-
procedural thromboembolism, anticoagulation is required 
during the procedure. However, the presence of anticoag-
ulation can make the management of bleeding complica-
tions more difficult. Before the advent of NOAC therapy, 
observational145,146 and randomized147 studies suggested 
that uninterrupted VKA therapy was associated with su-
perior outcomes compared with VKA interruption with 
intraprocedural heparin. In particular, the COMPARE (Role 
of Coumadin in Preventing Thromboembolism in Atrial Fi-
brillation [AF] Patients Undergoing Catheter Ablation) clini-
cal trial randomized 1584 patients to interrupted warfarin 
with bridging anticoagulation (n=790) versus continuous 
warfarin (n=794). Bleeding events were less common in 
the continuous warfarin arm with no significant difference 
in stroke or transient ischemic attack (0.4% versus 0.8% 
major bleeding, 0.5% versus 0.9% pericardial effusion, 
and 4% versus 22% minor bleeding).147
How interrupted/continuous NOAC therapy compares 
to continuous warfarin has been the subject of intense 
study over the past 5 years. Multiple systematic assess-
ments and meta-analyses have demonstrated similar 
outcomes in patients treated with NOACs (interrupted 
or continuous) versus continuous warfarin.148–152 One 
randomized study compared uninterrupted rivaroxaban 
and VKA in 248 patients. The occurrence of any throm-
boembolic events (0 versus 2) and bleeding events (21 
versus 18) was similar in the uninterrupted rivaroxa-
ban and VKA arms. Although the study was relatively 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e621
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
small with limited power, the results were largely in line 
with previous observational data that have suggested 
similar outcomes with NOAC and VKA therapy. Another 
randomized study compared uninterrupted apixaban 
versus continuous warfarin in 200 subjects with drug-
refractory AF undergoing ablation and found no differ-
ence in thromboembolic or bleeding outcomes.153 There 
are several ongoing larger randomized clinical trials of 
interrupted versus uninterrupted NOAC therapy and con-
tinuous warfarin versus continuous NOAC therapy.
The recommendation to use TEE to exclude the pres-
ence of left atrial appendage/left atrial thrombus should 
be similar regardless of whether VKA or NOAC therapy 
is used.154 If the patient has not had 3 to 4 weeks of pre-
procedural anticoagulation or if the patient is considered 
at increased risk for stroke, the use of TEE is mandatory. 
However, many laboratories conduct a TEE in all patients 
before ablation since thrombus can be observed even in 
low-risk patients with paroxysmal AF.155
Regardless of whether continuous or interrupted NOAC 
therapy is used, on the basis of current consensus recom-
mendations, patients should be heparinized with 100-U/
kg bolus followed by an infusion of 10 U/kg/hour before 
or immediately after puncture. The activated clotting time 
should be checked every 10 to 15 minutes until target 
and then every 30 minutes thereafter. The activated clot-
ting time target should be at least 300 to 350 seconds or 
350 to 400 seconds in the case of spontaneous echocar-
diographic contrast (“smoke”) or severe left atrial enlarge-
ment.154 Heparinization before transeptal access may be 
associated with a lower risk of asymptomatic microembol-
ic events as detected by brain magnetic resonance imag-
ing.156 It is important to note that the use of NOAC therapy 
before and during the procedure results in the need for 
an increased dose of heparin to achieve target activated 
clotting times during the ablation procedure.157 After the 
procedure, NOAC therapy is generally reintroduced within 
4 to 8 hours after sheath removal if access site hemo-
stasis has been achieved. Consistent with consensus rec-
ommendations, NOAC therapy should be continued for a 
minimum of 2 to 3 months after ablation. Thereafter, oral 
anticoagulation should be based on the patient’s underly-
ing risk for stroke (CHA2DS2-VASc score) rather than the 
current rhythm.
Electronic Device Implantation
Management of oral anticoagulation surrounding cardiac 
implantable electronic device insertion presents several 
challenges. Oral anticoagulation increases the risk of 
bleeding and hematoma formation after device implan-
tation. Furthermore, hematoma formation increases the 
risk of postoperative infection. Based upon the results 
from randomized clinical trials, uninterrupted warfarin 
has been shown to lead to less bleeding and superior 
outcomes compared with interrupted warfarin and par-
enteral bridging therapy.158,159 These findings are also 
consistent with the BRIDGE (Perioperative Bridging Anti-
coagulation in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation) trial, which 
found no significant benefit to bridging for general inter-
ruption of oral anticoagulation for invasive procedures 
in patients with NVAF.116 However, the optimal manage-
ment of NOAC therapy surrounding cardiac implantable 
electronic device implantation remains unknown.
In general, discontinuation of NOAC therapy before 
cardiac implantable electronic device implantation in 
a manner consistent with the elimination half-life is the 
most common practice pattern. For apixaban, edoxa-
ban, and rivaroxaban, this would include discontinuation 
24 hours in advance of the procedure. In the case of 
dabigatran, discontinuation is recommended 24 hours 
before in patients with a CrCl ≥80 mL/min, 36 hours be-
fore in those with CrCl 50 to 79 mL/min, and 48 hours 
before in those with a CrCl <50 mL/min.160 Survey data 
from implanting physicians suggest wide variation in 
practice patterns reflecting the uncertainly over optimal 
management.161 However, the majority of physicians 
discontinue NOAC therapy at the time of implantation 
(82%).161 Although uninterrupted warfarin has the best 
evidence base (>1 randomized trial), an increasing num-
ber of cardiac implantable electronic device patients are 
taking NOAC therapy. Whether NOAC therapy can be 
continued through cardiac implantable electronic de-
vice implantation remains debated and is the subject 
of a large clinical trial (BRUISE CONTROL-2 [Strategy 
of Continued vs Interrupted Novel Oral Anticoagulant at 
Time of Device Surgery in Patients With Moderate to 
High Risk of Arterial Thromboembolic Events] study) in 
which perioperative management will be randomized to 
a strategy of continued versus interrupted NOAC thera-
py. The few available observational data are limited by 
their small cohort size but have not identified significant 
risks of bleeding with uninterrupted NOAC therapy.162,163 
When a decision is made to interrupt NOAC therapy 
for cardiac implantable electronic device implantation, 
the implanting physician must decide when the NOAC 
therapy should be restarted. This decision is often influ-
enced by patient characteristics, including risk factors 
for bleeding and the postimplantation physical examina-
tion (eg, hematoma). Similar to discontinuation, prac-
tice patterns regarding resumption of NOAC therapy 
after implantation are highly variable.161 Typically, NOAC 
therapy was restarted 24 to 48 hours after surgical pro-
cedures in the pivotal NOAC trials. Patients with multiple 
risk factors for bleeding, concomitant antiplatelet ther-
apy, or evidence of hematoma on their postoperative 
examination may benefit from a greater delay to NOAC 
resumption (3 to 5 days). However, given the lack of 
evidence to guide these decisions, management should 
be approached on a patient-by-patient basis, weighing 
the risks and benefits of earlier versus later resumption 
of NOAC therapy.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e622
Cardiovascular Surgery
There is limited information regarding the use of NOACs 
in coronary artery bypass grafting or valve replacement 
surgery. At present, information related to perioperative 
NOAC use in cardiac surgery is anecdotal or based on 
limited subset analyses.48,164,165 No significant bleeding 
event differences were observed between rivaroxaban 
and warfarin treated patients who underwent cardiac 
surgery in ROCKET AF.110a The ATLAS ACS-2-TIMI-51 trial 
tested rivaroxaban to lower cardiovascular events in 
patients with ACS and reported 10 patients undergoing 
coronary artery bypass grafting after ST-segment eleva-
tion myocardial infarction.129,166 Per the trial protocol, the 
drug was stopped 12 hours before the procedure and 
resumed 12 hours after the postprocedural drains were 
removed or after the last dose of parenteral anticoagu-
lant therapy had been administered. The results specific 
to this group were not reported; therefore, no conclu-
sions regarding coronary artery bypass grafting–related 
care can be made.
Established indications for NOACs in the pericardiac 
surgery setting include stroke prevention in preoperative 
AF, prolonged or frequent postoperative AF, and VTE 
treatment. NOAC use is contraindicated in patients with 
mechanical valves; as the RE-ALIGN (The Randomized, 
Phase II Study to Evaluate the Safety and Pharmacoki-
netics of Oral Dabigatran Etexilate in Patients After Heart 
Valve Replacement) trial with dabigatran demonstrated, 
there is an increased rate of thromboembolic and bleed-
ing complications compared with warfarin.167 There are 
case reports of dabigatran use after left ventricular 
assist device placement168 and of rivaroxaban use for 
heparin induced thrombocytopenia after coronary artery 
bypass grafting.169 However, these off-label uses are not 
supported by available clinical trial evidence.
For cardiac surgery, NOACs should be stopped in 
the perioperative setting and restarted after clinical 
hemostasis has been established. As cardiac surgery 
is considered a high-bleeding-risk procedure, surgery 
should be postponed if at all possible until after the 
appropriate interruption period. Bleeding after car-
diac surgery should be monitored via standard post-
procedure drains. Life-threatening bleeding should be 
treated with supportive therapy, including transfusion 
of blood products and administration of antifibrinolyt-
ics as indicated for hemorrhage resuscitation, and 
return to the operating room. If contributing to an on-
going coagulopathy, administration of NOAC antidotes 
as previously described (Laboratory Measurement of 
NOAC Effect) could be considered. Mild bleeding may 
be monitored, but NOACs should not be reinitiated until 
there is bleeding control.
Similarly, the published experience of NOAC manage-
ment in patients undergoing vascular surgery is limited 
to case reports and very small trial subsets.48,164,165 In a 
subgroup analysis of ROCKET AF, patients with periph-
eral artery disease on rivaroxaban had a higher risk of 
major bleeding and nonmajor clinically relevant bleeding 
compared with warfarin.170
Noncardiovascular Surgery
Studies examining outcomes among NOAC users af-
ter noncardiovascular surgery largely grouped patients 
into cohorts spanning minor to major high-risk sur-
gery.48,103,164,171 NOACs do not increase the rate of post-
operative bleeding events when compared with warfarin. 
A pooled analysis of dabigatran phase III trial bleeding 
data demonstrated no difference in postoperative bleed-
ing events between patients on dabigatran and warfa-
rin.171 In the ARISTOTLE trial, there was no difference in 
stroke, myocardial infarction, mortality, or bleeding for 
patients on apixaban versus warfarin for NVAF.105 How-
ever, small differences may not have been detected as 
only 2.9% of procedures in this trial were considered 
emergent and only 10.2% of procedures were consid-
ered major.
Bridging therapy is not recommended during NOAC 
therapy interruption for patients undergoing surgery. 
The dabigatran RE-LY study demonstrated an increased 
risk for major bleeding with bridging therapy.165 Non-
bridged patients had a thromboembolic event risk of 
0.6%. Analysis of periprocedural dabigatran use in the 
RE-LY trial demonstrated no difference in major bleed-
ing events between urgent versus elective surgery 
and major versus minor surgery.103 There was also no 
difference in fatal bleeding, reoperation as a result of 
bleeding, or transfusion requirements. There were few-
er bleeding events in patients with shorter interruption 
periods, though this may not be a causal relationship 
given that shorter interruptions may indicate patients 
with characteristics of faster drug clearance. In con-
trast, analysis of the Dresden NOAC registry demon-
strated increased risk of bleeding in patients with major 
procedures.48 Heparin bridging still did not reduce car-
diovascular events and did not statistically affect bleed-
ing risk once the data were adjusted for major versus 
minor procedures.48 In the Canadian dabigatran cohort 
study, none of the 541 patients received preoperative 
bridging, and only 1.7% of patients received postopera-
tive heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin. Despite 
this, there was only 1 transient ischemic attack event 
(0.2%) and no major arterial thromboembolic events. In 
the ARISTOTLE study, 37.5% of procedures did not re-
quire NOAC interruption and 11.7% of patients received 
bridging anticoagulation.105
In phase III trials of NOAC use for VTE prevention 
in high-bleeding-risk orthopedic surgery, the first pro-
phylactic dose was administered 6 to 12 hours post-
operatively.172 Real-world registries of NOAC use after 
orthopedic surgery suggest higher rates of bleeding 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e623
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
compared with those observed in the trials. In the Dres-
den NOAC registry, 6 out of 42 patients undergoing 
major orthopedic surgery developed major cardiovas-
cular (n=2) or bleeding events (n=4).48 In the Canadian 
dabigatran cohort, 5 out of 19 patients undergoing 
major orthopedic surgery developed major bleeding 
complications.164 Caution should be exercised in man-
aging patients on NOACs who require major orthopedic 
interventions.
Neuraxial Anesthesia
Spinal or epidural hematoma can be a devastating com-
plication of neuraxial anesthesia. There are limited data 
pertaining to the interval between the discontinuation of 
NOACs, the neuraxial anesthesia procedure itself, and 
subsequent resumption of the NOAC. Rivaroxaban to 
prevent VTE after total knee joint replacement or total 
hip arthroplasty with neuraxial anesthesia has also been 
examined. In an analysis of 4 trials, neuraxial hematoma 
occurred in only 1 of 4086 patients in the rivaroxaban 
group and this occurred before drug administration.173 
Of the 2550 patients who underwent neuraxial anesthe-
sia in the rivaroxaban group in a phase IV cohort study, 1 
patient developed intraspinal/hemorrhagic puncture.174 
These data suggest that the incidence of neuraxial he-
matoma is low despite concurrent administration of 
therapeutic doses of a NOAC.
There are no robust clinical outcomes data to address 
the timing and safety of NOAC discontinuation and rein-
stitution. The American Society of Regional Anesthesia 
and European Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain 
Therapy recommend stopping dabigatran 4 to 5 days 
before neuraxial block.175 For patients with end-stage 
renal disease, 6 days off dabigatran is recommended. 
For patients with high risk of VTE, dabigatran may be 
administered 12 hours after the pain intervention. This 
group recommends stopping apixaban and rivaroxaban 
3 to 5 days before neuroaxial block, and resuming either 
drug 12 hours after the pain intervention if the risk of 
VTE is considered high. No guidance on edoxaban was 
considered in this document. These recommendations 
are controversial because discontinuation periods of ≥4 
days are inconsistent with the return to hemostasis time 
of these agents, which may expose patients to excess 
thromboembolic risk.
CONCLUSION
NOACs are no longer novel and are now commonly used 
in day-to-day medical practice. Healthcare providers are 
encouraged to use well-defined protocols established in 
collaborations with multiple professional disciplines to 
address NOAC dose and continuation or cessation when 
invasive procedures are required. Such protocols should 
also be encouraged to assist acute care providers who 
manage bleeding while patients take NOACs. Simple to 
administer antidotes are either approved for use, such 
as idarucizumab for dabigatran, or are currently under 
investigation. Further studies that measure clinical out-
comes after NOAC reversal are needed to optimize pro-
tocols for NOAC-associated bleeding and periprocedural 
NOAC management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The AHA writing group thanks Taylor Klein for assistance in 
reference formatting and Anne Leonard and Connie Land for 
administrative assistance.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, 
all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships 
that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Asso-
ciation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on Octo-
ber 10, 2016, and the American Heart Association Executive 
Committee on October 25, 2016. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse 
by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-
2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Raval AN, Cigarroa JE, Chung MK, 
Diaz-Sandoval LJ, Diercks D, Piccini JP, Jung HS, Washam JB, 
Welch BG, Zazulia AR, Collins SP; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Clinical Pharmacology Subcommittee of 
the Acute Cardiac Care and General Cardiology Committee 
of the Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascu-
lar Disease in the Young; and Council on Quality of Care and 
Outcomes Research. Management of patients on non–vitamin 
K antagonist oral anticoagulants in the acute care and peri-
procedural setting: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted 
by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA state-
ments and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en-
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permit-
ted without the express permission of the American Heart Asso-
ciation. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://
www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission- 
Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Per-
missions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e624
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Amish N. Raval
University of 
Wisconsin
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sean P. Collins
Vanderbilt University 
College of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Mina K. Chung
Cleveland Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Joaquin E. 
Cigarroa
Oregon Health and 
Science University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Larry J. Diaz-
Sandoval
Michigan State 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Deborah Diercks
UT Southwestern 
Emergency Medicine
None
Johnson & 
Johnson*
(Steering 
Committee 
member on a 
study about the 
treatment of PE 
using NOACS)
None
None
None
None
None
Hee Soo Jung
University of 
Wisconsin
NIH(National 
Center for 
Advancing 
Translational 
Sciences)*; 
National Board 
of Medical 
Examiners*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jonathan P. 
Piccini
Duke University
Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals†
None
None
None
None
Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals*; 
Medtronic*; BMS 
Pfizer*
None
Jeffrey B. 
Washam
Duke University Heart 
Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Babu G. Welch
UT Southwestern 
Medical Center
St. Paul Medical 
Foundation†
None
None
None
None
Stryker 
Neurovascular*; 
Covidien*
None
Allyson R. 
Zazulia
Washington 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
DISCLOSURES
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e625
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Barnes GD, Ageno W, Ansell J, Kaatz S; Subcommittee on the 
Control of Anticoagulation of the International Society on Throm-
bosis and Haemostasis. Recommendation on the nomenclature 
for oral anticoagulants: communication from the SSC of the 
ISTH. J Thromb Haemost. 2015;13:1154–1156. doi: 10.1111/
jth.12969.
 2. Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, Eikelboom J, Oldgren J, 
Parekh A, Pogue J, Reilly PA, Themeles E, Varrone J, Wang S, Alings 
M, Xavier D, Zhu J, Diaz R, Lewis BS, Darius H, Diener H-C, Joyner 
CD, Wallentin L; RE-LY Steering Committee and Investigators. Dabi-
gatran versus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J 
Med. 2009;361:1139–1151. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0905561.
 3. Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, Pan G, Singer DE, Hacke 
W, Breithardt G, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, Piccini JP, Becker 
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Tyler W. 
Barrett
Vanderbilt 
University
NIH NHLBI (PI on 
a K23 studying 
A Fib that ended 
in Sept 2015)†; 
Janssen (Site PI 
for a multicenter 
international ORBIT-
AF II registry)†; 
Boehringer Ingelheim 
(PI for a multicenter 
retrospective cohort 
that completed in 
early 2016)*
None
None
None
None
Boehringer 
Ingelheim†
None
John W. 
Eikelboom
McMaster 
University (Canada)
BMS†; Boehringer 
Ingelheim†; Pfizer†; 
Bayer†
None
BMS†; Boehringer 
Ingelheim†; 
Pfizer†; Bayer†; 
Janssen*; Daiichi 
Sankyo*
None
None
None
None
David A. 
Garcia
University of 
Washington
Daiichi Sankyo (Local 
PI and St Committee 
member for clinical 
trial involving 
edoxaban)*; Janssen 
(Local PI for clinical 
trial)*
None
None
Pfizer*; 
BMS*
None
Pfizer*; BMS*; 
Boehringer 
Ingelheim*
None
Gregory Y.H. 
Lip
City Hospital
(United Kingdom)
None
None
Bayer†; BMS/
Pfizer†; 
Medtronic†; 
Boehringer 
Ingelheim†; 
Microlife†; 
Roche†;
Daiichi-Sankyo†
None
None
Bayer/Janssen†; 
Astellas†; Merck†; 
Sanofi†; BMS/
Pfizer†; Biotronik†; 
Medtronic†; Portola†;
Boehringer 
Ingelheim†; 
Microlife†; Daiichi-
Sankyo†
None
Jeffrey I. 
Weitz
Thrombosis & 
Atherosclerosis 
Research Institute 
(Canada)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e626
RC, Nessel CC, Paolini JF, Berkowitz SD, Fox KA, Califf RM; 
ROCKET AF Steering Committee, for the ROCKET AF Inves-
tigators. Rivaroxaban versus warfarin in nonvalvular atrial fi-
brillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:883–891. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1009638.
 4. Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, Lopes RD, Hylek EM, 
Hanna M, Al-Khalidi HR, Ansell J, Atar D, Avezum A, Bahit MC, 
Diaz R, Easton JD, Ezekowitz JA, Flaker G, Garcia D, Geraldes 
M, Gersh BJ, Golitsyn S, Goto S, Hermosillo AG, Hohnloser SH, 
Horowitz J, Mohan P, Jansky P, Lewis BS, Lopez-Sendon JL, Pais 
P, Parkhomenko A, Verheugt FW, Zhu J, Wallentin L; ARISTOTLE 
Committees and Investigators. Apixaban versus warfarin in pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:981–992. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1107039.
 5. Giugliano RP, Ruff CT, Braunwald E, Murphy SA, Wiviott SD, Halperin 
JL, Waldo AL, Ezekowitz MD, Weitz JI, Špinar J, Ruzyllo W, Ruda M, 
Koretsune Y, Betcher J, Shi M, Grip LT, Patel SP, Patel I, Hanyok JJ, 
Mercuri M, Antman EM; ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 Investigators. Edoxa-
ban versus warfarin in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369:2093–2104. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1310907.
 6. Piccini JP, Hellkamp AS, Washam JB, Becker RC, Breithardt G, 
Berkowitz SD, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, Hacke W, Mahaffey KW, 
Nessel CC, Singer DE, Fox KA, Patel MR. Polypharmacy and the 
efficacy and safety of rivaroxaban versus warfarin in the preven-
tion of stroke in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Cir-
culation. 2016;133:352–360. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
115.018544.
 7. Levy JH, Faraoni D, Spring JL, Douketis JD, Samama CM. Man-
aging new oral anticoagulants in the perioperative and intensive 
care unit setting. Anesthesiology. 2013;118:1466–1474. doi: 
10.1097/ALN.0b013e318289bcba.
 8. Gehrie E, Tormey C. Novel oral anticoagulants: efficacy, labora-
tory measurement, and approaches to emergent reversal. Arch 
Pathol Lab Med. 2015;139:687–692. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-
0677-RS.
 9. Cuker A, Siegal DM, Crowther MA, Garcia DA. Laboratory mea-
surement of the anticoagulant activity of the non-vitamin K oral 
anticoagulants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1128–1139. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.065.
 
10. Mar PL, Familtsev D, Ezekowitz MD, Lakkireddy D, Gopinathannair 
R. Periprocedural management of anticoagulation in patients tak-
ing novel oral anticoagulants: review of the literature and recom-
mendations for specific populations and procedures. Int J Cardiol. 
2016;202:578–585. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.09.035.
 
11. Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, Eikelboom J, Glund S, Verhamme P, Bern-
stein RA, Dubiel R, Huisman MV, Hylek EM, Kamphuisen PW, Kreu-
zer J, Levy JH, Sellke FW, Stangier J, Steiner T, Wang B, Kam 
CW, Weitz JI. Idarucizumab for dabigatran reversal. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:511–520. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1502000.
 
12. Eerenberg ES, Kamphuisen PW, Sijpkens MK, Meijers JC, Buller 
HR, Levi M. Reversal of rivaroxaban and dabigatran by prothrom-
bin complex concentrate: a randomized, placebo-controlled, 
crossover study in healthy subjects. Circulation. 2011;124:1573–
1579. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.029017.
 
13. Claisse G, Delavenne X, Masson I, Maillard N, Alamartine E, Mariat 
C. Venovenous haemodiafiltration for the management of dabiga-
tran overdose in intensive care unit. Clin Kidney J. 2015;8:199–
201. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfv001.
 
14. Chen BC, Sheth NR, Dadzie KA, Smith SW, Nelson LS, Hoffman 
RS, Winchester JF. Hemodialysis for the treatment of pulmo-
nary hemorrhage from dabigatran overdose. Am J Kidney Dis. 
2013;62:591–594. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.02.361.
 
15. Siegal DM, Curnutte JT, Connolly SJ, Lu G, Conley PB, Wiens BL, 
Mathur VS, Castillo J, Bronson MD, Leeds JM, Mar FA, Gold A, 
Crowther MA. Andexanet alfa for the reversal of factor Xa inhibi-
tor activity. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2413–2424. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1510991.
 
16. Connolly SJ, Milling TJ Jr, Eikelboom JW, Gibson CM, Curnutte JT, 
Gold A, Bronson MD, Lu G, Conley PB, Verhamme P, Schmidt J, 
Middeldorp S, Cohen AT, Beyer-Westendorf J, Albaladejo P, Lopez-
Sendon J, Goodman S, Leeds J, Wiens BL, Siegal DM, Zotova E, 
Meeks B, Nakamya J, Lim WT, Crowther M; ANNEXA-4 Investi-
gators. Andexanet alfa for acute major bleeding associated with 
factor Xa inhibitors. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1131–1141. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1607887.
 
17. Perzborn E, Heitmeier S, Laux V, Buchmüller A. Reversal of 
rivaroxaban-induced anticoagulation with prothrombin com-
plex concentrate, activated prothrombin complex concentrate 
and recombinant activated factor VII in vitro. Thromb Res. 
2014;133:671–681. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2014.01.017.
 
18. Stevenson JW, Minns AB, Smollin C, Albertson TE, Cantrell FL, 
Tomaszewski C, Clark RF. An observational case series of dabi-
gatran and rivaroxaban exposures reported to a poison control 
system. Am J Emerg Med. 2014;32:1077–1084. doi: 10.1016/j.
ajem.2014.04.031.
 
19. Lehmann T, Hofer KE, Baumann M, Hasler K, Ceschi A, Kupfer-
schmidt H, Rohde G, Korte W. Massive human rivaroxaban over-
dose. Thromb Haemost. 2014;112:834–836. doi: 10.1160/
TH14-02-0138.
 
20. Dibu JR, Weimer JM, Ahrens C, Manno E, Frontera JA. The role 
of FEIBA in reversing novel oral anticoagulants in intracerebral 
hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 2015;24:413–419. doi: 10.1007/
s12028-015-0213-y.
 
21. Zahir H, Brown KS, Vandell AG, Desai M, Maa JF, Dishy V, Lom-
eli B, Feussner A, Feng W, He L, Grosso MA, Lanz HJ, Antman 
EM. Edoxaban effects on bleeding following punch biopsy 
and reversal by a 4-factor prothrombin complex concentrate.  
Circulation. 2015;131:82–90. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
114.013445.
 
22. Ansell JE, Bakhru SH, Laulicht BE, Steiner SS, Grosso M, Brown K, 
Dishy V, Noveck RJ, Costin JC. Use of PER977 to reverse the an-
ticoagulant effect of edoxaban. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:2141–
2142. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1411800.
 
23. Ansell JE, Laulicht BE, Bakhru SH, Hoffman M, Steiner SS, Cos-
tin JC. Ciraparantag safely and completely reverses the antico-
agulant effects of low molecular weight heparin. Thromb Res. 
2016;146:113–118. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2016.07.008.
 
24. Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, Hoffman EB, Deenadayalu 
N, Ezekowitz MD, Camm AJ, Weitz JI, Lewis BS, Parkhomenko 
A, Yamashita T, Antman EM. Comparison of the efficacy and 
safety of new oral anticoagulants with warfarin in patients with 
atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet. 
2014;383:955–962. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62343-0.
 
25. Linkins L, O’Donnell M, Julian JA, Kearon C. Intracranial and 
fatal bleeding according to indication for long-term oral antico-
agulant therapy. J Thromb Haemost. 2010;8:2201–2207. doi: 
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.04016.x.
 
26. Hemphill JC 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, Becker K, Bendok 
BR, Cushman M, Fung GL, Goldstein JN, Macdonald RL, Mitch-
ell PH, Scott PA, Selim MH, Woo D. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline for 
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2015;46:2032–2060. doi: 
10.1161/STR.0000000000000069.
 
27. Hemphill JC 3rd, Farrant M, Neill TA Jr. Prospective validation 
of the ICH score for 12-month functional outcome. Neurology. 
2009;73:1088–1094. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b8b332.
 
28. Wada R, Aviv RI, Fox AJ, Sahlas DJ, Gladstone DJ, Tomlinson G, Sy-
mons SP. CT angiography “spot sign” predicts hematoma expan-
sion in acute intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2007;38:1257–
1262. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000259633.59404.f3.
 
29. Chakraborty S, Blacquiere D, Lum C, Stotts G. Dynamic nature 
of the CT angiographic “spot sign”. Br J Radiol. 2010;83:e216–
e219. doi: 10.1259/bjr/74416385.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e627
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 30. Sakamoto Y, Koga M, Yamagami H, Okuda S, Okada Y, Kimura 
K, Shiokawa Y, Nakagawara J, Furui E, Hasegawa Y, Kario 
K, Arihiro S, Sato S, Kobayashi J, Tanaka E, Nagatsuka K, 
Minematsu K, Toyoda K; SAMURAI Study Investigators. Systolic 
blood pressure after intravenous antihypertensive treatment and 
clinical outcomes in hyperacute intracerebral hemorrhage: the 
Stroke Acute Management with Urgent Risk-Factor Assessment 
and Improvement-Intracerebral Hemorrhage study. Stroke. 
2013;44:1846–1851. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.001212.
 31. Rodriguez-Luna D, Piñeiro S, Rubiera M, Ribo M, Coscojuela P, 
Pagola J, Flores A, Muchada M, Ibarra B, Meler P, Sanjuan E, 
Hernandez-Guillamon M, Alvarez-Sabin J, Montaner J, Molina 
CA. Impact of blood pressure changes and course on hema-
toma growth in acute intracerebral hemorrhage. Eur J Neurol. 
2013;20:1277–1283. doi: 10.1111/ene.12180.
 32. Anderson CS, Heeley E, Huang Y, Wang J, Stapf C, Delcourt 
C, Lindley R, Robinson T, Lavados P, Neal B, Hata J, Arima H, 
Parsons M, Li Y, Wang J, Heritier S, Li Q, Woodward M, Simes 
RJ, Davis SM, Chalmers J; INTERACT2 Investigators. Rapid 
blood-pressure lowering in patients with acute intracerebral hem-
orrhage. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:2355–2365. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1214609.
 
32a. Qureshi AI, Palesch YY, Barsan  WG, Hanley DF, Hsu CY, Martin 
RL, Moy CS, Silbergleit R, Steiner T, Suarez JI, Toyoda K, Wang Y, 
Yamamoto H, Yoon B-W; for the ATACH-2 Trial Investigators and the 
Neurological Emergency Treatment Trials Network. Intensive blood-
pressure lowering in patients with acute cerebral hemorrhage. N Engl 
J Med. 2016;375:1033–1043. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1603460.
 33. Lip GY, Lane DA. Assessing bleeding risk in atrial fibrillation 
with the HAS-BLED and ORBIT scores: clinical application re-
quires focus on the reversible bleeding risk factors. Eur Heart J. 
2015;36:3265–3267. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv415.
 34. Verheugt FW, Granger CB. Oral anticoagulants for stroke pre-
vention in atrial fibrillation: current status, special situations, 
and unmet needs. Lancet. 2015;386:303–310. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(15)60245-8.
 35. Caldeira D, Barra M, Pinto FJ, Ferreira JJ, Costa J. Intracranial 
hemorrhage risk with the new oral anticoagulants: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Neurol. 2015;262:516–522. doi: 
10.1007/s00415-014-7462-0.
 36. Dossett LA, Riesel JN, Griffin MR, Cotton BA. Prevalence and 
implications of preinjury warfarin use: an analysis of the National 
Trauma Databank. Arch Surg. 2011;146:565–570. doi: 
10.1001/archsurg.2010.313.
 37. Durie R, Kohute M, Fernandez C, Knight M. Prothrombin complex 
concentrate for the management of severe traumatic bleeding 
in a patient anticoagulated with apixaban. J Clin Pharm Ther. 
2016;41:92–93. doi: 10.1111/jcpt.12339.
 38. Cotton BA, McCarthy JJ, Holcomb JB. Acutely injured patients 
on dabigatran. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2039–2040. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc1111095.
 39. Croft PE, Cabral KP, Strout TD, Baumann MR, Gibbs MA, Delaney 
MC. Managing blunt trauma in patients receiving dabigatran 
etexilate: case study and review of the literature. J Emerg Nurs. 
2013;39:302–308. doi: 10.1016/j.jen.2013.01.016.
 40. Huang GS, Chance EA. When dabigatran and trauma collide. Am 
Surg. 2013;79:113–114.
 41. Joseph B, Ditillo M, Pandit V, Aziz H, Sadoun M, Hays D, Davis K, 
Friese R, Rhee P. Dabigatran therapy: minor trauma injuries are 
no longer minor. Am Surg. 2014;80:E116–E118.
 42. Obeng-Gyasi S, Loor MM, Samotowka MA, Moorman ML. 
Management of dabigatran-induced anticoagulation in trauma 
and acute care surgery patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2012;73:1064–1069. doi: 10.1097/TA.0b013e31827019c9.
 43. Committee on Trauma, American College of Surgeons. Advanced 
Trauma Life Support Student Course Manual. Chicago, IL: 
American College of Surgeons; 2012.
 
44. Dias JD, Norem K, Doorneweerd DD, Thurer RL, Popovsky MA, 
Omert LA. Use of thromboelastography (TEG) for detection of new 
oral anticoagulants. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015;139:665–673. 
doi: 10.5858/arpa.2014-0170-OA.
 
45. Oswald E, Velik-Salchner C, Innerhofer P, Tauber H, Auckenthaler 
T, Ulmer H, Streif W. Results of rotational thromboelastometry, co-
agulation activation markers and thrombin generation assays in or-
thopedic patients during thromboprophylaxis with rivaroxaban and 
enoxaparin: a prospective cohort study. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 
2015;26:136–144. doi: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000203.
 46. Sherwood MW, Nessel CC, Hellkamp AS, Mahaffey KW, Piccini JP, Suh 
EY, Becker RC, Singer DE, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, Berkowitz SD, Fox 
KA, Patel MR. Gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with atrial fibrilla-
tion treated with rivaroxaban or warfarin: ROCKET AF Trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2015;66:2271–2281. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.09.024.
 
47. Fang MC, Go AS, Chang Y, Hylek EM, Henault LE, Jensvold NG, 
Singer DE. Death and disability from warfarin-associated intracra-
nial and extracranial hemorrhages. Am J Med. 2007;120:700–
705. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2006.07.034.
 
48. Beyer-Westendorf J, Gelbricht V, Förster K, Ebertz F, Köhler C, 
Werth S, Kuhlisch E, Stange T, Thieme C, Daschkow K, Weiss N. 
Peri-interventional management of novel oral anticoagulants in dai-
ly care: results from the prospective Dresden NOAC registry. Eur 
Heart J. 2014;35:1888–1896. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht557.
 
49. Staerk L, Lip GY, Olesen JB, Fosbøl EL, Pallisgaard JL, Bonde AN, 
Gundlund A, Lindhardt TB, Hansen ML, Torp-Pedersen C, Gislason 
GH. Stroke and recurrent haemorrhage associated with antithrom-
botic treatment after gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with 
atrial fibrillation: nationwide cohort study. BMJ. 2015;351:h5876. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.h5876.
 
50. Conway SE, Schaeffer SE, Harrison DL. Evaluation of dabigatran 
exposures reported to poison control centers. Ann Pharmacother. 
2014;48:354–360. doi: 10.1177/1060028013513883.
 
51. Spiller HA, Mowry JB, Aleguas A Jr, Griffith JR, Goetz R, Ryan 
ML, Bangh S, Klein-Schwartz W, Schaeffer S, Casavant MJ. An 
observational study of the factor Xa inhibitors rivaroxaban and 
apixaban as reported to eight poison centers. Ann Emerg Med. 
2016;67:189–195. doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2015.07.014.
 
52. Alikhan R, Rayment R, Keeling D, Baglin T, Benson G, Green L, 
Marshall S, Patel R, Pavord S, Rose P, Tait C. The acute manage-
ment of haemorrhage, surgery and overdose in patients receiv-
ing dabigatran. Emerg Med J. 2014;31:163–168. doi: 10.1136/
emermed-2012-201976.
 
53. Chang DN, Dager WE, Chin AI. Removal of dabigatran by hemo-
dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013;61:487–489. doi: 10.1053/j.
ajkd.2012.08.047.
 
54. Woo JS, Kapadia N, Phanco SE, Lynch CA. Positive outcome after 
intentional overdose of dabigatran. J Med Toxicol. 2013;9:192–
195. doi: 10.1007/s13181-012-0276-5.
 
55. Sajkov D, Gallus A. Accidental rivaroxaban overdose in a patient 
with pulmonary embolism: some lessons for managing new oral 
anticoagulants. Clin Med Insights Case Rep. 2015;8:57–59. doi: 
10.4137/CCRep.S27992.
 
56. Chiew AL, Khamoudes D, Chan BS. Use of continuous veno-venous 
haemodiafiltration therapy in dabigatran overdose. Clin Toxicol (Phi-
la). 2014;52:283–287. doi: 10.3109/15563650.2014.900179.
 
57. Fountzilas C, George J, Levine R. Dabigatran overdose sec-
ondary to acute kidney injury and amiodarone use. N Z Med J. 
2013;126:110–112.
 
58. Linkins LA, Moffat K. Monitoring the anticoagulant effect af-
ter a massive rivaroxaban overdose. J Thromb Haemost. 
2014;12:1570–1571. doi: 10.1111/jth.12669.
 
59. Montaruli B, Erroi L, Vitale C, Berutti S, Cosseddu D, Sivera P, Co-
glitore R, Marangella M, Migliardi M. Dabigatran overdose: case 
report of laboratory coagulation parameters and hemodialysis of 
an 85-year-old man. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2015;26:225–
229. doi: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000221.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e628
 
60. Ratanapo S, Ungprasert P, Srivali N, Cheungpasitporn W, Bischof EF. 
Reversal of a dabigatran overdose: what are possible options? Am J 
Med Sci. 2013;346:259. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e318295cc72.
 
61. Mumoli N, Cei M, Fiorini M, Pennati P, Testa S, Dentali F. Conser-
vative management of intentional massive dabigatran overdose. 
 
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015;63:2205–2207. doi: 10.1111/jgs.13684.
 
62. Andreu-Cayuelas JM, Pastor-Perez FJ, Puche CM, Mateo-Martinez 
A, Garcia-Alberola A, Flores-Blanco PJ, Valdes M, Lip GY, Roldan 
V, Manzano-Fernandez S. Impact of variations in kidney function 
on nonvitamin K oral anticoagulant dosing in patients with atrial 
fibrillation and recent acute heart failure. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl 
Ed). 2015;69:134–140. doi: 10.1016/j.rec.2015.06.021.
 
63. Caldeira D, Gonçalves N, Pinto FJ, Costa J, Ferreira JJ. Risk of 
renal failure with the non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug 
Saf. 2015;24:757–764. doi: 10.1002/pds.3791.
 
64. Narasimha Krishna V, Warnock DG, Saxena N, Rizk DV. Oral an-
ticoagulants and risk of nephropathy. Drug Saf. 2015;38:527–
533. doi: 10.1007/s40264-015-0290-z.
 
65. Brodsky SV, Nadasdy T, Rovin BH, Satoskar AA, Nadasdy GM, Wu 
HM, Bhatt UY, Hebert LA. Warfarin-related nephropathy occurs in 
patients with and without chronic kidney disease and is associated 
with an increased mortality rate. Kidney Int. 2011;80:181–189. 
doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.44.
 
66. Fordyce CB, Hellkamp AS, Lokhnygina Y, Lindner SM, Piccini JP, 
Becker RC, Berkowitz SD, Breithardt G, Fox KA, Mahaffey KW, 
Nessel CC, Singer DE, Patel MR; ROCKET AF Steering Commit-
tee and Investigators. On-treatment outcomes in patients with 
worsening renal function with rivaroxaban compared with warfa-
rin: insights from ROCKET AF. Circulation. 2016;134:37–47. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.021890.
 
67. Böhm M, Ezekowitz MD, Connolly SJ, Eikelboom JW, Hohnloser SH, 
Reilly PA, Schumacher H, Brueckmann M, Schirmer SH, Kratz MT, Yu-
suf S, Diener HC, Hijazi Z, Wallentin L. Changes in renal function in pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation: an analysis from the RE-LY Trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2015;65:2481–2493. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.03.577.
 
68. The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA 
Stroke Study Group. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute isch-
emic stroke. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1581–1587.
 
69. Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, Brozman M, Dávalos A, Guidetti D, 
Larrue V, Lees KR, Medeghri Z, Machnig T, Schneider D, von Kum-
mer R, Wahlgren N, Toni D; ECASS Investigators. Thrombolysis 
with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic stroke. N Engl 
J Med. 2008;359:1317–1329. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0804656.
 
70. Lees KR, Bluhmki E, von Kummer R, Brott TG, Toni D, Grotta JC, 
Albers GW, Kaste M, Marler JR, Hamilton SA, Tilley BC, Davis SM, 
Donnan GA, Hacke W, Allen K, Mau J, Meier D, del Zoppo G, De 
Silva DA, Butcher KS, Parsons MW, Barber PA, Levi C, Bladin C, 
Byrnes G; ECASS, ATLANTIS, NINDS and EPITHET rt-PA Study 
Group. Time to treatment with intravenous alteplase and out-
come in stroke: an updated pooled analysis of ECASS, ATLANTIS, 
NINDS, and EPITHET trials. Lancet. 2010;375:1695–1703. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60491-6.
 
71. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaer-
schalk BM, Khatri P, McMullan PW Jr, Qureshi AI, Rosenfield K, 
Scott PA, Summers DR, Wang DZ, Wintermark M, Yonas H; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council 
on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Dis-
ease; Council on Clinical Cardiology. Guidelines for the early man-
agement of patients with acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for 
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2013;44:870–947. doi: 
10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a.
 
72. Sun L, Zhou W, Ploen R, Zorn M, Veltkamp R. Anticoagulation with 
dabigatran does not increase secondary intracerebral haemorrhage 
after thrombolysis in experimental cerebral ischaemia. Thromb Hae-
most. 2013;110:153–161. doi: 10.1160/TH12-12-0942.
 
73. Ploen R, Sun L, Zhou W, Heitmeier S, Zorn M, Jenetzky E, Velt-
kamp R. Rivaroxaban does not increase hemorrhage after throm-
bolysis in experimental ischemic stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2014;34:495–501. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.226.
 
74. Jayathissa S, Gommans J, Harper P. Stroke thrombolysis in pa-
tients taking dabigatran. Intern Med J. 2013;43:826–828. doi: 
10.1111/imj.12182.
 
75. Casado Naranjo I, Portilla-Cuenca JC, Jiménez Caballero PE, Calle 
Escobar ML, Romero Sevilla RM. Fatal intracerebral hemorrhage 
associated with administration of recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator in a stroke patient on treatment with dabigatran. Cere-
brovasc Dis. 2011;32:614–615. doi: 10.1159/000334578.
 
76. Seiffge DJ, Hooff RJ, Nolte CH, Béjot Y, Turc G, Ikenberg B, Berge 
E, Persike M, Dequatre-Ponchelle N, Strbian D, Pfeilschifter W, 
Zini A, Tveiten A, Næss H, Michel P, Sztajzel R, Luft A, Gensicke H, 
Traenka C, Hert L, Scheitz JF, De Marchis GM, Bonati LH, Peters 
N, Charidimou A, Werring DJ, Palm F, Reinhard M, Niesen WD, 
Nagao T, Pezzini A, Caso V, Nederkoorn PJ, Kägi G, von Hessling 
A, Padjen V, Cordonnier C, Erdur H, Lyrer PA, Brouns R, Steiner T, 
Tatlisumak T, Engelter ST; NOACISP Study Group. Recanalization 
therapies in acute ischemic stroke patients: impact of prior treat-
ment with novel oral anticoagulants on bleeding complications 
and outcome. Circulation. 2015;132:1261–1269. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.115.015484.
 
77. Berkhemer OA, Fransen PS, Beumer D, van den Berg LA, Lings-
ma HF, Yoo AJ, Schonewille WJ, Vos JA, Nederkoorn PJ, Wermer 
MJ, van Walderveen MA, Staals J, Hofmeijer J, van Oostayen JA, 
Lycklama à Nijeholt GJ, Boiten J, Brouwer PA, Emmer BJ, de Bruijn 
SF, van Dijk LC, Kappelle LJ, Lo RH, van Dijk EJ, de Vries J, de Kort 
PL, van Rooij WJ, van den Berg JS, van Hasselt BA, Aerden LA, Dal-
linga RJ, Visser MC, Bot JC, Vroomen PC, Eshghi O, Schreuder TH, 
Heijboer RJ, Keizer K, Tielbeek AV, den Hertog HM, Gerrits DG, van 
den Berg-Vos RM, Karas GB, Steyerberg EW, Flach HZ, Marquering 
HA, Sprengers ME, Jenniskens SF, Beenen LF, van den Berg R, 
Koudstaal PJ, van Zwam WH, Roos YB, van der Lugt A, van Oosten-
brugge RJ, Majoie CB, Dippel DW; MR CLEAN Investigators. A ran-
domized trial of intraarterial treatment for acute ischemic stroke. 
N Engl J Med. 2015;372:11–20. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411587.
 
78. Campbell BC, Mitchell PJ, Kleinig TJ, Dewey HM, Churilov L, Yassi 
N, Yan B, Dowling RJ, Parsons MW, Oxley TJ, Wu TY, Brooks M, 
Simpson MA, Miteff F, Levi CR, Krause M, Harrington TJ, Faulder 
KC, Steinfort BS, Priglinger M, Ang T, Scroop R, Barber PA, Mc-
Guinness B, Wijeratne T, Phan TG, Chong W, Chandra RV, Bladin 
CF, Badve M, Rice H, de Villiers L, Ma H, Desmond PM, Donnan 
GA, Davis SM; EXTEND-IA Investigators. Endovascular therapy for 
ischemic stroke with perfusion-imaging selection. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1009–1018. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1414792.
 
79. Saver JL, Goyal M, Bonafe A, Diener HC, Levy EI, Pereira VM, 
Albers GW, Cognard C, Cohen DJ, Hacke W, Jansen O, Jovin TG, 
Mattle HP, Nogueira RG, Siddiqui AH, Yavagal DR, Baxter BW, Dev-
lin TG, Lopes DK, Reddy VK, du Mesnil de Rochemont R, Singer 
OC, Jahan R; SWIFT PRIME Investigators. Stent-retriever throm-
bectomy after intravenous t-PA vs. t-PA alone in stroke. N Engl J 
Med. 2015;372:2285–2295. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1415061.
 
80. Goyal M, Demchuk AM, Menon BK, Eesa M, Rempel JL, Thornton 
J, Roy D, Jovin TG, Willinsky RA, Sapkota BL, Dowlatshahi D, Frei 
DF, Kamal NR, Montanera WJ, Poppe AY, Ryckborst KJ, Silver FL, 
Shuaib A, Tampieri D, Williams D, Bang OY, Baxter BW, Burns PA, 
Choe H, Heo JH, Holmstedt CA, Jankowitz B, Kelly M, Linares G, 
Mandzia JL, Shankar J, Sohn SI, Swartz RH, Barber PA, Coutts SB, 
Smith EE, Morrish WF, Weill A, Subramaniam S, Mitha AP, Wong 
JH, Lowerison MW, Sajobi TT, Hill MD; ESCAPE Trial Investiga-
tors. Randomized assessment of rapid endovascular treatment 
of ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1019–1030. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1414905.
 
81. Jovin TG, Chamorro A, Cobo E, de Miquel MA, Molina CA, Rovira 
A, San Román L, Serena J, Abilleira S, Ribó M, Millán M, Urra X, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e629
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Cardona P, López-Cancio E, Tomasello A, Castaño C, Blasco J, Aja 
L, Dorado L, Quesada H, Rubiera M, Hernandez-Pérez M, Goyal M, 
Demchuk AM, von Kummer R, Gallofré M, Dávalos A; REVASCAT 
Trial Investigators. Thrombectomy within 8 hours after symptom 
onset in ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2296–2306. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1503780.
 
82. Javedani PP, Horowitz BZ, Clark WM, Lutsep HL. Dabigatran 
etexilate: management in acute ischemic stroke. Am J Crit Care. 
2013;22:169–176. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2013125.
 
83. Moey AW, Koblar SA, Chryssidis S, Robinson M, Jannes J. Endo-
vascular therapy after stroke in a patient treated with dabigatran. 
Med J Aust. 2012;196:469–471.
 
84. Müller P, Topakian R, Sonnberger M, Nußbaumer K, Windpessl M, 
Eder V, Nesser HJ, Trenkler J, Haring HP. Endovascular throm-
bectomy for acute ischemic stroke patients anticoagulated with 
dabigatran. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2013;115:2257–2259. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.07.017.
 
85. Freeman WD, Kuo RS, Hanel RA. Letter by Freeman et al regard-
ing article, “Using dabigatran in patients with stroke: a practical 
guide for clinicians.” Stroke. 2012;43:e48; author reply e49. doi: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.652313.
 
86. Mehta S, Dababneh H, Hussain M, Moussavi M, Kirmani JF. Endo-
vascular treatment in acute ischemic stroke patient on factor Xa 
inhibitor. J Vasc Interv Neurol. 2014;7:5–7.
 
87. Kimura S, Ogata T, Fukae J, Okawa M, Higashi T, Iwaasa M, Inoue 
T, Tsuboi Y. Revascularization for acute ischemic stroke is safe 
for rivaroxaban users. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2014;23:e427–
e431. doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2014.05.015.
 
88. Powers WJ, Derdeyn CP, Biller J, Coffey CS, Hoh BL, Jauch EC, 
Johnston KC, Johnston SC, Khalessi AA, Kidwell CS, Meschia JF, 
Ovbiagele B, Yavagal DR; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council. 2015 American Heart Association/American Stroke 
Association focused update of the 2013 guidelines for the early 
management of patients with acute ischemic stroke regarding endo-
vascular treatment: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2015;46:3020–3035. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000074.
 
89. Paciaroni M, Agnelli G, Micheli S, Caso V. Efficacy and safety of 
anticoagulant treatment in acute cardioembolic stroke: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Stroke. 2007;38:423–
430. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000254600.92975.1f.
 
90. Sandercock PA, Counsell C, Kane EJ. Anticoagulants for acute isch-
aemic stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;3:CD000024. 
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000024.pub4.
 
91. Paciaroni M, Agnelli G, Corea F, Ageno W, Alberti A, Lanari A, 
Caso V, Micheli S, Bertolani L, Venti M, Palmerini F, Biagini S, 
Comi G, Previdi P, Silvestrelli G. Early hemorrhagic transformation 
of brain infarction: rate, predictive factors, and influence on clini-
cal outcome: results of a prospective multicenter study. Stroke. 
2008;39:2249–2256. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.510321.
 
92. Fiorelli M, Bastianello S, von Kummer R, del Zoppo GJ, Larrue V, 
Lesaffre E, Ringleb AP, Lorenzano S, Manelfe C, Bozzao L. Hem-
orrhagic transformation within 36 hours of a cerebral infarct: rela-
tionships with early clinical deterioration and 3-month outcome in 
the European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study I (ECASS I) cohort. 
Stroke. 1999;30:2280–2284. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.30.11.2280.
 
93. Berger C, Fiorelli M, Steiner T, Schäbitz W-R, Bozzao L, Bluhm-
ki E, Hacke W, von Kummer R. Hemorrhagic transformation of 
ischemic brain tissue: asymptomatic or symptomatic? Stroke. 
2001;32:1330–1335. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.32.6.1330.
 
94. Pessin MS, Estol CJ, Lafranchise F, Caplan LR. Safety of anticoagula-
tion after hemorrhagic infarction. Neurology. 1993;43:1298–1303.
 
95. Bohmann F, Mirceska A, Pfeilschifter J, Lindhoff-Last E, Steinmetz 
H, Foerch C, Pfeilschifter W. No influence of dabigatran anticoagu-
lation on hemorrhagic transformation in an experimental model 
of ischemic stroke. PLoS One. 2012;7:e40804. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0040804.
 96. Gliem M, Hermsen D, van Rooijen N, Hartung HP, Jander S. Secondary 
intracerebral hemorrhage due to early initiation of oral anticoagula-
tion after ischemic stroke: an experimental study in mice. Stroke. 
2012;43:3352–3357. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.666818.
 97. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom J, Joyner C, Diener HC, Hart R, Golitsyn 
S, Flaker G, Avezum A, Hohnloser SH, Diaz R, Talajic M, Zhu J, 
Pais P, Budaj A, Parkhomenko A, Jansky P, Commerford P, Tan 
RS, Sim KH, Lewis BS, Van Mieghem W, Lip GY, Kim JH, Lanas-
Zanetti F, Gonzalez-Hermosillo A, Dans AL, Munawar M, O’Donnell 
M, Lawrence J, Lewis G, Afzal R, Yusuf S; AVERROES Steering 
Committee and Investigators. Apixaban in patients with atrial 
fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:806–817. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1007432.
 98. Lansberg MG, O’Donnell MJ, Khatri P, Lang ES, Nguyen-Huynh 
MN, Schwartz NE, Sonnenberg FA, Schulman S, Vandvik PO, 
Spencer FA, Alonso-Coello P, Guyatt GH, Akl EA. Antithrombotic 
and thrombolytic therapy for ischemic stroke: antithrombotic 
therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College 
of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 
Chest. 2012;141:e601S–636S.
 99. Heidbuchel H, Verhamme P, Alings M, Antz M, Hacke W, Oldgren 
J, Sinnaeve P, Camm AJ, Kirchhof P; European Heart Rhythm 
Association. European Heart Rhythm Association Practical Guide 
on the use of new oral anticoagulants in patients with non-valvular 
atrial fibrillation. Europace. 2013;15:625–651. doi: 10.1093/
europace/eut083.
 
100. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, Bravata DM, Chimowitz MI, 
Ezekowitz MD, Fang MC, Fisher M, Furie KL, Heck DV, Johnston 
SC, Kasner SE, Kittner SJ, Mitchell PH, Rich MW, Richardson 
D, Schwamm LH, Wilson JA; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Peripheral 
Vascular Disease. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in pa-
tients with stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline for 
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:2160–2236. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000024.
 
101. Lip GY. Assessing bleeding risk with the HAS-BLED score: balancing 
simplicity, practicality, and predictive value in bleeding-risk assess-
ment. Clin Cardiol. 2015;38:562–564. doi: 10.1002/clc.22436.
 
102. Lip GY, Lane DA. Assessing eligibility for anticoagulation after 
diagnosis of atrial fibrillation–reply. JAMA. 2015;314:949–950. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.8995.
 
103. Healey JS, Eikelboom J, Douketis J, Wallentin L, Oldgren J, 
Yang S, Themeles E, Heidbuchel H, Heidbuchle H, Avezum A, 
Reilly P, Connolly SJ, Yusuf S, Ezekowitz M; RE-LY Investigators. 
Periprocedural bleeding and thromboembolic events with dabi-
gatran compared with warfarin: results from the Randomized 
Evaluation of Long-Term Anticoagulation Therapy (RE-LY) ran-
domized trial. Circulation. 2012;126:343–348. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.111.090464.
 
104. Sherwood MW, Douketis JD, Patel MR, Piccini JP, Hellkamp AS, 
Lokhnygina Y, Spyropoulos AC, Hankey GJ, Singer DE, Nessel CC, 
Mahaffey KW, Fox KA, Califf RM, Becker RC; ROCKET AF Investigators. 
Outcomes of temporary interruption of rivaroxaban compared with 
warfarin in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: results from the 
Rivaroxaban-Once Daily, Oral, Direct Factor Xa Inhibition Compared 
With Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of Stroke and Embolism 
Trial in Atrial Fibrillation (ROCKET AF). Circulation. 2014;129:1850–
1859. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.005754.
 
105. Garcia D, Alexander JH, Wallentin L, Wojdyla DM, Thomas 
L, Hanna M, Al-Khatib SM, Dorian P, Ansell J, Commerford P, 
Flaker G, Lanas F, Vinereanu D, Xavier D, Hylek EM, Held C, 
Verheugt FW, Granger CB, Lopes RD. Management and clinical 
outcomes in patients treated with apixaban vs warfarin undergo-
ing procedures. Blood. 2014;124:3692–3698. doi: 10.1182/
blood-2014-08-595496.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e630
 
106.  
Caldeira D, Costa J, Ferreira JJ, Pinto FJ. Thromboembolic risk 
in the initiation, switch and interruption/re-initiation of oral anti-
coagulants: do newcomers improve outcomes? Insights from a 
meta-analysis of RCTs. Int J Cardiol. 2014;177:117–119. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.09.099.
 
107.  
Patel MR, Hellkamp AS, Lokhnygina Y, Piccini JP, Zhang Z, Mohanty 
S, Singer DE, Hacke W, Breithardt G, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, 
Becker RC, Nessel CC, Berkowitz SD, Califf RM, Fox KA, Mahaffey 
KW. Outcomes of discontinuing rivaroxaban compared with warfa-
rin in patients with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation: analysis from the 
ROCKET AF trial (Rivaroxaban Once-Daily, Oral, Direct Factor Xa 
Inhibition Compared With Vitamin K Antagonism for Prevention of 
Stroke and Embolism Trial in Atrial Fibrillation). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:651–658. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.09.057.
 
108.  
Mahaffey KW, Hellkamp AS, Patel MR, Hannan KL, Schwabe 
K, Nessel CC, Berkowitz SD, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, Becker 
RC, Piccini JP, Breithardt G, Hacke W, Singer DE, Califf RM, 
Fox KA. End-of-study transition from study drug to open-label 
vitamin K antagonist therapy: the ROCKET AF experience. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013;6:470–478. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000132.
 
109.  
Granger CB, Lopes RD, Hanna M, Ansell J, Hylek EM, Alexander 
JH, Thomas L, Wang J, Bahit MC, Verheugt F, Lawrence J, 
Xavier D, Wallentin L. Clinical events after transitioning from 
apixaban versus warfarin to warfarin at the end of the Apixaban 
for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in 
Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trial. Am Heart J. 2015;169:25–
30. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2014.09.006.
 
110.  
Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, Mercuri M, Curt V, Betcher 
J, Grip L, Cange AL, Crompton AE, Murphy SA, Deenadayalu N, 
Antman EM. Transition of patients from blinded study drug to 
open-label anticoagulation: the ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2014;64:576–584. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.05.028.
 
110a.  
Piccini JP, Garg J, Patel MR, Lokhnygina Y, Goodman SG, 
Becker RC, Berkowitz SD, Breithardt G, Hacke W, Halperin JL, 
Hankey GJ, Nessel CC, Mahaffey KW, Singer DE, Califf RM, Fox 
KA; ROCKET AF Investigators. Management of major bleeding 
events in patients treated with rivaroxaban vs. warfarin: results 
from the ROCKET AF trial. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1873–1880. 
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu083.
 
111.  
Beyer-Westendorf J, Gelbricht V, Förster K, Ebertz F, Röllig 
D, Schreier T, Tittl L, Thieme C, Hänsel U, Köhler C, Werth S, 
Kuhlisch E, Stange T, Röder I, Weiss N. Safety of switching 
from vitamin K antagonists to dabigatran or rivaroxaban in 
daily care–results from the Dresden NOAC registry. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2014;78:908–917. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12391.
 
112.  
Bouillon K, Bertrand M, Maura G, Blotière PO, Ricordeau P, Zureik 
M. Risk of bleeding and arterial thromboembolism in patients with 
non-valvular atrial fibrillation either maintained on a vitamin K an-
tagonist or switched to a non-vitamin K-antagonist oral anticoagu-
lant: a retrospective, matched-cohort study. Lancet Haematol. 
2015;2:e150–e159. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(15)00027-7.
 
113.  
Douketis JD, Berger PB, Dunn AS, Jaffer AK, Spyropoulos AC, 
Becker RC, Ansell J. The perioperative management of anti-
thrombotic therapy: American College of Chest Physicians 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines (8th edition). Chest. 
2008;133:299S–339S.
 
114.  
Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA, Mayr M, Jaffer 
AK, Eckman MH, Dunn AS, Kunz R. Perioperative manage-
ment of antithrombotic therapy: antithrombotic therapy and 
prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest 
Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 
2012;141:e326S–350S
 
115.  
Gallego P, Apostolakis S, Lip GY. Bridging evidence-based 
practice and practice-based evidence in periprocedural antico-
agulation. Circulation. 2012;126:1573–1576. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.135681.
 
116. Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, Becker RC, Caprini JA, 
Dunn AS, Garcia DA, Jacobson A, Jaffer AK, Kong DF, Schulman 
S, Turpie AG, Hasselblad V, Ortel TL; BRIDGE Investigators. 
Perioperative bridging anticoagulation in patients with atrial fi-
brillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:823–833. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1501035.
 
117. Schulman S, Kearon C; Subcommittee on Control of Anticoagulation 
of the Scientific and Standardization Committee of the 
International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis. Definition 
of major bleeding in clinical investigations of antihemostatic 
medicinal products in non-surgical patients. J Thromb Haemost. 
2005;3:692–694. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2005.01204.x.
 
118. Kralev S, Haag B, Spannenberger J, Lang S, Brockmann MA, 
Bartling S, Marx A, Haase KK, Borggrefe M, Süselbeck T. 
Expansion of the Multi-Link Frontier™ coronary bifurcation stent: 
micro-computed tomographic assessment in human autopsy 
and porcine heart samples. PLoS One. 2011;6:e21778. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0021778.
 
119. Bashore TM, Balter S, Barac A, Byrne JG, Cavendish JJ, 
Chambers CE, Hermiller JB Jr, Kinlay S, Landzberg JS, Laskey 
WK, McKay CR, Miller JM, Moliterno DJ, Moore JW, Oliver-McNeil 
SM, Popma JJ, Tommaso CL; ACCF Task Force Members. 
2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation/Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions expert consensus 
document on cardiac catheterization laboratory standards up-
date: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation 
Task Force on expert consensus documents. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:2221–2305. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.02.010.
 
120. Lip GY, Nieuwlaat R, Pisters R, Lane DA, Crijns HJ. Refining clini-
cal risk stratification for predicting stroke and thromboembolism 
in atrial fibrillation using a novel risk factor-based approach: the 
Euro Heart Survey on atrial fibrillation. Chest. 2010;137:263–
272. doi: 10.1378/chest.09-1584.
 
121. Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, Vicari R, Frey MJ, 
Lakkis N, Neumann FJ, Robertson DH, DeLucca PT, DiBattiste PM, 
Gibson CM, Braunwald E; TACTICS (Treat Angina with Aggrastat 
and Determine Cost of Therapy with an Invasive or Conservative 
Strategy)–Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 18 Investigators. 
Comparison 
of 
early 
invasive 
and 
conservative 
strategies 
in 
patients 
with unstable coronary syndromes treated with the glycoprotein 
IIb/IIIa inhibitor tirofiban. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1879–1887. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM200106213442501.
 
122. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Casey DE Jr, Chung MK, de 
Lemos JA, Ettinger SM, Fang JC, Fesmire FM, Franklin BA, Granger 
CB, Krumholz HM, Linderbaum JA, Morrow DA, Newby LK, Ornato 
JP, Ou N, Radford MJ, Tamis-Holland JE, Tommaso CL, Tracy CM, 
Woo YJ, Zhao DX, Anderson JL, Jacobs AK, Halperin JL, Albert 
NM, Brindis RG, Creager MA, DeMets D, Guyton RA, Hochman 
JS, Kovacs RJ, Kushner FG, Ohman EM, Stevenson WG, Yancy 
CW; American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013 ACCF/AHA 
guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2013;127:e362–e425. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182742cf6.
 
123. Jolly SS, Yusuf S, Cairns J, Niemelä K, Xavier D, Widimsky P, 
Budaj A, Niemelä M, Valentin V, Lewis BS, Avezum A, Steg 
PG, Rao SV, Gao P, Afzal R, Joyner CD, Chrolavicius S, Mehta 
SR; RIVAL trial group. Radial versus femoral access for coro-
nary angiography and intervention in patients with acute 
coronary syndromes (RIVAL): a randomised, parallel group, 
multicentre trial. Lancet. 2011;377:1409–1420. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(11)60404-2.
 
124. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Bailey SR, Bittl JA, Cercek 
B, Chambers CE, Ellis SG, Guyton RA, Hollenberg SM, Khot UN, 
Lange RA, Mauri L, Mehran R, Moussa ID, Mukherjee D, Nallamothu 
BK, Ting HH. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e631
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
coronary intervention: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–
e651. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823ba622.
 
125. Gupta S, Cigarroa JE. Bivalirudin: an expensive heparin? 
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;86:397–399. doi: 10.1002/
ccd.26124.
 
126. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Fihn SD, Fleisher LA, 
Granger CB, Lange RA, Mack MJ, Mauri L, Mehran R, Mukherjee 
D, Newby LK, O’Gara PT, Sabatine MS, Smith PK, Smith SC, Jr. 
2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual 
antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines: an update 
of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coro-
nary intervention, 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery, 2012 ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/
STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease, 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline 
for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction, 2014 
AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non–
ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes, and 2014 ACC/AHA 
guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and man-
agement of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. Circulation. 
2016;134:1–33. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000404.
 
127. Oldgren J, Budaj A, Granger CB, Khder Y, Roberts J, Siegbahn 
A, Tijssen JG, Van de Werf F, Wallentin L; RE-DEEM Investigators. 
Dabigatran vs. placebo in patients with acute coronary syn-
dromes on dual antiplatelet therapy: a randomized, double-blind, 
phase II trial. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:2781–2789. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehr113.
 
128. Alexander JH, Lopes RD, James S, Kilaru R, He Y, Mohan P, 
Bhatt DL, Goodman S, Verheugt FW, Flather M, Huber K, Liaw 
D, Husted SE, Lopez-Sendon J, De Caterina R, Jansky P, Darius 
H, Vinereanu D, Cornel JH, Cools F, Atar D, Leiva-Pons JL, Keltai 
M, Ogawa H, Pais P, Parkhomenko A, Ruzyllo W, Diaz R, White 
H, Ruda M, Geraldes M, Lawrence J, Harrington RA, Wallentin 
L; APPRAISE-2 Investigators. Apixaban with antiplatelet therapy 
after acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:699–
708. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1105819.
 
129. Mega JL, Braunwald E, Wiviott SD, Bassand JP, Bhatt DL, Bode 
C, Burton P, Cohen M, Cook-Bruns N, Fox KA, Goto S, Murphy 
SA, Plotnikov AN, Schneider D, Sun X, Verheugt FW, Gibson CM; 
ATLAS ACS 2–TIMI 51 Investigators. Rivaroxaban in patients with 
a recent acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:9–
19. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1112277.
 
130. Sherwood MW, Cyr DD, Jones WS, Becker RC, Berkowitz SD, 
Washam JB, Breithardt G, Fox KA, Halperin JL, Hankey GJ, Singer 
DE, Piccini JP, Nessel CC, Mahaffey KW, Patel MR. Use of dual 
antiplatelet therapy and patient outcomes in those undergo-
ing percutaneous coronary intervention: the ROCKET AF trial. 
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9:1694–1702. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcin.2016.05.039.
 
131. Bhatt DL, Cryer BL, Contant CF, Cohen M, Lanas A, Schnitzer 
TJ, Shook TL, Lapuerta P, Goldsmith MA, Laine L, Scirica BM, 
Murphy SA, Cannon CP; COGENT Investigators. Clopidogrel with 
or without omeprazole in coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:1909–1917. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1007964.
 
132. Gibson CM, Mehran R, Bode C, Halperin J, Verheugt F, Wildgoose 
P, van Eickels M, Lip GY, Cohen M, Husted S, Peterson E, Fox K. 
An open-label, randomized, controlled, multicenter study explor-
ing two treatment strategies of rivaroxaban and a dose-adjusted 
oral vitamin K antagonist treatment strategy in subjects with 
atrial fibrillation who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PIONEER AF-PCI). Am Heart J. 2015;169:472–478 e475
 
133. Gao F, Shen H, Wang ZJ, Yang SW, Liu XL, Zhou YJ. Rationale and 
design of the RT-AF study: combination of rivaroxaban and ticagre-
lor in patients with atrial fibrillation and coronary artery disease 
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. Contemp Clin 
Trials. 2015;43:129–132. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2015.05.012.
 
134. Hoshi T, Sato A, Nogami A, Gosho M, Aonuma K; SAFE-A 
Investigators. Rationale and design of the SAFE-A study: 
SAFety and Effectiveness trial of apixaban use in association 
with dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation 
undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention [published on-
line ahead of print July 18, 2016]. J Cardiol. doi: 10.1016/j.
jjcc.2016.06.007. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ 
pii/S0914508716301344. Accessed January 17, 2017.
 
135. Dewilde WJ, Oirbans T, Verheugt FW, Kelder JC, De Smet BJ, 
Herrman JP, Adriaenssens T, Vrolix M, Heestermans AA, Vis MM, 
Tijsen JG, van ‘t Hof AW, ten Berg JM; WOEST Study Investigators. 
Use of clopidogrel with or without aspirin in patients taking oral 
anticoagulant therapy and undergoing percutaneous coronary 
intervention: an open-label, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet. 
2013;381:1107–1115. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)62177-1.
 
136. Nagarakanti R, Ezekowitz MD, Oldgren J, Yang S, Chernick M, 
Aikens TH, Flaker G, Brugada J, Kamensky G, Parekh A, Reilly 
PA, Yusuf S, Connolly SJ. Dabigatran versus warfarin in pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation: an analysis of patients undergoing 
cardioversion. Circulation. 2011;123:131–136. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.110.977546.
 
137. Piccini JP, Stevens SR, Lokhnygina Y, Patel MR, Halperin JL, Singer 
DE, Hankey GJ, Hacke W, Becker RC, Nessel CC, Mahaffey KW, 
Fox KA, Califf RM, Breithardt G; ROCKET AF Steering Committee 
& Investigators. Outcomes after cardioversion and atrial fibrilla-
tion ablation in patients treated with rivaroxaban and warfarin in 
the ROCKET AF trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1998–2006. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.02.025.
 
138. Flaker G, Lopes RD, Al-Khatib SM, Hermosillo AG, Hohnloser SH, 
Tinga B, Zhu J, Mohan P, Garcia D, Bartunek J, Vinereanu D, Husted 
S, Harjola VP, Rosenqvist M, Alexander JH, Granger CB; ARISTOTLE 
Committees and Investigators. Efficacy and safety of apixaban 
in patients after cardioversion for atrial fibrillation: insights from 
the ARISTOTLE trial (Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other 
Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1082–1087. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.09.062.
 
139. Sen P, Kundu A, Sardar P, Chatterjee S, Nairooz R, Amin H, 
Aronow WS. Outcomes after cardioversion in atrial fibrillation pa-
tients treated with non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants 
(NOACs): insights from a meta-analysis. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 
2015;16:33–41. doi: 10.1007/s40256-015-0136-1.
 
140. Caldeira D, Costa J, Ferreira JJ, Lip GY, Pinto FJ. Non-vitamin 
K antagonist oral anticoagulants in the cardioversion of pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation: systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. Clin Res Cardiol. 2015;104:582–590. doi: 10.1007/
s00392-015-0821-8.
 
141. Cappato R, Ezekowitz MD, Klein AL, Camm AJ, Ma CS, Le Heuzey 
JY, Talajic M, Scanavacca M, Vardas PE, Kirchhof P, Hemmrich 
M, Lanius V, Meng IL, Wildgoose P, van Eickels M, Hohnloser SH; 
X-VeRT Investigators. Rivaroxaban vs. vitamin K antagonists for 
cardioversion in atrial fibrillation. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3346–
3355. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu367.
 
142. Pallisgaard JL, Lindhardt TB, Hansen ML, Schjerning AM, Olesen 
JB, Staerk L, Torp-Pedersen C, Gislason GH. Cardioversion 
and risk of adverse events with dabigatran versus warfarin: a 
nationwide cohort study. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0141377. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0141377.
 
143. Coleman CM, Khalaf S, Mould S, Wazni O, Kanj M, Saliba W, 
Cantillon D. Novel oral anticoagulants for DC cardioversion proce-
dures: utilization and clinical outcomes compared with warfarin. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2015;38:731–737. doi: 10.1111/
pace.12618.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Raval et al
March 7, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477
e632
 
144. Goette A, Merino JL, Ezekowitz MD, Zamoryakhin D, Melino 
M, Jin J, Mercuri MF, Grosso MA, Fernandez V, Al-Saady N, 
Pelekh N, Merkely B, Zenin S, Kushnir M, Spinar J, Batushkin 
V, de Groot JR, Lip GY; ENSURE-AF investigators. Edoxaban 
versus enoxaparin-warfarin in patients undergoing cardiover-
sion of atrial fibrillation (ENSURE-AF): a randomised, open-label, 
phase 3b trial. Lancet. 2016;388:1995–2003. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)31474-X.
 
145. Di Biase L, Burkhardt JD, Mohanty P, Sanchez J, Horton R, 
Gallinghouse GJ, Lakkireddy D, Verma A, Khaykin Y, Hongo R, Hao 
S, Beheiry S, Pelargonio G, Dello Russo A, Casella M, Santarelli P, 
Santangeli P, Wang P, Al-Ahmad A, Patel D, Themistoclakis S, Bonso 
A, Rossillo A, Corrado A, Raviele A, Cummings JE, Schweikert 
RA, Lewis WR, Natale A. Periprocedural stroke and management 
of major bleeding complications in patients undergoing catheter 
ablation of atrial fibrillation: the impact of periprocedural therapeu-
tic international normalized ratio. Circulation. 2010;121:2550–
2556. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.921320.
 
146. Santangeli P, Di Biase L, Horton R, Burkhardt JD, Sanchez J, 
Al-Ahmad A, Hongo R, Beheiry S, Bai R, Mohanty P, Lewis WR, 
Natale A. Ablation of atrial fibrillation under therapeutic warfarin 
reduces periprocedural complications: evidence from a meta-
analysis. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2012;5:302–311. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.111.964916.
 
147. Di Biase L, Burkhardt JD, Santangeli P, Mohanty P, Sanchez 
JE, Horton R, Gallinghouse GJ, Themistoclakis S, Rossillo A, 
Lakkireddy D, Reddy M, Hao S, Hongo R, Beheiry S, Zagrodzky 
J, Rong B, Mohanty S, Elayi CS, Forleo G, Pelargonio G, Narducci 
ML, Dello Russo A, Casella M, Fassini G, Tondo C, Schweikert 
RA, Natale A. Periprocedural stroke and bleeding complications 
in patients undergoing catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation with 
different anticoagulation management: results from the Role of 
Coumadin in Preventing Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibrillation 
(AF) Patients Undergoing Catheter Ablation (COMPARE) random-
ized trial. Circulation. 2014;129:2638–2644. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.006426.
 
148. Shurrab M, Morillo CA, Schulman S, Kansal N, Danon A, Newman 
D, Lashevsky I, Healey JS, Crystal E. Safety and efficacy of 
dabigatran compared with warfarin for patients undergoing 
radiofrequency catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: a meta-
analysis. Can J Cardiol. 2013;29:1203–1210. doi: 10.1016/j.
cjca.2013.07.005.
 
149. Providência R, Albenque JP, Combes S, Bouzeman A, Casteigt 
B, Combes N, Narayanan K, Marijon E, Boveda S. Safety and 
efficacy of dabigatran versus warfarin in patients undergo-
ing catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Heart. 2014;100:324–335. doi: 10.1136/
heartjnl-2013-304386.
 
150. Lu D, Zhang Q, Liu Q, Wang K, Wang S, Shan Q. Bleeding risks 
with novel oral anticoagulants during catheter ablation of atrial 
fibrillation: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.  
J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2015;44:105–111. doi: 10.1007/
s10840-015-0053-x.
 151 Nairooz R, Sardar P, Pino M, Aronow WS, Sewani A, Mukherjee 
D, Paydak H, Maskoun W. Meta-analysis of risk of stroke and 
thrombo-embolism with rivaroxaban versus vitamin K antagonists 
in ablation and cardioversion of atrial fibrillation. Int J Cardiol. 
2015;187:345–353. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.03.323.
 
152. Lu D, Liu Q, Wang K, Zhang QI, Shan QJ. Meta-analysis of efficacy 
and safety of apixaban in patients undergoing catheter ablation 
for atrial fibrillation. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2016;39:54–59. 
doi: 10.1111/pace.12771.
 
153. Kuwahara T, Abe M, Yamaki M, Fujieda H, Abe Y, Hashimoto K, 
Ishiba M, Sakai H, Hishikari K, Takigawa M, Okubo K, Takagi K, 
Tanaka Y, Nakajima J, Takahashi A. Apixaban versus warfarin for 
the prevention of periprocedural cerebral thromboembolism in 
atrial fibrillation ablation: multicenter prospective randomized 
study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2016;27:549–554. doi: 
10.1111/jce.12928.
 
154. Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato R, Brugada J, Camm AJ, Chen 
SA, Crijns HJ, Damiano RJ Jr, Davies DW, DiMarco J, Edgerton 
J, Ellenbogen K, Ezekowitz MD, Haines DE, Haissaguerre M, 
Hindricks G, Iesaka Y, Jackman W, Jalife J, Jais P, Kalman J, 
Keane D, Kim YH, Kirchhof P, Klein G, Kottkamp H, Kumagai K, 
Lindsay BD, Mansour M, Marchlinski FE, McCarthy PM, Mont 
JL, Morady F, Nademanee K, Nakagawa H, Natale A, Nattel S, 
Packer DL, Pappone C, Prystowsky E, Raviele A, Reddy V, Ruskin 
JN, Shemin RJ, Tsao HM, Wilber D. 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS ex-
pert consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of 
atrial fibrillation: recommendations for patient selection, proce-
dural techniques, patient management and follow-up, definitions, 
endpoints, and research trial design. Europace. 2012;14:528–
606. doi: 10.1093/europace/eus027.
 
155. Wallace TW, Atwater BD, Daubert JP, Voora D, Crowley AL, 
Bahnson TD, Hranitzky PM. Prevalence and clinical characteris-
tics associated with left atrial appendage thrombus in fully antico-
agulated patients undergoing catheter-directed atrial fibrillation 
ablation. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2010;21:849–852. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540-8167.2010.01729.x.
 
156. Di Biase L, Gaita F, Toso E, Santangeli P, Mohanty P, Rutledge N, Yan 
X, Mohanty S, Trivedi C, Bai R, Price J, Horton R, Gallinghouse GJ, 
Beheiry S, Zagrodzky J, Canby R, Leclercq JF, Halimi F, Scaglione 
M, Cesarani F, Faletti R, Sanchez J, Burkhardt JD, Natale A. Does 
periprocedural anticoagulation management of atrial fibrillation af-
fect the prevalence of silent thromboembolic lesion detected by 
diffusion cerebral magnetic resonance imaging in patients under-
going radiofrequency atrial fibrillation ablation with open irrigated 
catheters? Results from a prospective multicenter study. Heart 
Rhythm. 2014;11:791–798. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2014.03.003.
 
157. Konduru SV, Cheema AA, Jones P, Li Y, Ramza B, Wimmer AP. 
Differences in intraprocedural acts with standardized heparin 
dosing during catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation in patients 
treated with dabigatran vs. patients on uninterrupted warfarin. J 
Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2012;35:277–284; discussion 284.
 
158. Cheng A, Nazarian S, Brinker JA, Tompkins C, Spragg DD, Leng 
CT, Halperin H, Tandri H, Sinha SK, Marine JE, Calkins H, Tomaselli 
GF, Berger RD, Henrikson CA. Continuation of warfarin during 
pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator implantation: 
a randomized clinical trial. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:536–540. doi: 
10.1016/j.hrthm.2010.12.016.
 
159. Birnie DH, Healey JS, Wells GA, Verma A, Tang AS, Krahn AD, 
Simpson CS, Ayala-Paredes F, Coutu B, Leiria TL, Essebag V; 
BRUISE CONTROL Investigators. Pacemaker or defibrillator 
surgery without interruption of anticoagulation. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:2084–2093. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1302946.
 
160. Birnie DH, Healey JS, Essebag V. Management of anticoagula-
tion around pacemaker and defibrillator surgery. Circulation. 
2014;129:2062–2065. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113. 
006027.
 
161. Nascimento T, Birnie DH, Healey JS, Verma A, Joza J, Bernier 
ML, Essebag V. Managing novel oral anticoagulants in patients 
with atrial fibrillation undergoing device surgery: Canadian 
survey. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30:231–236. doi: 10.1016/j.
cjca.2013.11.027.
 
162. Jennings JM, Robichaux R, McElderry HT, Plumb VJ, Gunter A, 
Doppalapudi H, Osorio J, Yamada T, Kay GN. Cardiovascular 
implantable electronic device implantation with uninterrupted 
dabigatran: comparison to uninterrupted warfarin. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol. 2013;24:1125–1129. doi: 10.1111/jce.12214.
 
163. Rowley CP, Bernard ML, Brabham WW, Netzler PC, Sidney DS, 
Cuoco F, Sturdivant JL, Leman RB, Wharton JM, Gold MR. Safety 
of continuous anticoagulation with dabigatran during implantation 
of cardiac rhythm devices. Am J Cardiol. 2013;111:1165–1168. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.12.046.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Management of Patients on NOACs in the Acute Care and Periprocedural Setting
Circulation. 2017;135:e604–e633. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000477 
March 7, 2017
e633
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
164. Schulman S, Carrier M, Lee AY, Shivakumar S, Blostein M, Spencer 
FA, Solymoss S, Barty R, Wang G, Heddle N, Douketis JD; Periop 
Dabigatran Study Group. Perioperative management of dabi-
gatran: a prospective cohort study. Circulation. 2015;132:167–
173. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.015688.
 
165. Douketis JD, Healey JS, Brueckmann M, Eikelboom JW, Ezekowitz 
MD, Fraessdorf M, Noack H, Oldgren J, Reilly P, Spyropoulos 
AC, Wallentin L, Connolly SJ. Perioperative bridging anticoagula-
tion during dabigatran or warfarin interruption among patients 
who had an elective surgery or procedure: substudy of the RE-
LY trial. Thromb Haemost. 2015;113:625–632. doi: 10.1160/
TH14-04-0305.
 
166. Mega JL, Braunwald E, Murphy SA, Plotnikov AN, Burton P, 
Kiss RG, Parkhomenko A, Tendera M, Widimsky P, Gibson CM. 
Rivaroxaban in patients stabilized after a ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction: results from the ATLAS ACS-2-TIMI-51 trial 
(Anti-Xa Therapy to Lower Cardiovascular Events in Addition to 
Standard Therapy in Subjects with Acute Coronary Syndrome-
Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction-51). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:1853–1859. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.01.066.
 
167. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Brueckmann M, Granger CB, 
Kappetein AP, Mack MJ, Blatchford J, Devenny K, Friedman 
J, Guiver K, Harper R, Khder Y, Lobmeyer MT, Maas H, Voigt 
JU, Simoons ML, Van de Werf F; RE-ALIGN Investigators. 
Dabigatran versus warfarin in patients with mechanical heart 
valves. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1206–1214. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1300615.
 
168. Terrovitis JV, Ntalianis A, Kapelios CJ, Vakrou S, Diakos N, 
Katsaros L, Tsamatsoulis M, Kaldara E, Charitos C, Nanas JN. 
Dabigatran etexilate as second-line therapy in patients with a left 
ventricular assist device. Hellenic J Cardiol. 2015;56:20–25.
 
169. Abouchakra L, Khabbaz Z, Abouassi S, Badaoui G. Rivaroxaban 
for treatment of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia after cardiac 
surgery: a case report. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;150:e19–
e20. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.04.054.
 
170. Jones WS, Hellkamp AS, Halperin J, Piccini JP, Breithardt G, 
Singer DE, Fox KA, Hankey GJ, Mahaffey KW, Califf RM, Patel 
MR. Efficacy and safety of rivaroxaban compared with warfarin 
in patients with peripheral artery disease and non-valvular atrial 
fibrillation: insights from ROCKET AF. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:242–
249. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht492.
 
171. Majeed A, Hwang HG, Connolly SJ, Eikelboom JW, Ezekowitz MD, 
Wallentin L, Brueckmann M, Fraessdorf M, Yusuf S, Schulman S. 
Management and outcomes of major bleeding during treatment 
with dabigatran or warfarin. Circulation. 2013;128:2325–2332. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002332.
 
172. Paikin JS, Hirsh J, Chan NC, Ginsberg JS, Weitz JI, Eikelboom 
JW. Timing the first postoperative dose of anticoagulants: les-
sons learned from clinical trials. Chest. 2015;148:587–595. doi: 
10.1378/chest.14-2710.
 
173. Rosencher N, Llau JV, Mueck W, Loewe A, Berkowitz SD, 
Homering M. Incidence of neuraxial haematoma after total hip or 
knee surgery: RECORD programme (rivaroxaban vs. enoxaparin). 
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2013;57:565–572. doi: 10.1111/
aas.12069.
 
174. Turpie AG, Haas S, Kreutz R, Mantovani LG, Pattanayak CW, 
Holberg G, Jamal W, Schmidt A, van Eickels M, Lassen MR. A 
non-interventional comparison of rivaroxaban with standard of 
care for thromboprophylaxis after major orthopaedic surgery 
in 17,701 patients with propensity score adjustment. Thromb 
Haemost. 2014;111:94–102. doi: 10.1160/TH13-08-0666.
 
175. Narouze S, Benzon HT, Provenzano DA, Buvanendran A, De 
Andres J, Deer TR, Rauck R, Huntoon MA. Interventional spine 
and pain procedures in patients on antiplatelet and anticoagulant 
medications: guidelines from the American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, the European Society of Regional 
Anaesthesia and Pain Therapy, the American Academy of Pain 
Medicine, the International Neuromodulation Society, the North 
American Neuromodulation Society, and the World Institute of 
Pain. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2015;40:182–212. doi: 10.1097/
AAP.0000000000000223.
 
176. Ruff CT, Giugliano RP, Braunwald E, Morrow DA, Murphy SA, 
Kuder JF, Deenadayalu N, Jarolim P, Betcher J, Shi M, Brown 
K, Patel I, Mercuri M, Antman EM. Association between edoxa-
ban dose, concentration, anti-factor Xa activity, and outcomes: 
an analysis of data from the randomised, double-blind ENGAGE 
AF-TIMI 48 trial. Lancet. 2015;385:2288–2295. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(14)61943-7.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
