 9
ISSN 1758-1966
Lung Cancer Manag. (2016) 5(1), 9–19
part of
Lung Cancer 
Management
10.2217/lmt-2015-0007 © 2016 AA Raval & L Amir
CLINICAL TRIAL PROTOCOL
Community hospital experience 
using electromagnetic navigation 
bronchoscopy system integrating tidal 
volume computed tomography mapping
Abhijit A Raval1 & Leah Amir*,2
1AnMed Health – Pulmonology, 2000 East Greenville Street, Suite 1100, Anderson, SC 29621, USA 
2Institute for Quality Resource Management – Health Economics, 1 City Place Drive, Suite 285, St Louis, MO 63141, USA 
*Author for correspondence: leahamir@vantageview.com
Results of the first 50 consecutive patients referred for bronchoscopy or surgery by the 
tumor review board to confirm suspect lung lesions identified by computed tomography. 
Electromagnetic navigation was used to biopsy peripheral pulmonary nodules, 
(19.3 ± 10.7 mm). An electromagnetic tracking system was used to detect miniature position 
sensors integrated directly into tip-tracked instruments advanced through a 2 mm working 
channel in a bronchoscope. Learning curve, diagnostic yield, safety and use of the 4D 
positional information on the patient’s tidal volume expiration computed tomography 
map demonstrate a potential to improve the diagnostic yield of transbronchial biopsies of 
peripheral pulmonary nodules less than 30 mm reporting a diagnostic yield of 83.3% (40/48). 
Early experience was safe and effective, with a limited learning curve.
First draft submitted: 17 November 2015; Accepted for publication: 22 March 2016; Published 
online: 8 April 2016
Lung cancer accounts for approximately 27% of all cancer deaths and is by far the leading cause 
of cancer death among both men and women. Each year, more people die of lung cancer than of 
colon, breast and prostate cancers combined. Lung cancer surpasses breast cancer as the biggest 
cancer killer of women. The American Cancer Society expects 221,200 new cases (115,610 in men 
and 105,590 in women) with 158,040 deaths from lung cancer, (86,380 in men and 71,660 women) 
in 2015 [1]. The United States Prevention Task Force (USPSTF) recommends high-risk patients 
should be screened for the presence of lung cancer using low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) 
to aid earlier detection. Earlier detection is poised to reduce patient morbidity and save lives yet is 
likely to increase the number of smaller distal pulmonary lesions requiring biopsy or surgery [2].
The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) demonstrated a 20% reduction in lung cancer mor-
tality for the LDCT screening arm, thus recommending screening for high-risk patients. However, 
Practice points
 
●
 
The community pulmonologist will be faced with higher volumes of patients requiring a confirmatory diagnosis for 
positive lung computed tomography.
 
●
 
Detecting lung cancer early requires the least minimally invasive method having the lowest risk profile and the 
highest diagnostic yield.
 
●
 
Patients and the institution’s tumor review board will need to understand minimally invasive techniques and their 
value to the patient.
 
●
 
Electromagnetic navigation using tidal volume computed tomography mapping has a high diagnostic yield with a 
low-risk profile enabling minimally invasive lung tissue biopsy.
KEYWORDS  
• bronchoscopy 
• electromagnetic 
navigation • tidal volume 
expiration
 Lung Cancer Manag. (2016) 5(1)
10
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Raval & Amir
future science group
96.4% of the NLST patients who today would 
meet the USPSTF lung cancer screening crite-
ria had false positives [3]. This high number of 
patients suitable for lung cancer screening creates 
a diagnostic challenge for the community pul-
monologist who must become proficient using 
a safe and effective diagnostic method to iden-
tify the positive peripheral pulmonary nodule 
(PPN) while avoiding costly procedures that 
expose patients to increased morbidity. While 
watchful waiting is suitable for the smallest 
lung lesions, Fleischner Society guidelines rec-
ommend biopsying lesions that are greater than 
8 mm in this high-risk population. NLST found 
39.1% patients had at least one positive screening 
result, compared with 16% positive results in 
the chest radiograph arm. A positive screening 
result was defined as at least one nodule ≥4 mm 
in diameter. Out of the positive LDCT screened 
patients, 1638 patients were recommended for a 
follow-up percutaneous computer tomography 
(CT)-guided transthoracic needle aspiration 
(TTNA) examination, bronchoscopy or a sur-
gical procedure resulting in malignancy findings 
of 39.6% (649) [3].
Clinical significance & rationale
Screening high-risk patients, absence of symp-
toms associated with advanced stages of lung 
cancer, ushers in a new patient management 
paradigm. Patients with positive findings will 
be referred for a confirmatory diagnosis. The 
community pulmonologist in collaboration 
with the primary care physician (PCP) and 
their institutions tumor review board must assist 
patients in making informed decisions regard-
ing lung biopsy options. A lung biopsy method 
with higher specificity to rule out the presence 
of lung cancer with a low complication profile 
offers a cost-effective solution to the healthcare 
system and to the patient. This high volume of 
nonsymptomatic yet high-risk patients is likely 
to have a low incidence of positive lung cancer 
findings thus commanding a biopsy method 
with a low incidence patient complications to 
access and biopsy PPN <30 mm.
The presence of benign lesions in 40–60% of 
solitary pulmonary nodules surgically removed 
signifies a need for a less invasive approach, able 
to preserve lung tissue and reduce patient mor-
bidity [4]. A finding of benign tissue in the lung 
after a positive CT impacts patient manage-
ment. With the increase in positive CT find-
ings less invasive biopsy methods are required 
to verify the diagnosis yet reduce the increased 
patient morbidity and costs of a population 
recommended for verification of suspect lung 
cancer. A lung biopsy result indicating the sus-
pect lung lesion is benign is by definition not 
malignant. A benign tumor is not expected to 
spread to other parts of the body. They may grow 
slowly, or might even stop growing or shrink. 
Typically benign lung lesions are usually not life-
threatening, and they do not generally need to be 
removed. A benign lung lesion could expand and 
push against nearby tissues but it will not invade, 
destroy or replace other tissues. Consideration 
for safe, effective patient management must be 
given to aid clinical decision-making for high-
risk patients having co-morbidities and pul-
monary disease who are referred for follow-up 
resulting from a suspect lung lesion found on 
LDCT. Some of these patients may be poor sur-
gical candidates; therefore a less invasive method 
is sought.
For the community pulmonologist and their 
patient, selecting the most clinically appropri-
ate biopsy technique for PPNs presents a dif-
ficult clinical complication/benefit decision. 
Radiographic findings including CT of nodule 
size, location, nodule characteristics, patient 
co-morbidities, patient respiratory function, 
patient significant history and postprocedure 
patient management are all carefully weighted 
by the pulmonologist, the patient, the institu-
tional tumor review board and the patient’s PCP. 
Balancing all these factors, the lung team strives 
to determine the patient’s specific risk/benefit 
profile to select the most appropriate, outcome 
orientated treatment plan to achieve a defini-
tive diagnosis that will guide patient manage-
ment. It is imperative that definitive diagnosis 
be completed on these patients.
A positive CT finding follows standard prac-
tice guidelines to aid diagnosis and patient 
management [5]. There are three well-accepted 
patient management regimens based on the 
patient’s probability of malignancy. Watchful 
waiting with serial CT scans for lesions less 
than 8 mm, tissue biopsy for pathologic diag-
nosis and direct surgical excision. When includ-
ing the patient’s wishes, they may request even a 
lesion less than 8 mm to be biopsied. Watchful 
waiting for lesions greater than 8 mm is not 
consistent with the USPSTF intent to iden-
tify and treat lung cancer at stage I or stage II. 
This approach mitigates the significant benefit 
intended of earlier detection for lung cancer. If 
 11
Using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy integrating tidal volume CT mapping CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
lung tissue biopsy is the selected option, then 
CT-guided TTNA is preferred. It has a high 
diagnostic yield slightly below 90%, yet a pneu-
mothorax rate of about 30%, of which 15% 
of the patient’s tend to require a chest tube. 
TTNA represents a high patient morbidity 
profile [6–9]. Flexible bronchoscopy is another 
diagnostic option due to the lower pneumotho-
rax rate, however, the sensitivity of traditional 
bronchoscopic biopsy is only 34% for nodules 
less than 20 mm, and as low as 14% for the 
PPN [7,10]. The sensitivity increases to 63% 
when nodules are greater than 20 cm in size, 
but decreases as the distance from the hilum 
increases [10,11]. A lesion having a bronchus 
sign leading to the lesion increases the success 
of transbronchial biopsy and brushing with a 
diagnostic yield approaching 70% [12].
Increased complications of TTNA or surgi-
cal resection are costly to the healthcare pro-
vider while causing the patient to suffer undue 
morbidity. Screening the higher volume popu-
lation with a reduced risk for a positive find-
ing requires careful clinical decision-making 
by the physician, their patient and the tumor 
review board. Methods enabling a diagnosis of 
PPN less than 30 mm are appropriate for this 
patient population due to their low-risk profile. 
The cost–effectiveness of electromagnetic navi-
gation (EMN) procedures has been compared 
with CT-guided TTNA procedures. EMN 
procedures have demonstrated a significant 
cost reduction to the hospital, especially with 
the addition of EMN–TTNA capabilities in the 
bronchoscopy suite [13]. Tidal volume expira-
tion (TV-EXP)-mapped EMN capturing breath 
motion during the procedure offers an oppor-
tunity to improve on accessing the PPN and to 
reduce the incidence of complications.
Aims of the study
Provide minimally invasive solution for patients 
recommended for biopsy or surgery as rec-
ommended by the multidisciplinary hospital 
tumor review board for follow-up due to a posi-
tive CT diagnostic evaluation and a thorough 
analysis of each patient’s clinical findings and 
medical history. The primary objective was 
to measure the total diagnostic yield relative 
to location and size of the lung lesion when 
using the TV-EXP-mapped EMN system for 
the first 50 consecutive patients (61 lesions) in 
the absence of radial-endobronchial ultrasound 
(EBUS), fluoroscopic navigation or rapid on-site 
cytology (ROSE). Additionally, we are report-
ing on the overall performance of the TV-EXP-
mapped EMN system; community pulmonol-
ogist learning curve of the TV-EXP-mapped 
EMN technology; safety of the TV-EXP-
mapped EMN system; and ultimately the clini-
cal appropriateness of TV-EXP-mapped EMN 
to comply with the decision-making needs for 
the community pulmonologist receiving a high 
volume of patients referred for further evalua-
tion due to a positive CT. Overall diagnostic 
yield and bronchus sign for TV-EXP-mapped 
EMN, complications, and patient follow-up are 
reported. Including in the findings TV-EXP-
mapped EMN is compared with pulmonary 
nodules that were previously sent routinely for 
TTNA to measure the accuracy of a rule out 
for lung cancer.
Materials & methods
●
● TV-EXP to remove lung motion artifact 
limitations
Pulmonologists and thoracic surgeons are chal-
lenged to effectively access PPNs that do not 
have an airway leading directly to their position. 
Over the past several years, total lung capacity 
(TLC)-mapped electromagnetic navigation 
bronchoscopy (ENB) has proven effective at 
being able to assess some pulmonary nodules; 
however, the lung lesions were more centrally 
located, rather than the smaller, more periph-
eral pulmonary nodules expected in the lung 
cancer screening population. TV-EXP-mapped 
EMN systems use hybrid imaging protocols and 
multiple access techniques to improve diagnostic 
yields for these challenging PPNs.
TLC-mapped ENB systems in conjunction 
with radial-EBUS, fluoroscopic navigation and 
ROSE have been reported in the peer-reviewed 
literature, however, overall their standard diag-
nostic yield ranges 50–70% [9,11–12]. Different 
from the TLC-mapped ENB systems, TV-EXP-
mapped EMN systems use hybrid imaging pro-
tocols, respiratory gating, electromagnetic (EM) 
tip tracked instruments and multiple approaches 
(endobronchial and percutaneous) providing 
an opportunity to adapt this technology in the 
diagnosis of lung cancer at earlier stages. TLC-
mapped ENB systems with radial-EBUS offer a 
less invasive option but improvement is needed 
beyond their diagnostic yield.
The malignancy rate for symptomatic patients 
is 70% or higher with lung cancer at stage III 
or IV ensuring an 80% death rate at 5 years. 
 Lung Cancer Manag. (2016) 5(1)
12
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Raval & Amir
future science group
This is significantly higher than <4% incidence 
found in the nonsymptomatic screening patients 
in the NLST. Patients meeting the USPSTF 
criteria may likely not have evident symptoms 
and therefore are likely to have a lower prob-
ability of positive findings greater than 4% but 
certainly less than 70%. Clearly patients with a 
probable lower rate of malignancy require a less 
invasive solution to identify the suspect lesion 
relative to cancer or a different tissue abnormal-
ity. Physicians will be challenged to determine 
which patients are better served with an inva-
sive procedure TTNA or transthoracic needle 
biopsy (TTNB), or if indeed the less invasive 
TV-EXP-mapped EMN can provide a suitable 
diagnostic yield given the risk/benefit profile of 
the individual patient.
Points to consider when selecting the 
optimal method
●
● TLC-mapped ENB systems may not be well 
suited for PPNs
Eberhardt [14] delineated TLC-mapped ENB 
yield from radial EBUS, reporting 59% yield 
for ENB for lesions 28.0 ± 8 mm. The diag-
nostic yield of lower lobes was 29%. It was 
hypothesized that the reduced yield rate could 
be due to using CT images acquired in only a 
single breath hold measured as TLC and there-
fore not correctly compensating for respiratory 
movement.
Nabavizadeh [15] used a TLC-mapped ENB 
system in conjunction with radial EBUS and 
fluoroscopic guidance reporting a diagnostic 
yield of 32%. During the procedure fiducials 
were placed. They were found to be 10–50 mm 
from the lesion surface in 27% of the patients, 
therefore providing further evidence that TLC-
mapped ENB may not be suitable to access and 
biopsy of PPN.
Becker [16], Schwarz [17] and Gildea [18] used a 
TLC-mapped ENB system in conjunction with 
fluoroscopic guidance to achieve a diagnostic 
yield of 69, 69 and 73%, respectively, with an 
average lesion size of 33.5 ± 11 mm. These find-
ings do not delineate between ENB and fluoro-
scopic guidance which contributed to the overall 
yield. Data regarding the mean distance from 
the lesion center measuring 9 ± 5 mm could be 
at least 2–23 mm from the center of the lesion. 
This evidence suggests TLC-mapped ENB may 
not be the suitable option to access and biopsy 
the PPNs. Please refer to Table 1 for a breakdown 
of the data.
●
● Study design
The first consecutive 50 patients referred to a 
community pulmonologist for suspect lung can-
cer diagnostic follow-up resulting from a positive 
CT were treated from July 2012 to May 2013. 
Each referred patient’s clinical findings; medi-
cal history and risk for lung cancer were first 
screened by the hospital tumor review board. 
The tumor review board comprised pulmon-
ologists, radiologists, oncologists and internal 
medicine physicians, who studied each patient’s 
overall medical history, family history, signs and 
symptoms, co-morbidities, smoking history and 
recent CT findings to arrive at the unanimous 
conclusion that the patient’s evaluation would 
benefit from a lung tissue biopsy to confirm the 
presence or absence of suspect lung cancer. In 
the combined clinical judgement of the hospi-
tal tumor review board, the patient was recom-
mended for lung biopsy. All of the patients had a 
positive CT scan showing a suspect lung lesion. 
In light of the USPSTF lung cancer screening 
guidelines, combined with the patient’s clinical 
evaluation, and recommendation of the tumor 
review board, these patients were treated by 
the community pulmonologist. Each patient 
was consented to allow the use of the TV-EXP 
EMN procedure along with linear-EBUS as 
needed compliant with the recommendations of 
the American College of Chest Physicians [6,19]. 
The CT was read by the pulmonologist to aid 
in the TV-EXP EMN technique.
Patients were followed for 24 months to 
compare long-term outcomes with initial 
findings. Data were collected using retrospec-
tive chart review. The 50 consecutive patients 
underwent diagnostic TV-EXP-mapped EMN 
using the SPiNDrive SystemTM (Veran Medical 
Technologies MO, USA). Under IRB approval 
and with patient’s consent each patient’s, 
TV-EXP-mapped EMN procedure time and 
experience, diagnostic test reports and follow-
up treatment and findings were extracted and 
included in an excel spreadsheet (Version 15) 
for analysis. Biopsy findings and long-term 
follow-up were reported for diagnostic yield 
and the TV-EXP-mapped EMN performance 
was reported for patient’s safety, pulmonolo-
gist learning curve and contribution to over-
all diagnostic yield. The final diagnosis was 
determined by: repeat CT, or as recommended 
by the pulmonologist or tumor review board, 
these patients were referred to TTNA, or lung 
resection and biopsy.
 13
Using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy integrating tidal volume CT mapping CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
●
● Patient population & lung lesions
The study population was representative of 
patients having a positive finding on a screen-
ing CT who were also found to be at high risk 
for lung cancer by the hospital tumor review 
board. There was no statistically significant 
difference among the study population of 28 
males and 22 females ranging in age from 31 
to 87 years with an average age of 67.7 ± 12.2 
reported in Table 2. The average size of the lesion 
was 19.3 ± 10.7 mm, ranging from 4 to 49 mm. 
There were a total of 61 lesions biopsied in the 
50 patients. Lesion location was mapped and 
related to diagnostic yield.
A clear airway was confirmed using flexible 
bronchoscopy (Olympus America, Center Valley, 
PA, USA). All procedures were performed using 
a conscious sedation protocol including intrave-
nous versed (midazolam-HCl: 6 mg) and fenta-
nyl (75–125 µg) provided as needed at the dis-
cretion of the anesthesiologist. Local anesthesia 
comprised topical lidocaine in the oropharynx 
and airways as required throughout the proce-
dure. Fluoroscopic guidance was not utilized. 
It is not required for TV-EXP-mapped EMN. 
TV-EXP-mapped EMN using EM tip-tracked 
forceps was used after linear EBUS (Olympus 
America, PA, USA) sampling of the lymph nodes 
of the main carina to immediately determine 
the stage of lung cancer. If a lung cancer stage 
is determined no further biopsies are needed, 
however if the initial staging is negative further 
biopsies are required to verify the absence of lung 
cancer. TV-EXP-mapped EMN using EM tip-
tracked forces sampled 48 remaining patients. 
Biopsied tissue samples were sent to the hospital 
pathology laboratory for further diagnosis.
●
● TV-EXP-mapped EMN technique
The SPiNDrive system using a hybrid inspiration-
expiration CT scan pair creates a TV-EXP CT 
map for navigation. EMN systems use electro-
magnetic localization systems to guide the pul-
monologist through the patient’s airways to the 
lung nodule of interest. Localization is based on 
maps created from CT images. In EMN proce-
dures, the CT scan information is commonly 
used for three purposes: to map the pathway to 
the target/nodule, registration and the display of 
navigated instruments.
The hybrid inspiration–expiration CT scan 
follows a scanning protocol that uses low-dose 
parameters to acquire a scan pair for EMN pro-
cedures. Patients are frequently closer to a tidal 
breathing expiration state during the procedure 
rather than a TLC arms-up position. The objec-
tive of the TV-EXP process is to have the opti-
mal CT map for accurate EMN procedures. 
The pulmonologist uses the system to identify 
optimal airway segmentation, target/nodule 
planning and finally use deformation algorithm 
maps to a tidal breathing expiration scan [21]. The 
TV-EXP process better accommodates to allow 
the pulmonologist to consistently reach targets 
less than 20 mm in size by compensating for 
respiratory movement. The use of referral, TLC 
only, scans may correlate to lower accuracy due to 
the patient state during the procedure not match-
ing the patient state during the acquisition of 
the CT utilized to create the navigation map [22].
Table 1. Decision criteria for diagnostic yield of peripheral small lung lesions.
Study (year)
Diagnostic 
yield (%) 
Lesion size 
(mm) 
Patients 
evaluated (n)
Method
Ref.
Eberhardt et al. 
(2007)
59
28 ± 8
118
ENB
[14]
Eberhardt et al. 
(2007)
69
25 ± 5
118
EBUS
[14]
Nabavizadeh et al. 
(2014)
32
22.7 
(range: 8–44)
31 patients, 
105 fiducials 
placed
ENB with daily CBCT
[15]
Becker et al. (2005)
69
24 ± 5.4
29
ENB conventional breath 
hold
[16]
Schwarz et al. 
(2006)
69
33.5 ± 11
13
ENB
[17]
Gildea et al. (2006)
73
22.8 ± 12.6
60
ENB
[18]
The findings in Table 1 indicate the tidal volume expiration-mapped ENB may not be adequate for a higher diagnostic yield. They 
are similar to the meta-analyses of 15 ENB publications totaling 1033 nodules, finding positive overall definitive diagnosis was 
obtained in 64.9% of all ENB procedures [20]. The negative predictive value was 52.1%.
CBCT: Cone-beam computed tomography; EBUS: Endobronchial ultrasound; ENB: Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy.
 Lung Cancer Manag. (2016) 5(1)
14
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Raval & Amir
future science group
The differences between TV and TLC 
on accuracy of locating a PPN are critical to 
achieve a more representative location of the 
PPN. Registration is the process of matching 
a CT image space to patient lesion space. The 
SPiNDrive system uses a fiducial patient tracker 
enabling respiratory gating and computer or 
automatic registration of the patient requiring 
no user interaction. Conversely, TLC-mapped 
ENB systems use lumen registration to match 
the physical 3D state of the patient near expira-
tion to a segmented airway from a TLC inspi-
ration referral scan. Multiple registration error 
components may contribute to the inaccuracy 
of lumen registration such as user error from 
over or under sampling during point cloud col-
lection, no respiratory gating, and the physical 
difference between the patient and CT scan due 
to arm position and respiratory state. By using 
the TV-EXP mapping EMN procedure these 
inherent inaccuracies of TLC-mapped ENB are 
corrected.
Registration accuracy of TLC-mapped ENB 
has been reported to be 2.6 ± 1.1 mm in CT 
phantom testing [23] and average fiducial target 
registration error (AFTRE) of 0.3–0.5 mm. A 
meta-analysis including 15 ENB studies, all with 
greater than ten patients, totaling 1033 lung 
nodules, found the discordance between the 
virtual bronchoscopic landmarks using TLC-
mapped ENB and the actual anatomic reference 
points (e.g., the main carina and lobar carinas) 
evaluated by AFTRE was a median of 4.6 mm 
(range: 3.6–6.6 mm), with an overall pooled 
AFTRE of 5.1 mm [20].
●
● TV-EXP mapping EMN navigation 
procedure
Using the SPiNDrive, EM sensors were inte-
grated directly into 1.8–1.9 mm sampling 
devices, or forceps used in this study, allowing 
tracking to be maintained at all times. Figure 1 
below illustrates a typical navigation screen 
using the EM sensors of the SPiNDrive system. 
Axial, Coronal and Oblique CT cut planes are 
provided as well as 3D rendered airway views 
from the perspective of flying through or fly-
ing above the airway. Additionally, this EM tip 
tracking technique provides continuous patient 
tracking and respiratory gating that is displayed 
in the lower left quadrant of the screen.
●
● Patient confirmatory diagnosis  
& follow-up
The community hospital multidisciplinary 
tumor review board considered many variables 
when deciding on the diagnostic evaluation for 
each of the patients with a positive CT finding. 
Patient’s wishes, overall lung function, medical 
and family history, the patient’s risk factors for 
invasive procedures, including any pre-existing 
conditions promulgating lung cancer were all 
considered before concluding on the optimal 
approach for each individual patient. Patient’s 
with an initial biopsy result reported from 
pathology as negative for malignancy contin-
ued to be followed using either an additional 
diagnostic procedure such as a CT-guided 
TTNA, surgical resection, PET and/or serial 
CT imaging over a series of months.
Biopsies not yielding a diagnosis of malignant 
cancer were classified in the patient’s chart as nega-
tive for lung cancer. The determination of negative 
for lung cancer was confirmed from negative find-
ings by a second biopsy procedure. Tissue biopsies 
were taken using TTNA, or surgical resection. 
When the results of this second more invasive 
biopsy sample were absent of malignant tissue, the 
reported finding was benign for malignant lung 
cancer. Details of the biopsy specimens’ medical 
Table 2. Characteristics of the study population.
Characteristics
TV-EXP-mapped EMN 
Number of patients
48†
Female gender
21
Male gender
27
Age, mean ± standard deviation; years
67.7 ± 12.2
Type of sedation:
– Moderate/conscious sedation
48
– General anesthesia
0
– Number of lesions biopsied
61
– Size, mean ± standard deviation; mm
19.3 ± 10.7
– Number of benign lesions
29
– Number of malignant lesions
19
Distribution of lesion size by number of lesions:
– ≤10 mm
15
– ≤20 mm
22
– 21–30 mm
14
– >30 mm
10
Number of lesions and lobar location:
– Right upper lobe
23
– Right middle lobe
3
– Right lower lobe
16
– Left upper lobe
11
– Left lower lobe
8
†50 patients were consecutively treated; however, two patients did not progress to the TV-EXP-mapped EMN 
procedure due to excessive coughing during linear endobronchial ultrasound. 
EMN: Electromagnetic navigation; TV-EXP: Tidal volume expiration.
 15
Using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy integrating tidal volume CT mapping CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
documentation included pathology findings, 
noting pneumonia, lesions that disappeared on 
follow-up imaging, and lesions that demonstrated 
stability over 24 months. Lesions with ground 
glass changes or inflammation in biopsy reports 
were further characterized. A false-negative biopsy 
was defined as biopsies that were originally biop-
sied, found to be negative for malignancy, yet were 
later determined to be malignant by percutaneous 
or surgical biopsy.
●
● Data analysis
Continuous variables are expressed using mean, 
standard deviation and range. Dichotomous 
variables are summarized as simple proportions. 
Statistical significance is reported using a t-test 
to evaluate variance between groups.
Results
In total, 48 patients were able to complete the 
TV-EXP-mapped EMN procedure and contin-
ued to be followed. Two of the patients initially 
scheduled for the TV-EXP-mapped EMN pro-
cedure exhibited excessive coughing after or dur-
ing the linear EBUS phase of the procedure and 
therefore they were not exposed to the TV-EXP-
mapped EMN procedure, thus there leaving no 
data to report on these patients. The remaining 
48 patients had 61 lesions biopsied. Table 3 details 
the overall prevalence of malignancy found to be 
39.6% (19/48) consistent with prior studies report-
ing 39.6, 37 and 42.5% malignancy rates in their 
high-risk patient populations meeting the lung 
cancer screening guidelines [3,12,24]. Community 
pulmonologists may expect to experience a similar 
incidence of positive findings which is well within 
range as the malignancy rate reported by the 
NLST, therefore less invasive testing is warranted.
TV-EXP mapping ENB findings report an 
overall diagnostic yield of 83.3%. 15 nodules 
measured 10 mm or smaller, 22 measured 
11–20 mm, 14 measured 21–30 mm and ten 
lesions were larger than 31 mm reported in 
Table 4. LungRADs and Fleishner Society guide-
lines recommend biopsying nodules 8–20 mm 
in size if the patient’s risk profile is high risk. 
Our hospital tumor review board commonly fol-
lows these guidelines for patient’s that present 
with a nodule and fit the high-risk profile. All 
patients evaluated in the study had a positive 
Figure 1. Image of a patient’s peripheral pulmonary nodule on the SPiNDrive electromagnetic tip tracked system accessing a 
positive peripheral lung lesion.
Airway navigation
ICP
Distance to target
5.6 mm
Axial
Coronal
Oblique
Virtual bronchoscopy
Fly-above navigation - Plan RLL
1:34:11 PM
TargetLock
Respiration matched.
Path: Plan RLL
Distance to target: 41.1 mm
 Lung Cancer Manag. (2016) 5(1)
16
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Raval & Amir
future science group
finding on CT, and a recommendation for lung 
biopsy by the tumor review board based on 
patient risk profile. Multiple malignancies for 
nodules smaller than 20 mm were diagnosed 
leading to earlier stage diagnoses as intended 
by the USPSTF guidelines. Lung lesions were 
frequently located in the upper lobes, 23 located 
in the RUL, 16 RLL, three RML, 11 LUL and 
eight LLL as reported in Table 5.
Discussion of community pulmonologist 
initial experience
The TV-EXP mapping EMN procedure took an 
average of 6.8 ± 1.5 samples ranging from four to 
11 biopsies. Total procedure times ranged from 
35 to 90 min. Pulmonologist TV-EXP mapping 
planning times ranged from 5 to 10 min. As 
the pulmonologist gained experience with the 
system the planning time tended toward 5 min. 
40 of 48 (83.3%) patients had a correct diagnosis 
during their TV-EXP mapping EMN procedure. 
A correct diagnosis represents a finding that was 
identical to that of TTNA, watchful waiting, 
PET or surgical resection. In total, 11 patients 
were determined to have a malignancy via the 
procedure obtained biopsy, and 29 patients were 
determined to be true negative for a malignancy 
during follow-up with 100% specificity.
37 patients were initially found to not 
have a malignancy and were managed using 
shared decision-making between pulmonolo-
gist, patient, hospital tumor review board and 
their referring physician. The patient data are 
provided in Table 6.
 
● Three patients were diagnosed with pneumo-
nia on biopsy;
 
● Based on PET findings of 12 patients, six 
patients were referred to TTNA biopsy and 
one patient was referred to surgical resection. 
Of the patients referred to PET, four were 
found to be positive for lung cancer and 
eight patients were found to be benign;
 
● Six patients were referred for a PET study 
revealing limited to no activity. Follow-up 
CT scanning showed these nodules to be 
smaller, stable or missing and these patients 
were determined to be negative for the pres-
ence of malignant lung requiring no further 
intervention at this time;
 
● In total, 15 were followed up with a serial imag-
ing protocol at 3–6, 9–12 and 18–24 months 
during the study timeframe. Three of these 15 
patients had a nodule that was no longer pre-
sent during follow-up period. The remaining 
12 patients are continuing to be followed with 
a serial CT or x-ray scan according to recom-
mended guidelines and have shown no signs of 
nodule growth, all having over 24 months of 
follow-up. There was one pneumothorax (2%). 
No additional complications were reported for 
the patient group.
In total, 25 of 48 (52.1%) of the patients had 
a bronchus sign to the lesion. For the patients 
with a bronchus sign to the lesion, a correct 
diagnosis was achieved 88% (22/25) of the 
time. For patients without a bronchus sign to 
the target, a correct diagnosis was achieved 
78.3% (18/23) of the time. This is consistent 
with reports from prior studies that diagnostic 
rates are higher for patients with bronchus signs 
to the lesion [25].
Table 3. Findings of patient positive for lung cancer.
Cancer 
Patients (n)
Cancer detected (%)
Non-small-cell carcinoma
14
74
Small-cell carcinoma
5
26
Incidence of 39.6% (19/48) is representative of the lung cancer screening population who are expected to experience a lower 
incidence of lung cancer compared with patients with obvious signs and symptoms. Importantly this number of positive findings is 
consistent with the reported incidence in the National Lung Screening Trial.
Table 4. Comparison of lesion size, number of lesions and malignancy.
Size (mm)
Lesions (n)
Benign (n)
Malignant (n)
Malignant (%)
≤10
15
14
1
6.7
≤20
22
18
4
18.2
21–30
14
6
8
57.1
>30
10
4
6
60.0
Our findings are consistent with other studies wherein larger lung lesions have a higher probability of being malignant, prompting 
the importance to biopsy peripheral pulmonary nodule earlier to identify lung cancer at an earlier stage. The size difference 
between benign and malignant is statistically significant p-value < 0.0001.
 17
Using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy integrating tidal volume CT mapping CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
The diagnostic yield for our first 25 patients 
was 80% (20/25), which we found acceptable 
and a significant improvement over conventional 
bronchoscopic techniques using fluoroscopic 
guidance for these lesions. The diagnostic yield 
for the next 23 patients was 87% (20/23) reveal-
ing a promising trend toward improvement due 
to a learning curve with the technology. While 
the sample size was small, nevertheless the results 
reflect the experience of one physician faced with 
the need to provide a diagnostic solution to 
patients with a positive CT finding having a high 
risk for lung cancer. Nodule size was fairly con-
sistent across the first and second set of patients 
(18.4 vs 20.4 mm, respectively). Adapting to the 
TV-EXP-mapped EMN technique is operator 
dependent, therefore the learning curve may be 
different for other users.
Bronchoscopy with guidance has evolved as a 
viable option however the operator requires exper-
tise in newer guided techniques. Minimally inva-
sive diagnostic procedures using bronchoscopy, 
ENB, TTNA or TTNB can provide a definitive 
diagnosis early and therefore may be preferred 
management strategies for patients meeting the 
lung cancer screening guidelines. However, bal-
ancing the risk of a higher incidence of procedure-
related complications must be balanced with 
the likelihood of a negative finding; clinical 
team decision-making is essential in aiding the 
management of these patients. Early experience 
with the TV-EXP-mapped EMN offers an addi-
tional option reporting positive operator expe-
rience and definitively positive diagnostic yield 
with high ability to rule out lung cancer.
The new challenge facing pulmonologists is 
diagnosing lung cancer earlier through appropri-
ately applying the less invasive biopsy methodol-
ogy due to the low rate of positive lung cancer 
findings. Patients are presenting with smaller 
lesions and without symptoms. As high-risk 
patients are screened, identified nodules will be 
recommended for further workup. Noting the 
high number of positive CT scan in the NLST, 
the community pulmonologist is challenged to 
identify a minimally invasive method to consist-
ently reach these lesions and acquire adequate tis-
sue samples causing little complications leading to 
increased patient morbidity. The new TV-EXP-
mapped EMN system, evaluated in this study, 
shows promise to help lung specialists meet this 
new challenge. This technique has a low compli-
cation profile and a high probability of identifying 
patients with benign tissue pathology [26].
The hybrid inspiration/expiration CT proto-
col along with the respiratory gating capabilities 
of the system seemed to offer an improvement 
in diagnostic yield when compared with TLC-
ENB with equivalence to R-EBUS and ENB. 
With the limited space in most bronchoscopy 
Table 5. Comparison of lung lesion location and malignancy.
Lung lesion 
location
Lung lesions (n)
Benign (n)
Malignant (n)
Malignant (%)
RUL
23
13
10
43.5
RML
3
3
0
0
RLL
16
14
2
12.5
LUL
11
5
6
54.5
LLL
8
7
1
12.5
LLL: Left lower lobe; LUL Left upper lobe; RLL: Right lower lobe; RML: Right middle lobe; RUL: Right upper lobe.
Table 6. 37 patients follow-up after tidal volume expiration mapping electromagnetic 
navigation to verify confirmatory diagnosis to aid treatment decisions.
Follow-up/
diagnosis
Diagnostic 
method
Lung cancer status 
(number)
Total patients (n)
Patients diagnosis 
due to follow-up (%)
Pneumonia
Biopsy
Benign three
3
8.1
Malignant
TTNA
Malignant seven
12
32.4
Malignant
Surgical resection
Malignant one
1
2.7
PET – inactive + CT 
stable
 
Benign six
6
16.2
CT – disappeared
 
Benign three
3
8.1
CT stable – 
24+ months
 
Benign 12
12
32.4
TTNA: Transthoracic needle aspiration.
 Lung Cancer Manag. (2016) 5(1)
18
CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl Raval & Amir
future science group
suites, the opportunity to not utilize fluoros-
copy offers a cost-effective option. Having EM 
sensors embedded in the actual biopsy instru-
mentation was easy to use. The embedded EM 
sensors allowed the pulmonologist to never lose 
navigation, especially at the most critical time, 
while performing the biopsy. Using common 
bronchoscopic tools such as the EM always-on 
tip tracked forceps in conjunction with a stand-
ard bronchoscope made the procedure seamless 
to learn and to adapt to a procedure routine in 
the bronchoscopy suite.
Conclusion
At AnMed (SC, USA), a community-based 
hospital, this new technology has significantly 
changed our approach to suspicious PPN. 
Increased confidence in our ability to accu-
rately reach smaller PPNs has been meaningful 
in support of our desire to completely address the 
patient’s spectrum of biopsy options. The abil-
ity to collect staging samples and to accurately 
biopsy the lesion in a single procedure is encour-
aging to streamline patient care. The future of 
lung cancer diagnosis and management in the 
early stages will be directly impacted by our abil-
ity to embrace new approaches of patient care 
that enable us to make informed decisions rela-
tive to the patient’s risk profile to appropriately 
select the patient’s optimum treatment algo-
rithm. Additional studies of interest would be to 
further examine the comparison of different reg-
istration methods offered by the navigation sys-
tems. With accuracy being of vital importance 
in navigation procedures, it would be interesting 
to exam target location on the navigation system 
for the same patient with different registration 
techniques that advance the TV-EXP-mapped 
EMN procedure.
The aim of this study was to determine the 
community pulmonologist learning curve, use, 
safety and diagnostic yield of the TV-EXP map-
ping EMN procedure to enable access of EM 
forceps to access commonly found lung lesions 
in a CT screened patient population. Our initial 
findings suggest this approach shows potential to 
improve the diagnostic yield of transbronchial 
lung biopsy.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
L Amir, MS, MHA received a small stipend from Veran 
Medical Technologies. The authors have no other relevant 
affiliations or financial involvement with any organization 
or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict 
with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript apart from those disclosed.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of 
this manuscript.
Ethical conduct of research
The authors state that they have obtained appropriate insti-
tutional review board approval or have followed the prin-
ciples outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki for all human 
or animal experimental investigations. In addition, for 
investigations involving human subjects, informed consent 
has been obtained from the participants involved.
Open access
This work is licensed under the Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 Unported License. To 
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
References
1 
American Cancer Society website.  
www.cancer.org  
2 
Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force. Screening for lung cancer: U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann. Intern. Med. 
160(5), 330–338 (2014).
3 
The National Lung Screening Trial Research 
Team; Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD et al. 
Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose 
computed tomographic screening. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 365, 395–409 (2011).
4 
Ost DE, Gould MK. Decision making in 
patients with pulmonary nodules. Am. J. 
Respir. Crit. Care Med. 185(4), 363–372 
(2012).
5 
Welker JA, Alattar M, Gautam S. Repeat 
needle biopsies combined with clinical 
observation are safe and accurate in the 
management of a solitary pulmonary nodule. 
Cancer 103(3), 599–607 (2005).
6 
Gould MK, Fletcher J, Iannettoni MD et al. 
Evaluation of patients with pulmonary 
nodules: when is it lung cancer? ACCP 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines 
(2nd edition American College of Chest 
Physicians). Chest 132(Suppl. 3), S108–S130 
(2007).
7 
Rivera MP, Mehta AC, Wahidi MM. 
Establishing the diagnosis of lung cancer: 
diagnosis and management of lung cancer, 3rd 
ed; American College of Chest Physicians 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 
Chest 143(5 Suppl.), e142S–e165S (2013).
8 
Silvestri GA, Feller-Kopman D, Chen A et al. 
Latest advances in advanced diagnostic and 
therapeutic pulmonary procedures. Chest 142, 
1636–1644 (2012).
9 
Memoli JSW, Nietert PJ, Silvestri GA. 
Meta-analysis of guided bronchoscopy for the 
evaluation of the pulmonary nodule. Chest 
142(2), 385–393 (2012).
10 
Schreiber G, McCrory DC. Performance 
characteristics of different modalities for 
diagnosis of suspected lung cancer: summary 
of published evidence. Chest 123, S115–S128S 
(2003).
11 
Baaklini WA, Reinoso MA, Gorin AB, 
Sharafkaneh A, Manian P. Diagnostic yield of 
fiberoptic bronchoscopy in evaluating solitary 
pulmonary nodules. Chest 117(4), 1049–1054 
(2000).
 19
Using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy integrating tidal volume CT mapping CliniCal TRial PROTOCOl
future science group
www.futuremedicine.com
12 
Seijo LM, de Torres JP, Lozano MD et al. 
Diagnostic yield of electromagnetic 
navigation bronchoscopy is highly dependent 
on the presence of a bronchus sign on CT 
imaging: results from a prospective study. 
Chest 138(6), 1316–1321 (2010).
13 
Lee KA, Raval AA, Amir L. 
Cost–effectiveness of endobronchial 
percutaneous biopsy compared with 
transthoracic biopsy for diagnosis of 
peripheral lung lesions. Lung Cancer Manag. 
3(2), 135–148 (2014).
14 
Eberhardt R, Anantham D, Ernst A, 
Feller-Kopman D, Herth F. Multimodality 
bronchoscopic diagnosis of peripheral lung 
lesions. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 176, 
36–41 (2007).
15 
Nabavizadeh N, Zhand J, Elliott DA et al. 
Electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy-
guided fiducial markers for lung stereotactic 
body radiation therapy. J. Bronchol. Intervent. 
Pulmonol. 21, 123–130 (2014).
16 
Becker HC, Herth F, Ernst A, Schwarz Y. 
Bronchoscopic biopsy of peripheral lung 
lesions under electromagnetic guidance: a 
pilot study. J. Bronchoscopy 12, 9–13 (2005).
17 
Schwarz Y, Greif, , Becker HD, Ernst A, 
Mehta A. Real-time electromagnetic 
navigation bronchoscopy to peripheral lung 
lesions using overlaid CT images: the first 
human study. Chest 129, 988–994 (2006).
18 
Gildea TR, Mazzone PJ, Karnak D, Meziane 
M, Mehta AC. Electromagnetic navigation 
diagnostic bronchoscopy: a prospective study. 
Am. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 174, 982–989 
(2006).
19 
Wahidi MM, Herth F, Yasufuku K et al. 
Technical aspects of endobronchial 
ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle 
aspiration CHEST Guideline and Expert 
Panel Report. Chest 149(3), 816–835 (2016).
20 
Gex G, Pralong JA, Combescure C et al. 
Diagnostic yield and safety of 
electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy for 
lung nodules: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Respiration 87, 165–176 
(2014).
21 
Bauer M, Joshiy S, Modinz K. Diffeomorphic 
density matching by optimal information 
transport. Cornell University Library (2015). 
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1501.07635.pdf  
22 
Chen A, Pastis N, Furukawa B, Silvestri G. 
Effect of respiratory motion on pulmonary 
nodule location during electromagnetic 
navigation bronchoscopy. Chest 147(5), 
1275–1281 (2014).
23 
Appelbaum L, Sosna J, Nissenbaum Y, 
Benshtein A, Goldberg SN. Electromagnetic 
navigation system for CT-guided biopsy of 
small lesions. AJR Am. J. Roentgenol. 106, 
1194–1200 (2011).
24 
Mehta H, Ravenel J, Shaftman S et al. The 
utility of nodule volume in the context of 
malignancy prediction for small pulmonary 
nodules. Chest 145(3), 464–472 (2014).
25 
Lacunza MM, Zulueta JJ. Diagnostic yield of 
electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy is 
highly dependent on the presence of a 
Bronchus sign on CT imaging: results from a 
prospective study. Chest 138, 1316–1321 
(2010).
26 
Gilbert C, Akulian J, Ortizo R et al. Novel 
bronchoscopic strategies for the diagnosis of 
peripheral lung lesions: present techniques 
and future directions. Respirology 19(5), 
636–644 (2014).
