 Article
Live Imaging of HIV-1 Transfer across T Cell
Virological Synapse to Epithelial Cells that Promotes
Stromal Macrophage Infection
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d HIV-1-infected T cells form viral synapse with the epithelium
in reconstructed mucosa
d These viral synapse dynamics were recorded by live imaging
for the first time
d HIV-1 formed at the viral synapse crosses the epithelium by
transcytosis
d Transcytosed HIV-1 targets stromal macrophages, resulting
in their latent infection
Authors
Fernando Real, Alexis Sennepin,
Yonatan Ganor, Alain Schmitt,
Morgane Bomsel
Correspondence
morgane.bomsel@inserm.fr
In Brief
Real et al. established by live imaging the
dynamics of virological synapses formed
between HIV-1-infected T cells and the
epithelium at the surface of a human
reconstructed mucosa. HIV-1 virions
formed at the viral synapse cross the
epithelium and reach the mucosal
stroma, where the virus establishes a
latent infection in macrophages.
Real et al., 2018, Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805
May 8, 2018 ª 2018
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.028
 Cell Reports
Article
Live Imaging of HIV-1 Transfer across T Cell
Virological Synapse to Epithelial Cells
that Promotes Stromal Macrophage Infection
Fernando Real,1,3,4 Alexis Sennepin,1,3,4 Yonatan Ganor,1,3,4 Alain Schmitt,2,3,4 and Morgane Bomsel1,3,4,5,*
1Laboratory of Mucosal Entry of HIV and Mucosal Immunity, 3I Department, Institut Cochin, Universite
´ Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cite
´ ,
75014 Paris, France
2Electron Microscopy Facility, Cochin Institute, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cite
´ , 75014 Paris, France
3CNRS, UMR8104, 75014 Paris, France
4INSERM, U1016, Institut Cochin, 75014 Paris, France
5Lead Contact
*Correspondence: morgane.bomsel@inserm.fr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.028
SUMMARY
During sexual intercourse, HIV-1 crosses epithelial
barriers composing the genital mucosa, a poorly un-
derstood feature that requires an HIV-1-infected cell
vectoring efficient mucosal HIV-1 entry. Therefore,
urethral mucosa comprising a polarized epithelium
and a stroma composed of fibroblasts and macro-
phages were reconstructed in vitro. Using this sys-
tem, we demonstrate by live imaging that efficient
HIV-1 transmission to stromal macrophages de-
pends on cell-mediated transfer of the virus through
virological synapses formed between HIV-1-infected
CD4+ T cells and the epithelial cell mucosal surface.
We visualized HIV-1 translocation through mucosal
epithelial cells via transcytosis in regions where viro-
logical synapses occurred. In turn, interleukin-13 is
secreted and HIV-1 targets macrophages, which
develop a latent state of infection reversed by lipo-
polysaccharide (LPS) activation. The live observation
of virological synapse formation reported herein is
key in the design of vaccines and antiretroviral ther-
apies aimed at blocking HIV-1 access to cellular res-
ervoirs in genital mucosa.
INTRODUCTION
The early steps of HIV-1 acquisition during sexual intercourse in
men and the establishment of HIV-1 cell reservoirs at the
male genital tract are poorly understood features of HIV-1 path-
ogenesis. The apparent protection against HIV-1 conferred by
circumcision (around 50% of reduction) (Auvert et al., 2005) is
far from being complete, pointing to the existence of other
penile tissues serving as HIV-1 entry sites. The penile urethra
is the initial site of infection by many bacterial/viral pathogens
that
commonly
infect
the
male
genital
tract,
such
as
N. gonorrhea, C. trachomatis, E. coli, cytomegalovirus, human
papilloma virus, and herpes simplex virus-2, demonstrating
that the urethral mucosa is accessible to pathogen entry and
invasion during sexual intercourse (Pudney and Anderson,
1995). Experiments with the simian immunodeficiency virus
(SIV) revealed that infusion of this virus into the urethra of
male macaques resulted in the development of acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome-like disease, suggesting that the ure-
thral mucosa is also an efficient entry site for HIV-1 (Ma
et al., 2016; Miller et al., 1989).
Urethral mucosa displays CD4+ T cells and macrophages as
main HIV-1 cell targets, covered by a single thin layer of epithelial
cells. Additionally, the expression of mRNA for HIV-1 cellular co-
receptors CXCR4 and CCR5 was detected in urethral swabs
(Ganor and Bomsel, 2011), thus characterizing the male urethra
as a potential entry and establishment site for HIV-1. Accord-
ingly, we have previously shown that HIV-1 efficiently penetrates
the urethral mucosa reaching urethral macrophages that in turn
traffic from the epithelial to the dermal compartment, in a mech-
anism controlled by HIV-1-induced cytokines (Ganor et al.,
2013). In contrast with foreskin where HIV-1 targets Langerhans
cells (Ganor et al. 2010), in the urethral epithelia—in which Lang-
erhans cells are absent—HIV-1 targets macrophages, sparing
urethral T cells from infection (Ganor et al., 2013). Therefore,
the urethra represents an excellent model of genital mucosa
for the study of HIV-1 transmission specific to tissue macro-
phages, from which productive infection and further dynamics
have not been assessed yet.
Once initial infection foci are established, HIV-1 rapidly forms
cell reservoirs that cannot be eradicated despite combined an-
tiretroviral treatment. Apart from the best described CD4+ T cell
reservoir, HIV-1 establishes myeloid cell reservoirs in tissues
constituting an additional obstacle to virus eradication (Honey-
cutt et al., 2017; Stevenson, 2015). In addition, the vast majority
of sexually transmitted HIV-1 uses the CCR5 co-receptor, be-
ing thus R5 tropic or macrophage tropic, the variants that pre-
dominate in newly transmitted HIV-1 infection (Keele et al.,
2008; Margolis and Shattock, 2006). Therefore, CCR5-express-
ing cells like macrophages would represent a very likely first
HIV-1 target during sexual transmission, gaining increasing
importance as actors of HIV-1 persistence independently of
CD4+ T cells (Honeycutt et al., 2017). At least in vitro,
1794
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018 ª 2018
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 macrophages have a self-limiting production of new viral parti-
cles throughout time post-infection, interrupting or keeping a
very low-level production after weeks and limiting viral lytic
egress and cell-cell spread (Carter and Ehrlich, 2008; Cassol
et al., 2009), indicating that macrophages may be important
long-lasting reservoirs for the virus.
How HIV-1 reaches these safe niches, established in immune
cells such as T cells or Langerhans cells or macrophages de-
pending on the mucosa (Ganor et al., 2013; Hladik and
McElrath, 2008; Shen et al., 2009), in the midst of stromal
mucosal cells, sheltered from foreign aggressions by the efficient
barrier of epithelial cells, remains an open question.
HIV-1 gains access to the body by crossing epithelial barriers
that compose the ano-rectal and female/male genital mucosa
during sexual intercourse. One pathway of HIV-1 entry at
mucosal sites is via transcytosis through epithelial cells after
the formation of cell-cell contacts between epithelial cells and
HIV-1-infected cells (Alfsen et al., 2005; Bomsel, 1997) present
in all secretions that act as vector for HIV-1 infection (Politch
et al., 2014). The contact between HIV-1-infected cells and
monostratified epithelial target cells triggers the polarized
budding of cell-free HIV-1 in a cleft at the site of cell-to-cell con-
tact. Viral particles are then rapidly internalized and transcytosed
by the epithelial cells toward the basal pole without infecting
epithelial cells, culminating in the release of infectious HIV-1
into the basal environment (Bomsel and Alfsen, 2003; Bomsel,
1997). Next, viruses reach immune cell targets in the stroma
and establish infection. In contrast, cell-free HIV-1 inoculated
on the epithelial surface transcytoses poorly (Alfsen et al., 2005;
Anderson et al., 2010b; Ganor et al., 2010, 2013). Thus, transcy-
tosis and establishment of HIV-1 initial foci at mucosal sites
depend on HIV-1 cell-mediated infection, and they occur after
the formation of virus-containing clefts, a feature of virological
synapses. However, this sequence of events was mainly inferred
from biochemical studies or microscopy performed on fixed
cells. Furthermore, the dynamic evidence resulting from observa-
tions in real time and at a single-cell level that are required for
demonstrating virological synapse formation with non-immune
target cells, such as epithelial cells, in the context of viral trans-
mission to mucosa, has never been obtained.
Virological synapses are transient and polarized zones of
contact between HIV-1-infected and non-infected cells in
which viral particles are formed extemporaneously, concen-
trate, and are transferred from cell to cell. At least in vitro,
HIV-1 cell-to-cell transmission between immune cells occurs
by virological synapses and polysynapses between donor,
here HIV-1-infected, cells and one or several target immune
cells. This dynamic phenomenon in its essence has been suc-
cessfully assessed by live-imaging microscopy (Gousset et al.,
2008; H€
ubner et al., 2009; Jolly et al., 2004; Rudnicka et al.,
2009; Wang et al., 2017).
Here, using urethral mucosa reconstructed in vitro, we
describe by quantitative 3D live microscopy the transfer of
HIV-1 across T cell virological synapses toward the epithelial
cell surface and subsequent mucosal penetration, and we
demonstrate that efficient HIV-1 transmission to mucosal tissue
macrophages is mediated by virological synapses formed be-
tween infected CD4+ T cells and genital mucosa epithelial cells.
RESULTS
Infected CD4+ T Cells Shed HIV-1 on the Mucosal
Epithelium Reconstructed In Vitro
To monitor the virological synapse in the context of human mu-
cosa and subsequent HIV-1 translocation across polarized
epithelial cells, a polarized urethral epithelium was reconstructed
in vitro and inoculated at its mucosal pole with CD4+ T cells ex-
pressing a fluorescent R5-tropic HIV-1 strain (gag-iGFP HIV-1).
Human urethral tissue reconstruction consists in the sequential
seeding on membrane filters of fibroblasts embedded in collagen
matrix together with macrophages, prelabeled with engulfed fluo-
rescent quantum dots, for 2 days forming the stroma. The stroma
is overlayed by urethral epithelial cells allowed to grow on the
stromal matrix in liquid-liquid and air-liquid environments each
for an additional 7 days (Figure 1A). The tissue reconstructions
mimic structurally and immunologically the human urethral mu-
cosa, displaying a stroma rich in collagen fibrils (Figure 1B) and
a polarized epithelium presenting active caveolar endocytosis
and epithelial cell junctions (Figure 1C). The epithelium expresses
cytokeratins 10 and 13, allowing for the clear separation of epithe-
lial and stromal regions, the latter containing scattered macro-
phages vizualized as they were loaded with quantum dots before
being inserted in the tissue reconstuction (Figure 1D).
When inoculated selectively at the mucosal pole of the urethral
epithelium for 3 hr prior to fixation and observation by confocal
microscopy, the CD4+ T cells infected with gag-iGFP HIV-1 inter-
acted exclusively with the surface epithelium, without migrating
toward the stroma (Figure 1E). After 3 hr of interaction between
HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells and the urethral mucosa, 17.1% of
gag-iGFP HIV-1-infected cells (6 of 35 cells observed) shed fluo-
rescent virus at zones of infected T cell-epithelial cell contact,
indicating virological synapses (Figures 1E and 1F).
Transfer of HIV-1 to the Mucosal Epithelium Is Mediated
by Virological Synapses
To characterize dynamically the formation of virological synapses
formed between HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells and mucosal
epithelial cells, we assessed their interaction by quantitative live
imaging from 15 min to 6 hr. Therefore, mucosal tissues were re-
constructed on the underside of the membrane filters using the
same protocol as above, flipped back to the normal orientation,
and inoculated with infected CD4+ T cells deposited on micro-
scopy imaging dishes coupled to an adaptor suitable for micro-
scopy (Figures 2A and 2B). Virological synapses were character-
ized using the morphological criteria established previously
(H€
ubneretal.,2009),namely,(1)detectionofstable(>10-min)orga-
nization of fluorescent virus into clusters at zones of cell-cell con-
tact, demonstrated by others to be in fact synaptic clefts (H€
ubner
et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2017); and (2) detection of subsequent
transfer of fluorescent virus from the clusters to the target cell.
Upon HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cell-epithelial cell contact, fluo-
rescent viruses, defined by groups of singular fluorescent dots
of 0.77 (±0.05 SEM) mm2 of area, clearly distinguishable from
the background, formed and clustered in zones of contact be-
tween infected CD4+ cells and epithelial cells. Strikingly, a direc-
tional transfer of virus toward epithelial cell surface followed the
clustering (Figures 2C and 2D, arrowheads; Videos S1 and S2).
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
1795
 The time-spotting of cluster and transfer events (Figure 2E) re-
vealed that transfer of virus starts 37.75 (±14.9 SEM) min after
clustering, and transfer events were detected during a mean
period of 56.75 min (±12.9 SEM). HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells
transferred virus to the urethral epithelium through virological
synapse formation in 35.1% of the recorded cells (Table 1),
and synapses were resolved after transfer started in 72.7% of
the recordings where viral transfers occurred (Figure 2E).
Concerning distinctive features of virological synapses formed
between HIV-1-infected T cells and epithelial cells as compared
with virological synapses formed with uninfected target CD4+
T cells (Figure S1A) or macrophages (Figure S1B; Video S3), we
observed (1) the formation of membrane extensions in regions
of viral clustering at cell-cell contact zones and from which viral
particles were transferred to epithelium; and (2) the transfer of vi-
rus that could move away microns of distance from viral synapses
regions, not being necessarily retained in viral synapse regions as
in the case of bounded synaptic clefts. Frequency of virological
synapse formation with epithelial cells in tissue reconstructions
was similar to that obtained when uninfected macrophages
were targeted. Viral synapse formation followed by virus transfer
depended on the HIV-1 envelope, as no transfer to epithelium
was observed when a virus mutant lacking the HIV-1 envelope,
namely DENV, gag-iGFP virus was employed (Video S8; Table 1).
Totrack macrophages thateventuallymigratedtoupperregions
of the epithelium, directly contacting infected CD4+ T cells, macro-
phages were loaded with quantum dots before being inserted into
tissue reconstruction. In most of regions where viral synapses
were recorded, macrophages were absent or not reaching in-
fected CD4+ T cells. In a few recorded cases (n = 3), macrophages
Figure 1. HIV-1-Infected CD4+ T Cells Shed Virus on Polarized Urethral Epithelium upon Cell-Cell Contact
(A) Reconstruction of mucosal tissue. Human foreskin primary fibroblasts and monocyte-derived macrophages (MF) tagged with fluorescent cell trackers were
embedded in the extracellular matrix and seeded on a two-chamber unit membrane for 2 days, subsequently covered by urethral epithelial cells (THUECs) and
cultivated for 2 weeks in liquid-liquid then air-liquid environment in a culture medium favoring epithelial polarization. HIV-1-infected T cells producing fluorescent
viruses were added on the mucosal side of reconstructed mucosa to initiate infection.
(B) Collagen fibrils (red) in reconstructed urethral mucosa, detected by second harmonics generation (cell nuclei stained with Hoechst in blue). Side and top views
are shown. Scale bar, 50 mm.
(C) Electron microscopy images of reconstructed urethra, revealing the presence of caveolae (cyan arrowhead) and desmosomes (red arrowheads) in the
epithelium. Scale bar, 100 nm.
(D) Macrophages (arrowheads) distributed in the stroma of reconstructed mucosae (side view). Epithelium and stromal regions were separated by the yellow line,
defined after cytokeratin 10/13 expression, in pink. MF is shown in green (quantum dot fluorescence), and nuclei are shown in blue (Hoechst). Scale bar, 50 mm.
(E) Side and top views of an HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cell producing fluorescent viruses (green) interacting with reconstructed urethral epithelium (nuclei stained
with Hoechst in blue).
(F) Two HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells interacting with the epithelium (top view) and shedding fluorescent viruses to the epithelium (arrowheads). Scale bar, 10 mm.
Results are representative of n = 2 independent experiments.
1796
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
 were present in the epithelium close to infected CD4+ T cell-form-
ing viral synapses, although HIV-1 direct transfers from T cell to
these macrophages were not detected, whereas such transfer
can be observed in single HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cell/uninfected
macrophage co-cultures (Figure S1B; Video S3). Therefore, the
formation of viral synapses and clear HIV-1 transfers occur exclu-
sivelywithepithelialcelltargets,despiteproximityofmacrophages
to infected CD4+ T cells (Figure S1E; Video S6).
HIV-1 Shed from Viral Synapses Crosses the Epithelium
and Reaches the Mucosal Stroma
Considering that cell-to-cell contact, virological synapse for-
mation, and virus transcytosis across epithelium are sequen-
tial events in HIV-1 entry into mucosa (Bomsel, 1997), we
tracked fluorescent virus shed from virological synapse into
epithelial cells (Figure 3). To specifically delineate the epithe-
lial cell plasma membrane, we constructed urethral epithelial
Figure 2. Tracking of HIV-1-Infected T Cell Virological Synapses with the Urethral Epithelium
(A) Reconstruction of mucosal tissue for live-imaging recordings: Tissues were reconstructed on the underside of the chamber membrane filter and incubated at
their mucosal pole with HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells.
(B) The interaction is allowed in a system composed of the membrane filter coupled to an adaptor placed on a microscope dish containing the infected cells. The
adaptor adjusts the optical distance between epithelium and high-magnification objectives of the inverted confocal microscope. The upper photograph depicts
how the system is mounted (as indicated by the arrow), and the lower photograph shows the ensemble ready for live imaging.
(C and D) HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells interacting with reconstructed urethral epithelium, as observed by live confocal imaging (infected CD4+ T cell producing
gag-iGFP HIV-1 in green; nuclei stained with Hoechst in blue). See also Videos S1 and S2. In (D), gag-iGFP fluorescence is also shown with hue-saturation-value
scale ranging from dark blue (less fluorescence) to white (more fluorescence). Detection of viral cluster formation and resolution and the start and end of viral
transfers are depicted as green and red circles and green and red triangles, respectively. Time of image acquisition is expressed as minutes:seconds in (C) and
hours:minutes in (D). Scale bar, 10 or 5 mm.
(E) Time tracking of virological synapses. Each line in the y axis represents one live-imaging recording, and events of viral clustering (formation, green circle;
resolution, red circle) and viral transfers (start, green triangle; end, red triangle) were plotted on the x axis according to the recorded time after interaction with
HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells (hours). Virus is transferred either immediately or within z40 min after virological synapse formation; transfer events were observed
during z1 hr. Results are representative of n = 5 independent experiments.
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
1797
 cells tagged with red fluorescent ARF6 (ADP-ribosylation fac-
tor 6), a protein known to be expressed at the apical plasma
membrane of polarized epithelial cells (Altschuler et al.,
1999). Using mucosa reconstructed with fluorescent ARF6-
tagged epithelial cells and inoculated with HIV-1-infected
CD4+ T cell in a polarized manner as in Figure 2, we confirmed
the direct transfer of HIV-1 from virological synapse to the
epithelium (Figure 3A; Video S4). Fluorescent viruses are pro-
duced extemporaneously by infected CD4+ T cells upon viro-
logical synapse establishment, forming clusters in cell-cell
contact zones (Figure 3A) corresponding to previous observa-
tion with other CD4+ T cells (H€
ubner et al., 2009; Wang et al.,
2017). HIV-1 could be detected in intracellular epithelial cell
compartments during 3 hr of interaction with HIV-1-infected
CD4+ T cells when observed at the ultrastructural level by
electron microscopy (Figure 3B). Furthermore, the ultrastruc-
ture of particles found in epithelial cells was compared with
that of HIV-1 particles produced by gag-iGFP HIV-1-infected
CD4+ T cells, confirming their HIV-1 nature (Figure 3C).
Fluorescent viruses shed following viral synapse formation
with the epithelium were then tracked by live imaging in
z dimension. Epithelial and HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells were
also tracked, and their displacements in z coordinate were
used as references for fluorescent virus directional migration.
We observed that 3 of 9 (z30%) tracked fluorescent viruses
were found to migrate farther from HIV-1-infected CD4+
T cell and translocate across epithelial cell toward the
mucosal stroma, indicating viral transcytosis across the
epithelial barrier following viral synapse formation (Figures
3D and 3E; Video S5).
Stromal Macrophages Are Infected following HIV-1-
Infected T Cell Virological Synapse Formation with the
Epithelium
Next, having demonstrated that virological synapses formed
with epithelial cell surface lead in turn to extemporaneous
HIV-1 production and viral translocation resembling transcytosis
across epithelial cells as shown above, we assessed whether
transcytosed viruses could then productively infect macro-
phages in the following days after interaction between urethral
tissues within the reconstructed mucosa and HIV-1-infected
CD4+ T cells. In parallel experiments, cell-free virus was instead
inoculated selectively on the tissue mucosal pole. Viral produc-
tion was assessed by weekly collection of 24-hr serosal tissue
culture medium (Figure 4A).
We first confirmed the infectiousness of the R5-tropic gag-iGFP
HIV-1 to macrophages after co-culture with infected CD4+ T cells
(Figure S1C) or in macrophage single cultures infected with cell-
free gag-iGFP virus that has been previously produced by HIV-1-
infected CD4+ T cells (Figure S1D). Resulting infected macro-
phages displayed the characteristic arrest in viral production
around15dayspost-infection(p.i.)withcell-freevirus(FigureS1D).
The
in
vitro
urethral
tissue
reconstruction
successfully
mimicked the physical barrier provided by mucosal epithelia
to block direct contact between HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells
outside the mucosa and stromal macrophages (Figures 1D and
4B). Infected CD4+ T cells did not cross the epithelial barrier, re-
maining localized above the epithelial layer, as recorded by live
imaging (Figure S2A; Video S7). Furthermore, after being washed
out from tissue reconstructions at the end of the interaction
period, HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells were not detected in the re-
constructed mucosa, as in tissue cell suspensions prepared up
to 13 days post-infection lacked infected T cells, as demon-
strated by flow cytometry (Figure S2B).
When cell-free viruses were added to urethral reconstructions
and interacted with the mucosal pole of the epithelium, no viral
production was detected in the serosal medium up to 26 days
following inoculation (p.i.) (Figure 4C, open circles). Doubling
the number of macrophages inserted into the reconstruction
had no effect on mucosal infection. This indicates that cell-free
viruses were inefficient in targeting macrophages, in agreement
with the low efficiency of cell-free HIV-1 to penetrate mucosal
epithelia (Alfsen et al., 2005; Anderson, 2014; Bomsel, 1997; Ga-
nor et al., 2013). In contrast, when R5-tropic gag-iGFP HIV-1-in-
fected T cells where inoculated into the mucosal reconstruction
in a cell-mediated fashion, viral production was detected up to
18 days p.i. in the serosal medium (Figure 4C, closed circles).
Viral production was proportional to the number of macrophages
inserted in the reconstruction (Figure 4C, blue and magenta cir-
cles), establishing that the detected virus was indeed produced
by macrophages inserted in the reconstructed mucosa.
At later time points (up to day 25), viral production became un-
detectable, suggesting that HIV-1 infection of macrophages had
become latent. Latent HIV-1 infection in macrophages was
ascertained using lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a molecule known
to re-activate viral production from latency specifically in
Table 1. Summary of Detected Virological Synapses Formed between gag-iGFP HIV-1-Infected CD4+ T Cell Donor and Various Target
Cells in Live-Imaging Recordings
Target Cell
HIV-1 gag-iGFP
Strain
Cells Recorded
Virological
Synapses
Examples
n
%
Primary CD4+ T cells
WT
8
7
Figure S1A
2
87.5
DENV
6
0
data not shown
2
0
MD-MF
WT
36
11
Figure S1B; Video S3
5
30.5
DENV
4
0
data not shown
2
0
Urethral epithelial cells
WT
37
13
Figures 2, 3, and S1E; Videos S1, S2, S4, S5, and S6
5
35.1
DENV
5
0
Video S8
2
0
The efficiency of gag-iGFP HIV-1 (wild-type or a mutant virus lacking HIV-1 envelope [DENV]) in forming viral synapses and transfer viral particles to
target cells was evaluated using target cells such as uninfected primary CD4+ cells, peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages (MD-MF), and
urethral tissue reconstructions. n = independent experiments.
1798
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
 infected macrophages (Liou et al., 2002; Pomerantz et al., 1990).
Hence, treatment with LPS at day 25 p.i. of reconstruction other-
wise arrested in viral production induced a viral rebound, as
compared with non-treated reconstructions (Figure 4C, graph
on the right).
Macrophages were retained in urethral mucosal reconstruc-
tions after long-term cell-mediated HIV-1 infection, although
their location remained restricted to stromal regions at later
time points p.i. (Figure 4D). In situ hybridization performed us-
Figure 3. Viral Particles Formed at the Viro-
logical Synapse Transcytose across the
Epithelium toward the Mucosal Stroma
(A) HIV-1-nfected CD4+ T cell (fluorescent virus in
green) interacting with epithelium (THUECs en-
gineered to express a fluorescent ARF6 GTPase at
the apical plasma membrane to delineate the cell
border in red). Clustering and shedding of fluo-
rescent virus at the zone of contact are indicated
by arrowheads. Time of image acquisition is
depicted as minutes:seconds. Scale bar, 5 mm.
Results are representative of 3 virological synap-
ses with ARF6-tagged THUEC recorded in n = 3
independent experiments. See also Video S4.
(B) Contact zone between infected CD4+ T cell and
epithelium imaged by electron microscopy. The
green dotted square region shown in high magni-
fication (inset) reveals a viral particle within an
epithelial cell compartment. Scale bars, 1 mm and
100 nm.
(C) Examples of viral particles shed by an infected
CD4+ T cell under electron microscopy. Scale bar,
100 nm.
(D) Live imaging of an infected CD4+ T cell forming
a virological synapse and transferring viruses to
epithelium; arrowheads in the sequence indicate
examples of particles tracked for vertical (z coor-
dinate) displacement in (E). Time, hours:minutes;
scale bar, 10 mm. See also Video S5. Results are
representative of 13 virological synapses recorded
in n = 5 independent experiments.
(E) Vertical (z coordinate) tracking of fluorescent
virus shed from a virological synapse. Displace-
ment in z coordinate of epithelial cells (blue dotted
line), infected CD4+ T cell (green dotted line), and
transferred gag-iGFP particles (gray, not dis-
placed;
orange,
displaced
in
z
direction).
Displacement was calculated by subtracting the z
coordinate at each time point by the initial z co-
ordinate at time point = 0. Negative values repre-
sent displacement toward tissue reconstructions,
while positive values represent displacement to-
ward the confocal unit objective. From 6 different
live recordings analyzed in n = 4 independent ex-
periments, 3 of 9 tracked gag-iGFP particles
migrate further in z toward the stroma, thus indi-
cating transcytosis.
ing the recently developed DNA/RNA
scope technology (Deleage et al., 2016)
revealed that tissular macrophages dis-
played integrated proviral DNA as early
as 3 days p.i. Furthermore, HIV-1 DNA
was detected exclusively in macrophages colabeled with
CD68, not epithelial cells (Figure 4E, arrowheads). At long-
term infection, when macrophages were latently infected,
e.g., 25 days p.i., HIV-1 capsid proteins were detected in intra-
cellular clusters within CD68+ macrophage, as shown by
immunofluorescent labeling observed by confocal microscopy
(Figure
4F),
suggestive
of
viral-containing
compartments
typical of HIV-1 infection in myeloid cells (Rodrigues et al.,
2017) (unpublished data).
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
1799
 Figure 4. Virological Synapses with the Epithelium Mediate HIV-1 Infection of Tissue Macrophages
(A) Experimental set-up for cell-mediated or cell-free virus infection of reconstructed mucosa. After 2 hr of interaction with HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells or cell-free
viruses, 24-hr tissue supernatants (chase period) were collected at different indicated time points throughout 28 days post-infection (p.i.), chase periods being
separated by a resting period of 1 week of cultivation.
(B) HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cell contacting reconstructed mucosal epithelial cells, but not macrophages (MF, identified by electron-dense quantum dots (Qdots)
indicated by a red arrowhead), as observed by electron microscopy. Scale bar, 5 mm.
(C) MF viral production after cell-free versus cell-mediated infection of reconstructions containing different amounts (13 or 23) of inserted MF. Treatment of the
reconstruction with 1 mg/mL LPS restored viral production during the chase period between 26 and 27 days p.i. The limit of p24 detection is shown by the red
dotted line. Results are representative of n = 3 independent experiments. Data are represented as mean ± SEM; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA).
(D) Flow cytometry analysis of the percentage of CD68+ cells in the total population of cells of epithelium and stroma tissue cell suspensions. Macrophages
are retained in the stroma after 13 days post-infection, whereas no macrophages were detected in the epithelium at this later time point. Data are represented as
mean ± SEM; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA); ns, non-significant.
(E) HIV-1 DNA in situ hybridization (ISH) of infected (cell-mediated) and non-infected (control) tissue reconstructions. Proviral DNA staining is shown in magenta
and CD68 co-stainning is shown in cyan (HistoGreen staining), allowing contour of CD68+ macrophages in yellow. Proviral DNA is only detected in CD68+
macrophages early after 3 days of cell-mediated infection (two first images). Arrowhead indicates infected macrophage. Scale bar, 5 mm.
(F) Double indirect immunofluorescence of HIV-1 capsid proteins (p24) observed by confocal microscopy is only detected in CD68+ macrophages, in the stroma
of tissue reconstructions infected for 25 days. CD68 staining, red; p24 staining, green; nucleus staining, blue (DAPI). Arrowheads point to clusters of viral proteins,
indicating viral-containing compartments. Scale bar, 5 mm.
(legend continued on next page)
1800
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
 Direct cell-mediated HIV-1 infection of target macrophages
embedded in the collagen matrix did not occur when tissue recon-
structions devoid of epithelial cells interacted with infected CD4+
T cells (Figure 4G), indicating that the epithelial barrier is needed
asanactiveintermediatebetweenHIV-1cell-mediatedinoculation
and macrophage targeting. Such an active role of the epithelial
barrier resulted from cytokine/chemokine secretion induced by
the virological synapse formation. Hence, the interaction between
HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells and epithelium and the formation of
virological synapses increased the secretion in the reconstruction
culture medium of anti-inflammatory interleukin-13 (IL-13) in the
following 3 days p.i. (Figure 4H). Furthermore, the macrophage
chemoattractant cytokine MCP-1/CCL2 secretion was increased
upon epithelium interaction with CD4+ T cell, although regardless
of infection. Other tested cytokines, such as the anti-inflammatory
IL-4(<500pg/mL;Figure4H)butalsopro-inflammatoryones,were
also constitutively secreted by tissuereconstructions atlow levels,
not modified by viral synapses (MCP-4/CCL13, <100 pg/mL; MIP-
3a/CCL20, <40 pg/mL;MIP-1a/CCL3,<500pg/mL; and RANTES/
CCL5 and TRAIL/TNFSF10, <100 pg/mL).
DISCUSSION
We have established a urethral mucosa reconstruction model
suitable for live imaging at high-dimensional resolution and
appropriate minute-wise temporal resolution, which allowed for
the unprecedented demonstration in real time that virological
synapses are formed between HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells and
the human genital epithelium, thereby simulating in vitro HIV-1
acquisition as it occurs during sexual intercourses.
The scenario of cell-mediated targeting of mucosal macro-
phages via virological synapses, as demonstrated here using
urethral tissue reconstructions infected with R5-tropic HIV-1, is
schematized in Figure 5. It comprises the following sequential
steps: (1) contact between HIV-1-infected cells vectoring infec-
tion and the mucosal epithelial surface; (2) virological synapse
formation allowing for extemporaneous virus budding on the
epithelial cell layer; (3) HIV-1 translocation in a transcytosis-like
process across epithelium toward the mucosal stroma; and, (4)
in an anti-inflammatory microenvironment, stromal macro-
phages being infected, having integrated proviral DNA in their ge-
nomes, and producing new viral particles for 3 weeks p.i. prior to
(5) the establishment of a reversibly latent macrophage infection.
There is increasing evidence that cell-mediated HIV-1-in-
fected cells are more efficient than cell-free virus for spreading
infection to other cell targets (Alfsen et al., 2005; Bomsel,
1997; Bomsel and Alfsen, 2003; Deeks, 2011; Iwami et al.,
2015; Sigal et al., 2011), although HIV-1 likely employs both
modes of transmission. Efficient transfer following cell-mediated
infection is due to the extemporaneous generation of infectious
virus concentrated in regions of cell-to-cell contact. The virus
is shielded from host cell restriction factors and neutralizing an-
tibodies, especially those directed against the gp120 glycopro-
tein from the virus envelope (Abela et al., 2012; Kulpa et al.,
2013), thereby favoring viral transmission.
Virological synapse in the context of mucosal epithelial cells
was inferred before by functional assays regarding the efficiency
of cell-associated versus cell-free virus for HIV-1 entry into
epithelium and by microscopic observation of fixed samples
(Bomsel, 1997; Alfsen et al., 2005; Bouschbacher et al., 2008;
Collins et al., 2000; Ganor et al., 2013, 2010; Zussman et al.,
2003). We provide direct evidence of virological synapse forma-
tion at the mucosal level, retrieved from dynamic observation of
the interaction between live HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells and ure-
thral epithelium. We demonstrate the formation of clusters of
fluorescent viruses at zones of synaptic contacts, sustained for
z40 min and followed by viral transfers toward the epithelium.
Similar to viral synapses formed between T cells (H€
ubner et al.,
2009), CD4+ T cells infected with an envelope-depleted HIV-1
variant (DENV) of fluorescent virus are unable to transfer virus
to reconstructed urethral epithelium. This result highlights that
an HIV-1 envelope-dependent viral synapse with mucosal
epithelial cells occurs independently of CD4 engagement (Zhou
(G) Viral production of 72-hr tissue supernatants (chase period between 3 and 6 days p.i.) after cell-mediated infection of full or incomplete (no THUECs added)
reconstructions. Limit of p24 detection is shown by red dotted line. Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
(H) Measurement of MCP-1/CCL2, IL-13, and IL-4 cytokines constitutively secreted by tissue reconstructions or secreted upon interaction of tissues with cell-free
HIV-1 or HIV-1-infected or non-infected CD4+ T cells. Data are represented as boxplots; *p < 0.05 (ANOVA); ns, non-significant. Results are representative of n = 3
independent experiments.
Figure 5. Chain of Events of HIV-1 Transmission to Macrophages in
Genital Tissue following Virological Synapse Formation
After contacting the epithelium (1), HIV-1-infected CD4+T cells locally transfer
the virus through virological synapses (2) followed by viral transcytosis (3).
Macrophages are efficiently targeted in a microenvironment rich in macro-
phage chemoattractant cytokine MCP-1/CCL2 (induced by contact between
the epithelium and CD4+T cells) and IL-13 (secreted specifically upon viro-
logical synapse formation). In turn, macrophages display HIV-1 DNA and
produce new viral particles for weeks following infected CD4+T cell interaction
with the epithelium (4). Macrophage viral production decreases until latency,
reversed by LPS administration (5). Altogether, results demonstrate the po-
tential of mucosal stromal macrophages for establishing viral reservoirs early
after infected T cell virological synapses formed with epithelial cells.
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
1801
 et al., 2018), likely through glycosphingolipid galactosylceramide
(GalCer) expressed on the apical surface of CD4-negative epithe-
lial cells (Alfsen and Bomsel, 2002).
Viral transfers after virological synapses occur for z1 hr, and
fluorescent HIV-1 transcytoses across epithelial cells in regions
where viral synapses form. This time window of synapse be-
tween HIV-1-infected T cell and mucosal epithelia is similar to
that of viral synapses recorded between HIV-1-infected and
non-infected T cells, with a mean duration of 60 min (Martin
et al., 2010), and events of virus transfer, which last for 3 hr
(Chen et al., 2007; Jolly et al., 2004). It corresponds to the
required time for HIV-1 to efficiently translocate through urethral
and foreskin epithelia (Ganor et al., 2010, 2013) or endometrial
cells (Bomsel, 1997). Contact between infected CD4+ T cells
and mucosal epithelium established during the first hour of inter-
action is required for the subsequent efficient transport of viruses
across epithelium to the stroma. In contrast, cell-free viruses that
also contact the epithelium are inefficient in crossing mucosal
layers of cells and targeting macrophages, in agreement with
our and previous studies using different models (Alfsen and
Bomsel, 2002; Alfsen et al., 2001, 2005; Bomsel, 1997; Bomsel
et al., 1998; Bouschbacher et al., 2008; Ganor et al., 2010, 2013).
In inflammatory conditions, junctions of the epithelial barrier
can be loosened, allowing for paracellular cell-free HIV-1 trans-
port (Carreno et al., 2002). Alternatively, in pluristratified mucosa
such as the vagina, HIV-1-infected cells could penetrate the
epithelium, although a clear definition of HIV-1 entry pathway
in vivo remains to be ascertained (Bernard-Stoecklin et al.,
2014). Therefore, transcytosis is not the sole pathway for the vi-
rus to cross the epithelial barrier. We and others have shown
that, although the epithelial barrier is not disturbed by the cell-
cell contact, no direct contact between submucosal immune
cells and HIV-1-infected cells was detected and cell-associated
mucosal transcytosis is 50–100 times more efficient than that of
cell-free viruses (Alfsen et al., 2005; Anderson et al., 2010a), indi-
cating that HIV-1 transcytosis is one major pathway for cell-
mediated penetration across the mucosal epithelia.
The lack of efficient mucosal penetration of cell-free virus also
indicates that cell-cell contacts not only participate in local viral
production for efficient epithelial uptake but are also actively
implicated in later steps of viral entry, such as immunomodula-
tion of mucosal response by transducing signals to epithelial
cells, via nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) activation, driving down-
stream inflammatory signaling events as we recently reported
(Zhou et al., 2018) and ultimately the infection of tissue macro-
phages here reported.
The mucosal epithelium of urethra, like the gastrointestinal and
other mucosal tissues, directly interacts with viral and non-viral
pathogens, exerting an important and primordial barrier to pre-
vent pathogen access to underlying stromal cells and to blood
circulation (Ganor et al., 2013; Pudney and Anderson, 1995).
Epithelial cells that either contact or are infected by microbes
were shown to respond immunologically to pathogens by
engaging pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs). In turn, che-
mokines and inflammatory mediators are produced that recruit
innate and adaptive effector cells, thus orchestrating an early
response against an eventual pathogen penetration into the
epithelial barrier (Hyun et al., 2015; Nasu and Narahara, 2010;
Stanley, 2012; Zhou et al., 2018). Pathogens like HIV-1 have
evolved strategies to overcome the epithelial barrier and profit
from the immunomodulatory environment triggered by ag-
gressed epithelial cells to spread. For instance, the interaction
of T cells expressing the HIV-1 envelope with foreskin keratino-
cytes engage epithelial cell PRRs, such as Toll-like receptor-4,
promoting the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and che-
mokines known to attract HIV-1 cell targets, including macro-
phages (Zhou et al., 2018). In this context, epithelial cells
respond to HIV-1 virological synapses established with the
mucosal epithelial surface by producing chemokines sensed
by stromal immune cells, including macrophages, allowing for
their migration toward epithelial serosal membrane to capture
transcytosed virus, as we suggested (Zhou et al., 2018).
In the present model, virological synapses formed by CD4+
T cells infected with replication-competent HIV-1 with urethral
tissue reconstructions induced an increase in the secretion
of the macrophage chemoattractant pro-inflammatory cyto-
kine MCP-1/CCL2 and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-13.
MCP-1/CCL2 secretion is induced upon the interaction be-
tween CD4+ T cells and tissue reconstructions, but irrespective
of T cell infection. MCP-1/CCL2 is associated with monocyte
recruitment to sites of inflammation (Deshmane et al., 2009)
and could participate to recruit or maintain target macro-
phages in the submucosa near the basal membrane, ready
to capture HIV-1 exiting the epithelium after transcytosis.
IL-13 secretion, on the other hand, is increased specifically
upon virological synapse formation, as only HIV-1-infected
CD4+ T cells can trigger an upregulated secretion of this cyto-
kine by tissue reconstructions. In this scenario, synapse-
dependent IL-13 and MCP-1/CCL2 increased secretion after
virological synapse formation promote an anti-inflammatory
microenvironment
that
favors
chemoattraction
of
macro-
phages to synaptic regions and/or polarizes macrophages to-
ward immunological profiles susceptible for long-lasting viral
reservoir formation (Cassol et al., 2009; Saı
¨di et al., 2010)
(unpublished data).
After epithelial transcytosis and release in the stroma, HIV-1
can gain access to macrophages and, in turn, subvert these cells
in stable viral reservoirs by promoting integration of viral genome
(Cassol et al., 2009), low-level viral replication for days, as
demonstrated in vitro (Swingler et al., 2007) and in vivo using
the SIV model (Ribeiro Dos Santos et al., 2011), and latent infec-
tion (Cassol et al., 2009; Coiras et al., 2009) (unpublished data).
Tissular macrophages display proviral DNA early after 3 days
of cell-mediated infection of tissue reconstructions, and we
observed a similar self-limiting dynamic of viral production com-
ing from tissue reconstructions throughout the days after cell-
mediated
infection,
proportional
to
the
number
of
macrophages employed to reconstruct tissues. The latency of
macrophage infection, i.e., the reversibly nonproductive state
of infection (Eisele and Siliciano, 2012) in the weeks following
T cell virological synapses formed with epithelial cells, was
demonstrated by restoring viral production of infected macro-
phages, located mainly in the stroma 13 days p.i., by LPS
treatment, which is known to reactivate once silent HIV-1 LTR
promoters in a TLR4-mediated process (Liou et al., 2002; Pom-
erantz et al., 1990).
1802
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
 By simulating the interaction with HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells
with genital mucosal epithelium using tissues reconstructed
in vitro, the results altogether demonstrate that the establish-
ment of HIV-1 latent infection in mucosal macrophages in the
stroma occurs after virological synapses formed first with the
epithelial cell barrier. How HIV-1, produced locally at the virolog-
ical synapse, gets selective access to immune cell targets in the
urethra and other genital mucosa and which mechanisms drive
the selectivity of the targeting to macrophages are topics
currently under investigation.
Overall, the present study addresses basic physiopathology
questions on the early mechanism of HIV-1 penetration in male
genital mucosa at the cell-biology level. We have demonstrated
that virological synapses are formed between an HIV-1-infected
donor immune cell and a target epithelial cell in male urethral mu-
cosa, potentially revealing additional aspects of HIV-1 transmis-
sion that may contribute to the design of better-targeted antiviral
strategies.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Ethics Statement
Foreskin primary fibroblasts and peripheral blood mononuclear cells, obtained
from healthy volunteers and supplied, respectively, by the Urology Service at
the Cochin Hospital, Paris, France, and the local Blood Center (E
´ tablissement
Franc
¸ ais du Sang), were employed in this study according to local ethical regu-
lation, and methods were approved by a local ethical committee (Comite
´ de
Protection des Personnes, CPP, ^
Ile de France XI, approval 11,016).
Primary Cells
Primary fibroblasts were obtained from the foreskin of healthy adults undergo-
ing circumcision as described (Ganor et al., 2010). Primary CD4+ T cells were
obtained and activated as described (Tudor et al., 2012). Primary macro-
phages were obtained from monocyte-enriched peripheral blood mononu-
clear cells (PBMCs), isolated from healthy blood donors and cultivated for
6 days with 25 ng/mL macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF, R&D
Systems) and 50 ng/mL granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF, R&D Systems).
Infection of Inverted Tissue Reconstructions for Live Imaging
Urethral reconstructions interacting with HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells express-
ing fluorescent HIV-1 were observed with a confocal unit coupled to a heating
chamber (ibidi) and located in a BSL3 facility. Tissues reconstructed in the in-
verted fashion were brought to objective lens working distances with the aid of
an adaptor for imaging membrane filters (Delta T Artificial Membrane Adaptor,
Bioptechs), as reported by others (Ott and Lippincott-Schwartz, 2012; Waka-
bayashi et al., 2007) and shown in Figure 2B. Delta T was previously adjusted
to allow for high-magnification imaging of tissue with minimum contact of the
epithelium and the microscopy dish. The nucleic acid cell-permeant probe
Hoechst 33258 (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to tissue reconstructions used
for live imaging, at a concentration of 25 mg/mL in reconstruction medium
for 1 hr in a 37�C 5%-CO2 environment.
A small volume of RPMI medium with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) contain-
ing infected CD4+ T cells (50 mL) was placed between the epithelium held by
the Delta T adaptor and the microscopy dish (mDish 35 mm, ibidi) coupled to
the adaptor. The thin coverglass in the bottom of these chambers (0.13–
0.16 mm) allowed for 100 3 1.4-numerical aperture (NA) oil-immersion objec-
tive lens to reach the epithelium cell layer of the tissue cultivated on the filter
underside. Other lower-magnification objectives (63 3 1.4 NA and 40 3 1.3
NA oil-immersion objectives) were also employed for image acquisition to
include more than one infected cell per field, at the expense of spatial
resolution.
Live imaging generates three-dimensional reconstructions from confocal
optical sections, obtained from live samples at defined time intervals (3D plus
time), allowing for spatial and temporal acquisition and statistical analysis of
dynamic events, such as viral synapses and HIV-1 translocation in the z direc-
tion. At the microscope, the live imaging of reconstructed tissue was performed
during up to 2 hr of HIV-1-infected CD4+ T cells and urethral epithelium interac-
tion, aiming to track fluorescent HIV-1 clustered at regions of contact between
these cells. With the technique, we tracked live fluorescent and infectious virus
in time and in x, y, and z spatial coordinates. Images were acquired by Meta-
morph 7.7.5 software (Molecular Devices), using low-laser input (3% and 8%
of laser potency for laser lines 405 and 491, respectively) and no image binning.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software. The statistical tests
were employed based on normal and non-normal distributions and equal
and non-equal variances.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
two figures, and eight videos and can be found with this article online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.04.028.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Agence nationale de recherches sur le sida et
les he
´ patites virales (ANRS) fund (ANRS-2014AO21038) to M.B. F.R. and
A. Sennepin were supported by fellowships from SIDACTION and ANRS. We
would like to thank the staff of Institut Cochin IMAGI’C and CYBIO facilities and
Dr. Benjamin Cheng (Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY)
for providing the gag-iGFP HIV-1 plasmids employed in this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
F.R. and M.B. conceived and analyzed the experiments. F.R. conducted the
experiments and performed statistical analyses. Y.G., A. Sennepin, and F.R.
established the in vitro reconstruction of urethral tissues. A. Schmitt, M.B.,
and F.R. performed electron microscopy observation and analysis. F.R. and
M.B. wrote the manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: October 6, 2017
Revised: February 20, 2018
Accepted: April 4, 2018
Published: May 8, 2018
REFERENCES
Abela, I.A., Berlinger, L., Schanz, M., Reynell, L., G€
unthard, H.F., Rusert, P.,
and Trkola, A. (2012). Cell-cell transmission enables HIV-1 to evade inhibition
by potent CD4bs directed antibodies. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002634.
Alfsen, A., and Bomsel, M. (2002). HIV-1 gp41 envelope residues 650-685
exposed on native virus act as a lectin to bind epithelial cell galactosyl cer-
amide. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 25649–25659.
Alfsen, A., Iniguez, P., Bouguyon, E., and Bomsel, M. (2001). Secretory IgA
specific for a conserved epitope on gp41 envelope glycoprotein inhibits
epithelial transcytosis of HIV-1. J. Immunol. 166, 6257–6265.
Alfsen, A., Yu, H., Mage
´ rus-Chatinet, A., Schmitt, A., and Bomsel, M. (2005).
HIV-1-infected blood mononuclear cells form an integrin- and agrin-depen-
dent viral synapse to induce efficient HIV-1 transcytosis across epithelial cell
monolayer. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 4267–4279.
Altschuler, Y., Liu, S., Katz, L., Tang, K., Hardy, S., Brodsky, F., Apodaca, G.,
and Mostov, K. (1999). ADP-ribosylation factor 6 and endocytosis at the apical
surface of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. J. Cell Biol. 147, 7–12.
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
1803
 Anderson, D.J. (2014). Modeling mucosal cell-associated HIV type 1 transmis-
sion in vitro. J. Infect. Dis. 210 (Suppl 3), S648–S653.
Anderson, D.J., Politch, J.A., Nadolski, A.M., Blaskewicz, C.D., Pudney, J.,
and Mayer, K.H. (2010a). Targeting Trojan Horse leukocytes for HIV preven-
tion. AIDS 24, 163–187.
Anderson, D.J., Pudney, J., and Schust, D.J. (2010b). Caveats associated
with the use of human cervical tissue for HIV and microbicide research.
AIDS 24, 1–4.
Auvert, B., Taljaard, D., Lagarde, E., Sobngwi-Tambekou, J., Sitta, R., and
Puren, A. (2005). Randomized, controlled intervention trial of male circumci-
sion for reduction of HIV infection risk: the ANRS 1265 Trial. PLoS Med. 2,
e298.
Bernard-Stoecklin, S., Gommet, C., Cavarelli, M., and Le Grand, R. (2014).
Nonhuman primate models for cell-associated simian immunodeficiency virus
transmission: the need to better understand the complexity of HIV mucosal
transmission. J. Infect. Dis. 210 (Suppl 3), S660–S666.
Bomsel, M. (1997). Transcytosis of infectious human immunodeficiency virus
across a tight human epithelial cell line barrier. Nat. Med. 3, 42–47.
Bomsel, M., and Alfsen, A. (2003). Entry of viruses through the epithelial barrier:
pathogenic trickery. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 4, 57–68.
Bomsel, M., Heyman, M., Hocini, H., Lagaye, S., Belec, L., Dupont, C., and
Desgranges, C. (1998). Intracellular neutralization of HIV transcytosis across
tight epithelial barriers by anti-HIV envelope protein dIgA or IgM. Immunity 9,
277–287.
Bouschbacher, M., Bomsel, M., Verrone
` se, E., Gofflo, S., Ganor, Y., Dezutter-
Dambuyant, C., and Valladeau, J. (2008). Early events in HIV transmission
through a human reconstructed vaginal mucosa. AIDS 22, 1257–1266.
Carreno, M.P., Krieff, C., Irinopoulou, T., Kazatchkine, M.D., and Belec, L.
(2002). Enhanced transcytosis of R5-tropic human immunodeficiency virus
across tight monolayer of polarized human endometrial cells under pro-inflam-
matory conditions. Cytokine 20, 289–294.
Carter, C.A., and Ehrlich, L.S. (2008). Cell biology of HIV-1 infection of macro-
phages. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 62, 425–443.
Cassol, E., Cassetta, L., Rizzi, C., Alfano, M., and Poli, G. (2009). M1 and M2a
polarization of human monocyte-derived macrophages inhibits HIV-1 replica-
tion by distinct mechanisms. J. Immunol. 182, 6237–6246.
Chen, P., H€
ubner, W., Spinelli, M.A., and Chen, B.K. (2007). Predominant
mode of human immunodeficiency virus transfer between T cells is mediated
by sustained Env-dependent neutralization-resistant virological synapses.
J. Virol. 81, 12582–12595.
Coiras, M., Lo
´ pez-Huertas, M.R., Pe
´ rez-Olmeda, M., and Alcamı
´, J. (2009).
Understanding HIV-1 latency provides clues for the eradication of long-term
reservoirs. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7, 798–812.
Collins, K.B., Patterson, B.K., Naus, G.J., Landers, D.V., and Gupta, P. (2000).
Development of an in vitro organ culture model to study transmission of HIV-1
in the female genital tract. Nat. Med. 6, 475–479.
Deeks, S.G. (2011). HIV: How to escape treatment. Nature 477, 36–37.
Deleage, C., Wietgrefe, S.W., Del Prete, G., Morcock, D.R., Hao, X.P., Piatak,
M., Jr., Bess, J., Anderson, J.L., Perkey, K.E., Reilly, C., et al. (2016). Defining
HIV and SIV Reservoirs in Lymphoid Tissues. Pathog. Immun. 1, 68–106.
Deshmane, S.L., Kremlev, S., Amini, S., and Sawaya, B.E. (2009). Monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1): an overview. J. Interferon Cytokine Res.
29, 313–326.
Eisele, E., and Siliciano, R.F. (2012). Redefining the viral reservoirs that prevent
HIV-1 eradication. Immunity 37, 377–388.
Ganor, Y., and Bomsel, M. (2011). HIV-1 transmission in the male genital tract.
Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 65, 284–291.
Ganor, Y., Zhou, Z., Tudor, D., Schmitt, A., Vacher-Lavenu, M.C., Gibault, L.,
Thiounn, N., Tomasini, J., Wolf, J.P., and Bomsel, M. (2010). Within 1 h, HIV-1
uses viral synapses to enter efficiently the inner, but not outer, foreskin mucosa
and engages Langerhans-T cell conjugates. Mucosal Immunol. 3, 506–522.
Ganor, Y., Zhou, Z., Bodo, J., Tudor, D., Leibowitch, J., Mathez, D., Schmitt,
A., Vacher-Lavenu, M.C., Revol, M., and Bomsel, M. (2013). The adult penile
urethra is a novel entry site for HIV-1 that preferentially targets resident urethral
macrophages. Mucosal Immunol. 6, 776–786.
Gousset, K., Ablan, S.D., Coren, L.V., Ono, A., Soheilian, F., Nagashima, K.,
Ott, D.E., and Freed, E.O. (2008). Real-time visualization of HIV-1 GAG traf-
ficking in infected macrophages. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000015.
Hladik, F., and McElrath, M.J. (2008). Setting the stage: host invasion by HIV.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 447–457.
Honeycutt, J.B., Thayer, W.O., Baker, C.E., Ribeiro, R.M., Lada, S.M., Cao, Y.,
Cleary, R.A., Hudgens, M.G., Richman, D.D., and Garcia, J.V. (2017). HIV
persistence in tissue macrophages of humanized myeloid-only mice during
antiretroviral therapy. Nat. Med. 23, 638–643.
H€
ubner, W., McNerney, G.P., Chen, P., Dale, B.M., Gordon, R.E., Chuang,
F.Y., Li, X.D., Asmuth, D.M., Huser, T., and Chen, B.K. (2009). Quantitative
3D video microscopy of HIV transfer across T cell virological synapses. Sci-
ence 323, 1743–1747.
Hyun, J., Romero, L., Riveron, R., Flores, C., Kanagavelu, S., Chung, K.D.,
Alonso, A., Sotolongo, J., Ruiz, J., Manukyan, A., et al. (2015). Human intestinal
epithelial cells express interleukin-10 through Toll-like receptor 4-mediated
epithelial-macrophage crosstalk. J. Innate Immun. 7, 87–101.
Iwami, S., Takeuchi, J.S., Nakaoka, S., Mammano, F., Clavel, F., Inaba, H.,
Kobayashi, T., Misawa, N., Aihara, K., Koyanagi, Y., and Sato, K. (2015).
Cell-to-cell infection by HIV contributes over half of virus infection. eLife 4,
e08150.
Jolly, C., Kashefi, K., Hollinshead, M., and Sattentau, Q.J. (2004). HIV-1 cell to
cell transfer across an Env-induced, actin-dependent synapse. J. Exp. Med.
199, 283–293.
Keele, B.F., Giorgi, E.E., Salazar-Gonzalez, J.F., Decker, J.M., Pham, K.T.,
Salazar, M.G., Sun, C., Grayson, T., Wang, S., Li, H., et al. (2008). Identification
and characterization of transmitted and early founder virus envelopes in pri-
mary HIV-1 infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 7552–7557.
Kulpa, D.A., Brehm, J.H., Fromentin, R., Cooper, A., Cooper, C., Ahlers, J.,
Chomont, N., and Se
´ kaly, R.P. (2013). The immunological synapse: the
gateway to the HIV reservoir. Immunol. Rev. 254, 305–325.
Liou, L.Y., Herrmann, C.H., and Rice, A.P. (2002). Transient induction of cyclin
T1 during human macrophage differentiation regulates human immunodefi-
ciency virus type 1 Tat transactivation function. J. Virol. 76, 10579–10587.
Ma, Z.M., Dutra, J., Fritts, L., and Miller, C.J. (2016). Lymphatic Dissemination
of Simian Immunodeficiency Virus after Penile Inoculation. J. Virol. 90, 4093–
4104.
Margolis, L., and Shattock, R. (2006). Selective transmission of CCR5-utilizing
HIV-1: the ‘gatekeeper’ problem resolved? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4, 312–317.
Martin, N., Welsch, S., Jolly, C., Briggs, J.A., Vaux, D., and Sattentau, Q.J.
(2010). Virological synapse-mediated spread of human immunodeficiency vi-
rus type 1 between T cells is sensitive to entry inhibition. J. Virol. 84, 3516–
3527.
Miller, C.J., Alexander, N.J., Sutjipto, S., Lackner, A.A., Gettie, A., Hendrickx,
A.G., Lowenstine, L.J., Jennings, M., and Marx, P.A. (1989). Genital mucosal
transmission of simian immunodeficiency virus: animal model for heterosexual
transmission of human immunodeficiency virus. J. Virol. 63, 4277–4284.
Nasu, K., and Narahara, H. (2010). Pattern recognition via the toll-like receptor
system in the human female genital tract. Mediators Inflamm. 2010, 976024.
Ott, C., and Lippincott-Schwartz, J. (2012). Visualization of live primary cilia
dynamics using fluorescence microscopy. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. Chapter 4,
Unit 4.26.
Politch, J.A., Marathe, J., and Anderson, D.J. (2014). Characteristics and
quantities of HIV host cells in human genital tract secretions. J. Infect. Dis.
210 (Suppl 3), S609–S615.
Pomerantz, R.J., Feinberg, M.B., Trono, D., and Baltimore, D. (1990). Lipopoly-
saccharide is a potent monocyte/macrophage-specific stimulator of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 expression. J. Exp. Med. 172, 253–261.
1804
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
 Pudney, J., and Anderson, D.J. (1995). Immunobiology of the human penile
urethra. Am. J. Pathol. 147, 155–165.
Ribeiro Dos Santos, P., Rancez, M., Pre
´ tet, J.L., Michel-Salzat, A., Messent,
V., Bogdanova, A., Coue
¨ del-Courteille, A., Souil, E., Cheynier, R., and Butor,
C. (2011). Rapid dissemination of SIV follows multisite entry after rectal inocu-
lation. PLoS ONE 6, e19493.
Rodrigues, V., Ruffin, N., San-Roman, M., and Benaroch, P. (2017). Myeloid
Cell Interaction with HIV: A Complex Relationship. Front. Immunol. 8, 1698.
Rudnicka, D., Feldmann, J., Porrot, F., Wietgrefe, S., Guadagnini, S., Pre
´ vost,
M.C., Estaquier, J., Haase, A.T., Sol-Foulon, N., and Schwartz, O. (2009).
Simultaneous cell-to-cell transmission of human immunodeficiency virus to
multiple targets through polysynapses. J. Virol. 83, 6234–6246.
Saı
¨di, H., Carbonneil, C., Magri, G., Eslahpazir, J., Sekaly, R.P., and Be
´ lec, L.
(2010). Differential modulation of CCR5-tropic human immunodeficiency
virus-1 transfer from macrophages towards T cells under interleukin-4/inter-
leukin-13 microenvironment. Hum. Immunol. 71, 1–13.
Shen, R., Richter, H.E., Clements, R.H., Novak, L., Huff, K., Bimczok, D., San-
karan-Walters, S., Dandekar, S., Clapham, P.R., Smythies, L.E., and Smith,
P.D. (2009). Macrophages in vaginal but not intestinal mucosa are mono-
cyte-like and permissive to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection.
J. Virol. 83, 3258–3267.
Sigal, A., Kim, J.T., Balazs, A.B., Dekel, E., Mayo, A., Milo, R., and Baltimore, D.
(2011). Cell-to-cell spread of HIV permits ongoing replication despite antiretro-
viral therapy. Nature 477, 95–98.
Stanley, M.A. (2012). Epithelial cell responses to infection with human papillo-
mavirus. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 25, 215–222.
Stevenson, M. (2015). Role of myeloid cells in HIV-1-host interplay.
J. Neurovirol. 21, 242–248.
Swingler, S., Mann, A.M., Zhou, J., Swingler, C., and Stevenson, M. (2007).
Apoptotic killing of HIV-1-infected macrophages is subverted by the viral en-
velope glycoprotein. PLoS Pathog. 3, 1281–1290.
Tudor, D., Yu, H., Maupetit, J., Drillet, A.S., Bouceba, T., Schwartz-Cornil, I.,
Lopalco, L., Tuffery, P., and Bomsel, M. (2012). Isotype modulates epitope
specificity, affinity, and antiviral activities of anti-HIV-1 human broadly neutral-
izing 2F5 antibody. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 12680–12685.
Wakabayashi, Y., Chua, J., Larkin, J.M., Lippincott-Schwartz, J., and Arias,
I.M. (2007). Four-dimensional imaging of filter-grown polarized epithelial cells.
Histochem. Cell Biol. 127, 463–472.
Wang, L., Eng, E.T., Law, K., Gordon, R.E., Rice, W.J., and Chen, B.K. (2017).
Visualization of HIV T cell virological synapses and virus-containing compart-
ments by three-dimensional correlative light and electron microscopy. J. Virol.
91, e01605-16.
Zhou, Z., Xu, L., Sennepin, A., Federici, C., Ganor, Y., Tudor, D., Damotte, D.,
Barry Delongchamps, N., Zerbib, M., and Bomsel, M. (2018). The HIV-1 viral
synapse signals human foreskin keratinocytes to secrete thymic stromal lym-
phopoietin facilitating HIV-1 foreskin entry. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 158–171.
Zussman, A., Lara, L., Lara, H.H., Bentwich, Z., and Borkow, G. (2003). Block-
ing of cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 transmission through human cervix
organ culture with UC781. AIDS 17, 653–661.
Cell Reports 23, 1794–1805, May 8, 2018
1805
