 Accepted Manuscript
Post-FDA Approval, Initial US Clinical Experience with Watchman Left Atrial
Appendage Closure for Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation
Vivek Y. Reddy, MD, Douglas N. Gibson, MD, Saibal Kar, William O’Neill, MD,
Shephal K. Doshi, MD, Rodney P. Horton, MD, Maurice Buchbinder, MD, Nicole T.
Gordon, BSEE, David R. Holmes, MD
PII:
S0735-1097(16)36641-4
DOI:
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.010
Reference:
JAC 23106
To appear in:
Journal of the American College of Cardiology
Received Date: 5 October 2016
Revised Date:
13 October 2016
Accepted Date: 13 October 2016
Please cite this article as: Reddy VY, Gibson DN, Kar S, O’Neill W, Doshi SK, Horton RP, Buchbinder
M, Gordon NT, Holmes DR, Post-FDA Approval, Initial US Clinical Experience with Watchman Left
Atrial Appendage Closure for Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation, Journal of the American College of
Cardiology (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.010.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
Post-FDA Approval, Initial US Clinical Experience with Watchman Left Atrial Appendage 
Closure for Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation 
 
Running Title: Safety of Watchman Implantation in 3,822 Patients 
 
Vivek Y. Reddy MD1*, Douglas N. Gibson MD2, Saibal Kar3, William O’Neill MD4, Shephal K. 
Doshi MD5, Rodney P. Horton MD6, Maurice Buchbinder MD7, Nicole T. Gordon BSEE8, 
David R. Holmes MD9* 
*Both authors contributed equally to the development of this manuscript 
 
1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; 2Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA; 
3Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA; 4Center for Structural Heart Disease, Henry 
Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI; 5St. John’s Health Center, Santa Monica, CA; 6Texas Cardiac 
Arrhythmia Institute, Austin, TX; 7Foundation for Cardiovascular Medicine, La Jolla, CA; 
8Boston Scientific Corporation, St. Paul, MN; 9Department of Cardiology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 
 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
Dr. Reddy has received research grant support from and has been a consultant for Boston 
Scientific, Coherex, Sentreheart and St Jude Medical.; Dr. Gibson has received speaker and 
proctoring fees from SentreHeart and Boston Scientific. Dr. Kar has received research grants 
from Boston Scientific, St. Jude Medical, and Abbott Vascular; is a member of the advisory 
board for left atrial appendage closure; is the national principal investigator of the Continuous 
Access Registries (CAP and CAP2) has served as a proctor for Boston Scientific.; William 
O’Neill, MD: no disclosures; Dr. Doshi has received research grants and consultant fees from 
Boston Scientific, St. Jude Medical, Coherex, and SentreHeart; and is the national principal 
Investigator of the Continuous Access Registry (CAP2).; Dr. Horton has received consulting 
fees from Boston Scientific.; Dr. Buchbinder has received research grant support from and has 
been a consultant for Boston Scientific.; Nicole T. Gordon, BSEE:  Employee of Boston 
Scientific.; David R. Holmes, MD:  Both Mayo Clinic and Dr. Holmes have a financial interest in 
technology related to this research.  That technology has been licensed to Boston Scientific. 
 
Word Count: 4,288 
 
Address for correspondence:  
Vivek Y. Reddy, M.D. 
Helmsley Electrophysiology Center 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1030 
New York, NY 10029, U.S.A. 
Phone: 1-212-241-7114 
Fax: 1-646-537-9691 
E-mail: vivek.reddy@mountsinai.org  
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
ABSTRACT 
BACKGROUND:  Left atrial appendage closure (LAAC) using the Watchman device was 
FDA-approved as a stroke prevention alternative to warfarin for patients with non-valvular atrial 
fibrillation.  However, clinical decision-making is confounded by the fact that while LAAC 
avoids the anticoagulant-related lifetime risk of bleeding, implantation is associated with up-
front complications.  Thus, enthusiasm for LAAC as a treatment option has been appropriately 
tempered, particularly as the therapy is introduced beyond the clinical trial sites into general 
clinical practice. 
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the acute procedural performance and complication rates for all 
Watchman cases performed in the US since FDA approval.  
METHODS: In the absence of a formal national clinical registry since regulatory approval in 
March 2015, we obtained procedural data on Watchman implantation procedures.  Briefly, every 
LAAC procedure requires the presence of a manufacturer clinical specialist, and procedural 
parameter and peri-procedural complication data are collected using a standardized process and 
forms. 
RESULTS: In 3,822 consecutive cases, implantation was successful in 3,653 (95.6%) with a 
median procedure time of 50 min (range 10, 210); implanting physicians performing these 
procedures (n=382) included 71% new, non-clinical trial implanters, performing 50% of the 
procedures.  Procedural complication rates included: 39 pericardial tamponades (1.02%; 24 
treated percutaneously, 12 surgically and 3 fatal), three procedure-related strokes (0.078%), 9 
device embolizations (0.24%; 6 requiring surgical removal), and 3 procedure-related deaths 
(0.078%). 
CONCLUSIONS:  Despite a large fraction of previously-inexperienced operators, in the real-
world post-FDA approval experience of Watchman LAAC, procedural success was high and 
complication rates low. 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
AF:  atrial fibrillation  
CMS:  Center for Medicare Services 
LAAC:  left atrial appendage closure 
TEE:  transesophageal echocardiography 
  
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In March 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved left atrial 
appendage occlusion (LAAC) with the Watchman device to reduce the risk of stroke in patients 
with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (AF).1  Approval was based primarily on two pivotal 
randomized clinical trials of device versus warfarin anticoagulation, PROTECT-AF and 
PREVAIL.2-5  Together, those trials demonstrated that the device was non-inferior to warfarin 
for the primary composite endpoint of stroke, systemic embolism or cardiovascular death.  
Furthermore, device implantation was associated with an ~80% reduction in hemorrhagic 
strokes, and a greater than 50% reduction in cardiovascular death.2-6   
In February 2016, the U.S. Center for Medicare Services (CMS) finalized its coverage 
decision, requiring all patients undergoing LAAC to be included into a prospective national 
registry.7  However, the first such LAAC registry was only certified in August 2016; 
accordingly, the vast majority of LAAC procedures performed since FDA approval have not 
been included into any national registry.8  This is important since it would be expected that the 
highest complication rate with a novel technology/technique such as LAAC would occur at its 
initial introduction into clinical practice.   
Despite the absence of a prospective registry from the time of FDA approval, we were 
nonetheless able to collect procedural data on all LAAC procedures since approval.  Briefly, the 
manufacturer required a clinical specialist be present at all cases, and procedure parameters and 
major complications be collected and reported using a standardized process and forms.  Herein, 
we report the comprehensive procedural outcomes and acute procedure-related complication data 
for consecutive LAAC cases since FDA approval. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
METHODS 
The Watchman Left Atrial Appendage Closure Device:  The Watchman device (Boston 
Scientific, Inc; Natick, Massachusetts) has been previously described.9  Briefly, it is a self -
expanding nickel titanium structure available in 5 sizes to accommodate a variety of LAA 
dimensions.  The left atrial surface is covered by a permeable polyester fabric and affixed to the 
LAA ostium by anchors to minimize the possibility of embolization.  Implantation is performed 
via a trans-septal approach using pre-shaped guiding sheaths.  Peri-procedural medical therapy 
recommended by the FDA Instructions for Use (IFU) includes heparin during implantation, then 
aspirin 81 mg and warfarin for 45 days post-procedure at which time a transesophageal echo 
(TEE) is performed.  Assuming residual peri-device flow ≤ 5 mm, warfarin is discontinued and 
the patient is treated with aspirin and clopidogrel 75 mg daily until 6 months, at which time 
clopidogrel is discontinued.  Following this, patients are advised to continue aspirin indefinitely.  
Watchman Implantation:  LAAC procedures to-date have been performed by either 
interventional cardiologists or electrophysiologists or both.  Based on the education plan 
formulated jointly by the FDA and the manufacturer, all new implanting physicians fulfilled pre-
specified conditions including the knowledge base of stroke prevention in non-valvular AF, 
information about therapeutic alternatives, results of the Watchman trials and registries, prior 
transeptal puncture experience, Watchman implantation case review, simulator training, and 
attendance at a physician training event.  Manufacturer recommendations for patient selection, 
pre-procedural testing and adjunctive peri-implant and initial post-implant medication were 
provided to each implanting physician and discussed prior to each implant.  Implants were 
typically performed with guidance by multiplanar and/or 3D TEE imaging as well as 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
angiography to determine LAA dimensions and anatomy, exclude the presence of thrombus, 
assess adequacy and stability of implantation and ascertain any complications. 
Data Acquisition and Analysis:  In the previously reported PROTECT AF and 
PREVAIL randomized trials and the two companion registries, CAP and CAP2, the Watchman 
specific mandated protocols for patient selection, procedural performance and follow up have 
been reported.2-6  Standardized definitions were used as previously reported and these  protocols 
were followed in this current dataset.  During procedures, all implants were mandated to be 
performed with a trained Watchman Clinical Specialist in attendance; and this Boston Scientific-
employed individual was required to document the device characteristics, procedural 
performance and release criteria measurements on a standardized form in an online database.  
Implant success was defined as confirmation of the device specified release criteria and 
successful device release.  If the initial placement criteria were not met, the device could be 
partially recaptured into the access sheath and repositioned unless the initial device was deployed 
too proximal relative to the appendage ostium, in which case full recapture was required and a 
new device used.  An adequate seal was defined as a residual leak ≤ 5 mm observed by TEE.  
Major procedural complications were reported through the manufacturer’s complaint handling 
system, and de-identified patient data was part of the required regulatory MDR filling submitted 
to the FDA.  There was information on major complications: pericardial effusion, need for urgent 
cardiac surgery, stroke, and device embolization within 24 hours of implantation.  While there 
was no core laboratory, events were reviewed by the sponsor’s Medical Safety Group which 
included the manufacturer medical officer, as well as independently further reviewed by two of 
the authors: an electrophysiologist (V.R.) and an interventional cardiologist (D.H.).  Events were 
defined as procedure-related if happening during or within 7 days of the procedure, and 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
concurrence by reviewers that the event was likely related to the device/procedure.  If 
insufficient information, the conservative position (assuming procedure-related) was taken. 
 For this analysis, specific metrics of the procedure were compared with the results 
obtained in the prior FDA clinical trials (PROTECT AF, PREVAIL, CAP and CAP2) as well as 
a recent European registry (EWOLUTION).2-6,10,11  Because our present dataset did not include 
patient demographics or follow up outcomes data as part of a prospective clinical registry, 
specific IRB approvals were not required outside of the center-mandated informed consent.   
RESULTS 
Procedural Performance:  Between March 2015 and May 2016, 3,822 consecutive 
patients underwent device implantation by 382 operating physicians at 169 US centers.  The 
operators included both those who had previously performed LAAC procedures as part of 
clinical trials (29%), as well as "naive" operators" (71%) who had not previously performed any 
Watchman procedures prior to FDA approval (Figure 1).  This physician group performed 50% 
of all the procedures in this 3,822 patient cohort.   
As shown in Table 1, the procedure was successfully performed in 3,653 of 3,822 
patients (95.6%).  The median procedure time was 50 minutes (range 10 to 210 minutes). The 
average number of devices used per case was 1.38 (range 1 to 6).  During the procedure, a partial 
recapture on the final device was required in 23% of the cases.  In this subset of patients 
requiring recapture, the average number of recaptures per procedure was 1.49.  The Watchman 
device sizes used during the procedures were as follows: 21mm device in 10.2%, 24mm device 
in 25.5%, 27mm device in 32.7%, 30mm device in 19.1%, and 33mm device in 12.5%.  The 
average LAA ostial sizes (in millimeters) and final device compressions for the various 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
implanted devices were: 21mm device – 17.0, 19%, 24mm device – 19.3, 20%, 27mm device – 
21.2, 21%, 30mm device – 23.3, 22%, and 33mm device – 25.5, 23%, respectively.  Of note, the 
average device compression in this cohort, 21%, was slightly higher than recommended by the 
manufacturer IFU (10-20%). 
Procedure-Related Complications:  Agreement during event categorization was 100% 
among both adjudicating authors and the manufacturer medical officer.  As shown in Table 1, 
the most prevalent complication was pericardial effusion requiring intervention in 39 patients 
(1.02%).  In two-thirds of these instances (n=24), the effusions were successfully drained 
percutaneously, while the remaining (n=12) required surgery; three patients did not survive (see 
below).  An additional 11 patients (0.29%) developed pericardial effusions not requiring 
intervention, but instead only conservative management.   
There were 3 strokes (0.08%) and 3 deaths (0.08%) attributed to the procedure.  Two of 
the strokes presented with symptoms consistent with ischemic stroke (unable to use arm, and 
right-sided weakness).  The other stroke presented the day after the procedure, and a head CT 
scan revealed a hemorrhagic bleed.  All 3 deaths were secondary to pericardial effusions related 
to LAA perforation by the Watchman device.  One patient expired during pericardiocentesis 
before surgery could be performed, one during surgery, and the last patient underwent surgical 
repair, but expired 2 days later.  In addition, there was one patient that died within 7 days of the 
procedure from a pulmonary embolism unrelated to the device.  There were 9 (0.24%) instances 
of device embolization (Table 2); two-thirds (n=6) of these required surgical removal, while the 
remaining third (n=3) were removed percutaneously.  All but one of the device embolizations 
were identified either during the procedure (n=5) or while the patient was recovering in the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
hospital (n=3).  The last embolization was discovered during the routine 45-day TEE; this device 
was percutaneously removed within 24 hours. 
DISCUSSION 
This initial post-FDA approval US clinical experience with LAAC using the Watchman 
device in 3,822 consecutive patients implanted by 382 physicians revealed that:  1) procedural 
success was excellent at ~95%, with an acceptable average procedure duration of ~50 minutes, 
2) approximately half the procedures were performed by operators without prior Watchman 
implant experience, and 3) complication rates were favorable with pericardial tamponade, 
procedure-related stroke, and mortality rates of only ~1%, 0.08%, and 0.08%, respectively.    
In non-valvular AF, both the LAAC randomized controlled trials, PROTECT AF and 
PREVAIL, and their accompanying registries, CAP and CAP2, which together included nearly 
2000 patients receiving the Watchman device (Table 3), have been concordant in demonstrating 
non-inferiority of Watchman to warfarin for stroke or systemic embolism, and superiority in 
reducing hemorrhagic stroke, cardiovascular mortality and non-procedure related bleeding.2-6,10,12  
In addition, the Watchman device has been found to result in improved quality of life.13  Finally, 
in a detailed cost-effectiveness analysis which incorporated the economic impact of strokes as a 
function of their resulting level of disability, LAAC demonstrated dominance over both warfarin 
and the class of non-warfarin oral anticoagulants.14,15  Accordingly, LAAC with the Watchman 
device has become an important stroke prevention therapeutic alternative, particularly for 
patients who are poor candidates for long-term oral anticoagulation.16 
The Watchman efficacy data is compelling, but it is important to recognize that 
significant procedural complications have been reported.10  In PROTECT AF, while there was no 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
procedure-related mortality, there was a relatively high rate of other complications: cardiac 
tamponade in 4.3%, procedure-related stroke in 1.15%, and device embolization in 0.6% (Table 
4).2,5,10  Overall, complication rates improved over the course of the subsequent FDA Watchman 
trials, particularly the high rate of pericardial tamponade and procedure-related stroke (Table 
4).10  Of course, this improvement occurred in the context of the strictly controlled environment 
of FDA clinical trials.  On the other hand, there has been some experience of “real world” use of 
LAAC outside the United States.   
In the recently published prospective EWOLUTION registry, 1021 consecutive patients 
underwent Watchman implantation in 47 centers in Europe, the Middle East and Russia.11  The 
patient cohort had a high risk for stroke (CHA2DS2-VASc = 4.5±1.6) and at moderate to high 
bleeding risk (HAS-BLED score = 2.3±1.2), and the documented procedural success of device 
implantation was 98.5%.  Complication rates were favorable: cardiac tamponade occurred in 
0.29%, procedure-related stroke in 0.078%, device embolization in 0.24%, and procedure-related 
mortality rate in 0.078 (Tables 3 & 4).11  Indeed, other LAAC devices have also been evaluated 
in registries outside the United States, although no randomized trials have been completed.  
Studying the most common other LAAC device, the retrospective Amplatzer cardiac plug 
registry included 1,047 patients from 22 European centers.17  Similar to EWOLUTION, this 
registry investigated Amplatzer device safety, feasibility and efficacy in a real world AF patient 
population.  The cohort again had a high risk for stroke (CHA2DS2-VASc = 4.5±1.6) and 
bleeding (HAS-BLED score = 3.2±1.2), and device implantation was successful in 97.3%.  
Major complications were site reported, and occurred at rates similar to those reported for the 
Watchman device: cardiac tamponade occurred at 1.24%, procedure-related stroke in 0.86%, 
device embolization in 0.77%, and procedure-related mortality in 0.76%.17     
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
It is in the background of these favorable clinical trial and outside-the-US registry 
outcomes that the present data holds significant interest.  First, this dataset is notable for being 
comprehensive and inclusive of all Watchman implantation procedures since FDA approval in 
March 2015.  This is particularly important since this captures the initial experience in the 
absence of a National registry as this technology is elaborated beyond the clinical trials to 
widespread clinical practice.  Second, despite the limitations imposed on this study by the 
absence of patient-level clinical characteristics, both the total number of patients studied 
(n=3,822) and the number of implanting operators (n=382) are larger than the combined 
experience of all the FDA trials and the EWOLUTION registry.  In this context, the first 
important finding in our dataset was the high rate of successful device implantation.  Not 
surprisingly, implantation success had been lowest in the initial PROTECT AF trial at ~91%, and 
improved to ~95% in the subsequent FDA trials, culminating in a 98.5% implant success rate in 
EWOLUTION (Table 3); in comparison, the 95.6% success rate in the current post-approval 
experience, which included a large proportion of naive operators, is quite favorable.  The 
procedure proved to be efficient with procedural times approximating 1 hour.  Also, the number 
of devices used per case, 1.38, similarly compares favorably with the FDA clinical trial 
outcomes (Table 3). 
Finally, the most critical findings of these data relate to patient safety.  In the FDA 
clinical trials, the most frequent major procedural complication was pericardial tamponade.10  In 
the current post-FDA approval experience, pericardial tamponade occurred in only ~1% of 
patients, a rate that is quite favorable in comparison to the FDA clinical trials (Table 4).  While 
this rate is higher than the 0.39% tamponade rate observed in EWOLUTION, it is important to 
recognize that the device has only been approved in the US since 2015.  In contrast, the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
Watchman device, as well as other LAAC devices have been commercially available in Europe 
since 2009.  Greater experience with LAAC was likely the reason for the lower overall rate of 
complications in EWOLUTION.  One would expect a similar continued reduction of the 
procedure-related adverse event rate over time in the United States.   
Furthermore, the majority, ~two-thirds of these tamponades, could be treated 
percutaneously without the need for cardiac surgery – both in the current post-approval 
experience, as well as when one looks at the aggregate Watchman LAAC outcomes (Table 4).  
Also, an additional 0.29% of the cohort demonstrated pericardial effusion requiring no 
intervention.  It is unknown whether these are related to atrial micro-tears that self-sealed, or 
simply unrecognized effusions present before the implantation procedure.  Because patients did 
not receive routine transthoracic echocardiography the next day, it is possible that the true rate of 
asymptomatic effusion was underestimated.  Finally, it is worth comparing the cardiac 
tamponade rate with another left atrial cardiovascular procedure, catheter ablation of atrial 
fibrillation.  Despite this being a more mature therapy being annually performed in >300,000 
patients globally, the pericardial tamponade rate during AF ablation was 1.31% in a worldwide 
survey of 20,835 procedures,18 and 1.52% in an analysis of the 93,801 ablation procedures 
performed between 2000-2010 as identified in the National Inpatient Sample.19 
Procedure-related stroke, presumably related to inadvertent embolization of air or clot 
from the transeptal sheath, was an important issue in PROTECT AF, occurring in 1.15% of the 
patients. Indeed, these procedure-related strokes were the difference between non-inferiority and 
superiority at the time of the first reported analysis.2-3  But with enhanced physician training, this 
rate has dramatically declined such that the rate in the present post-approval experience rate was 
<0.1%.  Furthermore, of the 3 procedure-related strokes that occurred, one patient presented the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
next day with a cranial bleed identified on CT imaging, raising the possibility that this was 
actually a hemorrhagic stroke, perhaps related to oral anticoagulation.  Similarly, the device 
embolization rate is also lower at 0.24%, translating to one embolization per 425 patients.  As 
previously reported, the majority were recognized either at the time of the procedure or before 
hospital discharge.20  However, because comprehensive follow-up TEE data was not available, it 
is possible that not all asymptomatic embolizations were identified.  It is also important to 
recognize that approximately two-thirds of these embolized devices could not be removed 
percutaneously and required open surgical removal; this was true for both the post-approval 
cohort, as well as the aggregate Watchman LAAC cohort (Table 4).   
Finally, procedure-related mortality has been infrequent throughout the Watchman 
LAAC experience (Table 4).  In the aggregate Watchman LAAC experience, the procedure-
related mortality was only 0.06%; this translates to only one death per 1,680 patients (Table 4).  
Interestingly, the three deaths in the post-FDA approval experience all occurred in patients that 
sustained pericardial tamponade.  This is similar to catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation, wherein 
the most common cause of procedure-related mortality was also pericardial tamponade.21  Thus, 
while the overall safety outcomes are quite favorable, and pericardial tamponade rates are overall 
decreasing, this complication can nonetheless be deadly.  Hopefully, future technology 
improvements will further decrease cardiac tamponade rates.22 
These favorable complication rates are all the more remarkable when one considers that 
71% of the operators were newly implanting physicians, and these physicians performed 50% of 
the procedures.  Because this was not an IRB-approved clinical study with available patient-level 
data linked to complications, it was not possible to compare the complication rates of 
experienced with unexperienced operators.  However, even if one made the implausible 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
assumption that all of the complications had occurred only with the inexperienced operators, the 
complication rates for pericardial tamponade, procedure-related stroke, device embolization and 
procedure-related mortality would still only have been 2.0%, 0.16%, 0.48% and 0.16%, 
respectively.  When compared to the clinical trials, even these putative rates would be quite 
reasonable for an initial introduction of a first-in-class procedure like LAAC.  Together, these 
outcomes suggest that the FDA-mandated clinical education program instituted by the 
manufacturer has been successful in transferring to new operators the various procedural 
learnings from the years of clinical trials.    
Limitations:  Though information was entered by trained clinical specialists, this dataset 
lacks the structured oversight of a clinical trial: no source verification, no core lab for procedural 
testing and assessment, and no informed consent for collection of patient characteristics or 
follow-up outcomes.  Operators were not required to report procedure-related adverse events that 
were recognized beyond the procedural period itself (when the clinical specialist was not 
present), and therefore complication rates may be underestimated compared to that observed in 
the clinical trials.  Complication data were site-reported, and were submitted to the FDA by the 
manufacturer as part of the required regulatory MDR filings. These were all independently 
reviewed by two of the investigators (VV and DRH) with complete concordance of attribution of 
causation of any of the events.  Mitigating against these limitations was the presence of well-
trained clinical specialists during the cases, and an adjudication oversight process.  Patient 
demographics were not collected as a part of the standardized implant form, since a national 
registry with informed consent had not yet been established for this cohort.  However, clinical 
demographic data for all consecutive post-approval Watchman implant patients were obtained 
from several of the authors’ centers (VR, SD, DG, and RH) representing a total of 426 patients: 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
age 76±8, CHA2DS2-VASc 4.0±1.4, and HAS-BLED score 2.5±1.0 (Unpublished Observation).  
While representing only a fraction of the full 3,822 cohort, these characteristics do suggest that 
the patients in this cohort are similar to those patients enrolled in the clinical trials. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Since the time of device approval by the US FDA, clinical application of the Watchman 
LAA closure technology has been used in increasing numbers of patients.  The data in this 
manuscript indicate that in this real-world dispersion of this technology, procedural success rates 
remain high.  Similarly, despite a large fraction of inexperienced operators performing ~50% of 
the procedures, major complication rates were low compared to earlier reported experiences in 
the clinical trials: importantly, cardiac tamponade occurred in ~1% and procedure-related 
mortality occured in less than 0.1% of patients. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Watchman LAA Closure Technology, U.S. Food and Drug Administration 2015 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/ProductsandMedicalProcedures/DeviceApproval
sandClearances/Recently-ApprovedDevices/ucm440621.htm 
2. 
Holmes DR, Reddy VY, Turi ZG, et al.  PROTECT AF Investigators: Percutaneous 
closure of the left atrial appendage versus warfarin therapy for prevention of stroke in 
patients with atrial fibrillation: a randomised non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2009; 
374:534-42. 
3. 
Reddy VY, Doshi SK, Sievert H, Buchbinder M, et al, PROTECT AF Investigators: 
Percutaneous left atrial appendage closure for stroke prophylaxis in patients with 
atrial fibrillation: 2.3-Year follow-up of the PROTECT AF (Watchman Left Atrial 
Appendage System for Embolic Protection in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation) Trial. 
Circulation 2013, 127:720-29. 
4. 
Reddy VY, Sievert H, Halperin J, et al, PROTECT AF Steering Committee and 
Investigators:  Percutaneous left atrial appendage closure vs warfarin for atrial 
fibrilation:  A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2014; 312:1988-98. 
5. 
Holmes DR, Kar S, Price MJ, et al.  Prospective randomized evaluation of the 
Watchman Left Atrial Appendage Closure device in patients with atrial fibrillation 
versus long-term warfarin therapy: The PREVAIL Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014; 
64:1-12. 
6. 
Holmes DR Jr, Doshi SK, Kar S, et al.  Left atrial appendage closure as an alternative 
to warfarin for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation – a patient-level meta-analysis.  
J Am Coll Cardiol 2015; 65:2614-23. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
7. 
CMS releases National Coverage Determintaiton for Watchman and other LAA 
devices.  http://www.cardiovascularbusiness.com/topics/coronary-intervention-
surgery/cms-releases-national-coverage-determination-watchman-and-other-laa-
devices.  Accessed 3-23-16 
8. 
NCDR LAAC Registry.  http://cvquality.acc.org/NCDR-Home/Registries/Hospital-
Registries.aspx. Accessed 3-23-16. 
9. 
Fountain RB, Holmes DR Jr., Chandrasekaran K, et al.  The PROTECT AF 
(WATCHMAN left atrial appendage system for embolic PROTECTion in patients 
with atrial fibrillation) trial.  Am Heart J 151:956-61, 2006.   
10. 
Reddy VY, Holmes DR, Doshi SK, et al.  Safety of percutaneous left atrial appendage 
closure results from the Watchman Left Atrial Appendage System for Embolic 
Protection in Patients With AF (PROTECT AF) clinical trial and the Continued 
Access Registry. Circulation 2011; 123:417-24. 
11. 
Boersma LV, Schmidt B, Betts TR, et al.  Implant success and safety of left atrial 
appendage closure with the WATCHMAN device: peri-procedural outcomes from the 
EWOLUTION Registry.  Eur Heart J  2016; 37:2465-74. 
12. 
Price MJ, Reddy VY, Valderrabano M, et al.  Bleeding outcomes after left atrial 
appendage closure compared with long-term warfarin: A pooled, patient level 
analysis of the WATCHMAN randomized trial experience.  JACC Cardiovasc Interv 
2015; 8:1925-32. 
13. 
Alli O, Doshi S, Kar S, et al.  Quality of life assessment in the randomized PROTECT 
AF (Percutaneous Closure of the Left Atrial Appendage vs Warfain Therapy for 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
Prevention of Stroke in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation) trial of patients at risk for 
stroke with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation.  J Am Coll Cardiol 2013; 61:1790-8. 
14. 
Reddy VY, Akehurst RL, Armstrong SO, et al.  Cost effectiveness of left atial 
appendage closure with the Watchman device for atrial fibrillation patients with 
absolute contraindications to warfarin.  Europace 2016; 18:979-86. 
15. 
Reddy VY, Akehurst RL, Armstrong SO, et al.  Time to cost effectiveness following 
stroke reduction strategies in AF: Warfarin versus NOACs versus LAA closure.  J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2015; 66:2728-39. 
16. 
Gangireddy SR, Halperin JL, Fuster V, et al.  Percutaneous left atrial appendage 
closure for stroke prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation: an assessment of net 
clinical benefit.  Eur Heart J 2012; 33:2700-8. 
17. 
Tzikas A, Shakir S, Gafoor S, et al.  Left atrial appendage occlusion for stroke 
prevention in atrial fibrillation: multicentre experience with the AMPLATZER 
cardiac plug.  EuroIntervention 2016; 11:1170-9. 
18. 
Cappato R, Calkins H, Chen SA, et al.  Updated Worldwide Survey on the Methods, 
Efficacy, and Safety of Catheter Ablation for Human Atrial Fibrillation.  Circ 
Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2010;3:32-38. 
19. 
Deshmukh A, Patel NJ, Pant S, et al.  In-Hospital Complications Associated With 
Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation in the United States Between 2000 and 2010: 
Analysis of 93,801 Procedures.  Circulation 2013;128:2104-2112. 
20. 
Aminian A, Lalmand, J, Tzikas A, Budts W, Benit E, Kefer J.  Embolization of Left 
Atrial Appendage Closure Devices: A Systematic Review of Cases Reported With the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
Watchman Device and the Amplatzer Cardiac Plug.  Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 
2015;86:128-35. 
21. 
Cappato R, Calkins H, Chen SA, et al.  Prevalence and Causes of Fatal Outcome in 
Catheter Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53;1798-1803. 
22. 
Ledwoch J, Franke J, Gonzaga M, et al.  Left Atrial Appendage Closure: First in Man 
with the 4th Generation Watchman Device.  Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 
2016;87:787-94. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
FIGURE LEGENDS 
Figure 1:  Procedure Volume by Operator. The numbers of procedures performed by each 
operator are shown, separated by the experienced (A) and inexperienced (B) operator cohorts.  
Each horizontal bar represents a single operator and the magnitude of its rightward extension 
indicates the number of procedures performed by that particular operator. 
Central Illustration:  Major Complication Rates Across Watchman Clinical Studies.  The top-
left image depicts where the Watchman device is placed to sequester the left atrial appendage 
from the systemic circulation.  The bottom-left table summarizes the aggregate procedural 
parameter outcomes and complication rates after combining the >6000 patients receiving the 
Watchman device in the FDA clinical trials (PROTECT-AF, PREVAIL, CAP and CAP2) and 
the post-approval studies (EWOLUTION and the present post-FDA approval US cohort).  The 
graph on the right compares the complications rates of the four major procedure-related 
complications (pericardial tamponade, procedure-related stroke, device embolization and 
procedure-related death) across these various Watchman clinical studies. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 
 
 
