 The correlation between recessions and suicide is one of the best
characterised statistical relationships in demographic history.1 In
1897, Durkheim wrote, ‘It is a well-known fact that economic crises
have an aggravating effect on suicidal tendency’
.2 In North America
and Europe, two regions most affected by the worst financial crisis
since the Great Depression, suicides have risen markedly.
Method
To calculate excess suicides in Europe (2008–2010) and Canada
(2008–2009), we estimate, taking 2007 as our pre-recession baseline,
the unadjusted difference between the baseline suicide rate and the
suicide rate for each year after the recession began. These estimates
are conservative because background secular trends were declining
prior to the onset of the economic downturns. Estimates of the
excess suicides in the USA were taken from a previous study using
state-level data from the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Further details of our methods for calculating excess
suicides can be found in the online supplement.
Results
Internationally comparable suicide data from the World Health
Organization (WHO) European Health for All database, shows
that following the Great Recession nearly all European societies
have experienced rising suicide rates. As shown in Fig. 1, prior
to the onset of recession in 2007, suicide rates had been falling
in Europe. Subsequently, this downward trend reversed, rising
by 6.5% by 2009 and remaining elevated through 2011. This
increase corresponds to an additional 7950 suicides above what
would be expected on past trends between 2007 and 2010 (see
online supplement). Canada too experienced a reversal, as suicides
rose by 4.5% (about 240 suicides more than expected) between
2007 and 2009. In the USA, where suicides had been on an upward
trajectory, the rate of increase accelerated, with an increase over
and above past trends of 4.8%, totalling about 4750 excess suicides
between 2007 and 2010.3 However, those few industrialised
countries outside of these regions, such as New Zealand, that have
escaped unscathed from the financial crisis have avoided a rise in
suicides. These conservative figures suggest that, in total, there
have been at least 10 000 more economic suicides than would have
been expected in the European Union, Canada and the USA since
the Great Recession began in 2007. But are these suicides an
inevitable accompaniment of economic hardship?
One clue that, in theory, increased suicides during an economic
crisis are avoidable is seen in the marked cross-national variations
in countries affected by the current recession. Despite large
recessions, some countries experienced no change in suicides,
whereas in others suicides rose in step with worsening economies.
In
general,
we
observed
four
main
suicide
patterns:
(a)
accelerating rate of previous increase in suicides: USA and Poland;
(b) increase from stable trends: Canada; (c) reversal of downward
suicide trends: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, The
Netherlands, Portugal, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Spain and
UK; (d) no significant change: Austria and Sweden (missing data
and small populations mean that Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark,
Luxembourg, Malta, and the Slovak Republic are not reported).
Another clue that increases in such suicides can be averted
stems from the observation that not everyone is equally affected.
Although underlying suicide rates do vary, it is noteworthy that
the scale of the increase associated with an economic crisis does
too. Rates rose in both men and women but these increases are
about fourfold greater among men, widening the pre-existing
gap in suicide rates. Between 2008 and 2010, had the change in
the male suicide rate not exceeded that among females there
would have been 2380 fewer deaths in Europe (see online
supplement). This concentration of the increase in working-age
men, which is consistent with an extensive body of theory and
previous empirical research,4 also suggests these findings are not
due to data artefacts. Although comparisons of suicide rates among
countries must be treated with some caution, albeit often overstated,
in part because of cultural factors and coding practices (which may,
in fact, understate the rise), any such bias should be non-differential
with respect to changes within countries and over short periods of
time.5 Thus, it is implausible that any change in coding rules
would selectively affect only one gender and at particular ages.
It is important to check whether these increases are a potential
artefact of small numbers. Taking the USA as an example, we
found that the acceleration in the suicide rate was a statistically
significant departure from the time trend prior to the recession
(b = 0.51 (95% CI 0.28–0.75) rise in suicide rate per 100 000
population per year).3 Thus, these stark variations are likely to
be real; revealing the potential of preventing suicides associated
with economic crises.
Suicide rates may vary across nations because the depth and
nature of recessions also varies. Economic shocks can worsen mental
health and, potentially, lead to suicide, through three major
pathways. First, job loss is an independent risk factor for increased
risk of depression and suicide.4 Suicide is ~2.5 times more likely
among the unemployed compared with the employed (total
246
Economic suicides in the Great Recession
in Europe and North America
Aaron Reeves, Martin McKee and David Stuckler
Summary
There has been a substantial rise in ‘economic suicides’ in
the Great Recessions afflicting Europe and North America.
We estimate that the Great Recession is associated with
at least 10 000 additional economic suicides between 2008
and 2010. A critical question for policy and psychiatric
practice is whether these suicide rises are inevitable.
Marked cross-national variations in suicides in the recession
offer one clue that they are potentially avoidable. Job
loss, debt and foreclosure increase risks of suicidal
thinking. A range of interventions, from upstream
return-to-work programmes through to antidepressant
prescriptions may help mitigate suicide risk during
economic downturn.
Declaration of interest
None.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2014)
205, 246–247. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.144766
Short report
 odds ratio (OR) = 2.6).4 Indebtedness, itself a consequence of
unemployment, is another, independent risk factor for depression
and suicide. Longitudinal data from the UK show that those free
from mental health problems at baseline who had financial
difficulties were 1.33 times more likely to experience mental illness
than those who did not, after controlling for age, gender, marital
status, family type, employment status and other socioeconomic
measures.6 Third, debt and unemployment leading to foreclosure
on mortgages are associated with depression and anxiety-related
disorders.7 Those who have had their houses repossessed are 1.6
times more likely to experience mental illness than those who have
not.7 Due to the nature of the recession, unemployment, debt and
housing insecurity have risen in Europe and North America
increasing suicide risk. Yet, some European countries seem to have
avoided this association. For example, in Austria the suicide rate
has not increased despite rising unemployment during the
recession (online Fig. DS1). Further, our analysis of suicides in
the USA suggested that unemployment only explained a small
proportion of the variance in suicide rates. Consequently, there
is still a large residual not explained by economic shocks.3
Discussion
If we accept that these suicides could have been prevented, what
could have been done? Looking to recent history, two countries
have previously broken this link: Sweden, between 1991 and
1992, and Finland, between 1990 and 1993, both experienced
substantial rises in unemployment concurrent with reductions
in suicide.1 In the present recession, Sweden again exhibited no
marked increase in total suicide rates. Three factors may increase
mental health resilience during economic shocks. One is access to
secondary prevention. The majority of suicides occur among
persons with clinical depression.8 Effective treatment, such as
antidepressants, may moderate the impact of economic shocks
on suicide by controlling depression associated with financial
uncertainty. Yet, thus far, there is little individual-level evidence
to substantiate a protective role of antidepressants against suicide;
the most comprehensive meta-analysis to date finds no evidence of a
beneficial effect.8 Nonetheless, prescription rates have appeared to
rise markedly in some countries during the recent recession, such as
the UK where the rate of increase in prescribing accelerated from an
11% rise between2003 and 2007 toa 19% rise between 2007 and 2010.
Another potentially protective intervention is helping the
newly unemployed to return to work. Active labour market
programmes, which assist the unemployed find work while
providing
other
forms
of
support,
reduce
the
impact
of
unemployment on suicide.1 In European recessions in 1970–2007,
we estimated that each US$100 per capita of investment in
active labour market programmes reduced the association of
unemployment with suicide by 0.4%.1
Third, greater gender equality in the workplace may attenuate
the mental health risks of economic shocks.9 In highly masculine
environments, where male identity is bound up with work, job
loss poses greater status threat. Conversely, where women’s labour
force participation rates are lower, the threat or experience of
unemployment may less significantly affect women’s mental
health. More research is needed to understand how gender norms
and family structures affect vulnerability to economic change.9
There is also a need to better understand how to prevent
economic shocks from worsening mental health. For now, the
evidence
that
some
societies
have
successfully
de-coupled
economic shocks from adverse mental health outcomes reveals
the hope that it will be possible to eliminate the association of eco-
nomic shocks with a rise in suicidality. At a time of deep retrench-
ments in health systems, particularly in mental health services,
voices of psychiatrists must not remain silent. The medical com-
munity must first be informed about macro-economic policies
that affect the health of their patients. They can – and, according
to the medical code of ethics, have a duty to – contribute to the
mental health of populations, as practitioners but also advocates
of evidence-based prevention. Recessions will continue to hurt,
but need not cause self-harm.
Aaron Reeves, PhD, Department of Sociology, University of Oxford, Oxford;
Martin McKee, DSc, MSc, Department of Public Health and Policy, London School
of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London; David Stuckler, MPH, PhD, Hon MFPH,
Department of Sociology, University of Oxford, Oxford and Department of Public
Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Correspondence: Aaron Reeves, University of Oxford, Department of
Sociology, Manor Road, Manor Road Building, Oxford OX1 3UQ, UK.
Email: aaron.reeves@sociology.ox.ac.uk
First received 18 Jul 2013, final revision 14 Jan 2014, accepted 17 Feb 2014
References
1
Stuckler D, Basu S, Suhrcke M, Coutts A, McKee M. The public health effect
of economic crises and alternative policy responses in Europe: an empirical
analysis. Lancet 2009; 374: 315–23.
2
Durkheim E. Suicide: A Study in Sociology. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970.
3
Reeves A, Stuckler D, McKee M, Gunnell D, Chang S, Basu S. Increase in
state suicide rates in the USA during economic recession. Lancet 2012; 380:
1813–4.
4
Lewis G, Sloggett A. Suicide, deprivation, and unemployment: record linkage
study. BMJ 1998; 317: 1283–6.
5
Birt C, Bille-Brahe U, Cabecadas M, Chishti P, Corcoran P, Elgie R, et al.
Suicide mortality in the European Union. Eur J Public Health 2003; 13: 108–14.
6
Skapinakis P, Weich S, Lewis G, Singleton N, Araya R. Socio-economic
position and common mental disorders. Longitudinal study in the general
population in the UK. Br J Psychiatry 2006; 189: 109–17.
7
Pevalin DJ. Housing repossessions, evictions and common mental illness in
the UK: results from a household panel study. J Epidemiol Community Health
2009; 63: 949–51.
8
Gunnell D, Saperia J, Ashby D. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
and suicide in adults: meta-analysis of drug company data from placebo
controlled, randomised controlled trials submitted to the MHRA’s safety
review. BMJ 2005; 330: 385.
9
Bambra C, Pope D, Swami V, Stanistreet D, Roskam A, Kunst A, et al.
Gender, health inequalities and welfare state regimes: a cross-national
study of 13 European countries. J Epidemiol Community Health 2009; 63:
38–44.
247
Economic suicides
Standardised suicide rate per 100 000
20 –
18 –
16 –
14 –
12 –
10 –
8 –
6 –
4 –
2 –
0 –
(a)
(b)
(c)
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Year
Male
Female
Total
Fig. 1
European Union age-standardised suicide rate for the
total population (b), and for males (a) and females (c), 2001–2011.
