 Article
AgRP Neurons Require Carnitine Acetyltransferase
to Regulate Metabolic Flexibility and Peripheral
Nutrient Partitioning
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Crat in AgRP neurons helps nutrient replenishment as food is
available after fasting
d Crat in AgRP neurons helps maintain appropriate hepatic
glucose production during fasting
d Crat in AgRP neurons facilitates peripheral substrate
switching upon acute refeeding
d Crat regulates protein expression and acetylation in AgRP
cells in fasting and refeeding
Authors
Alex Reichenbach, Romana Stark,
Mathieu Mequinion, ..., Matthew J. Watt,
Serge Luquet, Zane B. Andrews
Correspondence
zane.andrews@monash.edu
In Brief
Reichenbach et al. demonstrate that
AgRP neurons require carnitine
acetyltransferase to regulate peripheral
substrate switching from fatty acid to
glucose utilization during fasting and the
transition to refeeding. This mechanism
preserves fatty acids when glucose from
food becomes available and maximizes
energy conservation for future periods of
energy deficit.
Reichenbach et al., 2018, Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759
February 13, 2018 ª 2018 The Author(s).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.01.067
 Cell Reports
Article
AgRP Neurons Require Carnitine Acetyltransferase
to Regulate Metabolic Flexibility
and Peripheral Nutrient Partitioning
Alex Reichenbach,1,2 Romana Stark,1,2 Mathieu Mequinion,1,2 Raphael R.G. Denis,3 Jeferson F. Goularte,1
Rachel E. Clarke,1,2 Sarah H. Lockie,1,2 Moyra B. Lemus,1,2 Greg M. Kowalski,4 Clinton R. Bruce,4 Cheng Huang,1,5
Ralf B. Schittenhelm,1,5 Randall L. Mynatt,6,7 Brian J. Oldfield,1,2 Matthew J. Watt,1,2 Serge Luquet,3
and Zane B. Andrews1,2,8,*
1Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia
2Department of Physiology, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia
3Universite
´ of Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cite
´ , Unite
´ de Biologie Fonctionelle et Adaptative, CNRS UMR 8251, 75205 Paris, France
4Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition, School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood 3125, VIC, Australia
5Monash Biomedical Proteomics Facility and Department of Biochemistry, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University,
Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia
6Gene Nutrient Interactions Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
7Transgenic Core Facility, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
8Lead Contact
*Correspondence: zane.andrews@monash.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.01.067
SUMMARY
AgRP neurons control peripheral substrate utiliza-
tion and nutrient partitioning during conditions of
energy deficit and nutrient replenishment, although
the molecular mechanism is unknown. We examined
whether carnitine acetyltransferase (Crat) in AgRP
neurons affects peripheral nutrient partitioning. Crat
deletion in AgRP neurons reduced food intake and
feeding behavior and increased glycerol supply to
the liver during fasting, as a gluconeogenic sub-
strate, which was mediated by changes to sympa-
thetic output and peripheral fatty acid metabolism
in the liver. Crat deletion in AgRP neurons increased
peripheral fatty acid substrate utilization and attenu-
ated the switch to glucose utilization after refeeding,
indicating altered nutrient partitioning. Proteomic
analysis in AgRP neurons shows that Crat regu-
lates protein acetylation and metabolic processing.
Collectively, our studies highlight that AgRP neurons
require Crat to provide the metabolic flexibility to
optimize nutrient partitioning and regulate peripheral
substrate utilization, particularly during fasting and
refeeding.
INTRODUCTION
The maintenance of energy and glucose homeostasis requires
the ability of the brain to detect and respond to acute changes
in energy state. Under conditions of energy deficit, sensing low
peripheral energy availability and hypoglycemia primes the brain
to initiate food intake and increase hepatic glucose production
(Kleinridders et al., 2009). Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) neurons
in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus are a population of
starvation-sensitive neurons that primarily function to increase
appetite and promote energy conservation (Aponte et al.,
2011; Gropp et al., 2005; Krashes et al., 2011; Luquet et al.,
2005; Ruan et al., 2014). For example, adult ablation of AgRP
neurons in mice causes a rapid cessation of food intake and
profound body weight loss to the point of starvation (Luquet
et al., 2005).
AgRP neurons primarily respond to signals of energy deficit
and increase firing rates, mRNA expression, and peptide secre-
tion (Andrews et al., 2008; Baskin et al., 1999; Briggs et al., 2011;
Schwartz et al., 1998) to maintain energy homeostasis. Although
AgRP neurons can respond to metabolic information in the form
of hormonal feedback from ghrelin, leptin, and insulin (Andrews,
2011; Andrews et al., 2008; Enriori et al., 2007; Ko
¨ nner et al.,
2007; van de Wall et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2013), the mecha-
nisms underlying nutrient sensing are less clear. This is not
only important during fasting but also during the transition from
fasting to refeeding when there is a dynamic change in metabolic
feedback information to the brain. An appropriate level of meta-
bolic flexibility ensures that, as glucose becomes available for
oxidation, such as during refeeding, high fasting fatty acid utiliza-
tion and oxidation are immediately suppressed to conserve en-
ergy reserves. Indeed, the ablation of AgRP neurons increases
fatty acid utilization, affects nutrient partitioning, and attenuates
body weight gain in mice fed a high-fat diet (Joly-Amado et al.,
2012). Thus, the ability of AgRP neurons to rapidly adjust sub-
strate utilization promotes maximal energy conservation and
is a core component of nutrient partitioning. However, the mo-
lecular mechanism responsible for this action in AgRP neurons
remains unknown.
Carnitine acetyltransferase (Crat) is an important enzyme
regulating metabolic flexibility in muscle and increases exercise
capacity (Muoio et al., 2012; Seiler et al., 2015). Crat is a funda-
mental enzyme in carnitine metabolism and is one of a number of
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018 ª 2018 The Author(s).
1745
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 enzymes, including carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1) and
carnitine octanoyltransferase, involved in regulating intracellular
pools of acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) esters (Ramsay and Zammit,
2004; Stark et al., 2015a). In mice with muscle-specific deletion
of Crat, excessive buildup of acetyl-CoA allosterically inhibits
glucose oxidation by suppressing pyruvate dehydrogenase ac-
tivity and impairs the substrate switch from fatty acid to glucose
oxidation during the fast/refeeding transition (Muoio et al., 2012).
Consequently, we hypothesized that Crat plays an important role
in AgRP neurons by providing the metabolic flexibility to respond
to metabolic information, particularly during fasting and the tran-
sition to refeeding, when the need to detect and respond to en-
ergy availability is most important. Our results show that Crat in
AgRP neurons influences feeding behavior, hepatic substrates
for gluconeogenesis and fatty acid metabolism, peripheral sub-
strate utilization and nutrient partitioning, and the AgRP prote-
ome during fasting and the transition to refeeding.
RESULTS
Validation of Crat Deletion in AgRP Neurons
We used a cre-lox approach to delete Crat from AgRP neurons.
Crat-floxed mice (Muoio et al., 2012) were crossed to AgRP-
ires-cre::NPY GFP mice to generate AgRP Crat wild-type (WT)
and knockout (KO) mice that expressed GFP in neuropeptide Y
(NPY) neurons. To confirm cre recombination in the arcuate
(ARC) nucleus, WT and KO mice were crossed to rosa(26)
tdTomato reporter mice (Figures 1A–1E) and we observed more
than 90% of NPY GFP neurons expressing the AgRP cre-depen-
dent tdTomato reporter (Figure 1D). We used a fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS) approach to isolate GFP-positive
NPY neurons in the ARC coupled with nested PCR to confirm
the deletion of Crat in NPY (AgRP) GFP-positive neurons. NPY
GFP neurons from WT (n = 5) mice showed expected RNA tran-
scripts for Crat at �500 bp, whereas no Crat mRNA transcripts
were observed in KO mice (n = 5) (Figure 1F). A stereological anal-
ysis showed no genotype differences in total NPY GFP neuronal
number and cell volume at post-natal day 14 (P14), confirming
that there were no adverse developmental effects on NPY cell
number and volume in the ARC (Figures 1G–1I). No differences
were observed in AgRP fiber density in the paraventricular nu-
cleus (PVN), dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus (DMH), or lateral
hypothalamus (LH) between WT and KO mice (Figures 1J–1L).
Likewise, we observed no differences in adrenal weight, adrenal
histology, plasma corticosterone, and adrenal Tyrosine hy-
droxylase and Agrp mRNA content between genotypes (Figures
S1A–S1H), an important observation because AgRP is also
expressed in adrenal glands (Gupta et al., 2017).
Ad Libitum and Fasting-Induced Feeding Behavior
Under conditions of ad libitum access to food, there was no
difference in average 24-hr food intake (Figures 2A and 2B).
Intriguingly, despite no difference in total 24-hr food intake, the
microstructure of feeding behavior was altered in KO mice with
significantly shorter meal duration compared with WT mice but
increased
meal
number
to
compensate
(Figures
2C–2E).
Because AgRP neurons promote food-seeking behavior during
states of negative energy balance, we examined refeeding in
response to an overnight fast. KO mice exhibited significantly
reduced cumulative food intake over a 24-hr period compared
with WT control mice (Figures 2G and 2H), indicating an impaired
feeding response after an overnight fast. Analysis of the micro-
structure of feeding behavior indicated that the first meal after
refeeding was significantly smaller and that both average meal
duration and meal size were significantly smaller compared
with WT mice (Figures 2J and 2K). Collectively, these results
show that deletion of Crat in AgRP neurons impairs refeeding
after fasting and affects the microstructure of feeding behavior.
There was no difference in body weight change or gastric
emptying (Figures S2A and S2B) in WT and KO mice during fast-
ing and refeeding.
Interestingly, there was no difference in the percentage of
activated NPY neurons in WT or KO mice under fasted or refed
conditions (Figure 2N) using fos as a surrogate marker for activa-
tion in NPY GFP-labeled neurons. However, an increase in
fos-positive neurons in non-NPY ARC neurons during refeeding
(Figure 2O) suggests a greater sensitivity to potential satiety
factors associated with refeeding. Body weight gain or fat
mass over a 20-week chow diet or high-fat diet (HFD) feeding
period did not differ between genotypes (Figures S3A to S3B).
Analysis of metabolic parameters revealed no genotype differ-
ences in heat production, oxygen consumption (VO2), or carbon
dioxide production (VCO2) on a chow diet (Figures S3C–S3E).
High-fat diet-fed KO mice had an increase in heat production
during both the light and dark phase relative to WT controls (Fig-
ure S3F), but this was not sufficient to influence adiposity. There
were no genotype differences in VO2 or VCO2 (Figures S3G and
S3H). There were also no differences in body weight change or
total food intake after 5 days of leptin injections (Figures S3K
and S3L).
Feeding Behavior in Response to Intraperitoneal CCK
and ICV Insulin
Given that deletion of Crat in AgRP neurons decreased meal
duration under ad libitum conditions, the possibility arises that
KO mice were more sensitive to satiety signals. An injection of
cholecystokinin (CCK) (0.25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally [i.p.]) imme-
diately before the dark phase (Figure 3A) highlighted that KO
mice were more sensitive to i.p. CCK. KO mice exhibited
reduced meal size and meal duration relative to WT mice (Figures
3B and 3C), but the meal number was significantly increased to
compensate (Figure 3D). Hence, there was no overall difference
in total food intake over the 24-hr period after CCK injection
(Figure 3E).
Central insulin suppresses food intake (Br€
uning et al., 2000;
Niswender et al., 2003), so we also injected insulin (0.025 mU, in-
tracerebroventricular [ICV]) into WT and KO mice and examined
food intake and feeding behavior over a 24-hr period (Figure 3F).
ICV insulin suppressed food intake in KO mice 2 hr after injection,
an effect that was no longer evident by 6 hr or thereafter (Figures
3G and 3H). Analysis of 24-hr feeding behavior revealed that ICV
insulin reduced meal size and meal duration and increased meal
number in KO mice to compensate (Figures 3I–3K), resulting
in no difference in 24-hr food intake between genotypes. These
results are in accord with those of others (Campos et al., 2016),
which highlight the ability of mice to adjust meal number to
1746
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 ensure constant 24-hr food intake (under ad libitum conditions)
despite reduced meal size and duration.
In line with the feeding response to insulin, NPY (AgRP) neu-
rons from KO mice showed greater sensitivity to exogenous
insulin (i.p. 0.75 U/kg body weight), with a significant increase
in insulin-induced phosphorylated AKT (pAKT) staining in NPY
(AgRP) neurons compared with saline (Figure 3L). To further
examine the physiological sensitivity of NPY (AgRP) neurons to
insulin, we measured pAKT in NPY neurons 30 min after refeed-
ing and observed significantly more NPY neurons expressing
pAKT in KO mice compared with WT controls (Figure 3M).
AgRP Crat Deletion Causes a Metabolic Adaptation in
Liver Function
Analysis of plasma in fed and fasted states revealed significantly
lower concentrations of insulin and triglyceride (TG) in fasted
KO mice compared with WT mice (Figures 3O and 3P). Fasting
significantly increased plasma corticosterone, non-esterified
fatty acids (NEFA), and ketone bodies in KO mice, but we found
no significant genotype effect on blood glucose (Figures 3Q–3T).
Although blood glucose was not different during fasting, the
increased circulating ketone bodies indicated increased fatty
acid oxidation and altered hepatic liver function in KO mice
Figure 1. Validation of Cre-Mediated Recombination and Crat Deletion in AgRP Neurons
(A–D) Crossing AgRP-ires-cre::NPY GFP with rosa26-td-Tomato mice reveals that more than 90% of NPY neurons in the ARC express tdTomato as a marker of
cre-dependent recombination in AgRP-expressing neurons. Scale bars, 200 mm.
(E) Cre-dependent tdTomato expression only in the ARC; tiled montage; scale bar, 1 mm.
(F) FACS isolation of NPY-GFP neurons coupled with PCR analysis confirms no Crat mRNA transcripts in KO mice. AgRP mRNA transcript were observed,
whereas neither proopiomelanocortin (Pomc) mRNA nor glial fibrillary acidic protein (Gfap) mRNA was observed from WT and KO mice.
(G–I) Stereological quantification of NPY GFP neurons confirms that neither cell number nor cell volume distribution was affected by Crat deletion during
development.
(J–L) No differences in AgRP fiber density in the PVN (J), LH (K), and DMH (L).
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 6–8.
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1747
 during fasting. In the fasted state, KO mice had significantly
lower liver glycogen and higher TG concentrations relative to
WT mice (Figure 4A–4C). The hepatic gluconeogenic genes
Pck1, Pck2, and G6pc were significantly increased in fasted
KO mice relative to fasted WT mice (Figure 4D), and, consistent
with increased breakdown of liver glycogen, liver glycogen phos-
phorylase (Pygl) gene expression was significant increased
(Figure 4D).
Figure 2. Deletion of Crat in AgRP Neurons
Affects Feeding Behavior and Food Intake
in Response to Fasting
(A–E) Deletion of Crat in AgRP neurons does not
affect total food intake (A), cumulative food intake
over a 24-hr period (B) and meal size (C); however,
meal duration is reduced (D), and an increase
in meal number (E) accounts for reduced meal
duration.
(F–H) In response to fasting-refeeding (F), KO mice
eat less than WT mice (G), and KO mice do not in-
creasefoodintakerelativetoadlibitum-fedmice(H).
(I–L) KO mice had a smaller first (I) and average
meal size (J) and reduced meal duration (K) and no
difference in meal number (L).
(M–O) Analysis of fos expression (M) demon-
strated AgRP/NPY neurons from KO mice had a
similar fos response to fasting refeeding (N),
whereas overall fos activity in response to re-
feeding in the ARC was significantly increased in
KO compared with WT (O).
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 5–8.
Two-way (repeated measures where appropriate)
ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc analysis; a, signifi-
cant at p < 0.05.
The accumulation of TG in the liver was
unlikely to be due to increased de novo
lipid synthesis because fatty acid syn-
thase (Fasn) and stearoyl CoA desaturase
(Scd1) were significantly suppressed in
the fed state with no differences in the
fasted state. Adipose TG lipase (Atgl), a
marker of lipolysis, and carnitine palmi-
toyltransferase 1a (Cpt1a), a rate-limiting
enzyme for acyl-CoA delivery into the
mitochondrial matrix for oxidation, were
elevated in fasted KO mice relative to
fasted WT mice (Figure 4D). Liver fatty
acid oxidation was also increased in KO
mice (Figures 4E and 4F), which would ac-
count for the increased ketone bodies in
the blood (Figure 3Q). Using a norepi-
nephrine (NE) turnover approach (Joly-
Amado et al., 2012), we showed little to
no norepinephrine turnover in fasted KO
mice and impaired norepinephrine turn-
over in the refed state (Figures 4G and
4H), suggesting that inappropriate AgRP
function in KO mice alters liver function
by diminished sympathetic activity.
The differences in liver glycogen and gluconeogenic genes
in fasted KO mice suggest alterations in glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis. In support of this, Glycerol kinase mRNA, the
enzyme required to facilitate gluconeogenesis from glycerol,
was significantly elevated in fasted KO mice (Figure 4D). More-
over, we investigated the fractional contribution of glycogenol-
ysis and gluconeogenesis during fasting by employing a
tracer-based approach to measure the sources of endogenous
1748
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 (legend on next page)
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1749
 glucose production (EGP). KO mice showed increased glycerol-
driven gluconeogenesis after 3 hr fasting with a corresponding
decrease in gluconeogenesis from phosphoenolpyruvate (Fig-
ures 4K and 4L). Moreover, blood glucose was significantly
higher in KO mice compared with WT mice 15 min after an
i.p. glycerol injection, indicating greater glycerol utilization for
glucose production (Figure 4M). Collectively, our results suggest
that the deletion of Crat from AgRP neurons affects the
output of the sympathetic nervous system, which shifts liver
metabolism to preferentially utilize glycerol as a substrate for
gluconeogenesis.
AgRP Crat Deletion Acutely Impairs Glucose Tolerance
Initial experiments highlighted a greater increase in plasma
glucose in KO compared with WT mice 15 and 30 min after
oral glucose gavage (Figure 5A). Notably, blood glucose was
not different between genotypes after 60 min, suggesting that
AgRP Crat deletion may affect acute glycemic control rather
than long-term regulation. Next we performed oral glucose toler-
ance tests (oGTTs) with stable isotope-labeled glucose (deuter-
ated [6,6D2] glucose), allowing the distinction between exoge-
nous labeled glucose and unlabeled endogenous glucose in
the blood. Our results showed significantly higher levels of
labeled (exogenous) glucose in the plasma of KO mice, indi-
cating reduced glucose disposal during the oral GTT (Figures
5C and 5D). Although there was no difference in the glucose con-
centration from endogenous sources over the course of 120 min,
the rate of change from 0–15 minutes was significantly reduced
in KO mice relative to WT mice (Figures 5E and 5F), indicating a
diminished ability to suppress endogenous glucose production
in that time. In addition, plasma insulin levels 5 and 10 min
after glucose gavage were reduced compared with WT mice
(Figure 5G), underpinning the reduced glucose disposal and
reduced ability to suppress endogenous glucose production
observed in KO mice.
We then performed a glucose uptake assay in various tissues
to determine the capacity of the endogenous response to oral
glucose to regulate glucose uptake. 15 min after glucose load,
glucose uptake was lower in white adipose tissue (WAT) and
skeletal muscle, with a paradoxical increase in the hypothalamus
(Figure 5H). By 30 min after glucose load, all tissues showed
greater glucose uptake in KO compared with WT mice (Figure 5I).
Fos coexpression within ARC NPY GFP neurons was examined
10 min after an oral glucose load, which should reduce Fos co-
expression in NPY neurons because their activity is reduced.
The results showed more Fos-expressing NPY (AgRP) neurons
in KO compared to WT mice (Figures 5J–5L), consistent with
lack of suppression of Fos activity in response to a glucose
load. Collectively, these results suggest that the deletion of
Crat from AgRP neurons attenuates their ability to acutely sense
glucose and engage the appropriate mechanisms to clear
plasma glucose within a 30-min time frame.
AgRP Crat Deletion Impairs Peripheral Nutrient
Partitioning
KO mice showed a shift toward increased fatty acid utilization
with a lower respiratory exchange ratio (RER) during both light
and dark phases of the day (Figures 6A and 6B) when fed an
ad libitum chow diet. In addition, heatmap analysis of RER values
from individual mice clearly shows reduced RER values during
fasting and refeeding (Figures 6C and 6D). Importantly, the
change in RER in response to refeeding was delayed in KO
mice, suggesting that the deletion of Crat from AgRP neurons
influences peripheral nutrient partitioning to incoming nutrient
availability. In line with greater fatty acid utilization, KO mice
showed a greater clearance of lipids from the plasma following
an olive oil gavage (Figure 6G). Moreover, we observed an adi-
pose tissue (inguinal white fat) gene expression profile that would
predict increased lipolysis in a fasted state (Figure 6H), which is
consistent with increased plasma NEFA levels during fasting in
KO mice (Figure 3S). Specifically, we observed an increase in
KO mice in Atgl and lipoprotein lipase (Lpl), which hydrolyze
TGs in intracellular lipid droplets and lipoproteins, respectively.
Similarly, protein kinase A (Pka), an enzyme induced by adren-
ergic stimulation that increases lipolysis and phosphoglycolate
phosphatase (Pgp), an enzyme required to liberate glycerol by
dephosphorylating glycerol-3-phosphate (Mugabo et al., 2016),
were both increased in KO mice. We also performed a lipopro-
tein lipase inhibition assay using tyloxapol (300 mg/kg body
weight i.p. after a 5-hr fast) (Schotz et al., 1957) and observed
a significant increase in plasma TG in KO mice (Figure 6I), sug-
gesting greater efflux from the liver for utilization in peripheral
tissues such as muscle. Indeed, the increased muscle TG con-
centration in the fed state shown in Figure 6J and increased
plasma TG concentration in KO mice 3 hr after refeeding (Fig-
ure S2E) support this idea as a mechanism to restock muscle
lipid content. We also observed that fasting increased Pgp
mRNA expression, muscle glycogen phosphorylase (Pygm),
and Glut4, whereas there was no increase in Cpt1b (Figure 6K).
Norepinephrine turnover was reduced in fasted KO mice but
significantly increased in refed KO mice compared with WT
controls (Figures 6L and 6M) underlying altered communication
between the central nervous system and muscle in KO mice.
Collectively, these studies show that Crat is required in AgRP
neurons to regulate nutrient partitioning by regulating fatty acid
utilization, gene expression, and metabolism.
Figure 3. Sensitivity to Insulin and CCK
(A–K) CCK (0.25 mg/kg, i.p.) (A) or insulin (0.025 mU, ICV) (F) produced smaller meal size (B and I), shorter meal duration (C and J) with a compensatory increase in
meal number (D and K) in KO mice compared with WT controls. As a result, there were no differences in overall food intake 24 hr after CCK injections (E) and no
differences 6 hr after insulin injections (G), although KO mice had significantly lower food intake 2 hr after ICV insulin administration (H).
(L–N) Analysis of pAKT staining in AgRP/NPY neurons 10 min after exogenous insulin injection (0.75 U/kg, i.p.) (L) or 30 min after refeeding (M) showed that
KO mice have a higher sensitivity to circulating insulin. Representative micrographs of NPY/pAKT coexpression ARC sections during fasting and 30 min after
refeeding (the white bar represents 100 mm) (N).
(O–T) Analysis of plasma insulin (O), triglycerides (P), ketone bodies (Q), glucose (R), NEFA (S), and corticosterone (T) from fed and fasted AgRP Crat mice.
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 7; a, significant at p < 0.05.
1750
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 Crat Deletion Changes the AgRP Proteomic Response to
Fasting and Refeeding
To examine how Crat deletion in AgRP neurons affects intracel-
lular protein expression during fasting and refeeding, we used a
FACS approach to collect NPY GFP neurons from WT and KO
mice under fed, fasted, and refed conditions and analyzed pro-
tein abundance using mass spectrometry (Figure 7A). A compar-
ison of WT versus KO mice under fed conditions revealed
32 proteins with a significant difference in abundance. Of these
32, 7 were more than 2-fold higher in NPY neurons, and 3 were
more than 2-fold lower in NPY neurons from KO versus WT
mice (Figure 7B; Table S1). Of the 32 proteins, 10 were grouped
into metabolic pathways (KEGG pathways ID 1100) (Figure 7C),
and 3 were grouped to glycolysis (KEGG pathway ID 10). Two
proteins within the metabolic KEGG pathway that were more
than 2-fold higher in KO were NADH dehydrogenase 1 alpha
subcomplex subunit 2 (Ndufa2) and methylenetetrahydrofolate
dehydrogenase (Mthfd1), an oxidoreductase that can use nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) or nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) as acceptors.
In the fasted state, we identified 131 significantly different
proteins in KO compared with WT NPY neurons. Of these 131,
84 were more than 2-fold higher, and 17 were more than 2-fold
decreased (Table S2). KEGG identified 79 enriched pathways
Figure 4. Deletion of Crat in AgRP Neurons Affects Peripheral Metabolism
(A) Liver glycogen was significantly reduced in KO mice relative to WT mice during fasting.
(B and C) Liver triglycerides (B) were significantly increased in fasted KO mice compared with WT mice (C); Scale bars, 100 mm.
(D) KO liver mRNA levels as log2 fold expression relative to WT controls.
(E and F) Ex vivo analysis of fasted liver (E) and soleus muscle (F) oleate oxidation.
(G and H) Noradrenaline turnover in fasted (G) and refed (H) liver.
(I–L) Analysis of the fractional contribution of glycogenolysis (I) and gluconeogenesis (J) to endogenous glucose production, as well as the contribution of glycerol
(K) and PEP (L) to gluconeogenesis, during fasting using heavy water coupled with mass spectrometry.
(M) Blood glucose measurements after i.p. glycerol injection to assess glycerol tolerance.
atgl, adipose triglyceride lipase; Cpt1a, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1a; Fasn, fatty acid synthase; G6p, glucose-6-phosphatase, catalytic; Gapdh, glyceral-
dehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; Gk, glycerol kinase, transcript variant 1; Gsk3b, glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta; IL-6, interleukin 6; Lpl, lipoprotein lipase;
Pck1, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (cytosol) ; Pck2, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2 (mitochondrial); Pygl, glycogen phosphorylase, liver; Scd1,
stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase 1. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 7–10. Two-way (repeated measures where appropriate) ANOVA with Tukey’s post
hoc analysis; a, significant at p < 0.05.
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1751
 with metabolic pathways (32 of 131) the most enriched (Fig-
ure 7D). The two most significantly increased proteins in KO
versus WT NPY neurons in the fasted state were mitochondrial
cytochrome b-c1 complex subunit 6 (Uqcrh) and ATP-depen-
dent 6-phosphofructokinase, platelet type (Pfkp), which cata-
lyzes the third step of glycolysis. The 2 most significantly
decreased proteins in NPY neurons from KO versus WT mice
were NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) Fe-S protein 6 (Ndufs6)
and ATP synthase, H+ transporting, mitochondrial F1F0 com-
plex, subunit e (Atp5K). For a complete list, see Table S2.
During refeeding, we observed 190 significantly different pro-
teins in KO versus WT NPY neurons. Of these 190, 39 were more
than 2-fold increased, and 47 were more than 2-fold decreased
in NPY neurons from KO versus WT mice. KEGG identified 59 en-
riched pathways, many of which were similar to those reported
in the fasted group, including the enrichment of the metabolic
pathway (50 of 190) (Figure 7E; Table S3). The 2 most signifi-
cantly increased metabolic pathway proteins in NPY neurons
from KO versus WT mice were NADH dehydrogenase (ubiqui-
none) 1 subunit C2 (Ndufc2) and dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccar-
ide protein (Rpn1). The 3 most significantly decreased proteins in
NPY neurons from KO versus WT mice were ATP synthase pro-
tein 8 (Mtatp8), arginase 1 (Arg-1), and NADH dehydrogenase
(ubiquinone) Fe-S protein 6 (Ndufs6).
Because acetyl CoA is the sole donor of acetyl groups for
acetylation (Pietrocola et al., 2015), Crat may play an important
indirect role in intracellular acetylation of proteins. Therefore,
we examined whether Crat deletion affected the protein acetyla-
tion signature within NPY neurons from KO versus WT mice. Our
results indicated that, under fed conditions, 14.15% versus
Figure 5. Deletion of Crat in AgRP Neurons Affects Glucose Homeostasis
(A and B) Oral GTT (1.5 g/kg) after 5 hr of fasting (A) and area under the curve (AUC) analysis (B).
(C–E) Labeled oral GTT allows an estimate of exogenous glucose from gavage (C), with AUC (D) versus endogenous glucose from hepatic gluconeogenesis (E).
(F) The change in blood glucose after 15 min after glucose gavage.
(G) Glucose-stimulated insulin release during the oral GTT.
(H and I) Glucose-stimulated glucose uptake after 15 min (H) and 30 min (I).
(J) Analysis of fos-positive AgRP/NPY neurons 10 min after glucose gavage.
(K and L) Representative micrographs of mid ARC (K) and caudal ARC (L) sections. Left: an overlay of the green channel (NPY-GFP) with the red (cos) from the
right. Top: WT. Bottom: KO. Scale bars, 100 mm.
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 7–10. Two-way (repeated measures where appropriate) ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc analysis; a, significant at
p < 0.05.
1752
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 Figure 6. AgRP Crat Deletion Impairs Peripheral Nutrient Partitioning
(A–F) KO mice have a lower respiratory quotient (RER) under ad libitum conditions (A and B) and during fasting and refeeding (C–F). Each column of the heatmap
represents one animal, and each row represents the average RER per hour; black boxes on the left side represent the dark phase, with black dotted lines
indicating the change in light conditions. The white line represents the time point of refeeding. KO mice have a delayed switch from fatty acid to glucose utilization.
(G) KO mice showed greater TG clearance after olive oil load.
(H) KO iWAT mRNA levels as log2 fold expression relative to WT controls.
(I) KO mice exhibit greater plasma TG levels after inhibiting LPL with tyloxapol (300 mg/kg body weight).
(J) Muscle triglycerides are significantly increased in fed KO mice compared with WT mice.
(K) KO muscle mRNA levels as log2 fold expression relative to WT controls.
(L and M) Noradrenaline turnover in fasted and refed muscle.
CD36, CD36 antigen, transcript variant 1; Cpt1b, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1b; Cs, citrate synthase; Glut4, glucose transporter 4; InsR, insulin receptor; Pgp,
phosphoglycolate phosphatase; Pka, protein kinase A; Pygm, glycogen phosphorylase, muscle. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n = 7–10. Two-way
(repeated measures where appropriate) ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc analysis; a, significant at p < 0.05.
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1753
 Figure 7. Crat Deletion Affects Protein Regulation in AgRP Neurons
(A) Hypothalami of mice under fed, fasted, and refed conditions were dissociated, and NPY GFP-positive cells were sorted by FACS for proteomic analysis.
(B) Significantly changed proteins were subjected to enrichment analysis using string database 10.0.
(C–E) The KEGG metabolic pathway had the highest enrichment under fed (C), fasted (D), and refed conditions (E).
(F) Enrichment analysis of acetylated proteins using FunRich 3.0 revealed that fewer proteins in KO are acetylated in the fasted and refed state.
Abat, 4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase; Acsl6, acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 6; Aldh2, aldehyde dehydrogenase 2, mitochondrial;
Aldh5a1, aldehyde dehydrogenase family 5, subfamily A1; Aldoc, aldolase C, fructose-bisphosphate; Arg1, arginase, liver; Atp5a1, ATP synthase, H+ trans-
porting, mitochondrial F1 complex, alpha subunit 1; Atp5j2, ATP synthase, H+ transporting, mitochondrial F0 complex, subunit F2; Atp5k, ATP synthase,
H+ transporting, mitochondrial F1F0 complex, subunit e; Atp5o, ATP synthase, H+ transporting, mitochondrial F1 complex, O subunit; Atp6v0a1, ATPase,
(legend continued on next page)
1754
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 13.80% of proteins were acetylated in WT and KO NPY neu-
rons, respectively (Figure 7F). However, under conditions of
fasting, 15.03% of proteins in WT NPY neurons were acety-
lated, whereas this was significantly lower at 13.88% in KO
NPY neurons (p < 0.05). Under refed conditions, 15.06% and
13.61% of proteins were acetylated from WT and KO NPY neu-
rons (p < 0.05), respectively (Figure 7F).
DISCUSSION
AgRP activation engages neural circuits to prevent and/or adapt
to states of hunger by promoting energy conservation and eugly-
cemia. However, the ability of AgRP neurons to acutely respond
to signals of incoming energy availability is also important to
conserve energy, as illustrated by increased fatty acid utilization
and attenuated body weight gain on a HFD in AgRP neonatally
ablated mice (Joly-Amado et al., 2012). This nutrient partitioning
involves effectively and rapidly switching off peripheral fatty acid
oxidation in favor of storage, characteristic of the transition from
a fasted to a refed state. Our current studies suggest that Crat
affects AgRP neuronal function predominantly during fasting
and the transition to refeeding. This is based on observations
in which the deletion of Crat in AgRP neurons changes food
intake and feeding behavior after fasting; hepatic function during
fasting, which includes a shift to glycerol as a preferred gluco-
neogenic substrate; peripheral glucose clearance in response
to an acute glucose load; peripheral fatty acid oxidation during
fasting and in response to refeeding; and the intracellular protein
abundance and acetylation status within AgRP neurons, partic-
ularly during fasting and refeeding. Thus, the influence of Crat
on AgRP neuronal function is most relevant during fasting and
in the transition to refeeding. This occurs at a time when meta-
bolic processing in AgRP neurons is most relevant to control
nutrient partitioning to promote maximal energy conservation.
Although a large amount of literature has focused on the
important role of AgRP neurons to increase energy-conserving
mechanisms during fasting, little research has focused on the
mechanisms that enable AgRP neurons to respond to acute
refeeding. In muscle, Crat regulates metabolic flexibility by facil-
itating the substrate switch during the transition from fasting to
refeeding (Muoio et al., 2012; Seiler et al., 2015). These actions
attenuate the development of metabolic diseases such as
obesity and type 2 diabetes. Our results show that Crat in
AgRP neurons is required to maintain metabolic flexibility during
the transition from fasting to refeeding and suggest a distinct
function of Crat in substrate switching, irrespective of tissue
type. KO mice not only showed increased fatty acid utilization
during ad libitum and fasted conditions, as indicated by the lower
RER, they also showed a blunted switch from fatty acid to
glucose utilization during the fasting-to-refeeding transition.
Moreover, the deletion of Crat in AgRP neurons improves
whole-body glycerol and TG handling and the response to lipo-
protein lipase inhibition in the same manner as AgRP ablation
(Joly-Amado et al., 2012). Although this did not influence body
fat loss during a single bout of fasting, we predict that this would
affect energy homeostasis during a model of chronic energy
deficit, such as calorie restriction or feeding entrainment, when
AgRP neurons are most important to restore energy homeosta-
sis (Andermann and Lowell, 2017).
The importance of Crat in AgRP neurons to maintain metabolic
flexibility and nutrient partitioning was also observed after
glucose administration because blood glucose was significantly
higher in KO mice 15 and 30 min after gavage, primarily because
of impaired glucose clearance, but returned to levels in WT mice
at 60 and 120 min. Together with RER changes, these results
show that Crat blunts, but does not prevent, the responsiveness
of AgRP neurons. This observation is supported by measures
of glucose-stimulated glucose uptake, which shows deficits in
glucose uptake in inguinal white adipose tissue (iWAT) and mus-
cle at 15 min but not at 30 min. Interestingly, it is after this 30-min
time point that glucose clearance is no longer different in WT and
KO mice during an oral GTT.
Crat deletion affected the acetylation profile of proteins within
AgRP neurons during fasting and refeeding but not in the fed
state, which further highlights the important role of Crat in
AgRP neurons during fasting-to-refeeding transition. This is
H+ transporting, lysosomal V0 subunit A1; Atp6v1a, ATPase, H+ transporting, lysosomal V1 subunit A; Atp6v1b2, ATPase, H+ transporting, lysosomal V1 subunit
B2; Atp6v1c1, ATPase, H+ transporting, lysosomal V1 subunit C1; Atp6v1g2, ATPase, H+ transporting, lysosomal V1 subunit G2; Bcat1, branched chain
aminotransferase 1, cytosolic; Bdh1, 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase, type 1; Ckb, creatine kinase, brain; Ckmt1, creatine kinase, mitochondrial 1, ubiquitous;
Cox4i1, cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV isoform 1; Dlat, dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase (E2 component of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex); Dld,
dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase; Eno1, enolase 1, alpha non-neuron; Eno2, enolase 2, gamma neuronal; Fdps, farnesyl diphosphate synthetase; Fh1, fumarate
hydratase 1; Got1, glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase 1, soluble; Got2, glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase 2, mitochondrial; Gss, glutathione synthetase;
H2-Ke6, H2-K region expressed gene 6; Hadha, hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase/3-ketoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase/enoyl-coenzyme A hydratase
(trifunctional protein), alpha subunit; Hk1, hexokinase 1; Hsd17b4, hydroxysteroid (17-beta) dehydrogenase 4; Idh1, isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (NADP+),
soluble; Idh3g, isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 (NAD+), gamma; Ldhb, lactate dehydrogenase B; Lta4h, leukotriene A4 hydrolase; Mdh1, malate dehydrogenase 1,
NAD (soluble); Mdh2, malate dehydrogenase 2, NAD (mitochondrial); Me1, malic enzyme 1, NADP(+)-dependent, cytosolic; Mgll, monoglyceride lipase; mt-Atp8,
mitochondrially encoded ATP synthase 8; Mthfd1, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (NADP+ dependent), methenyltetrahydrofolate cyclohydrolase,
formyltetrahydrofolate synthase; Ndufa10, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex 10; Ndufa2, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha
subcomplex, 2; Ndufa9, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex, 9; Ndufb10, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 beta subcomplex, 10;
Ndufb11, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 beta subcomplex, 11; Ndufb9, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 beta subcomplex, 9; Ndufc2, NADH
dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1, subcomplex unknown, 2; Ndufs1, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) Fe-S protein 1; Ndufs6, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiqui-
none) Fe-S protein 6; Ndufv1, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) flavoprotein 1; Ndufv2, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) flavoprotein 2; Ogdh, oxoglutarate
dehydrogenase (lipoamide); Pafah1b1, platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase, isoform 1b, subunit 1; Pafah1b3, platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase,
isoform 1b, subunit 3; Pcyt2, phosphate cytidylyltransferase 2, ethanolamine; Pdha1, pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 alpha 1; Pfkp, phosphofructokinase, platelet;
Pgam1, phosphoglycerate mutase 1; Pkm, pyruvate kinase, muscle; Prdx6, peroxiredoxin 6; Prps2, phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 2; Rpn1,
ribophorin I; Synj1, synaptojanin 1; Tkt, transketolase; Uqcrb, ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase binding protein; Uqcrh, ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase hinge
protein; Uqcrq, ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase, complex III subunit VII.
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1755
 consistent with others who showed that Crat plays an important
role in intracellular acetylation of proteins (Davies et al., 2016;
Madiraju et al., 2009) by regulating acetyl group availability for
acetylation (Pietrocola et al., 2015). Further analysis of proteomic
data highlighted that Crat regulates metabolic processing pri-
marily during fasting and refeeding. Differentially regulated pro-
teins included those involved in sirtuin (SIRT) activity, NADH
metabolism, uncoupling activity, glycolysis, and mitochondrial
dynamics. We also noted a number of differences related to
proteins involved in synaptic function and endocytosis. This
supports the concept that increased synaptic activity requires
greater energetic demands via mitochondrial transport (Li
et al., 2004), dynamics (Dietrich et al., 2013), and appropriate
mitochondrial processing. Although a number of proteins
regulating mitochondrial function are known to influence AgRP
function and energy homeostasis, including mitofusins (Dietrich
et al., 2013), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (Claret et al.,
2007), SIRT (Dietrich et al., 2010), PGC1a (Gill et al., 2016), and
uncoupling protein-2 (Andrews et al., 2008), none of these
studies have illustrated the importance of AgRP metabolic path-
ways during fasting and the refeeding transition.
Because AgRP neurons play a fundamental role in food intake,
we examined the effects of Crat deletion on food intake and
feeding behavior. Under ad libitum conditions, meal duration
was significantly reduced; however, animals increased the
meal number so that overall food intake was not different be-
tween genotypes. These results are consistent with Campos
et al. (2016), in which inactivation of a subpopulation of AgRP
to parabrachial calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) neurons
(AgRP/CGRPPBel) reduced meal duration but mice were able to
increase the meal number to maintain appropriate food intake.
Moreover, this study showed that the inability to engage the
AgRP/CGRPPBel pathway heightened sensitivity to satiety
cues (Campos et al., 2016), consistent with our observations
that KO mice are more sensitive to feedback signals of satiety
(i.p. CCK and ICV insulin). AgRP neurons projecting to the lateral
hypothalamus, anterior bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, PVN,
and paraventricular thalamus also increase the drive to eat
(Betley et al., 2013) independent from the AgRP/CGRPPBel
pathway, and elevated AgRP neuronal activity during fasting is
required to elicit positive valence after MC4RPVN activation (Gar-
field et al., 2015). Thus, under conditions of hunger, as seen in
fasted mice, AgRP neurons promote energy intake by simulta-
neously increasing food intake and suppressing the actions of
satiety signals. Indeed, Crat deletion occurs in 90% of ARC
NPY neurons, suggesting impaired pathways driving food intake
and the AgRP/CGRPPBel pathway that suppresses meal termi-
nation. Consistent with this, fasted KO mice exhibit reduced food
intake during refeeding and smaller meal size and duration.
Although there was no difference in fasting blood glucose be-
tween genotypes, our results indicate that, during fasting, the
deletion of Crat from AgRP neurons forces the liver to generate
glucose using glycerol as a substrate for gluconeogenesis.
Hepatic glycogen depletion during fasting in humans increases
glycerol as a substrate for gluconeogenesis, an effect dependent
on an increase in lipolysis (Jahoor et al., 1992). Indeed, we
observed greater glycogen depletion in fasted KO mice, sup-
porting the concept that KO mice shift more quickly to glycerol
as a gluconeogenic substrate and show greater fatty acid oxida-
tion. This change occurs without affecting the rates of glycogen-
olysis and total gluconeogenesis and suggests that a simple
endpoint measurement of blood glucose is not sufficient to
address the biological adaptive mechanisms that ensure eugly-
cemia. Importantly, gluconeogenesis from glycerol requires a
constant rate of glycerol supply (Samuel and Shulman, 2016),
and we observed significantly greater TG concentrations in the
liver and plasma NEFA in fasted KO mice, a phenomenon also
witnessed in AgRP-ablated mice (Joly-Amado et al., 2012). Our
data indicate that greater hepatic fatty acid oxidation (gene
expression, functional enzyme activity, and ketone bodies) in
fasted KO mice reflects the need to break down TG to supply
glycerol for gluconeogenesis. We also observed an increase
in phosphoglycolate phosphatase (pgp) mRNA in adipose
tissue, the enzyme required for glycerol release from adipocytes
(Mugabo et al., 2016).
In summary, our studies show that AgRP neurons require Crat
to regulate metabolic flexibility and peripheral nutrient partition-
ing during fasting and the transition to refeeding, similar to a
known role of Crat in skeletal muscle (Muoio et al., 2012; Seiler
et al., 2015). The metabolic flexibility required to acutely switch
from fatty acid to glucose utilization during refeeding represents
an important mechanism that helps store energy-rich fatty acids
and maximizes energy conservation until required. We suggest
that Crat in AgRP neurons is required for metabolic processing,
as shown by a number of intracellular proteomic changes, to
allow AgRP neurons to respond to changing metabolic states,
particularly during ‘‘active’’ fasting states and during the transi-
tion to refeeding, which requires ‘‘acute inhibition’’ of AgRP
neurons (Wu et al., 2014). Moreover, Crat within AgRP neurons
engages sympathetic outflow in response to changing meta-
bolic states, which, in turn, coordinates peripheral organs to
optimize nutrient partitioning. The inability to properly adapt to
changing metabolic substrates is clearly an important mecha-
nism affecting the development of obesity-related diseases,
including diabetes and dyslipidemia. Beyond calorie intake, it
is becoming clear that the inappropriate handling of nutrient
‘‘fate’’ is largely responsible for metabolic disease, and this
study shows that Crat in AgRP neurons has an unappreciated
role in this process.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Animals
All experiments were conducted in compliance with the Monash University
Animal Ethics Committee guidelines. Male mice were kept under standard lab-
oratory conditions with free access to food (chow diet, catalog no. 8720610,
Barastoc Stockfeeds, Victoria, Australia) and water at 23�C in a 12-hr light/
dark cycle and were group-housed to prevent isolation stress unless otherwise
stated. All male mice were aged 8 weeks or older for experiments unless
otherwise stated. Additional information about animals can be found in the
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Food Intake Experiments
Mice were single-housed in specialized feeding cages (BioDAQ, Research
Diets, NJ, USA), and recordings were analyzed after a 3-day acclimation
period. Feeding behavior after fasting and short-term fasting (3 hr) combined
with i.p. CCK (0.25 mg/kg) or ICV insulin (0.025 mU in 1.5 mL) administered at
the onset of the active period were analyzed.
1756
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 Metabolic Studies
For labeled or unlabeled oral GTTs (1.5 g/kg) and glycerol tolerance test
(GlyTT, 1 g/kg i.p.), mice were fasted from 8 a.m., and tests were performed
5 hr later, at 1 p.m. Labeled glucose enrichment in plasma samples was
measured via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (for details,
see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures).
Endogenous Glucose Production
Mice were injected with deuterated water (D2O) (0.9% NaCl in D2O, 25 mL/kg
bodyweight, i.p.) and 10% D2O mixed into drinking water. Five hours after
injection, mice were subjected to a fast, and plasma samples (20 mL) were
taken after 3 and 18 hr of fasting. Enrichment was measured via GC-MS
(Kowalski et al., 2015; Supplemental Experimental Procedures).
Glucose-Stimulated Glucose Uptake
To localize glucose uptake in tissue, we performed oral GTT (1.5g/kg)
combined
with
intraperitoneal
injection
of
tritiated
2-deoxy-D-glucose
(2-(3H)-DG) tracer (10 mCi in 200 mL saline; see the Supplemental Experimental
Procedures for details).
CLAMS
To assess the energy expenditure of AgRP Crat mice during ad libitum chow
feeding, fasting, and refeeding and HFD conditions, single-housed mice
were placed in a comprehensive lab animal monitoring system (Oxymax-
CLAMS), and recordings were analyzed after a 1-day acclimation period.
Analysis of Blood Chemistry
Detailed
protocols
can
be
found
in
the
Supplemental
Experimental
Procedures.
PCR
Total RNA was extracted from tissue with Qiazol (Qiazol Sciences) according
to the instruction manual (see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures
for a detailed description of the procedure). cDNA synthesis and real-time
qPCR were performed as described previously (Stark et al., 2015b). For primer
details, see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Ex Vivo Fat Oxidation Assay
Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane. Tissues were collected and incu-
bated in Krebs buffer containing 14C-oleate (1 mCi/mL), and 14CO2 was
captured in 1 M NaOH for a period of 2 hr and measured as described previ-
ously (Meex et al., 2015).
Norepinephrine Turnover
Norepinephrine was measured by high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC), and turnover rates were calculated after log transformation by
log(saline) � log(alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine [aMPT]) / 0.434, where 0.434 is an
estimate for the kinetic rate (Brodie et al., 1966; for details; see the Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures).
Proteomics of AgRP Neurons
Peptides were analyzed using nano liquid chromatography-mass spectrom-
etry (for details, see the Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Acquired
.raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) to globally identify and
quantify proteins across the different conditions. Data visualization and
statistical analyses were performed in Perseus (v1.5.5.3). After removing
the reversed and known contaminating proteins, the label-free quantification
(LFQ) values were log2-transformed, and the reproducibility across the
biological replicates was evaluated by Pearson’s correlation analysis. The
replicates were grouped into WT fed versus KO fed, WT fasted versus KO
fasted, and WT refed versus KO refed. A two-sample t test was performed
to obtain the significantly expressed proteins, with p < 0.05. Significantly
changed proteins were further analyzed to investigate association with
KEGG pathways and gene ontology (GO) terms using the String database.
Enrichment analysis for compartmentalization of acetylated proteins was
performed against the Uniprot database (rodents, taxon ID 9989) with
FunRich 3.0.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed as reported previously (Wu et al., 2014)
using the following primary antibodies: c-Fos rabbit polyclonal immunoglo-
bulin G (IgG) (sc-52, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and phospho-AKT (Ser473)
rabbit monoclonal IgG (9271s, Cell Signaling Technology). The secondary
antibody for both was Alexa Fluor goat anti-rabbit 594 antibody (A-11037, Invi-
trogen). Fiber density, cell number, and volume were measured with a design-
based unbiased stereology method (StereoInvestigator, MicroBrightField, VT,
USA) as described previously (Lemus et al., 2015).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism for MacOS X. Data
are represented as mean ± SEM. Two-way ANOVAs with post hoc tests were
used to determine statistical significance. A two-tailed Student’s unpaired
t test was used when comparing genotype only. p < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
three figures, and three tables and can be found with this article online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.01.067.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Minh Deo technical assistance. We acknowledge Monash FlowCore
for sorting of cells using FACS. We acknowledge use of the facilities at the
Monash Biomedical Proteomics Facility and the Monash Histology Platform.
We thank Doug Compton from Research Diets for helping to set up and estab-
lish BioDAQ feeding cages. This study was supported by an Australian
NHMRC grant and fellowship (1126724 and 1084344 to Z.B.A. and
APP1077703 to M.J.W.). This work used the PBRC Transgenic Core, which
is supported in part by COBRE (NIH 8P20GM103528) and NORC (NIH 2P30-
DK072476-11A1) center grants from the NIH. A.R. is supported by an Austra-
lian Government Research Training Program scholarship. J.F.G. is the recip-
ient of funding from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tec-
nologico-CNPq Brazil.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.R. and Z.B.A. conceived the idea, designed and performed the experiments,
analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. Z.B.A. supervised and coordinated
the project. G.M.K., C.R.B., R.B.S., B.J.O., S.L., and M.J.W. helped design ex-
periments. R.S., R.E.C., S.H.L., C.H., M.B.L., J.F.G., G.M.K., C.R.B., M.M.,
S.L., R.R.G.D., and M.J.W. contributed to performing experiments. R.L.M.
provided the Crat floxed mouse model. A.R., M.J.W., S.L., and Z.B.A. dis-
cussed the results and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: April 14, 2017
Revised: November 13, 2017
Accepted: January 22, 2018
Published: February 13, 2018
REFERENCES
Andermann, M.L., and Lowell, B.B. (2017). Toward a wiring diagram under-
standing of appetite control. Neuron 95, 757–778.
Andrews, Z.B. (2011). Central mechanisms involved in the orexigenic actions
of ghrelin. Peptides 32, 2248–2255.
Andrews, Z.B., Liu, Z.W., Walllingford, N., Erion, D.M., Borok, E., Friedman,
J.M., Tscho
¨ p, M.H., Shanabrough, M., Cline, G., Shulman, G.I., et al. (2008).
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1757
 UCP2 mediates ghrelin’s action on NPY/AgRP neurons by lowering free radi-
cals. Nature 454, 846–851.
Aponte, Y., Atasoy, D., and Sternson, S.M. (2011). AGRP neurons are sufficient
to orchestrate feeding behavior rapidly and without training. Nat. Neurosci. 14,
351–355.
Baskin, D.G., Breininger, J.F., and Schwartz, M.W. (1999). Leptin receptor
mRNA identifies a subpopulation of neuropeptide Y neurons activated by fast-
ing in rat hypothalamus. Diabetes 48, 828–833.
Betley, J.N., Cao, Z.F., Ritola, K.D., and Sternson, S.M. (2013). Parallel, redun-
dant circuit organization for homeostatic control of feeding behavior. Cell 155,
1337–1350.
Briggs, D.I., Lemus, M.B., Kua, E., and Andrews, Z.B. (2011). Diet-induced
obesity attenuates fasting-induced hyperphagia. J. Neuroendocrinol. 23,
620–626.
Brodie, B.B., Costa, E., Dlabac, A., Neff, N.H., and Smookler, H.H. (1966).
Application of steady state kinetics to the estimation of synthesis rate and turn-
over time of tissue catecholamines. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 154, 493–498.
Br€
uning, J.C., Gautam, D., Burks, D.J., Gillette, J., Schubert, M., Orban, P.C.,
Klein, R., Krone, W., M€
uller-Wieland, D., and Kahn, C.R. (2000). Role of brain
insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction. Science 289,
2122–2125.
Campos, C.A., Bowen, A.J., Schwartz, M.W., and Palmiter, R.D. (2016). Para-
brachial CGRP neurons control meal termination. Cell Metab. 23, 811–820.
Claret, M., Smith, M.A., Batterham, R.L., Selman, C., Choudhury, A.I., Fryer,
L.G., Clements, M., Al-Qassab, H., Heffron, H., Xu, A.W., et al. (2007). AMPK
is essential for energy homeostasis regulation and glucose sensing by
POMC and AgRP neurons. J. Clin. Invest. 117, 2325–2336.
Davies, M.N., Kjalarsdottir, L., Thompson, J.W., Dubois, L.G., Stevens, R.D.,
Ilkayeva, O.R., Brosnan, M.J., Rolph, T.P., Grimsrud, P.A., and Muoio, D.M.
(2016). The acetyl group buffering action of carnitine acetyltransferase offsets
macronutrient-induced lysine acetylation of mitochondrial proteins. Cell Rep.
14, 243–254.
Dietrich, M.O., Antunes, C., Geliang, G., Liu, Z.W., Borok, E., Nie, Y., Xu, A.W.,
Souza, D.O., Gao, Q., Diano, S., et al. (2010). Agrp neurons mediate Sirt1’s ac-
tion on the melanocortin system and energy balance: roles for Sirt1 in neuronal
firing and synaptic plasticity. J. Neurosci. 30, 11815–11825.
Dietrich, M.O., Liu, Z.W., and Horvath, T.L. (2013). Mitochondrial dynamics
controlled by mitofusins regulate Agrp neuronal activity and diet-induced
obesity. Cell 155, 188–199.
Enriori, P.J., Evans, A.E., Sinnayah, P., Jobst, E.E., Tonelli-Lemos, L., Billes,
S.K., Glavas, M.M., Grayson, B.E., Perello, M., Nillni, E.A., et al. (2007). Diet-
induced obesity causes severe but reversible leptin resistance in arcuate mel-
anocortin neurons. Cell Metab. 5, 181–194.
Garfield, A.S., Li, C., Madara, J.C., Shah, B.P., Webber, E., Steger, J.S.,
Campbell, J.N., Gavrilova, O., Lee, C.E., Olson, D.P., et al. (2015). A neural
basis for melanocortin-4 receptor-regulated appetite. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
863–871.
Gill, J.F., Delezie, J., Santos, G., and Handschin, C. (2016). PGC-1a expression
in murine AgRP neurons regulates food intake and energy balance. Mol.
Metab. 5, 580–588.
Gropp, E., Shanabrough, M., Borok, E., Xu, A.W., Janoschek, R., Buch, T.,
Plum, L., Balthasar, N., Hampel, B., Waisman, A., et al. (2005). Agouti-related
peptide-expressing neurons are mandatory for feeding. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
1289–1291.
Gupta, R., Ma, Y., Wang, M., and Whim, M.D. (2017). AgRP-expressing
edrenal chromaffin cells are involved in the sympathetic response to fasting.
Endocrinology 158, 2572–2584.
Jahoor, F., Klein, S., and Wolfe, R. (1992). Mechanism of regulation of glucose
production by lipolysis in humans. Am. J. Physiol. 262, E353–E358.
Joly-Amado, A., Denis, R.G., Castel, J., Lacombe, A., Cansell, C., Rouch, C.,
Kassis, N., Dairou, J., Cani, P.D., Ventura-Clapier, R., et al. (2012). Hypotha-
lamic AgRP-neurons control peripheral substrate utilization and nutrient parti-
tioning. EMBO J. 31, 4276–4288.
Kleinridders, A., Ko
¨ nner, A.C., and Br€
uning, J.C. (2009). CNS-targets in control
of energy and glucose homeostasis. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 9, 794–804.
Ko
¨ nner, A.C., Janoschek, R., Plum, L., Jordan, S.D., Rother, E., Ma, X., Xu, C.,
Enriori, P., Hampel, B., Barsh, G.S., et al. (2007). Insulin action in AgRP-ex-
pressing neurons is required for suppression of hepatic glucose production.
Cell Metab. 5, 438–449.
Kowalski, G.M., Kloehn, J., Burch, M.L., Selathurai, A., Hamley, S., Bayol, S.A.,
Lamon, S., Watt, M.J., Lee-Young, R.S., McConville, M.J., and Bruce, C.R.
(2015). Overexpression of sphingosine kinase 1 in liver reduces triglyceride
content in mice fed a low but not high-fat diet. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1851,
210–219.
Krashes, M.J., Koda, S., Ye, C., Rogan, S.C., Adams, A.C., Cusher, D.S., Mar-
atos-Flier, E., Roth, B.L., and Lowell, B.B. (2011). Rapid, reversible activation of
AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 1424–1428.
Lemus, M.B., Bayliss, J.A., Lockie, S.H., Santos, V.V., Reichenbach, A., Stark,
R., and Andrews, Z.B. (2015). A stereological analysis of NPY, POMC, Orexin,
GFAP astrocyte, and Iba1 microglia cell number and volume in diet-induced
obese male mice. Endocrinology 156, 1701–1713.
Li, Z., Okamoto, K., Hayashi, Y., and Sheng, M. (2004). The importance of den-
dritic mitochondria in the morphogenesis and plasticity of spines and synap-
ses. Cell 119, 873–887.
Luquet, S., Perez, F.A., Hnasko, T.S., and Palmiter, R.D. (2005). NPY/AgRP
neurons are essential for feeding in adult mice but can be ablated in neonates.
Science 310, 683–685.
Madiraju, P., Pande, S.V., Prentki, M., and Madiraju, S.R. (2009). Mitochondrial
acetylcarnitine provides acetyl groups for nuclear histone acetylation. Epige-
netics 4, 399–403.
Meex, R.C., Hoy, A.J., Morris, A., Brown, R.D., Lo, J.C.Y., Burke, M., Goode,
R.J.A., Kingwell, B.A., Kraakman, M.J., Febbraio, M.A., et al. (2015). Fetuin B
is a secreted hepatocyte factor linking steatosis to impaired glucose meta-
bolism. Cell Metab. 22, 1078–1089.
Mugabo, Y., Zhao, S., Seifried, A., Gezzar, S., Al-Mass, A., Zhang, D., Lamon-
tagne, J., Attane, C., Poursharifi, P., Iglesias, J., et al. (2016). Identification
of a mammalian glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatase: Role in metabolism and
signaling in pancreatic b-cells and hepatocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
113, E430–E439.
Muoio, D.M., Noland, R.C., Kovalik, J.P., Seiler, S.E., Davies, M.N., DeBalsi,
K.L., Ilkayeva, O.R., Stevens, R.D., Kheterpal, I., Zhang, J., et al. (2012).
Muscle-specific deletion of carnitine acetyltransferase compromises glucose
tolerance and metabolic flexibility. Cell Metab. 15, 764–777.
Niswender, K.D., Morrison, C.D., Clegg, D.J., Olson, R., Baskin, D.G., Myers,
M.G., Jr., Seeley, R.J., and Schwartz, M.W. (2003). Insulin activation of phos-
phatidylinositol 3-kinase in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus: a key mediator
of insulin-induced anorexia. Diabetes 52, 227–231.
Pietrocola, F., Galluzzi, L., Bravo-San Pedro, J.M., Madeo, F., and Kroemer, G.
(2015). Acetyl coenzyme A: A central metabolite and second messenger. Cell
Metab. 21, 805–821.
Ramsay, R.R., and Zammit, V.A. (2004). Carnitine acyltransferases and their in-
fluence on CoA pools in health and disease. Mol. Aspects Med. 25, 475–493.
Ruan, H.B., Dietrich, M.O., Liu, Z.W., Zimmer, M.R., Li, M.D., Singh, J.P.,
Zhang, K., Yin, R., Wu, J., Horvath, T.L., and Yang, X. (2014). O-GlcNAc trans-
ferase enables AgRP neurons to suppress browning of white fat. Cell 159,
306–317.
Samuel, V.T., and Shulman, G.I. (2016). The pathogenesis of insulin resistance:
integrating signaling pathways and substrate flux. J. Clin. Invest. 126, 12–22.
Schotz, M.C., Scanu, A., and Page, I.H. (1957). Effect of triton on lipoprotein
lipase of rat plasma. Am. J. Physiol. 188, 399–402.
Schwartz, M.W., Erickson, J.C., Baskin, D.G., and Palmiter, R.D. (1998). Effect
of fasting and leptin deficiency on hypothalamic neuropeptide Y gene tran-
scription in vivo revealed by expression of a lacZ reporter gene. Endocrinology
139, 2629–2635.
Seiler, S.E., Koves, T.R., Gooding, J.R., Wong, K.E., Stevens, R.D., Ilkayeva,
O.R., Wittmann, A.H., DeBalsi, K.L., Davies, M.N., Lindeboom, L., et al.
1758
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
 (2015). Carnitine acetyltransferase mitigates metabolic inertia and muscle
fatigue during exercise. Cell Metab. 22, 65–76.
Stark, R., Reichenbach, A., and Andrews, Z.B. (2015a). Hypothalamic carnitine
metabolism integrates nutrient and hormonal feedback to regulate energy
homeostasis. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 418, 9–16.
Stark, R., Reichenbach, A., Lockie, S.H., Pracht, C., Wu, Q., Tups, A., and An-
drews, Z.B. (2015b). Acyl ghrelin acts in the brain to control liver function and
peripheral glucose homeostasis in male mice. Endocrinology 156, 858–868.
van de Wall, E., Leshan, R., Xu, A.W., Balthasar, N., Coppari, R., Liu, S.M., Jo,
Y.H., MacKenzie, R.G., Allison, D.B., Dun, N.J., et al. (2008). Collective and in-
dividual functions of leptin receptor modulated neurons controlling meta-
bolism and ingestion. Endocrinology 149, 1773–1785.
Wang, Q., Liu, C., Uchida, A., Chuang, J.C., Walker, A., Liu, T., Osborne-Law-
rence, S., Mason, B.L., Mosher, C., Berglund, E.D., et al. (2013). Arcuate AgRP
neurons mediate orexigenic and glucoregulatory actions of ghrelin. Mol.
Metab. 3, 64–72.
Wu, Q., Lemus, M.B., Stark, R., Bayliss, J.A., Reichenbach, A., Lockie, S.H.,
and Andrews, Z.B. (2014). The temporal pattern of cfos activation in hypotha-
lamic, cortical, and brainstem nuclei in response to fasting and refeeding in
male mice. Endocrinology 155, 840–853.
Cell Reports 22, 1745–1759, February 13, 2018
1759
