 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Open Access
Cannabis as a Substitute for Opioid-Based Pain Medication:
Patient Self-Report
Amanda Reiman,1,* Mark Welty,2 and Perry Solomon3
Abstract
Introduction: Prescription drug overdoses are the leading cause of accidental death in the United States. Alter-
natives to opioids for the treatment of pain are necessary to address this issue. Cannabis can be an effective treat-
ment for pain, greatly reduces the chance of dependence, and eliminates the risk of fatal overdose compared to
opioid-based medications. Medical cannabis patients report that cannabis is just as effective, if not more, than
opioid-based medications for pain.
Materials and Methods: The current study examined the use of cannabis as a substitute for opioid-based pain
medication by collecting survey data from 2897 medical cannabis patients.
Discussion: Thirty-four percent of the sample reported using opioid-based pain medication in the past 6
months. Respondents overwhelmingly reported that cannabis provided relief on par with their other medica-
tions, but without the unwanted side effects. Ninety-seven percent of the sample ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’
that they are able to decrease the amount of opiates they consume when they also use cannabis, and 81%
‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that taking cannabis by itself was more effective at treating their condition than taking
cannabis with opioids. Results were similar for those using cannabis with nonopioid-based pain medications.
Conclusion: Future research should track clinical outcomes where cannabis is offered as a viable substitute for pain
treatment and examine the outcomes of using cannabis as a medication assisted treatment for opioid dependence.
Keywords: opiates; pain; harm reduction; substitution; opioids; cannabis
Introduction
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Preven-
tion report that ‘‘[o]pioids (including prescription
opioid pain relievers and heroin) killed more than
28,000 people in 2014, more than any year on record.’’
Unfortunately, this statistic has done little to curb the
prescribing and consumption patterns for prescription
opioids. The CDC estimates that, ‘‘since 1999, the amount
of prescription opioids sold in the United States nearly
quadrupled, yet there has not been an overall change in
the amount of pain that Americans report. Deaths from
prescription opioids—drugs like oxycodone, hydroco-
done, and methadone—have also quadrupled since
1999.’’1 Interestingly, Bachhuber et al. found that states
with medical cannabis laws had significantly lower state-
level opioid overdose mortality rates.2 Similarly, Bradford
and Bradford evaluated data on all prescriptions filled by
Medicare Part D patients from 2010 to 2013 and found
that the use of prescription drugs for which cannabis
could serve as a clinical alternative fell significantly, once
a state medical cannabis law was implemented. They
found that implementing an effective medical cannabis
law led to a reduction of 1826 daily doses for opioid
pain relief filled per physician per year.3
Patients who suffer with pain continue to use opioids
for chronic pain conditions despite their limited long-
1School of Social Welfare, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California.
2School of Lifespan Development and Educational Services, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio.
3Chief Medical Officer, HelloMD, San Francisco, California.
*Address correspondence to: Amanda Reiman, PhD, MSW, School of Social Welfare, University of California, Berkeley, 120 Haviland Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720, E-mail:
areiman@berkeley.edu
ª Amanda Reiman et al. 2017; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research
Volume 2.1, 2017
DOI: 10.1089/can.2017.0012
Cannabis and
Cannabinoid Research
160
 term efficacy. The management of chronic pain impacts
11.2% of adults in the United States with about 3% to 4%
of these patients receiving long-term opioid therapy.4
This translates to *100 million Americans and incurs
costs of up to $635 billion dollars per year.5 Long-term
opioid therapy is associated with a number of risks, in-
cluding opioid use disorder, overdose, and death. In
2012 the National Institute of Drug Abuse estimated
that there were *2.1 million people in the United States
suffering from substance use disorders related to pre-
scription opioid pain relievers and another half million
addicted to heroin.6
Used in combination with opioid pain medications,
cannabis can lower opioid side effects, cravings, and
withdrawal severity, as well as enhance the analgesic
effects of opioids, thereby allowing for lower doses
and less risk of overdose.7,8 A previous study reported
that their subjects’ pain ‘‘was significantly decreased
after the addition of vaporized cannabis’’ and suggested
that cannabis treatment ‘‘may allow for opioid treat-
ment at lower doses with fewer [patient] side effects.’’
The authors concluded that their results ‘‘demonstrate
that inhaled cannabis safely augments the analgesic ef-
fects of opioids.’’9 Research published last year found
that 80% of medical cannabis users reported substitut-
ing cannabis for prescribed medications, particularly
among patients with pain-related conditions.8
In an 1889 seminal article published in The Lancet,
Dr. Edward A. Birch writes about his tremendous suc-
cess in using cannabis to help patients who had become
addicted to pain medications, including opioids. He
wrote, ‘‘I prescribed the cannabis simply with a view to
utilizing a well-known remedy for insomnia, but it did
much more than procure sleep. I think it will be found
that there need be no fear of peremptorily withdrawing
the deleterious drug, if hemp be employed.’’ (p. 625).10
Birch’s comments from 127 years ago predicted what
we know to be true today, despite some controversy
that continues to surround the topic of cannabis as med-
icine. Numerous scholarly studies have demonstrated
the efficacy of cannabis for multiple conditions, includ-
ing the management of pain, while concurrently reduc-
ing the reliance on opioid medications and nonopioid
medications.5 In a 2010 pain study conducted in Can-
ada, Ware et al. found that ‘‘a single inhalation of
25mg of 9.4% tetrahydrocannabinol herbal cannabis
three times daily for five days reduced the intensity of
pain, improved sleep, and was well tolerated.’’11
While the use of cannabis to treat pain is becoming
more accepted in the United States, the Schedule I status
of cannabis has made it difficult to conduct large-scale
clinical trials on its efficacy. Recent clinical and system-
atic reviews have acknowledged the promise that canna-
bis might hold as a standardized pain treatment, while
recognizing the limitations that come from small sample
sizes and lack on controlled studies. While these reviews
show moderate evidence for cannabis as a treatment for
pain-related conditions, they also call for additional re-
search in the form of standardized clinical trials.12,13
Meanwhile, in parallel, medical cannabis patients are
reporting the use of cannabis to treat their pain in lieu
of or in conjunction with opioid-based pain medications.
The act of substituting cannabis for opioids has also
been documented in several studies of medical cannabis
patients. Consistently, these studies saw substitution rates
for prescription drugs over 50%, with less side effects
from cannabis being a top reason for substitution across
studies.14–16 Given the efficacy data on how cannabis as-
sists patients’ management of pain, while also mitigating
the risks associated with long-term opioid therapy, the
present study uses data gathered directly from the im-
pressions of patients who have used cannabis. Patients
were provided an opportunity to comment on how can-
nabis compared with their use of opioid and nonopioid-
based pain medication for the treatment of pain.
Materials and Methods
This study utilized a cross-sectional survey to gather
data about the use of cannabis as a substitute for opioid
and nonopioid-based pain medication. This study was
approved by the IRB at the University of California,
Berkeley (Protocol No. 2016-08-9044). Drs. Welty and
Reiman did not receive compensation from HelloMD
to complete the study.
Instrument
The survey instrument (see Supplementary Appendix
SA1 for a copy of the instrument) used for this study
was a modified version of the survey used in the Tilray
Observational Patient Survey (TOPS). The survey for
this study included questions about demographic charac-
teristics, conditions for which cannabis is used, and pre-
ferred method of cannabis ingestion. Participants were
then asked about their use of cannabis as a substitute
for opioid and nonopioid-based pain medication to create
subsets of respondents who were engaging in substitution.
An affirmative answer led participants to the sections that
asked about their experiences using cannabis as a substi-
tute. Questions in this section asked about perceived effi-
cacy of cannabis compared to their other medications,
Reiman, et al.; Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2017, 2.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/can.2017.0012
161
 perceived comparability of unwanted side effects, and
how the stigma around cannabis impacts their decision
to use it as a substitute.
Sampling
The survey was administered through e-mail to a data-
base of 67,422 medical cannabis patients in the state of
California using the HelloMD patient database. HelloMD
is a digital cannabis health and wellness platform that also
provides Telehealth evaluations for medical cannabis rec-
ommendations to patients in California. The members of
the database received an invitation e-mail describing the
study and the survey, along with a link to the survey.
After clicking the link, respondents were taken to the
Qualtrics survey site where they could complete the sur-
vey confidentially. A reminder e-mail with the link to the
survey was sent out 2 weeks after the initial invitation
was sent. The survey was closed 4 weeks after the re-
minder e-mail was sent. As an incentive for participating,
upon completion of the survey, respondents were asked if
they would like to enter a raffle for one of five Firefly va-
porizers. If they wished to enter, they clicked on a link
that directed them to a form where they could enter
their name and e-mail address. At the completion of
the sampling, five respondents were selected at random
and awarded the vaporizer.
Results
Demographics
Of the 2897 participants, 55% were male. Eleven respon-
dents identified as trans males and one identified as a
trans female. Fifty-three percent of the sample was be-
tween the ages of 20 and 39, 29% being over the age of
50, and 15% over the age of 60. Sixty-four percent identi-
fied as White, 14% Latino(a), and 7% African American.
Most patients had some college education or completed
college (71%) with 14% having completed postgraduate
work. There were some significant differences between
the general sample and those reporting past 6 month
use of opioid and nonopioid-based pain medications.
Whites were significantly more likely to report past 6
month use of both types of pain medication (p<0.001).
Age was also significantly related to past 6 month use
of these medications (p<0.001). Other significant deter-
minants were being a woman (p<0.001) and having a
pain condition (p<0.001) (Table 1).
Condition and cannabis use
Pain was the most common condition for which respon-
dents reported using cannabis with 16% reporting that as
their primary condition. However, when accounting for
all pain-related conditions (menstrual cramps, fibro-
myalgia, back pain and arthritis, etc.) that rises to 63%.
Common mental health conditions for which respon-
dents used cannabis included anxiety (13%), insomnia
(9%), and depression (5%) (Fig. 1). Smoking was the
most common method of ingestion with 50% of the sam-
ple reporting using cannabis in that way. Thirty-one per-
cent report vaporizing their cannabis, and 10% use
edibles. Three percent reported that they do not cur-
rently use medical cannabis.
Cannabis and opioids
Thirty percent of the sample (N = 841) reported using
an opioid-based pain medication currently or in the
past 6 months. Of those who have used opioids, 61%
reported using them with cannabis. Ninety-seven per-
cent of the sample ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that they
are able to decrease the amount of opioids they con-
sume when they also use cannabis. In addition, 89%
‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that taking opioids produces
unwanted side effects such as constipation and nausea.
Ninety-two percent of the sample ‘‘strongly agreed/
agreed’’ that cannabis has more tolerable side effects
than the opioid-based medications they have taken.
Eighty-one percent ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that taking
cannabis by itself was more effective at treating their
condition than taking cannabis with opioids. When
asked if cannabis produces the same amount of pain
relief as their opioid-based medications, 71% ‘‘strongly
agreed/agreed’’ with that fact. Ninety-two percent of
the sample ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that they prefer
cannabis to opioids for the treatment of their condition
and 93% ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that they would be
Table 1. Sample Demographics
N (%)
Male
1593 (55)
20–29
898 (31)
30–39
666 (23)
40–49
406 (14)
50–59
406 (14)
60 +
435 (15)
White (not Hispanic)
1854 (64)
Hispanic/Latino(a)
406 (14)
African American
203 (7)
Asian
145 (5)
Pacific Islander
29 (1)
American Indian
58 (2)
Other ethnicity
203 (7)
High school
435 (15)
Some college
1130 (39)
College graduate
927 (32)
Graduate school
406 (14)
Reiman, et al.; Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2017, 2.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/can.2017.0012
162
 FIG. 1.
Primary conditions.
Reiman, et al.; Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2017, 2.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/can.2017.0012
163
 more likely to choose cannabis to treat their condition if
it were more readily available (Fig. 2).
Cannabis and nonopioid-based medications
Sixty-four percent of the sample (N=1751) reported tak-
ing a nonopioid-based pain medication (e.g., Tylenol) for
their condition currently or in the past 6 months. Seventy-
six percent of the sample reported taking a nonopioid-
based pain medication along with cannabis currently
or in the past 6 months. Ninety-six percent ‘‘strongly
agreed/agreed’’ that they do not need to take as much
of their nonopioid-based pain medication when they
use cannabis and 92% ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ that can-
nabis works better for their condition than a nonopioid-
based pain medication.
As for preferring cannabis over nonopioid pain
medication, 95% ‘‘strongly agreed/agreed’’ with this
statement.
Similarly to the opioid pain medication group, 93%
reported that they would be more likely to use cannabis
as a substitute if it were more readily available and eas-
ier to access (Fig. 3).
Discussion
Supporting the results of previous research, this study
can conclude that medical cannabis patients report
successfully using cannabis along with or as a substi-
tute for opioid-based pain medication. Echoing the
results of Ware et al. and Abrams et al., patients in
this study who are using cannabis and opioids report
that they are able to use less opioids and that cannabis
presents less unwanted side effects than their opioid-
based medication.9,11 In addition, 80% of patients
reported that cannabis by itself was more effective
than their opioids. It is possible that the variability
of individual endocannabinoid and endo-opioid sys-
tems results in varying levels of efficacy between the
two treatments. For example, a recent review released
by the National Academy of Sciences reports conclu-
sive evidence cannabis’ efficacy in treating chronic
pain, but localized versus neuropathic pain might de-
mand different approaches.17 Cannabis has been
found to be very useful in treating neuropathic pain
specifically.11
This study found a similar pattern of results when
looking at substituting cannabis for nonopioid-based
pain medication like Tylenol and Advil. Research
suggests that long-term use of these remedies might
lead to organ damage.18 With cannabis not only be-
coming more accepted in the mainstream but also
coming in a variety of preparations, some of which
are nonintoxicating, more people are looking at can-
nabis as a viable treatment for everyday ailments
such as muscle soreness and inflammation. The
FIG. 2.
Use of cannabis as a substitute/in conjunction with opioid-based pain medication (n = 828).
Reiman, et al.; Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2017, 2.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/can.2017.0012
164
 results of this study support that not only is this prac-
tice common but also medical cannabis patients who
choose to use cannabis as a substitute for these med-
icines report better outcomes with fewer unwanted
side effects with cannabis compared to their other
medications.
Participants in this study overwhelmingly supported
the notion that they would be more likely to use cannabis
as a substitute for pain medication if it were less stigma-
tized and more available, suggesting that there are pop-
ulations of people who could benefit from this practice
but are shying away due to the stigma and legal restric-
tions related to cannabis use. If cannabis laws continue to
change across the country, it will be important to assess
how changes in these laws might impact other public
health behaviors and outcomes, such as opioid overdose,
dependence, risky behaviors, and spending on prescrip-
tion medications.
Limitations
This is a study of patient self-report through online survey.
The data for analyses are based on patient perception and
not on objective measure of cannabis and opioid use. Fur-
thermore, there is no comparison group of pain patients
who only have access to opioid-based medications or in-
dividuals solely using over-the-counter medications for
pain. Finally, the solicitation e-mail sent to potential par-
ticipants included the title of the study which relates to
cannabis use for pain. This may have biased the respon-
dents toward those using for pain versus other conditions.
Response rate
The survey yielded responses from 2897 participants,
which is a response rate of 4.3%. Since the survey
was sent to the HelloMD total patient database, includ-
ing those not using cannabis for pain, this could reflect
in the response rate. Other reasons for nonresponse,
besides lack of interest, include people who are no lon-
ger patients and those who chose not to participate for
other reasons such as privacy concerns.
Amount of cannabis consumed
One of the major limitations of cannabis research is the
difficulty in determining how much cannabis partici-
pants are using. Variations in strength of product,
size of vessel, and social use patterns all impact the re-
liability and validity of consumption measures. This
survey did not ask participants to estimate their amount
of consumption and therefore cannot comment on
reported effective doses.
Prescription status of opioids
This study did not ask participants if the opioids they con-
sumed were from a prescription or by self-medication.
The study also did not inquire as to the specific types
of opioids being consumed.
FIG. 3.
Use of cannabis as a substitute/in conjunction with nonopioid based medication (n = 1684).
Reiman, et al.; Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2017, 2.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/can.2017.0012
165
 Conclusions
The results of this study provide implications from both
a micro and macro level. First, from the macro level,
there have been three previously published indicators
of public health changes in states that permit medical
cannabis: decreases in opioid related mortality, de-
creases in spending on opioids, and a decrease in traffic
fatalities.2,3,19 While none of these studies shows a cause
and effect relationship, they do suggest public health re-
lated population based changes in localities where can-
nabis can be accessed to treat pain. Given that the
participants in this study reported a greater likelihood
of using cannabis as a substitute in a less stigmatized
and easily accessible environment, it makes sense why
we would see these changes in locations where medical
cannabis is sanctioned versus places where it is illegal.
At the micro level, there is a great deal of individual
risk associated with prolonged use of opioids and per-
haps even nonopioid-based pain medications. The pre-
scribing of opioids has not been curbed in the United
States, despite the growing number of fatal overdoses
and reported dependence. Providing the patient with
the option of cannabis as a method of pain treatment
alongside the option of opioids might assist with pain
relief in a safer environment with less risk. A society
with less opioid dependent people will result in fewer
public health harms.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
References
1. Centers for Disease Control. Injury prevention and control: opioid over-
dose. www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic (Accessed February 1, 2017).
2. Bachhuber MA, Saloner B, Cunningham CO, et al. Medical cannabis
laws and opioid analgesic overdose mortality in the United States,
1999–2010. JAMA. 2014;174:1668–1673.
3. Bradford AC, Bradford WD. Medical cannabis laws reduce prescription
medication use in Medicare Part D. Health Aff. 2016;35:1230–1236.
4. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing opioids
for chronic pain—United States, 2016. JAMA. 2016;315:1624–1645.
5. Boehnke KF, Litinas E, Clauw DJ. Medical cannabis associated with de-
creased opiate medication use in retrospective cross-sectional survey of
chronic pain patients. J Pain. 2016; DOI: 10.1016/j.jpain.2016.03.002.
6. Volkow ND. America’s addiction to opioids: heroin and prescription drug
abuse. 2014. www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/legislative-activities/
testimony-to-congress/2016/americas-addiction-to-opioids-heroin-
prescription-drug-abuse (last accessed March 27, 2017).
7. Degenhardt L, Lintzeris N, Campbell G, et al. Experience of adjunctive
marijuana use for chronic non-cancer pain: findings from the Pain and
Opioids IN Treatment (POINT) study. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015;147:44–
150.
8. Haroutounian S, Ratz Y, Ginosar Y, et al. The effect of medicinal marijuana
on pain and quality of life outcomes in chronic pain: a prospective
open-label study. Clin J Pain. 2016;32:1036–1043.
9. Abrams D, et al. Cannabinoid-opioid interaction in chronic pain. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 2011;90:844–851.
10. Birch EA. The use of Indian hemp in the treatment of chronic chloral and
chronic opium poisoning. Lancet. 1889;625.
11. Ware MA, Wang T, Shapiro S, et al. Smoked cannabis for chronic neuro-
pathic pain: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ. 2010;182:E694–E701.
12. Hill K. Medical marijuana for the treatment of chronic pain and other
medical and psychiatric problems: a clinical review. JAMA.
2015;313:2474–2483.
13. Whiting P, Wolff R, Deshpande S, et al. Cannabinoids for medical use: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2015;313:2456–2473.
14. Reiman A. Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and other drugs. Harm
Reduct J. 2009;6:35.
15. Lucas P. Cannabis as an adjunct to or substitute for opioids in the treat-
ment of chronic pain. J Psychoactive Drugs. 2012;44:125–133.
16. Lucas P, Reiman A, Earleywine M. Cannabis as a substitute for alcohol and
other drugs: a dispensary-based survey of substitution effect in Canadian
medical cannabis patients. Addict Res Theory. 2013; DOI: 10.3109/
16066359.2012.7334.
17. Institute of Medicine. The health effects of cannabis and cannabinoids:
the current state of evidence and recommendations for research.
National Academies Press, 2017. www.nap.edu/24625 (last accessed
March 27, 2017).
18. Food and Drug Administration. Acetaminophen and liver damage: Q and
A for consumers. 2017. www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/
ucm168830.htm (last accessed March 27, 2017).
19. Santaella Tenorio J, Mauro C, Wall M, et al. US traffic fatalities, 1985–2014,
and their relationship to medical marijuana laws. Am J Public Health.
2016;107:336–342.
Cite this article as: Reiman A, Welty M, Solomon P (2017) Cannabis as
a substitute for opioid-based pain medication: patient self-report,
Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2:1, 160–166, DOI: 10.1089/can
.2017.0012.
Abbreviations Used
CDC ¼ Centers for Disease Control
TOPS ¼ Tilray Observational Patient Survey
Publish in Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research
-Immediate, unrestricted online access
-Rigorous peer review
-Compliance with open access mandates
-Authors retain copyright
-Highly indexed
-Targeted email marketing
liebertpub.com/can
Reiman, et al.; Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research 2017, 2.1
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/can.2017.0012
166
