 Scaling up physical activity interventions across the globe: 
stepping up to larger and smarter approaches to get people 
moving
Rodrigo S. Reis1,2, Deborah Salvo3,4, David Ogilvie5, Estelle V. Lambert6, Shifalika 
Goenka7, Ross C. Brownson8,9, and Lancet Physical Activity Series 2 Executive 
Committee*
1Urban Management Graduate Program, Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Parana, Curitiba, 
Brazil
2Physical Education Gradate Program, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil
3Michael & Susan Dell Center for Healthy Living, The University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, School of Public Health - Austin Regional Campus, Austin, United States
4Center for Nutrition and Health Research, National Institute of Public a Health of Mexico 
Cuernavaca, Mexico
5MRC Epidemiology Unit and UKCRC Centre for Diet and Activity Research (CEDAR), University 
of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom
6Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, South Africa
7Indian Institute of Public Health and Public Health Foundation of India, Delhi, India
8Prevention Research Center in St. Louis, Brown School, Washington University in St. Louis, St. 
Louis, United States
9Division of Public Health Sciences and Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, United States
1. Background
Since the publication of the first Lancet series on physical activity in 2012, which recognised 
physical inactivity as a global pandemic and urged all sectors of governments and societies 
to take immediate action, the demand for effective strategies to increase population physical 
activity levels has grown.1, 2 A substantial body of evidence, resulting from decades of 
Address for correspondence: Rodrigo S. Reis, Urban Management Graduate Program, Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Parana, Rua 
Imaculada Conceicao, 1155, Curitiba, PR – Brazil, 80240050, reis.rodrigo@live.com, Phone: +554199812162.
*Lancet Physical Activity Series 2 Executive Committee:
Adrian E. Bauman, Ding Ding, Ulf Ekelund, Pedro C Hallal, Gregory W Heath, Harold W Kohl 3rd, I-Min Lee, Kenneth E Powell, 
Michael Pratt, Rodrigo S Reis, James F. Sallis.
Declaration of interest
We declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet. 2016 September 24; 388(10051): 1337–1348. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30728-0.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 research in the fields of exercise physiology, public health, epidemiology and the 
behavioural sciences, has demonstrated that physical activity has broad economic and health 
benefits1 and that under scientifically-controlled circumstances, behaviour change is 
achievable for increasing physical activity in diverse groups.3 Until recently, most of this 
evidence came from High-Income Countries (HICs),3 but during the past five years, the 
number of interventions developed, implemented, and evaluated in Low and Middle-Income 
Countries (LMICs) has grown significantly.4
Despite the many convincing arguments and global calls for action to reverse the physical 
inactivity pandemic,1 practitioners and policy makers have limited access to knowledge 
about existing physical activity programs that can be effectively implemented at scale. So-
called “effective physical activity interventions” have too often been conducted only in 
small, controlled settings.2 This is not to say that there have been no efforts to bring these 
findings into ‘real world’ programs. In fact, the scientific literature contains abundant 
examples of researcher-led translation and dissemination trials, implementing evidence-
based physical activity interventions in a variety of real-world settings.3 Unfortunately, for 
the most part, these initial translation attempts have not thrived in the real world (i.e. in 
becoming embedded in a system) once the research funds for translation have expired. 
Further expansion to reach more people and places (scaling-up) and achieve program 
maintenance and sustained health benefits requires extensive knowledge of strategies for 
implementation, adoption and sustainability.5, 6
On the other hand, there are well-known examples of fast-growing programs which arise 
from the ‘real world’, often reflecting common civic sense. These forms of ‘practice-based 
evidence’, are often implemented at scale and replicated in many settings around the world. 
Many times there is no budget for evaluation, but in the best of cases, these programs are 
later evaluated by researchers to estimate their effectiveness in promoting physical 
activity.3, 74 However, an exhaustive inventory of these cases is not available to researchers, 
practitioners and stakeholders, and the internal and external validity of the evaluations have 
been questioned.3, 74
In our view, scaling up is not simply achieved by researchers leading the implementation of 
a translated program at a larger scale (e.g. at city or state level), although in some cases this 
could represent the first step. It is only when an intervention ‘outgrows’ the research setting 
and becomes embedded in a system, thereby ensuring maintenance and sustainability of its 
health benefits, that successful scale-up can be considered to have been achieved. Likewise, 
in some cases, practice-based evidence can also ‘outgrow’ its local context to improve 
external validity and be embedded in its local system. Although other researchers have used 
varying definitions for scalability and scale-up, our approach is pragmatic and responsive to 
the urgent call to action to reverse the pandemic of inactivity. In essence, by seeking 
effective strategies for scaling up physical activity interventions around the world, we are 
aiming to find ways of re-integrating active living into the realms of government and society 
where it used to reside: in city planning, transport, education, culture, leisure, environmental 
sustainability (and, of course, health). ‘Scalable interventions’ in these wider areas of public 
policy are likely to be needed to shift societies towards a more active way of life.
Reis et al.
Page 2
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In this paper, we provide an overview of factors that could help to increase the ratio of 
success to failure in scaling up physical activity interventions around the world. We have 
four aims: (a) to summarize the available peer-reviewed, scientific evidence on scaling up 
physical activity interventions; (b) to integrate the knowledge and experience of senior 
researchers and key stakeholders on the factors influencing the scalability of physical 
activity interventions in High and LMIC countries; (c) to identify case studies of scaled-up 
physical activity interventions from around the world; and (d) to develop a framework to 
guide researchers, practitioners, policy makers and civil society in selecting, implementing 
and evaluating scaled-up physical activity interventions.
2. What can we learn about scaling up physical activity interventions from 
the scientific literature?
We conducted a systematic review of the peer-reviewed, English-language literature to 
summarise the available scientific evidence on scaling up physical activity interventions. An 
‘intervention’ was defined as “a set of actions with a coherent objective to bring about 
change or produce identifiable outcomes.”8, 9 Therefore, the review included not only 
traditional researcher-driven interventions proven to be efficacious in increasing physical 
activity in a controlled research setting (evidence-based practice),10 but also programs, 
strategies, policies or initiatives that originated outside the scientific realm, but have been 
evaluated by researchers and shown to be effective (practice-based evidence).11, 12 The 
search was conducted using the PubMed and Scopus databases, without any restriction on 
date of publication given the anticipated dearth of sufficiently detailed accounts of the scale-
up process in the literature. Publications with a ‘scalability’ search term — from an extended 
list based on that used by Milat et al. in a similar review for scaled-up public health 
interventions9 — in the title, and a ‘physical activity’ term in the title or abstract, were 
reviewed. The search terms used to define ‘scalability’ were centred around the objective of 
identifying truly scaled-up interventions, defined for this study as those which had outgrown 
research dependency and become embedded into a system. Therefore, we purposely 
excluded search terms reflecting researcher-driven and -funded translational studies. (See 
Online Web appendix 1 for a full list of search terms and criteria.)
Publications were eligible for further abstraction if they reported an intervention 
implemented at scale and embedded in a system, for which physical activity was an intended 
outcome, and if they included sufficient detail of the scaling-up process. We used an adapted 
version of the External Validity Assessment Tool (EVAT)7 developed by project GUIA 
(Guide for Useful Interventions for Physical Activity in Brazil and Latin America).13 
Interventions were classified by theme, using the ‘seven investments that work for physical 
activity’ outlined in the Toronto Charter for Physical Activity,14, 15 and by scalability 
category, using the World Health Organization’s (WHO) ExpandNet Framework for Scaling 
Up.16 Where available, information was abstracted on any process evaluation, key actors and 
partnerships, and cost-effectiveness relating to scaling-up. We also abstracted information on 
the geographic setting (country, world region, and World Bank income category17), the 
target population, and whether the scaled-up intervention was an example of ‘evidence-
Reis et al.
Page 3
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 based practice’ or of ‘practice-based evidence.’ Further details of the review methods are 
available in Web appendix 1.
The search yielded 547 unique articles. Among these, eighteen peer-reviewed articles were 
identified in which physical activity was either the main outcome or a co-benefit of a scaled-
up intervention, and for which sufficient detail of the scalability process was reported.18–35 
Sixteen unique scaled-up physical activity interventions were identified (with more than one 
publication for some interventions), of which 14 were from high-income 
countries,18–30, 32, 34, 35 one was from a middle-income country (Brazil)31 and one was from 
a low-income country (Uganda).33 Thirteen of the cases represented evidence-based 
practice.18–22, 24–30, 32, 34, 35 Two of the three practice-based evidence cases were from 
LMICs.31, 33 Fourteen of the cases described an intervention that fit into one of the seven 
categories of investment in physical activity (Figure 1), with the most frequently represented 
categories being those of community-wide programs (n=6),20, 22, 24, 31, 32, 34 ‘whole of 
school’ programs (n=3),23, 26–28, 30 and physical activity promotion or NCD prevention 
integrated into the health care system (n=3).18, 25, 29 No cases relating to the categories of 
transport systems prioritising active travel, or urban design policies and infrastructure, were 
identified. The remaining cases involved health education delivered by telephone or text 
message.19, 21 Six cases described interventions targeting children or youth,18, 23, 25–28, 30, 33 
while four focused on adults,19, 24, 29, 35 one on older adults,32 and another one on both 
adults and older adults.34 Two cases related to all age groups21, 22 and two were not specific 
about age groups.20, 31
Scalability was most commonly defined exclusively as extending the reach of an 
intervention by replicating it in other localities, cities or states (horizontal scale-up)16 
(n=6),20, 24, 25, 30, 34, 35 as institutionalising the intervention at government level so it could 
reach all citizens within a given jurisdiction (vertical scale-up)16 (n=5),22, 23, 29, 31, 32 or as a 
combination of horizontal and vertical scale-up (n=4).18, 19, 21, 26–28 Most of the monitoring 
and evaluation activities pertaining to scalability assessed whether the program was reaching 
the specified target population and whether the intervention was being properly 
implemented, with several cases reporting deficiencies in these regards. Public or private 
health-sector entities were the most commonly reported key actors, while partnerships with 
other sectors (schools, urban planning, sports and recreation, or academia) were reported in 
over half of cases. Further details of the 18 scientific publications, representing 16 unique 
scaled-up physical activity interventions found in the peer-reviewed literature, are available 
in Web Tables 1, 2 and 3.
The review provides important insights into the processes, key actors and partnerships 
involved in scaling up physical activity interventions. Demonstrated efficacy in controlled 
settings, partnerships beyond the health sector, and institutionalisation from an early stage of 
program development emerged as key factors for success. However, the exercise also 
highlighted some shortcomings of the evidence in this area. First, we found little information 
in the scientific literature —only 18 publications, representing 16 unique interventions — 
outlining the steps and processes involved in successful scale-up of physical activity 
interventions. Second, the great majority of this literature relates to interventions being taken 
to scale in HICs. Third, we found few examples of practice-based evidence. Fourth, we 
Reis et al.
Page 4
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 found no examples corresponding to transport systems or urban design policies and 
infrastructure, two of the ‘seven best investments for physical activity’.
3. Painting a larger picture: drawing from the knowledge and experience of 
key researchers and stakeholders from around the globe
To complement the literature review in building a fuller picture of the factors influencing the 
scalability of physical activity interventions, we sought to integrate the knowledge and 
experience of senior researchers and key stakeholders from all continents. We used an 
adapted Delphi methodology,3637 combining email and telephone contacts as this hybrid 
approach has been shown to outperform the traditional paper-based Delphi design.37, 38 We 
recruited participants from the Global Physical Activity Observatory (http://
www.globalphysicalactivityobservatory.com), comprised of key researchers and practitioners 
from around the world. Among the country contacts of the Global Physical Activity 
Observatory Network with full contact information available, at least one person per country 
(its primary contact listed in the Network database) was invited to take part. This entailed 
completing a two-round online survey using the Qualtrics platform (http://
www.qualtrics.com).
After testing all electronic contacts, 139 eligible participants (each from a different country) 
were identified. Among them, 45.0% were from HICs (N=62), 28.6% from Upper Middle-
Income Countries (U-MICs) (N=40), 20.0% from Lower Middle-Income Countries (L-
MICs) (N=28) and 6.4% (N=9) from Low-Income Countries (LICs). Of these, 74 (36 from 
HIC, 17 from U-MIC and 21 from L-MIC or LIC) responded to the first round of the survey, 
which included open-ended questions on key factors that should be considered when 
deciding to scale up a physical activity intervention, as well as examples of any such 
intervention that had been scaled up in their country or region. More details on the 
questionnaire and sample characteristics are available in the online Appendix. Following our 
definition of scalability, we identified 56 unique interventions that were cited as having been 
scaled up in the participants’ own regions and were not found in our literature search (Figure 
1 and Web Tables 4a and 4b). A search for information on content, reach, effectiveness, and 
scalability, was conducted for each regional intervention cited by the key informants, based 
on published references and web-links provided, and additionally, through targeted internet 
searchers based on the country, setting and program name (Web Tables 4a and 4b). Scaled-
up interventions were more frequently cited by key informants from HICs (38 interventions) 
than by their counterparts (14 from U-MIC, 4 from L-MIC or LIC). The most frequently 
reported categories of intervention were those of community-wide programs (n=12) and 
public education (n=11), whereas that of urban design policies and infrastructure (n=2) was 
the least frequent. Examples of all seven ‘best investments for physical activity’ categories 
were cited by HIC informants, whereas examples of urban design policies and infrastructure 
and of primary health care systems were not cited by any of our U-MIC, L-MIC and LIC 
informants.
We identified a variety of factors regarded as important for scaling up physical activity 
interventions. A total of 94 statements were provided and grouped by similarity into 16 
Reis et al.
Page 5
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 unique factors. In order to assess the relative importance and feasibility of these factors, we 
invited all 74 initial respondents to complete the second round of the survey, of whom 67 did 
so. They were asked to rate each factor for importance and feasibility relative to the other 
factors on a 10-point scale (from 1, relatively unimportant or infeasible, to 10, extremely 
important or feasible). We also conducted pattern matching, which creates a series of graphs 
representing clusters in the data in order of importance and/or feasibility (based on the 
average rating of the statements in each cluster). We used this to assess the correlation 
between importance and feasibility among our key informants (Figure 2), between 
researchers and practitioners (Web appendix 2), and by country income level (Web appendix 
3). We also assessed the correlation between groups using Spearman rank correlation.
Overall the scores attributed to importance were higher (Median=8.27; IQR=0.53) than 
those attributed to feasibility (Median=6.82; IQR=0.49) (Figure 2), suggesting that it 
remains a significant challenge to put what is considered to be important into practice. This 
mismatch was confirmed by the low and non-significant correlation of the importance and 
feasibility scores (rs=0.24; p=0.37). However, ‘needs of the community’ and ‘fit with the 
setting’ showed relatively high scores for both importance and feasibility, suggesting that 
these might be particularly important to consider when prioritising actions for scale-up. The 
large number of responses citing community-based interventions reinforces the importance 
of adapting and localising an intervention within a community setting. Conversely, the most 
important factors (sustainability and political support) had relatively low scores for 
feasibility, indicating a gap that might impede taking effective action. Previous research has 
found differences between responses from key informants from research and practice 
backgrounds in rating priorities for action on physical activity,39, 40 which our data support 
(Web figure 1). However, the pattern of mismatch did not change when comparing responses 
from key informants with practice and research backgrounds, suggesting that our overall 
findings may be fairly consistent regardless of the background of the participants. Finally, in 
analysis stratified by country income level, “sustainability” emerged as being equally 
important regardless of the country income level, whereas “content and delivery” and 
“multilevel collaboration” seemed to be more important in L-MICs and LICs than in their 
higher-income level counterparts. However, these factors — along with “capacity building” 
— were given lower feasibility scores by L-MIC and LIC informants (Web appendix 4).
4. Effective strategies aren’t always scaled up, and scaled-up strategies 
aren’t always effective: lessons in finding the right balance
Our mixed-methods approach included a traditional systematic literature search 
complemented by an adapted qualitative Delphi process to obtain comprehensive 
information on scaled-up interventions worldwide. With this approach, we examined where, 
why and how physical activity interventions are being scaled up around the world, and 
confirmed that the science of scalability in the realm of physical activity interventions 
remains a nascent field of research. The fact that the adapted Delphi process yielded 56 
examples of scaled-up interventions, which were not found through the systematic review of 
the peer-reviewed literature, highlights the importance of searching both peer-reviewed and 
grey literature to achieve a better understanding of the types of physical activity 
Reis et al.
Page 6
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interventions being scaled-up around the globe. This mixed-methods approach also allowed 
us to identify case studies covering a variety of geographical and country-level income 
settings, and a range of strength of evidence of effectiveness.
In terms of the ‘where,’ our findings suggest that evidence-based practice seems to be 
mainly a ‘practice’ of HICs. It is also the predominant type of scaled-up intervention 
reported in the peer-reviewed literature. Apart from reflecting the obvious — that evidence 
is more likely to be used for policy development in more highly developed nations — this 
could also reflect the significantly larger research capacity available in HICs to conduct and 
publish studies documenting all steps of the knowledge-to-practice process.41, 42 A good 
example of this is CATCH (the Coordinated Approach To Child Health) (Panel 1), which 
followed a clear linear progression from a controlled efficacy trial,43 to researcher-led 
dissemination efforts,28 to demonstrating effectiveness in researcher-led translation trials,26 
to achieving institutionalisation in more than half of Texas schools plus several other areas 
of the United States.44, 45 In spite of its success, the case of CATCH also serves to highlight 
how long it takes for knowledge to become available to the population at large through ‘real 
world’ programs — over 20 years have elapsed since the first efficacy trial of CATCH.
On the other hand, it seems that LMICs seldom rely on the ‘evidence-based practice’ 
approach for scaling up physical activity interventions. In addition to lacking (or only 
emerging) research capacity,41 the dearth of examples of effective physical activity 
interventions appropriate to the context of these settings may contribute to the “why.” 
Interventions designed, implemented and evaluated in LMICs have only fairly recently 
begun to appear in the peer-reviewed literature.4 As for the “how,” scaling-up efforts in 
LMICs have primarily emerged from the ‘real world,’ with practice moving faster than 
research.42 In these settings, the lack of knowledge or local applicability of existing 
evidence, together with the urgent need to find streamlined solutions to large-scale problems, 
seem to be important in moving practice agendas forward, as such factors are more highly 
valued than measures of effectiveness. These large-scale problems are not limited to health 
issues. Rather, the need to alleviate traffic congestion, air pollution, environmental injustice, 
social inequalities and other societal challenges is resulting in the scaling-up of interventions 
that may promote physical activity as a co-benefit.42 For the most part, initial scaling-up 
occurs with little consideration of the potential effectiveness of these programs for 
increasing physical activity in populations.42 In some instances in U-MICs, researchers are 
catching up to practice by conducting well-designed evaluation studies of practice-based 
interventions such as bus rapid transit systems (BRT) (Panel 2).46–49 In L-MICs and LICs, 
competing priorities and a lack of resources, and in some cases research capacity have 
resulted in few instances of rigorous evaluations of scaled-up interventions. An example of 
this is the case of Sports for Development (S4D) (Panel 3). Currently, there is insufficient 
evidence to deem S4D as either effective or ineffective in increasing physical activity, but the 
few available studies point out that the programs may be failing to reach those most in need 
(i.e. the most inactive)33 in spite of their popularity and widespread adoption in African 
nations and other regions worldwide.50–52
It is clear that not every intervention implemented at scale is effective for increasing physical 
activity in populations, and that not every effective, researcher-led intervention is scalable. 
Reis et al.
Page 7
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 This highlights the need for more and better research, and calls into question the role that the 
research community should play if we are serious about reversing the global pandemic of 
inactivity. Is it necessary to continue conducting RCTs in HICs to demonstrate that positive 
health behaviour change is achievable in small, selected samples under controlled 
conditions? In LMICs, where more evidence of effective, contextually-appropriate strategies 
is needed, should research funds be allocated if no clear potential for rapid, cost-effective 
scale-up is demonstrated? Should we be not be learning more about scaling up successful 
ventures, and how opportunities for dissemination can be strategically brokered to reduce the 
lag in scaling up evidence–based practice? How could we better understand the policy 
processes involved across varying settings, contexts and political systems to facilitate the 
more streamlined adoption and implementation of evidence-based practice? Currently, much 
of the evidence describing the scaling-up process of physical activity interventions, and in 
some cases of their impacts on population health, lies in government databases, reports, or 
websites, and not in the scientific peer-reviewed literature. This raises important questions 
about the methodological rigour and internal and external validity of such evidence. Why 
does the research community not focus more on systematic documentation and evaluation of 
already scaled-up innovations from around the world, using the best available methods to 
evaluate their reach and effectiveness, and why are there still such limited opportunities for 
funding and publishing natural experimental studies of innovations that are being scaled up 
without clear evidence of effectiveness?
5. Tying it all together: developing a framework for scaling up physical 
activity interventions
Taken together, the analytical steps described above suggest that successfully scaled-up 
physical activity interventions are not just those that are implemented at a large scale, but 
should also be effective in increasing population physical activity levels, and become fully 
embedded into a system. To further advance this field and improve efforts to develop, 
implement and evaluate such interventions, we have developed a framework for action.
The scaling up of physical activity interventions can be better understood and enhanced by 
the use of systematic planning frameworks, logic models, and theory.53 The main purpose of 
a planning framework is to map the key linkages, stages and conditions that are likely to 
affect scaling up and on which inferences about effectiveness may be made. A framework 
can help ensure that researchers focus on the most critical factors in the scaling-up process, 
and that policy makers and practitioners understand its staged nature (for example, that 
effectiveness is a prerequisite for sustainment).
We used a two-step process to develop the framework. We searched for existing frameworks. 
We then reviewed these together with the results of the literature review and Delphi survey, 
with the aim of either identifying one or more existing frameworks that could be adapted to 
create a scalability framework, or building one from scratch if necessary.
We identified over 60 possible frameworks for translational research,9, 54–56 many of which 
could potentially apply to scaling up physical activity interventions.9 There is a small 
number of published frameworks for scaling up public health programs and policies.6, 57–61 
Reis et al.
Page 8
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 After our three-step process, the RE-AIM framework emerged as the one that best framed 
the core elements. RE-AIM takes a staged approach to measure Reach, Efficacy/
Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, and Maintenance.62 In RE-AIM, reach refers to 
the participation rate within the target population and the characteristics of participants 
versus non-participants; i.e., does the scaled-up intervention reach those at highest risk for 
inactivity? Effectiveness refers to the impact of an intervention on specified outcomes; i.e., 
does the scaled-up intervention increase population physical activity levels? Adoption 
applies at the system level and refers to the percentage and representativeness of 
organizations that will adopt a given program or policy; e.g., for a school-based intervention: 
how many states within a country, municipalities within a state, school districts within a 
municipality, and schools within a school district, adopted the intervention as an official 
school program to be implemented within their jurisdiction? Implementation refers to 
intervention integrity, or the quality and consistency of delivery when the intervention is 
replicated in real-world settings; i.e., is the real-world, scaled-up version of the intervention 
being delivered properly? And finally, maintenance describes the long-term change at both 
individual and system/organizational levels, which are fundamental concepts for scaling up; 
i.e., have all of the implementation activities of the intervention been maintained at ‘full 
gear’ throughout the years, thus ensuring that the health benefits of the intervention continue 
to occur through time? RE-AIM has been applied across numerous risk factors, diseases, and 
settings.63 Its usefulness in evaluating the impact of public health policies and physical 
activity scale-up efforts has also been documented.6465, 66 In Figure 3, concepts from RE-
AIM are supplemented by two additional frameworks: the ExpandNet Framework for 
Scaling Up,61 and the Framework for Disseminating Evidence-Based Health Promotion 
Practices.67
In addition, our framework accounts for the importance and relevance of both evidence-
based practice (the “push”: interventions developed and tested through research that might 
be scaled up68) and practice-based evidence (the “pull”: real-world practitioner experience 
to inform intervention approaches12) in informing the scaling up of physical activity 
interventions. Therefore, this framework can be used both by those in the ‘research world’ 
and in the ‘real world’ (including public health practitioners, stakeholders and policy 
makers) to optimize the scaling up process in many stages across the research-to-practice or 
practice-to-research spectra. For instance, it can be used by stakeholders and policy makers 
to select a contextually appropriate intervention for scaling up, which has been proven to 
work at scale in similar settings in reaching the target population and in promoting physical 
activity. In such cases, the framework stresses that for successful scale-up, evaluation of 
adoption, implementation and maintenance is needed. Similarly, our framework can be used 
by researchers to evaluate innovative strategies being implemented at scale, without 
sufficient existing evidence to demonstrate one or more of the stages of RE-AIM.
6. Conclusions
Despite facing a global pandemic of similar proportions to that of smoking,1, 2 our response 
to the public health challenge of inactivity has not been as strong as is needed.1, 2 The 
successful scaling up of interventions that result in increased population levels of physical 
activity is challenging but feasible, across varying cultural, geographic, social and economic 
Reis et al.
Page 9
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 settings. It is crucial to draw on the best available evidence from both the traditional 
‘evidence-to-practice’ pathway and the ‘practice-to-evidence’ route. Using a mixed-methods 
approach, we have comprehensively examined both researcher-led and practice-based 
insights into the factors affecting scalability around the world. Active policies across society 
— particularly outside the healthcare sector — are urgently needed, as demonstrated by 
some of the successful examples of scale-up identified in this paper. Researchers, research 
funding agencies, practitioners in public health, transport, leisure, recreation and other 
sectors, policymakers and civil society should embrace this challenge of taking action to a 
larger and more sustainable level.
The research community should shift the balance of its efforts from designing and testing 
small-scale interventions to change individual behaviour towards expanding the evidence on 
strategies for translating, disseminating, implementing, and scaling-up effective policy and 
practice for physical activity promotion worldwide. In LMICs, more evidence is needed on 
effective interventions, which are contextually appropriate. The science of scalability will be 
greatly advanced by research that systematically identifies the key steps and processes 
needed for successful scale-up of interventions. While this may require more robust and 
standardised measures and indicators for tracking, assessing and reporting all stages of 
scaling-up, many of which might be developed at comparatively low cost using geographic 
information systems, it will also entail examining how political, cultural, and economic 
contexts influence the potential to adopt and scale-up evidence-based practices. Researchers 
from all regions of the world should conduct more program evaluation studies to strengthen 
the global practice-based evidence base. This can be achieved by using rigorous research 
methods to determine the impact of “real world” scaled-up interventions of which the reach 
and effectiveness remain unknown.
However, the success of these proposed actions for the research community is highly 
dependent on existent and future mechanisms for research funding, particularly for the rapid 
evaluation of natural experiments. Research funding agencies should provide faster and 
more flexible mechanisms to allow researchers to develop more practice-based evidence 
through natural experimental studies or evaluations of programs that have already been 
scaled up. The complexity of these research projects is likely to require transdisciplinary 
teams, sometimes with expertise in fields such as systems science, network analysis or 
policy analysis. For LMICs, where more evidence on effective interventions is needed, 
funding agencies should prioritise the evaluation of projects with clear potential for fast and 
cost-effective scale-up. Likewise, scientific journals should facilitate and prioritise the 
dissemination of this type of research.
Although more and stronger research is important, public health action in the face of a 
global pandemic responsible for over five million deaths each year should not wait for the 
outcomes of future studies. We urge all sectors of government and society to take immediate, 
bold actions to help make active living a more desired, affordable and accessible choice for 
all population groups. Getting people moving should become a priority of all sectors – not 
just health – in all entities and countries. In light of the limited scientific evidence of what 
works at scale and how to scale-up most strategies, we encourage governments and society 
to adopt and adapt strategies already used to address other public health issues such as 
Reis et al.
Page 10
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 smoking and sugar-sweetened beverage consumption.69, 70 International organizations such 
as the United Nations, the World Health Organization, and the World Bank should provide 
strong leadership for accelerating the scaling-up of evidence-based physical activity 
interventions worldwide, by setting targets and indicators for tracking countries’ progress. 
Governments should integrate active living into policies across sectors. National policies and 
action plans are particularly important to overcome scalability challenges in countries where 
decentralisation of power has led to devolved authority. Ministries of health should have a 
multilevel and multi-sectoral physical activity plan, with specific strategies to scale up 
physical activity interventions. Physical inactivity should become an actively monitored risk 
factor in clinical medical practice and in national and regional surveillance systems, and 
health care systems should provide physical activity counselling and support for the 
prevention and treatment of chronic diseases. Ministries of education should adopt whole-of-
school approaches for promoting physical activity among children and youth. More 
graduate-level programs to train researchers in physical activity and public health are 
critically needed worldwide, and specially in LMICs. Sports authorities should prioritize 
sports-for-all approaches and harness the potential co-benefits of sport participation. 
Similarly, environmental policies should be linked to the promotion of active living to 
maximize their opportunities for adoption, implementation and scale-up. Urban planning 
and transportation policies should prioritise actions that promote safe, equitable, and 
environmentally-friendly active mobility options for all citizens, including improved 
infrastructure for walking and cycling for transport and recreation, as well as accessible and 
convenient public transport. Civil society should demand better policies, programs, systems 
and places enable people to lead more lives. We encourage practitioners, policy makers and 
researchers to consider our framework and the catalogue of examples of scaled up 
interventions from around the globe presented here (Web Tables 1–4) for selecting 
contextually-appropriate, evidence-based strategies for scaling-up, prioritizing evaluation 
across all RE-AIM stages. Likewise, we encourage them to use our framework to guide the 
evaluation of scaled-up interventions that are already in place, using the findings to modify 
program delivery as needed to optimize the health benefits.
Even if taken to scale, unilateral efforts will not be enough to shift populations to a more 
active way of life. A shift in the focus of researchers will not help if funding agencies do not 
facilitate this type of research, and an increase in the quality of evidence to support scaling-
up will achieve nothing if is not translated into practice and effectively scaled up by policy 
makers and practitioners in multiple sectors. Large-scale problems require large-scale 
solutions, and we need the committed and joint efforts of all sectors of government and 
society to tackle the global public health challenge of inactivity.
Panel 1. Scaled-up interventions from around the globe: Coordinated 
Approach To Child Health (CATCH)
Overview
The Coordinated Approach To Child Health (CATCH) is a multilevel programme, based on 
CDC’s ‘Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child’ model.44, 72 It is designed to 
Reis et al.
Page 11
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 promote a healthy school environment through five modules: physical education, nutrition 
and cafeterias, the classroom, families and communities, and sun protection.
Where did the intervention originate?
California, Louisiana, Minnesota and Texas, U.S. (High-Income)
How has the intervention been scaled up?
Through horizontal (replication) and vertical (institutionalization) scale-up. Over 10,000 
sites worldwide have adopted CATCH, mostly in the U.S.45 In Texas, researchers led 
dissemination efforts by engaging health and education authorities and subsidizing initial 
distribution of materials for schools.73
Did the intervention originate from the ‘research world’ or from the ‘real world’?
CATCH originated from the ‘research world’ via the first trial in the early 1990s: the Child 
and Adolescent Trial for Cardiovascular Health.43 The intervention was later renamed for 
translation, implementation and scale-up in the ‘real world,’73 which has been facilitated by 
the CATCH Global Foundation, a charitable organization founded in 2014.45
Which of the seven investments for physical activity does it fit best?
Whole-of-school programs.
Is physical activity promotion the main purpose of the intervention, or is it a co-benefit?
Physical activity is one of its main intended outcomes, along with healthy eating and 
preventing obesity.
Has the scaled-up intervention been adopted by target staff, settings or institutions?
Education and health authorities at various levels from school to state across the U.S. have 
provided legislative, economic, organizational and administrative support for CATCH,44, 73 
but not all sites that could benefit have adopted it.
How has the scaled-up intervention been implemented?
Variably. In some cases (e.g. Dallas School District, Texas, U.S.), CATCH has become 
institutionalized, with strong multi-sectoral involvement (including principals, teachers, 
physical educators, administrative and catering staff, parents and the wider community) in 
schools.45 Elsewhere, discontinuous funding, or the lack of institutionalization or a local 
champion, have impeded optimal implementation.27, 73
Does the scaled-up intervention reach the target population?
CATCH is currently used in YMCAs in 32 U.S. states and more than half of Texas schools, 
but access varies by region.45
Reis et al.
Page 12
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Is the scaled-up intervention effective?
Yes. A substantial body of evidence demonstrates that CATCH is effective in increasing 
physical activity in school-age children, both in controlled trials and in ‘real world’ 
studies.26, 43
Have the effects of the scaled-up intervention been maintained over time?
In controlled trials the effects have been maintained for up to three years,74 and evaluations 
in some ‘real world’ settings (e.g., New Jersey, U.S.) also report maintained health 
effects.75–77 Evidence also shows that CATCH is cost-effective for preventing childhood 
obesity.78
To what extent is this an example of successful scaling-up?
CATCH is one of few good examples of the successful translation, dissemination and 
scaling-up of an evidence-based (research tested) physical activity programme, when it is 
institutionalized and given full school, health and other governmental support. It also 
exemplifies the time taken for the first scientific evidence, published over 20 years ago, to be 
widely translated into practice.
Panel 2. Scaled-up interventions from around the globe: Bus Rapid Transit 
systems
Overview
Bus rapid transit systems (BRTs) provide high-speed, mass public transport, using buses 
running on segregated lanes and stopping at stations spaced further apart than traditional bus 
stops.46, 79
Where did the intervention originate?
Curitiba, Brazil (Upper Middle-Income).
How has the intervention been scaled up?
Through horizontal scale-up (replication in other settings). Over 150 cities worldwide have 
BRT systems,46 most in middle-income countries.
Did the intervention originate from the ‘research world’ or from the ‘real world’?
BRT originated from the ‘real world’ of transport planning.
Which of the seven investments for physical activity does it fit best?
Transportation systems that promote walking, bicycling or public transit use.
Is physical activity promotion the main purpose of the intervention, or is it a co-benefit?
Physical activity is a co-benefit of BRTs,48 which were primarily designed to improve 
mobility and reduce carbon emissions in cities, more economically than by building 
Metrorail or light-rail systems.4679
Reis et al.
Page 13
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Has the scaled-up intervention been adopted by target staff, settings or institutions?
City mayors in several middle-income countries have provided strong political, economic 
and structural support for BRT, which offers high-capacity, fast, modern and 
environmentally sustainable public transport.48 Nonetheless, not all cities that could benefit 
have adopted BRT.
How has the scaled-up intervention been implemented?
In some cities (e.g., Bogota, Colombia), BRT implementation has been accompanied by new 
supportive infrastructure including improved routes for pedestrians and cyclists, and full 
integration with other transit systems (e.g., feeder bus systems).49 In other settings (e.g. 
Istanbul, Turkey), station and bus overcrowding, lack of integration with other urban transit 
systems, or lack of supporting infrastructure around some stations, may have limited the 
overall benefits by rendering active travel less attractive or safe.80
Does the scaled-up intervention reach the target population?
Studies assessing BRT’s reach are scarce, and indicators vary between cities. In Cali, 
Colombia, for example, BRT is more accessible to residents of middle-income 
neighborhoods than to those in high or low-income neighborhoods.81 In Delhi, India, BRT 
has increased the accessibility of destinations that were previously difficult to reach without 
a car.47 In Cambridge, UK, there is no evidence of a socioeconomic gradient in use of a new 
BRT.82 Further evaluation is needed to determine the extent to which BRT reaches those at 
highest risk for inactivity.
Is the scaled-up intervention effective?
Emerging evidence suggests that BRT can promote physical activity through transport: 
living closer to BRT is associated with higher levels of physical activity in adults in Bogota, 
Colombia and Curitiba, Brazil,48, 49 and with shifting from car-use towards active transit in 
Cambridge, UK.82
Have the effects of the scaled-up intervention been maintained over time?
Stable or increasing prevalence of BRT use indicate potential for sustained effects, but 
further and more rigorous evaluations are needed to establish if any physical activity benefits 
are maintained over time.
To what extent is this an example of successful scaling-up?
While BRT exemplifies the complexity involved in scaling up innovative urban public 
transport systems, it has been successfully scaled up in some settings (e.g. Bogota, 
Colombia). Key factors for success have included having a committed champion (often the 
mayor), providing supportive infrastructure as outlined above, and implementing 
complementary measures to limit car use.48
Reis et al.
Page 14
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Panel 3. Scaled-up interventions from around the globe: Sport for 
Development (S4D)
Overview
Sport for Development (S4D) is an umbrella term for a variety of programs that promote 
sport participation as a vehicle for ‘development’ —understood broadly to include outcomes 
like gender equity, economic development, access to education, health improvement (e.g. 
HIV prevention) and peace.50
Where did the intervention originate?
The idea can be traced back centuries, and the date of the first ‘S4D program’ is unclear.51 
Several S4D programs emerged in (mostly Low-Income) African nations in the 1990s, 
facilitated by financial and logistical support from high-income countries and international 
humanitarian organizations.51
How has the intervention been scaled up?
Mostly through replication (horizontal scale-up), and sometimes also through 
institutionalization (vertical scale-up).83 The United Nations (UN) has contributed to recent 
accelerated expansion through the establishment of its own S4D office in 2001.84
Did the intervention originate from the ‘research world’ or from the ‘real world’?
From the ‘real world,’ mainly through humanitarian efforts in disadvantaged settings.
Which of the seven investments for physical activity does it fit best?
Sports systems and programs that promote ‘sport for all.’
Is physical activity promotion the main purpose of the intervention, or is it a co-benefit?
Mostly a co-benefit, in that most S4D programs have prioritized other outcomes as outlined 
above.
Has the scaled-up intervention been adopted by target staff, settings or institutions?
Worldwide, S4D programs have been adopted by governments and non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs): mostly by those in high-income countries to aid development in low- 
or lower middle-income countries, but sometimes fully based in higher-income countries.52 
The UN’s adoption of S4D in 2001 has enhanced the credibility, and probably the scaling 
up, of these initiatives.50, 84
How has the scaled-up intervention been implemented?
Mainly through international partnerships between an international or high-income country 
government or agency (e.g. the UN) and a local NGO for delivery.52, 83 ‘Top-down’ 
approaches with funder-led program design and implementation are common, but have been 
criticized for being paternalistic and not accounting for local nuances.83 Other programs 
Reis et al.
Page 15
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 have used a more ‘horizontal’ approach with substantial local involvement and autonomy.83 
For the most part, comparative evidence from process evaluation is lacking.33
Does the scaled-up intervention reach the target population?
Rigorous evaluation is scarce, and reach probably varies by setting. For example S4D in 
Gulu, Uganda was found to reach mostly those who were already sufficiently active, owing 
to its voluntary enrolment policy.33
Is the scaled-up intervention effective?
There is insufficient evidence to support S4D’s effectiveness, or lack of it, for increasing 
populations’ physical activity levels.33 More rigorous evaluation is needed.
Have the effects of the scaled-up intervention been maintained over time?
This is not known.
To what extent is this an example of successful scaling-up?
S4D exemplifies how the ‘real world’ may be driven by factors other than evidence-based 
practice. In spite of weak evidence of effectiveness for physical activity, S4D has become 
very popular worldwide and therefore extremely successful in terms of being scaled up to 
multiple settings, and becoming embedded in systems. Rigorous outcome and process 
evaluation could assess its impacts on physical activity and other outcomes, and contribute 
important learning on how other interventions might be scaled up.
Panel 4. Key messages
•
The existing scientific literature has identified several key factors for the 
scaling up of physical activity interventions: demonstrated efficacy in 
controlled settings, partnerships beyond the health sector, and 
institutionalization early in program development
•
Drawing on input from researchers and stakeholders across the globe, over 
50 unique physical activity interventions were identified that have been 
scaled up but not reported in the peer-reviewed literature
•
Not every intervention implemented at scale is effective in increasing 
population physical activity levels, and not every effective, researcher-led 
intervention is scalable
•
More, more rigorous and more useful scalability research is needed: 
researchers, research funding agencies, and scientific journals should 
prioritize studies for evaluating the impact of ‘real world’ physical activity 
interventions
•
An action-oriented framework will help researchers to focus on the most 
critical factors in the scaling-up process, and will aid policy makers and 
practitioners in understanding its staged nature
Reis et al.
Page 16
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
International organizations (e.g., United Nations, World Health 
Organization, World Bank) should provide leadership for scaling up 
evidence-based physical activity interventions worldwide, by setting 
targets and indicators for countries
•
Ministries of health should have a multilevel and multi-sectoral plan to 
raise population physical activity levels.
•
Physical inactivity should become an actively monitored risk factor in 
clinical medical practice and in national and regional surveillance systems, 
and health care systems should provide physical activity counselling and 
support for the prevention and treatment of chronic diseases.
•
More graduate-level programs to train researchers in physical activity and 
public health are critically needed worldwide, and especially in LMICs.
•
Sectors outside of health are critical to scaling-up (schools, urban 
planning, transportation, sports and recreation, environmental sector); to 
reach these sectors more fully, medical and public health practitioners 
need to highlight and emphasize the benefits beyond health effects 
(economic benefits, quality of life).
•
Policy makers, stakeholders, and city and state planners should focus on 
scaling up approaches with the highest face validity:
○
Ministries of education should adopt whole-of-school 
approaches for promoting physical activity among children and 
youth.
○
Sports authorities should prioritize sports-for-all approaches 
and harness the potential co-benefits of sport participation.
○
Environmental policies should be linked to the promotion of 
active living to maximize their opportunities for adoption, 
implementation and scale up.
○
Urban planning and transportation policies should prioritise 
actions that promote safe, equitable, and environmentally-
friendly active mobility and leisure options for all citizens.
•
Civil society should demand better policies, programs, systems and places 
to enable people to lead more active lives.
•
Greatest progress is likely through interventions that are effective in 
promoting physical activity, are implemented at scale, regularly evaluated 
and are fully embedded in a system.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Jessica Mason, Anna Porter and Sarah Bentley for their assistance in data abstraction for the 
literature review, under the supervision of DS; Adalberto Lopes and Claudia Alberico for the assistance with the 
online survey, under the supervision of RS; and Andrea Ramirez for the assistance with the compilation of the 
Global Physical Observatory contacts.
Reis et al.
Page 17
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RR is supported by The Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development – CNPA (grant 
number308979/2014-1). DS is supported by the Michael & Susan Dell Foundation through a postdoctoral research 
fellowship at the Michael & Susan Dell Center for Healthy Living, which is part of the School of Public Health 
(Austin Regional Campus) of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston; and by the National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (grant number 3R01DK101593-03S1). RB is suported by 
the National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health (grant numbers 1R01CA124404-01 and P30 
CA09184); the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (grant number 1P30DK092950); 
and Washington University Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences (grant numbers UL1 TR000448 and 
KL2 TR000450) from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. DO is supported by the Medical 
Research Council [Unit Programme number MC_UU_12015/6].
References
1. Kohl HW III, Craig CL, Lambert EV, Inoue S, Alkandari JR, Leetongin G, et al. The pandemic of 
physical inactivity: global action for public health. Lancet. 2012; 380(9838):294–305. [PubMed: 
22818941] 
2. Hallal PC, Andersen LB, Bull FC, Guthold R, Haskell W, Ekelund U, et al. Global physical activity 
levels: surveillance progress, pitfalls, and prospects. Lancet. 2012; 380(9838):247–57. [PubMed: 
22818937] 
3. Heath GW, Parra DC, Sarmiento OL, Andersen LB, Owen N, Goenka S, et al. Evidence-based 
intervention in physical activity: lessons from around the world. Lancet. 2012; 380(9838):272–81. 
[PubMed: 22818939] 
4. Sallis JF, Bull F, Guthold R, Heath G, Inoue S, Kelly P, et al. Progress in Physical Activity Over the 
Olympic Quadrennium. Lancet. In Press. 
5. Milat, A.; Newson, R.; King, L. Increasing the scale of population health interventions: A Guide. 
Sydney: NSW Ministry of Health; 2014. 
6. Yamey G. Scaling up global health interventions: a proposed framework for success. PLoS 
medicine. 2011; 8(6):e1001049. [PubMed: 21738450] 
7. Hoehner CM, Ribeiro IC, Parra DC, Reis RS, Azevedo MR, Hino AA, et al. Physical activity 
interventions in Latin America: expanding and classifying the evidence. American journal of 
preventive medicine. 2013; 44(3):e31–40. [PubMed: 23415133] 
8. Rychetnik L, Frommer M, Hawe P, Shiell A. Criteria for evaluating evidence on public health 
interventions. Journal of epidemiology and community health. 2002; 56(2):119–27. [PubMed: 
11812811] 
9. Milat AJ, Bauman A, Redman S. Narrative review of models and success factors for scaling up 
public health interventions. Implementation science: IS. 2015; 10:113. [PubMed: 26264351] 
10. Brownson RC, Chriqui JF, Stamatakis KA. Understanding evidence-based public health policy. 
American journal of public health. 2009; 99(9):1576–83. [PubMed: 19608941] 
11. Green LW. Public health asks of systems science: to advance our evidence-based practice, can you 
help us get more practice-based evidence? American journal of public health. 2006; 96(3):406–9. 
[PubMed: 16449580] 
12. Green LW. Making research relevant: if it is an evidence-based practice, where’s the practice-based 
evidence? Fam Pract. 2008; 25(Suppl 1):i20–4. [PubMed: 18794201] 
13. Pratt M, Brownson RC, Ramos LR, Malta DC, Hallal PC, Reis RS, et al. Project GUIA: A model 
for understanding and promoting physical activity in Brazil and Latin America. Journal of physical 
activity & health. 2010; 7(Suppl 2):S131–4. [PubMed: 20702900] 
14. Global Advocacy for Physical Activity the Advocacy Council of the International Society for 
Physical A, Health. NCD prevention: investments [corrected] that work for physical activity. 
British journal of sports medicine. 2012; 46(10):709–12. [PubMed: 22869788] 
15. Trost SG, Blair SN, Khan KM. Physical inactivity remains the greatest public health problem of 
the 21st century: evidence, improved methods and solutions using the ‘7 investments that work’ as 
a framework. British journal of sports medicine. 2014; 48(3):169–70. [PubMed: 24415409] 
16. World Health Organization. Practical guidance for scaling up health service innovations. Geneva, 
Switzerland: 2009. 
Reis et al.
Page 18
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. World Bank Group. World development indicators 2012. Washington D.C.: World Bank 
Publications; 2012. 
18. Anderson YC, Taylor GM, Grant CC, Fulton RB, Hofman PL. The Green Prescription Active 
Families programme in Taranaki, New Zealand 2007–2009: Did it reach children in need? Journal 
of primary health care. 2015; 7(3):192–7. [PubMed: 26437042] 
19. Arbour-Nicitopoulos KP, Tomasone JR, Latimer-Cheung AE, Martin Ginis KA. Get in motion: an 
evaluation of the reach and effectiveness of a physical activity telephone counseling service for 
Canadians living with spinal cord injury. PM & R: the journal of injury, function, and 
rehabilitation. 2014; 6(12):1088–96.
20. Brady TJ, Sniezek J, Ramsey LA. News from the CDC: Scaling up sustainable intervention 
delivery-lessons learned from the CDC arthritis program. Transl Behav Med. 2012; 2(1):3–5. 
[PubMed: 24073091] 
21. Buis LR, Hirzel L, Turske SA, Des Jardins TR, Yarandi H, Bondurant P. Use of a text message 
program to raise type 2 diabetes risk awareness and promote health behavior change (part I): 
assessment of participant reach and adoption. Journal of medical Internet research. 2013; 
15(12):e281. [PubMed: 24356329] 
22. de Silva-Sanigorski AM, Bolton K, Haby M, Kremer P, Gibbs L, Waters E, et al. Scaling up 
community-based obesity prevention in Australia: background and evaluation design of the Health 
Promoting Communities: Being Active Eating Well initiative. BMC public health. 2010; 10:65. 
[PubMed: 20152018] 
23. Farrell L, Lloyd B, Matthews R, Bravo A, Wiggers J, Rissel C. Applying a performance 
monitoring framework to increase reach and adoption of children’s healthy eating and physical 
activity programs. Public health research & practice. 2014; 25(1)
24. Gyurcsik NC, Brittain DR. Partial examination of the public health impact of the People with 
Arthritis Can Exercise (PACE) program: reach, adoption, and maintenance. Public health nursing. 
2006; 23(6):516–22. [PubMed: 17096776] 
25. Hardy LL, Mihrshahi S, Gale J, Nguyen B, Baur LA, O’Hara BJ. Translational research: are 
community-based child obesity treatment programs scalable? BMC public health. 2015; 15:652. 
[PubMed: 26169687] 
26. Heath EM, Coleman KJ. Evaluation of the institutionalization of the coordinated approach to child 
health (CATCH) in a U.S./Mexico border community. Health education & behavior: the official 
publication of the Society for Public Health Education. 2002; 29(4):444–60. [PubMed: 12137238] 
27. Hoelscher DM, Feldman HA, Johnson CC, Lytle LA, Osganian SK, Parcel GS, et al. School-based 
health education programs can be maintained over time: results from the CATCH 
Institutionalization study. Prev Med. 2004; 38(5):594–606. [PubMed: 15066362] 
28. Hoelscher DM, Kelder SH, Murray N, Cribb PW, Conroy J, Parcel GS. Dissemination and 
adoption of the Child and Adolescent Trial for Cardiovascular Health (CATCH): a case study in 
Texas. Journal of Public Health Management and Practice. 2001; 7(2):90–100. [PubMed: 
12174404] 
29. Janus ED, Best JD, Davis-Lameloise N, Philpot B, Hernan A, Bennett CM, et al. Scaling-up from 
an implementation trial to state-wide coverage: results from the preliminary Melbourne Diabetes 
Prevention Study. Trials. 2012; 13:152. [PubMed: 22929458] 
30. McKay HA, Macdonald HM, Nettlefold L, Masse LC, Day M, Naylor PJ. Action Schools! BC 
implementation: from efficacy to effectiveness to scale-up. British journal of sports medicine. 
2015; 49(4):210–8. [PubMed: 25312876] 
31. Parra DC, Hoehner CM, Hallal PC, Reis RS, Simoes EJ, Malta DC, et al. Scaling up of physical 
activity interventions in Brazil: how partnerships and research evidence contributed to policy 
action. Global health promotion. 2013; 20(4):5–12.
32. Phelan EA, Williams B, Leveille S, Snyder S, Wagner EH, LoGerfo JP. Outcomes of a community‐
based dissemination of the Health Enhancement Program. Journal of the American Geriatrics 
Society. 2002; 50(9):1519–24. [PubMed: 12383149] 
33. Richards J, Foster C. Sport-for-development interventions: whom do they reach and what is their 
potential for impact on physical and mental health in low-income countries? J Phys Act Health. 
2013; 10(7):929–31. [PubMed: 24175348] 
Reis et al.
Page 19
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. Seguin RA, Economos CD, Nelson ME, Hyatt R, Palombo R, Reed PN. Peer Reviewed: Design 
and National Dissemination of the StrongWomen Community Strength Training Program. 
Preventing chronic disease. 2008; 5(1)
35. van Dongen JM, van Poppel MN, Milder IE, van Oers HA, Brug J. Exploring the reach and 
program use of Hello World, an email-based health promotion program for pregnant women in the 
Netherlands. BMC research notes. 2012; 5:514. [PubMed: 22999052] 
36. Rowe G, Wright G. The Delphi technique: Past, present, and future prospects—Introduction to the 
special issue. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 2011; 78(9):1487–90.
37. Landeta J, Barrutia J, Lertxundi A. Hybrid Delphi: A methodology to facilitate contribution from 
experts in professional contexts. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 2011; 78(9):1629–
41.
38. Hsu C-C, Sandford BA. The Delphi technique: making sense of consensus. Practical Assessment, 
Research & Evaluation. 2007; 12(10):1–8.
39. Reis RS, Kelly CM, Parra DC, Barros M, Gomes G, Malta D, et al. Developing a research agenda 
for promoting physical activity in Brazil through environmental and policy change. Revista 
panamericana de salud publica = Pan American journal of public health. 2012; 32(2):93–100. 
[PubMed: 23099869] 
40. Brownson RC, Kelly CM, Eyler AA, Carnoske C, Grost L, Handy SL, et al. Environmental and 
policy approaches for promoting physical activity in the United States: a research agenda. J Phys 
Act Health. 2008; 5(4):488–503. [PubMed: 18648115] 
41. Salvo D, Reis RS, Sarmiento OL, Pratt M. Overcoming the challenges of conducting physical 
activity and built environment research in Latin America: IPEN Latin America. Preventive 
medicine. 2014; 69(Suppl 1):S86–92. [PubMed: 25456800] 
42. Pratt M, Salvo D, Cavill N, Giles-Corti B, McCue P, Reis RS, et al. An International Perspective on 
the Nexus of Physical Activity Research and Policy. Environment and Behavior. 2016; 48(1):37–
54.
43. Luepker RV, Perry CL, McKinlay SM, Nader PR, Parcel GS, Stone EJ, et al. Outcomes of a field 
trial to improve children’s dietary patterns and physical activity. The Child and Adolescent Trial 
for Cardiovascular Health. CATCH collaborative group. Jama. 1996; 275(10):768–76. [PubMed: 
8598593] 
44. Hoelscher DM, Springer A, Menendez TH, Cribb PW, Kelder SH. From NIH to Texas schools: 
policy impact of the Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH) program in Texas. J Phys 
Act Health. 2011; 8(Suppl 1):S5–7. [PubMed: 21350263] 
45. CATCH Global Foundation. Coordinated Approach to Child Health website: Resource Library. 
2014–2016 [cited 2016 Jan 24]; Available from: 
46. Cervero R. Bus rapid transit (BRT): An efficient and competitive mode of public transport. IURD 
Working Paper. 2013:2013–01.
47. Tiwari G, Jain D. Accessibility and safety indicators for all road users: case study Delhi BRT. 
Journal of Transport Geography. 2012; 22:87–95.
48. Cervero R, Sarmiento OL, Jacoby E, Gomez LF, Neiman A. Influences of Built Environments on 
Walking and Cycling: Lessons from Bogotá. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation. 
2009; 3(4):203–26.
49. Hino AA, Reis RS, Sarmiento OL, Parra DC, Brownson RC. Built environment and physical 
activity for transportation in adults from Curitiba, Brazil. Journal of Urban Health. 2014; 91(3):
446–62. [PubMed: 24096625] 
50. Schulenkorf N, Adair D, Schulenkorf N, Adair D. Sport-for-Development: The Emergence and 
Growth of a New Genre. Global Sport-for-Development: Critical Perspectives. 2014:3–11.
51. Guest AM. The diffusion of development-through-sport: analysing the history and practice of the 
Olympic Movement’s grassroots outreach to Africa. Sport in society. 2009; 12(10):1336–52.
52. Kidd B. A new social movement: Sport for development and peace. Sport in society. 2008; 11(4):
370–80.
53. Glanz K, Bishop DB. The role of behavioral science theory in development and implementation of 
public health interventions. Annual review of public health. 2010; 31:399–418.
Reis et al.
Page 20
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 54. Wilson PM, Petticrew M, Calnan MW, Nazareth I. Disseminating research findings: what should 
researchers do? A systematic scoping review of conceptual frameworks. Implementation science: 
IS. 2010; 5:91. [PubMed: 21092164] 
55. Tabak RG, Khoong EC, Chambers DA, Brownson RC. Bridging research and practice: models for 
dissemination and implementation research. American journal of preventive medicine. 2012; 
43(3):337–50. [PubMed: 22898128] 
56. Nilsen P. Making sense of implementation theories, models and frameworks. Implementation 
science: IS. 2015; 10(1):53. [PubMed: 25895742] 
57. Bhandari N, Kabir AK, Salam MA. Mainstreaming nutrition into maternal and child health 
programmes: scaling up of exclusive breastfeeding. Maternal & child nutrition. 2008; 4(Suppl 1):
5–23. [PubMed: 18289156] 
58. Milat AJ, King L, Bauman AE, Redman S. The concept of scalability: increasing the scale and 
potential adoption of health promotion interventions into policy and practice. Health promotion 
international. 2012; 28(3):285–98. [PubMed: 22241853] 
59. Milat AJ, King L, Newson R, Wolfenden L, Rissel C, Bauman A, et al. Increasing the scale and 
adoption of population health interventions: experiences and perspectives of policy makers, 
practitioners, and researchers. Health Res Policy Syst. 2014; 12:18. [PubMed: 24735455] 
60. Perez-Escamilla R, Curry L, Minhas D, Taylor L, Bradley E. Scaling up of breastfeeding 
promotion programs in low- and middle-income countries: the “breastfeeding gear” model. 
Advances in nutrition. 2012; 3(6):790–800. [PubMed: 23153733] 
61. WHO. Practical Guidance for Scaling up Health Service Innovations. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2009. 
62. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion 
interventions: the RE-AIM framework. American journal of public health. 1999; 89(9):1322–7. 
[PubMed: 10474547] 
63. Dzewaltowski DA, Estabrooks PA, Klesges LM, Bull S, Glasgow RE. Behavior change 
intervention research in community settings: how generalizable are the results? Health Promot Int. 
2004; 19(2):235–45. [PubMed: 15128715] 
64. Jilcott S, Ammerman A, Sommers J, Glasgow RE. Applying the RE-AIM framework to assess the 
public health impact of policy change. Ann Behav Med. 2007; 34(2):105–14. [PubMed: 
17927550] 
65. Brownson RC, Ballew P, Brown KL, Elliott MB, Haire-Joshu D, Heath GW, et al. The effect of 
disseminating evidence-based interventions that promote physical activity to health departments. 
American journal of public health. 2007; 97(10):1900–7. [PubMed: 17761575] 
66. Jauregui E, Pacheco AM, Soltero EG, O’Connor TM, Castro CM, Estabrooks PA, et al. Using the 
RE-AIM framework to evaluate physical activity public health programs in Mexico. BMC public 
health. 2015; 15:162. [PubMed: 25881249] 
67. Harris JR, Cheadle A, Hannon PA, Forehand M, Lichiello P, Mahoney E, et al. A framework for 
disseminating evidence-based health promotion practices. Preventing chronic disease. 2011; 
9:E22. [PubMed: 22172189] 
68. Brownson, RC.; Baker, EA.; Leet, TL.; Gillespie, KN.; True, WR. Evidence-Based Public Health. 
2nd. New York: Oxford University Press; 2011. 
69. Hoffman SJ, Tan C. Overview of systematic reviews on the health-related effects of government 
tobacco control policies. BMC public health. 2015; 15:744. [PubMed: 26242915] 
70. Niebylski ML, Redburn KA, Duhaney T, Campbell NR. Healthy food subsidies and unhealthy food 
taxation: A systematic review of the evidence. Nutrition. 2015; 31(6):787–95. [PubMed: 
25933484] 
71. Lemoine PD, Sarmiento OL, Pinzon JD, Meisel JD, Montes F, Hidalgo D, et al. TransMilenio, a 
Scalable Bus Rapid Transit System for Promoting Physical Activity. Journal of urban health: 
bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine. 2016; 93(2):256–70. [PubMed: 26883031] 
72. Lewallen TC, Hunt H, Potts-Datema W, Zaza S, Giles W. The Whole School, Whole Community, 
Whole Child model: a new approach for improving educational attainment and healthy 
development for students. The Journal of school health. 2015; 85(11):729–39. [PubMed: 
26440815] 
Reis et al.
Page 21
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 73. Hoelscher DM, Kelder SH, Murray N, Cribb PW, Conroy J, Parcel GS. Dissemination and 
adoption of the Child and Adolescent Trial for Cardiovascular Health (CATCH): a case study in 
Texas. Journal of public health management and practice: JPHMP. 2001; 7(2):90–100. [PubMed: 
12174404] 
74. Nader PR, Stone EJ, Lytle LA, Perry CL, Osganian SK, Kelder S, et al. Three-year maintenance of 
improved diet and physical activity: the CATCH cohort. Child and Adolescent Trial for 
Cardiovascular Health. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 1999; 153(7):695–704. 
[PubMed: 10401802] 
75. Conroy, JL. Evaluation of Healthy U: Year 4 Executive Summary. 2011 Jul. [cited 2016 Jan 24]; 1–
8]. Available from: http://www.njymca.org/main/healthy-u/
76. Conroy, JL. Evaluation of Healthy U (Afterschool): Year 5 Executive Summary. 2012 Jul. [cited 
2016 Jan 24]; 1–9]. Available from: http://www.njymca.org/main/healthy-u/
77. Conroy, JL. Evaluation of Healthy U New Jersey (Afterschoo, Preschool and School): 2013 
Executive Summary. 2013 Aug. [cited 2016 Jan 24]; 1–9]. Available from: http://www.njymca.org/
main/healthy-u/
78. Brown HS 3rd, Perez A, Li YP, Hoelscher DM, Kelder SH, Rivera R. The cost-effectiveness of a 
school-based overweight program. The international journal of behavioral nutrition and physical 
activity. 2007; 4:47. [PubMed: 17908315] 
79. Suzuki, H.; Cervero, R.; Iuchi, K. Transforming cities with transit: Transit and land-use integration 
for sustainable urban development. World Bank Publications; 2013. 
80. Babalik-Sutcliffe E, Cengiz EC. Bus Rapid Transit System in Istanbul: A Success Story or Flawed 
Planning Decision? Transport Reviews. 2015; 35(6):792–813.
81. Delmelle EC, Casas I. Evaluating the spatial equity of bus rapid transit-based accessibility patterns 
in a developing country: The case of Cali, Colombia. Transport Policy. 2012; 20:36–46.
82. Ogilvie, D.; Panter, J.; Guell, C.; Jones, A.; Mackett, R.; Griffin, S. Health impacts of the 
Cambridgeshire Guided Busway: a natural experimental study. Southampton (UK): 2016. 
83. Giulianotti R. Sport, peacemaking and conflict resolution: a contextual analysis and modelling of 
the sport, development and peace sector. Ethnic and racial studies. 2011; 34(2):207–28.
84. Beutler I. Sport serving development and peace: Achieving the goals of the United Nations through 
sport. Sport in society. 2008; 11(4):359–69.
Reis et al.
Page 22
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Number of scaled-up physical activity interventions identified in the literature review and in 
the Delphi study.
Reis et al.
Page 23
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Pattern matches for importance and feasibility of scalability factors for physical activity 
interventions among key informants
Reis et al.
Page 24
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Framework for scaling up physical activity interventions
Reis et al.
Page 25
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
