 1
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Adolescent THC Exposure Causes 
Enduring Prefrontal Cortical 
Disruption of GABAergic Inhibition 
and Dysregulation of Sub-Cortical 
Dopamine Function
Justine Renard  
1, Hanna J. Szkudlarek1, Cecilia P. Kramar1, Christina E. L. Jobson1, Kyra 
Moura1, Walter J. Rushlow1,2 & Steven R. Laviolette1,2
Chronic adolescent marijuana use has been linked to the later development of psychiatric diseases 
such as schizophrenia. GABAergic hypofunction in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is a cardinal pathological 
feature of schizophrenia and may be a mechanism by which the PFC loses its ability to regulate sub-
cortical dopamine (DA) resulting in schizophrenia-like neuropsychopathology. In the present study, 
we exposed adolescent rats to Δ-9-tetra-hydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive component in 
marijuana. At adulthood, we characterized the functionality of PFC GABAergic neurotransmission and 
its regulation of sub-cortical DA function using molecular, behavioral and in-vivo electrophysiological 
analyses. Our findings revealed a persistent attenuation of PFC GABAergic function combined with a 
hyperactive neuronal state in PFC neurons and associated disruptions in cortical gamma oscillatory 
activity. These PFC abnormalities were accompanied by hyperactive DAergic neuronal activity 
in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and behavioral and cognitive abnormalities similar to those 
observed in psychiatric disorders. Remarkably, these neuronal and behavioral effects were reversed 
by pharmacological activation of GABAA receptors in the PFC. Together, these results identify a 
mechanistic link between dysregulated frontal cortical GABAergic inhibition and sub-cortical DAergic 
dysregulation, characteristic of well-established neuropsychiatric endophenotypes.
Marijuana is the most widely used illicit drug among adolescents. Although it is still a matter of debate, there is 
evidence suggesting that chronic exposure to the primary psychoactive phytochemical in cannabis, tetrahydro-
cannabinol (THC), increases the long-term risk of psychiatric diseases, including schizophrenia1–5. The risk is 
higher depending upon age of onset of chronic marijuana use (e.g. before 17) and relative THC concentration. 
Nevertheless, only a minority of cannabis users may be prone to develop psychiatric diseases. It is therefore likely 
that both environmental factors and genetic predisposition play a role in this causal association. Animal mod-
els are useful tools for investigating the long-term behavioral effects of cannabis exposure during adolescence. 
We have previously demonstrated that chronic THC exposure during adolescent neurodevelopment leads to 
persistent abnormalities in adulthood resembling schizophrenia, involving neuropathological molecular adapta-
tions in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), concomitant with a hyperactive sub-cortical dopamine (DA) system6. These 
effects are of particular clinical relevance given the increasing levels of THC in current strains of marijuana7. 
Nevertheless, the precise neurobiological mechanisms underlying the long-term neuropsychiatric effects of ado-
lescent THC exposure are still unknown.
Adolescence is a highly vulnerable period for brain development, during which the PFC undergoes mas-
sive functional remodeling. These cortical remodeling processes include refinement of intrinsic GABAergic 
function and changes in the excitatory–inhibitory neuronal balance, essential for synchronized cortical activity, 
1Dept. of Anatomy and Cell Biology & Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5C1, Canada. 
2Dept. of Psychiatry, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 
5C1, Canada. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.R.L. (email: steven.laviolette@
schulich.uwo.ca)
Received: 12 May 2017
Accepted: 29 August 2017
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
regulation of sub-cortical emotional processing centers, and maturation of normal adult behavior and cognition8, 
9. Importantly, due to their strategic location on local PFC GABAergic circuits, cannabinoid type 1 receptors 
(CB1R) play a key role in prefrontal maturational processes, maintaining the balance of excitatory/inhibitory 
neuronal activity and associated cortical oscillatory states10–12. Consequently, neurodevelopmental impairment 
of PFC CB1R signaling and associated GABAergic function has the potential to cause long-term patholog-
ical prefrontal disinhibition, impaired synchronized cortical activity states and psychopathological deficits in 
PFC-dependent function8, 13.
The onset of schizophrenia during adolescent neurodevelopment14, 15 is linked to impairments in PFC 
GABAergic signaling. For example, numerous studies demonstrate cortical reductions in the GABA synthesizing 
enzyme, glutamic acid decarboxylase-67 (GAD67) corresponding to a loss of GABAergic parvalbumin (PV) 
interneurons in post-mortem frontal cortical tissues from schizophrenia patients16–24. Altered expression levels 
of select prefrontal cortical GABAA receptor subunits have also been observed in schizophrenia, characterized by 
increased expression patterns of GABAA receptor α
2 subunits and decreased levels of the γ
2 and δ
 subunits25–27. It 
has been proposed that this cortical GABAergic dysfunction may underlie disturbances in gamma-band synchro-
nized neuronal activity associated with pathological emotional and cognitive deficits observed in schizophrenia28. 
For example, cortical gamma oscillation power has been reported to be increased in schizophrenia29, 30, a phenom-
ena that is thought to be associated with the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, including hallucinations31, 32. 
In addition, decreased activity of inhibitory PFC GABAergic neurons and a resulting dysregulation of PFC 
pyramidal neuron activity and associated gamma oscillatory states, may be associated with sub-cortical DAergic 
dysregulation, and related affective and cognitive disturbances in schizophrenia33. For example, knockdown of 
the α
3 GABAA receptor subunit causes a hyper-DAergic, schizophrenia-like phenotype linked to hyperactive 
DAergic activity states in the ventral tegmental area (VTA)34 consistent with the effects of chronic THC exposure 
during adolescent neurodevelopment6. Furthermore, GABAA receptor blockade or direct electrical stimulation of 
the PFC induces schizophrenia-like behaviors and increases sub-cortical DA release35–37.
Using a validated rodent model of adolescent THC exposure, we hypothesized that neurodevelopmental 
exposure to THC would lead to a molecular, neuronal and behavioral phenotype resembling schizophrenia due 
to a loss in GABAergic regulation of the PFC and associated sub-cortical DAergic activity patterns. We report 
that adolescent THC exposure induces a long-term loss of GABAergic inhibition within the PFC that persists 
into adulthood. This phenotype was characterized by dysregulated γ
 oscillatory activity, downregulation of 
GABAergic protein markers, increased medial PFC (mPFC) output neuron activity, hyperactive sub-cortical 
DAergic activity and a range of cognitive and affective abnormalities resembling to those observed in psychiat-
ric diseases such as schizophrenia. Remarkably, pharmacological activation of GABAA receptors directly in the 
mPFC, which shares functional-anatomical properties with the human dorsolateral PFC38, 39, reversed these defi-
cits, demonstrating that aberrant PFC-mesolimbic connectivity following adolescent THC exposure is a critical 
neuropathological mechanism underlying an increased risk for later adulthood schizophrenia-like abnormalities.
Results
THC exposure during adolescence reduces expression levels of GAD67 in the adult 
mPFC. 
Schizophrenia is associated with lower levels of GAD67 in the dorsolateral PFC17. Using Western 
Blotting (Fig. 1), we analyzed mPFC protein expression levels of GAD67 comparing adult rats treated with VEH 
or THC during adolescence. Western blot analysis of GAD 67 revealed a dramatic decrease in adolescent THC vs. 
VEH-treated rats (t(6) = 2.44; p < 0.05; Fig. 1A). This demonstrated strong reductions in mPFC GABAergic levels 
following adolescent THC exposure, consistent with schizophrenia neuropsychopathology. Conversely, we did 
not observe changes in mPFC protein expression levels of either GAD65 or parvalbumin (PV) in adolescent THC 
vs. VEH-treated rats (t(6) = −
0.33; p > 0.05 and t(6) = −
0.33; p > 0.05, respectively; Fig. 1B,C).
Adolescent THC exposure increases mPFC putative pyramidal neuron firing and bursting 
Rates. 
We next evaluated the long-term effects of adolescent THC exposure on adult spontaneous mPFC puta-
tive pyramidal neuron activity parameters (See Methods). A microphotograph of a representative mPFC neuronal 
Figure 1. Long-term effects of chronic THC exposure during adolescence on mPFC GABAergic markers. 
(A) Representative western blot for GAD67 expression in the mPFC (left). A significant decrease in GAD67 
expression is observed between adolescent VEH and adolescent THC pretreated rats. (B) Representative 
western blot for GAD65 expression in the mPFC (left). No significant changes in GAD65 were found between 
groups. (C) Representative western blot for parvalbumin (PV) expression in the mPFC (left). No significant 
changes in PV were found between groups. n = 8 rats, t-tests; *Indicated p < 0.05. Error bars represent the 
standard error of the means (SEMs). Western blots for GAD 67, GAD65 and parvalbumin levels are shown in 
Supplementary Figure 1.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
recording placement is shown in Fig. 2A. In THC treated rats, statistical analysis revealed that THC-exposed rats 
displayed significantly increased mPFC putative pyramidal neuronal firing frequencies (t(219) = 3.131; p < 0.01; 
Fig. 2B) relative to VEH controls. In addition, a greater proportion of bursting neurons was observed in THC vs. 
VEH exposed controls (75.41% vs. 57.58%; Fig. 2C). Representative rastergrams showing spontaneous activity 
of mPFC putative pyramidal neurons in THC vs. VEH pretreated rats are presented in Fig. 2D. When comparing 
spontaneous firing frequencies of mPFC putative pyramidal neurons displaying tonic vs. bursting patterns, firing 
rates of bursting, but not tonic cells, were significantly higher in THC vs. VEH exposed controls (t(147) = −
2.862; 
p < 0.01; Fig. 2E). Finally, in the subpopulation of bursting neurons, spontaneous bursting rates of putative 
pyramidal neurons were significantly higher in THC vs. VEH exposed controls (t(147) = 2.055; p < 0.05; Fig. 2G). 
Recording traces comparing bursting patterns in putative PFC pyramidal neurons in THC vs. VEH control rats 
are presented in Fig. 2G.
Adolescent THC treatment disrupts spontaneous adult cortical gamma oscillations. 
Local field 
potential (LFP) recordings in the mPFC were performed in urethane anesthetized rats and were typically char-
acterized by occurrence of slow, high-voltage fluctuations (>0.5 mV; Fig. 3B) corresponding to a synchronized 
cortical state. Occasionally, epochs of desynchronized states occurred, characterized by small-voltage (<0.5 mV) 
and fast oscillations (Fig. 3A). The strength of the oscillations was assessed by calculating power spectral densities 
(PSD; window length = 2 s; shift = 0.5 s; Fig. 3D) over a 1-min long recording epoch, averaging PSDs over time 
and subsequently normalizing the averaged PSD to the total power (normalized total power = 1; values for fre-
quencies between 59 and 61 Hz were excluded from calculations to avoid contamination with 60 Hz noise from 
power line).
During the desynchronized states the gamma oscillations were approximately 10 times more power-
ful than during the synchronized states. The total gamma power, calculated as a sum of power values for 
frequencies between 30–80 Hz of THC-treated rats did not differ from VEH controls (desynchronized 
LFPs: VEH = 0.0275 ± 0.0028, THC = 0.0330 ± 0.0018, t(96) = −
1.6467; p > 0.05) synchronized LFPs: 
VEH = 0.0027 ± 0.0001; THC = 0.0029 ± 0.0001; t(172) = −
0.9325; p > 0.05). However, the high-gamma oscilla-
tions (61–80 Hz) of the desynchronized state were significantly increased in THC-treated rats when compared 
with VEH-treated rats (VEH = 0.0040 ± 0.0003; THC = 0.0058 ± 0.0004; t(96) = −
3.1411; p < 0.01 Fig. 3F). These 
data suggest impairments of the intracortical inhibitory feedback within the PFC circuit and are consistent with 
the increased firing of putative pyramidal cells (Fig. 2) and decreased expression of GAD67 in THC-treated rats 
(Fig. 1A).
Figure 2. Long-term effects of chronic THC exposure during adolescence on spontaneous mPFC putative 
pyramidal neuron activity. (A) Microphotograph of a representative mPFC neuronal recording placement. 
(B) Adolescent THC pretreated rats displayed increasing spontaneous PFC putative pyramidal neuronal firing 
frequency. (C) Greater proportion of bursting neurons was observed in adolescent THC exposed rats when 
compared to VEH controls (75.41% vs. 57.58%). (D) Representative rastergrams showing spontaneous activity 
of putative PFC pyramidal neurons in THC (top) vs. VEH pretreated rats (bottom). (E) Firing frequencies of 
bursting cells, not tonic cells, were significantly higher in adolescent THC exposed rats when compared to VEH 
controls. (F) In the bursting cells population, the bursting rate of putative pyramidal neurons of adolescent 
THC-exposed rats was significantly higher than in VEH controls. (G) Representative examples showing 
bursting activity of putative PFC pyramidal neurons in THC (left) vs. VEH pretreated rats (right). Two-tailed 
t-tests; **indicated p < 0.01; *indicated p < 0.05. Error bars represent the standard error of the means (SEMs).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reverses deficits in short term memory induced by ado-
lescent THC exposure. 
We next mechanistically examined the potential role of PFC GABAA receptor trans-
mission by microinfusing the selective GABAA agonist, muscimol (MUS; 500 ng/0.5 μ
l) directly into the mPFC 
to determine if pharmacologically activating GABAA receptors may reverse behavioral abnormalities associated 
with adolescent THC exposure. A microphotograph of a representative intra-mPFC injector placement is showed 
in Fig. 4A. Memory deficits are core features of schizophrenia and are thought to be associated with abnormal 
prefrontal GABA function13. Therefore, we measured short-term memory performance of adult rats pretreated 
with VEH or THC during adolescence using the object recognition task. Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant 
main effect of treatment on recognition index (F(1,34) = 4.717; p < 0.05). Post hoc analysis revealed that THC expo-
sure during adolescence induced short-term memory deficits when compared to adolescent VEH pretreated rats 
(p < 0.05); Fig. 4B). Intra-mPFC MUS treatment reversed adolescent THC-induced short-term memory deficits 
relative to intra-mPFC VEH controls (p < 0.05; Fig. 4B) while having no effects in adolescent VEH pretreated rats 
(p > 0.05). Thus, intra-mPFC MUS infusion restored cognitive performances in adolescent THC pretreated rats.
Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reverses deficits in social cognition induced by adoles-
cent THC exposure. 
Affective impairment and social cognition represent negative symptoms of schizophre-
nia40–43. In addition, the PFC plays a critical role in regulating social cognition in both humans and rodents43–46. 
Therefore, we next compared social motivation/cognition performances in THC vs. VEH treated groups using 
the social novelty preference test. During the social motivation test, two-way ANOVA revealed a significant 
interaction between adolescent exposure and PFC treatment factors (F(1,41) = 9.062; p < 0.01). Post hoc analysis 
revealed that rats exposed to THC during adolescence displayed a lower social motivation index when compared 
to VEH controls (p < 0.05); Fig. 4C left). Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation impaired social motivation 
Figure 3. Adolescent THC-treatment lead to increased high gamma (61–80 Hz) power in the mPFC of adult 
rat. (A–C) Example recording traces from PFC of urethane anesthetized rat showing different cortical states. 
Desynchronized state (A) was characterized by small-amplitude fast oscillations while synchronized state 
(B) by large-amplitude slow oscillations. (C) Five-minute recording showing spontaneous alternation from 
the desynchronized to synchronized state. (D) Spectrogram calculated for a five-minute recording presented 
in C showing the temporal changes in the power at different frequencies. Note that upon transition from 
desynchronized to synchronized state gamma power decreased while the slow delta oscillation gradually 
emerged. The power values are color-coded as indicated on the right-hand side insets. A peak at around 60 Hz 
reflect power line frequency and the LFP power values for frequencies between 59–61 Hz were excluded from 
further analysis. (E,G) Average normalized power spectra corresponding to prefrontal LFP of VEH- (blue) and 
THC-treated (orange) rats in desynchronized (E) and synchronized (G) states. Note the increased power of 
high-gamma band (61–80 Hz) in THC-treated rats. (F,H) Bar graphs summarizing the average total power of 
the low- and high-gamma calculated for desynchronized (F) and synchronized (H) states of VEH (blue) and 
THC-treated (orange) rats. The high-gamma of THC-treated rats was significantly more powerful than VEH. 
Two-tailed t-tests; **indicated p < 0.01. Error bars represent the standard error of the means (SEMs).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
Figure 4. Effects of Intra-mPFC MUS on adolescent THC-induced behavioral abnormalities. (A) 
Microphotograph of a representative Intra-mPFC injector placement. (B) THC exposure during adolescence 
induced short-term memory deficits in the object recognition task. Intra-mPFC MUS treatment reversed 
adolescent THC-induced short-term memory deficits relative to intra-mPFC VEH controls. (C) THC exposure 
during adolescence induced lower social motivation (left) and social cognition (right) index in the social 
interaction task. Intra-mPFC MUS treatment reversed adolescent THC-induced social motivation (left) and 
social cognition (right) deficits relative to intra-mPFC VEH controls. (D) THC exposure during adolescence 
increased anxiety levels in the light dark box test. Intra-mPFC MUS reduced adolescent THC-induced 
anxiety relative to intra-mPFC VEH controls. (E) THC exposure during adolescence decreased locomotion 
(top) and rearing counts (bottom) in the open field test. Intra-mPFC MUS reduced adolescent THC-induced 
hypolocomotion relative to intra-mPFC VEH controls (top) but had no effects on rearing counts. Anova 2 
factors **indicated p < 0.01; *indicated p < 0.05. Error bars represent the standard error of the means (SEMs).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
performances in VEH treated rats (p < 0.05; Fig. 4C left) while reversing adolescent THC-induced social cogni-
tion deficits relative to controls (p < 0.05; Fig. 4C left).
During the social cognition test, two-way ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between adolescent 
exposure and PFC treatment factors (F(1,41) = 6.67; p < 0.05). Post hoc analysis revealed that rats exposed to THC 
during adolescence displayed a lower social memory index when compared to VEH controls (p < 0.01); Fig. 4C 
right). Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reversed adolescent THC-induced social cognition deficits rela-
tive to intra-mPFC VEH controls (p < 0.05; Fig. 4C right) while having no effects in adolescent VEH pretreated 
rats (p > 0.05).
Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reduces increased anxiety levels following adolescent 
THC exposure. 
Next, the effects of intra-mPFC MUS microinfusion on anxiety levels were examined in THC 
vs. VEH treated rats using the light-dark box anxiety test (Fig. 4D). The latencies to first transition (i.e. moving 
from the light to dark environment) and second transition (i.e. moving from the dark to light environment) 
were recorded and compared between the different drug treatment conditions. Two-way ANOVA analysis of 
the latency to first transition revealed non-significant effects of either adolescent exposure or adult intra-mPFC 
treatment or interaction between factors, indicating that all groups of rats displayed similar entry latency times 
(data not shown). However, two-way ANOVA analysis of the latency to second transition indicated a slight yet 
non-significant effect of adult intra-mPFC treatment (F(1,39) = 3.68; p = 0.062). Post hoc comparisons showed that 
in adolescent THC pretreated rats the latency to re-emerge from the dark compartment was increased when com-
pared to adolescent VEH pretreated rats (p < 0.05; Fig. 4D, bottom), demonstrating increased anxiety in adoles-
cent THC pretreated rats, consistent with previous findings6. Intra-mPFC MUS reduced the latency to reemerge 
from the dark compartment in adolescent THC pretreated rats relative to intra-mPFC VEH controls (p < 0.05; 
Fig. 4D, bottom) while having no effects on adolescent VEH pretreated rats (p > 0.05). Thus, intra-mPFC MUS 
infusion decreased anxiety levels in adolescent THC pretreated rats.
Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reduces deficits in exploratory behavior induced by 
adolescent THC exposure. 
Adolescent THC exposure has been shown to decrease motivational explor-
atory behaviors6. Therefore, we next tested if intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation may reverse this deficit. 
Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect of adolescent treatment on total distance travelled (F(1,40) = 6.145; 
p < 0.05). Post hoc analysis revealed that adolescent THC pretreated rats showed decreased locomotion when 
compared to VEH controls (p < 0.01; Fig. 4E, top). However, intra-mPFC MUS restored locomotor activity levels 
in THC treated rats relative to VEH controls (p < 0.05; Fig. 4E, top) while having no effects on adolescent VEH 
pretreated rats (p > 0.05). Examples of typical activity plots for adolescent VEH or THC-intra-mPFC or MUS 
treated rats are presented in Fig. 4E. Analysis of rearing counts revealed a significant main effect of adolescent 
treatment (F(1,40) = 9.82; p < 0.01). Post hoc analysis demonstrated that THC treated rats exhibited significantly 
less rearing behavior vs. VEH controls (p < 0.01; Fig. 4E, bottom). However, intra-mPFC MUS had no effects 
in either of the adolescent VEH or THC pretreated groups (p > 0.05; Fig. 4E, bottom). Thus, intra-mPFC MUS 
infusion restored exploratory motor behavior in adolescent THC pretreated rats.
Intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reverses sub-cortical DAergic hyperactivity induced by 
adolescent THC exposure. 
Given our previous findings of significantly reduced GABAergic PFC GAD67 
activity and PFC neuronal hyperactivity in following adolescent THC exposure, we hypothesized that phar-
macologically restoring PFC GABAA receptor tone may reverse the hyperactive VTA DA neuron phenotype 
induced by adolescent THC exposure. Using in vivo, single-unit VTA neuronal recordings in putative DAergic 
VTA neurons (see Methods) we next examined the effects of intra-mPFC MUS infusions on putative VTA 
DAergic neuronal frequency and bursting rates. Microphotographs of a representative PFC injector placement 
and VTA neuronal recording site are shown in Fig. 5A. Collective analysis of baseline firing frequency levels 
before mPFC micro-infusions of either MUS or VEH showed increased neuronal firing frequency in adolescent 
THC-pretreated rats (n = 40 neurons) relative to adolescent VEH-pretreated rats (n = 45 neurons) (t(83) = 3.15, 
p < 0.01, Fig. 5B). For analysis purposes, a neuron was considered to have changed its firing rate if there was a 
minimum of 10% difference in frequency rate from baseline. Using this previously reported criterion47, quali-
tative analyses revealed that in VEH pretreated rats, intra-mPFC MUS microinfusions caused mixed effects on 
firing rates with 10% of putative DA neurons showing increased firing, 40% decreased, and 50% unchanged. In 
THC pretreated rats that received intra-mPFC MUS, 12% of putative DA neurons showed increased in firing 
frequency, 46% decreased, and 42% were unchanged. One-way ANOVA comparing pre vs. post-infusion firing 
rates in sub-populations of putative DA neurons showing decreased firing following mPFC MUS, revealed a 
significant effect of recording epoch (F(1,22) = 13.002; p < 0.01) on firing rates. Post hoc comparisons revealed that 
before mPFC MUS infusions, VTA putative DA neuron baseline frequency in THC pretreated rats was signifi-
cantly increased relative to VEH controls (p < 0.01; Fig. 5C). In addition, in adolescent THC treated, but not VEH 
controls, the firing frequency of VTA putative DA neurons was significantly reduced by mPFC MUS infusions 
(p < 0.01; Fig. 5C). Thus, pharmacological activation of GABAA transmission in the mPFC was able to effectively 
reverse the hyper-DAergic phenotype induced by adolescent THC exposure. A representative rastergram showing 
the spontaneous activity of a putative DA neuron treated with intra-mPFC muscimol in a THC pretreated rat is 
presented in Fig. 5D.
Similar to VTA putative DA neuron firing frequency rates, collective analysis of spontaneous baseline lev-
els of putative DA neuron bursting activity comparing THC vs. VEH control neurons demonstrated increased 
bursting rates specifically in THC-treated rats (t(83) = −
2.86; p < 0.01; Fig. 5E). One-way ANOVA comparing 
the sub-populations of neurons from THC and VEH rats showing intra-mPFC MUS-induced decreased burst-
ing levels showed a significant effect of recording epoch (F(1,11) = 13.12; p < 0.01) on bursting rate levels. Similar 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
to firing frequency, post hoc comparisons revealed that baseline bursting levels of VTA putative DA neurons 
recorded in THC treated rats were significantly increased relative to VEH controls (p < 0.05; Fig. 5F). In addition, 
in adolescent THC, but not VEH treated rats, intra-mPFC MUS significantly reduced bursting rates relative to 
pre-infusion levels (p < 0.01; Fig. 5F). Thus, intra-mPFC activation of GABAA receptor transmission was able to 
effectively reverse the hyper-bursting VTA putative DA neuron phenotype induced by adolescent THC exposure. 
mPFC VEH microinfusions had no effects on either DA neuron firing frequency or bursting levels in either VEH 
or THC treated rats (data not shown). These results suggest that hyperexcitability of VTA DA neurons induced 
by adolescent exposure to THC can be attenuated by pharmacologically restoring the inhibitory balance within 
the mPFC.
Discussion
In the present study, we demonstrate that adolescent THC exposure induces persistent prefrontal GABA hypo-
function in adulthood characterized by reduced expression levels of the GABAergic marker GAD67, increased 
spontaneous PFC pyramidal neuron bursting and firing rates and potentiated high gamma power oscillatory 
activity. Furthermore, these cortical neuronal abnormalities occurred in concert with a sub-cortical hyperDAer-
gic neuronal phenotype in the VTA. Finally, adolescent THC exposure induced cognitive and affective distur-
bances characterized by impairments in short-term memory, social motivation and cognition, higher anxiety 
levels and decreased motivation. Remarkably, these behavioral impairments were reversed by pharmacological 
activation of GABAA receptors in the adult mPFC which concomitantly, reversed sub-cortical hyperDAergic 
activity in the VTA. Together, these results identify a mechanistic link between dysregulated frontal cortical 
GABAergic inhibition and sub-cortical DAergic dysregulation, characteristic of well-established schizophrenia 
endophenotypes.
First, the observed decrease of GAD67 in the adult mPFC following adolescent THC exposure is consistent 
with schizophrenia-related cortical neuropathology. Decreased cortical GABA function is one of the most reli-
able neuropathological markers observed in post-mortem analyses of the schizophrenic brain48. Both mRNA 
and protein expression of GAD67 are reduced in the dorsolateral PFC of individuals with schizophrenia16, 19, 21–23 
suggesting a reduction in cortical GABA synthesis and release. Furthermore, consistent with previous findings 
in schizophrenia, we observed no PFC GAD65 alterations49. Our results are consistent with previous studies 
showing GAD67 reductions in selective parvalbumin (PV)- and CCK-containing PFC interneuron populations 
Figure 5. Effects of Intra-mPFC MUS on adolescent THC-induced sub-cortical hyperdopaminergia. (A) 
microphotograph of a representative mPFC microsyringe and VTA neuronal recording placements. (B) 
Increased VTA putative DA neuronal firing frequency in adolescent THC-pretreated rats relative to adolescent 
VEH-pretreated rats. (C) Before intra-mPFC MUS microinfusion, sub-population of VTA putative DA neurons 
firing frequency in adolescent THC pretreated rats were significantly increased compared to adolescent VEH 
pretreated rats. Intra-mPFC MUS reduced firing frequency of VTA putative DA in adolescent THC-pretreated 
rats relative to adolescent VEH-pretreated rats. (D) Representative rastergram showing the spontaneous activity 
of 1 putative DA neuron treated with intra-mPFC muscimol in adolescent THC pretreated rat. (E) Increased 
VTA putative DA neurons bursting levels in adolescent THC vs. VEH pretreated rats. (F) Before intra-mPFC 
MUS microinfusion, sub-population of VTA putative DA neurons spikes firing in bursts in adolescent THC 
pretreated rats were significantly increased compared to adolescent VEH pretreated rats. Intra-mPFC MUS 
reduced spikes firing in bursts of VTA putative DA in adolescent THC-pretreated rats relative to adolescent 
VEH-pretreated rats. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA or Two-tailed t-tests; **indicated p < 0.01. Error 
bars represent the standard error of the means (SEMs).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
following adolescent THC exposure50. Similar to previous reports, we did not find any THC-induced changes in 
total PFC PV levels, suggesting that, despite a deficit in cortical GABAergic synthesis, overall population levels of 
PV interneurons are likely not attenuated50.
Consistent with a loss of cortical GABAergic inhibition, we observed a significant potentiation in both firing 
and bursting rates of putative mPFC pyramidal neurons, demonstrating a persistent dysregulation of cortical 
excitatory/inhibitory balance following adolescent THC exposure. This increase in firing frequency was con-
comitant with a general increase in the proportion of mPFC neurons displaying bursting patterns of activity, 
suggesting a general shift from tonic to bursting neuronal activity states. In the PFC, pyramidal burst-firing gen-
erally indicates greater signal to noise ratio, which in turn can pathologically amplify the strength of selective 
signals entering the cortex. Moreover, altered burst-firing patterns of pyramidal PFC neurons can be indicators of 
dysregulated pyramidal cell function due to changes in the integration of multiple neuronal inputs51, which may 
underlie cognitive, motivational and affective deficits observed in psychiatric disorders. Importantly, cannabi-
noid transmission strongly modulates PFC pyramidal neuron encoding of associative emotional memories. For 
example, acute overstimulation of CB1R transmission in the PFC causes profound misattribution of emotional 
salience cues measured in associative fear memory paradigms, both by increasing the firing frequency and asso-
ciative bursting activity of PFC neurons52, 53. Thus, adolescent THC exposure induces a PFC neuronal phenotype 
consistent with deficits in the ability to appropriately integrate competing cortical inputs in terms of their affective 
and/or attentional relevance, consistent with the profound behavioral abnormalities observed following adoles-
cent THC exposure.
Consistent with our observation of mPFC neuronal hyperactivity and loss of GABAergic inhibitory tone, 
we observed a significant and persistent potentiation in gamma-band oscillatory activity states in the adult 
mPFC, following adolescent THC exposure. In the healthy brain, the interplay between GABA interneurons 
and excitatory pyramidal cells is critical for the generation of synchronous gamma oscillations54. This cortical 
oscillatory activity represents a fundamental mechanism to enable the normal functioning of distributed cortical 
networks and supports a variety of higher order information processing necessary for normal cognition, learn-
ing and memory. Considerable evidence demonstrates that dysregulated PFC gamma oscillations are a critical 
neuropathological feature of schizophrenia and may serve as a neurodevelopmental signature for the onset of 
first-episode schizophrenia55. For example, affective and social cognition disturbances are associated with abnor-
mal patterns of PFC gamma activity in schizophrenia56, 57. In addition, hallucinations and reality distortion have 
been correlated with increased cortical gamma power in schizophrenia58, 59. High (>60 Hz) gamma-band oscilla-
tory dysregulation may contribute to schizophrenia-related perceptual and cognitive deficits60–62. While numer-
ous studies have reported reduced evoked levels of cortical gamma band activity, other studies have found that 
schizophrenia patients demonstrate potentiated spontaneous gamma band oscillatory patterns in the PFC and 
during working memory tasks63, 64, believed to be related to a loss of cortical GABAergic inhibitory mechanisms.
At the cellular level, CB1R transmission plays a role in the control of neuronal network gamma oscillations. 
For example, acute CB1R stimulation alters neuronal network oscillations in the gamma-frequency ranges65–67 in 
both hippocampus and cortex. Similarly, 5 days of exposure to a synthetic CB1R agonist during early adolescence 
in rats impaired the modulation of cortical oscillatory activity evoked by hippocampal stimulation8. Thus, acute 
or chronic CB1R activation can alter network oscillations in the mammalian PFC. Given the critical role of CB1R 
signaling in frontal cortical maturation8 and maintenance of normal oscillatory activity, the present findings pro-
vide further evidence for the critical role of neurodevelopmental CB1R signaling in the maturation of inhibitory 
cortical networks.
Given our evidence for a profound hypo-GABAergic PFC phenotype following adolescent THC exposure and 
studies linking downregulation of cortical GABAA receptor expression levels with schizophrenia-related defi-
cits68, we examined the potential mechanistic role of mPFC GABAA receptor transmission by pharmacologically 
activating mPFC GABAA receptors. Remarkably, we found that direct mPFC GABAA receptor activation reversed 
adolescent THC-induced impairments in short-term memory as well as motivational and anxiety-related abnor-
malities in adult rats, while having no effects on adolescent VEH pretreated rats. Thus, it appears that under 
normal conditions, such as in adolescent VEH pretreated rats, enhancing mPFC GABAergic transmission has no 
effects on cognitive performance. In contrast, under pathological conditions involving hypo-GABAergic func-
tion, such as in adolescent THC pretreated rats, activation of mPFC GABAA transmission can reverse these defi-
cits. Therefore, similar to observations in schizophrenia35, 69, 70 decreasing prefrontal GABAA transmission and 
disinhibition of the mPFC can disrupt cognitive and emotional function. However, these cognitive and emotional 
impairments can be restored by increasing prefrontal GABAA transmission. Similarly, it has been shown that 
mPFC inactivation via infusion of the GABAA receptor agonist muscimol, did not affect working and reference 
memories in rats tested in the radial-arm maze task. In contrast, mPFC disinhibition via infusions of the GABAA 
receptor antagonist bicuculline impairs both working and reference memory71 and impairs performance of 
PFC-independent cognitive tasks, suggesting that hyperactivity of the frontal lobes may interfere with cognitive/
mnemonic processes mediated by downstream structures71. Thus, it is possible that in adolescent THC pretreated 
rats, memory processes may be disrupted by disinhibitory increases in mPFC activity, consistent with the mPFC 
glutamatergic hyperactivity that we found in these animals. Since the mPFC sends excitatory projections to the 
VTA72, it is possible that mPFC disinhibition-induced cognitive impairments may be driven by aberrant patterns 
of excitatory outflow to sub-cortical, mesolimbic structures. Therefore, although decreasing prefrontal GABAA 
transmission/disinhibition of the mPFC impaired cognitive performance, inhibition of mPFC neural activity with 
GABA agonists had no effect on cognitive performance in adolescent VEH pretreated rats but might selectively 
inhibit mPFC hyperactivity in adolescent THC pretreated rats.
Interestingly, we found that intra-mPFC GABAA receptor activation reversed social behavior deficits in ado-
lescent THC pretreated rats, but caused impairments in VEH control rats. Similar results have been observed in 
previous studies. For example, intra-mPFC muscimol was shown to block social familiarity-induced reductions 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
in anxiety in healthy rats73. Thus, under normal conditions, enhancing mPFC GABAergic transmission appears 
to suppress social motivation. However, under pathological conditions involving hypo-GABAergic function, such 
as those induced by adolescent THC exposure, increasing mPFC GABAergic tone may reverse social deficits and 
cognition, as demonstrated by the present findings, suggesting that the normal balance between excitation and 
inhibition within the prefrontal circuitry is crucial for the integration of socially relevant cues and social mem-
ory formation and that adolescent THC exposure may compromise normal social cognition by disturbing an 
intra-mPFC inhibitory GABAergic network.
Interestingly, clinical studies have demonstrated therapeutic effects of GABA-modulating drugs on 
schizophrenia-related symptoms, including cognitive deficits, hallucinations, agitation and anxiety74, 75. Moreover, 
increasing GABAA receptor function in schizophrenia patients with chronic administration of a GABAA 
α
2/3-selective agonist was shown to reverse working memory deficits and cognitive control impairments, as 
well as normalizing gamma band power abnormalities associated with these symptoms68. To our knowledge, the 
present findings represent the first demonstration that a THC-induced neurodevelopmental cortical GABAergic 
deficit can be functionally reversed by direct pharmacological intervention in adulthood.
Increasing mPFC GABAergic tone not only rescued adolescent THC-induced affective/cognitive deficits, but 
also normalized VTA DAergic activity levels. Dysregulation of the mesocorticolimbic DA pathway is a cardinal 
neuropathological feature associated with schizophrenia-related symptoms. In terms of PFC-VTA interactions, 
the PFC sends dense glutamatergic, regulatory projections to VTA DA neurons76. Thus, we hypothesized that 
our observed sub-cortical DAergic hyperactive phenotype may be directly linked to hyperactive excitatory drive 
from the PFC. Consistent with this model, previous studies have reported that PFC GABAA receptor antag-
onist infusions induced schizophrenia-like cognitive and affective disturbances in rodents and primates35, 77. 
Furthermore, the partial GABAA receptor agonist imidazenil reverses methionine-induced schizophrenia-like 
deficits in rodents, including social interaction and sensorimotor gating impairments78. In addition, knockout 
of the GABAA α
3-subunit was shown to induce a hyper-DAergic state and sensorimotor gating deficits which 
could be reversed with antipsychotics34. Since tonic DA release is thought to be controlled by PFC GLUTergic 
afferents79, one possible mechanistic explanation is that direct activation of PFC GABAA transmission within 
the PFC, may reverse PFC overdrive to sub-cortical DA targets and associated cognitive and affective deficits, as 
suggested by the present findings.
In summary, our results demonstrate that hypofunction of inhibitory PFC GABAergic neurotransmission 
plays a crucial role in the behavioral and neuronal effects observed following adolescent THC exposure. These 
findings improve our knowledge of the precise neurobiological mechanisms leading to the long-term deleterious 
effects of THC exposure during adolescence and the later risk of schizophrenia onset. More importantly, these 
findings demonstrate that THC-induced neurodevelopmental insults to the PFC-mesolimbic circuitry may be 
reversible by restoration of GABAergic cortical tone, even into adulthood.
Methods
Animals and housing. 
Adolescent Sprague-Dawley rats were obtained at postnatal day (PND) 28 from 
Charles River Laboratories (Quebec, Canada). At arrival, rats were pair housed under controlled conditions (12 h 
light/dark cycle, constant temperature, and humidity) with free access to food and water. All procedures were 
performed in accordance with Governmental and Institutional guidelines for appropriate rat care and experimen-
tation. The experimental protocols were approved by the Canadian Council on Animal Care and the Animal Care 
Committee at Western University, Ontario.
Adolescent THC administration. 
Rats treated with THC (Cayman Chemical) received twice daily injec-
tions of THC (2.5 mg/kg; Days 1–3; 5 mg/kg; Days 4–7; 10 mg/kg, Days 8–11). Control groups received the same 
injection schedule (volume adjusted per body weight) with vehicle (VEH). Increasing doses of THC were admin-
istered to counter the development of drug tolerance80. These doses of THC were chosen based on our and oth-
ers previously published protocols6, 50, 81–83 and are known to produce long-term behavioral and molecular and 
neuronal effects in rats. Importantly, this escalating THC exposure protocol mimics a heavy use regiment of 
marijuana exposure, with the 2.5 mg/kg dose corresponding to approximately one cannabis cigarette, the 5 mg/kg 
dose corresponding to approximately two cannabis cigarettes, and the 10 mg/kg dose corresponding to approx-
imately four cannabis cigarettes50. THC in ethanol was dissolved in cremophor and saline (1:1:18). Ethanol was 
then evaporated using nitrogen gas to remove it from the final THC solution. All injections were administered 
intraperitoneally (i.p). The adolescent exposure experiments began at PND 35. Experimental procedures were 
initiated following a 30 days drug-free period (at PND 75).
Protein Expression Analyses. 
At adulthood (PND75), rats received an overdose of sodium pentobarbi-
tal (240 mg/kg, i.p., EuthanylTM). Under deep anesthesia rats were decapitated and brains removed and frozen. 
Coronal sections (60 μ
m) containing the PFC were cut on a cryostat and slide mounted. Bilateral micro-punches 
of the mPFC, were obtained for protein isolation. The western blotting procedure was performed as described pre-
viously84. Primary antibody dilutions were as follows: α
-tubulin (1:120 000; Sigma-Aldrich), GAD67 (1:1000; Cell 
Signaling Technology), GAD65 (1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and Parvalbumin (1:2000; Sigma-Aldrich). 
Species appropriate horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (Thermo Scientific) were all 
used at a dilution of 1:20 000.
Neuronal Activity Recordings and Analysis. 
Extracellular single-unit electrophysiological recordings 
were performed in vivo in adult (>PND 75) VEH and THC pretreated rats during adolescence. The recordings 
were taken from either putative glutamatergic (GLUT) PFC neurons (cells/animals: VEH = 99/6, THC = 122/10) 
or dopaminergic (DA) VTA neurons (cells/animals: VEH = 45/24, THC = 40/20). Rats were anesthetized with 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
urethane (1.4 g/kg, i.p., Sigma-Aldrich) and placed in a stereotaxic frame with body temperature maintained at 
37 °C. A scalp incision was made and a hole was drilled in the skull overlaying the targeted structure at the follow-
ing coordinates: mPFC: AP: +2.7 to +3.5 mm from bregma, L: ±0.8 to ±1 mm, DV: −
2.5 to −
4 mm from the 
dural surface; VTA: AP: −
5.2 mm from bregma, L: ±0.8 to ±1 mm, DV: −
6.5 to −
9 mm from the dural surface. 
Recordings were taken with glass microelectrodes (average impedance of 6–10 MΩ) filled with 2 M sodium ace-
tate solution containing 2% pontamine sky blue (Sigma-Aldrich). A bone screw was placed over the cerebellum 
and was connected with the return of the headstage and served as a reference electrode. Extracellular signals were 
amplified (×
5000) using a MultiClamp 700B amplifier (Molecular Devices), digitized at 25 kHz and recorded 
on the computer using a Digidata 1440 A and pClamp software (Molecular Devices). The wideband signal of 
PFC recordings was fed to two channels of the digitizer and filtered to obtain single unit recordings (band pass 
between 0.3 and 3 kHz) and local field potentials (LFPs; low pass at 0.3 kHz). For the VTA electrophysiology only 
unit data were recorded.
Putative mPFC pyramidal cells were identified based on established criteria85: (1) firing frequency < 10 Hz, (2) 
waveform shape, and (3) action potential duration > 2.5 ms. Cells exhibiting 3 consecutive spikes with inter-spike 
intervals < 45 ms were classified as burst-firing cells85. The electrophysiological properties of spontaneously active 
pyramidal neurons were sampled in the mPFC by making vertical passes of the electrode through the pyramidal 
cell body region. These tracks were made in a predefined pattern, with each track separated by 200 µm. After an 
individual putative pyramidal neuron was isolated, its spontaneous activity was recorded for 5 min. Two param-
eters of activity were sampled, the basal firing rate and the bursting rate.
VTA DA neurons were identified according to well established electrophysiological features86: (1) action 
potential width > 2.5 ms, (2) spontaneous firing rate between 2–5 Hz, (3) a triphasic waveform consisting of a 
notch on the rising phase followed by a delayed after potential, and (4) a single irregular or burst firing pattern. 
For intra-mPFC microinfusions of VEH or Muscimol (MUS, 1 μ
g/0.5 μ
l) a 10 μ
l Hamilton syringe was slowly low-
ered into the mPFC using the same stereotaxic coordinates as described above. The firing frequencies of collective 
VTA putative DA neurons from adolescent THC pretreated rats before microinfusions of VEH or muscimol into 
the mPFC were averaged and normalized to the average firing frequency of collective VTA neurons from adoles-
cent VEH pretreated rats. The response patterns of isolated VTA neurons to microinfusion of VEH or MUS into 
the mPFC were determined by comparing the neuronal frequency rates between the 5 min preinfusion vs. postin-
fusion recording epochs. We also analyzed the proportion of DA neuronal spikes fired in burst mode. The onset 
of a burst was defined as the occurrence of two consecutive spikes with an interspike interval of 80 ms86. The per-
centage of burst spikes was calculated by dividing the number of spikes occurring in bursts by the total number 
of spikes occurring in the same period of time. We sampled a total of n = 85 VTA DA neurons (Adolescent VEH 
pretreated-Intra mPFC VEH group; n = 15 cells in 7 rats; Adolescent VEH pretreated- Intra-mPFC MUS group; 
n = 30 cells in 17 rats; Adolescent THC pretreated- Intra mPFC VEH group; n = 14 cells in 7 rats; Adolescent 
THC pretreated- Intra mPFC MUS group; n = 26 cells in 13 rats).
LFP signals were analyzed using NeuroExplorer (Nex Technologies). First, the signals were decimated to 
1 kHz, and lowpass filtered (IIR Butterworth filter at 170 Hz; filter order set to 3). Subsequently a spectrogram 
function was used to calculate the power of oscillations at frequencies between 0–100 Hz (window length 2 s; 
shift 0.5 s). One minute long recording epochs were used for estimating the average power spectrum distribu-
tions. Epochs were selected such as either the desynchronized (relatively small signal amplitude devoid of slow 
oscillations) or synchronized (relatively large signal amplitude with slow oscillations present) cortical state could 
be easily distinguished. Power values for a given frequency were averaged over time of the recording epoch and 
normalized so that the sum of all power spectrum values equals 1. The total power was calculated by adding all 
the power values at frequencies between 0–59 and 61–100 Hz. Power values at 60 ± 1 Hz were excluded from all 
the calculations. Gamma band was defined as frequency between 30–80 Hz and subcategorized into low gamma 
(30–59 Hz) and high gamma (61–80 Hz). Statistics are based on 98 recordings of desynchronized state (VEH = 37, 
THC = 61) and 174 recordings of synchronized state (VEH = 107, THC = 67). Every recording was taken at dif-
ferent electrode location throughout mPFC.
For histological analyses the recording electrodes positions were marked with an iontophoretic deposit 
of pontamine sky blue dye (−
20 mA, continuous current for 15 min). Histological analysis was performed as 
described previously47. No mPFC cells were recorded outside the anatomical boundaries of the mPFC as defined 
by Paxinos and Watson (2007). One recorded rat was excluded from electrophysiological data analysis because 
its cells were recorded outside the anatomical boundaries of the VTA as defined by Paxinos and Watson (2007).
Surgical Procedures. 
At adulthood (PND) 75, rats were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection 
of ketamine (80 mg/mL, Vetoquinol)-xylazine (6 mg/kg, Bayer) mixture. To minimize pain and inflammation, 
meloxicam (1 mg/kg; s.c., Boehringer Ingelheim) was administered before and after surgeries. Rats were posi-
tioned in a Kopf stereotaxic device for cannulae implantation. Stainless steel guide cannulae (22-gauge) were 
implanted bilaterally into the mPFC with the coordinates (15° angle, in mm from bregma): AP: +2.9 L: ±1.9 
mm: DV: −
3 mm from the dural surface. The guide cannulae were secured into position by jeweler’s screws and 
dental acrylic cement. Rats were singly housed post-surgery and behavioral tests were initiated after one week of 
recovery.
Intra-mPFC Microinfusions. 
Intra-mPFC microinfusions of either vehicle (VEH, NaCl 0.9%) or the selec-
tive GABAA receptor agonist, muscimol (500 ng/0.5 µl, Sigma-Aldrich, diluted in NaCl 0.9%) were performed 
immediately before behavioral experiments. A total volume of 0.5 μ
l per hemisphere was delivered via a 28 gauge 
injector over a period of 1 min. Microinjectors were left in place for an additional 1 min following infusions to 
ensure adequate diffusion from the tip.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
Behavioral Testing. 
Object recognition. Rats were tested using the object recognition task as described 
previously87. This task evaluates the ability of the rat to discriminate between the familiarity of previously encoun-
tered objects; normal rats typically spend more time exploring a novel object than a familiar object. The test 
sessions consisted of two 3-min trials. During the first trial (T1 acquisition trial), each rat was placed in the center 
of an arena containing two identical objects placed in the far corners 15 cm from the side wall. After a delay of 
60 min during which the rat was returned to its cage, and both objects were replaced (one by an identical copy, the 
other by a novel object in the same location), the rat was returned to the arena for the second trial (T2 test trial). 
Between rats, both the role (familiar or novel object) and the relative position of the two objects were randomly 
counterbalanced. Object exploration was considered when the head of the rat was facing the object or the rat 
was touching or sniffing the object. Times spent in exploration were videotaped with a video-tracking system 
(ANY-maze; Stoelting) and analyzed by an experimenter blind to the treatment conditions. Exploration times 
were recorded and used to calculate object recognition index [time spent with novel object/total time explor-
ing both objects] *100. The final number of rats in each group was as follows: Adolescent VEH-Intra-mPFC 
VEH (VEH/VEH) group, n = 10; Adolescent VEH-Intra-mPFC MUS (VEH/MUS) group, n = 9; Adolescent 
THC-Intra-mPFC VEH (THC/VEH) group, n = 9; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC MUS (THC/MUS) group, 
n = 10.
Social motivation and social cognition. Rats were tested using a social interaction procedure as described previ-
ously6. Briefly, this task evaluates 2 distinguishable aspects of social behavior: (1) social affiliation/motivation and 
(2) social recognition memory. Rats were habituated to the test arena for 13 min, 24 h before testing. Testing con-
sisted of 2 successive 8-min phases. During the first phase, we analyzed social motivation, that is, the propensity 
to spend time with an unfamiliar male rat (stranger rat) enclosed in a small wire cage compared with time spent 
with an identical but empty cage. During the second phase, occurring just after the first one, we analyzed social 
recognition, that is, the propensity to spend time with a novel unfamiliar rat (novel stranger) rather than with 
the familiar stranger rat (encountered during the first phase). The locations of stranger vs. novel rats in the left 
vs. right side chambers were counterbalanced between trials. Times spent in exploration were videotaped with a 
video-tracking system (ANY-maze; Stoelting) and analyzed by an experimenter blind to the treatment conditions. 
After each test, chambers and cages were cleaned with 50% ethanol to avoid olfactory cue bias. Exploration times 
were recorded and used to calculate a social motivation or cognition index [time spent with stranger (or novel 
stranger)/total time exploring both rats] *100. The final number of rats in each group was as follows: Adolescent 
VEH-Intra-mPFC VEH (VEH/VEH) group, n = 12; Adolescent VEH-Intra-mPFC MUS (VEH/MUS) group, 
n = 11; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC VEH (THC/VEH) group, n = 12; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC MUS 
(THC/MUS) group, n = 10.
Light dark box. This test is based upon a rat’s natural aversion to bright environments and attributes greater 
time spent in an illuminated environment as reflecting lower anxiety levels. The test was performed as previ-
ously described6. At the start of the experiment, a rat was placed in the center of the lighted box with its head 
facing the wall opposite the door and was allowed to freely explore both compartments for a period of 8 min. A 
zone entry was considered to have begun when the rat placed all 4 paws in that zone. Experiments were video-
taped with a video-tracking system (ANY-maze;Stoelting) and analyzed by an experimenter blind to treatment 
conditions. Behaviors analyzed included latency time to leave the dark box and enter the light box (latency to 
second transition), which is thought to be the most reliable indicator of anxiety-like behavior and is sensitive to 
both anxiogenic and anxiolytic treatments88. The final number of rats in each group was as follows: Adolescent 
VEH-Intra-mPFC VEH (VEH/VEH) group, n = 9; Adolescent VEH-Intra-mPFC MUS (VEH/MUS) group, 
n = 12; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC VEH (THC/VEH) group, n = 12; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC MUS 
(THC/MUS) group, n = 10.
Open field test. Rats were placed in an automated open field activity chamber (San Diego Instruments, San 
Diego, CA, USA) for 60 min. Total distance travelled and vertical counts were recorded and analyzed. The final 
number of rats in each group was as follows: Adolescent VEH-Intra-mPFC VEH (VEH/VEH) group, n = 11; 
Adolescent VEH-Intra-mPFC MUS (VEH/MUS) group, n = 12; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC VEH (THC/
VEH) group, n = 12; Adolescent THC-Intra-mPFC MUS (THC/MUS) group, n = 9.
Statistical analysis. 
The data were analyzed using t-tests, one or two-way ANOVA. Post hoc analyses were 
calculated using Fisher’s LSD. Densitometry values for Western blots were acquired with Kodak digital analysis 
software and analyzed with t-tests.
Data availability. 
The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available from 
the corresponding author on reasonable request.
References
 1. Andréasson, S., Allebeck, P., Engström, A. & Rydberg, U. Cannabis and schizophrenia. A longitudinal study of Swedish conscripts. 
Lancet 2, 1483–1486 (1987).
 2. Arseneault, L. et al. Cannabis use in adolescence and risk for adult psychosis: longitudinal prospective study. BMJ 325, 1212–1213 
(2002).
 3. Arseneault, L., Cannon, M., Witton, J. & Murray, R. M. Causal association between cannabis and psychosis: Examination of the 
evidence. British Journal of Psychiatry 184, 110–117 (2004).
 4. Stefanis, N. C. et al. Early adolescent cannabis exposure and positive and negative dimensions of psychosis. Addiction 99, 1333–1341 
(2004).
 5. Renard, J., Krebs, M. O., Le Pen, G. & Jay, T. M. Long-term consequences of adolescent cannabinoid exposure in adult 
psychopathology. Front Neurosci 8, 1–14 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
 6. Renard, J. et al. Adolescent Cannabinoid Exposure Induces a Persistent Sub-Cortical Hyper-Dopaminergic State and Associated 
Molecular Adaptations in the Prefrontal Cortex. Cereb. Cortex doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv335 (2016).
 7. Smith, N. High potency cannabis: the forgotten variable. Addiction (Abingdon, England) 100, 1551–1558 (2005).
 8. Cass, D. K. et al. CB1 cannabinoid receptor stimulation during adolescence impairs the maturation of GABA function in the adult 
rat prefrontal cortex. Mol. Psychiatry 19, 536–43 (2014).
 9. Caballero, A., Flores-Barrera, E., Cass, D. K. & Tseng, K. Y. Differential regulation of parvalbumin and calretinin interneurons in the 
prefrontal cortex during adolescence. Brain Struct. Funct. 219, 395–406 (2014).
 
10. Long, L. E., Lind, J., Webster, M. & Weickert, C. Developmental trajectory of the endocannabinoid system in human dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex. BMC Neuroscience 13, 87 (2012).
 
11. Heng, L., Beverley, J. A., Steiner, H. & Tseng, K. Y. Differential developmental trajectories for CB1 cannabinoid receptor expression 
in limbic/associative and sensorimotor cortical areas. Synapse 65, 278–286 (2011).
 
12. Ellgren, M. et al. Dynamic changes of the endogenous cannabinoid and opioid mesocorticolimbic systems during adolescence: THC 
effects. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 18, 826–834 (2008).
 
13. Volk, D. W. & Lewis, D. A. GABA Targets for the Treatment of Cognitive Dysfunction in Schizophrenia. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 3, 
45–62 (2005).
 
14. Andersen, S. L. Trajectories of brain development: Point of vulnerability or window of opportunity? In. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews 27, 3–18 (2003).
 
15. Paus, T., Keshavan, M. & Giedd, J. N. Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge during adolescence? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 947–957 
(2008).
 
16. Straub, R. E. et al. Allelic variation in GAD1 (GAD67) is associated with\rschizophrenia and influences cortical function and gene\
rexpression. Mol Psychiatry 12, 854–869 (2007).
 
17. Lewis, D. A., Hashimoto, T. & Volk, D. W. Cortical inhibitory neurons and schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 312–324 (2005).
 
18. Hashimoto, T. et al. Alterations in GABA-related transcriptome in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia. 
Mol. Psychiatry 13, 147–161 (2008).
 
19. Guidotti, A. et al. Decrease in Reelin and Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase 67 (GAD 67) Expression in Schizophrenia and Bipolar 
Disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 57, 1061–1069 (2000).
 
20. Akbarian, S. et al. Gene expression for glutamic acid decarboxylase is reduced without loss of neurons in prefrontal cortex of 
schizophrenics. Arch Gen Psychiatry 52, 258–266 (1995).
 
21. Volk, D. W., Austin, M. C., Pierri, J. N., Sampson, A. R. & Lewis, D. A. Decreased glutamic acid decarboxylase67 messenger RNA 
expression in a subset of prefrontal cortical gamma-aminobutyric acid neurons in subjects with schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 
57, 237–245 (2000).
 
22. Hashimoto, T. et al. Gene expression deficits in a subclass of GABA neurons in the prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia. 
J. Neurosci. 23, 6315–6326 (2003).
 
23. Curley, A. A. et al. Cortical deficits of glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 expression in schizophrenia: clinical, protein, and cell type-
specific features. Am. J. Psychiatry 168, 921–929 (2011).
 
24. Woo, T.-U., Whitehead, R. E., Melchitzky, D. S. & Lewis, D. A. A subclass of prefrontal gamma-aminobutyric acid axon terminals are 
selectively altered in schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 5341–5346 (1998).
 
25. Vawter, M. P. et al. Microarray analysis of gene expression in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia: A preliminary study. Schizophr. 
Res. 58, 11–20 (2002).
 
26. Maldonado-Avilés, J. G. et al. Altered markers of tonic inhibition in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of subjects with schizophrenia. 
Am. J. Psychiatry 166, 450–459 (2009).
 
27. Huntsman, M. M., Tran, B. V., Potkin, S. G., Bunney, Jr., W. E. & Jones, E. G. Altered ratios of alternatively spliced long and short g2 
subunit mRNAs of the g-amino butyrate type A receptor in prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95, 
15066–71. (1998).
 
28. Aoki, F., Fetz, E. E., Shupe, L., Lettich, E. & Ojemann, G. A. Increased gamma-range activity in human sensorimotor cortex during 
performance of visuomotor tasks. Clin. Neurophysiol. 110, 524–537 (1999).
 
29. Sohal, V. S., Zhang, F., Yizhar, O. & Deisseroth, K. Parvalbumin neurons and gamma rhythms enhance cortical circuit performance. 
Nature 459, 698–702 (2009).
 
30. Cardin, J. A. et al. Driving fast-spiking cells induces gamma rhythm and controls sensory responses. Nature 459, 663–7 (2009).
 
31. Gordon, E., Williams, L., Haig, A. R., Wright, J. & Meares, R. A. Symptom profile and ‘gamma’ processing in schizophrenia. Cogn. 
Neuropsychiatry 6, 7–19 (2001).
 
32. Lee, K. H., Williams, L. M., Breakspear, M. & Gordon, E. Synchronous Gamma activity: A review and contribution to an integrative 
neuroscience model of schizophrenia. Brain Research Reviews 41, 57–78 (2003).
 
33. Nakazawa, K. et al. GABAergic interneuron origin of schizophrenia pathophysiology. Neuropharmacology 62, 1574–1583 (2012).
 
34. Yee, B. K. et al. A schizophrenia-related sensorimotor deficit links alpha 3-containing GABAA receptors to a dopamine 
hyperfunction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102, 17154–17159 (2005).
 
35. Enomoto, T., Tse, M. T. & Floresco, S. B. Reducing prefrontal gamma-aminobutyric acid activity induces cognitive, behavioral, and 
dopaminergic abnormalities that resemble schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 69, 432–441 (2011).
 
36. Murase, S., Grenhoff, J., Chouvet, G., Gonon, F. G. & Svensson, T. H. Prefrontal cortex regulates burst firing and transmitter release 
in rat mesolimbic dopamine neurons studied in vivo. Neurosci. Lett. 157, 53–56 (1993).
 
37. Taber, M. T., Das, S. & Fibiger, H. C. Cortical Regulation of Subcortical Dopamine Release: Mediation via the Ventral Tegmental 
Area. J. Neurochem. 65, 1407–1410 (1995).
 
38. Vertes, R. P. Interactions among the medial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and midline thalamus in emotional and cognitive 
processing in the rat. Neuroscience 142, 1–20 (2006).
 
39. Uylings, H. B. M., Groenewegen, H. J. & Kolb, B. Do rats have a prefrontal cortex? Behavioural Brain Research 146, 3–17 (2003).
 
40. Seillier, A., Martinez, A. A. & Giuffrida, A. Phencyclidine-induced social withdrawal results from deficient stimulation of 
cannabinoid CB1 receptors: implications for schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology 38, 1816–24 (2013).
 
41. Ochsner, K. N. The Social-Emotional Processing Stream: Five Core Constructs and Their Translational Potential for Schizophrenia 
and Beyond. Biological Psychiatry 64, 48–61 (2008).
 
42. Millan, M. J. et al. Selective blockade of dopamine D3 versus D2 receptors enhances frontocortical cholinergic transmission and 
social memory in rats: A parallel neurochemical and behavioural analysis. J. Neurochem. 100, 1047–1061 (2007).
 
43. Bicks, L. K., Koike, H., Akbarian, S. & Morishita, H. Prefrontal cortex and social cognition in mouse and man. Front. Psychol. 6, 1–15 
(2015).
 
44. Mitchell, J. P., Macrae, C. N. & Banaji, M. R. Dissociable Medial Prefrontal Contributions to Judgments of Similar and Dissimilar 
Others. Neuron 50, 655–663 (2006).
 
45. Amodio, D. M. & Frith, C. D. Meeting of minds: the medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 268–77 (2006).
 
46. Wood, J. N., Romero, S. G., Makale, M. & Grafman, J. Category-specific representations of social and nonsocial knowledge in the 
human prefrontal cortex. J Cogn Neurosci 15, 236–248 (2003).
 
47. Loureiro, M., Renard, J., Zunder, J. & Laviolette, S. R. Hippocampal Cannabinoid Transmission Modulates Dopamine Neuron 
Activity: Impact on Rewarding Memory Formation and Social Interaction. Neuropsychopharmacology 40, 1436–1447 (2014).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
 
48. Lewis, D. A., Curley, A. A., Glausier, J. R. & Volk, D. W. Cortical parvalbumin interneurons and cognitive dysfunction in 
schizophrenia. Trends in Neurosciences 35, 57–67 (2012).
 
49. Fatemi, S. H. et al. Glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 and 67 kDa proteins are reduced in autistic parietal and cerebellar cortices. Biol. 
Psychiatry 52, 805–810 (2002).
 
50. Zamberletti, E. et al. Alterations of prefrontal cortex GABAergic transmission in the complex psychotic-like phenotype induced by 
adolescent delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol exposure in rats. Neurobiol. Dis. 63, 35–47 (2014).
 
51. Homayoun, H. & Moghaddam, B. Progression of cellular adaptations in medial prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex in response to 
repeated amphetamine. J. Neurosci. 26, 8025–8039 (2006).
 
52. Laviolette, S. R. & Grace, A. A. Cannabinoids Potentiate Emotional Learning Plasticity in Neurons of the Medial Prefrontal Cortex 
through Basolateral Amygdala Inputs. J. Neurosci. 26, 6458–6468 (2006).
 
53. Tan, H. et al. Cannabinoid transmission in the basolateral amygdala modulates fear memory formation via functional inputs to the 
prelimbic cortex. J Neurosci 31, 5300–5312 (2011).
 
54. Buzsáki, G. & Wang, X.-J. Mechanisms of Gamma Oscillations. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 203–225, doi:https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
neuro-062111-150444 (2012).
 
55. Symond, M. B., Harris, A. W. F., Gordon, E. & Williams, L. M. ‘Gamma synchrony’ in first-episode schizophrenia: A disorder of 
temporal connectivity? Am. J. Psychiatry 162, 459–465 (2005).
 
56. Gandal, M. J. et al. GABAB-mediated rescue of altered excitatory-inhibitory balance, gamma synchrony and behavioral deficits 
following constitutive NMDAR-hypofunction. Transl. Psychiatry 2, e142 (2012).
 
57. Williams, L. M. et al. Emotion-elicited gamma synchrony in patients with first-episode schizophrenia: A neural correlate of social 
cognition outcomes. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 34, 303–313 (2009).
 
58. Lee, K. H., Williams, L. M., Haig, A. & Gordon, E. ‘Gamma (40 Hz) phase synchronicity’ and symptom dimensions in schizophrenia. 
Cogn Neuropsychiatry 8, 57–71 (2003).
 
59. Baldeweg, T., Spence, S., Hirsch, S. R. & Gruzelier, J. Gamma-band electroencephalographic oscillations in a patient with somatic 
hallucinations. Lancet (London, England) 352, 620–621 (1998).
 
60. Hamm, J. P., Gilmore, C. S., Picchetti, N. A. M., Sponheim, S. R. & Clementz, B. A. Abnormalities of neuronal oscillations and 
temporal integration to low- and high-frequency auditory stimulation in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 69, 989–996 (2011).
 
61. Tsuchimoto, R. et al. Reduced high and low frequency gamma synchronization in patients with chronic schizophrenia. Schizophr. 
Res. 133, 99–105 (2011).
 
62. Grützner, C. et al. Deficits in high- (>60 Hz) gamma-band oscillations during visual processing in schizophrenia. Front. Hum. 
Neurosci. 7, 88 (2013).
 
63. Barr, M. S. et al. Evidence for excessive frontal evoked gamma oscillatory activity in schizophrenia during working memory. 
Schizophr. Res. 121, 146–152 (2010).
 
64. Farzan, F. et al. Evidence for gamma inhibition deficits in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia. Brain 
133, 1505–1514 (2010).
 
65. Morrison, P. D. et al. Disruption of frontal theta coherence by Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol is associated with positive psychotic 
symptoms. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 827–836 (2011).
 
66. Holderith, N. et al. Cannabinoids attenuate hippocampal gamma oscillations by suppressing excitatory synaptic input onto CA3 
pyramidal neurons and fast spiking basket cells. J. Physiol. 589, 4921–4934 (2011).
 
67. Hajós, M., Hoffmann, W. E. & Kocsis, B. Activation of Cannabinoid-1 Receptors Disrupts Sensory Gating and Neuronal Oscillation: 
Relevance to Schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 63, 1075–1083 (2008).
 
68. Lewis, D. A. et al. Subunit-selective modulation of GABA type A receptor neurotransmission and cognition in schizophrenia. Am. 
J. Psychiatry 165, 1585–1593 (2008).
 
69. Piantadosi, P. T. & Floresco, S. B. Prefrontal Cortical GABA Transmission Modulates Discrimination and Latent Inhibition of 
Conditioned Fear: Relevance for Schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology 39, 2473–2484 (2014).
 
70. Paine, T. A., Slipp, L. E. & Carlezon, W. A. Schizophrenia-Like Attentional Deficits Following Blockade of Prefrontal Cortex GABAA 
Receptors. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 1703–1713 (2011).
 
71. Auger, M. L. & Floresco, S. B. Prefrontal cortical GABA modulation of spatial reference and working memory. Int. J. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 18 (2015).
 
72. French, E. D., Dillon, K. & Wu, X. Cannabinoids excite dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmentum and substantia nigra. 
Neuroreport 8, 649–652 (1997).
 
73. Lungwitz, E. A. et al. The role of the medial prefrontal cortex in regulating social familiarity-induced anxiolysis. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 39, 1009–1019 (2014).
 
74. Delini-Stula, A., Berdah-Tordjman, D. & Neumann, N. Partial benzodiazepine agonists in schizophrenia: expectations and present 
clinical findings. Clin. Neuropharmacol. 15(Suppl 1), 405A–406A (1992).
 
75. Delini-Stula, A. & Berdah-Tordjman, D. Antipsychotic effects of bretazenil, a partial benzodiazepine agonist in acute schizophrenia 
- A study group report. J. Psychiatr. Res. 30, 239–250 (1996).
 
76. Sesack, S. R. & Pickel, V. M. Prefrontal cortical efferents in the rat synapse on unlabeled neuronal targets of catecholamine terminals 
in the nucleus accumbens septi and on dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area. J. Comp. Neurol. 320, 145–160 (1992).
 
77. Rao, S. G., Williams, G. V. & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. Destruction and creation of spatial tuning by disinhibition: GABA(A) blockade 
of prefrontal cortical neurons engaged by working memory. J. Neurosci. 20, 485–494 (2000).
 
78. Tremolizzo, L. et al. Valproate corrects the schizophrenia-like epigenetic behavioral modifications induced by methionine in mice. 
Biol. Psychiatry 57, 500–509 (2005).
 
79. Grace, A. A. Phasic versus tonic dopamine release and the modulation of dopamine system responsivity: A hypothesis for the 
etiology of schizophrenia. Neuroscience 41, 1–24 (1991).
 
80. González, S., Cebeira, M. & Fernández-Ruiz, J. Cannabinoid tolerance and dependence: A review of studies in laboratory animals. 
in. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 81, 300–318 (2005).
 
81. Rubino, T. et al. Changes in hippocampal morphology and neuroplasticity induced by adolescent THC treatment are associated with 
cognitive impairment in adulthood. Hippocampus 19, 763–772 (2009).
 
82. Rubino, T. et al. Chronic delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol during adolescence provokes sex-dependent changes in the emotional profile 
in adult rats: behavioral and biochemical correlates. Neuropsychopharmacology 33, 2760–2771 (2008).
 
83. Realini, N. et al. Chronic URB597 treatment at adulthood reverted most depressive-like symptoms induced by adolescent exposure 
to THC in female rats. Neuropharmacology 60, 235–43 (2011).
 
84. Lyons, D. et al. Opiate exposure and withdrawal induces a molecular memory switch in the basolateral amygdala between ERK1/2 
and CaMKIIα
-dependent signaling substrates. J. Neurosci. 33, 14693–704 (2013).
 
85. Parsegian, A., Glen, W. B., Lavin, A. & See, R. E. Methamphetamine self-administration produces attentional set-shifting deficits and 
alters prefrontal cortical neurophysiology in rats. Biol. Psychiatry 69, 253–259 (2011).
 
86. Grace, A. A. & Bunney, B. S. Intracellular and extracellular electrophysiology of nigral dopaminergic neurons–1. Identification and 
characterization. Neuroscience 10, 301–315 (1983).
 
87. Ennaceur, A. & Delacour, J. A new one-trial test for neurobio- logical studies of memory in rats. Behav. Brain Res. 31, 47–59 (1988).
 
88. Ardayfio, P. & Kim, K.-S. Anxiogenic-like effect of chronic corticosterone in the light-dark emergence task in mice. Behav. Neurosci. 
120, 249–256 (2006).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
Scientific REPORTS | 7: 11420  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR; MOP 246144) and the National 
Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
Author Contributions
In vivo Electrophysiological recordings were performed by J.R., C.P.K., K.M. and H.J.S. Behavioural experiments 
were performed by J.R. Tissue extractions were performed by J.R., C.E.L.J., W.J.R. and S.R.L. Western blots 
were performed by C.E.L.J. and W.J.R. Experimental design and conception were done by J.R., W.J.R. and 
S.R.L. Analyses were performed by J.R. and H.J.S. The paper has been written by J.R. and S.R.L. The project was 
supervised by S.R.L.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-11645-8
Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2017
