 ARTICLE
OPEN
Label-free isolation of prostate circulating tumor cells using
Vortex microfluidic technology
Corinne Renier1, Edward Pao2, James Che1, Haiyan E. Liu1, Clementine A. Lemaire1, Melissa Matsumoto2, Melanie Triboulet3,
Sandy Srivinas4, Stefanie S. Jeffrey3, Matthew Rettig5,6,7, Rajan P. Kulkarni2,7,8,9, Dino Di Carlo2,7,8 and Elodie Sollier-Christen1
There has been increased interest in utilizing non-invasive “liquid biopsies” to identify biomarkers for cancer prognosis and
monitoring, and to isolate genetic material that can predict response to targeted therapies. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have
emerged as such a biomarker providing both genetic and phenotypic information about tumor evolution, potentially from both
primary and metastatic sites. Currently, available CTC isolation approaches, including immunoaffinity and size-based filtration, have
focused on high capture efficiency but with lower purity and often long and manual sample preparation, which limits the use of
captured CTCs for downstream analyses. Here, we describe the use of the microfluidic Vortex Chip for size-based isolation of CTCs
from 22 patients with advanced prostate cancer and, from an enumeration study on 18 of these patients, find that we can capture
CTCs with high purity (from 1.74 to 37.59%) and efficiency (from 1.88 to 93.75 CTCs/7.5 mL) in less than 1 h. Interestingly, more
atypical large circulating cells were identified in five age-matched healthy donors (46–77 years old; 1.25–2.50 CTCs/7.5 mL) than in
five healthy donors <30 years old (21–27 years old; 0.00 CTC/7.5 mL). Using a threshold calculated from the five age-matched
healthy donors (3.37 CTCs/mL), we identified CTCs in 80% of the prostate cancer patients. We also found that a fraction of the cells
collected (11.5%) did not express epithelial prostate markers (cytokeratin and/or prostate-specific antigen) and that some instead
expressed markers of epithelial–mesenchymal transition, i.e., vimentin and N-cadherin. We also show that the purity and DNA yield
of isolated cells is amenable to targeted amplification and next-generation sequencing, without whole genome amplification,
identifying unique mutations in 10 of 15 samples and 0 of 4 healthy samples.
npj Precision Oncology  (2017) 1:15 ; doi:10.1038/s41698-017-0015-0
INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer (PC) is currently the most common cancer among
men in the world, and one of the leading causes of death from
cancer in men of all races, with an estimated 26,120 deaths in
2016 in the United States alone (NCI SEER Stat Fact Sheets:
Prostate Cancer). While there has been a marked increase in 5-year
relative survival in the past 20 years, the majority of deaths
associated with PC are attributed to failure of current therapies to
cure metastatic disease. Additional research is still critically
needed to address specific challenges, such as improving cancer
screening to enable an earlier diagnostic, or developing more
effective treatments, such as targeted therapies.
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are extremely rare malignant cells
that originate from the primary tumor or metastatic sites and can
be isolated from peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors. A
few clinical trials have examined the relevance of CTC enumera-
tion in PC1–3 and have shown that the number of CTCs is
associated with progression-free and overall survival in advanced
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). While
enumeration data provide prognostic and predictive information,
it is the molecular characterization and functional analysis of CTCs
that will offer insights into the biology of the tumor cells and lead
to the development of personalized treatments. Genomic testing
of CTCs from each patient can be performed once or repeatedly to
identify certain therapeutic targets to guide the treatment for
mCRPC patients or to monitor the prognosis and molecular
evolution of the disease.
To date, however, the clinical utility of CTCs has been hampered
by the difficulty to rapidly and effectively isolate pure populations
of CTCs. Some of the pioneering technologies, including the
CellSearch System, tend to be multi-steps, labor-intensive, and
allow mainly for CTC detection and enumeration. More recently
other technologies, such as the CTC-iChip,4, 5 GEDI,6 Adnagen,7, 8
and the EPIC platforms9,
10 have allowed the isolation and
genomic analysis of CTCs from PC. However, most of these
techniques require an extensive sample preparation that may lead
to loss and damage of tumor cells, compromising the stability of
nucleic acids for downstream analysis.11 Furthermore, methods
such as the CTC-iChip relies on a negative depletion step to
remove leukocytes, or on a positive selection step with markers
Received: 24 October 2016 Revised: 28 February 2017 Accepted: 5 March 2017
1Vortex Biosciences Inc., 1490 O’Brien Drive, Suite E, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA; 2Department of Bioengineering, University of California, 420 Westwood Plaza, 5121 Engineering
V, PO Box 951600, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 3Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, MSLS Bldg, 1201 Welch Road, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
4Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; 5Departments of Medicine Urology, UCLA Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 6Department of Medicine, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System-West Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90073, USA; 7Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 8California NanoSystems Institute, 570 Westwood Plaza, Building 114, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA and 9Division of Dermatology, UCLA
Medical Center, 52-121 CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Correspondence: Rajan P. Kulkarni (rkulkarn@ucla.edu) or Dino Di Carlo (dicarlo@seas.ucla.edu) or Elodie Sollier-Christen (elodie@vortexbiosciences.com)
Corinne Renier, Edward Pao and James Che contributed equally to this work.
Rajan P. Kulkarni, Dino Di Carlo and Elodie Sollier-Christen jointly supervised this work.
www.nature.com/npjprecisiononcology
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
 such as EpCAM or other specific surface markers to capture the
CTCs; this requires prior knowledge of the marker of interest for
capture.4 The EPIC platform allows for rapid high-throughput
imaging of all cells but again requires preexisting knowledge and
manual selection of cells based on expression of specific
biomarkers.9
Molecular
marker-independent
CTC
enrichment
methodologies are thus critically needed to rapidly isolate and
define a broader spectrum of CTCs in PC.
To eliminate the bias associated with affinity capture, several
groups have developed label-free methods for isolating CTCs.12
Generally, these technologies take advantage of the larger size of
tumor cells of epithelial origin compared with red blood cells
(RBCs) and white blood cells (WBCs) and perform size-selective
isolation. The simplest of these techniques is density centrifuga-
tion, which utilizes a denser-than-water material such as sucrose
gradient or Ficoll to separate cells by size and density by
centrifugation through the material. While this is attractive due to
its low cost and need for minimal equipment, the capture
efficiency is often very low and it is difficult to get good purity as
these methods are also utilized for isolation of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells such as lymphocytes.12 This concept of size-
based separation has been improved upon by several technolo-
gies. For example, the Clearbridge technology utilizes hydro-
dynamic sorting of cells by size in a specially designed microfluidic
chip, termed Dean flow fractionation.13 The presence of curved
channels generates rotational flow in the channel, resulting in two
counter-rotating vortices across the channel cross-section (Dean
vortices).14 Larger particles or cells (CTCs) occupy a single
equilibrium position near the inner wall, while smaller cells such
as RBCs or WBCs move toward the outer wall, which results
in distinct cell streams that can be collected differentially.
Limitations of this method include a collection into a large
volume and the consequent need for additional centrifugation
and transfer step.13
Another approach to size-based and label-free isolation is the
use of microfilters to remove cells below a certain size cutoff. The
isolation by size of epithelial tumor cells technology utilizes
microfiltration through pores of calibrated size (usually 8 µm).
Microfiltration involves flowing the blood through a device with
filters of varying geometric design.15 One type is the membrane
micro filter, which consists of a semipermeable membrane with a
2D array of small openings (between 6 and 11 µm but typically 8
µm). Smaller cells pass through, while larger ones are trapped.
However, this setup is prone to clogging with cells and debris,
which limits the efficiency of capture over time. A similar
approach is the use of a size exclusion filter on a syringe to
isolate CTCs.16 This method is simple and rapid and requires
minimal infrastructure or equipment, though clogging and loss of
cells can be a significant issue. A related approach is the
Parsortix device, which functions by sorting cells by both
deformability and size. The setup involves flowing blood through
a microfluidic chip in which steps of varying size have been
incorporated in order to separate cells by size. Cells smaller than
the dimensions of the step can pass through, while those larger
would remain trapped.17 Limitations of this approach are the need
for preliminary preparation, such as buffy-coat enrichment, as
well as downstream extra steps to harvest the cells from the
trapping cassette.
We have previously described the Vortex Chip,18 a simple
microfluidic device that relies on laminar microvortices to isolate
and concentrate CTCs from blood or other body fluids19 based
solely on their size. Here, we use the High Throughput Vortex Chip
(Vortex HT),20, 21 which features an optimized processing speed (8
mL/min), higher overall capture efficiency, and high purity CTC
enrichment. Using the Vortex HT chip and with objective
classification criteria based on cytokeratin (CK), prostate-specific
antigen (PSA), CD45, and 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
immunostaining, we were able to rapidly isolate CTCs in whole-
blood samples from 22 patients with advanced mCRPC. Cells
undergoing epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and which
are potentially relevant in metastatic dissemination were further
identified with vimentin and N-cadherin (VNC) staining. We also
performed multiplex PCR-targeted next-generation sequencing
(NGS) on a custom panel designed to cover all exons of four genes
(AR, RB1, TP53, PTEN) and analyze the genetic variants in CTCs
isolated from PC patients via NGS. At least 1 mutation was
detected in 10 out of 15 (66.7%) patient samples, while no
additional mutation was detected in 4 healthy donors.
RESULTS
Device performance with prostate cell lines
Improving upon the original design of the Vortex Chip,18, 19 we
recently described a High Throughput Vortex Chip (Vortex HT)
featuring a size cutoff of ~13 μm, with increased processing speed
(8 mL/min) for the same overall capture efficiency and high purity
enrichment (Fig. 1).20 We first evaluated the performance of the
Vortex HT chip to isolate cells of PC origin (Fig. 2). Spiking
experiments in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) performed with the
PC cell line LNCaP resulted in a capture efficiency of 24.6 ± 7.7%
on average (n = 12; 1 cycle) (Supp. Fig. 2). When LNCaP cells were
spiked in whole blood from healthy donors, the performance
remained unchanged with a 24.5% cell capture for a purity of
73.9% on average, i.e., 64.2 WBCs/mL (n = 3; 1 cycle) (Fig. 2a).
Given the increased processing throughput (8 mL/min of 10X
diluted blood) of the Vortex HT chip, in the next experiment, the
sample flow-through was collected in a conical tube and
reprocessed through the chip using the same operating condi-
tions. This process was repeated for a total of six cycles and
resulted in a cumulative efficiency of 51.0%, corresponding to a
2.1-fold increase when compared with a single cycle (n = 3). Purity
of the collected cells remained high after six cycles, 55.2%,
compared with 73.9% purity after one cycle (Fig. 2a). As a
compromise between cell recovery and sample processing time,
and to be consistent with other ongoing clinical studies, the next
experiments were performed with two cycles.
To evaluate potential variability due to changes in cell proper-
ties over many culture cycles, cell lines harvested at two different
time points were spiked in blood and overall cell diameter
measured before and after processing through the vortex chip
(two cycles total) (Fig. 2b). The overall particle diameter (i.e., from
cells or cell clusters) was measured to estimate the dimension of
particles entering the trapping chambers. On Day 1, cell/cell
cluster diameter ranged from 8.97 to 79.03 μm, with a mean of
22.47, for a capture efficiency of 37%. On Day 2, cell/cell cluster
diameter ranged from 9.39 to 66.32 μm, with a mean of 27.16 μm,
for a capture efficiency of 59%. The variability observed in the
distribution of the particles sizes and its impact on the resulting
capture
efficiencies
highlights
the
importance
of
cell
line
maintenance and preparation22–27 and the limitations of using
cell lines to evaluate performance of CTC capture technologies.
Cells processed through Vortex HT chip remain viable
Live/dead
assays
performed
over
time
revealed
no
major
difference in viability between the cells processed through the
Vortex HT chip and their respective controls (Fig. 2c). The cells
released off-chip attached to the well-plate and were cultured for
over 7 days (Fig. 2d), at which point the experiment was stopped.
Enumeration of CTCs from PC patients and healthy subjects
CTCs were enumerated from a cohort of 20 PC samples with a
median age of 71 years (range 46–87). Out of 18 patients, 17 had
metastatic prostate cancer (mPC) and 1 was non-metastatic. Of
the 17 mPC, 13 were mCRPC, 3 were mCSPC and the status was
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
2
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
 not available for 1 patient (Supp. Table 1). All but one patient were
receiving treatment at the time of blood draw. As a control, blood
from 10 healthy male donors was analyzed as well; 5 were age-
matched healthy controls, with a median age of 64 years (range
46–77), and 5 were healthy volunteers under 30 years of age
(median 24 years old; range 21–27) (Supp. Table 1).
To identify CTCs, cells collected were immunostained with
antibodies directed against CKs (CK subtypes CK1 to CK8, CK10,
CK14–16, and CK19), CD45, and nuclear-stained with DAPI. The
prostate origin of these circulating cells was confirmed by staining
for PSA. Following imaging, cells were classified and enumerated
following a set of objective criteria, and according to well-
established cytomorphological features of malignancy.20 Detailed
explanations of cell classifications with accompanying image
galleries are shown in Fig. 3a and d. Briefly, CTCs were defined as
nucleated (determined by DAPI staining) cells expressing either
PSA or CK and lacking the marker of hematopoietic lineage CD45
(PSA+/CD45− and/or CK+/CD45−). Cells that were CD45 positive
(PSA−/CK−/CD45+) were counted as WBCs. In some instances,
cells were double stained for CK and CD45 (CK+/CD45+). These
double-stained cells were also classified as WBCs on the basis of
their multi-lobed nuclei, N/C ratio, and morphologies similar to
neutrophils.
Using these enumeration criteria, 1.25–2.50 cells per 7.5 mL
were isolated from the age-matched controls and characterized as
CTCs (Fig. 3b). In contrast, no CTCs were found in the young
healthy donor group. CTCs were detected in 17 of 20 patient
blood samples (15 unique patients) with CTC counts ranging from
1.88 to 93.75 CTCs/7.5 mL (average of 16.22 CTCs/7.5 mL). Besides
the CTCs, between 25.00 and 316.88 WBCs were collected per 7.5
mL (mean: 112.8 WBCs) for all patient samples considered (Fig. 3c).
Using the age-matched healthy cohort enumeration data, a
“healthy” cutoff value was defined as the mean number of CTCs +
2 SD, and calculated to be 3.37 CTCs/7.5 mL. Using this threshold,
16 out of 20 PC samples (80%) were considered positive for CTCs
(Fig. 3b). No correlation (nonparametric Spearman correlation
analysis) was found between the patients’ PSA level and CTC
count (r = 0.1086, n = 20, p = 0.6485), or between patients’ highest
Gleason score and CTC count (r = −0.2923, n = 15, p = 0.2869).
CTC heterogeneity: variability in expression patterns
The CTCs isolated in this patient cohort displayed varying PSA and
CK expression (Fig. 4a), with 45.3% of the total CTCs collected not
expressing PSA at all. Most (89.6%) of those PSA negative CTCs
were expressing CK, while the remainder (10.4%) were double
Fig. 1
Sample processing workflow with the microfluidic Vortex HT chip. ① Whole blood samples are collected from donors in EDTA-coated
tubes. ② Blood is diluted 10-fold in PBS before ③ processing through the Vortex HT microfluidic device. ④ Purified CTCs are released in a small
volume and collected in a 96-well plate. ⑤ Cells are fixed, immunostained, and imaged before manual enumeration. ⑥ Mutation analysis is
performed using a targeted NGS panel. The Vortex HT chip consists of 16 parallel channels and 12 serial reservoirs in each channel (blue box).
At high flow rates (8 mL/min), laminar microvortices develop in the rectangular reservoirs and trap larger cancer cells, while smaller blood cells
(RBCs and WBCs) either pass through (red dotted box) or are not stably trapped during the wash step. Sample processing involves (i) priming
the device with wash solution to remove air bubbles, (ii) infusing the sample and capturing target cells, (iii) switching to a wash solution at the
same flow rate, and (iv) releasing captured cells by lowering the flow rate to dissipate the vortices
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
3
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
 negative (PSA−/CK−). Regardless of PSA expression status, 51.3%
of all the CTCs isolated in this study did not show CK expression.
Interestingly, this trend was not observed at the individual patient
level, but rather reflects a significant inter-individual phenotypic
heterogeneity in our patient cohort. In healthy subjects, most of
the collected cells (66.7%; 6/9 of cells collected for all healthy
donors combined) were “traditional” CTCs (i.e., CK+/PSA−/CD45−
cells)
and
11.1%
(1/9)
were
classified
as
CTCs
based
on
cytomorphological features (CK−/PSA−/CD45− and DAPI+ only).
Only two cells out of nine (22.2%) were CK±/PSA+. Approximately
48.6% of CTCs collected from patients were CK+, which is within
10% of the number found by the Vortex HT chip for non-small cell
lung and breast cancer (59.3%).20 The lower number of CK+CTCs
compared with EpCAM-based isolation approaches reflects the
ability for Vortex technology to collect CTCs that have likely de-
differentiated and lost epithelial characteristics.
CTC expression of mesenchymal markers
To better characterize CTCs and gain insight into EMT in CTCs from
mPCa patients, three additional blood samples were processed
and the collected cells were stained with a combination of
antibodies targeting VNC in addition to CK, CD45, and DAPI
staining. Interestingly, prostate CTCs clustered into different
subpopulations based on their CK and VNC expression pattern
(Fig. 5). For patient #31, e.g., 62% of the cells collected were CK+,
with 25% being both CK+ and Vim/NCad+; 12.5% additional cells
were identified as mesenchymal only (CK− Vim/NCad+), and still
25% being unidentified (DAPI only, large N/C ratio). Similar
percentages were obtained for patient #32, with 71% of the CTCs
being CK+, 21% being only mesenchymal, and 7% not identified.
Patient #33 had only CK+Vim/NCad+ and Vim/NCad+ only CTCs. A
summary of the CTC characteristics is presented in Supp. Table 2.
These results show that Vortex HT can capture both cells with
epithelial and mesenchymal characteristics, and thus give access
to different cell phenotypes. However, the use of immunostaining
only to identify the cancer cells collected has some limits, since
the limited number of fluorescence filters does not allow the
simultaneous staining of DAPI, CD45 for WBC exclusion, CK/Vim/
NCad for epithelial and mesenchymal markers, with prostate-
specific markers such as PSA. Supp. Figure 3 recapitulates the
different immunostaining conditions tested, as well as the cocktail
defined as optimal for our protocol and microscope set-up.
CTC heterogeneity: morphological analysis
Cytomorphological
characteristics
were
analyzed
to
explore
differences between epithelial and non-epithelial CTCs, using CK
staining as a marker. On average, CK− cells (26.2 ± 6.5 µm) were
significantly
larger
than
CK+
(15.9 ± 6.9 µm)
cells,
with
no
significant difference in nuclear fraction (Fig. 4b). Taking into
account all combinations of CTC staining characteristics with PSA
and CK, cells displayed differences in morphology but no distinct
trends were observed (Fig. 4c). Since few PSA−/CK− and PSA+/CK
+ cells were found, morphological differences between PSA+/CK−
and PSA−/CK+CTCs were closely matched to grouped epithelial
characteristics (all CK− cells vs. all CK+) discussed previously
(Fig. 4b). Therefore, it is unclear whether PSA expression is
correlated to cell morphology, or if morphology is more correlated
to the combination of PSA and CK. Moreover, it is difficult to
determine whether PSA and CK expression on CTCs were retained
from cells of the original tumor or changed once cells entered
circulation. To note, PSA+/CK+CTCs exhibited a uniquely wide
range of cell diameters.
The sizes of CTCs matched closely between cancer patients
(21.1 ± 8.4 µm) and the few identified as CTCs from healthy donors
(21.1 ± 5.4 µm), as well as with 22Rv1 cancer control cells (18.2 ±
1.8 µm), and were expectedly larger than WBC (10.4 ± 1.4 µm)
control cells (Fig. 4d). Patient CTCs displayed greater nuclear
fractions (69.7 ± 16.7%) than 22Rv1 (56.6 ± 8.7%) and WBC (61.0 ±
Fig. 2
Vortex HT device performance with PC cell lines. a Cumulative capture efficiency and capture purity for LNCaP PC cells spiked into
healthy blood. ~300 cells were spiked into 5 mL of 10X diluted blood. Experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated on 3 different
days (n = 3). To increase cell capture, sample flow-through was collected and re-processed through the chip for additional cycles. b Cell
diameter and capture performance at 2 different days of harvesting. c No difference in cell viability was observed for up to 2 days after
processing through the Vortex HT chip. Unprocessed cells were used as a control. d After collection, LNCaP cells were maintained in culture
for 7 days. Scale bar represents 20 µm
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
4
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
 10.4%) control cells, which may be due to a variety of factors.
Compared with both 22Rv1 and WBC control cells, CTCs exhibited
greater variance of size and nuclear fractions, which highlights the
morphological differences among heterogeneous CTCs from
patients. Since Vortex technology only selects for larger cells,
the range of CTC sizes may be wider when taking into account
smaller CTCs potentially not isolated by this approach.
Genomics characterization of CTCs collected
Molecular characterization of cancer samples is hampered by
tumor tissue availability in mCRPC patients. Access to serial liquid
biopsies such as CTCs for molecular characterization would
drastically change the way cancer is monitored. Here, in addition
to CTC enumeration, we report the results of a mutation analysis
performed on CTCs isolated from both patients and healthy
donors by using a targeted NGS panel. In preliminary experiments,
the workflow for multiplex PCR-targeted NGS panel was optimized
and verified on LNCaP DNA (Supp. Fig. 4). First, the sensitivity of
the method was verified with different amounts of DNA (1.0, 0.5,
0.2 ng, respectively) (Supp. Fig. 4C). The two mutations AR
substitution
c.2632
A>G
(p.T878A)
and
PTEN
deletion
c.17_18delAA (p.K6fs*4) could be detected from as low as 0.2 ng
input DNA (about 40 cells), with similar allelic fractions regardless
Fig. 3
Prostate CTC enumeration criteria. a Collected cells were enumerated using objective criteria based on immunofluorescence staining
and cytomorphological characteristics, shown in the table. Each cell was assessed for each criteria in the order listed until the characteristics
matched. Scale bars represent 10 µm. b The number of CTCs per 7.5 mL of blood was evaluated for our PC patient cohort (n = 20 samples),
healthy donors of same age (n = 5), or donors younger than 30 years old (n = 5). The dotted line represents the threshold defined from the age-
matched healthy donors as the mean number of CTCs + 2 SD, calculated to be 3.37 CTCs/7.5 mL. c For all patient samples, CTC and WBC
numbers are represented, with 0–93.75 CTCs/7.5 mL and 25.00–316.88 WBCs/7.5 mL, respectively. d A diverse set of CTCs were collected from
patients, which varied in size and displayed all combinations of CK and PSA expression. Scale bars represent 20 µm
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
5
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
 of the DNA input. In a second experiment (Supp. Fig. 4D), LNCaP
DNA was mixed at different ratios (80, 50, 20, 10, 5.0, 2.5, and 0%)
with germline DNA (control WBC DNA) for a total of 0.5 ng DNA/
sample to test the limit of detection. The AR c.2632 A>G mutation
could be detected consistently in samples with as little as 5%
purity. However, PTEN c.17_18delAA was detected only in samples
with purity greater than 50%. This difference might reflect
differential amplification in the limited DNA samples.
The verified workflow was then applied to cells isolated from 17
patients and 4 healthy age-matched donors. Two samples (#3 and
#5) were not sequenced due to unsuccessful library preparation,
leaving 15 sequenced patient samples. The remainder were
sequenced, variants were called using Qiagen web portal, and
further filtered by Ingenuity Variant Analysis (IVA). Finally, a total of
20 variants were detected in this cohort and are listed in Fig. 6.
Among those variants, PTEN variant (chr 10: 89720791, A>G) was
detected in almost all patients (14/15) and all healthy donors. RB1
variant (chr 13: 49051511, C>T) was found in 73.3% of the patients
(11/15) and in 75.0% (3/4) of the healthy donors. No clear
conclusion about the clinical significance of these two variants
was found in the literature. Apart from these two variants,
mutations were detected in 10 out of 15 (66.7%) patient samples.
P53 mutation was detected in four patients, AR was detected in
five patients, RB1 was detected in three patients, and PTEN in five
patients. Two samples (#7 and #8), corresponding to the same
patient sampled 2 months apart, showed very good concordance,
with five out of seven variants being identical. No additional
mutation was detected in four healthy donors.
DISCUSSION
In the study presented here, we describe the use of a microfluidic
device for the label-free isolation of CTCs from patients with
advanced PC. We find that the Vortex technology is able to isolate
prostate CTCs with both high purity (from 1.74 to 37.59%, i.e.,
25.00–316.88 WBCs/7.5 mL) and recovery (from 1.88 to 93.75
CTCs/7.5 mL). While some CTC technologies may require manual
and time-consuming preprocessing steps, such as a RBC lysis or
buffy-coat preparation,9,
12,
13 diluted blood can be directly
processed with this microfluidic technology, hence limiting the
loss of rare CTCs. Moreover, this label-free approach was able to
isolate CK negative populations of CTCs in this cohort of patients
and to characterize this subset of cells with additional staining for
cancer-specific markers (PSA) or markers for EMT.
In this study, up to 93.75 CTCs per 7.5 mL of blood were
collected, with 16.22 CTCs per 7.5 mL on average, and 112.8 WBCs,
more CTCs than reported for the CellSearch system for a similar
cohort of PC patients.1 A side-by-side comparison with CellSearch
was performed by the authors with other cancer types (breast and
lung) and provided a similar conclusion.20 Other technologies
Fig. 4
Characterization of CTC heterogeneity: expression pattern and cell morphology. a Collected CTCs are heterogeneous and display
different combinations of PSA and CK within each patient sample. Cells classified as CTCs in healthy patient samples also exhibit all
combinations of PSA and CK markers. b CK+ CTCs (mean 15.9 ± 6.9 µm) were significantly smaller in diameter than CK− CTCs (mean 26.2 ± 6.5
µm), which suggests potential morphological changes in cells undergoing EMT. c CTCs displayed all combinations of PSA and CK expression
with varying size and nuclear fraction. The majority of CTCs were either PSA+/CK− (n = 66) or PSA−/CK+ (n = 60). d CTCs isolated from patients
had similar sizes and morphologies as the few similarly classified cells found from healthy donors. CTCs displayed a wide range of sizes (mean
21.1 ± 8.4 µm), and the average diameter and nuclear fraction of CTCs were greater than those of 22RV1 PC and WBC control cells
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
6
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
 such as from Parsortix or Fluxion have reported recoveries of 33.8
and 37.6 CTCs/7.5 mL, respectively, with a median purity of 3.1 and
1% for similar patient cohort.17 The microfluidic-based CTC
technology like iChip reported an average purity of 7.8% for
positive selection (capture of EpCAM positive cells), but a
contamination of around 32,000 WBCs/mL blood in the negative
depletion mode (depletion of WBCs).4
Thus, the presented CTC platform achieves good performance,
with the added advantages of a simple and fast processing time,
while
keeping
the
cells
viable
and
intact.
However,
we
Fig. 5
Staining with markers such as VNC identifies cells (CK negative) that may have undergone EMT. a Staining was optimized with PC3
prostate cell lines and WBCs as positive and negative controls, respectively, and applied to three PC patient samples. Different cell
subpopulations were identified: CK+VNC+, CK+VNC−, CK−VNC+, and CK−VNC−. b More than 68% of the CTCs collected are CK+, more than
20% were CK−VNC+
Fig. 6
Variants and variant frequencies identified in samples isolated from PC patients and age-matched healthy donors. DNA was extracted
from cells and subjected to the multiplex PCR using the GeneRead DNAseq Prostate Cancer Mix and Match Panel, enabling enrichment of the
coding regions and exon/intron junctions of four genes: AR, PTEN, RB1, and TP53. Variant frequency of the detected mutation is highlighted in
light blue
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
7
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
 acknowledge that there are some limitations in the current
workflow. Using this microfluidic device and manual set-up, we
obtained a capture efficiency of around 24.5% for LNCaP cells
spiking experiments with one cycle, which highlights that some
CTCs may not be effectively captured. A newer generation of this
device, made of rigid plastic material, is in development to
circumvent this limitation and provide higher recovery while
maintaining a similar purity. Results shown here have also
demonstrated that cell recovery can be improved further by
multiple processing, which could be run automatically with an
automated instrument. These improvements will need to be
tested in a future study with more PC cell lines and patient
samples. To assess the performance of our technology, a known
number of cancer cell line controls was spiked into healthy donor
blood. While this straightforward experimental design has been
the cornerstone for the evaluation of CTC technologies so far,
these results emphasize that one must be careful when using cell
lines in place of CTCs as some limitations exist.22–27 This highlights
the challenge to have a systematic and controlled method to
reproducibly
prepare
cancer
cell
lines
for
evaluating
CTC
technologies without any bias. Programs such as CancerID in
Europe/USA are being set-up among the community to standar-
dize protocols. However, even though such methods were
available and applied, recent studies have emphasized significant
differences between cultured cell lines and patient-derived
CTCs.28, 29 This confirms that cultured cell lines may not be an
appropriate model for patient-derived CTCs.
Although 80% of the patient samples had >3.37 CTCs/7.5 mL
above the threshold set from healthy donor controls, variations
were observed in the healthy donors that correlated with age.
Interestingly, zero CTCs were observed in the young healthy
donors (<30) but 2.25 CTC/7.5 mL on average were enumerated in
the age-matched (range 46–77) samples. We believe that this is
the first time such a distinction has been made based on the age
of the
healthy donors.
Besides highlighting the need for
standardized controls in future CTC studies, this raises questions
concerning the potential malignant origin of these cells. Although
PC can be diagnosed in some very young men and at an
increasing rate with age, symptom development and clinical
diagnosis mostly occur in older men, if at all. A systematic review
of autopsy studies showed indeed that the estimated mean
prevalence of previously undiagnosed PC increased in a nonlinear
fashion from 5% at age <30 years to 59% by age >79 years. The
isolation of CTCs from age-matched healthy donor samples could
be an indication of covert, subclinical cancer.30, 31 Alternatively,
age-related changes in large circulating cells with epithelial
signatures may be connected with other degenerative disease
processes. Further studies with a larger cohort would be needed
to test these hypotheses and gain more insight into the biology of
these “CTCs”.
CTC capture with Vortex technology allows evaluation of both
CTC morphological and molecular heterogeneity. (1) Our mor-
phological study highlighted several key points. On the one hand,
cell size matched closely between cancer patients CTCs, healthy
donor “CTCs”, and control cells (22Rv1), while being all larger than
WBCs as expected. On the other hand, however, cell nuclear
fraction was higher for CTCs than 22Rv1 (on average 69.7 ± 16.7
vs. 56.6 ± 8.7%). Interestingly, CK negative CTCs were larger than
CK positive CTCs (on average 26.2 ± 6.5 vs. 15.9 ± 6.9 µm), with no
significant difference in nuclear fraction. CK negative CTCs may
potentially represent cells that have undergone EMT, and an
increase in average cell size agrees with observations from other
studies.32 Larger cell size is also connected to chromosomal
abnormalities and aneuploidy, which is associated with chromo-
somal instability, more rapid evolution, and may indicate a worse
prognosis.33 Further long-term studies with large CTCs may shed
light on correlations between average cell size and patient
outcome. Differences in nuclear ratio may be due to a variety of
factors, including a high degree of transcriptional activity, nuclear
restructuring,
cell growth,
or other changes
that may be
associated with EMT34,
35 and increased invasiveness. At this
stage, making additional conclusions on relationships between
PSA and CK expression on CTCs and their morphologies would
require a larger cohort of patients. Similarly, it would be very
interesting next to apply similar morphological studies to single
CTCs and clustered CTCs. (2) Immunostaining for markers such as
CK, PSA, or Vim/NCad enabled the observation of multiple CTC
subtypes in this patient cohort, including CK+/PSA± and CK−/PSA
±. Despite CK being the standard for CTC classification, more than
half (51.3%) of the CTCs isolated with the Vortex chip did not show
any CK expression. This may be biased by the high CTC count of
the first two patient samples. While the biological relevance of CK
negative CTCs is still unclear, it has been shown that CTCs of
epithelial origin can display a range of both epithelial and non-
epithelial gene biomarker signatures. Indeed, in solid tumors, EMT
is a process characterized by upregulation of mesenchymal
markers (vimentin, fibronectin, and N-cadherin) concurrent with
E-cadherin downregulation. Emerging data suggest that this
phenomenon of epithelial plasticity, encompassing both rever-
sible mesenchymal transitions and acquisition of stemness traits,
may underlie the biology of tumor dissemination and treatment
resistance.36, 37 In addition to CK expression, CTCs isolated from
three mPCA patients were characterized for VNC expression. While
very limited conclusions can be drawn from such a small study, it
is worth noting that CTCs isolated from advanced PC patients
clustered into epithelial CTCs (CK+/VNC−; 36%), EMT CTCs (CK
+/VNC+; 32%), and mesenchymal CTCs (CK−/VNC+; 20%). The
remaining CTCs (12%) were both CK and VNC negative. So far, CTC
studies in EMT have been limited by the fact that most CTC
capture technologies are dependent on epithelial marker expres-
sion (e.g., EpCAM/CellSearch). The development of label-free CTC
isolation
platforms,
unbiased
for
molecular
characteristics,
together with the functional characterization of CTCs should
definitely help elucidate the EMT process and clarify cancer
metastasis mechanisms. Similarly, such technologies make possi-
ble the use of cancer-specific markers for in-depth biomarker
studies.
The advantages of Vortex technology open up new opportu-
nities. As CTC capture with Vortex technology is a label-free and
contact-free process, isolated CTCs remain unbiased by molecular
characteristics. CTCs are unaltered by physical filters, labels, or
reagents. Experiments with cancer cell lines confirm the cells are
viable, and we presume CTCs do as well, making them ideal for
in vitro culture and live cell assays. This CTC isolation approach
opens up possibilities to characterize the behavior and function of
captured CTCs, to obtain information on proliferative and invasive
properties
or,
ultimately,
tumor
re-initiating
potential
and
response to drug. The cells are released free-floating off the
microfluidic chip in a small volume and can be easily collected in a
multiwell plate, microscope slide, or vial for compatibility with
downstream assays (immunostaining, fluorescence in-situ hybri-
dization, confocal, genomic assays).21
In addition to their use for live cell assays, CTCs provide a readily
accessible source of genomic tumor material from cancer patients
and may be used in lieu of tumor biopsy for cancer prognosis,
disease monitoring, and targeted therapeutics. Molecular profiling
of these rare cells can lead to insight on disease progression and
therapeutic strategies. For example, future studies with castration-
resistant prostate cancer patients will consider AR-V7 mutation as
a target.38 However, since CTCs are rare, a significant enrichment
and sample integrity is required to adapt to conventional
analytical techniques. As we show, CTCs collected at a higher
purity increase the accuracy and sensitivity of the downstream
genomic workflow, making possible assays like Sanger sequen-
cing,39 NGS with small targeted panels (present study), or larger
panels. Here, a 137 amplicon panel was used on small amounts of
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
8
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
 DNA input as low as 0.2 ng, without whole-genome amplification
(WGA), and still enabled the detection of mutations from CTCs
collected from a blood volume as low as 4 mL in a majority of
patients. Mutations were detected in 10 out of 15 (66.7%) patient
samples, with P53 mutation detected in four patients (26.7%).
Among them, a missense mutation of P53 in exon 8 (c.817 C>T,
R273C) detected in patient 19 had been previously reported in
several cancer types. For example, Nigro et al. reported a high
frequency of complex TP53 mutations, including TP53 c.817 C>T,
in the metastases from breast cancer patients.40 Several TP53
mutations, including TP53 c.817 C>T, were also reported during
disease progression in acute myeloid leukemia patients41 or in
prostatic small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, where accumula-
tion of p53 was observed in 56% of small cell carcinomas.42 Other
than P53, mutations of AR, PTEN were also detected both in 33.3%
(5/15) of the CTC samples. Robinson et al. recently reported that
the mutation frequencies of AR, TP53, and PTEN were 62.7, 53.3,
and 40.7%, respectively, in tumor biopsies from a cohort of 150
mCRPC affected individuals.43 The frequencies from the tumor
seemed slightly higher than what we observed from the CTC
samples. This may be due to the different molecular characteriza-
tion between CTC and tumor biopsy, or might be biased by the
small number of patients enrolled in our study (15 vs. 150
patients). Further studies comparing the CTCs with a matched
tumor tissue from a larger patient cohort are needed to
investigate these differences. It should be noted that here we
used the pooled CTC samples to detect likely cancer mutations
(even in the presence of potentially contaminating WBCs that
might carry germline mutations), without access to separate WBC
germline controls. To address this issue, serial filtration cascades
from IVA were used to arrive at the cancer-associated somatic
mutations. For example, the “predicted deleterious” filtration
keeps only the variants experimentally observed to be associated
with a pathogenic or likely pathogenic phenotype according to
computed ACMG (American College of Medical Genetics) Guide-
lines classification. The filtration of “Cancer-Driven Variants” keeps
only variants that are found in cancer-associated events, cancer
therapeutic targets, or published cancer literature. The variants
reported here are likely cancer-associated pathogenic mutations.
However, to be more accurate, WBC germline controls should be
included in future studies when using pooled cells.
A limitation of this study was the limited blood sample volume
(4 mL) available from patients leading to a limited number of CTCs
available for downstream sequencing, while the downstream
fixation of the cells with paraformaldehyde also decreased the
DNA yield, making it challenging to use a larger panel. NGS is still
possible with larger panels but would require (i) fresh, unfixed
cells, (ii) a prior WGA step, and finally (iii) access to germline DNA
of the patient to obtain baseline sequence polymorphism
information.
CONCLUSION
We have shown that CTCs can be isolated in a label-free manner
from patients with advanced PC using the microfluidic vortex
technology. Cells can be isolated in less than 1 h, with high purity
and good cumulative efficiency. In all, 80% of patients were
observed to have cells above healthy background levels. We also
found that 51% of cells collected were negative for classical
epithelial markers in prostate adenocarcinoma (CK), and that some
of these cells were positive for EMT markers. This suggests that the
Vortex chip can efficiently isolate cells that are undergoing
developmental transitions and pointing to the power of the label-
free isolation method described here. Further work is underway to
categorize these cells expressing EMT markers and will help add to
our knowledge of PC. The clinical value of monitoring CTC counts
in PC has already been confirmed in various studies and use of
such label-free Vortex technology would give access to more
clinical information for targeted therapy selection through a
workflow for genomic analysis as described here. Future studies
could also expand on the analysis of CTC morphology and
viability, characterizing apoptotic CTCs, membrane intact CTCs,
and CTC clusters, which may offer additional prognostic informa-
tion compared with enumeration alone.44
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Vortex microfluidic device design
As previously introduced,18–20 Vortex HT is a PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane)
70-μm deep microfluidic device comprising a parallelized array of
16 straight 40-μm wide channels, leading to a series of 12 rectangular
trapping reservoirs (480 × 720 μm) (Fig. 1).
Vortex microfluidic device fabrication and operation
Conventional PDMS fabrication processes were used to assemble Vortex
HT devices.18 A photomask was printed with the microfluidic channel
layout, and utilized to fabricate a master mold from a 4-inch silicon wafer
coated with negative photoresist and patterned with standard photolitho-
graphic techniques (KMPR 1050 Photoresist from MicroChem Corp.). 1:10
PDMS mix was poured on the master mold, degassed, and cured at 65 °C
for 21 h. Once peeled from the master mold, cut and punched, the PDMS
chip was bonded to a glass slide using oxygen plasma (800 Micro RIE, at
500 mTorr, 80 W RF, for 30 s) to enclose the channels. To operate the
device, flow is driven through two inlets using two syringe pumps (Harvard
Apparatus), one for the sample and one for the wash (Fig. 1). After a
priming step to fill in the device with PBS at 8 mL/min for 30 s, the cell
sample is infused at 7 mL/min together with wash buffer at 1 mL/min to
achieve cell capture (Fig. 1). To wash the cells trapped in the vortices and
remove contaminating cells, the buffer flow rate is increased to 8 mL/min,
while infusion of the sample is stopped. Captured cells are then released
from the vortices by stopping the flow from the wash solution.
Cell culture and viability assay
The human prostate carcinoma epithelial cell lines 22Rv1 (ATCC®
CRL2505™) and LNCaP (ATCC® CRL-1740™) were used to characterize
device performance, i.e., capture efficiency and purity. Cells lines were
evaluated for mycoplasma contamination by PCR and authenticated by
Short Tandem Repeat profiling (CellCheck 9 Plus) by IDEXX BioResearch.
22Rv1, LNCaP, and PC-3 (ATCC® CRL-1435) cells were grown in RPMI-1640
medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin-
streptomycin, and incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Viability
assays were performed with the LNCaP cell line. Briefly, cells were
harvested at 30–50% confluency, 500 cells spiked into 5 mL of PBS,
processed through the Vortex HT device using normal operation
procedures and collected in the wells of a 96-well plate. In parallel, 500
cells were directly seeded in control wells. This process was repeated three
times for each time point (1 h, 24 h, 48 h). Complete media was added to
the wells and the plate was incubated at 37 °C until readout. For each time
point a live/dead assay was performed by adding Calcein AM (0.5 µL of a 1
mg/mL stock) and propidium iodide (2 µL of 1 mg/mL stock) to each well
and incubating for 15 min at 37 °C. The well-plate was imaged (FITC, 100
ms exposure; Tetramethylrhodamine, 500 ms exposure), live and dead cells
were counted, and cell viability estimated as the number of live cells over
the total number of cells expressed as a percentage (#live/#live+#dead).
Processing of PC cell lines
Adherent cells (30–40% confluency) were dissociated with TrypLE express
(Gibco), resuspended in complete media, and spiked (200–500 cells) in
either 5 mL Dulbecco's PBS (DPBS) or 5 mL healthy blood diluted 10× in
DPBS, prior to injection through the device. The sample was processed as
indicated in the Device Operation section. The captured cells were released
and collected into a 96-well plate (Greiner CELLSTAR) for imaging and
enumeration. To increase capture efficiency, sample flow-through was
recycled in a separate conical tube and reprocessed through the device for
additional cycles. Capture performance was evaluated as follows: capture
efficiency was calculated as the number of captured target cells over the
total number of target cells spiked into the initial blood sample, while
capture purity was calculated as the number of target cells collected over
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
9
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
 the total number of captured nucleated cells. Each experiment was
performed in triplicate and repeated three separate times (n = 3).
Recruitment of PC patients
Eighteen PC patients were enrolled in the UCLA Oncology Clinics using
Institutional Review Board approved protocol (UCLA IRB #11-01798) and
three stage IV patients were enrolled from the Stanford Cancer Center
(Stanford IRB #350—Protocol #5630) (Supp. Table 1). Samples #10 and 11
correspond to distinct time points of the same patient. The age of patients
ranged from 46 to 87 years old. Blood was also collected from young (<30
years of age, n = 5, UCLA) and age-matched (n = 5, Stanford) healthy
volunteers, and processed in the same manner as the patient samples
(Supp. Fig. 1). The healthy volunteers had no known illness or fever at the
time of draw, and no history of malignant disease. To be included in this
study, all donors provided written informed consent. Peripheral blood
sample was collected into 10 mL EDTA-coated tubes (BD Vacutainer),
transported and stored at room temperature (RT), and processed within 4 h
of the draw.
Processing of PC patient samples
Whole blood (4–8 mL) was diluted 10-fold in PBS, then processed as
described in the Device Operation section. CTCs were collected into a 96-
well plate (Greiner CELLSTAR) for imaging and enumeration. Sample flow-
through was collected in a conical tube and reprocessed through the
device for a total of two cycles.
Cell immunostaining and enumeration
Cells collected from 20 samples (18 patients) were fixed with 2%
paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences) for 10 min, permeabi-
lized with 0.4% v/v Triton X-100 (Research Products International Corp) for
7 min, blocked with 5% goat serum (Invitrogen) for 30 min, and labeled for
1 h at RT with DAPI (Life Technologies), anti CD45-phycoerythrin (CD45-PE,
Clone HI30, BD Biosciences), and a cocktail of primary antibodies to identify
CK positive cells (Pan-CK clone AE1/AE3, eBioscience, clone CK3-6H5,
Miltenyi Biotec, and CK clone CAM5.2, BD Biosciences). PSA positive cells
were identified using a rabbit anti-PSA polyclonal antibody (Dako) and
were visualized using AlexaFluor-647 secondary antibodies (Anti-rabbit
IgG, Cell Signaling). For three patient samples, PSA staining was replaced
by Vimentin (Vimentin-AF467, clone V9, Abcam) and N-cadherin (NC-
AF647, clone EPR1791-4, Abcam) staining. After staining, the cells were
imaged (Axio Observer Z1, Zeiss) and manually enumerated using specific
classification criteria (Fig. 3a, d). For patient samples, purity is calculated as
the number of CTCs that meet the criteria described in Fig. 3a (i.e., DAPI+
with CK and/or PSA positivity or nuclear size >9 μm with nuclear/
cytoplasmic (N:C) ratio >0.6 and negative for CD45) divided by the total
number of DAPI positive cells counted.
Cell morphology analysis
To measure average cell/cell cluster size, cancer cells were stained with
Calcein AM (1 μM) in the cell flask before trypsinization, incubated for 15
min, washed with PBS, and trypsinized following the protocol provided
above. Cell/cell cluster diameter was measured with Zen software from
Zeiss, with the diameter being defined as the largest dimension of the
object if not spherical. Immunostained cells were also assessed for
morphology metrics. Zen software was used to calculate areas of line
traces around cell membranes and nuclei. Nuclear fraction was defined as
the ratio of nuclear area to whole cell area observed, N:C ratio was defined
as the ratio of nuclear area to cytoplasmic area (cellular area minus nuclear
area), and cell diameter was back-calculated from cellular area, assuming a
circular cell.
Mutation analysis
For gene mutation analysis, a Qiagen GeneRead DNAseq-targeted panel
NGS was selected, optimized, and verified first on a PC cell line (LNCaP),
then applied to cells isolated from patient’s samples. Genomic DNA from
cells isolated from 17 PC patients and 4 age-matched healthy donors was
extracted using the QIAamp Micro Kit (Qiagen). The Qiagen optimized
protocol for small tissue samples was followed with some modifications.
Specifically, the 96-well plate was centrifuged after cell enumeration, PBS
was carefully removed from each well, and replaced by buffer ATL and
proteinase K. The plate was sealed with adhesive sealing film and
incubated overnight at 60 °C. The lysate was transferred to a micro
centrifuge tube, and Buffer AL and carrier RNA were added to continue the
lysis step. For each patient sample, lysates from multiple wells were then
combined and loaded onto the provided column and the rest of the
procedure followed without further modification. DNA was quantitated by
absolute quantitative qPCR (7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system, Applied
Biosystems®). DNA was subjected to multiplex PCR amplification using the
GeneRead DNAseq Prostate Cancer Mix and Match Panel (Qiagen),
containing 137 primer sets covering all exons of the following genes: AR,
PTEN, RB1, and TP53. The amplified PCR products were purified with the
Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter), subjected to the library
preparation using Truseq library prep kit (Illumina), and then sequenced on
Miseq sequencer using v2 chemistry (Seqmatic, Fremont, CA). Fastq.gz files
generated by the MiSeq Reporter program (Illumina) were uploaded into
QIAGEN NGS data analysis web portal. The resulting analysis-ready report (.
VCF file) was uploaded directly and further analyzed through the use of
QIAGEN’s
Ingenuity®
Variant
Analysis™
software
(www.qiagen.com/
ingenuity) from QIAGEN (Redwood City), using the following filter cascade:
Variants→Confidence→Common
Variants→Predicted
Deleterious→Ge-
netic Analysis→Cancer-Driven Variants.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge funding from a sponsored research grant from Vortex Biosciences,
Prostate Cancer Foundation (a Young Investigator Award to RPK), and the UCLA
SPORE in Prostate Cancer (Career Development Program Award to RPK). The authors
thank Dr. Oladunni Adeyiga, Dr. Westbrook Weaver, and Dr. Soojung Hur from UCLA
Bioengineering for their scientific contributions, and all the nurses for their help with
the blood collection. Last but not least, the authors thank all patients and healthy
donors for their blood donation to make this work possible.
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTIONS
C.R., H.E.L., C.A.L., R.P.K., D.D.C., E.S.C. designed and planned experiments. C.R., E.P., H.
E.L., C.A.L. helped perform experiments. M.M., M.T., S.J., S.S., M.R., R.P.K. helped obtain
patient samples. C.R., J.C., H.E.L., E.S.C. wrote the manuscript with assistance from all
authors. All authors have read and approved this manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
Some of the authors (C.R., J.C., H.E.L., C.A.L., D.D.C., E.S.C.) and the Regents of the
University of California have financial interests in Vortex Biosciences and intellectual
property described herein. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Danila, D. C. et al. Circulating tumor cell number and prognosis in progressive
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 13, 7053–7058 (2007).
2. Danila, D. C. et al. TMPRSS2-ERG status in circulating tumor cells as a predictive
biomarker of sensitivity in castration-resistant prostate cancer patients treated
with abiraterone acetate. Eur. Urol. 60, 897–904 (2011).
3. Scher, H. I. et al. Circulating tumor cell biomarker panel as an individual-level
surrogate for survival in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. J. Clin.
Oncol. 33, 1348–1355 (2015).
4. Ozkumur, E. et al. Inertial focusing for tumor antigen-dependent and -indepen-
dent sorting of rare circulating tumor cells. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 179ra147 (2013).
5. Miyamoto, D. T. et al. RNA-Seq of single prostate CTCs implicates noncanonical
Wnt signaling in antiandrogen resistance. Science 349, 1351–1356 (2015).
6. Kirby, B. J. et al. Functional characterization of circulating tumor cells with a
prostate-cancer-specific microfluidic device. PLoS ONE 7, e35976 (2012).
7. Steinestel J. et al. Detecting predictive androgen receptor modifications in cir-
culating prostate cancer cells. Oncotarget doi:10.18632/oncotarget.3925 (2015).
8. Antonarakis, E. S. et al. AR-V7 and resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone in
prostate cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 1028–1038 (2014).
9. Dago, A. E. et al. Rapid phenotypic and genomic change in response to ther-
apeutic pressure in prostate cancer inferred by high content analysis of single
circulating tumor cells. PLoS ONE 9, e101777 (2014).
10. Beltran H. et al. The initial detection and partial characterization of circulating
tumor cells in neuroendocrine prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 22(6), 1510–1519
(2015).
11. Zhang, Z., Ramnath, N. & Nagrath, S. Current status of CTCs as liquid biopsy in
lung cancer and future directions. Front. Oncol. 5, 209 (2015).
12. Low W. S. & Wan Abas W. A. Benchtop technologies for circulating tumor cells
separation based on biophysical properties. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015, 239362 (2015).
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
10
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
 13. Bhagat, A. A. et al. Pinched flow coupled shear-modulated inertial microfluidics
for high-throughput rare blood cell separation. Lab Chip 11, 1870–1878 (2011).
14. Di Carlo, D. et al. Continuous inertial focusing, ordering, and separation of
particles in microchannels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 18892–18897 (2007).
15. Farace, F. et al. A direct comparison of cellsearch and ISET for circulating tumour-
cell detection in patients with metastatic carcinomas. Br. J. Cancer 105, 847–853
(2011).
16. Desitter, I. et al. A new device for rapid isolation by size and characterization of
rare circulating tumor cells. Anticancer Res. 31, 427–441 (2011).
17. Xu, L. et al. Optimization and evaluation of a novel size based circulating tumor
cell isolation system. PLoS ONE 10, e0138032 (2015).
18. Sollier, E. et al. Size-selective collection of circulating tumor cells using Vortex
technology. Lab Chip 14, 63–77 (2014).
19. Che, J. et al. Microfluidic purification and concentration of malignant pleural
effusions for improved molecular and cytomorphological diagnostics. PLoS ONE
8, e78194 (2013).
20. Che, J. et al. Classification of large circulating tumor cells isolated with ultra-high
throughput microfluidic Vortex technology. Oncotarget 7, 12748–12760 (2016).
21. Dhar M. et al. Label-free enumeration, collection and downstream cytological and
cytogenetic analysis of circulating tumor cells. Nat. Sci. Rep. doi:10.1038/
srep35474 (2016).
22. Simons, J. W. The use of frequency distributions of cell diameters to characterize
cell populations in tissue culture. Exp. Cell Res. 45, 336–350 (1967).
23. Huang, H. L. et al. Trypsin-induced proteome alteration during cell subculture in
mammalian cells. J. Biomed. Sci. 17, 36 (2010).
24. Kapiszewska, M. et al. Trypsin-induced changes in cell shape and chromatin
structure result in radiosensitization of monolayer Chinese hamster V79 cells. Int.
J. Radiat. Biol. 60, 635–646 (1991).
25. Liu, W., Morgan, K. M. & Pine, S. R. Activation of the Notch1 stem cell signaling
pathway during routine cell line subculture. Front. Oncol. 4, 211 (2014).
26. Puliafito, A. et al. Collective and single cell behavior in epithelial contact inhibi-
tion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, 739–744 (2012).
27. Spector, A. A. & Yorek, M. A. Membrane lipid composition and cellular function. J.
Lipid Res. 26, 1015–1035 (1985).
28. Park, S. et al. Morphological differences between circulating tumor cells from
prostate cancer patients and cultured prostate cancer cells. PLoS ONE 9, e85264
(2014).
29. Sinkala, E. et al. Profiling protein expression in circulating tumour cells using
microfluidic western blotting. Nat. Commun. 8, 14622 (2017).
30. Greaves, M. et al. Does everyone develop covert cancer? Nat. Rev. Cancer 14,
209–210 (2014).
31. Bell, K. J. et al. Prevalence of incidental prostate cancer: a systematic review of
autopsy studies. Int. J. Cancer 137, 1749–1757 (2015).
32. Lamouille, S. & Derynck, R. Cell size and invasion in TGF-beta-induced epithelial to
mesenchymal transition is regulated by activation of the mTOR pathway. J. Cell
Biol. 178, 437–451 (2007).
33. Storchova, Z. & Pellman, D. From polyploidy to aneuploidy, genome instability
and cancer. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5, 45–54 (2004).
34. Bonnomet, A. et al. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions and circulating tumor
cells. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 15, 261–273 (2010).
35. Polyak, K. & Weinberg, R. A. Focus on: migration and metastasis transitions
between epithelial and mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem
cell traits. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9, 265–273 (2009).
36. Bitting, R. L. et al. The role of epithelial plasticity in prostate cancer dissemination
and treatment resistance. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 33, 441–468 (2014).
37. Kolijn, K., Verhoef, E. & van Leenders, G. J. Morphological and immunohisto-
chemical identification of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in clinical prostate
cancer. Oncotarget 6, 24488–24498 (2015).
38. Scher H. I. et al. Association of AR-V7 on circulating tumor cells as a treatment-
specific biomarker with outcomes and survival in castration-resistant prostate
cancer. JAMA Oncol. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2016.1828. (2016).
39. Kidess, E. et al. Enumeration and targeted analysis of KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA
mutations in CTCs captured by a label-free platform: comparison to ctDNA and
tissue in metastatic colorectal cancer. Oncotarget 7, 85349–85364 (2016).
40. Nigro, C. L. et al. High frequency of complex TP53 mutations in CNS metastases
from breast cancer. Br. J. Cancer 106, 397–404 (2012).
41. Hou, H. A. et al. TP53 mutations in de novo acute myeloid leukemia patients:
longitudinal follow-ups show the mutation is stable during disease evolution.
Blood Cancer J. 5, e331 (2015).
42. Tan, H.-L. et al. Rb loss is characteristic of prostatic small cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 890–904 (2014).
43. Robinson, D. et al. Integrative clinical genomics of advanced prostate cancer. Cell
161, 1215–1228 (2015).
44. Jansson, S. et al. Prognostic impact of circulating tumor cell apoptosis and
clusters in serial blood samples from patients with metastatic breast cancer in a
prospective observational cohort. BMC Cancer 16, 433 (2016).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2017
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Precision Oncology website (doi:10.1038/s41698-017-0015-0).
Label-free isolation
C Renier et al.
11
Published in partnership with The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota
npj Precision Oncology (2017)  15 
