 Musashi-2 Attenuates AHR Signaling to Expand Human 
Hematopoietic Stem Cells
Stefan Rentas1, Nicholas Holzapfel#1, Muluken S Belew#1, Gabriel Pratt#2,6, Veronique 
Voisin4, Brian T Wilhelm5, Gary D Bader4, Gene W Yeo2,3,6, and Kristin J Hope1
1 Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Stem Cell and Cancer Research 
Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
2 Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
3 Department of Physiology, National University of Singapore and Molecular Engineering 
Laboratory, A*STAR, Singapore
4 The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
5 Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada
6 Bioinformatics Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Umbilical cord blood (CB)-derived hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are essential in many life 
saving regenerative therapies, but their low number in CB units has significantly restricted their 
clinical use despite the advantages they provide during transplantation1. Select small molecules 
that enhance hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) expansion in culture have been 
identified2,3, however, in many cases their mechanisms of action or the nature of the pathways 
they impinge on are poorly understood. A greater understanding of the molecular pathways that 
underpin the unique human HSC self-renewal program will facilitate the development of targeted 
strategies that expand these critical cell types for regenerative therapies. Whereas transcription 
factor networks have been shown to influence the self-renewal and lineage decisions of human 
HSCs4,5, the post-transcriptional mechanisms guiding HSC fate have not been closely 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to G.W.Y. (; Email: geneyeo@ucsd.edu), K.H. (; Email: 
kristin@mcmaster.ca). 
Author Contributions
S.R. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. N.H. constructed CLIP-seq libraries. M.S.B. 
helped perform CB experiments. G.P. and G.W.Y advised CLIP-seq library construction, performed CLIP-seq bioinformatic analyses 
and wrote the manuscript. B.W. performed RNA-seq analyses. V.V and G.D.B performed RNA-seq bioinformatic analyses. K.H. 
conceived the project, supervised the study, analyzed data, interpreted results and wrote the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Supplementary Information
Supplementary Tables 1-7
Supplementary Figure 1
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 April 28; 532(7600): 508–511. doi:10.1038/nature17665.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 investigated. Here we show that overexpression of the RNA-binding protein (RBP) Musashi-2 
(MSI2) induces multiple pro-self-renewal phenotypes, including a 17-fold increase in short-term 
repopulating cells and a net 23-fold ex vivo expansion of long-term repopulating HSCs. By 
performing a global analysis of MSI2-RNA interactions, we determined that MSI2 directly 
attenuates aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling through post-transcriptional downregulation 
of canonical AHR pathway components in CB HSPCs. Our study provides new mechanistic 
insight into RBP-controlled RNA networks that underlie the self-renewal process and give 
evidence that manipulating such networks ex vivo can provide a novel means to enhance the 
regenerative potential of human HSCs.
RBP-mediated control of translation in human HSCs and its potential to regulate HSC self-
renewal remains underexplored. Here we investigated the role of MSI2 in post-
transcriptionally controlling human HSPC self-renewal as it is known to regulate mouse 
HSCs6-8, and is predicted to impact mRNA translation9. MSI2 was present and elevated in 
primitive CB HSPCs and decreased during differentiation, whereas its paralog, MSI1, was 
not expressed (Extended Data Fig. 1a-f). Lentiviral overexpression (OE) of MSI2 resulted in 
a 1.5-fold increase in colony forming units (CFU) relative to control, principally due to a 
3.7-fold increase in the most primitive CFU-Granulocyte Erythrocyte Monocyte 
Megakaryocyte (GEMM) colony type (Extended Data Fig. 2a, Fig. 1a). Remarkably, 100% 
of MSI2 OE CFU-GEMMs generated secondary colonies compared to only 40% of controls. 
In addition, MSI2 OE yielded 3-fold more colonies per re-seeded CFU-GEMM (Fig. 1b, c, 
Extended Data Fig. 2b). During in vitro culture MSI2 OE resulted in 2.3- and 6-fold more 
cells relative to control at the 7 and 21-day time points, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 2c, 
d). Moreover after 7 days in culture MSI2 OE yielded a cumulative 9.3-fold increase in 
colony forming cells in the absence of changes in cell cycling or death (Extended Data Fig. 
2e-h). Altogether, our data demonstrate that enforced expression of MSI2 has potent self-
renewal effects on early progenitors and promotes their in vitro expansion.
Short-term repopulating cells (STRC) produce a transient multi-lineage graft in NOD-scid-
IL2Rγc−/− (NSG) mice10, and in patients reconstitute granulocytes and platelets critical for 
preventing post-transplant infection and bleeding1. STRCs overexpressing MSI2 exhibited 
1.8-fold more primitive CD34+ cells post-infection and a dramatic 17-fold increase in 
functional STRCs relative to control as determined by limiting dilution analysis (LDA) of 
human chimerism at 3 weeks post-transplant (Fig. 1d-f, Extended Data Fig. 3a, b). 
Furthermore, at a protracted engraftment readout time of 6.5 weeks at non-limiting 
transplant doses, 100% of MSI2 OE STRC transplanted mice were engrafted compared to 
only 50% of controls, indicating MSI2 OE extended the duration of STRC-mediated 
engraftment (Extended Data Fig. 3c).
We next explored the effect of shRNA-induced MSI2 knockdown (KD) on HSPC function. 
MSI2 KD did not alter clonogenic potential but did decrease CFU replating 3-fold 
(Extended Data Fig. 4a-c). When effects on more primitive culture-initiating cells were 
explored we found MSI2 KD significantly decreased cell number over culture (Extended 
Data Fig. 4d, e) independent of increased death or altered cell cycling (data not shown). 
Upon transplantation, engrafted MSI2 KD GFP+ cells showed no evidence of lineage 
Rentas et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 skewing, yet were strikingly reduced relative to the percentage of GFP+ cells initially 
transplanted (Extended Data Fig. 4f-h). Combined, our in vitro and in vivo data show that 
MSI2 KD reduces self-renewal in early progenitors and HSCs.
To characterize the earliest transcriptional changes induced by modulating MSI2 expression, 
we performed RNA-seq on CD34+ MSI2 OE and KD cells immediately post-transduction 
(Supplementary Tables 1, 2). MSI2 OE-induced transcriptional changes anti-correlated with 
those of MSI2 KD, suggesting OE and KD have opposite effects (Extended Data Fig. 5a). 
When compared to transcriptome data from 38 human hematopoietic cell subpopulations4, 
we observed that genes significantly upregulated upon MSI2 OE and downregulated upon 
MSI2 KD were exclusively enriched for those highly expressed in HSC and other primitive 
CD34+ populations (Extended Data Fig. 5b).
Since MSI2 OE conferred an HSC gene expression program, we hypothesized that it could 
facilitate HSC expansion ex vivo. Remarkably, MSI2 OE induced a 4-fold increase in 
CD34+CD133+ phenotypic HSCs relative to control after 7 days of culture (Fig. 2a). We 
next performed an LDA to define functional HSC frequency before (day 3 post-transduction, 
D3) and after 7 days of ex vivo culture (day 10, D10; Extended Data Fig. 6a). D3 recipients 
displayed no altered engraftment as a result of MSI2 OE, however, recipients of MSI2 OE 
D10-expanded cells displayed multiple phenotypes of enhanced reconstitution relative to 
control, including a 2-fold increase in BM GFP+ levels without changes to lineage output, 
proportionally more GFP+ cells within the human graft relative to pre-transplant D10 levels, 
greater GFP mean fluorescence intensity and enrichment of CD34 expression in GFPhigh 
cells (Fig. 2b, c, Extended Data Fig. 6b-h). As the lentiviral construct design ensures GFP 
levels mirror MSI2's, this indicates high levels of MSI2 impart enhanced competitiveness 
and are conducive to in vivo HSPC activity. Importantly, D10 MSI2 OE cultures contained 
more CD34+CD133+ cells prior to transplant (Extended Data Fig. 6i), and in accordance, the 
HSC frequency in D10 MSI2 OE cultures was increased 2-fold relative to the D3 culture 
time point, whereas control cultures displayed a 3-fold decrease. These results demonstrate 
that MSI2 OE facilitated an ex vivo net 6-fold increase in HSCs relative to control (Fig. 2g, 
h, Supplementary Tables 3, 4).
Secondary LDA transplants were performed to fully explore the effects of MSI2 OE and 
culturing has on self-renewal and long-term HSCs (LT-HSC). Robust engraftment with 
MSI2 OE did not display altered myelo-lymphopoiesis or leukemic development (Fig. 2e). 
Secondary LDA measurements revealed BM GFP+ percentage increased 4.6-fold and LT-
HSC frequency 3.5-fold with MSI2 OE compared to controls (Fig. 2d, e, f, Supplementary 
Table 5). This corresponds to MSI2 OE GFP+ HSCs having expanded in primary mice 2.4-
fold over input as compared to a decrease of 1.5-fold for control HSCs (Fig. 2g). The level 
of MSI2 OE-induced in vivo fold expansion reflects the behaviour of uncultured HSCs, 
which undergo similarly controlled expansion during passage in mice3,11,12. Finally, when 
accounting for the total change in GFP+ HSCs upon ex vivo culture, MSI2 OE provided a 
cumulative 23-fold-expansion of secondary LT-HSC relative to control (Fig. 2g, h) 
indicating elevated MSI2 provides a significant self-renewal advantage to functional HSCs 
during ex vivo culture.
Rentas et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To gain mechanistic insights we examined MSI2 OE-induced differentially expressed genes 
and found Cytochrome P450 1B1 Oxidase (CYP1B1), an effector of AHR signaling13, 
amongst the most repressed (Supplementary Table 1). Pathway analysis revealed many 
predicted AHR targets were enriched in MSI2 OE downregulated (Fig. 3a) and MSI2 KD 
upregulated gene sets (Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). Binding of the nuclear receptor 
transcription factor AHR with StemRegenin 1 (SR1) inhibits AHR target gene activation 
leading to human HSPC expansion in culture2. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) 
revealed MSI2 OE downregulated genes significantly matched the SR1 downregulated gene 
set in an SR1 dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3b, c), whereas MSI2 KD induced the opposite 
expression profile (Extended Data Fig. 7c, d). We next examined the overlap of 
downregulated genes with ChIP-seq-identified AHR targets14. This comparison was 
extended to downregulated genes upon treatment with UM171, another compound that 
expands HSPCs, but independent of AHR3. Direct transcriptional targets of AHR were 
enriched in the MSI2 OE and SR1 downregulated gene sets by 3.8 and 5.6-fold, respectively, 
compared to UM171, an overrepresentation maintained for predicted AHR targets and one 
that suggests MSI2 OE expands HSPCs through AHR signaling attenuation (Fig. 3d, 
Extended Data Fig. 7e). Furthermore, SR1 treatment increased the percentage of CD34+ 
cells 8-fold for control cultures compared to only 4-fold with MSI2 OE (Extended Data Fig. 
8a, b), a finding that indicates a redundancy in SR1 and MSI2 OE activity on HSPCs, which 
suggests they act on the same pathway.
To further elucidate the AHR connection, MSI2 OE and control cultures were treated with 
the AHR agonist 6-Formylindolo(3,2-b)carbazole (FICZ), whose induction of canonical 
AHR targets in MSI2 OE cells, demonstrates that they remain competent for AHR activation 
(Extended Data Fig. 8c). FICZ induced a dramatic reversal of the MSI2 OE-mediated 
increases in primary CFU-GEMMs and their replating capacities (Fig. 3e, f). Furthermore, 
FICZ-treated MSI2 OE cultures displayed greater losses in phenotypic HSPCs compared to 
controls which showed no change (Extended Data Fig. 8d, e). Altogether, these results 
demonstrate agonist-induced restoration of AHR activity reduces MSI2 OE's pro-self-
renewal effects and strongly supports downregulation of AHR signaling as the mechanism 
through which MSI2 OE achieves HSPC expansion.
To identify key RNA targets underlying MSI2 function, we analyzed global MSI2 protein-
RNA interactions using CLIP-seq (Extended Data Fig. 9a, b)15. Mapped reads identified 
highly correlated gene RPKMs and enrichment of significantly overlapping clusters within 
>6000 protein-coding genes from replicate experiments (Extended Data Fig. 9c, Fig. 4a, b). 
Within the top 40% of reproducible clusters, MSI2 bound predominantly to mature mRNA 
within their 3’ untranslated regions (3'UTRs) (Fig. 4c). Importantly, 9% of annotated 
protein-coding genes were reproducible MSI2 targets, compared to 0.2% of long non-coding 
RNAs (Extended Data Fig. 9d), suggesting MSI2 controls stability or translation of coding 
mRNAs. Motif analyses identified a consensus pentamer (U/G)UAGU resembling the 
known mouse Msi1 binding sequence9,16 within binding sites in all genic regions and 
significantly more conserved than background (Fig. 4d, Extended Data Fig. 9e-h). MSI2 
binding sites within Msi1 targets16 indicate Musashi proteins may bind the same genes 
through 3'UTR-embedded motifs (Extended Data Fig. 9i). Finally, target gene ontology 
analysis revealed 186 biological processes categories (Supplementary Table 6), among the 
Rentas et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 most significant of which were electron transport, estrogen receptor signaling regulation and 
metabolism of small molecules, all processes known to be transcriptionally impacted by 
AHR signaling17.
Strikingly, among the top 2% of enriched CLIP-seq targets (Supplementary Table 7) were 
the 3'UTRs of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) and CYP1B1, two AHR pathway components. 
Each exhibited multiple MSI2 binding motifs correlating with overlapping clusters of CLIP-
seq reads (Fig. 4e, Extended Data Fig. 10a). Querying MSI2's ability to post-
transcriptionally regulate these genes during HSPC expansion, we looked for instances of 
uncoupled transcript and protein expression. HSP90 displayed uncoupling of transcript (1.6-
fold up) and protein (1.6-fold down) early in culture, but at 7 days showed further 
upregulated transcript (2.5-fold) and variable protein levels (Fig. 4f, Extended Data Fig. 
10b). Since AHR-HSP90 binding is critical for ligand-dependent transcriptional activity13, 
downregulation of HSP90 protein at the outset of HSPC culture would be expected to reduce 
latent AHR complex formation and attenuate AHR signaling (Fig. 3a). Indeed, CYP1B1 
transcript and protein displayed 2-fold reductions early in culture, consistent with decreased 
AHR pathway activity, however at day 7, CYP1B1 transcripts were upregulated 1.7-fold, 
uncoupled from 2-fold downregulated protein (Fig. 4g, Extended Data Fig. 10c). To test if 
MSI2 directly mediates post-transcriptional repression of these targets, CYP1B1 and HSP90 
3'UTR regions were coupled to luciferase. MSI2 OE induced significant reductions in 
luciferase signal from both reporters, an effect mitigated upon mutating the core CLIP-seq-
identified UAG motifs (Extended Data Fig. 10d, e). Since MSI2 OE-mediated post-
transcriptional downregulation of the AHR pathway converged on CYP1B1 protein 
repression throughout culture, we explored the effects of inhibiting CYP1B1 independently 
with (E)-2,3’,4,5’-Tetramethoxystilbene (TMS) on HSPCs. During culture, TMS increased 
the frequency and total numbers of CD34+ cells by 1.5- and 2-fold respectively (Fig. 4h, i), 
phenocopying the effects of MSI2 OE. Lastly, co-overexpression of 3'UTRless CYP1B1 
with MSI2 decreased secondary CFU-GEMM replating efficiency (Extended Data Fig. 10f 
and g) suggesting that CYP1B1, while typically used to report on AHR signaling, promotes 
HSPC differentiation.
Our work identifies MSI2 as an important new mediator of human HSPC self-renewal and 
ex vivo expansion by coordinating the post-transcriptional regulation of proteins belonging 
to a shared self-renewal regulatory pathway (Extended Data Fig. 10h). We envision that 
manipulation of the post-transcriptional circuitry controlled by RBPs will provide a novel 
and powerful means by which to enhance the regenerative potential of not only human HSCs 
but other stem cell types as well.
Methods
Mice
NOD-scid-IL2Rγc−/− (Jackson Laboratory) mice were bred and maintained in the Stem Cell 
Unit animal barrier facility at McMaster University. All procedures received the approval of 
the Animal Research Ethics Board at McMaster University.
Rentas et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Isolation of primitive human hematopoietic cells and flow cytometry
All patient samples were obtained with informed consent and with the approval of local 
human subject research ethics boards at McMaster University. Human umbilical cord blood 
mononuclear cells were collected by centrifugation with Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE), followed 
red blood cell lysis with ammonium chloride (Stemcell Technologies). Cells were then 
incubated with a cocktail of lineage specific antibodies (CD2, CD3, CD11b, CD11c, CD14, 
CD16, CD19, CD24, CD56, CD61, CD66b, and GlyA; Stemcell Technologies) for negative 
selection of Lin− cells using an EasySep immunomagnetic column (Stemcell Technologies). 
Live cells were discriminated on the basis of cell size, granularity and, as needed, absence of 
viability dye 7-AAD (BD Biosciences) uptake. All flow cytometry analysis was performed 
using a BD LSR II instrument (BD Biosciences). Data acquisition was conducted using BD 
FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences) and analysis was performed using FlowJo software 
(Tree Star).
HSPC sorting and qRT-PCR analysis
To quantify MSI2 expression in human HSPCs, Lin− CB cells were stained with the 
appropriate antibody combinations to resolve HSC (CD34+ CD38− CD45RA− CD90+), 
MPP (CD34+ CD38− CD45RA− CD90−), CMP (CD34+ CD38+ CD71−) and EP (CD34+ 
CD38+ CD71+) fractions as similarly described previously18,19 with all antibodies from BD 
Biosciences: CD45RA (HI100), CD90 (5E10), CD34 (581), CD38 (HB7) and CD71 (M-
A712). Cell viability was assessed using the viability dye 7AAD (BD Biosciences). All cell 
subsets were isolated using a BD FACSAria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences) or a MoFlo XDP 
cell sorter (Beckman Coulter). HemaExplorer20 analysis was used to confirm MSI2 
expression in human HSPCs and across the hierarchy. For all qRT-PCR determinations total 
cellular RNA was isolated with TRIzol LS reagent according to the manufacturer's 
instructions (Invitrogen) and cDNA was synthesized using the qScript cDNA Synthesis Kit 
(Quanta Biosciences). qRT-PCR was done in triplicate with PerfeCTa qPCR SuperMix Low 
ROX (Quanta Biosciences) with gene specific probes (Universal Probe Library, UPL, 
Roche) and primers: MSI2 UPL-26, F- ggcagcaagaggatcagg, R-ccgtagagatcggcgaca; HSP90 
UPL-46, F-gggcaacacctctacaagga, R-cttgggtctgggtttcctc; CYP1B1 UPL-20, F-
acgtaccggccactatcact, R-ctcgagtctgcacatcagga; GAPDH UPL-60, F-agccacatcgctcagacac, R-
gcccaatacgaccaaatcc; ACTB (UPL Set Reference Gene Assays, Roche). The mRNA content 
of samples compared by qRT-PCR was normalized based on the amplification of GAPDH or 
ACTB.
Lentivirus production and western blot validation
MSI2 shRNAs were designed with the Dharmacon algorithm (http://www.dharmacon.com). 
Predicted sequences were synthesized as complimentary oligonucleotides, annealed and 
cloned downstream of the H1 promoter of the modfied cppt-PGK-EGFP-IRES-PAC-WPRE 
lentiviral expression vector18. Sequences for the MSI2 targeting and control RFP targeting 
shRNAs were as follows: shMSI2, 5’-gagagatcccactacgaaa-3’; shRFP, 5’-
gtgggagcgcgtgatgaac-3’. Human MSI2 cDNA (BC001526; Open Biosystems) was 
subcloned into the MA bi-directional lentiviral expression vector21. Human CYP1B1 cDNA 
(BC012049; Open Biosystems) was cloned in to psMALB22. All lentivirus was prepared by 
Rentas et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transient transfection of 293FT (Invitrogen) cells with pMD2.G and psPAX2 packaging 
plasmids (Addgene) to create VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral particles. All viral preparations 
were titrated on HeLa cells before use on cord blood. Standard SDS-PAGE and western 
blotting procedures were performed to validate the effect of knockdown on transduced NB4 
cells (DSMZ) and over expression on 293FT cells. Immunoblotting was performed with 
anti-MSI2 rabbit monoclonal IgG (EP1305Y, Epitomics) and β-actin mouse monoclonal IgG 
(ACTBD11B7, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) antibodies. Secondary antibodies used were 
IRDye 680 goat anti-rabbit IgG and IRDye 800 goat anti-mouse IgG (LI-COR). 293FT and 
NB4 cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma. NB4 cells were authenticated by ATRA 
treatment prior to use.
CB transduction
CB transductions were conducted as described previously18,23. Briefly, thawed Lin− CB, 
flow-sorted Lin− CD34+ CD38− or Lin− CD34+ CD38+ cells were prestimulated for 8-12 
hours in StemSpan medium (StemCell Technologies) supplemented with growth factors 
Interleukin 6 (IL-6; 20 ng/ml, Peprotech), Stem cell factor (SCF; 100 ng/ml, R&D Systems), 
Flt3 ligand (FLT3-L; 100 ng/ml, R&D Systems) and Thrombopoietin (TPO; 20 ng/ml, 
Peprotech). Lentivirus was then added in the same medium at a multiplicity of infection of 
30–100 for 24 hours. Cells were then given 2 days post transduction before use in in vitro or 
in vivo assays. For in vitro CB studies biological (experimental) replicates were performed 
with three independent CB samples.
Clonogenic progenitor assays
Human clonogenic progenitor cell assays were done in semi-solid methylcellulose medium 
(Methocult H4434; Stem Cell Technologies) with flow-sorted GFP+ cells post transduction 
(500 cells/ml) or from day seven cultured transduced cells (12000 cells/ml). Colony counts 
were carried out after 14 days of incubation. CFU-GEMMs can seed secondary colonies due 
to their limited self-renewal potential24. MSI2 OE and control CFU-GEMM replating for 
secondary CFU analysis was performed by picking single CFU-GEMMs at day 14 and 
disassociating colonies by vortexing. Cells were spun and resuspended in fresh methocult, 
mixed with a blunt end needle and syringe, and then plated into single wells of a 24-well 
plate. Secondary CFU analysis for shMSI2 and shControl expressing cells was performed by 
harvesting total colony growth from a single dish (since equivalent numbers of CFU-
GEMMs), resuspending cells in fresh methocult by mixing vigorously with a blunt end 
needle and syringe and then plating into replicate 35 mm tissue culture dishes. In both 
protocols, secondary colony counts were done following incubation for 10 days. For primary 
and secondary colony forming assays performed with the AHR agonist 6-Formylindolo(3,2-
b)carbazole (FICZ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 200 nM FICZ or 0.1% DMSO was added 
directly to H4434 methocult medium. 2-way ANOVA analysis was performed examining 
secondary CFU output and FICZ treatment for MSI2 OE or control conditions. Colonies 
were imaged with a Q-Colour3 digital camera (Olympus) mounted to an Olympus IX5 
microscope with a 10X objective lens. Image-Pro Plus imaging software (Media 
Cybernetics) was used to acquire pictures and subsequent image processing was performed 
with ImageJ software (NIH).
Rentas et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lin− CB and Lin− CD34+ suspension cultures
Transduced human Lin− CB cells were sorted for GFP expression and seeded at a density of 
1 × 105 cells/ml in IMDM 10% FBS supplemented with human growth factors IL-6 (10 ng/
ml), SCF (50 ng/ml), FLT3-L (50 ng/ml), and TPO (20 ng/ml) as previously described25. To 
generate growth curves, every seven days cells were counted, washed, and resuspended in 
fresh medium with growth factors at a density of 1 × 105 cells/ml. Cells from suspension 
cultures were also used in clonogenic progenitor assays, cell cycle and apoptosis assays. 
Experiments performed on transduced Lin− CD34+ CB cells used serum free conditions as 
described in the CB transduction subsection of the Methods. For in vitro CB studies 
biological (experimental) replicates were performed with three independent CB samples.
Cell cycle and apoptosis assays
Monitoring cell cycle progression was performed with the addition of BrdU to day 10 
suspension cultures at a final concentration of 10 μM. After three hours of incubation, cells 
were assayed with the BrdU Flow Kit (BD Biosciences) according to the manufacture's 
protocol. Cell proliferation and quiescence was measured by Ki67 (BD Bioscience) and 
Hoechst 33342 (Sigma) on day 4 suspension cultures after fixing and permeabilizing cells 
with the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD Biosciences). For apoptosis analysis, Annexin V 
(Invitrogen) and 7-AAD (BD Bioscience) staining on day 7 suspension cultures was 
performed according to the manufacture's protocol.
Intracellular flow cytometry
Lin− CB cells were initially stained with anti-CD34 PE (581) and anit-CD38 APC (HB7) 
antibodies (BD Biosciences) then fixed with the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD Biosciences) 
according to the manufacturer's instructions. Fixed and permeabilized cells were 
immunostained with anti-MSI2 rabbit monoclonal IgG antibody (EP1305Y, Abcam) and 
detected by Alexa-488 goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (Invitrogen).
RNA-Sequencing data processing
CD34+ cells were transduced with MSI2 OE or KD lentivirus along with their corresponding 
controls and then sorted for GFP expression 3 days later. Transductions for MSI2 OE and 
KD were each performed on two independent CB samples. Total RNA from transduced cells 
(>1×105) was isolated using TRIzol LS as recommended by the manufacturer (Invitrogen), 
and then further purified using RNeasy columns (Qiagen). Sample quality was assessed 
using Bioanalyzer RNA Nano chips (Agilent). Paired-end, barcoded RNA-seq sequencing 
libraries were then generated using the TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kit (v2) (Illumina) 
following the manufacturer's protocols starting from 1ug of total RNA. Quality of library 
generation was then assessed using a Bioanalyzer platform (Agilent) and Illumina MiSeq-
QC run was performed or quantified by qPCR using KAPA quantification kit (KAPA 
Biosystems). Sequencing was performed using an Illumina HiSeq2000 using TruSeq SBS v3 
chemistry at the Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer's Genomics Platform 
(University of Montreal) with cluster density targeted at 750k clusters/mm2 and paired-end 
2×100bp read lengths. For each sample, 90-95M reads were produced and mapped to the 
hg19 (GRCh37) human genome assembly using CASAVA (version 1.8). Read counts 
Rentas et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 generated by CASAVA were processed in EdgeR (edgeR_3.12.0, R 3.2.2) using TMM 
normalization, paired design, and estimation of differential expression using a generalized 
linear model (glmFit). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated from the output p-
values using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. The fold change of logarithm of base 2 of 
TMM normalized data (logFC) was used to rank the data from top up-regulated to top down-
regulated genes and FDR (0.05) was used to define significantly differentially expressed 
genes. RNA-seq data has been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus and are 
accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE70685.
GSEA and iRegulon AHR target prediction
iRegulon26 was used to retrieve the top 100 AHR predicted targets with a minimal 
occurrence count threshold of 5. The data were analyzed using GSEA27 with ranked data as 
input with parameters set to 2000 gene-set permutations.
GSEA and StemRegenin 1 (SR1) gene-sets
The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset GSE28359 that contains Affymetrix Human 
Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array gene expression data of CD34+ cells treated with SR1 at 30 
nM, 100nM, 300nM and 1000nM was used to obtain lists of genes differentially expressed 
in the treated samples compared to the control ones (0 nM)2. Data were background 
corrected using Robust Multi-Array Average (RMA) and quantile normalized using the 
expresso() function of the affy Bioconductor package (affy_1.38.1 , R 3.0.1). Lists of genes 
were created from the 150 genes top up regulated and top down regulated by the SR1 treated 
samples at each dose compared to the non-treated samples (0 nM). The data were analyzed 
using GSEA with ranked data as input with parameters set to 2000 gene-set permutations. 
Normalized enrichment score (NES) and false discovery rate (FDR) were calculated for each 
comparison.
DMAP population comparisons
The GEO dataset GSE24759 that contains Affymetrix GeneChip HT-HG_U133A Early 
Access Array gene expression data of 38 distinct hematopoietic cell states4 was compared to 
the OE and KD data. GSE24759 data were background corrected using Robust Multi-Array 
Average (RMA), quantile normalized using the expresso() function of the affy Bioconductor 
package (affy_1.38.1 , R 3.0.1), batch corrected using the ComBat() function of the sva 
package (sva_3.6.0) and scaled using the standard score. Bar graphs were created by 
calculating for significantly differentially expressed genes the number of scaled data that 
were above (>0) or below (<0) the mean for each population. Percentages indicating time 
the observed value (set of up or downregulated genes) was better represented in that 
population than random values were calculated from 1000 trials.
AHR ChIP-seq comparison to downregulated gene sets
A unique list of genes closest to AHR bound regions previously identified from TCDD-
treated MCF7 ChIP-seq data14 was used to calculate the overlap with genes showing >1.5-
fold down regulation with UM171 (35 nM) and SR1 (500 nM) relative to DMSO treated 
samples3 as well as with genes significantly down regulated in MSI2 OE versus control 
Rentas et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treated samples (FDR<0.05). Percentage of down regulated genes with AHR bound regions 
was then graphed for each gene set. P-values were generated with Fisher's exact test between 
gene lists.
oPOSSUM analysis for promoter AHR binding sites in downregulated gene sets
AHR transcription factor binding sites in downregulated gene sets were identified with 
oPOSSUM-328. Genes showing >1.5-fold down regulation with UM171 (35 nM) and SR1 
(500 nM) relative to DMSO treated samples3 were used along with significantly 
downregulated genes (FDR<0.05) with EdgeR analyzed MSI2 OE versus control treated 
samples. The three gene lists uploaded into oPOSSUM-3 and the AHR:ARNT transcription 
factor binding site profile was used with the matrix score threshold set at 80% and analyzing 
the region 1500 bp upstream and 1000 bp downstream of transcription start site. Percentage 
of downregulated genes with AHR binding sites in the promoter was then graphed for each 
gene set. Fisher's exact test was used to identify significant overrepresentation of AHR 
binding sites in gene lists relative to background.
Analysis for human chimerism
NSG mice were sublethally irradiated (315 cGy) one day prior to intrafemoral injection with 
transduced cells carried in IMDM 1% FBS at 25μl per mouse. Injected mice were analyzed 
for human hematopoietic engraftment at 12-14 weeks post transplantation or 3 and 6.5 
weeks for STRC experiments. Mouse bones (femurs, tibiae and pelvis) and spleen were 
harvested and bones were crushed with a mortar and pestle then filtered in to single cell 
suspensions. Bone marrow and spleen cells were blocked with mouse Fc block (BD 
Biosciences) and human IgG (Sigma) and then stained with fluorochrome-conjugated 
antibodies specific to human hematopoietic cells. For multilineage engraftment analysis, 
cells from mice were stained with CD45 (HI30) (Invitrogen), CD33 (P67.6), CD15 (HI98), 
CD14 (MφP9), CD19 (HIB19), CD235a/GlyA (GA-R2), CD41a (HIP8) and CD34 (581) 
(BD Biosciences).
HSC and STRC xenotransplantations
For MSI2 KD in HSCs 5.0×104 and 2.5×104 sorted Lin− CD34+ CD38− cells were used per 
short-hairpin transduction experiment leading to transplantation of day zero equivalent cell 
doses of 10×103 and 6.25×103, respectively per mouse. For STRC LDA transplantation 
experiments 1×105 sorted CD34+CD38+ cells were used per control and MSI2 OE 
transduction. After assessing levels of gene transfer, day zero equivalent GFP+ cell doses 
were calculated to perform the LDA. Recipients with greater than 0.1% GFP+CD45+/− cells 
were considered to be repopulated. For STRC experiments that readout extended 
engraftment at 6.5 weeks, 2×105 CD34+ CD38+ cells were used per OE and control 
transduction allowing for non-limiting 5×104 day zero equivalent cell doses per mouse. For 
HSC expansion and LDA experiments CD34+CD38− cells were sorted and transduced with 
MSI2 OE or control vectors (50,000 cells per condition) for three days and then analyzed for 
gene-transfer levels (% GFP+/−) and primitive cell marker expression (% CD34 and CD133). 
To ensure equal numbers of GFP+ cells were transplanted in both control and MSI2 OE 
mice, we added identically cultured GFP− cells to the MSI2 culture to match % GFP+ of the 
control culture (necessary due to the differing efficiency of transduction). The adjusted OE 
Rentas et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 culture was recounted and aliquoted (63,000 cells) to match the output of half the control 
culture. Three day 0 equivalent GFP+ cell doses (1000, 300 and 62) were then transplanted 
per mouse to perform the D3 primary LDA. A second aliquot of the adjusted OE culture was 
then taken and put in to culture in parallel with the remaining half of the control culture for 
performing another LDA after 7 days of growth (10 days total growth, D10 primary LDA). 
Altogether, 4 cell doses were transplanted, if converted back to day 0 equivalents these 
equaled approximately 1000, 250, 100, and 20 GFP+ cells per mouse, respectively. Pooled 
bone marrow from six engrafted primary mice that received D10 cultured control or MSI2 
OE cells (from 2 highest doses transplanted) was aliquoted in to 4 cell doses of 15 million, 
10 million, 6 million, 2 million and 1 million cells. Numbers of GFP+ cells within primary 
mice was estimated from nucleated cell counts obtained from NSG femurs, tibias and pelvis 
and from Colvin et al.29. Actual numbers of GFP+ cells used for determining numbers of 
GFP+ HSCs and the number of mice transplanted for all LDA experiments is found in 
Supplementary Tables 3-5. The cutoff for HSC engraftment was a demonstration of 
multilineage reconstitution which was set at BM having >0.1% GFP+ CD33+ and >0.1% 
GFP+ CD19+ cells. Assessment of HSC and STRC frequency was carried out by using 
ELDA software30. For all mouse transplantation experiments, mice were aged (6-12wk) and 
sex matched. All transplanted mice were included for analysis unless mice died from 
radiation sickness before the experimental endpoint. No randomization or blinding was 
performed for animal experiments. Approximately 3-6 mice were used per cell dose for each 
CB transduction and transplantation experiment.
UV cross-linking immunoprecipitation sequencing (CLIP-seq) library preparation
CLIP-seq was performed as previously described15. Briefly, 25 million NB4 cells, a 
transformed human cell line of hematopoietic origin, were washed in PBS and UV-cross-
linked at 400mJ/cm2 on ice. Cells were pelleted, lysed in wash buffer (PBS, 0.1% SDS, 
0.5% Na-Deoxycholate, 0.5% NP-40), DNAse treated, and supernatants from lysates were 
collected for immunoprecipitation. MSI2 was immunoprecipitated overnight using 5 μg of 
anti-MSI2 antibody (EP1305Y, Abcam) and Protein A Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Beads 
containing immunoprecipated RNA were washed twice with wash buffer, high-salt wash 
buffer (5X PBS, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Na-Deoxycholate, 0.5% NP-40), and PNK buffer (50 mM 
Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40). Samples were then treated with 0.2 U MNase 
for 5 minutes at 37 degrees with shaking to trim immunopreciptated RNA. MNase 
inactivation was then carried out with PNK + EGTA buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 20 mM 
EGTA, 0.5% NP-40). The sample was dephosphorylated using alkaline phosphatase (CIP, 
NEB) at 37 degrees for 10 followed by washing with PNK+EGTA, PNK buffer, and then 0.1 
mg/mL BSA in nuclease free water. 3’ RNA linker ligation was performed at 16 degrees 
overnight with the following adapter: 5' PUGGAAUUCUCGGGUGCCAAGG-puromycin. 
Samples were then washed with PNK buffer, radiolabelled using P32-y-ATP (Perkin Elmer), 
run on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel and then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The 
nitrocellulose membrane was developed via autoradiography and RNA-protein complexes 
15-20 kDa above the molecular weight of MSI2 was extracted with Proteinase K followed 
by RNA extraction with acid phenol-chloroform. A 5’ RNA linker (5' HO- 
GUUCAGAGUUCUACAGUCCGACGAUC-OH) was ligated to the extracted RNA using 
T4 RNA ligase (Fermentas) for two hours and the RNA was again purified using acid 
Rentas et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phenol-chloroform. Adapter ligated RNA was re-suspended in nuclease free water and 
reverse transcribed using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). 20 cycles of PCR 
were performed using NEB Phusion Polymerase using a 3’ PCR primer that contained a 
unique Illumina barcode sequence. PCR products were run on an 8% TBE gel. Products 
ranging between 150-200 bp were extracted using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen) 
and re-suspended in nuclease free water. Two separate libraries were prepared and sent for 
single-end 50 bp Illumina sequencing at the Institute for Genomic Medicine at the 
University of California, San Diego. 47,098,127 reads from the first library passed quality 
filtering of which 73.83% mapped uniquely to the human genome. 57,970,220 reads from 
the second library passed quality filtering of which 69.53% mapped uniquely to the human 
genome. CLIP-data reproducibility was verified through high correlation between gene 
RPKMs and statistically significant overlaps in the clusters and genes within replicates. 
CLIP-seq data has been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible 
through GEO Series accession number GSE69583.
CLIP-seq mapping and cluster identification
Before sequence alignment of CLIP-seq reads to the human genome was performed, 
sequencing reads from libraries were trimmed of polyA tails, adapters, and low quality ends 
using Cutadapt with parameters --match-read-wildcards --times 2 -e 0 -O 5 --quality-cutoff' 
6 -m 18 -b TCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG -b ATCTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG -b 
CGACAGGTTCAGAGTTCTACAGTCCGACGATC -b TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGG 
-b AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 
-b TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT. Reads were 
then mapped against a database of repetitive elements derived from RepBase (version 
18.05). Bowtie (version 1.0.0) with parameters -S -q -p 16 -e 100 -l 20 was used to align 
reads against an index generated from Repbase sequences31. Reads not mapped to Repbase 
sequences were aligned to the hg19 human genome (UCSC assembly) using STAR (version 
2.3.0e)32 with parameters --outSAMunmapped Within –outFilterMultimapNmax 1 –
outFilterMultimapScoreRange 1. To identify clusters in the genome of significantly enriched 
CLIP-seq reads, reads that were PCR replicates were removed from each CLIP-seq library 
using a custom script of the same method as33, otherwise reads were kept at each nucleotide 
position when more than one read's 5' end was mapped. Clusters were then assigned using 
the CLIPper software with parameters --bonferroni --superlocal --threshold-34. The ranked 
list of significant targets was calculated assuming a Poisson distribution, where the observed 
value is the number of reads in the cluster, and the background is the number of reads across 
the entire transcript and or across a window of 1000 bp +/− the predicted cluster.
Gene annotations for CLIP-seq
Transcriptomic regions and gene classes were defined using annotations found in gencode 
v17. Depending on the analysis clusters were either associated by the Gencode annotated 5’ 
UTR, 3’ UTR, CDS or intronic regions. If a cluster overlapped multiple regions, or a single 
part of a transcript was annotated as multiple regions, clusters were iteratively assigned first 
as CDS, then 3’ UTR, 5’ UTR and finally as proximal (<500 bases from an exon) and distal 
(>500 bases from an exon) introns. Overlapping peaks were calculated using bedtools and 
pybedtools35,36.
Rentas et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gene ontology analysis for CLIP-seq
Significantly enriched gene ontology (GO) terms were identified using a hypergeometric test 
that compared the number of genes that were MSI2 targets in each GO term to genes 
expressed in each GO term as the proper background. Expressed genes were identified by 
using the control samples in SRA study SRP012062. Mapping was performed identically to 
CLIP-seq mapping, without peak calling and changing the STAR parameter 
outFilterMultimapNmax to 10. Counts were calculated with featureCounts37 and RPKMs 
were then computed. Only genes with a mean RPKM > 1 between the two samples were 
used in the background expressed set.
De-novo motif and conservation analysis for CLIP-seq
Randomly located clusters within the same genic regions as predicted MSI2 clusters were 
used to calculate a background distribution for motif and conservation analyses. Motif 
analysis was performed using the HOMER algorithm as in Lovci et al.34. For evolutionary 
sequence conservation analysis the mean (mammalian) phastCons score for each cluster was 
used.
Immunofluorescence
CD34+ cells (>5×104) were transduced with MSI2 OE or control lentivirus, after 3 days 
GFP+ cells were sorted and then put back in to StemSpan medium containing growth factors 
IL-6 (20 ng/ml), SCF (100 ng/ml), FLT3-L (100 ng/ml) and TPO (20 ng/ml). A minimum of 
10,000 cells were used for immunostaining at culture days 3 and 7 post GFP-sort. Cells were 
fixed in 2% PFA for 10 minutes, washed with PBS and then cytospun on to glass slides. 
Cytospun cells were then permeabilized (PBS 0.2 % Triton X-100) for 20 minutes, blocked 
(PBS 0.1% saponin 10% donkey serum) for 30 minutes and stained with primary antibodies 
(anti-CYP1B1 antibody, EPR14972, Abcam; anti-HSP90 antibody, 68/hsp90, BD 
Biosciences) in PBS 10% donkey serum for 1 hour. Detection with secondary antibody was 
performed in PBS 10% donkey serum with Alexa-647 donkey anti-rabbit antibody or 
Alexa-647 donkey anti-mouse antibody for 45 minutes. Slides were mounted with Prolong 
Gold Antifade containing DAPI (Invitrogen). Several images (200-1000 cells total) were 
captured per slide at 20X magnification using an Operetta HCS Reader (Perkin Elmer) with 
epifluorescence illumination and standard filter sets. Columbus software (Perkin Elmer) was 
used to automate the identification of nuclei and cytoplasm boundaries in order quantify 
mean cell fluorescence.
Luciferase reporter gene assay
A 271 bp region of the CYP1B1 3'UTR that flanked CLIP-seq identified MSI2 blinding sites 
was cloned from human HEK293FT genomic DNA using the forward primer 
GTGACACAACTGTGTGATTAAAAGG and reverse primer TGATTTTTATTATTTTGGT 
AATGGTG and placed downstream of renilla luciferase in the dual-luciferase reporter 
vector, pGL4 (Promega). A 271 bp geneblock (IDT) with 6 TAG>TCC mutations was 
cloned in to pGL4 using XbaI and NotI. The HSP90 3'UTR was amplified from HEK293FT 
genomic DNA with the forward primer TCTCTGGCTGAGGGATGACT and reverse primer 
TTTTAAGGCCAAGGAATTAAGTGA and cloned in pGL4. A geneblock of the HSP90 
Rentas et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3'UTR (IDT) with 14 TAG>TCC mutations was cloned in to pGL4 using SfaAI and NotI. 
Co-transfection of wild type or mutant luciferase reporter (40 ng) and control or MSI2 OE 
lentiviral expression vector (100 ng) was performed in the non-Musashi1 and 2 expressing 
NIH-3T3 cell line. 50,000 cells were used per co-transfection. Reporter activity was 
measured using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) 36-40 hours later.
MSI2 OE suspension cultures with AHR antagonist SR1 and agonist FICZ
For MSI2 OE cultures with the AHR antagonist SR1, Lin− CD34+ cells were transduced 
with MSI2 OE or control lentivirus in medium supplemented with SR1 (750 nM; Abcam) or 
DMSO vehicle (0.1%). GFP+ cells were isolated (20,000 cells per culture) and allowed to 
proliferate with or without SR1 for an additional 7 days at which point they were counted 
and immunophenotyped for CD34 and CD133 expression. For MSI2 OE cultures with the 
AHR agonist FICZ, Lin− CD34+ cells were transduced with MSI2 OE or control lentivirus. 
GFP+ cells were isolated (20,000 cells per culture) and allowed to proliferate with FICZ 
(200 nM; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or DMSO (0.1%) for an additional 3 days at which 
point they were immunophenotyped for CD34 and CD133 expression.
HSPC expansion with (E)-2,3’,4,5’-Tetramethoxystilbene (TMS)
Lin− CD34+ cells were cultured for 72 hours (lentiviral treated but non-transduced flow-
sorted GFP− cells) in StemSpan medium containing growth factors IL-6 (20 ng/ml), SCF 
(100 ng/ml), FLT3-L (100 ng/ml) and TPO (20 ng/ml) before the addition of the CYP1B1 
inhibitor TMS (Abcam) at a concentration of 10 μM or mock treatment with 0.1% DMSO. 
Equal numbers of cells (12,000 per condition) were then allowed to proliferate for 7 days at 
which point they were counted and immunophenotyped for CD34 and CD133 expression.
Statistical analysis
Unless stated otherwise (i.e., analysis of RNA-seq and CLIP-seq data sets), all statistical 
analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software version 5.0). Unpaired 
student t-tests or Mann-Whitney tests were performed with p < 0.05 as the cut-off for 
statistical significance.
Rentas et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. MSI2 is highly expressed in human hematopoietic stem and progenitor 
cell populations
a, Schematic of the human hematopoietic hierarchy showing key primitive cell populations 
and simplified surface marker expression. b, qRT-PCR analysis of MSI1 and MSI2 
expression in Lin− CB cell populations (n=3 independent Lin- CB samples). c, Gating 
strategy used to sort sub-fractions of Lin− CB HSPCs for MSI2 qRT-PCR expression 
analysis (n=2 independent pooled Lin− CB samples). d, MSI2 expression across the human 
hematopoietic hierarchy. Each circle represents an independent gene expression dataset 
curated by HemaExplorer. e, Intracellular flow cytometry analysis of MSI2 protein levels in 
Lin− CB. Histograms show background staining with secondary antibody (red) and positive 
staining with anti-MSI2 antibody plus secondary in Lin− CB (blue). MSI2 fluorescence 
Rentas et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intensity was divided into quartiles of negative (Q1), low (Q2), mid (Q3) and high (Q4) level 
expression. f, Plots show cell percentage within each quartile from e that are CD34+ CD38− 
(left) and CD34+ CD38+ (right) (n=2 independent Lin− CB samples). All data presented as 
mean ± SEM. *p<0.05; ***p<0.001.
Extended Data Figure 2. MSI2 OE enhances in vitro culture of primitive CB cells
a, Top: Schematic of bi-directional promoter lentivirus used to overexpress MSI2. Bottom: 
Western blot and histogram showing intracellular flow validation of enforced MSI2 
expression in 293FT cells (left) and Lin− CB (right), respectively. b, Representative images 
of secondary CFU made from replated control and MSI2 OE CFU-GEMMs and types of 
colonies made, scale bar = 200 μm. c, Fold change in Lin− CB transduced cell number after 
7 days in culture following transduction (n=5 experiments). d, 21 day growth curve of 
transduced Lin− CB cells (n=4 experiments). e, Colony output of transduced Lin− CB from 
day 7 cultures (n=8 cultures from 4 experiments). f, BrdU cell cycle analysis of transduced 
Lin− CB cells from day 10 cultures (n=3 experiments). g, Ki67 cell cycle analysis of 
transduced Lin− CB cells from day 4 cultures (n=4 experiments). h, Apoptotic and dead 
cells in day 7 cultures of transduced Lin− CB by Annexin V staining (n=3 experiments). 
Western blot source data in Supplementary Figure 1. All data presented as mean ± SEM. 
**p<0.01; ***p<0.001.
Rentas et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. MSI2 OE does not affect STRC lineage output and extends STRC-
mediated engraftment
a, Schematic of STRC LDA experimental setup. b, Left: Gating strategy to identify 
engrafted GFP+ CD45+ progenitor and myelo-lympho lineage positive cell types or GFP+ 
CD45− erythroid cells and platelets. Right: Summary of lineage output in the injected femur 
at 3 weeks post-transplant (n=4 control and n=18 MSI2 OE mice). MK = Megakaryocyte, E 
= Erythroid cells, P = Platelets. c, Representative flow plots and summary of transduced 
STRCs read out for human CD45+ engraftment at 6.5 weeks post-transplant (n=4 mice per 
condition). All data presented as mean ± SEM.
Rentas et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. MSI2 KD impairs secondary CFU replating potential and HSC 
engraftment capacity
a, Left: Schematic of MSI2- and control RFP-targeted shRNA lentiviruses. Right: 
Confirmation of MSI2 protein knockdown (both isoforms that can be detected by western 
blot) in transduced NB4 cells. b, CFU production by shMSI2 and shControl transduced Lin− 
CB (n=8 cultures from 4 experiments). c, Secondary CFU output from shMSI2 and images 
of representative secondary CFU (scale bar = 200 μm, performed on n=4 cultures from 2 
experiments). d, Fold change in transduced cell number after 7 days in culture (n=4 
experiments). e, Growth curves of cultures initiated with transduced Lin− CB cells (n=4 
experiments). f, Experimental design to readout changes in HSC capacity with MSI2 KD. g, 
Left: Representative flow analysis of transduced CD34+ CD38− derived human chimerism in 
NSG mouse BM. Right: Shown is the ratio of the percentage of GFP+ cells in the CD45+ 
population post-transplant to the initial pre-transplant GFP+ cell percentage. Dotted line 
indicates the proportion of GFP+ cells is unchanged relative to input. (One sample t-test, no 
Rentas et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 change = 1, n = 6 shControl and n = 8 shMSI2 mice pooled from 2 experiments). h, 
Representative flow plots and summary of multilineage engraftment with shControl and 
shMSI2 (gated on GFP+ cells). Western blot source data is shown in Supplementary Figure 
1. Data presented as mean ± SEM. *p<0.05; ***p<0.001.
Extended Data Figure 5. MSI2 OE confers an HSC gene expression signature
a, Genes that are up in OE (21 genes, logFC>0) and down (156 genes, logFC<0) relative to 
control with a FDR<0.05 were compared to MSI2 KD normalized to shControl expression 
data. Red circles represent 177 significantly differentially expressed genes with OE. Gray 
outlined circles represent random genes (number of gray circles = number of red circles). 
Only genes that are significantly up or down regulated in OE have anti-correlation with KD. 
b, Differentially expressed genes between MSI2 OE and control cells (FDR <0.05) 
compared to DMAP populations. Numbers beside each bar indicate the percentage of the 
time the observed value (set of up or downregulated genes) was better represented in that 
population than random values (equal number of randomly selected genes based on 1000 
trials).
Rentas et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. MSI2 OE enhances HSC activity after ex vivo culture
a, Experimental layout to measure changes in HSC engraftment capacity and frequency with 
ex vivo culture. b, Representative flow plots of CD45+ GFP+ reconstitution from mice 
receiving the highest cell dose transplanted per time point. c, Multilineage engraftment of 
mice injected with D3 cultures. d, Proportion of the human CD45+ graft containing GFP+ 
cells from D3 primary mice relative to pre-transplant levels of GFP+ cells before expansion. 
Shown are mice transplanted at the two highest doses (n=8 mice for both conditions). e, 
Proportion of the human CD45+ graft containing GFP+ cells from D10 primary mice relative 
Rentas et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to pre-transplant levels of GFP+ cells after expansion. Shown are mice transplanted at the 
two highest doses (n=8 mice for both conditions, one sample t-test, no change = 1). f, 
Summary of multilineage engraftment from mice in c. g, GFP mean fluoresence intensity 
(MFI) in D10 primary engrafted mice. Shown are mice transplanted with the highest three 
doses, n=11 control and 13 MSI2 mice. h, CD34 expression in GFP-high (top 60%) relative 
to GFP-low (bottom 40%) gated cells (set per mouse) from engrafted recipients in c. i, 
Number of transduced phenotyped HSCs after 7 days of culture from HSC expansion 
experiment described in a. Symbols represent individual mice and shaded symbols represent 
MSI2 OE. All data presented as mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Figure 7. Predicted AHR targets and genes downregulated with SR1 and MSI2 
OE are upregulated with MSI2 KD
a, Predicted AHR targets were identified with the iRegulon tool and compared with MSI2 
KD normalized to shControl upregulated gene signature by GSEA. b, Heatmap of MSI2 OE 
and KD shared leading edge AHR target genes from GSEA. c, GSEA comparing SR1 high 
and low dose downregulated gene sets with the MSI2 KD upregulated gene signature. d, 
Heatmap shows list of shared leading edge genes identified by GSEA from MSI2 OE, KD 
and SR1 at varying doses. e, The percentage of downregulated genes from UM171-, SR1-
treated and MSI2 OE data sets containing at least one AHR binding site 1500 bp upstream 
and downstream of transcription start site. Dotted line indicates the background percentage 
of genes with AHR binding sites. P-values were generated relative to background with 
Fisher's exact test.
Rentas et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. AHR antagonism with SR1 has redundant effects with MSI2 OE, and 
AHR activation with MSI2 OE results in a loss of HSPCs
a, Representative flow plots and summary of CD34 expression with MSI2 OE and control 
transduced CD34+ CB cells grown for 10 days in medium containing SR1 or DMSO vehicle 
(n=3 experiments). b, Fold change in CD34 expression from results shown in a. c, Fold-
increase in CYP1B1 and AHRR transcript levels with FICZ in transduced cultures (n=3 
experiments). d, Transduced CD34+ CB cells grown for 3 days in medium supplemented 
with FICZ and the corresponding change in CD34 expression. Each coloured pair (DMSO 
and FICZ) represents a matched CB sample (n=3 experiments). e, Differences in culture 
CD34 levels from d. All data presented as mean ± SEM. * p<0.05.
Rentas et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. MSI2 preferentially binds mature mRNA within the 3'UTR
a, Validation of the capacity of the anti-MSI2 antibody to immunoprecipitate MSI2 
compared to IgG control pulldowns. b, Autoradiogram showing anti-MSI2 
immunoprecipitated, MNase digested and radiolabelled RNA isolated for CLIP library 
construction and sequencing (red box). Low levels of MNase show a smearing pattern 
extending upwards from the modal weight of MSI2. c, Scatter plot of total number of 
uniquely mapped CLIP-seq reads for each gene, comparing both replicates. d, Heatmap 
indicating the number of different classes of Gencode annotated genes that contain at least 
Rentas et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 one predicted MSI2 binding site. e, Consensus motifs within MSI2 clusters in the different 
genic regions. P-values for the most statistically significant enriched motif is presented for 
all overlapping clusters between replicates. f, Cumulative distribution function of mean 
conservation score (Phastcons) of MSI2 clusters, compared to a shuffled background 
control, computed for all overlapping clusters and the top 40% of overlapping clusters. P-
values were obtained by a Kolgomorov-Smirnov two-tailed test comparing the distributions 
from actual and shuffled locations. g, Number of clusters within 200 bases of the annotated 
stop codon in known mRNA transcripts for all overlapping clusters between replicates and 
the top 40% of overlapping clusters. h, Cumulative distribution function of mean 
conservation score (Phastcons) of MSI2 clusters, compared to a shuffled background 
control, computed for overlapping clusters between the replicates and the top 40% of 
overlapping clusters found in different genic regions. Similarity in the 3'UTR conservation 
for the top 40% with the shuffled background control is likely due to MSI2 sites being small 
and not needing structural contexts for conservation. P-values were obtained by a 
Kolgomorov-Smirnov two-tailed test comparing the distributions from actual and shuffled 
locations. i, Genome browser views displaying CLIP-seq mapped reads from replicate 1 
(blue), predicted clusters (purple), exact matches for the GUAG sequence (black) and 
mammal conservation scores (PhyloP) in the 3' UTRs for a previously predicted Msi1 target.
Rentas et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. MSI2 OE represses CYP1B1 and HSP90 3'UTR Renilla Luciferase 
reporter activity
a, CLIP-seq reads (replicate 1 in blue and replicate 2 in green) and clusters (purple) mapped 
to the 3'UTR of HSP90. Matches to the GUAG motif are shown in black. Mammal PhyloP 
score listed in last track. b and c, Representative data of mean per cell fluoresence for 
HSP90 and CYP1B1 protein in transduced CD34+ CB. Protein level in cells during in vitro 
culture was analyzed 3 days (D3) and 7 days (D7) after transduction and sorting for GFP. 
Corresponding secondary alone antibody staining is shown for each experiment. Each circle 
represents a cell, and greater than 200 cells were analyzed per condition. d and e, Levels of 
renilla luciferase activity in NIH-3T3 cells co-transfected with control or MSI2 OE vectors 
Rentas et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and the CYP1B1 or HSP90 wild type or TCC mutant 3'UTR luciferase reporter (dotted line 
indicates no change in renilla activity; n=4 CYP1B1 and n=3 HSP90 experiments). f, Flow 
plots of co-transduced CD34+ CB cells with MSI2 (GFP) and CYP1B1 (BFP) lentivirus. g, 
GFP+ BFP+ CFU-GEMMs generated from f were replated in to secondary CFU assays and 
enumerated for total number of colonies formed. A total of 24 CFU-GEMMs from MSI2-
BFP and MSI2-CYP1B1 were replated (n=2 experiments). Data presented as mean ± SEM. 
***p<0.001, **p<0.01. h, A model for AHR pathway attenuation through MSI2 post-
transcriptional processing. MSI2 mediates the post-transcriptional down regulation of 
HSP90 at the outset of culture and continuously represses the prominent AHR pathway 
effector CYP1B1 to facilitate HSPC expansion. The resultant MSI2-mediated repression of 
AHR signaling enforces a self-renewal program and allows HSPC expansion ex vivo.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Eric Lechman and Peter Van Galen for providing H1 and pSMALB vectors. The MA overexpression 
vector was provided as a gift by Luigi Naldini. We also thank the SCC-RI core flow cytometry staff, the Obstetrics 
and Gynecology Unit at McMaster Children's Hospital for cord blood, Brad Doble and Mick Bhatia for critical 
assessment of this work and all members of the Hope laboratory for experimental support and advice. This work 
was supported by an Ontario Institute for Cancer Research New Investigator Award (IA-033), an Ontario Institute 
for Cancer Research Cancer Stem Cell Program Team Grant (P.CSC.005) and a Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research (MOP-126030) grant to K.H. S.R. is supported by a Canadian Blood Services Graduate Fellowship and 
Health Canada. The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the view of the federal government of 
Canada. This work was partially supported by grants from the National Institute of Health (HG004659 and 
NS075449) to G.W.Y. and from the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine (RB3-05219) to G.W.Y. G.P. was 
supported by a National Science Graduate Fellowship. G.W.Y. is an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow. We thank the 
UCSD Institute for Genomic Medicine's Genomics Center for providing access to high-throughput sequencing 
facilities.
References
1. Miller PH, Knapp DJ, Eaves CJ. Heterogeneity in hematopoietic stem cell populations: implications 
for transplantation. Curr Opin Hematol. 2013; 20:257–264. [PubMed: 23615054] 
2. Boitano AE, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor antagonists promote the expansion of human 
hematopoietic stem cells. Science. 2010; 329:1345–1348. [PubMed: 20688981] 
3. Fares I, et al. Pyrimidoindole derivatives are agonists of human hematopoietic stem cell self-
renewal. Science. 2014; 345:1509–1512. [PubMed: 25237102] 
4. Novershtern N, et al. Densely interconnected transcriptional circuits control cell states in human 
hematopoiesis. Cell. 2011; 144:296–309. [PubMed: 21241896] 
5. Laurenti E, et al. The transcriptional architecture of early human hematopoiesis identifies multilevel 
control of lymphoid commitment. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:756–763. [PubMed: 23708252] 
6. Hope K, et al. An RNAi screen identifies Msi2 and Prox1 as having opposite roles in the regulation 
of hematopoietic stem cell activity. Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 7:101–114. [PubMed: 20621054] 
7. de Andrés-Aguayo L, et al. Musashi 2 is a regulator of the HSC compartment identified by a 
retroviral insertion screen and knockout mice. Blood. 2011; 118:554–618. [PubMed: 21613258] 
8. Park SM, et al. Musashi-2 controls cell fate, lineage bias, and TGF-beta signaling in HSCs. J Exp 
Med. 2014; 211:71–87. [PubMed: 24395885] 
9. Ohyama T, et al. Structure of Musashi1 in a complex with target RNA: the role of aromatic stacking 
interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:3218–3231. [PubMed: 22140116] 
Rentas et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Glimm H, et al. Previously undetected human hematopoietic cell populations with short-term 
repopulating activity selectively engraft NOD/SCID-beta2 microglobulin-null mice. J Clin Invest. 
2001; 107:199–206. [PubMed: 11160136] 
11. Cashman JD, Eaves CJ. Human growth factor-enhanced regeneration of transplantable human 
hematopoietic stem cells in nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice. Blood. 
1999; 93:481–487. [PubMed: 9885209] 
12. Holyoake TL, Nicolini FE, Eaves CJ. Functional differences between transplantable human 
hematopoietic stem cells from fetal liver, cord blood, and adult marrow. Exp Hematol. 1999; 
27:1418–1427. [PubMed: 10480433] 
13. Mimura J, Fujii-Kuriyama Y. Functional role of AhR in the expression of toxic effects by TCDD. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003; 1619:263–268. [PubMed: 12573486] 
14. Lo R, Matthews J. High-Resolution Genome-wide Mapping of AHR and ARNT Binding Sites by 
ChIP-Seq. Toxicol Sci. 2012; 130:349–361. [PubMed: 22903824] 
15. Yeo GW, et al. An RNA code for the FOX2 splicing regulator revealed by mapping RNA-protein 
interactions in stem cells. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009; 16:130–137. [PubMed: 19136955] 
16. Katz Y, et al. Musashi proteins are post-transcriptional regulators of the epithelialluminal cell state. 
Elife. 2014; 3:e03915. [PubMed: 25380226] 
17. Tijet N, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor regulates distinct dioxin-dependent and dioxin-
independent gene batteries. Mol Pharmacol. 2006; 69:140–153. [PubMed: 16214954] 
18. Doulatov S, et al. PLZF is a regulator of homeostatic and cytokine-induced myeloid development. 
Genes Dev. 2009; 23:2076–2163. [PubMed: 19723763] 
19. Majeti R, Park CY, Weissman IL. Identification of a hierarchy of multipotent hematopoietic 
progenitors in human cord blood. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:635–645. [PubMed: 18371405] 
20. Bagger FO, et al. HemaExplorer: a database of mRNA expression profiles in normal and malignant 
haematopoiesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:D1034–1039. [PubMed: 23143109] 
21. Amendola M, Venneri MA, Biffi A, Vigna E, Naldini L. Coordinate dual-gene transgenesis by 
lentiviral vectors carrying synthetic bidirectional promoters. Nat Biotechnol. 2005; 23:108–116. 
[PubMed: 15619618] 
22. van Galen P, et al. The unfolded protein response governs integrity of the haematopoietic stem-cell 
pool during stress. Nature. 2014; 510:268–272. [PubMed: 24776803] 
23. Lechman ER, et al. Attenuation of miR-126 activity expands HSC in vivo without exhaustion. Cell 
Stem Cell. 2012; 11:799–811. [PubMed: 23142521] 
24. Carow CE, Hangoc G, Broxmeyer HE. Human multipotential progenitor cells (CFU-GEMM) have 
extensive replating capacity for secondary CFU-GEMM: an effect enhanced by cord blood plasma. 
Blood. 1993; 81:942–949. [PubMed: 7679010] 
25. Milyavsky M, et al. A distinctive DNA damage response in human hematopoietic stem cells 
reveals an apoptosis-independent role for p53 in self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 7:186–197. 
[PubMed: 20619763] 
26. Janky R, et al. iRegulon: from a gene list to a gene regulatory network using large motif and track 
collections. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003731. [PubMed: 25058159] 
27. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 
16199517] 
28. Kwon AT, Arenillas DJ, Worsley Hunt R, Wasserman WW. oPOSSUM-3: advanced analysis of 
regulatory motif over-representation across genes or ChIP-Seq datasets. G3 (Bethesda). 2012; 
2:987–1002. [PubMed: 22973536] 
29. Colvin GA, et al. Murine marrow cellularity and the concept of stem cell competition: geographic 
and quantitative determinants in stem cell biology. Leukemia. 2004; 18:575–583. [PubMed: 
14749701] 
30. Hu Y, Smyth GK. ELDA: extreme limiting dilution analysis for comparing depleted and enriched 
populations in stem cell and other assays. J Immunol Methods. 2009; 347:70–78. [PubMed: 
19567251] 
31. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short 
DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R25. [PubMed: 19261174] 
Rentas et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Dobin A, et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:15–21. 
[PubMed: 23104886] 
33. Darnell R. CLIP (cross-linking and immunoprecipitation) identification of RNAs bound by a 
specific protein. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2012; 2012:1146–1160. [PubMed: 23118367] 
34. Lovci MT, et al. Rbfox proteins regulate alternative mRNA splicing through evolutionarily 
conserved RNA bridges. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013; 20:1434–1442. [PubMed: 24213538] 
35. Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. 
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:841–842. [PubMed: 20110278] 
36. Dale RK, Pedersen BS, Quinlan AR. Pybedtools: a flexible Python library for manipulating 
genomic datasets and annotations. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:3423–3424. [PubMed: 21949271] 
37. Liao Y, Smyth GK, Shi W. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning 
sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:923–930. [PubMed: 24227677] 
Rentas et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. MSI2 OE enhances in vitro CB progenitor activity and increases numbers of STRCs
a, CFU output from transduced Lin− CB (n=9 control and 10 MSI2 OE cultures from 5 
experiments). b, CFU-GEMM secondary CFU replating potential (n=24 control and 30 
MSI2 OE from 2 experiments) and images of primary GEMMs (scale bar 200 μm). c, 
Number of secondary colonies per replated CFU-GEMM from b. d, CD34 expression in 
STRCs prior to transplant (n=3 experiments). e, Human chimerism at 3 weeks in mice 
transplanted with varying doses of transduced STRCs. Dashed line indicates engraftment 
cutoff (n=3 experiments). f, STRC frequency as determined by LDA from e. Dashed lines 
indicate 95% C.I. Data shown as mean ± SEM. *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001.
Rentas et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. MSI2 OE expands LT-HSCs with ex vivo culture
a, Transduced CD34+CD133+ cells after one week of culture (n=4 experiments, unpaired t-
test). b-d, CD45+GFP+ engraftment from mice receiving the highest two cell doses for D3 
and D10 (n=8 mice for both conditions) and the highest three doses for D10 secondary mice 
(n=6 control and 9 MSI2 OE mice, Mann-Whitney test). e, Myelo-lymphopoiesis in D10 
secondary mice. f, Multi-lineage LT-HSC frequency in BM cells of D10 primary mice. 
Dashed lines indicate 95% C.I. g, Numbers of GFP+ HSCs as evaluated by LDA. h, 
Cumulative fold change in MSI2 OE-transduced HSCs. Data shown as mean ± SEM. 
*p<0.05; **p<0.01.
Rentas et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. MSI2 OE in human HSPCs attenuates AHR signaling
a, Predicted AHR targets compared by GSEA to genes downregulated with MSI2 OE. b, 
GSEA of SR1 and MSI2 OE downregulated gene sets. c, Log fold-change of MSI2 OE and 
SR1 GSEA leading edge genes. d, Percentage of gene overlap between UM171-, SR1-
treated and MSI2 OE downregulated gene sets and AHR ChIP-seq-identified targets. e, 
Number of CFU-GEMMs generated from transduced cells grown in CFU medium 
containing FICZ or DMSO (n=3 experiments). f, CFU-GEMMs from e replated into CFU 
assays containing FICZ or DMSO (n=30 control and 29 MSI2 OE per treatment). Data are 
presented as mean ± SEM. **p<0.01.
Rentas et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. MSI2 OE post-transcriptionally downregulates AHR pathway components
a, Overlap between MSI2 target genes from separate CLIP-seq experiments. b, Statistically 
significant overlap (p<0.0001, hypergeometric test) of clusters between the replicates. c, 
Percent of CLIP-seq clusters in different genic regions. d, Consensus motifs within MSI2 
clusters in different genic regions. P-values presented for the top 40% of clusters. e, CLIP-
seq reads (replicate 1: blue, replicate 2: green) and clusters (purple) mapped to the 3'UTR of 
CYP1B1. Matches to the GUAG motif shown in black. f and g, Immunofluorescent images 
of HSP90 and CYP1B1 3 days after transduction and summary of fold-change in HSP90 and 
CYP1B1 protein and transcript levels with MSI2 OE at 3 and 7 days post transduction (scale 
bar 20 μm, dotted line indicates no change, n=3 experiments). h, HSPC marker expression 
by CD34+ cells treated with TMS for 10 days. i, Absolute CD34+ cell number with TMS 
(n=4 experiments). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. **p<0.01.
Rentas et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 28.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
