 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Choice, Transparency, Coordination, and Quality Among
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites
and Apps Treating Skin Disease
Jack S. Resneck Jr, MD; Michael Abrouk; Meredith Steuer, MMS; Andrew Tam; Adam Yen; Ivy Lee, MD;
Carrie L. Kovarik, MD; Karen E. Edison, MD
IMPORTANCE Evidence supports use of teleconsultation for improving patient access to
dermatology. However, little is known about the quality of rapidly expanding
direct-to-consumer (DTC) telemedicine websites and smartphone apps diagnosing and
treating skin disease.
OBJECTIVE To assess the performance of DTC teledermatology services.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS Simulated patients submitted a series of structured dermatologic
cases with photographs, including neoplastic, inflammatory, and infectious conditions, using
regional and national DTC telemedicine websites and smartphone apps offering services to
California residents.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Choice of clinician, transparency of credentials, clinician
location, demographic and medical data requested, diagnoses given, treatments
recommended or prescribed, adverse effects discussed, care coordination.
RESULTS We received responses for 62 clinical encounters from 16 DTC telemedicine
websites from February 4 to March 11, 2016. None asked for identification or raised concerns
about pseudonym use or falsified photographs. During most encounters (42 [68%]), patients
were assigned a clinician without any choice. Only 16 (26%) disclosed information about
clinician licensure, and some used internationally based physicians without California
licenses. Few collected the name of an existing primary care physician (14 [23%]) or offered
to send records (6 [10%]). A diagnosis or likely diagnosis was proffered in 48 encounters
(77%). Prescription medications were ordered in 31 of 48 diagnosed cases (65%), and
relevant adverse effects or pregnancy risks were disclosed in a minority (10 of 31 [32%] and 6
of 14 [43%], respectively). Websites made several correct diagnoses in clinical scenarios
where photographs alone were adequate, but when basic additional history elements (eg,
fever, hypertrichosis, oligomenorrhea) were important, they regularly failed to ask simple
relevant questions and diagnostic performance was poor. Major diagnoses were repeatedly
missed, including secondary syphilis, eczema herpeticum, gram-negative folliculitis, and
polycystic ovarian syndrome. Regardless of the diagnoses given, treatments prescribed were
sometimes at odds with existing guidelines.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Telemedicine has potential to expand access to high-value
health care. Our findings, however, raise concerns about the quality of skin disease diagnosis
and treatment provided by many DTC telemedicine websites. Ongoing expansion of health
plan coverage of these services may be premature. Until improvements are made, patients
risk using health care services that lack transparency, choice, thoroughness, diagnostic and
therapeutic quality, and care coordination. We offer several suggestions to improve the
quality of DTC telemedicine websites and apps and avoid further growth of fragmented,
low-quality care.
JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152(7):768-775. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.1774
Published online May 15, 2016.
Editor's Note page 775
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 856
Author Affiliations: Department of
Dermatology, and Philip R. Lee
Institute for Health Policy Studies,
University of California, San Francisco
School of Medicine, San Francisco
(Resneck); University of California,
San Francisco School of Medicine,
San Francisco (Abrouk, Steuer,
Tam, Yen); Pasadena Premier
Dermatology, Pasadena, California
(Lee); Department of Dermatology,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (Kovarik); Department
of Dermatology, University of
Missouri, Columbia (Edison).
Corresponding Author: Jack S.
Resneck Jr, MD, Department of
Dermatology, University of California,
San Francisco, Box 0316, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0316 (resneckj
@derm.ucsf.edu).
Research
Original Investigation
768
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
D
ermatology was an early adopter of telemedicine tech-
nologies, and a substantial evidence base has demon-
strateddiagnosticconcordance,1-3improvedcost,4and
similar outcomes to in-person care5,6 for certain clinical sce-
narios. These positive findings are primarily from store-and-
forward (asynchronous) teleconsultation models, where a re-
ferring clinician sends a patient’
s history and images to a
dermatologist for recommendations.
Direct-to-consumer (DTC) teledermatology, while less
studied, is expanding rapidly. Direct-to-consumer telemedi-
cine companies have raised substantial investor capital7 and
marketed themselves heavily to consumers, employers, and
health plans. Many additional DTC telemedicine websites with
a narrower focus on dermatology have also emerged. While
most initially relied on fees paid by individual patients who
soughtconvenienceorinexpensivecare,largeDTCservicesare
increasingly contracting with major health plans to provide
telecare to millions of enrollees.8 Meanwhile, many of these
payers still exclude asynchronous telemedicine services pro-
vided by a patient’
s existing health care team.
While the number of DTC telemedicine website visits in
2015 reached 1.25 million,9 relatively little is known about the
quality of these services. A recent study assessing DTC tele-
medicine consultations for primary care conditions revealed
a lack of appropriate diagnostic testing and poor antibiotic
stewardship.10 Reviews of teledermatology services showed
failures to collect key medical history11 and raised concerns
about use of international physicians and advertising promi-
nently featuring easily obtained prescriptions.12
National physician groups, many of which support ex-
panded telemedicine, have questioned whether these
companies are giving patients choice, disclosing clinician cre-
dentials, collecting adequate medical history, following evi-
dence-based guidelines, coordinating care with existing treat-
ingphysicians,andestablishingprotocolsforlocalreferrals.13-16
We assessed the performance of DTC telemedicine websites
and apps by submitting a series of structured dermatologic
consultations.
Methods
We performed a series of internet searches seeking DTC tele-
medicine websites and smartphone apps accepting patient-
originatedvisitsforskinconditions.Forinclusion,websiteshad
to offer services to California residents and mention skin dis-
ease among treated conditions. Websites were excluded if they
required live-interactive video, a specific enrolled employer,
or communication from a referring clinician. We also ex-
cluded websites with just 1 clinician, only serving a clinic’
s ex-
isting patients, or primarily offering custom medication
compounding.
Six simulated structured dermatologic cases were con-
structed, each including patient demographics, history of
present illness (HPI), review of systems (ROS), and 3 photo-
graphs of skin eruptions or lesions. The photographs were
mostly obtained from publicly available online image search
engines, which any patient wanting to obtain prescriptions
from a DTC telemedicine website could access, copy, and sub-
mit. To simulate the information that real patients present dur-
ingbothin-personandvirtualinteractionswithclinicians,each
universally submitted HPI (what a patient might think is rel-
evant) was supplemented with additional HPI and ROS data
that each patient would offer if asked or if there was any place
in the submission process to include it. The highlights of each
case are summarized in Table 1.
Study personnel accessed each website and app between
February4andMarch11,2016,posingaspatients(allcaseswere
separately submitted to each website, except that acne-only
websites received just 2 cases). Study personnel claimed to be
uninsuredandpaidfeesusingVisagiftdebitcardsinthenames
of the simulated patients. No study personnel provided any
falsegovernment-issuedidentificationcardsornumbers.When
given a choice of clinician, we selected with the following pri-
ority: dermatologist > primary care physician > other physi-
cian > nurse practitioner > physician assistant. The initial HPI
was submitted in its entirety if there was any opportunity to
enter it, and was supplemented with the additional history if
opportunities were given to enter an ROS or if relevant addi-
tional questions were asked. At least 1 of the photographs was
submitted if there was any way to do so, and additional pho-
tographs were also uploaded if the website specified that 2 or
3 photographs were preferable.
We recorded data from each encounter related to fees paid,
response times, choice of clinician, transparency of creden-
tials, clinician location, demographic and medical data re-
quested, diagnoses given, treatments prescribed, adverse
effects discussed, referrals made, and medical records made
available. When provided with a clinician name and location
but not credentials, we used searches of state licensure
databases, national board certification databases, and other
websites to attempt to establish licensure and board certifica-
tion status. No prescriptions were ever procured by study per-
sonnel.
The institutional review board of the University of Cali-
fornia, San Francisco, reviewed and approved the study
protocol.
Key Points
Question Are rapidly expanding direct-to-consumer (DTC)
telemedicine websites and apps providing high-quality diagnosis
and treatment for skin diseases?
Findings Sixty-two simulated encounters to 16 DTC telemedicine
websites resulted in care that often lacked patient choice of
clinician, transparency of clinician credentials, or care
coordination. Many incorrect diagnoses were proffered without
reasonable attempts to ask basic medical history follow-up
questions, treatment recommendations sometimes contradicted
evidence-based guidelines, and prescriptions frequently lacked
disclosure of possible adverse effects and pregnancy risks.
Meaning Telemedicine has potential to expand access, but these
findings raise doubts about the quality of skin disease diagnosis
and treatment currently being provided by DTC telemedicine
websites and apps.
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
769
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Results
Sixteen DTC telemedicine websites and apps met inclusion cri-
teria and responded to at least 1 case (Box 1). A few others met
inclusion criteria but failed to respond to requests or had por-
tal error messages that prevented successful case submission
(Figure).
There were 62 clinical cases with a successful submission
and response. Nonresponders were the result of scope limita-
Table 1. Structured Clinical Case Descriptions of 6 Simulated Patients
Patient Age, y/Sex/Occupation
and Diagnosis
Initial HPI Given
Additional History Offered if Asked or Submitted
if Opportunity to Enter in ROS
28/F/Freelance writer with acne in
setting of undiagnosed PCOS
I’
ve had acne since my teen years but now I’
m 28 and
I’
m getting tired of it. I tried a bunch of prescription
creams and ointments (like clindamycin and Retin-A)
that didn’
t work, and an antibiotic pill (I’
m not sure
which kind) I took for a few months a couple of years
ago made it halfway better. What can I do to get clearer
skin?
Irregular periods ranging from 4 to 10 weeks apart,
sometimes skips a month.
I have more hair growth on my face than my friends; I get
electrolysis on my chin and jawline.
I use condoms, no current or prior OCPs, no prior pregnancies.
My mom has diabetes.
25/M/Waiter with annular secondary
syphilis plaques
I have a bad new rash. I saw my regular doctor and she
said it is psoriasis, but the cream she gave me (desonide)
isn’
t helping much. It all started about 3 weeks ago
when it broke out on my back, chest, arms, legs, and
feet. It doesn’
t really itch that much, but I look terrible.
It’
s even all in my scalp, and the desonide cream just
makes a mess of my hair.
No prior similar rashes.
Mostly protected sex with 1 male partner, but occasional
unprotected sex with others.
No oral lesions.
I get herpes sores on my penis every few months, last was 2
months ago, none now.
A couple of weeks ago, I had a headache and felt feverish for
a couple of days, but it is better now.
Last HIV test 6 months ago, negative result.
No arthralgias, no nail changes.
Current medications: Desonide cream.
20/M/College student with
gram-negative folliculitis due to acne
antibiotics
I’
ve had acne since I was 12. Two years ago, my
dermatologist started me on pills (doxycycline) and it
was awesome. It was so much better for a long time. I’
m
still on the pills, but my acne has been getting bad again
on my lips and chin with some new pus bumps for 2
months. Why isn’
t it working anymore? What else can I
use?
Right before this breakout, I ran out of doxycycline for 2
weeks, but I restarted the pills 6 weeks ago, and they aren’
t
helping anymore.
No truncal acne.
No other symptoms.
No medication adverse effects except sunburn from the
doxycycline last year.
No new topicals or cosmetics being put on face.
Similar to prior acne? No, this breakout is totally different.
35/M/Barista with both a nodular
melanoma and a seborrheic keratosis
There are 2 moles that I wanted you to check. Do I need
to get them taken off? One is on my right cheek, the
other is in the middle of my back. I think they both
showed up about 5 years ago, but I’
m not sure. They
both seem to have grown some this year, but they don’
t
hurt or itch or anything.
Growth? Not sure, maybe they are 25% bigger
Change? I’
m not sure, wasn’
t really looking at them much
before. One seems round, the other kind of oval. Painful? No.
Itchy? No. Bleeding? No.
Lots of other moles? I have 20 or so total.
Previous skin biopsies? No, I’
ve never seen a dermatologist.
Anybody in the family with skin cancer? No
Sun exposure history? I guess I got a few sunburns when I
was a teenager on vacation, I’
m not sure how many.
Indoor tanning history? Nope, I never did that.
Current medications? Cymbalta.
19/F/Student and waiter with eczema
herpeticum
I’
ve had eczema since I was a little kid. It’
s been pretty
bad at times. But it was getting better over the last year
or 2. My creams had been working pretty well. Over the
past 10 days, my skin on my face and neck got way more
itchy and irritated and my rash got worse. Do I need a
stronger cream? Should I start on Atarax pills again?
Blisters? Maybe, my skin is oozing a lot.
History of cold sores? I don’
t think so.
History of genital lesions? No
Fever or other symptoms: I felt a little warm lately, but
haven’
t taken my temperature, and don’
t have a thermometer
around. No other symptoms.
Do the new bumps hurt? They do sting .
Eye lesions or soreness? No.
Has your eczema been on your face or neck in the past? I’
ve
had it just about everywhere.
Ever had any immune system problems? No.
Positive personal history of asthma. My mom and sister both
had eczema.
Current medications? Desonide face, triamcinolone
extremities.
60/M/Retired high school coach with
stasis dermatitis
These red splotches on my legs have been there a couple
of months, and this week they turned brighter red and
got all irritated. My wife thinks it has started to get
bigger. Is this an infection? Do I need antibiotics?
Does it itch? Yeah, at night.
Is it warm/hot? Seems like it. Yeah, it does feel a little warm.
How fast is it spreading? I don’
t know, it took a few days to
get bigger.
Fever, sweats, chills? No.
Any other rashes? No.
Any surgical procedures? None other than my appendix
removal.
Leg swelling? I always have a little bit, but this is making it
worse.
Any medicine tried? I tried some Gold Bond cream for the last
3 days, but I don’
t know if it did anything.
Current medications? Diovan, hydrochlorothiazide, Zocor.
Abbreviations: HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HPI, history of present illness; OCP, oral contraceptive pill; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome;
ROS, review of systems.
Research Original Investigation
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
770
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
tions, payment problems (a few websites accepted gift debit
cards on some submissions but not others), and inconsistent
replies (some websites only intermittently replied). No web-
site asked for photographic identification or raised any con-
cernsthatthepatienthadusedapseudonymorsubmittedfalse
photographs.
The price per consultation varied—most charged a fixed
cost per visit ($35-$95), while others charged monthly mem-
berships($9per2weeksto$49monthly).Responsetimeswere
rapid (0-8 days), with 87% of encounters receiving replies on
the same or following day.
Websites allowed patients to select a clinician on 20 of 62
encounters (32%), while the remaining 42 (68%) assigned a cli-
nician without any patient choice. We were able to determine
the practice type of the clinician in all but 5 encounters (57 of
62 encounters). Physician backgrounds included dermatol-
ogy (27), internal medicine (5), emergency medicine (3), fam-
ily medicine (3), obstetrics/gynecology (1), cardiology (1), pain
management (1), and physical medicine/rehabilitation (1). The
nonphysician backgrounds included family nurse practition-
ers (3), physician assistants from dermatology settings (3), and
a nurse practitioner in emergency medicine. The rest were
primary care physicians in India (6) and dermatologists in
Sweden (2).
For the 49 identified US-based clinicians, we were able to
confirm that all were licensed in California. Only 16 of the en-
counters (26%) disclosed information about licensure. Board
certification was disclosed for 20 of the 42 known domestic
MD encounters, and we were able to subsequently verify
American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) board certifi-
cation in the declared specialty for 39 of these.
The clinician’
s geographic practice location was dis-
closed in 38 encounters (61%). We were able to determine the
location for 57 encounters, 35 of which were in California (11
within 100 miles of the patient). The remaining locations in-
cluded India (6), Minnesota (4), Colorado (3), Illinois (2), Wash-
ington, DC (2), Vermont (2), Sweden (2), and New York (1).
The 8 internationally based physicians who were not
California-licensed and provided responses worked for First
Opinion or First Derm, both of which are headquartered in
California. First Derm claims their physicians are “board-
certified dermatologists,” but we were unable to find
evidence that they were either licensed in California or
were ABMS certified. These websites post a variety of dis-
claimers that they do “not provide health care services,”
and do “not create a physician-patient relationship,” but we
found that they did make diagnoses and offer specific treat-
ment recommendations (without sending prescriptions to
pharmacies).
The demographic and clinical data collected by the web-
sites are summarized in Table 2. In very few of the encoun-
ters did the clinician ask the name of an existing primary care
physician (23%) or dermatologist (2%), and only 6 of 62 (10%)
ultimately offered to send records to a current member of the
Box 1. Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Website
and App Respondents
Dermatology only
• DermatologistOnCall
• Dermcheck (phone app only)
• DermLink
• Direct Dermatology
• First Derm
• SkyMD
• Spruce (phone app only)
• Virtual Acne (acne only)
• YoDerm (acne only)
General medical websites
• Amwell
• First Opinion (phone app only)
• HealthTap Prime
• MD Live
• MeMD
• Teladoc
• Virtuwell
Figure. Sample, Excluded Websites, Nonresponders, and Responders
3 Did not respond
1 Failed to respond to any request
2 Portal error messages prevented 
all submissions
14 Consultations excluded (unable to submit 
due to credit card payment failure)
12 Consultations excluded
8 No response
4 Cases declined by clinicians
2 Cases considered out of scope
1 Required >3 photographs
1 Only treated existing patients
30 Direct-to-consumer telemedicine 
websites that offered telemedicine 
services to California residents for 
skin diseases 
88 Consultations requested
14 Websites were each sent 6 cases
2 Acne cases
4 Non-acne cases
2 Websites were each sent 2 acne 
cases only
19 Telemedicine websites to which cases 
were submitted
16 Telemedicine websites responded 
to ≥1 case submission
74 Consultations successfully submitted
62 Consultations included in the analysis
11 Excluded
3 Required live interactive video
2 Only 1 clinician performed all consults
2 Only served brick-and-mortar clinic’
s 
existing patients
2 Primarily offered custom medication 
compounding
1 Required specific enrolled employer
1 Required communication from 
referring clinician
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
771
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
patient’
s clinical team. While all encounters allowed the pa-
tient to give some history, only 21 sought any ROS (34%). Forty-
six(74%)collectedmedicationorallergylists,andonly11(52%)
askedfemalepatientsaboutpregnancyorlactationstatus.Most
encounters allowed our patients to submit photographs, re-
questing 1 to 3 images. Clinicians in 4 encounters, however,
provided diagnoses based solely on a submitted medical his-
tory without asking for or offering the chance to upload any
images. These diagnoses without images were provided by a
board-certified physical medicine/rehabilitation physician (1),
board-certified internist (1), and physicians located in India (2).
A diagnosis or likely diagnosis was proffered in 48 (77%)
of encounters, with the remainder of patients being referred
to a local physician for diagnosis. Patients referred for diag-
nosis were given suggested name(s) of practicing local clini-
cians in only 2 of 14 instances. No patients were sent to a labo-
ratory for studies. A differential diagnosis was listed in 8 of 48
cases with diagnoses (17%), and 2 of 14 cases without diagno-
ses (14%).
Among 48 encounters with diagnoses, 31 (65%) were given
prescription medications, and 9 (19%) were told to seek a lo-
cal physician for treatment (3 gave suggested names). The
remainder were reassured, treated with over-the-counter
medications, or had prescriptions recommended but not pro-
vided. When prescriptions were provided, the clinician dis-
closed relevant adverse effects or risks in 10 of 31 encounters
(32%). Among 14 encounters where a female patient was pre-
scribed a pregnancy class C or higher drug, pregnancy risks
were disclosed in 6 (43%).
In the case of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) with in-
flammatory acne, the 28-year-old patient was not asked rel-
evant questions about her hypertrichosis or irregular menses
by a single website (1 website inquired about menses only to
check pregnancy status before prescribing). Every clinician di-
agnosed acne, including 1 who did not ask for photographs,
and none raised the issue of hirsutism, androgen excess, or
PCOS. Two of 12 websites responding to this case recom-
mended in-person follow-up for treatment, and 1 recom-
mended use of only mild soaps, moisturizers, and cool show-
ers.Thepatientreceivedprescriptionsfororalantibiotics(from
8 websites), topical retinoids (6), and topical antibiotics (5).
None of the clinicians discussed hormonal treatment options.
In the case of secondary syphilis with unusual plaques, the
patientwasnotaskedabouthisrecentfever(evenwhenhepro-
actively reported it on ROS), and no clinician seemed con-
cerned that his diffuse eruption began so acutely only 3 weeks
previously without a history of prior skin eruptions (uncom-
mon in patients with large-plaque psoriasis). Seven of the 8 cli-
nicians diagnosed psoriasis, including 1 who did not ask for
photographs. One clinician (an emergency physician) made no
diagnosis and referred the patient to see a local dermatolo-
gist, and another (a Sweden-based physician) who diagnosed
psoriasis suggested that the patient see a local dermatologist
for treatment. This patient received prescriptions for class I or
II topical steroids in 5 encounters and was told to use mois-
turizers and take lukewarm baths in another.
In the case of gram-negative folliculitis, 1 clinician (a
board-certified dermatologist) referred the patient to a local
dermatologist for a culture, and another (an India-based phy-
sician) sent him to his primary care physician for diagnosis.
The remaining 10 clinicians all diagnosed acne, seemingly
unconcerned by the sudden appearance of pustules around
the mouth after lengthy doxycycline use (a common presen-
tation of gram-negative folliculitis caused by Proteus, Klebsi-
ella, or Serratia). This patient was prescribed trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (by 2 clinicians), minocycline (by 3),
continued doxycycline (by 1), topical antibiotics (by 3), and
topical retinoids (by 2). One clinician suggested only topical
retinol, and another recommended reducing his sugar intake
and applying moisturizer.
In the patient with 1 nodular melanoma and 1 seborrheic
keratosis, 11 of 14 clinicians referred the patient for an in-
person examination of at least 1 of his lesions. The others (2
dermatologists and a physician assistant) reassured him that
both lesions were benign.
The young woman with eczema herpeticum blisters (a po-
tentially life-threatening infection caused by herpes simplex
virus erupting in eczema) was diagnosed as having an ordi-
nary eczema flare or contact allergies in 7 of 9 encounters, but
2 clinicians (1 dermatologist, 1 unidentified) raised concerns
Table 2. Percentage of Encounters Requiring Specific Demographic
or Clinical Information
Type of Data Collected
No. (%)
Demographic data
Patient name
57 (92)
Street address
33 (53)
City/state
56 (90)
Phone No.
44 (71)
Age or date of birth
62 (100)
Social security No.
0
Driver’
s license No.
0
Occupation
6 (10)
Name of existing PCP
14 (23)
Address of existing PCP
3 (5)
Fax of existing PCP
7 (11)
Name of existing dermatologist
1 (2)
Address of existing dermatologist
1 (2)
Fax No. of existing dermatologist
1 (2)
Local pharmacy
48 (77)
Insurance status
25 (40)
Clinical data
History of present illness
62 (100)
Review of systems
21 (34)
Medical history
41 (66)
Surgical history
12 (19)
Skin cancer history
7 (11)
Family history
20 (32)
Current medication list
46 (74)
Allergies
46 (74)
Pregnancy statusa
11 (52)a
Lactation statusa
11 (52)a
Abbreviation: PCP, primary care physician.
a Denominator includes only the 21 encounters with a female patient.
Research Original Investigation
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
772
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
about infection and referred her to be seen in person (though
they did not suggest any timeline or individuals she could see).
Shewasprescribedoralprednisone(2),topicalsteroids(2),and
antihistamines (1). Of the remaining 2 websites that diag-
nosed eczema, one recommended that topical steroids be pre-
scribed in person, and the other recommended a vegan diet
and suggested follow-up with an allergist. The 2 clinicians rec-
ommending prednisone, which can worsen eczema herpeti-
cum when given without antiviral drugs, and which clinical
guidelinesrecommendavoidingevenforuninfectedatopicder-
matitis, were a doctor of osteopathic internal medicine and a
family nurse practitioner.
The patient with stasis dermatitis was properly diag-
nosed by all 7 websites where his case was successfully sub-
mitted. He was prescribed topical clobetasol (3) or hydrocor-
tisone(2).Onewebsitesuggestedclobetasolbutdidnotprovide
a prescription, and 1 website suggested he see a local physi-
cian for a cardiac workup.
Discussion
When implemented appropriately, DTC telemedicine web-
sites can improve access to quality care for patients facing geo-
graphic, mobility, or financial constraints. While a large body
of evidence supports the use of teleconsultation for skin dis-
easebetweenareferringcliniciananddermatologist,ourstudy
raises significant concerns about the rapidly expanding use of
direct-to-consumer telemedicine.
The DTC telemedicine websites we consulted, many with
a large and growing national footprint, provided care that of-
ten lacked patient choice of clinician, transparency of clini-
cian credentials, or care coordination with existing health care
teams. Many diagnoses were proffered without reasonable at-
tempts to ask basic medical history follow-up questions, treat-
ment recommendations sometimes contradicted evidence-
based guidelines, and prescriptions frequently lacked basic
disclosure of adverse effects, risks, or pregnancy warnings.
When referrals to in-person care were made, they rarely in-
cluded suggested clinician names. No DTC telemedicine web-
sites attempted to confirm the identity of patients or raised
doubts about the authenticity of photographs.
Patientchoiceoftheirtreatingphysicianispartofourmedi-
cal code of ethics,17 and we were surprised that these web-
sites with multiple clinicians on staff assigned a clinician with-
out patient choice in most encounters. Transparency about
licensing and credentials is inherent in patient choice and
informed consent, and most services failed to provide licen-
sure or board certification information during encounters.
Despite claims that they were not providing health care ser-
vices, we believe that 2 DTC telemedicine websites head-
quartered in California but using foreign clinicians were
engaged in the practice of medicine without a state license,
as they clearly provided diagnoses and treatment recom-
mendations.
Our findings also suggest that treatment provided by these
websites is likely to exacerbate care fragmentation, since only
23% asked for the names of existing primary care physicians,
and only 10% offered to provide medical records to existing cli-
nicians. In an era when traditional health care delivery is work-
ing to “minimize silos” (ie, individuals, groups, organizations,
or systems that operate in isolation, lacking adequate commu-
nication with other groups) and improve inadequate care co-
ordination,itmakeslittlesensetodesignnewcaredeliverychan-
nels without including an ability for patients’longitudinal care
teams to know about new diagnoses made and treatments ini-
tiated. When DTC telemedicine websites determined that in-
person care was necessary, they only suggested where pa-
tients might go in a small minority of cases. None offered to
actually facilitate a referral to a local physician (except in 1 in-
stancewheretheclinicianself-referred),evenwhensomeofthe
clinical scenarios involved urgent medical conditions in which
ensuringfollow-upwasvital.Thislackofcarecoordinationmay
berelatedtothesubstantialgeographicdistanceofmanyofthe
clinicians from our simulated patients and their possible lack
of knowledge of the local health care system.
Many patients were prescribed oral or topical medica-
tions, and only one-third were told about relevant risks or ad-
verseeffects.FewerthanhalfofpregnancycategoryCorhigher
prescriptions given to women of childbearing age included any
discussion of pregnancy risks or avoidance.
One dominant pattern emerged when examining the di-
agnostic accuracy of these websites with our clinical sce-
narios. For the 2 cases in which photographs alone were ad-
equate to easily make a correct diagnosis (stasis dermatitis and
melanoma), most of the DTC telemedicine websites per-
formed well. However, when further engaging the patient for
basic history elements was a necessary part of the interac-
tion, diagnostic performance was poor.
None of the clinicians asked the 28-year-old woman with
inflammatory acne about her irregular menses or hirsutism,
so none raised concerns about PCOS or androgen excess or ini-
tiated appropriate treatment. The young man with highly in-
fectious secondary syphilis was not asked about his recent
fevers, attention was not paid to the unusually sudden onset
he described, and all but 1 of the websites accepted the diag-
nosis of psoriasis the patient himself offered. This not only left
him at substantial risk from untreated syphilis, but was a pub-
lic health failure given the urgent need for contact tracing and
risks of ongoing transmission. The patient with gram-
negative folliculitis was not given a chance to say that the ram-
pant new pustules around his mouth were unlike the acne he
had before. The patient with eczema herpeticum faces the risk
of disseminated infection and even death (especially when
given systemic steroids without antiviral drugs) because most
of the DTC telemedicine clinicians did not ask about the sting-
ing vesicles shown in her photographs.
Our study has a significant limitation: we are unable to
assesswhethercliniciansseeingthesepatientsintraditionalin-
person encounters would have performed better on diagnos-
tic accuracy. However, the additional medical history neces-
sarytomakethediagnoses(eg,fevers,irregularmenses)arethe
types of information that, in our experience, typically emerge
in the give-and-take of obtaining a history in the office setting.
This give-and-take could certainly be replicated in a store-and-
forward telemedicine environment, especially if the clinician
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
773
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
takestimetoengagethepatient,buttheDTCtelemedicineweb-
sites we queried typically offered diagnoses and prescriptions
immediately after 1 form-driven submission, without sending
meaningful, appropriate follow-up questions to our simulated
patients.Inaddition,diagnosticinaccuracyisonly1ofmanycon-
cerning outcomes we reported.
Another limitation of our study is that the design forced
us to exclude any DTC telemedicine websites or apps that re-
quired live interactive video. However, only 3 DTC telemedi-
cine websites from our initial search had to be excluded for re-
quiringvideo.Wealsoexcludedplatformsservingonlyaclinic’
s
existing patients, which may be expected to offer more coor-
dinated care.
Finally, we cannot fully guarantee the photographs ac-
quired from the internet are of patients with biopsy or labo-
ratory proof of the listed diseases. However, the fact that most
DTC telemedicine websites failed to consider a diagnosis of ec-
zemaherpeticuminayoungwomanwitheczemaandnewooz-
ing, stinging blisters seems far more important than whether
wehaveevidenceofapositiveHerpesculturefromthiswoman
with a classic presentation in her photographs.
Conclusions
Telemedicine has potential to expand access, and the medi-
cal literature is filled with examples of telehealth systems pro-
viding quality care. Our findings, however, raise doubts about
the quality of skin disease diagnosis and treatment being pro-
vided by a variety of DTC telemedicine websites and apps. The
substantial investment of health plans in providing enrollees
withinsurance-coveredaccesstotheseDTCtelemedicineweb-
sites, as well as rapidly expanding availability for patients will-
ing to pay out of pocket over the internet, may be premature.
The problem may be exacerbated by several health plans’will-
ingnesstopaylargenationalDTCtelemedicineproviderswhile
excluding asynchronous telemedicine provided by a pa-
tient’
s existing specialists.
We believe that DTC telemedicine can be used effec-
tively, but it is best performed by physicians and team mem-
bers who are part of practices or regional systems in which pa-
tients already receive care. This allows telemedicine clinicians
toviewapatient’
sexistingmedicalrecords,communicatewith
existing health care team members, provide in-person fol-
low-up when needed, and be accountable for the care they de-
liver. A regional clinician network can provide a safety net for
patients when errors in diagnosis and treatment occur.
Based on our findings, we believe that DTC telemedicine
services should, at a minimum, adopt several standard prac-
tices (Box 2). We hope that studies such as ours will help DTC
telemedicine companies and participating clinicians im-
prove their services so that patients seeking these newer chan-
nels of care delivery can receive transparent, ethically pro-
vided,coordinated,high-qualitycare.Inthemeantime,wealso
hope that policymakers, regulators, and payers will find ways
to identify and encourage telemedicine services that abide by
these principles, while discouraging the growth of DTC tele-
medicine websites and apps that provide fragmented, low-
quality care.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: April 23, 2016.
Published Online: May 15, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.1774.
Author Contributions: Dr Resneck had full access
to all the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Resneck, Abrouk, Lee,
Kovarik, Edison.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Resneck, Abrouk, Steuer, Tam, Yen.
Drafting of the manuscript: Resneck, Abrouk.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Obtained funding: Resneck.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Abrouk, Lee.
Study supervision: Abrouk, Lee, Kovarik.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Resneck serves
on the Board of Trustees of the American Medical
Association. Drs Resneck, Lee, Kovarik, and Edison
serve on the Telemedicine Task Force of the
American Academy of Dermatology Association. Dr
Lee serves as a physician performing consultations
for Direct Dermatology but did not participate in
any of the telemedicine consultations
encompassed in this study. No other disclosures are
reported.
Funding/Support: The American Academy of
Dermatology Association provided funding for the
debit cards used in the study.
Box 2. Authors’ Recommended Practices for Direct-to-Consumer
Telemedicine Websites
• Disclose the licensure, credentials, and location of their clinicians,
making sure that all are licensed in the states where patients are
located, and give patients some choice of which clinician will
provide their care.
• Obtain proof of identity of patients seeking care, and establish an
initial relationship with live interactive video before beginning a
store-and-forward relationship (when a patient’
s existing health
care team is uninvolved).
• Collect relevant medical history, including at least a history of
present illness, review of systems, medication list, and drug
allergies. In many instances, appropriate past medical records
should be available to the consulting clinician.
• Recognize that the accurate diagnosis of disease often requires
an interactive history, and train participating clinicians to ask
appropriate follow-up questions to complete a patient’
s relevant
medical history.
• Seek the use of laboratory studies in clinical scenarios when an
in-person physician would have relied on those studies.
• Provide diagnoses and treatments consistent with existing
evidence-based guidelines.
• Engage in meaningful informed consent, including discussion of
risks, potential adverse effects, pregnancy concerns, and a clear
follow-up plan when prescribing medications.
• Collect information about a patient’
s existing health care team
and provide medical records to relevant team members—unless a
patient opts out.
• Have relationships with local physicians in all areas where they
treat patients, so that patients are not sent to emergency
departments or left on their own when they need urgent
in-person follow-up or experience medication adverse effects.
• Create quality assurance programs that regularly monitor clinical
performance, patient outcomes, follow-up, and care
coordination.
Research Original Investigation
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
774
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
(Reprinted)
jamadermatology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The American
Academy of Dermatology Association had no role in
the design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis, and interpretation of the
data; preparation, review, or approval of the
manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript
for publication.
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the American Medical
Association or the American Academy of
Dermatology Association (Dr Resneck is a trustee of
the American Medical Association).
REFERENCES
1. Warshaw EM, Gravely AA, Nelson DB. Reliability
of store and forward teledermatology for skin
neoplasms. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015;72(3):426-435.
2. Edison KE, Ward DS, Dyer JA, Lane W, Chance L,
Hicks LL. Diagnosis, diagnostic confidence, and
management concordance in live-interactive and
store-and-forward teledermatology compared to
in-person examination. Telemed J E Health. 2008;
14(9):889-895.
3. Warshaw EM, Gravely AA, Bohjanen KA, et al.
Interobserver accuracy of store and forward
teledermatology for skin neoplasms. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2010;62(3):513-516.
4. Datta SK, Warshaw EM, Edison KE, et al. Cost
and utility analysis of a store-and-forward
teledermatology referral system: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151(12):1323-1329.
5. Whited JD, Warshaw EM, Kapur K, et al. Clinical
course outcomes for store and forward
teledermatology versus conventional consultation:
a randomized trial. J Telemed Telecare. 2013;19(4):
197-204.
6. Pak H, Triplett CA, Lindquist JH, Grambow SC,
Whited JD. Store-and-forward teledermatology
results in similar clinical outcomes to conventional
clinic-based care. J Telemed Telecare. 2007;13(1):
26-30.
7. Digital Health Funding 2015 Year in Review. Rock
Health. http://rockhealth.com/reports
/digital-health-funding-2015-year-in-review/.
Accessed March 31, 2016.
8. Dolan B. InDepth: The Changing Relationship of
Health Plans and Virtual Visit Services. MobiHealth
News. September 11, 2015. http://mobihealthnews
.com/46676/in-depth-the-changing-relationship
-of-health-plans-and-virtual-visit-services.
Accessed March 31, 2016.
9. Huff C. AARP Bulletin. Medical Diagnosis by
Webcam? Telemedicine exams are fast and
easy—but questions remain. December 2015. http:
//www.aarp.org/health/conditions-treatments
/info-2015/telemedicine-health-symptoms
-diagnosis.html. Accessed March 31, 2016.
10. Uscher-Pines L, Mulcahy A, Cowling D, Hunter
G, Burns R, Mehrotra A. Access and quality of care
in direct-to-consumer telemedicine. Telemed J E
Health. 2016;22(4):282-287.
11. Kochmann M, Locatis C. Direct to consumer
mobile teledermatology apps: an exploratory study
[published online March 9, 2016]. Telemed J E Health.
doi:10.1089/tmj.2015.0189.
12. Fogel AL, Sarin KY. A survey of
direct-to-consumer teledermatology services
available to US patients: explosive growth,
opportunities and controversy [published online
January 4, 2016]. J Telemed Telecare. doi:10.1177
/1357633X15624044.
13. American Medical Association. H-480.946
Coverage of and payment for telemedicine. https:
//www.ama-assn.org/ssl3/ecomm
/PolicyFinderForm.pl?site=www.ama-assn
.org&uri=/resources/html/PolicyFinder/policyfiles
/HnE/H-480.946.HTM. Accessed March 31, 2016.
14. American Academy of Dermatology
Association. Position statement on
teledermatology (amended March 7, 2016). https:
//www.aad.org/Forms/Policies/Uploads/PS/PS
-Teledermatology.pdf. Accessed March 31, 2016.
15. Daniel H, Sulmasy LS; Health and Public Policy
Committee of the American College of Physicians.
Policy recommendations to guide the use of
telemedicine in primary care settings: an American
College of Physicians position paper. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163(10):787-789.
16. Marcin JP, Rimsza ME, Moskowitz WB;
Committee on Pediatric Workforce. The use of
telemedicine to address access and physician
workforce shortages. Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):202-
209.
17. American Medical Association. Code of Medical
Ethics. Opinion 9.06—Free Choice. http://www
.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources
/medical-ethics/code-medical-ethics/opinion906
.page. Accessed April 3, 2016.
Editor's Note
Need for State Licensure
June K. Robinson, MD
California (and 47 other states) requires that physicians en-
gaging in telemedicine are licensed in the state in which the
patient is located and follow the medical practice act regula-
tionsofthatstate.1Atthetime
this research was performed
by Resneck and colleagues,2
multistate reform offered by
the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB) was not in ef-
fect in California. The FSMB has created an Interstate Medi-
calLicensureCompactthathasalreadybeenenactedby12state
legislatures, and is under consideration in many others. For
states that join, the Compact will offer a voluntary expedited
pathway for eligible physicians without existing medical board
disciplinary histories to obtain licenses to practice in mul-
tiplestateswithouthavingtoresubmitextensiveeligibilityand
credentialing paperwork. Each state will retain its role in regu-
lating the practice of medicine and protecting patient wel-
fare, and the Compact enhances the ability of states to share
disciplinary information. Implementation is still under way,
and this new option for licensure is not yet in effect.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
1. Federation of State Medical Boards.
Telemedicine policies: board by board overview.
https://www.fsmb.org/Media/Default/PDF/FSMB
/Advocacy/GRPOL_Telemedicine_Licensure.pdf.
Accessed April 27, 2016.
2. Resneck Jr JS, Abrouk M, Steuer M, et al. Choice,
transparency, coordination, and quality among
direct-to-consumer telemedicine websites and
apps treating skin disease [published online May 15,
2016]. JAMA Dermatol. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol
.2016.1774.
Related article page 768
Direct-to-Consumer Telemedicine Websites Treating Skin Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamadermatology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Dermatology
July 2016
Volume 152, Number 7
775
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/02/2019
