 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2016 Vol. 213 No. 9 1759–1778
www.jem.org/cgi/doi/10.1084/jem.20160368
1759
INT 
ROD 
UCT 
ION
Misfolded α-synuclein (α-syn) accumulates in Lewy bodies 
(in somata) and Lewy neurites, which are intraneuronal in-
clusions found in Parkinson’s disease (PD; Goedert, 2001). In 
both PD (Goedert, 2001; Braak et al., 2003b) and other Lewy 
body disorders (Beach et al., 2009), pathological α-syn inclu-
sions progressively develop in a spatially stereotypic pattern in 
the brain that appears to follow neuronal connections. Braak 
et al. (2003b) suggested that PD pathology initially develops 
in anterior olfactory regions, the enteric nervous system and 
the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve (DMX), before 
spreading to different brain regions via axonal projections.
Significant nervous system pathology is suggested to be 
present several years before PD diagnosis and onset of the 
classical motor syndrome (i.e., tremor, rigidity, and bradyki-
nesia; Mahlknecht et al., 2015). During this phase, termed 
prodromal PD, certain nonmotor signs are evident, e.g., olfac-
tory dysfunction, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disor-
der, constipation, and other autonomic disturbances (Postuma 
et al., 2012; Mahlknecht et al., 2015). Prodromal PD is viewed 
as the ideal stage at which to apply neuroprotective and dis-
ease-modifying strategies. To facilitate development of such 
therapies, improved understanding of PD etiology and the 
route of pathology spread between different parts of the ner-
vous system is necessary. The prion-like propagation theory 
for PD suggests that misfolded α-syn seeds aggregation of na-
tively unfolded α-syn (Olanow and Prusiner, 2009; George et 
al., 2013; Guo and Lee, 2014). Such misfolded α-syn is then 
potentially transported over long distances in axons, released 
into the extracellular space and taken up by neighboring cells 
(Dunning et al., 2012; Lamberts et al., 2014). This process is 
proposed to contribute to the spatial progression of PD pa-
thology. α-Syn pathology can be triggered in experimental 
animals after intracerebral, intramuscular, or intravenous inoc-
ulation of brain homogenates from affected mice and patients, 
or recombinant fibrillar α-syn (Luk et al., 2012a,b; Mougenot 
et al., 2012; Masuda-Suzukake et al., 2013; Recasens et al., 
2014; Sacino et al., 2014; Paumier et al., 2015; Peelaerts et al., 
2015; Dehay et al., 2016). The pathology appears in brain re-
gions anatomically connected to the injection site, but obser-
vations of pathology that progressively involves synaptically 
connected neurons in different brain regions are lacking (Rey 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterized by the progressive appearance of intraneuronal Lewy aggregates, which are primarily 
composed of misfolded α-synuclein (α-syn). The aggregates are believed to propagate via neural pathways following a stereo-
typical pattern, starting in the olfactory bulb (OB) and gut. We hypothesized that injection of fibrillar α-syn into the OB of 
wild-type mice would recreate the sequential progression of Lewy-like pathology, while triggering olfactory deficits. We 
demonstrate that injected α-syn fibrils recruit endogenous α-syn into pathological aggregates that spread transneuronally 
over several months, initially in the olfactory network and later in distant brain regions. The seeded inclusions contain post-
translationally modified α-syn that is Thioflavin S positive, indicative of amyloid fibrils. The spreading α-syn pathology induces 
progressive and specific olfactory deficits. Thus, we demonstrate that propagating α-syn pathology triggered in the OB is 
functionally detrimental. Collectively, we have created a mouse model of prodromal PD.
Widespread transneuronal propagation of 
α-synucleinopathy triggered in olfactory bulb mimics 
prodromal Parkinson’s disease
Nolwen L. Rey,1 Jennifer A. Steiner,1 Nazia Maroof,1,3 Kelvin C. Luk,4 Zachary Madaj,2 
John Q. Trojanowski,4 
Virginia M.-Y
. Lee,4 and Patrik Brundin1
1Center for Neurodegenerative Science and 2Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI 49503
3Roche Pharma Research & Early Development, Neuroscience Discovery, Roche Innovation Center, 4070 Basel, Switzerland
4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104
© 2016 Rey et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–
No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/
terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Nolwen L. Rey: Nolwen.Rey@vai.org
Abbreviations used: α-syn, α-synuclein; ACC, anterior cingulate area; Am B, basal 
amygdaloid nuclei; Am Co, cortical amygdaloid nuclei and areas; AON, anterior olfac-
tory nucleus; AP, propionic acid; Contra, contralateral; DMX, dorsal motor nucleus of 
the vagus nerve; Ect, Ectorhinal cortex; Ent, entorhinal cortex; FC, frontal and orbital 
cortex; Hipp, hippocampus; HuPFFs, human PFF; LC, locus coeruleus; LMMs, linear 
mixed-effects model; mMs, mouse monomeric α-syn; MO, mineral oil; Mol, molecu-
lar layer of the hippocampus; mPFFs, preformed fibrils of recombinant mouse α-syn; 
nLOT, nucleus of the lateral olfactory tract; OB, olfactory bulb; OT, olfactory tubercle; 
PC, piriform cortex; PD, Parkinson’s disease; PFFs, pre-formed fibrillar assemblies of 
recombinant α-synuclein; PRh, perirhinal cortex; Pser129, α-syn phosphorylated on 
serine 129; RN, raphe nucleus; SN, substantia nigra; ThS, Thioflavin S.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
on June 3, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20160368
Published Online: 8 August, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1760
et al., 2016). Most prior studies are on misfolded α-syn in-
jected in transgenic mice overexpressing α-syn, and few have 
used WT mice (Dehay et al., 2016). Importantly, no prior 
study has focused on the olfactory system, which is highly 
relevant to prodromal PD and might represent a trigger site 
for α-syn pathology (Braak et al., 2003b; Beach et al., 2009).
We now demonstrate that α-syn pathology, resembling 
human disease, propagates sequentially between synaptically 
connected brain regions 1–12 mo after α-syn fibril injection 
into the olfactory bulb (OB), and eventually reaches mul-
tiple structures that display Lewy pathology in PD. We also 
reveal progressive olfactory deficits in the mice inoculated 
with α-syn fibrils. We suggest that injections of α-syn fibrils 
into mouse OB result in a novel model of prodromal PD 
that can be used to test therapeutics aimed at preventing or 
slowing PD development.
RES 
ULTS
We hypothesized that injection of fibrillar α-syn into the 
OB of WT mice would trigger stereotypic progression of 
induced α-syn–positive pathology and replicate features of 
the neuropathology that has been associated with prodro-
mal PD. 
We tested this hypothesis by stereotactically injecting 
preformed fibrillar assemblies of recombinant α-syn (PFFs; 
Luk et al., 2012a; Volpicelli-Daley et al., 2014). We used fi-
brils of either human (HuPFFs) or mouse (mPFFs) α-syn, 
and injected WT mice unilaterally into the OB following 
a previously published surgical protocol (Rey et al., 2013). 
Importantly, this volume of injectate does not lead to diffu-
sion into cerebrospinal fluid or brain parenchyma adjacent to 
the OB (Rey et al., 2013).
Uptake of PFFs and induction of 
α-synucleinopathy in the OB
As we had predicted, 90 min after injection of HuPFFs, mi-
tral cells, i.e., the relay cells of the OB (βIII-tubulin-positive 
[Tuj1] in confocal images), contain HuPFFs (human α-syn 
immunoreactivity; Fig. 1, A–C), indicating immediate up-
take of PFFs by mitral cells of the OB. 1 mo after injection, 
we detected α-syn–immunoreactive pathology using an an-
tibody directed against α-syn phosphorylated on serine 129 
(Pser129), the predominant posttranslational modification 
of α-syn occurring in synucleinopathies (Fujiwara et al., 
2002; Oueslati, 2016). Antiserum directed against Pser129 
labels abnormal α-syn inclusions and is a reliable marker for 
α-syn pathology (Beach et al., 2009; Rey et al., 2016). We 
detected Pser129-immunoreactive material both in mitral 
cell bodies and in neurites in the OB of mice injected with 
HuPFFs or mPFFs (Fig. 1, D and E). Control injections 
(PBS) or mouse monomeric α-syn (mMs) did not induce 
Pser129 pathology in the OB (Fig. 1, F and G). To define 
the consequences of injections of PFFs, we quantified mi-
tral cells at the injection site 6 mo after injection. Measure-
ments of mitral cell density in the OB reveal no neuronal 
loss (Fig. 1, H and I).
Widespread progressive propagation of mPFFs 
α-synucleinopathy along anatomical pathways
To assess the propagation of pathology in mouse brain, we 
analyzed Pser129-immunostained sections and examined 
the entire brain 1–12 mo after injection in noninjected, 
PBS-, mMs-, HuPFFs-, and mPFFs-injected mice. Presence 
of a single Pser129-positive cell or neurite was considered 
pathological, akin to how, Lewy pathology distribution is 
staged in human brain (Braak et al., 2003a,b; Beach et al., 
2009). 1 mo after unilateral injection of mPFFs in the OB, 
we found Pser129 α-syn in widespread areas anatomically 
connected to the OB (Figs. 2 A and 3). They included ip-
silateral piriform cortex (PC), entorhinal cortex (Ent), cor-
tical amygdaloid nuclei and areas (Am Co), and ipsilateral 
and contralateral anterior olfactory nucleus (AON), which 
are all part of the olfactory system, and either receive direct 
axonal projections from the mitral cells and/or send direct 
efferents to the OB (Doty, 2003), as well as in the basolateral 
amygdala, which sends inputs to the Ent (Fig. 2 A). Impor-
tantly, we did not observe pathology in the control mice 
(uninjected or injected with mMs) at any time point up to 
12 mo after injection (Fig. 3).
At 3 mo, the Pser129 pathology progressed to additional 
areas located 1 synapse away from those directly connected 
with the injected OB. Those structures included the molecu-
lar layer of hippocampus (Mol(Hipp)), which receives afferent 
projections from Ent (De La Rosa-Prieto et al., 2015); the 
insulate cortex, which receives inputs from the amygdala (Shi 
and Cassell, 1998); Ect, which receives projections from Ent 
(Burwell et al., 1995); other basal amygdaloid nuclei (Am B; 
Sah et al., 2003); and frontal and orbital cortex (FC; Cinelli 
et al., 1987; Figs. 2 B and 3). In short, in the ipsilateral hemi-
sphere at 3 mo, pathology was only present in structures that 
send or receive direct projections from olfactory regions. At 
this time, α-syn pathology was also present in contralateral ol-
factory structures connected to the contralateral AON, which 
already exhibited α-syn aggregates 1 mo after injection.
At 6 mo, we observed Pser129 pathology in additional 
brain areas that are directly connected to the OB, including 
nucleus of the lateral olfactory tract (nLOT) and the olfactory 
tubercle (OT). We also detected pathology outside the olfac-
tory system, two synapses away from the OB, in, e.g., the cen-
tral amygdala and the dentate gyrus, and cornu ammonis of the 
Hipp (Figs. 2 C and 3). We also observed α-syn pathology in 
other central brain regions, e.g., the thalamus and hypothalamus.
Finally, at the 12-mo time point, mPFFs-induced 
Pser129 pathology was even more widespread. Cortical asso-
ciative and secondary cortical brain regions (secondary visual 
[V2] and somatosensory [S2] cortices and the anterior cingu-
late area [ACC]) exhibited pathology (Figs. 2 D and 3). Oc-
casionally, we found Pser129 immunoreactivity in the locus 
coeruleus (LC), the substantia nigra (SN), and the medial and 
dorsal raphe nuclei (RN).
In total, we detected α-syn pathology in >40 brain regions 
or subregions at 12 mo after injection. Additional micrographs 
 1761
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
and a table listing brain regions with pathology are presented 
in Fig. 3 and Table S1 (abbreviations listed in Table S3).
Differential effect of mPFFs versus huPFFs injection on 
the extent of pathology
Next, we compared the spread of HuPFFs-induced pathol-
ogy to that of the mPFFs. 1 mo after injection of HuPFFs, 
we found a similar pattern of Pser129 pathology in olfactory 
structures to that observed with mPFFs injections (Fig. 4 A). 
At 3 mo, the induced pathology spread into a limited number 
of areas located 1 synapse away from the olfactory system, 
including ipsilateral Hipp, basal amygdala (Am B), and to the 
contralateral PC (Fig. 4 B). At 6 mo, we observed Pser129 pa-
thology in areas located two synapses away from the OB, but 
for HuPFFs-injected mice it was restricted to ipsilateral ecto-
rhinal cortex (Ect) and contralateral Ent (Fig. 4 C). Finally, at 
the 12-mo time point, HuPFFs-induced Pser129 pathology 
spread to additional brain regions, some located two synapses 
away from the OB, but the pathology was less pronounced 
(Fig. 4 D) compared with mPFFs-injected mice (Fig. 2 D). 
The limited amount and spread of pathology in the HuPFFs 
mice can be appreciated in diagrams (Fig. 4, E–H), when com-
Figure 1. PFFs injected in the OB of WT 
mice were rapidly taken up by mitral cells 
and induced α-syn pathology after 1 mo. 
(A and B) Mitral cells (plain black arrows; cells 
delineated in B) and granule cells (simple 
wide black arrows) were positive for human 
α-syn 1.5 h after injection of HuPFFs in the 
OB (A), but not in noninjected animals (B). (C) 
1.5 h after injection, human α-syn (red) was 
detected within mitral cells (Tuj1-positive, 
green DAPI, blue; white arrows). (D–G) α-Syn 
pathology detected by an antibody directed 
against α-syn phosphorylated on serine 129 
(Pser129) can be observed in mitral cells in 
the mitral cell layer (MCL) and the granule 
cell layer (GcL) of OB 1 mo after injection of 
HuPFFs (D) or mouse PFFs (mPFFs; E), but not 
after injection of mouse monomers (mMs; F) 
or PBS (G). (A–G) Histochemical analysis was 
performed on all animals euthanized 1.5 h 
after HuPFFs injection in one histochemical 
experiment (A–C; n = 4 per group), and in six 
independent histochemical experiments on all 
animals euthanized 1, 3, 6, and 12 mo after in-
jection of PBS, mMs, HuPFFs, and mPFFs (D–G; 
n = 4–5 per group). The data shown are from 
one representative animal. (H) Cresyl staining 
in the OB from one representative animal. 
White stars mark mitral cells. (I) Density of mi-
tral cells in the mitral cell layer of the OB (n = 
4–5 animals per group, performed on all ani-
mals from the 1-, 3-, and 6-mo survival time 
points; Ipsi, ipsilateral; Contra, contralateral). 
Data were analyzed by Kruskal–Wallis test-
ing. No significant differences were observed 
(P = 0.41). Bars: (A and B) 20 µm; (C) 10 µm; 
(D–G) 20 µm; (H) 50 µm.
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1762
Figure 2. mPFFs 
injected 
in 
OB 
caused 
progressive 
spreading 
of 
α-syn 
pathology 
first 
to 
olfactory 
structures, 
then 
to 
connected 
brain 
regions. 
(A–D) Schematic of a ventral brain view. First and second order projections from and to the OB are depicted, respectively, in a red solid line, purple-dashed 
line, and green-dashed line. Colored regions represent brain structures where mPFFs-induced pathology appears (Pser129) at 1 mo (A, green regions), 3 
mo (B, orange regions), 6 mo (C, pink regions), and 12 mo (D, purple regions) after injection. Micrographs show pathology (Pser129) in related brain regions. 
Location of injection is indicated with a green star. A list of the abbreviations is available as Table S3. The sections were immunostained in eight independent 
histochemical experiments. Histochemical analysis was performed on all animals from the 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-mo survival time points; 1 and 3 mo delay, 
 
n = 4 mice per group; 6 and 12 mo delay, n = 5 mice per group. (A) At 1 mo delay, pathology was observed in olfactory regions (ipsi AON, PC, 
 
Am Co, Ent, TT, OB, and contra AON; Table S3). (B) Pathology was detected in additional brain regions after 3 mo (including ipsi FC, Mol, Am B, Ect, 
and contra Am Co, PC, and Ent). Regions located one synapse away from the olfactory system are identified with a red star. (C) Pathology was 
detected in additional brain regions after 6 mo (including ipsi nLOT, hypothalamus, thalamus, Hipp, OT, AOB, and contra CA2, AmB, and Ect). Brain 
regions located two synapses away from the olfactory system are labeled by a black star. (D) 12 mo after injection, additional brain regions displayed 
pathology. (E–H) Diagram illustrating the anatomical pattern of α-syn pathology in the brain on coronal sections 1 (E), 3 (F), 6 (G), and 12 mo (H) 
after injection. Bars: (A–D) 10 µm.
 1763
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
pared with mPFFs (Fig. 2, E–H). 
The brain regions exhibiting 
pathology are listed in Tables S1 and S2. We then semi-quan-
titatively scored the pathology in mPFFs- and HuPFFs-in-
jected mice in particular brain areas (AON, perirhinal cortex 
[PRh] and Ect) at 1, 3, and 6 mo. At all time points, there was 
no difference between mPFFs- and HuPFFs-injected mice in 
AON (Fig. 4, I–K). A trend toward more pathology in PRh 
was observed at 3 and 6 mo after injection, and significantly 
Figure 3. Injection of mPFFs in the OB induced widespread α-syn pathology (Pser129) in the brain. Pathology (Pser129) detected in numerous 
brain regions from 1 to 12 mo after injection of mPFFs in ipsilateral (Ipsi) and contralateral (Contra) structures. Histochemical analysis was performed on all 
animals from the 1-, 3-, 6-, 12-mo survival time points. The sections were immunostained in eight independent histochemical experiments. n = 4–5 animals 
per group. The data shown are from representative animals. List of abbreviations is available in Table S3. Bars: 20 µm.
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1764
more pathology was induced in Ect by mPFFs when com-
pared with HuPFFs at 6 mo after injection. Collectively, in 
the long-term, the Pser129 pathology induced by injection 
of HuPFFs is not as extensive as that of mPFFs.
Characterization of the inclusions induced by PFFs injections
Next, we used confocal microscopy to characterize the in-
clusions induced by mPFFs with molecular markers typically 
used to evaluate Lewy pathology in human disease. 1 mo after 
injection, Pser129-positive inclusions in the AON co-local-
ized with p62 (Fig. 5 A) and ubiquitin (Fig. 5 B), which 
are both characteristic of compact Lewy inclusions in PD 
(Kuusisto et al., 2003). The mPFFs-induced inclusions were 
also positive for Thioflavin S (ThS; Fig. 5, C–F), which binds 
to β-pleated sheets with cross β-secondary structure (Kelly, 
1996), and detects proteins displaying an amyloid conforma-
tion (Li et al., 2010; Chu and Kordower, 2015). The ThS in-
clusions were resistant to proteinase K (Fig. 5, C–F
, bottom). 
Thus, very mature α-syn amyloid inclusions were present at 
all time points from 1 to 12 mo after injection.
As it was previously suggested that misfolded α-syn can 
cross-seed with other amyloidogenic proteins (Giasson et al., 
2003; Ishizawa et al., 2003; Guo et al., 2013; Moussaud et al., 
2014), we used two antibodies detecting hyperphosphory-
lated tau, CP13 and PHF1 (Ishizawa et al., 2003) to determine 
whether mPFFs also induced tau pathology. We did not find 
any evidence of tau pathology in the AON or the PC 12 mo 
after injection (not depicted). We then characterized the cell 
types displaying Pser129-α-syn pathology 1 mo after injec-
tion of mPFFs. As expected, NeuN-positive cells (Fig. 5 G) 
contained Pser129 pathology. However, Iba-1–positive mi-
croglial cells (Fig. 5 H), GFAP-positive astrocytes (Fig. 5 I), 
and Olig-2/APC CC1-positive oligodendrocytes (Fig. 5 J) 
lacked Pser129 signal in the AON. We obtained similar results 
for HuPFFs-induced inclusions (Fig. 6).
To define the pathological consequences of injections of 
PFFs, we assessed neuroinflammation in the AON (Fig. 7 A). 
Qualitative analyses of the densities of Iba1-positive microglia 
revealed that there were no statistically significant differences 
between any of the groups (Fig. 7 B).
Specific and progressive olfactory 
deficits after PFFs injection
We also investigated extensively whether the pathology was 
associated with behavioral deficits. Open-field testing did not 
reveal gross motor or anxiety-related deficits (Fig. 8, A–F). 
Given the preponderance of pathology in the olfactory sys-
tem, we conducted a battery of olfactory tests (odor detec-
tion, odor discrimination, and odor retention tests, adapted 
from previous studies; Mandairon et al., 2009; Rey et al., 
2012a,b). No deficits were observed during the spontaneous 
odor discrimination test (Fig. 8 G). We also did not observe 
alteration of spontaneous habituation (first phase during the 
detection and discrimination tests; Figs. 8 G and 9). On the 
contrary, significant deficits were observed in other tests of 
olfactory function. In the odor detection test, the injection 
of mPFFs induced a lower odor detection threshold (>10−2 
dilution factor) already at 3 mo after injection, while injection 
of HuPFFs or mMs did not impact the odor detection thresh-
old (Fig. 9 and Table S4). Odor retention time was signifi-
cantly reduced (from 30 min in the control groups to 16 min 
in PFFs groups) 1 mo after injection of mPFFs or HuPFFs. 
The most severe deficits were induced by mPFFs that mark-
edly reduced odor retention (<6 min) after 3 mo, whereas this 
level was achieved at 12 mo by HuPFFs (Fig. 10 and 
Table S4).
These data demonstrate that pathology induced by 
PFFs injection into OB leads to specific olfactory deficits 
that progressively increase, and which are more pronounced 
and rapidly developing in mPFFs-injected mice than in 
 
HuPFFs-injected mice.
DIS 
CUS 
SION
We used carefully controlled local injections of fibrillar α-syn 
(Rey et al., 2013) to trigger α-synucleinopathy in the OB of 
WT mice. Over the 12 mo after injection, we found that the 
α-synucleinopathy gradually spread from the OB to multiple 
olfactory and nonolfactory brain regions that are also progres-
sively affected in PD. At the longest follow-up period, we ob-
served α-syn inclusions in neocortical brain regions, as well as 
occasionally in SN, RN, and LC neurons. This propagation is 
particularly striking considering that the injected mice do not 
overexpress α-syn and structures located several synapses away 
from the injection site are gradually affected. It also mimics 
the progression of α-syn pathology thought to occur in the 
olfactory system in prodromal PD. We also showed that the 
α-syn aggregates in affected neurons had several features—
including immunoreactivity for ubiquitin, p62, and Pser129 
α-syn, resistance to proteinase K, and ThS staining—that are 
characteristic of Lewy pathology seen in human disease.
Widespread progressive propagation of mPFFs 
α-synucleinopathy along anatomical pathways
The injection of PFFs in the OB triggered pathology first 
in ipsilateral olfactory regions connected to the site of in-
jection, and spread to contralateral side, first in the contralat-
eral AON. The contralateral AON is connected to both OBs 
(Brunjes and Illig, 2009; Illig and Eudy, 2009), therefore, the 
contralateral AON might play the role of a gateway through 
which misfolded α-syn can reach olfactory structures in the 
hemisphere contralateral to the injection. Later, pathology 
progressed to other ipsilateral and contralateral regions lo-
cated one to two synapses away from the olfactory system. 
Interestingly, despite their spatial proximity and direct axo-
nal connections to the OB, OT, and nLOT developed pa-
thology later than other olfactory regions located at a similar 
distance from the injection site. These findings are consistent 
with observations of Lewy pathology in PD, where the OT 
and nLOT also develop pathology later than other olfactory 
structures (Del Tredici and Braak, 2000). This might indicate 
that those neurons are less prone to develop α-syn aggregates. 
 1765
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Figure 4. HuPFFs inoculated in OB led to slower progressive spreading of α-syn pathology first to olfactory structures, and then to connected 
brain. (A–D) Schematic of a ventral brain view, depicting the localization of pathology (Pser129) at 1, 3, 6, and 12 mo after huPFFs injections. Micrographs 
show pathology (Pser129) in related brain regions. (A–E) Histochemical analysis was performed on all animals from the 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-mo survival time 
points. The sections were immunostained in eight independent histochemical experiments. 1 and 3 mo delay, n = 4 mice per group; 6 and 12 mo delay, 
 
n = 5 mice per group. (A) At 1 mo delay, pathology was observed in olfactory regions (Ipsi AON, Pc, Am Co, Ent, TT, OB, and contra AON). Bar, 10 µm. (B) At 
3 mo delay, pathology appeared in a few more ipsilateral (Mol and Am B) and contralateral brain regions (PC). Regions located one synapse away from the 
olfactory system are identified with a red star. (C) Pathology appeared in two additional brain regions after 6 mo. (D) 12 mo after injection, additional brain 
regions show pathology; Regions located 2 synapses away from the olfactory system are identified with black stars. (E–H) Diagram illustrating the anatom-
ical pattern of α-syn pathology in the brain on coronal sections, 1 mo (E), 3 mo (F), 6 mo (G), and 12 mo (H) after injection. (I–K) Scoring of Pser129 immu-
noreactivity (neurites and cell bodies) in the AON (I), the perirhinal (PRh; J), and ectorhinal cortex (Ect; K). Scoring was performed on all animals from the 1-, 
3-, 6-months survival time points. Sections were immunostained in eight independent histochemical experiments (1 and 3 mo delay, n = 4 mice per group; 
6 mo delay, n = 5 mice per group) and were analyzed by two-way ANO 
VA, followed by a Tukey post-hoc test. Statistics are provided in Table S4. **, P < 0.05. 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1766
Alternatively, the delayed apparition of inclusions in the OT 
could be explained by the direction of spreading: If the prop-
agation occurs only retrogradely, then the propagation to the 
OT would involve indirect connections because the OT does 
not project back to the OB as opposed to other olfactory 
regions, and thus propagation to the OT might be slower. 
After 12 mo, we observed pathology in >40 different brain 
regions and subregions. Notably, cortical associative and sec-
ondary cortical brain regions exhibited pathology, akin to the 
late appearance of Lewy pathology in the same brain regions 
Figure 5. Inclusions induced by inoculation of mPFFs are positive for markers of Lewy bodies and are present only in neurons. (A–D) 
 
Pser129-positive inclusions (green; DAPI in blue) co-localized with p62 (A, red) and ubiquitin (B, red). Inclusions in the AON are also detected by ThS 1 (C), 
3 (D), 6 (E), and 12 mo after injection (C–F) and are resistant to Proteinase K treatment (C–F, bottom). (G–J) Pser129-positive inclusions were detected in 
NeuN-positive cells (neurons; G), but not in Iba-1– (microglial cells; H), GFAP- (astrocytes; I), or Olig2-APC-CC1–positive cells (oligodendrocytes; J) in the 
AON, 1 mo after injection. Histochemical analysis was performed on all animals from 1 mo delay (A–B and G–J), and all animals from the 1-, 3-, 6-, and 
12-mo survival time points (C–F). The sections were immunostained in one single histochemical experiment for each marker used. 1 and 3 mo delay, n = 4 
mice per group; 6 and 12 mo delay, n = 5 mice per group). Bars: (A–J) 5 µm.
 1767
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
in PD according to Braak (stages 4–5) and the unified staging 
system for Lewy body disorders (Braak et al., 2004; Beach et 
al., 2009). We also observed Pser129 α-syn–immunoreactive 
profiles occasionally in the LC, the SN, and the RN at 12 mo 
after injection of PFFs into the OB. At Braak stage 2 of PD, 
Lewy pathology appears in the LC, RN, and progresses to the 
Figure 6. Inclusions induced by inoculation of HuPFFs are positive for markers of Lewy bodies, and are present only in neurons. (A–D) 
 
Pser129-positive inclusions (green) in AON co-localize with p62 (A, red) and Ubiquitin (B, red). Inclusions in the AON are also ThS positive 1 (C), 3 (D), 6 (E), 
and 12 mo (F) after injection, and are resistant to Proteinase K treatment (C–F, bottom). (E–H) Pser129-positive inclusions were present in NeuN-positive 
cells (neurons, E), but not in Iba-1– (microglial cells, F), GFAP- (astrocytes, G), or Olig2-APC-CC1–positive cells (oligodendrocytes, H) in the AON 1 mo after 
injection. Histochemical analysis was performed on all animals from 1 mo delay (A–B and G–J), and all animals from the 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-mo survival time 
points (C–F). The sections were immunostained in one single histochemical experiment for each marker used (1 and 3 mo delay, n = 4 mice per group; 6 and 
12 mo delay, n = 5 mice per group). Bars: (A–J) 5 µm.
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1768
SN at stage 3 (Del Tredici and Braak, 2000). Both SN and 
LC exhibit neuronal death in PD, with it being particularly 
extensive and functionally detrimental in the SN. Approxi-
mately 40% of noradrenergic neurons located in the LC proj-
ect to the OB (Doty, 2003); 0.5% of neurons from the RN 
and 3% of nigral dopamine neurons project to the OB in rats 
(Doty, 2003; Höglinger et al., 2015). It is not clear whether 
this α-syn pathology was a result of direct transport of α-syn 
seeds from the injected OB, or from propagation over sev-
eral synapses, which would explain the long delay (12 mo). 
However, at this final time point, as a result of the complexity 
of axonal connections, it is impossible to ascertain precisely 
which neural connections mediated the spreading of α-syn 
pathology. Interestingly, although the DMX is postulated to 
be one of the first brain regions affected by Lewy pathology 
in PD, we found no Pser129 α-syn immunoreactivity there. 
These results are consistent with the debated concept that 
Lewy pathology in the DMX in prodromal PD is triggered 
by retrograde transport (along the vagal nerve) of α-syn ag-
gregates that were initially formed in the intestinal wall.
In summary, from 1 to 12 mo after injection, we ob-
served a sequential spreading of pathology, first to regions that 
are directly connected to the OB, and then to structures up 
to two synaptic connections away from the olfactory system 
in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Spreading occurs also to the 
contralateral hemisphere, first to the contralateral AON, di-
rectly connected to the ipsilateral OB, and then to structures 
one and two synapses away from the contralateral AON. We 
also observed a progressive increase in pathology in regions 
that were affected early.
Differential effect of mPFFs versus huPFFs injection on 
the extent of pathology
We also investigated the pathology induced by HuPFFs, 
which appears to be not as extensive as that of mPFFs. One 
explanation could be that the pathology triggered by the 
HuPFFs spread more slowly and to a lesser extent than that 
produced by mPFFs. Alternatively, differential levels of PFF 
toxicity could affect the spreading of the two types of in-
jected protein. An earlier study demonstrated that propaga-
tion of induced α-syn pathology in the brainstem is reduced 
when neuronal death occurs and the circuitry is interrupted 
(Ulusoy et al., 2015). Additionally, in prion biology, partial 
and complete species barriers can exist when a disease-related 
protein is transferred between different hosts (Bruce et al., 
1994). The amino acid sequences of mouse and human α-syn 
differ at 7 of the 140 residues (Lavedan, 1998), which might 
cause differences in fibril structure even after sonication, and 
in the association of α-syn with other cellular components. 
Therefore, the transmissibility of the recombinant human 
α-syn fibrils might be reduced in mouse brain.
Long-term propagation of α-syn pathology and short-term 
transfer of α-syn from the OB
We previously reported that monomeric and oligomeric 
human α-syn injected into the mouse OB is transported 
within a few hours along axonal pathways to the AON, the 
PC, OT, and amygdala (Rey et al., 2013); those forms of α-syn 
are cleared from the brain within a few days of injection. In 
that study, we also found that preparations of pure elongated 
α-syn fibrils are rarely taken up by mitral cells and conse-
quently are not transported to a great extent to other brain 
regions. In the present study, α-syn PFFs were subjected to 
vigorous sonication before injection, resulting in a mixture of 
α-syn fibrils of varying sizes (Luk et al., 2009; 
Volpicelli-Daley 
et al., 2014). Similar preparations injected into mouse or rat 
striatum trigger pathological intraneuronal α-syn accumula-
tion in nigral dopamine neurons and subsequent degenera-
tion of a subset of these neurons (Luk et al., 2012a; Paumier 
et al., 2015). Based on our own observations, we suggest that 
the differences in outcome after injection of pure elongated 
Figure 7. Changes in the density of microglia after injections of 
mMs and mPFFs. (A) Microphotographs of Iba-1–immunopositive cells 
in the anterior olfactory nucleus (AON) of mice injected with PBS, HuPFFs, 
mMs, and mPFFs at 1 and 3 mo after injection. The data shown are from 
one representative animal. Bar, 50 µm. (B) Density of Iba1-positive cells 
(microglia) in the AON at 1 and 3 mo after injection (n = 4–5 animals 
per group). Histochemical analysis was performed on all animals from 1- 
and 3-mo survival time points, in two separate histochemical experiments. 
Data were analyzed by Linear Mixed-effect Model. After multiple testing 
corrections, no difference between groups was detected. P > 0.05. 
 1769
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Figure 8. mPFFs- and HuPFFs-injected mice did not exhibit alteration of locomotion or anxiety level, or deficits in odor discrimination in the 
open field test. (A) Total distance moved in the area during a 5-min trial. (B and C) Time spent in external zone (B) and in inner zone (C). (D) Mean velocity 
in the open field. (E–F) Velocity of mice in the external zone (E) and the inner zone (F). Behavioral data were acquired from four independent experiments. 
No significant differences (P > 0.05; analysis by linear mixed-effect models) were observed between groups and across aging. Number of animals per group 
(control, mMs, PBS, HuPFFs, and mPFFs, respectively) for 1-mo survival time point: 25, 29, 44, 43, and 33; 3-mo survival time point: 21, 25, 39, 39, and 28; 
6-mo survival time point: 18, 17, 32, 36, and 28; and 12-mo survival time point: 11, 9, 29, 25, and 17. (G) Odor discrimination test. Mice were first habituated 
during a prehabituation trial with MO. Next, mice were exposed to the habituation odor during three successive trials (OHab1, OHab2, and OHab3) and, 
finally, to three presentations of test odorants (Test OHab, Test C+1, Test C+3) in a random order, separated by a presentation of habituation odor (OHab) 
between each test odorant. All the mice habituated to the habituation odor during the three first trials and investigated the odors C+1 and C+3 more sig-
nificantly during the discrimination phase, indicating that they discriminated C+1 and C+3 odorants from the odor of habituation. Thus, no group exhibited 
a deficit in discrimination at any time point. Behavioral data were acquired from four independent experiments. Numbers of animals per group (control, 
mMs, PBS, HuPFFs, and mPFFs, respectively) for 1-mo survival time point: 22, 26, 40, 37, and 29; 3-mo survival time point: 16, 21, 33, 35, and 23; 6-mo 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1770
α-syn fibrils or α-syn PFFs is that the latter contain shorter 
fibrils that are readily taken up by neurons and transported 
along axons within a short timeframe, seeding endogenous 
α-syn rapidly for further aggregation and propagation.
Similarities and differences between PFFs-induced α-syn 
pathology and Lewy pathology in PD
The Pser129-positive inclusions induced by PFFs injections 
co-localized with molecular markers typically used to eval-
uate Lewy pathology in human disease. Inclusions were hy-
perphosphorylated on ser129, resistant to proteinase K and 
co-localized with p62 and ubiquitin, similar to Lewy bod-
ies found in PD, but their morphology differed from that of 
Lewy bodies. PFFs-induced inclusions had a tendril-like cy-
toplasmic structure that wrapped around the nucleus, similar 
to those observed in a previous study (Osterberg et al., 2015). 
The Pser129-positive structures were also larger than and 
morphologically different from the ThS-stained inclusions 
observed in the same mice. We speculate that the α-syn ag-
gregates consist of a mature, insoluble amyloid ThS-positive 
core surrounded by a less compact α-syn that is ThS negative, 
but Pser129, p62, and ubiquitin positive. Notably, we detected 
inclusions only in neurons, not in astrocytes, oligodendro-
cytes, or microglia. The absence of α-syn aggregates in glia 
suggests that propagation between brain regions was not due 
to release of α-syn seeds from migrating astrocytes or micro-
glia, but more likely transneuronal propagation after axonal 
transport of the α-syn seeds.
Progressive olfactory deficit accompanying 
progression of α-syn pathology
We monitored the mice injected with PFFs in multiple be-
havioral paradigms. Importantly, the propagation of α-syn pa-
thology throughout the brain was accompanied by progressive 
and specific deterioration of olfactory function, similar to the 
olfactory deficits seen in early PD, even during the prodromal 
phase before the emergence of motor deficits (Kranick and 
Duda, 2008; Haehner et al., 2009). Although odor detection 
and odor retention were severely impaired, no deficits in odor 
discrimination, and no alteration of locomotion or anxiety 
in open field testing were observed. Importantly, the PFFs 
were injected unilaterally into 1 OB. Related mechanical 
damage should not affect sense of olfaction because unilat-
eral bulbectomy does not alter olfactory function in rodents 
(Slotnick et al., 1987). Further, control mice injected with 
vehicle or α-syn monomers showed no deficits; and no loss 
of mitral cells was detected in the OB in either of the groups 
injected with PFFs. This suggests that deficits we observed 
are unlikely to be the result of mechanical damage or neuro-
nal loss in the OB itself.
The lack of deficits in olfactory discrimination might 
be explained by the relative lack of α-syn pathology in the 
OT, which is known to play an important role in this faculty 
(Wesson and Wilson, 2011). Notably, odor detection relies on 
the processing of olfactory input by the OB, which enhances 
the sensitivity of odors by lateral inhibition mechanisms 
(Wilson and Leon, 1987).
Pathology was less severe in the PC, OB, and OT of 
mice injected with HuPFFs than mPFFs, which is consis-
tent with the olfaction deficits being less severe in the mice 
injected with HuPFFs. Furthermore, spreading of α-syn pa-
thology to the contralateral hemisphere was less pronounced 
in the mice injected with HuPFFs, opening up the possibility 
that spared contralateral structures might have compensated 
for functional changes in the ipsilateral hemisphere.
Concluding remarks
In conclusion, we provide the first evidence of a transneuro-
nal, progressive propagation of PD-like α-syn pathology from 
the OB to central brain regions, accompanied by specific and 
progressive deficits in olfactory function. Hence, our model 
of α-syn propagation is highly relevant to prodromal PD. It 
also supports the idea that the OB could be a starting point 
of α-syn pathology from which it spreads to other olfactory 
structures and the basal ganglia, as well as neocortical regions. 
The neuropathology (at both molecular and anatomical lev-
els), as well as the functional deficits, are faithful to observa-
tions made in prodromal and manifest PD, and that the rate 
of progression is slow over several months should make this 
model of α-synucleinopathy powerful when testing novel 
therapies aimed at modifying disease progression.
MAT 
ERI 
ALS AND MET 
HODS
Animals
We purchased C57BL/6J 3-mo-old female mice from 
Charles River laboratories and the Jackson Laboratory and 
housed them five to six per cage under a 12-h light/12-h 
dark cycle with access to food and water ad libitum. The 
housing of the animals and all procedures were in accor-
dance with the European international guidelines, with the 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory animals (United 
States National Institutes of Health) and were approved by 
the Malmö-Lund ethical Committee for Animal research and 
Van Andel Research Institute's institutional animal care and 
use committee guidelines.
Stereotactic injections
Purification of recombinant full-length mouse α-syn and 
full-length human α-syn and fibril assembly were performed 
as previously described (Volpicelli-Daley et al., 2014). Before 
survival time point: 18, 19, 36, 35, and 21; and 12-mo survival time point: 8, 7, 27, 23, and 14. Habituation and discrimination were analyzed by one-way 
ANO 
VA with repeated measures. We then performed multiple comparisons by a Sidak post-hoc test. *, P = 0.05; **, P = 0.01; ***, P = 0.001 for difference 
from Hab1. ##, P = 0.01; ###, P = 0.001 for difference from Test Hab. Results of the ANO 
VAs and number of animals per group are provided in Table S4.
 1771
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Figure 9. PFFs-injected mice exhibit a progressive alteration of odor detection. (A) Experimental design of the odor detection test. Mice were ex-
posed to MO for three consecutive trials (habituation), and then to increased concentrations of propionic acid (AP; dilution factor, 10−6, 10−4, or 10−2) during 
three other trials. (B) Summary of the results of the odor detection test. Dots represent the odorant threshold detected (measured as the dilution factor 
used), for each animal group at 1, 3, 6, and 12 mo after injection. Whereas control-, PBS-, mMs-, and HuPFFs-injected mice show a low odor threshold (10−2) 
from 1 to 6 mo after injection; mice injected with mPFFs exhibit a strong deficit of odor detection appearing at 3 mo, with an odor detection threshold 
higher than the 10−2 dilution. (C) Odor detection results. All mice display habituation across the trials with the odor of habituation (OHab). Control, PBS-, 
mMs-, and HuPFFs-injected mice investigate significantly more the odorant at the lowest concentration compared with OHab, demonstrating that their 
odor detection threshold is 10−6. The mice injected with mPFFs show a mild deficit of odor retention already at 1 mo after injection. At 3 mo after injection, 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1772
injections, the PFFs were thawed and sonicated at room tem-
perature by probe sonication (QSonica; 15% power, for 10 
pulses of 0.5 s ON, 1 s OFF
, repeated four times with 5-min 
intervals). Recombinant soluble mouse α-syn was thawed and 
kept on ice during the surgical procedures.
We anesthetized 202 mice (3 mo old) with isoflurane/
oxygen mixture, and stereotactically injected sterile PBS, 
mouse monomers (mMs), 
WT mouse α-syn PFFs (mPFFs) or 
WT human α-syn preformed fibrils (HuPFFs) into the OB. 
We 
performed the stereotactic injections using a glass capillary at-
tached to a 10 µl Hamilton microsyringe, and injected 0.8 µl of 
protein (5 µg/µl in sterile PBS) or PBS unilaterally in the OB 
(coordinates: AP
, +5.4 mm; L, −0.75 mm; DV
, −1 mm relative 
to bregma and dural surface) at a constant rate of 0.2 µl per min-
ute as previously described (Rey et al., 2013). 
The capillary was 
left in place for 4 min after injection, and then slowly removed.
Preparation of the tissue
We perfused the mice at various time points (1.5 h, 1 mo, 3 
mo, 6 mo, and 12 mo after injection). We anesthetized mice 
with sodium pentobarbital and perfused them transcardially 
with 0.9% saline, followed by 4% PFA in phosphate buffer. 
We collected the brains (4–5 mice per group) for histol-
ogy, post-fixed them for 24 h in 4% PFA, and placed them 
in 30% sucrose in phosphate buffer. We stored the brains 
at 4°C until sectioning. We cut the entire brain of each 
mouse into 30-µm free-floating coronal sections on a freez-
ing microtome, and stored them in antifreeze solution at 
4°C until immunostaining.
Immunohistochemistry
We stained coronal free-floating sections using primary anti-
bodies and secondary biotinylated antibodies listed in Table 
S5. For the detection of the antibody with DAB, we used a 
standard peroxidase-based method (Vectastain ABC kit and 
DAB kit; Vector Laboratories). Sections stained for human 
α-syn were then counterstained by hematoxylin. After de-
hydration, slides are coverslipped with Cytoseal 60 mounting 
medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We analyzed sections 
with conventional light using an Eclipse Ni-U microscope 
(Nikon); images were captured with a Retiga 2000R digital 
camera using NIS Elements AR 4.00.08 software (Nikon).
For analysis of pathology spreading in the brains of 
mice, we stained with anti-pser129 antibody a whole series of 
coronal sections (210-µm intervals between consecutive sec-
tions) from four to five animals per group (noninjected, PBS, 
mMs, mPFFs, and HuPFFs injected groups). We assessed in a 
blinded manner the presence of pser129-positive accumula-
tions by screening every single section at 20× magnification 
using an Eclipse Ni-U microscope (Nikon).
Immunofluorescence staining
We stained coronal free-floating sections with primary anti-
bodies and appropriate secondary antibodies listed in 
Table S5.
The sections to be stained with ThS were first 
mounted on glass slides and then rehydrated in PBS. Sec-
tions were then incubated for 8 min at room tempera-
ture with 0.05% ThS that had been diluted into distilled 
water and filtered. Sections were then differentiated for 
3 min in 80, 95, and then 95% ethanol, and treated with 
TrueBlack (Biotium) at a 1:20 concentration in 70% etha-
nol for 30 s, washed in PBS, and mounted with EverBrite 
mounting medium (Biotium).
We analyzed blind coded sections with an inverted con-
focal laser microscope Nikon Eclipse Ti-E (Nikon). To ac-
quired images we applied a median filter (kernel 3) to remove 
noise. All images were generated using NIS Elements AR 
4.00.08 software (Nikon).
Scoring of pathology
On blind coded sections, we assessed the accumulation of 
α-syn pathology (pser129-positivity) in selected brain struc-
tures (AON, perirhinal [PRh], and ectorhinal [Ect] cortices) 
in animals that were 1, 3, and 6 mo after injection (four to 
five animals per group) by scoring cell bodies and neurites 
positive for phosphorylated α-syn (Pser129). We first set a 
scoring scale from 1 to 5 specific for each single brain re-
gion using template images (0, no aggregates; 1, sparse [very 
few neurites, max 1 soma]; 2, mild [more neurites, with or 
without soma]; 3, moderate [many soma and neurites, but 
large areas without aggregates]; 4, dense; 5, very dense). Next, 
we assigned a score to each section and brain region (cor-
responding stereotactic antero-posterior coordinates [from 
Bregma] as described in Paxinos and Franklin (2012): AON, 
3.20–1.98 mm; PRh, −1.34–−4.36 mm; Ect, −1.34–−4.36 
mm), by comparison with the template images. We calcu-
lated the mean score value for each brain region per ani-
mal. We then calculated the mean score values per group, 
and analyzed them using two-way unpaired ANO 
VA fol-
lowed by Tukey post-hoc multiple comparisons on Prism 
6.0 (GraphPad Software). Data points represent mean values 
from each animal score.
all mice except the mPFFs-injected mice detect the lowest concentration (10−6). From this time point, the mPFFs-injected mice exhibit a severe alteration of 
odor detection (unable to detect the higher concentration used here). The mean exploration time per trial was analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA with repeated 
measures across trials for each group and time point. Results of the ANO 
VAs are provided in Table S4. Behavioral data were acquired from four indepen-
dent experiments. Number of animals per group (control, PBS, mMs, HuPFFs, and mPFFs, respectively) for 1-mo survival time point: 22, 26, 40, 37, and 29; 
3-mo survival time point: 16, 21, 33, 35, and 23; 6-mo survival time point: 18, 19, 36, 35, and 21; and 12-mo survival time point: 8, 7, 27, 23, and 14. We 
then performed multiple comparisons by Sidak post-hoc tests (more conservative than Fisher LSD post-hoc test). *, P = 0.05; **, P = 0.01; ***, P = 0.001 for 
difference from MO1. #, P = 0.05; ##, P = 0.01; ###, P = 0.001 for difference from MO3.
 1773
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Figure 10. Mice injected with PFFs develop a progressive alteration of odor retention. (A) Experimental design of the odor retention test. During the 
first trial (acquisition), mice were exposed to the same odor in two cartridges. After a delay of 6, 16, or 30 min, mice were exposed to the first odor (familiar 
odor) in one cartridge, and a new scent (novel odor) in the second cartridge during a second trial (recall). (B) Summary of the results of the odor retention 
test. Bar lengths represent the median duration of odor retention for each group. Control, PBS, and mMs groups show a slight decrease of retention time at 
12 mo, which is an effect of normal aging. HuPFFs mice show a deficit of retention at 1 mo, which remains steady until it is exacerbated after 12 mo. mPFFs 
mice show severe shortening of odor retention already after 3 mo. (C) Odor retention results. Results are expressed as a preference for novel odor versus 
the familiar odor, at the 3 time points used. mMs mice display a preference for the novel odor above the chance level of 50% at 6, 16, and 30 min inter-trial 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1774
Mitral cell density
To measure the density of mitral cells in the OB, we stained 
sections with Cresyl violet (one section every eighth section). 
Slides were incubated for 9 min in 0.1% Cresyl violet solution, 
and were dipped into 95%, 100% ethanol and xylene before 
coverslipping with Cytoseal 60 mounting medium (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific). On blind coded sections stained with Cresyl 
violet, we measured the density of mitral cells in the mitral cell 
layer of the OB. Mitral cells can be easily identified from other 
cells based on their morphology (large nucleus and cytoplasm). 
Quantifications were done on a computer-assisted mapping 
and cell quantification program (Stereo Investigator; MBF 
Bioscience) coupled to an Imager M2 microscope (ZEI 
SS). 
We analyzed four sections per animal spaced by 450 µm, and 
distributed along the rostrocaudal axis at equivalent locations 
in each animal, in four to five animals per group. We outlined 
the mitral cell layer and counted every mitral cell in that area. 
We then calculated the density of cells per section (number 
of cells per surface area) and the mean density per animal. We 
then calculated the mean density per group and analyzed the 
data by Kruskal–Wallis testing with post-hoc Dunn’s multiple 
comparison analysis using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software).
Iba1-positive cells density
On blind coded sections, we measured the density of 
Iba1-positive cells in the AON (diaminobenzidine stained) 
using a computer-assisted mapping and cell quantification 
program (Stereo Investigator; MBF Bioscience) coupled to 
a NIK 
ON Eclipse Ni-U microscope (Nikon). We analyzed 
three sections per animal spaced by 450 µm, and distributed 
along the rostrocaudal axis at equivalent locations in each 
animal, in four to five animals per group. We outlined the 
AON and counted every positive cell in each section. We 
then calculated the density of cells per section (number of 
cells per surface area) and calculated the mean density per 
animal. We then calculated the mean density per group and 
analyzed the data with linear mixed-effects models (LMMs) 
with the software R. We included a random intercept for 
mouse to account for the fact that we measured densities 
on both sides of the brain in each animal, and we stratified 
the analysis by time. Time, group, and side (ipsilateral and 
contralateral side to injection) were included as covariates. 
Tests for differences between groups were done using linear 
contrasts and false discovery rate correction. After multiple 
testing corrections, no difference between groups was de-
tected. However, some effects were significant before this 
correction (Controls/mMs; Controls/mPFFs), suggesting 
that there might exist true effects and that, as a result of 
inter-animal variability within groups, the study was not 
sufficient to detect them.
Open field test
To evaluate general locomotor activity and anxiety, mice 
were tested in an open field arena for one trial at 1, 3, 6, 
and 12 mo in a blinded manner. A square arena (48 cm × 
48 cm × 35 cm) with white background was used and il-
luminated evenly. Mice were habituated to the arena the 
day before the test. During the test, mice were placed in the 
arena for 5 min, and their activity was recorded and analyzed 
by videotracking system ANYmaze (Stoelting). We assessed 
the total distance traveled, the mean speed, the velocity, and 
the time spent in an inner centered zone (24 cm × 24 cm) 
and in the external zone.
We analyzed the total distance traveled, the mean speed, 
the velocity, and the time spent in an inner centered zone 
and in the external zone. The differences between groups 
and over time, and their interaction were analyzed with mul-
tiple LMMs with the software R. LMMs appropriately ad-
just for repeated measures and allow missing values (animals 
sacrificed at previous time points), unlike repeated measure 
ANO 
VA. LMMs can also adjust for a portion of the with-
in-subject variation via random slopes and intercepts. Both 
of these features should result in superior model perfor-
mance and accuracy (Krueger and Tian, 2004). Each model 
was fit, including random intercepts, to account for the high 
variability in mice at the initial time point. Final models in-
cluded time and experimental group main effects, as well as 
interactions between both factors. When interactions were 
nonsignificant, they were abandoned and the models were 
refit. All the parameters except “Time in external zone” were 
analyzed using quadratic term (based on Akaike and Bayes-
ian information criteria). Within each outcome, we com-
pared each treatment group to all others using contrasts and 
Tukey's honest significant difference to correct for multiple 
testing. All outliers (residuals more than three standards de-
viation away from mean residual) were inspected for possible 
recording errors or extreme experimental issues. We found 
no convincing reasons to remove any of these mice. Normal-
ity and homoscedasticity were checked using quantile–quan-
tile plots and residual plots.
delays, indicating that the mice could remember the familiar odorant for at least 30 min (retention time) at any time point. HuPFFs and mPFFs mice exhibit 
a retention time of only 16 min 1 mo after injection. mPFFs mice show a decrease in retention time (<6 min) 3 mo after injection, whereas HuPFFs mice 
show a further alteration of retention (to <6 min) only 12 mo after injection. Notably, after 3 mo, control and PBS groups show transient inability to recall 
the novel odor after 30 min, whereas groups injected with mMs perform well. This is probably a result of the relatively small sample sizes in the control 
and PBS groups. Behavioral data were acquired from four independent experiments. Number of animals per group (control, PBS, mMs, HuPFFs, and mPFFs, 
respectively) for 1-mo survival time: 22–24, 25–29, 40–42, 41, and 29–32; 3-mo survival time point: 20–21, 25, 36–39, 36–43, and 26–28; 6-mo survival 
time point: 15–18, 15–16, 33–34, 33–34, and 22–25; and 12-mo survival time point: 11, 8–9, 22–28, 21–23, and 12–14 (numbers vary depending on which 
retention delay is tested). Mean preference for the novel odor for each group during the recall trial was analyzed by one-sample Student’s t test compared 
with the chance level of 50% *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 1775
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Odor detection test
We tested the detection threshold of the odorant propi-
onic acid (AP) in mice using three different concentrations 
of the odorant: 10−6, 10−4, and 10−2 in mineral oil (MO). 
For all olfactory tests, the odorants were diluted the day 
before the test in MO, and tests were performed at 1, 3, 6, 
and 12 mo after injection, with 25–30 mice per group by 
a blinded experimenter.
The detection test was performed in clean cages with-
out bedding, and in a blinded manner. A paper swab was im-
pregnated with the odorant and placed in a mesh ball hanging 
in the cage. We first habituated the mice to the setting during 
a prehabituation trial with MO. Mice were then exposed to 
MO for three trials of 50 s with a 5-min interval (habitua-
tion phase, MO), and then exposed during three consecutive 
trials to increasing concentrations of the odorant (AP 10−6, 
AP 10−4, and AP 10−2; Fig. 6 a). During each trial, we re-
corded investigation time as defined as the duration of active 
sniffing with the nose placed less than 1 cm from the mesh 
ball. Mice that did not investigate the MO during the first 
habituation trial were excluded, and outliers defined by an 
investigation time higher than the mean + 2 SD were also 
excluded. We calculated the mean exploration time per trial 
and analyzed the data by one-way ANO 
VA with repeated 
measures across trials for each group and time point, first for 
the habituation phase (MO1, MO2, and MO3), which is crit-
ical for being able to interpret the results from the following 
detection phase, and then for the detection phase (MO3, AP 
10−6, AP 10−4, and AP 10−2), followed by Sidak post-hoc test 
(more conservative than Fisher LSD post-hoc test) to com-
pare MO1 to MO2, MO3, and MO3 to AP 10−6, AP 10−4, 
and AP 10−2 using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software).
Odor discrimination test (habituation/discrimination)
This test assesses habituation and discrimination in a nonas-
sociative memory task. We used cross-habituation between a 
structurally and perceptually similar odorant to measure non-
associative odor memory (Cleland et al., 2002; Rey et al., 
2012a,b). Odorants used in this test (sets of acetate esters and 
aldehydes) were used at a vapor phase partial pressure of 1Pa 
(Rey et al., 2012a,b). Within a set of odorants, odorants were 
from a same chemical family but differed by the length of 
their carbon chain, which define in a correlated manner their 
perceptual proximity (Cleland et al., 2002). Similar to the de-
tection test, the odorant was placed in a mesh ball, and mice 
were exposed to MO during a prehabituation trial (Fig. 6 b), 
and the test was performed in a blinded manner. Next, mice 
were exposed to the habituation odorant (OHab1, OHab2, 
and OHab3; habituation phase) during three consecutive 
trials (50 s duration, 5-min interval), followed by three ran-
domized presentations of the test odorants (T
est OHab, T
est 
C+1, and T
est C+3; detection phase) separated by a presen-
tation of habituation odor (OHab) between each test odor. 
Investigation time is recorded for each trial of habituation 
and discrimination phases. Mice that did not investigate the 
OHab during the first habituation trial, and outliers, are 
defined by an investigation time higher than the mean +2 
standard deviations were excluded. We calculated the mean 
investigation time for each trial within each group, and habit-
uation and discrimination were analyzed by one-way ANO 
VA with repeated measures, first for the habituation phase 
(OHab1, OHab2, OHab3, and T
est OHab), which is critical 
for being able to interpret the results from the following dis-
crimination phase, and then for the discrimination phase (T
est 
OHab, C+1, and C+3; Rey et al., 2012a). 
We then performed 
multiple comparisons by Sidak post-hoc test (more conser-
vative than Fisher LSD post-hoc test) to compare OHab1 to 
OHab2, OHab3, and T
est OHab; and to compare OHab to 
C+1 and C+3 using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad).
Odor retention test (odor recognition task)
This test assessed short-term olfactory memory in a two-trial 
odor recognition task, using pairs of odorants. The protocol 
was adapted from previous work (Mandairon et al., 2009; Rey 
et al., 2012a,b). Before the first test, mice were prehabituated 
to the setup for 5 min with empty cartridges in the test cage. 
During the test (performed in a blinded manner), mice were 
exposed to two odorants at a time and placed in cartridges 
containing a paper swab. During the first trial (Acquisition), 
mice were exposed to the same unfamiliar odorant in the two 
cartridges. After 6, 16, or 30 min, mice were exposed during 
a second trial (Recall) to a cartridge containing the same 
odorant at the first trial, and a second cartridge with a novel 
odorant (Fig. 6 C). We recorded odorant investigation (de-
fined as in the previous tests), and calculated the preference 
of the mouse for the novel odor during the recall trial. We 
chose three pairs of odorants (familiar and novel odor) used 
at supraliminal concentration, and known for having equal 
hedonicity among each pair (Rey et al., 2012a,b): (-) lim-
onene (diluted 1:10) and (+) carvone (diluted 1:10); Amyl-
acetate (1:100) and Anisol (1:100); and propyl acetate (1:10) 
and Pentanal (1:10). The use of each odorant from the pair 
as familiar or novel odor is randomized. Mice that did not 
investigate the odorants during the acquisition trial, and out-
liers defined by an investigation time higher than the mean 
+2 standard deviations were excluded. Data are expressed as 
a preference for novel odor. The mean preference for novel 
odor for each group during the recall trial was analyzed by 
one-sample Student’s t test compared with the chance level 
of 50% (Prism 6.0; GraphPad). The odorants used in the dif-
ferent behavioral tests were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, 
TCI America, or provided by A. Didier (Lyon Neuroscience 
Research Center, Lyon, France).
Online supplemental material
Tables S1 and S2, available as Excel files, summarize the 
progression of pathology observed after PFFs injection. Table 
S3, available as an Excel file, contains a list of abbreviations. 
Table S4, available as an Excel file, gathers additional details 
on statistical analyses. Table S5, available as an Excel file, is 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1776
a list of antibodies used in this study. Online supplemental 
material is available at http 
://www 
.jem 
.org 
/cgi 
/content 
/full 
/jem 
.20160368 
/DC1.
ACK 
NOW 
LED 
GME 
NTS
We thank Emily Schulz, Darcy Marckini, and Marie Persson-Vejgården for their tech-
nical assistance; Dr. Sonia George for advice on and expertise with confocal micros-
copy; Dr. Mary Winn from the Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core of the Van Andel 
Research Institute; David Nadziejka from the Van Andel Research Institute, for text 
editing; the Confocal Core of the Van Andel Research Institute; and the staff of the 
Vivarium of Van Andel Research Institute and of Lund University for animal care. We 
are grateful to Dr. Jeffrey Kordower for critical reading of the manuscript, to Dr. Anne 
Didier for providing some odorants for the behavioral tests, and to Drs. Darren Moore 
and Peter Davies for providing PHF1 and CP13 antibodies.
We acknowledge the Van Andel Research Institute and the many individuals and 
corporations that financially supported the neurodegenerative research at Van Andel 
Research Institute. N.L. Rey is supported by the Peter C. and Emajean Cook Founda-
tion. N. Maroof is supported by a Roche Postdoctoral Fellowship (RPF) grant.
Pilot experiments were supported by the European Research Council (PRI 
STI 
NE-PD 269064 to P. Brundin). P. Brundin reports grants from The Michael J. Fox 
Foundation, National Institutes of Health (NIA PO1 AG 17586-10, PO1 AG-032953, 
NIN 
DS P50 NS053488-02, and NIA UO1 AG029213-01 to V.M.-Y. Lee), Cure Parkin-
son’s Trust, TEVA Neuroscience, East Tennessee Foundation, KiMe Fund, and Campbell 
Foundation, which are outside the study but relevant to the submitted work. Addi-
tionally, we acknowledge organizational support from the Van Andel Research Insti-
tute. K.C. Luk, J.Q. Trojanowski, and V.M.-Y. Lee acknowledge support from the Penn 
Morris K. Udall Parkinson’s Disease Research Center of Excellence (NS53488). V.M.-Y. 
Lee also received research support from the Marian S. Ware Alzheimer Program.
Dr. Brundin has received commercial support as a consultant from Renovo Neural, 
Inc., Roche, and Teva Inc, Lundbeck A/S, AbbVie, ClearView Healthcare, FCB Health, 
IOS Press Partners and Capital Technologies, Inc. Additionally he has received com-
mercial support for grants/research from Renovo and Teva/Lundbeck. Dr. Brundin has 
ownership interests in Acousort AB and Parkcell AB. Dr. Trojanowski serves as an 
Associate Editor of Alzheimer's and Dementia. He may accrue revenue on patents 
submitted by the University of Pennsylvania wherein he is inventor including: Modified 
avidin-biotin technique, method of stabilizing microtubules to treat Alzheimer's dis-
ease, method of detecting abnormally phosphorylated tau, method of screening for 
Alzheimer's disease or disease associated with the accumulation of paired helical 
filaments, compositions and methods for producing and using homogeneous neuronal 
cell transplants, rat comprising straight filaments in its brain, compositions and 
methods for producing and using homogeneous neuronal cell transplants to treat 
neurodegenerative disorders and brain and spinal cord injuries, diagnostic methods 
for Alzheimer's disease by detection of multiple MRNAs, methods and compositions 
for determining lipid peroxidation levels in oxidant stress syndromes and diseases, 
compositions and methods for producing and using homogenous neuronal cell trans-
plants, method of identifying, diagnosing and treating α-synuclein–positive neuro-
degenerative disorders, mutation-specific functional impairments in distinct tau 
isoforms of hereditary frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chro-
mosome-17: genotype predicts phenotype, microtubule stabilizing therapies for 
neurodegenerative disorders, and treatment of Alzheimer's and related diseases with 
an antibody. He is co-inventor on patents submitted to the University of Pennsylvania, 
wherein he is the inventor and has generated income he has received from the sale 
of Avid to Eli Lily, including amyloid plaque aggregation inhibitors and diagnos-
tic imaging agents. 
Dr. Lee has received funding for travel and honoraria from Takeda Pharmaceuti-
cal Company Ltd.; has received speaker honoraria from Pfizer Inc., BMS and Merck; 
may accrue revenue on patents re: Modified avidin-biotin technique, method of sta-
bilizing microtubules to treat Alzheimer's disease, method of detecting abnormally 
phosphorylated tau, method of screening for Alzheimer's disease or disease associ-
ated with the accumulation of paired helical filaments, compositions and methods 
for producing and using homogeneous neuronal cell transplants, rat comprising 
straight filaments in its brain, compositions and methods for producing and using 
homogeneous neuronal cell transplants to treat neurodegenerative disorders and 
brain and spinal cord injuries, diagnostic methods for Alzheimer's disease by detec-
tion of multiple MRNAs, methods and compositions for determining lipid peroxida-
tion levels in oxidant stress syndromes and diseases, compositions and methods for 
producing and using homogenous neuronal cell transplants, method of identifying, 
diagnosing and treating alpha-synuclein positive neurodegenerative disorders, mu-
tation-specific functional impairments in distinct tau isoforms of hereditary fronto-
temporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome-17: genotype predicts 
phenotype, microtubule stabilizing therapies for neurodegenerative disorders, and 
treatment of Alzheimer's and related diseases with an antibody. 
The authors declare no additional competing financial interests.
Author contributions: N.L. Rey designed the study; performed the injections, 
behavioral tests, histology, and analysis and interpretation of behavioral data and 
histological results; and wrote the manuscript. J.A. Steiner provided critical expertise 
and contributed to study design, and wrote the manuscript. N. Maroof performed 
measurements to define densities of microglia. Z. Madaj performed and interpreted 
the statistical analysis of the open field test and the Iba1-positive cell density by 
linear mixed-effect models, and wrote related parts of the manuscript. K.C. Luk, J.Q. 
Trojanowski, and V.M.-Y. Lee synthetized and provided the PFFs for injections, con-
tributed to scientific discussion of the results and discussion on the design of the 
study, and edited the manuscript. P. Brundin contributed to the design of the study, 
interpretation of the results, and wrote the manuscript. All authors gave input 
to the manuscript.
Submitted: 10 March 2016
Accepted: 16 June 2016
REFERENCES
Beach, T.G., C.H. Adler, L. Lue, L.I. Sue, J. Bachalakuri, J. Henry-Watson, J. 
Sasse, S. Boyer, S. Shirohi, R. Brooks, et al. Arizona Parkinson’s Disease 
Consortium. 2009. Unified staging system for Lewy body disorders: 
correlation with nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and 
motor dysfunction. Acta Neuropathol. 117:613–634. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00401 
-009 
-0538 
-8
Braak, H., K. Del Tredici, U. Rüb, R.A.I. de 
Vos, E.N.H. Jansen Steur, and E. 
Braak. 2003a. Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Aging. 24:197–211. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0197 
-4580(02)00065 
-9
Braak, H., U. Rüb, W
.P
. Gai, and K. Del Tredici. 2003b. Idiopathic Parkinson’s 
disease: possible routes by which vulnerable neuronal types may be 
subject to neuroinvasion by an unknown pathogen. J Neural Transm 
(Vienna). 110:517–536. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00702 
-002 
-0808 
-2
Braak, H., E. Ghebremedhin, U. Rüb, H. Bratzke, and K. Del Tredici. 2004. 
Stages in the development of Parkinson’s disease-related pathology. Cell 
Tissue Res. 318:121–134. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00441 
-004 
-0956 
-9
Bruce, M., A. Chree, I. McConnell, J. Foster, G. Pearson, and H. Fraser. 1994. 
Transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and scrapie to mice: 
strain variation and the species barrier. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. 
Sci. 343:405–411. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1098 
/rstb 
.1994 
.0036
Brunjes, P
.C., and K.R. Illig. 2009. Anterior Olfactory Nucleus. In 
Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin 
Heidelberg. 128–131.
Burwell, R.D., M.P
. Witter, and D.G. Amaral. 1995. Perirhinal and postrhinal 
cortices of the rat: a review of the neuroanatomical literature and 
comparison with findings from the monkey brain. Hippocampus. 5:390–
408. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/hipo 
.450050503
Chu, Y
., and J.H. Kordower. 2015. The prion hypothesis of Parkinson’s 
disease. Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 15:28. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/
s11910 
-015 
-0549 
-x
Cinelli, A.R., H. Ferreyra-Moyano, and E. Barragan. 1987. Reciprocal 
functional connections of the olfactory bulbs and other olfactory related 
areas with the prefrontal cortex. Brain Res. Bull. 19:651–661. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0361 
-9230(87)90051 
-7
Cleland, T.A., A. Morse, E.L. 
Yue, and C. Linster. 2002. Behavioral models of 
odor similarity. Behav. Neurosci. 116:222–231. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1037 
/0735 
-7044 
.116 
.2 
.222
 1777
JEM Vol. 213, No. 9
Dehay, B., M. Vila, E. Bezard, P
. Brundin, and J.H. Kordower. 2016. Alpha-
synuclein propagation: New insights from animal models. Mov. Disord. 
31:161–168. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/mds 
.26370
De La Rosa-Prieto, C., M. De Moya-Pinilla, D. Saiz-Sanchez, I. Ubeda-
Banon, D.M. Arzate, A. Flores-Cuadrado, T. Liberia, C. Crespo, and A. 
Martinez-Marcos. 2015. Olfactory and cortical projections to bulbar and 
hippocampal adult-born neurons. Front. Neuroanat. 9:4. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3389 
/fnana 
.2015 
.00004
Del Tredici, K., and H. Braak. 2000. Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: staging an 
α-synucleinopathy with a predictable pathoanatomy. In Madame Curie 
Bioscience Database. Landes Bioscience, Austin, TX. Available at: http 
://
www 
.ncbi 
.nlm 
.nih 
.gov 
/books 
/NBK6077 
/
Doty, R.L. ed. 2003. Handbook of Olfaction and Gustation. Marcel Dekker, 
Inc. 1172 pp.
Dunning, C.J.R., J.F
. Reyes, J.A. Steiner, and P
. Brundin. 2012. Can Parkinson’s 
disease pathology be propagated from one neuron to another? Prog. 
Neurobiol. 97:205–219. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.pneurobio 
.2011 
.11 
.003
Fujiwara, H., M. Hasegawa, N. Dohmae, A. Kawashima, E. Masliah, M.S. 
Goldberg, J. Shen, K. Takio, and T. Iwatsubo. 2002. alpha-Synuclein is 
phosphorylated in synucleinopathy lesions. Nat. Cell Biol. 4:160–164.
George, S., N.L. Rey, N. Reichenbach, J.A. Steiner, and P
. Brundin. 2013. 
α-Synuclein: the long distance runner. Brain Pathol. 23:350–357. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/bpa 
.12046
Giasson, B.I., M.S. Forman, M. Higuchi, L.I. Golbe, C.L. Graves, P
.T. 
Kotzbauer, J.Q. Trojanowski, and V
.M.Y
. Lee. 2003. Initiation and 
synergistic fibrillization of tau and alpha-synuclein. Science. 300:636–640. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1082324
Goedert, M. 2001. Alpha-synuclein and neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 2:492–501. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/35081564
Guo, J.L., and V
.M.Y
. Lee. 2014. Cell-to-cell transmission of pathogenic 
proteins in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Med. 20:130–138. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.3457
Guo, J.L., D.J. Covell, J.P
. Daniels, M. Iba, A. Stieber, B. Zhang, D.M. Riddle, 
L.K. Kwong, Y
. Xu, J.Q. Trojanowski, and V
.M.Y
. Lee. 2013. Distinct 
α-synuclein strains differentially promote tau inclusions in neurons. Cell. 
154:103–117. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2013 
.05 
.057
Haehner, A., S. Boesveldt, H.W
. Berendse, A. Mackay-Sim, J. Fleischmann, 
P
.A. Silburn, A.N. Johnston, G.D. Mellick, B. Herting, H. Reichmann, 
and T. Hummel. 2009. Prevalence of smell loss in Parkinson’s disease—a 
multicenter study. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 15:490–494. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.parkreldis 
.2008 
.12 
.005
Höglinger, G.U., D. Alvarez-Fischer, O. Arias-Carrión, M. Djufri, A. 
Windolph, U. Keber, A. Borta, V
. Ries, R.K.W
. Schwarting, D. Scheller, 
and W
.H. Oertel. 2015. A new dopaminergic nigro-olfactory projection. 
Acta Neuropathol. 130:333–348. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00401 
-015 
-1451 
-y
Illig, K.R., and J.D. Eudy. 2009. Contralateral projections of the rat anterior 
olfactory nucleus. J. Comp. Neurol. 512:115–123. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/cne 
.21900
Ishizawa, T., P
. Mattila, P
. Davies, D. Wang, and D.W
. Dickson. 2003. 
Colocalization of tau and alpha-synuclein epitopes in Lewy bodies. J. 
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 62:389–397. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/jnen 
/62 
.4 
.389
Kelly, J.W
. 1996. Alternative conformations of amyloidogenic proteins govern 
their behavior. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6:11–17. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0959 
-440X(96)80089 
-3
Kranick, S.M., and J.E. Duda. 2008. Olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson’s 
disease. Neurosignals. 16:35–40. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1159 
/000109757
Krueger, C., and L. Tian. 2004. A comparison of the general linear mixed 
model and repeated measures ANO 
VA using a dataset with multiple 
missing data points. Biol. Res. Nurs. 6:151–157. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1177 
/1099800404267682
Kuusisto, E., L. Parkkinen, and I. Alafuzoff. 2003. Morphogenesis of Lewy 
bodies: dissimilar incorporation of alpha-synuclein, ubiquitin, and p62. 
J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 62:1241–1253. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/
jnen 
/62 
.12 
.1241
Lamberts, J.T., E.N. Hildebrandt, and P
. Brundin. 2014. Spreading of 
α-synuclein in the face of axonal transport deficits in Parkinson's disease: 
a speculative synthesis. Neurobiol. Dis. 77:276–283. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.nbd 
.2014 
.07 
.002
Lavedan, C. 1998. The synuclein family. Genome Res. 8:871–880.
Li, J.-Y
., E. Englund, H. Widner, S. Rehncrona, A. Björklund, O. Lindvall, 
and P
. Brundin. 2010. Characterization of Lewy body pathology in 12- 
and 16-year-old intrastriatal mesencephalic grafts surviving in a patient 
with Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 25:1091–1096. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/mds 
.23012
Luk, K.C., C. Song, P
. O'Brien, A. Stieber, J.R. Branch, K.R. Brundent, J.Q. 
Trojanowski, and 
V
.M.-Y
. Lee. 2009. Exogenous α-synuclein fibrils seed 
the formation of Lewy body-like intracellular inclusions in cultured 
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:20051–20056. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0908005106
Luk, K.C., V
. Kehm, J. Carroll, B. Zhang, P
. O’Brien, J.Q. Trojanowski, and 
V
.M.Y
. Lee. 2012a. Pathological α-synuclein transmission initiates 
Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice. Science. 
338:949–953. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1227157
Luk, K.C., 
V
.M. Kehm, B. Zhang, P
. O’Brien, J.Q. 
Trojanowski, and 
V
.M.Y
. Lee. 
2012b. Intracerebral inoculation of pathological α-synuclein initiates a 
rapidly progressive neurodegenerative α-synucleinopathy in mice. J. Exp. 
Med. 209:975–986. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20112457
Mahlknecht, P
., K. Seppi, and W
. Poewe. 2015. The Concept of Prodromal 
Parkinson’s Disease. J. Parkinsons Dis. 5:681–697. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3233 
/JPD 
-150685
Mandairon, N., S. Sultan, N. Rey, F
. Kermen, M. Moreno, G. Busto, 
V
. Farget, 
B. Messaoudi, M. Thevenet, and A. Didier. 2009. A computer-assisted 
odorized hole-board for testing olfactory perception in mice. J. Neurosci. 
Methods. 180:296–303. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jneumeth 
.2009 
.04 
.008
Masuda-Suzukake, M., T. Nonaka, M. Hosokawa, T. Oikawa, T. Arai, H. 
Akiyama, D.M.A. Mann, and M. Hasegawa. 2013. Prion-like spreading 
of pathological α-synuclein in brain. Brain. 136:1128–1138. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/brain 
/awt037
Mougenot, A.-L., S. Nicot, A. Bencsik, E. Morignat, J. Verchère, L. Lakhdar, 
S. Legastelois, and T. Baron. 2012. Prion-like acceleration of a 
synucleinopathy in a transgenic mouse model. Neurobiol. Aging. 33:2225–
2228. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neurobiolaging 
.2011 
.06 
.022
Moussaud, S., D.R. Jones, E.L. Moussaud-Lamodière, M. Delenclos, O.A. 
Ross, and P
.J. McLean. 2014. Alpha-synuclein and tau: teammates in 
neurodegeneration? Mol. Neurodegener. 9:43. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1750 
-1326 
-9 
-43
Olanow, C.W
., and S.B. Prusiner. 2009. Is Parkinson’s disease a prion disorder? 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:12571–12572. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0906759106
Osterberg, V
.R., K.J. Spinelli, L.J. Weston, K.C. Luk, R.L. Woltjer, and V
.K. 
Unni. 2015. Progressive aggregation of alpha-synuclein and selective 
degeneration of lewy inclusion-bearing neurons in a mouse model of 
parkinsonism. Cell Reports. 10:1252–1260. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2015 
.01 
.060
Oueslati, A. 2016. Implication of Alpha-Synuclein Phosphorylation at S129 
in Synucleinopathies: What Have We Learned in the Last Decade? J. 
Parkinsons Dis. 6:39–51. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3233 
/JPD 
-160779
Paumier, K.L., K.C. Luk, F
.P
. Manfredsson, N.M. Kanaan, J.W
. Lipton, T.J. 
Collier, K. Steece-Collier, C.J. Kemp, S. Celano, E. Schulz, et al. 2015. 
 α-Synucleinopathy spreads across brain regions | Rey et al.
1778
Intrastriatal injection of pre-formed mouse α-synuclein fibrils into rats 
triggers α-synuclein pathology and bilateral nigrostriatal degeneration. 
Neurobiol. Dis. 82:185–199. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.nbd 
.2015 
.06 
.003
Paxinos, G., and K.B.J. Franklin. 2012. Paxinos and Franklin’s The Mouse 
Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Fourth edition. Elsevier Academic 
Press, London. 360 pp.
Peelaerts, W
., L. Bousset, A. Van der Perren, A. Moskalyuk, R. Pulizzi, 
M. Giugliano, C. Van den Haute, R. Melki, and V
. Baekelandt. 2015. 
α-Synuclein strains cause distinct synucleinopathies after local and 
systemic administration. Nature. 522:340–344. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature14547
Postuma, R.B., D. Aarsland, P
. Barone, D.J. Burn, C.H. Hawkes, 
W
. Oertel, and 
T. Ziemssen. 2012. Identifying prodromal Parkinson’s disease: pre-motor 
disorders in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 27:617–626. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/mds 
.24996
Recasens, A., B. Dehay, J. Bové, I. Carballo-Carbajal, S. Dovero, A. Pérez-
Villalba, P
.-O. Fernagut, J. Blesa, A. Parent, C. Perier, et al. 2014. Lewy 
body extracts from Parkinson disease brains trigger α-synuclein 
pathology and neurodegeneration in mice and monkeys. Ann. Neurol. 
75:351–362. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/ana 
.24066
Rey, N.L., D. Jardanhazi-Kurutz, D. Terwel, M.P
. Kummer, F
. Jourdan, 
A. Didier, and M.T. Heneka. 2012a. Locus coeruleus degeneration 
exacerbates olfactory deficits in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Neurobiol. 
Aging. 33:426.e1–426.e11. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neurobiolaging 
.2010 
.10 
.009
Rey, N.L., J. Sacquet, A. Veyrac, F
. Jourdan, and A. Didier. 2012b. Behavioral 
and cellular markers of olfactory aging and their response to enrichment. 
Neurobiol. Aging. 
33:626.e9–626.e23. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neurobiolaging 
.2011 
.03 
.026
Rey, N.L., G.H. Petit, L. Bousset, R. Melki, and P
. Brundin. 2013. Transfer 
of human α-synuclein from the olfactory bulb to interconnected brain 
regions in mice. Acta Neuropathol. 126:555–573. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00401 
-013 
-1160 
-3
Rey, N.L., S. George, and P
. Brundin. 2016. Review: Spreading the word: 
precise animal models and validated methods are vital when evaluating 
prion-like behaviour of alpha-synuclein. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 
42:51–76. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/nan 
.12299
Sacino, A.N., M. Brooks, M.A. Thomas, A.B. McKinney, S. Lee, R.W
. 
Regenhardt, N.H. McGarvey, J.I. Ayers, L. Notterpek, D.R. Borchelt, 
et al. 2014. Intramuscular injection of α-synuclein induces CNS 
α-synuclein pathology and a rapid-onset motor phenotype in transgenic 
mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:10732–10737. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1321785111
Sah, P
., E.S. Faber, M. Lopez De Armentia, and J. Power. 2003. 
The amygdaloid 
complex: anatomy and physiology. Physiol. Rev. 83:803–834. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1152 
/physrev 
.00002 
.2003
Shi, C.J., and M.D. Cassell. 1998. Cascade projections from somatosensory 
cortex to the rat basolateral amygdala via the parietal insular cortex. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 399:469–491. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/(SICI)1096 
-9861(19981005)399 
:4<469::AID-CNE3>3.0.CO;2-#
Slotnick, B.M., S. Graham, D.G. Laing, and G.A. Bell. 1987. Detection of 
propionic acid vapor by rats with lesions of olfactory bulb areas associated 
with high 2-DG uptake. Brain Res. 417:343–346. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0006 
-8993(87)90460 
-4
Ulusoy, A., R.E. Musgrove, R. Rusconi, M. Klinkenberg, M. Helwig, A. 
Schneider, and D.A. Di Monte. 2015. Neuron-to-neuron α-synuclein 
propagation in vivo is independent of neuronal injury. Acta Neuropathol. 
Commun. 3:13. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s40478 
-015 
-0198 
-y
Volpicelli-Daley, L.A., K.C. Luk, and V
.M.Y
. Lee. 2014. Addition of 
exogenous α-synuclein preformed fibrils to primary neuronal cultures 
to seed recruitment of endogenous α-synuclein to Lewy body and Lewy 
neurite-like aggregates. Nat. Protoc. 9:2135–2146. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nprot 
.2014 
.143
Wesson, D.W
., and D.A. Wilson. 2011. Sniffing out the contributions of the 
olfactory tubercle to the sense of smell: hedonics, sensory integration, 
and more? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35:655–668. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neubiorev 
.2010 
.08 
.004
Wilson, D.A., and M. Leon. 1987. Evidence of lateral synaptic interactions in 
olfactory bulb output cell responses to odors. Brain Res. 417:175–180. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0006 
-8993(87)90196 
-X
