 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
366 
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Vital Signs: Update on Zika Virus–Associated Birth Defects  
and Evaluation of All U.S. Infants with Congenital Zika Virus Exposure — 
U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, 2016
Megan R. Reynolds, MPH1; Abbey M. Jones, MPH1; Emily E. Petersen, MD2; Ellen H. Lee, MD3; Marion E. Rice, MPH1,4; Andrea Bingham, 
PhD5; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH2; Nicole Evert, MS6; Sarah Reagan-Steiner, MD7; Titilope Oduyebo, MD2; Catherine M. Brown, DVM8; 
Stacey Martin, MSc9; Nina Ahmad, MD10; Julu Bhatnagar, PhD7; Jennifer Macdonald, MPH11; Carolyn Gould, MD9; Anne D. Fine, MD3; 
Kara D. Polen, MPH1; Heather Lake-Burger, MPH5; Christina L. Hillard, MA1; Noemi Hall, PhD6,12; Mahsa M. Yazdy, PhD8; Karnesha Slaughter, 
MPH1; Jamie N. Sommer, MS10; Alys Adamski, PhD1; Meghan Raycraft, MPH1; Shannon Fleck-Derderian, MPH4,13; Jyoti Gupta, MPH11; 
Kimberly Newsome, MPH1; Madelyn Baez-Santiago, PhD1; Sally Slavinski, DVM3; Jennifer L. White, MPH10; Cynthia A. Moore, MD, PhD1; 
Carrie K. Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD2; Lyle Petersen, MD9; Coleen Boyle, PhD14; Denise J. Jamieson, MD2; Dana Meaney-Delman, MD13; 
Margaret A. Honein, PhD1; U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry Collaboration
On April 4, 2017, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
Abstract
Background: In collaboration with state, tribal, local, and territorial health departments, CDC established the U.S. Zika 
Pregnancy Registry (USZPR) in early 2016 to monitor pregnant women with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika 
virus infection and their infants.
Methods: This report includes an analysis of completed pregnancies (which include live births and pregnancy losses, 
regardless of gestational age) in the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia (DC) with laboratory evidence of possible 
recent Zika virus infection reported to the USZPR from January 15 to December 27, 2016. Birth defects potentially 
associated with Zika virus infection during pregnancy include brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly, eye abnormalities, 
other consequences of central nervous system dysfunction, and neural tube defects and other early brain malformations.
Results: During the analysis period, 1,297 pregnant women in 44 states were reported to the USZPR. Zika virus–associated 
birth defects were reported for 51 (5%) of the 972 fetuses/infants from completed pregnancies with laboratory evidence of 
possible recent Zika virus infection (95% confidence interval [CI] = 4%–7%); the proportion was higher when restricted to 
pregnancies with laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection (24/250 completed pregnancies [10%, 95% CI = 7%–14%]). 
Birth defects were reported in 15% (95% CI = 8%–26%) of fetuses/infants of completed pregnancies with confirmed 
Zika virus infection in the first trimester. Among 895 liveborn infants from pregnancies with possible recent Zika virus 
infection, postnatal neuroimaging was reported for 221 (25%), and Zika virus testing of at least one infant specimen 
was reported for 585 (65%).
Conclusions and Implications for Public Health Practice: These findings highlight why pregnant women should 
avoid Zika virus exposure. Because the full clinical spectrum of congenital Zika virus infection is not yet known, all 
infants born to women with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection during pregnancy should receive 
postnatal neuroimaging and Zika virus testing in addition to a comprehensive newborn physical exam and hearing 
screen. Identification and follow-up care of infants born to women with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika 
virus infection during pregnancy and infants with possible congenital Zika virus infection can ensure that appropriate 
clinical services are available.
Introduction
In response to the outbreak of Zika virus in the World Health 
Organization Region of the Americas and concerns about birth 
defects linked to Zika virus infection during pregnancy, CDC 
issued a travel notice on January 15, 2016, advising pregnant 
women to consider postponing travel to areas with active 
transmission of Zika virus. As part of the initial phase of the 
emergency response, CDC collaborated with state, tribal, local, 
and territorial health departments to establish the U.S. Zika 
Pregnancy Registry (USZPR) as an enhanced national surveil-
lance system to monitor pregnancy and fetal/infant outcomes 
among pregnancies with laboratory evidence of possible recent 
Zika virus infection (1). The USZPR includes data on pregnant 
women and their infants at birth and at ages 2, 6, and 12 months.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13 
367
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The USZPR includes data from all 50 states, DC, and all U.S. 
territories except Puerto Rico; pregnancies in Puerto Rico are 
monitored separately by the Zika Active Pregnancy Surveillance 
System (2). To be included in the USZPR, either the pregnant 
woman, placenta, or fetus/infant must have laboratory evidence 
of possible recent Zika virus infection. Pregnant women in the 
United States and U.S. territories (with the exception of Puerto 
Rico) with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus 
infection (regardless of whether they have symptoms) and the 
periconceptionally,* prenatally, or perinatally exposed infants 
born to these women are eligible to be included. The USZPR also 
includes infants with laboratory evidence of possible congenital 
Zika virus infection (regardless of whether they have symptoms 
or findings at birth) and their mothers.
This report updates the previous report (3) from the USZPR 
and provides data on pregnancies completed in the 50 U.S. 
states and DC from December 1, 2015 through December 27, 
2016, reported to CDC from January 15, 2016, through 
March 14, 2017.† Completed pregnancies include those of any 
length of gestation that end in a liveborn infant or a pregnancy 
loss. The baseline prevalence of defects consistent with those 
that have been observed with congenital Zika virus infection 
was approximately 2.9 per 1,000 live births in the pre-Zika 
years (4). The initial findings from the USZPR represent an 
approximate twentyfold increase in Zika virus–associated birth 
defects among pregnant women with laboratory evidence of 
possible recent Zika virus infection, with an approximate 
thirtyfold increase in brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly. 
Updated data in this report can also be compared with this 
benchmark (3,4).
Methods
The USZPR defines laboratory evidence of possible recent 
Zika virus infection as 1) recent Zika virus infection detected by 
a Zika virus RNA nucleic acid test (NAT, e.g., reverse transcrip-
tion–polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR]) on any maternal, 
placental, or fetal/infant specimen or 2) detection of recent 
Zika virus infection or recent unspecified flavivirus infection 
by serologic tests on a maternal or infant specimen (i.e., either 
positive or equivocal Zika virus immunoglobulin M [IgM] 
AND Zika virus plaque reduction neutralization test [PRNT] 
titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT value; or negative 
Zika virus IgM, AND positive or equivocal dengue virus IgM, 
AND Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus 
* Periconceptional exposure is defined as maternal Zika virus infection during 
the 8 weeks before conception (6 weeks before and 2 weeks after the first day 
of the last menstrual period).
† Data on pregnancies reported to CDC by December 27, 2016; all data have 
been updated with additional information reported on these pregnancies 
through March 14, 2017. Completed pregnancies are limited to those with a 
pregnancy completion date on or before December 27, 2016.
PRNT titer). Infants with positive or equivocal Zika virus IgM 
are included, provided a confirmatory PRNT has been 
performed on a maternal or infant specimen. The USZPR 
laboratory inclusion criteria are specified as “possible” recent 
Zika virus infection because the USZPR includes mother-
infant pairs with serological evidence of a recent unspecified 
flavivirus infection, as well as those with laboratory-confirmed 
Zika virus infection.
Analyses were done on both the overall completed pregnan-
cies in the USZPR from the 50 U.S. states and DC and a subset 
of completed pregnancies that demonstrated confirmed recent 
Zika virus infection (5,6). These are pregnancies in which 
the presence of Zika virus RNA in a maternal, placental, or 
fetal/infant specimen was documented by a positive NAT, or 
in which Zika virus IgM was positive or equivocal and Zika 
virus PRNT titer was ≥10 and dengue virus PRNT was <10.
Among symptomatic women, gestational timing of Zika 
virus infection was calculated using symptom onset date. 
Among asymptomatic women, the trimester of exposure was 
calculated using dates of travel to areas of active Zika virus 
transmission or sexual exposure. First trimester exposure was 
classified into two categories: 1) women with symptoms or 
exposure in the first trimester only§ (defined as first trimester 
or first trimester and periconceptional period); and 2) women 
with exposure during multiple trimesters including the first 
trimester. Estimates were not calculated for exposure in other 
trimesters because of small numbers. Pregnant women who 
did not have first trimester exposure might have had exposure 
in the periconceptional period only, second trimester, third 
trimester, or both the second and third trimester; for many 
women, the information on trimester of exposure was missing.
The Zika virus–associated birth defects (henceforth referred 
to as “birth defects”) were analyzed in two mutually exclusive 
categories: 1) brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly regard-
less of the presence of additional birth defects, and 2) neural 
tube defects and other early brain malformations, eye abnor-
malities, and other consequences of central nervous system 
dysfunction, among fetuses and infants without evident brain 
abnormalities or microcephaly (7). Clinical experts reviewed 
reported information to ensure that each fetus or infant with 
birth defects met the criteria of the USZPR case definition.
The proportion of fetuses or infants with birth defects among 
completed pregnancies was estimated among asymptomatic and 
symptomatic pregnant women, and women with first trimester 
exposure, using the Wilson score interval and 95% CI for a 
binomial proportion. Outcomes from multiple gestation preg-
nancies were counted once. Separate estimates were calculated 
for pregnancies with any laboratory evidence of recent Zika 
§ First trimester is defined as last menstrual period +14 days to 13 weeks, 6 days 
(97 days).
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
368 
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
virus infection and for the subset of pregnancies with laboratory-
confirmed recent Zika virus infection. For all liveborn infants 
with and without birth defects, the proportion who had any 
reported postnatal neuroimaging (cranial ultrasound, computed 
tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging) was calculated, as 
well as the proportion who had laboratory testing for Zika virus 
reported on an infant specimen. CDC released updated Interim 
Guidance for the Evaluation and Management of Infants with 
Possible Congenital Zika Virus Infection in August 2016 (8), 
which stated that postnatal neuroimaging and testing should be 
routine for all infants born to women with laboratory evidence of 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy; the proportion of infants 
with neuroimaging performed was calculated before and after 
this guidance was released.
Results
From January 15 through December 27, 2016, a total 
of 1,297 pregnancies with possible recent Zika virus infec-
tion were reported to the USZPR from 44 states (Figure 1), 
including 972 completed pregnancies with reported outcomes 
(895 liveborn infants and 77 pregnancy losses). Among the 
completed pregnancies, 599 (62%) pregnant women were 
asymptomatic, 348 (36%) were symptomatic, and 25 (3%) 
had missing symptom information (Table 1).
Birth defects were reported for 51 (5%) of the 972 completed 
pregnancies with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika 
virus infection. The proportion was higher among completed 
pregnancies with confirmed Zika virus infection (24/250, 10%). 
Among completed pregnancies with confirmed Zika virus 
infection, 217 of 250 (87%) tested positive by 
RT-PCR, including 24 pregnancies with a fetus 
or infant with birth defects.
Birth defects were reported in similar propor-
tions of fetuses/infants whose mothers did and 
did not report symptoms of Zika virus disease 
during pregnancy. Brain abnormalities and/
or microcephaly were reported in 43 (84%) of 
51 fetuses/infants with birth defects. Among 
pregnancies with confirmed Zika virus infec-
tion, brain abnormalities and/or microcephaly 
were reported in 18 (75%) of 24 fetuses/infants 
with birth defects. The 51 fetuses or infants with 
birth defects were from pregnancies with Zika 
virus exposure from the following 16 countries/
territories with active Zika virus transmission: 
Barbados, Belize, Brazil, Cape Verde, Colombia, 
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, 
Puerto Rico, Republic of Marshall Islands, 
and Venezuela.
Birth defects were reported in a higher proportion of fetuses 
or infants whose mothers were infected during the first trimes-
ter of pregnancy. Among 157 pregnancies in which women 
had symptom onset or exposure to Zika virus infection during 
the first trimester, 14 (9%) fetuses/infants had reported birth 
defects (Table 1). When pregnancies with symptom onset 
or exposure during first trimester were limited to those with 
laboratory-confirmed Zika virus infection, nine (15%) of 60 
completed pregnancies had reported birth defects.
Among the 895 liveborn infants, postnatal neuroimaging 
results were reported to the USZPR for 221 (25%). Zika virus 
testing results of any specimen were reported for 585 (65%) 
infants; 94 (11%) of all 895 liveborn infants had positive Zika 
virus test results. Among the 45 liveborn infants with birth 
defects, 25 (56%) had positive infant Zika virus testing results 
reported, and 29 (64%) had postnatal neuroimaging reported 
to the USZPR (Table 2). Among the 850 liveborn infants 
without birth defects, 69 (8%) had positive infant Zika virus 
testing results reported, and 192 (23%) had postnatal neuro-
imaging reported to the USZPR. The percentage of infants 
reported to have received postnatal neuroimaging was 20% 
among 406 born through August 2016, and 28% among 489 
born during September–December 2016, after the updated 
CDC guidance was released (8) (Figure 2).
Conclusions and Comments
The number of pregnant women with laboratory evidence of 
possible recent Zika virus infection and the number of fetuses/
infants with Zika virus–associated birth defects continues to 
FIGURE 1. Cumulative number of pregnant women with laboratory evidence of possible 
recent Zika virus infection reported to the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, by month of 
report — United States, January–December 2016 (n = 1,297)
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
Jan
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
2017
2016
No. of pregnant women with laboratory 
evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection
Month of report
Total no. pregnancies reported from 50 U.S. states 
and the District of Columbia
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13 
369
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Pregnancy outcomes* for 972 women with completed pregnancies† with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection, 
by maternal symptom status and timing of symptom onset or exposure — U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, United States, December 2015–December 2016
Characteristic
Brain  
abnormalities  
and/or 
microcephaly  
(No.)
NTDs and  
early brain 
malformations,  
eye abnormalities, 
or consequences of 
CNS dysfunction 
without brain 
abnormalities  
or microcephaly 
(No.)
Total with  
≥1 birth defect 
(No.)
Completed 
pregnancies  
(No.)
Proportion  
affected by 
Zika virus–
associated 
birth defects,  
% (95% CI§)
Any laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection¶
Total
43
8
51
972
5 (4–7)
Maternal symptom status
Symptoms of Zika virus infection reported
18
3
21
348
6 (4–9)
No symptoms of Zika virus infection 
reported
24
4
28
599
5 (3–7)
Unknown
1
1
2
25
—
Timing of symptoms or exposure**
First trimester††,§§
13
1
14
157
9 (5–14)
Multiple trimesters including first
22
6
28
396
7 (5–10)
Confirmed evidence of Zika virus infection¶¶
Total
18
6
24
250
10 (7–14)
Maternal symptom status
Symptoms of Zika virus infection reported
8
3
11
141
8 (4–13)
No symptoms of Zika virus infection 
reported
10
2
12
102
12 (7–19)
Unknown
0
1
1
7
—
Timing of symptoms or exposure**
First trimester††,§§
8
1
9
60
15 (8–26)
Multiple trimesters including first
8
4
12
58
21 (12–33)
Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; CNS = central nervous system; IgM=immunoglobulin M; NAT=nucleic acid test; NTD = neural tube defect; PRNT = plaque 
reduction neutralization test; RT-PCR = reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction.
 * Outcomes for multiple gestation pregnancies are counted once.
 
† Includes live births, spontaneous abortions, terminations, and stillbirths.
 
§ 95% CI for a binomial proportion using Wilson score interval.
 
¶ Includes maternal, placental, or fetal/infant laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection based on presence of Zika virus RNA by a positive NAT (e.g., 
RT-PCR) or similar test, serological evidence of a recent Zika virus infection, or serological evidence of a recent unspecified flavivirus infection.
 ** Estimates were not calculated for exposure in other trimesters because of small numbers. Pregnant women who did not have first trimester exposure might have 
had exposure in the periconceptional period only (8 weeks before conception or 6 weeks before and 2 weeks after the first day of the last menstrual period), 
second trimester, third trimester, both the second and third trimester; many women were missing information on trimester of exposure.
 †† First trimester is defined as last menstrual period +14 days to 13 weeks, 6 days (97 days). 
 §§ First trimester exposure includes women with exposure limited to the first trimester and women with exposure limited to the first trimester and periconceptional period. 
 ¶¶ Includes maternal, placental, or fetal/infant laboratory evidence of confirmed Zika virus infection based on presence of Zika virus RNA by a positive NAT (e.g., 
RT-PCR) or similar test or serological results of IgM positive/equivocal with Zika PRNT ≥10 and dengue PRNT <10.
increase in the United States. The proportion of fetuses and 
infants with birth defects among pregnancies with confirmed 
Zika virus infection at any time during pregnancy was more 
than 30 times higher than the baseline prevalence in the pre-
Zika years, and a higher proportion of those with first trimester 
infections had birth defects (4). Although microcephaly was 
the first recognized birth defect reported in association with 
congenital Zika virus infection, Zika virus–associated brain 
abnormalities can occur without microcephaly, and neuroimag-
ing is needed to detect these abnormalities (9). Neuroimaging 
is also used in other congenital infections to identify brain 
abnormalities; for example, neuroimaging findings in infants 
with congenital cytomegalovirus infection are correlated with 
neurodevelopmental outcomes (10). Postnatal neuroimaging 
is recommended for all infants born to women with labora-
tory evidence of Zika virus infection to identify infants with 
brain anomalies that warrant additional evaluation to ensure 
that appropriate intervention is provided (8). Based on data 
reported to the USZPR, the majority of these infants had not 
received recommended neuroimaging. In addition to infants 
with birth defects, complete follow-up and routine develop-
mental assessment of all infants born to women with laboratory 
evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection is essential 
to help identify future outcomes potentially associated with 
congenital Zika virus infection and ensure that the referrals to 
appropriate support and follow-up care are made.
The findings in this report are subject to at least four limita-
tions. First, selection bias might affect which pregnancies are 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
370 
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Postnatal neuroimaging* and infant Zika virus testing 
results for 895 liveborn infants in the U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry — 
50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, 2016
Testing
No (%) liveborn infants
With  
birth  
defects
Without  
birth  
defects
Total
Total
45 
850 
895 
Neuroimaging
Any neuroimaging reported to USZPR
29 (64)
192 (23)
221 (25)
Infant Zika virus testing
Positive test result on an 
infant specimen†,§
25 (56)
69 (8)
94 (11)
Negative infant test results among 
infants with ≥1 infant specimen 
reported as tested
17 (38)
474 (56)
491 (55)
No infant specimen test results 
reported to USZPR
3 (7)
307 (36)
310 (35)
Abbreviations: IgM= immunoglobulin M; NAT=nucleic acid test; RT-PCR = reverse 
transcription–polymerase chain reaction; USZPR = U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry.
* Neuroimaging includes any cranial ultrasound, computed tomography, or 
magnetic resonance imaging test reported to the USZPR.
† Positive infant tests included the presence of Zika virus RNA by a positive NAT 
(e.g., RT-PCR)  and/or serological results of IgM positive/equivocal.
§ Infant specimens include serum, urine, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, cord serum, 
and cord blood.
reported to the USZPR, because pregnant women with symp-
toms of Zika virus disease might be more likely than asymp-
tomatic women to be tested. Pregnant women with Zika virus 
exposure and prenatally detected fetal abnormalities or infants 
with birth defects might be more likely to be tested for Zika virus 
infection. In addition, pregnancies resulting in a loss might be 
more likely to have had a confirmed Zika virus infection and more 
likely to have the placenta or other pathologic specimens tested 
(11). However, it is also possible that birth defects in pregnancy 
losses, including stillbirths, have not been reported. Second, while 
CDC has worked closely with state and local health departments 
to obtain complete information, delays in reporting postnatal 
neuroimaging or infant Zika virus testing results are possible. In 
addition, some of the pregnancies included in the analysis were 
completed before CDC’s most recent infant guidance (8) was 
released, and thus, current recommendations for neuroimaging or 
testing might not have been implemented. Third, current testing 
methodologies are limited in that they can only identify recent 
Zika virus infections (5) and might miss those women who are 
tested when Zika virus RNA and/or IgM is no longer detectable; 
these pregnancies would not be included in the USZPR unless the 
fetus/infant or placenta has a positive Zika virus test result. Also, 
serologic testing cannot readily discriminate between flaviviruses 
because of crossreactivity (5); therefore, some pregnancies in the 
USZPR might have had a recent infection with a flavivirus other 
than Zika virus which could lead to an underestimate of the pro-
portion of fetuses/infants affected. For this reason, in this report, 
analysis of the subset of pregnancies with laboratory-confirmed 
FIGURE 2. Postnatal neuroimaging for infants reported to the 
U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, by  month of birth — United States, 
December 2015–December 2016
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
400
350
No. of infants
December 2015–
August 2016
September–
December 2016
Month of birth
Any neuroimaging reported
No neuroimaging reported
recent Zika virus infection was included. Finally, limited data 
are available about other maternal risk factors for birth defects, 
including genetic or other infectious causes, which might be 
causal factors for a few of the birth defects reported here.
These findings underscore the serious risk for birth defects 
posed by Zika virus infection during pregnancy and highlight 
why pregnant women should avoid Zika virus exposure and that 
all pregnant women should be screened for possible Zika virus 
exposure at every prenatal visit, with testing of pregnant women 
and infants in accordance with current guidance (https://www.
cdc.gov/zika/pdfs/zikapreg_screeningtool.pdf) (8,12). Zika 
virus testing of infants is recommended for 1) all infants born 
to women with laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection in 
pregnancy and 2) infants with findings suggestive of congenital 
Zika syndrome born to women with an epidemiologic link 
suggesting possible transmission, regardless of maternal testing 
results. Infants without abnormalities born to women with an 
epidemiological link suggesting possible Zika virus exposure 
during pregnancy, and for whom maternal testing was not per-
formed or was performed more than 12 weeks after exposure, 
should have a comprehensive exam. If there is concern about 
infant follow-up or maternal testing is not performed, infant 
Zika virus testing should be considered. The initial evaluation 
of infants should include a comprehensive physical examination, 
including a neurologic examination, postnatal neuroimaging, 
and standard newborn hearing screen. Additional evaluation 
might be considered based on clinical and laboratory findings, 
however routine developmental assessment is recommended 
as part of pediatric care (8). Based on initial USZPR reports, 
most infants born to women with laboratory evidence of 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13 
371
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Key Points
• In 2016, a total of 1,297 pregnancies with possible 
recent Zika virus infection were reported to the U.S. 
Zika Pregnancy Registry from 44 states.
• Approximately one in 10 pregnancies with laboratory-
confirmed Zika virus infection resulted in a fetus or 
infant with Zika virus–associated birth defects.
• The proportion of fetuses and infants with Zika virus–
associated birth defects was highest among those with 
first trimester Zika virus infections.
• Only 25% of infants from pregnancies with possible 
recent Zika virus infection reported receiving postnatal 
neuroimaging.
• Identification and follow-up care of infants born to 
mothers with laboratory evidence of possible recent 
Zika virus infection during pregnancy and infants with 
congenital Zika virus infection can ensure that 
appropriate intervention services are available to 
affected infants.
• Additional information is available at https://www.cdc.
gov/vitalsigns/.
possible recent Zika virus infection during pregnancy might 
not be receiving the recommended evaluation (e.g., postnatal 
neuroimaging). CDC is working with public health officials, 
professional societies, and health care providers to increase 
awareness of and adherence to CDC guidance for the evaluation 
and management of infants with possible congenital Zika virus 
infection. Identification and follow-up care of infants born to 
mothers with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy and infants with possible congenital 
Zika virus infection can ensure that appropriate intervention 
services are available to affected infants.
Acknowledgments
Alabama Zika Response Team, Alabama Department of Public 
Health; Alaska Division of Public Health; Division of Epidemiology-
Disease Surveillance & Investigation, District of Columbia 
Department of Health; Illinois Department of Public Health Zika 
Response Team; The Iowa Department of Public Health; Kansas 
Department of Health and Environment; Kentucky Department for 
Public Health Zika Pregnancy Workgroup; Michigan Zika Pregnancy 
Registry Workgroup, Michigan Department of Health and Human 
Services; Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services; Office 
of Public Health Informatics and Epidemiology, Nevada Division of 
Public and Behavioral Health; Oregon Public Health Division Acute 
and Communicable Disease Program; Center for Acute Infectious 
Disease Epidemiology, Rhode Island Department of Health; Birth 
Defects Epidemiology and Surveillance Branch, Texas Department 
of State Health Services; Texas Department of State Health Services; 
Wisconsin Division of Public Health.
 1Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on 
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 2Division of Reproductive 
Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 
CDC; 3New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; 4Oak Ridge 
Institute for Science and Education; 5Florida Department of Health; 6Texas 
Department of State Health Services; 7Division of High-Consequence 
Pathogens and Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases, CDC; 8Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
9Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 10New York State Department of Health; 
11Virginia Department of Health; 12Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 
13Office of the Director, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, CDC; 14Office of the Director, National Center on Birth Defects 
and Developmental Disabilities, CDC.
Corresponding author: Margaret A. Honein, eocbirthdef@cdc.gov, 
404-639-3286.
U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry Collaboration
Jennifer Adair, MSW, Maricopa County Department of Public 
Health, Arizona; Irene Ruberto, PhD, Arizona Department of Health 
Services; Dirk T. Haselow, MD, PhD, Arkansas Department of Health; 
Lucille Im, MPH, Arkansas Department of Health; Wendy Jilek, MPH, 
California Department of Public Health; Monica S. Lehmann, MPH, 
MSN, California Department of Public Health, Center for Family 
Health, California Birth Defects Monitoring Program; Richard Olney, 
MD, California Department of Public Health; Charsey Cole Porse, 
PhD, California Department of Public Health; Karen C. Ramstrom, 
DO, California Department of Public Health; Similoluwa Sowunmi, 
MPH, California Department of Public Health; Natalie S. Marzec, 
MD, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment; Karin 
Davis, Connecticut Department of Public Health; Brenda Esponda-
Morrison, Connecticut Department of Public Health; M. Zachariah 
Fraser, Connecticut Department of Public Health; Colleen Ann 
O’Connor, MPH, Connecticut Department of Public Health; Wendy 
Chung, MD, Dallas County Health and Human Services; Folasuyi 
Richardson, MPH, Dallas County Health and Human Services; Taylor 
Sexton, MPH, Dallas County Health and Human Services; Meredith E. 
Stocks, MPH, Dallas County Health and Human Services; Senait 
Woldai, MPH, Dallas County Health and Human Services; Amanda 
M. Bundek, Delaware Division of Public Health; Jennifer Zambri, 
MBA, Delaware Division of Public Health, Office of Infectious Disease 
Epidemiology; Cynthia Goldberg, Miami/Dade County Health 
Department, Florida Department of Health; Leah Eisenstein, MPH, 
Florida Department of Health; Jennifer Jackson, MPH, Orange County 
Health Department, Florida Department of Health; Russell Kopit, 
MPH, Palm Beach County Health Department, Florida Department 
of Health; Teresa Logue, MPH, Miami/Dade County Health 
Department, Florida Department of Health; Raphael Mendoza, 
Broward County Health Department, Florida Department of Health; 
Amanda Feldpausch, MPH, Georgia Department of Public Health; 
Teri Graham, MPH, Georgia Department of Public Health; Sylvia 
Mann, MS, Hawaii Department of Health; Sarah Y. Park, MD, Hawaii 
Department of Health; Kris Kelly Carter, DVM, Idaho Division of 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
372 
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Public Health, CDC, U.S. Public Health Service; Emily J. Potts, MPH, 
Indiana State Department of Health; Taryn Stevens, MPH, Indiana 
State Department of Health; Sean Simonson, MPH, Louisiana 
Department of Health; Julius L. Tonzel, MPH, Louisiana Department 
of Health; Shari Davis, MPH, Maine Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention; Sara Robinson, MPH, Maine Department of Health and 
Human Services; Judie K. Hyun, MHS, Maryland Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene; Erin M. Jenkins, MPH, Maryland 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Monika Piccardi, 
Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Lawrence D. 
Reid, PhD, Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; 
Julie E. Dunn, PhD, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Cathleen A. Higgins, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Angela E. Lin, MD, Massachusetts General Hospital for Children; 
Gerlinde S. Munshi, MA, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Kayleigh Sandhu, MPH, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Sarah J. Scotland, MPH, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Susan Soliva, MPH, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; 
Glenn Copeland, MBA, Michigan Department of Health and Human 
Services; Kimberly A. Signs, DVM, Michigan Department of Health 
and Human Services; Elizabeth Schiffman, MPH, MA, Minnesota 
Department of Health; Paul Byers, MD, Mississippi State Department 
of Health; Sheryl Hand, Mississippi State Department of Health; 
Christine L. Mulgrew, PhD, State of Montana; Jeff Hamik, MS, 
Division of Public Health, Nebraska Department of Health and Human 
Services; Samir Koirala, MSc, Division of Public Health, Nebraska 
Department of Health and Human Services; Lisa A. Ludwig, MD, 
Division of Public Health, Nebraska Department of Health and Human 
Services; Carolyn Rose Fredette, MPH, New Hampshire Department 
of Health and Human Services; Kristin Garafalo, MPH, New Jersey 
Department of Health; Karen Worthington, MS, New Jersey 
Department of Health; Abubakar Ropri, MPH, New Mexico State 
Department of Health; Julius Nchangtachi Ade, MD, DrPH, New 
York State Department of Health; Zahra S. Alaali, MPH, New York 
State Department of Health; Debra Blog, MD, New York State 
Department of Health; Scott J. Brunt, Wadsworth Center, New York 
State Department of Health; Patrick Bryant, PhD, Wadsworth Center, 
New York State Department of Health; Amy E. Burns, MS, New York 
State Department of Health; Steven Bush, MS, Wadsworth Center, 
New York State Department of Health; Kyle Carson, New York State 
Department of Health; Amy B. Dean, PhD, Wadsworth Center, New 
York State Department of Health; Valerie Demarest, Wadsworth Center, 
New York State Department of Health; Elizabeth M. Dufort, MD, 
New York State Department of Health; Alan P
. Dupuis II, Wadsworth 
Center, New York State Department of Health; Ann Sullivan-Frohm, 
New York State Department of Health; Andrea Marias Furuya, PhD, 
Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health; Meghan 
Fuschino, MS, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of 
Health; Viola H. Glaze, Health Research Inc; Jacquelin Griffin, New 
York State Department of Health; Christina Hidalgo, MPH, New York 
State Department of Health; Karen E. Kulas, Wadsworth Center, New 
York State Department of Health; Daryl M. Lamson, Wadsworth 
Center, New York State Department of Health; Lou Ann Lance, MSN, 
New York State Department of Health; William T. Lee, PhD, 
Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health; Ronald 
Limberger, PhD, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of 
Health; Patricia S. Many, MS, New York State Department of Health; 
Mary J. Marchewka, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department 
of Health; Brenda Elizabeth Naizby, New York State Department of 
Health; MaryJo Polfleit, New York State Department of Health; Michael 
Popowich, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health; 
Tabassum Rahman, MS, New York State Department of Health; 
Timothy Rem, New York State Department of Health; Amy E. Robbins, 
MPH, New York State Department of Health; Jemma V. Rowlands, 
MPH, New York State Department of Health; Chantelle Seaver, MS, 
New York State Department of Health; Kimberley A. Seward, MPH, 
New York State Department of Health; Lou Smith, MD, New York 
State Department of Health; Inderbir Sohi, MSPH, New York State 
Department of Health; Kirsten St. George, PhD, Wadsworth Center, 
New York State Department of Health; Maria I. Souto, MPH, Rockland 
County Department of Health; Rachel Elizabeth Wester, MPH, New 
York State Department of Health; Susan J. Wong, PhD, Wadsworth 
Center, New York State Department of Health; Li Zeng, Wadsworth 
Center, New York State Department of Health; Joel Ackelsberg, MD, 
New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Byron Alex, 
MD, New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Vennus 
Ballen, MD, New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; 
Jennifer Baumgartner, MSPH, New York City Department of Health 
& Mental Hygiene; Danielle Bloch, MPH, New York City Department 
of Health & Mental Hygiene; Sandhya Clark, MPH, New York City 
Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Erin Conners, PhD, New 
York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Hannah Cooper, 
MBChB, New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; 
Alexander Davidson, MPH, New York City Department of Health & 
Mental Hygiene; Catherine Dentinger, MS, MPH, New York City 
Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Bisram Deocharan, PhD, 
New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Andrea 
DeVito, MPH, New York City Department of Health & Mental 
Hygiene; Jie Fu, PhD, New York City Department of Health & Mental 
Hygiene; Gili Hrusa, MPH, New York City Department of Health & 
Mental Hygiene; Maryam Iqbal, MS, New York City Department of 
Health & Mental Hygiene; Martha Iwamoto, MD, New York City 
Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Lucretia Jones, DrPH, New 
York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Hannah 
Kubinson, MPH, New York City Department of Health & Mental 
Hygiene; Maura Lash, MPH, New York City Department of Health 
& Mental Hygiene; Marcelle Layton, MD, New York City Department 
of Health & Mental Hygiene; Christopher T. Lee, MD, New York City 
Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Dakai Liu, PhD, New York 
City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Emily McGibbon, 
MPH, New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; 
Morgan Moy, MPH, New York City Department of Health & Mental 
Hygiene; Stephanie Ngai, MPH, New York City Department of Health 
& Mental Hygiene; Hilary B. Parton, MPH, New York City 
Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Eric Peterson, MPH, New 
York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Jose Poy, MPH, 
New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Jennifer 
Rakeman, PhD, New York City Department of Health & Mental 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / April 7, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 13 
373
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Hygiene; Alaina Stoute, MPH, New York City Department of Health 
& Mental Hygiene; Corinne Thompson, PhD, New York City 
Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Don Weiss, MD, New York 
City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Emily Westheimer, 
MSc, New York City Department of Health & Mental Hygiene; Ann 
Winters, MD, New York City Department of Health & Mental 
Hygiene; Mohammad Younis, MS, MPA, New York City Department 
of Health & Mental Hygiene; Ronna L. Chan, PhD, North Carolina 
Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Public Health; 
Laura Jean Cronquist, North Dakota Department of Health, Division 
of Disease Control; Lisa Caton, MS, Oklahoma State Department of 
Health; Leah Lind, MPH, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Kumar 
Nalluswami, MD, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Dana Perella, 
MPH, Philadelphia Department of Public Health; Diane S. Brady, MS, 
Rhode Island Department of Health; Michael Gosciminski, MPH, 
Rhode Island Department of Health; Patricia McAuley, MSN, Rhode 
Island Department of Health; Daniel Drociuk, MT, South Carolina 
Department of Health & Environmental Control, Division of Acute 
Disease Epidemiology; Vinita Leedom, MPH, South Carolina 
Department of Health & Environmental Control, Division of Maternal 
and Child Health; Brian Witrick, MPH, South Carolina Department 
of Health & Environmental Control, Division of Acute Disease 
Epidemiology; Jan Bollock, South Dakota Department of Health DIS; 
Marie Bottomley Hartel, MPH, Tennessee Department of Health; 
Loraine Swanson Lucinski, MPH, Tennessee Department of Health; 
Morgan McDonald, MD, Tennessee Department of Health; Angela M. 
Miller, PhD, Tennessee Department of Health; Tori Armand Ponson, 
MPH, Tennessee Department of Health; Laura Price, Tennessee 
Department of Health; Amy E. Nance, MPH, Utah Birth Defect 
Network, Utah Department of Health; Dallin Peterson, Utah 
Department of Health; Sally Cook, Vermont Department of Health; 
Brennan Martin, MPH, Vermont Department of Health; Hanna 
Oltean, MPH, Washington State Department of Health; Jillian Neary, 
MPH, Washington State Department of Health; Melissa A. Baker, MA, 
West Virginia Office of Maternal, Child and Family Health; Kathy 
Cummons, MSW, West Virginia Office of Maternal, Child and Family 
Health; Katie Bryan, MPH, Wyoming Department of Health; 
Kathryn E. Arnold, MD, CDC; Annelise C. Arth, MPH, CDC; 
Brigid C. Bollweg, MPH, CDC; Janet D. Cragan, MD, CDC; April L. 
Dawson, MPH, CDC; Amy M. Denison, PhD, CDC; Eric J. Dziuban, 
MD, CDC; Lindsey Estetter, MS, CDC; Luciana Silva-Flannery, PhD, 
CDC; Rebecca J. Free,  MD, CDC; Romeo R. Galang, MD, CDC; 
Joy Gary, DVM, PhD, CDC; Cynthia S. Goldsmith, MGS, CDC; 
Caitlin Green, MPH, CDC; Gillian L. Hale, MD, CDC; Heather M. 
Hayes, CDC; Irogue Igbinosa, MD, CDC; M. Kelly Keating, DVM, 
CDC;  Sumaiya Khan, MPH, CDC, ORISE; Shin Y. Kim, MPH, 
CDC; Margaret Lampe, MPH, CDC; Amanda Lewis, CDC; Cara 
Mai, PhD, CDC; Roosecelis Brasil Martines, MD, PhD, CDC; Brooke 
Miers, MS, CDC; Jazmyn Moore, MPH, CDC; Atis Muehlenbachs, 
MD, PhD, CDC; John Nahabedian, MS, CDC; Amanda Panella, 
MPH, CDC; Vaunita Parihar, CDC; Mitesh M. Patel, CDC; D. Brett 
Rabeneck, MS, CDC; Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, CDC; Jana M. Ritter, 
DVM, CDC; Dominique C. Rollin, MD, CDC; Jeanine H. Sanders, 
CDC; Wun-Ju Shieh, MD, PhD, CDC; Regina M. Simeone, MPH, 
CDC; Elizabeth L. Simon, MPH, CDC; John R. Sims, CDC; Pamela J. 
Spivey, CDC; Helen Talley-McRae, CDC; Alphonse K. Tshiwala, MPA, 
CDC; Kelley VanMaldeghem, MPH, CDC; Laura Viens, MD, CDC; 
Anne Wainscott-Sargent, Carter Consulting; Tonya Williams, PhD, 
CDC; Sherif Zaki, MD, PhD, CDC; all of these individuals meet 
collaborator criteria.
References
1. Meaney-Delman D, Hills SL, Williams C, et al. Zika virus infection 
among U.S. pregnant travelers, August 2015–February 2016. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:211–4. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6508e1
2. Simeone RM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Meaney-Delman D, et al.; Zika 
and Pregnancy Working Group. Possible Zika virus infection among 
pregnant women—United States and Territories, May 2016. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:514–9. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6520e1
3. Honein MA, Dawson AL, Petersen EE, et al.; US Zika Pregnancy Registry 
Collaboration. Birth defects among fetuses and infants of US women 
with evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. JAMA 
2017;317:59–68. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.19006
4. Cragan JD, Mai CT, Petersen EE, et al. Baseline prevalence of birth defects 
associated with congenital Zika virus infection—Massachusetts, North 
Carolina, and Atlanta, Georgia, 2013–2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2017;66:219–22. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6608a4
5. Rabe IB, Staples JE, Villanueva J, et al.; MTS. Interim guidance for 
interpretation of Zika virus antibody test results. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:543–6. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6521e1
6. Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists. Zika virus disease 
and Zika virus infection 2016 case definition. CSTE position 
statement 16-IC-01. Atlanta, GA: Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists; 2016. https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/conditions/zika/
case-definition/2016/06/
7. Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al. Characterizing the pattern of 
anomalies in congenital Zika syndrome for pediatric clinicians. JAMA Pediatr 
2017;171:288–95. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.3982
8. Russell K, Oliver SE, Lewis L, et al.; Contributors. Update: interim 
guidance for the evaluation and management of infants with possible 
congenital Zika virus infection—United States, August 2016. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:870–8. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6533e2
 9. van der Linden V, Pessoa A, Dobyns W, et al. Description of 13 infants 
born during October 2015–January 2016 with congenital Zika virus 
infection without microcephaly at Birth—Brazil. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:1343–8. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6547e2
 
10. Alarcon A, Martinez-Biarge M, Cabañas F, Quero J, García-Alix A. 
A prognostic neonatal neuroimaging scale for symptomatic congenital 
cytomegalovirus infection. Neonatology 2016;110:277–85. https://doi.
org/10.1159/000446690
 
11. Bhatnagar J, Rabeneck DB, Martines RB, et al. Zika virus RNA 
replication and persistence in brain and placental tissue. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2017;23:405–14. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2303.161499
 
12. Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:739–44. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e1
