 Zurich Open Repository and
Archive
University of Zurich
Main Library
Strickhofstrasse 39
CH-8057 Zurich
www.zora.uzh.ch
Year: 2017
Oncolytic Virotherapy Promotes Intratumoral T Cell Infiltration and
Improves Anti-PD-1 Immunotherapy
Ribas, Antoni; Dummer, Reinhard; Puzanov, Igor; VanderWalde, Ari; Andtbacka, Robert H I;
Michielin, Olivier; Olszanski, Anthony J; Malvehy, Josep; Cebon, Jonathan; Fernandez, Eugenio;
Kirkwood, John M; Gajewski, Thomas F; Chen, Lisa; Gorski, Kevin S; Anderson, Abraham A; Diede,
Scott J; Lassman, Michael E; Gansert, Jennifer; Hodi, F Stephen; Long, Georgina V
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.027
Posted at the Zurich Open Repository and Archive, University of Zurich
ZORA URL: https://doi.org/10.5167/uzh-139465
Journal Article
Accepted Version
The following work is licensed under a Creative Commons: Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) License.
Originally published at:
Ribas, Antoni; Dummer, Reinhard; Puzanov, Igor; VanderWalde, Ari; Andtbacka, Robert H I; Michielin,
Olivier; Olszanski, Anthony J; Malvehy, Josep; Cebon, Jonathan; Fernandez, Eugenio; Kirkwood, John
M; Gajewski, Thomas F; Chen, Lisa; Gorski, Kevin S; Anderson, Abraham A; Diede, Scott J; Lass-
man, Michael E; Gansert, Jennifer; Hodi, F Stephen; Long, Georgina V (2017). Oncolytic Virotherapy
Promotes Intratumoral T Cell Infiltration and Improves Anti-PD-1 Immunotherapy. Cell, 170(6):1109-
1119.e10.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.027
 Page 1 of 36 
Oncolytic Virotherapy Promotes Intratumoral T-Cell Infiltration and Improves Anti‒PD-1 
Immunotherapy 
Antoni Ribas,1* Reinhard Dummer,2 Igor Puzanov,3 Ari VanderWalde,4 Robert H. I. Andtbacka,5 
Olivier Michielin,6 Anthony J. Olszanski,7 Josep Malvehy,8 Jonathan Cebon,9 Eugenio 
Fernandez,10 John M. Kirkwood,11 Thomas F. Gajewski,12 Lisa Chen,13 Kevin S. Gorski,14 
Abraham A. Anderson,13 Scott J. Diede,15 Michael E. Lassman,14 15 Jennifer Gansert,13 F. 
Stephen Hodi,16 Georgina V. Long17 
1University of California at Los Angeles, Medical CenterJonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 2University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 3Roswell 
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA; 4The West Clinic, Memphis, TN, USA; 5University of 
Utah Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 6Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland; 7Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 8Hospital 
Clinic i Provincial de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 9Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research 
Institute, Austin Health, School of Cancer Medicine, LaTrobe University, Heidelberg, Victoria, 
Australia; 10Hopitaux Universitaires de Genèeve, Geneva, Switzerland; 11University of Pittsburgh 
Cancer Institute and Hillman UPMC Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 12The University of 
Chicago School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; 13Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, USA; 
14Amgen Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA; 15Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA; 
16Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA; 17Melanoma Institute Australia, The 
University of Sydney and Royal North Shore and Mater Hospitals, Sydney, NSW, Australia 
*Lead contact 
Correspondence: Antoni Ribas, MD, PhD, Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-
Oncology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA. 11-934 Factor Building, 10833 Le 
Conte Avenue. Los Angeles, CA 90095-1782. Telephone: 310-206-3928. Fax: 310-825-2493. 
E-mail: aribas@mednet.ucla.edu. 
 
Trial registration: 
ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02263508 
Character counts:  
40,494 (limit, 55,000 including spaces, title, authors, affiliations, 
summary, main body, author contributions, acknowledgments, 
references, main figure legends) 
Tables/figures:  
1/5 (limit, 7 total) 
Supplemental tables/figures: 4/6 
 Page 2 of 36 
IN BRIEF 
The intratumoral injection of talimogene laherparepvec, an oncolytic virus engineered to 
enhance immune recognition of cancer, resulted in a high response rate in combination with 
anti−PD-1 therapy. 
 
SUMMARY 
Here we report a phase 1b clinical trial testing the impact of oncolytic virotherapy with 
talimogene laherparepvec on cytotoxic T-cell infiltration and therapeutic efficacy of the anti−PD-
1 antibody pembrolizumab.  Twenty-one patients with advanced melanoma were treated with 
talimogene laherparepvec followed by combination therapy with pembrolizumab.  Therapy was 
generally well-tolerated, with fatigue, fevers, and chills as the most common adverse events.  
No dose-limiting toxicities occurred.  Confirmed objective response rate was 62%, with the 
complete response rate of 33% per immune-related response criteria.  Patients who responded 
to combination therapy had increased CD8+ T-cells, elevated PD-L1 protein expression, as well 
as IFN-γ gene expression on several cell subsets in tumors after talimogene laherparepvec 
treatment. Response to combination therapy did not appear to be associated with baseline 
CD8+ T-cell infiltration or baseline IFN-γ signature.  These findings suggest that oncolytic 
virotherapy may improve the efficacy of anti‒PD-1 therapy by changing the tumor 
microenvironment. 
 
 
 
 Page 3 of 36 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Treatment with anti−programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) or anti−PD ligand 1 (PD-L1) antibodies 
results in long-lasting antitumor responses in patients with a variety of cancers, and it is 
becoming standard of care treatment for patients with metastatic melanoma, carcinomas of the 
head and neck, lung, kidney and bladder, Merkel cell carcinoma, and Hodgkin disease (Sharma 
and Allison, 2015).  However, in all of these indications, only a subset of patients respond to 
therapy, with the majority of patients being primarily resistant to PD-1 blockade.  By analyzing 
baseline biopsies of patients treated with anti−PD-1 antibodies, it was previously observed that 
patients who did not respond were more likely to lack CD8+ T cells inside the tumor lesions 
(Herbst et al., 2014; Tumeh et al., 2014).  If there are no CD8+ T cells within a tumor that are 
inhibited by the PD-1:PD-L1 interaction, then PD-1 blockade therapy is unlikely to work (Pardoll, 
2012; Ribas, 2015; Spranger et al., 2013).  In this setting, combination immunotherapy designed 
to attract CD8+ T cells into tumors by altering the immune-suppressive tumor microenvironment 
may improve the antitumor activity of PD-1 blockade therapy. 
 
We hypothesized that the intratumoral administration of an oncolytic virus optimized to attract 
immune cells might favorably change the tumor microenvironment in the injected lesions and 
increase CD8+ T-cell infiltration.  Furthermore, reactive expression of PD-L1 in the tumor 
microenvironment could be a mechanism of resistance to oncolysis, which would be obviated by 
concurrent PD-1 blockade.  After combined therapy, tumor antigen−specific CD8+ T cells that 
were fully stimulated in the injected lesion would be able to traffic to and infiltrate distant 
metastatic lesions to exert systemic antitumor activity, thereby reversing primary resistance to 
PD-1 blockade therapy.  
 Page 4 of 36 
 
Talimogene laherparepvec is a genetically modified herpes simplex virus type 1 designed to 
selectively replicate in tumors and produce granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) to enhance antigen release, presentation, and systemic antitumor immune response 
(Liu et al., 2003).  In a prior phase 3 clinical trial, the intratumoral injection of talimogene 
laherparepvec into melanoma metastases improved the durable response rate compared with 
subcutaneous GM-CSF in patients with advanced melanoma (Andtbacka et al., 2015).  
Promising antitumor activity was demonstrated in a phase 1 study of talimogene laherparepvec 
combined with the checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab, which blocks the cytotoxic T-cell−associated 
antigen 4 (CTLA-4) (Chesney et al., 2016; Puzanov et al., 2016), and was confirmed in a phase 
2 randomized trial comparing the same combination with ipilimumab alone (Chesney et al., 
2017). There was a significant increase in the confirmed objective response rate by immune-
related response criteria (irRC) with the combination compared with ipilimumab alone (39% 
versus 18%, respectively, P=0.002). 
 
We designed a phase 1b trial in patients with advanced melanoma combining the intratumoral 
injection of talimogene laherparepvec with the systemic administration of the anti−PD-1 
antibody pembrolizumab, with baseline and repeated on-therapy biopsies; the primary objective 
was to test the safety of this combination and to explore its ability to boost inflammatory status 
of tumors.  Specifically, we evaluated the ability of talimogene laherparepvec to reverse the low 
baseline presence of intratumoral CD8+ T cells in some of the metastatic lesions and then 
mediate increased objective tumor responses systemically. 
 
 Page 5 of 36 
RESULTS  
 
A Phase 1b Clinical Trial Combining Talimogene Laherparepvec With Pembrolizumab 
The phase 1b trial included a baseline biopsy before initiation of intratumoral talimogene 
laherparepvec injections, with a first injection of up to 4 mL × 106 plaque-forming units (pfu) per 
mL with the goal of inducing seroconversion and a protective immune response to the oncolytic 
viral vector, followed 3 weeks later with repeated injections of the full dose of up to 4 mL × 108 
pfu/mL of talimogene laherparepvec every 2 weeks (Figure 1A).  A second tumor biopsy was 
performed before administration of the second full dose of talimogene laherparepvec and before 
commencing treatment with pembrolizumab 200 mg intravenously every 2 weeks coinciding 
with subsequent doses of talimogene laherparepvec.  The run-in period with single-agent 
talimogene laherparepvec administration was designed to analyze how intratumoral injection of 
this agent alters the tumor microenvironment before combination therapy began.  A third tumor 
biopsy was planned, if feasible, during the combination therapy part of the study (Figure 1A and 
Supplemental Figure 1. Related to Figure 1).  The clinical trial enrolled 21 patients with 
advanced melanoma and dermal, subcutaneous, or nodal melanoma lesions amenable to 
intratumoral injection between December 2014 and March 2015 (see Supplemental Table 1. 
Related to Figure 1 for full patient characteristics); seven (33%) had received prior anticancer 
therapy (including adjuvant therapy) and four (19%) had received prior radiotherapy.  Patients 
had a median (range) potential follow-up time of 18.6 (17.7−20.8) months at the time of 
reporting.  
 
 Page 6 of 36 
Combined Talimogene Laherparepvec and Pembrolizumab Did Not Increase the 
Toxicities From Single-Agent Therapy 
With the combined therapy, there were no novel or dose-limiting toxicities in any of the 21 
patients (see Supplemental Table 2. Related to Figure 1 for full details on toxicities).  The 
most common treatment-related toxicities were fatigue (62%), chills (48%), and fever (43%), 
which are anticipated with the intratumoral injection of talimogene laherparepvec (Andtbacka et 
al., 2015). Frequently occurring and partially overlapping pembrolizumab-related adverse events 
were fatigue (62%), rash (33%), arthralgia (33%), fever (29%) and chills (29%), which are 
anticipated with this agent (Ribas et al., 2016). One event of grade 1 cytokine-release syndrome 
resulting in hospitalization and was described as possibly related to the combination.  The only 
other serious adverse events were attributed solely to pembrolizumab and included grade 3 
autoimmune hepatitis, grade 3 aseptic meningitis, and grade 4 pneumonitis (one patient each). 
In the patient with treatment-related aseptic meningitis, no herpes simplex virus was detected in 
the cerebrospinal fluid; the patient had stopped therapy with talimogene laherparepvec and 
pembrolizumab 1 month earlier and had already switched therapy to dabrafenib and trametinib 
at the time of first presentation of this adverse event.  
 
Antitumor Activity With Combined Talimogene Laherparepvec and Pembrolizumab 
The confirmed objective response rate as evaluated by investigators per irRC (Wolchok et al., 
2009) was 61.9% (95% CI, 38.4%–81.9%), with a confirmed complete response rate of 33.3% 
(95% CI, 14.6%–57.0%) (Table 1).  Responses occurred across all substages of melanoma 
(Figures 1B and C).  Nine patients presented a transient increase in overall tumor size during 
the administration of talimogene laherparepvec, in particular after the first dose (106 pfu/mL) and 
before receiving the 108-pfu/mL dose in combination with pembrolizumab; however, these 
 Page 7 of 36 
lesions later responded to combined therapy (Figure 1D).  Median progression-free survival 
(PFS) and overall survival (OS) were not reached at the time of last follow up (Figures 1E and 
1F).  The combination treatment resulted in a >50% reduction in 82% of injected, 43% of 
noninjected nonvisceral, and 33% of noninjected visceral lesions (Supplemental Figure 2. 
Related to Figure 1). Interestingly, among the seven patients with stage IIIB/IIIC disease, four 
patients had noninjected nonvisceral lesions.  In these patients, there were a total of 16 injected 
and 10 noninjected nonvisceral lesions (baseline and new) that were evaluable for assessment 
of percentage change in tumor area from baseline.  Fifteen injected lesions (93.7%) showed any 
reduction; 6 noninjected lesions (60%) showed any reduction (Supplemental Table 3. Related 
to Figure 1). 
 
Tumor Responses Independent of the Baseline CD8+ Infiltration, PD-L1 Status, and 
Interferon-γ Signature 
PD-L1 is induced by interferon gamma (IFN-γ) produced by tumor-infiltrating, antigen-specific T 
cells, in what is termed adaptive immune resistance allowing cancer cells to avoid the cytotoxic 
activity of T cells (Pardoll, 2012; Ribas, 2015).  Because these T cells are then blocked by 
PD-1:PD-L1 interactions, it is not surprising that patients who respond to single-agent PD-1 
blockade therapy have higher densities of baseline CD8+ infiltration, IFN-γ gene expression 
signatures, and PD-L1 expression (Herbst et al., 2014; Ribas et al., 2015; Tumeh et al., 2014).  
We analyzed baseline biopsies of patients in this study for CD8+ T-cell density, PD-L1 positivity, 
and IFN-γ gene signature.  As opposed to prior experience with single-agent pembrolizumab 
therapy (Ribas et al., 2015; Tumeh et al., 2014), responses in this clinical trial were evident in 
patients whose baseline biopsies had very low CD8+ T-cell infiltrates or negative IFN-γ gene 
signature.  Among 13 patients in whom biopsies revealed a CD8+ density <1000 cells/mm2, 
 Page 8 of 36 
nine patients went on to respond to therapy and four patients had disease progression (Figure 
2A).  Out of the five patients with baseline biopsies with a low IFN-γ signature, three patients 
went on to have a complete response and two had disease progression (Figure 2B).  There 
was only one baseline biopsy that was scored as PD-L1 negative, but that patient went on to 
have a complete response to the combined therapy (Figure 2B).  
 
Talimogene Laherparepvec Intratumoral Injections Increase CD8+ T-Cell Infiltration in 
Patients Who Respond to Combined Therapy 
Because some patients whose baseline biopsies had relatively low CD8+ cell density and were 
not positive for an IFN-γ gene signature went on to have an objective response, we analyzed 
whether the run-in period with single-agent talimogene laherparepvec had changed the tumor 
microenvironment by bringing T cells into metastatic melanoma lesions in patients who 
responded to therapy.  Indeed, immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis comparing baseline 
biopsies with biopsies performed after talimogene laherparepvec alone showed an increase in 
the density of infiltrating CD8+ T cells in eight out of twelve injected lesions available for 
analysis, which further increased in several of the biopsies obtained at the time of combined 
therapy (Figures 3A and B). In three patients with a response to therapy, the CD8+ density 
decreased in the on-therapy biopsy, and one additional patient had no change in CD8+ density. 
The three patients without a response all had a decrease in CD8+ density in the on-therapy 
biopsies.  Overall, the increase in CD8+ density was most evident in the injected lesions of the 
patients who went on to respond to therapy (Figure 3B), a relationship supported by logistic 
regression analysis (P=0.0048; Supplemental Figure 3A. Related to Figure 3; logistic 
regression described in methods).  The change in CD8+ infiltration density was variable in the 
noninjected lesions at week 6 even in patients who later responded to therapy, with the caveat 
 Page 9 of 36 
that there are only three such biopsies available for interpretation (Figure 3B; Supplemental 
Figure 3B. Related to Figure 3).  Some posttreatment tumor-depleted samples were not 
initially analyzed because of histologic absence of tumor in the sample, but upon reevaluation 
were found to have evidence of prior tumor content (indicated by open symbols in Figures 3B 
and C).  In the five patients with tumor-depleted samples at week 6, the CD8+ cell density was 
much higher in the injected lesions from the four responding patients as compared with the 
single nonresponder.  We also performed IHC for the cytotoxic granule component granzyme B 
(associated with the cytotoxic subset of CD8+ T cells and natural killer cells), which has been 
shown to increase in tumors after PD-1 blockade (Tumeh et al., 2014).  A trend suggesting 
increased granzyme B in tumors after talimogene laherparepvec and combination treatment 
was also observed, in particular for the biopsies with low residual tumor content (Figure 3C). 
Furthermore, on analysis of tumor gene expression data, we found that CD8α and IFN-γ 
mRNAs were elevated after treatment, providing additional supporting evidence for treatment-
related change in the tumor microenvironment increasing the number of IFN-γ−producing 
cytotoxic T cells (Figures 3D, 3E).  CD8α increased 1.7-fold (P=0.01) in injected lesions at 
week 6 compared with baseline and 1.44-fold (P=0.0012) in noninjected lesions.  Similarly, the 
IFN-γ fold increases for injected and noninjected lesions were 1.63 (P=0.0004) and 1.41 
(P=0.17), respectively.   
 
Characterization of Changes in Immune Cell Infiltrates in Talimogene Laherparepvec 
Injected and Noninjected Lesions 
To further characterize the changes in tumors, we performed multiplexed immunofluorescence 
staining of paired biopsies at different time points from 13 patients.  We observed broad 
changes in tumor inflammation after talimogene laherparepvec at week 6, including increased 
 Page 10 of 36 
infiltration by immune cells and a clear increase in cells expressing PD-L1 in eight out of 10 
injected tumors and in two out of four noninjected tumors (Figure 4A).  Changes in immune 
infiltrates in the on-treatment biopsies from some patients included an influx of a large 
proportion of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, many coexpressing PD-1, as well as CD56+-expressing 
cells and CD20+ B cells (the full set of immunofluorescence analyses in biopsies is reported in 
Supplemental Table 4. Related to Figure 4).  Increases were also observed in the density of 
cells expressing the memory T-cell marker CD45RO and in cells expressing the regulatory T-
cell (Treg) marker Foxp3 (Figure 4A).  The magnitude of effector T cell (Teff) increases, 
however, was much larger relative to Treg, resulting in an overall decrease in the Treg to Teff 
ratio in tumors after talimogene laherparepvec (Supplemental Figure 4. Related to Figure 4) 
consistent with previous reports (Kaufman et al., 2010).  Supplemental Table 4. Related to 
Figure 4. additionally shows that there was no apparent change in the density of macrophages 
based on CD68 staining.  An example of increased CD8+ and PD-L1 density by 
immunofluorescence at weeks 6 and 30 relative to baseline is shown in Figure 4B.  At weeks 6 
and 30, tumor cells costaining for S100 (blue) and PD-L1 (red) are evident along with CD8+ T 
cells (green), showing coexpression of PD-L1.  The biopsy taken during combined therapy in a 
responding patient was nearly completely infiltrated by CD8+ T cells.  Additional representative 
images are shown in Supplemental Figure 5. Related to Figure 4.  Finally, to address 
potential changes in dendritic cell subsets, we assessed CD141 (marker of Batf3 cross-priming  
dendritic cells) and CD123 (a marker of plasmacytoid dendritic cells) mRNA levels.  We did not 
observe significant changes in either marker in biopsies from talimogene laherparepvec–
injected and –noninjected lesions from week 1 to 6 (Supplemental Figure 6. Related to Figure 
4). 
 
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
 Page 11 of 36 
Changes in the Functional Phenotype of Circulating T Cells With Combined Therapy 
We also analyzed changes in immune cells in peripheral blood as a potential pharmacodynamic 
effect of the single-agent and combined therapy. After talimogene laherparepvec single-agent 
therapy, the majority of patients had an increase in the number of circulating CD8+ and CD4+ 
T cells in peripheral blood, which did not increase further when pembrolizumab was added 
(Figures 5A and B).  However, the addition of pembrolizumab tended to increase the number of 
dividing CD8+ T cells in circulation as indicated by increases in Ki67+CD3+CD8+ T cells 
(Figure 5C).  Analysis of the expression of different immune checkpoint receptors in the 
circulating CD3+CD8+ T cells revealed an increase in PD-1 and TIM-3 (a molecule expressed 
on IFN-γ−producing CD8+ and CD4+ T cells) with single-agent talimogene laherparepvec 
therapy (Figures 5D and E), whereas there was no change in B- and T-lymphocyte attenuator 
protein (BTLA; Figure 5F).  No associations of response with baseline cell levels or changes 
over time passed our false discovery controls. 
 
 
 Page 12 of 36 
DISCUSSION 
 
This first-in-human combination immunotherapy clinical trial demonstrates a high overall and 
complete response rate in patients with advanced melanoma, which was associated with 
changes in tumor biopsies that were mechanistically correlated with the hypothesis that the 
injection of the oncolytic virus talimogene laherparepvec would change the tumor 
microenvironment by attracting T cells that may induce a systemic response in distant 
metastases after subsequent blockade of PD-1 with pembrolizumab.  Indeed, during the run-in 
period of the study with single-agent talimogene laherparepvec intratumoral administration, 
there was evidence of a systemic increase in circulating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and increased 
CD8+ T-cell infiltration into tumors.  These T cells expressed PD-1 and the tumor cells 
expressed PD-L1, likely limiting the antitumor activity of single-agent talimogene laherparepvec, 
which benefitted from PD-1 blockade, thereby resulting in clinical activity beyond what would be 
expected with either therapy alone.  The benefit of increased responses was achieved with a 
low rate of toxicities, most of which were expected with the single-agent use of talimogene 
laherparepvec or pembrolizumab (Andtbacka et al., 2015; Ribas et al., 2016).  
 
PD-1 blockade therapy with pembrolizumab or nivolumab leads to an objective response of 
approximately 35% to 40% for treatment-naive patients with metastatic melanoma (Ribas et al., 
2016; Robert et al., 2015a; Robert et al., 2015b).  Although the need to select patients who had 
injectable lesions may have skewed the population toward those with a good prognosis, an 
overall response rate of 62% and a CR rate of 33% is unlikely to be a result of anti−PD-1 
therapy alone.  In a study of 655 patients treated with pembrolizumab, there were 34 patients 
who had only skin and nodal metastases (stage M1a), and the overall response rate in this 
 Page 13 of 36 
group of patients was 38% (Ribas et al., 2016).  When evaluating the efficacy outcomes of the 
current study, it is important to note that the primary objective of this study was to evaluate the 
safety of the combination of talimogene laherparepvec and pembrolizumab in patients with 
advanced melanoma.  Therefore, we acknowledge that the interpretation of the efficacy 
outcomes is limited by the small size of the study population (n=21), and the limited number of 
enrolled patients with stage IV M1c disease.  Only a randomized trial would be able to 
definitively demonstrate that the combination is better than either single-agent pembrolizumab 
or talimogene laherparepvec.  An ongoing phase 3 clinical trial is currently comparing systemic 
administration of pembrolizumab with intralesional injection of talimogene laherparepvec or 
placebo in patients with stage IIIB–IV melanoma (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02263508).   
 
To significantly increase the response rate to single-agent anti−PD-1, a new combination 
therapy should address the major mechanism for primary resistance.  Patients whose baseline 
biopsies had low densities of CD8+ T cells, lack of significant IFN-γ expression, and resulting 
low PD-L1 expression would be unlikely to respond (Postow et al., 2015; Ribas et al., 2015; 
Topalian et al., 2012; Tumeh et al., 2014).  Therefore, the combination therapy should increase 
the intratumoral infiltration by CD8+ T cells, which may attract enough T cells with tumor 
specificity to reverse the primary resistance to PD-1 blockade therapy (Chen et al., 2016; Ribas, 
2015).  Our data suggest that talimogene laherparepvec may provide this combinatorial effect. 
In this study, the number of patients with tumors with low baseline CD8+ density and a low IFN-
γ signature who had an objective response to combined therapy was high compared with prior 
trials of single-agent pembrolizumab (Ribas et al., 2015; Tumeh et al., 2014). 
 
 Page 14 of 36 
Evidence that local administration of talimogene laherparepvec contributed to a systemic 
antitumor effect was provided by the increase in circulating CD8+ and CD4+ T cells and the 
increase in inflammation observed in tumors not injected with talimogene laherparepvec before 
the introduction of pembrolizumab.  In the pivotal single agent study of talimogene 
laherparepvec, a decrease in tumor size was observed in 15% of evaluable, noninjected, 
measurable visceral lesions (Andtbacka et al., 2015; Andtbacka et al., 2016).  We also observed 
reductions in dimensions of noninjected lesions, including both visceral and nonvisceral lesions 
(including in patients with stage IIIB/IIIC disease).  Approximately two out of the four week 6 
noninjected lesions showed increased CD8+ density and PD-L1 (by immunofluorescence), and 
three out of five for IFN-γ mRNA.  Alternatively, talimogene laherparepvec’s unique properties 
(incorporating local GM-CSF for dendritic cell recruitment together with its own innate immune 
stimulation via toll-like receptors and cytoplasmic sensing pathways to promote adaptive 
immune responses) may provide a unique set of signals, making it ideal for immunotherapy 
combinations, including checkpoint inhibitors.  Although we did not detect any differences in 
dendritic cell subset markers from week 1 to week 6 in the either injected or noninjected lesions 
(Supplemental Figure 6) it is possible that the late timing of the biopsies (with week 6 occurring 
2 weeks after the previous talimogene laherparepvec injection) was not optimal to address this 
question.  Another possibility is that the selected marker, CD141 (mRNA), was not specific 
enough to accurately represent Batf3 DC abundance. Therefore, we also evaluated additional 
Batf3 DC markers, IRF8 and XCR1, but significant changes were not observed for these 
markers either. Future studies evaluating biopsies soon after talimogene laherparepvec injection 
will be needed to determine the timing of dendritic cell recruitment and to address the role of 
local GM-CSF.  Further information on events leading to CD8 infiltration is provided by 
preclinical studies.  Administration of OncoVEXmGM-CSF (talimogene laherparepvec with the 
mouse GM-CSF transgene) alone or in combination with checkpoint blockade in an A20 
contralateral murine tumor model (Moesta et al. Clin Cancer Res 2017; in press) (Moesta et al., 
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
 Page 15 of 36 
2017). Treatment with OncoVEXmGM-CSF in combination with checkpoint blockade resulted in 
increased tumor-specific CD8+ T cells and also anti-AH1 T cells and systemic efficacy. 
 
We will seek confirmation of the conclusions from this 21-patient phase 1b study (eg, lack of 
requirement for baseline tumor infiltration) in the ongoing phase 3 study of the combination of 
talimogene laherparepvec plus pembrolizumab, which is currently accruing 660 patients, half 
receiving combination therapy and half receiving pembrolizumab with intratumoral placebo in 
the control arm (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02263508). Also, to further evaluate systemic effects of 
talimogene laherparepvec, a separate biomarker study is ongoing to evaluate baseline and post 
talimogene laherparepvec noninjected tumors from over 100 patients (ClinicalTrials.gov, 
NCT02366195).  This will help provide follow-up data on findings from the small set of tumor 
biopsies not injected with talimogene laherparepvec in this series, many of which showed 
increased tumor inflammation. 
 
In conclusion, the high response rate in this phase 1 clinical trial and the mechanistic changes 
documented in patient biopsies suggest that the combination of talimogene laherparepvec and 
pembrolizumab may be able to overcome some limitations of either single agent therapy and 
provide responses beyond what would be expected with either talimogene laherparepvec or 
pembrolizumab administered alone. 
 
 
 Page 16 of 36 
STAR METHODS 
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING  
Further information and requests for reagents and/or data may be directed to the Lead Contact, 
Toni Ribas (aribas@mednet.ucla.edu).  Any sharing of materials or data may be subject to 
material transfer agreements and/or data-sharing agreements per the requirements of the study 
sponsors and applicable legislation. 
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND PATIENT DETAILS 
Eligible patients (≥18 years) had histologically confirmed, surgically unresectable, stage IIIB to 
IV cutaneous melanoma; measurable disease (≥1 melanoma lesion with longest diameter ≥10 
mm); and ≥1 injectable cutaneous, subcutaneous, or nodal melanoma lesion(s) ≥10 mm in 
longest diameter, either alone or in aggregate, for which surgery was not recommended.   
Patients were required to have adequate performance status and hematologic, hepatic, renal, 
and coagulation function.  Patients were excluded if they had uveal/mucosal melanoma; had 
previously received talimogene laherparepvec or any prior systemic anticancer treatment (ie, 
chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy) given in a nonadjuvant setting for 
unresectable, stage IIIB to IV melanoma; Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance 
status ≥2; active brain metastases; active herpetic skin lesions; prior complications from 
herpetic infection; or required systemic antiherpetic treatment other than intermittent topical use. 
Of the 21 patients included in this study, 13 (62%) were female and 8 (38%) were male.  The 
median (range) age of patients was 58 (37–89) years.  All patients provided written informed 
consent.  Study procedures were approved by an institutional ethics committee at each site. 
 Page 17 of 36 
METHOD DETAILS  
Study Design  
The phase 1b portion of the MASTERKEY-265 study was an open-label, multicenter, single-arm 
study that primarily evaluated the safety of intralesional talimogene laherparepvec in 
combination with intravenous pembrolizumab (Supplemental Figure 1. Related to Figure 1).  
Briefly, to seroconvert herpes simplex virus−negative patients, intralesional talimogene 
laherparepvec 106 pfu/mL was administered on day 1 of study week 1.  Subsequent doses of 
talimogene laherparepvec 108 pfu/mL were administered on day 1 of weeks 4 and 6 and every 2 
weeks thereafter.  Up to 4 mL (total volume) of talimogene laherparepvec could be administered 
by intralesional injection at each treatment visit; the volume delivered to each injected lesion 
was contingent on the diameter of the lesion (Hoffner et al., 2016).  The injected volume per 
lesion ranged from 0.1 mL for lesions ≤0.5 cm to 4.0 mL for lesions >5 cm in longest diameter.  
Talimogene laherparepvec administration continued until disappearance of injectable lesions, 
CR, confirmed disease progression (PD) per modified irRC (Wolchok et al., 2009), treatment 
intolerance, 24 months from the first dose of pembrolizumab, or end of study, whichever 
occurred first.  If toxicity occurred, talimogene laherparepvec doses could be delayed for up to 4 
weeks; delays >4 weeks resulted in permanent discontinuation. 
Pembrolizumab (200 mg) was administered intravenously every 2 weeks beginning on day 1 of 
week 6 (ie, at the time of the third dose of talimogene laherparepvec).  Pembrolizumab 
treatment was to be continued until confirmed PD by irRC, treatment intolerance, 24 months 
from the first dose of pembrolizumab, or end of study, whichever occurred first.  Pembrolizumab 
could be withheld or discontinued per protocol-specified rules consistent with the US prescribing 
information (Kaufman et al., 2010).  If pembrolizumab was withheld >12 weeks, pembrolizumab 
treatment was permanently discontinued.  
 Page 18 of 36 
The primary endpoint was incidence of dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs) starting from when both 
agents were given in combination.  Incidence of DLTs in the first 6 DLT-evaluable patients and 
additional safety data from all patients were evaluated by a dose-level review team comprising 
investigators and representatives of the Amgen/Merck study teams.  The combination would be 
declared tolerable if the incidence of DLTs was <33% during the DLT evaluation period.  
Secondary endpoints included confirmed objective response rate (ORR; the rate of CR plus 
partial response [PR]) as evaluated by investigators per irRC, (Wolchok et al., 2009) best overall 
response, and incidence of adverse events.   
Dose-limiting toxicities were defined as any of the following treatment-related toxicities occurring 
during the 6-week period from the beginning of pembrolizumab treatment: grade 4 
nonhematologic toxicity; grade 3/4 pneumonitis; grade 3 nonhematologic toxicity lasting >3 days 
despite optimal supportive care (except grade 3 fatigue); grade 3/4 nonhematologic laboratory 
value requiring medical intervention/hospitalization or persisting >1 week; grade 3/4 febrile 
neutropenia; thrombocytopenia <25 × 109/L if associated with a life-threatening bleeding event 
or bleeding event requiring platelet infusion; any grade 5 toxicity; or any toxicity requiring 
permanent discontinuation of talimogene laherparepvec or pembrolizumab.   
Study Clinical Assessments 
Adverse events occurring from week 1 to 30 days after the last dose of study treatment were 
recorded and graded using Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0. 
Tumor response was evaluated per modified irRC (Wolchok et al., 2009) by investigators.  CR 
was defined as the disappearance of all lesions; PR was defined as a decrease in tumor area 
≥50% relative to baseline; PD was defined as an increase in tumor area ≥25% relative to nadir; 
and SD was defined as any outcome not meeting the criteria for response or PD with ≥77 days 
elapsed after enrollment.  Responses were confirmed within 4 weeks from the date of first 
 Page 19 of 36 
documentation of response.  Tumor assessments were performed at screening, week 6 (prior to 
initiation of pembrolizumab), week 18, and every 12 weeks thereafter.  Radiographic imaging for 
assessment of lesions was performed using computed tomography, positron emission 
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or ultrasound.  Clinical measurement of cutaneous, 
subcutaneous, and palpable nodal tumor lesions was conducted with calipers.  Initial 
measurement of PD was confirmed by assessment of measureable/nonmeasureable new 
lesions as well as index lesions ≥4 weeks later.  If clinically stable, patients continued treatment 
while awaiting confirmation of PD. 
Biomarker Analysis 
Flow Cytometry 
T-cell subsets were analyzed in three immunophenotyping assays using fresh blood samples 
evaluated in regional flow cytometry labs (LabCorp, Cranford, NJ, USA; Mechelin, Belgium; 
Singapore).  First T-cell counts were derived from a BD TruCOUNT assay including the CD45, 
CD3, CD4, and CD8 markers.  Additionally, checkpoint markers on T-cell subsets were 
assessed in a second assay including PD-1, Tim3, and BTLA.  Finally, a third assay evaluated 
T-cell subsets for intracellular markers including Ki67. 
RNA Profiling and Interferon- γ Gene Signature  
Total RNA was isolated from 5-µm thick formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections fixed on 
positively charged slides.  Percentage tumor area was first assessed and either all tissue was 
scraped for isolation or if <50% tumor area was present, tumor tissue was macrodissected for 
isolation.  RNA isolation was performed using the High Pure FFPET RNA isolation kit from 
Roche Diagnostics (Indianapolis, IN, USA).  NanoString gene expression profiling was 
conducted using 50 ng of RNA run on the nCounter PanCancer Immune Profiling Panel 
 Page 20 of 36 
(NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA) per manufacturer’s instructions.  An IFN-γ gene 
signature score was obtained using a calculation that compared a calculated normalized value 
to a predefined weighted score for each gene within the signature. To determine these 
normalized gene expression values from the NanoString assay, the log10 transformed raw 
counts for each gene were subtracted from the log10 calculated mean of the housekeeping 
genes.  Of note, the normalized reference value determined here was used solely to derive the 
IFN-γ gene signature score and not for any statistical analyses.  
Immunohistochemistry 
PD-L1 expression in tumors was assessed using IHC as described previously (Daud et al., 
2016) using an investigational version of the Dako PD-L1 22C3 assay (Carpinteria, CA, USA). 
CD8 and granzyme B IHC analysis was performed at Mosaic Laboratories (Lake Forest, CA, 
USA).  A hematoxylin and eosin stain was performed and reviewed by a pathologist to verify the 
presence of melanoma and to define tumor areas as regions of interest for analysis.  The anti-
CD8 mouse monoclonal antibody clone C8/144B was used for CD8 IHC.  The anti-granzyme B 
mouse monoclonal antibody clone GrB-7 (Dako) was used for granzyme B IHC. 
Immunohistochemical detection was performed with a polymer-based detection method and a 
red chromogen.  Slides were scanned using a ScanScope CS or AT Turbo system (Aperio, 
Vista, CA, USA), the region of tumor was circled, and the density of positive cells (eg, CD8-
positive cells per mm2) was evaluated by automated image analysis.  To address the potential 
for tumor heterogeneity and ensure that it did not unduly influence the assessment of tumor 
biopsies, the IHC analysis plan required the pathologist to identify tumor areas by hematoxylin 
and eosin stain and for CD8 IHC analysis, for example, entire slides were scanned and 
automated cell counting applied to all tumor areas.  Thus, the numerical data are a reflection of 
the entire specimen. 
 Page 21 of 36 
Immunofluorescence 
Available paired, pre- and post-treatment biopsies were evaluated using MultiOmyx™ 
technology to stain 12 biomarkers using a single slide. Repeated cycles of staining using a pair 
of antibodies directly conjugated to either Cy3 or Cy5, followed by imaging and dye inactivation 
were performed according to published methods (Au et al., 2016; Gerdes et al., 2013). The 
staining was performed by NeoGenomics (Aliso Viejo, CA) to interrogate modulation of immune 
cells and checkpoint markers in tumors after treatment.  
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
Using a 6+3 trial design, 6 to 9 DLT-evaluable patients were required to assess the DLT profile 
of talimogene laherparepvec in combination with pembrolizumab, assuming a true DLT 
incidence rate between 11% and 33%.  Additional patients were enrolled to evaluate the 
association between biomarkers and response. 
The DLT analysis set included all DLT-evaluable patients enrolled in phase 1b who had the 
opportunity to be on treatment ≥6 weeks from the initial dose of pembrolizumab and who 
received ≥2 doses of talimogene laherparepvec and 2 doses of pembrolizumab in combination, 
or who experienced a DLT within 6 weeks of starting combination therapy.  The safety analysis 
sets included all patients who received ≥1 dose of talimogene laherparepvec or pembrolizumab. 
Predictive biomarker analyses included all patients with a baseline biomarker result; analyses of 
biomarker changes included all patients with a baseline biomarker result and ≥1 subsequent 
biomarker result. 
Corresponding exact 95% CIs were calculated for ORR and disease control rate.  PFS (time 
from enrollment to disease progression per modified irRC or death) and OS (time from 
enrollment to death) were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. 
 Page 22 of 36 
For cell density or H-score results from IHC, change from baseline was assessed with the sign-
test of the log2 ratio of postbaseline over baseline (week 1) in injected and noninjected lesions 
separately.  For flow cytometry results, change from baseline was assessed with a linear mixed-
effects model with baseline as a covariate for log10 ratio (absolute counts or molecules of 
equivalent soluble fluorochrome [MESF]) or percentage difference to/from baseline.  For 
immunofluorescence-based multiparameter imaging, effects on cell density were assessed with 
linear mixed-effects models for cube root of density with visit and injection status as factors.  For 
NanoString, gene expression changes from baseline were assessed with linear mixed effects 
models for normalized transcript count log2 ratio to baseline with covariates of total pre-
normalization transcript count, and baseline. Injected and noninjected lesions were evaluated 
separately. NanoString total transcript counts were normalized to 1 million prior to statistical 
analysis.  Only a single visit after baseline was fit with the mixed effects model, and only a 
single lesion per patient was fit by the model. Some patients had two (but not more than two) 
Nanostring results for a given visit and lesion. In these instances, the patient was included in the 
model each time to account for the correlation in results of these potential duplicate tests. Two 
rounds of testing were conducted: week 0 change from baseline for injected lesions, and week 0 
change from baseline for noninjected lesions. 
Association with unconfirmed best response per investigator as of August 2016 was evaluated 
with logistic regression of response (CR or PR) versus continuous biomarker results at either 
baseline or change from baseline at a given visit.  Transformed results were used for analyses. 
Injected and noninjected lesions were analyzed separately.  The Kruskal-Wallis test was also 
evaluated in cases of small sample size. 
The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at 5% with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, 
and flow cytometry analysis was stratified by a priority set of endpoints and reporting metrics 
(Abs, MESF, %). 
 Page 23 of 36 
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY  
The lead contact should be contacted for data set requests. As noted previously, sharing may 
be subject to data-sharing agreement.   
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 
The ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier for this study is :  NCT02263508.  The    
Sstudy Protocol is available as : supplemental material.  
 
 Page 24 of 36 
REFERENCES 
Andtbacka, R.H., Kaufman, H.L., Collichio, F., Amatruda, T., Senzer, N., Chesney, J., Delman, 
K.A., Spitler, L.E., Puzanov, I., Agarwala, S.S., et al. (2015). Talimogene laherparepvec 
improves durable response rate in patients with advanced melanoma. J Clin Oncol 33, 2780-
2788. 
Andtbacka, R.H., Ross, M., Puzanov, I., Milhem, M., Collichio, F., Delman, K.A., Amatruda, T., 
Zager, J.S., Cranmer, L., Hsueh, E., et al. (2016). Patterns of clinical response with talimogene 
laherparepvec (T-VEC) in patients with melanoma treated in the OPTiM phase III clinical trial. 
Ann Surg Oncol 23, 4169-4177. 
Au, Q., Nguyen, K., Padmanabhan, R., Kuller, A., Moler, E., and Hoe, N. (2016). MultiOmyx 
multiplexed tumor infiltrating lymphocyte panel provides comprehensive immunophenotyping 
from a single FFPE slide. Paper presented at: Proceedings of the 107th Annual Meeting of the 
American Association for Cancer Research (New Orleans, LA: AACR). 
Chen, P.L., Roh, W., Reuben, A., Cooper, Z.A., Spencer, C.N., Prieto, P.A., Miller, J.P., Bassett, 
R.L., Gopalakrishnan, V., Wani, K., et al. (2016). Analysis of Immune Signatures in Longitudinal 
Tumor Samples Yields Insight into Biomarkers of Response and Mechanisms of Resistance to 
Immune Checkpoint Blockade. Cancer Discov 6, 827-837. 
Chesney, J., Collichio, F., Andtbacka, R.H., Puzanov, I., Glaspy, J.A., Milhem, M., Hamid, O., 
Cranmer, L., Saenger, Y., Ross, M., et al. (2016). Interim safety and efficacy of a randomized 
(1:1), open-label phase 2 study of talimogene laherparepvec (T) and ipilimumab (I) vs I alone in 
unresected, stage IIIB- IV melanoma. Ann Oncol 27 (6), 379-400. 
Chesney, J., Puzanov, I., Ross, M., Collichio, F., Milhem, M., Chen, L., Kim, J.H., Garbe, C., 
Hauschild, A., and Andtbacka, R.H.I. (2017). Primary results from a randomized (1:1), open-
label phase II study of talimogene laherparepvec (T) and ipilimumab (I) vs I alone in unresected 
stage IIIB- IV melanoma. J Clin Oncol 35, abstr 9509. 
Daud, A.I., Wolchok, J.D., Robert, C., Hwu, W.J., Weber, J.S., Ribas, A., Hodi, F.S., Joshua, 
A.M., Kefford, R., Hersey, P., et al. (2016). Programmed Death-Ligand 1 Expression and 
Response to the Anti-Programmed Death 1 Antibody Pembrolizumab in Melanoma. J Clin Oncol 
34, 4102-4109. 
Gerdes, M.J., Sevinsky, C.J., Sood, A., Adak, S., Bello, M.O., Bordwell, A., Can, A., Corwin, A., 
Dinn, S., Filkins, R.J., et al. (2013). Highly multiplexed single-cell analysis of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded cancer tissue. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 11982-11987. 
Herbst, R.S., Soria, J.C., Kowanetz, M., Fine, G.D., Hamid, O., Gordon, M.S., Sosman, J.A., 
McDermott, D.F., Powderly, J.D., Gettinger, S.N., et al. (2014). Predictive correlates of response 
to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature 515, 563-567. 
 Page 25 of 36 
Hoffner, B., Iodice, G.M., and Gasal, E. (2016). Administration and handling of talimogene 
laherparepvec: an intralesional oncolytic immunotherapy for melanoma. Oncol Nurs Forum 43, 
219-226. 
Kaufman, H.L., Kim, D.W., DeRaffele, G., Mitcham, J., Coffin, R.S., and Kim-Schulze, S. (2010). 
Local and distant immunity induced by intralesional vaccination with an oncolytic herpes virus 
encoding GM-CSF in patients with stage IIIc and IV melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol 17, 718-730. 
Liu, B.L., Robinson, M., Han, Z.Q., Branston, R.H., English, C., Reay, P., McGrath, Y., Thomas, 
S.K., Thornton, M., Bullock, P., et al. (2003). ICP34.5 deleted herpes simplex virus with 
enhanced oncolytic, immune stimulating, and anti-tumour properties. Gene Ther 10, 292-303. 
Moesta, A.K., Cooke, K., Piasecki, J., Mitchell, P., Rottman, J.B., Fitzgerald, K., Zhan, J., Yang, 
B., Le, T., Belmontes, B., et al. (2017). Local Delivery of OncoVEXmGM-CSF Generates Systemic 
Anti-Tumor Immune Responses Enhanced by Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte–Associated Protein 
Blockade. Clin Cancer Res in press. 
Pardoll, D.M. (2012). The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev 
Cancer 12, 252-264. 
Postow, M.A., Callahan, M.K., and Wolchok, J.D. (2015). Immune Checkpoint Blockade in 
Cancer Therapy. J Clin Oncol 33, 1974-1982. 
Puzanov, I., Milhem, M.M., Minor, D., Hamid, O., Li, A., Chen, L., Chastain, M., Gorski, K.S., 
Anderson, A., Chou, J., et al. (2016). Talimogene laherparepvec in combination with ipilimumab 
in previously untreated, unresectable stage IIIB-IV melanoma. J Clin Oncol 34, 2619-2626. 
Ribas, A. (2015). Adaptive Immune Resistance: How Cancer Protects from Immune Attack. 
Cancer Discov 5, 915-919. 
Ribas, A., Hamid, O., Daud, A., Hodi, F.S., Wolchok, J.D., Kefford, R., Joshua, A.M., Patnaik, 
A., Hwu, W.J., Weber, J.S., et al. (2016). Association of Pembrolizumab With Tumor Response 
and Survival Among Patients With Advanced Melanoma. JAMA 315, 1600-1609. 
Ribas, A., Robert, C., Hodi, F.S., Wolchok, J.D., Joshua, A.M., Hwu, W.J., Weber, J.S., Zarour, 
H.M., Kefford, R., Loboda, A., et al. (2015). Association of response to programmed death 
receptor 1 (PD-1) blockade with pembrolizumab (MK-3475) with an interferon-inflammatory 
immune gene signature. J Clin Oncol 33, abstr 3001. 
Robert, C., Long, G.V., Brady, B., Dutriaux, C., Maio, M., Mortier, L., Hassel, J.C., Rutkowski, 
P., McNeil, C., Kalinka-Warzocha, E., et al. (2015a). Nivolumab in previously untreated 
melanoma without BRAF mutation. N Engl J Med 372, 320-330. 
Robert, C., Schachter, J., Long, G.V., Arance, A., Grob, J.J., Mortier, L., Daud, A., Carlino, M.S., 
McNeil, C., Lotem, M., et al. (2015b). Pembrolizumab versus ipilimumab in advanced 
melanoma. N Engl J Med 372, 2521-2532. 
 Page 26 of 36 
Sharma, P., and Allison, J.P. (2015). The future of immune checkpoint therapy. Science 348, 
56-61. 
Spranger, S., Spaapen, R.M., Zha, Y., Williams, J., Meng, Y., Ha, T.T., and Gajewski, T.F. 
(2013). Up-regulation of PD-L1, IDO, and T(regs) in the melanoma tumor microenvironment is 
driven by CD8(+) T cells. Sci Transl Med 5, 200ra116. 
Topalian, S.L., Hodi, F.S., Brahmer, J.R., Gettinger, S.N., Smith, D.C., McDermott, D.F., 
Powderly, J.D., Carvajal, R.D., Sosman, J.A., Atkins, M.B., et al. (2012). Safety, activity, and 
immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer. N Engl J Med 366, 2443-2454. 
Tumeh, P.C., Harview, C.L., Yearley, J.H., Shintaku, I.P., Taylor, E.J., Robert, L., Chmielowski, 
B., Spasic, M., Henry, G., Ciobanu, V., et al. (2014). PD-1 blockade induces responses by 
inhibiting adaptive immune resistance. Nature 515, 568-571. 
Wolchok, J.D., Hoos, A., O'Day, S., Weber, J.S., Hamid, O., Lebbe, C., Maio, M., Binder, M., 
Bohnsack, O., Nichol, G., et al. (2009). Guidelines for the evaluation of immune therapy activity 
in solid tumors: immune-related response criteria. Clin Cancer Res 15, 7412-7420. 
 
 
 
 Page 27 of 36 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
A.R., R.D., I.P., O.M., A.J.O., J.M., J.C., E.F., and G.V.L. participated in patient data collection, 
data acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data, and the writing and editing of the 
manuscript.  A.VW. and R.H.I.A. participated in the conception and design of the study, patient 
data collection, data acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data, and the writing and editing 
of the manuscript.  J.M.K., T.F.G., and A.A.A. assisted with the analysis and interpretation of the 
data and the writing and editing of the manuscript.  L.C. K.S.G., and F.S.H. participated in the 
conception and design of the study, assisted with the analysis and interpretation of the data, 
and contributed to the writing and editing of the manuscript.  S.J.D., M.L., and J.G. assisted with 
the analysis and interpretation of the data, and contributed to the writing and editing of the 
manuscript.  
 Page 28 of 36 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank the following individuals: Richard Scolyer, Robyn Saw, Andrew Spillane, 
Kenneth Lee, and Omgo Neiwig of the Melanoma Institute Australia for tumor excision biopsies 
to maximize tissue acquisition; Hajime Hiraragi (Amgen Inc.) for peer review of tumor biopsy 
analyses, Jessica Stern (Amgen Inc.) for flow cytometry peer review and organization of IHC 
image galleries for preparation of figures, David Kaufman and Christine Gause from Merck & Co 
for many hours of designing the study and the statistical plan for both the phase 1b and 3 
portions, and with special acknowledgment to Jeffrey Chou, MD, PhD, for his medical and 
scientific contributions to the design and execution of this study during his tenure as the Amgen 
medical monitor.  Antoni Ribas is supported by the NIH grant R35 CA197633.  I.P. is supported 
by NIH grant P30CA016056 to Roswell Park Cancer Institute. G.V.L. is supported by an 
Australian NHMRC fellowship and the Medical Foundation University of Sydney. Lastly, we wish 
to thank Meghan Johnson, PhD (Complete Healthcare Communications, LLC, Chadds 
FordWest Chester, PA), whose work was funded by Amgen Inc., and Emily Plummer, PhD  
(Amgen Inc.) and Mee Rhan Kim, PhD (Amgen Inc.) for assistance in the preparation of this 
manuscript.  The study was funded by Amgen Inc. 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
A. Ribas has received consulting fees from Amgen Inc. and Merck. R. Dummer has intermittent, 
project focused consulting and/or advisory relationships with Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, Amgen Inc., Takeda, and Pierre Fabre outside the submitted 
work. I. Puzanov has received consulting fees and honoraria from Amgen Inc. A. VanderWalde 
has received research grants from Amgen Inc. and consulting fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
AstraZeneca, and Amgen Inc. R. H. I. Andtbacka has received consulting fees from Amgen Inc., 
Merck, Takara, and Provectus. O. Michielin has previously served on advisory boards for 
 Page 29 of 36 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Roche, Novartis, and Amgen Inc., and has 
received travel assistance from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and Amgen Inc. 
A. J. Olszanski has received research grants from Takeda, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Kyowa, 
Immunocore, EMD Serono, Amgen Inc., Incyte, Eli Lilly, Advaxis, Mirati, Ignyta, Novartis, Pfizer, 
and Kura; and has received consulting fees from Merck, Takeda, Bristol-Myers Squibb, G1 
therapeutics, and Kyowa Hakko Kirin. J. Malvehy has received research grants from Almirall, 
Amgen Inc., Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol-Myers Squibb; has received consulting fees from 
Almirall, Amgen Inc., Pierre Fabre, and Leo Pharma; and has served on speakers’ bureaus for 
Amgen Inc., Almirall, Novartis, and Isdin. J. Cebon has received honoraria from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and Amgen Inc.; has 
served in a nonremunerative position of influence for Austin Health Oncology Information 
System project Control Group, Olivia Newton-John Cancer & Wellness Centre Executive 
Committee, and Olivia Newton-John Cancer and Wellness Centre MRI Advisory Committee; 
has served as a consultant/advisor for Amgen Inc., Bionomics, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, and Novartis; has received research funding to his institution from 
GlaxoSmithKline and CSL, has patents/intellectual property at GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol-Meyers 
Squibb, and Novartis; and is an employee of the Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute. 
E. Fernandez has received consulting fees from Amgen, Inc. J. M. Kirkwood has received 
research grants from Merck and Prometheus and has received consulting fees from Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Green Peptide, Roche, Solaran RX, Checkmate Pharmaceuticals, and Novartis. 
T. F. Gajewski has received research funding from Amgen, Inc., Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, 
Roche/Genentech, Ono, Incyte, and Seattle Genetics; has served on advisory board or as a 
consultant for Merck, Roche/Genentech, Bayer, Abbvie, Aduro, and Jounce; and owns stock in 
Jounce. L. Chen, K. Gorski, A. Anderson, and J. Gansert are employees of, and own stock in, 
Amgen, Inc. S. J. Diede and M. Lassman are employees of, and own stock in, Merck. F. S. Hodi 
has received research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb; has received consulting fees from 
 Page 30 of 36 
Amgen Inc., Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, EMD Serono, Celldex, and Genentech; and 
has received royalties to his institution (per institutional policy) from MICA Related disorders 
patent pending. G. V. Long has received consulting fees from Amgen Inc., Array, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Roche, and Pierre Fabre.  
 
 Page 31 of 36 
TABLES 
 
Table 1. Best Overall Responsea 
 
Talimogene Laherparepvec Plus Pembrolizumab 
(N=21) 
 
Totalb 
Confirmedb 
Patients with a response  
15 
13 
Response rate, % (95% CI) 
71 (48–89) 
62 (38–82) 
Best overall response, n (%)  
 
Complete response 
8 (38) 
7 (33) 
Partial response 
7 (33) 
6 (29) 
Stable diseasec 
1 (5) 
3 (14) 
Progressive disease 
5 (24) 
5 (24) 
Disease control rate, n (%) 
16 (76) 
16 (76) 
aResponse was evaluated per immune-related response criteria by investigators; data cutoff 
was August 31, 2016. 
bResponses were confirmed by a subsequent assessment at least 4 weeks later. 
cA best overall response of stable disease required an evaluation of stable disease no earlier 
than 77 days after enrollment. 
 
 
 Page 32 of 36 
FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
Figure 1. Melanoma study design and clinical response to combination of talimogene 
laherparepvec and pembrolizumab.  (A) Phase 1b study design schema.  Stars indicate the time 
of scheduled tumor biopsies.  (B) Computer tomographic scans of two patients with response to 
the combination therapy.  Melanoma metastases are marked with a blue arrow at baseline.  (C) 
Waterfall plot of best response change in tumor burden from baseline.  Patients were required 
to have baseline and ≥1 postbaseline tumor assessments to be included.  (D) Change in tumor 
burden over time.  (E) Kaplan-Meier analysis of progression-free survival.  (F) Kaplan-Meier 
analysis of overall survival. 
 
Figure 2. Combination of talimogene laherparepvec and pembrolizumab is effective in patients 
with low tumor CD8 density.  (A) Baseline CD8 density in tumor biopsies according to response 
rate.  Magnitude of bars indicates baseline tumor CD8 density in each patient’s baseline biopsy, 
and best overall response is indicated on x-axis and by bar color.  Red: CR; pink: PR; black: 
PD.  (B) Baseline PD-L1 by IHC status (1% cutoff) and IFN-γ signature score by NanoString 
analysis is shown under each patient’s CD8 result.  Best overall response per investigator is 
shown as of cutoff date of August 2016.  CR=complete response; IFN-γ=interferon γ; 
IHC=immunohistochemistry; NA=result not available; PD=progressive disease; PR=partial 
response. 
 
Figure 3. Talimogene laherparepvec increases tumor CD8 density in patients responding to 
combination of talimogene laherparepvec and pembrolizumab.  (A) Examples of pre (week 1) 
and post (week 6) talimogene laherparepvec and talimogene laherparepvec plus 
pembrolizumab (week 30) CD8+ density in tumor biopsies: visualization of cells stained with 
CD8 antibody with red chromogen.  Staining was quantified for tissue regions of interest 
 Page 33 of 36 
including CD8+ density in the tumor as shown for talimogene laherparepvec−injected tumors.  
(B) CD8+ density, and (C) granzyme B H-score is shown for baseline and postbaseline 
biopsies.  The left side in each panel shows postbaseline results from injected lesions, and the 
right side in each panel shows results from noninjected lesions.  Open circles indicate results 
from tumor biopsies that were depleted of melanoma cells but had pathologic features of having 
previously been infiltrated by melanoma cells such as melanin deposits.  Response is color- 
coded for best overall response per investigator (complete or partial response in red and 
nonresponse in blue).  (D) CD8α and (E) IFN-γ normalized mRNA transcript count were 
measured in the NanoString Pan Cancer Immune Profiling Panel.  IFN-γ=interferon γ. 
 
Figure 4. Talimogene laherparepvec increases tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte density and PD-L1 
expression in tumors.  Twelve-color immunofluorescence staining was performed on a single 
slide from paired pre− and post−talimogene laherparepvec tumor biopsies from each of 13 
patients.  Markers evaluated included S100 (as melanoma segmentation marker), CD3, CD4, 
CD8, PD-1, PD-L1, CTLA-4, CD45RO, Foxp3, CD56, CD68, and CD20.  (A) A subset of 
changes at week 6 from baseline in marker cell positive cell density for results with statistical 
significance (PD-L1, PD-1, CD8, CD4, CD56, CD20, CD45RO, and Foxp3) are graphed for 
noninjected samples (left) and injected samples (right).  Median change for each subset is 
shown with a horizontal line.  Response is color-coded for best overall response per 
investigator: complete or partial response in red and nonresponse in blue.  (B) Example of the 
combination of S100 (blue), CD8 (green), and PD-L1 (red) staining is shown at low (top row) 
and high (bottom row) magnification for a baseline biopsy from a patient who went on to have a 
partial response (week 1), week 6 after injection of talimogene laherparepvec, and at week 30 
after 
long-term 
treatment 
with the 
combination 
of 
talimogene 
laherparepvec 
and 
pembrolizumab.  CTLA-4=cytotoxic T-cell−associated antigen 4; I=biopsy of an injected 
 Page 34 of 36 
metastasis; PD-1=programmed death protein 1; PD-L1=programmed death ligand 1;  NI=biopsy 
of a noninjected metastasis. 
 
Figure 5.  Circulating T-cell subsets and expression of activation markers. Peripheral blood 
cells obtained from baseline, week 1, week 6, week 8, and week 30 were analyzed by flow 
cytometry.  (A) Fold change in absolute CD3+/CD8+ cells.  (B) Fold change in absolute 
CD3+/CD4+ cells.  (C) Percentage change in Ki67+ (CD3+/CD8+) cells.  (D) Percentage 
change in PD-1+ (CD3+/CD8+) cells at week 1 and week 6 only; after starting on 
pembrolizumab, the staining antibody competed for the same epitope.  (E) Percentage change 
in TIM3+ (CD3+/CD8+) cells.  (F) Percentage change in BTLA+ (CD3+/CD8+) cells.  P values 
for comparison with baseline are shown below data for each postbaseline visit, based on 
contrasts from linear mixed-effects modeling.  Response is color-coded for best overall 
response per investigator (complete or partial response in red and nonresponse in blue).  
BTLA=B- and T-lymphocyte attenuator; PD-1=programmed death protein 1. 
 
 
 
 
 Page 35 of 36 
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
Supplemental Figure 1 (Related to Figure 1). Disposition of patients enrolled in the study and 
biopsy availability for biomarker testing. 
 
Supplemental Figure 2 (Related to Figure 1). Changes in tumor burden at lesion level. (A) 
Injected lesion response, (B) noninjected, nonvisceral lesion response, and (C) noninjected 
visceral lesion response. 
 
Supplemental Figure 3 (Related to Figure 3). Responders had CD8 density increases in 
injected lesions after talimogene laherparepvec.  Changes from baseline (week 1) in CD8 
density as measured by IHC after talimogene laherparepvec treatment but before the start of 
combination therapy (W6) are plotted for responders and nonresponders separately.  (A) 
Changes in injected lesions and (B) noninjected lesions are shown on a fold change scale.  
Response was defined as best overall response per investigator of CR or PR and nonresponse 
as PD or SD.  Cancer cell−depleted samples are indicated with open circles.  Median fold 
change is indicated with a horizontal line (solid for all samples, dashed for only those with tumor 
present).  BL=baseline; CR=complete response; IHC=immunohistochemical; PR=partial 
response; SD=stable disease.  
 
Supplemental Figure 4 (Related to Figure 4). Talimogene laherparepvec decreases Treg 
fraction of CD4 T-cells in tumors. Twelve-color immunofluorescence staining was performed on 
a single slide from paired tumor biopsies at pre- and post-talimogene laherparepvec from each 
of 13 patients.  Markers evaluated included S100 (as melanoma segmentation marker), CD3, 
CD4, CD8, PD-1, PD-L1, CTLA-4, CD45RO, Foxp3, CD56, CD68, and CD20.  Changes from 
baseline in Treg fraction of CD4 T cells at week 6 are graphed for noninjected samples (left) and 
 Page 36 of 36 
injected samples (right).  Median change for each subset is shown with a horizontal line.  
Response is color-coded for best overall response per investigator: complete or partial response 
in red and nonresponse in blue.  CTLA-4=cytotoxic T-cell−associated antigen 4; PD-
1=programmed death protein 1; PD-L1=programmed death ligand 1; Treg=regulatory T-cell.  
 
Supplemental Figure 5 (Related to Figure 4).  Additional multiparameter imaging (MultiOmyx 
platform) examples from a patient with a partial response to therapy are shown for (A) the 
combination of S100, CD8, and PD-L1 (0.6- and 0.04-mm2 image area) at baseline (week 1), 
week 6 after injection of talimogene laherparepvec, and at week 30 after long-term treatment 
with the combination of talimogene laherparepvec and pembrolizumab.  (B) S100, CD3, CD4, 
and Foxp3 staining are shown (0.6- and 0.04-mm2 image area) for an additional patient.  In the 
0.04 mm2 images, white arrows indicate some of the FoxP3 expressing cells.  PD-
L1=programmed death ligand 1.  
 
Supplemental Figure 6 (Related to Figure 4).  mRNA levels of (A) CD141 (THBD, BDCA-3) 
and (B) CD123 (IL3RA) before and after talimogene laherparepvec treatment in injected and 
noninjected lesions.  No significant changes from baseline, adjusting for total RNA and baseline 
expression, or association with response were observed.  Blue dashed line indicates limit of 
blank.  
 
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
Formatiert: Schriftart: Kursiv
