 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
858 
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Vital Signs: Zika-Associated Birth Defects and Neurodevelopmental 
Abnormalities Possibly Associated with Congenital Zika Virus Infection — 
U.S. Territories and Freely Associated States, 2018
Marion E. Rice, MPH1,2; Romeo R. Galang, MD1; Nicole M. Roth, MPH1; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH3; 
Cynthia A. Moore, MD, PhD1; Miguel Valencia-Prado, MD4; Esther M. Ellis, PhD5; Aifili John Tufa, MPH6; Livinson A. Taulung, DCHMS7; 
Julia M. Alfred8; Janice Pérez-Padilla, MPH9; Camille A. Delgado-López, MPH4; Sherif R. Zaki, MD10; Sarah Reagan-Steiner, MD10; 
Julu Bhatnagar, PhD10; John F. Nahabedian III, MS1; Megan R. Reynolds, MPH1; Marshalyn Yeargin-Allsopp, MD1; Laura J. Viens, MD1; 
Samantha M. Olson, MPH1; Abbey M. Jones, MPH1; Madelyn A. Baez-Santiago, PhD1; Philip Oppong-Twene, MBChB1; Kelley VanMaldeghem, MPH1; 
Elizabeth L. Simon, MPH1; Jazmyn T. Moore, MPH1; Kara D. Polen, MPH1; Braeanna Hillman, MPH5; Ruta Ropeti6; Leishla Nieves-Ferrer, MS4; 
Mariam Marcano-Huertas4; Carolee A. Masao, DCHMS7; Edlen J. Anzures8; Ransen L. Hansen, Jr.8; Stephany I. Pérez-Gonzalez, MPH4; 
Carla P
. Espinet-Crespo, MPH4; Mildred Luciano-Román4; Carrie K. Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD3; Suzanne M. Gilboa, PhD1; Margaret A. Honein, PhD1
On August 7, this report was posted as an MMWR Early Release on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
Abstract
Introduction: Zika virus infection during pregnancy causes serious birth defects and might be associated with 
neurodevelopmental abnormalities in children. Early identification of and intervention for neurodevelopmental problems 
can improve cognitive, social, and behavioral functioning.
Methods: Pregnancies with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection and infants resulting from 
these pregnancies are included in the U.S. Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registry (USZPIR) and followed through active 
surveillance methods. This report includes data on children aged ≥1 year born in U.S. territories and freely associated 
states. Receipt of reported follow-up care was assessed, and data were reviewed to identify Zika-associated birth defects 
and neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection.
Results: Among 1,450 children of mothers with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy and with reported follow-up care, 76% had developmental screening or evaluation, 60% had postnatal 
neuroimaging, 48% had automated auditory brainstem response-based hearing screen or evaluation, and 36% had an 
ophthalmologic evaluation. Among evaluated children, 6% had at least one Zika-associated birth defect identified, 9% 
had at least one neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection identified, 
and 1% had both.
Conclusion: One in seven evaluated children had a Zika-associated birth defect, a neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly 
associated with congenital Zika virus infection, or both reported to the USZPIR. Given that most children did not have 
evidence of all recommended evaluations, additional anomalies might not have been identified. Careful monitoring and 
evaluation of children born to mothers with evidence of Zika virus infection during pregnancy is essential for ensuring 
early detection of possible disabilities and early referral to intervention services.
Introduction
Zika virus infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth 
defects, including structural abnormalities of the brain and eye 
(1–7). As infants with congenital Zika virus infection get older, 
problems such as epilepsy, vision loss, and developmental delays 
have been increasingly recognized (8). Early identification of and 
intervention for adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes have 
been determined to improve cognitive, social, and behavioral 
functioning and to be cost effective to society in general (9–12).
The most critical time to intervene and promote optimal 
brain development is during the first 3 years of life (9). To 
facilitate early identification and intervention, CDC released 
clinical guidance for the evaluation and management of infants 
with possible congenital Zika virus infection in January 2016 
(13). The guidance was based largely on existing guidelines 
for pediatric health promotion and care (14); expert opinion 
was incorporated from clinicians and researchers with knowl-
edge of congenital infections and of clinical care of infants 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31 
859
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
with birth defects as described in early reports (15–18). 
Recommendations for the care and management of infants 
with possible congenital Zika virus exposure and infants with 
one or more clinical findings consistent with congenital Zika 
virus syndrome have remained largely unchanged through sub-
sequent updates (19). Standard evaluation* at birth and during 
each well-child visit is recommended for all infants and young 
children with possible prenatal Zika virus exposure (13,19). 
Laboratory testing for Zika virus is recommended for infants 
born to mothers with laboratory evidence of confirmed or pos-
sible Zika virus infection during pregnancy and for infants with 
one or more clinical findings consistent with congenital Zika 
syndrome born to mothers with possible Zika virus exposure, 
regardless of maternal testing results. In addition to a standard 
evaluation, infants born to mothers with laboratory evidence 
of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
should have a cranial ultrasound or other brain imaging and 
a comprehensive ophthalmologic evaluation performed by 
age 1 month to detect subclinical brain and eye findings (19).
To better understand the effects of Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy on mothers and children from a national surveillance 
perspective, CDC collaborated with state, territorial, and local 
health departments on the U.S. Zika Pregnancy and Infant 
Registry (USZPIR)† to monitor pregnancy and infant/child out-
comes among pregnancies with laboratory evidence of confirmed 
or possible Zika virus infection (www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/zika/
research/registry.html). The USZPIR currently monitors out-
comes of approximately 7,300 pregnancies, over 4,800 of which 
are reported from the U.S. territories and freely associated states§ 
* Standard evaluation includes a comprehensive physical exam, including growth 
parameters; newborn hearing screen, preferably with automated auditory 
brainstem response (ABR); developmental monitoring and screening using 
validated screening tools recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics 
(https://www.aap.org/en-us/advocacy-and-policy/aap-health-initiatives/
Screening/Pages/Screening-Tools.aspx); and vision screening as recommended 
by the American Academy of Pediatrics Policy Statement “Visual System 
Assessment in Infants, Children, and Young Adults by Pediatricians” (http://
pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/137/1/e20153596). Infants should be 
referred for automated ABR by age 1 month if the newborn hearing screen was 
passed using only otoacoustic emissions methodology.
† The U.S. Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registry (USZPIR) refers to the Zika 
Pregnancy and Infant Registries implemented in all U.S. states, the District of 
Columbia, all U.S. territories, and U.S. freely associated states. The USZPIR 
is an enhanced surveillance system that collects data on pregnancy and infant/
child outcomes in pregnancies with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible 
Zika virus infection. In Puerto Rico, the USZPIR is also known as the Zika 
Active Pregnancy Surveillance System (ZAPSS). Children are followed through 
age 36 months in Puerto Rico and through age 24 months in other U.S. 
territories, freely associated states, and U.S. states.
§ U.S. territories and freely associated states reporting cases included American 
Samoa, Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Puerto Rico, and the 
U.S. Virgin Islands.
(https://www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/zika/data/pregwomen-uscases.
html). This report is the first to provide data on Zika-associated 
birth defects and neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly 
associated with congenital Zika virus infection identified during 
infancy and early childhood among children aged ≥1 year who 
were born in the U.S. territories and freely associated states.§
Methods
Pregnancies with laboratory evidence of confirmed or pos-
sible Zika virus infection¶ and infants resulting from these 
pregnancies are included in the USZPIR and followed through 
active surveillance methods (6). Data on birth defects and neu-
rodevelopmental outcomes were abstracted from prenatal, birth 
hospitalization, pediatric, and specialty care medical records 
using standardized methods and reported to the USZPIR. 
CDC provided technical assistance to all U.S. territories and 
freely associated states that reported cases to the USZPIR 
through the Zika Local Health Department Initiative (https://
www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/zika/research/lhdi.html) and the 
Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases 
Cooperative Agreement (https://www.cdc.gov/ncezid/dpei/
epidemiology-laboratory-capacity.html). This report includes 
children who, among pregnancies reported to the USZPIR, 
1) were born in U.S. territories or freely associated states; 2) had 
a date of birth on or before February 1, 2017, and  reached age 
1 year on or before February 1, 2018; and 3) had follow-up 
care reported to the USZPIR by June 1, 2018. For the purpose 
of this analysis, follow-up care was defined as clinical care at 
age >14 days reported to the USZPIR. Children from multiple 
gestation pregnancies were counted separately; infants who 
died during the first year of life were excluded.
Among children who met the definition for reported follow-
up care, the percentages who were reported to have received 
each of the following types of clinical care or evaluations, 
¶ Maternal laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection was 
defined as 1) Zika virus infection detected by a Zika virus RNA nucleic acid 
test (NAT) (e.g., reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR]) 
on any maternal, placental, fetal, or infant specimen (referred to as NAT-
confirmed) or 2) detection of recent Zika virus infection or recent unspecified 
flavivirus infection by serologic tests on a maternal, fetal, or infant specimen 
(i.e., either positive or equivocal Zika virus immunoglobulin M [IgM] and Zika 
virus plaque reduction neutralization test [PRNT] titer ≥10, regardless of dengue 
virus PRNT value; or negative Zika virus IgM, and positive or equivocal dengue 
virus IgM, and Zika virus PRNT titer ≥10, regardless of dengue virus PRNT 
titer). Infants with positive or equivocal Zika virus IgM are included, provided 
a confirmatory PRNT has been performed on a maternal or infant specimen. 
The use of PRNT for confirmation of Zika virus infection, including in pregnant 
women and infants, is not routinely recommended in Puerto Rico; dengue 
virus is endemic and cross-reactivity is likely to occur in most cases (https://
www.cdc.gov/zika/laboratories/lab-guidance.html). In Puerto Rico, detection 
of a positive Zika IgM result in a pregnant woman, fetus, or infant (within 
48 hours after delivery) was considered sufficient to indicate possible 
Zika virus infection.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
860 
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
recommended in CDC clinical guidance, were calculated: 
1) neuroimaging (cranial ultrasound, computed tomography, 
or magnetic resonance imaging) any time after birth; 2) hearing 
screen by automated auditory brainstem response (ABR) or 
audiologic evaluation by diagnostic ABR (ABR-based hearing 
screen or evaluation) any time after birth; 3) ophthalmologic 
evaluation any time after birth; 4) developmental screening 
or evaluation at age >14 days; and 5) physical examination, as 
indicated by reported growth parameters (head circumference, 
length, or weight) at age >14 days.
Data were reviewed by clinical subject matter experts to 
identify Zika-associated birth defects and neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus 
infection (Box). Data for each child were reviewed by at least 
two reviewers; discrepant review findings were discussed among 
clinical subject matter experts to reach agreement. Although the 
category of neural tube defects and other early brain malforma-
tions was initially included in the surveillance case definition 
for Zika-associated birth defects, it was excluded in this report 
because of growing evidence suggesting a lack of association 
of these defects with congenital Zika virus infection (6,20). 
Postnatal-onset microcephaly detected during follow-up care 
is distinct from microcephaly detected at birth and is included 
among neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated 
with congenital Zika virus infection (Box). Neurodevelopmental 
findings such as hearing loss, seizures, or swallowing abnormali-
ties consistently documented in reports of infants with possible 
congenital Zika virus infection were specifically selected for 
inclusion; however, the broad range of neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus 
infection necessitates inclusion of less specific but more prevalent 
categories, such as possible developmental delay. The percentages 
of these adverse outcomes were calculated among all children 
born to mothers with laboratory evidence of confirmed or 
possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy with reported 
follow-up care, as well as among the subset of children born to 
mothers with nucleic acid testing (NAT)–confirmed infection 
during pregnancy, with reported follow-up care.
A sensitivity analysis to address the concern about possible 
misclassification of microcephaly at birth** was performed by 
excluding infants with a birth head circumference measurement 
indicating microcephaly and no other Zika-associated birth 
defects, who subsequently had normal neuroimaging and at 
least two postnatal measurements with a head circumference 
 
** Microcephaly was defined as head circumference at delivery <3rd percentile 
for infant sex and gestational age, regardless of birth weight. When multiple 
head circumference measurements were available, the majority of those 
measurements had to be <3rd percentile for a designation of microcephaly. A 
clinical diagnosis of microcephaly or mention of microcephaly or small head 
in the medical record was not required. (https://www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/zika/
data/pregnancy-outcomes.html).
above the tenth percentile for the infant’s age and sex. Among 
infants tested after birth for Zika virus with either NAT or 
serologic tests (immunoglobulin M [IgM]) in serum, urine, or 
cerebrospinal fluid, the percent positivity is reported.
Results
The U.S. territories and freely associated states reported 
4,816 pregnancies with laboratory evidence of confirmed or 
possible Zika virus infection by June 1, 2018, including 4,320 
(90%) completed on or before February 1, 2018; 4,165 (96%) 
pregnancies resulted in 4,199 live-born infants, and 155 (4%) 
resulted in a pregnancy loss (Figure 1). Seven infants were 
excluded who would have reached age 1 year on or before 
February 1, 2018 and were reported to have died, including 
three who died during the first 14 days of life. By February 1, 
2018, a total of 2,141 (51%) children were aged ≥1 year, 
1,450 (68%) of whom had some follow-up care reported to 
the USZPIR after age 14 days.
Among these 1,450 children 1,376 (95%) had at least one 
physical examination reported after 14 days of life, 1,106 
(76%) had at least one developmental screening or evalua-
tion, 864 (60%) had postnatal neuroimaging, and 695 (48%) 
had at least one ABR-based hearing screen or evaluation. 
An ophthalmologic evaluation was reported for 522 (36%) 
children (Figure 2).
Among all 1,450 children with reported follow-up care, 
203 (14%) had a Zika-associated birth defect, neurodevelop-
mental abnormality possibly associated with congenital Zika 
virus infection identified, or both: 87 (6%) had at least one 
Zika-associated birth defect, 136 (9%) had at least one neuro-
developmental abnormality possibly associated with congenital 
Zika virus infection, and 20 (1%) had both (Table). Among 
the 1,386 (96%) children who did not have microcephaly 
detected at birth, 822 (59%) received neuroimaging, includ-
ing 14 (2%) who had at least one brain anomaly identified. In 
addition, among the 494 (36%) children who received an oph-
thalmologic evaluation, 12 (2%) had at least one eye anomaly 
identified. Thus, had these infants not received neuroimaging 
or ophthalmologic evaluation, 26 brain or eye anomalies in 23 
children might have gone undetected.
The sensitivity analysis to assess possible misclassification of 
microcephaly at birth identified 84 (6%) children with microceph-
aly among the 1,450 children who had follow-up care reported: 
five infants had microcephaly at birth with brain or eye anomalies 
identified at birth; 59 had microcephaly at birth with no brain 
or eye anomalies identified at birth; and 20 infants did not have 
microcephaly identified at birth but had postnatal identification 
of microcephaly. The 59 infants with only microcephaly at birth 
included 15 who had no other Zika-associated birth defects identi-
fied during follow-up care, had normal neuroimaging, and had 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31 
861
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BOX. Surveillance case classification — children, neonate to 2 years of age, born to mothers with any evidence of Zika virus infection 
during pregnancy
Zika-associated birth defects: Selected structural anomalies of the brain or eyes present at birth (congenital) and detected 
from birth to age 2 years. Microcephaly at birth, with or without low birthweight, was included as a structural anomaly.
• Selected congenital brain anomalies: intracranial calcifications; cerebral atrophy; abnormal cortical formation (e.g., 
polymicrogyria, lissencephaly, pachygyria, schizencephaly, gray matter heterotopia); corpus callosum abnormalities; 
cerebellar abnormalities; porencephaly; hydranencephaly; ventriculomegaly/hydrocephaly.
• Selected congenital eye anomalies: microphthalmia or anophthalmia; coloboma; cataract; intraocular calcifications; 
chorioretinal anomalies involving the macula (e.g., chorioretinal atrophy and scarring, macular pallor, and gross pigmentary 
mottling), excluding retinopathy of prematurity; optic nerve atrophy, pallor, and other optic nerve abnormalities.
• Microcephaly at birth: birth head circumference <3rd percentile for infant sex and gestational age based on 
INTERGROWTH-21st online percentile calculator (http://intergrowth21.ndog.ox.ac.uk/).
Neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection: Consequences of 
neurologic dysfunction detected from birth (congenital) to age 2 years. Postnatal-onset microcephaly was included as a 
neurodevelopmental abnormality.
• Hearing abnormalities: Hearing loss or deafness documented by testing, most frequently auditory brainstem response 
(ABR). Includes sensorineural hearing loss, mixed hearing loss, and hearing loss not otherwise specified. Failed newborn 
hearing screen is not sufficient for diagnosis.
• Congenital contractures: Multiple contractures (arthrogryposis) and isolated clubfoot documented at birth. Brain 
anomalies must be documented for isolated clubfoot, but not for arthrogryposis.
• Seizures: Documented by electroencephalogram or physician report. Includes epilepsy or seizures not otherwise 
specified; excludes febrile seizures.
• Body tone abnormalities: Hypertonia or hypotonia documented at any age in conjunction with 1) a failed screen or 
assessment for gross motor function; 2) suspicion or diagnosis of cerebral palsy from age 1 year to age 2 years; or 
3) assessment by a physician or other medical professional, such as a physical therapist.
• Movement abnormalities: Dyskinesia or dystonia at any age; suspicion or diagnosis of cerebral palsy from age 1 year to 
age 2 years.
• Swallowing abnormalities: Documented by instrumented or noninstrumented evaluation, presence of a gastrostomy 
tube, or physician report.
• Possible developmental delay: Abnormal result from most recent developmental screening (i.e., failed screen for gross 
motor domain or failed screen for ≥2 developmental domains at the same time point or age); developmental evaluation; 
or assessment review by developmental pediatrician. Results from developmental evaluation are considered the gold 
standard if available.
• Possible visual impairment: Includes strabismus (esotropia or exotropia), nystagmus, failure to fix and follow at age 
<1 year; diagnosis of visual impairment at age ≥1 year.
• Postnatal-onset microcephaly: Two most recent head circumference measurements reported from follow-up care 
<3rd percentile for child’s sex and age based on World Health Organization child growth standards; downward trajectory 
of head circumference percentiles with most recent measurement <3rd percentile. Age at measurement was adjusted for 
gestational age in infants born at <40 weeks’ gestational age through age 24 months chronological age.
at least two postnatal measurements with a head circumference 
above the tenth percentile for the infant’s sex and age. Excluding 
these 15 infants from the 87 with Zika-associated birth defects 
results in a decrease in the estimated percentage of affected children 
from 6% to 5%.
Among the 1,450 children whose mothers had laboratory 
evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy and who had follow-up care reported, 136 (9%) 
had neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated with 
congenital Zika virus infection identified (Table). One hundred 
sixteen (8%) had one or more neurodevelopmental abnormali-
ties possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection 
identified, but no Zika-associated birth defects; of these 116 
children, 58 (50%) had only possible developmental delay 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
862 
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 1. Children born to mothers with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy — U.S. Zika 
Pregnancy and Infant Registry, U.S. territories and freely associated states, February 1, 2017–June 1, 2018*,†,§,¶,**
Pregnancies with laboratory evidence of 
confrmed or possible Zika virus infection 
reported from U.S. territories and freely 
associated states
 
(n = 4,816)
Pregnancies reported as completed 
in U.S. territories and freely associated 
states by February 1, 2018
 
(n = 4,320; 90%)
Live-born infants 
 
(n = 4,199)
Children aged ≥1 year 
by February 1, 2018
 
(n = 2,141; 51%)
Pregnancies not reported as completed 
in U.S. territories and freely associated 
states by February 1, 2018 
(n = 496; 10%)
Pregnancy losses 
 
(n = 155; 4%)
Reported infant deaths 
(n = 7; <1%)
 
Infants aged <1 year by February 1, 2018 
(n = 2,051; 49%)
Children with no reported follow-up care 
as of June 1, 2018
(n = 691; 32%)
Children aged ≥1 year 
by February 1, 2018, 
with some reported  follow-up care 
as of June 1, 2018
 
(n = 1,450; 68%)
 * Percentages might not sum to 100 because of rounding.
 † Date and location of pregnancy completion were required to document a completed pregnancy in U.S. territories and freely associated states.
 § Live-born infants include 4,199 infants from 4,165 pregnancies (includes 34 multiple gestation pregnancies).
 ¶ Of the 691 children with no reported follow-up care as of June 1, 2018, 99 were reported to have moved out of U.S. territories and freely associated states.
 ** Of the 1,450 children aged ≥1 year by February 1, 2018, with some reported follow-up care by June 1, 2018, 154 were reported to have moved out of U.S. territories 
and freely associated states.
identified, and 25 (22%) had possible developmental delay 
with at least one other neurodevelopmental abnormality pos-
sibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection identified.
Among 943 pregnancies with NAT-confirmed Zika virus 
infection, 144 (15%) had a Zika-associated birth defect, neuro-
developmental abnormality possibly associated with congenital 
Zika virus infection identified, or both: 62 (7%) had at least 
one Zika-associated birth defect identified. Ninety-nine (10%) 
had at least one neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly 
associated with congenital Zika virus infection identified, and 
17 (2%) had both. 
Among the 1,450 children in this analysis, 607 (42%) did not 
receive testing for Zika virus infection in serum, urine, or cerebro-
spinal fluid. Among the 843 (58%) who did receive testing, 32 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31 
863
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE 2. Percentage of children aged ≥1 year born to mothers with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy reported to have received recommended clinical evaluations*,†,§,¶,** among children with reported follow-up care†† (n = 1,450) — 
U.S. Zika Pregnancy and Infant Registry (USZPIR), U.S. territories and freely associated states, February 1, 2017–June 1, 2018
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Ophthalmological
 evaluation
ABR-based hearing
screening or evaluation
Neuroimaging
Developmental screening
  or evaluation
Physical examination
after birth
Percentage of children reported to have received recommended clinical evaluation
Reported clinical evaluation
Abbreviation: ABR = auditory brainstem response.
 * Physical examination after birth denotes at least one physical examination, indicated by length, weight, or head circumference measurements and date of 
measurements, at age >14 days reported to the USZPIR. 
 † Developmental screening or evaluation denotes at least one developmental screening or evaluation result at age >14 days reported to the USZPIR.
 § Neuroimaging denotes at least one postnatal imaging of the infant head (cranial ultrasound, computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging) result 
reported to the USZPIR. 
 ¶ ABR-based hearing screening or evaluation denotes at least one ABR-based hearing screen or evaluation result reported to the USZPIR. Of 1,450 children with 
reported follow-up care, 96% had at least one hearing screen or evaluation of any kind reported to the USZPIR.
 ** Ophthalmological evaluation denotes at least one ophthalmological evaluation result reported to the USZPIR.
 †† Any clinical care at age >14 days reported to the USZPIR.
(4%) tested positive by either NAT or IgM (four of 69 tested by 
NAT only; zero of 18 tested by IgM only; and 28 of 756 tested 
by both NAT and IgM tested positive by either NAT or IgM). 
Zika-associated birth defects or neurodevelopmental abnormali-
ties possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection were 
identified in children with positive Zika virus IgM or NAT, 
negative IgM and NAT, and in those who did not receive testing.
Conclusion and Comments
A total of  1,450 children aged ≥1 year were born to mothers 
with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus 
infection during pregnancy in the U.S. territories and freely 
associated states and were reported to the USZPIR. Among 
these children, approximately one in seven (14%) were identi-
fied during infancy or early childhood as having either a Zika-
associated birth defect, a neurodevelopmental abnormality 
possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection, or both.
The 6% with Zika-associated birth defects in this report can 
be viewed in the context of the previously published baseline 
frequency of brain and eye abnormalities potentially related 
to Zika virus infection. Before the introduction of Zika in the 
Region of the Americas the baseline frequency of brain and eye 
abnormalities potentially related to Zika virus infection among 
live-born infants was approximately 0.16% (21), suggesting a 
more than 30-fold increase over baseline. 
Among all children aged ≥1 year by February 1, 2018, 68% 
had some follow-up care reported to the USZPIR. Of these 
children, 95% had at least a physical examination, 76% had 
developmental screening or evaluation, and 60% had neuro-
imaging. Approximately one half of the children (48%) had an 
ABR-based hearing screen or evaluation, and approximately one 
third of the children (36%) had an ophthalmologic evaluation 
reported to the USZPIR. Because the full spectrum of adverse 
outcomes related to congenital Zika virus infection is not yet 
known, careful monitoring and evaluation of children born to 
mothers with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika 
virus infection during pregnancy is essential for ensuring early 
detection of possible disabilities and early referral to interven-
tion services that might improve outcomes. For example, with 
early identification of vision problems, a prescription for cor-
rective eyeglasses might be beneficial to a child’s development 
(12). Among children without microcephaly detected at birth, 
brain or eye anomalies might have gone undetected without 
neuroimaging or ophthalmologic evaluation.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
864 
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE. Outcomes among children aged ≥1 year from pregnancies with any laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection 
(n = 1,450) and with nucleic acid test–confirmed Zika virus infection (n = 943) and with reported follow-up care* — U.S. Zika Pregnancy and 
Infant Registry (USZPIR), U.S. territories and freely associated states, February 1, 2017–June 1, 2018
Zika-related outcomes
Any laboratory evidence of confirmed or 
possible Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy (n = 1,450)† No. (%)
Pregnancies with nucleic acid 
test–confirmed Zika virus infection 
(n = 943)§ No. (%)
Zika-associated birth defect¶
87 (6)
62 (7)
Neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly associated with congenital 
Zika virus infection**
136 (9)
99 (10)
Zika-associated birth defect and neurodevelopmental abnormality 
possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection
20 (1)
17 (2)
Total with Zika-associated birth defect, neurodevelopmental 
abnormality possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection, 
or both
203 (14)
144 (15)
Microcephaly 
Microcephaly at birth††
64 (4)
44 (5)
Postnatal-onset microcephaly only§§
20 (1)
12 (1)
Total with microcephaly
84 (6)
56 (6)
 * Any clinical care at age >14 days reported to the USZPIR.
 † Includes maternal, placental, or infant laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy based on presence of Zika virus RNA by 
a positive nucleic acid test (e.g., reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction [RT-PCR]), serologic evidence of a Zika virus infection, or serologic evidence of an 
unspecified flavivirus infection.
 § Includes maternal, placental, or infant laboratory evidence of confirmed Zika virus infection during pregnancy based on presence of Zika virus RNA by a positive 
nucleic acid test (e.g., RT-PCR).
 ¶ Includes Zika-associated birth defect detected from birth to age 2 years with or without neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly associated with congenital 
Zika virus infection. Zika-associated birth defects include selected congenital brain anomalies (intracranial calcifications; cerebral atrophy; abnormal cortical 
formation; corpus callosum abnormalities; cerebellar abnormalities; porencephaly; hydranencephaly; ventriculomegaly/hydrocephaly); selected congenital eye 
anomalies (microphthalmia or anophthalmia; coloboma; cataract; intraocular calcifications; chorioretinal anomalies involving the macula, excluding retinopathy 
of prematurity; and optic nerve atrophy, pallor, and other optic nerve abnormalities); and/or microcephaly at birth (birth head circumference <3rd percentile for 
infant sex and gestational age based on INTERGROWTH-21st online percentile calculator [http://intergrowth21.ndog.ox.ac.uk/]).
 ** Includes neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection detected from birth to age 2 years, with or without Zika-associated 
birth defect. Neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection include hearing abnormalities; congenital contractures; 
seizures; body tone abnormalities; movement abnormalities; swallowing abnormalities; possible developmental delay; possible visual impairment; and/or postnatal-
onset microcephaly (two most recent head circumference measurements reported from follow-up care <3rd percentile for child’s sex and age based on World 
Health Organization child growth standards; downward trajectory of head circumference percentiles with most recent <3rd percentile. Age at measurement was 
adjusted for gestational age in infants born at <40 weeks’ gestational age, through age 24 months chronological age).
 †† Microcephaly at birth is a subset of Zika-associated birth defects and was defined as birth head circumference <3rd percentile for infant sex and gestational age 
based on INTERGROWTH-21st online percentile calculator (http://intergrowth21.ndog.ox.ac.uk/).
 
§§ Postnatal-onset microcephaly is a subset of neurodevelopmental abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection and was defined as two 
most recent head circumference measurements reported from follow-up care <3rd percentile for child’s sex and age based on World Health Organization child 
growth standards; downward trajectory of head circumference percentiles with most recent <3rd percentile. Age at measurement was adjusted for gestational 
age in infants born at <40 weeks’ gestational age, through age 24 months chronological age.
Many infants did not have Zika virus testing results reported. 
This could be because of changing recommendations for labora-
tory testing of infants born to mothers with laboratory evidence of 
confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy (19). 
Among infants with testing reported, only 4% tested positive for 
Zika virus infection by IgM or NAT. In addition, limitations of 
laboratory testing for Zika virus have been previously described 
(19); Zika virus RNA is only transiently present in body fluids; 
thus, a negative NAT result does not rule out infection. Zika 
virus-associated birth defects and neurodevelopmental abnor-
malities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection 
also were identified in children with negative Zika virus NAT or 
IgM test results. These finding are consistent with other reports 
of infants with clinical findings suggestive of possible congenital 
Zika syndrome but with negative laboratory results (2,20,22).
Microcephaly is challenging to monitor accurately as 
an outcome because it is difficult to reliably measure head 
circumference in a newborn, it can be affected by inaccura-
cies in estimated gestational age, and it does not distinguish 
between a small head size related to underlying pathology 
and one that will subsequently exhibit typical brain develop-
ment (3). The sensitivity analysis suggests that the number of 
infants with Zika-associated birth defects could be a modest 
overestimate.
This is the first analysis assessing neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika virus 
infection in addition to Zika-associated birth defects among 
children born to mothers in the U.S. territories and freely 
associated states with laboratory evidence of confirmed or pos-
sible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. Although there are 
large cohort studies monitoring pregnancies with and without 
Zika virus infection in several countries, the data in this report 
come from the largest cohort of children born to mothers 
with laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31 
865
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Zika virus infection during pregnancy can cause serious birth 
defects and might be associated with neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities.
What is added by this report?
Among children aged ≥1 year born in U.S. territories and freely 
associated states to mothers with laboratory evidence of 
confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy 
and who had follow-up care reported, 6% had a Zika-associated 
birth defect, 9% had ≥1 neurodevelopmental abnormality 
possibly associated with congenital Zika virus infection, and 
1% had both.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Given the potential benefits from interventions during early 
critical periods of infant development, health care providers 
should share information on maternal Zika virus exposure and 
closely monitor child health and development.
infection during pregnancy in the world who are currently 
being monitored as part of an enhanced surveillance system.
Whereas the cohort size is a strength of this analysis, the find-
ings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, 
the data are limited to evaluations and clinical care received 
and reported to the USZPIR. The recommended services 
might not have been available to all children, and among those 
with reported follow-up care, information was limited for 
some children. In addition, data are limited to clinical records 
reported to the USZPIR; collecting these data are challenging 
because children might be seen in various outpatient settings 
and by multiple providers. To alleviate this barrier, territorial 
and state jurisdictions made extensive efforts to actively follow 
up, abstract, and report available data; CDC also provided sub-
stantial technical assistance. Second, it is possible that children 
with recognized health problems might have received follow-up 
care more frequently than did those without identified health 
problems, which might lead to an overestimate of the percentage 
of children with Zika-related health problems. Third, estimates 
of the baseline frequencies of neurodevelopmental abnormalities 
among very young children are available only for a few of the 
specific abnormalities; the lack of an appropriate comparison 
group limits assessment of whether the prevalence of reported 
neurodevelopmental abnormalities in the U.S. territories and 
freely associated states among children born to mothers with 
laboratory evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infec-
tion during pregnancy is an increase over baseline levels. Fourth, 
given the potential persistence, cross-reactivity, or nonspecific 
reactivity of IgM, some mothers included in the USZPIR might 
not have been infected with Zika virus during their pregnancy. 
For this reason, an analysis of child outcomes restricted to preg-
nancies with NAT-confirmed Zika virus infection was included, 
and similar percentages of children with a Zika-associated birth 
defect, a neurodevelopmental abnormality possibly associated 
with congenital Zika virus infection, or both were found. 
Finally, it might be difficult to distinguish between birth defects 
and neurodevelopmental abnormalities that might be causally 
linked to congenital Zika virus infection and those that might 
be attributable to unrelated causes; thus, this report describes 
occurrences without attributing causation.
Despite the limitations, this report extends understanding about 
the impact of congenital Zika virus infection. Whereas approxi-
mately 6% of children with congenital Zika virus exposure have 
Zika-associated birth defects, more children have neurodevelop-
mental abnormalities possibly associated with congenital Zika 
virus infection, identified during follow-up care, albeit without an 
appropriate comparison group on the baseline prevalence of these 
neurodevelopmental abnormalities among very young children. 
Given that most children did not have evidence of all recom-
mended evaluations according to data reported to the USZPIR, 
additional unidentified anomalies might exist in this population. 
Furthermore, it is recognized that there were substantial disrup-
tions to the provision of clinical care in Puerto Rico and the U.S. 
Virgin Islands related to hurricanes in 2017 (23); many families 
also were internally displaced or left the affected territories, 
potentially resulting in fewer follow-up care data reported to the 
USZPIR. Children who were most affected by Zika virus infec-
tion during pregnancy might have been either more or less likely 
to be displaced after hurricanes; there is no specific information 
on the impact of this displacement in these estimates. However, 
jurisdictional staff members attempted to find families and link 
them to the USZPIR in their new jurisdiction.
It is essential that health care providers who care for chil-
dren have access to information regarding maternal exposure 
to Zika virus infection during pregnancy. This will improve 
the identification of children born to mothers with laboratory 
evidence of confirmed or possible Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy so that they can receive recommended postnatal 
evaluations. Zika virus transmission is far less prevalent in the 
Americas in 2018 than during 2015–2017 (https://www.cdc.
gov/zika/reporting/case-counts.html); however, information 
about this cohort of children can inform and guide future 
responses to outbreaks of Zika virus that will inevitably occur 
among susceptible populations and disproportionately affect 
pregnant women and their children.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
866 
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Acknowledgments
Christopher Carr, CDC, Oak Ridge Institute for Science and 
Education, Oak Ridge, Tennessee; Janet D. Cragan, S. Nicole 
Fehrenbach, W. Thane Hancock, Stacey W. Martin, Dana Meaney-
Delman, Kimberly B. Newsome, Emily E. Petersen, Regina M. 
Simeone, Camille Smith, Matthew R. Williams, Tineka Yowe-Conley, 
CDC; Lessely Brown-Shuler, Myles Johnson, Denise H. Underwood, 
CNI Advantage, LLC, Norman, Oklahoma; Annie Zandueta, 
Commonwealth Healthcare Corporation, Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands; Meghan Raycraft, Daniel Schoelles, Deloitte 
Consulting, LLP
, Atlanta, Georgia; Anna C. Fulton, Amy Hudson, 
Kellianne M. King, Eagle Medical Services, San Antonio, Texas; 
Cristina Acevedo Menéndez, Amanda Akosa, Leonella Alziefallo-Flores, 
Amarilys Asencio-Torres, Lisbeth Báez González, Leisha L. Colón 
Ortiz, Marloane Cortés Rodríguez, Maria De Lourdes Cotto Torres, 
Augustina Delaney, Daphne Hale, Paul Laguna Martínez, Crystal A. 
Lozano, Diliana I. Maldonado-Castillo, Carlos M. Martínez Morán, 
Jennifer Martínez Quiles, Zuleika Martínez-Santiago, Glorimar 
Meléndez Rosario, Marangelí Olán-Martínez, Jennifer M. Pagán, 
Reynaldo J. Pérez Alicea, Paloma D. Reyes Correa, Jose Reyes Marte, 
Maria E. Rivera Falcón, Xiomara Rodríguez, Natalie Romero Rivera, 
Jose A. Ruiz Rodríguez, Valerie Sánchez Vázquez, Nelida R. Santos 
Burgos, Ashley Smoots, Ziwei Song, Santos Villarán Gutiérrez, G2S 
Corporation, San Antonio, Texas; Guam Department of Public Health 
and Social Services; Rose Joe, Paz E. Velasco, Kosrae Department of 
Health Services; Mary W. Noe, P3S Corporation, San Antonio, Texas; 
Ashley A. Derieux, Ashley A. Méndez Escobar, Adaliz Reyes Ortiz, 
Puerto Rico Department of Health; Bureau of Public Health, Ministry 
of Health, Republic of Palau. 
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth 
Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; 2Oak Ridge Institute for Science 
and Education, Oak Ridge, Tennessee; 3Division of Reproductive Health, 
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC; 
4Puerto Rico Department of Health; 5U.S. Virgin Islands Department of Health; 
6American Samoa Department of Health; 7Kosrae Department of Health Services; 
8Republic of Marshall Islands Ministry of Health and Human Services; 9Division 
of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, CDC; 10Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, 
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC.
Corresponding author: Margaret A. Honein, mrh7@cdc.gov, 404-498-3921.
References
 1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus 
and birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
 2. de Araújo TVB, Ximenes RAA, Miranda-Filho DB, et al.; Investigators 
from the Microcephaly Epidemic Research Group; Brazilian Ministry 
of Health; Pan American Health Organization; Instituto de Medicina 
Integral Professor Fernando Figueira; State Health Department of 
Pernambuco. Association between microcephaly, Zika virus infection, 
and other risk factors in Brazil: final report of a case-control study. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2018;18:328–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1473-3099(17)30727-2
 3. Krow-Lucal ER, de Andrade MR, Cananéa JNA, et al. Association and 
birth prevalence of microcephaly attributable to Zika virus infection 
among infants in Paraíba, Brazil, in 2015–16: a case-control study. 
Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2018.
 4. Honein MA, Dawson AL, Petersen EE, et al.; US Zika Pregnancy 
Registry Collaboration. Birth defects among fetuses and infants of US 
women with evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. 
JAMA 2017;317:59–68. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.19006
 5. Reynolds MR, Jones AM, Petersen EE, et al.; US Zika Pregnancy 
Registry Collaboration. Vital signs: update on Zika virus-associated 
birth defects and evaluation of all U.S. infants with congenital Zika 
virus exposure—U.S. Zika Pregnancy Registry, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:366–73. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6613e1
 6. Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Rice ME, Galang RR, et al.; Zika Pregnancy 
and Infant Registries Working Group. Pregnancy outcomes after 
maternal Zika virus infection during pregnancy—U.S. Territories, 
January 1, 2016–April 25, 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2017;66:615–21. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6623e1
 7. Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al. Characterizing the 
pattern of anomalies in congenital Zika syndrome for pediatric 
clinicians. JAMA Pediatr 2017;171:288–95. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2016.3982
 8. Satterfield-Nash A, Kotzky K, Allen J, et al. Health and development 
at age 19–24 months of 19 children who were born with microcephaly 
and laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus infection during the 
2015 Zika virus outbreak—Brazil, 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2017;66:1347–51. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6649a2
 9. Karoly LA, Kilburn MR, Cannon JS. Proven benefits of early childhood 
interventions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2005.
 
10. Yoshinaga-Itano C, Sedey AL, Wiggin M, Chung W. Early hearing 
detection and vocabulary of children with hearing loss. Pediatrics 
2017;140:e20162964. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2964
 
11. Sonksen PM, Petrie A, Drew KJ. Promotion of visual development of 
severely visually impaired babies: evaluation of a developmentally based 
programme. Dev Med Child Neurol 1991;33:320–35. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.1991.tb14883.x
 
12. Ventura LO, Lawrence L, Ventura CV, et al. Response to correction of 
refractive errors and hypoaccommodation in children with congenital 
Zika syndrome. J AAPOS. 2017;21:480–4 e1.
 
13. Staples JE, Dziuban EJ, Fischer M, et al. Interim guidelines for the 
evaluation and testing of infants with possible congenital Zika virus 
infection—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:63–7. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6503e3
 
14. Hagan JF
, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds. Bright futures: guidelines for health 
supervision of infants, children, and adolescents, 3rd edition. Elk Grove 
Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2007. 
 
15. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Rapid risk 
assessment: Zika virus epidemic in the Americas: potential association 
with microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Stockholm, Sweden: 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control; 2015. https://ecdc.
europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/zika-virus-americas-association-
with-microcephaly-rapid-risk-assessment.pdf
 
16. Oliveira Melo AS, Malinger G, Ximenes R, Szejnfeld PO, Alves Sampaio S, 
Bispo de Filippis AM. Zika virus intrauterine infection causes fetal brain 
abnormality and microcephaly: tip of the iceberg? Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2016;47:6–7. https://doi.org/10.1002/uog.15831
 
17. Schuler-Faccini L, Ribeiro EM, Feitosa IM, et al.; Brazilian Medical 
Genetics Society–Zika Embryopathy Task Force. Possible association 
between Zika virus infection and microcephaly—Brazil, 2015. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:59–62. https://doi.org/10.15585/
mmwr.mm6503e2
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 10, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 31 
867
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
18. Ventura CV, Maia M, Bravo-Filho V, Góis AL, Belfort R Jr. Zika virus 
in Brazil and macular atrophy in a child with microcephaly. Lancet 
2016;387:228. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00006-4
 
19. Adebanjo T, Godfred-Cato S, Viens L, et al.; Contributors. Update: 
interim guidance for the diagnosis, evaluation, and management of 
infants with possible congenital Zika virus infection—United States, 
October 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:1089–99. 
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6641a1
 
20. Delaney A, Mai C, Smoots A, et al. Population-based surveillance of 
birth defects potentially related to Zika virus infection—15 States and 
U.S. Territories, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67:91–6. 
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6703a2
 
21. Cragan JD, Mai CT, Petersen EE, et al. Baseline prevalence of birth 
defects associated with congenital Zika virus infection—Massachusetts, 
North Carolina, and Atlanta, Georgia, 2013–2014. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:219–22. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6608a4
 
22. Melo AS, Aguiar RS, Amorim MM, et al. Congenital Zika virus infection: 
beyond neonatal microcephaly. JAMA Neurol 2016;73:1407–16. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.3720
 
23. Kishore N, Marqués D, Mahmud A, et al. Mortality in Puerto Rico 
after Hurricane Maria. N Engl J Med 2018;379:162–70. Epub May 29, 
2018. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1803972
