 2016 updated EULAR evidence-based
recommendations for the management of gout
P Richette,1 M Doherty,2 E Pascual,3 V Barskova,4 F Becce,5 J Castañeda-Sanabria,6
M Coyfish,7 S Guillo,6 T L Jansen,8 H Janssens,9 F Lioté,1 C Mallen,10 G Nuki,11
F Perez-Ruiz,12 J Pimentao,13 L Punzi,14 T Pywell,7 A So,15 A K Tausche,16 T Uhlig,17
J Zavada,18 W Zhang,2 F Tubach,6 T Bardin1
▸ Additional material is
published online only. To view
please visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
annrheumdis-2016-209707).
For numbered affiliations see
end of article.
Correspondence to
Professor Pascal Richette,
Fédération de Rhumatologie,
Centre Viggo Petersen, Hôpital
Lariboisière, 2 rue Ambroise
Paré, Paris 75010, France;
pascal.richette@aphp.fr
Received 13 April 2016
Revised 14 June 2016
Accepted 29 June 2016
Published Online First
25 July 2016
To cite: Richette P,
Doherty M, Pascual E, et al.
Ann Rheum Dis
2017;76:29–42.
ABSTRACT
Background New drugs and new evidence concerning
the use of established treatments have become available
since the publication of the first European League
Against Rheumatism (EULAR) recommendations for the
management of gout, in 2006. This situation has
prompted a systematic review and update of the 2006
recommendations.
Methods The EULAR task force consisted of 15
rheumatologists, 1 radiologist, 2 general practitioners,
1 research fellow, 2 patients and 3 experts in
epidemiology/methodology from 12 European countries.
A systematic review of the literature concerning all
aspects of gout treatments was performed.
Subsequently, recommendations were formulated by use
of a Delphi consensus approach.
Results Three overarching principles and 11 key
recommendations were generated. For the treatment of
flare, colchicine, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), oral or intra-articular steroids or a combination
are recommended. In patients with frequent flare and
contraindications to colchicine, NSAIDs and
corticosteroids, an interleukin-1 blocker should be
considered. In addition to education and a non-
pharmacological management approach, urate-lowering
therapy (ULT) should be considered from the first
presentation of the disease, and serum uric acid (SUA)
levels should be maintained at<6 mg/dL (360 mmol/L)
and <5 mg/dL (300 mmol/L) in those with severe gout.
Allopurinol is recommended as first-line ULT and its
dosage should be adjusted according to renal function.
If the SUA target cannot be achieved with allopurinol,
then febuxostat, a uricosuric or combining a xanthine
oxidase inhibitor with a uricosuric should be considered.
For patients with refractory gout, pegloticase is
recommended.
Conclusions These recommendations aim to inform
physicians and patients about the non-pharmacological
and pharmacological treatments for gout and to provide
the best strategies to achieve the predefined urate target
to cure the disease.
INTRODUCTION
Gout is a disabling and common disease in Europe;
its prevalence ranges from 0.9% to 2.5% depend-
ing on the country.1–3 The prevalence and inci-
dence of the disease have increased steadily in
recent years, particularly in the UK.4 5 However,
despite effective treatments, gout is still often mis-
diagnosed
and
its
management
remains
suboptimal.3 6 7 This situation prompted the elab-
oration
of
the
first
European
League
Against
Rheumatism (EULAR) recommendations for the
management of gout, in 2006, which were based
on a systematic literature review (SLR) and expert
opinion.8
Since 2006, our knowledge of the pathophysi-
ology of the disease has improved greatly9 10 and
the
field
of
gout
management
has
advanced
quickly. When the first EULAR recommendations
were produced, the number of drugs available
for gout treatment was limited and the main urate-
lowering therapy (ULT) was allopurinol. Since
then, a number of new drugs have become available
or are in late-stage development (ie, febuxostat,
pegloticase,
interleukin-1
(IL-1)
blockers,
lesi-
nurad).11 12 Moreover, additional data on estab-
lished drugs such as colchicine13 and allopurinol14–
16 have been published, and studies have repeatedly
identified increased cardiovascular mortality with
gout.17
Therefore, the indications for old and new drugs
need to be clarified and novel therapeutic strategies
recommended on the basis of their availability, the
patient profile, previous drug failure and benefit/
risk ratio as well as the cost of the various drugs
now available for the treatment of flare and for
lowering urate levels. For this purpose, a task force
was convened to update the 2006 EULAR recom-
mendations for the management of gout, with the
objective of addressing all overarching principles
and individual recommendations by a SLR and
expert and patient opinion.
METHODS
With the approval of the EULAR executive commit-
tee,
the
convenor
(TB)
along
with
two
co-convenors of the 2006 task force (MD and EP),
an epidemiologist (FT) and an academic rheuma-
tologist (PR) formed a steering group to update the
2006 EULAR recommendations for the manage-
ment of gout. The steering group prioritised the
research questions, drafted the methodology to be
used for these novel set of recommendations and
assembled a task force.
This EULAR task force comprised 15 rheumatol-
ogists, 1 musculoskeletal radiologist, 2 general
practitioners (GPs), 1 research fellow, 2 patients
and 3 experts in epidemiology/methodology from
12
European
countries.
The
recommendations
were developed according to the standardised oper-
ating procedures for the elaboration, evaluation
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
29
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 dissemination
and
implementation
of
recommendations
endorsed by the EULAR.18 19
The first step was to determine whether the 12 former
EULAR recommendations (2006) for the management of gout
should be retained, modified or abandoned. For this purpose,
members of the task force were sent a questionnaire and were
asked to rate each recommendation by using a 9-point numer-
ical rating scale (1, totally disagree; 9, fully agree). For each
item, participants indicated whether they would keep the same
recommendation (first question). If the answer was scored ≥5,
the participants were then asked if they would modify the rec-
ommendation (second question). It was explained that the
phrasing of the updated recommendations should not be a mere
clinical statement—as for most of the 2006 EULAR recommen-
dations—but wherever possible should take the form of a clear
active recommendation specific to a particular clinical situation,
as advised by the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research &
Evaluation (AGREE II).20 The steering group had predeter-
mined that an item from the 2006 recommendations would be
deleted if all scores from the participants for the first question
were <5 with a median ≤3.5. Conversely, the item would be
unchanged if all scores for to the first question were ≥5 with a
median ≥7 and when all scores for the second question were
<5 with a median ≤3.5. If not, the items had to be modified.
Members of the task force were also invited to indicate topics
they would like to address for additional recommendations.
Subsequently, one research fellow ( JC-S) with the help of an
expert in systematic review methodology (SG) performed an
SLR by searching for literature published since 1 January 2005
in MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Library databases in
June 2013. This process included both a general search and a
proposition-specific search. The general search strategy consisted
of two basic components: (1) gout in whatever possible terms in
the databases and (2) types of study design in the forms of sys-
tematic
review/meta-analysis,
randomised
controlled
trial
(RCT)/controlled trial, uncontrolled trial, cohort study, case–
control study, cross-sectional study. The two components were
combined to search for the current available research evidence
on gout. The quality of evidence and grades of recommendation
were determined according to the standards of the Oxford
Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine.19 The quality of evidence
was assessed by the GRADE method. Criteria for RCTs included
adequate randomisation and allocation concealment, prognostic
similarity between groups (in terms of the evaluated outcome),
equal follow-up of groups, adequate blinding, validation of out-
comes, application of intent-to-treat analysis, selective outcome
reporting, stopping early for benefit, α-risk control with mul-
tiple comparisons or multiple outcomes. Criteria for observa-
tional studies included choice of controls, measurement of both
exposures and outcomes, confounding factors, completeness of
data, magnitude of effect and dose–response gradient. Criteria
for meta-analysis included a priori-defined objectives and out-
comes of interest, description of the literature search, selection
criteria for included studies, assessment of quality of studies,
evaluation of publication bias and homogeneity of results.
In the next step, all task force members attended a 2-day
meeting during which results of the SLR were presented in an
aggregated form. The task force debated and evaluated the evi-
dence presented and formulated a preliminary set of new
recommendations. Then, the task force reached consensus
regarding the proposed recommendations by using the Delphi
sequential
voting
technique
by
email
after
the
meeting.
Subsequently, the level of agreement for each recommendation
was
graded.
Each
participant
was
asked
to
rate
each
recommendation again by using the 9-point numerical rating
scale (1, totally disagree; 9, fully agree) and could propose a
reformulation of the recommendation.
Subsequently, this set of recommendations was externally
evaluated by GPs (n=8) and rheumatologists (n=5) mainly in
independent or private practice in Europe (the UK, The
Netherlands, Spain, France, Portugal and Italy). Each physician
was asked to rate each recommendation by using the abovemen-
tioned numerical rating scale. Finally, the task force set up a
research agenda to discuss and develop 14 proposals.
Finally, because the delay between the first SLR and the
writing of the present manuscript was longer than expected, we
conducted an additional SLR from June 2013 to May 2016.
Results from this updated SLR can be found in the online
supplementary material. The steering group discussed result of
this SLR and agreed that it did not impact the overall content of
the whole recommendations. Relevant references have been
inserted in the body of the manuscript.
RESULTS
The task force voted unanimously for a change in all items of
the 2006 recommendations (see online supplementary material).
Therefore, all the previous recommendations were amended to
reflect newly available evidence from the SLR. In total, 984
references were retrieved form the literature search, among
which 51 were analysed (see flow chart, online supplementary
material).
At the end of the 2-day meeting, a set of 14 preliminary new
recommendations was produced and three Delphi rounds by
email were needed to establish the final set of recommendations.
Because too many recommendations might result in a loss of
focus, the steering committee decided to move the first three
recommendations under the umbrella of ‘overarching princi-
ples’, for a final set of 11 novel recommendations that focus
more specifically on the treatment of flares and long-term man-
agement (tables 1 and 2). The external evaluation is provided as
online supplementary material, and the research agenda appears
in box 1.
Overarching principles
A. Every person with gout should be fully informed about
the pathophysiology of the disease, the existence of effec-
tive treatments, associated comorbidities and the principles
of managing acute attacks and eliminating urate crystals
through lifelong lowering of SUA below a target level.
Although gout is a curable disease, its management is still not
optimal in a large proportion of patients.6 Recent studies report
that less than half of the patients with gout receive ULT
, and
that when prescribed, it is often at an insufficient dose to effect-
ively lower the SUA levels to target.21–24 Since the last 2006
recommendations, barriers to the effective treatment and cure
of gout have been identified and the importance of the lack of
knowledge of the disease and subsequent non-adherence to
treatment have been emphasised.25–27 Moreover, an observa-
tional study showed that full patient education increased adher-
ence to ULT
, leading to a high rate (92%) of effectively treated
patients at 12 months.28
Education of patients was mentioned in the 2006 recommenda-
tion (item 2) together with general advice regarding lifestyle as
part of a global recommendation. With this first overarching prin-
ciple dedicated solely to education, the task force emphasises that
education is a key aspect of gout management. Also it introduces
the approach ‘treat to serum urate target,’ which has been found
effective in alleviating all features of the disease.28
30
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 B. Every person with gout should receive advice regarding life-
style: weight loss if appropriate and avoidance of alcohol
(especially beer and spirits) and sugar-sweetened drinks,
heavy meals and excessive intake of meat and seafood.
Low-fat dairy products should be encouraged. Regular exer-
cise should be advised.
Since the previous recommendations (item 2), several studies
have confirmed that weight loss, achieved by dietary interven-
tion or bariatric surgery29–32 is effective in reducing SUA level.
Moreover, regular physical activity might decrease the excess
mortality associated with chronic hyperuricaemia.33
In addition, the association between excessive intake of meat
and alcohol with an increased risk of developing gout has been
confirmed29 34 35 as well as increased risk of gout attacks.36 37
Importantly, other modifiable risk factors have been identified
since 2006, specifically sugar-sweetened drinks, foods rich in
fructose and orange or apple juice.38–41 In contrast, according
to epidemiological studies, consumption of coffee,42–44 and
cherries is negatively associated with gout, and eating cherries
may reduce the frequency of acute gout flares.45 Studies found
an inverse association between dairy intake and urate levels, par-
ticularly with skimmed milk and low-calorie yoghurt.34 46 This
likely results from the uricosuric property of milk, as demon-
strated in an RCT
.47 The benefit of dairy products, underlined
in the 2006 recommendation, was reported in a RCT
, suggesting
that skimmed milk powder derivatives have anti-inflammatory
effects against acute gout flares.48 However, impact of lifestyle
and dietary modification has little effect on urate concentra-
tions.49 50 In addition, the task force recognises that the level of
evidence to support the effect of lifestyle modification on SUA
levels is low, and therefore, this overarching principle was
mainly based on expert opinion. However, given the high preva-
lence of cardiovascular comorbidities in patients with gout, life-
style modifications should also be implemented as part of
cardiovascular prevention.
C. Every person with gout should be systematically screened for
associated comorbidities and cardiovascular risk factors,
including renal impairment, coronary heart disease, heart
failure, stroke, peripheral arterial disease, obesity, hyperlipid-
aemia, hypertension, diabetes and smoking, which should be
addressed as an integral part of the management of gout.
The importance of screening and managing hypertension,
hyperglycaemia and obesity in patients with gout was addressed
in the previous recommendations (item 3). Since then, a
Table 1
Overarching principles and final set of 11 recommendations for the treatment of gout
Overarching principles
A
Every person with gout should be fully informed about the pathophysiology of the disease, the existence of effective treatments, associated comorbidities and the
principles of managing acute attacks and eliminating urate crystals through lifelong lowering of SUA level below a target level.
B
Every person with gout should receive advice regarding lifestyle: weight loss if appropriate and avoidance of alcohol (especially beer and spirits) and sugar-sweetened
drinks, heavy meals and excessive intake of meat and seafood. Low-fat dairy products should be encouraged. Regular exercise should be advised.
C
Every person with gout should be systematically screened for associated comorbidities and cardiovascular risk factors, including renal impairment, coronary heart disease,
heart failure, stroke, peripheral arterial disease, obesity, hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, diabetes and smoking, which should be addressed as an integral part of the
management of gout.
Final set of 11 recommendations
1
Acute flares of gout should be treated as early as possible. Fully informed patients should be educated to self-medicate at the first warning symptoms. The choice of drug
(s) should be based on the presence of contraindications, the patient’s previous experience with treatments, time of initiation after flare onset and the number and type
of joint(s) involved.
2
Recommended first-line options for acute flares are colchicine (within 12 hours of flare onset) at a loading dose of 1 mg followed 1 hour later by 0.5 mg on day 1 and/or
an NSAID (plus proton pump inhibitors if appropriate), oral corticosteroid (30–35 mg/day of equivalent prednisolone for 3–5 days) or articular aspiration and injection of
corticosteroids. Colchicine and NSAIDs should be avoided in patients with severe renal impairment. Colchicine should not be given to patients receiving strong
P-glycoprotein and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors such as cyclosporin or clarithromycin.
3
In patients with frequent flares and contraindications to colchicine, NSAIDs and corticosteroid (oral and injectable), IL-1 blockers should be considered for treating flares.
Current infection is a contraindication to the use of IL-1 blockers. ULT should be adjusted to achieve the uricaemia target following an IL-1 blocker treatment for flare.
4
Prophylaxis against flares should be fully explained and discussed with the patient. Prophylaxis is recommended during the first 6 months of ULT. Recommended
prophylactic treatment is colchicine, 0.5–1 mg/day, a dose that should be reduced in patients with renal impairment. In cases of renal impairment or statin treatment,
patients and physicians should be aware of potential neurotoxicity and/or muscular toxicity with prophylactic colchicine. Co-prescription of colchicine with strong
P-glycoprotein and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors should be avoided. If colchicine is not tolerated or is contraindicated, prophylaxis with NSAIDs at low dosage, if not
contraindicated, should be considered.
5
ULT should be considered and discussed with every patient with a definite diagnosis of gout from the first presentation. ULT is indicated in all patients with recurrent
flares, tophi, urate arthropathy and/or renal stones. Initiation of ULT is recommended close to the time of first diagnosis in patients presenting at a young age (<40 years)
or with a very high SUA level (>8.0 mg/dL; 480 mmol/L) and/or comorbidities (renal impairment, hypertension, ischaemic heart disease, heart failure). Patients with gout
should receive full information and be fully involved in decision-making concerning the use of ULT.
6
For patients on ULT, SUA level should be monitored and maintained to <6 mg/dL (360 mmol/L). A lower SUA target (<5 mg/dL; 300 mmol/L) to facilitate faster dissolution
of crystals is recommended for patients with severe gout (tophi, chronic arthropathy, frequent attacks) until total crystal dissolution and resolution of gout. SUA level
<3 mg/dL is not recommended in the long term.
7
All ULTs should be started at a low dose and then titrated upwards until the SUA target is reached. SUA <6 mg/dL (360 mmol/L) should be maintained lifelong.
8
In patients with normal kidney function, allopurinol is recommended for first-line ULT, starting at a low dose (100 mg/day) and increasing by 100 mg increments every
2–4 weeks if required, to reach the uricaemia target. If the SUA target cannot be reached by an appropriate dose of allopurinol, allopurinol should be switched to
febuxostat or a uricosuric or combined with a uricosuric. Febuxostat or a uricosuric are also indicated if allopurinol cannot be tolerated.
9
In patients with renal impairment, the allopurinol maximum dosage should be adjusted to creatinine clearance. If the SUA target cannot be achieved at this dose, the
patient should be switched to febuxostat or given benzbromarone with or without allopurinol, except in patients with estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 mL/min.
10
In patients with crystal-proven, severe debilitating chronic tophaceous gout and poor quality of life, in whom the SUA target cannot be reached with any other available
drug at the maximal dosage (including combinations), pegloticase is indicated.
11
When gout occurs in a patient receiving loop or thiazide diuretics, substitute the diuretic if possible; for hypertension consider losartan or calcium channel blockers;
for hyperlipidaemia, consider a statin or fenofibrate.
IL, interleukin; NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; SUA, serum uric acid; ULT, urate-lowering therapy.
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
31
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 number of studies have demonstrated that both hyperuricaemia
and gout are associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD).51 52
In a US population-based study, the prevalence of CKD (stage
≥2) in patients with SUA level ≥10 mg/dL (594.9 μmol/L) and
in patients with gout was 86% and 53%, respectively. CKD
appears to be a major risk factor for gout and, conversely, gout
might cause renal dysfunction.53 54 The task force agreed that
identifying CKD in patients with gout was of major importance
because of the therapeutic implications, as discussed in items 1, 2,
4, 5, 8 and 9. Therefore, estimated glomerular filtration rate
(eGFR) should be calculated at the time of diagnosis for CKD
classification and monitored regularly in parallel with SUA
measurement. This item also emphasises the need to search for
other important associated comorbidities, especially coronary
heart disease, heart failure, stroke, peripheral arterial disease and
diabetes because large epidemiological studies have suggested that
hyperuricaemia and/or gout are independent risk factors for these
conditions55–63 and for death due to cardiovascular causes.17 58
Final set of 11 recommendations on treating patients
with gout
1. Acute flares of gout should be treated as early as possible.
Fully informed patients should be educated to self-medicate
at the first warning symptoms. The choice of drug(s) should
be based on the presence of contraindications, the patient’s
previous experience with treatments, time of initiation after
flare onset and the number and type of joint(s) involved.
This recommendation was mainly based on expert opinion and
derives from the first item of the 2006 recommendations.
Because of the recognised high frequency of comorbidities and
thus the high frequency of comedications in patients with gout,
the task force felt that a global recommendation regarding the
choice of drugs for flares based on the presence or absence of
contraindications was highly desirable. This item emphasises the
importance of searching for contraindications, often present in
patients with gout. One study found that more than 90% of
patients had at least one contraindication to non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and that about one-third of
patients who were prescribed colchicine had at least one major
contraindication.64 This item also underlines the importance to
treat as early as possible. Colchicine is effective when given
within 12 hours of symptoms onset13 and there was general
agreement that early initiation of any treatment for flare leads to
better effectiveness. Therefore, the task force recommends the
‘pill in the pocket’ approach to treat flare in fully informed
patients.
2. Recommended first-line options for acute flare are colchicine
(within 12 hours of flare onset) at a loading dose of 1 mg fol-
lowed 1 hour later by 0.5 mg on day 1 and/or an NSAID
(plus a proton pump inhibitor if appropriate), oral corticos-
teroids
(30–35 mg/day
of
equivalent
prednisolone
for
3–5 days) or articular aspiration and injection of corticoster-
oids. Colchicine and NSAIDs should be avoided in patients
with severe renal impairment. Colchicine should not be given
to patients receiving strong P-glycoprotein and/or CYP3A4
inhibitors such as cyclosporin or clarithromycin.
This item amalgamates the 2006 items 4–6, which have been
amended in light of novel evidence. The main therapeutic
options for flare are colchicine, NSAIDs and corticosteroids.
The task force does not prioritise between these options
because of no direct comparative evidence, but unlike 2006
item 4, it recommends considering combination therapy, such as
colchicine and an NSAID or colchicine and corticosteroids,
which can be proposed for patients with particularly severe
acute gout (figure 1), for instance, when flares involve multiple
Table 2
Evidence, grade of recommendation and level
of agreement for each recommendation
Item
Category of
evidence
Grade of
recommendation
Level of agreement
(mean±SD)
A
NA
NA
8.9±0.3
B
NA
NA
8.4±1.1
C
NA
NA
8.5±0.9
1
1b*, 4
A, D
8.4±1.1
2
1b, 3†
A, C
8.6±0.7
3
1b‡, 3§
A, C
8.1±0.9
4
2b
B
8.1±0.9
5
1b
A
8.2±0.9
6
3
C
8.8±0.5
7
3
C
8.6±0.7
8
1b¶, 2b**
A, B
8.8±0.4
9
3
C
8.8±0.4
10
1b
A
8.2±1.3
11
3
C
8.2±0.9
Ranking for category of evidence and grade of recommendation is provided in the
online supplementary material.
*For the evidence that colchicine should be given as early as possible, within 12 hours
of symptom onset.
†There are no randomised controlled trials of intra-articular corticosteroid injections for
flares.
‡Level of evidence for canakinumab.
§For ankinra.
¶Level of evidence for febuxostat and allopurinol.
**For uricosurics (probenecid or benzbromarone).
NA, not applicable.
Box 1
Proposals for future research
▸ Investigating the ability of low-dose NSAIDs or prednisone
to prevent ULT-induced flares.
▸ A head-to-head trial of anakinra versus a conventional
anti-inflammatory agent for the treatment of flares.
▸ A controlled trial of early low-dose colchicine versus early
NSAIDs or oral corticosteroids or potential new drugs for
flares over 1 week.
▸ The optimal combined therapy for treatment of an acute
attack.
▸ The optimal duration for prophylaxis of acute attacks when
starting ULT.
▸ Risk factors for flares when initiating ULT.
▸ The long-term impact of very low urate levels on the central
nervous system.
▸ The possible benefits of XO inhibition and/or lowering serum
uric acid levels for cardiovascular diseases.
▸ The impact of ULT on kidney function.
▸ The best strategy in patients with tophaceous gout.
▸ Direct comparison (efficacy, side effects, cost utility) between
emerging uricosurics and allopurinol or febuxostat.
▸ The cost-utility of HLA-B*58:01 determination before
initiating allopurinol in patients not of Asian descent.
▸ Imaging to visualise crystal dissolution during ULT.
▸ More research should be conducted in primary care.
NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; ULT, urate-lowering
therapy.
32
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 joints. In comparison to 2006 items 4 and 5, more evidence is
now available in terms of the effectiveness of colchicine,65
NSAIDs66–69 and oral corticosteroids.70–72 A double-blind, ran-
domised equivalence trial of crystal-proven gout from a primary
care source population found that prednisolone (35 mg/day for
5 days) was equivalent to naproxen (500 mg twice a day for
5 days) for treating flare.71 72 A recent trial also found that oral
prednisolone (30 mg/day for 5 days) had analgesic effectiveness
equivalent to that of indomethacin.70 The AGREE trial demon-
strated that when taken within 12 hours of flare onset, self-
administrated low-dose colchicine (1.8 mg) was as effective as
high-dose colchicine (4.8 mg) but with a safety profile compar-
able to that of a placebo.65 In Europe, colchicine is available in
1 mg tablets, so the task force recommends the use of 1 mg
colchicine followed 1 hour later by 0.5 mg for treating flare.
A pharmacokinetic study73 showed that strong P-glycoprotein
and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors such as cyclosporin, clarithromycin,
verapamil and ketoconazole when prescribed with colchicine
increased colchicine plasma concentration, thereby exposing
patients to risk of serious side effects. The safe use of colchicine
in patients with severe renal impairment (GFR <30 mL/min)
has
not
been
established.
Because
colchicine
clearance
is
decreased in patients with severe renal impairment,74 75 the
group considered that it should be avoided in these patients,
because a reduced dosage73 might be a source of therapeutic
misuse. In addition, it should be noted that colchicine is
Figure 1
Management of acute flare according to the European League Against Rheumatism recommendations. Letters and numbers in
parentheses indicate the items of the recommendations presented in table 1. Strong P-glycoprotein or CYP3A4 inhibitors are cyclosporin,
clarithromycin, ketoconazole and ritonavir. IL, interleukin; NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; ULT,
urate-lowering therapy.
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
33
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 contraindicated in some countries in patients with severe renal
failure. From data from two RCTs,71 72 the group also recom-
mends the use of oral prednisolone at 30–35 mg for 5 days for
treating flare. Finally, from data from an open trial76 77 and
expert opinion, the group considered that intra-articular injec-
tion of corticosteroids, which has a good safety profile, should
be considered particularly in patients with monoarthritis of an
easily accessible joint, although acknowledging that this may not
be practical in many primary care settings.
3. In patients with frequent flares and contraindications to col-
chicine, NSAIDs and corticosteroids (oral and injectable),
IL-1 blockers should be considered for treating flares. Current
infection is a contraindication to the use of IL-1 blockers.
ULT should be adjusted to achieve the uricaemia target fol-
lowing IL-1 blocker treatment for flare.
Since the last 2006 recommendations, IL-1β was found to
play a crucial role in monosodium urate (MSU) crystal-induced
inflammation.78 T
wo RCTs have reported that the anti-IL-1β
monoclonal antibody canakinumab (150 mg subcutaneously,
one dose) was superior to triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg sub-
cutaneously, one dose) in reducing pain in patients with flare
with
contraindication,
intolerance
of
or
non-response
to
NSAIDs and/or colchicine.79 These findings led to approval of
the drug in Europe solely in patients with contraindication to
colchicine, NSAIDs and steroids. Despite the lack of RCTs of
anakinra, a case series also suggest that this IL-1 receptor antag-
onist, administered subcutaneously at 100 mg for 3 days, could
be effective in reducing pain in patients with acute attacks.80–83
By contrast, an RCT demonstrated that one subcutaneous injec-
tion of rilonacept, 320 mg, a soluble receptor fusion protein
binding both IL-1α and IL-1β,84 provided no benefit over indo-
methacin (oral, 50 mg, three times a day for 3 days).85 Because
of the risk of sepsis in patients receiving IL-1 blockers,86 the
task force considered current infection a contraindication to the
use of anti-IL-1 biologics, which implies screening for occult
infections. Finally, in accordance with the European Medicines
Agency labelling of canakinumab, the group stressed the need to
effectively lower SUA level in these patients with severe gout
once the flare resolved following IL-1β blockade.
4. Prophylaxis against flares should be fully explained and dis-
cussed with the patient. Prophylaxis is recommended during
the first 6 months of ULT. Recommended prophylactic treat-
ment is colchicine, 0.5–1 mg/day, a dose that should be
reduced in patients with renal impairment. In cases of renal
impairment or statin treatment, patients and physicians
should be aware of potential neurotoxicity and/or muscular
toxicity with prophylactic colchicine. Co-prescription of col-
chicine with strong P-glycoprotein and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors
should be avoided. If colchicine is not tolerated or is contra-
indicated, prophylaxis with NSAIDs at a low dosage, if not
contraindicated, should be considered.
Dispersion of MSU crystals during the initial phase of deposit
dissolution may expose the patient to increased rate of acute
flare that can contribute to poor treatment adherence.87 The
2006 recommendations (item 11) mentioned that prophylactic
treatment should be given during the first months of ULT
.
Since then, data from pivotal trials of febuxostat versus a fixed
dose of allopurinol (300 mg) found that flare prophylaxis with
low-dose
colchicine
(colchicine,
0.6 mg/day)
or
low-dose
NSAID (naproxen, 250 mg twice daily) for up to 6 months
appeared to provide greater benefit than flare prophylaxis for
8 weeks, with no increase in adverse events.88 However, the
task force felt that initiation of prophylaxis should be discussed
with every patient. Indeed, a study found that following patient
education and with slow upward titration of ULT
, mostly allo-
purinol, many patients chose not to take prophylaxis and did
not experience a significantly greater flare rate.28 This recom-
mendation also explicitly underlines the need to search for renal
impairment before prescribing colchicine75 and co-prescription
with statins89 and P-glycoprotein and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors73 to
avoid serious side effects. Of note, two RCTs found that
low-dose colchicine in patients with a history of coronary heart
disease could reduce the incidence of major cardiovascular
events.90 91 Reports for several trials described the efficacy of
canakinumab and rilonacept,92–96 two IL-1 inhibitors, for pre-
venting flares during the initiation of allopurinol therapy.
However, none of them has been approved for prophylactic
treatment.
5. ULT should be considered and discussed with every patient
with a definite diagnosis of gout from the first presentation.
ULT is indicated in all patients with recurrent flare (≥2/year),
tophi, urate arthropathy and/or renal stones. Initiation of ULT
is recommended close to the time of first diagnosis in patients
presenting at a young age (<40 years), or with a very high
SUA level (>8 mg/dL; 480 mmol/L) and/or comorbidities
(renal impairment, hypertension, ischaemic heart disease,
heart failure). Patients with gout should receive full informa-
tion and be fully involved in decision-making concerning the
use of ULT.
ULT allows for dissolving crystal deposits and the disappear-
ance of gout features, as long as uricaemia is maintained to
target. Since 2006, large trials have shown that appropriate ULT
reduces the frequency of gout flare and once all crystals have
been dissolved, avoids their reoccurrence.97–99 In addition,
effective ULT reduces the size and number of tophi97 99 100 and
facilitates their disappearance, thereby improving the quality of
life of patients with gout,101 102 which can be seriously impaired
by the disease.103–106
Several studies concur in showing that gout is a risk factor for
mortality, in particular from cardiovascular causes,17 107 108 and
a risk factor for kidney impairment51 as discussed previously
(see the third overarching principle).
Unlike the 2006 guideline in which the group of experts
recommended starting ULT only for patients with certain severe
clinical features, including recurrent acute attacks and tophi
(item 7), the current task force recommends possible initiation
of ULT close to the first presentation (ie, in most cases, close to
the first attack). Indeed, the task force felt that delaying initi-
ation of ULT until the second or third attack would expose
patients to a higher crystal load, for difficulties in dissolution
and to longstanding hyperuricaemia, which may be deleterious
for the cardiovascular system and kidney.51 56 107–110 Therefore,
the recommendation to initiate ULT earlier was mainly based on
expert opinion but also took into account studies that suggest a
cardiovascular111
112 and renal benefit113–116 from xanthine
oxidase inhibitors (XOI). XO inhibition improved exercise
capacity in patients with chronic stable angina in a randomised
cross-over trial.117 Epidemiological studies suggested that allo-
purinol might decrease morbidity and mortality in patients
with congestive heart failure and a history of gout,118 119 a
benefit not confirmed in a recent randomised trial of patients
with heart failure and hyperuricaemia without gout.120 In add-
ition, pharmaco-epidemiological studies report that allopurinol
use is associated with an approximately 20% reduction in
myocardial infarction risk.121
122 However, the task force
acknowledged that additional well-conducted trials are war-
ranted in this field, as recent studies yielded conflicting
results.123 124
34
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 Item 5 also underlines the need to start ULTearly, particularly
in patients with comorbidities and/or SUA level >8 mg/dL.
Encouragement to treat patients with high SUA level earlier is
based on studies showing an association of high uricaemia with
increased flare frequency.125–127 Similarly, early treatment in
patients with comorbidities is supported by a study of a large
cohort of gout patients finding hypertension, ischaemic heart
disease and CKD all associated with increased risk of recurrence
of flare.128 Young age at gout onset is also a marker of gout
severity129 and should also prompt earlier treatment. This rec-
ommendation underlines again the importance of providing full
information and involving the patient in the decision-making
process, to ensure adherence to ULT and optimal patient-centred
outcomes.
Finally, the task force did not give specific guidance on
whether urate-lowering drugs should be initiated during a flare
or whether a traditional 2 weeks delay from flare termination
should be observed. T
wo small trials have suggested that allopur-
inol initiation during an acute gout attack did not prolong the
duration of flares nor worsen its severity as compared with
delayed initiation.130 131 However, the task force considered
that the low number of patients (n=51 and n=31, respectively)
in these trials precluded any firm conclusions and that data
obtained with allopurinol 200–300 mg could not be generalised
to more potent urate-lowering drugs, such as febuxostat or a
combination of XOI and an uricosuric.
6. For patients on ULT, SUA level should be monitored and
maintained to <6 mg/dL (360 mmol/L). A lower SUA target
(<5 mg/dL; 300 mmol/L) to facilitate faster dissolution of
crystals is recommended for patients with severe gout (tophi,
chronic arthropathy, frequent attacks) until total crystal dissol-
ution and resolution of gout. SUA level <3 mg/dL is not
recommended in the long term.
As
in
2006
(item
8),
the
task
force
recommends
a
treat-to-target strategy for every patient with gout, to maintain
the SUA level <6 mg/dL, which is below the saturation point
for MSU132 to dissolve all crystal deposits.133 Because the velo-
city of crystal dissolution depends on the SUA level,134 135 the
task force also recommends reducing the SUA level to <5 mg/dL
for severe gout reflecting high crystal load until total crystal dis-
solution has occurred. The task force also agreed that once dissol-
ution of crystals is achieved, SUA level could be maintained
<6 mg/dL by a reduction in the dose of UL
T to avoid new forma-
tion of urate crystals.
Some studies, but not all,136–138 have suggested that uric acid
might protect against various neurodegenerative diseases such as
Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease or amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.139–142 Given these data and the availability of ULT
that has the potency to greatly decrease SUA levels, the task
force does not recommend lowering continuously the SUA level
to <3 mg/dL in the long term that is, for several years.
7. All ULTs should be started at a low dose and then titrated
upward until the SUA target is reached. SUA <6 mg/dL
(360 mmol/L) should be maintained lifelong.
The task force recommends upward titration of ULT in every
patient when feasible. This approach, mentioned in 2006 (item 9),
might result in fewer episodes of acute flares during treatment
initiation28 and therefore improved adherence to ULT
, which is
low according to several studies.27 143 144 Following complete
dissolution of MSU crystals, the SUA level should be maintained
at <6 mg/dL lifelong. Indeed, a study showed that about 40%
of successfully treated patients show recurrence of flare 5 years
after withdrawal of ULT
.145 Therefore, determining SUA level
on a regular basis is a key aspect of treatment.
8. In patients with normal kidney function, allopurinol is
recommended for first-line ULT, starting at a low dose
(100 mg/day) and increasing by 100 mg increments every
2–4 weeks if required, to reach the uricaemic target. If the
SUA target cannot be reached by an appropriate dose of allo-
purinol, allopurinol should be switched to febuxostat or a
uricosuric, or combined with a uricosuric. Febuxostat or a
uricosuric
are
also
indicated
if
allopurinol
cannot
be
tolerated.
As in 2006 (item 9), the task force recommends the use of
allopurinol as first-line therapy in patients with normal kidney
function. This recommendation takes into account the efficacy,
low cost and safety of this drug. Since 2006, two RCTs have
confirmed the superior urate-lowering efficacy of allopurinol
(300 mg/day) over placebo.97 130 Medico-economic studies of
ULT reported that a dose-escalation strategy with allopurinol as
first-line therapy was cost-effective.146 147 Allopurinol should be
started at a low dose (100 mg/day) to reduce early gout flare28
and because high starting doses might increase the risk of
serious cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs).15 The most com-
monly used allopurinol dose of 300 mg/day does not achieve
the SUA target of 6 mg/dL (360 mmol/L) in about 30%–50% of
patients with normal kidney function.28
148
149 For those
patients, the task force recommends a dose-escalation strategy to
increase the dose in order to reach the predefined uricaemia
target. Treatment with allopurinol up to 600–800 mg/day had a
75%–80% success rate of achieving SUA levels of <6 mg/dL
(360 mmol/L).28 150
Febuxostat is a potent non-purine selective XOI approved at
daily doses of 80 and 120 mg in Europe. It is metabolised in the
liver and renal excretion is not a major route of elimination,
which allows for its use in patients with mild-to-moderate
kidney failure. A short-term phase II trial151 and three large
RCTs (see online supplementary material) showed superior
urate-lowering efficacy with febuxostat (80 or 120 mg) as com-
pared with the commonly used fixed daily dose of 300 mg allo-
purinol.97 98 149 Cutaneous reactions have been described in
pivotal trials with febuxostat.97
149 Despite case reports of
SCARs in patients receiving febuxostat,152 153 recent data do
not support any cross-reactivity between the two drugs.153 154
Therefore, the task force considered that a history of allergic
reaction to allopurinol was not a contraindication to febuxostat,
but underlined the need to carefully follow these patients.
Uricosurics are recommended, where available, alone or in
combination with allopurinol in patients without proper control
with allopurinol alone. Benzbromarone (50–200 mg/day) is a more
potent uricosuric as compared with probenecid (1–2 g/day).155 In
an RCT of patients without proper control with allopurinol,
300 mg/daily, 92% and 65% of patients reached a SUA target of
300 mmol/L
(5 mg/dL)
when
switched
to
benzbromarone,
200 mg, or probenecid, 2 g daily, respectively.148 Finally, the
recommendation for combination therapy with allopurinol and
a uricosuric, not mentioned in 2006, is based on uncontrolled
trials that have suggested that probenecid-allopurinol156–158 or
benzbromarone-allopurinol135 was more effective than allopur-
inol alone. Furthermore, emerging uricosuric, such as lesi-
nurad,159 has shown promising results in a phase II trial when
combined with allopurinol.160
9. In patients with renal impairment, the allopurinol maximum
dosage should be adjusted to creatinine clearance. If the
SUA target cannot be achieved at this dose, the patient
should be switched to febuxostat or given benzbromarone
with or without allopurinol, except in patients with eGFR
<30 mL/min.
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
35
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 This item retained the 2006 recommendation (item 9) to
adjust the allopurinol dosage according to the creatinine clearance.
The greatest concern with the use of allopurinol in patients with
renal failure is the development of SCARs, which includes drug
rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, Stevens-Johnson
syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrosis. Since 2006, several
studies
have
further
explored
allopurinol-induced
SCARs.
Allopurinol was found to be the most common drug associated
with
SJS
or
toxic
epidermal
necrolysis
in
Europe.161
Allopurinol-induced SCARs are rare, the incidence rate being
about 0.7/1000 patient-years in allopurinol initiators in the
USA,162 but the mortality rate is high (25%–30%).163–165
Renal failure has been associated with an increased risk of
SCARs and poor outcome.163
164 Decreased renal function
results in decreased clearance and higher serum levels of oxy-
purinol,164 166 which could induce a cytotoxic T-cell response
and trigger hypersensitivity reactions in SCARs.167 In some
studies, dose escalation of allopurinol above the limit allowed
by creatinine clearance did not result in SCARs,14 168 but given
the very low incidence of SCARs and the limited number of
patients involved in these studies, the task force considered that
they probably lacked power to detect a potential association.
Therefore, given the extreme severity of SCARs and the possi-
bility of therapeutic alternatives such as febuxostat, the task
force retained the conservative approach to adjust the maximum
dose of allopurinol to the creatinine clearance169 in patients
with renal impairment, as required by most regulatory agencies.
Because the dose recommendations in renal disease may slightly
differ across countries, the task force recommends to follow the
local Summary of Product Characteristics.
Febuxostat has been found more effective in patients with
CKD than allopurinol given at doses adjusted to creatinine clear-
ance149 170 and therefore can be used in these patients. Finally,
benzbromarone is not recommended for use in patients with
eGFR <30 mL/min, but can be used in patients with moderate
renal impairment171 172 because it is predominately metabolised
by the liver.
10. In patients with crystal-proven severe debilitating chronic
tophaceous gout and poor quality of life, in whom the SUA
target cannot be reached with any other available drug at
the maximal dosage (including combinations), pegloticase is
indicated.
Since the
last EULAR
recommendation, pegloticase
has
emerged as a powerful ULT for refractory gout. Pegloticase is a
pegylated uricase, produced by a genetically modified strain of
Escherichia coli that catalyses the oxidation of uric acid into
allantoin, a more soluble end product.173 Its efficacy has been
assessed in two replicate 6-month, randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, phase III trials.99 100 In this study, the per-
centage of responders (SUA level <6 mg/dL) was 42%, on
average, in patients who received pegloticase, 8 mg, every
2 weeks and 0% in the placebo group. Allergic reactions, pos-
sibly related to the occurrence of antibody against pegloti-
case,174 were observed in about 25% of patients who received
pegloticase biweekly. Given the safety profile of pegloticase and
the demonstration of its efficacy in patients with refractory
gout, the task force recommends its use in patients with clinic-
ally severe crystal-proven gout that cannot be properly treated
with conventional ULT
, including a combination of an XOI and
a uricosuric agent. There was no firm agreement with regards to
the duration of treatment with pegloticase. However, there was
a consensus to consider a switch, if feasible, toward an oral ULT
once all tophi had disappeared.
11. When gout occurs in a patient receiving loop or thiazide
diuretics, substitute the diuretic if possible; for hyperten-
sion, consider losartan or calcium channel blockers; for
hyperlipidaemia, consider a statin or fenofibrate.
This recommendation is similar to the 12th 2006 recom-
mendation. However, in addition to losartan, the task force
now recommends consideration of calcium blockers in patients
with gout. This recommendation is supported by a large
epidemiological study finding relative risks of incident gout
associated with the current use of calcium channel blockers
and losartan of 0.87 (95% CI 0.82 to 0.93) and 0.81 (95%
CI 0.70 to 0.94), respectively.175 Finally, the uricosuric prop-
erty
of
fenofibrate176
177
and
statins
has
been
further
documented.178 179
DISCUSSION
These updated EULAR recommendations aim to provide physi-
cians—rheumatologists, GPs and others—with the best prag-
matic strategies to manage hyperuricaemia and flare in patients
with gout (figures 1 and 2).
As first-line care providers, GPs have a predominant role in
gout treatment. Likewise, the involvement of patients in the
management of chronic diseases is crucial. Therefore, in contrast
to 2006, the current task force included two GPs and two
patients to broaden the involvement of stakeholders involved in
the disease. As mentioned previously, gout is mainly managed
by GPs, and the task force recognises that we lack trials con-
ducted in primary care; most of the RCTs analysed in this paper
were conducted in tertiary care. Overall, this set of recommen-
dations was well graded by external GPs and rheumatologists
(see online supplementary material).
Since 2006, the perception of gout has changed. The increase
in prevalence of gout in developed countries,1–3 180 the severity
of the arthritis itself,6 and the increasing evidence for an as-
sociation between gout with cardiovascular events, kidney
failure and mortality have heightened the realisation that gout
should never be neglected and should be treated properly.6
Furthermore, since 2006, the treatment armamentarium has
greatly expanded, with the approval of both febuxostat and
pegloticase, the demonstration of the efficacy of IL-1 blockers to
treat flare and the emergence of novel ULTs.11
12
181 As
expected, the task force modified all the previous 2006 recom-
mendation items to incorporate all these recent developments
and altered perspectives that have resulted from recent research
evidence.
As compared with 2006, the key differences in terms of the
therapeutic strategy for the management of hyperuricaemia are
the recommendations to titrate and initiate ULT very early in
the course of the disease, to combine an XOI and a uricosuric,
and for patients with severe gout to reach a target SUA level of
5 mg/dL (300 mmol/L) to hasten crystal dissolution. The task
force was convinced that treatment of hyperuricaemia should be
target-oriented and initiated without delay to avoid a further
longstanding period of silent urate deposits.182–184 In addition,
a ‘start low, go slow’ approach is recommended, because it prob-
ably results in fewer episodes of acute gout during treatment ini-
tiation and therefore might improve ULT adherence.
The task force was aware that not all ULTs mentioned in this
paper, especially the uricosurics, are readily available in all
European countries. However, it felt that these older drugs, in
the absence of available new ULTs, could benefit some patients
without adequate control with allopurinol or febuxostat alone.
Of note, the recommendation to combine benzbromarone or
36
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 probenecid with an XOI is a novel strategy that should help
physicians manage severe gout that is not readily controlled by
single agents and not eligible for pegloticase. This recommenda-
tion was not strictly evidence-based and relied more on expert
opinion and on recent data from phase II trials showing the
potency to combine allopurinol or febuxostat with lesinurad, a
novel uricosuric targeting URAT1.11 160
These
revised
EULAR
recommendations
differ
in
some
aspects from the 2012 American College of Rheumatology
(ACR) guidelines.185 186 For instance, ACR recommends allo-
purinol or febuxostat as first-line therapy, whereas EULAR
recommends allopurinol first and then febuxostat with failure to
achieve the predetermined SUA target. As indicated previously,
this recommendation was not supported by efficacy data, but
rather took into account the cost and effectiveness of both
drugs at their optimal dosage as well as regulatory rules en-
dorsed in several European countries. Importantly, unlike the
ACR, the EULAR recommends adjusting the dosage of allopur-
inol to the creatinine clearance in patients with renal failure,
owing to an increased risk of SCARs in those patients,164 and
febuxostat as an alternative if the SUA target is not reached.
The ACR also recommended that ULT could be started during
an acute attack185 if anti-inflammatory treatment had been
introduced, a strategy not recommended in the present paper.
Figure 2
Management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout according to the European League Against Rheumatism recommendations. Letters
and numbers in parentheses refer to the items of the recommendations presented in table 1. SUA, serum uric acid; ULT, urate-lowering therapy; XOI,
xanthine oxidase inhibitor. ¶At this stage, combined allopurinol and a uricosuric is also recommended.
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
37
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 These
recommendations
also
did
not
mention
systematic
HLA-B*5801 screening before the initiation of allopurinol. This
haplotype is the strongest risk factor for allopurinol-induced
SCARs,187 and oxypurinol, the serum levels of which are
increased in patients with renal failure,164 can preferentially
bind to the peptide binding groove of HLA-B*58:01 and
dose-dependently
activate
T cells.188
189
The
association
between carriage of this allele and increased risk of SCARs has
been mainly observed in certain ethnic populations, including
Han Chinese, Thai and Korean patients, showing high allele
frequency.187 By contrast, in Europe, where the allele frequency
is much lower, allopurinol-induced SCARs have been reported
also in the absence of this haplotype.190 Although studies
conducted in Asia found that screening for HLA-B*58:01 was
cost-effective191 192 and reduced the incidence of allopurinol-
induced SCARs,159 the task force felt that we lack sufficient data
to provide firm recommendations for cost-effective screening in
populations
with
low
allele
frequency,
such
as
Europe.
Therefore, screening for this haplotype before initiating allopur-
inol is left to the discretion of the attending physician, who
should however be aware of the genetic risk of severe allergic
reaction conferred by HLA-B*58.01 carriage.
Recommendations for the treatment of flares have also mark-
edly evolved since 2006 in that use of colchicine should be tai-
lored according to current medications and comorbidities, oral
corticosteroids can be offered and a combination of anti-
inflammatory agents is now recommended depending on the
severity of flares. Items related to colchicine, NSAIDs and oral
corticosteroids are now predominantly evidence-based, whereas
those related to combined therapy and intra-articular cortico-
steroid injections rely on expert and patient opinion, which
highlights the need for further trials. The other main novelty
for treatment of flares is the recommendation for IL-1 blockade
in patients with frequent, poorly controlled flares. Given the
price and putative infection risk associated with IL-1 blockers,
the task force recommends their use in patients with contraindi-
cations to colchicine, NSAIDs and corticosteroids. Finally, the
need to educate patients and to promote a ‘pill-in-the-pocket’
approach is highlighted to provide rapid treatment of flares,
because the task force is convinced that patients must play a key
role and be fully involved in the management of their disease.
These novel EULAR recommendations will undoubtedly
require updating over the next few years. Indeed, we anticipate
that new data on existing drugs or emerging drugs, in particular
novel uricosurics, will be available soon. In addition, studies of
therapeutic strategies are likely to emerge. The task force sin-
cerely
hopes
that
these
pragmatic
recommendations
will
improve the current quality of gout care.
Author affiliations
1AP-HP, hôpital Lariboisière, service de Rhumatologie, F-75010 Paris, France;
Inserm, UMR1132, Hôpital Lariboisière, F-75010 Paris, France; Universitè Paris
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Citè, F-75205 Paris, France
2Academic Rheumatology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
3Department of Rheumatology, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante,
Spain
4Institute of Rheumatology RAMS, Moscow, Russia
5Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Lausanne University
Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland
6AP-HP, Dèpartement d’Epidèmiologie et Recherche Clinique, Hôpital Bichat, Paris,
France: APHP, Centre de Pharmacoèpidèmiologie, Paris, France: Univ Paris Diderot,
Paris, France: INSERM UMR 1123 ECEVE, Paris, France
7Patient from Nottingham, UK, Paris
8Department of Rheumatology, VieCuri Medical Centre, Venlo, and Scientific IQ
HealthCare, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
9Department of Primary and Community Care, Radboud University Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
10Arthritis Research UK Primary Care Centre University of Keele, Keele, UK
11Osteoarticular Research Group, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
12Seccion de Rheumatologia, Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain
13Rheumatology Unit, Clínica Coração de Jesus, Lisbon, Portugal
14Rheumatology Unit, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
15Service de Rhumatologie, CHUV and Universitè de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
16Department of Rheumatology, University Clinic at the Technical University Dresden,
Germany
17Department of Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway
18Institute of Rheumatology, Prague, and Department of Rheumatology, First Faculty
of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic
Acknowledgements This paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr Victoria
Barskova. We are grateful to the external GPs and rheumatologists who read and/or
rated these recommendations: Burchert-Mainz@t-online.de; a.hagenow@ansb.de;
Uta.Kiltz@elisabethgruppe.de; graham@davenport1.plus.com; emwise@doctors.org.
uk; philip.courtney@nuh.nhs.uk; m.kloppenborg@wxs.nl; wendyvantuijl@kpnmail.nl;
mjanssen@rijnstate.nl; bohumil.seifert@svl.cz; ondrej.viklicky@ikem.cz;
marianpou@gmail.com; cesardiaztorne@gmail.com; anarita.rferreira@gmail.com;
eunicecarrapico@gmail.com; inescrispin@hotmail.com; jacques.malghem@uclouvain.
be; franz.kainberger@billrothhaus.at; marco.zanetti@hirslanden.ch;
danielguntern@hotmail.com; e.roddy@keele.ac.uk; Tove.Borgen@diakonsyk.no;
hbham@online.no; LarsFridtjof.Karoliussen@diakonsyk.no; gerard.
chales@chu-rennes.fr; docteur.aubert@gmail.com; gilleserrieau@yahoo.fr.
Contributors All authors have contributed to this work and approved the final
version.
Competing interests PR received fees from Ipsen Pharma/Menarini, AstraZeneca
and Savient. MD has received honoraria for ad hoc advisory boards on gout or
osteoarthritis from Ardea BioSciences, AstraZeneca, Nordic BioSciences and Roche
and CI for a Nottingham University Investigator-led non-drug study on gout funded
by AstraZeneca. EP received fees from Ipsen Pharma/Menarini and AstraZeneca. TLJ
received fees for lectures and/or advisory boards from AstraZeneca, AbbVie, BMS,
Janssen, Eli Lilly, Menarini, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, UCB. FL received fees for
advisory boards: Ardea BioSciences, AstraZeneca global, AstraZeneca France, Ipsen
Pharma, Menarini International, Menarini France, Novartis France, Novartis Global,
Savient, Mayoly Spindler. He also had unrestricted grants for organising the
European Crystal Workshops (Convenor Frédéric Lioté, France & Alexander SO,
Switzerland) since 2010: Ardea BioSciences, AstraZeneca global, AstraZeneca
France, Ipsen Pharma, Novartis France, Novartis Global, Mayoly Spindler, Savient,
SOBI France, SOBI International. He received fees for lectures from Ardea
BioSciences, Ipsen Pharma, Menarini France, Novartis Global. GN received fees from
Savient, Ipsen and Menarini. FP-R has received fees from Ipsen Pharma, Menarini
and AstraZeneca. LP has received consulting or speaker fees from Menarini, Fidia,
AbbVie, Merck. AS has served as consultant to AstraZeneca and SOBI in regards to
the treatment of gout. AKT received fees from Berlin Chemie-Menarini, Novartis and
AstraZeneca/Ardea BioSciences. TU received fees from Novartis and AstraZeneca/
Ardea. JZ received fees from Berlin Chemie-Menarini and Novartis, both <US$1000.
WZ received honorarium from Savient as part of the Advisory Board for Pegloticase.
TB has received consulting fees, speaker fees or grants from Ipsen Pharma,
Menarini, AstraZeneca, Novartis, SOBI, Savient and CymaBay.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Bardin T, Bouée S, Clerson P, et al. Prevalence of gout in the Adult Population of
France. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2016;68:261–6.
2
Trifirò G, Morabito P, Cavagna L, et al. Epidemiology of gout and hyperuricaemia
in Italy during the years 2005–2009: a nationwide population-based study. Ann
Rheum Dis 2013;72:694–700.
3
Kuo CF, Grainge MJ, Mallen C, et al. Rising burden of gout in the UK but
continuing suboptimal management: a nationwide population study. Ann Rheum
Dis 2015;74:661–7.
4
Roddy E, Doherty M. Epidemiology of gout. Arthritis Res Ther 2010;12:223.
5
Kuo CF, Grainge MJ, Zhang W, et al. Global epidemiology of gout: prevalence,
incidence and risk factors. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2015;11:649–62.
6
Doherty M, Jansen TL, Nuki G, et al. Gout: why is this curable disease so seldom
cured? Ann Rheum Dis 2012;71:1765–70.
7
Richette P, Clerson P, Périssin L, et al. Revisiting comorbidities in gout: a cluster
analysis. Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:142–7.
8
Zhang W, Doherty M, Bardin T, et al. EULAR evidence based recommendations for
gout. Part II: Management. Report of a task force of the EULAR Standing
Committee for International Clinical Studies Including Therapeutics (ESCISIT). Ann
Rheum Dis 2006;65:1312–24.
9
So A, Thorens B. Uric acid transport and disease. J Clin Invest 2010;120:1791–9.
10
Rock KL, Kataoka H, Lai JJ. Uric acid as a danger signal in gout and its
comorbidities. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2013;9:13–23.
38
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 11
Diaz-Torné C, Perez-Herrero N, Perez-Ruiz F. New medications in development for
the treatment of hyperuricemia of gout. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2015;27:164–9.
12
Edwards NL, So A. Emerging therapies for gout. Rheum Dis Clin North Am
2014;40:375–87.
13
Terkeltaub RA. Colchicine update: 2008. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2009;38:411–19.
14
Stamp LK, O’Donnell JL, Zhang M, et al. Using allopurinol above the dose based
on creatinine clearance is effective and safe in patients with chronic gout,
including those with renal impairment. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63:412–21.
15
Stamp LK, Taylor WJ, Jones PB, et al. Starting dose is a risk factor for allopurinol
hypersensitivity syndrome: a proposed safe starting dose of allopurinol. Arthritis
Rheum 2012;64:2529–36.
16
Hung SI, Chung WH, Liou LB, et al. HLA-B*5801 allele as a genetic marker for
severe cutaneous adverse reactions caused by allopurinol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2005;102:4134–9.
17
Perez-Ruiz F, Martínez-Indart L, Carmona L, et al. Tophaceous gout and high level
of hyperuricaemia are both associated with increased risk of mortality in patients
with gout. Ann Rheum Dis 2014;73:177–82.
18
Dougados M, Betteridge N, Burmester GR, et al. EULAR standardised operating
procedures for the elaboration, evaluation, dissemination, and implementation of
recommendations endorsed by the EULAR standing committees. Ann Rheum Dis
2004;63:1172–6.
19
van der Heijde D, Aletaha D, Carmona L, et al. 2014 Update of the EULAR
standardised operating procedures for EULAR-endorsed recommendations. Ann
Rheum Dis 2015;74:8–13.
20
Colebatch-Bourn AN, Conaghan PG, Arden NK, et al. Raising the quality of
rheumatology management recommendations: lessons from the EULAR process 10
years after provision of standard operating procedures. Rheumatology (Oxford)
2015;54:1392–6.
21
Annemans L, Spaepen E, Gaskin M, et al. Gout in the UK and Germany:
prevalence, comorbidities and management in general practice 2000-2005. Ann
Rheum Dis 2008;67:960–6.
22
Roddy E, Zhang W, Doherty M. Concordance of the management of chronic gout
in a UK primary-care population with the EULAR gout recommendations. Ann
Rheum Dis 2007;66:1311–15.
23
Harrold LR, Mazor KM, Negron A, et al. Primary care providers’ knowledge, beliefs
and treatment practices for gout: results of a physician questionnaire.
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2013;52:1623–9.
24
Kuo CF, Grainge MJ, Mallen C, et al. Eligibility for and prescription of
urate-lowering treatment in patients with incident gout in England. JAMA
2015;312:2684–6.
25
Spencer K, Carr A, Doherty M. Patient and provider barriers to effective
management of gout in general practice: a qualitative study. Ann Rheum Dis
2012;71:1490–5.
26
Reach G. Treatment adherence in patients with gout. Joint Bone Spine
2011;78:456–9.
27
Harrold LR, Andrade SE, Briesacher BA, et al. Adherence with urate-lowering
therapies for the treatment of gout. Arthritis Res Ther 2009;11:R46.
28
Rees F, Jenkins W, Doherty M. Patients with gout adhere to curative treatment if
informed appropriately: proof-of-concept observational study. Ann Rheum Dis
2013;72:826–30.
29
Williams PT. Effects of diet, physical activity and performance, and body weight on
incident gout in ostensibly healthy, vigorously active men. Am J Clin Nutr
2008;87:1480–7.
30
Dalbeth N, Chen P, White M, et al. Impact of bariatric surgery on serum urate
targets in people with morbid obesity and diabetes: a prospective longitudinal
study. Ann Rheum Dis 2014;73:797–802.
31
Zhu Y, Zhang Y, Choi HK. The serum urate-lowering impact of weight loss among
men with a high cardiovascular risk profile: the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention
Trial. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010;49:2391–9.
32
Richette P, Poitou C, Manivet P, et al. Weight loss, xanthine oxidase and serum
urate levels: a prospective, longitudinal study of obese patients. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken) 2016;68:1036–42.
33
Chen JH, Wen CP, Wu SB, et al. Attenuating the mortality risk of high serum
uric acid: the role of physical activity underused. Ann Rheum Dis
2015;74:2034–42.
34
Roddy E, Choi HK. Epidemiology of gout. Rheum Dis Clin North Am
2014;40:155–75.
35
Bhole V, de Vera M, Rahman MM, et al. Epidemiology of gout in women:
fifty-two-year follow-up of a prospective cohort. Arthritis Rheum
2010;62:1069–76.
36
Zhang Y, Chen C, Choi H, et al. Purine-rich foods intake and recurrent gout
attacks. Ann Rheum Dis 2012;71:1448–53.
37
Zhang Y, Woods R, Chaisson CE, et al. Alcohol consumption as a trigger of
recurrent gout attacks. Am J Med 2006;119:800.e13–8.
38
Choi HK, Curhan G. Soft drinks, fructose consumption, and the risk of gout in
men: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2008;336:309–12.
39
Choi HK, Willett W, Curhan G. Fructose-rich beverages and risk of gout in women.
JAMA 2010;304:2270–8.
40
Gao X, Qi L, Qiao N, et al. Intake of added sugar and sugar-sweetened drink and
serum uric acid concentration in US men and women. Hypertension
2007;50:306–12.
41
Choi JW, Ford ES, Gao X, et al. Sugar-sweetened soft drinks, diet soft drinks, and
serum uric acid level: the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
Arthritis Rheum 2008;59:109–16.
42
Choi HK, Curhan G. Coffee, tea, and caffeine consumption and serum uric acid
level: the third national health and nutrition examination survey. Arthritis Rheum
2007;57:816–21.
43
Choi HK, Curhan G. Coffee consumption and risk of incident gout in women: the
Nurses’ Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92:922–7.
44
Choi HK, Willett W, Curhan G. Coffee consumption and risk of incident gout in
men: a prospective study. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:2049–55.
45
Zhang Y, Neogi T, Chen C, et al. Cherry consumption and decreased risk of
recurrent gout attacks. Arthritis Rheum 2012;64:4004–11.
46
Zgaga L, Theodoratou E, Kyle J, et al. The association of dietary intake of
purine-rich vegetables, sugar-sweetened beverages and dairy with plasma urate, in
a cross-sectional study. PLoS ONE 2012;7:e38123.
47
Dalbeth N, Wong S, Gamble GD, et al. Acute effect of milk on serum urate
concentrations: a randomised controlled crossover trial. Ann Rheum Dis
2010;69:1677–82.
48
Dalbeth N, Ames R, Gamble GD, et al. Effects of skim milk powder enriched with
glycomacropeptide and G600 milk fat extract on frequency of gout flares: a
proof-of-concept randomised controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2012;71:929–34.
49
Holland R, McGill NW. Comprehensive dietary education in treated gout patients
does not further improve serum urate. Intern Med J 2015;45:189–94.
50
Moi JH, Sriranganathan MK, Falzon L, et al. Lifestyle interventions for the
treatment of gout: a summary of 2 Cochrane systematic reviews. J Rheumatol
Suppl 2014;92:26–32.
51
Krishnan E. Reduced glomerular function and prevalence of gout: NHANES
2009-10. PLoS ONE 2012;7:e50046.
52
Zhu Y, Pandya BJ, Choi HK. Comorbidities of gout and hyperuricemia in the US
general population: NHANES 2007-2008. Am J Med 2011;125:679–687.e1.
53
Jalal DI, Chonchol M, Chen W, et al. Uric acid as a target of therapy in CKD. Am
J Kidney Dis 2013;61:134–46.
54
Feig DI, Kang DH, Johnson RJ. Uric acid and cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med
2008;359:1811–21.
55
Liu SC, Xia L, Zhang J, et al. Gout and risk of myocardial infarction: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. PLoS ONE 2015;10:e0134088.
56
Clarson LE, Hider SL, Belcher J, et al. Increased risk of vascular disease associated
with gout: a retrospective, matched cohort study in the UK clinical practice
research datalink. Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:642–7.
57
Krishnan E, Baker JF, Furst DE, et al. Gout and the risk of acute myocardial
infarction. Arthritis Rheum 2006;54:2688–96.
58
Choi HK, Curhan G. Independent impact of gout on mortality and risk for coronary
heart disease. Circulation 2007;116:894–900.
59
De Vera MA, Rahman MM, Bhole V, et al. Independent impact of gout on the risk
of acute myocardial infarction among elderly women: a population-based study.
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1162–4.
60
Baker JF, Schumacher HR, Krishnan E. Serum uric acid level and risk for peripheral
arterial disease: analysis of data from the multiple risk factor intervention trial.
Angiology 2007;58:450–7.
61
Krishnan E. Gout and the risk for incident heart failure and systolic dysfunction.
BMJ Open 2012;2:e000282.
62
Seminog OO, Goldacre MJ. Gout as a risk factor for myocardial infarction and
stroke in England: evidence from record linkage studies. Rheumatology (Oxford)
2013;52:2251–9.
63
Krishnan E, Akhras KS, Sharma H, et al. Relative and attributable diabetes risk
associated with hyperuricemia in US veterans with gout. QJM 2013;106:721–9.
64
Keenan RT, O’Brien WR, Lee KH, et al. Prevalence of contraindications and
prescription of pharmacologic therapies for gout. Am J Med 2011;124:
155–63.
65
Terkeltaub RA, Furst DE, Bennett K, et al. High versus low dosing of oral
colchicine for early acute gout flare: twenty-four-hour outcome of the first
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
dose-comparison colchicine study. Arthritis Rheum 2010;62:1060–8.
66
van Durme CM, Wechalekar MD, Buchbinder R, et al. Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs for acute gout. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;(9):
CD010120.
67
Li T, Chen SL, Dai Q, et al. Etoricoxib versus indomethacin in the treatment of
Chinese patients with acute gouty arthritis: a randomized double-blind trial. Chin
Med J 2013;126:1867–71.
68
Schumacher HR, Berger MF, Li-Yu J, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of celecoxib in
the treatment of acute gouty arthritis: a randomized controlled trial. J Rheumatol
2012;39:1859–66.
69
Willburger RE, Mysler E, Derbot J, et al. Lumiracoxib 400 mg once daily is
comparable to indomethacin 50 mg three times daily for the treatment of acute
flares of gout. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2007;46:1126–32.
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
39
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 70
Rainer TH, Cheng CH, Janssens HJ, et al. Oral prednisolone in the treatment of
acute gout: a pragmatic, multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial. Ann Intern
Med 2016;164:464–71.
71
Janssens HJ, Janssen M, van de Lisdonk EH, et al. Use of oral prednisolone or
naproxen for the treatment of gout arthritis: a double-blind, randomised
equivalence trial. Lancet 2008;371:1854–60.
72
Man CY, Cheung IT, Cameron PA, et al. Comparison of oral prednisolone/
paracetamol and oral indomethacin/paracetamol combination therapy in the
treatment of acute gout-like arthritis: a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial.
Ann Emerg Med 2007;49:670–7.
73
Terkeltaub RA, Furst DE, Digiacinto JL, et al. Novel evidence-based colchicine
dose-reduction algorithm to predict and prevent colchicine toxicity in the presence
of cytochrome P450 3A4/P-glycoprotein inhibitors. Arthritis Rheum
2011;63:2226–37.
74
Richette P, Bardin T. Colchicine for the treatment of gout. Expert Opin
Pharmacother 2010;11:2933–8.
75
Wason S, Mount D, Faulkner R. Single-dose, open-label study of the differences in
pharmacokinetics of colchicine in subjects with renal impairment, including
end-stage renal disease. Clin Drug Investig 2014;34:845–55.
76
Fernández C, Noguera R, González JA, et al. Treatment of acute attacks of gout
with a small dose of intraarticular triamcinolone acetonide. J Rheumatol
1999;26:2285–6.
77
Wechalekar MD, Vinik O, Schlesinger N, et al. Intra-articular glucocorticoids for
acute gout. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;(4):CD009920.
78
Martinon F, Pétrilli V, Mayor A, et al. Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate
the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature 2006;440:237–41.
79
Schlesinger N, Alten RE, Bardin T, et al. Canakinumab for acute gouty arthritis in
patients with limited treatment options: results from two randomised, multicentre,
active-controlled, double-blind trials and their initial extensions. Ann Rheum Dis
2012;71:1839–48.
80
So A, De Smedt T, Revaz S, et al. A pilot study of IL-1 inhibition by anakinra in
acute gout. Arthritis Res Ther 2007;9:R28.
81
Chen K, Fields T, Mancuso CA, et al. Anakinra’s efficacy is variable in refractory
gout: report of ten cases. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2010;40:210–14.
82
Ottaviani S, Moltó A, Ea HK, et al. Efficacy of anakinra in gouty arthritis: a
retrospective study of 40 cases. Arthritis Res Ther 2013;15:R123.
83
Ghosh P, Cho M, Rawat G, et al. Treatment of acute gouty arthritis in complex
hospitalized patients with anakinra. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
2013;65:1381–4.
84
Terkeltaub R, Sundy JS, Schumacher HR, et al. The interleukin 1 inhibitor
rilonacept in treatment of chronic gouty arthritis: results of a placebo-controlled,
monosequence crossover, non-randomised, single-blind pilot study. Ann Rheum
Dis 2009;68:1613–17.
85
Terkeltaub RA, Schumacher HR, Carter JD, et al. Rilonacept in the treatment of
acute gouty arthritis: a randomized, controlled clinical trial using indomethacin as
the active comparator. Arthritis Res Ther 2013;15:R25.
86
Schlesinger N. Canakinumab in gout. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2012;12:1265–75.
87
Becker MA, MacDonald PA, Hunt BJ, et al. Determinants of the clinical outcomes
of gout during the first year of urate-lowering therapy. Nucleosides Nucleotides
Nucleic Acids 2008;27:585–91.
88
Wortmann RL, Macdonald PA, Hunt B, et al. Effect of prophylaxis on gout flares
after the initiation of urate-lowering therapy: analysis of data from three phase III
trials. Clin Ther 2010;32:2386–97.
89
Finkelstein Y, Aks SE, Hutson JR, et al. Colchicine poisoning: the dark side of an
ancient drug. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2010;48:407–14.
90
Nidorf SM, Eikelboom JW, Budgeon CA, et al. Low-dose colchicine for secondary
prevention of cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61:404–10.
91
Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Raisakis K, et al. Colchicine treatment for the
prevention of bare-metal stent restenosis in diabetic patients. J Am Coll Cardiol
2013;61:1679–85.
92
Schlesinger N, Mysler E, Lin HY, et al. Canakinumab reduces the risk of acute
gouty arthritis flares during initiation of allopurinol treatment: results of a
double-blind, randomised study. Ann Rheum Dis 2011;70:1264–71.
93
Schumacher HR Jr, Sundy JS, Terkeltaub R, et al. Rilonacept (interleukin-1 trap) in
the prevention of acute gout flares during initiation of urate-lowering therapy:
results of a phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis
Rheum 2012;64:876–84.
94
Mitha E, Schumacher HR, Fouche L, et al. Rilonacept for gout flare prevention
during initiation of uric acid-lowering therapy: results from the PRESURGE-2
international, phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Rheumatology
(Oxford) 2013;52:1285–92.
95
Schumacher HR Jr, Evans RR, Saag KG, et al. Rilonacept (interleukin-1 trap) for
prevention of gout flares during initiation of uric acid-lowering therapy: results
from a phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, confirmatory
efficacy study. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2012;64:1462–70.
96
Sundy JS, Schumacher HR, Kivitz A, et al. Rilonacept for gout flare prevention in
patients receiving uric acid-lowering therapy: results of RESURGE, a phase III,
international safety study. J Rheumatol 2014;41:1703–11.
97
Schumacher HR Jr, Becker MA, Wortmann RL, et al. Effects of febuxostat versus
allopurinol and placebo in reducing serum urate in subjects with hyperuricemia
and gout: a 28-week, phase III, randomized, double-blind, parallel-group trial.
Arthritis Rheum 2008;59:1540–8.
98
Becker MA, Schumacher HR Jr, Wortmann RL, et al. Febuxostat compared with
allopurinol in patients with hyperuricemia and gout. N Engl J Med
2005;353:2450–61.
99
Sundy JS, Baraf HS, Yood RA, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of pegloticase for the
treatment of chronic gout in patients refractory to conventional treatment: two
randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2011;306:711–20.
100
Baraf HS, Becker MA, Gutierrez-Urena SR, et al. Tophus burden reduction with
pegloticase: results from phase 3 randomized trials and open-label extension in
patients with chronic gout refractory to conventional therapy. Arthritis Res Ther
2013;15:R137.
101
Strand V, Khanna D, Singh JA, et al. Improved health-related quality of life and
physical function in patients with refractory chronic gout following treatment with
pegloticase: evidence from phase III randomized controlled trials. J Rheumatol
2012;39:1450–7.
102
Richette P. Debulking the urate load to feel better. J Rheumatol
2012;39:1311–13.
103
Scire CA, Manara M, Cimmino MA, et al. Gout impacts on function and
health-related quality of life beyond associated risk factors and medical conditions:
results from the KING observational study of the Italian Society for Rheumatology
(SIR). Arthritis Res Ther 2013;15:R101.
104
Becker MA, Schumacher HR, Benjamin KL, et al. Quality of life and disability in
patients with treatment-failure gout. J Rheumatol 2009;36:1041–8.
105
Singh JA, Strand V. Gout is associated with more comorbidities, poorer
health-related quality of life and higher healthcare utilisation in US veterans.
Ann Rheum Dis 2008;67:1310–16.
106
Chandratre P, Roddy E, Clarson L, et al. Health-related quality of life in gout:
a systematic review. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2013;52:2031–40.
107
Stack AG, Hanley A, Casserly LF, et al. Independent and conjoint associations of
gout and hyperuricaemia with total and cardiovascular mortality. QJM
2013;106:647–58.
108
Bhole V, Krishnan E. Gout and the heart. Rheum Dis Clin North Am
2014;40:125–43.
109
Richette P, Perez-Ruiz F. Serum uric acid and metabolic risk. Curr Med Res Opin
2013;29(Suppl 3):9–15.
110
Krishnan E, Svendsen K, Neaton JD, et al. Long-term cardiovascular mortality
among middle-aged men with gout. Arch Intern Med 2008;168:
1104–10.
111
Higgins P, Dawson J, Lees KR, et al. Xanthine oxidase inhibition for the treatment
of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Ther
2012;30:217–26.
112
Agarwal V, Hans N, Messerli FH. Effect of allopurinol on blood pressure: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich)
2013;15:435–42.
113
Goicoechea M, Garcia de Vinuesa S, Verdalles U, et al. Allopurinol and
progression of CKD and cardiovascular events: long-term follow-up of a
randomized clinical trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;65:543–9.
114
Bose B, Badve SV, Hiremath SS, et al. Effects of uric acid-lowering therapy on
renal outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2014;29:406–13.
115
Kanji T, Gandhi M, Clase CM, et al. Urate lowering therapy to improve renal
outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMC Nephrol 2015;16:58.
116
Sircar D, Chatterjee S, Waikhom R, et al. Efficacy of Febuxostat for slowing the
GFR decline in patients with CKD and asymptomatic hyperuricemia: a 6-month,
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis
2015;66:945–50.
117
Noman A, Ang DS, Ogston S, et al. Effect of high-dose allopurinol on exercise in
patients with chronic stable angina: a randomised, placebo controlled crossover
trial. Lancet 2010;375:2161–7.
118
Kelkar A, Kuo A, Frishman WH. Allopurinol as a cardiovascular drug. Cardiol Rev
2011;19:265–71.
119
Thanassoulis G, Brophy JM, Richard H, et al. Gout, allopurinol use, and heart
failure outcomes. Arch Intern Med 2010;170:1358–64.
120
Givertz MM, Anstrom KJ, Redfield MM, et al. Effects of xanthine oxidase inhibition
in hyperuricemic heart failure patients: the xanthine oxidase inhibition for
hyperuricemic heart failure patients (EXACT-HF) study. Circulation
2015;131:1763–71.
121
Grimaldi-Bensouda L, Alpérovitch A, Aubrun E, et al. Impact of allopurinol on risk
of myocardial infarction. Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:836–42.
122
de Abajo FJ, Gil MJ, Rodríguez A, et al. Allopurinol use and risk of non-fatal acute
myocardial infarction. Heart 2015;101:679–85.
123
Kok VC, Horng JT, Chang WS, et al. Allopurinol therapy in gout patients does not
associate with beneficial cardiovascular outcomes: a population-based
matched-cohort study. PLoS ONE 2014;9:e99102.
40
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 124
Saag KG, Whelton A, Becker MA, et al. Impact of febuxostat on renal function in
gout subjects with moderate-to-severe renal impairment. Arthritis Rheumatol
2016. [Epub ahead of print 19 Feb 2016]. doi:10.1002/art.39654
125
Wu EQ, Patel PA, Mody RR, et al. Frequency, risk, and cost of gout-related
episodes among the elderly: does serum uric acid level matter? J Rheumatol
2009;36:1032–40.
126
Abhishek A, Valdes AM, Zhang W, et al. Serum uric acid & disease duration
associate with frequent gout attacks but are poor at identifying such patients:
a case control study. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2016. [Epub ahead of print 11
Feb 2016]. doi:10.1002/acr.22855
127
Singh JA, Reddy SG, Kundukulam J. Risk factors for gout and prevention:
a systematic review of the literature. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2011;23:192–202.
128
Rothenbacher D, Primatesta P, Ferreira A, et al. Frequency and risk factors of gout
flares in a large population-based cohort of incident gout. Rheumatology (Oxford)
2011;50:973–81.
129
Yamanaka H. Gout and hyperuricemia in young people. Curr Opin Rheumatol
2011;23:156–60.
130
Taylor TH, Mecchella JN, Larson RJ, et al. Initiation of allopurinol at first medical
contact for acute attacks of gout: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Med
2012;125:1126–1134.e7.
131
Hill EM, Sky K, Sit M, et al. Does starting allopurinol prolong acute treated gout?
A randomized clinical trial. J Clin Rheumatol 2015;21:120–5.
132
Bardin T. Hyperuricemia starts at 360 micromoles (6 mg/dL). Joint Bone Spine
2015;82:141–3.
133
Pascual E, Sivera F. Time required for disappearance of urate crystals from synovial
fluid after successful hypouricaemic treatment relates to the duration of gout.
Ann Rheum Dis 2007;66:1056–8.
134
Perez-Ruiz F, Lioté F. Lowering serum uric acid levels: what is the optimal target
for improving clinical outcomes in gout? Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:1324–8.
135
Perez-Ruiz F, Calabozo M, Pijoan JI, et al. Effect of urate-lowering therapy on the
velocity of size reduction of tophi in chronic gout. Arthritis Rheum
2002;47:356–60.
136
Chamorro A, Amaro S, Castellanos M, et al. Safety and efficacy of uric acid in
patients with acute stroke (URICO-ICTUS): a randomised, double-blind phase 2b/3
trial. Lancet Neurol 2014;13:453–60.
137
Peng F, Zhang B, Zhong X, et al. Serum uric acid levels of patients with multiple
sclerosis and other neurological diseases. Mult Scler 2008;14:188–96.
138
Schretlen DJ, Inscore AB, Vannorsdall TD, et al. Serum uric acid and brain
ischemia in normal elderly adults. Neurology 2007;69:1418–23.
139
Chen H, Mosley TH, Alonso A, et al. Plasma urate and Parkinson’s disease in the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Am J Epidemiol
2009;169:1064–9.
140
Weisskopf MG, O’Reilly E, Chen H, et al. Plasma urate and risk of Parkinson’s
disease. Am J Epidemiol 2007;166:561–7.
141
Kim TS, Pae CU, Yoon SJ, et al. Decreased plasma antioxidants in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2006;21:344–8.
142
Abraham A, Drory VE. Influence of serum uric acid levels on prognosis and
survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a meta-analysis. J Neurol
2014;261:1133–8.
143
Zandman-Goddard G, Amital H, Shamrayevsky N, et al. Rates of adherence and
persistence with allopurinol therapy among gout patients in Israel. Rheumatology
(Oxford) 2013;52:1126–31.
144
Solomon DH, Avorn J, Levin R, et al. Uric acid lowering therapy: prescribing
patterns in a large cohort of older adults. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;67:609–13.
145
Perez-Ruiz F, Herrero-Beites AM, Carmona L. A two-stage approach to the
treatment of hyperuricemia in gout: the “dirty dish” hypothesis. Arthritis Rheum
2011;63:4002–6.
146
Meltzer M, Pizzi LT, Jutkowitz E. Payer decision-making with limited comparative
and cost effectiveness data: the case of new pharmacological treatments for gout.
Evid Based Med 2012;17:105–8.
147
Jutkowitz E, Choi HK, Pizzi LT, et al. Cost-effectiveness of allopurinol and
febuxostat for the management of gout. Ann Intern Med 2014;161:617–26.
148
Reinders MK, van Roon EN, Jansen TL, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of
urate-lowering drugs in gout: a randomised controlled trial of benzbromarone
versus probenecid after failure of allopurinol. Ann Rheum Dis 2009;68:51–6.
149
Becker MA, Schumacher HR, Espinoza LR, et al. The urate-lowering efficacy and
safety of febuxostat in the treatment of the hyperuricemia of gout: the CONFIRMS
trial. Arthritis Res Ther 2010;12:R63.
150
Reinders MK, Haagsma C, Jansen TL, et al. A randomised controlled trial on the
efficacy and tolerability with dose escalation of allopurinol 300-600 mg/day versus
benzbromarone 100-200 mg/day in patients with gout. Ann Rheum Dis
2009;68:892–7.
151
Becker MA, Schumacher HR Jr, Wortmann RL, et al. Febuxostat, a novel nonpurine
selective inhibitor of xanthine oxidase: a twenty-eight-day, multicenter, phase II,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response clinical trial
examining safety and efficacy in patients with gout. Arthritis Rheum
2005;52:916–23.
152
Abeles AM. Febuxostat hypersensitivity. J Rheumatol 2012;39:659.
153
Chohan S. Safety and efficacy of febuxostat treatment in subjects with gout and
severe allopurinol adverse reactions. J Rheumatol 2011;38:1957–9.
154
Bardin T, Chalès G, Pascart T, et al. Risk of cutaneous adverse events with
febuxostat treatment in patients with skin reaction to allopurinol. A retrospective,
hospital-based study of 101 patients with consecutive allopurinol and febuxostat
treatment. Joint Bone Spine 2016;83:314–17.
155
Kydd AS, Seth R, Buchbinder R, et al. Uricosuric medications for chronic gout.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;(11):CD010457.
156
Pui K, Gow PJ, Dalbeth N. Efficacy and tolerability of probenecid as urate-lowering
therapy in gout; clinical experience in high-prevalence population. J Rheumatol
2013;40:872–6.
157
Reinders MK, van Roon EN, Houtman PM, et al. Biochemical effectiveness of
allopurinol and allopurinol-probenecid in previously benzbromarone-treated gout
patients. Clin Rheumatol 2007;26:1459–65.
158
Stocker SL, Graham GG, McLachlan AJ, et al. Pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic interaction between allopurinol and probenecid in patients with
gout. J Rheumatol 2011;38:904–10.
159
Ko TM, Tsai CY, Chen SY, et al. Use of HLA-B*58:01 genotyping to prevent
allopurinol induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions in Taiwan: national
prospective cohort study. BMJ 2015;351:h4848.
160
Perez-Ruiz F, Sundy JS, Miner JN, et al. Lesinurad in combination with allopurinol:
results of a phase 2, randomised, double-blind study in patients with gout with an
inadequate response to allopurinol. Ann Rheum Dis 2016;75:1074–80.
161
Halevy S, Ghislain PD, Mockenhaupt M, et al. Allopurinol is the most common
cause of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in Europe and
Israel. J Am Acad Dermatol 2008;58:25–32.
162
Kim SC, Newcomb C, Margolis D, et al. Severe cutaneous reactions requiring
hospitalization in allopurinol initiators: a population-based cohort study. Arthritis
Care Res (Hoboken) 2013;65:578–84.
163
Ramasamy SN, Korb-Wells CS, Kannangara DR, et al. Allopurinol hypersensitivity:
a systematic review of all published cases, 1950-2012. Drug Saf 2013;36:953–80.
164
Chung WH, Chang WC, Stocker SL, et al. Insights into the poor prognosis of
allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions: the impact of renal
insufficiency, high plasma levels of oxypurinol and granulysin. Ann Rheum Dis
2015;74:2157–64.
165
Chao J, Terkeltaub R. A critical reappraisal of allopurinol dosing, safety, and
efficacy for hyperuricemia in gout. Curr Rheumatol Rep 2009;11:135–40.
166
Stocker SL, McLachlan AJ, Savic RM, et al. The pharmacokinetics of oxypurinol in
people with gout. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2012;74:477–89.
167
Yun J, Mattsson J, Schnyder K, et al. Allopurinol hypersensitivity is primarily
mediated by dose-dependent oxypurinol-specific T cell response. Clin Exp Allergy
2013;43:1246–55.
168
Dalbeth N, Kumar S, Stamp L, et al. Dose adjustment of allopurinol according to
creatinine clearance does not provide adequate control of hyperuricemia in
patients with gout. J Rheumatol 2006;33:1646–50.
169
Hande KR, Noone RM, Stone WJ. Severe allopurinol toxicity. Description and
guidelines for prevention in patients with renal insufficiency. Am J Med
1984;76:47–56.
170
Hira D, Chisaki Y, Noda S, et al. Population pharmacokinetics and therapeutic
efficacy of febuxostat in patients with severe renal impairment. Pharmacology
2015;96:90–8.
171
Perez-Ruiz F, Calabozo M, Fernandez-Lopez MJ, et al. Treatment of chronic gout
in patients with renal function impairment: an open, randomized, actively
controlled study. J Clin Rheumatol 1999;5:49–55.
172
Fujimori S, Ooyama K, Ooyama H, et al. Efficacy of benzbromarone in
hyperuricemic patients associated with chronic kidney disease. Nucleosides
Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 2011;30:1035–8.
173
Sundy JS, Becker MA, Baraf HS, et al. Reduction of plasma urate levels following
treatment with multiple doses of pegloticase (polyethylene glycol-conjugated
uricase) in patients with treatment-failure gout: results of a phase II randomized
study. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:2882–91.
174
Lipsky PE, Calabrese LH, Kavanaugh A, et al. Pegloticase immunogenicity:
the relationship between efficacy and antibody development in patients treated
for refractory chronic gout. Arthritis Res Ther 2014;16:R60.
175
Choi HK, Soriano LC, Zhang Y, et al. Antihypertensive drugs and risk of incident
gout among patients with hypertension: population based case-control study. BMJ
2012;344:d8190.
176
Derosa G, Maffioli P, Sahebkar A. Plasma uric acid concentrations are reduced by
fenofibrate: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
placebo-controlled trials. Pharmacol Res 2015;102:63–70.
177
Ansquer JC, Dalton RN, Caussé E, et al. Effect of fenofibrate on kidney function:
a 6-week randomized crossover trial in healthy people. Am J Kidney Dis
2008;51:904–13.
178
Ogata N, Fujimori S, Oka Y, et al. Effects of three strong statins (atorvastatin,
pitavastatin, and rosuvastatin) on serum uric acid levels in dyslipidemic patients.
Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 2010;29:321–4.
179
Takagi H, Umemoto T. Atorvastatin therapy reduces serum uric acid levels: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Int J Cardiol 2012;157:255–7.
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
41
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 180
Zhu Y, Pandya BJ, Choi HK. Prevalence of gout and hyperuricemia in the US
general population: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
2007-2008. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63:3136–41.
181
Crittenden DB, Pillinger MH. New therapies for gout. Annu Rev Med
2013;64:325–37.
182
Bardin T, Richette P. Definition of hyperuricemia and gouty conditions. Curr Opin
Rheumatol 2014;26:186–91.
183
Dalbeth N, House ME, Aati O, et al. Urate crystal deposition in asymptomatic
hyperuricaemia and symptomatic gout: a dual energy CT study. Ann Rheum Dis
2015;74:908–11.
184
Dalbeth N, Stamp L. Hyperuricaemia and gout: time for a new staging system?
Ann Rheum Dis 2014;73:1598–600.
185
Khanna D, Fitzgerald JD, Khanna PP, et al. 2012 American College of
Rheumatology guidelines for management of gout. Part 1: systematic
nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic therapeutic approaches to hyperuricemia.
Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2012;64:1431–46.
186
Khanna D, Khanna PP, Fitzgerald JD, et al. 2012 American College of
Rheumatology guidelines for management of gout. Part 2: therapy and
anti-inflammatory prophylaxis of acute gouty arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
2012;64:1447–61.
187
Saito Y, Stamp LK, Caudle KE, et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation
Consortium (CPIC) guidelines for human leukocyte antigen B (HLA-B) genotype
and allopurinol dosing: 2015 update. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2015;
99:36–7.
188
Yun J, Marcaida MJ, Eriksson KK, et al. Oxypurinol directly and immediately
activates the drug-specific T cells via the preferential use of HLA-B*58:01.
J Immunol 2014;192:2984–93.
189
Lin CH, Chen JK, Ko TM, et al. Immunologic basis for allopurinol-induced severe
cutaneous adverse reactions: HLA-B*58:01-restricted activation of drug-specific
T cells and molecular interaction. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:
1063–5.e5.
190
Lonjou C, Borot N, Sekula P, et al. A European study of HLA-B in Stevens-Johnson
syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis related to five high-risk drugs.
Pharmacogenet Genomics 2008;18:99–107.
191
Saokaew S, Tassaneeyakul W, Maenthaisong R, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of
HLA-B*5801 testing in preventing allopurinol-induced SJS/TEN in Thai population.
PLoS ONE 2014;9:e94294.
192
Park DJ, Kang JH, Lee JW, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of HLA-B5801
genotyping in the treatment of gout patients with chronic renal insufficiency in
Korea. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2015;67:280–7.
42
Richette P, et al. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:29–42. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707
Recommendation
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ard.bmj.com/
Ann Rheum Dis: first published as 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707 on 25 July 2016. Downloaded from 
