 HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 10 May 2016
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00193
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
Edited by:
Kathleen A. Maguire-Zeiss,
Georgetown University Medical
Center, USA
Reviewed by:
Bogdan A. Stoica,
University of Maryland School of
Medicine, USA
Varun Kesherwani,
University of Nebraska Medical
Center, USA
*Correspondence:
Robert I. Richards
robert.richards@adelaide.edu.au
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neurodegeneration,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
Received: 16 March 2016
Accepted: 18 April 2016
Published: 10 May 2016
Citation:
Richards RI, Robertson SA,
O’Keefe LV, Fornarino D, Scott A,
Lardelli M and Baune BT (2016) The
Enemy within: Innate
Surveillance-Mediated Cell Death, the
Common Mechanism of
Neurodegenerative Disease.
Front. Neurosci. 10:193.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00193
The Enemy within: Innate
Surveillance-Mediated Cell Death,
the Common Mechanism of
Neurodegenerative Disease
Robert I. Richards 1*, Sarah A. Robertson 2, Louise V. O’Keefe 1, Dani Fornarino 1,
Andrew Scott 1, Michael Lardelli 1 and Bernhard T. Baune 3
1 Department of Genetics and Evolution, Centre for Molecular Pathology, School of Biological Sciences, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia, 2 School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Research Institute, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia, 3 School of Medicine, Discipline of Psychiatry, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA, Australia
Neurodegenerative diseases comprise an array of progressive neurological disorders all
characterized by the selective death of neurons in the central nervous system. Although,
rare (familial) and common (sporadic) forms can occur for the same disease, it is
unclear whether this reflects several distinct pathogenic pathways or the convergence of
different causes into a common form of nerve cell death. Remarkably, neurodegenerative
diseases are increasingly found to be accompanied by activation of the innate immune
surveillance system normally associated with pathogen recognition and response. Innate
surveillance is the cell’s quality control system for the purpose of detecting such danger
signals and responding in an appropriate manner. Innate surveillance is an “intelligent
system,” in that the manner of response is relevant to the magnitude and duration of
the threat. If possible, the threat is dealt with within the cell in which it is detected,
by degrading the danger signal(s) and restoring homeostasis. If this is not successful
then an inflammatory response is instigated that is aimed at restricting the spread of the
threat by elevating degradative pathways, sensitizing neighboring cells, and recruiting
specialized cell types to the site. If the danger signal persists, then the ultimate response
can include not only the programmed cell death of the original cell, but the contents of this
dead cell can also bring about the death of adjacent sensitized cells. These responses
are clearly aimed at destroying the ability of the detected pathogen to propagate and
spread. Innate surveillance comprises intracellular, extracellular, non-cell autonomous
and systemic processes. Recent studies have revealed how multiple steps in these
processes involve proteins that, through their mutation, have been linked to many familial
forms of neurodegenerative disease. This suggests that individuals harboring these
mutations may have an amplified response to innate-mediated damage in neural tissues,
and renders innate surveillance mediated cell death a plausible common pathogenic
pathway responsible for neurodegenerative diseases, in both familial and sporadic forms.
Here we have assembled evidence in favor of the hypothesis that neurodegenerative
disease is the cumulative result of chronic activation of the innate surveillance pathway,
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
triggered by endogenous or environmental danger or damage associated molecular
patterns in a progressively expanding cascade of inflammation, tissue damage and cell
death.
Keywords:
dementia,
innate
autoimmunity,
inflammation,
neurodegeneration,
Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s,
Huntington’s
INTRODUCTION
Different chronic neurodegenerative diseases are distinguished
by the type of neurons and the regions of the brain that are
first affected. In each case the different initial symptoms and
functions lost are due to the progressive death of specific neurons.
Neurodegenerative diseases also tend to be diverse in their
timing, with some being congenital whereas others are late age-
at-onset. Those that progress, gradually exhibit commonalities.
A large number and wide variety of causes of neurodegeneration
have been identified. These range from inherited single gene
mutation effects, to environmental factors or complex mixtures
of both. It has been difficult to establish cause and effect
pathways and to reconcile how so many apparently disparate
conditions all result in similar outcomes. Either the diverse causes
trigger multiple pathogenic pathways, or alternatively they must
converge into a common mechanism of cell death and tissue
damage. Familial cases of neurodegeneration, while typically less
frequent than sporadic cases, have provided opportunities to
gain insight into the genetic factors and thereby the underlying
biological processes.
In this review we present evidence to support the hypothesis
that a common pathogenic mechanism for neurodegenerative
disease exists, and is mediated by innate surveillance-cell death.
OVERVIEW
Cell death is vital in the biology of multicellular organisms.
It is integral to tissue remodeling during development, where
programmed cell death is required to deconstruct, remove
and replace tissues. Cell death is also a vital defense strategy
in combating infection. Where cells harbor and are unable
to destroy pathogens then cell death is a means to limit
propagation and spread of the pathogen. Similarly, if a cell has
acquired somatic mutations that predispose to tumorigenesis,
then elimination by cell death is a means to neutralize the threat.
In each of these situations the innate immune surveillance system
programs the appropriate cell death pathways.
In the last few years, a growing body of literature has
appeared, pointing to innate surveillance system activity being
an early, elemental and consistent hallmark of neurodegenerative
disease. In particular recent genome wide association studies
in Alzheimer’s disease (see Table 1A) and genetic modification
studies in animal models of various neurodegenerative diseases
Abbreviations:
Abbreviations:
AGS,
Aicardi-Goutieres
Syndrome;
ALS,
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis; DAMPs, Danger Associated Molecular Patterns;
dAMPs,
Damage
Associated
Molecular
Patterns;
FTD,
Fronto-Temporal
Dementia;
PAMP,
Pathogen
Associated
Molecular
Pattern;
PRR,
Pattern
Recognition Receptor; TLR, Toll-like Receptor; RLR, RIG-I-like Receptor.
(see Table 1B) have identified multiple components of the innate
surveillance system as genetic determinants. These findings are
inconsistent and difficult to reconcile with the prevailing theories
of neurodegenerative disease. There is now decisive evidence
supporting the hypothesis that innate surveillance mediated cell
death is a common cause, not simply a consequence, of nerve
cell death and therefore the principle causal mechanism of
neurodegenerative disease.
TABLE 1 | Innate surveillance hallmarks in human neurodegenerative
disease and their animal models.
Disease
IS component(s)
References/review
(A) INNATE SURVEILLANCE COMPONENTS IN HUMAN
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE
AD
“Innate immune”
see
Bettens
et
al.,
2013;
Zhang et al., 2013
Glial cell activation
see Mosher and Wyss-Coray,
2014
Astrocytosis
see Rodriguez-Vieitez et al.,
2016
Various (by GWAS)
Escott-Price et al., 2014
ALS
Cytokines & immune
Batra et al., 2016
AGS
Interferon
Crow, 2015; Rice et al., 2012,
2014
BSN
Interferon
Livingston et al., 2014
DM1, DM2
Interferon
Rhodes et al., 2012
HD
IL-4, 6, 8, 10, TNF
Bjorkqvist et al., 2008
Multiple
XBP-1
Dunys et al., 2014
Multiple
Microglial priming
see Perry and Holmes, 2014
PD
Microglia
Russo
et
al.,
2014;
Schapansky et al., 2015
SP
Interferon
Crow et al., 2014
(B) INNATE SURVEILLANCE MODIFIERS/MARKERS IN ANIMAL MODELS
OF NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE
Disease
Modifier/marker
References
AD
NLRP1
Tan et al., 2014
AD
CD33/TREM2
Chan et al., 2015
AD
CSF1R
Olmos-Alonso et al., 2016
AGS (ADAR1)
MDA-5 (IFIH1)
Liddicoat et al., 2015; Pestal
et al., 2015
ALS (SOD1)
XBP-1
Hetz et al., 2009
TLR4
Lee et al., 2015
FTD (toll, CHMP2B)
Serpin5
Ahmad et al., 2009
PD (chemical)
HMG-B1
Sasaki et al., 2016
PD (LRRK2)
TLR4
Moehle et al., 2012
HD, SCAs
TNF, drosomycin
Samaraweera et al., 2013
SCA6
MyD88
Aikawa et al., 2015
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
The innate surveillance and immune inflammatory response
system is a complex, highly integrated means of surveillance,
detection and response to pathogens and precancerous cells.
The current understanding of this system is almost certainly
incomplete and is the composite from studies in multiple species
and cell types that may well differ from one another in detail
(Beutler et al., 2007; Buchan et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2014; Pellegrino
et al., 2014). In the following sections we review the components
and attributes of this system from a perspective that sets a context
for its potential role in neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis.
THE INNATE IMMUNE INFLAMMATORY
RESPONSE TO PATHOGEN RECOGNITION
Innate Immune Surveillance System
Biological competition comes in various forms. In the host-
pathogen “arms race” a key requirement for host survival is
the ability to sense danger and respond appropriately. Integral
to this is the ability to distinguish “self” from “non-self.” Such
recognition can be direct, by virtue of molecular patterns that
are either intrinsic or foreign to the host, or indirect, reflecting
the consequences of foreign intrusion, such as changes in
homeostasis or stress responses.
Activation occurs via one or more Pattern Recognition
Receptors (PRRs) that detect trigger molecules—foreign Pathogen
Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs) or endogenous Danger
Associated Molecular Patterns (DAMPs), the latter typically
being elevated in response to perturbation of homeostasis.
The immediate response is an escalation of appropriate
degradation pathways (e.g., autophagy) in order to eliminate
the intruder and/or restore homeostasis. Persistence of trigger
signal molecules provokes the production and release of pro-
inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, which sensitize
adjacent cells. This is followed by programmed death (by
necroptosis) of cells in which trigger molecules are detected (Wu
et al., 2012; Kaczmarek et al., 2013; Pasparakis and Vandenabeele,
2015). Cell death via necroptosis causes release of cell contents
that are recognized as Damage Associated Molecular Patterns
(dAMPs) by adjacent sensitized cells (Lu et al., 2014). In-
turn, this expands the foci of cells undergoing PRR-triggered
innate surveillance-mediated cell death. Cytokines also recruit
specialized cells to the focal response site, contributing to
its amplification, then ultimately containment and resolution
(Vanha-aho et al., 2015).
The innate surveillance system is ancient, having an integral
role in the biology of animals and plants. Its origins probably
trace back to bacteria where the defense system of restriction-
modification enabled bacteria to identify their own DNA and
selectively degrade that of an intruder. In plants and animals
the post-transcriptional modification of nucleic acids is common
(over 100 different types of modification to tRNAs alone). At
least some of this modification appears devoid of function,
other than to identify nucleic acids as belonging to the host.
Indeed, such modifications are required for exogenous mRNA to
avoid stimulating the innate surveillance response, even when its
sequence is identical to that of the endogenous mRNA (Warren
et al., 2007; Andries et al., 2013).
The selective pressure of the host-pathogen “arms race” has
seen this system both evolve rapidly and reach into most, if not
all, cellular compartments such that it monitors the surveillance
of a vast array of cellular processes. At least in some organisms,
certain elements participate in developmental processes. It is this
system that has also evolved to detect and respond to detrimental
consequences of somatic DNA mutations, such as those that can
increase the risk of neoplasia (Feng and Martin, 2015). Since such
mutations accumulate and are more likely to cause dysfunction
over time, there is good reason to think that longer-lived animals
are dependent upon this system to minimize the occurrence of
cancer, particularly later in life (Caulin and Maley, 2011). In this
regard it is noteworthy that this system appears to increase in
sensitivity with age (von Bernhardi et al., 2010).
The innate surveillance system therefore confers major
biological benefits in the front line of defense in detecting and
responding to pathogens and also in the monitoring and removal
of rogue endogenous cells that can threaten the host through
malignancy. These benefits come at a cost—in particular the
risk of bringing about the inappropriate death of host cells,
such as that seen in neurodegeneration and other examples of
inflammatory damage.
This raises the question of why some individuals and not
others are more susceptible to neurodegeneration at different
phases of the life course. It seems likely that disposition is
conferred by intrinsic errors in the system itself, i.e., mutations
in relevant genes, and/or threshold responses to environmental
factors that are detected as “danger” signals—each contributing
to cumulative risk of neurodegeneration. Importantly, the genetic
causes of neurodegenerative disease have led to the identification
of innate surveillance mediated cell death as the proximal
cause of, at least certain forms of, neurodegeneration. Many
of the genetic changes linked with neurodegeneration can be
demonstrated to specifically escalate the innate surveillance
pathway, as detailed in later sections of this review. First, it
is relevant to navigate the various cellular compartments and
systems that trigger the innate surveillance response.
Innate Surveillance—Mediated Cell Death
Sensing—Pathogen and Quality Control Sentinels
The first characterized components of the innate surveillance
system, Toll and spätzle, were initially identified for their role
in Drosophila development (Stein and Nüsslein-Volhard, 1992).
Subsequent demonstration (Lemaitre et al., 1996) that this
receptor-ligand combination also mediates antifungal responses
revealed that the innate surveillance system is not simply a
host-pathogen detection-response system, but is also integral to
normal biological processes. This functional diversity reflects the
capacity for innate surveillance to recognize specific endogenous
trigger molecules as well as foreign molecules that signal a danger
to the cell. Characterization of spätzle also revealed that activation
steps are sometimes invoked, to switch the pattern of a signal
molecule to one that is recognized by the relevant receptors
(Mizuguchi et al., 1998). More recently it has become clear that
the role of this surveillance system in development includes
cellular elimination based on cell competition and fitness (Meyer
et al., 2014).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
The sensing of pathogens occurs both directly and indirectly
in both the extracellular and intracellular compartments, the
latter as an extension of mechanisms that monitor and maintain
homeostasis. While quality control mechanisms likely exist for
all cellular compartments—that of the endoplasmic reticulum
unfolded protein response is best understood (Gardner et al.,
2013).
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Unfolded Protein Response
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) interacts dynamically with
membranous structures in the cell including the Golgi apparatus,
mitochondria,
peroxisomes,
endosomes,
lysosomes,
and
autophagosomes. The ER plays a key role in protein biosynthesis
of cellular components and therefore it is a target for pathogens
seeking to co-opt this capacity for replication, as well as being a
risk site for the synthesis of aberrant proteins that can contribute
to tumourigenesis. Newly synthesized proteins entering the ER
are either folded into their required conformation for targeting
to organelles or identified as unfolded and are then destined for
degradation.
The unfolded protein response (UPR) monitors and maintains
protein-folding homeostasis within the ER (Gardner et al., 2013;
Senft and Ronai, 2015). Yeast experiments demonstrate that this
ancient system comprises sentinel sensors (Gardner et al., 2013).
In the ER, proteins that exceed the protein-folding capacity
activate three stress sensor proteins—IRE1α, PERK, and ATF6.
At least one of these sentinels has evolved to trigger the innate
surveillance system. IRE1 is present in all eukaryotes and conveys
the UPR response to the innate surveillance system. IRE1α
cleaves endogenous XBP1 mRNA to remove an intron, enabling
the resultant mRNA to encode the active form of the XBP1
transcription factor, that in turn stimulates expression of proteins
involved in restoration of proteostasis, as well as cytokine
synthesis (Zeng et al., 2010). Cleavage of the XBP1 intron causes
the RNA to acquire an unusual 3′ cyclic phosphate that enables
its recognition as a DAMP by RIG-I, a cytosolic PRR of the innate
surveillance system (Cho et al., 2013; Eckard et al., 2014). Recent
studies reveal that this intron RNA is an endogenous DAMP
in Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome, a congenital neurodegenerative
disease caused by mutation in one of a number of nucleic acid
metabolizing enzymes (Eckard et al., 2014). Communication
between ER components and the innate surveillance system
is further exemplified in Unc93-B, an ER resident membrane
protein that is indispensable to TLR3, TLR7, and TLR9 signaling
(Brinkmann et al., 2007; Nakano et al., 2010).
Mitochondrial Stress Unfolded Protein Response
A
distinct
system
of
unfolded
protein
response
in
the
mitochondria is best characterized in C. elegans (Haynes and
Ron, 2010; Pellegrino et al., 2014). Mitochondrial function is
essential for homeostasis and regulation of apoptosis. At least
one mechanism exists for sensing mitochondrial dysfunction.
The transcription factor ATFS-1 is normally imported into the
mitochondria, through the TOM/TIM import complex, where
it is degraded by the resident Lon protease. Disruption to this
mitochondrial import causes cytoplasmic accumulation, then
nuclear localization of ATFS-1, resulting in the expression of
mitochondria-specific protein folding machinery. An intriguing
gate-keeper of this mitochondrial import process is TOMM40,
the gene for which is located within the APOE block of linkage
disequilibrium that confers susceptibility to Alzheimer’s Disease
(Roses et al., 2010), as discussed later. Some, but not all of
the factors identified in C. elegans have orthologs in humans
indicating that additional components are likely to participate
in this process. Indeed PINK1 has been identified in humans
as a protein that in normal cells is partially imported into
the mitochondria, via the TOM/TIM complex. In dysfunctional
mitochondria this import is inhibited, resulting in an excess of
PINK1 accumulation in the outer membrane where it recruits
the ubiquitinating enzyme Parkin that then initiates mitophagy
(Harbauer et al., 2014). The details of this pathway for the
removal of dysfunctional mitochondria have recently been
elucidated (Celardo et al., 2014). Loss-of-function mutations
in either PINK1 or Parkin are the cause of familial cases of
Parkinson’s Disease (OMIM 608309 and 602544) implicating
defects in this pathway, in the pathogenesis of this form of
neurodegeneration.
Trigger Molecules
The host defense system operates in an environment comprising
a complex mixture of molecules - some pose a threat while others
are either harmless or beneficial. Recognition of threatening
molecules occurs on the basis of their molecular pattern
(Figure 1).
Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns
Molecular patterns exhibited by a diverse array of exogenous,
foreign pathogen molecules of viral, bacterial and fungal origin
are recognized by the innate immune surveillance system
and trigger an inflammatory response. Some “non-pathogenic”
molecules also act as trigger molecules, invoking a sterile
inflammatory response. Such molecules may be threatening, such
as asbestos (Hamilton, 1980; Rock et al., 2010) and therefore
inflammation may aid in their removal. In general the distinction
between exogenous and endogenous molecules is clear, however
there are very important exceptions.
Danger Associated Molecular Patterns (DAMPs – see Box 1
Regarding Nomenclature)
In addition to pathogen-derived molecules, there are a variety
of endogenous agents that can act as triggers of the innate
surveillance response system. For endogenous agents the
distinction between “self” and “non-self” typically involves
modification of the molecular structure. RNA molecules are a
good example, with a multitude of modified forms, many of
which don’t affect function, but some of which distinguish "self”
from “non-self.” A good example of this distinction is seen
in experiments of “induced pluripotent stem cells”. Fibroblasts
can be transformed into induced pluripotent stem cells by
transfection with four mRNAs encoding the required factors.
However these mRNAs need to be subjected to RNA modification
beforehand otherwise they will elicit an inflammatory response
in the fibroblasts (Warren et al., 2007). Such modifications can
occur via enzymes that recognize specific sequence motifs or
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
FIGURE 1 | Simplified schematic of signaling junctions that integrate the recognition of pathogen, host or environmentally derived DAMPs and dAMPs
by their cognate receptors. Viral or host derived nucleic acids are recognized by several PRR families according to distinct structural characteristics and their
location. cGAS generates second messenger cGAMP to activate STING-dependent signaling (Hornung et al., 2014). Other cytoplasmic DNA sensors, such as IFI16,
converge on this pathway (Goubau et al., 2010). RIG-I has dual functions in inducing nuclear translocation of transcription factors such as NF-κB and IRF-3/7 through
MAVS (Yoneyama et al., 2016) and MAVS-independent inflammasome activation (Poeck et al., 2010). Like RIG-I, inflammasome forming PRRs AIM2 and NLRP1/3
direct procytokine conversion by activating caspase-1 (Kim et al., 2016; Thaiss et al., 2016; in response to stimuli such as bacteria-derived MDP or toxins (Wen et al.,
2013). Transcription factors NF-κB, AP-1, and IRF-3/7 can also translocate to the nucleus following activation of the endosomal TLRs which signal through either
Myd88 or TRIF. Membrane bound TLR2/4 innervate these pathways on detecting host derived dAMPs such as HSPs and MSU (Gelderblom et al., 2015). Binding of
pro-inflammatory ligands including AGEs, S100/calgranulin, amphoterin (HMGB1), and amyloid beta-peptide to RAGE, the receptor of advanced glycation
end-products, triggers an increase in proinflammatory molecules, oxidative stressors and cytokines (Ray et al., 2015). HMGB1 is a diverse PRR activator (Harris et al.,
2012). TLR3-mediated necrosis is via TRIF (Kaiser et al., 2013). A table of DAMPs/dAMPs and their respective PRRs is included in Supplementary Section. PRR,
pattern recognition receptor; cGAS, cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate synthase; STING, stimulator of IFN genes; IFI16, IFN-ϒ-inducible
protein 16; RIG-I, retinioc acid inducible gene-I; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; IRF, interferon regulatory factor; MAVS, mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein; AIM2,
absent in melanoma 2; NLRP
, NOD like receptor, pyrin domain containing 1 and 3; MDP
, muramyl-dipeptide; AP1, activator protein 1; TLRs, Toll-like receptors;
Myd88, myeloid differentiation primary response 88; TRIF, Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain containing adapter-inducing interferon-β; DAMPs, danger-associated
molecular patterns; dAMPs, damage-associated molecular patterns; AGEs, advanced glycation end products; HSPs, heat-shock proteins; MSU, monosodium urate.
appear at the RNA 5′ or 3′ends as a result of the type of enzymatic
cleavage of the RNA. For example, when activated as part of
the Unfolded Protein Response, IRE-1 cleaves not only XBP-1
mRNA (as described above) but other RNAs as well, producing
a pool of RNA products with unusual 3′ cyclic phosphates, that
trigger a “danger” response (Eckard et al., 2014). In this manner
endogenous RNA molecules are recruited to act as signaling
molecules in the innate surveillance system (Eckard et al., 2014).
Damage Associated Molecular Patterns (dAMPs—see Box 1
Regarding Nomenclature)
Non-autonomous cell death is part of the strategy to restrict
the spread of a persistent pathogen. Indeed the finding that
spätzle is an extracellular ligand for the cell surface receptor
Toll, is indicative of cell-cell signaling in the system (Mizuguchi
et al., 1998). Intracellular molecules released from one cell can
act as extracellular trigger molecules for the innate surveillance
response in another cell. Cell damage that results in release
of damage associated molecular patterns (dAMPs) can include
environmental causes (Bernard et al., 2012). Endogenous damage
molecules include RNAs (Bernard et al., 2012) and proteins such
as HMG-B1 (Kim et al., 2006; Harris et al., 2012; Gelderblom
et al., 2015) and F-Actin (Ahrens et al., 2012). These dAMPs
are recognized by members of the Toll-like Receptor family
(TLRs). TLRs have, at least in some cases, been induced in the
cells adjacent to the primary cell undergoing an inflammatory
response, by virtue of the cytokines that the primary response cell
produces (Khoo et al., 2011). This localized sensitization creates
a zone or field of cells that are able to detect products shed from
the dead primary cell.
Sentinels (Pattern Recognition Receptors, PRRs)
PRRs are the detectors or sentinels of the innate surveillance
system. They are sensors of an alarm system that not only detects
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
BOX 1 | DANGER (DAMP) AND DAMAGE (dAMP) ASSOCIATED MOLECULAR PATTERNS.
While labeled in the literature with common and therefore confusing acronyms, two types of molecular patterns factor in the innate surveillance system—those that
signal danger, and those that arise from cell damage (the latter via specific forms of cell death). In an effort to distinguish these, we have used “D” for danger and
“d” for damage.
Pattern recognition is a major element of innate surveillance. While the host needs to be able to distinguish “self” from “non-self,” and do so in a manner uncorrupted
by pathogen mimicry, it also needs to monitor endogenous trigger molecules—those that act as sentinels of a developmental switch or a perturbation in homeostasis.
Post-transcriptional modification of RNA and post-translational modification of proteins are processes that cells utilize to either mask or unmask molecular patterns
that trigger recognition. Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs) can be molecules derived from pathogens that either contain recognizable patterns
or are devoid of modifications that would otherwise mask their recognition. Pathogen RNAs will not have been exposed to the same post-transcriptional modifications
as host RNAs and can be distinguished on this basis (Nallagatla et al., 2008). Furthermore, some nuclease cleavage of RNA exposes structures that are recognized
by Pattern Recognition Receptors (e.g. RIG-I-mediated recognition of viral RNA bearing 5′-diphosphates (Goubau et al., 2014). In this manner, endogenous RNAs
can also be recognized as Danger Associated Molecular Patterns (DAMPs) and utilized as intracellular danger signaling molecules. Ribonuclease IRE-1 cleavage
produces a pool of RNA products with unusual 3′ cyclic phosphates, that are recognized by Pattern Recognition Receptors.
Cell death comes in various forms, certain types of which lead to the extracellular appearance of normally intracellular molecules. Some of these cell damage
molecules—damage Associated Molecular Patterns (dAMPs)—are also recognized by PRRs. Viruses that lyse cells or environmental damage (such as ischemic
stroke or head injury) can thereby activate the innate surveillance response. Forms of programmed cell death (such as necroptosis) facilitate the release of dAMPs
that are recognized by PRRs on adjacent cells. Sensitized adjacent cells can have elevated levels of PRRs thereby mediating their non-cell autonomous death. In
this manner dAMPs act as extracellular signaling molecules.
intruders but also danger signals that cells make to amplify
a local response to disturbed homeostasis. PRRs typically act
synergistically rather than in isolation (Nasirudeen et al., 2011). A
diverse multitude of trigger molecules are detected by PRRs, via
recognition of distinct patterns in the trigger molecules (e.g., the
presence or absence of a chemical modification). This recognition
occurs in intra- and extra-cellular compartments and is mediated
by families of related receptor proteins (Figure 1).
Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs)
Toll was discovered in Drosophila as a key regulator of both
development and host defense against pathogens. Toll is a
transmembrane receptor and binds the extracellular ligand
spätzle in its developmental role. Toll is related in structure to
the cytokine receptors and is one of a family of such proteins,
comprising 9 members in Drosophila (Valanne et al., 2011)and
13 in humans (Roach et al., 2005). Sequence comparison does
not reveal clear orthologous relationships—they are therefore
termed Toll-like receptors (TLRs) in vertebrates and Toll-related
receptors (TRRs) in Drosophila. Functional relationships are
likely based on their cellular localization, some common pattern
recognition and inter-connected signal transduction pathways
(Figure 1). This inter-connected signal transduction of TLRs
suggests that they function collectively as a network, to mount an
integrated response. TLRs sample the extracellular environment
and the interstices of endosomes, where they recognize
PAMPs and dAMPs. Endosomes can fuse with autophagosomes
(Klionsky et al., 2016), therefore endosomal TLRs are also
exposed to the internal constituents of autophagosomes, such as
RNA stress granules and defective mitochondria, that have been
targeted for degradation.
Other Pattern Recognition Receptors (RLRs, NLRs, and
CLRs)
At least three other families of Pattern Recognition Receptors
have been identified and characterized to varying extents
(Figure 1). The most thoroughly studied of these are the RIG-
I-like Receptors (RLRs) (Loo and Gale, 2011). They are located
in the cytoplasm and recognize both exogenous PAMPs and
endogenous DAMPs. The functional extent of this family is
uncertain, as there are no clear orthologs in some species. For
example in Drosophila the closest ortholog for the characterized
human RLRs is Dicer 2 and there is good evidence that Drosophila
Dicer 2 does indeed act as an intracellular PRR, in addition
to its role in miRNA biosynthesis (MacKay et al., 2014). Two
additional families of proteins, Nod-like Receptors (NLRs) and
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), also act as PRRs (see references to
Figure 1), but the mechanisms by which they activate the innate
surveillance response are not well defined. Some PRRs may be
specific to certain specialized cells that are recruited to the site of
pattern recognition detection by the early response extracellular
signaling molecules (Applequist et al., 2002).
Early Response Mechanisms
The immediate response to activation of innate surveillance
appears aimed at degrading the danger signal(s) and restoring
homeostasis by reprogramming gene expression. In some cases
this includes the cessation of processes that contribute to the
trigger signal and increasing the activity of degradative pathways.
A diverse array of such degradative processes are activated
(Box 2, Figure 2).
Autophagy—in its Multiple Forms
The destruction of molecules deemed dangerous makes good
use of the cell’s normal recycling mechanism, autophagy. The
activity of autophagy varies above a basal state in response to
various stimuli including innate surveillance activation. Cross-
talk between the ER unfolded protein response, autophagy and
mitochondria underlies the cellular response to stress (Senft and
Ronai, 2015), with autophagosomes formed at ER-mitochondria
contact sites (Hamasaki et al., 2013). There are multiple sub-
types of autophagy dependent upon the materials being recycled
(Klionsky et al., 2016).
Granulophagy
In
response
to
stress,
cells
reprogram
translation—they
disassociate polysomes from mRNA and specific proteins
are aggregated into granules (Stress Granules and P-bodies;
Buchan et al., 2013). If the stress is transient and relieved then
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
BOX 2 | CELLULAR CLEARANCE MECHANISMS IMPLICATED IN INNATE SURVEILLANCE RESPONSE.
Pathways responsible for proteostasis and RNAstasis in the event of stress response
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR)—integrated pathway for sensing and overcoming the accumulation of unfolded or mis-folded proteins within the ER, or in
the event of persistent accumulation, to induce innate surveillance-mediated cell death (Senft and Ronai, 2015). Involves 3 distinct activation pathways—ATF6/ATF6f;
PERK/ATF4; IRE1/XBP1s. IRE1 cleavage product of XBP-1 mRNA is recognized by the cytosolic pattern recognition receptor RIG-I of the innate surveillance system.
Endoplasmic Reticulum Associated Degradation (ERAD)—pathway is modulated by the UPR and targets misfolded proteins to the cytosol for their
ubiquitination and subsequent proteosomal degradation.
Autophagy—degradation of macromolecular complexes including protein aggregates and RNA granules, as well as damaged organelles through fusion with
lysosomes.
Granulophagy—in response to stress polysomes disassociate and their mRNAs form granules (stress granules or P-bodies) with specific RNA binding proteins
(including TDP43 and FUS). These stress granules hold the RNAs until the stress is relieved or failing this are transported (by VCP) to autophagosomes that then fuse
with lysosomes (regulated by the inhibitor CHMP2B) for degradation and subsequent recycling.
Mitochondrial Unfolded Protein Response (UPRmt)—the location of activating transcription factor associated with stress-1 (ATFS-1) is sensitive to unfolded
protein stress inside the mitochondria. Stress restricts mitochondrial importation of ATFS-1 resulting in higher cytosolic level, that in turn leads to its nuclear localization
where it activates target genes, the products of which act to protect the mitochondria. Failure to resolve the mitochondrial stress leads to autophagy (also known as
mitophagy) of the damaged mitochondria.
Heat Shock Response (HSR)—includes dissociation of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) from inhibitory binding with heat shock factor 90 (HSP90). HSF-1 induces
heat shock target genes that in turn mediate protein quality control pathways.
Nonsense Mediated Decay (NMD)—a highly conserved RNA integrity surveillance pathway that not only leads to the elimination of faulty endogenous transcripts
and viral RNAs, but also regulates levels of ∼10% of normal cellular transcripts (Rigby and Rehwinkel, 2015).
Ubiquitin-Proteosome System (UPS)—the major pathway for non-lysosomal degradation of proteins.
RNA exosome (SKIV2L)—an exoribonuclease complex for RNA processing, quality control and turnover regulation. In low stress environments it efficiently digests
mRNAs including those encoding cytokines. It is negatively regulated by stress, resulting in greater stability of cytokine mRNAs (and therefore elevated cytokine
levels) as well as incomplete removal of IRE1 RNA digestion products that are recognized by RIG-Like Receptors (RLRs) of the innate surveillance system (e.g.,
XBP-1 RNA fragments that are recognized by RIG-I) resulting in its activation (Blin and Fitzgerald, 2015). The SKIV2L RNA exosome limits the activation of RIG-I-like
receptors (Eckard et al., 2014). Loss-of-function mutations in the EXOSC3 gene, encoding the RRP40 RNA exosome protein, are a cause of the inherited progressive
neurodegenerative disorder pontocerebellar hypoplasia (Wan et al., 2012).
these granules disaggregate, the mRNA is subject to polysome
reassembly and translation resumes. If the stress stimulus
continues then the granules are trafficked to an autophagosome
that then fuses with a lysosome—a vesicle containing degradative
enzymes. The contents of these autolysosomes are then degraded
to the building blocks for de novo transcription of genes,
including those that facilitate the cell’s response to the stress
stimulus. The genes for four proteins involved in this process
(TDP43, FUS, VCP, and CHMP2B) have mutations in various
familial cases of the neurodegenerative diseases fronto-temporal
dementia (FTD) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). While
TDP43 and FUS have multiple functions, both have been
found in RNA stress granules (Bentmann et al., 2013; Li
et al., 2013). Genetic screens in yeast have identified CDC48
(the ortholog of human protein VCP) as a regulator of the
trafficking of these aggregates for degradation (Buchan et al.,
2013). Mitochondrial function in neuronal cells depends on
VCP/Cdc48-mediated quality control (Fang et al., 2015). Loss-
of-function mutations in VCP have been detected in some
familial cases of ALS and FTD (Talbot and Ansorge, 2006).
CHMP2B also has multiple functions but one of these is an
inhibitor of autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Gain-of-function
mutations in CHMP2B are also found in familial cases of
ALS and FTD (Talbot and Ansorge, 2006). Loss of function
mutations in SamHD1, a regulator of stress granule assembly,
are another cause of the neurodegenerative disease known as
Aicardi-Gouitieres Disease (Hu et al., 2015 and see below). This
clustering of mutations around the autophagy function implies
that defective stress granule metabolism has a causal role to play
in neurodegenerative disease.
Mitophagy
Cellular metabolism of glucose occurs as a balance between
glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation. Glycolysis in the
cytoplasm produces biosynthetic building blocks (e.g., pyruvate),
whereas oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria produces
energy (ATP). Once cells cease dividing and differentiate they
have reduced biosynthetic requirements and shift to mainly
utilizing glucose as an energy source for cell function. Since
pathogens strive to replicate themselves, their biosynthesis
requires structural components and therefore a reduction in
mitochondrial metabolism, in favor of glycolysis, facilitates their
replication. Similarly cancer cells favor glycolysis as it facilitates
cell division. The state of the mitochondria and its perturbation
is therefore closely monitored, including the mechanism of
mitochondrial unfolded protein response (described above).
The functional integrity of the mitochondria is maintained
by mitophagy, a specific form of autophagy. Damaged or
dysfunctional mitochondria are recognized as such and shunted
into the autophagy process, for recycling and regeneration.
Defects in this process are detected by PRRs to trigger alarm in
the cell, resulting in an elevated response to the danger, including
increased mitophagy (Pellegrino and Haynes, 2015). If increased
mitophagy is unsuccessful in resolving the dysfunction then
ultimately the complete destruction of the cell is programmed
(Yu et al., 2015).
The benefit of mitochondrial-regulated innate immunity is
that it provides resistance to pathogen infection (Pellegrino and
Haynes, 2015). However there is also a cost in that loss of function
mutations in proteins that are required for mitophagy will lead
to inappropriate cell death. As discussed above, it is noteworthy
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
FIGURE 2 | Innate Surveillance Pathways and Genetic Contributions to Neurodegenerative Disease. In response to activation by trigger molecules, innate
surveillance recruits a diverse array of degradative processes to reduce the danger signal(s) and restore homeostasis. Genetic lesions in one or other of these
degradative pathways will lead to a build-up of danger signal (DAMP) levels beyond a threshold that elicits an escalated response. Pattern Recognition Receptors
(PRRs) orchestrate the release of signaling molecules directly (cytokines and interferon) and indirectly (damage-associated molecular patterns, dAMPs, from
programmed necrotizing cells) leading to sensitization and eventual non-autonomous death of adjacent cells. It is noteworthy that the ER stress response is activated
by amyloid beta in brain cells (Fonseca et al., 2013).
that mutations in two such proteins parkin and PINK1are known
causes of autosomal recessive early onset Parkinson Disease
(Kitada et al., 1998; Piccoli et al., 2008; Figure 2). Impaired
autophagy is also a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (Salminen
et al., 2013).
Other forms of autophagy almost certainly exist, indeed such
a mechanism involving the nucleus has just been described (Dou
et al., 2015), widening the scope of autophagy as part of the innate
surveillance monitoring and response system.
Cytokines—Sensitization Permissive of Focal Cell Death
Induction of intracellular and extracellular signals is another
element of the innate surveillance response. The innate
surveillance response includes the production of extracellular
signaling molecules (collectively termed cytokines, including
chemokines, interferons, interleukins, and tumor necrosis
factor). These molecules have been identified in different cell
types and model organisms and likely vary in composition and
function in different circumstances (e.g., Beutler et al., 2007).
They act as both feed-forward and feed-back controls, enabling a
mixture of responses and at varying distances, either in the trigger
cell, its neighbors or systemically.
Interferons comprise several families of structurally related
proteins that exhibit a wide range of biological activities (Pestka
et al., 2004). Type I interferons are an essential component
of the brain’s innate immune defense, conferring protection
against viral infection (McGlasson et al., 2015). Interferons
are both inducers of TLRs and are induced by activation
of TLRs (Khoo et al., 2011) and clearly act to amplify a
danger response. Similarly, tumor necrosis factor is required for
pathogen resistance in the CNS (Francisco et al., 2015) and acts
in sensitizing cells to programmed death pathways.
Mechanisms are also in place to limit the duration, spread
and extent of response. Negative feed-back controls include
miRNAs specific to the induced mRNAs (Zhou et al., 2011)
and ribonucleases (Regnase-1 and Roquin) specific to structures
found in cytokine mRNAs (Mino et al., 2015). Regnase-1 and
Roquin act in different compartments of the cell and also serve
to increase degradation of RNA P-bodies and stress granules.
Persistent Response Mechanisms—Programmed
Cell Death
In the early activation phase of innate surveillance, cytokine
release will create a zone of sensitized or primed cells that then
enables a focal response (Khoo et al., 2011). If the trigger persists,
a major integrated defense strategy is activated to ensure not
only the original cellular site of danger molecule detection is
eliminated, but also adjacent cells in the vicinity will undergo
non-autonomous cell death. This focal response restricts the
pathogen’s ability to survive, propagate and spread. Similarly,
rogue cells and perhaps their adjacent siblings or daughter cells,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
that have accumulated somatic mutations and therefore begun
the process of tumorigenesis, can be eliminated by a zone of
cell death around the primary trigger of innate surveillance
activation. As part of this process the manner of cell death has
an important role to play.
Given the importance of programmed cell death as a defense
mechanism and the intense selective pressure this system faces
from rapidly evolving pathogens, it is hardly surprising that
multiple forms of programmed cell death have evolved. There
appear to be two functionally distinct forms with respect to
the innate surveillance system—(1) those that release dAMPs
and/or pro-inflammatory cytokines to perpetuate and spread the
response, and (2) those that do not release dAMPs, and thereby
limit and contain the response.
Apoptosis is a well-characterized form of programmed cell
death (Elmore, 2007). It is utilized in normal developmental
processes as well as host-pathogen defense and typically involves
the degradation of cellular components commensurate with cell
death, either internally or by surrounding cells. Apoptosis is
therefore not normally associated with the release of dAMPs. The
molecular mechanism involves a cascade of activated caspases.
Caspases are broadly classified as initiator (caspase-2, 8, 9, 10),
effector (caspase-3, 6, 7) or inflammatory (caspase-1, 4, 5). The
intrinsic pathway of caspase activation involves mitochondria. A
variety of stimuli cause mitochondria to release cytochrome c,
that in turn binds to and sequesters the adaptor protein Apaf-1.
Apaf-1 binds, aggregates and cleaves procaspase-9 molecules,
to trigger a caspase cascade (Elmore, 2007). While apoptosis is
the canonical form of programmed cell death and has certain
conserved features, there are clearly variant forms that may differ
between cell types, species or have specific roles.
Pyroptosis is a distinct form of cell death that may be
restricted to only certain immune cell types and also may
vary between such cell types (Bortoluci and Medzhitov, 2010;
Nyström et al., 2013). These cells may either be resident or have
been attracted to the site of infection by chemokines released
by the initial responding cell. Such cells are activated through
a specific set of cytoplasmic PRRs, the Nod-like receptors
(NLRs)—although the mechanism of this activation is as yet
unclear (Harijith et al., 2014). These dying cells can in turn
release pro-inflammatory cytokines to amplify the response.
For example NLRP3-inflammasome activating dAMPs stimulate
an inflammatory response in glia that contributes to brain
inflammation after injury (Savage et al., 2012).
Necroptosis is another distinct form of programmed cell
death (Christofferson and Yuan, 2010; Wu et al., 2012). In
order to bring about the non-autonomous cell death of adjacent
sensitized cells, a distinct form of extracellular communication
occurs. dAMPs that are released upon the death of the trigger
cell act as activators of PRRs on adjacent sensitized cells. dAMPs
may include those originating from pathogens, but it is clear that
certain endogenous molecules are also able to act in this capacity.
Endogenous dAMPs include heat shock proteins (HSPs), the
nuclear protein HMGB1, F-Actin, RNA, and DNA (Kim et al.,
2006; Ahrens et al., 2012; Shichita et al., 2014; Gelderblom
et al., 2015). Various TLRs are specific receptors for dAMPs.
Intriguingly, HSPs and HMGB1 are also thought to mediate
inflammatory activation in ischemic stroke (Kim et al., 2006;
Gelderblom et al., 2015). It is noteworthy that anti-HMGB1
antibody has recently been found to exert neuroprotection
in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease (Sasaki et al., 2016).
Furthermore, Murakami et al. (2014) found that necroptosis,
not apoptosis, is a key mediator of cell loss and dAMP-mediated
inflammation in a mouse model of dsRNA-induced retinal
degeneration.
“Other”-optosis encompasses the fact that some organisms,
such as Drosophila, do not have orthologs for essential
components of pyroptosis or necroptosis (i.e., inflammasome
constituents or RIP1 and RIP3) yet they do exhibit Toll-like
receptor mediated cell death. This is due to the expression
of intracellular dAMPs (Samaraweera et al., 2013) indicating
that there are additional cell death pathways that lead to the
release of dAMPs, given the requirement of TLRs for activation
by extracellular signals. One such candidate pathway is that
mediated by Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase (PARP-1) (Wu et al.,
2012). PARP-1 links nuclear and mitochondrial function and is
conserved in Drosophila. Dysfunction of mitochondria is a key
step in PARP-1-induced cell death, although the mechanism of
PARP-1 induced mitochondria dysfunction remains unknown.
Reactive oxygen species have frequently been linked to both
inflammation (Harijith et al., 2014) and neurodegenerative
disease and it is noteworthy that over-expression of superoxide
dismutase (SOD) protects against mitochondrial-initiated PARP-
mediated cell death (Kiningham et al., 1999). Kauppinen et al.
(2011) demonstrated a role for PARP in microglial responses to
amyloid beta, suggesting a role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s
disease (Martire et al., 2015).
Neurodegenerative Diseases—Causes and
Correlations
The ever-growing emergence of one or more components of
the innate surveillance system in neurodegenerative pathogenesis
implicates this cell system as a common mechanism for
neurodegenerative disease (Tables 1, 2). Remarkably, plausible
mechanisms can be postulated by which each of the known
genetic causes of neurodegeneration feed into one or other
form of activation of the innate surveillance system. Moreover,
the genetic lesion as proximal trigger shows how activation
of the innate surveillance system is not simply a bystander
effect, but a central upstream cause of pathogenesis. These rare
genetic causes of disease can help delineate the responsible
pathogenic pathway for the more common, sporadic forms of
the disease. Furthermore, identification of responsible genes
enables the establishment of genetic animal models with which
to define and dissect the pathogenic pathway from mutation to
symptoms.
Genetic
Mendelian causes of neurodegeneration roughly fall into two
distinct groups exhibiting either recessive inheritance due to
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
TABLE 2 | Summary of evidence for role of innate immunity in the etiology
of distinct forms of neurodegenerative disease
Disease
Pathways or proteins involved in innate immunity
UPR/MAM
ER Stress
XPB-1
CHMP2B
VCP
IRG
IL
AD
+a,b
+c
+d
PD
+d
FTD/ALS
+d,e
+f,g
+h
HD*
+d
+i
+j
+k
AGS
+l
+m
IRG, interferon regulated genes; IL, interleukins; *, and other expanded repeat diseases.
References: aCornejo and Hetz, 2013, bLee et al., 2010, cFonseca et al., 2013, dDunys
et al., 2014, eHetz et al., 2009, fCox et al., 2010, gAhmad et al., 2009, hAzuma et al.,
2014, iHigashiyama et al., 2002 jRhodes et al., 2012, kBjorkqvist et al., 2008, lEckard
et al., 2014, mRice et al., 2014.
loss-of-function mutations, or dominant transmission typically
due to some form of gain-of-function.
Loss-of-function
mutations
inform
on
mechanisms
of
pathophysiology, and also are instructive to indicate those
pathways that are candidates for sporadic forms of the disease.
Amyotrophic
lateral
sclerosis
(ALS)
and
frontotemporal
dementia (FTD) exhibit overlap in both clinical and genetic
features. They share multiple common genetic causes and can
be found separately or co-incidentally in different members of
the same family (Lattante et al., 2015). The majority of cases of
ALS and FTD appear not to have a genetic cause and therefore
must have environmental origins. Genetic causes for ALS and
FTD can be loss of function mutations in a variety of proteins
including TDP43, FUS, and VCP. Until recently, a link between
these proteins has been difficult to pinpoint but remarkably, it
is now apparent that all of these proteins share the ability to
interact with RNA. TDP43, and FUS are both components of
RNA stress granules, while VCP is required for the trafficking
of these granules to autosomes. Reasonably, it can be seen that
loss of this degradative pathway can cause inflammation and
ultimately neurodegeneration by elevating endogenous RNA
“danger” signal(s)—DAMPs.
Evidence for RNA degradation as a key step in control of
the innate surveillance pathway also comes from the loss-of-
function mutations that cause Aicardi–Goutières Syndrome
(AGS). AGS is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive
encephalopathy characterized in its most severe form by cerebral
atrophy, leukodystrophy, intracranial calcifications, chronic
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lymphocytosis, increased CSF alpha-
interferon (IFNA1), and negative serologic investigations for
common prenatal infections. AGS is phenotypically similar
to in utero viral infection. Severe neurologic dysfunction
becomes clinically apparent in infancy, and manifests as
progressive
microcephaly,
spasticity,
dystonic
posturing,
profound psychomotor retardation, and often death in early
childhood. Loss-of-function mutations in genes in at least six
distinct loci are able give rise to the constellation of symptoms
that
defines
Aicardi–Goutières
Syndrome.
Four
of
these
(RNAseH2A, RNAseH2B, RNAseH2C, and ADAR1) are in genes
that encode RNA-metabolizing proteins. The remaining two
genes that have been identified (TREX1 and SAMHD1) also
encode enzymes that have roles in nucleic acid metabolism,
and have recently both been shown to also have ribonuclease
activity (Ryoo et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2015). Deficiency in any
one of these six enzymes is thought to result in the accumulation
of endogenous nucleic acids that are sensed as “non-self” by
RIG-I-like receptors, that in turn activate innate inflammatory
pathways (Crow and Rehwinkel, 2009; Hofer and Campbell,
2013; Rigby and Rehwinkel, 2015), indeed AGS has been
termed an “interferonopathy” (Crow, 2011). The XBP-1 intronic
RNA generated by IRE-1 cleavage has been identified as an
endogenous danger RNA in the pathogenesis of AGS (Eckard
et al., 2014). A more general role for RNA degradation in
preventing neurodegeneration is indicated by loss-of-function
mutations in the RNA exosome component EXOSC3, that are a
cause of Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia (PCH1) (Wan et al., 2012;
Rigby and Rehwinkel, 2015). The RNA exosome has a key role in
innate sensing of RNA regulating cytokine production (Blin and
Fitzgerald, 2015).
Therefore, loss-of-function mutations in a variety of proteins
that are required for the degradation of RNA identify the
accumulation of specific RNA danger molecules that trigger
innate surveillance activation as a common causal mechanism
through which neurodegeneration is initiated.
Gain-of-function mutations in neurodegenerative diseases
have generally proven more difficult to attribute. In a few cases
the gain-of-function can be an enhancement of the normal
function of the relevant protein and a plausible pathway to
neurodegeneration is evident. For example, CHMP2B is an
inhibitor of autophagosome-lysosome fusion (West et al., 2015).
Therefore, dominant ALS/FTD causing mutations that enhance
inhibitory action of CHMP2B reduce the degradative capacity
of this pathway, decreasing the turn-over and causing a build-
up of danger associated molecular patterns (including trigger
RNAs). Similarly, dominant AGS-causing mutations in IFIH1
(MDA5) enhance its affinity for RNA DAMPs, with consequent
increased activation of downstream interferon signaling and
innate surveillance-mediated cell death.
In other cases, the pathophysiological pathway from the
gain-of-function
mutation
to
clinical
symptoms
remains
evasive. There are approximately 20 dominantly inherited
neurodegenerative
diseases
caused
by
expanded
repeat
mutations. The genes in which these repeats are located are
neither structurally nor functionally related, so either there are
many different pathogenic pathways or the gain-of-function
responsible is not an enhancement of the normal functions of
these proteins. Some proteins harbor the expanded repeat within
regions encoding polyglutamine, and the resulting accumulation
of polyglutamine has long been investigated as a possible
common toxic agent. However, this is difficult to reconcile with
observations that cells containing polyglutamine aggregates
have a survival advantage (Sisodia, 1998) and, at least in the
case of huntingtin protein, polyglutamine is substantially less
toxic within the context of the remaining protein (Barbaro et al.,
2015). A distinct form of repeat associated non-AUG translation
has been described in which polypeptides are translated from
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
all reading frames of repeat RNA in the absence of an initiator
AUG. These polypeptides have also been found in patients with
expanded repeat diseases but again do not correlate well with
the sites of pathology (Mann, 2015; Mackenzie et al., 2015). In
addition, some diseases (ALS and FTD) have multiple genetic
causes in addition to an expanded repeat disease locus. Cases
of ALS/FTD that aren’t due to repeat expansion cannot feasibly
share an expanded polypeptide repeat. The only way to explain
these conflicting observations is to propose distinct pathogenic
pathways for these diseases or otherwise a single pathogenic
pathway, independent of expanded polypeptide toxicity.
RNA
pathogenesis
is
one
pathogenic
pathway
that
accommodates
all
of
the
existing
evidence.
Recognition
of expanded repeat RNA as an innate surveillance trigger
molecule is an alternative potential common mechanism for
neurodegeneration, since in all cases of dominantly inherited
expanded repeat disease, the expanded repeat DNA sequences
are transcribed into RNA.
A precedent for RNA as the causal pathogenic agent in
expanded repeat diseases has been proposed in myotonic
dystrophy (DM). This disease is due to expansion of either of
two repeat sequences. These repeats are transcribed as either
3′ untranslated RNA (CUG in DM1) or intronic RNA (CCUG
in DM2). Both of these expanded repeat RNAs bind and
sequester the alternative splicing factor muscleblind and as a
consequence, alter the balance of alternative splicing of multiple
genes in the muscle. The muscle-related component of the
disease phenotype can be modeled in mice by either muscle-
specific expression of the repeat RNA (Mankodi et al., 2000) or
by reduction in endogenous muscleblind protein (Kanadia et al.,
2003), providing clear evidence in support of expanded repeat
RNA being the causal pathogenic agent.
An additional mechanism for RNA pathology in expanded
repeat diseases has come from Drosophila models where RNA in
various forms has been tested for its ability to initiate cell death
(McLeod et al., 2005; Lawlor et al., 2011; van Eyk et al., 2011; Yu
et al., 2011; Samaraweera et al., 2013). Of these, double strand
CAG.CUG expanded repeat RNA was clearly found to cause
cell death (Lawlor et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2011). All dominantly
inherited expanded repeat disease loci exhibit bi-directional
transcription (Batra et al., 2010), so double-strand expanded
repeat RNA is plausible as a common cause in these diseases.
In the Drosophila model, expanded repeats of CAG.CUG100
were cleaved to CAG7mers. These CAG7mers have also been
detected in Huntington’s Disease brain RNA (Banez-Coronel
et al., 2012). Components of the innate surveillance pathway were
subsequently shown to be required for this form of cell death
in Drosophila (Samaraweera et al., 2013). Innate surveillance
activation is evident, through the elevation in expression levels of
its key targets drosomycin and cytokine eiger (ortholog of tumor
necrosis factor). These hallmark pathogen response changes in
Drosophila are consistent with observations of immune pathway
activation (increased circulating levels of IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-
10, and TNF) before clinical onset in Huntington’s disease
Bjorkqvist et al. (2008). Mutant huntingtin protein does not
affect the intrinsic phenotype of human Huntington’s Disease
T lymphocytes (Miller et al., 2015) supporting the notion that
innate surveillance activation is responsible for the observed
increase in cytokine activity, rather than the adaptive immune
system. In the cataracts of either DM1 or DM2 individuals,
up-regulated genes are highly enriched in both interferon-
regulated genes (IRGs) and genes associated with response to
dsRNA (Rhodes et al., 2012), demonstrating the RNA-triggered
activation of innate surveillance in at least this symptom of
myotonic dystrophy pathology.
Further evidence of a causal role for innate surveillance
in expanded repeat disease comes from the finding that a
mouse model of SCA6 can be modified by MyD88, a major
adaptor protein in the conveyance of TLR signaling (Aikawa
et al., 2015). SCA6 is another expanded CAG repeat disease
thought to be caused by expanded polyglutamine. Histological
analysis of the cerebellum of this knock-in mouse model showed
the predominance of M1-like pro-inflammatory microglia and
this was concomitant with elevated expression levels of tumor
necrosis factor, interleukin-6, Toll-like receptors 2 and 7.
Until recently an expanded repeat at a single locus was
typically the sole identified mutation in these dominantly
inherited expanded repeat diseases. However, an exception to this
general rule is the genetically heterogeneous disease ALS/FTD.
Some inherited cases of ALS/FTD are due to expansion of a
6 base repeat in the intron of the C9orf72 gene, others are
due to non-repeat mutations in a variety of other genes. The
functions of these genes therefore give insight into how a single
pathogenic mechanism might be responsible. Animal models
for mutations in ALS/FTD genes have been instructive of the
molecular pathway of pathogenesis. A variety of mutations in
SOD1 cause ALS and a mouse model for one of these (SODG93A)
exhibits a phenotype consistent with the symptoms of the human
disease. The survival of SODG93A mice is extended by genetic
removal of the TLR4 pattern recognition receptor, indicating a
role for innate surveillance in the pathogenesis (Lee et al., 2015).
The normal function of ALS/FTD causing genes is instructive.
As discussed previously, loss-of-function mutations occur in
TDP-43 and FUS components of RNA stress granules (Ito and
Suzuki, 2011) and in VCP, required for trafficking of the granules
to the autophagosome (Azuma et al., 2014). Gain-of-function
mutations in CHMP2B also cause ALS and this protein acts as an
inhibitor of autophagosome-lysosome fusion (Cox et al., 2010).
Together these observations suggest that defects in granulophagy
are a likely cause of ALS/FTD. As detailed above, various
forms of autophagy are critical for the degradation of DAMPs,
including those of endogenous origin. Therefore, a clear path
for the activation of innate surveillance is again evident, as is
the potential for pathogens or environmental stress to contribute
to the etiology of these diseases by independently activating the
immune surveillance pathway.
Expansion of a GGGGCC repeat in the intron of the C9orf72
gene is a major cause of inherited ALS/FTD, adding further
weight to the argument for RNA being the best candidate for a
common trigger molecule in expanded repeat neurodegenerative
diseases. Indeed expanded GGGGCC repeat RNA does cause
neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model (Xu et al., 2013). The
pathogenic mechanism responsible for expanded GGGGCC
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
repeat RNA to cause ALS/FTD is as yet unclear however
recent reports indicate that key regulators of nucleocytoplasmic
transport are compromised in Drosophila models (Freibaum
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). The GGGGCC repeat RNA is
retained in the nucleus not only in these Drosophila models
but also in cells derived from ALS/FTD affected individuals.
In ALS/FTD affected individuals the nucleolus exhibits stress
(Haeusler et al., 2014) and it will be of interest to see whether this
stress mediates the recently described nuclear autophagy (Dou
et al., 2015).
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative
disease that is thought to have both genetic and environmental
causes. Certain chemicals in the environment are strongly
associated with PD. These include the herbicides rotenone
and paraquat (Tanner et al., 2011). Rotenone is an inhibitor
of mitochondrial complex I, while paraquat is a cause of
oxidative stress. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress
are both thought to be elements of PD pathogenesis and are
consistent with the rare genetic causes of the disease. The
chemical 6-hydroxydopamine has been used to establish rat
models of PD taking advantage of the specific accumulation of
this toxin into catecholaminergic neurons (Simola et al., 2007).
A role for innate surveillance in PD has recently been revealed
in this rat model by the finding that an antibody directed
against the dAMP HMG-B1 is neuroprotective (Sasaki et al.,
2016).
Multiple genetic loci have been identified for familial cases
of Parkinson’s Disease that can segregate in either a dominant
or recessive manner, most likely indicating gain- or loss-of-
function respectively. The responsible genes and their mutations
have been identified at many but not all loci and include SNCA,
PARK2, PINK1, LRRK2, DJ-1. Loss-of-function mutations in
either PARK2 (encoding parkin) or PINK1 cause early onset
recessive PD, with both proteins having important roles to
play in mitophagy (as described earlier). Drosophila models
reveal that mitochondrial dysfunction in PINK1 mutants is
complemented by parkin (Park et al., 2006) and that parkin
mutations lead to dopaminergic neuron loss, that can be rescued
by increased glutathione S-transferase activity (Whitworth
et al., 2005). Furthermore, Drosophila parkin mutants exhibit
elevated biomarkers of innate immune responses in pathogenesis
(e.g., Diptericin protein), indicating the activation of innate
surveillance (Greene et al., 2005). Finally, LRRK2 functionally
interacts with Parkin, DJ-1, and PINK-1 (Vendorova et al., 2009).
The relationship between these proteins and others, wherein
mutant
forms
cause
PD,
has
been
unclear
(Schapansky
et al., 2015). However, Norris et al. (2015) recently report
convergence of Parkin, PINK1, and α-synuclein in stress-
induced mitochondrial remodeling. SNCA encodes α-synuclein
and mutations in this gene were the first described in familial
cases of PD. α-synuclein is also found in the protein aggregates
known as Lewy Bodies that are found in the brains of some,
but not all PD patients. The PD-causing SNCA mutations
occur on a single allele and can be either missense mutations
or increases in gene copy number, implicating a gain-of-
function mechanism in the contribution of SNCA to disease
pathogenesis. Expression of human α-synuclein in Drosophila
neurons recapitulates symptoms of PD including loss of motor
control, development of neuronal inclusions and degeneration
of dopaminergic neurons. This phenotype is again rescued by
expression of parkin indicating commonality in pathogenesis
(Haywood and Staveley, 2004).
α-synuclein is not located in the mitochondria itself but
in the mitochondria-associated membrane (MAM), a distinct
compartment of the endoplasmic reticulum (Guardia-Laguarta
et al., 2014; Figure 2). Disease-causing point mutations in α-
synuclein reduce its association with the MAM implicating
this localization in disease pathology. The MAM is the site of
autophagosome formation (Hamasaki et al., 2013) and therefore
a key component of a major degradative control pathway
for the innate surveillance response. In a further indicator
of commonality of pathogenesis, Ye et al. (2015) recently
reported Parkin-mediated mitophagy in mutant hAPP neurons
and Alzheimer’s disease patient brains.
Gain-of-function
mutations
in
the
LRRK2
gene
are
responsible for the most frequent inherited cause of PD,
although with low disease penetrance of 32% at 80 years of
age (Goldwurm et al., 2007) suggesting interaction with other
genetic and/or environmental factors. LRRK2 has multiple
functions including roles in autophagy and mediating microglial
proinflammatory responses (Moehle et al., 2012; Schapansky
et al., 2014). These relationships have led to the conclusion that
inflammation has a causal role to play in Parkinson’s Disease
(Russo et al., 2014).
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) occurs in both sporadic and familial
forms, with genetic causes or contributions to each form.
Familial forms are earlier onset, with mutations found in genes
that encode the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and two
components of its cleavage (presenilin 1 and 2) to amyloid beta
protein, a major component of amyloid plaques found in AD
brain. These findings led to the amyloid cascade hypothesis—
in essence that fragments of APP cause AD (Schellenberg and
Montine, 2012; Tanzi, 2012; Hardy et al., 2014; Masters et al.,
2015). This hypothesis has prevailed over the field of AD research
for more than 25 years (Hardy and Higgins, 1992). Failure to
progress to effective prevention or treatment of AD has provoked
a recent call to focus on testing alternative hypotheses (Herrup,
2015).
One
competing
hypothesis
involves
the
pathogenic
interference
with
axonal
transport
of
neurofilament
and
neurotubule proteins (Iqbal et al., 1977), subsequently identified
as the microtubule associated protein tau (Grundke-Iqbal et al.,
1986). The brains of individuals with AD exhibit abnormal
phosphorylation and aggregation of tau into paired helical
filaments in the form of neurofibrillary tangles.
Amyloid beta plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are the
two main histopathological hallmarks of AD. Tau is encoded
by a single gene MAPT, that is mutated in some cases of
fronto-temporal dementia and certain other neurodegenerative
diseases (Iqbal et al., 2005) but somewhat surprisingly, not in
AD (Iqbal et al., 2015). Attempts to fuse these two hypotheses
include proposals that the hallmark features of pathology directly
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
influence one another (Mudher and Lovestone, 2002), for
example the concept of “tauopathies” where aberrantly folded
proteins (including tau, amyloid beta and α–synuclein) lead to
the formation of toxic structures that spread through the brain,
in a similar manner to prions (Goedert, 2015). The contribution
of such structures to pathology has been challenged given the lack
of correlation between plaque load and cognitive impairment
in AD, with alternative forms of amyloid beta proposed as
the neurotoxic agent (Muller-Schiffmann et al., 2016). So while
unifying the field to some extent, this fused hypothesis has not
provided an agreed mechanism of toxicity, nor does it explain
additional genetic causes of, and risk factors for, Alzheimer’s
disease.
Like numerous other neurodegenerative diseases, increased
inflammation correlates with Alzheimer’s disease progression
and has therefore been proposed as a disease mechanism (Heneka
and O’Banion, 2007; Heneka et al., 2014, 2015). However
since inflammation has been observed in a diverse array of
neurodegenerative diseases, with seemingly distinct causes, this
has led to the view that inflammation is a protective response
to neurodegeneration, rather than a cause of it. Recently,
genome-wide association studies of late-onset Alzheimer’s
disease have however identified susceptibility variants in loci
harboring innate immune-related genes, including CLU, CR1,
CD33, EPHA1, MS4A4E/MS4A6A, PTK2B, TREM1, TREM2,
and TREML2 (see Perry and Holmes, 2014). Several of these
proteins have now been found to functionally interact (Chan
et al., 2015). Therefore, elements of the innate surveillance and
response system are indeed rate-limiting for Alzheimer’s disease
pathogenesis. Intriguingly, these are proteins more typically
associated with microglia than neurons (Perry and Holmes,
2014), consistent with a non-cell autonomous mechanism for
neurodegeneration. Indeed microglial dysfunction is a hallmark
of the aging brain and Alzheimer’s disease (Mosher and Wyss-
Coray, 2014).
Conclusions Regarding Genetic Causes of Neurodegeneration
Together these observations form a compelling case that the
innate surveillance system is a central upstream cause of
neurodegenerative disease. The complexity of causal agents—
whether
genetic
or
environmental—can
be
explained
by
convergence around elevated susceptibility or active triggering
of inflammation through the innate surveillance pathway. The
key question is therefore not whether the innate surveillance
system has a role in neurodegenerative disease, but what kind of
role? Distinguishing whether innate surveillance has a pernicious
or protective role in neurodegeneration has been problematic
given its complex array of feed-forward and feed-back signaling
mechanisms. For example it has been proposed that the role of
innate surveillance in AD is in clearing amyloid beta plaques
from the brain (Guillot-Sestler et al., 2015). This hypothesis is
based on the observations that a reduction in anti-inflammatory
cytokine (IL-10) signaling mitigates AD-like pathology, while
over-expression reduces clearance in mouse models of cerebral
amyloidosis (Guillot-Sestler et al., 2015). The innate surveillance
system involves a mixture of anti- and pro-inflammatory
cytokines, local and systemic actions, with neuroinflammation
noted to have negative effects on neurogenesis and cognition
(Ryan and Nolan, 2016). Genetic causes define the proximal
defects and/or trigger molecules in pathways and on this basis
identify the role of innate surveillance in neurodegeneration as
causal.
The vast majority of AD cases are late age-at-onset and
in these instances the most striking genetic contribution is a
susceptibility locus on chromosome 19. A polymorphism within
the ApoE gene is an indicator of age-at-onset (Saunders et al.,
1993) and until recently it was assumed that variation in ApoE
protein is the biochemical basis of this variation possibly through
its impact on amyloid beta deposition (Masters et al., 2015).
ApoE also affects the activity of innate surveillance signaling
(Guillot-Sestler et al., 2015) providing an additional plausible
mechanism for its variation impacting on AD pathogenesis.
The ApoE gene is however located within a block of Linkage
Disequilibrium raising the possibility that another gene also
located within this block mediates AD susceptibility. One such
gene is TOMM40 that also contains a polymorphism predictive
of AD risk (Roses et al., 2010). TOMM40 is a component of
the mitochondrial protein import complex and in this capacity
is a key regulatory protein of mitochondrial function and the
mitochondrial unfolded protein response mediated by ATFS-1
transport (see above and Gottschalk et al., 2015). Mitophagy plays
a key role in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis, therefore variation
in TOMM40 is also a plausible means by which polymorphism
in the ApoE/TOMM40 linkage disequilibrium block can have a
causal role in AD.
Environmental
The vast majority of cases of neurodegeneration are thought to
have environmental agents as their principle cause. Pathogen
infection is likely to be one environmental cause. Sensitization is
a key component of innate surveillance mediated by extracellular
and
systemic
signaling
molecules
(DAMPs
and
dAMPs).
Pathogens either directly or indirectly generate such signaling
molecules, that the systemic component of innate surveillance
then utilizes to communicate the presence of infection and
primes the body to prepare for its potential spread. While such
sensitization provokes host cells to then actively restrict infection,
it also appears to increase susceptibility to other processes
mediated by innate surveillance—including neurodegeneration.
A very clear illustration of this phenomenon occurs following
sepsis. Long-term cognitive impairment and functional disability
are frequent consequences among survivors of severe sepsis
(Iwashyna et al., 2010). The mechanism responsible is yet to be
determined however the elevation of inflammation and resultant
systemic sensitization has been proposed (Sharshar et al., 2014;
Widmann and Heneka, 2014). Microglial activation plays a role
in experimentally induced sepsis in a rodent model (Michels
et al., 2015) and this is likely mediated by the dAMP HMG-
B1 (Chavan et al., 2012; Valdes-Ferrer et al., 2013). Physical
trauma, through head injury or ischemic stroke, are other factors
thought to contribute to increased risk of neurodegeneration.
Again HMG-B1 is a key mediator of immune mechanisms in
ischemic stroke (Kim et al., 2006) and brain injury (Laird et al.,
2014).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
Inverse Correlation between Cancer Incidence and
Neurodegenerative Disease
While the ability to defend against pathogens is clearly essential
for survival, the use of cell death as a defense strategy seems
a very high biological cost to pay. It is therefore noteworthy
that a clear inverse correlation has been found between the
incidence of cancer and Alzheimer’s disease (Driver et al.,
2012; Musicco et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014). This inverse
correlation with cancer incidence has also been observed for
additional neurodegenerative disorders (notably PD and HD)
in a large meta-analysis study (Catalá-López et al., 2014).
These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that
innate surveillance is the common mediator of both pre-
cancerous cell elimination and neurodegeneration, explaining
the trade-off between susceptibility to these conditions. A
more sensitive innate surveillance system is more effective at
detecting and eliminating dysfunctional, rogue cells that have
accumulated somatic mutations otherwise leading them on a
pathway of tumourigenesis. However this same sensitive innate
surveillance system is more readily able to detect genetic and/or
environmental danger and damage signals in the nervous system,
leading to increased susceptibility to neurodegenerative disease.
Conversely, a less sensitive innate surveillance system will confer
a lower risk of neurodegeneration, but a higher risk that pre-
cancerous cells will go undetected, and therefore lead to cancer.
Why are Nerve Cells Sensitive to Innate
Surveillance-Mediated Cell Death?
The central nervous system has characteristics that may go some
way to explaining its greater sensitivity to the consequences
of innate surveillance activation. Peripheral tissues utilize the
systemic component of innate surveillance to recruit specialized
cells (primarily histiocytes) to the site of activation (Vanha-aho
et al., 2015). These cells act in containment and resolution,
however until elimination is achieved the combined cell mass can
appear as a nodule referred to as a granuloma or inflammatory
pseudotumors. While such structures appear common to many
peripheral diseases they are very rare in the central nervous
system (Tekkok et al., 2000; Hausler et al., 2003; Lui et al., 2009).
This may be due to difficulty in attracting histiocytes into the
CNS and/or that microglial cells fulfill such a role in the CNS.
In any event the mechanics of resolving the cause of innate
surveillance activation in the CNS appears to be distinct from that
in peripheral tissues. Given the major role that microglial cells
play in nerve cell maintenance it is noteworthy that microglial
cell dynamics alter with age (Hefendhel et al., 2014), with a
general reduction in functional capacity. Such changes may well
confer a decreased ability to contain and resolve instances of
innate surveillance activation and therefore mediate increased
susceptibility to neurodegeneration with age.
If there is a Common Cause why are there are Different
Diseases?
Differing susceptibilities are nothing new in genetic causes of
disease. The same mutation in a single family can cause ALS or
FTD or both (see—OMIM 105550). The same ADAR1 mutation
can cause differing symptoms (Livingston et al., 2014). There are
a large number and variety of innate surveillance components. It
is likely that these components differ in their quantity and quality,
even among differing nerve cell types, indeed such variation
has already been reported (Applequist et al., 2002) with some
of this variation likely due to the requirement for pathway
components in normal developmental processes (Asakura et al.,
2015). Therefore, disease-causing components are likely rate-
limiting in some nerves, less so in others. Indeed neuronal
plasticity may overcome single cell loss through alternative
connections, but not the loss of the whole circuit. Finally, the
strategy of adjacent cell sensitization that leads to foci of cell
death, while working well in most tissues, may be ineffective in
the aging brain with diminished microglial function.
Future Perspectives
The hypothesis stated here, that innate surveillance mediated
cell death is the common cause of neurodegeneration, is a
paradigm shift. This model heralds the exciting prospect of
finally having a unifying view that accommodates all known
data and reconciles some of the long-standing incompatibilities
between previous models for neurodegenerative diseases. Until
now the accumulating body of data in support of this innate
surveillance hypothesis has been assembled from experiments
that have not been specifically designed to test it. So it will
now be important to directly challenge this hypothesis and its
predictions. Numerous animal models and a vast quantity of
clinical material are available for such targeted experiments and
analyses. These experiments will need to build in the distinct
possibility that innate surveillance is both protective early and
pernicious late in neurodegenerative disease. Such information
will be crucial for the design of clinical trials.
Detection and Intervention—Biomarkers for
Neurodegeneration
Reactive, presymptomatic biomarkers are needed, both to
predict the onset of impending symptoms and to monitor the
effectiveness of potential therapeutics in clinical trials. Given
that innate surveillance activation is the proximal cause of
neurodegeneration, it will be important to distinguish such
biomarkers that are specific for neurodegeneration from those
that possibly signal the activity of protective mechanisms
(Zetterberg et al., 2013). Informative, quantifiable biomarkers for
neurodegenerative disease are vital in assessing the effectiveness
of interventions, particularly given the very long time frames
involved for both age-at-onset and clinical progression for some
of these diseases.
New
targets
for
preventative
therapies
and/or
drug
interventions will be contingent not only upon defining
key molecular processes and the identification of their rate-
limiting steps, but also the window of time in which intervention
is able to be effective. An intervention at the wrong time could
impede a protective process rather than alleviate a pernicious
one.
Genetic Models of Neurodegenerative Disease
Distinguishing cause from consequence in the pathogenesis
of disease can be problematic. Experimental animal models
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
(both invertebrate and mouse) of the defined genetic causes of
neurodegeneration in humans, are therefore a key strategy in
establishing cause and effect relationships in the pathophysiology
of neurodegenerative disease.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RR conceived the hypothesis, initiated the assembly of supporting
data, and wrote the first and final drafts following input from
each of the co-authors. SR contributed material on the molecular
and cellular components of inflammatory pathways, their roles in
combating infection and their dysfunction in disease; intellectual
contributions to both the formulation of the hypothesis and
the form and content of the manuscript. LO contributed
material on animals models, particularly Drosophila; commented
and provided intellectual input into several manuscript drafts.
DF conducted literature searches on RNA based pathology,
particularly the distinction between “self” and “non-self”
RNAs and contributed Figure 1; commented and provided
intellectual input into several manuscript drafts. AS conducted
literature searches on Parkinson’s Disease and inflammatory
pathways, assembled Figure 2, and detailed discussion of the
contribution of mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy to
neurodegenerative disease; commented and provided intellectual
input into several manuscript drafts. ML conducted literature
searches on Alzheimer’s Disease and inflammation, and detailed
discussion of the contribution of the membrane associated with
the mitochondria (MAM) to Alzheimer’s Disease. BB provided
clinical insight into the occurrence of inflammation in the
progression of neurodegenerative disease and the current state of
presymptomatic markers; commented and provided intellectual
input into several manuscript drafts.
FUNDING
This research is funded in part by Project Grant (APP1069348)
from the National Health and Medical Research Council of
Australia and a grant from the National Ataxia Foundation
(USA).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Dan Kastner, Shaun McColl and Ivona
Aksentiijevich for reading drafts of this review.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnins.
2016.00193
REFERENCES
Ahmad, S. T., Sweeney, S. T., Lee, J. A., Sweeney, N. T., and Gao, F. B. (2009).
Genetic screen identifies serpin5 as a regulator of the toll pathway and
CHMP2B toxicity associated with frontotemporal dementia. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 106, 12168–12173. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903134106
Ahrens, S., Zelenay, S., Sancho, D., Hanc, P., Kjaer, S., Feest, C., et al. (2012).
F-Actin is an evolutionarily conserved damage-associated molecular pattern
recognized by DNGR-1, a receptor for dead cells. Immunity 36, 635–645. doi:
10.1016/j.immuni.2012.03.008
Aikawa, T., Mogushi, K., Iijima-Tsutsui, K., Ishikawa, K., Sakurai, M., Tanaka, H.,
et al. (2015). Loss of MyD88 alters neuroinflammatory response and attenuates
early Purkinje cell loss in a spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 mouse model. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 24, 4780–4791. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv202
Andries, O., De Filette, M., De Smedt, S. C., Demeester, J., Van Poucke, M.,
Peelman, L., et al. (2013). Innate immune response and programmed cell death
following carrier-mediated delivery of unmodified mRNA to respiratory cells.
J. Contr. Rel. 167, 157–166. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.01.033
Applequist, S. E., Wallin, R. P. A., and Ljunggren, H.-G. (2002). Variable expression
of Toll-like receptors in murine innate and adaptive immune cell lines. Int.
Immunol. 14, 1065–1074. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxf069
Asakura, T., Ogura, K., and Goshima, Y. (2015). IRE-1/XBP-1 pathway of the
unfolded protein response is required for properly localizing neuronal UNC-
6/Netrin for axon guidance in C. elegans. Genes Cells 20, 153–159. doi:
10.1111/gtc.12206
Azuma, Y., Tokuda, T., Shimamura, M., Kyotani, A., Sasayama, H., Yoshida, T.,
et al. (2014). Identification of ter94, Drosophila VCP, as a strong modulator of
motor neuron degeneration induced by knockdown of Caz, Drosophila FUS.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 23, 3467–3480. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu055
Banez-Coronel, M., Porta, S., Kagerbauer, B., Mateu-Huertas, E., Pantano, L.,
Ferrer, I., et al. (2012). A pathogenic mechanism in Huntington’s disease
involves small CAG-repeated RNAs with neurotoxic activity. PLoS Genet
8:e1002481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002481
Barbaro, B. A., Lukacsovich, T., Agrawal, N., Burke, J., Bornemann, D. J., Purcell,
J. M., et al. (2015). Comparative study of naturally occurring huntingtin
fragments in Drosophila points to exon 1 as the most pathogenic species
in Huntington’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 24, 913–925. doi: 10.1093/hmg/
ddu504
Batra, R., Charizanis, K., and Swanson, M. S. (2010). Partners in crime:
bidirectional transcription in unstable microsatellite disease. Hum. Mol. Genet.
19, R77–R82. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq132
Batra, R., Hutt, K., Vu, A., Rabin, S. J., Baughn, M. W., Libby, R. T., et al.
(2016). Gene expression signatures of sporadic ALS motor neuron populations.
Biorvix. 4, 74. doi: 10.1101/038448
Bentmann, E., Haass, C., and Dormann, D. (2013). Stress granules in
neurodegeneration – lessons learnt from TAR DNA binding protein of 43 kDa
and fused in sarcoma. FEBS J. 280, 4348–4370. doi: 10.1111/febs.12287
Bernard, J. J., Cowing-Zitron, C., Nakatsuji, T., Muehleisen, B., Muto, J.,
Borkowski, A. W., et al. (2012). Ultraviolet radiation damages self noncoding
RNA and is detected by TLR3. Nat. Med. 18, 1286–1290. doi: 10.1038/nm.2861
Bettens, K., Sleegers, K., and Van Broeckhoven, C. (2013). Genetic insights
in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 12, 92–104. doi: 10.1016/S1474-
4422(12)70259-4
Beutler, B., Eidenschenk, C., Crozat, K., Imler, J.-L., Takeuchi, O., Hoffman, J. A.,
et al. (2007). Genetic analysis of resistance to viral infection. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
7, 753–755. doi: 10.1038/nri2174
Bjorkqvist, M., Wild, E. J., Thiele, J., Silvestroni, A., Andre, R., Lahiri, N., et al.
(2008). A novel pathogenic pathway of immune activation detectable before
clinical onset in Huntington’s disease. J. Exp. Med. 205, 1869–1877. doi:
10.1084/jem.20080178
Blin, J., and Fitzgerald, K. A. (2015). Perspective: the RNA exosome, cytokine
gene regulation and links to autoimmunity. Cytokine 74, 175–180. doi:
10.1016/j.cyto.2015.03.005
Bortoluci, K. R., and Medzhitov, R. (2010). Control of infection by pyroptosis and
autophagy: role of TLR and NLR. Cell. Molec. Life Sci. 67, 1643–1651. doi:
10.1007/s00018-010-0335-5
Brinkmann, M. M., Spooner, E., Hoebe, K., Beutler, B., Ploegh, H. L., and Kim, Y.
M. (2007). The interaction between the ER membrane protein UNC93B and
TLR3, 7, and 9 is crucial for TLR signaling. J. Cell Biol. 177, 265–275. doi:
10.1083/jcb.200612056
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
Buchan, J. R., Kolaitis, R. M., Taylor, J. P., and Parker, R. (2013). Eukaryotic
stress granules are cleared by autophagy and Cdc48/VCP function. Cell 153,
1461–1474. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.037
Buchan, N., Silverman, N., and Cherry, S. (2014). Immunity in Drosophila
melanogaster – from microbial recognition to whole-organism physiology. Nat.
Rev. Immunol. 14, 796–810. doi: 10.1038/nri3763
Catalá-López, F., Suárez-Pinilla, M., Suárez-Pinilla, P., Valderas, J. M., Gómez-
Beneyto, M., Martinez, S., et al. (2014). Inverse and direct cancer comorbidity
in people with Central Nervous System disorders: a meta-analysis of Cancer
incidence in 577,013 participants of 50 observational studies. Psych. Psychosom.
83, 89–105. doi: 10.1159/000356498
Caulin,
A.
F.,
and
Maley,
C.
C.
(2011).
Peto’s
paradox:
evolution’s
prescription for Cancer prevention Trends Ecol. Evol. 26, 175–182. doi:
10.1016/j.tree.2011.01.002
Celardo, I., Martins, L. M., and Gandhi, S. (2014). Unravelling mitochondrial
pathways in Parkinson’s disease. Br. J. Pharmacol. 171, 1943–1957. doi:
10.1111/bph.12433
Chan, G., White, C. C., Winn, P. A., Cimpean, M., Replogle, J. M., Glick, L. R., et al.
(2015). CD33 modulates TREM2: convergence of Alzheimer loci. Nat. Neurosci.
18, 1556–1558. doi: 10.1038/nn.4126
Chavan, S. S., Huerta, P. T., Robbiati, S., Valdes-Ferrer, S. I., Ochani, M., Dancho,
M., et al. (2012). HMGB1 mediates cognitive impairment in sepsis survivors.
Mol. Med. 18, 930–937. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2012.00195
Cho, J. A., Lee, A.-H., Platzer, B., Cross, B. C. S., Gardner, B. M., De Luca, H.,
et al. (2013). The unfolded protein response element IRE1α senses bacterial
proteins invading the ER to activate RIG-I and innate immune signaling. Cell
Host Microbe 13, 558–569. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.03.011
Christofferson, D. E., and Yuan, J. (2010). Necroptosis as an alternative
form of programmed cell death. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22, 263–268. doi:
10.1016/j.ceb.2009.12.003
Cornejo, V. H., and Hetz, C. (2013). The unfolded protein response in Alzheimer’s
disease.
Semin.
Immunopathol.
35,
277–292.
doi:
10.1007/s00281-013-
0373-9
Cox, L. E., Ferraiuolo, L., Goodall, E. F., Heath, P. R., Higginbottom, A.,
Mortiboys, H., et al. (2010). Mutations in CHMP2B in lower motor neuron
predominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). PLoS ONE 5:e9872. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0009872
Crow, Y. J. (2011). Type I interferonopathies: a novel set of inborn errors
of immunity. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1238, 91–98. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2011.06220.x
Crow, Y. J. (2015). Type I interferonopathies: mendelian type I interferon up-
regulation. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 32, 7–12. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2014.10.005
Crow, Y. J., and Rehwinkel, J. (2009). Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome and related
phenotypes: linking nucleic acid metabolism with autoimmunity. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 18, R130–R136. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp293
Crow, Y. J., Zaki, M. S., Abdel-Hamid, M. S., Abdel-Salam, G., Boespflug-Tanguy,
O., Cordeiro, N. J., et al. (2014). Mutations in ADAR1, IFIH1, and RNASEH2B
presenting as Spastic Paraplegia. Neuropediatrics 6, 386–393. doi: 10.1055/s-
0034-1389161
Dou, Z., Xu, C., Donahue, G., Shimi, T., Pan, J. A., Zhu, J., et al. (2015). Autophagy
mediates degradation of nuclear lamina. Nature doi: 10.1038/nature15548
Driver, J. A., Beiser, A., Au, R., Kreger, B. E., Lee, G., Kurth, T., et al. (2012).
Inverse association between cancer and Alzheimer’s disease: results from the
Framingham Heart Study. BMJ 344:e1442. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e1442
Dunys, J., Duplan, E., and Checler, F. (2014). The transcription factor X-box
binding protein-1 in neurodegenerative diseases. Mol. Neurodegener. 9:35. doi:
10.1186/1750-1326-9-35
Eckard, S. C., Rice, G. I., Fabre, A., Badens, C., Gray, E. E., Hartley, J. L., et al.
(2014). The SKIV2L RNA exosome limits activation of the RIG-I-like receptors.
Nat. Immunol. 15, 839–845. doi: 10.1038/ni.2948
Elmore, S. (2007). Apoptosis: a review of programmed cell death. Toxicol Pathol.
35, 495–516. doi: 10.1080/01926230701320337
Escott-Price, V., Bellenguez, C., Wang, L.-S., Choi, S.-H., Harold, D., Jones,
L., et al. (2014). Gene-wide analysis detects two new susceptibility genes
for Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS ONE 9:e94661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0094661
Fang,
L.,
Hemion,
C.,
Pinho
Ferreira
Bento,
A.
C.,
Bippes,
C.
C.,
et al. (2015). Mitochondrial
function in neuronal cells depends on
p97/VCP/Cdc48-mediated
quality
control.
Front.
Cell.
Neurosci.
9:16.
doi: 10.3389/fncel2015.00016
Feng, Y., and Martin, P. (2015). Imaging innate immune responses at tumour
initiation: new insights from fish and flies. Nat. Rev. Cancer 15, 556–562. doi:
10.1038/nrc3979
Fonseca, A. C., Ferreiro, E., Oliveira, C. R., Cardoso, S. M., and Pereira, C. F.
(2013). Activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response by the amyloid-
beta 1-40 peptide in brain endothelial cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1832,
2191–2203. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.08.007
Francisco, N. M., Hsu, N.-J., Keeton, R., Randall, P., Sebesho, B., Allie, N., et al.
(2015). TNF-dependent regulation and activation of innate immune cells are
essential for host protection against cerebral tuberculosis. J. Neuroinflam. 12,
125. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0345-1
Freibaum, B. D., Lu, Y., Lopez-Gonzalez, R., Kim, N. C., Almeida, S., Lee,
K. H., et al. (2015). GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9orf72 compromises
nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature 525, 129–133. doi: 10.1038/nature14974
Gardner, B. M., Pincus, D., Gotthardt, K., Gallagher, C. M., and Walter, P. (2013).
Endoplasmic reticulum stress sensing in the unfolded protein response. Cold
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 5:a013169. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a013169
Gelderblom, M., Sobey, C. G., Kleinschnitz, C., and Magnus, T. (2015).
Danger
signals
in
stroke.
Ageing
Res.
Rev.
24(Pt
A),
77–82.
doi:
10.1016/j.arr.2015.07.004
Goedert, M. (2015). Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases: the prion concept
in relation to assembled Ab, tau and α-synuclein. Science 349:1255555. doi:
10.1126/science.1255555
Goldwurm,
S.,
Zini,
M.,
Mariani,
L.,
Tesel,
S.,
Miceli,
R.,
Sironi,
F.,
et al. (2007). Evaluation of LRRK2 G2019S penetrance: relevance for
genetic counseling in Parkinson disease. Neurobiology 68, 1141–1143. doi:
10.1212/01.wnl.0000254483.19854.ef
Gottschalk, W. K., Michael, W. L., He, Y. T., Saunders, A. M., Burns, D. K., Roses,
A. D., et al. (2015). The broad impact of TOM40 on Neurodegenerative diseases
in aging. J. Parkinsons Dis. Alzheimers Dis. 1, pii: 12. doi: 10.13188/2376-
922X.1000003
Goubau, D., Rehwinkel, J., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2010). PYHIN proteins: center
stage in DNA sensing. Nat. Immunol. 11, 984–986. doi: 10.1038/ni1110-984
Goubau, D., Schlee, M., Deddouche, S., Pruijssers, A. J., Zillinger, T., Goldeck,
M., et al. (2014). Antiviral Immunity via RIG-I-mediated recognition of RNA
bearing 5’-diphosphates. Nature 514, 372–375. doi: 10.1038/nature13590
Greene, J. C., Whitworth, A. J., Andrews, L. A., Parker, T. J., and Pallanck, L. J.
(2005). Genetic and genomic studies of Drosophila parkin mutants implicate
oxidative stress and innate immune responses in pathogenesis. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 14, 799–811. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi074
Grundke-Iqbal, I., Iqbal, K., Quinlan, M., Tung, Y.-C., Zuidi, M. S., and
Wisniewski, H. M. (1986). Microtubule-associated protein tau. A component
of Alzheimer paired helical filaments. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 6084–6089.
Guardia-Laguarta, C. E., Area-Gomez, E., Rub, C., Liu, Y., Magrane, J., Becker,
D., et al. (2014). α-synuclein is localized to mitochondria-associated ER
membranes. J. Neurosci. 34, 249–259. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2507-13.2014
Guillot-Sestler,
M.-V.,
Doty,
K.
R.,
and
Town,
T.
(2015).
Innate
immunity fights Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Neurosci. 38, 674–681. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2015.08.008
Haeusler, A. R., Donnelly, C. J., Periz, G., Simko, E. A., Shaw, P. G., Kim, M. S.,
et al. (2014). C9orf72 nucleotide repeat structures initiate molecular cascades
of disease. Nature 507, 195–200. doi: 10.1038/nature13124
Hamasaki, M., Furuta, N., Matsuda, A., Nezu, A., Yamamoto, A., Fujita, N., et al.
(2013). Autophagosomes form at ER-mitochondria contact sites. Nature 495,
389–393. doi: 10.1038/nature11910
Hamilton, J. A. (1980). Macrophage stimulation and the inflammatory response to
asbestos. Environ. Health Perspect. 34, 69–74. doi: 10.1289/ehp.803469
Harbauer, A. B., Zahedi, R. P., Sickmann, A., Pfanner, N., and Meisinger,
C. (2014). The protein import Machinery of Mitochondria—a regulatory
hub in metabolism, stress, and disease. Cell Metabol. 19, 357–372. doi:
10.1016/j.cmet.2014.01.010
Hardy, J. A., Bogdanovic, N., Winblad, B., Portelius, E., Andreasen, N., Cedazo-
Minguez, A., et al. (2014). Pathways to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Intern. Med. 275,
296–303. doi: 10.1111/joim.12192
Hardy, J. A., and Higgins, G. A. (1992). Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade
hypothesis. Science 256, 184–185. doi: 10.1126/science.1566067
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
Harijith, A., Ebenezer, D. L., and Natarajan, V. (2014). Reactive oxygen species at
the crossroads of inflammasome and inflammation. Front. Physiol. 5:352. doi:
10.3389/fphys.2014.00352
Harris, H. E., Andersson, U., and Pisetsky, D. S. (2012). HMGB1: a multifunctional
alarmin driving autoimmune and inflammatory disease. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol.
8, 195–202. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.222
Hausler, M., Schaade, L., Ramaekers, V. T., Doenges, M., Heimann, G., and
Sellhaus, B. (2003). Inflammatory pseudotumours of the central nervous
system: report of 3 cases and a literature review. Hum. Pathol. 34, 253–262. doi:
10.1053/hupa.2003.35
Haynes, C. M., and Ron, D. (2010). The mitochondrial UPR – protecting
organelle protein homeostasis. J. Cell Sci. 123, 3849–3855. doi: 10.1242/jcs.
075119
Haywood, A. F., and Staveley, B. E. (2004). Parkin counteracts symptoms
in a Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease. BMC Neurosci. 5:14. doi:
10.1186/1471-2202-5-14
Hefendhel, J. K., Neher, J. J., Suhs, R. B., Kohsaka, S., Skodras, A., and amd Jucker,
M. (2014). Homeostatic and injury-induced microglia behavior in the aging
brain. Aging Cell 13, 60–69. doi: 10.1111/acel.12149
Heneka, M. T., Carson, M. J., El Khoury, J., Landreth, G. E., Brosseron, F.,
Feinstein, D. L., et al. (2015). Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet
Neurol. 14, 388–405. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)70016-5
Heneka, M. T., Kummer, M. P., and Latz, E. (2014). Innate immune
activation in neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 463–477. doi:
10.1038/nri3705
Heneka, M. T., and O’Banion, M. K. (2007). Inflammatory processes in Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Neuroimmunol. 184, 69–91. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2006.11.017
Herrup, K. (2015). The case for rejecting the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Nat.
Neurosci. 18, 794–799. doi: 10.1038/nn.4017
Hetz, C., Thielen, P., Matus, S., Nassif, M., Court, F., Kiffin, R., et al. (2009). XBP-1
deficiency in the nervous system protects against amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
by increasing autophagy. Genes Dev. 23, 2294–2306. doi: 10.1101/gad.1830709
Higashiyama, H., Hirose, F., Yamaguchi, M., Inoue, Y. H., Fujikake, N., Matsukage,
A., et al. (2002). Identification of ter94, Drosophila VCP, as a modulator of
polyglutamine-induced neurodegeeration. Cell Death Differ. 9, 264–273. doi:
10.1038/sj.cdd.4400955
Hofer, M. J., and Campbell, I. L. (2013). Type I interferon in neurological disease
– The devil from within. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 24, 257–267. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2013.03.006
Hornung, V., Hartmann, R., Ablasser, A., and Hopfner, K.-P. (2014). OAS proteins
and cGAS: unifying concepts in sensing and responding to cytosolic nucleic
acids. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 521–528. doi: 10.1038/nri3719
Hu, S., Li, J., Xu, F., Mei, S., Le Duff, Y., Yin, L., et al. (2015). SAMHD1 Inhibits
LINE-1 Retrotransposition by Promoting Stress Granule Formation. PLoS
Genet. 11:e1005367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005367
Iqbal, K., Alonso, A., del, C., Chen, S., Omar Chohan, M., El-Akkad, E., et al.
(2005). Tau pathology in Alzhemier’s disease and other tauopathies. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1739, 198–210. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.09.008
Iqbal, K., Grundke-Iqbal, I., Wisnieski, M., and Terry, R. D. (1977). On
neurofilament and neurotubule proteins from human autopsy tissue. J.
Neurochem. 29, 417–424. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.1977.tb10689.x
Iqbal, K., Liu, F., and Gong, C.-X. (2015). Tau and neurodegenerative disease: the
story so far. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 1, 15–27. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2015.225
Ito, D., and Suzuki, N. (2011). Conjoint pathologic cascades mediated by
ALS/FTLD-U linked RNA-binding proteins TDP-43 and FUS. Neurology 77,
1636–1643. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182343365
Iwashyna, T. J., Ely, E. W., Smith, D. M., and Langa, K. M. (2010). Long-term
cognitive impairment and functional disability among survivors of severe
sepsis. JAMA 304, 1787–1794. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1553
Juranek, J. K., Daffu, G. K., Wojtkiewicz, J., Lacomis, D., Kofler, J., and Schmidt, A.
M. (2015). Receptor for Advanced Glycation end products and its inflammatory
ligands are upregulated in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Front. Cell Neurosci.
9:485. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00485
Kaczmarek, A., Vandenabeele, P., and Krysko, D. V. (2013). Necroptosis: the
release of damage-associated molecular patterns and its physiological relevance.
Immunity 38, 209–223. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.02.003
Kaiser, W. J., Sridharan, H., Huang, C., Mandal, P., Upton, J. W., Gough, P. J., et al.
(2013). Toll-like Receptor 3-mediated Necrosis via TRIF, RIP3, and MLKL. J.
Biol. Chem. 288, 31268–31279. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462341
Kanadia, R. N., Johnstone, K. A., Mankodi, A., Lungu, C., Thornton,
C. A., Esson, D., et al. (2003). A muscleblind knockout model for
myotonic
dystrophy.
Science
302,
1978–1980.
doi:
10.1126/science.
1088583
Kauppinen, T. M., Suh, S. W., Higashi, Y., Berman, A. E., Escartin, C., Won, S. J.,
et al. (2011). Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 modulates microglial responses
to amyloid beta. J. Neuroinflammation 8:152. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-152
Khoo, J. J., Forster, S., and Mansell, A. (2011). Toll-like receptors as interferon-
regulated genes and their role in disease. J. Interferon. Cytokine Res. 31, 13–25.
doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0095
Kim, J. B., Sig Choi, J., Yu, Y. M., Nam, K., Piao, C. S., Kim, S. W., et al. (2006).
HMGB1, a novel cytokine-like mediator linking acute neuronal death and
delayed neuroinflammation in postischemic brain. J. Neurosci. 26, 6413–6421.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3815-05.2006
Kim, Y. K., Shin, J., and Nahm, M. H. (2016). NOD-like receptors in infection,
immunity, and disease. Yonsei. Med. J. 57, 5–14. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2016.57.1.5
Kiningham, K. K., Oberley, T. D., Lin, S.-M., , Mattingly, C. A., and St. Clair,
D. K. (1999). Overexpression of manganese superoxide dismutase protects
against Mitochondrial-Initiated Poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase-mediated cell
death. FASEB J. 13, 1601–1610.
Kitada, T., Asakawa, S., Hattori, N., Matsumine, H., Yamamura, Y., Minoshima, S.,
et al. (1998). Mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile
parkinsonism. Nature 392, 605–608. doi: 10.1038/33416
Klionsky, D. J., Abdelmohsen, K., Abe, A., Abedin, M. J., Abeliovich, H.,
Arozena, A. A., et al. (2016). Guidelines for the use and interpretation of
assays for monitoring autophagy (3rd edition). Autophagy 12, 1–222.doi:
10.1080/15548627.2015.1100356
Kubes, P., and Mehal, W. Z. (2012). Sterile inflammation in the liver.
Gastroenterology 143, 1158–1172. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.09.008
Laird, M. D., Shields, J. S., Sukumari-Ramesh, S., Kimbler, D. E., Fessler, R. D.,
Shakir, B., et al. (2014). High mobility group box protein-1 promotes cerebral
edema after traumatic brain injury via activation of toll-like receptor 4. Glia. 62,
26–38. doi: 10.1002/glia.22581
Lattante, S., Ciura, S., Rouleau, G., and Kabashi, E. (2015). Defining the genetic
connection linking amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with frontotemporal
dementia (FTD). Trends Genet. 31, 263–273. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2015.03.005
Lawlor, K. T., O’Keefe, L. V., Samaraweera, S. E., van Eyk, C. L., McLeod, C. J.,
Maloney C. A., et al. (2011). Double-stranded RNA is pathogenic in Drosophila
models of expanded repeat neurodegenerative diseases. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20,
3757–3768. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr292
Lee, J. H., Won, S. M., Suh, J., Son, S. J., Moon, G. J., Park, U.-J., et al.
(2010). Induction of the unfolded protein response and cell death pathway in
Alzheimer’s disease, but not in aged Tg2576 mice. Exp. Mol. Med. 42, 386–394.
doi: 10.3858/emm.2010.42.5.040
Lee, J. Y., Lee, J. Y., Lee, J. D., Phipps, S., Noakes, P. G., and Woodruff, T. M.
(2015). Absence of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) extends survival in the hSOD1
G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Neuroinflammation 12,
90. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0310-z
Lemaitre, B., Nicolas, E., Michaut, L., Reichhart, J.-M., and Hoffmann, J. A.
(1996). The dorsoventral regulatory gene cassette spätzle/Toll/cactus controls
the potent antifungal response in drosophila adults. Cell 86, 973–983. doi:
10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80172-5
Li, M.-J., Liu, C., Hu, X., Ma, C., Luo, X.-G., and Yan, X.-X. (2014). Inverse
correlation between Alzheimer’s disease and cancer: implication for a strong
impact of regenerative propensity on neurodegeneration? BMC Neurol. 14:211.
doi: 10.1186/s12883-014-0211-2
Li,
Y.
R.,
King,
O.
D.,
Shorter,
J.,
and
Gitler,
A.
D.
(2013).
Stress
granules as crucibles of ALS pathogenesis. J. Cell Biol. 201, 361–372. doi:
10.1083/jcb.201302044
Liddicoat, B. J., Piskol, R., Chalk, A. M., Ramaswami, G., Higuchi, M.,
Hartner, J. C., et al. (2015). RNA editing by ADAR1 prevents MDA5
sensing of endogenous dsRNA as nonself. Science 349, 1115–1120. doi:
10.1126/science.aac7049
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
Liu, Y., Samuel, B. S., Breen, P. C., and Ruvkun, G. (2014). Caenorhabditis elegans
pathways that surveil and defend mitochondria. Nature 508, 406–410. doi:
10.1038/nature13204
Livingston, J. H., Lin, J. P., Dale, R. C., Gill, D., Brogan, P., Munnich, A., et al.
(2014). A type I interferon signature identifies bilateral striatal necrosis due to
mutations in ADAR1. J. Med. Genet. 51, 76–82. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-
102038
Loo, Y.-M., and Gale, M. (2011). Immune signalling by RIG-I-like receptors.
Immunity 34, 680–692. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.003
Lu, J. V., Chen, H. C., and Walsh, C. M. (2014). Necroptotic signaling in
adaptive and innate immunity. Sem. Cell. Develop. Biol. 35, 33–39. doi:
10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.07.003
Lui, P. C. W., Fan, Y. S., Wong, S. S., Chan, A. N. H., Wong, G., Chau, T. K. F.,
et al. (2009). Inflammatory pseudotumours of the central nervous system. Hum.
Pathol. 40, 1611–1617. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.04.016
MacKay, C. R., Wang, J. P., and Kurt-Jones, E. A. (2014). Dicer’s role as an antiviral:
still an enigma. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 26, 49–55. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2013.
10.015
Mackenzie, I. R., Frick, P., Grässer, F. A., Gendron, T. F., Petrucelli, L., Cashman,
N. R., et al. (2015). Quantitative analysis and clinico-pathological correlations
of different dipeptide repeat protein pathologies in C9ORF72 mutation carriers.
Acta Neuropathol. 6, 845–861. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1476-2
Mankodi, A., Logigian, E., Callahan, L., McClain, C., White, R., Henderson,
D., et al. (2000). Myotonic dystrophy in transgenic mice expressing an
expanded CUG repeat. Science 289, 1769–1772. doi: 10.1126/science.289.54
85.1769
Mann, D. M. A. (2015). Dipeptide repeat protein toxicity in frontotemporal
lobar degeneration and in motor neurone disease associated with expansions
in C9ORF72da cautionary note. Neurobiol. Aging 36, 1224–1226. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.10.011
Martire, S., Mosca, L., and d’Erme, M. (2015). PARP-1 involvement in
neurodegeneration: a focus on Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Mech.
Ageing Devel. 146, 53–64. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2015.04.001
Masters, C. L., Bateman, R., Blennow, K., Rowe, C. C., Sperling, R. A., and
Cummings, J. L. (2015). Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Rev. Disease Primer. 1:15056.
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.56
McGlasson, S., Jury, A., Jackson, A., and Hunt, D. (2015). Type I interferon
dysregulation and neurological disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 11, 515–523. doi:
10.1038/nrneurol.2015.143
McLeod, C. J., O’Keefe, L. V., and Richards, R. I. (2005). The pathogenic
agent in Drosophila models of ’polyglutamine’ diseases. Hum. Mol. Genet. 14,
1041–1048. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi096
Meyer, S. N., Amoyel, M., Bergantifios, C., de la Cova, C., Schertel, C.,
Basler, K., et al. (2014). An ancient defense system eliminates unfit cells
from developing tissues during cell competition. Science 346:1258236. doi:
10.1126/science.1258236
Michels, M., Vieira, A. S., Vuolo, F., Zapelini, H. G., Mendonca, B., Mina, F.,
et al. (2015). The role of microglia activation in the development of sepsis-
induced long-term cognitive impairment. Brain, Behav. Immun. 43, 54–59. doi:
10.1016/j.bbi.2014.07.002
Miller, J. R. C., Träger, U., Andre, R., Sarah, J., and Tabrizi, S. J. (2015).
Mutant Huntingtin does not affect the Intrinsic Phenotype of Human
Huntington’s
Disease
T
Lymphocytes.
PLoS
ONE
10:e0141793.
doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0141793
Mino, T., Murakawa, Y., Fukao, A., Vandenbon, A., Wessels, H.-H., Daisuke
Ori, D., et al. (2015). Regnase-1 and roquin regulate a common element
in inflammatory mRNAs by spatiotemporally distinct mechanisms. Cell 161,
1058–1073. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.029
Mizuguchi, K., Parker, J. S., Blundell, T. L., and Gay, N. J. (1998). Getting knotted:
a model for the structure and activation of Spätzle. Trends Biochem. Sci. 23,
239–242. doi: 10.1016/S0968-0004(98)01216-X
Moehle, M. S., Webber, P. J., Tse, T., Sukar, N., Standaert, D. G., DeSilva,
T. M., et al. (2012). LRRK2 inhibition attenuates microglial inflammatory
responses. J. Neurosci. 32, 1602–1611. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5601-
11.2012
Mosher, K. I., and Wyss-Coray, T. (2014). Microglial dysfunction in brain
aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem. Pharmacol. 88, 594–604. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2014.01.008
Mudher, A., and Lovestone, S. (2002). Alzheimer’s disease – do tauists and
baptists finally shake hands? Trends Neurosci. 25, 22–26. doi: 10.1016/S0166-
2236(00)02031-2
Muller-Schiffmann,
A.,
Herring,
A.,
Abdel-Hafiz,
L.,
Chepkova,
A.
N.,
Schable,
S.,
Wedel,
D.,
et
al.
(2016).
Amyloid-β
dimers
in
the
absence
of
plaque
pathology
impair
learning
and
synaptic
plasticity.
Brain
139(Pt
2),
509–525.
doi:
10.1093/brain/
awv355
Murakami, Y., Matsumoto, H., Roh, M., Giani, A., Kataoka, K., Morizane, Y., et al.
(2014). Programmed necrosis, not apoptosis, is a key mediator of cell loss and
DAMP-mediated inflammation in dsRNA-induced retinal degeneration. Cell
Death Differ. 21, 270–277. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.109
Musicco, M., Adorni, F., Di Santo, S., Prinelli, F., Pettenati, C., Caltagirone, C., et al.
(2013). Inverse occurrence of cancer and Alzheimer disease: a population-based
incidence study. Neurology 81, 322–328. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31829c5ec1
Nakano, S., Morimoto, S., Suzuki, S., Watanabe, T., Amano, H., and Takasaki, Y.
(2010). Up-regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane protein
UNC93B in the B cells of patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus.
Rheumatology 49, 876–881. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keq001
Nallagatla, S. R., Toroney, R., and Bevilacqua, P. C. (2008). A brilliant disguise
for self RNA: 5′-end and internal modifications of primary transcripts suppress
elements of innate immunity. RNA Biol. 5, 140–144. doi: 10.4161/rna.5.3.6839
Nasirudeen, A. M. A., Wong, H. H., Thien, P., Xu, S., Lam, K.-P., and Liu,
D. X. (2011). RIG-I, MDA5 and TLR3 synergistically play and important
role in restriction of Dengue Virus infection. PLoS NTDS 5:e926. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0000926
Norris, K. L., Hao, R., Chen, L.-F., Lai, C.-H., Kapur, M., Shaughnessy, P. J.,
et al. (2015). Convergence of Parkin, PINK1, and α-synuclein on stress-induced
mitochondrial morphological remodelling. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 13862–13874.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634063
Nyström, S., Antoine, D. J., Lundbäck, P., Lock, J. G., Nita, A. F., Högstrand,
K., et al. (2013). TLR activation regulates damage-associated molecular
pattern isoforms released during pyroptosis. EMBO J. 32, 86–99. doi:
10.1038/emboj.2012.328
Olmos-Alonso, A., Schetters, S. T. T., Sri, S., Askew, K., Mancuso, R., Vargas-
Caballero, M., et al. (2016). Pharmacological targeting of CSF1R inhibits
microglial proliferation and prevents the progression of Alzheimer’s-like
pathology. Brain 139(Pt 3), 891–907. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv379
Park, J., Lee, S. B., Lee, S., Kim, Y., Song, S., Kim, S., et al. (2006). Mitochondrial
dysfunction in Drosophila PINK1 mutants is complemented by parkin. Nature
441, 1157–1161. doi: 10.1038/nature04788
Pasparakis, M., and Vandenabeele, P. (2015). Necroptosis and its role in
inflammation. Nature 517, 311–320. doi: 10.1038/nature14191
Pellegrino, M. W., and Haynes, C. M. (2015). Mitophagy and the mitochondrial
unfolded protein response in neurodegeneration and bacterial infection. BMC
Biol. 13:22. doi: 10.1186/s129-015-0129-1
Pellegrino, M. W., Nargund, A. M., Kirienko, N. V., Gillis, R., Fiorese,
C. J., and Haynes, C. M. (2014). Mitochondrial UPR-regulated innate
immunity provides resistance to pathogen infection. Nature 516, 414–418. doi:
10.1038/nature13818
Perry, V. H., and Holmes, C. (2014). Microglial priming in neurodegenerative
disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10, 217–224. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2014.38
Pestal, K., Funk, C. C., Snyder, J. M., Price, N. D., Treuring, P. M., and
Stetson, D. B. (2015). Isoforms of RNA-Editing Enzyme ADAR1 independently
control nucleic acid sensor MDA5-Driven autoimmunity and multi-organ
development. Immunity 43, 933–944. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.001
Pestka, S., Krause, C. D., and Walter, M. R. (2004). Interferons, interferon-like
cytokines, and their receptors. Immunol. Rev. 202, 8–32. doi: 10.1111/j.0105-
2896.2004.00204.x
Piccoli, C., Ripoli, M., Quarato, G., Scrima, R., D’Aprile, A., Boffoli, D., et al. (2008).
Coexistence of mutations in PINK1 and mitochondrial DNA in early onset
parkinsonism. J. Med. Genet. 45, 596–602. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.058628
Poeck, H., Bschelder, M., Gross, O., Finger, K., Roth, S., Rebsamen, M., et al.
(2010). Recognition of RNA virus by RIG-I results in activation of CARD9 and
inflammasome signaling for interleukin 1 beta production. Nat. Immunol. 11,
63–69. doi: 10.1038/ni.1824
Radian, A. D., de Almeide, L., Dorfleutner, A., and Stehlik, C. (2013). NLRP7
and related inflammasome activating pattern recognition receptors and their
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
function in host defense and disease. Microb. Infect. 15, 630–639. doi:
10.1016/j.micinf.2013.04.001
Radian, A. D., Khare, S., Chu, L. H., Dorfleutner, A., and Stehlik, C.
(2015). ATP binding by NLRP7 is required for inflammasome activation
in response to bacterial lipopeptides. Mol. Immunol. 67, 294–302. doi:
10.1016/j.molimm.2015.06.013
Ray, R., Juranek, J. K., and Rai, V. (2015). RAGE axis in neuroinflammation,
neurodegeneration
and
its
emerging
role
in
the
pathogenesis
of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 62, 48–55. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.12.006
Rhodes, J. D., Lott, M. C., Russell, S. L., Moulton, V., Sanderson, J., Wormstone,
I. M., et al. (2012). Activation of the innate immune response and interferon
signalling in myotonic dystrophy type 1 and type 2 cataracts. Hum. Mol. Genet.
21, 852–862. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr515
Rice, G. I., del Toro Duany, Y., Jenkinson, E. M., Forte, G. M., Anderson, B.
H., Ariaudo, G., et al. (2014). Gain-of-function mutations in IFIH1 cause
a spectrum of human disease phenotypes associated with upregulated
type
I
interferon
signaling.
Nat.
Genet.
46,
503–509.
doi:
10.1038/
ng.2933
Rice, G. I., Kasher, P. R., Forte, G. M., Mannion, N. M., Greenwold, S. M.,
Szynklewicz, M., et al. (2012). Mutations in ADAR1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres
syndrome associated with a type I interferon signature. Nat. Genet. 44,
1243–1248. doi: 10.1038/ng.2414
Rigby, R. E., and Rehwinkel, J. (2015). RNA degradation in antiviral immunity and
autoimmunity. Trends Immunol. 36, 179–188. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2015.02.001
Roach, J. C., Glusman, G., Rowen, L., Kaur, A., Purcell, M. K., Smith, K. D., et al.
(2005). The evolution of vertebrate Toll-like receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 102, 9577–9582. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0502272102
Rock, K. L., Latz, E., Ontiveros, F., and Kono, H. (2010). The sterile inflammatory
response. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 28, 321–342. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-
030409-101311
Rodriguez-Vieitez, E., Saint-Aubert, L., Carter, S. F., Almkvist, O., Farid, K., Scholl,
M., et al. (2016). Diverging longitudinal changes in astrocytosis and amyloid
PET in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 139(Pt 3), 922–936. doi:
10.1093/brain/awv404
Roses, A. D., Lutz, M. W., Amrine-Madsen, H., Saunders, A. M., Crenshaw, D.
G., Sundseth, S. S., et al. (2010). A TOMM40 variable-length polymorphism
predicts the age of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmacogenomics J. 10,
375–384. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2009.69
Russo, I., Bubacco, L., and Greggio, E. (2014). LRRK2 and neuroinflammation:
partners in crime in Parkinson’s disease? J. Neuroinflammation 11:52. doi:
10.1186/1742-2094-11-52
Ryan, S. M., and Nolan, Y. M. (2016). Neuroinflammation negatively affects adult
hippocampal neurogenesis and cognition: can exercise compensate? Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 61, 121–131. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.12.004
Ryoo, J., Choi, J., Oh, C., Kim, S., Seo, M., Kim, S.-Y., et al. (2014). The ribonuclease
activity of SAMHD1 is required for HIV-1 restriction. Nat. Med. 20, 936–941.
doi: 10.1038/nm.3626
Salminen, A., Kaarniranta, K., Kauppinen, A., Ojala, J., Haapasalo, A., Soininen, H.,
et al. (2013). Impaired autophagy and APP processing in Alzheimer’s disease:
the potential role of Beclin 1 interactome. Prog. Neurobiol. 106–107, 33–54. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.002
Samaraweera, S. E., O’Keefe, L. V., Price, G. R., Venter, D. J., and Richards, R. I.
(2013). Distinct roles for Toll and autophagy pathways in double-stranded RNA
toxicity in a Drosophila model of expanded repeat neurodegenerative diseases.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 22, 2811–2819. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt130
Sasaki, T., Liu, K., Agari, T., Yasuhara, T., Mori-moto, J., Okazaki, M., et al.
(2016). Anti-high mobility group box 1 antibody exerts neuroprotection in
a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol. 275(Pt 1), 220–231. doi:
10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.11.003
Saunders, A. M., Strittmatter, W. J., Schmechel, D., George-Hyslop, P. H., Pericak-
Vance, M. A., Joo, S. H., et al. (1993). Association of apolipoprotein E allele
ε4 with late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimers disease. Neurology 43,
1467–1472. doi: 10.1212/WNL.43.8.1467
Savage, C. D., Lopez-Castejon, G., Denes, A., and Brough, D. (2012). NLRP3-
inflammasome activating DAMPs stimulate an inflammatory response in glia
in the absence of priming which contributes to brain inflammation after injury.
Front. Immunol. 3:288. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00288
Schapansky, J., Nardozzi, J. D., Felizia, F., and Lavoie, M. J. (2014). Membrane
recruitment of endogenous LRRK2 precedes its potent regulation of autophagy.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 23, 4201–4214. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu138
Schapansky, J., Nardozzi, J. D., and Lavoie, M. J. (2015). The complex relationship
between microglia, alpha-synuclein, and LRRK2 in Parkinson’s Disease.
Neuroscience 302, 74–88. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.09.049
Schellenberg, G. D., and Montine, T. J. (2012). The genetics and neuropathology of
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 124, 305–323. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-
0996-2
Senft, D., and Ronai, Z. A. (2015). UPR, autophagy, and mitochondrial cross-
talk underlies the ER stress response. Trends Biochem. Sci. 40, 141–148. doi:
10.1016/j.tibs.2015.01.002
Sharshar, T., Bozza, F., and Chretien, F. (2014). Neuropathological processes in
sepsis. Lancet Neurol. 13, 534–536. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70064-X
Shichita, T., Ito, M., and Yoshimura, A. (2014). Post-ischemic inflammation
regulates neural damage and protection. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8:319. doi:
10.3389/fncel.2014.00319
Simola, N., Morelli, M., and Carta, A. R. (2007). The 6-hydroxydopamine model
of Parkinson’s Disease. Neurotox. Res. 11, 151–167. doi: 10.1007/BF03033565
Sisodia, S. S. (1998). Nuclear inclusions in glutamine repeat disorders: are
they pernicious, coincidental, or beneficial? Cell 95, 1–4. doi: 10.1016/S0092-
8674(00)81743-2
Stein, D., and Nüsslein-Volhard, C. (1992). Multiple extracellular activities in
Drosophila egg perivitelline fluid are required for establishment of embryonic
dorsal-ventral polarity. Cell 68, 429–440. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90181-B
Talbot, K., and Ansorge, D. (2006). Recent advances in the genetics of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: common pathways
in neurodegenerative disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15, R182–R187. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddl202
Tan, M.-S., Tan, L., Jiang, T., Zhu, X.-C., Wang, H.-F., and Jia, C.-D. (2014).
Amyloid-β induces NLRP1-dependent neuronal pyroptosis in models of
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Death Dis. 5:e1382. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.348
Tanner, C. M., Kamel, F., Ross, G. W., Hoppin, J. A., Goldman, S. M., Korell,
M., et al. (2011). Rotenone, paraquat, and Parkinson’s disease. Environ. Health
Perspect. 119, 866–872. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1002839
Tanzi, R. E. (2012). The genetics of Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect.
Med. 2:a006296. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a006296
Tekkok, I. H., Ventureyra, E. C., and Jimenez, C. L. (2000). Intracranial
plasma cell granuloma. Brain Tumor. Path. 17, 97–103. doi: 10.1007/BF024
84280
Thaiss, C. A., Levy, M., Itav, S., and Elinav, E. (2016). Integration of innate immune
signaling. Trends Immunol. 37, 84–101. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2015.12.003
Thundyil, J., and Lim, K. L. (2015). DAMPs and neurodegeneration. Ageing Res.
Rev. 24(Pt A), 17–28. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2014.11.003
Valanne, S., Wang, J.-H., and Rämet, M. (2011). The Drosophila toll signaling
pathway J. Immunol. 186, 649–656. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002302
Valdes-Ferrer, S. I., Rosas-Ballina, M., Olofssan, P. S., Lu, B., Dancho, M. E.,
Ochani, M., et al. (2013). HMGB1 mediates splenomegaly and expansion
of splenic CD11b+ Ly-yChigh inflammatory monocytes in murine sepsis
survivors. J. Int. Med. 274, 381–390. doi: 10.1111/joim.12104
van Eyk, C. L., O’Keefe, L. V., Lawlor, K. T., Samaraweera, S. E., McLeod,
C. J., Price, G. R., et al. (2011). Perturbation of the Akt/Gsk3-β signalling
pathway is common to Drosophila expressing expanded untranslated CAG,
CUG and AUUCU repeat RNAs. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, 2783–2794. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddr177
Vanha-aho, L.-M., Valanne, S., and Rämet, M. (2015). Cytokines in Drosophila
immunity. Immunol. Lett. 170, 42–51. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2015.12.005
Vendorova, K., Kabback, G., Abdel-Messih, E., Zhang, Y., Parks, R. J., Imai, Y., et al.
(2009). Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 interacts with Parkin, DJ-1 and PINK-1 in
a Drosophila melanogaster model of Parkinson’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18,
4390–4404. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp394
Venereau, E., Ceriotti, C., and Bianchi, M. E. (2015). DAMPs from cell death to
new life. Front. Immunol. 6:422. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00422
von Bernhardi, R., Tichauer, J. E., and Eugenin, J. (2010). Aging-dependent
changes of microglial cells and their relevance for neurodegenerative disorders.
J. Neurochemistry 112, 1099–1114. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06537.x
Wan, J., Yourshaw, M., Mamsa, H., Rudnik-Schoneborn, S., Menezes, M. P., Hong,
J. E., et al. (2012). Mutations in the RNA exosome component gene EXOSC3
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
19
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
 Richards et al.
Autoinflammatory Cause of Dementia Hypothesis
cause pontocerebellar hypoplasia and spinal motor neuron degeneration. Nat.
Genet. 44, 704–708. doi: 10.1038/ng.2254
Warren, L., Manos, P. D., Ahfeldt, T., Loh, Y. H., Li, H., Lau, F., et al. (2007).
Highly efficient reprogramming to pluripotency and directed differentiation of
human cells with synthetic modified mRNA. Cell Stem Cell 7, 618–630. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2010.08.012
Wen, H., Miao, E. A., and Ting, J. P. (2013). Mechanisms of NOD-like
receptor-associated inflammasome activation. Immunity 39, 432–441. doi:
10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.037
West, R. J. H., Lu, Y., Marie, B., Gao, F.-B., and Sweeney, S. T. (2015). Rab8, POSH,
and TAK1 regulate synaptic growth in a Drosophila model of frontotemporal
dementia. J. Cell Biol. 208, 931–947. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201404066
Whitworth, A. J., Theodore, D. A., Greene, J. C., Benes, H., Wes, P. D., and
Pallanck, L. J. (2005). Increased glutathione S-transferase activity rescues
dopaminergic neuron loss in a Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 8024–8029. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0501078102
Widmann, C. N., and Heneka, M. T. (2014). Long-term cerebral consequences of
sepsis. Lancet Neurol. 13, 630–636. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70017-1
Wu, W., Liu, P., and Li, J. (2012). Necroptosis: an emerging form of
programmed cell death. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 82, 249–258. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.08.004
Xu, Z., Poidevin, M., Li, X., Li, Y., Shu, L., Nelson, D. L., et al. (2013). Expanded
GGGGCC repeat RNA associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and
frontotemporal dementia causes neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 110, 7778–7783. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1219643110
Ye, X., Sun, X., Starovoytov, V., and Cai, Q. (2015). Parkin-mediated mitophagy
in mutant hAPP neurons and Alzheimer’s disease patient brains. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 24, 2938–2951. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv056
Yoneyama, M., Jogi, M., and Onomoto, K. (2016). Regulation of antiviral innate
immune signaling by stress-induced RNA granules. J. Biochem. 159, 279–286.
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvv122
Yu, A. K., Song, L., Murray, K. D., van der List, D., Sun, C., Shen, Y., et al.
(2015). Mitochondrial complex I deficiency leads to inflammation and retinal
ganglion cell death in the Ndufs4 mouse. Hum. Mol. Genet. 24, 2848–2860. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddv045
Yu, Z., Teng, X., and Bonini, N. M. (2011). Triplet repeat-derived siRNAs enhance
RNA-mediated toxicity in a Drosophila model for myotonic dystrophy. PLoS
Genet. 7:e1001340. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001340
Yuan, F., Dutta, T., Wang, L., Song, L., Gu, L., Qian, L., et al. (2015). Human
DNA exonuclease TREX1 is also an exoribonuclease that acts on single-
stranded RNA. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 13344–13353. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.
653915
Zeng, L., Liu, Y.-P., Sha, H., Chen, H., Qi, L., and Smith, J. A. (2010).
XBP-1 Couples ER Stress to Augmented IFN-β Induction via a cis-acting
enhancer in macrophages. J. Immunol. 185, 2324–2330. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.
0903052
Zetterberg, H., Smith, D. H., and Blennow, K. (2013). Biomarkers of mild traumatic
brain injury in cerebrospinal fluid and blood. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 9, 201–210. doi:
10.1038/nrneurol.2013.9
Zhang, B., Gaiteri, C., Bodea, L.-G., Wang, Z., McElwee, J., Podtelezhnikov,
A. A., et al. (2013). Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes
and networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 153, 707–720. doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.030
Zhang, K., Donnelly, C. J., Haeusler, A. R., Grima, J. C., Machamer, J. B.,
Steinwald, P., et al. (2015). The C9orf72 repeat expansion disrupts
nucleocytoplasmic
transport.
Nature
525,
56–61.
doi:
10.1038/nature
14973
Zhou, R., O’Hara, S. P., and Chen, X.-M. (2011). MicroRNA regulation of innate
immune responses in epithelial cells. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 8, 371–379. doi:
10.1038/cmi.2011.19
Disclosures: RR has previously been a consultant for Glaxo-Wellcome (later
GlaxoSmithKline), but is not currently and was not during the preparation of this
manuscript.
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Richards, Robertson, O’Keefe, Fornarino, Scott, Lardelli and
Baune. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
20
May 2016 | Volume 10 | Article 193
