 University of Nebraska - Lincoln
DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Faculty Publications, Department of Psychology
Psychology, Department of
2018
Beauty Is in the Eye of the Beer Holder: An Initial
Investigation of the Effects of Alcohol,
Attractiveness, Warmth, and Competence on the
Objectifying Gaze in Men
Abigail R. Riemer
University of Nebraska–Lincoln, ariemer@huskers.unl.edu
Michelle Haikalis
University of Nebraska–Lincoln, michellehaik@gmail.com
Molly R. Franz
University of Nebraska–Lincoln, mollyrfranz@gmail.com
Michael Dodd
University of Nebraska‐Lincoln, mdodd2@unl.edu
David DiLillo
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, ddilillo@unl.edu
See next page for additional authors
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/psychfacpub
Part of the Biological Psychology Commons, Cognition and Perception Commons,
Experimental Analysis of Behavior Commons, and the Personality and Social Contexts Commons
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Psychology, Department of at DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln. It has
been accepted for inclusion in Faculty Publications, Department of Psychology by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons@University of
Nebraska - Lincoln.
Riemer, Abigail R.; Haikalis, Michelle; Franz, Molly R.; Dodd, Michael; DiLillo, David; and Gervais, Sarah, "Beauty Is in the Eye of
the Beer Holder: An Initial Investigation of the Effects of Alcohol, Attractiveness, Warmth, and Competence on the Objectifying Gaze
in Men" (2018). Faculty Publications, Department of Psychology. 809.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/psychfacpub/809
 Authors
Abigail R. Riemer, Michelle Haikalis, Molly R. Franz, Michael Dodd, David DiLillo, and Sarah Gervais
This article is available at DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/psychfacpub/809
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     1 
 
Published in Sex Roles (2018), doi 10.1007/s11199-017-0876-2  
Copyright © 2017 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC. Used by permission.  
Published online December 20, 2017.  
 
Supplementary material follows the References.    
________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
Beauty Is in the Eye of the Beer Holder:  
An Initial Investigation of the Effects of 
Alcohol, Attractiveness, Warmth, and 
Competence on the Objectifying Gaze  
in Men   
 
 
Abigail R. Riemer, Michelle Haikalis, Molly R. Franz,  
Michael D. Dodd, David DiLillo, and Sarah J. Gervais   
 
 
Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0308 
Corresponding author — Abigail R. Riemer, ariemer@huskers.unl.edu    
 
 
Abstract  
Despite literature revealing the adverse consequences of objectifying gazes for women, little 
work has empirically examined origins of objectifying gazes by perceivers. Integrating 
alcohol myopia and objectification theories, we examined the effects of alcohol as well as 
perceived female attractiveness, warmth, and competence on objectifying gazes. 
Specifically, male undergraduates (n = 49) from a large U.S. Midwestern university were 
administered either an alcoholic or placebo beverage. After consumption, participants were 
asked to focus on the appearance or personality (counterbalanced) of pictured women who 
were previously rated as high, average, or low in attractiveness, warmth, and competence. 
Replicating previous work, appearance focus increased objectifying gazes as measured by 
decreased visual dwell time on women’s faces and increased dwell time on women’s bodies. 
Additionally, alcohol increased objectifying gazes. Whereas greater perceived attractiveness 
increased objectifying gazes, more perceived warmth and perceived competence decreased 
objectifying gazes. Furthermore, the effects of warmth and competence perceptions on 
objectifying gazes were moderated by alcohol condition; intoxicated participants objectified 
women low in warmth and competence to a greater extent than did sober participants. 
Implications for understanding men’s objectifying perceptions of women are addressed, 
shedding light on potential interventions for clinicians and policymakers to reduce alcohol-
involved objectification and related sexual aggression.  
Keywords: 
Objectification, 
Myopia, 
Eye 
fixation, 
Alcohol 
intoxication, 
Physical 
attractiveness, Competence, Impression formation, Humanization  
 
 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     2 
 
Fill another cup up   
Feeling on yo butt what?  
You don’t even care now  
I was unaware of how fine you was  
Before my buzz set in,  
My buzz set in  
Blame it on the booze  
– Blame It, song by Jamie Foxx  
youtube.com/watch?v=rfjtpp90lu8  
 
The objectifying gaze—staring at people’s bodies and body parts—is a prevalent 
and damaging manifestation of objectification that is often directed at women 
from men (Archer et al. 1983; Fredrickson and Roberts 1997; Kaschak 1992; Kozee 
et al. 2007; Moradi and Huang 2008; Mulvey 1975). Objectifying gazes indicate to 
women they are being reduced to their body parts for the pleasure of the viewer, 
resulting in myriad adverse outcomes (Fredrickson and Roberts 1997). 
Environments in which alcohol is present are ripe with opportunities for 
objectifying gazes, as indicated in the media (e.g., Jamie Foxx’s song Blame It) and 
through empirical examinations (Gervais et al. 2014). Importantly, adopting 
objectifying gazes toward women leads perceivers to dehumanize women (Heflick 
and Goldenberg 2011; Heflick et al. 2011), potentially laying the foundation for 
many negative consequences such as sexual violence (Rudman and Mescher 2012) 
and workplace gender discrimination (Rudman and Borgida 1995).  
Despite theorizing about the importance of the objectifying gaze (Fredrickson 
and Roberts 1997), self-reports from women experiencing the gaze (Kozee et al. 
2007), and self-reports of men perpetrating the gaze (Gervais et al. 2014), 
surprisingly little research has examined which factors affect this objectionable 
behavior. The only known published studies on the objectifying gaze using 
behavioral measures to date suggest that as focus on appearance increases, the 
objectifying gaze also increases (Gervais et al. 2013). Much less is known about 
specific contextual, perpetrator, or recipient variables that facilitate or attenuate 
the objectifying gaze. Further, despite anecdotal accounts that alcohol increases 
objectification, only one known study has examined this link empirically (Gervais et 
al. 2014) and the results from that study were based on self-reports.  
The present study expands the scientific understanding of factors that increase 
the objectifying gaze in men, specifically examining the role of alcohol, appearance 
focus, as well as perceived attractiveness, warmth, and competence of women. 
Extending prior work beyond self-reports, we conducted an initial investigation of 
the effect of alcohol on objectification by manipulating alcohol intoxication using 
alcohol administration procedures in the laboratory and examining the objectifying 
gaze via eye-tracking technology. Before conducting the main eye-tracking study, 
we conducted a preliminary study in which photographs of women were rated on 
perceived attractiveness, warmth, and competence—variables that were then 
manipulated in the present study. Understanding why the objectifying gaze occurs 
in the first place is an initial step toward stopping its incidence and its damaging 
effects.  
Social perception research reveals that perceivers spontaneously attend to other 
people’s visual appearance to quickly and effortlessly gain information about them. 
Perceivers rely on social category memberships such as race or sex and other 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     3 
 
physical features such as facial appearance, weight, or clothing to form these first 
impressions (Allport 1954; Fiske and Neuberg 1990; McArthur and Baron 
1983;Miller 1988; Tajfel 1981). Although a range of body parts can relay important 
information about individual characteristics, previous research shows that faces are 
most informative regarding key features needed for initial impression formation 
(i.e., an individual’s identity, social categories, emotions, behavioral intentions, and 
health; Ekman 1993; Hall et al. 2005). Indeed, a number of studies find that during 
social interactions, people usually attend to faces more quickly and more 
frequently than other body parts (Henderson 2003; Henderson et al. 2003; Hewig 
et al. 2008; Morton and Johnson 1991; Stangor et al. 1992).  
Given the multitude of features visually salient during interactions, perceivers 
must be selective in their allocation of attention to targets’ various features (Cowan 
2005; Miller 1956). Although attention to faces tends to dominate person 
perception, objectification theory suggests that this is not always the case in the 
perception of women (Fredrickson and Roberts 1997). When women are 
objectified, their bodies and body parts are theorized to be attended to more 
whereas their faces are attended to less than in typical social interactions (see also 
Archer et al. 1983). Deemed the “objectifying gaze,” (Fredrickson and Roberts 1997, 
p. 175; see also Kaschak 1992; Mulvey 1975) this attention pattern is marked by a 
shift in focus to the body and away from the face. To illustrate, when participants 
are asked to objectify women by evaluating their appearance (Heflick and 
Goldenberg 2009), as opposed to their personality, they spend less time looking at 
women’s faces and more time looking at women’s sexual body parts (Gervais et al. 
2013). In the next sections, we turn to potential predictors of the objectifying gaze 
that are of both theoretical and practical importance.  
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
According to alcohol myopia theory (Steele and Josephs 1990), alcohol intoxication 
limits the amount of information people can process, leading to increased 
attention to the most salient cues through a narrowing of perceptual field and 
reduced cognitive functioning. Integrating alcohol myopia theory with 
objectification theory, Gervais et al. (2014) suggested that alcohol use may cause 
more objectification perpetration due to the narrowing of the perceptual field that 
follows from intoxication. Specifically, intoxicated individuals have fewer cognitive 
resources to process the cues in their environment; more salient, instigating cues 
tend to capture attention whereas less salient, inhibiting cues receive less attention. 
When deciding whether to drive home after a night of heavy drinking, for example, 
intoxicated individuals may focus on the impelling, proximal cues in the immediate 
environment (e.g., the keys in their pocket or their car parked outside) and less on 
potentially inhibiting, distal cues (e.g., getting arrested or injuring oneself or 
another in a car accident) because their limited attention allows them to focus only 
on the most salient cues in the situation. Likewise, when presented with 
provocatively dressed women, myopia may lead intoxicated men to focus on more 
immediate and salient cues that are easier to process due to the disproportionate 
emphasis on women’s sexual body parts in the media (Fredrickson and Roberts 
1997) and/or the evolutionary significance of women’s body parts (Buss 1989; cf. 
Tassinary and Hansen 1998), rather than less provocative cues like their faces. 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     4 
 
Consistent with this idea, when presented with scantily clad and nude women, men 
bias their fixations away from faces, focusing more on bodies (Lykins et al. 2008; 
Nummenmaa et al. 2012;Wenzlaff et al. 2015). The present work builds on this prior 
work by examining the role of alcohol intoxication in predicting objectifying gazes 
toward provocatively dressed women.  
Moreover, myopia theory suggests that, whereas sober individuals can attend 
to a full range of cues including those that inhibit inappropriate behaviors, 
intoxication renders individuals less capable of comprehending inhibiting cues 
(e.g., considering long-term consequences) making them less likely to experience 
inhibition conflict (Steele and Josephs 1990). Consistent with this idea, intoxicated 
individuals often struggle to inhibit socially inappropriate behaviors (Hoffman et 
al. 2011; Hull and Bond 1986). Objectifying gazes from men toward women are 
normalized and justified within society (Calogero and Tylka 2014, e.g., media 
depictions of men as unable to help themselves from ogling women abound). Yet, 
there is evidence suggesting that objectifying gazes are still regarded as socially 
inappropriate; for example, men who are concerned about being perceived in 
favorable ways by others report engaging in fewer objectifying gazes (Gervais et 
al. 2017). Alcohol’s myopic effects, however, may further inhibit the perceiver’s 
ability to draw his attention away from women’s sexually salient body parts. In 
support of this possibility, Gervais et al. (2014) found significant associations 
between alcohol use and objectification, but this finding was correlational and does 
not allow for causal inferences. Furthermore, Gervais et al. relied upon self-report 
measures whereas alcohol myopia theory focuses specifically on the physiological 
effects of alcohol and related attention mechanisms, which are difficult to assess 
with retrospective self-reports.  
 
Attractiveness  
 
According to objectification theory, women live in a culture that places 
disproportionate emphasis on their physical beauty, suggesting women’s value is 
predominantly contingent on their appearance (Fredrickson and Roberts 1997). 
Although facial attractiveness is an important feature of overall attractiveness, the 
weight and shape of women’s bodies and body parts are also thought to play a 
prominent role in determining women’s attractiveness. Consistent with this idea, 
studies manipulating breast size of women provide evidence that women’s bodies 
influence judgments of attractiveness; women with larger than average breasts are 
rated as more attractive and receive more sexual advances (Gueguen 2007; 
Zelazniewicz and Pawlowski 2011). Importantly, men and women spend less time 
looking at the faces, and more time on the chests and waists, of women with more 
attractive relative to less attractive bodies (Gervais et al. 2013).  
 
Humanization  
 
Although we rely on observable, visual information during person perception, 
these processes also allow perceivers to gain a wealth of information regarding 
non-observable characteristics, such as personalities, goals, or current emotional 
states of others. Stated differently, although attention to superficial, observable 
attributes results in information on the target’s appearance-related qualities, 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     5 
 
person perception also can lead to impressions of qualities that lie below the 
surface—those features that make someone human. With very little effort, for 
example, perceivers spontaneously categorize people into social groups, which in 
turn activates stereotypes about the characteristics those category members 
possess (Bodenhausen et al. 1997; Fiske and Neuberg 1990). Although these 
stereotypes are often inaccurate (for a review see Jussim 2012), people still render 
first impressions regarding other people’s personalities, including morality and 
competence (Wojciszke 2005).  
Perceptions of warmth (i.e., positive or negative intentions toward others, Fiske 
et al. 2002; Gray et al. 2007; Harris and Fiske 2009; Haslam et al. 2008) and 
competence (i.e., how effectively one can pursue intentions, Fiske et al. 2002; Gray 
et al. 2007) are two traits that have been deemed essential in perceiving others as 
human (Fiske 2013; Harris and Fiske 2006, 2009). Although traits such as warmth 
and competence are attributed to non-human entities through the process of 
anthropomorphism (Epley et al. 2007; Gray et al. 2007), many scholars have argued 
that attributing people with less competence and/or warmth represents a form of 
relative dehumanization (Haslam and Loughnan 2014). In Haslam’s two-factor 
model of humanization (Haslam 2006, p. 254; Haslam et al. 2005, p. 937), for 
example, warmth is a central “human nature” attribute that differentiates humans 
from objects, and competence is a central “human uniqueness” attribute that 
differentiates us from animals.  
Interestingly, attributions of warmth and competence are often gendered with 
women who fit traditional roles such as housewives perceived as higher in warmth 
but lower in competence, whereas nontraditional women including feminists and 
business women perceived as lower in warmth and higher in competence (Cuddy 
et al. 2004; Eckes 2002; Fiske et al. 2002). Considered through the dehumanization 
lens (Fiske 2013; Haslam 2006, 2005), women appear to be susceptible to relative 
dehumanization, being denied either warmth or competence. Although these 
inferred traits are only perceptions of targets’ qualities, and thus are sometimes 
inaccurate, perceived traits can powerfully shape the ways in which perceivers see 
and subsequently interact with targets (Snyder et al. 1977).  
Although greater levels of attractiveness may increase objectifying gazes, we 
also reasoned that physical information that emphasizes women’s warmth and/or 
competence might decrease objectifying gazes. Supporting this notion, 
appearance focus increases objectification, but person focus has the opposite 
effect; when perceivers focus on the personhood of a female they attribute her 
more warmth and competence than when they focus on her physical appearance 
(Heflick and Goldenberg 2009; Heflick et al. 2011). Building on prior work that has 
primarily focused on the dehumanizing consequences of objectification 
suggesting objectified women are regarded as less warm and competent (Heflick 
and Goldenberg 2009; Heflick et al. 2011; see also Loughnan et al. 2010; Vaes et al. 
2011), we focused on the inverse—whether humanization causes less 
objectification. Consistent with this idea, humanizing information about the 
warmth and competence of sexualized women causes people to perceive women 
in less objectifying and more humanizing ways (e.g., seeing women in more holistic 
rather than piecemeal ways; Bernard et al. 2015). Prior work has not, however, 
specifically focused on objectifying gazes. Furthermore, previous work has 
introduced warmth and competence information about women via written 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     6 
 
descriptions as opposed to the visual manner in which warmth and competence 
attributes are commonly conveyed.  
 
 
Overview and Hypotheses  
 
Although a large body of research has established women’s frequent experiences 
of objectifying gazes (e.g., Kozee et al. 2007), little work has examined the origins 
of these behaviors. The current study examines a situational variable—alcohol 
consumption—to determine whether intoxication increases objectifying gazes as 
well as interacts with perceived attractiveness, warmth, and competence to 
influence objectifying gazes directed at female targets. Furthermore, most studies 
examining objectification perpetration have focused on very attractive women 
(e.g., swimsuit models; Bernard et al. 2012; Loughnan et al. 2010; Vaes et al. 2011; 
celebrities; Heflick and Goldenberg 2009). As a result, less is known about when 
and why people objectify women who are less attractive, even though average and 
less attractive women self-report objectification (Kozee et al. 2007; Swim et al. 
2001). Additionally, we sought to extend previous research revealing that 
objectification causes dehumanization by examining whether women who appear 
less warm or less competent are objectified more than women who appear more 
warm or more competent.  
As an initial examination of these ideas, we tested the effect of alcohol and 
target appearance and human attributes on objectifying gazes through the use of 
a 2 alcohol condition (placebo, alcohol) × 3 body part (face, chest, waist) × 2 focus 
(appearance, personality) × 3 attribute level (high, average, low) mixed model 
design, with alcohol condition as the between-participants variable. Using alcohol 
administration procedures, participants were randomized to an alcohol condition 
in which they believed they could be administered alcohol; those in the alcohol 
condition were given an alcohol dose to get them moderately intoxicated (Breath 
alcohol concentration, BrAC = .08), and those in the placebo control condition were 
given only a trivial amount of alcohol placed on the rim and top of the glass. We 
utilized a placebo control condition because alcohol consumption can also lead to 
expectations of disinhibition in sexual situations (Ven and Beck 2009). Because our 
integration of objectification and alcohol myopia theory focuses primarily on the 
physiological effects of alcohol, we attempted to keep expectations consistent 
across conditions; all participants believed they could be drinking alcohol and were 
exposed to alcohol cues including the smell and taste of alcohol.  
Male participants completed two eye-tracking tasks in which focus was a within-
participants variable manipulated through instructions to evaluate pictured female 
targets’ appearance (appearance focus condition) and personality (personality 
focus condition, counterbalanced) while either sober (placebo condition) or 
intoxicated (alcohol condition). Attractiveness, warmth, and competence were 
manipulated within-participants during the eye-tracking task using images of 
female targets previously identified as high, average, or low in perceived 
attractiveness, warmth, and competence based on ratings in a separate preliminary 
study. As in prior research (Gervais et al. 2013) and consistent with objectification 
theory (Fredrickson and Roberts 1997), objectifying gazes were operationalized by 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     7 
 
a greater focus on targets’ sexual body parts (i.e., chests and waists) as well as a 
lesser focus on targets’ faces.  
We thus tested four hypotheses. First, replicating previous work (Gervais et al. 
2013), we expected a focus × body part interaction; we hypothesized that 
participants would dwell on faces for shorter durations and waists and chests for 
longer durations in the appearance focus compared to the personality focus 
condition (Hypothesis 1). Second, given the high comorbidity of alcohol use and 
objectification perpetration (Gervais et al. 2014), we also expected an alcohol × 
body part interaction (Hypothesis 2). Specifically, we hypothesized that participants 
would dwell on faces for shorter durations and waists and chests for longer 
durations in the alcohol compared to the placebo condition.  
We also predicted attribute × body part interactions, revealing that perceived 
attractiveness, warmth, and competence influence objectifying gazes (Hypothesis 
3). On the one hand, greater attractiveness was expected to increase objectifying 
gazes; we hypothesized that participants would dwell on faces for shorter durations 
and waists and chests for longer durations of attractive women relative to average 
or unattractive women. On the other hand, extending previous research, greater 
competence and warmth were expected to reduce objectifying gazes; we 
hypothesized that participants would dwell on faces for longer durations and 
waists and chests for shorter durations of women previously rated as high in 
warmth or competence relative to women previously rated as average or low in 
warmth or competence.  
Finally, we explored whether alcohol further moderated the effects of perceived 
attractiveness, warmth, or competence on objectifying gazes by examining 
attribute × alcohol × body part three-way interactions (Hypothesis 4). Relying on 
our integration of alcohol myopia and objectification theories, we expected alcohol 
intoxication to increase objectifying gazes; we hypothesized that participants 
would dwell on faces for shorter durations and waists and chest for longer 
durations of women high in attractiveness and low in warmth or competence in 
the alcohol compared to the placebo condition.  
 
 
Method  
 
Participants  
 
An estimated sample size using Cohen’s (1988) guidelines was calculated for 
detecting hypothesized effects. Given that this is an initial study in the examination 
of alcohol on objectification and because no known experimental research has 
been conducted examining the influence of alcohol on the objectifying gaze, we 
estimated medium effect sizes. Using this effect size assumption with 80% power 
and a 5% chance of Type I error, an overall sample size of 50 (25 in each condition) 
would be sufficient to detect effects between and within both groups. Prior work 
examining the objectifying gaze as a result of appearance focus relative to 
personality focus showed that 15–20 participants were needed to detect between-
participants effects (Gervais et al. 2013).  
In the present work, we manipulated focus (appearance vs. personality) within-
participants to further boost power and relied upon a sound integration of 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     8 
 
objectification and alcohol myopia theories to develop a priori hypotheses. A total 
of 49 heterosexual male undergraduate students from a large U.S. midwestern 
university participated in exchange for either course credit or $10 an hour, 
depending on which they were interested in obtaining. Although 50 participants 
were sought in line with our power analyses, only 49 participants were actually run 
due to participant recruitment scheduling exigencies (e.g., participants were 
unavailable after the end of the semester). Participants identified primarily as White 
(n = 38, 77.6%), as well as African American (n = 4, 8.2%), Hispanic (n = 4, 8.2%), 
Asian/Pacific Islander (n = 2, 4.1%), and Native American (n = 1, 2%). Age of 
participants ranged between 21 and 27 years (M= 22.14, SD = 1.61).  
 
Materials and Stimuli  
 
Prior to conducting the main eye-tracking study, 80 undergraduate women were 
recruited to have their pictures taken for use as future study stimuli. These 
participants were asked to come to the lab dressed in “going out attire.” (See Fig. 
1s in the supplementary material for an example; all stimuli are available for 
research purposes on request of the first author.) In the lab, pictures were taken in 
front of a neutral backdrop while the participant was standing, directly facing the 
camera, and smiling. All photographed participants consented to the use of their 
photos for research purposes in which future participants would be shown their 
pictures.  
Each of these images was then submitted to pre-test ratings before use as eye-
tracking stimuli. Specifically, 309 male and female participants recruited from 
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk were asked to use a 5-point scale to rate the woman 
pictured across a number of appearance and human-related attributes, with 
response options ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely). To reduce potential 
fatigue, each participant was presented with five images of women randomly 
selected of the 80, resulting in 15–25 participants rating each image. Participant 
ratings of physical attractiveness (assessed via a single item), warmth (i.e., warm, 
good-natured, friendly, agreeable, likeable, tolerant; range 3.01–4.05; α = .95; 
adapted from Fiske et al. 2002), and competence (i.e., competent, confident, 
intelligent, conscientious; range 2.88–3.89; α = .81; adapted from Fiske et al. 2002) 
were included in the present analyses. Ratings of attractiveness, warmth, and 
competence were averaged across participants for each of the 80 images.  
Based on these averages, each image was grouped into either a high, average, 
or low level of each of the three attributes—attractiveness, warmth, and 
competence (e.g., one image could be rated as high in attractiveness, low in 
warmth, and average in competence) resulting in the perceived high, average, and 
low conditions of attractiveness, warmth, and competence. For the purposes of the 
current study we compared the high, average, and low groupings of attractiveness, 
warmth, and competence from the entire sample to the ratings made specifically 
by the young men (n = 29, 18–30 years-old) in the pilot sample to match the 
sample used within the study. Consistent with the results for the larger sample, we 
found that young men also rated the highly attractive women (M= 3.99, SD = .54) 
as more attractive than average attractive women (M= 3.22, SD = .74), t(48) = 4.25, 
p < .001, d = 1.20, and as more attractive than the low attractive women (M = 2.47, 
SD = .79), t(51) = 8.13, p < .001, d = 2.24. Average attractive women were also rated 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     9 
 
as more attractive than low attractive women, t(49) = 3.49, p = .001, d = .98. Young 
men also regarded high warmth women (M= 3.87, SD=.38) as more warm than the 
average warmth women (M= 3.64, SD = .44), t(51) = 2.08, p = .04, d = .57, as well 
as low warmth women (M= 3.43, SD = .34), t(51) = 4.47, p < .001, d = 1.23.Average 
warmth women were also rated as more warm than low warmth women, t(50) = 
1.94, p = .05, d = .54. Finally, young men regarded high competence women (M= 
3.73, SD = .54) as more competent than average competence women (M= 3.49, SD 
= .31), t(51) = 1.98, p = .05, d = .55, and low competence women (M= 3.25, SD = 
.40), t(51) = 3.67, p = .001, d = 1.01. Average competence women were also rated 
as more competent than low competence women, t(50) = 2.41, p = .02, d = .67. 
Thus, these results suggest that the groupings of women into perceived low, 
average, and high in terms of attractiveness, warmth, and competence generalize 
to young men’s perceptions of women. Competence and warmth were positively 
significantly correlated, r = .50, p < .001; however, attractiveness was not 
significantly correlated with competence (r = .19., p=.12) or warmth (r = .17 p = 
.14).  
For the eye-tracking portion of the study, we created template boxes for each 
model to capture interest areas (as in Gervais et al. 2013) to be used during data 
analyses; however, boxes were not visible to participants. The three interest area— 
(a) face (i.e., chin to forehead, ear to ear), (b) chest (i.e., slightly below the shoulders 
to slightly below the breasts, between armpits), and (c) waist (i.e., slightly below the 
breasts to slightly above the pelvis, between hips—were outlined with rectangular 
boxes. We focused on faces, chests, and waists because breasts and waists are 
regarded as cultural indicators of attractiveness (e.g., women with large breasts or 
“hour-glassed” shaped figures are regarded as attractive; Zelazniewicz and 
Pawlowski 2011) and because these body parts are regarded as the most 
objectified parts of women (Bartky 1990). Measuring dwell time on women’s faces 
allowed us to compare visual attention directed toward humanizing aspects of 
targets compared to objectified body parts including chests and waists. Consistent 
with prior work on the objectifying gaze (Gervais et al. 2013) and due to the 
variability in visibility (e.g., target wearing skirt vs. pants or wearing flat shoes vs. 
sandals), we did not analyze dwell times for legs or feet. Although differences in 
head and body sizes resulted in slight variation across photographs, template 
boxes were sized to ensure that each interest area was fully represented and 
approximately the same size across models to enable comparisons. Template 
boxes were applied to each stimuli following data collection, and dwell time was 
calculated by summing the total duration in milliseconds (ms) participants spent 
fixating on the target’s face, chest, and waist over the duration of each trial (see 
Gervais et al. 2013).  
 
Procedure  
 
All procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the home 
university. Male undergraduate students were recruited from classrooms and the 
psychology department subject pool to participate in a study entitled “Alcohol and 
Media Preferences.” After emailing to indicate interest, participants were called by 
a research assistant to complete a phone screen. During this brief phone call, 
participants were screened for their gender, minimum age of 21 years-old, and 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     10 
 
sexual attraction to women. Furthermore, due to risks associated with alcohol 
consumption, participants were also excluded for (a) current/past alcohol 
dependence, alcohol-related treatment, or hospitalization, (b) not being a social 
drinker—consuming two or more drinks at least twice monthly, (c) any past serious 
head injuries, (d) serious psychological symptoms, and (e) medical or legal 
contradictions to the consumption of alcohol (Watkins et al. 2015). Once screened, 
participants were emailed a link to complete an online survey prior to the in-lab 
session. The survey link directed participants to complete a battery of individual 
difference measures unrelated to the present study’s hypotheses through Qualtrics 
(see Haikalis et al. 2017, manuscript in preparation and Franz et al. 2017). Prior to 
the laboratory session, participants were asked to refrain from drinking alcohol 24 
h prior, as well as eating 4 h prior to the study. They were also notified that they 
would need someone to pick them up at the conclusion of the study and, if given 
alcohol, they would be required to remain at the laboratory until they reached a 
BrAC of .03%.  
Upon arrival to the lab, participants were greeted by a female research assistant 
and randomly assigned to the alcohol or placebo condition. The inclusion of a 
placebo control condition allowed us to examine the physiological effects of 
alcohol, holding alcohol expectations constant (Fillmore and Vogel-Sprott 1998). 
After verifying participants’ age based on their driver’s licenses and ensuring they 
had a ride home following completion of the study, the research assistant locked 
up their keys for safe keeping. Next, the research assistant reviewed the informed 
consent with participants to ensure comprehension that participants may be given 
alcohol and those randomized to the alcohol condition would be required to stay 
at the laboratory until their BrAC reached below .03%. Additionally, the research 
assistant administered an alcohol waiver and traumatic brain injury screening to 
ensure that drinking was not contraindicated. Following consent processes, the 
research assistant weighed participants and administered a breathalyzer to verify 
sobriety.  
 
Alcohol Administration  
 
While the research assistant was obtaining this information from participants, a 
second research assistant mixed drinks for participants based on condition 
(procedure following Giancola 2002; Giancola et al. 2009a, b; Watkins et al. 2015). 
The manipulation of alcohol condition was a single-blind procedure; however, the 
research assistants were unaware of the specific hypotheses regarding alcohol and 
objectification, reducing the possibility of experimenter effects. In the placebo 
condition, the research assistant filled two rock glasses about three-fourths of the 
way with orange juice. Next, two milliliters of Everclear grain alcohol was injected 
deep into the center of each of the drinks, and another two milliliters of Everclear 
was layered on the top of each drink. Finally, each of the glasses was misted with 
alcohol from a spray bottle; the rim of each glass was coated to provide the smell 
and taste of alcohol.  
We utilized a placebo control condition because alcohol consumption can also 
lead to expectations of disinhibition across a variety of situations (Ven and Beck 
2009). Because our integration of objectification and alcohol myopia theory 
focuses primarily on the physiological effects of alcohol, we attempted to keep 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     11 
 
expectations consistent across conditions (i.e., all participants believed they could 
be drinking). To achieve a BrAC of .08 in the alcohol condition, the research 
assistant calculated the mixture of alcohol and orange juice to fill two pint glasses 
(participant’s weight in kilograms × 1.06 = milliliters of alcohol; milliliters of alcohol 
× 5 =milliliters of orange juice). Each volume of alcohol and orange juice was 
measured separately, mixed together, and poured into the glasses. In both 
conditions, the two drinks were presented to participants with directions to drink 
them within 20 min. Following consumption, participants in the placebo condition 
were breathalyzed and continued on to the next task; participants in the alcohol 
condition were given 15 min to absorb the alcohol. After the 15-min absorption 
period, participants were breathalyzed. If participants were at or above a BrAC of 
.07, they continued on to the next task; if below a BrAC of .07 they were given 
another 8 min for absorption. If participants were below a BrAC of .07 after the 8 
additional minutes, they were given an additional 7 min. At that point, participants 
were led to the next task regardless of whether their BrAC was below .07. Although 
our intent was to reach a BrAC of .08, due to the ascending curve of blood alcohol 
content (where BrAC levels ascend before plateauing and ultimately descending), 
a BrAC of .07 was used as a threshold assuming participants BrAC would continue 
to ascend to .08. Because placebo manipulations are effective for a short period of 
time (i.e., it becomes apparent that they did not drink an alcoholic beverage; 
Bradlyn and Young 1983; Martin et al. 1990;Martin and Sayette 1993), participants 
in the placebo condition were moved on to the next task immediately after 
consumption (Giancola 2004; Phillips and Giancola 2008). Before (immediately after 
absorption) and after the eye-tracking task, participants rated how intoxicated they 
were on a scale from 0 to 10 from 0 (not drunk at all) through 8 (as drunk as I have 
ever been) to 10 (more drunk than I have ever been).  
 
Eye-Tracking Task  
 
Following consumption and absorption of the drinks, objectifying gazes were 
measured using an SR Research Ltd. EyeLink II system (Mississauga, Ontario, 
Canada), with high spatial resolution and a sampling rate of 500 Hz. Thresholds for 
detecting the onset of a saccadic movement were acceleration of 8000°/s2, velocity 
of 30°/s and distance of .5° of visual angle. Movement offset was detected when 
velocity fell below 30°/s and remained at that level for 10 consecutive samples. 
Stimulus displays were presented on two monitors, one for the participant and the 
other for the experimenter (real-time feedback to the experimenter allowed for 
recalibration when necessary). Average error in the computation of gaze position 
was less than .5°. A 9-point calibration procedure was performed at the beginning 
of the experiment, followed by a 9-point calibration accuracy test. After successful 
calibration, participants began the hour long eye-tracking task; however, 
calibration was repeated if any point was in error by more than 11 or if the average 
error for all points was greater that .5°, following standard procedures for quality 
data utilizing eye-trackers.  
A cross was initially presented at the center of the screen, on which participants 
were required to fixate and press the spacebar to initiate each trial. Following a 500 
ms delay, a pre-tested photograph of a woman previously rated as high, average, 
or low in attractiveness, warmth, and competence was presented for 3000 ms (see 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     12 
 
above for pre-testing information). Participants completed both the personality 
and appearance focus conditions (counterbalanced), in which 80 photographs 
were presented in random order across participants two separate times, allowing 
participants to view each image while evaluating personality or appearance. 
Participants were told they would “view some images of people;” focus was 
manipulated by asking participants to rate the appearance (appearance focus 
condition) or the personality (personality focus condition) of the pictured female 
target on a scale ranging from 1 (not at all positive) to 7 (extremely positive). After 
completing each of the eye-tracking tasks, participants were again breathalyzed 
and completed the same perceived intoxication measure used immediately after 
consumption before completing additional measures unrelated to the current 
hypotheses (reported in Haikalis et al. 2017, manuscript in preparation and Franz 
et al. 2017). Participants were thoroughly debriefed. Due to the nature of the tasks 
and the study title, many participants assumed the study examined alcohol and 
perceptions of other-sex individuals, but no participants mentioned objectification 
and or gazing-related behaviors. At this point, participants were either immediately 
released (placebo condition) or were provided snacks and movies until their BrAC 
reached at or below .03% (alcohol condition).  
 
 
Results  
Manipulation Checks  
 
To determine whether our manipulations of target characteristics were successful, 
we conducted a series of repeated measures ANOVAs with three levels of the 
attribute (high, average, low) for either the appearance or personality ratings. 
Maulchy’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for 
both the attractiveness condition, χ2(2) = 25.55, p < .001, and warmth condition, 
χ2(2) = 20.03, p < .001; thus degrees of freedom for these conditions were 
corrected using the Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity (ε = .70 and .73 
respectively). Results revealed that our manipulations of target characteristics were 
successful (see Table 1 for means and standard deviations of ratings). When 
participants were in the appearance focus condition, the appearance of highly 
attractive women was rated more positively, followed by average attractive women, 
and finally less attractive women, F(1.40, 60.17) = 108.82, p < .001, ηp2 = .72. 
Additionally, when participants were in the personality focus condition, the 
personality of women high in perceived warmth was rated more positively, 
followed by women average in perceived warmth, and finally women low in 
perceived warmth, F(1.46, 64.13) = 86.19, p < .001, ηp2 = .66. Lastly, when 
participants were in the personality focus condition, the personality of women high 
or average in perceived competence was deemed more positive than women low 
in perceived competence, F(2, 88) = 46.26, p < .001, ηp2 = .51. Overall, these effects 
mostly support findings from the preliminary study including pre-testing used to 
distinguish women high, average, or low in attractiveness, perceived warmth, and 
perceived competence.  
To ensure that our alcohol manipulation was successful, BrAC levels measured 
after the absorption period and eye-tracking task were submitted to independent 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     13 
 
samples t-tests. Our manipulation was successful, t(46) = −12.94, p < .001, d = 3.79; 
participants in the alcohol condition (M = .08, SD = .02) had a higher BrAC 
immediately after the absorption period than participants in the placebo condition 
(M= .02, SD = .01); although participants in the placebo condition had a discernible 
BrAC, this dropped to .00 by the completion of the eye-tracking task. Participants 
in the alcohol condition (M= .08, SD = .01) also had a higher BrAC after completing 
the eye-tracking task than participants in the placebo condition (M = .00, SD = .00), 
t(46) = 26.95, p < .001, d = 11.31. Furthermore, participants in the alcohol condition 
reported feeling more intoxicated than participants in the placebo condition 
immediately after consumption (Malcohol = 4.04, SD = 2.16; Mplacebo = 1.08 SD = 1.14), 
t(45) = −5.91, p < .001, d = 1.71, and after the eye-tracking task (Malcohol = 4.29, SD 
= 2.22; Mplacebo = .67, SD = 1.37), t(46) = −6.81, p < .001, d = 1.96. These differences 
are consistent with prior alcohol administration research (e.g., Giancola et al. 2009a, 
b; Watkins et al. 2015).  
 
Hypotheses Testing  
 
To test hypotheses, dwell times were submitted to a 2 (focus: appearance, 
personality) × 3 (body part: face, chest, waist) × 3 (perceived attribute level: high, 
average, low) × 2 (alcohol condition: placebo, alcohol) mixed model Analyses of 
Variance (ANOVA), with alcohol condition as the between-participants variable. 
Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for 
body part, χ2(2) = 74.31, p < .001, and therefore degrees of freedom for the effects 
including body part were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of 
sphericity (ε = .54). Dwell times are reported below in raw milliseconds (ms).  
 
Hypothesis 1: The Effect of Focus on Objectification Perpetration  
 
We expected that an appearance focus would increase objectifying gazes. The 
hypothesized focus × body part interaction emerged, F(1.08, 45.73) = 48.08, p < 
.001, ηp2 = .53. Consistent with Hypothesis 1, dwell time on faces was always 
greatest, yet an appearance focus resulted in shorter dwell times on faces and 
longer dwell times on chests and waists relative to a personality focus, ps < .001; 
taking an appearance focus increased objectifying gazes relative to a personality 
focus (see Table 2a for means and standard deviations of dwell times).  
 
Hypothesis 2: The Effect of Alcohol on Objectification Perpetration  
 
We also expected that alcohol would increase objectifying gazes. The hypothesized 
alcohol condition × body part interaction emerged, F(1.09, 45.73) = 4.46, p = .04, 
ηp2 = .10. In support of Hypothesis 2, intoxicated participants spent less time 
looking at the faces of targets compared to sober participants, p = .03. Yet, 
inconsistent with Hypothesis 2, there was no difference in the dwell time on chests 
and waists between intoxicated and sober participants (ps > .21–.24; see Table 2b 
for means and standard deviations of dwell times). In partial support of Hypothesis 
2, intoxicated men, compared with sober men, were more likely to engage in 
objectifying gazes, via less time spent on women’s faces.  
 
Hypothesis 3: The Effect of Target Attributes on Objectification Perpetration  
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     14 
 
 
We hypothesized that attractiveness would increase, whereas humanness would 
decrease, objectifying gazes. To test this hypothesis, dwell times were submitted 
to separate 3 attribute (high, average, low) × 2 focus (appearance, personality) × 3 
body part (face, chest, waist) × 2 alcohol condition (placebo, alcohol) mixed model 
ANOVAs with alcohol condition serving as a between-participants variable. Means 
and standard deviations can be found in Table 2c.  
First, the attractive attribute × body part interaction emerged as hypothesized, 
F(2.86, 120.18) = 13.66, p < .001, ηp2 = .25. Specifically, participants dwelled for 
shorter durations on the faces but for longer durations on the chests and waists of 
more attractive women than average attractive women, ps < .001. Interestingly, 
participants dwelled on the faces, chests, and waists of less attractive women for 
similar durations as they dwelled on the faces, chests, and waists of more attractive 
women, ps > .08–.57; whereas participants dwelled on the faces of less attractive 
women for shorter durations, participants dwelled on the chests and waists of less 
attractive women for longer durations than average attractive women, ps < .001. 
In summary, Hypothesis 3 was supported; the attractiveness of women increased 
men’s objectifying gazes.  
The hypothesized warmth attribute × body part interaction, F(2.59, 108.87) = 
10.86, p < .001, ηp2 = .21, also emerged. Consistent with hypotheses, participants 
dwelled for longer durations on the faces, and shorter durations on the chests, of 
women high in perceived warmth relative to women average in perceived warmth, 
ps < .001. Participants dwelled on the faces and chests of women low in perceived 
warmth for similar durations as women high in perceived warmth, ps > .37–.53; 
participants dwelled on faces of women low in perceived warmth for longer 
durations, and chests of women low in perceived warmth for shorter durations, 
than women average in perceived warmth. For dwell time on waists, a different 
pattern emerged; although there was no difference between dwell time on waists 
of women high and average in perceived warmth, p = .59, participants dwelled on 
the waists of women low in perceived warmth for longer durations than women 
high and average in perceived warmth, ps = .03. Or in other words, in support of 
Hypothesis 3, the humanizing attribute of warmth decreased men’s objectifying 
gazes.  
Finally, the hypothesized competence attribute × body part interaction 
emerged, F(3.13, 131.51) = 7.50, p < .001, ηp2 = .15. Participants dwelled for longer 
durations on the faces of women high and average in perceived competence 
relative to women low in perceived competence (phigh vs. low = .003, paverage vs. low = 
.048), and participants dwelled for shorter durations on the chests of women high 
in perceived competence relative to women average and low in perceived 
competence (paverage vs. high < .001, plow vs. high = .001). There were no differences in 
dwell time on the waists of women high, average, or low in perceived competence, 
ps > .07–.89. In further support of Hypothesis 3, the humanizing attribute of 
competence decreased men’s objectifying gazes.  
 
Hypothesis 4: Alcohol Moderating the Effect of Target Attributes on 
Objectification Perpetration  
 
Our final hypothesis explored the possibility that alcohol moderates the effect of 
target attributes on objectifying gazes. In line with alcohol myopia theory, we 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     15 
 
predicted that intoxication would increase attention directed at more salient cues 
(sexualized body parts) and decrease attention from less salient humanizing cues 
(faces). Alcohol did not qualify the attractive attribute × body part interaction, 
F(2.86, 120.18) = 1.41, p = .25, ηp2=.03. Inconsistent with Hypothesis 4, this finding 
means that alcohol did not moderate the effect of attractiveness on men’s 
objectifying gazes.  
The warmth attribute × body part × alcohol condition interaction was 
significant, F(2.59, 108.87) = 2.83, p = .049, ηp2 = .06. (All means and standard 
deviations from the attribute × body part × alcohol condition interaction can be 
found in Table 3.) The same pattern of effects that emerged for the warmth × body 
part interaction also emerged for this three-way interaction; participants in the 
placebo condition dwelled for longer durations on faces and waists, but shorter 
durations on the chests of women high and low in perceived warmth compared to 
women average in perceived warmth (ps ≤ .001). However, participants in the 
alcohol condition dwelled for shorter durations on targets’ faces and dwelled for 
longer durations on targets’ chests and waists compared to participants in the 
placebo condition (ps ≤ .001). And thus, dwell time on women’s bodies was 
greatest when intoxicated participants viewed women low and average in 
perceived warmth. In support of Hypothesis 4, alcohol did significantly moderate 
the effect of warmth on men’s objectifying gazes.  
The competence attribute × body part × alcohol condition interaction also 
emerged, F(3.13, 131.51) = 2.73, p = .04, ηp2 = .06. Although dwell times on faces, 
chests, and waists from participants in the placebo condition did not differ based 
on perceived target competence level, ps > .14–.93, a different pattern emerged 
for participants in the alcohol condition. Specifically, participants who were 
intoxicated spent shorter durations on faces of low perceived competence women 
compared to average and high perceived competence women (plow vs. average = .03, 
plow vs. high = .001), but longer durations on the chests of low compared to average 
or high perceived competence women (ps ≤ .001) as well as waists of low and 
average compared to high perceived competence women (plow vs. high = .007, paverage 
vs. high = .03). The combination of less perceived competence and intoxication led to 
the greatest likelihood of objectifying gazes. In conclusion, further support was 
found of Hypothesis 4; alcohol moderated the effect of competence on men’s 
objectifying gazes.  
 
 
Discussion  
 
Despite the adverse consequences of the objectifying gaze of women for both 
perceivers (e.g., dehumanization, violence, and discrimination) and recipients (e.g., 
self-objectification, mental health consequences), little work has examined the 
origins of men’s objectifying gaze behaviors. The findings from the present initial 
study with U.S. college students extend past investigations and suggest that focus 
on appearance, alcohol intoxication, as well as attractiveness, warmth, and 
competence perceptions all influence men’s sexual objectification of women. 
Further, male alcohol intoxication and perceived warmth and competence 
interacted to differentially predict objectifying gazes toward women. In the 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     16 
 
following we summarize our findings, consider the limitations and suggest steps 
for future research, and discuss the practical implications.  
Our findings supported Hypothesis 1; focus on appearance triggered 
objectifying gazes via less time spent on the faces and more time spent on the 
sexual aspects of women, namely their chests and waists. These findings replicate 
previous work (Gervais et al. 2013) suggesting that although the general pattern of 
person perception involves a greater focus on the face than on the body, the time 
spent on the face differs depending on the objectifying focus of the perceiver. 
Although people are not instructed in everyday life to focus on targets’ personality 
or appearance, there may be situational influences that prompt men to focus more 
on women’s appearances (e.g., interest in a one-night stand) than on women’s 
personalities, ultimately increasing likelihood of objectifying gazes. Future work 
should examine situational influences that may naturally promote appearance 
versus personality focus within first impression situations.  
In partial support of Hypothesis 2, intoxicated men were more likely to engage 
in objectifying gazes than were sober men. Intoxicated participants spent 
significantly less time gazing at women’s faces. Although in the expected direction, 
the differences between alcohol and placebo groups in time spent on women’s 
chests as well as waists were not statistically significant. From the perspective of 
alcohol myopia theory, difficult-to-process stimuli such as faces (which convey 
emotions, thoughts, intentions) may overwhelm attentional capacity for individuals 
in a state of intoxication, leading to less time spent on these humanizing attributes. 
By contrast, alcohol myopia theory also predicts that intoxicated men should 
display increased perceptual bias toward more provocative stimuli, in this case 
women’s sexualized body parts. A possible explanation for intoxicated men not 
spending greater time on women’s sexual body parts is that, although women in 
the photos were dressed in “going out” attire, few were wearing outfits that would 
be considered especially attention grabbing (e.g., that were extremely form-fitting 
or revealing). It is also important to note that perceived female warmth and 
competence further qualified the alcohol by body part interaction, which may also 
help explain the lack of lower order effects. Regardless, more research is needed 
to test our supposition that greater salience of women’s sexual attributes would be 
associated with increased objectification by intoxicated men.  
Supporting Hypothesis 3, perceived attractiveness, warmth, and competence 
influenced men’s objectifying gazes. Consistent with previous research (Gervais et 
al. 2013; Gueguen 2007; Zelazniewicz and Pawlowski 2011), women high in 
attractiveness were objectified to a greater degree than were women average in 
attractiveness. In line with previous work on the relative dehumanization of women 
denied warmth and competence (Fiske 2013; Haslam 2006; Haslam et al. 2005), 
women high in perceived warmth and competence were objectified to a lesser 
degree than were women average or low in perceived warmth and competence. 
Prior work shows that sexy women are thought to be average on competence and 
below average on warmth in general (Fiske et al. 2002, see Fig. 1), but we found 
that individual images of women in “going out attire” represented the entire 
continuum of competence and warmth, providing a more nuanced picture than 
prior research. Although participants rated the women in high and average 
perceived competence groups equivalently in terms of their personality, 
participants dwelled for shorter durations on the chests of women high in 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     17 
 
perceived competence relative to women average and low in perceived 
competence. This finding implies that although there may be a curve of diminishing 
returns of the extent that greater competence results in more positive personality 
perceptions, greater competence does significantly decrease objectifying gazes 
directed at women’s chests. Interestingly, men were also more likely to objectify 
women who were low in attractiveness relative to women who were average in 
attractiveness. Although we are unsure of men’s underlying motivations behind 
these objectifying gazes, it is possible that men perceive objectification directed at 
women outside conventional norms of attractiveness as more acceptable. The sum 
of these results support the notion that being perceived as high in humanizing 
attributes (i.e., warmth, competence) or being average in attractiveness provides a 
buffer from sexual objectification (Bernard et al. 2015).  
Finally, in partial support of Hypothesis 4, alcohol further moderated the effects 
of perceived warmth and competence, but not attractiveness, on objectifying 
gazes. Objectifying gazes were greatest among intoxicated men viewing 
photographs of women who they perceived to be lower in warmth and 
competence, suggesting that alcohol may further disinhibit the already increased 
objectifying gazes toward women who are seen to be lower in humanness. This 
finding provides support for the belief that the responsibility for choosing whether 
to objectify lies in the hands of the perceiver rather than the recipient, because it 
indicates that women’s humanizing attributes only relate to objectifying gazes 
among some men, namely those who are intoxicated. Future work should extend 
these findings to examine the attitudes and beliefs (e.g., rape myths, hostile sexism) 
that may also interact with recipient characteristics to result in more sexually 
objectifying behaviors.  
 
Limitations and Future Research Directions  
 
Although the present study provides valuable contributions, it is not without 
limitations. Although the hypotheses that were generated a priori based on theory 
and published research were mostly supported, the small sample size suggests this 
work stands more as a pilot study of the relation between alcohol use and 
objectification perpetration. We included several within-participants variables 
because such variables typically allow for larger effect sizes and within-participants 
effects may be detectable even with a lower sample size. However, the results 
should be replicated in future studies with larger samples sizes.  
Another limitation regarding our sample is the relatively uniform, primarily 
White, young sample of U.S. college students. Examining sexual objectification in 
larger and more diverse samples is a critical next step before generalizing the 
present findings to other populations. People may be attracted to and attend to 
the bodies of women in various ways for many reasons. For example, if a 
heterosexual man is looking for a mate, women with lower waist-to-hip ratios may 
be regarded as more attractive due to the evolutionary significance associated with 
these body parts (Marlowe and Westman 2001; Singh 1993), whereas if he has 
consumed large amounts of media, larger breasts may be regarded as more 
attractive due to socialization processes (Kenrick and Gutierres 1980). Future 
research is needed to address these and related questions for racial and ethnic 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     18 
 
minorities, sexual minorities, older people, non-collegiate individuals, and across 
cultures.  
There were also some limitations of using a placebo control condition instead 
of a non-placebo control condition in which participants believed they were 
drinking a non-alcoholic beverage. Our use of a placebo control was purposeful 
because a placebo control is considered the gold standard in alcohol 
administration research with respect to examining the physiological, rather than 
expectancy, effects of alcohol (Testa et al. 2006). Yet, the inclusion of a placebo 
control necessitated a difference in time spent between alcohol conditions after 
alcohol consumption and prior to the eye-tracking; participants in the alcohol 
condition were given a 15–30 min absorption period, whereas participants in the 
placebo condition began the task immediately after consumption. Although the 
absorption period for participants in the alcohol condition introduces a potential 
confound due to differences in timing, we have no reason to believe that this 
inconsistency could plausibly explain the differences in objectifying gazes between 
the alcohol and placebo control conditions. Indeed, keeping the timing uniform 
may have undermined the manipulation; if participants in the alcohol condition 
had no absorption period, they likely would not have been intoxicated prior to the 
objectifying gaze measure and if participants in the placebo control condition were 
given the 15–30 min absorption period, it would quickly have become apparent 
they did not consume alcohol (Bradlyn and Young 1983; Martin et al. 1990; Martin 
and Sayette 1993). Additionally, due to a small amount of alcohol in the placebo 
beverages used to enhance believability, participants in that condition had a 
discernible BrAC prior to beginning the eye-tracking task. Despite the presence of 
alcohol cues, including the smell and taste, participants in the placebo condition 
reported less perceived intoxication than participants in the alcohol condition. 
Although the BrAC of participants in the control condition was .00 after completing 
the eye-tracking task, there is a possibility that their responding was impacted by 
the trivial amount of alcohol they consumed; if we included an aware sober control 
condition in which even this negligible amount of alcohol was eliminated, we would 
expect the differences between the alcohol and control conditions to be even more 
pronounced. In sum, like other work in this area (Testa et al. 2006), it is difficult to 
completely disentangle the role of physiology relative to expectations in the 
present study, and future research would benefit from including multiple different 
control conditions (e.g., placebo control, aware sober control).  
It should also be noted that the controlled laboratory design— complete with 
randomization to drinking condition and eye-tracking measurement during a 
controlled counterbalanced task—prioritized internal validity over external or 
ecological validity. Participants viewed photographs rather than engaging in live 
interactions with women, but ecological validity was preserved to the highest 
possible extent by using photographs of actual college women who wore their own 
outfits. Further, although eye movements during the laboratory eye-tracking task 
have been established as a manifestation of sexual objectification (Gervais et al. 
2013), it is possible that some men may engage in more, less, or different 
objectifying behaviors in the real world than they would in the laboratory setting. 
This may be especially true given that we did not assess dwell times directed at 
female targets’ other sexualized body parts, that are commonly gazed upon, such 
as legs and buttocks (Lewis et al. 2016). Together, these ideas suggest that our 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     19 
 
initial study could represent a more liberal or conservative test of our hypotheses; 
men may be less likely to objectify women during actual interactions, but may be 
more likely to objectify women when they can gaze at certain body parts (e.g., 
buttocks) unbeknownst to women. To examine whether intoxication would have 
the same influence on sexual objectification in real life settings where multiple 
factors are at play, more ecologically valid examinations, such as virtual reality or 
actual interactions with women, may be beneficial.  
Finally, additional manifestations of objectification and humanization should be 
examined in future research. Although the objectifying gaze has been theorized as 
looking more at women’s bodies and less at their faces (Fredrickson and Roberts 
1997; Loughnan et al. 2010; Mulvey 1975), it is also possible that aspects of 
women’s faces (e.g., lips), at times, may also be objectified. Increased attention to 
a woman’s lips and decreased attention to her eyes, for example, may be 
dehumanizing in the minds of perceivers and experienced as similarly 
dehumanizing among recipients. Eye-tracking while people view female faces 
could be a useful methodological approach to detecting these subtler 
manifestations of objectifying gazes in future research. Likewise, although warmth 
and competence have been regarded as core as aspects of humanness (Fiske 2013; 
Harris and Fiske 2006, 2009; Haslam2006), these are but two of its defining 
constructs, and thus future research would benefit from investigating the effect of 
additional humanizing attributes on objectification perpetration.  
 
Practice Implications  
 
The present findings may have practical implications for efforts to address men’s 
objectifying perceptions of women. Although a plethora of research has revealed 
a link between alcohol use and sexual assault on college campuses, the current 
study sheds light on precursors to men’s perpetration of objectifying gazes—
behaviors that may be a gateway to more serious forms of sexual aggression 
(Gervais et al. 2014). It is possible, for example, that increased sexual objectification, 
brought on by myopia, may be an underlying process that contributes to outcomes 
such as men’s misperceptions of women’s sexual interest and related sexual 
aggression (Abbey et al. 2000). If men who are under the influence of alcohol pay 
less attention to the humanizing attributes of women (e.g., through decreased 
focus on facial cues), they may be less able to gauge women’s sexual interests 
accurately (Farris et al. 2008). Furthermore, for women who are targets of 
objectification, these experiences may potentially act as a precursor to behavioral 
confirmation in which women begin to self-objectify (Kozee et al. 2007), leading to 
safety concerns (Fairchild and Rudman 2008), negative affect, reduced flow, 
increased body monitoring, and shame (Calogero et al. 2011; Noll and Fredrickson 
1998; Tiggemann and Williams 2012). Within clinical settings, potential 
objectification resulting from myopia should be considered and addressed. For 
instance, some have suggested that, just as the myopic influences of alcohol may 
facilitate aggression when left unchecked, if harnessed and redirected through 
intervention, these processes may have the counterintuitive effect of decreasing 
the risk of sexual assault (Giancola et al. 2009a, b). One means of accomplishing 
this is through mindfulness-based interventions, which could be used to boost self-
reflection and outcome evaluation in ways that counteract myopia and reduce 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     20 
 
men’s objectification of women. Supporting this possibility are correlational 
findings that heavy drinking is associated with sexual aggression only among men 
low in mindfulness (Gallagher et al. 2010).  
Although the present study examined the influence of target characteristics on 
objectification, of course, no characteristic gleaned from observation alone could 
possibly be considered a solicitation of sexual objectification. However, it is 
possible some men may hold problematic beliefs that lead them to objectify 
women based on superficial evaluations of their attractiveness, warmth, and 
competence. It is certainly not the burden of women to change their outward 
appearance to reduce objectification by men. However, the present findings help 
to advance our understanding of the objectifying gaze and may help to challenge 
specific maladaptive beliefs held by some men that objectifying gazes directed 
toward certain women (i.e., those outside the norms of attractiveness and not high 
in superficially perceived competence and warmth) are acceptable. Although the 
present findings were obtained in a laboratory setting, it may be useful to develop 
strategies for addressing dehumanized perceptions of women based on superficial 
aspects of appearance.  
 
 
Conclusions  
 
As a whole, the present findings extend our understanding of factors that lead men 
to sexually objectify women. Although the empirical investigation of the alcohol-
sexual objectification link is in its infancy, it seems that many people may already 
be aware of the objectification that occurs while intoxicated, as exemplified by the 
lyrics in Jamie Foxx’s hit song Blame It (on the Alcohol). It is clear that many factors 
either promote (or inhibit) objectifying gazes, including factors that increase focus 
on appearance (or personality), acute alcohol intoxication, and superficially 
evaluated target characteristics (i.e., attractiveness, warmth, or competence). 
Further, those aiming to reduce the occurrence of sexual objectification could 
target alcohol use or cue people to focus on evaluating personalities when 
interacting with women. Sexual objectification has also been linked to perpetrating 
more severe acts of sexual violence (Gervais et al. 2014). Therefore, understanding 
the etiology of sexual objectification may serve a crucial role in informing primary 
prevention programs to reduce the continuum of sexual violence that women 
disproportionately experience.    
 
 
 
Table 1. Means and standard deviations of appearance and personality ratings by target characteristic 
condition  
 
High  
Average  
Low  
 
M (SD)  
M (SD)  
M (SD)  
Appearance focus  
    Attractiveness  
5.11 (.10)a  
4.50 (.11)b  
3.92 (.14)c  
Personality focus  
    Warmth  
5.13 (.10)a  
4.93 (.10)b  
4.54 (.11)c  
    Competence  
4.96 (.10)a  
5.01 (.10)a  
4.64 (.11)b  
Means within each row with different subscripts are significantly different, ps < .001   
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     21 
 
Table 2. Means and standard deviations for the significant two-way interactions  
 
Face  
Chest  
Waist  
 
M (SD)  
M (SD)  
M (SD)  
(a) Focus x body part interaction  
   Appearance  
1435.13 (82.39)a  
397.69 (30.86)c  490.75 (28.48)e  
   Personality 
 1913.12 (75.49)b  
264.63 (21.42)d  
378.90 (26.39)f  
(b) Alcohol condition x body part interaction  
   Alcohol  
1510.46 (103.79)a  
360.67 (35.08)c  465.79 (35.00)d  
   Placebo  
1837.79 (99.17)b  
301.65 (33.52)c  403.86 (33.45)d  
(c) Attribute x body part interactions  
Attractiveness  
   High  
1658.04 (73.18)a  
348.38 (25.69)c 
 435.00 (25.66)e  
   Average  
1734.43 (72.68)b  
291.83 (26.79)d  
415.89 (22.57)f  
   Low  
1632.70 (72.80)a  
341.41 (22.94)c  454.46 (26.61)e  
Warmth  
   High  
1700.12 (72.01)a  
308.80 (24.72)c  429.62 (24.02)e  
   Average  
1636.16 (75.28)b  
369.04 (26.71)d  425.00 (25.05)e  
   Low  
1689.65 (70.06)a  
316.90 (23.17)c  
446.70 (25.02)f  
Competence  
   High  
1704.42 (72.72)a  
312.67 (25.12)c  425.17 (25.13)e  
   Average  
1673.68 (71.58)a  
314.53 (24.11)d  439.12 (25.58)e  
   Low  
1643.13 (73.12)b  
365.73 (26.22)d  440.86 (24.10)e  
For each of the three interaction, means within columns and within rows different subscripts signify 
significant differences, ps < .05. All values are milliseconds and high scores indicate more attention.    
 
 
Table 3. Attribute X alcohol condition X body part interaction  
 
 
Face  
Chest  
Waist  
Warmth  
   High  
Alcohol  
1554.36 (104.12)a  
335.95 (35.74)e  
450.41 (34.73)i  
 
Placebo  
1845.88 (99.49)b  
281.64 (34.15)f  
408.83 (33.18)j  
   Average  
Alcohol  
1483.76 (108.86)c  
400.48 (38.62)g  
452.83 (36.28)i  
 
Placebo  
1788.56 (104.02)d  
337.59 (36.91)h  
397.17 (34.62)j  
   Low  
Alcohol  
1500.34 (101.31)c  
347.86 (33.50)e  
487.76 (36.17)k  
 
Placebo  
1878.97 (96.81)b  
285.95 (32.02)f  
405.60 (34.56)j  
Competence  
   High  
Alcohol  
1559.24 (105.15)a  
344.52 (36.32)e  
443.81 (36.33)i  
 
Placebo  
1849.59 (100.48)b  
280.83 (34.70)f  
406.53 (34.72)j  
   Average  
Alcohol  
1514.40 (103.50)c  
331.11 (34.86)e 
476.60 (36.99)k  
 
Placebo  
1832.95 (98.90)b  
297.96 (33.31)fg  
401.64 (35.35)j  
   Low  
Alcohol  
1456.23 (105.73)d  
404.79 (37.91)h  
478.59 (34.85)k  
 
Placebo  
1830.03 (101.03)b  
326.67 (36.23)h  
403.13 (33.30)j  
Means within columns (i.e., comparing faces, chests, and waists) and within rows (i.e., comparing alcohol condition, high and low, 
and level of target attribute, high, average, and low) with different subscripts are significantly different, ps < .05.All values are 
milliseconds and higher scores indicate more attention    
 
 
Acknowledgments — This project was supported by a grant to the fifth and sixth authors 
by the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Office of Research and Economic Development. We 
would also like to thank Gwenith Nuss and Mark Mills for their assistance with developing 
the stimuli and procedure as well as our undergraduate research assistants, Mandy Boothe, 
Ellen Dudley, Marco Gullickson, Autumn Kramer, Tran Le, Lindsay Undeland, Elise Polly, 
whom were essential in the data collection process.  
 
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     22 
 
Compliance with Ethical Standards — All of the research reported in the manuscript 
complies with APA ethical standards in the treatment of human participants. The 
Institutional Review Board of the University at which this study was conducted approved of 
the study and informed consent procedures.  
 
References  
 
Abbey, A., Zawacki, T., & McAuslan, P. (2000). Alcohol’s effects on sexual perception. Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol, 61, 688–697. doi 10.15288/jsa.2000.61.688.  
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.  
Archer, D., Iritani, B., Kimes, D. D., & Barrios, M. (1983). Face-ism: Five studies of sex differences in 
facial prominence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 725–735. doi 
10.1037/0022-3514.45.4.725  
Bartky, S. L. (1990). Femininity and domination: Studies in the phenomenology of oppression. New-
York: Routledge.  
Bernard, P., Gervais, S. J., Allen, J., Campomizzi, S., & Klein, O. (2012). Integrating sexual 
objectification with object versus person recognition: The sexualized-body-inversion 
hypothesis. Psychological Science, 23, 469–471. doi 10.1177/0956797611434748  
Bernard, P., Gervais, S., Allen, J., Delmee, A., & Klein, O. (2015). From sex objects to human beings: 
Masking sexual body parts and humanization as moderators to women’s objectification. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 15, 1–14. doi 10.1177/0361684315580125  
Bodenhausen, G. V., Macrae, C. N., & Garst, J. (1997). Stereotypes in thought and deed: Social-
cognitive origins of intergroup discrimination. In C. Sedikides, J. Schopler, & C. A. Insko (Eds.), 
Intergroup cognition and intergroup behavior. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Bradlyn, A., & Young, L. (1983). Parameters influencing the effectiveness of the balanced placebo 
design in alcohol research. In L. A. Pohorecky & J. Brick (Eds.), Stress and alcohol use (pp. 87–
103). New York: Elsevier Biomedical.  
Buss, D.M. (1989). Sex differences in human mate selection: Evolutionary hypothesis tested in 37 
cultures. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12, 1–49. doi 10.1017/S0140525X00023992  
Calogero, R. M., Tantleff-Dunn, S., & Thompson, J. K. (Eds.). (2011). Self-objectification in women: 
Causes, consequences, and counteractions. Washington D.C.: American Psychological 
Association. doi 10.1037/12304-000  
Calogero, R. M., & Tylka, T. L. (2014). Sanctioning resistance to sexual objectification: An 
integrative system justification perspective. Journal of Social Issues, 70, 763–778. doi 
10.1111/josi.12090  
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences, 2nd edn. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.  
Cowan, N. (2005). Working memory capacity. New York: Psychology Press.  
Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P., & Fiske, S. T. (2004). When professionals become mothers, warmth doesn’t 
cut the ice. Journal of Social Issues, 60, 701–718. doi 10.1111/j.0022-4537.2004.00381.x  
Eckes, T. (2002). Paternalistic and envious gender stereotypes: Testing predictions from the 
stereotype content model. Sex Roles, 47, 99– 114. doi 10.1023/A:1021020920715  
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist, 48, 384–392. doi 
10.1037/0003-066X.48.4.384  
Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). On seeing human: A three-factor theory of 
anthropomorphism. Psychological Review, 114, 864–886. doi 10.1037/0033-295X.114.4.864  
Fairchild, K., & Rudman, L. A. (2008). Everyday stranger harassment and women’s objectification. 
Social Justice Research, 21, 338–357. doi 10.1007/s11211-008-0073-0  
Farris, C., Treat, T. A., Viken, R. J., & McFall, R.M. (2008). Sexual coercion and the misperception of 
sexual interest. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 48–66. doi 10.1016/j.cpr.2007.03.002  
Fillmore, M. T., & Vogel-Sprott, M. (1998). Behavioral impairment under alcohol: Cognitive and 
pharmacokinetic factors. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 22, 1476–1482. doi 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.1998.tb03938.x  
Fiske, S. T. (2013). Varieties of (de)humanization: Divided by competition and status. In S. J. Gervais 
(Ed.), Objectification and (de)humanization: 60th Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (pp. 53–
71). New York: Springer.  
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     23 
 
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often mixed) stereotype content: 
Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived status and competition. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 878–902. doi 10.1037//0022-3514.82.6.878  
Fiske, S. T., & Neuberg, S. L. (1990). A continuum of impression formation, from category-based 
to individuating processes: Influences of information and motivation on attention and 
interpretation. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 23, 1–74. doi 10.1037/0022-
3514.82.6.878  
Franz, M. R., Haikalis, M., Riemer, A. R., Parrott, D. J., Gervais, S. J., & DiLillo, D. (2017). Further 
validation of a laboratory analog sexual aggression task: Associations with novel risk factors 
for sexual violence. Violence and Victims (in press).  
Fredrickson, B. L., & Roberts, T.-A. (1997). Objectification theory: Toward understanding women’s 
lived experiences and mental health risks. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 21, 173–206. doi 
10.1111/j.1471-6402.1997.tb00108.x  
Gallagher, K. E., Hudepohl, A. D., & Parrott, D. J. (2010). Power of being present: The role of 
mindfulness on the relation between men’s alcohol use and sexual aggression toward 
intimate partners. Aggressive Behavior, 36, 405–413. doi 10.1002/ab.20351  
Gervais, S. J., Davidson, M. M., Styck, K., Canivez, G., & DiLillo, D. (2017). The development and 
psychometric properties of the interpersonal sexual objectification scale-perpetration version. 
Psychology of Violence. doi 10.1037/vio0000148  
Gervais, S. J., DiLillo, D., & McChargue, D. (2014). Understanding the link between men’s alcohol 
use and sexual violence perpetration: The mediating role of sexual objectification. Psychology 
of Violence, 4, 156–169. doi 10.1037/a0033840  
Gervais, S. J., Holland, A. M., & Dodd, M. D. (2013). My eyes are up here: The nature of the 
objectifying gaze toward women. Sex Roles, 69, 557–570. doi 10.1007/s11199-013-0316-x  
Giancola, P. R. (2002). Irritability, acute alcohol consumption and aggressive behavior in men and 
women. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 68, 263–274. doi 10.1016/S0376-8716(02)00221-1  
Giancola, P. R. (2004). Difficult temperament, acute alcohol intoxication, and aggressive behavior. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 74, 135–145. doi 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2003.11.013  
Giancola, P. R., Josephs, R. A., Dewall, C. N., & Gunn, R. L. (2009a). Applying the attention-allocation 
model to the explanation of alcohol-related aggression: Implications for prevention. 
Substance Use & Misuse, 44, 1263–1279. doi 10.1080/10826080902960049  
Giancola, P. R., Levinson, C. A., Corman, M. D., Godlaski, A. J., Morris, D. H., Phillips, J. P., et al. 
(2009b). Men and women, alcohol and aggression. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 17, 154–164. doi 10.1037/a0016385  
Gray, H. M., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007). Dimensions of mind perception. Science, 315, 619. 
doi 10.1126/science.1134475  
Gueguen, N. (2007). Women’s bust size and men’s courtship solicitation. Body Image, 4, 386–390. 
doi 10.1016/j.bodyim.2007.06.006  
Hall, J. A., Coats, E. J., & Smith LeBeau, L. (2005). Nonverbal behavior and the vertical dimension 
of social relations: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 898–924. doi 10.1037/0033-
2909.131.6.898  
Harris, L. T., & Fiske, S. T. (2006). Dehumanizing the lowest of the low: Neuro-imaging responses 
to 
extreme 
outgroups. 
Psychological 
Science, 
17, 847–853. doi 
10.1111/j.1467-
9280.2006.01793.x  
Harris, L. T., & Fiske, S. T. (2009). Social neuroscience evidence for dehumanized perception. 
European Review of Social Psychology, 20, 192–231. doi 10.1080/10463280902954988  
Haslam, N. (2006). Dehumanization: An integrative review. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 10, 252–264. doi 10.1207/s15327957pspr1003_4  
Haslam, N., Bain, P., Bastian, B., Douge, L., & Lee, M. (2005). More human than you: Attributing 
humanness to self and others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 937–950. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1037/0022-3514.89.6.937.  
Haslam, N., & Loughnan, S. (2014). Dehumanization and infrahumanization. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 65, 399–423. doi 10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115045  
Haslam, N., Loughnan, S., Kashima, Y., & Bain, P. (2008). Attributing and denying humanness to 
others. European Review of Social Psychology, 19, 55–85. doi 10.1080/10463280801981645  
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     24 
 
Heflick, N. A., & Goldenberg, J. L. (2009). Objectifying Sarah Palin: Evidence that objectification 
causes women to be perceived as less competent and less fully human. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 598–601. doi 10.1016/j.jesp.2009.02.008  
Heflick, N. A., & Goldenberg, J. L. (2011). Sarah Palin, a nation object(ifie)s: The role of appearance 
focus in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. Sex Roles, 65, 149–155. doi 10.1007/s11199-010-
9901-4  
Heflick, N. A., Goldenberg, J. L., Cooper, D. P., & Puvia, E. (2011). From women to objects: 
Appearance focus, target gender, and perceptions of warmth, morality and competence. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 572–581. doi 10.1016/j.jesp.2010.12.020  
Henderson, J. M. (2003). Human gaze control during real-world scene perception. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 498–504. doi 10.1016/j.tics.2003.09.006  
Henderson, J. M., Williams, C. C., Castelhano, M. S., & Falk, R. J. (2003). Eye movements and picture 
processing 
during 
recognition. 
Perception 
& 
Psychophysics, 
65, 
725–734. 
doi 
10.3758/BF03194809  
Hewig, J., Trippe, R. H., Hecht, H., Straube, T., & Miltner, W. H. R. (2008). Gender differences for 
specific body regions when looking at men and women. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 32, 
67–78. doi 10.1007/s10919-007-0043-5  
Hoffman, W., Forster, G., Stroebe, W., & Wiers, R.W. (2011). The great disinhibitor: Alcohol, food 
cues, and eating behavior. In V. R. Preedy, R. R. Watson, & C. R. Martin (Eds.), Handbook of 
behavior, food and nutrition (pp. 2977–2991). New York: Springer.  
Hull, J. G., & Bond, C. F. (1986). Social and behavioral consequences of alcohol consumption and 
expectancy: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 347–360. doi 10.1037/0033-
2909.99.3.347  
Jussim, L. (2012). Social perception and social reality: Why accuracy dominates bias and self-
fulfilling prophecy. New York: Oxford University Press.  
Kaschak, E. (1992). Engendered lives: A new psychology of women’s experience. New York: Basic 
Books.  
Kenrick, D. T., & Gutierres, S. E. (1980). Effect and judgments of physical attractiveness: When 
beauty becomes a social problem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 131–140. 
doi 10.1037/0022-3514.38.1.131  
Kozee, H. B., Tylka, T. L., Augustus-Horvath, A., & Denchik, A. (2007). Development and 
psychometric evaluation of the interpersonal sexual objectification scale. Psychology of 
Women Quarterly, 31, 176–189. doi 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2007.00351.x  
Lewis, D. M. G., Russell, E. M., Al-Shawaf, L., & Buss, D. (2016). Lumbar curvature: A previously 
undiscovered standard of attractiveness. Evolution and Human Behavior, 36, 345–350. doi 
10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2015.01.007  
Loughnan, S., Haslam, N., Murnane, T., Vaes, J., Reynolds, C., & Suitner, C. (2010). Objectification 
leads to depersonalization: The denial of mind and moral concern to objectified others. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 709–717. doi 10.1002/ejsp.755  
Lykins, A. D., Meana, M., & Strauss, G. P. (2008). Sex differences in visual attention to erotic and 
non-erotic stimuli. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 37, 219–228. doi 10.1007/s10508-007-9208-x  
Marlowe, F., & Westman, A. (2001). Preferred waist-to-hip ratio and ecology. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 30, 481–489. doi 10.1016/S0191-8869(00)00039-8  
Martin, C. S., Earleywine, M., Finn, P. R., & Young, R. D. (1990). Some boundary conditions for 
effective use of alcohol placebos. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 51, 500–505. 
10.15288/jsa.1990.51.500  
Martin, C. S., & Sayette, M. A. (1993). Experimental design in alcohol administration research: 
Limitations and alternatives in the manipulation of dosage-set. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 
54, 750–761. doi 10.15288/jsa.1993.54.750  
McArthur, L. Z., & Baron, R. M. (1983). Toward an ecological theory of social perception. 
Psychological Review, 90, 215–238. doi 10.1037/0033-295X.90.3.215  
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magic number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for 
processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97. doi 10.1037//0033-295x.101.2.343  
Miller, G. F. (1988). How mate choice shaped human nature: A review of sexual selection and 
human evolution. In C. Crawford & D. Krebs (Eds.), Evolution and human behavior: Ideas, issues, 
and applications (pp. 87–93). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     25 
 
Moradi, B., & Huang, Y. P. (2008). Objectification theory and psychology of women: A decade of 
advances and future directions. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 32, 377–398. doi 
10.1111/j.1471-6402.2008.00452.x  
Morton, J., & Johnson, M. H. (1991). CONSPEC and CONLERN: A two-process theory of infant face 
recognition. Psychological Review, 98, 164–181. doi 10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.164  
Mulvey, 
L. 
(1975). 
Visual 
pleasure 
and 
narrative 
cinema. 
Screen, 
16, 
6–18. 
doi 
10.1093/screen/16.3.6  
Noll, S. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). A mediational model linking self-objectification, body 
shame, and disordered eating. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 22, 623–636. doi 
10.1111/j.1471-6402.1998.tb00181.x  
Nummenmaa, L., Hietanen, J. K., Santtila, P., & Hyönä, J. (2012). Gender and visibility of sexual 
cues influence eye movements while viewing faces and bodies. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 
41, 1439–1451. doi 10.1007/s10508-012-9911-0  
Phillips, J. P., & Giancola, P. R. (2008). Experimentally induced anxiety attenuates alcohol-related 
aggression in men. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 16, 43–56. doi 
10.1037/1064-1297.16.1.43  
Rudman, L. A., & Borgida, E. (1995). The afterglow of construct accessibility: The behavioral 
consequences of priming men to view women as sexual objects. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 31, 493–517. doi 10.1006/jesp.1995.1022  
Rudman, L. A., & Mescher, K. (2012). Of animals and objects: Men’s implicit dehumanization of 
women and likelihood of sexual aggression. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 
734–746. doi 10.1177/0146167212436401  
Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: Role of waist-to-hip ratio. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 293–307. doi 10.1037/0022-3514.65.2.293  
Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perception and interpersonal behavior: On 
the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 
656–666. doi 10.1037/0022-3514.35.9.656  
Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B. (1992). Categorization of individuals on the basis of 
multiple social features. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 207–218. doi 
10.1037/0022-3514.62.2.207  
Steele, C. M., & Josephs, R. A. (1990). Alcohol myopia: Its prized and dangerous effects. American 
Psychologist, 45, 921–933. doi 10.1037/0003-066X.45.8.921  
Swim, J. K., Hyers, L. L., Cohen, L. L., & Ferguson, M. J. (2001). Everyday sexism: Evidence for its 
incidence, nature, and psychological impact from three daily diary studies. Journal of Social 
Issues, 57, 31–53. doi 10.1111/0022-4537.00200  
Tajfel, H. (1981). Human groups and social categories. New York: Cambridge University Press.  
Tassinary, L. G., & Hansen, K. A. (1998). A critical test of the waist-to-hip-ratio hypothesis of female 
physical attractiveness. Psychological Science, 9, 150–155. doi 10.1111/1467-9280.00029  
Testa, M., Fillmore, M. T., Norris, J., Abbey, A., Curtin, J. J., Leonard, K. E., … Hayman, L. W. (2006). 
Understanding alcohol expectancy effects: Revisiting the placebo condition. Alcohol Clinical 
Experimental Research, 30, 339–248. doi 10.1111/j.1530.0277.2006.00039.x  
Tiggemann, M., &Williams, E. (2012). The role of self-objectification in disordered eating, 
depressed mood, and sexual functioning among women: A comprehensive test of 
objectification 
theory. 
Psychology 
of 
Women 
Quarterly, 
36, 
66–75. 
doi 
10.1177/0361684311420250  
Vaes, J., Paladino, P., & Puvia, E. (2011). Are sexualized women complete human beings? Why men 
and women dehumanize sexually objectified women. European Journal of Social Psychology, 
41, 774–785. doi 10.1002/ejsp.824  
Ven, T. V., & Beck, J. (2009). Getting drunk and hooking up: An exploratory study of the 
relationship between alcohol intoxication and causal coupling in a university sample. 
Sociological Spectrum, 29, 626–648. doi 10.1080/02732170903051417  
Watkins, L. E., DiLillo, D., & Maldonado, R. C. (2015). The interactive effects of emotion regulation 
and alcohol intoxication on lab-based intimate partner aggression. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors, 29, 653–663. doi 10.1037/adb0000074  
Wenzlaff, F., Briken, P., & Dekker, A. (2015). Video-based eye tracking in sex research: A systematic 
literature review. The Journal of Sex Research, 12pp. doi 10.1080/00224499.2015.1107524  
 R I E M E R  E T  A L. I N  S EX  R O L ES  (2018), E F F E CT S  O F  A LC O H O L  ON  T H E O BJ EC T IF Y IN G  GA Z E     26 
 
Wojciszke, B. (2005). Morality and competence in person-and self-perception. European Review 
of Social Psychology, 16, 155–188. doi 10.1080/10463280500229619  
Zelazniewicz, A. M., & Pawlowski, B. (2011). Female breast size attractiveness for men as a function 
of sociosexual orientation (restricted vs. unrestricted). Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 1129–
1135. doi 10.1007/s10508-011-9850-1 
    
 Supplement for Riemer, A. R., Haikalis, M., Franz, M. R., Dodd, M. D., DiLillo, D., & Gervais, S. J. 
(2017). Beauty is in the eye of the beer holder: An initial investigation of the effects of alcohol, 
attractiveness, warmth, and competence on the objectifying gaze in men. Sex Roles. Abigail R. Riemer, 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln.  E-mail: ariemer@huskers.unl.edu 
 
 
  
Figure 1s. Example photographed woman used for eye-tracking stimuli (faces were not blurred in the 
experiment, but are blurred here to maintain confidentiality).  
 
