  
1
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access 
AbstrAct
Objectives This paper reports the sources of stress and 
distress experienced by general practitioners (GP) as part 
of a wider study exploring the barriers and facilitators to 
help-seeking for mental illness and burnout among this 
medical population.
Design Qualitative study using in-depth interviews with 
47 GP participants. The interviews were audio-recorded, 
transcribed, anonymised and imported into NVivo V.11 to 
facilitate data management. Data were analysed using a 
thematic analysis employing the constant comparative 
method.
setting England.
Participants A purposive sample of GP participants who 
self-identified as: (1) currently living with mental distress, 
(2) returning to work following treatment, (3) off sick or 
retired early as a result of mental distress or (4) without 
experience of mental distress. Interviews were conducted 
face-to-face or over the telephone.
results The key sources of stress/distress related to: 
(1) emotion work—the work invested and required in 
managing and responding to the psychosocial component 
of GPs’ work, and dealing with abusive or confrontational 
patients; (2) practice culture—practice dynamics and 
collegial conflict, bullying, isolation and lack of support; 
(3) work role and demands—fear of making mistakes, 
complaints and inquests, revalidation, appraisal, 
inspections and financial worries.
conclusion In addition to addressing escalating 
workloads through the provision of increased resources, 
addressing unhealthy practice cultures is paramount. 
Collegial support, a willingness to talk about vulnerability 
and illness, and having open channels of communication 
enable GPs to feel less isolated and better able to cope 
with the emotional and clinical demands of their work. 
Doctors, including GPs, are not invulnerable to the clinical 
and emotional demands of their work nor the effects of 
divisive work cultures—culture change and access to 
informal and formal support is therefore crucial in enabling 
GPs to do their job effectively and to stay well.
IntrODuctIOn
Compared 
with 
the 
general 
popula-
tion, doctors, including general practi-
tioners (GP), continue to experience high 
levels of workplace stress and burnout,1–4 
with some evidence suggesting higher rates 
of mental illness.5–9 The pressures facing GPs 
have been compounded by escalating bureau-
cracy, increased patient demand (evidenced 
by a 16% increase in workload over the past 
7 years10), as well as workforce shortages and 
a reduction in resources.11 12 Currently, 90% 
of patient consultations take place in general 
practice, yet the allocated budget accounts for 
What are the sources of stress and 
distress for general practitioners 
working in England? A 
qualitative study
Ruth Riley,1 Johanna Spiers,2 Marta Buszewicz,3 Anna Kathryn Taylor,4 
Gail Thornton,2 Carolyn Anne Chew-Graham5
To cite: Riley R, Spiers J, 
Buszewicz M, et al.  What 
are the sources of stress and 
distress for general practitioners 
working in England? A 
qualitative study. BMJ Open 
2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2017-017361
 
► Prepublication history for 
this paper is available online. 
To view please visit the journal 
online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjopen- 
2017- 
017361).
Received 20 April 2017
Revised 29 June 2017
Accepted 13 July 2017
1Institute of Applied Health 
Research, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
2Bristol Medical School, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
3Research Department of 
Primary Care and Population 
Health, University College 
London, London, UK
4Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
5Primary Care and Health 
Sciences, Research Institute, 
Keele University, Keele, UK
correspondence to
Dr Ruth Riley;  
 
r. 
riley@ 
bham. 
ac. 
uk
Research
strengths and limitations of this study
 
► Few studies employing qualitative methods, using 
in-depth interviews, have been used to examine 
this topic—this study carried out 47 interviews 
with general practitioners (GP) from across England 
and contributes to a growing body of research 
illuminating and examining the causes and impact 
of chronic stress and distress among GPs.
 
► Participants were self-selecting, which may be 
perceived as a limitation; however, the sampling of 
participants ensured that the sample was varied in 
terms of age, gender, number of years as practising 
GPs, level of seniority/employment status in the 
practice, and geographical location.
 
► Due to time constraints, the researchers were 
unable to employ respondent validation; however, 
the second coders included academic GPs and team 
members with lived experience of mental illness 
which afforded some checks and balances to the 
validity of the analytic process, interpretation of data 
and generalisability of the research findings.
 
► While recruiting individuals with experience of 
mental illness and burnout, we also included the 
perspectives of GPs who had no disclosed history 
of mental illness, which enables the data to be more 
widely generalisable to the GP population.
 
► The multidisciplinary research team independently 
analysed a subset of transcripts in order to 
contribute to the generation and refinement of 
codes to maximise rigour; emergent themes were 
subsequently discussed by the whole team to 
ensure credibility and confirmability.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access 
box Interview topic guide
Introduction and background
 
► Describe average working day in practice (hours, surgery, 
home visits) and any additional responsibilities.
Current well-being 
 
► Describe average working day in practice (hours, surgery, 
home visits) and any additional responsibilities.
 
► Explore current well-being, feelings about work, levels of stress, 
work-life balance.
 
► Explore causes of stress/distress (workload, hours, admin, clinical 
caseloads, organisational issues, lack of support, personal issues, 
pre-existing mental health symptoms).
 
► Explore reasons for early retirement/sickness (if relevant).
Managing stress
 
► Explore how general practitioners (GP) manage their workload/
stress in their day-to-day work life, what they do to relax, to look 
after themselves (self-care strategies: supportive relationships, 
sport, exercise relaxation techniques).
 
► Explore relationship with colleagues and whether/how/if concerns 
are raised, how they are responded.
 
► Explore if given informal/formal supervision or mentor (1:1 or group) 
and experience/value of group.
 
► Explore thoughts/feelings about seeking help, barriers to seeking 
help (stigma/shame, fears about confidentiality, uncertainty of 
where to go).
only 8% of the National Health Service (NHS) total.13 14 
Consequently, the pressure on primary care is currently 
at its highest ever, and is predicted to increase in the 
future.13 It is argued that these pressures have contributed 
to low job satisfaction and low morale among staff, as well 
as stress, burnout and early retirement,15–17 which further 
compounds workforce shortages.18 In a recent survey,19 
20% of GPs indicated that the likelihood of leaving their 
job was ‘high’, while reported levels of stress were higher 
than previous years. In addition to the personal cost to 
individuals in terms of mental distress, the financial 
cost of losing doctors to burnout, early retirement and 
reduced clinical hours already impacts adversely on the 
sustainability of adequate patient services.15 16 
Additionally, a substantive body of evidence has identi-
fied a clear link between the experiences and well-being 
of NHS staff, including doctors, and the experiences of 
patients and the quality of care they receive, as indicated 
by health outcomes and patient satisfaction and quality of 
care ratings.20–23 Patient reported experiences are better 
when staff are satisfied and feel more supported by the 
organisation and their supervisors.23 It is important to 
understand the sources of the increased levels of stress 
and distress, in order to address them more effectively. 
This paper reports the sources of stress and distress expe-
rienced by GPs as part of a wider study exploring the 
barriers and facilitators to help-seeking for mental illness 
and burnout among this medical population.
MethODs
This was a multicentre qualitative study, employing 
in-depth interviews with 47 GPs in England. Information 
about the study was advertised through professional publi-
cations such as Pulse, social media, and national and local 
GP networks (such as Local Medical Committees and 
Clinical Commissioning Groups) in Bristol, Manchester 
and London. A subsample (n=12) was recruited through 
a specialist treatment service. Interested GPs were sent 
a participant information sheet and informed consent 
was taken from those willing to take part. GPs wishing 
to take part were asked to self-select into the following 
groups: (1) living with anxiety, depression, stress and/
or burnout; (2) returning to work following treatment; 
(3) off sick or retired early due to illness; (4) no mental 
illness. Participating GPs were reimbursed with £80 to 
recognise the time for their participation. Interested GPs 
were purposively sampled to represent as even a spread 
as possible across these four groups, although the largest 
number of participants was in group 1. We intended to 
purposively sample approximately 10 participants per 
group. However, the majority of GPs who contacted us 
self-selected into group 1, and due to the emergent rich 
data continued recruitment to this group and further 
exploration of emerging themes was justified in meeting 
the study’s aims and objectives. We endeavoured to recruit 
more participants into groups 2 and 4 using targeted 
publicity information, but because of time constraints 
those groups remained marginally under-recruited. In 
the event, many GPs who identified as living with no stress 
reported as having had experiences of stress and distress 
at some juncture in their career.
More female GPs contacted the study team expressing 
an interest in participating, and therefore the disparity 
in numbers reflects this. The iterative process of recruit-
ment, sampling and analysis ensured that emerging 
concepts and themes could be tested out among partici-
pants with different characteristics (eg, partners vs locum 
GPs). Further GPs who expressed an interest in participa-
tion were politely thanked, given an explanation about 
the high rates of interest in the study and told that their 
participation was not required.
Face-to-face (either at the participant’s home, or at 
work) or telephone interviews lasting between 27 and 
126 min (mean=69 min) were conducted between April 
and September 2016. The recorded in-depth interviews 
were conducted by two authors (JS, RR), both social scien-
tists and qualitative experts, using a flexible topic guide 
(see box). This was informed by the existing literature, 
input from GPs on the study team and patient and public 
involvement (PPI) consultation exercises conducted 
with GP networks prior to obtaining funding. The inter-
views were audio-recorded, transcribed, anonymised and 
imported into NVivo V.11 to facilitate data management. 
Analysis and data collection were conducted iteratively 
until data saturation was reached and no new themes 
were arising from the data.24 A thematic analysis was 
conducted, involving a process of constant comparison 
between cases.25 Analysis commenced with JS generating 
an initial coding framework, grounded in the data, which 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
  
3
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access
Table 1 Participant demographics
GP characteristics
n=47
Sex (female)
33
Age (years)
  
20–29
1
  
30–39
12
  
40–49
20
  
50–59
14
Group
  
1
19
  
2
9
  
3
11
  
4
8
Years since qualified
  
<10
19
No of sessions contracted per week
  
<5 
sessions (mean actual hours worked)
12 (15) 
  
>5 
sessions (mean actual hours worked)
32 (38) 
  
Fully retired
3 
Mean size of practice
12 
624
  
Range 
3600–37 
000
Employment status
  
Partner
17
  
Salaried
11
  
Locum
5
  
Registrar
4
  
Retired
3
  
Sick leave
5
  
More than one role
2
GP
, general practitioner.
was added to and refined, with material regrouped and 
recoded as new data were gathered. Codes were gradu-
ally built into broader categories through comparison 
across transcripts and higher level recurring themes 
were developed. Reflexivity was employed throughout 
the research. Both interviewers were experienced qual-
itative researchers who both reflected on and discussed 
the impact of the data on their cognitive and emotional 
sensing throughout the study.26 Both researchers also 
discussed and made explicit how their epistemological 
(JS with a background in psychology and RR in medical 
sociology) and experiential backgrounds may have 
oriented the data collection and analytic process.
The multidisciplinary research team independently 
analysed a subset of transcripts in order to contribute 
to the generation and refinement of codes to maximise 
rigour. Emergent themes were discussed by the whole 
team to ensure credibility and confirmability.
results
Forty-seven interviews were conducted with participants. 
The demographic and practice characteristics of partici-
pants are included in table 1.
Analysis of the interview transcripts and field notes iden-
tified three main themes, with corresponding subthemes 
relating to sources of stress/distress:
 
► Emotion work—the work invested and required in 
managing and responding to the psychosocial 
component of GPs’ work and dealing with abusive or 
confrontational patients.
 
► Practice culture—practice dynamics and collegial 
conflict, bullying, isolation and lack of support.
 
► Work role and demands—fear of making mistakes, 
complaints and inquests, revalidation, appraisal, 
inspections and financial worries.
emotion work
This theme refers to the emotion work invested and 
required in managing and responding to the emotional 
content of consultations with patients. In particular, the 
work required in managing confrontational patients and 
in treating and responding to the many psychosocial 
components of a GP’s work and its subsequent impact on 
clinicians, as these participants indicate:
I think when you’re dealing with really difficult 
problems, you’re dealing with lots of sadness, you’re 
dealing with loads of stuff that you can’t change, and 
people bring in and they park with you their prob-
lems and their sadnesses, and they feel better for that 
and you feel worse. (P20, male partner)
It’s like they’re [patients] hanging tiny weights on 
you. (P21, female salaried and locum)
However, it is important to remember that while face-
to-face consultations with patients can be emotionally 
demanding, many participants indicated that patient 
contact was also the most enjoyable and satisfying aspect 
of their work, as these participants highlight:
My job satisfaction was patients coming in and going 
out having got their needs attended to and happy. 
(P49, female retired)
I feel very conflicted, because I love general practice. 
I’ve always wanted to be a GP. I love my patients. And 
on a day when I’ve got time to spend with them, it’s a 
brilliant job. (P17, female partner)
A related source of stress/distress was the emotion work 
required in managing physically and verbally abusive 
or confrontational patients—another common theme 
reported among participants:
You know, it would be very much around, you know, 
patients who’d been quite aggressive, being quite 
rude, or having a particularly busy night. (P12, fe-
male partner)
I’ve had situations where I’ve felt say physically 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 4
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access 
threatened and had to ask someone to leave. (P6, 
male salaried)
Practice culture
Practice dynamics and collegial conflict
The stress and anxiety associated with the responsibilities 
related to staffing issues, practice dynamics and collegial 
conflict was a key source of stress among GP participants, 
as these participants indicate:
Some of the stress, in general practice as distinct from 
other branches of medicine, comes from the inter-
nal politics. And there have been some very stressful 
times with partners. (P1, female partner)
And then I became more unhappy with the practice. 
Now that’s not necessarily the patients and the work 
of the practice. It’s the difficulty I had in relationships 
with partners. (P51, male retired)
Stresses related to power politics within the practice, 
having decisions undermined or overturned, or as a result 
of a lack of input in decision-making were also described 
by some:
And increasingly I felt that my view, decisions I think 
we’ve made, have been overturned. By the meeting. 
And so I felt increasingly I had less and less say in 
the practice and that my views weren’t taken into ac-
count. (P46, female partner)
I just seemed to be getting over-ruled by the senior 
partner. (P47, female on sick leave)
Bullying
The experience of being bullied by colleagues and/or 
partners was a recurring theme and a key source of distress 
for a significant minority of participants in this study. This 
bullying contributed to or exacerbated ongoing chronic 
stress among participants, and also contributed to high 
staff turnover in some practices:
I thought, ‘This is like an abusive relationship, where 
I’m unwell and I’m being shouted at at work. I hate 
coming into work. I’m crying a lot with, you know, 
finding it so stressful.’ (P31, female locum)
And it was just one (pause) there was one particular 
individual who made my life very difficult, who really 
I found very difficult through the whole time I was in 
the partnership. (P22, male salaried)
These 
participants 
highlighted 
that 
colleagues, 
including partners, could be complicit in perpetuating 
abuse among staff, through their lack of support, ambiva-
lence or by failing to intervene:
Yeah, and they had a huge turnover of GPs […] 
There was one GP who was a bit of a bully and the rest 
were just unsupportive. And the patients were fed up 
because they had had so many changes of GPs. (P37, 
female off sick)
Isolation and lack of support
Feeling isolated and unsupported in their work was 
a dominant theme among the majority of the 47 GP 
participants, and contributed to participants’ existing 
stress and distress. The loneliness and isolation was 
also compounded by the burden of responsibility and 
increasing workload, which left GPs with little time to 
connect with their colleagues. Some participants high-
lighted that a sense of isolation was often heightened in 
general practice, as most of their work was done on an 
individual basis:
You don’t really leave your room or talk to many oth-
er people. (P26, female salaried)
And I think that’s one of the issues that general prac-
tice particularly faces, in that you’re actually quite iso-
lated. (P29, female partner)
The following participant highlights that this may be a 
particular occupational hazard for locums, who can feel 
disconnected from their colleagues:
[Being a locum is] quite isolating in that you could 
go to a practice for the first time, never meet any of 
the other doctors, hardly see a nurse. You’re just told, 
‘Right, here’s your room. Get on with it,’ and you just 
see a patient every ten minutes. And, yeah, I find that 
quite difficult. (P5, female salaried and locum)
GPs’ sense of working alone was exacerbated by the 
increase in workload, resulting in fewer opportunities for 
a break and time to talk to colleagues:
But as the workload increased, the coffee time be-
came less (pause) important in everyone’s day, be-
cause they would catch up with their paperwork or 
phone calls or extras […] Over those years we, I think 
we all became more isolated and separate from one 
another. (P35, female retired)
The lack of support and acknowledgement among 
other colleagues or GP partners for those who were expe-
riencing mental illness was also observed and experi-
enced by many participants:
One of my colleagues went off with depression […] 
and then died by suicide, which was really devastating 
to the practice. But it was a bit like, ‘Well, we’ve just 
got to carry on. We’ve got this job to do,’ and there 
was no time to (pause) even really acknowledge it, 
you know, beyond having the usual things like funer-
als and stuff. So it was almost swept under the carpet 
like, ‘Well, you know, let’s just carry on. Let’s not ad-
dress what perhaps might have contributed to it at 
work.’ (P31, female locum)
The following participant highlights the contrast 
between supportive practices and those which appeared 
to engender a ‘survival of the fittest’ culture:
There may be practices that are really supportive and 
really want to know these things and want to help 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
  
5
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access
people, (laughs) but that’s certainly not the case 
in ours. Every man for himself, I think. (P9, male 
partner)
In contrast, some GP participants clearly benefited from 
being part of a team and working alongside colleagues 
who have invested in cultivating a supportive culture over 
time:
I work in a fantastic team. I love all my partners. I 
love the team I work with. And that’s something that 
we have created over, over that, all those years. You 
know, it’s not just something I parachuted into; it’s 
been carefully created by me and my partners over 
that time. (P19, male partner)
The following quote highlights the importance of 
support and collegiality as a protective factor for good 
mental health, maintaining morale and feeling less 
isolated in dealing with the challenges of being a GP:
The ones that are left of us at the moment are being 
very supportive of each other and making sure that 
we’re not getting too bogged down with work each 
and that we are OK. And we keep checking on each 
other and, you know, ‘Are you alright?’ And we’ve 
had a few little social things to try and get everyone’s 
morale up and support each other and things like 
that. (P27, female partner)
Work role and demands
The roles and demands intrinsic to the work of a GP 
were a source of significant stress for participants. They 
frequently reported stress related to workload and long 
hours; however, we have omitted these findings since 
they have been widely reported previously (see the 
Discussion section). Other work-related sources of stress 
among participants included a fear of making mistakes 
(compounded by an increased workload), complaints 
and inquests, as well as the additional work associated 
with revalidation and appraisal, and managing finances 
on reduced budgets.
Fear of making mistakes
A significant source of palpable anxiety and distress for 
many GP participants was the fear of making a clinical 
mistake and the resulting repercussions. Many partic-
ipants were concerned that the escalating workload 
directly increased the risk of making a mistake:
The fear of making mistakes is—huge. When you see 
really good colleagues who, because you’re dealing 
with such an overwhelming volume of work, making 
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of clinical de-
cisions a day—they're not all gonna be right. (P24, 
female partner)
Managing complaints
The stress of managing complaints from patients was also 
a common theme:
A serious complaint is a failure, isn’t it? You’ve done 
something badly wrong probably, or someone thinks 
you’ve done something badly wrong. And they can be 
very difficult times emotionally for doctors. And um 
often they arrive at the times when you’re most vul-
nerable, so quite a few people are very badly affected 
by complaints. (P36, male partner)
Revalidation, appraisal and inspections
The additional workload and stress associated with under-
taking revalidation, appraisal and care quality commis-
sion (CQC) inspections was a dominant theme among 
the participants, some of whom found the process to be 
punitive, unhelpful and at times overwhelming:
…a lot of younger doctors do get very stressed about 
appraisals actually. I mean older doctors do as well, 
because of all the information collecting and it just 
feels like, ‘Oh bloody hell, I’m doing the job. Can’t 
you see I’m doing it alright? Why do I have to prove 
I’m doing it alright?’ (P2, female partner)
A lot of the additional work and tick-boxing and 
bureaucracy we’re being asked to do could be done 
away with. The CQC thing has kind of exploded from 
nowhere. We’re being charged thousands of pounds 
(pause) to provide evidence of X, Y and Z, and there 
is no basis that this proves that one GP surgery is 
better than another, it’s just an enforced grading 
system. (P13, male partner)
Financial risks for partners
Being a GP partner usually brings with it a financial 
burden. There was concern among participants that 
general practices are being expected to do more on 
fewer resources, which also has financial implications for 
individuals:
And it’s also very worrying because, financially, you 
know, as a partner in the practice, if it goes under and 
we’re at the stage where, we are very, very close to it 
going under (pause) I will be personally responsible 
for hundreds and hundreds of thousands of pounds 
of debt. Which means that we will lose our house. 
(P24, female partner)
DIscussIOn
These findings indicate that the sources of stress and 
distress for GPs are varied and relate to the occupational 
pressures of working as a GP, including the emotional 
pressures involved in managing the psychosocial elements 
of everyday consultations, as well as having to manage 
some abusive, confrontational patients and dealing with 
complaints. Stress and distress were also associated with 
the practice environment, including dysfunctional rela-
tionships at work, collegial conflict, bullying and the lack 
of support from colleagues, which further compounded 
the sense of isolation often experienced in their work. 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 6
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access 
Further key sources of stress were long hours, time pres-
sures, the fear of making mistakes and inquests, as well 
as the appraisal and revalidation processes. Participants 
who were partners also reported tensions relating to their 
financial responsibilities and being expected to achieve 
more on reduced budgets while managing personal debt 
accrued by buying into the practice.
Many of these stressors were interlinked and cumula-
tively contributed to and/or exacerbated existing distress. 
Participants frequently worked with little support or 
supervision, often feeling isolated within their practice. 
Crucially, those GP participants who felt more supported 
in their practices, as a result of greater collegial support, 
colleagues’ willingness to talk about vulnerability and 
illness and having open channels of communication 
within the practice, reported feeling less isolated, more 
resilient and better able to cope with the emotional and 
clinical demands of their work.
The existing literature has identified increasing work-
loads, time pressures, long hours and bureaucratic 
demands as key causes of work-related stress/distress 
among GPs.5 11–13 27 28 Suggestions for addressing stresses 
intrinsic to the work of a GP (ie, workload, bureaucracy) 
have also been identified.12 27 28 Participants in this study 
also highlighted sources of stress associated with the fear 
of making mistakes, inspections, complaints and inquests, 
as well as the pressures associated with the revalidation and 
the appraisal process—the latter regarded as unhelpful, 
time consuming and of little value.29 The emotional 
component of work in general practice and its impact 
on GP well-being is supported by previous evidence high-
lighting the impact of the emotional demands of working 
with patients and exposure to suffering.5
This study and recent findings12 suggest that unhealthy 
practice cultures (which may be characterised by bullying 
or the absence of collegial support and the opportunity 
to discuss the emotional and clinical demands of GPs’ 
work) are a key source of stress and distress for many GPs. 
As highlighted by the participants, working in an unsup-
portive cultural climate can cause distress and add to a 
burgeoning sense of isolation for many individuals, while 
the attitudes of some senior colleagues appeared to create 
or perpetuate a culture of distancing and disengagement 
with one’s feelings and those of colleagues. Such a culture 
sets an unhealthy and unhelpful precedent for how feel-
ings are expressed and managed within the work setting, 
which can exacerbate existing feelings of isolation and 
difficulties in seeking effective support, particularly for 
GPs in distress and those living with mental illness.
These findings have important implications for policy 
and practice, namely that providing a safe space for GPs to 
process the emotional and clinical content of their work 
and the potential stressors related to the organisational 
culture (eg, bullying in the workplace) and relationships 
at work (eg, collegial conflict) is imperative. This echoes 
findings from a recent systematic review on interventions 
to reduce burnout among doctors, including GPs, which 
found that improving communication between team 
members, cultivating teamwork, increasing job control 
and giving doctors permission to acknowledge and 
manage stress have proven effective in militating against 
burnout.30 GPs are expected to provide their patients 
with the space, opportunity and permission for them 
to communicate their concerns and feelings within the 
consultation, thus enabling individuals to voice and share 
their experiences and be heard.31 However, the same is 
not always afforded to GPs.
In terms of prevention and provision, NHS England 
have committed to increasing the retention, return and 
recruitment of GPs and investing more resources in 
general practice aiming to reduce the workload, as well as 
providing a specialist England-wide occupational health 
service for GPs.32 This new GP occupational health service 
is also available to support individuals who are affected by 
toxic work cultures such as the bullying, collegial conflict 
and practice dynamics highlighted in this research. The 
ability to respond effectively to the emotional demands 
and anxiety often expressed by patients in the consulta-
tion33 without feeling overwhelmed needs to be addressed 
in GP training as well as in ongoing support and supervi-
sion. Crucially, collegial support is a protective factor for 
good mental health—support from mentors, supervisors 
and colleagues is associated with resilience and reduced 
sickness.34 Balint groups or similarly structured group 
work or supervision continue to be employed in general 
practice and are valued by GPs,35 yet are optional. Indi-
vidual or group supervision aims to provide a safe and 
supportive space where staff can openly discuss the pres-
sures and emotional challenges of their work and may, as 
previous evidence suggests, provide GPs with the support 
they need while offering protection against compas-
sion fatigue and burnout.36 Their wider use may need 
to be reconsidered. Tackling the culture of invulnera-
bility early on in medical training is also key. Schwartz 
Centre Rounds, for instance, are currently being piloted 
in medical schools with early evidence supporting their 
value.37 First 5, buddy systems and access to regular 
supervision or mentorship can also offer support and a 
reflective space—talking, sharing and having one’s feel-
ings normalised, understood and validated are critical in 
maintaining good mental health.
cOnclusIOn
This study highlights that the sources of stress and 
distress cannot solely be attributed to increases in work-
load and occupational stress linked to the work role 
demands of being a GP. Sources of stress and distress are 
also linked to unhealthy practice cultures, which may 
be characterised by bullying or the absence of collegial 
support and the opportunity to discuss the emotional 
and clinical demands of GPs’ work. Such a workplace 
climate can cause and add to stress and distress, and 
leave GPs feeling isolated. Promoting compassionate 
and supportive work cultures is therefore imperative in 
addressing the dynamic interplay between the personal, 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
  
7
Riley R, et al. BMJ Open 2018;8:e017361. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361
Open Access
professional and organisational sources of stress and 
distress for GPs.
Acknowledgements  The authors thank all volunteer participants who kindly gave 
their time to share their experiences of working in English general practice; and 
collaborators Dr Clare Gerada and Dr Chris Manning for endorsing this study and 
who provided valuable comments on the funding application and who assisted with 
recruitment. 
contributors RR, JS, MB and CCG: substantial contributions to conception and 
design, acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; drafting the article 
or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and final approval of the 
version to be published. AT and GT: analysis and interpretation of data; drafting the 
article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and final approval of 
the version to be published.
Funding The study was funded by the NIHR School for Primary Care Research.
Disclaimer The views and opinions expressed therein are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect those of the NIHR School for Primary Care Research, 
NIHR, NHS or the Department of Health. 
competing interests None declared.
ethics approval Ethical approval was granted by the South West-Frenchay 
Research Ethics Committee (reference number: 15/SW/0350).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement This study has not received ethical approval to share 
confidential data with any third party other than the study research team.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, 
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
reFerences
 1. Beyondblue. The mental health of doctors: a systematic literature 
review: executive summary, 2010.
 2. Chopra SS, Sotile WM, Sotile MO. Physician Burnout. JAMA 
2004;291:633–33.
 3. Orton P
, Orton C, Pereira Gray D. Depersonalised doctors: a cross-
sectional study of 564 doctors, 760 consultations and 1876 patient 
reports in UK general practice. BMJ Open 2012;2:e000274.
 4. Vijendren A, Yung M, Sanchez J. Occupational health 
issues amongst UK doctors: a literature review. Occup Med 
2015;65:519–28.
 5. Brooks SK, Gerada C, Chalder T. Review of literature on the mental 
health of doctors: are specialist services needed? J Ment Health 
2011;20:146–56.
 6. Carr GD. Physician suicide–a problem for our time. J Miss State Med 
Assoc 2008;49:308–12.
 7. Hawton K, Clements A, Sakarovitch C, et al. Suicide in doctors: 
a study of risk according to gender, seniority and specialty in 
medical practitioners in England and Wales, 1979-1995. J Epidemiol 
Community Health 2001;55:296–300.
 8. Richings JC, Khara GS, McDowell M. Suicide in young doctors. Br J 
Psychiatry 1986;149:475–8.
 9. Department of Health. Mental health and ill health in doctors. 
London: Department of Health, 2008.
 
10. Hobbs FDR, Bankhead C, Mukhtar T, et al. Clinical workload in UK 
primary care: a retrospective analysis of 100 million consultations in 
England, 2007–14. The Lancet 2016;387:2323–30.
 
11. Baird B, Charles A, Honeyman M, et al. Understanding pressures in 
general practice, 2016.
 
12. Doran N, Fox F
, Rodham K, et al. Lost to the NHS: a mixed methods 
study of why GPs leave practice early in England. Br J Gen Pract 
2016;66:e128–135.
 
13. Fund King’s. Improving the quality in general practice. London: King’s 
Fund, 2011.
 
14. Hippisley-Cox J, Vinogradova Y. Trends in consultation rates in 
general practice 1995 to 2008: analysis of the QResearchs database. 
London: NHS Information Centre, 2009.
 
15. Dewa CS, Loong D, Bonato S, et al. How does burnout affect 
physician productivity? A systematic literature review. BMC Health 
Serv Res 2014;14:325.
 
16. Dewa CS, Jacobs P
, Thanh NX, et al. An estimate of the cost 
of burnout on early retirement and reduction in clinical hours of 
practicing physicians in Canada. BMC Health Serv Res 2014;14:254.
 
17. Firth-Cozens J. A perspective on stress and depression. In:  
Cox JK J, Hutchinson A, McAvoy P
, eds. Understanding doctors’ 
performance. Oxford: Radcliffe Publishing, 2006:22–5.
 
18. NHS. Securing the future gp workforce delivering the mandate on gp 
expansion: Gp Taskforce Final Report, 2014.
 
19. DoH. National survey of general practitioner job satisfaction, 2012.
 
20. Boorman S. Nhs health and well being. Final report. London: 
Department of Health, 2009.
 
21. Dawson J. Staff Experience And Patient Outcomes: What Do We 
Know? NHS England: Report for NHS Employers, 2014.
 
22. Fahrenkopf AM, Sectish TC, Barger LK, et al. Rates of medication 
errors among depressed and burnt out residents: prospective cohort 
study. BMJ 2008;336:488–91.
 
23. Maben J. Patients’ Experiences of care and the influence of staff 
motivation, affect and wellbeing: Final report NIHR Service Deliver 
and Organisation, 2012.
 
24. Sandelowski M. Sample size in qualitative research. Res Nurs Health 
1995;18:179–83.
 
25. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res 
Psychol 2006;3:77–101.
 
26. Hubbard G, Backett-Milburn K, Kemmer D. Working with emotion: 
Issues for the researcher in fieldwork and teamwork. Int J Soc Res 
Methodol 2001;4:119–37.
 
27. Croxson CH, Ashdown HF
, Hobbs FR. GPs’ perceptions of 
workload in England: a qualitative interview study. Br J Gen Pract 
2017;67:e138–47.
 
28. Fisher RF
, Croxson CH, Ashdown HF
, et al. GP views on strategies 
to cope with increasing workload: a qualitative interview study. Br J 
Gen Pract 2017;67:e148–56.
 
29. Curtis P
, Taylor G, Riley R, et al. Written reflection in assessment and 
appraisal: GP and GP trainee views. Educ Prim Care 2017;28:141–9.
 
30. Panagioti M, Lewith G, et al. Controlled intervention to reduce 
burnout in physicians: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 
2016.
 
31. Smith P
. The emotional labour of nursing revisited. 2nd edn. 
Basingstoke: edPalgrave Macmillan, 2012.
 
32. NHS. General practice forward view. Secondary General practice 
forward view. 2016 https://www. 
england. 
nhs. 
uk/ 
gp/ 
gpfv/
 
33. Fischer M, Ereaut G. When doctors and patients talk: making sense 
of the consultation: The Health Foundation, 2012.
 
34. Firth-Cozens JH. A little too much, in how to survive in medicine: 
personally and professionally. Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, 2010.
 
35. Van Roy K, Vanheule S, Inslegers R. Research on Balint groups: a 
literature review. Patient Educ Couns 2015;98:685–94.
 
36. Benson J, Magraith K. Compassion fatigue and burnout: the role of 
Balint groups. Aust Fam Physician 2005;34:497–8.
 
37. Gishen F
, Gill D. Introducing Schwartz rounds at UCL Medical 
School. Secondary Introducing Schwartz rounds at UCL Medical 
School. 2014 https:// 
uclmsnews. 
wordpress. 
com/ 
2014/ 
09/ 
29/ 
introducing- 
schwartz- 
rounds- 
at- 
ucl- 
medical- 
school/
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017361 on 5 December 2017. Downloaded from 
