 Modern Pathology (2018) 31:1770–1786
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-018-0110-y
ARTICLE
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms:
an International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and World
Health Organization (WHO) expert consensus proposal
Guido Rindi1
● David S. Klimstra2
● Behnoush Abedi-Ardekani3
● Sylvia L. Asa
4
● Frederik T. Bosman5
●
Elisabeth Brambilla6
● Klaus J. Busam2
● Ronald R. de Krijger7
● Manfred Dietel8
● Adel K. El-Naggar9
●
Lynnette Fernandez-Cuesta3
● Günter Klöppel10
● W. Glenn McCluggage11
● Holger Moch12
● Hiroko Ohgaki3
●
Emad A. Rakha13
● Nicholas S. Reed14
● Brian A. Rous15
● Hironobu Sasano16
● Aldo Scarpa
17
● Jean-Yves Scoazec18
●
William D. Travis2
● Giovanni Tallini19
● Jacqueline Trouillas20
● J. Han van Krieken21
● Ian A. Cree
3
Received: 22 May 2018 / Revised: 14 June 2018 / Accepted: 14 June 2018 / Published online: 23 August 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is published with open access
Abstract
The classification of neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) differs between organ systems and currently causes considerable
confusion. A uniform classification framework for NENs at any anatomical location may reduce inconsistencies and
contradictions among the various systems currently in use. The classification suggested here is intended to allow pathologists
and clinicians to manage their patients with NENs consistently, while acknowledging organ-specific differences in
classification criteria, tumor biology, and prognostic factors. The classification suggested is based on a consensus conference
held at the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in November 2017 and subsequent discussion with
additional experts. The key feature of the new classification is a distinction between differentiated neuroendocrine tumors
(NETs), also designated carcinoid tumors in some systems, and poorly differentiated NECs, as they both share common
expression of neuroendocrine markers. This dichotomous morphological subdivision into NETs and NECs is supported by
genetic evidence at specific anatomic sites as well as clinical, epidemiologic, histologic, and prognostic differences. In many
organ systems, NETs are graded as G1, G2, or G3 based on mitotic count and/or Ki-67 labeling index, and/or the presence of
necrosis; NECs are considered high grade by definition. We believe this conceptual approach can form the basis for the next
generation of NEN classifications and will allow more consistent taxonomy to understand how neoplasms from different
organ systems inter-relate clinically and genetically.
Introduction
The current pathologic classifications of neuroendocrine
neoplasms (NENs) across different organ systems use a
range of site-specific terminologies and criteria, creating
significant confusion among pathologists and treating clin-
icians. The World Health Organization (WHO) Interna-
tional Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has now
started the new fifth edition of the WHO Classification of
Tumors, published as the widely used WHO Blue Books
(http://whobluebooks.iarc.fr). A uniform classification fra-
mework for NENs at any anatomical location would reduce
inconsistencies and contradictions among the various sys-
tems currently in use, allowing unification of classification
concepts, despite organ-specific differences in classification
criteria, tumor biology, and prognostic factors. The classi-
fication suggested here is intended to allow pathologists and
clinicians to manage their patients with NENs consistently,
and to facilitate comparisons between the different entities
falling into this category of neoplasms.
Methods
A dedicated consensus meeting was held in Lyon on 2–3
November 2017 at IARC, under the auspices of the WHO
These authors contributed equally: Guido Rindi, David S. Klimstra
* Ian A. Cree
creei@iarc.fr
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:
 Classification of Tumors Group. IARC devised the struc-
ture, defined the aims, selected the experts and prepared the
meeting agenda. Itemized proposal statements and ques-
tions were presented, discussed, and consensually agreed
upon or discarded by the working group. A resulting
“common classification framework” was developed to
standardize concepts among NENs of different anatomic
sites. Several additional experts were later selected to assist
with specific topics. Each subspecialty expert subsequently
provided
site-specific
classification
considerations
for
implementation of the proposed common classification
framework.
Results and discussion
A framework for NEN classification is proposed in which
the term NEC is clearly indicative of high-grade malignant
histology and biologic behavior. Neuroendocrine tumor
(NET), in contrast, is intended to designate a family of well-
differentiated neoplasms whose potential to metastasize or
invade the adjacent tissues depends on tumor site and type,
and grade [1, 2]. In some sites, such as the pituitary and
parathyroid, the vast majority exhibit very low risk of
metastatic behavior (hence the terminology “adenoma” that
has been used in these sites); in others such as the pancreas
and small intestine, most NETs behave in a malignant
fashion. The difficulty of specifically predicting the beha-
vior of well-differentiated NENs is well-known, and
although organ-specific grading schemes have aided in
stratifying relative aggressiveness, the proposed conceptual
terminology expressly avoids categorizing the neoplasms as
explicitly “benign” or “malignant”. Thus, there is no intent
for the designation of NET to affect the current under-
standing of malignant potential, which should remain an
organ-specific characteristic. It is hoped that the proposed
classification will stimulate interest in exploring potential
grading parameters for anatomic sites where there is little
information regarding the prognostic significance of grad-
ing, and/or where NETs are not currently graded, and to
encourage the potential for examining the role of cell pro-
liferation and other grading factors for prognostication in
sites where this has not been performed.
Proposed classification
NENs are relatively rare and comprise a heterogeneous
group of tumors characterized by the presence of neurose-
cretory granules and typically showing a characteristic
histology and immunoprofile. Their incidence in the general
population varies depending on the specific anatomic
location [3, 4]. It was widely acknowledged that:
i. NENs arise at almost any anatomical site, including
paraganglia, and are distributed throughout the body
in organs of all types, as well as in soft tissues;
ii. NENs at various sites are of epithelial or neuronal/
neuroectodermal origin, and share major morphologi-
cal and protein expression signatures depending on
differentiation;
iii. NENs express a variable spectrum of proteins, shared
with
their
normal
cell
counterparts
at
specific
anatomical locations, including markers of general
neuroendocrine differentiation (such as chromogranin
A, chromogranin B, and synaptophysin) as well as
site-specific markers such as hormones and transcrip-
tion factors [4].
Existing classification systems vary widely in terminol-
ogy and criteria between sites, with robust data supporting
grading systems in some anatomic sites (e.g., lung, gastro-
intestinal tract, pancreas), but not in others (e.g., breast,
thyroid, parathyroid). In addition, some NETs have been
subjected to careful cell-type classification (most well-
known in the pituitary, but also in the rectum and pancreas)
that has prognostic and predictive value, whereas others
have not, e.g., in the female genital tract and breast. The
relative prevalence of different NEN categories also varies
by anatomic site. The panorama of genetic knowledge
regarding NENs is patchy, with well-defined traits defined
by high-throughput studies for some anatomic sites and
relatively scarce information for other sites.
The term NENs encompasses both well-differentiated
NETs and poorly differentiated NECs, as they both share
common histologic, immunophenotypic, and ultrastructural
neuroendocrine features. However, genetic evidence at
specific anatomic sites supports the dual morphological
subdivision that distinguishes poorly differentiated NECs
from well-differentiated NETs [5–9]. Although they can
have overlapping histologic features, their inclusion toge-
ther in a single classification framework may incorrectly
lead to the presumption that well-differentiated NETs and
poorly differentiated NECs are closely related neoplasms; in
most organs where these families of neoplasms have been
studied, the data suggest that they are not biologically
closely related [7–9]. In addition, to have different degrees
of biological aggressiveness, and different responses to
medical therapy, NETs and NECs have different risk fac-
tors, hereditary predispositions, relationships to non-NE
neoplasia, and underpinning genetics. This is well sup-
ported by data in the pulmonary and the digestive systems,
as described below, with limited data as yet in other
systems.
Six major points of discussion were identified by the
expert group: 1. anatomy; 2. tumor category definition; 3.
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1771
 tumor family definition; 4. tumor-type definition; 5. tumor
sub-types definition; 6. tumor grading procedures.
1. Anatomy: It is recognized that every anatomical site
has its own individuality and clinical–pathological
features, which often form the basis for historical
classification systems. Anatomic site-specific features
must be considered when devising any common
classification system in order to avoid potential
confusion. It was proposed and agreed that current
WHO definitions (i.e., site-specific tumor definitions)
should be maintained, until potentially revised within
the next edition of each WHO Blue Book, and that the
novel uniform standard classification terminology for
NEN (NEN-WHO 2018) be appended in brackets
when it differs from the currently employed site-
specific terminology. It was noted that the recently
proposed new terminology for pituitary tumors is
more in line with this proposal than the current 2017
WHO terminology [10]. Use of this new terminology
for pituitary NENs, rather than the 2017 WHO
terminology may be helpful to allow for a clear and
smooth transition in the classification to assist those
using it. We expect that future WHO Blue Books will
use the new classification system.
2. Tumor category definition: It was proposed and
agreed to adopt the term “neuroendocrine neoplasm
(NEN)” as a term encompassing all tumor classes with
predominant neuroendocrine differentiation, including
both well and poorly differentiated forms. Given the
multiple anatomic sources (neural structures, endo-
crine organs and/or neuroendocrine cells), morphol-
ogy, and the expression of markers of neuroendocrine
differentiation (general and specific) were recognized
as key features defining these neoplasms at any
specific anatomic site. It was acknowledged that the
expression
of
neuroendocrine
markers
can
vary
depending on anatomic site and degree of differentia-
tion,
and
that
different
general
neuroendocrine
markers to define neuroendocrine differentiation are
currently used in different organ systems (e.g., only
chromogranins, and synaptophysin in the gastrointest-
inal
tract
and
pancreas,
versus
chromogranins,
synaptophysin, and CD56 in the lung).
3. Tumor family definition: It was proposed and agreed
that two families (or classes) of epithelial NENs be
recognized, well-differentiated and poorly differen-
tiated. It was further agreed that classical cytological/
histological morphological criteria be adopted for the
definition
of
differentiation
(Table
1).
It
was
Table 1 NEN 2018 WHO proposed classification of selected NEN by site, category, family, and tumor type
Site
Category
Family
Type
Grade
Current terminology
Lung
Neuroendocrine neoplasm
(NEN)
Neuroendocrine tumor
(NET)
Pulmonary neuroendocrine
tumor (NET)a
G1
G2
Carcinoid
Atypical carcinoida
Neuroendocrine carcinoma
(NEC)
Small cell lung carcinoma
(Pulmonary NEC, small cell-
type)b
Small cell lung
carcinoma
Pulmonary NEC, large cell-
type
Large cell NE
carcinoma
Uterus (corpus
and cervix)
Neuroendocrine neoplasm
(NEN)
Neuroendocrine tumor
(NET)
Uterine neuroendocrine tumor
(NET)
G1
G2
G3
Carcinoid
Atypical carcinoid
Atypical carcinoid
Neuroendocrine carcinoma
(NEC)
Uterine NEC, small cell-type
Small cell carcinoma
Uterine NEC, large cell-type
Large cell NE
carcinoma
Pancreas
Neuroendocrine neoplasm
(NEN)
Neuroendocrine tumor
(NET)
Pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumor (NET)
G1
G2
G3
PanNET G1
PanNET G2
PanNET G3
Neuroendocrine carcinoma
(NEC)
Pancreatic NEC, small cell-
type
Small cell NE
carcinoma
Pancreatic NEC, large cell-type
Large cell NE
carcinoma
NEC are regarded as high grade, but as they represent a separate tumor family, there is no need to for formal grading.
aThe category of G3 atypical carcinoid in the lung is not a validated entity and not recognized in the 2015 WHO classification. Currently such
tumors are classified as small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) or large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC). High-grade NET with features of
atypical carcinoid similar to the G3 tumors of the pancreatic/gastrointestinal tract are rare in the lung, not well characterized and need further study.
bNot recommended as small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is too well ingrained in clinical practice and some SCLC lack commonly used
neuroendocrine markers.
1772
G. Rindi et al.
 acknowledged that the two families may not exist in
all anatomical sites, and that their relative prevalence
also varies widely by site of origin. It was proposed
and agreed that the well-differentiated family be
designated “neuroendocrine tumor (NET)”, and the
poorly differentiated family “neuroendocrine carci-
noma (NEC)”. There are some areas of the body
where almost all NENs are NETs (e.g., small
intestine, ovary, parathyroid, pituitary); in other
organs NECs predominate (e.g., lung, colon). As this
is primarily a classifier for NEN of epithelial origin, it
was further suggested that paragangliomas (i.e., NEN
of non-epithelial origin) be regarded as a third family
of NENs.
4. Tumor-type definition: Tumor types (Table 1) repre-
sent the diagnostic entities within the families outlined
above: for some this is currently the same as the
family name with the addition of site (e.g., pancreatic
NET), though for others it may differ substantially
(e.g.,
carcinoid
tumor,
small cell
lung
cancer).
Independent tumor types are recognized by their
own ICD-O codes (http://codes.iarc.fr), which should
be maintained until revision as part of the WHO
Classification of Tumors.
5. Tumor sub-type definition: Tumor sub-types (variants)
can be defined morphologically or by other criteria,
and some may have their own ICD-O codes.
6. Tumor grade: It was proposed and agreed that well-
differentiated neoplasms (NETs) should usually be
graded in three tiers as G1, G2, and G3 (Table 1),
corresponding to low-grade, intermediate-grade, and
high-grade. In some organs, the current nomenclature
inherently reflects the grade (e.g., lung and thymus,
where carcinoid tumors are G1 and atypical carcinoid
tumors are G2), and therefore current reporting
practices do not separately specify the grade. It is
not necessary to grade NEC as these are always high
grade.
It was also agreed that three grading parameters of
prognostic relevance are:
i. the mitotic count should usually be expressed as
mitoses per mm2 area, ideally counted in up to
10 mm2 to assure accuracy, unless hotspots are
required (e.g., breast). In lung and pancreatic
NENs, it is current practice to express the number
of mitoses within an area of 2 mm2. In practice,
tissue availability may restrict areas available for
counting. It may also be best practice to specify the
number of mitoses counted within the total area
assessed for each case (i.e., X mitoses in Y mm2);
ii. the Ki-67 cell labeling index performed on regions
of most intense labeling (“hotspots of at least
0.4 mm2”) using a validated antibody (i.e., MIB1
antibody) and
iii. the presence or absence of necrosis, defined by
morphological criteria. Necrosis may be focal
(punctate) or diffuse (geographic).
Mitotic counts have in the past been expressed as the
number per high-powered field (HPF) as the unit of area
within the tumor. Unfortunately, different combinations of
microscopes and lenses result in HPFs of variable area [11–
13]. Grade may therefore differ, simply based on the
microscope being used. While it is possible to at least define
the exact size of these fields in scientific publications, this
does not allow an accurate grade to be assigned in routine
practice. It is arguable that there is little excuse for the use
of HPFs, when international standard (SI) units such as
mm2 are available, and we have chosen to express the
mitotic count per mm2, in line with WHO Blue Book
policy.
It was agreed that the specific basis for grading should
continue to be contingent on anatomic site, based on
current practices for each site. Mitotic count and/or Ki-67
labeling index are the minimum required for grading at
almost any anatomic site (where grading is mandated). It
was proposed and agreed that poorly differentiated neo-
plasms NEC be (i) of high grade by definition; (ii) of two
separate morphologic types and (iii) defined as small cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma (SCNEC) or large cell neu-
roendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC). Some tumor types may
have organ-specific names: e.g., small cell lung cancer
(SCLC), although small cell carcinoma should not be
abbreviated to SCC to avoid confusion with squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC). It was proposed and agreed that
tumor classes be site-specific and different, and site-
specific grading parameters (cut-offs) be defined for each
anatomic subgroup.
It was proposed and agreed that in the pathology report:
(i) the parameters used for grading (mitotic count, Ki-67
labeling index [%] and necrosis) be stated clearly; (ii) the
site-specific tumor nomenclature according to current WHO
classifications be stated first; and (iii) the novel uniform
standard classification framework be added in brackets, i.e.,
(NEN-WHO 2018).
Additional points
NENs in some anatomic sites are further characterized
based on their production of bioactive substances (peptide
hormones or bioamines), and in a number of anatomic sites,
clinically functional NENs exist in which a hormonal or
paraneoplastic syndrome may be the dominant clinical
manifestation of the neoplasm. It was acknowledged that
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1773
 the detection of secretory products, either in the serum or
using immunohistochemistry to assay the tumor cells, may
be of relevance for classification (i.e., in the pituitary), for
prognosis (such as in pancreatic insulinomas), or to corre-
late with the clinical symptoms in selected patient popula-
tions. However, given the variety of different bioactive
substances produced in NENs of different locations, no
general recommendations for assaying them could be
developed.
In many anatomic sites, neoplasms exist that exhibit both
neuroendocrine and non-neuroendocrine elements, which
can be present in morphologically distinct cell populations
or more intimately intermixed. The neuroendocrine ele-
ments of these “mixed” or “combined” neoplasms are most
commonly NECs [14–16]; the non-neuroendocrine com-
ponents can be glandular, squamous, or other lineages.
Designations such as combined small cell carcinoma (in the
lung) mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma (MANEC; in
the tubular gastrointestinal tract), or mixed neuroendocrine-
non-neuroendocrine neoplasm (MiNEN; in the pancreas)
have been proposed for this family. While this conceptual
category is recognized as an important member of the NEN
family, these complex neoplasms were not included in the
present classification framework, though they are men-
tioned in the site-specific sections below where they may be
a cause of confusion.
Another scenario in which neuroendocrine differentiation
can occur in neoplasms is in non-NECs following che-
motherapy, molecularly targeted therapy, or radiotherapy.
In some instances, a small cell carcinoma may arise fol-
lowing treatment of an adenocarcinoma (such as in the
prostate or lung) and such poorly differentiated NECs can
be considered within the present classification framework.
In other scenarios, however, treated carcinomas may display
apparent well-differentiated neuroendocrine elements, such
as in the Paneth-like cell features of treated prostatic ade-
nocarcinoma [17, 18], or the well-differentiated neu-
roendocrine cell nests in rectal carcinomas following
chemoradiotherapy [19].
Finally, tumors of the paraganglia are designated para-
ganglioma and are classified based on criteria for these
neoplasms: they are mentioned in passing, but are not the
focus of this paper.
Implications for site-specific classification
The above classification framework criteria (Fig. 1) was
proposed and agreed to be applied to each anatomical site in
which NENs arise. It was recognized that NENs at different
anatomic sites may fit variably into the above-defined fra-
mework. Accordingly, the site-specific applications for the
classification are further defined below.
Pancreatic and gastrointestinal tract NENs
The current proposed NEN classification (Table 1) is largely
based on the recently updated WHO classification for
pancreatic NENs [16]. This classification separately distin-
guishes pancreatic well-differentiated NE tumors (Pan-
NETs) and poorly differentiated NE carcinomas (PanNECs)
morphologically [1, 2, 20–22]. Grading of PanNETs into
three tiers (G1, G2, and G3) is based on proliferation
assessed by mitotic count and Ki-67 index. Necrosis,
though recognized as a potential adverse prognostic factor,
is not included in the grading parameters. In the 2017 WHO
classification, PanNECs are also designated as G3, whereas
in the current proposal NECs are not specifically graded, as
they are regarded all to be high grade by definition. In the
pancreas, high-grade NENs are uncommon, and it appears
that G3 PanNETs are at least as frequent as PanNECs, in
contrast to the gastrointestinal tract (see below) (Fig. 2).
In the pancreas, NETs display recurrent somatic muta-
tions in MEN1, DAXX, ATRX, PTEN, and members of the
mTOR signaling pathway [23–25]. Clinically, sporadic
NETs also present germline mutations in the DNA repair
genes MUTYH, CHEK2, and BRCA2 [24]. In contrast,
NECs instead commonly have mutations in TP53 and RB1
and may share mutations in KRAS and SMAD4, genes
commonly involved in the pathogenesis of ductal adeno-
carcinoma [26–28]. Pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinomas
(PanNECs) are usually large cell-type and may contain
components of adenocarcinoma, typically not found in
NETs. Progression from G1 or G2 NETs to G3 may occur,
both within a primary tumor and between sites of disease,
particularly over time as the tumor evolves clinically. Very
rare, conversely, is the progression from G3 NET to NEC—
if it occurs at all: further evidence is required. As in pan-
creatic NETs (PanNETs), gastrointestinal NETs (GI-NETs)
are mutationally quiet, with the most frequent mutated gene
being CDNK1B, which harbor mutations in 8% of small
intestine NETs [26, 29]. In the gastrointestinal tract, G3
NETs are also reported, though less commonly than in the
pancreas. SSTR2A expression is usually recognized in
PanNETs, while it is only occasionally observed in Pan-
NECs [30].
Clinical data demonstrate the dependency of prognosis
on grade, with G2 PanNETs being more aggressive than
G1. G3 PanNETs also appear to be somewhat more
aggressive than G1 or G2, but they are not as aggressive as
PanNECs, which are rapidly lethal in most cases. As in
other anatomic locations, PanNECs are felt to respond best
to platinum-based chemotherapy, whereas PanNETs are
more optimally treated with somatostatin analogs, mTOR
inhibitors, alkylating agents, or VEGF inhibitors [31–33];
these differences in clinical management also emphasize the
importance of distinguishing PanNETs from PanNECs. The
1774
G. Rindi et al.
 value of determining the hormone secretion profile of
pancreatic NENs is debated, although insulinomas are
usually less aggressive, and gastrinomas more so.
In the gastrointestinal tract, the classification of NENs
has not been updated by WHO since 2010 [14], though this
is now in progress. At that time, NET G3 was not a
recognized category, and all G3 NENs were regarded to be
poorly differentiated NECs; hence, the current classification
differs in that regard from the present proposal. In fact, G3
NETs in the gastrointestinal tract have also been reported
[25], although less commonly than in the pancreas. There-
fore, it has been proposed that a three tier system (G1–G3)
should be adopted for NETs in the gastrointestinal tract as
well [2]. However, most high-grade NENs of the gastro-
intestinal tract are NECs, with mutations in TP53 and RB1
and, in the colon, APC mutations similar to those found in
adenocarcinomas, which are not usually reported in NETs
[27, 28]. As in PanNETs, there is a low overall incidence of
Fig. 1 The H&E appearance of NEN from different sites: a a grade 1 NET from the ileum, b a grade 2 NET from the lung (atypical carcinoid), c a
grade 3 NET from the pancreas, d a NEC (SCLC) from the lung, and e large cell NEC from the pancreas
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1775
 mutations in gastrointestinal NETs; for example, small
bowel NETs have an 8% incidence of CDNK1B mutations
and few other recurrent mutations [26, 34]. Instead, epige-
netic dysregulation appears to have a major role in the
pathogenesis of small bowel NETs [35]. NECs of the gas-
trointestinal tract may exhibit components of adenocarci-
noma or, in the esophagus or anus, squamous cell
carcinoma, again emphasizing the close relationship of
NECs to non-NECs.
Lung NENs
In the lung NENs are currently classified as low-grade
typical carcinoid, intermediate-grade atypical carcinoid, and
the high-grade LCNEC and small cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC) [15, 36, 37]. Use of this terminology and the 2015
WHO criteria were recommended by a recent ENETS
guideline based upon a systematic literature review and
consensus of an international, multidisciplinary panel of
experts and endorsed by the International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer [38]. typical carcinoid and aty-
pical carcinoid are well-differentiated and correspond to
NET, while LCNEC and SCLC are poorly differentiated
and correspond to NEC within the classification proposed
here (Table 1). Up to 25% of surgically resected SCLC and
LCNEC have histologic components of other non-small cell
carcinomas such as adenocarcinoma or squamous cell car-
cinoma and these tumors are classified as combined SCLC
or combined LCNEC, respectively [36, 37]. In contrast to
SCLC and LCNEC, carcinoids characteristically do not
have components of non-small cell carcinoma.
Since the 1999 and 2004 WHO classifications [39, 40]
these tumors have primarily been distinguished based on
mitotic counts per 2 mm2, the presence or absence of
necrosis and for the high-grade NEC, whether the tumor has
small cell or large cell cytologic features [15].
The main role of Ki-67 in lung NENs is to distinguish the
carcinoids from the high-grade LCNEC and SCLC. This is
particularly important in small biopsies with crush artifact,
where carcinoids can be misdiagnosed as SCLC [41, 42].
Fig. 2 Ki-67 staining of NEN from different sites: a a grade 1 NET from the ileum, b a grade 2 NET from the lung (atypical carcinoid), c a grade 3
NET from the pancreas, and d a NEC (SCLC) from the lung
1776
G. Rindi et al.
 No reliable cut-off has been established for Ki-67 in the
distinction between typical carcinoid and atypical carcinoid
[43], although reported ranges for typical carcinoid are 2.3
to 4.15% and for atypical carcinoid are 9 to 17.8% [43].
Although some studies have suggested usefulness of Ki-67
in grading lung carcinoids, others have shown limited
additive value over histologic criteria, particularly mitotic
counts [44, 45]. In addition there is no well-defined
threshold
to
distinguish
carcinoids
from
SCLC
or
LCNEC, however a wide range of cut-off values from 2.5 to
30% have been proposed. Some studies have evaluated the
entire spectrum of neuroendocrine lung neoplasms with
various proposals of how to incorporate Ki-67 proliferation
rates and mitotic counts, but there is no consensus on the
optimal approach [38, 43, 46, 47]. There is a great need for
further research on this topic both on the issue of separating
typical carcinoid from atypical carcinoid and carcinoids
from the high-grade LCNEC and SCLC.
The category of G3 atypical carcinoid in the lung is not a
validated entity and not recognized in the 2015 WHO
classification, although a few studies suggest these cases
may exist [48, 49]. Currently such tumors are classified as
SCLC or LCNEC. High-grade NET with features of aty-
pical carcinoid similar to the G3 tumors of the pancreatic/
gastrointestinal tract are rare in the lung, not well char-
acterized and need further clinical, pathologic and genetic
evaluation [48, 49].
Within the lung, 95% of NENs are high grade poorly
differentiated, including SCLC (79%) and LCNEC (16%)
with the carcinoids only comprising ~5% (5% typical car-
cinoid and 0.5% atypical carcinoid) [50, 51]. Poorly dif-
ferentiated NECs typically present in older patients, with
strong association with cigarette smoking and a very poor
prognosis. Clinically, SCLC is distinct from all other non-
small cell lung cancers and the other NENs in that it con-
sistently shows an initial clinical response to cisplatin/eto-
poside
chemotherapy.
Responsiveness
to
SCLC
chemotherapy regimens has been reported in some LCNEC
series [52], but this is not a consistent finding [37, 52].
Typical carcinoid and atypical carcinoid occur in younger
patients than SCLC or LCNEC and they do not show a
strong association with cigarette smoking [50]. Current
evidence suggests these tumors show less benefit from
traditional platinum-based chemotherapy, however ever-
olimus, an MTOR pathway inhibitor, is now approved, and
recent evidence shows temozolamide may have some effect.
Global genomic studies have demonstrated extensive
genetic alterations in SCLC and large cell carcinoma
(including LCNEC), consisting of amplifications, deletions,
and mutations in contrast to very few genetic changes in
lung carcinoids [53]. SCLCs characteristically have bial-
lelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1 [54–56]. In addition,
SCLCs show inactivating mutations in NOTCH family
genes in 25% of cases and in rare cases kinase gene
mutations [57]. Several studies have shown that LCNECs
are more genomically heterogeneous than SCLCs, with a
group that is similar to SCLC, with biallelic inactivation of
TP53 and RB1, and another group that is more non-small
cell-like, with mutations in KRAS, STK11/KEAP1 [48, 57].
In contrast, lung carcinoids lack mutations in TP53, RB1,
KRAS, STK11/KEAP1, but show frequent mutations in
chromatin-remodeling genes such as covalent histone
modifiers in 40% and subunits of the SWI/SNF complex
including the MEN1, PSIP1, and ARID1A genes in 22% of
cases [58, 59]. Rare cases of LCNEC with carcinoid-like
genetic features such as MEN-1 mutations have been
reported [48]. These data demonstrate that, although pul-
monary NETs (typical carcinoid and atypical carcinoid) are
regarded as part of the spectrum of pulmonary NE neo-
plasms, they are only distantly related to poorly differ-
entiated NECs (SCLC and LCNEC) because these groups
of tumors have major clinical, epidemiologic, histologic,
genetic, and prognostic differences.
Pituitary
The current WHO classification consists only of well-
differentiated neoplasms classified as adenomas or well-
differentiated carcinomas based on the presence of distant
metastasis and sub-classified depending on hormone pro-
duction. However, despite the rarity of distant metastatic
spread, these tumors are recognized to have a high incidence
of invasion of surrounding tissues. As recently defined,
“aggressive tumors with invasion, and unusually rapid tumor
growth, multiple recurrences despite optimal therapies” cause
significant morbidity and mortality [60]. Clinically and
pathologically, these aggressive tumors and carcinomas with
metastasis were very similar [61–63]. It is exceptionally
unusual for a pituitary carcinoma to present with synchronous
metastasis; they usually develop metachronously, usually
after the initial presentation with an adenoma, leading to the
awkward situation where a tumor is classified as “adenoma”,
and then must be reclassified as “carcinoma” when it spreads.
Therefore, it has been proposed that pituitary tumors be
classified as NETs, i.e., pituitary NETs (PitNETs) rather than
adenomas or carcinomas [10]. Poorly differentiated NECs do
not occur in the pituitary.
PitNET prognosis and prediction relies more on cell type
and degree of cell differentiation than on proliferative
markers [10]. Indeed, this organ has been so well scruti-
nized that “poorly differentiated tumors” are currently
defined based on expression of transcription factors with
loss of differentiated cell morphology and hormone pro-
duction
[64,
65],
but
these
tumors
remain
well-
differentiated NETs based on criteria applied in other
sites. Although mitotic count and/or Ki-67 index are not
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1777
 useful in clinical practice, it has been recently shown that
these proliferative markers have a major impact on PitNET
prognosis [66], while others have not [67]. However,
grading of these tumors as G1, G2, and G3 is currently not
possible based on available data. Mitoses are uncommon in
these tumors and there are no data on the value of mitotic
counts in the classification of PitNETs. Necrosis is rare and
related to vascular thrombosis.
There is some evidence that different mutations underlie
tumors of different cell types. For example, GNAS mutations
may be implicated in the pathogenesis of densely granulated
somatotroph/mammosomatotroph tumors, and USP8 muta-
tions in densely granulated corticotroph tumors. In contrast,
AIP mutations may be implicated in some sparsely granulated
somatotroph tumors with epigenetic silencing in those tumors
without mutation. Interestingly, MEN1 mutation in PitNETs is
not specific to the cell type. Early studies suggested that TP53
inactivation and RAS mutations were features of carcinomas
[68, 69]. However, the genetic factors underlying the majority
of sporadic PitNETS remain unknown and epigenetic altera-
tions are thought to be common.
Paragangliomas arising in and around the sella turcica
should be distinguished from PitNETs and classified as a
separate family.
Head and neck, including thyroid and parathyroid
Nasal cavity, larynx, trachea NEN, neck and parotid gland
Epithelial neuroendocrine neoplasms in the 2016 Head and
Neck WHO tumor blue book are categorized into well-
differentiated (typical carcinoid), moderately differentiated
(atypical carcinoid) and poorly differentiated (small and
large cell) neuroendocrine carcinomas. In the proposed
nomenclature, based on a recent proposal, they are collec-
tively termed NENs (Table 1) [70] with well-differentiated
(typical carcinoid) and moderately differentiated (atypical
carcinoid) carcinomas are defined as NETs, grades 1 and 2,
respectively and the poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinomas
as
NECs;
SCNEC
and
LCNEC.
Well-
differentiated NEN (typical carcinoid), NET-G1, display
organoid formation composed of monotonous cells with
minimal mitotic figures [71]. The differential diagnoses
include paraganglioma and medullary thyroid carcinoma
[72–74]. Moderately differentiated (atypical carcinoid),
NET-G2, carcinoma retains organoid architecture and
manifest cellular pleomorphism, moderate numbers of
mitoses, and occasional necrosis and amyloid-like deposi-
tion. Although not widely practiced, Ki-67 scoring can be
helpful. The main differential diagnoses are medullary
thyroid carcinoma and paraganglioma [75–77].
In the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses, the most
common NENs are poorly differentiated SCNECs. The
differential diagnosis of this entity is broad and includes
neuroblastoma, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, sinonasal
undifferentiated, NUT carcinoma, pituitary NETs, para-
ganglioma, mucosal melanoma, and primitive neuroecto-
dermal tumors. Lineage-associated immunohistochemical
markers are needed in the diagnosis and categorization of
these entities. Undifferentiated sinonasal carcinomas do
not
express
neuroendocrine
markers,
while
para-
ganglioma, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and mel-
anoma are keratin negative. NUT carcinoma is negative
for neuroendocrine markers and positive for nuclear pro-
tein in testis (NUT-M1 antibody). Primitive neuroecto-
dermal tumor is positive for CD99 and FLI-1 protein. In
the neck nodes and parotid gland, NENs comprise of
poorly differentiated SCNEC and Merkel cell carcinoma
(MCC). MCC commonly express dot-like CK20 staining
[78]. Metastasis from skin and other sites must be
excluded.
Thyroid NENs
The vast majority of thyroid NENs are tumors of C-cells
(parafollicular cells), traditionally known as “medullary
thyroid carcinoma” (MTC) [79]. MTCs currently represent
3–5% of all thyroid carcinomas and develop in the setting
of MEN2 syndromes in ~30% of the cases [80]. Most
MTCs are well-differentiated NETs, based on the expres-
sion of calcitonin and TTF-1; aggressive, poorly differ-
entiated NECs represent less than 1% of MTCs, and
include a small cell variant that needs to be distinguished
from small cell carcinoma metastatic to the thyroid gland,
especially since small cell carcinomas of many anatomic
sites express TTF-1 [81, 82]. The prognosis of MTC is
heavily influenced by the stage of the disease, by serum
calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen levels, and in
MEN2 cases by the type of RET mutation [80]. RET
mutations influence the tumor microenvironment and
angiogenesis, and among sporadic cases p.M918T RET has
been linked to poor prognosis, compared to MTCs that are
RAS mutated or without mutations [77, 83, 84]. The Ki-67
labeling index in MTC is often <1% (and therefore difficult
to assess); nevertheless, limited evidence indicates that Ki-
67-based grading may be of prognostic significance [85,
86]. Mitotic count, necrosis and/or Ki-67 labeling index
may be used as markers of aggressive behavior but they are
not currently part of any validated grading system. Inter-
estingly, however, there is evidence that immunohisto-
chemical loss of calcitonin expression with retention of
CEA is considered an unfavorable sign, pointing to the
potential value of biomarkers, including hormones, in
defining MTC prognosis [75]. Improved biomarker and
grade profiling offers a great opportunity for the optimal
selection of patients to be treated with the tyrosine kinase
1778
G. Rindi et al.
 inhibitors (Vandetanib, Cabozantinib) currently approved
for advanced MTC [80].
Mixed medullary and follicular cell carcinomas, where
neoplastic C-cells are closely intermixed with other types of
non-neuroendocrine follicular cell-derived tumors (usually
papillary carcinoma), are extremely rare but well docu-
mented. They correspond to the mixed neuroendocrine-non-
neuroendocrine tumors of other organs (e.g., pancreatic
mixed neuroendocrine neoplasms), and need to be dis-
tinguished
from
collision
MTC-follicular
cell-derived
tumors and from the rare amphicrine MTC variant where
cytoplasmic mucin accumulates within neoplastic C-cells
[76]. Equally rare are intrathyroidal NEN with the features
of paraganglioma, that need to be distinguished from the
paraganglioma-like MTC variant [87].
Parathyroid NENs
The current classification includes well-differentiated neo-
plasms classified as adenomas, atypical adenomas, or car-
cinomas
(parathyroid
NETs);
poorly
differentiated,
aggressive carcinomas corresponding to parathyroid NECs
are extremely unusual. The diagnosis of malignancy is
based on invasive growth, evidenced by vascular invasion,
full penetration of the tumor capsule with extension into the
surrounding non-neoplastic tissues, or metastases [88, 89].
Mitoses, atypical mitoses, macronucleoli, thick intersecting
fibrous bands, and necrosis are potential signs of malig-
nancy [89, 90]. The Ki-67 labeling index is often >5% in
carcinomas compared with adenomas and hyperplastic
nodules, but there is a significant overlap in individual
equivocal cases [91]. Therefore, although the Ki-67 labeling
index, mitotic counts, and necrosis are often used as mar-
kers of aggressive behavior, they are not part of a formally
defined diagnostic grading scheme.
The parafibromin gene (CDC73, previously HRPT2) is
frequently inactivated in malignant tumors, and loss of
function mutations are identified in the germline of
patients with apparently sporadic parathyroid carcinoma (as
well as in other CDC73 related disorders, such as
hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome and familial
isolated hyperparathyroidism). Lack of immunohistochem-
ical expression of parafibromin combined with immunor-
eactivity for PGP9.5 provides a useful diagnostic adjunct to
the diagnosis of carcinoma [92]. Parathyroid NENs are a
well-known
component
of
MEN1,
MEN2A,
and
MEN4 syndromes, although MEN1 gene inactivation is not
associated with malignant behavior. A variety of genetic
alterations including CCND1 amplification, alterations of
the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and overexpression of
CCND1 (previously PRAD1) have been identified by high-
throughput genetic screening in parathyroid carcinoma and
adenoma [93, 94].
Breast NENs
NENs of the breast are rare and poorly defined. Apart from
rare cases of small cell carcinoma, analogous to its pulmonary
counterpart, the definition of NENs in the breast varies
widely, resulting in variable incidence from <0.1% [95] up to
20% [96]. Most are likely to represent mixed NENs. Clinical
syndromes related to hormone production are extremely rare
in breast NENs and the classic organoid features of carcinoid
tumors of the lung and gastrointestinal tract (i.e., ribbons,
cords, and rosettes) are not features of primary NENs of the
breast [97]. The 2012 WHO Working Group included NENs
under the category “carcinomas with NE features” and
defined these as tumors exhibiting morphological features
similar to those of NE tumor of gastrointestinal tract and lung
and expressing NE markers (i.e., chromogranins, and synap-
tophysin) to any extent [97]. They classified NENs in the
breast into (1) NETs, well-differentiated; these include low
and intermediate-grade tumors, which by definition in the
breast are malignant, and based on the presence of a periph-
eral myoepithelial cell layer they are classified and managed
as either in situ or invasive disease; (2) NECs, poorly dif-
ferentiated/small cell carcinomas; these neoplasms, based on
the description, included SCNEC but not LCNEC [97]. The
current classification also acknowledged the presence of a
third category which comprises a subset of breast carcinomas
with neuroendocrine differentiation as determined by histo-
chemical and immunohistochemical analysis. These include
breast carcinoma of no special type (NST) as well as special
types such as solid papillary carcinoma and the hypercellular
variant of mucinous carcinoma of any histological grade.
Therefore, distinction between well-differentiated NETs and
grade 1 or 2 breast carcinomas expressing neuroendocrine
markers should be based on the presence of histological
features characteristic of neuroendocrine differentiation. Pre-
sence of ductal carcionoma in situ (DCIS), estrogen receptor
expression (which is present in almost all well-differentiated
NETs and in more than 50% of poorly differentiated NECs),
axillary node metastasis, and lack of a history of an extra-
mammary primary NEN can support that a breast NEN is
primary in that location. Assessment of prognostic variables
including mitotic count and Ki-67 labeling index is used as a
marker of aggressive behavior, although in a way similar to
other breast carcinomas and not as a formally defined grading
system for NENs. Unlike most other sites, necrosis is not used
as a well-established prognostic factor in NENs of the breast
[97]. Tumor stage and histological grade, which encompass
mitotic counts, are used as the main prognostic parameters.
Currently, there are no data from prospective clinical trials on
optimal management of NENs of the breast and these tumors
are usually treated with the same strategy used for the other
types of invasive breast cancer. Thus, outside of the context of
the exceedingly rare small cell carcinoma of the breast,
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1779
 neuroendocrine differentiation in breast neoplasms is not
regarded to have therapeutic significance.
Genito-urinary system and male and female genital
organ NENs
Genito-urinary system and male genital organs
The 2016 WHO classification of Tumors of the Urinary
System and Male Genital Organs [98] introduced a novel
terminology
for
NETs,
with
well-differentiated
NETs,
LCNEC, SCNEC, and paraganglioma for NENs of the kid-
ney, prostate, and bladder. The terms carcinoid, typical and
atypical carcinoid are not recommended. The classification in
all locations is based on morphology but proliferation markers
as well as necrosis are not formally included in the classifi-
cation parameters.
NETs in the kidney, formerly designated carcinoid tumors,
are extremely rare, and high-grade NENs arising from the
renal pelvic mucosa must be excluded before the diagnosis of
NEN of renal parenchyma because they are more common
than tumors of renal origin [98]. Up to 15% of well-
differentiated NETs arise in a horseshoe kidney [99, 100]. In
cases of renal paraganglioma, tumors arising from the peri-
hilar sympathetic ganglia must also be excluded. Some stu-
dies have correlated poor patient prognosis with increased
mitotic activity, presence of necrosis and cytological atypia,
but stage at presentation is the strongest predictor of survival.
Poorly differentiated NECs (small cell and large cell types)
are aggressive with most patients dying of metastasis.
NETs and NECs of the bladder are derived from the
urothelium. For a tumor to be classified as NEC, the typical
neuroendocrine histology must constitute the majority of the
tumor. Some reported cases were associated with a lesser
component of conventional urothelial carcinomas. NETs of
the bladder are extremely rare and present as small polypoid
masses (mean diameter 5 mm).
Most
acinar
prostate
adenocarcinomas
demonstrate
scattered neuroendocrine cells by immunohistochemistry.
True well-differentiated NETs and LCNEC of the prostate
are exceptionally rare. Prostatic NETs must be distinguished
from prostatic adenocarcinomas showing extensive Paneth-
like differentiation, which can be present initially or fol-
lowing androgen deprivation therapy [101]. SCNECs are
frequently mixed with prostate acinar adenocarcinomas or
have a history of usual prostatic adenocarcinoma in
40–50%. It is therefore thought that SCNECs represent
transdifferentiation from usual prostate adenocarcinoma.
Female genital organs
NENs are uncommon or rare at all sites in the female genital
tract. They are most common in the ovary where most are
clinically benign, morphologically corresponding to carci-
noid tumors, and arise in dermoid cysts. The uterine cervix
is the most common site of NECs in the female genital tract.
The terminology has been confusing in the past, and to
some extent currently, due to different nomenclatures being
used at different sites. The updated 2014 WHO Classifica-
tion [102] introduced changes to the terminology of NENs
at most, but unfortunately not all, sites in the female genital
tract [103]. In the uterine cervix and corpus and vulva,
categories of low-grade NET and high-grade NEC are used
in WHO 2014 [102], which correspond to NET and NEC in
the currently proposed system; the vulva also includes the
category of MCC. These terms replace the various cate-
gories of carcinoid tumor, atypical carcinoid and small cell
and large cell NEC used in WHO 2003 [104]. In WHO
2014 [102], carcinoid and atypical carcinoid are considered
as synonymous with low-grade NET while small cell and
large cell NEC are synonymous with high-grade NEC. The
classification is based on morphology, and mitotic count;
proliferation markers and necrosis are not formally included
in the classification parameters.
In the 2014 WHO classification of ovarian tumors,
there is no separate category of NENs, unlike at other sites
in the female genital tract [103]. This is a shortcoming of
the 2014 classification. In the ovary, the NEN types
included in WHO 2014 [102] are: (1) carcinoid tumor
(sub-types of strumal and mucinous carcinoid), which is
included in the category of monodermal teratoma and
somatic-type tumors arising from a dermoid cyst; (2)
small cell carcinoma, pulmonary type; the latter is
essentially a SCNEC which is included in the category of
miscellaneous tumors and must be distinguished from
ovarian small cell carcinoma of hypercalcaemic type, a
non-NEN associated with mutations in SMARCA4 [105],
and (3) paraganglioma which is included in the category
of miscellaneous tumors. There is no category in the
WHO 2014 ovarian classification covering the entity of
LCNEC.
Adrenal gland and paraganglia
Tumors deriving from the neurectoderm of the neural crest
can occur throughout the body, from the sellar region to the
rectum and cauda equina, and may thus represent a diagnostic
challenge. When located in the adrenal medulla they are
called pheochromocytomas and in all other locations they are
called paragangliomas. With regard to the proposed classifi-
cation framework, all of these neoplasms are regarded to be
well-differentiated and therefore NETs; poorly differentiated
NECs do not occur in the adrenal or in paraganglia. Because
of their embryologic origin, these neoplasms are distinct from
other NENs in that they are not epithelial and thus do not
express keratins, which may help distinguish them from
1780
G. Rindi et al.
 epithelial NENs. In contrast, they express the transcription
factor GATA-3 and often display a population of S100
protein-positive sustentacular cells that surround the nests of
tumor cells. Tumors of the adrenal cortex and neuroblastic
tumors, arising from the adrenal medulla in infants and chil-
dren, are beyond the scope of this paper.
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are histolo-
gically very similar, having a nested growth pattern (the
so-called “Zellballen” pattern) composed of cells with
ample granular cytoplasm. Nuclear atypia may sometimes
be present or even striking. The most striking difference
between pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas is the
cytoplasmic staining, which is usually more basophilic in
pheochromocytomas and more eosinophilic in para-
gangliomas. The clinical course of pheochromocytomas
and paragangliomas is variable, with the majority of
patients being cured by surgery. In a minority of cases,
metastases occur. This has led to the notion that all
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas should be con-
sidered potentially malignant. Many attempts have been
made to predict the behavior of pheochromocytomas and
paragangliomas. These attempted grading systems have
used histological characteristics and in addition, bio-
chemical or immunohistochemical criteria. In the recent
new edition of the WHO volume on endocrine tumors
[16], it was concluded that there is no wide acceptance of
any grading system and that some systems were awaiting
independent confirmation. The two most recent and most
promising grading systems are those by Thompson and by
Kimura. Thompson proposed a pheochromocytoma of the
adrenal gland scaled score (PASS) based on 12 histolo-
gical criteria (8 criteria scoring 2 points and 4 criteria
scoring 1 point) for a total score of 20 [106]. A compound
score of 4 or more would indicate adverse clinical beha-
vior of the tumor. Kimura proposed a grading system for
adrenal pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (GAPP)
based on 4 histological characteristics, the Ki-67 labeling
index, and biochemistry (catecholamine secretion pattern)
[107]. This was used to create a three-tiered grading into
well-differentiated, moderately differentiated and poorly
differentiated pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma, that
correlated with statistically significant 5-year and 10-year
survival differences. It should be noted that well, mod-
erately, and poorly differentiated categories would cor-
respond to low, intermediate, and high-grade categories in
the proposed classification framework. SDHB immuno-
histochemistry potentially had additional value in pre-
dicting metastasis. Specifically, for Ki-67 labeling index,
cut-offs of <1%, 1–3%, and >3% were used, based on
counting 500–2000 cells in two of the most highly labeled
areas, selected by eyeballing. The value of these scoring
systems remains unclear and they await widespread
application.
Skin NENs
The prototypical primary cutaneous NEN is the so-called
MCC. Its etiology is related to the clonal integration of the
Merkel cell polyomavirus and/or ultraviolet radiation [108].
MCC is a high grade, poorly differentiated neoplasm that
would be categorized with the NECs in the proposed clas-
sification framework. Neither proliferation parameters nor
the presence of necrosis are formally needed for its status as
a high-grade carcinoma. The main prognostic factor is
tumor size. The spectrum of MCC includes small cell,
intermediate-size, and large cell cytology, so the general
diagnosis of MCC does not rigidly conform to the dichot-
omous separation of small cell carcinoma and large cell
NEC, within the NEC group. Furthermore, a significant
differential diagnosis with MCC is pulmonary type small
cell carcinoma, and a variety of studies have emphasized the
distinguishing histologic and immunophenotypic features of
these two entities (11175640; 21453956) [109, 110]. Rare
primary cutaneous large cell NECs other than MCC have
been reported, but they likely represent sweat gland carci-
nomas with neuroendocrine differentiation [111].
Most
carcinoid
or
atypical
carcinoid-like
low
or
intermediate-grade NETs found in the skin are metastatic
lesions [112]. While there are a few case reports of primary
cutaneous well-differentiated, low-grade NENs [113], most of
them are best classified as low-grade sweat gland carcinomas
with
neuroendocrine
differentiation
displaying
immunor-
eactivity for chromogranins, and/or synaptophysin. Some
alleged NETs may be sebaceous neoplasms with a carcinoid-
like pattern or basal cell carcinomas partly expressing
chromogranin A. While a true primary cutaneous well-
differentiated NET is not impossible, it is at best exceedingly
rare, precluding the need for a grading system.
The future
The uniform classification framework we have proposed for
the universal classification of NENs is based on the com-
mon morphology that these neoplasms display at different
anatomic sites. It is reasonable to expect that such mor-
phology is the result of a common “neuroendocrine” mul-
tigene program functioning at all anatomic sites and driving
the neuroendocrine cell commitment. Despite the common
morphology, NENs speak different clinicopathological
languages depending on their site of origin. Along the same
lines, it is expected that tissue-specific neuroendocrine dif-
ferentiation programs act at specific anatomic sites, deciding
the neuroendocrine cell fate and dictating tissue-specific
hormonal production. It is also likely (and for the stomach it
is proven) that this programming may respond to specific
local
and
general
physiologic
or
pathologic
stimuli.
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1781
 Nevertheless, there are situations where NENs express
hormones
ectopically,
emphasizing
the
relationships
between tumors from different sites, and sometimes a tumor
presents as a metastatic focus with no known primary, and
so it is important to be able to classify such lesions in a
rational consistent way irrespective of the site of origin. Our
classification framework, although based on solid morpho-
logical grounds, lacks an equally solid genetic basis across
all anatomic sites. The major hope we have and wish to
foresee in the future is that such programs will be unveiled
by the massive genetic analyses that are now possible. The
genetic landscapes of lung, pancreas and small intestinal
NENs have been recently published [6–9, 48, 59] and lay
the groundwork for similar studies in other organs. A uni-
versal analytic approach of available NEN databases is very
much required and we identified a number of other impor-
tant research needs (Box 1).
Conclusions
We have provided a framework for a common classification
of NENs. Morphology is the primary basis for this classi-
fication, supported in some sites by underlying genomic
alterations. We believe this conceptual approach can form
the basis for the next generation of NET classifications and
will allow more consistent taxonomy to understand how
neoplasms
from
different
organ
systems
inter-relate
genetically. We also recognize the site-specific differences
among NENs, which are also of critical importance in their
proper diagnosis and clinical management.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC) for funding the meeting of which this
paper is the result. We wish to thank the IARC secretariat members
involved, particularly Ms Anne-Sophie Hameau, and Ms Asiedua
Asante, Mr Alberto Machado, for their expert assistance in organizing
the meeting and Ms Jessica Cox for editing the manuscript.
Author contributions The consensus meeting was planned by IC and
HO. The meeting participants were asked to provide background
information related to cell of origin (provided by GK), morphology
(GR), genetics (AS), and the oncological approach (NR). The current
classification systems and relevant principles for each major anato-
mical site were provided for the paper by participants as follows:
endocrine (JT, HS, SA, RK, GT), head and neck (AE-N, GT), skin
(KB), breast (ER), lung (WT, EB), digestive tract and pancreas (DK,
JS, AS, FB, GK), female genital tract (WGM), and genito-urinary
system (HM). GR developed an outline of major points to be
addressed, and molecular pathology was addressed by JS, AS, and LF.
The relevance to general pathology practice was addressed by IC, BR,
BA, HM, MD, and HK. Coding issues were considered by BR.
Clinical implications were addressed by NR. DK, GR and IC lead on
the writing, assisted by all authors in their areas of expertise as above.
All authors saw, agreed, and approved the final manuscript.
Funding This work was funded by the World Health Organization
(WHO) Classification of Tumors Group and International Agency for
Research on Cancer.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
Box 1 Some research needs identified by the expert group to
illustrate the studies required to advance understanding of NEN
●
General: Further genetic studies of NEN are required
in many sites, ideally with computational pathology
and phenotypic data on outcome. What are the
common genetic and genomic features (and the
differences) of NEN from different organs?
●
General: Computational pathology studies of Ki-67
proliferation, and mitotic count per mm2, are required
to assess whether grade is a continuous or categorical
variable, including validation against microscope
counting (including inter-laboratory and observer
reproducibility studies). What thresholds should be
applied in clinical practice to separate grades?
●
General:
What
is
the
prevalence
and
clinical
significance of tumor heterogeneity for mitotic
counts and K-67 proliferation index in NEN?
●
General: Do NET and NEC occur in all anatomical
sites?
●
General: What are the distinguishing genetic features
of NEC and NET?
●
General: What is the nature of mixed neuroendo-
crine:non-NETs of all organs?
●
General: Coordination of NEN databases is required
to allow ease of data comparison between NEN
arising at different sites.
●
Lung: Studies on the separation between typical
carcinoid and atypical carcinoid, and between these
entities, SCLC and LCNEC using molecular, histo-
logical and protein expression methods. Does a G3
category of lung NET exist comparable to that in the
pancreas?
●
Pituitary: Studies of the genetics of NET (adenoma/
NET, aggressive NET, and carcinoma) are required.
It is as yet uncertain if NEC exist at this site.
●
Metastases: What are the optimal diagnostic criteria
and terminology to be used for metastatic rather than
primary NEN?
1782
G. Rindi et al.
 long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Klimstra DS, Modlin IR, Adsay NV, Chetty R, Deshpande V,
Gonen M, et al. Pathology reporting of neuroendocrine tumors:
application of the Delphic consensus process to the development
of
a
minimum
pathology
data
set.
Am
J
Surg
Pathol.
2010;34:300–13.
2. Kloppel G. Neuroendocrine Neoplasms: Dichotomy, Origin and
Classifications. Visc Med. 2017;33:324–30.
3. Pearse AG. The diffuse neuroendocrine system and the apud
concept: related “endocrine” peptides in brain, intestine, pitui-
tary,
placenta,
and
anuran
cutaneous
glands.
Med
Biol.
1977;55:115–25.
4. Inzani F, Petrone G, Fadda G, Rindi G. Cyto-histology in NET:
what is necessary today and what is the future? Rev Endocr
Metab Disord. 2017;18:381–91.
5. Kimiloglu Sahan E, Erdogan N, Ulusoy I, Samet E, Akyildiz
Igdem A, Gonullu D. P53, KI-67, CD117 expression in gastro-
intestinal and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours and evaluation
of their correlation with clinicopathological and prognostic
parameters. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2015;26:104–11.
6. Vijayvergia N, Boland PM, Handorf E, Gustafson KS, Gong Y,
Cooper HS, et al. Molecular profiling of neuroendocrine malig-
nancies to identify prognostic and therapeutic markers: a Fox
Chase Cancer Center Pilot Study. Br J Cancer. 2016;115:564–
70.
7. Woischke C, Schaaf CW, Yang HM, Vieth M, Veits L, Geddert
H, et al. In-depth mutational analyses of colorectal neuroendo-
crine carcinomas with adenoma or adenocarcinoma components.
Mod Pathol. 2017;30:95–103.
8. Simbolo M, Mafficini A, Sikora KO, Fassan M, Barbi S, Corbo
V, et al. Lung neuroendocrine tumours: deep sequencing of the
four World Health Organization histotypes reveals chromatin-
remodelling genes as major players and a prognostic role for
TERT, RB1, MEN1 and KMT2D. J Pathol. 2017;241:488–500.
9. Ali AS, Gronberg M, Federspiel B, Scoazec JY, Hjortland GO,
Gronbaek H, et al. Expression of p53 protein in high-grade
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine carcinoma. PLoS ONE.
2017;12:e0187667.
10. Asa SL, Casar-Borota O, Chanson P, Delgrange E, Earls P, Ezzat
S, et al. From pituitary adenoma to pituitary neuroendocrine
tumor (PitNET): an International Pituitary Pathology Club pro-
posal. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2017;24:C5–8.
11. Sadler DW, Coghill SB. Histopathologists, malignancies, and
undefined high-power fields. Lancet. 1989;1:785–6.
12. Cree IA, Foss AJ, Luthert PJ. Undefined high-power fields.
Lancet. 1996;347:273–4.
13. Travis WD, Rush W, Flieder DB, Falk R, Fleming MV, Gal AA,
et al. Survival analysis of 200 pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors
with clarification of criteria for atypical carcinoid and its
separation
from
typical
carcinoid.
Am
J
Surg
Pathol.
1998;22:934–44.
14. Bosman FTCF, Hruban RH, Theise ND. WHOclassification of
tumours of the digestive system. 4th ed. Bosman FTJE, Lakhani
SR, Ohgaki H, editors. Lyon: International Agency for Research
on Cancer; 2010. 417 p.
15. Travis WDBE, Burke AP, Marx A, Nicholson AG. WHO
Classification of Tumours of the Lung, Pleura, Thymus and
Heart. 4th ed. Bosman FTJE, Lakhani SR, Ohgaki H, editors.
Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2015.
412 p.
16. Lloyd RV, Osamura RY, Klöppel G, Rosai J. WHO Classifica-
tion of Tumours of Endocrine Organs. 4th ed. Lyon: Interna-
tional Agency for Research on Cancer; 2017. 355 p.
17. Tamas EF, Epstein JI. Prognostic significance of paneth cell-like
neuroendocrine differentiation in adenocarcinoma of the pros-
tate. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006;30:980–5.
18. Beltran H, Rickman DS, Park K, Chae SS, Sboner A, MacDo-
nald TY, et al. Molecular characterization of neuroendocrine
prostate cancer and identification of new drug targets. Cancer
Discov. 2011;1:487–95.
19. Shia J, Tickoo SK, Guillem JG, Qin J, Nissan A, Hoos A, et al.
Increased endocrine cells in treated rectal adenocarcinomas: a
possible reflection of endocrine differentiation in tumor cells
induced by chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Am J Surg Pathol.
2002;26:863–72.
20. Basturk O, Tang L, Hruban RH, Adsay V, Yang Z, Krasinskas
AM, et al. Poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas of
the pancreas: a clinicopathologic analysis of 44 cases. Am J Surg
Pathol. 2014;38:437–47.
21. Basturk O, Yang Z, Tang LH, Hruban RH, Adsay V, McCall
CM, et al. The high-grade (WHO G3) pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumor category is morphologically and biologically heterogenous
and includes both well differentiated and poorly differentiated
neoplasms. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015;39:683–90.
22. Singhi AD, Klimstra DS. Well-differentiated pancreatic neu-
roendocrine tumours (PanNETs) and poorly differentiated pan-
creatic neuroendocrine carcinomas (PanNECs): concepts, issues
and a practical diagnostic approach to high-grade (G3) cases.
Histopathology. 2018;72:168–77.
23. Jiao Y, Shi C, Edil BH, de Wilde RF, Klimstra DS, Maitra A,
et al. DAXX/ATRX, MEN1, and mTOR pathway genes are
frequently altered in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Science.
2011;331:1199–203.
24. Scarpa A, Chang DK, Nones K, Corbo V, Patch AM, Bailey P,
et al. Whole-genome landscape of pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumours. Nature. 2017;543:65–71.
25. Tang LH, Untch BR, Reidy DL, O'Reilly E, Dhall D, Jih L, et al.
Well-Differentiated Neuroendocrine Tumors with a Morpholo-
gically Apparent High-Grade Component: A Pathway Distinct
from Poorly Differentiated Neuroendocrine Carcinomas. Clin
Cancer Res. 2016;22:1011–7.
26. Francis JM, Kiezun A, Ramos AH, Serra S, Pedamallu CS, Qian
ZR, et al. Somatic mutation of CDKN1B in small intestine
neuroendocrine tumors. Nat Genet. 2013;45:1483–6.
27. Wincewicz A, Kowalik A, Zieba S, Sulkowski S, Gozdz S.
Morphology with immunohistochemical and genetic profiling of
high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma of colon - a case report
with
review
of
literature.
Rom
J
Morphol
Embryol.
2017;58:655–63.
28. Jesinghaus M, Konukiewitz B, Keller G, Kloor M, Steiger K,
Reiche M, et al. Colorectal mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcino-
mas and neuroendocrine carcinomas are genetically closely related
to colorectal adenocarcinomas. Mod Pathol. 2017;30:610–9.
29. Banck MS, Kanwar R, Kulkarni AA, Boora GK, Metge F, Kipp
BR, et al. The genomic landscape of small intestine neu-
roendocrine tumors. J Clin Invest. 2013;123:2502–8.
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1783
 30. Konukiewitz B, Schlitter AM, Jesinghaus M, Pfister D, Steiger
K, Segler A, et al. Somatostatin receptor expression related to
TP53 and RB1 alterations in pancreatic and extrapancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms with a Ki67-index above 20. Mod
Pathol. 2017;30:587–98.
31. Kulke MH, Anthony LB, Bushnell DL, de Herder WW, Gold-
smith SJ, Klimstra DS, et al. NANETS treatment guidelines:
well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors of the stomach and
pancreas. Pancreas. 2010;39:735–52.
32. Strosberg JR, Coppola D, Klimstra DS, Phan AT, Kulke MH,
Wiseman GA, et al. The NANETS consensus guidelines for the
diagnosis and management of poorly differentiated (high-grade)
extrapulmonary
neuroendocrine
carcinomas.
Pancreas.
2010;39:799–800.
33. Sorbye H, Welin S, Langer SW, Vestermark LW, Holt N,
Osterlund P, et al. Predictive and prognostic factors for treatment
and survival in 305 patients with advanced gastrointestinal
neuroendocrine carcinoma (WHO G3): the NORDIC NEC study.
Ann Oncol. 2013;24:152–60.
34. Nieser M, Henopp T, Brix J, Stoss L, Sitek B, Naboulsi W, et al.
Loss of Chromosome 18 in Neuroendocrine Tumors of the Small
Intestine:
The
Enigma
Remains.
Neuroendocrinology.
2017;104:302–12.
35. Karpathakis A, Dibra H, Pipinikas C, Feber A, Morris T, Francis
J, et al. Prognostic Impact of Novel Molecular Subtypes of Small
Intestinal
Neuroendocrine
Tumor.
Clin
Cancer
Res.
2016;22:250–8.
36. Nicholson SA, Beasley MB, Brambilla E, Hasleton PS, Colby
TV, Sheppard MN, et al. Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC): a
clinicopathologic study of 100 cases with surgical specimens.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2002;26:1184–97.
37. Sarkaria IS, Iyoda A, Roh MS, Sica G, Kuk D, Sima CS, et al.
Neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy in resected pulmonary
large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas: a single institution
experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92:1180–6. discussion 6–7.
38. Caplin ME, Baudin E, Ferolla P, Filosso P, Garcia-Yuste M, Lim
E, et al. Pulmonary neuroendocrine (carcinoid) tumors: European
Neuroendocrine Tumor Society expert consensus and recom-
mendations for best practice for typical and atypical pulmonary
carcinoids. Ann Oncol. 2015;26:1604–20.
39. Travis WD, Colby TV, Corrin B, Shimosato Y, Brambilla E.
Histological Typing of Lung and Pleural Tumours. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 1999.
40. Travis WD, World Health Organization. Pathology and genetics
of tumours of the lung, pleura, thymus and heart. Lyon: IARC
Press; 2004.
41. Pelosi G, Rodriguez J, Viale G, Rosai J. Typical and atypical
pulmonary carcinoid tumor overdiagnosed as small-cell carci-
noma on biopsy specimens: a major pitfall in the management of
lung cancer patients. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005;29:179–87.
42. Aslan DL, Gulbahce HE, Pambuccian SE, Manivel JC, Jessurun
J. Ki-67 immunoreactivity in the differential diagnosis of pul-
monary neuroendocrine neoplasms in specimens with extensive
crush artifact. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005;123:874–8.
43. Pelosi G, Rindi G, Travis WD, Papotti M. Ki-67 antigen in lung
neuroendocrine tumors: unraveling a role in clinical practice. J
Thorac Oncol. 2014;9:273–84.
44. Walts AE, Ines D, Marchevsky AM. Limited role of Ki-67
proliferative index in predicting overall short-term survival in
patients with typical and atypical pulmonary carcinoid tumors.
Mod Pathol. 2012;25:1258–64.
45. Swarts DR, Rudelius M, Claessen SM, Cleutjens JP, Seidl S,
Volante M, et al. Limited additive value of the Ki-67 pro-
liferative index on patient survival in World Health Organiza-
tion-classified pulmonary carcinoids. Histopathology. 2017;70:
412–22.
46. Rindi G, Klersy C, Inzani F, Fellegara G, Ampollini L, Ardizzoni
A, et al. Grading the neuroendocrine tumors of the lung: an
evidence-based proposal. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014;21:1–16.
47. van Velthuysen ML, Groen EJ, van der Noort V, van de Pol A,
Tesselaar ME, Korse CM. Grading of neuroendocrine neo-
plasms: mitoses and Ki-67 are both essential. Neuroendocrinol-
ogy. 2014;100:221–7.
48. Rekhtman N, Pietanza MC, Hellmann MD, Naidoo J, Arora A,
Won H, et al. Next-Generation Sequencing of Pulmonary Large
Cell Neuroendocrine Carcinoma Reveals Small Cell Carcinoma-
like and Non-Small Cell Carcinoma-like Subsets. Clin Cancer
Res. 2016;22:3618–29.
49. Quinn AM, Chaturvedi A, Nonaka D. High-grade Neuroendo-
crine Carcinoma of the Lung With Carcinoid Morphology: A
Study of 12 Cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 2017;41:263–70.
50. Travis WD. Pathology and diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumors:
lung neuroendocrine. Thorac Surg Clin. 2014;24:257–66.
51. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2018. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2018;68:7–30.
52. Rossi G, Cavazza A, Marchioni A, Longo L, Migaldi M, Sartori
G, et al. Role of chemotherapy and the receptor tyrosine kinases
KIT, PDGFRalpha, PDGFRbeta, and Met in large-cell neu-
roendocrine carcinoma of the lung. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:8774–
85.
53. Clinical Lung Cancer Genome P, Network Genomic M. A
genomics-based classification of human lung tumors. Sci Transl
Med. 2013;5:209ra153.
54. Rudin CM, Durinck S, Stawiski EW, Poirier JT, Modrusan Z,
Shames DS, et al. Comprehensive genomic analysis identifies
SOX2 as a frequently amplified gene in small-cell lung cancer.
Nat Genet. 2012;44:1111–6.
55. Peifer M, Fernandez-Cuesta L, Sos ML, George J, Seidel D,
Kasper LH, et al. Integrative genome analyses identify key
somatic driver mutations of small-cell lung cancer. Nat Genet.
2012;44:1104–10.
56. George J, Lim JS, Jang SJ, Cun Y, Ozretic L, Kong G, et al.
Comprehensive genomic profiles of small cell lung cancer.
Nature. 2015;524:47–53.
57. George J, Walter V, Peifer M, Alexandrov LB, Seidel D,
Leenders F, et al. Integrative genomic profiling of large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas reveals distinct subtypes of high-
grade neuroendocrine lung tumors. Nat Commun. 2018;9:1048.
58. Debelenko LV, Brambilla E, Agarwal SK, Swalwell JI, Kester
MB, Lubensky IA, et al. Identification of MEN1 gene mutations
in sporadic carcinoid tumors of the lung. Hum Mol Genet.
1997;6:2285–90.
59. Fernandez-Cuesta L, Peifer M, Lu X, Sun R, Ozretic L, Seidal D,
et al. Frequent mutations in chromatin-remodelling genes in
pulmonary carcinoids. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3518.
60. Raverot G, Burman P, McCormack A, Heaney A, Petersenn S,
Popovic V, et al. European Society of Endocrinology Clinical
Practice Guidelines for the management of aggressive pituitary
tumours and carcinomas. Eur J Endocrinol. 2018;178:G1–24.
61. Lenders N, McCormack A. Malignant transformation in non-
functioning pituitary adenomas (pituitary carcinoma). Pituitary.
2018.
62. McCormack A, Dekkers OM, Petersenn S, Popovic V, Trouillas
J, Raverot G, et al. Treatment of aggressive pituitary tumours
and carcinomas: results of a European Society of Endocrinology
(ESE) survey 2016. Eur J Endocrinol. 2018;178:265–76.
63. Trouillas J, Burman P, McCormack AI, Petersenn S, Popovic V,
Dekkers O, et al. Aggressive pituitary tumours and carcinomas:
two sides of the same coin? Eur J Endocrinol. 2018.
64. Mete O, Gomez-Hernandez K, Kucharczyk W, Ridout R, Zadeh
G, Gentili F, et al. Silent subtype 3 pituitary adenomas are not
always silent and represent poorly differentiated monomorphous
1784
G. Rindi et al.
 plurihormonal
Pit-1
lineage
adenomas.
Mod
Pathol.
2016;29:131–42.
65. Mete O, Lopes MB. Overview of the 2017 WHO Classification
of Pituitary Tumors. Endocr Pathol. 2017;28:228–43.
66. Raverot G, Dantony E, Beauvy J, Vasiljevic A, Mikolasek S,
Borson-Chazot F, et al. Risk of Recurrence in Pituitary Neu-
roendocrine Tumors: A Prospective Study Using a Five-Tiered
Classification. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:3368–74.
67. Mete O, Cintosun A, Pressman I, Asa SL. Epidemiology and
biomarker profile of pituitary adenohypophysial tumors. Mod
Pathol. 2018.
68. Asa SL, Mete O. What's new in pituitary pathology? Histo-
pathology. 2018;72:133–41.
69. Tanizaki Y, Jin L, Scheithauer BW, Kovacs K, Roncaroli F,
Lloyd RV. P53 gene mutations in pituitary carcinomas. Endocr
Pathol. 2007;18:217–22.
70. Klöppel G, Franchi A, Matias-Guiu X. Neuroendocrine Neo-
plasms, Olfactory Neuroblastomas and Paragangliomas of the
Head and Neck. Cardesa A, Slootweg PJ, Gale N, Franchi A,
editors. Pathology of the head and neck. 2nd ed. Berlin:
Springer; 2016. p. 515–38.
71. Bell D, El-Naggar AK, Gidley PW. Middle ear adenomatous
neuroendocrine tumors: a 25-year experience at MD Anderson
Cancer Center. Virchows Arch. 2017;471:667–72.
72. Wenig BM, Hyams VJ, Heffner DK. Moderately differentiated
neuroendocrine carcinoma of the larynx. A clinicopathologic
study of 54 cases. Cancer. 1988;62:2658–76.
73. Woodruff JM, Senie RT. Atypical carcinoid tumor of the larynx.
A critical review of the literature. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat
Spec. 1991;53:194–209.
74. Haack H, Johnson LA, Fry CJ, Crosby K, Polakiewicz RD,
Stelow EB, et al. Diagnosis of NUT midline carcinoma using a
NUT-specific
monoclonal
antibody.
Am
J
Surg
Pathol.
2009;33:984–91.
75. Mendelsohn G, Wells SA Jr., Baylin SB. Relationship of tissue
carcinoembryonic antigen and calcitonin to tumor virulence in
medullary thyroid carcinoma. An immunohistochemical study in
early, localized, and virulent disseminated stages of disease.
Cancer. 1984;54:657–62.
76. Papotti M, Volante M, Komminoth P, Sobrinho-Simoes M,
Bussolati G. Thyroid carcinomas with mixed follicular and C-cell
differentiation patterns. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2000;17:109–19.
77. Verrienti A, Tallini G, Colato C, Boichard A, Checquolo S,
Pecce V, et al. RET mutation and increased angiogenesis in
medullary
thyroid
carcinomas.
Endocr
Relat
Cancer.
2016;23:665–76.
78. Knopf A, Bas M, Hofauer B, Mansour N, Stark T. Clin-
icopathological characteristics of head and neck Merkel cell
carcinomas. Head Neck. 2017;39:92–7.
79. Asa SL, Mete O. Endocrine pathology: past, present and future.
Pathology. 2018;50:111–8.
80. Hadoux J, Pacini F, Tuttle RM, Schlumberger M. Management
of advanced medullary thyroid cancer. Lancet Diabetes Endo-
crinol. 2016;4:64–71.
81. Albores-Saavedra J, LiVolsi VA, Williams ED. Medullary car-
cinoma. Semin Diagn Pathol. 1985;2:137–46.
82. Frank-Raue K, Machens A, Leidig-Bruckner G, Rondot S, Haag
C, Schulze E, et al. Prevalence and clinical spectrum of non-
secretory medullary thyroid carcinoma in a series of 839 patients
with
sporadic
medullary
thyroid
carcinoma.
Thyroid.
2013;23:294–300.
83. Elisei R, Cosci B, Romei C, Bottici V, Renzini G, Molinaro E,
et al. Prognostic significance of somatic RET oncogene muta-
tions in sporadic medullary thyroid cancer: a 10-year follow-up
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:682–7.
84. Moura MM, Cavaco BM, Leite V. RAS proto-oncogene in
medullary thyroid carcinoma. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015;22:
R235–52.
85. Tisell LE, Oden A, Muth A, Altiparmak G, Molne J, Ahlman H,
et al. The Ki67 index a prognostic marker in medullary thyroid
carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2003;89:2093–7.
86. Mian C, Pennelli G, Barollo S, Cavedon E, Nacamulli D, Via-
nello F, et al. Combined RET and Ki-67 assessment in sporadic
medullary thyroid carcinoma: a useful tool for patient risk stra-
tification. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011;164:971–6.
87. Lee SM, Policarpio-Nicolas ML. Thyroid Paraganglioma. Arch
Pathol Lab Med. 2015;139:1062–7.
88. Schantz A, Castleman B. Parathyroid carcinoma. A study of 70
cases. Cancer. 1973;31:600–5.
89. Carlson D. Parathyroid pathology: hyperparathyroidism and para-
thyroid tumors. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2010;134:1639–44.
90. Bondeson L, Sandelin K, Grimelius L. Histopathological vari-
ables and DNA cytometry in parathyroid carcinoma. Am J Surg
Pathol. 1993;17:820–9.
91. Erickson LA, Jin L, Wollan P, Thompson GB, van Heerden JA,
Lloyd RV. Parathyroid hyperplasia, adenomas, and carcinomas:
differential expression of p27Kip1 protein. Am J Surg Pathol.
1999;23:288–95.
92. Kruijff S, Sidhu SB, Sywak MS, Gill AJ, Delbridge LW.
Negative parafibromin staining predicts malignant behavior in
atypical parathyroid adenomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;21:426–
33.
93. Kasaian K, Wiseman SM, Thiessen N, Mungall KL, Corbett RD,
Qian JQ, et al. Complete genomic landscape of a recurring
sporadic parathyroid carcinoma. J Pathol. 2013;230:249–60.
94. Pandya C, Uzilov AV, Bellizzi J, Lau CY, Moe AS, Strahl M,
et al. Genomic profiling reveals mutational landscape in para-
thyroid carcinomas. JCI Insight. 2017;2:e92061.
95. Wang J, Wei B, Albarracin CT, Hu J, Abraham SC, Wu Y.
Invasive neuroendocrine carcinoma of the breast: a population-
based study from the surveillance, epidemiology and end results
(SEER) database. BMC Cancer. 2014;14:147.
96. Miremadi A, Pinder SE, Lee AH, Bell JA, Paish EC, Wencyk P,
et al. Neuroendocrine differentiation and prognosis in breast
adenocarcinoma. Histopathology. 2002;40:215–22.
97. Lakhani SREI, Schnitt SJ, Tan PY, van de Vijver MJ. WHO
classification of tumours of the breast. 4th ed. Lyon: International
Agency for Research on Cancer; 2012. 240 p.
98. Moch HHP, Ulbright TM, Reuter VE. WHO classification of
tumours of the urinary system and male genital organs. Bosman
FTJE, Lakhani SR, Ohgaki H, editors. Lyon: International
Agency for Research on Cancer; 2016. 356 p.
99. Aung PP, Killian K, Poropatich CO, Linehan WM, Merino MJ.
Primary neuroendocrine tumors of the kidney: morphological
and molecular alterations of an uncommon malignancy. Hum
Pathol. 2013;44:873–80.
100. Krishnan B, Truong LD, Saleh G, Sirbasku DM, Slawin KM.
Horseshoe kidney is associated with an increased relative risk of
primary renal carcinoid tumor. J Urol. 1997;157:2059–66.
101. Epstein JI, Amin MB, Beltran H, Lotan TL, Mosquera JM,
Reuter VE, et al. Proposed morphologic classification of prostate
cancer with neuroendocrine differentiation. Am J Surg Pathol.
2014;38:756–67.
102. Kurman RJCM, Herrington CS, Young RH. WHO classification of
tumours of female reproductive organs. Bosman FTJE, Lakhani
SR, Ohgaki H, editors. Lyon: International Agency for Research on
Cancer; 2014. 307 p.
103. Howitt BE, Kelly P, McCluggage WG. Pathology of Neu-
roendocrine Tumours of the Female Genital Tract. Curr Oncol
Rep. 2017;19:59.
A common classification framework for neuroendocrine neoplasms: an International Agency for Research on. . .
1785
 104. Tavassoli FA, Devilee P, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, World Health Organization. Pathology and genetics of
tumours of the breast and female genital organs. Lyon: IARC
Press; 2003. 432 p.
105. Patibandla JR, Fehniger JE, Levine DA, Jelinic P. Small cell
cancers of the female genital tract: Molecular and clinical
aspects. Gynecol Oncol. 2018.
106. Thompson LD. Pheochromocytoma of the Adrenal gland Scaled
Score (PASS) to separate benign from malignant neoplasms: a
clinicopathologic and immunophenotypic study of 100 cases.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2002;26:551–66.
107. Kimura N, Takayanagi R, Takizawa N, Itagaki E, Katabami T,
Kakoi N, et al. Pathological grading for predicting metastasis in
phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma. Endocr Relat Cancer.
2014;21:405–14.
108. Becker JC, Stang A, DeCaprio JA, Cerroni L, Lebbe C, Veness
M, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma. Nat Rev Dis Primers.
2017;3:17077.
109. Cheuk W, Kwan MY, Suster S, Chan JK. Immunostaining for
thyroid transcription factor 1 and cytokeratin 20 aids the dis-
tinction of small cell carcinoma from Merkel cell carcinoma, but
not pulmonary from extrapulmonary small cell carcinomas. Arch
Pathol Lab Med. 2001;125:228–31.
110. Paik JY, Hall G, Clarkson A, Lee L, Toon C, Colebatch A, et al.
Immunohistochemistry for Merkel cell polyomavirus is highly
specific but not sensitive for the diagnosis of Merkel cell carci-
noma in the Australian population. Hum Pathol. 2011;42:1385–
90.
111. Lano IM, Rayson D, Arnason T, Walsh NMG. Primary large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin: An under-recognized
entity and a mimic of metastatic disease. J Cutan Pathol.
2018;45:54–8.
112. Jedrych J, Busam K, Klimstra DS, Pulitzer M. Cutaneous
metastases as an initial manifestation of visceral well-differ-
entiated neuroendocrine tumor: a report of four cases and a
review of literature. J Cutan Pathol. 2014;41:113–22.
113. Goto K, Anan T, Nakatsuka T, Kaku Y, Sakurai T, Fukumoto T,
et al. Low-Grade Neuroendocrine Carcinoma of the Skin (Pri-
mary Cutaneous Carcinoid Tumor) as a Distinctive Entity of
Cutaneous Neuroendocrine Tumors: A Clinicopathologic Study
of 3 Cases With Literature Review. Am J Dermatopathol.
2017;39:250–8.
Affiliations
Guido Rindi1
● David S. Klimstra2
● Behnoush Abedi-Ardekani3
● Sylvia L. Asa
4
● Frederik T. Bosman5
●
Elisabeth Brambilla6
● Klaus J. Busam2
● Ronald R. de Krijger7
● Manfred Dietel8
● Adel K. El-Naggar9
●
Lynnette Fernandez-Cuesta3
● Günter Klöppel10
● W. Glenn McCluggage11
● Holger Moch12
● Hiroko Ohgaki3
●
Emad A. Rakha13
● Nicholas S. Reed14
● Brian A. Rous15
● Hironobu Sasano16
● Aldo Scarpa
17
● Jean-Yves Scoazec18
●
William D. Travis2
● Giovanni Tallini19
● Jacqueline Trouillas20
● J. Han van Krieken21
● Ian A. Cree
3
1
Istituto di Anatomia Patologica, Università Cattolica-Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy
2
Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA
3
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), World
Health Organization (WHO), Lyon, France
4
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada
5
University of Lausanne Medical Center, Lausanne, Switzerland
6
CHUGA, UniversitéUGA, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France
7
Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht and
Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The
Netherlands
8
Charité - University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany
9
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX,
USA
10
Department of Pathology, Technical University of München,
München, Germany
11
Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust,
Belfast, UK
12
University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
13
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
14
Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Centre, Glasgow, UK
15
National Cancer Registration and Analysis Service, Fulbourn, UK
16
Department of Pathology, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan
17
Section of Pathology, ARC-Net Research Center and Department
of Diagnostics and Public Health, University and Hospital Trust of
Verona, Verona, Italy
18
Departement of Pathology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus,
Villejuif, France
19
University Medical Center, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
20
Faculté de Médecine Lyon Est, Lyon, France
21
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
1786
G. Rindi et al.
