 Association Between Anticholinergic Medication Use and 
Cognition, Brain Metabolism, and Brain Atrophy in Cognitively 
Normal Older Adults
Corresponding Author: Shannon L. Risacher, PhD, Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana University Health Neuroscience Center, Ste 4100, 355 W 16th St, Indianapolis, IN 
46202 (srisache@iupui.edu). 
Supplemental content at jamaneurology.com
Author Contributions: Dr Risacher had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data 
and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Saykin.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Risacher.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Risacher, Gao.
Obtained funding: Jagust, Saykin.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Tallman, West, Boustani, Jack, Jagust, Weiner.
Study supervision: Weiner.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Farlow reports grant research support from Accera, Biogen, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Genentech, Roche, 
Lundbeck, Chase Pharmaceuticals, and Boehringer-Ingelheim and being a consultant for or on the advisory or data and safety 
monitoring boards of Accera, Alltech, Avanir, Biogen, Eisai Medical Research Inc, FORUM Pharmaceuticals, Genentech Inc, Grifols, 
Helicon Inc Research, Lundbeck, Medavante, Medivation Inc, Merck and Company Inc, Medtronic, Neurotrope Biosciences, Novartis, 
Pfizer, QR Pharma, Axovant Sciences Inc, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, Schering-Plough, Takeda, Toyama Pharmaceutical, Pharm, Eli Lilly 
and Company, and UCB Pharma. Dr Petersen serves on the advisory boards of Pfizer Inc and Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy and 
is a consultant for Roche Incorporated, Merck, Genentech, and Biogen. He receives support from the National Institute on Aging 
(grants U01-AG006786, P50-AGG016574, R01-AG011378, and U01-AG024904) and publishing royalties from Oxford University 
Press. Dr Jack serves as a consultant for Eli Lilly and Company and receives research support from the National Institute on Aging 
(grants R01 AG11378 and R01 AG041851) and the Alexander Family Alzheimer’s Disease Research Professorship of the Mayo 
Foundation. Dr Jagust serves on the scientific advisory boards of Genentech and Banner/ Genentech and was a consultant for Synarc, 
Siemens Medical, Genentech, F. Hoffman–La Roche, and Novartis. He receives research support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, the 
Rainwater Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (grants AG034570, AG025303, AG044292, AG012345, 
AG021028, AG031563, AG019724, AG030048, AG032306, and AG024904). Dr Aisen serves on the scientific advisory boards of 
Novartis and Biogen and has been a consultant for Elan Corporation, Wyeth, Eisai Inc, Schering-Plough Corp, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Eli Lilly and Company, Roche, Amgen, Genentech Inc, Abbott, Pfizer Inc, Novartis, Bayer, Medivation Inc, Daiichi Sankyo, Astellas, 
Bainippon, Biomarin, Solvay, Ostuka, AstraZeneca, and Janssen. He receives research support from Baxter, Pfizer, Janssen, and Eli 
Lilly and Company, as well as from the National Institute on Aging (grants U01-AG10483, U01 AG024904, R01 AG030048, and R01 
AG16381). Dr Weiner serves on the scientific advisory boards for Pfizer, BOLT International, Neurotrope Bioscience, Eli Lilly and 
Company, the University of Pennsylvania’s Neuroscience of Behavior Initiative, the National Brain Research Centre, India, and the 
ADNI and is a consultant for Synarc, Pfizer, Janssen, KLJ Associates, Easton Associates, Harvard University, the University of 
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Clearview Healthcare 
Partners, Perceptive Informatics, Smartfish AS, Decision Resources Inc, Neurotrope Bioscience, Araclon, Merck, Defined Health, and 
Genentech. He receives research support from Avid Radiopharmceuticals, Eli Lilly and Company, the NIH, the US Department of 
Defense, and the Veterans Administration. He also has received travel funding or speaker honoraria from Pfizer, Paul Sabatier 
University, the MCI Group France, eDreams, the Neuroscience School of Advanced Studies, Danone Trading, BV, CTAD ANT 
Congrès, Kenes International, the Aging and Disability Resource Center, UCLA, the University of California, San Diego, the Sanofi-
Aventis Group, University Center Hospital, Toulouse, Araclon, AC Immune, Eli Lilly and Company, the New York Academy of 
Sciences, the National Brain Research Center, Indiana for Johns Hopkins Medicine, the Consortium for Multiple Sclerosis Centers, 
Northwestern University, and the University of Pennsylvania. Dr Saykin serves on scientific advisory boards of Siemens Healthcare 
and Eli Lilly and Company and was a consultant for Baxter Bioscience, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, Pfizer Inc, 
Siemens Healthcare, Dartmouth Medical School, the University of Michigan, the University of Vermont, Vanderbilt University, and 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital/ Massachusetts General Hospital. He has received research support from Siemens Medical Solutions, 
Welch Allyn Inc, the Foundation for the NIH, and the NIH (grants R01 AG19771, R01 CA101318, R01 LM011360, RC2 AG036535, 
P30 AG10133, and U01 AG032984). He has also received travel support and/or speaker honoraria from Siemens Healthcare. No other 
disclosures are reported.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Published in final edited form as:
JAMA Neurol. 2016 June 1; 73(6): 721–732. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0580.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Shannon L. Risacher, PhD, Brenna C. McDonald, PsyD, MBA, Eileen F. Tallman, BS, John 
D. West, MS, Martin R. Farlow, MD, Fredrick W. Unverzagt, PhD, Sujuan Gao, PhD, Malaz 
Boustani, MD, MPH, Paul K. Crane, MD, MPH, Ronald C. Petersen, MD, PhD, Clifford R. Jack 
Jr, MD, William J. Jagust, MD, Paul S. Aisen, MD, Michael W. Weiner, MD, Andrew J. Saykin, 
PsyD, and for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indiana University Health Neuroscience Center, Indianapolis (Risacher, 
McDonald, Tallman, West, Saykin); Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis (Risacher, McDonald, Tallman, West, Farlow, Unverzagt, Gao, Boustani, 
Saykin); Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 
(McDonald, Farlow); Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis (Unverzagt); Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis (Gao); Indiana University Center for Aging Research, Indianapolis (Boustani); 
Regenstrief Institute Inc, Indianapolis, Indiana (Boustani); Eskenzai Health, Indianapolis, Indiana 
(Boustani); Department of Internal Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle (Crane); 
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (Petersen); Department of 
Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (Jack); Department of Neurology, University of 
California–Berkeley, Berkeley (Jagust); Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute, University of 
Southern California, San Diego (Aisen); Departments of Radiology, Medicine, and Psychiatry, 
University of California�San Francisco, San Francisco (Weiner); Department of Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, San Francisco, California (Weiner).
Abstract
IMPORTANCE—The use of anticholinergic (AC) medication is linked to cognitive impairment 
and an increased risk of dementia. To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the 
association between AC medication use and neuroimaging biomarkers of brain metabolism and 
atrophy as a proxy for understanding the underlying biology of the clinical effects of AC 
medications.
OBJECTIVE—To assess the association between AC medication use and cognition, glucose 
metabolism, and brain atrophy in cognitively normal older adults from the Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the Indiana Memory and Aging Study (IMAS).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS—The ADNI and IMAS are longitudinal studies 
with cognitive, neuroimaging, and other data collected at regular intervals in clinical and academic 
research settings. For the participants in the ADNI, visits are repeated 3, 6, and 12 months after the 
baseline visit and then annually. For the participants in the IMAS, visits are repeated every 18 
months after the baseline visit (402 cognitively normal older adults in the ADNI and 49 
cognitively normal older adults in the IMAS were included in the present analysis). Participants 
were either taking (hereafter referred to as the AC+ participants [52 from the ADNI and 8 from the 
IMAS]) or not taking (hereafter referred to as the AC− participants [350 from the ADNI and 41 
from the IMAS]) at least 1 medication with medium or high AC activity. Data analysis for this 
study was performed in November 2015.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES—Cognitive scores, mean fludeoxyglucose F 18 
standardized uptake value ratio (participants from the ADNI only), and brain atrophy measures 
Risacher et al.
Page 2
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from structural magnetic resonance imaging were compared between AC+ participants and AC− 
participants after adjusting for potential confounders. The total AC burden score was calculated 
and was related to target measures. The association of AC use and longitudinal clinical decline 
(mean [SD] follow-up period, 32.1 [24.7] months [range, 6–108 months]) was examined using 
Cox regression.
RESULTS—The 52 AC+ participants (mean [SD] age, 73.3 [6.6] years) from the ADNI showed 
lower mean scores on Weschler Memory Scale–Revised Logical Memory Immediate Recall (raw 
mean scores: 13.27 for AC+ participants and 14.16 for AC− participants; P = .04) and the Trail 
Making Test Part B (raw mean scores: 97.85 seconds for AC+ participants and 82.61 seconds for 
AC− participants; P = .04) and a lower executive function composite score (raw mean scores: 0.58 
for AC+ participants and 0.78 for AC− participants; P = .04) than the 350 AC− participants (mean 
[SD] age, 73.3 [5.8] years) from the ADNI. Reduced total cortical volume and temporal lobe 
cortical thickness and greater lateral ventricle and inferior lateral ventricle volumes were seen in 
the AC+ participants relative to the AC− participants.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE—The use of AC medication was associated with 
increased brain atrophy and dysfunction and clinical decline. Thus, use of AC medication among 
older adults should likely be discouraged if alternative therapies are available.
Anticholinergic (AC) medications have been linked to impaired cognition1–16 primarily in 
nondemented older adults10,17 and an increased risk for cognitive impairment and dementia 
in older adults.1,3,4,18–20 The biological basis for the cognitive effects of AC medications is 
unknown. However, given the importance of the cholinergic system in cognition, researchers 
speculate that direct impairment of cholinergic neurons may underlie these effects. In fact, 
previous studies21,22 using scopolamine hydrobromide, a cholinergic antagonist, have shown 
transient cognitive impairment in young and older adults. A recent study23 suggested that 
administration of AC medications modulates the association between brain volume and 
cognition. However, to our knowledge, no studies have examined the effects of regular AC 
medication use on neuroimaging measures of brain structure and function in cognitively 
normal (CN) older adults.
The goal of the present study was to assess AC medication use in CN older adults from the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). In particular, we sought to evaluate 
whether cognitive performance, brain glucose hypometabolism, structural brain atrophy, and 
clinical progression to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and/or Alzheimer disease (AD) 
were associated with the use of AC medication. We also completed a similar analysis in an 
independent cohort of CN older adults from the Indiana Memory and Aging Study(IMAS). 
We hypothesized that participants taking AC medications (hereafter referred to as AC+ 
participants) would show poorer cognition, reduced glucose metabolism, brain atrophy, and 
increased clinical decline relative to those not taking AC medications (hereafter referred to 
as AC− participants) and that these effects would be greatest in those with the highest total 
AC burden score.
Risacher et al.
Page 3
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods
Alzheimer’sDisease Neuroimaging Initiative
Data used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the ADNI (http://
adni.loni.usc.edu; for more information, see the eAppendix in the Supplement,http://
www.adni-info.org, and previous reports24–29). Written informed consent was obtained 
according to the Declaration of Helsinki.30
Indiana Memory and Aging Study
The IMAS includes CN participants, participants with subjective cognitive decline, 
participants with MCI, and participants with AD, but only data from CN participants and 
participants with subjective cognitive decline were used for this analysis. Participants 
provided written informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki,30 and the 
procedures were approved by the Indiana University Committee for the Protection of Human 
Subjects.
AC Medications
Medication logs from the ADNI and the IMAS were manually curated to identify 
medications with low, medium, or high AC effects as defined by the Anticholinergic 
Cognitive Burden (ACB) scale and other reports.18,31–33 See eTable 1 in the Supplement for 
all medications identified. To be defined as an AC+ participant, participants had to have been 
taking the medication at the baseline visit for a minimum of 1 month. The total AC burden 
score was also calculated using the ACB scale, which uses the literature to guide an expert-
based determination of the adverse cognitive AC activities (low effect = 1, medium effect = 
2, and high effect = 3). The total AC burden score was the sum of ACB scores of all 
applicable medications taken by a participant.4,6,8 See eTable 2 in the Supplement for 
medications included in calculating the total AC burden score.
Participants
A total of 402 CN participants from ADNI 1, ADNI Grand Opportunity, and ADNI 2, 
including 301 CN participants without significant memory concerns and 101 CN 
participants with significant memory concerns, were included in the present analysis. A 
diagnosis was made as previously described34,35 and as in the ADNI 2 manual (http://
www.adni-info.org/Scientists/doc/ADNI2_Procedures_Manual_20130624.pdf). Participants 
were divided by AC medication use into those taking 1 or more medications with medium or 
high AC activity (AC+ participants) and those not taking any such medications (AC− 
participants), resulting in 52 AC+ participants and 350 AC− participants. There was no 
significant difference in the rates of AC use between CN participants with significant 
memory concerns and those without, nor was there a significant effect of diagnosis (with or 
without significant memory concerns) or of the interaction between diagnosis and AC use on 
clinical progression.
The CN participants with or without subjective cognitive decline from the IMAS were also 
evaluated as an independent replication sample. Participants were CN if they had normal 
cognition relative to demographically adjusted norms and no significant self- or informant-
Risacher et al.
Page 4
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 based cognitive complaints. Participants had subjective cognitive decline if they had normal 
cognition and self- and/or informant-based complaints. From the IMAS, there were 8 AC+ 
participants and 41 AC− participants.
Cognitive Testing
The ADNI participants underwent a comprehensive cognitive and clinical battery. We 
assessed the effect of AC use on executive function (Trail Making Test Part B [TMT-B], a 
composite executive function score36) and memory (Weschler Memory Scale–Revised 
Logical Memory Immediate and Delayed, a composite memory score37).
Participants from the IMAS received a battery of neuropsychological tests and cognitive 
concern questionnaires, most of which have been previously described.38 After pread-justing 
for age, sex, and education, combined z scores (relative to the complete IMAS CN group) 
were generated for 3 domains: executive function, memory, and general cognition. We then 
assessed the effect of AC use on the z scores of these 3 domains.
Fluorodeoxyglucose F 18 Positron Emission Tomography
Preprocessed fluorodeoxyglucose F 18–positron emission tomographic (FDG-PET) scans 
(coregistered, averaged, standardized image and voxel size, and uniform resolution) were 
downloaded from the ADNI Laboratory of Neuroimaging (LONI) site (http://
adni.loni.usc.edu) and processed as previously described.25,34 Mean standardized uptake 
value ratios (SUVRs) were extracted from 2 regions of interest, including a bilateral 
hippocampal region of interest39 and an overall cortical region of interest representing 
regions where CN participants show greater glucose metabolism than participants with AD 
from the full ADNI 1 cohort. Seventy-three participants were excluded from FDG-PET 
analyses for missing data. The IMAS participants did not undergo FDG PET.
Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Baseline structural 3-T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were downloaded from 
LONI for ADNI 2 participants; ADNI 1 participants were excluded because their scans were 
collected on 1.5-T scanners using a different protocol. Scans were corrected prior to 
downloading as previously described.24 After downloading, we processed the scans using 
FreeSurfer version 5.134,35 to extract target measures of atrophy selected for known 
relevance in cognitive function and AD (temporal lobe, ventricle volume, and total cortex). 
If 2 MRI scans were available, the values from both scans were averaged. A total of 116 
ADNI participants were excluded from this analysis owing to missing data. The IMAS 
participants underwent structural magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient-echo 
scans on a Siemens 3T Tim Trio using the ADNI sequence. Similar to ADNI, scans were 
processed using FreeSurfer version 5.1 to extract the same atrophy measures. Two 
participants were excluded owing to missing data.
Confounding Effects of Medical History and Medication Use
Because the observed effects may potentially be caused by overall morbidity in AC+ 
participants, we evaluated the effect of the total number of medications, the total number of 
common comorbid conditions, and the presence or absence of each comorbid condition. The 
Risacher et al.
Page 5
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 comorbid conditions tested included transient ischemic attack, myocardial infarction, cardiac 
surgery, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, sleep apnea, other vascular disorders, 
insomnia, depression, anxiety, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and other psychiatric 
disorders. First, we determined whether there was a difference between AC+ participants and 
AC− participants regarding medical history and medication use (Table). Next, we determined 
whether these variables were associated with the outcome variables. Finally, we included 
those variables that were either different between AC+ participants and AC− participants or 
associated with an outcome in the general linear model assessing the effect of AC 
medication use on cognitive and imaging measures. Only those that were significant within 
the final general linear model were included (covariates reported in the Results). 
Furthermore, we randomly selected samples matched on medical history variables (52 AC− 
participants and 52 AC+ participants) and ran similar analyses.
Statistical Analysis
In the ADNI, cross-sectional measures of cognitive performance, glucose metabolism, and 
brain atrophy were compared between AC+ participants and AC− participants using a 
general linear model preadjusted for age, sex, and Aβ positivity (yes/no; defined using 
previously established cutoffs on either cerebrospinal fluid sample [Aβ1–42 < 192 mg/
mL]40 or cortical florbetapir F-18 SUVR [SUVR≥1.1],41 years of education [included in 
analyses of cognitive variables only], and total intracranial volume [included in analyses of 
MRI variables only] using the residuals of a linear regression model). After checking 
normality, we determined that the TMT-B score, the FDG SUVR in the cortical region of 
interest, and the inferior lateral ventricle and lateral ventricle volumes were skewed. Using 
log transformations, we normalized the TMT-B scores and FDG SUVR in the overall 
cortical region-of-interest variables, while the ventricular volumes were normalized using a 
square root transformation. These transformed variables were used in the statistical analyses 
to test the effect of AC medication use. All other variables were normally distributed, so 
untransformed values are reported. The statistical threshold for significance was set at P < .
05.
Associations between the total AC burden score and cognitive performance, glucose 
metabolism, and brain atrophy measures were evaluated using Spearman correlation models. 
Target cognitive and imaging variables were preadjusted for age, sex, Aβ positivity, 
education, medical history variables (see Results), and total intracranial volume as 
appropriate.
Finally, a Cox regression model was used to determine whether AC medication use was 
associated with clinical progression from CN to MCI and/or AD in the ADNI cohort (mean 
[SD] follow-up period, 32.1 [24.7] months [range, 6–108 months]), covaried for age, sex, 
medical history variables (see Results), and Aβ positivity. We also looked at the interaction 
of AC medication use and Aβ positivity on clinical progression.
Cognitive performance and brain atrophy measures were compared between AC+ 
participants and AC− participants in the IMAS to replicate the results observed in the ADNI. 
All measures showed a normal distribution. A general linear model was used to assess the 
effect of AC medication use in the IMAS, co-varied for age, sex, education, and total 
Risacher et al.
Page 6
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intracranial volume as appropriate. Associations between the total AC burden score and 
cognitive performance and brain atrophy measures were also evaluated using Spearman 
correlation models. No medical history variables were found to be significant covariates in 
the IMAS.
Results
Cognitive Performance
No significant differences in age, sex, education, ethnicity/ race, or APOE ε4 genotype were 
observed between AC+ participants and AC− participants in either sample (Table; see eTable 
3 in the Supplement for the demographic characteristics of the IMAS participants). Of the 
medical variables examined, only the total number of medications, the total number of 
comorbid conditions, anxiety, and depression were different between AC+ participants and 
AC− participants (P < .05). Significant effects of AC medication use on the mean Logical 
Memory–Immediate score (raw mean scores: 13.27 for AC+ participants and 14.16 for AC− 
participants; P = .04 [Figure 1A]), the mean TMT-B score (raw mean scores: 97.85 seconds 
for AC+ participants and 82.61 seconds for AC− participants; P = .04 [Figure 1B], with 
transient is-chemic attack as an additional covariate), and the mean composite executive 
function score (raw mean scores: 0.58 for AC+ participants and 0.78 for AC− participants; P 
= .04 [Figure 1C], with transient ischemic attack, myocardial infarction, and diabetes as 
additional covariates) were found, with AC+ participants showing lower scores than AC− 
participants. The mean Logical Memory–Delayed Memory score (raw mean scores: 12.40 
for AC+ participants and 13.24 for AC− participants; P = .07) and the mean memory 
composite score (raw mean scores: 0.85 for AC+ participants and 0.93 for AC− participants; 
P = .11 [data not shown]) trended toward significance, with AC+ participants showing lower 
scores than AC− participants. In the IMAS, the general mean cognition z score was 
significantly reduced for the AC+ participants relative to the AC− participants (raw mean 
scores: −1.27 for AC+ participants and −0.34 for AC− participants; P = .03 [eFigure 1 in the 
Supplement]).
FDG Positron Emission Tomography
Differences in glucose metabolism between AC+ participants and AC− participants were 
observed, with the AC+ participants showing reduced glucose metabolism in the 
hippocampus (raw mean values: 1.06 for the AC+ participants and 1.08 for AC− participants; 
P = .02 [Figure 1D], with anxiety as an additional covariate) and the global FDG-PET region 
of interest (raw mean values: 1.48 for AC+ participants and 1.52 for AC− participants; P = .
03 [Figure 1E], with concussion and other vascular diseases as additional covariates) relative 
to AC− participants.
Structural MRI
A significant effect of AC medication use on brain structure was also observed. The AC+ 
participants demonstrated reduced total cortical volume (raw mean values: 406134.21 mm3 
for AC+ participants and 423107.01 mm3 for AC− participants; P = .02 [Figure 2A]) and 
larger lateral ventricle (raw mean values: 17880.19 mm3 for AC+ participants and 15620.22 
mm3 for AC− participants; P = .01 [Figure 2B]) and inferior lateral ventricle volumes (raw 
Risacher et al.
Page 7
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mean values: 757.25 mm3 for A C+ participants and 571.49 mm3 for AC− participants; P < .
001 [Figure 2C]) relative to the AC− participants. Regional effects were also observed in the 
temporal lobe, with AC+ participants showing a reduced temporal lobe cortical thickness 
(raw mean values: 2.80 mm for AC+ participants and 2.84 mm for AC− participants; P = .02 
[Figure 2D], with concussion as an additional covariate) and a reduced medial temporal lobe 
(MTL) cortical thickness (raw mean values: 3.10 mm for AC+ participants and 3.15 mm for 
AC− participants; P = .02 [Figure 2E], with concussion and cardiac surgery as additional 
covariates) relative to AC− participants. In the IMAS, the AC+ participants had a reduced 
MTL cortical thickness (raw mean values: 2.91 mm for AC+ participants and 3.10 mm for 
AC− participants; P = .01 [eFigure 2A in the Supplement]) and showed a trend toward 
thinner bilateral temporal lobe cortices (raw mean values: 2.69 mm for AC+ participants and 
2.81 mm for AC− participants; P = .05 [eFigure 2B in the Supplement]) compared with the 
AC− participants.
Association of Total AC Burden Score With Cognition and Brain Atrophy
Significant associations of the total AC burden score with cognition and brain atrophy were 
observed. Specifically, a higher total AC burden score was associated with a poorer TMT-B 
performance (r = 0.137; P = .01 [Figure 3A], with transient ischemic attack and total number 
of medications additional as co-variates) and greater inferior lateral ventricle (r = 0.126; P 
= .03 [Figure 3B]) and lateral ventricle volumes (r = 0.154; P = .01 [Figure 3C]). The 
inferior lateral ventricle volume remained significantly associated with the total AC burden 
score after excluding participants with a total AC burden score of 0 (r = 0.331; P < .001 
[Figure 3E]). The TMT-B score (r = 0.146; P = .06 [Figure 3D]) and the lateral ventricle 
volume (r = 0.152; P = .10 [Figure 3F]) showed nonsignificant trend associations with the 
total AC burden score after excluding those participants with a total AC burden score of 0.
In the IMAS, the pattern of results was similar, although mostly nonsignificant trends were 
observed owing to attenuated power. Specifically, a higher total AC burden score was 
associated with reduced general cognition and atrophy (eFigure 3 in the Supplement). A 
trend for a negative association between the total AC burden score and general cognition 
across all participants (r = −0.239; P = .10 [eFigure 3A in the Supplement]) was observed, 
which was significant after excluding those with a total AC burden score of 0 (r = −0.625; P 
= .004 [eFigure 3C in the Supplement]). A negative association was observed between the 
total AC burden score and MTL cortical thickness (r = −0.313; P = .03 [eFigure 3B in the 
Supplement]), which only trended toward significant after excluding those with a total AC 
burden score of 0 (r = −0.428; P = .07 [eFigure 3D in the Supplement]).
Association of AC Use With Future Progression
A significant association between AC medication use and future progression of ADNI 
participants to MCI and/or AD was observed (P = .01; hazard ratio, 2.47 [Figure 4A]; with 
total number of medications, cardiac surgery, total number of comorbid conditions, and 
other psychiatric conditions as additional covariates). After evaluating the interaction 
between AC medication use and Aβ positivity, we observed that AC+ participants who are 
Aβ positive showed the highest risk of conversion relative to AC− participants who are Aβ 
negative (P < .001; hazard ratio, 7.73 [Figure 4B]; with cardiac surgery and other psychiatric 
Risacher et al.
Page 8
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conditions as additional covariates) or those who are positive for either AC medication use 
or Aβ (P = .001; hazard ratio, 4.24 [Figure 4B]).
Matched Sample
In the matched sample, the AC+ participants showed reduced total cortex volumes (raw 
mean values: 406134.21 mm3 for AC+ participants and 417770.60 mm3 for AC− 
participants; P = .01), increased inferior lateral ventricle volumes (raw mean values: 757.25 
mm3 for AC+ participants and 583.62 mm3 for AC− participants; P = .02), and an increased 
likelihood for clinical conversion (P = .01; hazard ratio, 3.87 [data not shown]) compared 
with the AC− participants. The AC+ participants also showed a trend toward poorer Logical 
Memory–Immediate performance (raw mean values: 13.27 for AC+ participants and 14.42 
for AC− participants; P = .08) and increased lateral ventricle volumes (raw mean values: 
17880.19 mm3 for AC+ participants and 15164.28 mm3 for AC− participants; P = .10 [data 
not shown]) compared with the AC− participants.
Discussion
Use of medications with medium or high AC effects in the ADNI cohort was associated with 
poorer cognition (particularly in immediate memory recall and executive function), reduced 
glucose metabolism, whole-brain and temporal lobe atrophy, and clinical decline. The effect 
appeared additive because an increased burden of AC medications was associated with 
poorer executive function and increased brain atrophy. Similar effects were seen in an 
independent cohort of older adults. These results suggest that medications with AC 
properties may be detrimental to brain structure and function, as well as cognition.
The observed findings support previous reports1–16 regarding the association between AC 
medication use and cognitive impairments, with a significant effect of AC medication use on 
executive and immediate, rather than delayed, memory. We also found that the increased 
clinical progression from CN to MCI and/or AD was associated with AC medication use.
This study is one of the first, to our knowledge, to examine in vivo brain structural and 
functional differences between CN participants taking medications with medium or high AC 
activity and CN participants not taking these medications. We observed that AC+ 
participants had reduced brain glucose metabolism and increased brain atrophy compared 
with AC− participants. Furthermore, those with the highest total AC burden scores showed 
the most atrophy.
The increased brain atrophy and decreased brain function that we observed may be linked to 
the central effects of AC medications on cholinergic pathways within the brain. Cholinergic 
pathways, especially those extending from the basal fore-brain, are important for 
cognition.42 Studies have suggested that AC medications may affect cognition by altering 
cholinergic inputs, with a study23 showing that AC medication administration leads to an 
uncoupling between brain structure and cognition in older adults. The process by which AC 
medications might lead to neurodegeneration is less clear. Cholinergic receptor antagonists 
have been shown to induce cell death,43 while increased cholinergic neurotransmission 
reduces neurodegeneration in an AD mouse model.44 Decreased cholinergic activity due to 
Risacher et al.
Page 9
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 AC medications may induce synaptic loss and neurodegeneration in regions with significant 
cholinergic innervation, namely the MTL and cortex.45
In mice, lesioning or damaging cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain has been shown to 
cause degeneration of the septal-hippocampal and basalo-cortical projections and neurons in 
the hippocampus and cortex.46 Another possibility is that participants taking AC 
medications may be more sensitive to neuronal damage in response to stress. This 
hypothesis centers around the interaction of cholinergic systems and stress because MTL 
cholinergic neurons have been shown to regulate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.47 
Reduced cholinergic activity has been linked to increased plasma corticosterone levels, 
which in turn are linked to increased hippocampal cell death.47 Furthermore, chronic stress 
has been associated with increased Aβ levels, tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation, 
and neurodegeneration in mouse models through dysregulation of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis.48
Overall, the findings in this study provide a potential biological basis for the reduced 
cognition associated with the use AC medications through the functional and structural 
changes in the brain. However, future longitudinal studies with imaging and other brain 
biomarkers, as well as in animal models, are needed to more fully understand the 
mechanism underlying the effect of AC medications on the brain.
There are a few notable limitations to this study. First, the information on medication use 
was based on self-report rather than directly ascertained through medical/prescription 
records. Self-report could be inaccurate because participants may forget to report specific 
medication use. However, given the normal cognitive status of the participants at baseline, it 
is unlikely that they would have reported taking medications that they were, in fact, not 
taking. Thus, the observed effect is potentially underestimated because some AC− 
participants may in fact have been taking an AC medication. Future studies using medical/ 
pharmacy records, along with imaging and biomarker measures, would help to confirm the 
findings of the present study.
A second limitation is the relatively small sample size of AC+ participants. Future studies 
using larger samples are warranted. A third limitation is the inability to determine the 
causality of the findings because the results may be due to poor health rather than AC 
medication use.49 We did include common comorbid health conditions (eg, vascular and 
psychiatric conditions), total number of medications, and total number of comorbid 
conditions as covariates. However, the only way to determine true causality would be by use 
of a well-controlled prospective longitudinal study.
Another limitation may be the variability in the duration of AC medication use among 
participants. Furthermore, a participant who had taken an AC medication for many years but 
ceased shortly before the baseline visit would not be captured as an AC+ participant. Future 
studies with a better-controlled medication history assessment (ie, using medical/pharmacy 
records and patient self-report) are warranted, as well as studies on the effect of the duration 
of AC medication use on the target outcomes. Finally, only structural MRI and FDGPET 
were assessed in the present report. Future studies examining changes on more advanced 
Risacher et al.
Page 10
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 imaging measures (ie, diffusion tensor imaging and resting-state or task-based functional 
MRI) would provide additional evidence about the selective effect of AC medications on the 
brain structure and function in specific circuits.
Conclusions
In summary, we observed that CN older adults taking medications with medium or high AC 
activity showed poorer cognition, reduced cerebral glucose metabolism, increased brain 
atrophy, and increased clinical decline compared with those not taking these medications 
and that these symptoms were greatest in CN older adults with the highest total AC burden 
scores. These findings highlight the importance of considering the cognitive adverse effects 
of AC medications before using them to treat older adults at risk for cognitive decline in a 
clinical setting, as well as in therapeutic trials.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Funding/Support: Data collection and sharing for this project were funded by the ADNI (NIH grant U01 
AG024904) and Department of Defense ADNI (Department of Defense award W81XWH-12-2-0012). The ADNI is 
funded by the National Institute on Aging and the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, 
and through the generous contributions from the Alzheimer’s Association, the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery 
Foundation, Araclon Biotech, BioClinica Inc, Biogen Idec Inc, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Eisai Inc, Elan 
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Eli Lilly and Company, EuroImmun, F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company 
Genentech Inc, Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, IXICO Ltd, Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research and 
Development LLC, Johnson and Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and Development LLC, Medpace Inc, Merck 
and Company Inc, Meso Scale Diagnostics LLC, NeuroRx Research, Neurotrack Technologies, Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Pfizer Inc, Piramal Imaging, Servier, Synarc Inc, and Takeda Pharmaceutical 
Company. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research are providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in 
Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the NIH (http://www.fnih.org/). The 
grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated 
by the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San Diego. The ADNI data are 
disseminated by the LONI at the University of Southern California. The ADNI was also supported by NIH grants 
P30 AG010129 and K01 AG030514 and the Dana Foundation. Additional support for analyses included in the 
present report was provided by the following sources: the National Institute on Aging (grants R01 AG19771, P30 
AG10133, and K01 AG049050), the Alzheimer’s Association, the Indiana University Health–Indiana University 
School of Medicine Strategic Research Initiative, and the Indiana Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, 
management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and 
decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Appendix
Group Information: The ADNI investigators were as follows: I. ADNI 1, Grand 
Opportunity, and 2: Part A: Leadership and Infrastructure: Michael W. Weiner, MD, 
University of California–San Francisco (UCSF), principal investigator (PI). Paul Aisen, MD, 
University of California, San Diego (UC San Diego), Alzheimer’s Diseases Cooperative 
Study PI and Director of Coordinating Center Clinical Core. Executive Committee: Michael 
Weiner, MD, UCSF; Paul Aisen, MD, UC San Diego; Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester; Clifford R. Jack Jr, MD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester; William Jagust, MD, 
UC Berkeley; John Q. Trojanowki, MD, PhD, University Pennsylvania; Arthur W. Toga, 
Risacher et al.
Page 11
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PhD, University of Southern California (USC); Laurel Beckett, PhD, University of 
California, Davis (UC Davis); Robert C. Green, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital/ Harvard Medical School; Andrew J. Saykin, PsyD, Indiana University; John 
Morris, MD, Washington University in St Louis (WUSTL); Leslie M. Shaw, University of 
Pennsylvania. ADNI External Advisory Board: Zaven Khachaturian, PhD, Prevent 
Alzheimer’s Disease 2020 (Chair); Greg Sorensen, MD, Siemens; Maria Carrillo, PhD, 
Alzheimer’s Association; Lew Kuller, MD, University of Pittsburg; Marc Raichle, MD, 
WUSTL; Steven Paul, MD, Cornell University; Peter Davies, MD, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine of Yeshiva University; Howard Fillit, MD, AD Drug Discovery Foundation; 
Franz Hefti, PhD, Acumen Pharmaceuticals; Davie Holtzman, MD, WUSTL; M. Marcel 
Mesulam, MD, Northwestern University; William Potter, MD, National Institute of Mental 
Health; Peter Snyder, PhD, Brown University. ADNI 2 Private Partner Scientific Board: 
Adam Schwartz, MD, Eli Lilly (Chair). Data and Publication Committee: Robert C. Green, 
MD, MPH, Brigham and Women’s Hospital/ Harvard Medical School (Chair). Resource 
Allocation Review Committee: Tom Montine, MD, PhD, University of Washington (Chair). 
Clinical Core Leaders: Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester (core PI); Paul 
Aisen, MD, UC San Diego. Clinical Informatics and Operations: Ronald G. Thomas, PhD, 
UC San Diego; Michael Donohue, PhD, UC San Diego; Sarah Walter, MSc, UC San Diego; 
Devon Gessert, UC San Diego; Tamie Sather, MA, UC San Diego; Gus Jiminez, MBS, UC 
San Diego; Archana B. Balasubramanian, PhD, UC San Diego; Jennifer Mason, MPH, UC 
San Diego; Iris Sim, UC San Diego. Biostatistics Core Leaders and Key Personnel: Laurel 
Beckett, PhD, UC Davis (core PI); Danielle Harvey, PhD, UC Davis; Michael Donohue, 
PhD, UC San Diego. MRI Core Leaders and Key Personnel: Clifford R. Jack Jr, MD, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester (core PI); Matthew Bernstein, PhD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Nick Fox, 
MD, University of London; Paul Thompson, PhD, UCLA School of Medicine; Norbert 
Schuff, PhD, UCSF MRI; Charles DeCarli, MD, UC Davis; Bret Borowski, RT, Mayo 
Clinic; Jeff Gunter, PhD, Mayo Clinic; Matt Senjem, MS, Mayo Clinic; Prashanthi Vemuri, 
PhD, Mayo Clinic; David Jones, MD, Mayo Clinic; Kejal Kantarci, Mayo Clinic; Chad 
Ward, Mayo Clinic. PET Core Leaders and Key Personnel: William Jagust, MD, UC 
Berkeley (core PI); Robert A. Koeppe, PhD, University of Michigan; Norm Foster, MD, 
University of Utah; Eric M. Reiman, MD, Banner Alzheimer’s Institute; Kewei Chen, PhD, 
Banner Alzheimer’s Institute; Chet Mathis, MD, University of Pittsburgh; Susan Landau, 
PhD, UC Berkeley. Neuropathology Core Leaders: John C. Morris, MD, WUSTL; Nigel J. 
Cairns, PhD, MRCPath, WUSTL; Erin Householder, WUSTL; Lisa Taylor-Reinwald, BA, 
HTL (ASCP), past investigator, WUSTL. Biomarkers Core Leaders and Key Personnel: 
Leslie M. Shaw, PhD, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; John Q. Trojanowki, 
MD, PhD, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Virginia Lee, PhD, MBA, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Magdalena Korecka, PhD, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Michal Figurski, PhD, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine. Informatics Core Leaders and Key Personnel: Arthur W. Toga, PhD, USC (core 
PI); Karen Crawford, USC; Scott Neu, PhD, USC. Genetics Core Leaders and Key 
Personnel: Andrew J. Saykin, PsyD, Indiana University; Tatiana M. Foroud, PhD, Indiana 
University; Steven Potkin, MD, UC Irvine; Li Shen, PhD, Indiana University; Kelley Faber, 
MS, CCRC, Indiana University; Sungeun Kim, PhD, Indiana University; Kwangsik Nho, 
PhD, Indiana University. Initial Concept Planning and Development: Michael W. Weiner, 
Risacher et al.
Page 12
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MD, UCSF; Lean Thal, MD, UC San Diego; Zaven Khachaturian, PhD, Prevent 
Alzheimer’s Disease 2020. Early Project Proposal Development: Leon Thal, MD, UC San 
Diego; Neil Buckholtz, National Institute on Aging; Michael W. Weiner, MD, UCSF; Peter 
J. Snyder, PhD, Brown University; William Potter, MD, National Institute of Mental Health; 
Steven Paul, MD, Cornell University; Marylyn Albert, PhD, Johns Hopkins University; 
Richard Frank, MD, PhD, Richard Frank Consulting; Zaven Khachaturian, PhD, Prevent 
Alzheimer’s Disease 2020. National Institute on Aging: John Hsiao, MD, National Institute 
on Aging.
Part B: Investigators by Site. Oregon Health and Science University: Jeffrey Kaye, MD; 
Joseph Quinn, MD; Lisa Silbert, MD; Betty Lind, BS; Raina Carter, BA; Sara Dolen, BS, 
past investigator. USC: Lon S. Schneider, MD; Sonia Pawluczyk, MD; Mauricio Beccera, 
BS; Liberty Teodoro, RN; Bryan M. Spann, DO, PhD, past investigator. UC San Diego: 
James Brewer, MD, PhD; Helen Vanderswag, RN; Adam Fleisher, MD, past investigator. 
University of Michigan: Judith L. Heidebrink, MD, MS; Joanne L. Lord, LPN, BA, CCRC. 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester: Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD; Sara S. Mason, RN; Colleen S. Albers, 
RN; David Knopman, MD; Kris Johnson, RN, past investigator. Baylor College of 
Medicine: Rachelle S. Doody, MD, PhD; Javier Villanueva-Meyer, MD; Munir Chowdhury, 
MBBS, MS; Susan Rountree, MD; Mimi Dang, MD. Columbia University Medical Center: 
Yaakov Stern, PhD; Lawrence S. Honig, MD, PhD; Karen L. Bell, MD. WUSTL: Beau 
Ances, MD; John C. Morris, MD; Maria Carroll, RN, MSN; Mary L. Creech, RN, MSW; 
Erin Franklin, MS, CCRP; Mark A. Mintun, MD, past investigator; Stacy Schneider, APRN, 
BC, GNP, past investigator; Angela Oliver, RN, BSN, MSG, past investigator. University of 
Alabama–Birmingham: Daniel Marson, JD, PhD; Randall Griffith, PhD, ABPP; David 
Clark, MD; David Geldmacher, MD; John Brockington, MD; Erik Roberson, MD; Marissa 
Natelson Love, MD. Mount Sinai School of Medicine: Hillel Grossman, MD; Effie Mitsis, 
PhD. Rush University Medical Center: Raj C. Shah, MD; Leyla deToledo-Morrell, PhD, past 
investigator. Wien Center: Ranjan Duara, MD; Daniel Varon, MD; Maria T. Greig, MD; 
Peggy Roberts, CAN, past investigator. Johns Hopkins University: Marilyn Albert, PhD; 
Chiadi Onyike, MD; Daniel D’Agostino II, BS; Stephanie Kielb, BS, past investigator. New 
York University: James E. Galvin, MD, MPH; Brittany Cerbone; Christina A. Michel, past 
investigator; Dana M. Pogorelec, past investigator; Henry Rusinek, PhD, past investigator; 
Mony J de Leon, EdD, past investigator; Lidia Glodzik, MD, PhD, past investigator; Susan 
De Santi, PhD, past investigator. Duke University Medical Center: P. Murali Doraiswamy, 
MBBS, FRCP; Jeffrey R. Petrella, MD; Salvador Borges-Neto, MD; Terence Z. Wong, MD, 
past investigator; Edward Coleman, past investigator. University of Pennsylvania: Steven E. 
Arnold, MD; Jason H. Karlawish, MD; David Wolk, MD; Christopher M. Clark, MD. 
University of Kentucky: Charles D. Smith, MD; Greg Jicha, MD; Peter Hardy, PhD; Partha 
Sinha, PhD; Elizabeth Oates, MD; Gary Conrad, MD. University of Pittsburgh: Oscar L. 
Lopez, MD; MaryAnn Oakley, MA; Donna M. Simpson, CRNP, MPH. University of 
Rochester Medical Center: Anton P. Porsteinsson, MD; Bonnie S. Goldstein, MS, NP; Kim 
Martin, RN; Kelly M. Makino, BS, past investigator; M. Saleem Ismail, MD, past 
investigator; Connie Brand, RN, past investigator. UC Irvine: Ruth A. Mulnard, DNSc, RN, 
FAAN; Gaby Thai, MD; Catherine McAdams-Ortiz, MSN, RN, A/GNP. University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School: Kyle Womack, MD; Dana Mathews, MD, PhD; Mary 
Risacher et al.
Page 13
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quiceno, MD. Emory University: Allan I. Levey, MD, PhD; James J. Lah, MD, PhD; Janet 
S. Cellar, DNP, PMHCNS-BC. University of Kansas, Medical Center: Jeffrey M. Burns, 
MD; Russell H. Swerdlow, MD; William M. Brooks, PhD. UCLA: Liana Apostolova, MD; 
Kathleen Tingus, PhD; Ellen Woo, PhD; Daniel H. S. Silverman, MD, PhD; Po H. Lu, 
PsyD, past investigator; George Bartzokis, MD, past investigator. Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville: 
Neill R Graff-Radford, MBBCH, FRCP (London); Francine Parfitt, MSH, CCRC; Tracy 
Kendall, BA, CCRP; Heather Johnson, MLS, CCRP, past investigator. Indiana University: 
Martin R. Farlow, MD; Ann Marie Hake, MD; Brandy R. Matthews, MD; Jared R. Brosch, 
MD; Scott Herring, RN, CCRC, past investigator; Cynthia Hunt, BS, CCRP, past 
investigator. Yale University School of Medicine: Christopher H. van Dyck, MD; Richard E. 
Carson, PhD; Martha G. MacAvoy, PhD; Pradeep Varma, MD. McGill University, Montreal-
Jewish General Hospital: Howard Chertkow, MD; Howard Bergman, MD; Chris Hosein, 
MEd. Sunnybrook Health Sciences, Ontario: Sandra Black, MD, FRCPC; Bojana 
Stefanovic, PhD; Curtis Caldwell, PhD. University of British Columbia Clinic for AD and 
Related Disorders: Ging-Yuek Robin Hsiung, MD, MHSc, FRCPC; Howard Feldman, MD, 
FRCPC; Benita Mudge, BS; Michele Assaly, MA, past investigator. Cognitive Neurology–St 
Joseph’s, Ontario: Elizabeth Finger, MD; Stephen Pasternack, MD, PhD; Irina Rachisky, 
MD; Dick Trost, PhD, past investigator; Andrew Kertesz, MD, past investigator. Cleveland 
Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health: Charles Bernick, MD, MPH; Donna Munic, PhD. 
Northwestern University: Marek-Marsel Mesulam, MD; Kristine Lipowski, MA; Sandra 
Weintraub, PhD; Borna Bonakdarpour, MD; Diana Kerwin, MD, past investigator; Chuang-
Kuo Wu, MD, PhD, past investigator; Nancy Johnson, PhD, past investigator. Premiere 
Research Institute (Palm Beach Neurology): Carl Sadowsky, MD; Teresa Villena, MD. 
Georgetown University Medical Center: Raymond Scott Turner, MD, PhD; Kathleen 
Johnson, NP; Brigid Reynolds, NP. Brigham and Women’s Hospital: Reisa A. Sperling, 
MD; Keith A. Johnson, MD; Gad Marshall, MD. Stanford University: Jerome Yesavage, 
MD; Joy L. Taylor, PhD; Barton Lane, MD; Allyson Rosen, PhD, past investigator; Jared 
Tinklenberg, MD, past investigator. Banner Sun Health Research Institute: Marwan N. 
Sabbagh, MD; Christine M. Belden, PsyD; Sandra A. Jacobson, MD; Sherye A. Sirrel, 
CCRC. Boston University: Neil Kowall, MD; Ronald Killiany, PhD; Andrew E. Budson, 
MD; Alexander Norbash, MD, past investigator; Patricia Lynn Johnson, BA, past 
investigator. Howard University: Thomas O. Obisesan, MD, MPH; Saba Wolday, MSc; 
Joanne Allard, PhD. Case Western Reserve University: Alan Lerner, MD; Paula Ogrocki, 
PhD; Curtis Tatsuoka, PhD; Parianne Fatica, BA, CCRC. UC Davis–Sacramento: Evan 
Fletcher, PhD; Pauline Maillard, PhD; John Olichney, MD; Charles DeCarli, MD, past 
investigator; Owen Carmichael, PhD, past investigator. Neurological Care of Central New 
York: Smita Kittur, MD, past investigator. Parkwood Hospital: Michael Borrie, MB, ChB; 
T.-Y. Lee, PhD; Rob Bartha, PhD. University of Wisconsin: Sterling Johnson, PhD; Sanjay 
Asthana, MD; Cynthia M. Carlsson, MD, MS. UC Irvine, Brain Imaging Center: Steven G. 
Potkin, MD; Adrian Preda, MD; Dana Nguyen, PhD. Banner Alzheimer’s Institute: Pierre 
Tariot, MD; Anna Burke, MD; Nadira Trncic, MD, PhD, CCRC; Adam Fleisher, MD, past 
investigator; Stephanie Reeder, BA, past investigator. Dent Neurologic Institute: Vernice 
Bates, MD; Horacio Capote, MD; Michelle Rainka, PharmD, CCRP. Ohio State University: 
Douglas W. Scharre, MD; Maria Kataki, MD, PhD; Anahita Adeli, MD. Albany Medical 
College: Earl A. Zimmerman, MD; Dzintra Celmins, MD; Alice D. Brown, FNP. Hartford 
Risacher et al.
Page 14
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hospital, Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center: Godfrey D. Pearlson, MD; Karen Blank, 
MD; Karen Anderson, RN. Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center: Laura A. Flashman, PhD; 
Marc Seltzer, MD; Mary L. Hynes, RN, MPH; Robert B. Santulli, MD, past investigator. 
Wake Forest University Health Sciences: Kaycee M. Sink, MD, MAS; Leslie Gordineer; Jeff 
D. Williamson, MD, MHS, past investigator; Pradeep Garg, PhD, past investigator; Franklin 
Watkins, MD, past investigator. Rhode Island Hospital: Brian R. Ott, MD; Henry Querfurth, 
MD; Geoffrey Tremont, PhD. Butler Hospital: Stephen Salloway, MD, MS; Paul Malloy, 
PhD; Stephen Correia, PhD. UCSF: Howard J. Rosen, MD; Bruce L. Miller, MD; David 
Perry, MD. Medical University South Carolina: Jacobo Mintzer, MD, MBA; Kenneth Spicer, 
MD, PhD; David Bachman, MD. St Joseph’s Health Care: Elizabeth Finger, MD; Stephen 
Pasternak, MD; Irina Rachinsky, MD; John Rogers, MD; Andrew Kertesz, MD, past 
investigator; Dick Drost, MD, past investigator. Nathan Kline Institute: Nunzio Pomara, 
MD; Raymundo Hernando, MD; Antero Sarrael, MD. University of Iowa College of 
Medicine: Susan K. Schultz, MD; Laura L. Boles Ponto, PhD; Hyungsub Shim, MD; Karen 
Ekstam Smith, RN. Cornell University: Norman Relkin, MD, PhD; Gloria Chaing, MD; 
Michael Lin, MD; Lisa Ravdin, PhD. University of South Florida (USF), USF Health Byrd 
Alzheimer’s Institute: Amanda Smith, MD; Balebail Ashok Raj, MD; Kristin Fargher, MD, 
past investigator.
A Study of Brain Aging in Vietnam War Veterans; Department of Defense ADNI; Part A: 
Leadership and Infrastructure: Michael W. Weiner, MD, UCSF, PI; Paul Aisen, MD, UC San 
Diego, Alzheimer’s Diseases Cooperative Study PI and Director of Coordinating Center 
Clinical Core. Executive Committee: Michael Weiner, MD, UCSF; Paul Aisen, MD, UC San 
Diego; Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Robert C. Green, MD, MPH, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School; Danielle Harvey, PhD, UC Davis; 
Clifford R. Jack Jr, MD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester; William Jagust, MD, UC Berkeley; John 
C. Morris, MD, WUSTL; Andrew J. Saykin, PsyD, Indiana University; Leslie M. Shaw, 
PhD, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania; Arthur W. Toga, PhD, 
USC; John Q. Trojanowki, MD, PhD, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania. Psychological Evaluation/Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Core: Thomas 
Neylan, MD, UCSF. Traumatic Brain Injury Core: Jordan Grafman, PhD, Rehabilitation 
Institute of Chicago, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University. Data and 
Publication Committee: Robert C. Green, MD, MPH, Brigham and Women’s Hospital/
Harvard Medical School (Chair). Resource Allocation Review Committee: Tom Montine, 
MD, PhD, University of Washington (Chair). Clinical Core Leaders: Michael Weiner MD 
(core PI); Ronald Petersen, MD, PhD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester (core PI); Paul Aisen, MD, 
UC San Diego. Clinical Informatics and Operations: Ronald G. Thomas, PhD, UC San 
Diego; Michael Donohue, PhD, UC San Diego; Devon Gessert, UC San Diego; Tamie 
Sather, MA, UC San Diego; Melissa Davis, UC San Diego; Rosemary Morrison, MPH, UC 
San Diego; Gus Jiminez, MBS, UC San Diego. San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center: Thomas Neylan, MD, UCSF; Jacqueline Hayes, UCSF; Shannon Finley, UCSF. 
Biostatistics Core Leaders and Key Personnel: Danielle Harvey, PhD, UC Davis (core PI); 
Michael Donohue, PhD, UC San Diego. MRI Core Leaders and Key Personnel: Clifford R. 
Jack Jr, MD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester (core PI); Matthew Bernstein, PhD, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester; Bret Borowski, RT, Mayo Clinic; Jeff Gunter, PhD, Mayo Clinic; Matt Senjem, 
Risacher et al.
Page 15
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MS, Mayo Clinic; Kejal Kantarci, Mayo Clinic; Chad Ward, Mayo Clinic. PET Core 
Leaders and Key Personnel: William Jagust, MD, UC Berkeley (core PI); Robert A. Koeppe, 
PhD, University of Michigan; Norm Foster, MD, University of Utah; Eric M. Reiman, MD, 
Banner Alzheimer’s Institute; Kewei Chen, PhD, Banner Alzheimer’s Institute; Susan 
Landau, PhD, UC Berkeley. Neuropathology Core Leaders: John C. Morris, MD, WUSTL; 
Nigel J. Cairns, PhD, FRCPath, WUSTL; Erin Householder, MS, WUSTL. Biomarkers Core 
Leaders and Key Personnel: Leslie M. Shaw, PhD, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania; John Q. Trojanowki, MD, PhD, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania; Virginia Lee, PhD, MBA, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania; Magdalena Korecka, PhD, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania; Michal Figurski, PhD, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania. Informatics Core Leaders and Key Personnel: Arthur W. Toga, PhD, USC 
(core PI); Karen Crawford, USC; Scott Neu, PhD, USC. Genetics Core Leaders and Key 
Personnel: Andrew J. Saykin, PsyD, Indiana University; Tatiana M. Foroud, PhD, Indiana 
University; Steven Potkin, MD, UC Irvine; Li Shen, PhD, Indiana University; Kelley Faber, 
MS, CCRC, Indiana University; Sungeun Kim, PhD, Indiana University; Kwangsik Nho, 
PhD, Indiana University. Initial Concept Planning and Development: Michael W. Weiner, 
MD, UCSF; Karl Friedl, Department of Defense (retired).
Part B: Investigators by Site: USC: Lon S. Schneider, MD, MS; Sonia Pawluczyk, MD; 
Mauricio Beccera. UC San Diego: James Brewer, MD, PhD; Helen Vanderswag, RN. 
Columbia University Medical Center: Yaakov Stern, PhD; Lawrence S. Honig, MD, PhD; 
Karen L. Bell, MD. Rush University Medical Center: Debra Fleischman, PhD; Konstantinos 
Arfanakis, PhD; Raj C. Shah, MD. Wien Center: Ranjan Duara, MD, PI; Daniel Varon, MD, 
co-PI; Maria T Greig, HP Coordinator. Duke University Medical Center: P. Murali 
Doraiswamy, MBBS; Jeffrey R. Petrella, MD; Olga James, MD. University of Rochester 
Medical Center: Anton P. Porsteinsson, MD (director); Bonnie Goldstein, MS, NP 
(coordinator); Kimberly S. Martin, RN. UC Irvine: Ruth A. Mulnard, DNSc, RN, FAAN; 
Gaby Thai, MD; Catherine McAdams-Ortiz, MSN, RN, A/GNP. Medical University South 
Carolina: Jacobo Mintzer, MD, MBA; Dino Massoglia, MD, PhD; Olga Brawman-Mintzer, 
MD. Premiere Research Institute (Palm Beach Neurology): Carl Sadowsky, MD; Walter 
Martinez, MD; Teresa Villena, MD. UCSF: William Jagust, MD; Susan Landau, PhD; 
Howard Rosen, MD; David Perry. Georgetown University Medical Center: Raymond Scott 
Turner, MD, PhD; Kelly Behan; Brigid Reynolds, NP. Brigham and Women’s Hospital: 
Reisa A. Sperling, MD; Keith A. Johnson, MD; Gad Marshall, MD. Banner Sun Health 
Research Institute: Marwan N. Sabbagh, MD; Sandra A. Jacobson, MD; Sherye A. Sirrel, 
MS, CCRC. Howard University: Thomas O. Obisesan, MD, MPH; Saba Wolday, MSc; 
Joanne Allard, PhD. University of Wisconsin: Sterling C. Johnson, PhD; J. Jay Fruehling, 
MA; Sandra Harding, MS. University of Washington: Elaine R. Peskind, MD; Eric C. Petrie, 
MD, MS; Gail Li, MD, PhD. Stanford University: Jerome A. Yesavage, MD; Joy L. Taylor, 
PhD; Ansgar J. Furst, PhD; Steven Chao, MD. Cornell University: Norman Relkin, MD, 
PhD; Gloria Chaing, MD; Lisa Ravdin, PhD.
Additional Information: Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the 
ADNI database (http://adni.loni.usc.edu/). As such, the investigators within the ADNI 
Risacher et al.
Page 16
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contributed to the design and implementation of the ADNI and/or provided data but did not 
participate in analysis or writing of this report.
REFERENCES
1. Ancelin ML, Artero S, Portet F, Dupuy AM, Touchon J, Ritchie K. Non-degenerative mild cognitive 
impairment in elderly people and use of anticholinergic drugs: longitudinal cohort study. BMJ. 
2006; 332(7539):455–459. [PubMed: 16452102] 
2. Bottiggi KA, Salazar JC, Yu L, et al. Long-term cognitive impact of anticholinergic medications in 
older adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006; 14(11):980–984. [PubMed: 17068321] 
3. Boustani M, Campbell N, Munger S, Maidment I, Fox C. Impact of anticholinergics on the aging 
brain: a review and practical application. Aging Health. 2008; 4(3):311–320.
4. Cai X, Campbell N, Khan B, Callahan C, Boustani M. Long-term anticholinergic use and the aging 
brain. Alzheimers Dement. 2013; 9(4):377–385. [PubMed: 23183138] 
5. Campbell N, Boustani M, Limbil T, et al. The cognitive impact of anticholinergics: a clinical review. 
Clin Interv Aging. 2009; 4:225–233. [PubMed: 19554093] 
6. Campbell NL, Boustani MA, Lane KA, et al. Use of anticholinergics and the risk of cognitive 
impairment in an African American population. Neurology. 2010; 75(2):152–159. [PubMed: 
20625168] 
7. Carrière I, Fourrier-Reglat A, Dartigues JF, et al. Drugs with anticholinergic properties, cognitive 
decline, and dementia in an elderly general population: the 3-city study. Arch Intern Med. 2009; 
169(14):1317–1324. [PubMed: 19636034] 
8. Fox C, Richardson K, Maidment ID, et al. Anticholinergic medication use and cognitive impairment 
in the older population: the medical research council cognitive function and ageing study. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2011; 59(8):1477–1483. [PubMed: 21707557] 
9. Kashyap M, Belleville S, Mulsant BH, et al. Methodological challenges in determining longitudinal 
associations between anticholinergic drug use and incident cognitive decline. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2014; 62(2):336–341. [PubMed: 24417438] 
10. Konishi K, Hori K, Uchida H, et al. Adverse effects of anticholinergic activity on cognitive 
functions in Alzheimer’s disease. Psychogeriatrics. 2010; 10(1):34–38. [PubMed: 20594285] 
11. Lampela P, Lavikainen P, Garcia-Horsman JA, Bell JS, Huupponen R, Hartikainen S. 
Anticholinergic drug use, serum anticholinergic activity, and adverse drug events among older 
people: a population-based study. Drugs Aging. 2013; 30(5):321–330. [PubMed: 23475596] 
12. Lechevallier-Michel N, Molimard M, Dartigues JF, Fabrigoule C, Fourrier-Réglat A. Drugs with 
anticholinergic properties and cognitive performance in the elderly: results from the PAQUID 
Study. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2005; 59(2):143–151. [PubMed: 15676035] 
13. Shah RC, Janos AL, Kline JE, et al. Cognitive decline in older persons initiating anticholinergic 
medications. PLoS One. 2013; 8(5):e64111. [PubMed: 23741303] 
14. Sittironnarit G, Ames D, Bush AI, et al. AIBL research group. Effects of anticholinergic drugs on 
cognitive function in older Australians: results from the AIBL study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 
2011; 31(3):173–178. [PubMed: 21389718] 
15. Tannenbaum C, Paquette A, Hilmer S, Holroyd-Leduc J, Carnahan R. A systematic review of 
amnestic and non-amnestic mild cognitive impairment induced by anticholinergic, antihistamine, 
GABAergic and opioid drugs. Drugs Aging. 2012; 29(8):639–658. [PubMed: 22812538] 
16. Uusvaara J, Pitkala KH, Kautiainen H, Tilvis RS, Strandberg TE. Detailed cognitive function and 
use of drugs with anticholinergic properties in older people: a community-based cross-sectional 
study. Drugs Aging. 2013; 30(3):177–182. [PubMed: 23361527] 
17. Fox C, Livingston G, Maidment ID, et al. The impact of anticholinergic burden in Alzheimer’s 
dementia-the LASER-AD study. Age Ageing. 2011; 40(6):730–735. [PubMed: 21926432] 
18. Gray SL, Anderson ML, Dublin S, et al. Cumulative use of strong anticholinergics and incident 
dementia: a prospective cohort study. JAMA Intern Med. 2015; 175(3):401–407. [PubMed: 
25621434] 
Risacher et al.
Page 17
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Jessen F, Kaduszkiewicz H, Daerr M, et al. Anticholinergic drug use and risk for dementia: target 
for dementia prevention. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010; 260(suppl 2):S111–S115. 
[PubMed: 20960005] 
20. Kashyap M, Mulsant BH, Tannenbaum C. Small longitudinal study of serum anticholinergic 
activity and cognitive change in community-dwelling older adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2015; 
23(3):326–329. [PubMed: 25450763] 
21. Flicker C, Ferris SH, Serby M. Hypersensitivity to scopolamine in the elderly. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1992; 107(2–3):437–441. [PubMed: 1615141] 
22. Molchan SE, Martinez RA, Hill JL, et al. Increased cognitive sensitivity to scopolamine with age 
and a perspective on the scopolamine model. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1992; 17(3):215–226. 
[PubMed: 1467811] 
23. Teipel SJ, Bruno D, Grothe MJ, Nierenberg J, Pomara N. Hippocampus and basal forebrain 
volumes modulate effects of anticholinergic treatment on delayed recall in healthy older adults. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2015; 1(2):216–219.
24. Jack CR Jr, Bernstein MA, Borowski BJ, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. 
Update on the magnetic resonance imaging core of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative. Alzheimers Dement. 2010; 6(3):212–220. [PubMed: 20451869] 
25. Jagust WJ, Bandy D, Chen K, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. The 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative positron emission tomography core. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2010; 6(3):221–229. [PubMed: 20451870] 
26. Trojanowski JQ, Vandeerstichele H, Korecka M, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative. Update on the biomarker core of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
subjects. Alzheimers Dement. 2010; 6(3):230–238. [PubMed: 20451871] 
27. Petersen RC, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): 
clinical characterization. Neurology. 2010; 74(3):201–209. [PubMed: 20042704] 
28. Saykin AJ, Shen L, Foroud TM, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative biomarkers as quantitative phenotypes: genetics core aims, 
progress, and plans. Alzheimers Dement. 2010; 6(3):265–273. [PubMed: 20451875] 
29. Weiner MW, Aisen PS, Jack CR Jr, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. The 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: progress report and future plans. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2010; 6(3):202–211. [PubMed: 20451868] 
30. World Medical Association. World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical principles 
for medical research involving human subjects. JAMA. 2013; 310(20):2191–2194. [PubMed: 
24141714] 
31. Aging Brain Care. [Accessed March 24, 2016] Anticholinergic Cognitive Burden scale: 2012 
update. http://www.agingbraincare.org/uploads/products/ACB_scale_-_legal_size.pdf
32. Drugs on the Anitcholinergic Burden (ACB) scale. [Accessed March 24, 2016] http://
www.bmedreport.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Drugs-on-the-Anticholinergic-Burden-ACB-
scale.jpg
33. Anticholinergics and the elderly. [Accessed March 24, 2016] Pharmacist’s Letter website. http://
pharmacistsletter.therapeuticresearch.com/pl/ArticleDD.aspx?
nidchk=1&cs=&s=PL&pt=5&fpt=2&dd=271223&pb=PRL
34. Risacher SL, Kim S, Nho K, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). APOE 
effect on Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in older adults with significant memory concern. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2015; 11(12):1417–1429. [PubMed: 25960448] 
35. Risacher SL, Kim S, Shen L, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)†. The 
role of apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype in early mild cognitive impairment (E-MCI). Front 
Aging Neurosci. 2013; 5:11. [PubMed: 23554593] 
36. Gibbons LE, Carle AC, Mackin RS, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. A 
composite score for executive functioning, validated in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) participants with baseline mild cognitive impairment. Brain Imaging Behav. 
2012; 6(4):517–527. [PubMed: 22644789] 
Risacher et al.
Page 18
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 37. Crane PK, Carle A, Gibbons LE, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Development 
and assessment of a composite score for memory in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Brain Imaging Behav. 2012; 6(4):502–516. [PubMed: 22782295] 
38. Saykin AJ, Wishart HA, Rabin LA, et al. Older adults with cognitive complaints show brain 
atrophy similar to that of amnestic MCI. Neurology. 2006; 67(5):834–842. [PubMed: 16966547] 
39. Brett, M.; Anton, JL.; Valabregue, R.; Poline, JB. Region of interest analysis using an SPM toolbox 
[abstract]. Presented at: Eighth International Conference on Functional Mapping of the Human 
Brain; June 2–6, 2002; Sendai, Japan. 
40. Shaw LM, Vanderstichele H, Knapik-Czajka M, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative. Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker signature in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
subjects. Ann Neurol. 2009; 65(4):403–413. [PubMed: 19296504] 
41. Landau SM, Mintun MA, Joshi AD, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Amyloid 
deposition, hypometabolism, and longitudinal cognitive decline. Ann Neurol. 2012; 72(4):578–
586. [PubMed: 23109153] 
42. Everitt BJ, Robbins TW. Central cholinergic systems and cognition. Annu Rev Psychol. 1997; 
48:649–684. [PubMed: 9046571] 
43. Del Pino J, Zeballos G, Anadón MJ, et al. Cadmium-induced cell death of basal forebrain 
cholinergic neurons mediated by muscarinic M1 receptor blockade, increase in GSK-3β enzyme, 
β-amyloid and tau protein levels [published online May 31, 2015]. Arch Toxicol. 
44. Capsoni S, Giannotta S, Stebel M, et al. Ganstigmine and donepezil improve neurodegeneration in 
AD11 antinerve growth factor transgenic mice. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2004; 19(3):
153–160. [PubMed: 15214201] 
45. Geula C. Abnormalities of neural circuitry in Alzheimer’s disease: hippocampus and cortical 
cholinergic innervation. Neurology. 1998; 51(1)(suppl 1):S18–S29. discussion S65-S67. [PubMed: 
9674759] 
46. Moreau PH, Cosquer B, Jeltsch H, Cassel JC, Mathis C. Neuroanatomical and behavioral effects of 
a novel version of the cholinergic immunotoxin mu p75-saporin in mice. Hippocampus. 2008; 
18(6):610–622. [PubMed: 18306300] 
47. Paul S, Jeon WK, Bizon JL, Han JS. Interaction of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons with the 
glucocorticoid system in stress regulation and cognitive impairment. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015; 
7:43. [PubMed: 25883567] 
48. Carroll JC, Iba M, Bangasser DA, et al. Chronic stress exacerbates tau pathology, 
neurodegeneration, and cognitive performance through a corticotropin-releasing factor receptor-
dependent mechanism in a transgenic mouse model of tauopathy. J Neurosci. 2011; 31(40):14436–
14449. [PubMed: 21976528] 
49. Resnick SM, Pham DL, Kraut MA, Zonderman AB, Davatzikos C. Longitudinal magnetic 
resonance imaging studies of older adults: a shrinking brain. J Neurosci. 2003; 23(8):3295–3301. 
[PubMed: 12716936] 
Risacher et al.
Page 19
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Key Points
Question
Is use of anticholinergic medication associated with poorer cognition, brain 
hypometabolism, brain atrophy, and/or increased risk of clinical decline in cognitively 
normal older adults?
Findings
In this longitudinal study of 2 cohorts of cognitively normal older adults, use of 
medications with medium or high anticholinergic activity was associated with poorer 
memory and executive function, brain hypometabolism, brain atrophy, and increased risk 
of clinical conversion to cognitive impairment. This finding was greatest for those taking 
drugs with the most anticholinergic activity.
Meaning
Use of medication with significant anticholinergic activity should likely be discouraged 
in older adults if alternative therapies are available.
Risacher et al.
Page 20
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Association of Anticholinergic (AC) Medication Use With Cognition and Glucose 
Metabolism Among Participants From the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)
Cognitively normal older adults taking 1 or more medications with medium or high AC 
activity (referred to as AC+ participants [n = 52]) showed poorer cognition than those not 
taking these medications (referred to as AC− participants [n = 350]), including a lower score 
on the Weschler Memory Scale–Revised Logical Memory Immediate Recall (P = .04 [A]), 
the Trail Making Test Part B (TMT-B) (P = .04 [B]), and an executive function composite (P 
= .04, with transient ischemic attack, myocardial infarction, and diabetes as additional 
covariates [C]). Glucose hypometabolism, as measured by the fluorodeoxyglucose F 18–
positron emission tomographic (FDG-PET) standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR), was 
also observed in the bilateral hippocampus (P = .02, with anxiety as an additional covariate 
[D]) and in a global cortical region of interest of AC+ participants (n = 43) relative to AC− 
participants (n = 286), generated from an analysis of cognitively normal participants who 
show greater glucose metabolism than participants with AD from the full ADNI 1 cohort (P 
= .03, with other vascular conditions and concussion as additional covariates [E]). Error bars 
indicate SD.
Risacher et al.
Page 21
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Effect of Anticholinergic (AC) Medication Use on Brain Atrophy Measures
Cognitively normal older adults taking 1 or more medications with medium or high 
anticholinergic activity (referred to as AC+ participants [n = 35]) showed more brain atrophy 
than participants not taking these medications (referred to as AC participants [n = 251]). 
Reduced total cortex volume (P = .02 [A]), increased bilateral lateral ventricle volume (P = .
01 [B]), and increased inferior lateral ventricle volume (P < .001 [C]) were observed in AC+ 
participants relative to AC participants. Furthermore, reduced bilateral temporal lobe (P = .
02, with concussion as an additional covariate [D]) and medial temporal lobe (P = .02, with 
concussion and cardiac surgery as additional covariates [E]) cortical thicknesses were also 
observed. Error bars indicate SD.
Risacher et al.
Page 22
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Association of Total Anticholinergic (AC) Burden Score and Brain Atrophy
The total AC burden score was significantly associated with both cognition and brain 
atrophy. Specifically, a higher total AC burden score was associated with poorer 
performance on the Trail Making Test Part B (TMT-B) (r = 0.137; P = .01, with transient 
ischemic attack and total number of medications as additional covariates [A]) and greater 
inferior lateral ventricle (r = 0.126; P = .03 [B]) and lateral ventricle volumes (r = 0.145; P 
= .01 [C]). Inferior lateral ventricle volume was still significantly associated with the total 
AC burden score after excluding participants with a total AC burden score of 0 (r = 0.331; P 
< .001 [E]). The TMT-B score (r = 0.146; P = .06 [D]) and lateral ventricle volume showed 
nonsignificant trend associations with the total AC burden score after excluding those with a 
total AC burden score of 0 (r = 0.152; P = .10 [F]).
Risacher et al.
Page 23
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Effect of Anticholinergic (AC) Medication Use on Clinical Conversion
A, A significant association between AC use and future progression of Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative participants to mild cognitive impairment and/or Alzheimer disease 
was observed (P = .01; hazard ratio [HR], 2.47; with total number of medications, cardiac 
surgery, total number of comorbid conditions, and other psychiatric conditions as additional 
covariates).
B, When evaluating the interaction between AC use and Aβ positivity, we found that 
participants taking 1 or more medications with medium or high AC activity who are positive 
for Aβ on florbetapir F-18–positron emission tomographic (PET) scans or cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) samples (referred to as AC+ and Aβ+ participants) showed a higher risk of 
conversion relative to participants not taking these medications who are negative for Aβ on 
florbetapir F-18–PET scans or CSF samples (referred to as AC and Aβ participants) (P < .
001; HR, 7.73; with cardiac surgery and other psychiatric conditions as additional 
covariates) and participants who are positive for either AC use or Aβ (P = .001; HR, 4.24).
Risacher et al.
Page 24
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Risacher et al.
Page 25
Table
Demographic Characteristics and Medical Histories of 402 Participants From the ADNI
Characteristic
Participants, No.
P Value
AC−
(n = 350)
AC+
(n = 52)
Age, mean (SD), y
73.3 (5.8)
73.3 (6.6)
.96
Sex
    Male
171
18
.06
    Female
179
34
Education, mean (SD), y
16.4 (2.6)
16.1 (2.7)
.40
Handedness
    Right
318
50
.20
    Left
32
2
APOE ε4 positive, % of participants
28.0
25.0
.65
Non-Hispanic white, % of participants
84.6
94.2
.06
Medications, mean (SD), Total No.
4.2 (2.8)
6.7 (3.1)
<.001
Comorbid conditions, mean (SD), Total No.
1.8 (1.3)
2.2 (1.5)
.03
Transient ischemic attack
    No
341
51
.78
    Yes
9
1
Myocardial infarction
    No
325
51
.15
    Yes
25
1
Cardiac surgery
    No
330
50
.58
    Yes
20
2
Hypertension
    No
193
24
.23
    Yes
157
28
Hyperlipidemia
    No
181
29
.59
    Yes
169
23
Diabetes
    No
324
49
.67
    Yes
26
3
Sleep apnea
    No
334
49
.70
    Yes
16
3
Other vascular conditions (eg, atrial fibrillation)
    No
327
47
.42
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Risacher et al.
Page 26
Characteristic
Participants, No.
P Value
AC−
(n = 350)
AC+
(n = 52)
    Yes
23
5
Anxiety
    No
342
47
.01
    Yes
8
5
Depression
    No
306
37
.002
    Yes
44
15
Insomnia
    No
338
46
.01
    Yes
12
6
ADD or ADHD
    No
348
52
.59
    Yes
2
0
Other psychiatric condition (eg, posttraumatic stress disorder)
    No
348
52
.56
    Yes
2
0
Concussion
    No
331
48
.51
    Yes
19
4
Abbreviations: AC+, participant taking anticholinergic medication with medium or high anticholinergic activity; AC−, participant not taking 
anticholinergic medication; ADD, attention-deficit disorder; ADHD, attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder; ADNI, Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.
JAMA Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
