 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 1
REVIEW
published: 04 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00834
Edited by:
Kimberly Huey,
Drake University, United States
Reviewed by:
Martino V. Franchi,
Universitätsklinik Balgrist, Switzerland
Paul Timothy Reidy,
University of Utah, United States
Jeremy P
. Loenneke,
University of Mississippi,
United States
*Correspondence:
Michael D. Roberts
mdr0024@auburn.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Exercise Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 12 April 2018
Accepted: 13 June 2018
Published: 04 July 2018
Citation:
Roberts MD, Haun CT, Mobley CB,
Mumford PW, Romero MA,
Roberson PA, Vann CG and
McCarthy JJ (2018) Physiological
Differences Between Low Versus High
Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophic
Responders to Resistance Exercise
Training: Current Perspectives
and Future Research Directions.
Front. Physiol. 9:834.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00834
Physiological Differences Between
Low Versus High Skeletal Muscle
Hypertrophic Responders to
Resistance Exercise Training:
Current Perspectives and Future
Research Directions
Michael D. Roberts1*, Cody T. Haun1, Christopher B. Mobley1, Petey W. Mumford1,
Matthew A. Romero1, Paul A. Roberson1, Christopher G. Vann1 and John J. McCarthy2
1 School of Kinesiology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, United States, 2 Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY, United States
Numerous reports suggest there are low and high skeletal muscle hypertrophic
responders following weeks to months of structured resistance exercise training
(referred to as low and high responders herein). Specifically, divergent alterations
in muscle fiber cross sectional area (fCSA), vastus lateralis thickness, and whole
body lean tissue mass have been shown to occur in high versus low responders.
Differential responses in ribosome biogenesis and subsequent protein synthetic rates
during training seemingly explain some of this individual variation in humans, and
mechanistic in vitro and rodent studies provide further evidence that ribosome
biogenesis is critical for muscle hypertrophy. High responders may experience a
greater increase in satellite cell proliferation during training versus low responders.
This phenomenon could serve to maintain an adequate myonuclear domain size
or assist in extracellular remodeling to support myofiber growth. High responders
may also express a muscle microRNA profile during training that enhances insulin-
like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) mRNA expression, although more studies are needed
to better validate this mechanism. Higher intramuscular androgen receptor protein
content has been reported in high versus low responders following training, and this
mechanism may enhance the hypertrophic effects of testosterone during training.
While high responders likely possess “good genetics,” such evidence has been
confined to single gene candidates which typically share marginal variance with
hypertrophic outcomes following training (e.g., different myostatin and IGF-1 alleles).
Limited evidence also suggests pre-training muscle fiber type composition and
self-reported dietary habits (e.g., calorie and protein intake) do not differ between
high versus low responders. Only a handful of studies have examined muscle
biomarkers that are differentially expressed between low versus high responders.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 2
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
Thus, other molecular and physiological variables which could potentially affect the
skeletal muscle hypertrophic response to resistance exercise training are also discussed
including rDNA copy number, extracellular matrix and connective tissue properties, the
inflammatory response to training, and mitochondrial as well as vascular characteristics.
Keywords: hypertrophy, ribosome biogenesis, satellite cells, microRNAs, IGF-1, androgen receptor
INTRODUCTION
Physiological factors that affect trait responsiveness to exercise
training (e.g., changes in aerobic capacity, strength, or muscle
growth)
have
gained
widespread
research
interest.
From
a historical perspective, this interest was largely inspired
by
the
renowned
HERITAGE
study
whereby
individual
VO2max changes reportedly ranged from almost no gain to
a 100% increase following 20 weeks of endurance training in
previously sedentary individuals (Bouchard and Rankinen,
2001). Additionally, Van Etten et al. (1994) examined the skeletal
muscle hypertrophic response in individuals that were classified
as “
slender”of “
solid”following 12 weeks of resistance exercise
training. Subjects were classified on the basis of their fat-free
mass index (FFMI) determined by skinfolds, in which slender
subjects had comparatively lower values relative to solid subjects.
These authors reported solid subjects presented significant
increases in fat-free mass following training (+1.6 kg), while
slender subjects experienced virtually no gain in fat-free mass.
While this paper did not examine potential biomarkers which
could have facilitated these divergent responses, the authors
did conclude that future research should “
study the mechanism
responsible for differences in weight-training-induced changes in
fat free mass.”
More than a decade later Bamman et al. (2007) published
a seminal paper reporting that different skeletal muscle
biomarkers exist between skeletal muscle hypertrophic response
clusters following 16 weeks of training. “
Extreme responders”
(termed high responders herein) presented robust increases
in muscle fiber cross-sectional area (fCSA) relative to “
non-
responders”(termed low responders herein) following training.
High responders also expressed higher levels of skeletal
muscle insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) mRNA variants
as well as an mRNA indicative of satellite cell differentiation
(myogenin) relative to low responders following training. Similar
approaches were subsequently implemented by Bamman’
s
laboratory (Kim et al., 2007; Petrella et al., 2008; Thalacker-
Mercer et al., 2013; Stec et al., 2016), our laboratory (Mobley
et al., 2018a), and others (Davidsen et al., 2011; Ogasawara
et al., 2016) with the intent of identifying skeletal muscle
biomarkers associated with high versus low response clusters
following weeks to months of resistance exercise training.
The purpose of this review is to summarize these research
findings. Given that only a handful of studies have examined
differentially expressed muscle biomarkers between low versus
high responders, we also propose less examined factors which
may contribute to the differential hypertrophic responses that
occur during resistance exercise training and should be further
investigated.
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF MECHANISMS
THAT FACILITATE HYPERTROPHY IN
RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE EXERCISE
TRAINING
Skeletal muscle hypertrophy in response to resistance exercise
training is likely influenced through the interaction of numerous
extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Indeed, extrinsic factors could (e.g.,
sleep patterns) or have (e.g., nutrition) been shown to influence
intrinsic cellular responses to resistance exercise training, and
these topics are discussed in greater detail elsewhere (Campbell
et al., 2007; Knowles et al., 2018). However, for the purpose of
this review, three key intrinsic factors which have been generally
regarded to influence the hypertrophic response to resistance
exercise training will be discussed. These intrinsic factors include:
(a) an upregulation in myofibrillar and overall muscle protein
synthesis (MyoPS and MPS, respectively) during post-exercise
periods which is largely modulated through mammalian target
of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling, (b) a reduction in
skeletal muscle proteolysis during post-exercise periods, and (c)
an increase in satellite cell-mediated myonuclear addition.
mTORC1 is a multi-subunit complex that consists of the
mTOR protein, Raptor and mTOR associated protein LST8
homolog (mLST8) (Bond, 2016). Active mTORC1 complexes are
localized to lysosomes in the cell body (Betz and Hall, 2013),
and these complexes possess kinase activity to phosphorylate
downstream target proteins that facilitate translation initiation
and upregulate MyoPS and MPS (Wang and Proud, 2006).
From a mechanistic perspective, mTORC1 activity is critical for
resistance exercise-induced increases in MPS and MyoPS. For
instance, pharmacological mTORC1 inhibition via rapamycin
substantially abrogates post-exercise MPS increases in humans
and rodents (Drummond et al., 2009; West et al., 2016). Further,
several studies suggest the magnitude increase of mTORC1
signaling and MyoPS following a resistance exercise bout are
predictive of longer-term skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Post-
exercise increases in MyoPS rates up to 6 h following a
naïve training bout have been shown to poorly correlate with
quadriceps CSA increases following 16 weeks of subsequent
training (Mitchell et al., 2014). However, subsequent studies
indicate post-absorptive MyoPS elevations weeks into training
are associated with skeletal muscle hypertrophy given that the
initial trauma of training (e.g., z-line streaming and heightened
proteolysis) likely subsides by these time points (Damas et al.,
2016; Reidy et al., 2017a). Additionally, although some equivocal
findings exist (Mitchell et al., 2012), several rodent and human
studies have reported the post-exercise phosphorylation status
of downstream mTORC1 targets (i.e., p70s6k and 4EBP-1) are
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 3
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
associated with muscle hypertrophy following chronic resistance
exercise training (Baar and Esser, 1999; Terzis et al., 2008;
Hulmi et al., 2009; Mayhew et al., 2009; Mitchell et al., 2013,
2014). Bodine et al. (2001) published a landmark report in mice
strengthening the evidence that mTORC1 activity is obligatory
for overload-induced hypertrophy; specifically, these authors
noted synergist ablation-induced plantaris hypertrophy and
p70s6k activity was completely abrogated with 7 and 14 days
of rapamycin administration. Longer-term post-exercise MyoPS
and MPS responses using the orally ingested deuterium oxide
(D2O) tracer have allowed for the reappraisal of fractional
synthesis rates days (rather than hours using infused 13C tracers)
following a single exercise bout (Wilkinson et al., 2014). Aside
from the aforementioned Damas et al. (2016) study suggesting
24 h post-exercise MyoPS elevations occur weeks into training
following single exercise bouts, Brook et al. (2015) recently
employed the D2O tracer on a weekly basis over a 6-week
unilateral leg extensor resistance exercise training study to
examine longer-term MyoPS responses to training. These authors
reported that, relative to the non-trained leg, MyoPS levels
were significantly elevated with training from weeks 0 to 3, but
not weeks 3 to 6, and this finding associated with diminished
mTORC1 signaling following single exercise bouts at weeks 3
and 6 relative to the first bout at week 0. Thus, it is apparent
that mTORC1 is a critical signaling node for increasing MyoPS,
MPS, and eventual skeletal muscle hypertrophy in response to
resistance exercise training in humans and rodents, or overload in
rodents. What cannot be discounted, however, is the contribution
of other signaling molecules to skeletal muscle hypertrophy
[e.g., mTORC-1 independent Yes-Associated Protein (YAP)
signaling, p38 MAPK signaling, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling],
and these signaling cascades are discussed in greater detail in
elsewhere (Armstrong and Esser, 2005; Norrby and Tagerud,
2010; Goodman et al., 2015; Watt et al., 2018).
There are multiple resistance exercise- or overload-responsive
mechanisms that up-regulate mTORC1 activity (Hornberger,
2011). For instance, Hornberger et al. (2006) noted synergist
ablation in rodents activates a mechano-sensitive signaling
cascade
to
increase
intracellular
phosphatidic
acid
levels
and activate mTORC1 signaling. Additionally, transmembrane
proteins (e.g., integrins) and associated intracellular proteins
(e.g., focal adhesion kinase) act to potentially enhance mTORC1
signaling in rodent skeletal and cardiac muscle subjected to
acute eccentric loading or overload (Fluck et al., 1999; Lueders
et al., 2011; Clemente et al., 2012), as well as in human
skeletal muscle following chronic eccentric training (Franchi
et al., 2018b). Resistance exercise also up-regulates skeletal
muscle IGF-1 transcript variants during post-exercise periods
in humans (Hameed et al., 2003; Roberts et al., 2010), and
these variants can be encoded into IGF-1 isoforms which
function to increase mTORC1 activity through IGF-1 receptor-
mediated Akt activation (Rommel et al., 2001; Schiaffino and
Mammucari, 2011). Intramuscular PGF2α prostaglandin levels
increase following resistance exercise (Trappe et al., 2001),
and this signaling mediator has been shown to increase MPS
through mTORC1 activation (Markworth and Cameron-Smith,
2011). Myostatin (MSTN) mRNA levels as well as downstream
SMAD signaling are also down-regulated in humans following
one or multiple resistance exercise bouts (Louis et al., 2007;
Dalbo et al., 2011, 2013), and these events likely result in
enhanced mTORC1 activity given that MSTN signaling abrogates
Akt activation (Morissette et al., 2009). As an interesting side
note, Potts et al. (2017) recently used mass spectrometry-
based phosphoproteomic analyses to demonstrate that over 600
phosphorylation events occur in rodent skeletal muscle 1-h
following maximal-intensity contractions, and bioinformatics
indicated that this phosphorylation signature was largely due
to increased mTORC1 activity. Hence, beyond upregulating
MPS, enhanced mTORC1 signaling hours following resistance
exercise likely facilitates other physiological adaptations in
skeletal muscle.
While mTORC1 is the hub that regulates MPS, there
are multiple systems that regulate skeletal muscle proteolysis
including (Pasiakos and Carbone, 2014; Tipton et al., 2018):
(a) the calcium-dependent calpain system which liberates
myofibrillar proteins from sarcomeric Z-lines, (b) the autophagy-
lysosomal system which degrades cellular organelles as well
as myofibrillar proteins, (c) the caspase system which cleaves
myofibrillar proteins into smaller fragments, and (d) the
ubiquitin-proteasome
system
(UPS)
which
uses
E1/E2/E3
enzymes to poly-ubiquinate myofibril fragments and degrade
these
proteins
into
individual amino
acids
via the 26S
proteasome.
Proteolysis
rates
are
likely
influenced
by
a
combination of these systems, and several human and rodent
studies have reported biomarkers in each system are dynamically
altered in response to acute and chronic resistance exercise
training (Louis et al., 2007; Kerksick et al., 2010, 2013; Dalbo
et al., 2013; Kwon et al., 2015; Stefanetti et al., 2015; Mobley
et al., 2018b). Interestingly, rodent and in vitro studies have
also demonstrated that inhibiting autophagy and UPS reduces
skeletal muscle mass (Masiero and Sandri, 2010) and promotes
myotube atrophy (Chandler et al., 2017), respectively, which
suggests proteolytic mechanisms are seemingly obligatory for
muscle mass maintenance. Mechanisms aside, human studies
suggest: (a) chronic resistance exercise training increases MyoPS
and MPS while reducing MPB in the post-absorptive state (Reidy
et al., 2017a) and (b) a resistance exercise bout significantly
elevates postabsorptive, post-exercise muscle proteolysis rates in
the trained and untrained state, although the magnitude and
duration of this increase is lower in the trained state (Phillips
et al., 1999).
Compelling associations in humans have led to a general
consensus that satellite cell-mediated myonuclear addition
occurs during periods of resistance exercise training. For
instance, numerous studies have used immunohistochemical
staining techniques to demonstrate that satellite cell counts
increase in response to one bout (Crameri et al., 2004;
O’
Reilly et al., 2008; Walker et al., 2012; Bellamy et al., 2014;
Nederveen et al., 2015) and weeks of resistance exercise training
(Kadi et al., 2004; Petrella et al., 2008; Verdijk et al., 2014; Reidy
et al., 2017b). Many of these chronic training studies also reported
myonuclear number concomitantly increases with satellite cell
number (Petrella et al., 2008; Mobley et al., 2017; Reidy et al.,
2017b). Such observations have led to a widespread hypothesis
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 4
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
that satellite cell-mediated myonuclear addition supports fCSA
increases during resistance exercise training. In fact it has
been estimated that a 26% increase in fCSA can be achieved
through training-induced alterations protein turnover (i.e., ↑
MPS and ↓ MPB), whereas satellite cell-mediated myonuclear
addition occurs thereafter to maintain an adequate sarcoplasmic
volume:myonucleus ratio and facilitate further hypertrophy
(Kadi et al., 2004; Reidy et al., 2017b). This concept suggesting
a myonucleus regulates a finite sarcoplasmic area is termed the
myonuclear domain theory (Cheek et al., 1971; Hall and Ralston,
1989; Allen et al., 1999), and is discussed in greater detail below.
DEFINITION OF LOW VERSUS HIGH
SKELETAL MUSCLE HYPERTROPHIC
RESPONDERS
It is important to highlight how different studies have defined
high versus low skeletal muscle hypertrophic responders to
resistance exercise training (summarized in Table 1).
Notably, each study in Table 1 has used different criterion
variables to generate response cohorts. For instance two studies
generated cohorts based upon pre- to post-training changes in
fCSA (Bamman et al., 2007; Stec et al., 2016), whereas two other
studies allocated muscle imaging techniques (Ogasawara et al.,
2016; Mobley et al., 2018a), and one study used a combination
of metrics (e.g., fCSA and whole-body lean tissue mass changes)
(Davidsen et al., 2011). All of the training interventions also
differed in training modality, duration, and frequency. Further,
three of the aforementioned studies examined college-aged males
(Davidsen et al., 2011; Ogasawara et al., 2016; Mobley et al.,
2018a), one study examined older males (Stec et al., 2016),
and the landmark study by Bamman et al. (2007) examined
younger and older subjects from both sexes. These comparative
differences aside, low responders typically experience little to
no change in skeletal muscle hypertrophic indices (i.e., no
appreciable changes in quadriceps volume or fCSA, ∼4% increase
in vastus lateralis muscle thickness, or ∼0.5–
1.2 kg increase
in whole-body lean tissue mass). These average gains in low
responders, while seemingly marginal, are still significantly
different from pre-training levels when considering increases in
VL thickness and whole-body lean tissue mass, and it is notable
that Franchi et al. (2018a) have recently suggested even small
changes in VL thickness can account for appreciable increases
in muscle volume. Relative to these changes in low responders,
however, high responders experience much more impressive
increases in these metrics (i.e., 20% increase in quadriceps
volume, ∼83% increase in fCSA, 30% increase in vastus lateralis
muscle thickness, or ∼2.2–
4.5 kg increase in whole-body lean
tissue mass).
TRAINING-INDUCED RIBOSOME
BIOGENESIS IS GREATER IN HIGH
VERSUS LOW RESPONDERS
Ribosome biogenesis involves new ribosome formation through
an increase in nucleolar transcriptional activity (Chaillou et al.,
2014). Specifically, 5S and 45S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) repeats
are enriched in the nucleolus, and an up-regulation in ribosome
biogenesis occurs through increases in 5S ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
transcription via RNA polymerase-III (Pol-III) activity as well
as increases in 45S pre-rRNA via RNA Pol-I activity. Following
45S rRNA transcription, small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins
(snoRNPs) cleave 45S pre-rRNA to form mature 18S, 5.8S,
and 28S rRNAs. Thereafter, the formation of mature 60S and
40S ribosomal subunits is catalyzed by enzymes that assemble
ribosomal proteins with the 5S/5.8S/18S/28S rRNAs as well as
enzymes that facilitate ribosome export from the nucleus.
Given that ribosomes catalyze MyoPS and MPS, and
repetitive
post-exercise
increases
in
these
synthesis
rates
likely facilitate muscle growth, an increase in muscle fiber
ribosome content during periods of resistance exercise training
is seemingly advantageous for skeletal muscle hypertrophy.
Akin to the myonuclear domain theory, ribosomes may
regulate MyoPS and MPS in a finite area of the sarcoplasm.
However,
unlike
the
myonuclear
domain
theory
which
has been posited through observations involving nuclear
staining methods and conventional light or immunofluorescent
microscopy, empirically testing a ribosome domain theory is
extraordinarily challenging given that ribosomes are remarkably
small macromolecules (∼30 nm diameter) and are dispersed
throughout the cell body. It is possible to detect skeletal muscle
ribosomes
through
high-resolution
transmission
electron
TABLE 1 | Studies clustering low versus high skeletal muscle hypertrophic responders.
Study (year)
Training summary
Criterion measure
Findings
Bamman et al., 2007
16 weeks of full body RT (3 d/wk) in
younger and older males and females
Types I and II muscle fCSA changes
LR (n = 17): −16 µm2 HR (n = 17): +2,475
µm2
Davidsen et al., 2011
12 weeks of full body RT (5 d/wk) in
college-aged males
Combination of histological, strength
and DXA LBM changes
LR: ∼1.2 kg increase in DXA LBM HR: ∼4.5 kg
increase in DXA LBM
Stec et al., 2016
4 weeks of full body RT (3 d/wk) in
older males (60–75 years old)
Percent change in type II fCSA
LR (n = 17): −7% HR (n = 6): +83%
Ogasawara et al., 2016
12 weeks of leg extensor and curl
training (3 d/wk) in college-aged males
Upper leg muscle size assessment via
MRI
LR (n = 5): no increase in leg muscle size HR
(n = 5): ∼20% increase in leg muscle size
Mobley et al., 2018a
12 weeks of full body RT (3 d/wk) in
college-aged males
VL thickness (ultrasound)
LR (n = 17): 4% increase HR (n = 21): 30%
increase
LR, low responder; HR, high responder; DXA LBM, lean body mass assessed by dual X-ray absorptiometry; fCSA, fi
ber cross sectional area; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; RT, resistance exercise training; VL, vastus lateralis.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 5
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
microscopy with appropriate gold-conjugated antibody labeling
techniques
(Gauthier
and
Mason-Savas,
1993).
However,
providing an accurate ribosome count per muscle fiber using
this method would be laborious and has not been attempted.
An in situ hybridization (ISH) method for 28S rRNA particle
detection using conventional microscopy has been published
using complimentary 35S-cRNA probes (Habets et al., 1999).
These authors were able to visualize 28S rRNA (and presumably
ribosome) particles within individual rat muscle fibers, and
noted that smaller type I fibers paradoxically presented a fivefold
to sixfold greater particle count relative to larger type II fibers.
This method holds promise in terms of elucidating a potential
ribosome domain, albeit this method or comparable methods
(e.g., fluorescent in situ hybridization) have not been performed
to track muscle fiber 28S rRNA particle changes during resistance
exercise training.
A surrogate method that is commonly used for determining
relative ribosome content includes assessing total RNA content
per unit of wet muscle mass. This assumption is based upon
85% of total RNA existing as rRNA (Zak et al., 1967). Thus,
increases in total RNA are likely reflective of rRNA increases,
and rRNA increases are likely indicative of increases in ribosome
content. Several studies using this method have reported
inter-individual responses in ribosome biogenesis are related
to differential hypertrophic responses to resistance exercise
training. For instance, Figueiredo et al. (2015) examined younger,
college-aged males and reported a high positive correlation
existed between changes in quadriceps CSA and fold-change
in ribosome content following 8 weeks of resistance exercise
training (r = 0.72, p < 0.05). Bamman’
s laboratory (Stec et al.,
2016) subsequently reported that ribosome content increased
∼30% in older males (60–
75 years old) that were high responders
to 4 weeks of resistance exercise training (+83% type II fCSA),
whereas no significant changes in ribosome content or fCSA
were observed in low responders. Our laboratory reported
similar findings in younger, college-aged males in that those
experiencing robust increases in vastus lateralis (VL) muscle
thickness (+30%; high responders) also experienced a 32%
increase (p < 0.001) in muscle ribosome content following 12
weeks of resistance exercise training (Mobley et al., 2018a).
Conversely, low responders experienced a small but significant
increase in VL muscle thickness (+4%) coupled with an 8%
non-significant increase in ribosome content following training
(p = 0.25). Interestingly, Brook et al. (2017) recently employed
the D2O tracer method to examine the rate of ribosome
biogenesis during 6 weeks of resistance exercise training in
college-aged males. These authors reported: (a) basal ribosome
synthesis rates were ∼0.8% per day, whereas synthesis rates
increased during the training period to ∼1.7% per day, and (b)
increased basal ribosome biogenesis rates during training were
significantly correlated to increased basal MPS rates (r = 0.57,
p < 0.01). Additionally, other human training studies have
similarly observed that rRNA increases parallel increases in
hypertrophic indices following weeks of resistance exercise
training (Kadi et al., 2004; Reidy et al., 2017a). Hence, these
studies collectively demonstrate that the degree of ribosome
biogenesis is associated with the degree of muscle hypertrophy
during resistance exercise training and, according to the recent
data from Atherton’
s group, an increase in ribosome content
parallels increases in basal MPS rates during training periods.
Beyond these human studies, mechanistic in vitro studies
have similarly suggested ribosome biogenesis is critical for
myotube growth. For instance, Nader et al. (2005) reported
that increases in ribosome content paralleled cell growth in
20% serum-stimulated rat L6-derived myotubes. Stec et al.
(2016) subsequently replicated these findings with 20% serum
stimulation
of
primary
human-derived
myotubes,
albeit
pharmacological Pol-I inhibition completely abrogated both
ribosome biogenesis and cell growth. In rats, recent evidence
suggests the degree of synergist ablation-induced plantaris
hypertrophy parallels proportional increases in ribosome content
(Nakada et al., 2016). Our laboratory (Mobley et al., 2016, 2018b;
Roberts et al., 2016) and others (West et al., 2016; Brook et al.,
2017) have also reported that acute and chronic resistance
exercise training models in rats increase indices of ribosome
biogenesis and ribosome content, respectively.
Collectively, these in vitro, rodent, and human studies provide
consistent evidence that the degree of ribosome biogenesis
during a hypertrophic stimulus is associated with the degree of
muscle growth that occurs therein. Notwithstanding, outstanding
research questions remain to be investigated. For instance,
it would be insightful to determine whether 5S and/or 45S
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) copy number is greater in high versus
low responders. To this end, inter-individual differences in rDNA
copy number exist in rodents and humans (Wang and Lemos,
2017), although no publication to our knowledge has reported
the relationship between rDNA copy number and markers
ribosome biogenesis following one or multiple bouts of resistance
exercise training. Additionally, determining whether rDNA copy
number differs between high versus low responders remains to be
explored. Examining these relationships holds exciting promise
in determining how inter-individual variation in rDNA copy
number affects resistance exercise training-induced changes in
muscle size.
SATELLITE CELL-MEDIATED
MYONUCLEAR ADDITION MAY DICTATE
THE HYPERTROPHIC RESPONSE TO
RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING
Satellite cell-mediated myonuclear accretion seemingly occurs
during longer-term periods of resistance exercise training, and
high responders may experience this phenomenon to a greater
extent relative to low responders due to robust increases in
satellite cell number and fusion potential. Data from Bamman’
s
laboratory supports this paradigm in that pre- and post-
training satellite cell counts were greater in high versus low
hypertrophic responders following 16 weeks of training (Petrella
et al., 2008). Bellamy et al. (2014) also observed that subjects
experiencing the greatest increases in satellite cell proliferation
72 h following a naïve training bout experienced the greatest
increases in quadriceps volume changes following 16 weeks
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 6
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
of subsequent resistance exercise training. Additionally, other
laboratories have observed increases in satellite cell number
following resistance exercise training is associated with increased
fCSA values (Kadi et al., 2004; Verdijk et al., 2014; Reidy et al.,
2017b). These findings have led to a general consensus that
satellite cell-mediated myonuclear addition is likely an involved
mechanism in promoting skeletal muscle hypertrophy, and this
hypothesis is further supported by studies which have illustrated
high associations exist between fCSA and myonuclear number
(Kadi et al., 1999; Hikida et al., 2000). Notably, only our
study and Petrella et al. (2008) sought to determine if chronic
resistance exercise training differentially affected satellite cell
number between low versus high skeletal muscle hypertrophic
responders. Contrary to the findings of Petrella et al. (2008), as
well as the hypothesis that increases in satellite cells are obligatory
for resistance exercise training-induced muscle hypertrophy, we
reported that training-induced increases in satellite cell number
and increases in types I and II fiber myonuclear number
were similar between high versus low responders following 12
weeks of resistance exercise training (Mobley et al., 2018a).
While it is difficult to reconcile why our data differed from
the aforementioned study by Petrella et al. (2008), critical
differences between these studies should be noted. First, several
different staining methods exist for satellite cell quantification
(e.g., Pax7 versus NCAM staining, as well as DAB versus
fluorescent imaging) (Lindstrom and Thornell, 2009). Notably,
our study identified satellite cells as Pax7(FITC)+/DAPI+ cell
bodies using immunofluorescent microscopy, and Petrella et al.
(2008) identified satellite cells as NCAM(DAB)+ cell bodies
using light microscopy. FITC quantification can yield a high
level of autofluorescence (unpublished observations), and this
methodological difference between studies may have artificially
inflated our satellite cell counts relative to Petrella et al. (2008).
Second, response clusters examined by Petrella et al. (2008)
included college-aged and older (60–
75 years old) subjects
from both sexes, whereas our study consisted of only college-
aged males. It is also notable that an earlier publication by
Bamman’
s group (Petrella et al., 2006) examined many of the
same subjects contained in the Petrella et al. (2008) paper, and
the authors noted college-aged males (not older males or females)
experienced the most robust increases in fCSA, satellite cell
counts and myonuclear addition following training. Alternatively
stated, it appears that college-aged males (i.e., generally high
responders) experience greater increases in satellite cell counts
and satellite cell-mediated myonuclear addition during periods
of resistance exercise training relative to older subjects or females
(i.e., generally low responders).
Regarding the role of satellite cells during periods of
resistance training or overload, there is compelling evidence
in rodents which challenge the necessity of satellite cell-
mediated myonuclear addition for skeletal muscle hypertrophy.
In this regard, a landmark study by McCarthy et al. (2011)
used
adult,
female
Pax7-DTA
mice
to
ablate
>90%
of
satellite cells via intraperitoneal tamoxifen injections. Notably,
synergist ablation-induced plantaris hypertrophy doubled in
both tamoxifen- and vehicle-treated mice following 2 weeks
of overload, and hypertrophy in tamoxifen-treated mice still
occurred in the absence of myonuclear addition. Indeed, these
findings have been challenged by another laboratory suggesting
that tamoxifen-induced depletion of satellite cells in adult
female Pax7-DTA mice does indeed prevent synergist ablation-
induced plantaris and EDL myofiber hypertrophy (Egner et al.,
2016). Nevertheless, at least in murine models, these conflicting
reports do not provide conclusive evidence suggesting satellite
cell-mediated myonuclear addition is obligatory for overload-
induced, supraphysiological hypertrophy. It is also noteworthy
that, in humans, while it has been posited that myonuclear
accretion is needed to offset domain expansion and contribute to
fCSA increases >26% (Kadi et al., 2004), some studies contradict
this hypothesis. For instance, increases in satellite cell number
and myonuclear addition have been shown to occur in the
absence of fCSA increases following 12 weeks of resistance
exercise training (Mackey et al., 2007). A recent study also
suggests myonuclear domain expansion does not occur during or
following 12 weeks of resistance exercise training in college-aged
men despite observed increases in fCSA, satellite cell number, and
myonuclear number (Snijders et al., 2016). Damas et al. (2018)
also reported that type II fiber satellite cell content significantly
increased in college-aged men 48 h following a naïve training
bout, as well as prior to and 48 h following training bouts
that occurred 3- and 10 weeks into resistance exercise training.
However, while the authors observed a significant increase
in type II fCSA by week 10 of training, virtually no change
occurred in type II fiber myonuclear number. Notwithstanding,
an overwhelming majority of evidence from human studies does
suggest that resistance exercise training increases satellite cell
number acutely and chronically, and these findings collectively
underscore the important role that satellite cells likely have in the
adaptive response.
SELECT SKELETAL microRNAs MAY
INFLUENCE THE HYPERTROPHIC
RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE EXERCISE
TRAINING VIA IGF-1 INDUCTION
microRNAs (miRs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that
are ∼20 nucleotides in length and function to inhibit the
translation of select mRNAs in a sequence-specific fashion. Since
the discovery of miRs in the 1990s, several research groups have
studied the skeletal muscle miR response to exercise training
(Silva et al., 2017). Interestingly, there is evidence suggesting
select skeletal muscle miRs may be differentially expressed
between high versus low responders during periods of resistance
exercise training. Davidsen et al. (2011) examined 21 mature
skeletal muscle miRNAs prior to and following 12 weeks of
resistance exercise training in college-aged men, and reported
that miR-378, miR-29a, and miR-26a were downregulated in
low responders and unchanged in high responders, whereas
miR-451 was upregulated only in low responders. The authors
also reported skeletal muscle IGF-1 mRNA levels were only
upregulated in the high responders, and bioinformatics suggested
the observed miR signature in low responders may be a
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 7
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
compensatory mechanism attempting to activate genes related
to growth factor signaling. Interestingly, these data partially
replicated Bamman’
s original responder paper given high
responders in both studies experienced significant increases in
basal skeletal muscle IGF-1 mRNA expression levels following
training (Bamman et al., 2007). It is also notable that muscle miR
levels are dynamically altered during supraphysiological plantaris
hypertrophy following synergist ablation in mice, and this
mechanism may also act to upregulate IGF-1 mRNA expression.
To this end, McCarthy and Esser (2007) reported that 7 days of
synergist ablation increased plantaris mass by 45% and down-
regulated plantaris miR-1 and miR-133a levels by ∼50%, and
these authors speculated that a down-regulation in miR-1 may
serve to up-regulate IGF-1 levels during overload given that
the seed region of miR-1 targets IGF-1 mRNA. Taken together,
skeletal muscle miR expression patterns in high responders
during training, or in mice experiencing supraphysiological
hypertrophy, may lead to an upregulation in IGF-1 mRNA
levels which acts to further enhance anabolic signaling. However,
this mechanism is highly speculative and should be researched
further.
Differential muscle mIR profiles in high versus low responders
has also been reported by Ogasawara et al. (2016) who
demonstrated over 100 mIRs were altered following 12 weeks of
resistance exercise training in college-aged men, and miR-30d-
5p and miR-376a-3p were differentially expressed between high
versus low responders 3 h following a training bout as well as after
6 weeks of training. However, potential mRNA targets these miRs
could have affected were not provided. Thus, more investigative
in vitro work (e.g., mIR transfection experiments) is needed in
order to determine if the aforementioned miR candidates affect
muscle fiber hypertrophy.
SKELETAL MUSCLE ANDROGEN
RECEPTOR INDUCTION MAY
DELINEATE THE HYPERTROPHIC
RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE EXERCISE
TRAINING
Testosterone and other androgens exert their physiological effects
on different tissues through binding to androgen receptors
localized in the sarcoplasm. Upon ligand binding, androgen
receptors translocate to the nucleus to act as a transcription
factor and alter the mRNA expression of hundreds to thousands
of genes (Jiang et al., 2009). Given that enhanced androgen
receptor signaling in skeletal muscle through the administration
of anabolic steroids has been linked to increased satellite cell
proliferation (Sinha-Hikim et al., 2002, 2003) and MPS (Griggs
et al., 1989; Ferrando et al., 1998), a high level of enthusiasm exists
regarding the hypertrophic effects of this pathway. Interestingly,
two studies have demonstrated that changes in skeletal muscle
androgen receptor protein content correlate with increases in
skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Ahtiainen et al. (2011) reported
skeletal muscle androgen receptor protein increases correlated
with fCSA and lean body mass increases in younger and
older men following 21 weeks of resistance exercise training.
Mitchell et al. (2013) subsequently reported skeletal muscle
androgen receptor protein increases, not serum testosterone
levels, correlated with fCSA increases following 12 weeks of
resistance training college-aged men. However, we recently
reported (Mobley et al., 2018a) that high and low responders
similarly exhibit a downregulation in androgen receptor protein
levels with training. We speculate that this downregulation with
training was potentially due to negative feedback; specifically, if
androgen signaling is enhanced with resistance exercise training
then receptor levels would likely be down-regulated in order
to prevent excessive signaling from occurring. Additionally,
the Ahtiainen et al. (2011) and Mitchell et al. (2013) studies
associated androgen receptor protein changes with fCSA and/or
lean body mass changes (not VL thickness changes) which
could have led to discordant findings. Notwithstanding, multiple
studies suggest increases in androgen receptor protein content
may promote further increases in skeletal muscle hypertrophy
during resistance exercise training, and more studies are needed
in order validate this potential mechanism.
DO “FAVORABLE” GENETICS
DELINEATE SKELETAL MUSCLE
HYPERTROPHIC RESPONSE CLUSTERS
TO RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING?
Heritability studies have estimated ∼50% exercise training
adaptations are influenced by genetics (Mann et al., 2014), and
it is widely speculated that “
favorable”genetics facilitate optimal
training adaptations. A well-documented case study that has
commonly been cited as showing “
favorable”genetics promote a
muscular phenotype involves a child with a homozygous MSTN
mutation (Schuelke et al., 2004). Notably, this subject presented
an exceptionally muscular phenotype for his age, and the MSTN
mutation was shown to result in functionally deficient protein.
However, it is highly unlikely that such rare mutations exist
in the upper quartile of individuals that are high responders
to resistance exercise training, and “
favorable”genetics likely
includes a combination of numerous polymorphisms.
A powerful approach that does possess the potential to
decipher if a combination of polymorphisms associates with
differential hypertrophic responses to resistance exercise training
are genome-wide association studies (GWAS). GWAS utilizes
DNA hybridization arrays or next generation sequencing to
interrogate thousands to millions of common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), insertion-deletion alleles, or genomic
repeat alleles. As a contextual example, Bouchard et al. (2011)
used GWAS to examine over 320,000 SNP candidates related to
the VO2max responses in HERITAGE study participants. The
authors reported that 21 SNP candidates accounted for 49%
of the shared variance in VO2max changes, and subjects who
carried ≤9 of these favorable alleles improved their VO2max
by 221 mL/min whereas those who carried ≥19 of these alleles
improved their VO2max by 604 mL/min. No GWAS study has
been carried out to determine if a combination of SNP candidates
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 8
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
might share variance with hypertrophic outcomes following
resistance exercise training; however, in principal, Bouchard’
s
data demonstrates that a combination of variant alleles are likely
responsible for some of the divergence of this trait.
A targeted approach commonly used to examine if genetics
is related to an exercise phenotype includes restriction enzyme-
or TaqMan-based polymerase chain reaction techniques. Two
very well-studied SNP candidates related to exercise phenotypes
include the ACE I/D and ACTN3 R577X genotypes (Guth
and Roth, 2013). Various studies have suggested that the
ACE I/I genotype is more common in endurance athletes
(Puthucheary et al., 2011). However, this SNP has been reported
to not affect the degree of muscle hypertrophy following 10
weeks of knee extensor training in older men and women
(Charbonneau et al., 2008). The ACTN3 R577X genotype may
affect strength outcomes following resistance exercise training.
For instance, Clarkson et al. (2005) reported females with
the XX genotype experienced significant increases in strength
following 12 weeks of upper body resistance exercise training
compared to females with the RR genotype (69% versus
56%, respectively). However, all genotypes experienced similar
increases in muscle size following training (∼2.5%), and only 2%
of reported strength gains after training were attributable to the
ACTN3 R577X genotype. Examples of other studies using these
targeted approaches to identify SNPs associated with differential
hypertrophic responses to resistance exercise training include the
following:
(a) Young men with the bradykinin type 2 receptor (B2BRK)
−9/−9 genotype (∼21% of subjects) experienced an 8.5%
increase in triceps brachii muscle thickness following 6
weeks of resistance exercise training, whereas those with
the +9/−9 or +9/+9 genotype experienced a significantly
lower degree of hypertrophy (4.7% combined) (Popadic
Gacesa et al., 2012).
(b) College-aged Chinese men possessing one or two T
alleles for the MSTN A55T genotype (∼14% of subjects)
experienced a 12.6% increase in biceps muscle thickness
following 8 weeks of resistance exercise training, whereas
those with the AA genotype experienced a significantly
lower degree of hypertrophy (8.2%) (Li et al., 2014). These
authors also examined another MSTN SNP in these same
subjects and reported that those possessing one R allele for
the MSTN K135R genotype (∼6% of subjects) experienced
12.9% and 9.1% increases in biceps and quadriceps muscle
thicknesses, respectively, following training whereas those
with the KK genotype experienced a significantly lower
degree of hypertrophy (8.6% and 3.9%, respectively).
(c) Older Caucasian men and women (average age ∼70 years
old) possessing at least one cytosine adenine dinucleotide
repeat in the IGF-1 promoter region (∼87% of subjects)
experienced ∼130 mL increase in quadriceps muscle
volume following 10 weeks of knee extensor resistance
exercise training, whereas homozygotes lacking this allele
experienced a lower degree of hypertrophy (∼95 mL)
(p = 0.08 between genotypes) (Kostek et al., 2005).
Collectively, these studies illustrate genetic variation is likely
responsible for some of the differential hypertrophic response to
resistance exercise training. However, magnitude differences for
hypertrophic outcomes between genotypes in these studies are
not nearly as impressive as what has been reported for high versus
low responders (Table 1). Additionally, as Bouchard et al. (2011)
reported with HERITAGE participants, a combination different
of SNPs/insertions-deletions/tandem repeats are likely prevalent
in high versus low skeletal muscle hypertrophic responders. Thus,
replicating Bouchard’
s GWAS approach in a large training cohort
is needed to gain greater insight as to how genetic variation
contributes to differential hypertrophy responses to resistance
exercise training.
PRE-TRAINING FIBER TYPE
COMPOSITION DOES NOT LIKELY
DELINEATE RESPONSE CLUSTERS TO
RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING
Elite strength/power athletes possess a high proportion of fast-
twitch/type II muscle fibers (∼60%) (Tesch et al., 1984; Trappe
et al., 2015), whereas elite endurance athletes possess a high
proportion of slow-twitch/type I muscle fibers (∼70%) (Ingjer,
1979). These observations have led to a general consensus that
individuals possessing a high proportion of type II muscle
fibers are predisposed to be talented strength/power athletes,
whereas those possessing a high proportion of type I fibers are
predisposed to be talented endurance athletes. In line with this
rationale, it is possible that untrained individuals with a greater
proportion of type II fibers may experience a greater degree of
muscle hypertrophy during periods of resistance exercise training
relative to individuals with a high proportion of type I fibers
given that type II fibers are typically larger than type I fibers
(∼5,000 µm2 versus ∼4000 µm2). However, a recent review cites
multiple lines of evidence suggesting type I and II fCSAs similarly
increase with higher volume resistance exercise training, and that
the “
growth potential”of both fiber types appear to be similar
(Ogborn and Schoenfeld, 2014). It is also notable that our cluster
analysis (Mobley et al., 2018a) as well as two of Bamman’
s cluster
analysis papers (Bamman et al., 2007; Stec et al., 2016) suggest
pre-training type I/II fiber type distribution patterns do not
differ between low versus high responders. Taken together these
studies suggest pre-training fiber type likely does not appreciably
dictate the hypertrophic response potential to resistance exercise
training.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
EXAMINING FACTORS WHICH MAY
CONTRIBUTE TO DIFFERENTIAL
HYPERTROPHY RESPONSES TO
RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING
The remainder of this article presents factors which could
theoretically
distinguish
high
versus
low
responders.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 9
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
Importantly, little to no data supports these factors to
differentially affect the hypertrophic response to resistance
exercise training and, as such, these relationships should be
further examined.
Does Connective Tissue Limit Skeletal
Muscle Growth in Response to
Resistance Exercise Training?
It is logical that connective tissue thickness and malleability
potential may limit skeletal muscle growth, although no
human studies have directly illustrated this concept. A recent
transcriptomic interrogation in humans suggests combined
endurance
and
resistance
exercise
training
chronically
upregulates the mRNA expression of skeletal muscle genes
related to collagen synthesis and extracellular matrix remodeling
(e.g., MXRA5, COL1A1, COL3A1, COL4A1) (Hjorth et al.,
2015). Notwithstanding, the authors did not determine if
the fold-change magnitude in these genes were associated
with hypertrophic outcomes. There is stronger evidence in
animals suggesting connective tissue components limit skeletal
and cardiac muscle growth. Perhaps the strongest evidence
suggesting connective tissue acts as a governor of myocyte
growth is in a study in pigs whereby the surgical removal
of pericardial sheath elicited a rapid 18% increase in cardiac
hypertrophy 14–
21 days post-surgery (Hammond et al., 1992).
However, this was a secondary outcome of the study and
the authors did not elaborate on the potential significance of
these findings relative to skeletal muscle physiology. Impaired
overload-induced hypertrophy has been reported in IL-6−/−
versus wild-type mice, and this mal-adaptation was associated
with a significantly greater accumulation of hydroxyproline and
procollagen-1 mRNA (White et al., 2009). Fry et al. (2014) also
reported that satellite cell depletion in the Pax7-DTA mouse
line reduced plantaris type IIa/x fCSA increases following 8
weeks of synergist ablation relative to vehicle-treated mice, and
noted satellite cell depletion significantly increased fibroblast
and collagen accumulation around individual muscle fibers.
Interestingly, these authors also used intricate co-culturing
methods to demonstrate primary isolated satellite cells down-
regulated mRNA levels of collagen-related genes in fibroblasts. In
explaining the significance of these findings, the authors posited
the enhanced deposition of collagen in the extracellular matrix
may have constricted synergist ablation-induced hypertrophy
in satellite cell-depleted mice, and satellite cells act to offset
this phenomenon by secreting miR-containing vesicles which
target/downregulate collagen-related genes in fibroblasts. This
hypothesis was supported through a follow-up study by this
research group which reported satellite cell depletion prior to
synergist ablation increased skeletal muscle collagen deposition
in the extracellular matrix and impaired muscle hypertrophy 8
weeks following synergist ablation, although inducing satellite
cell depletion 1 week into synergist ablation rescued this effect
(Fry et al., 2017). Therefore, if high responders do benefit from
a heightened satellite cell proliferation response during training
then this may be due, in part, to the “
supporting role”that
satellite cells have on promoting extracellular matrix adaptations
(Murach et al., 2018). These interesting observations in animals
aside, future studies are needed to determine if changes in
muscle collagen content, and/or mRNAs or miRs related to
extracellular matrix remodeling differentiate high versus low
responders.
Does the Inflammatory Response to
Resistance Exercise Training Limit
Skeletal Muscle Growth?
Heightened
inflammatory
states
during
cancer/cachexia,
infections, and extensive tissue trauma have been linked to
skeletal muscle catabolism (Bistrian et al., 1992). From a
mechanistic perspective, pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-
α and IL-1β) upregulate proteolytic activity in skeletal muscle
(Zamir et al., 1992; De Larichaudy et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2014).
While IL-6 is not entirely pro-inflammatory and has several
pleiotropic roles in skeletal muscle (Munoz-Canoves et al., 2013),
rodent (Haddad et al., 2005), and human data (Raj et al., 2008)
suggest chronic elevations in IL-6 upregulate skeletal muscle
proteolysis as well. Prostaglandin PGE2 has also been shown to
stimulate IL-6 mRNA expression in order to further upregulate
inflammatory signaling (Standley et al., 2013), and the mRNAs
for TNF-α and IL-6 as well as PGE2 levels in skeletal muscle have
all been shown to be upregulated during the post-exercise period
following a single resistance exercise bout (Trappe et al., 2001;
Louis et al., 2007). Thus, for reasons listed above, it is conceivable
that individuals who fail to down-regulate these markers between
training bouts may experience a stagnation in muscle growth.
Indeed,
there
is
precedence
suggesting
a
differential
inflammatory mRNA expression signature in skeletal muscle
is related to the individual hypertrophic responsiveness to
resistance exercise training. For instance, Raue et al. (2012)
highlighted
data
demonstrating
the
fold-change
of
two-
inflammatory-related mRNAs (TNFRSF12A and NFKBIA) 4 h
following a naïve resistance exercise bout were positively and
negatively correlated, respectively, with increases in quadriceps
muscle CSA following 12 weeks of resistance exercise training.
Additionally, while Dennis et al. (2009) demonstrated that
certain skeletal muscle mRNAs associated with inflammation
were associated strength (not hypertrophy) in older subjects
following 12 weeks of resistance exercise training (e.g., IL-1β,
IL-1β receptor agonist and IL-10 mRNA decreases all strongly
correlated with strength gains), Thalacker-Mercer et al. (2013)
subsequently reported several mRNAs related to the NF-κB
inflammatory signaling cascade were down-regulated in high
versus low responders following a 16-week training protocol.
Similar to these findings, we recently reported that IL-1β mRNA
was significantly down-regulated in high versus low responders
following 12 weeks of training (Mobley et al., 2018a).
There is counterevidence, however, suggesting heightened
post-exercise
inflammation
actually
facilitates
skeletal
muscle
hypertrophy.
For
instance,
post-exercise
increases
in prostaglandin PGE2 and PGF2α stimulate post-exercise
increases in muscle protein synthesis (Trappe et al., 2001, 2002).
Recent in vitro evidence also suggests myotubes treated with IL-6
upregulate mTORC1 signaling and myotube protein synthesis
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 10
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
(Gao et al., 2017). Further confounding this issue is evidence
suggesting the inhibition of inflammatory signaling via NSAIDs
during periods of resistance exercise training does not affect
hypertrophic outcomes. For instance, the daily consumption
of over-the-counter doses of ibuprofen, which inhibits muscle
prostaglandin synthesis, was reported to have no effects on
muscle thickness increases in college-aged subjects over a
6-week resistance exercise training period (Krentz et al., 2008).
Similar outcomes have also been reported in older adults (∼65
years old) following 12 weeks of lower-body training (Trappe
et al., 2011). It is also notable we reported certain aspects of
inflammatory signaling do not differ between high and low
responder cohorts (i.e., serum levels of IL-6 as well as skeletal
muscle phosphorylated p65/NF-κB, IL-6 mRNA, and TNF-α
mRNA) (Mobley et al., 2018a). To summarize, while preliminary
evidence suggests that select mRNAs related to inflammatory
signaling may be differentially expressed in low versus high
responders, there is not enough experimental evidence to
suggest low responders exist in a heightened inflammatory state
during training periods. Notwithstanding, potential relationships
between
differential
hypertrophic
responses
to
resistance
exercise training and inflammatory signaling should be further
explored in other subject populations susceptible to increased
inflammation (e.g., older subjects) given the theoretical rationale
suggesting heightened inflammation favors skeletal muscle
catabolism.
Is There a Relationship Between
Mitochondrial Characteristics and
Hypertrophic Responders?
Differences in muscle mitochondrial function and/or volume
may also exist between high versus low responders. Notably,
it has been estimated that upward of four ATP molecules are
required per peptide bond synthesized (Stouthamer, 1973). It is
therefore plausible that increases in mitochondrial function or
volume are needed to sustain muscle growth during resistance
exercise training due to the energy required for sarcoplasmic and
myofibrillar protein accretion. Groennebaek and Vissing (2017)
authored a recent review including 16 studies which examined
how chronic “
high load”resistance exercise training affected
mitochondrial volume and function. These authors noted only
two of these studies reported an increase in mitochondrial
volume after 12 weeks of training while the other 14 studies
reported no change or decreases. However, these authors did
also note that three of the five chronic training studies that
did measure function in permeabilized fibers reported improved
indices of mitochondrial function (e.g., a tighter coupling
of oxidative phosphorylation) (Pesta et al., 2011; Salvadego
et al., 2013; Porter et al., 2015). Thus, resistance exercise
training may generally increase mitochondrial function without
affecting mitochondrial volume changes, and examining these
phenomena in low versus high responders would provide greater
insight as to whether there is mitochondrial involvement in
differential hypertrophic responses. It should also be noted recent
evidence suggests mechanisms regulating ribosome biogenesis
and mitochondrial biogenesis may also be in direct opposition
of one another (Gibbons et al., 2014). Specifically, these
authors used advanced genomic sequencing and bioinformatics
techniques to discover that mtDNA abundance, which is loosely
associated with mitochondrial volume and also demonstrates
a high degree of inter-individual variability like rDNA copy
number, was significantly negatively associated with rDNA copy
number. These data imply if high responders do possess a higher
rDNA copy number (yet to be tested) then it is also possible that
these same individuals would also have a lower mitochondrial
volume relative to low responders. Hence, clarification is needed
in delineating mitochondrial characteristics as well as rDNA copy
number in high versus low responders.
Do Hypertrophic Response Clusters
Possess Differences in Vascular
Properties?
Resistance exercise has been reported to upregulate the mRNA
expression of the pro-angiogenic vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) hours following a single bout (Gavin et al.,
2007), and this phenomenon likely participates in de novo
skeletal muscle capillary formation reported with longer term
training (McCall et al., 1996; Verdijk et al., 2016; Nederveen
et al., 2017). While no literature to date has established that
training-induced increases in capillary number is obligatory for
fCSA increases, some studies have reported a tight coupling
between fCSA increases and increases in capillary number per
fiber following resistance exercise training (Verdijk et al., 2016;
Nederveen et al., 2017). Additionally, Snijders et al. (2017)
recently reported that older men with higher baseline capillary
densities experienced greater increases in type II fCSA and
satellite cell counts relative to individuals with lower capillary
densities following 24 weeks of resistance exercise training. There
is also evidence suggesting skeletal muscle capillary content
and/or microvascular endothelial function may directly influence
muscle fiber size. For instance, middle-aged to older sarcopenic
subjects have been reported to possess a significantly lower
skeletal muscle capillary content compared to age-matched non-
sarcopenic counterparts (Prior et al., 2016), and the authors
interpreted these findings to suggest transcapillary transport of
nutrients, anabolic hormones, and oxygen to muscle is critical
for muscle mass maintenance. This study parallels other evidence
suggesting impaired endothelial function with aging reduces
the anabolic response to amino acid feeding (Timmerman
et al., 2012), and these authors similarly posited a reduction
in skeletal muscle blood flow may contribute to sarcopenia
due to a reduction in nutrient delivery. Thus, future research
examining if high responders possess a higher capillary content
or enhanced endothelial function compared to low responders
is warranted, albeit the aforementioned Snijders et al. (2017)
study is already beginning to establish that this relationship
exists.
Other Considerations
First, a major consideration regarding all of the aforementioned
studies examining characteristics between high versus low
responders is that these studies are age- and gender-biased toward
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 11
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
college-aged males. Exceptions to this bias include the Bamman
et al. (2007) publication which studied both younger and older
subjects from both sexes (Bamman et al., 2007), and the 2016
publication from the same laboratory which studied older males
(Stec et al., 2016). Hence, the aforementioned muscle biomarkers
that associate with high and low responders should be viewed in
this context, and more studies are needed to validate these targets
in females and older populations.
Second, while this review was meant to be as comprehensive
as possible on the topic, there are still other mechanisms to
consider which may delineate skeletal muscle hypertrophic
responses
to
resistance
exercise
training.
For
instance,
while
transcriptome-wide
differences
between
low
and
high
responders
skeletal
muscle
hypertrophic
responders
has been reported as discussed above (Thalacker-Mercer
et al., 2013), it is also notable that Raue et al. (2012) also
performed transcriptome-wide profiling and reported that
661 genes which were affected by resistance exercise training
were correlated to changes in muscle size and strength.
Additionally, similar transcriptome-wide studies suggest select
pre-training mRNAs and/or the fold-change induction in
certain mRNAs correlate with changes in hypertrophic indices
following resistance exercise training (Dennis et al., 2009;
Phillips et al., 2013).
Hence,
these
collective
–
omics-based
data implicate that numerous intrinsic molecular signaling
pathways, many of which are presumably unidentified and not
mentioned herein, likely delineate high versus low hypertrophic
responders.
Third, a critical extrinsic factor not discussed herein and
deserves mentioning includes differences in dietary habits that
exist between high versus low responders. A general consensus
in the scientific literature is that higher protein, hypercaloric
diets optimize skeletal muscle hypertrophy during periods of
resistance exercise training (Volek et al., 2006; Campbell et al.,
2007). Thus, one potential hypothesis could be that high
responders may subscribe to these dietary practices more so than
low responders. It is compelling, however, that our data (Mobley
et al., 2018a) and Bamman’
s data (Thalacker-Mercer et al., 2009)
FIGURE 1 | Factors which may or likely affect the skeletal muscle hypertrophic response to resistance exercise training. High skeletal muscle hypertrophic
responders (HR) experience, on average, ∼80% in fiber cross sectional area (fCSA) or a 20–30% increase in muscle size following weeks to months of resistance
exercise training. Low responders (LRs) experience virtually no change in fCSA or muscle size. Pre-training differences between clusters have included greater
satellite cell number in high versus low responders; however, these findings have not replicated in other studies (indicated by ‘?’). Other speculative pre-training
differences which may exist and need to be researched include connective tissue properties (e.g., fascia thickness, proteins related to extracellular matrix), genetic
differences (e.g., multiple SNP candidates through GWAS), rDNA copy number differences, mitochondrial volume or function differences, or capillary differences
(indicated by ‘???’). Following training, the observed phenotype in HR is influenced in part by superior increases in ribosome biogenesis and subsequent elevations
in basal and post-exercise MPS. Limited evidence suggests HR experience superior training-induced increases in satellite cell number and satellite cell-mediated
myonuclear addition as well as an altered micro RNA (miR) response to training to potentially enhance IGF-1 gene expression and increased androgen receptor
protein content, although more research is needed to explore these areas. It is speculative whether HR experience superior increases in mitochondrial volume or
capillary number following training relative to LR (indicated by ‘???’). It is also speculative whether LR experience a heightened inflammatory response to training
(indicated by ‘???’).
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 12
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
suggest self-reported caloric and protein intakes do not differ
between high versus low responders. While this evidence is
limited to two studies, these findings exclude the possibility that
low responders could benefit from additional dietary protein
and/or calories. In this regard, Reidy and Rasmussen (2016)
compiled evidence from numerous studies (n = 95 total subjects)
illustrating that there are both low and high skeletal muscle
hypertrophic responders which may not experience added benefit
to protein supplementation. Notwithstanding, designing studies
to identify low responders during training and then feeding said
participants a higher amount of protein or energy will provide
more insight.
Finally, it is critical for the reader to appreciate that low
skeletal muscle hypertrophic responders still (on average)
observe beneficial training adaptations. Our recent study
examining low responders, assessed via VL thickness changes,
suggest that this group experienced significant increases in
whole-body lean tissue mass (+2.2 kg versus +3.3 kg in
high responders, p > 0.05) as well as lower body strength
(+31 kg versus +39 kg in high responders, p > 0.05) following
training (Mobley et al., 2018a). Further, and as mentioned
earlier, there clear distinctions between study methodologies
used to generate response clusters both from statistical (e.g.,
K-means cluster versus percentile rank) and methodological
perspectives (e.g., clustering based upon fCSA versus VL
thickness versus a combination of metrics). These between-study
differences are clearly a limitation since single methodologies
used to assess changes in muscle mass following training
have been shown to poorly correlate (e.g., MRS-determined
VL volume versus VL thickness assessed via ultrasound)
(Franchi et al., 2018a). Moreover, there is criticism of statistical
clustering methods used to identify responders versus non-
responders following training interventions (Atkinson and
Batterham, 2015). Additionally, these authors posited that
“
comparator” (or non-training) arms are typically lacking
from studies which posit biomarkers that delineate low
versus high exercise responders. Therefore, moving forward,
the field should attempt to standardize the definition of
low versus high skeletal muscle hypertrophic responders,
and
we
posit
that
using
multiple
metrics
(e.g.,
pre-to-
post training changes in fCSA, lean tissue mass, and VL
thickness) would be a more preferable approach compared
to
using
one
criterion
clustering
variable.
Furthermore,
implementing comparator arms in future studies will provide
data regarding magnitude-based or statistical changes that occur
in both low and high responders relative to a non-training
group.
CONCLUSION
Several intrinsic factors likely drive the hypertrophic response to
resistance exercise training (summarized in Figure 1). There
are human reports from several laboratories suggesting the
degree of ribosome biogenesis during training associates with
the degree of hypertrophy, and the importance of ribosome
biogenesis in facilitating muscle hypertrophy is strengthened by
numerous in vitro and rodent studies. Other factors which have
been studied and may contribute to differential hypertrophic
responses to resistance exercise training include: (a) a heightened
capacity for satellite cell proliferation and satellite cell-mediated
myonuclear addition, (b) differential expression patterns in select
skeletal muscle miRs following acute bouts and chronic training,
(c) elevated androgen receptor protein content in skeletal
muscle, and (d) the presence of certain genomic SNP/insertion-
deletion/repeat variants. However, these factors should be more
thoroughly investigated given some of the sparse or conflicting
data presented herein. Other intrinsic factors which we speculate
may lead to differential hypertrophic responses to training
include rDNA copy number, extracellular matrix and connective
tissue
properties,
inflammatory
signaling,
mitochondrial
characteristics, and/or microvascular characteristics.
Research identifying intrinsic factors that regulate differential
hypertrophic responses to resistance exercise training will
generate future research which examines if these factors can
be modulated by altering extrinsic variables such as nutrition,
exercise dosing, or recovery strategies. Importantly, these series
of scientific conquests will ultimately improve our understanding
of factors that optimize resistance exercise training adaptations,
and such research will likely be useful for individuals seeking to
apply this knowledge in a practical setting.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
The response paper from MR’
s laboratory cited throughout was
supported through gift funds provided by Hilmar Ingredients
(Hilmar, CA, United States), Bionutritional Research Group
(Irvine, CA, United States), and Lockwood LLC (Draper, UT,
United States).
REFERENCES
Ahtiainen, J. P., Hulmi, J. J., Kraemer, W. J., Lehti, M., Nyman, K., Selanne, H.,
et al. (2011). Heavy resistance exercise training and skeletal muscle androgen
receptor expression in younger and older men. Steroids 76, 183–
192. doi: 10.
1016/j.steroids.2010.10.012
Allen, D. L., Roy, R. R., and Edgerton, V. R. (1999). Myonuclear domains in muscle
adaptation and disease. Muscle Nerve 22, 1350–
1360. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-
4598(199910)22:10<1350::AID-MUS3>3.0.CO;2-8
Armstrong, D. D., and Esser, K. A. (2005). Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activates
growth-control genes during overload-induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 289, C853–
C859. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00093.2005
Atkinson, G., and Batterham, A. M. (2015). True and false interindividual
differences in the physiological response to an intervention. Exp. Physiol. 100,
577–
588. doi: 10.1113/EP085070
Baar, K., and Esser, K. (1999). Phosphorylation of p70(S6k) correlates with
increased skeletal muscle mass following resistance exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 276,
C120–
C127.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 13
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
Bamman, M. M., Petrella, J. K., Kim, J. S., Mayhew, D. L., and Cross, J. M.
(2007). Cluster analysis tests the importance of myogenic gene expression
during myofiber hypertrophy in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 102, 2232–
2239.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00024.2007
Bellamy, L. M., Joanisse, S., Grubb, A., Mitchell, C. J., Mckay, B. R., Phillips, S. M.,
et al. (2014). The acute satellite cell response and skeletal muscle hypertrophy
following resistance training. PLoS One 9:e109739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0109739
Betz, C., and Hall, M. N. (2013). Where is mTOR and what is it doing there? J. Cell
Biol. 203, 563–
574. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201306041
Bistrian, B. R., Schwartz, J., and Istfan, N. W. (1992). Cytokines, muscle proteolysis,
and the catabolic response to infection and inflammation. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol.
Med. 200, 220–
223. doi: 10.3181/00379727-200-43423
Bodine, S. C., Stitt, T. N., Gonzalez, M., Kline, W. O., Stover, G. L., Bauerlein, R.,
et al. (2001). Akt/mTOR pathway is a crucial regulator of skeletal muscle
hypertrophy and can prevent muscle atrophy in vivo. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 1014–
1019. doi: 10.1038/ncb1101-1014
Bond, P. (2016). Regulation of mTORC1 by growth factors, energy status, amino
acids and mechanical stimuli at a glance. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 13:8.
doi: 10.1186/s12970-016-0118-y
Bouchard, C., and Rankinen, T. (2001). Individual differences in response to
regular physical activity. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 33, S446–
S451. doi: 10.1097/
00005768-200106001-00013
Bouchard, C., Sarzynski, M. A., Rice, T. K., Kraus, W. E., Church, T. S., Sung,
Y. J., et al. (2011). Genomic predictors of the maximal O2 uptake response
to standardized exercise training programs. J. Appl. Physiol. 110, 1160–
1170.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00973.2010
Brook, M. S., Wilkinson, D. J., Mitchell, W. K., Lund, J. L., Phillips, B. E., Szewczyk,
N. J., et al. (2017). A novel D2O tracer method to quantify RNA turnover as
a biomarker of de novo ribosomal biogenesis, in vitro, in animal models, and
in human skeletal muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 313, E681–
E689.
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00157.2017
Brook, M. S., Wilkinson, D. J., Mitchell, W. K., Lund, J. N., Szewczyk, N. J.,
Greenhaff, P. L., et al. (2015). Skeletal muscle hypertrophy adaptations
predominate in the early stages of resistance exercise training, matching
deuterium oxide-derived measures of muscle protein synthesis and mechanistic
target of rapamycin complex 1 signaling. FASEB J. 29, 4485–
4496. doi: 10.1096/
fj.15-273755
Campbell, B., Kreider, R. B., Ziegenfuss, T., La Bounty, P., Roberts, M., Burke, D.,
et al. (2007). International society of sports nutrition position stand: protein and
exercise. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 4:8. doi: 10.1186/1550-2783-4-8
Chaillou, T., Kirby, T. J., and Mccarthy, J. J. (2014). Ribosome biogenesis: emerging
evidence for a central role in the regulation of skeletal muscle mass. J. Cell.
Physiol. 229, 1584–
1594. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24604
Chandler, P. N., Liu, C., Von Walden, F., and Nader, G. A. (2017). Proteasome
activity is required for ribosomal DNA transcription and muscle hypertrophy.
FASEB J. 31:lb782–
lb782.
Charbonneau, D. E., Hanson, E. D., Ludlow, A. T., Delmonico, M. J., Hurley,
B. F., and Roth, S. M. (2008). ACE genotype and the muscle hypertrophic and
strength responses to strength training. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 40, 677–
683.
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e318161eab9
Cheek, D. B., Holt, A. B., Hill, D. E., and Talbert, J. L. (1971). Skeletal muscle cell
mass and growth: the concept of the deoxyribonucleic acid unit. Pediatr. Res. 5,
329–
334. doi: 10.1203/00006450-197107000-00004
Clarkson, P. M., Devaney, J. M., Gordish-Dressman, H., Thompson, P. D., Hubal,
M. J., Urso, M., et al. (2005). ACTN3 genotype is associated with increases in
muscle strength in response to resistance training in women. J. Appl. Physiol.
99, 154–
163. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01139.2004
Clemente, C. F., Xavier-Neto, J., Dalla Costa, A. P., Consonni, S. R., Antunes, J. E.,
Rocco, S. A., et al. (2012). Focal adhesion kinase governs cardiac concentric
hypertrophic growth by activating the AKT and mTOR pathways. J. Mol. Cell.
Cardiol 52, 493–
501. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.10.015
Crameri, R. M., Langberg, H., Magnusson, P., Jensen, C. H., Schroder, H. D.,
Olesen, J. L., et al. (2004). Changes in satellite cells in human skeletal
muscle after a single bout of high intensity exercise. J. Physiol. 558, 333–
340.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.061846
Dalbo, V. J., Roberts, M. D., Hassell, S., and Kerksick, C. M. (2013). Effects of
pre-exercise feeding on serum hormone concentrations and biomarkers of
myostatin and ubiquitin proteasome pathway activity. Eur. J. Nutr. 52, 477–
487.
doi: 10.1007/s00394-012-0349-x
Dalbo, V. J., Roberts, M. D., Sunderland, K. L., Poole, C. N., Stout, J. R., Beck, T. W.,
et al. (2011). Acute loading and aging effects on myostatin pathway biomarkers
in human skeletal muscle after three sequential bouts of resistance exercise.
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 66, 855–
865. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glr091
Damas, F., Libardi, C. A., Ugrinowitsch, C., Vechin, F. C., Lixandrao, M. E.,
Snijders, T., et al. (2018). Early- and later-phases satellite cell responses
and myonuclear content with resistance training in young men. PLoS One
13:e0191039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191039
Damas, F., Phillips, S. M., Libardi, C. A., Vechin, F. C., Lixandrao, M. E.,
Jannig, P. R., et al. (2016). Resistance training-induced changes in integrated
myofibrillar protein synthesis are related to hypertrophy only after attenuation
of muscle damage. J. Physiol. 594, 5209–
5222. doi: 10.1113/JP272472
Davidsen, P. K., Gallagher, I. J., Hartman, J. W., Tarnopolsky, M. A., Dela, F., Helge,
J. W., et al. (2011). High responders to resistance exercise training demonstrate
differential regulation of skeletal muscle microRNA expression. J. Appl. Physiol.
110, 309–
317. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00901.2010
De Larichaudy, J., Zufferli, A., Serra, F., Isidori, A. M., Naro, F., Dessalle, K.,
et al. (2012). TNF-alpha- and tumor-induced skeletal muscle atrophy involves
sphingolipid metabolism. Skelet. Muscle 2:2. doi: 10.1186/2044-5040-2-2
Dennis, R. A., Zhu, H., Kortebein, P. M., Bush, H. M., Harvey, J. F., Sullivan, D. H.,
et al. (2009). Muscle expression of genes associated with inflammation, growth,
and remodeling is strongly correlated in older adults with resistance training
outcomes. Physiol. Genomics 38, 169–
175. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00056.
2009
Drummond, M. J., Fry, C. S., Glynn, E. L., Dreyer, H. C., Dhanani, S.,
Timmerman, K. L., et al. (2009). Rapamycin administration in humans blocks
the contraction-induced increase in skeletal muscle protein synthesis. J. Physiol.
587, 1535–
1546. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.163816
Egner, I. M., Bruusgaard, J. C., and Gundersen, K. (2016). Satellite cell depletion
prevents fiber hypertrophy in skeletal muscle. Development 143, 2898–
2906.
doi: 10.1242/dev.134411
Ferrando, A. A., Tipton, K. D., Doyle, D., Phillips, S. M., Cortiella, J., and Wolfe,
R. R. (1998). Testosterone injection stimulates net protein synthesis but not
tissue amino acid transport. Am. J. Physiol. 275, E864–
E871. doi: 10.1152/
ajpendo.1998.275.5.E864
Figueiredo, V. C., Caldow, M. K., Massie, V., Markworth, J. F., Cameron-
Smith, D., and Blazevich, A. J. (2015). Ribosome biogenesis adaptation in
resistance training-induced human skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 309, E72–
E83. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00050.2015
Fluck, M., Carson, J. A., Gordon, S. E., Ziemiecki, A., and Booth, F. W. (1999). Focal
adhesion proteins FAK and paxillin increase in hypertrophied skeletal muscle.
Am. J. Physiol. 277, C152–
C162. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.1999.277.1.C152
Franchi, M. V., Longo, S., Mallinson, J., Quinlan, J. I., Taylor, T., Greenhaff, P. L.,
et al. (2018a). Muscle thickness correlates to muscle cross-sectional area in the
assessment of strength training-induced hypertrophy. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports
28, 846–
853. doi: 10.1111/sms.12961
Franchi, M. V., Ruoss, S., Valdivieso, P., Mitchell, K. W., Smith, K., Atherton, P. J.,
et al. (2018b). Regional regulation of focal adhesion kinase after concentric
and eccentric loading is related to remodelling of human skeletal muscle. Acta
Physiol. 223:e13056. doi: 10.1111/apha.13056
Fry, C. S., Kirby, T. J., Kosmac, K., Mccarthy, J. J., and Peterson, C. A. (2017).
Myogenic progenitor cells control extracellular matrix production by fibroblasts
during skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Cell Stem Cell 20, 56–
69. doi: 10.1016/j.
stem.2016.09.010
Fry, C. S., Lee, J. D., Jackson, J. R., Kirby, T. J., Stasko, S. A., Liu, H., et al. (2014).
Regulation of the muscle fiber microenvironment by activated satellite cells
during hypertrophy. FASEB J. 28, 1654–
1665. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-239426
Gao, S., Durstine, J. L., Koh, H. J., Carver, W. E., Frizzell, N., and Carson, J. A.
(2017). Acute myotube protein synthesis regulation by IL-6-related cytokines.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 313, C487–
C500. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00112.2017
Gauthier, G. F., and Mason-Savas, A. (1993). Ribosomes in the skeletal muscle
filament lattice. Anat. Rec. 237, 149–
156. doi: 10.1002/ar.1092370202
Gavin, T. P., Drew, J. L., Kubik, C. J., Pofahl, W. E., and Hickner, R. C.
(2007). Acute resistance exercise increases skeletal muscle angiogenic growth
factor expression. Acta Physiol. 191, 139–
146. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2007.
01723.x
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 14
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
Gibbons, J. G., Branco, A. T., Yu, S., and Lemos, B. (2014). Ribosomal DNA copy
number is coupled with gene expression variation and mitochondrial
abundance
in
humans.
Nat.
Commun.
5:4850.
doi:
10.1038/ncomms
5850
Goodman, C. A., Dietz, J. M., Jacobs, B. L., Mcnally, R. M., You, J. S., and
Hornberger, T. A. (2015). Yes-associated protein is up-regulated by mechanical
overload and is sufficient to induce skeletal muscle hypertrophy. FEBS Lett. 589,
1491–
1497. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.047
Griggs, R. C., Kingston, W., Jozefowicz, R. F., Herr, B. E., Forbes, G., and
Halliday, D. (1989). Effect of testosterone on muscle mass and muscle protein
synthesis. J. Appl. Physiol. 66, 498–
503. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1989.66.1.498
Groennebaek, T., and Vissing, K. (2017). Impact of resistance training on skeletal
muscle mitochondrial biogenesis, content, and function. Front. Physiol. 8:713.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00713
Guth, L. M., and Roth, S. M. (2013). Genetic influence on athletic performance.
Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 25, 653–
658. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283659087
Habets, P. E., Franco, D., Ruijter, J. M., Sargeant, A. J., Pereira, J. A., and Moorman,
A. F. (1999). RNA content differs in slow and fast muscle fibers: implications for
interpretation of changes in muscle gene expression. J. Histochem. Cytochem.
47, 995–
1004. doi: 10.1177/002215549904700803
Haddad, F., Zaldivar, F., Cooper, D. M., and Adams, G. R. (2005). IL-6-induced
skeletal muscle atrophy. J. Appl. Physiol. 98, 911–
917. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.
01026.2004
Hall, Z. W., and Ralston, E. (1989). Nuclear domains in muscle cells. Cell 59,
771–
772. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90597-7
Hameed, M., Orrell, R. W., Cobbold, M., Goldspink, G., and Harridge, S. D. (2003).
Expression of IGF-I splice variants in young and old human skeletal muscle
after high resistance exercise. J. Physiol. 547, 247–
254. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.
2002.032136
Hammond, H. K., White, F. C., Bhargava, V., and Shabetai, R. (1992). Heart size
and maximal cardiac output are limited by the pericardium. Am. J. Physiol. 263,
H1675–
H1681. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1992.263.6.H1675
Hikida, R. S., Staron, R. S., Hagerman, F. C., Walsh, S., Kaiser, E., Shell, S., et al.
(2000). Effects of high-intensity resistance training on untrained older men. II.
Muscle fiber characteristics and nucleo-cytoplasmic relationships. J. Gerontol.
A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 55, B347–
B354.
Hjorth, M., Norheim, F., Meen, A. J., Pourteymour, S., Lee, S., Holen, T., et al.
(2015). The effect of acute and long-term physical activity on extracellular
matrix and serglycin in human skeletal muscle. Physiol. Rep. 3:e12473.
doi: 10.14814/phy2.12473
Hornberger, T. A. (2011). Mechanotransduction and the regulation of mTORC1
signaling in skeletal muscle. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 43, 1267–
1276.
doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.05.007
Hornberger, T. A., Chu, W. K., Mak, Y. W., Hsiung, J. W., Huang, S. A., and
Chien, S. (2006). The role of phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid in the
mechanical activation of mTOR signaling in skeletal muscle. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 103, 4741–
4746. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0600678103
Hulmi, J. J., Tannerstedt, J., Selanne, H., Kainulainen, H., Kovanen, V., and Mero,
A. A. (2009). Resistance exercise with whey protein ingestion affects mTOR
signaling pathway and myostatin in men. J. Appl. Physiol. 106, 1720–
1729.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00087.2009
Ingjer, F. (1979). Capillary supply and mitochondrial content of different skeletal
muscle fiber types in untrained and endurance-trained men. A histochemical
and ultrastructural study. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 40, 197–
209.
doi: 10.1007/BF00426942
Jiang, M., Ma, Y., Chen, C., Fu, X., Yang, S., Li, X., et al. (2009). Androgen-
responsive gene database: integrated knowledge on androgen-responsive genes.
Mol. Endocrinol. 23, 1927–
1933. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0103
Kadi, F., Eriksson, A., Holmner, S., and Thornell, L. E. (1999). Effects of anabolic
steroids on the muscle cells of strength-trained athletes. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
31, 1528–
1534. doi: 10.1097/00005768-199911000-00006
Kadi, F., Schjerling, P., Andersen, L. L., Charifi, N., Madsen, J. L., Christensen,
L. R., et al. (2004). The effects of heavy resistance training and detraining
on satellite cells in human skeletal muscles. J. Physiol. 558, 1005–
1012.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2004.065904
Kerksick, C. M., Kreider, R. B., and Willoughby, D. S. (2010). Intramuscular
adaptations to eccentric exercise and antioxidant supplementation. Amino
Acids 39, 219–
232. doi: 10.1007/s00726-009-0432-7
Kerksick, C. M., Roberts, M. D., Dalbo, V. J., Kreider, R. B., and Willoughby,
D. S. (2013). Changes in skeletal muscle proteolytic gene expression after
prophylactic supplementation of EGCG and NAC and eccentric damage. Food
Chem. Toxicol. 61, 47–
52. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.01.026
Kim, J. S., Petrella, J. K., Cross, J. M., and Bamman, M. M. (2007). Load-mediated
downregulation of myostatin mRNA is not sufficient to promote myofiber
hypertrophy in humans: a cluster analysis. J. Appl. Physiol. 103, 1488–
1495.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01194.2006
Knowles, O. E., Drinkwater, E. J., Urwin, C. S., Lamon, S., and Aisbett, B.
(2018). Inadequate sleep and muscle strength: Implications for resistance
training. J. Sci. Med. Sport. doi: 10.1016/j.jsams.2018.01.012 [Epub ahead of
print].
Kostek, M. C., Delmonico, M. J., Reichel, J. B., Roth, S. M., Douglass, L., Ferrell,
R. E., et al. (2005). Muscle strength response to strength training is influenced
by insulin-like growth factor 1 genotype in older adults. J. Appl. Physiol. 98,
2147–
2154. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00817.2004
Krentz, J. R., Quest, B., Farthing, J. P., Quest, D. W., and Chilibeck, P. D. (2008).
The effects of ibuprofen on muscle hypertrophy, strength, and soreness during
resistance training. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 33, 470–
475. doi: 10.1139/H08-
019
Kwon, I., Lee, Y., Cosio-Lima, L. M., Cho, J. Y., and Yeom, D. C. (2015). Effects
of long-term resistance exercise training on autophagy in rat skeletal muscle of
chloroquine-induced sporadic inclusion body myositis. J. Exerc. Nutr. Biochem.
19, 225–
234. doi: 10.5717/jenb.2015.15090710
Li, X., Wang, S. J., Tan, S. C., Chew, P. L., Liu, L., Wang, L., et al. (2014). The A55T
and K153R polymorphisms of MSTN gene are associated with the strength
training-induced muscle hypertrophy among Han Chinese men. J. Sports Sci.
32, 883–
891. doi: 10.1080/02640414.2013.865252
Lindstrom, M., and Thornell, L. E. (2009). New multiple labelling method
for improved satellite cell identification in human muscle: application to a
cohort of power-lifters and sedentary men. Histochem. Cell Biol. 132, 141–
157.
doi: 10.1007/s00418-009-0606-0
Louis, E., Raue, U., Yang, Y., Jemiolo, B., and Trappe, S. (2007). Time course
of proteolytic, cytokine, and myostatin gene expression after acute exercise
in human skeletal muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 103, 1744–
1751. doi: 10.1152/
japplphysiol.00679.2007
Lueders, T. N., Zou, K., Huntsman, H. D., Meador, B., Mahmassani, Z., Abel, M.,
et al. (2011). The alpha7beta1-integrin accelerates fiber hypertrophy and
myogenesis following a single bout of eccentric exercise. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 301, C938–
C946. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00515.2010
Mackey, A. L., Esmarck, B., Kadi, F., Koskinen, S. O., Kongsgaard, M.,
Sylvestersen, A., et al. (2007). Enhanced satellite cell proliferation with
resistance training in elderly men and women. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 17,
34–
42.
Mann, T. N., Lamberts, R. P., and Lambert, M. I. (2014). High responders and
low responders: factors associated with individual variation in response to
standardized training. Sports Med. 44, 1113–
1124. doi: 10.1007/s40279-014-
0197-3
Markworth, J. F., and Cameron-Smith, D. (2011). Prostaglandin F2&α stimulates
PI3K/ERK/mTOR signaling and skeletal myotube hypertrophy. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 300, C671–
C682. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00549.2009
Masiero, E., and Sandri, M. (2010). Autophagy inhibition induces atrophy and
myopathy in adult skeletal muscles. Autophagy 6, 307–
309. doi: 10.4161/auto.
6.2.11137
Mayhew, D. L., Kim, J. S., Cross, J. M., Ferrando, A. A., and Bamman,
M. M. (2009). Translational signaling responses preceding resistance training-
mediated myofiber hypertrophy in young and old humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 107,
1655–
1662. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.91234.2008
McCall, G. E., Byrnes, W. C., Dickinson, A., Pattany, P. M., and Fleck, S. J. (1996).
Muscle fiber hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and capillary density in college men after
resistance training. J. Appl. Physiol. 81, 2004–
2012. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1996.81.
5.2004
McCarthy, J. J., and Esser, K. A. (2007). MicroRNA-1 and microRNA-133a
expression are decreased during skeletal muscle hypertrophy. J. Appl. Physiol.
102, 306–
313. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00932.2006
McCarthy, J. J., Mula, J., Miyazaki, M., Erfani, R., Garrison, K., Farooqui, A. B.,
et al. (2011). Effective fiber hypertrophy in satellite cell-depleted skeletal muscle.
Development 138, 3657–
3666. doi: 10.1242/dev.068858
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 15
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
Mitchell, C. J., Churchward-Venne, T. A., Bellamy, L., Parise, G., Baker, S. K., and
Phillips, S. M. (2013). Muscular and systemic correlates of resistance training-
induced muscle hypertrophy. PLoS One 8:e78636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0078636
Mitchell, C. J., Churchward-Venne, T. A., Parise, G., Bellamy, L., Baker, S. K.,
Smith, K., et al. (2014). Acute post-exercise myofibrillar protein synthesis is not
correlated with resistance training-induced muscle hypertrophy in young men.
PLoS One 9:e89431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089431
Mitchell, C. J., Churchward-Venne, T. A., West, D. W., Burd, N. A., Breen, L.,
Baker, S. K., et al. (2012). Resistance exercise load does not determine training-
mediated hypertrophic gains in young men. J. Appl. Physiol. 113, 71–
77.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00307.2012
Mobley, C. B., Fox, C. D., Thompson, R. M., Healy, J. C., Santucci, V., Kephart,
W. C., et al. (2016). Comparative effects of whey protein versus L-leucine on
skeletal muscle protein synthesis and markers of ribosome biogenesis following
resistance exercise. Amino Acids 48, 733–
750. doi: 10.1007/s00726-015-
2121-z
Mobley, C. B., Haun, C. T., Roberson, P. A., Mumford, P. W., Kephart,
W. C., Romero, M. A., et al. (2018a). Biomarkers associated with low,
moderate, and high vastus lateralis muscle hypertrophy following 12 weeks
of resistance training. PLoS One 13:e0195203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.01
95203
Mobley, C. B., Haun, C. T., Roberson, P. A., Mumford, P. W., Romero, M. A.,
Kephart, W. C., et al. (2017). Effects of whey, soy or leucine supplementation
with 12 weeks of resistance training on strength, body composition, and
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue histological attributes in college-aged males.
Nutrients 9:E972. doi: 10.3390/nu9090972
Mobley, C. B., Holland, A. M., Kephart, W. C., Mumford, P. W., Lowery,
R. P., Kavazis, A. N., et al. (2018b). Progressive resistance-loaded voluntary
wheel running increases hypertrophy and differentially affects muscle protein
synthesis, ribosome biogenesis, and proteolytic markers in rat muscle. J. Anim.
Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 102, 317–
329. doi: 10.1111/jpn.12691
Morissette, M. R., Cook, S. A., Buranasombati, C., Rosenberg, M. A., and
Rosenzweig, A. (2009). Myostatin inhibits IGF-I-induced myotube hypertrophy
through Akt. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 297, C1124–
C1132. doi: 10.1152/
ajpcell.00043.2009
Munoz-Canoves, P., Scheele, C., Pedersen, B. K., and Serrano, A. L. (2013).
Interleukin-6 myokine signaling in skeletal muscle: a double-edged sword?
FEBS J. 280, 4131–
4148. doi: 10.1111/febs.12338
Murach, K. A., Fry, C. S., Kirby, T. J., Jackson, J. R., Lee, J. D., White, S. H., et al.
(2018). Starring or supporting role? Satellite cells and skeletal muscle fiber size
regulation. Physiology 33, 26–
38. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00019.2017
Nader, G. A., Mcloughlin, T. J., and Esser, K. A. (2005). mTOR function in
skeletal muscle hypertrophy: increased ribosomal RNA via cell cycle regulators.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 289, C1457–
C1465. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00165.
2005
Nakada, S., Ogasawara, R., Kawada, S., Maekawa, T., and Ishii, N. (2016).
Correlation between ribosome biogenesis and the magnitude of hypertrophy in
overloaded skeletal muscle. PLoS One 11:e0147284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0147284
Nederveen, J. P., Joanisse, S., Seguin, C. M., Bell, K. E., Baker, S. K., Phillips, S. M.,
et al. (2015). The effect of exercise mode on the acute response of satellite cells
in old men. Acta Physiol. 215, 177–
190. doi: 10.1111/apha.12601
Nederveen, J. P., Snijders, T., Joanisse, S., Wavell, C. G., Mitchell, C. J., Johnston,
L. M., et al. (2017). Altered muscle satellite cell activation following 16 wk of
resistance training in young men. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.
312, R85–
R92. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00221.2016
Norrby, M., and Tagerud, S. (2010). Mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein kinase 2 (MK2) in skeletal muscle atrophy and hypertrophy. J. Cell.
Physiol. 223, 194–
201. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22023
Ogasawara, R., Akimoto, T., Umeno, T., Sawada, S., Hamaoka, T., and
Fujita, S. (2016). MicroRNA expression profiling in skeletal muscle reveals
different regulatory patterns in high and low responders to resistance
training. Physiol. Genomics 48, 320–
324. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00124.
2015
Ogborn, D., and Schoenfeld, B. J. (2014). The role of fiber types in muscle
hypertrophy: implications for loading strategies. Strength Cond. J. 36, 20–
25.
doi: 10.1519/SSC.0000000000000030
O’
Reilly, C., Mckay, B., Phillips, S., Tarnopolsky, M., and Parise, G. (2008).
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and the satellite cell response following muscle
lengthening contractions in humans. Muscle Nerve 38, 1434–
1442. doi: 10.1002/
mus.21146
Pasiakos, S. M., and Carbone, J. W. (2014). Assessment of skeletal muscle
proteolysis and the regulatory response to nutrition and exercise. IUBMB Life
66, 478–
484. doi: 10.1002/iub.1291
Pesta, D., Hoppel, F., Macek, C., Messner, H., Faulhaber, M., Kobel, C., et al. (2011).
Similar qualitative and quantitative changes of mitochondrial respiration
following strength and endurance training in normoxia and hypoxia in
sedentary humans. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 301, R1078–
R1087. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00285.2011
Petrella, J. K., Kim, J. S., Cross, J. M., Kosek, D. J., and Bamman, M. M. (2006).
Efficacy of myonuclear addition may explain differential myofiber growth
among resistance-trained young and older men and women. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 291, E937–
E946. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00190.2006
Petrella, J. K., Kim, J. S., Mayhew, D. L., Cross, J. M., and Bamman, M. M. (2008).
Potent myofiber hypertrophy during resistance training in humans is associated
with satellite cell-mediated myonuclear addition: a cluster analysis. J. Appl.
Physiol. 104, 1736–
1742. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01215.2007
Phillips, B. E., Williams, J. P., Gustafsson, T., Bouchard, C., Rankinen, T.,
Knudsen, S., et al. (2013). Molecular networks of human muscle adaptation
to exercise and age. PLoS Genet. 9:e1003389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.100
3389
Phillips, S. M., Tipton, K. D., Ferrando, A. A., and Wolfe, R. R. (1999). Resistance
training reduces the acute exercise-induced increase in muscle protein turnover.
Am. J. Physiol. 276, E118–
E124. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.1999.276.1.E118
Popadic Gacesa, J. Z., Momcilovic, M., Veselinovic, I., Brodie, D. A., and Grujic,
N. G. (2012). Bradykinin type 2 receptor -9/-9 genotype is associated with
triceps brachii muscle hypertrophy following strength training in young
healthy men. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 13:217. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-
13-217
Porter, C., Reidy, P. T., Bhattarai, N., Sidossis, L. S., and Rasmussen, B. B.
(2015). Resistance exercise training alters mitochondrial function in human
skeletal muscle. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 47, 1922–
1931. doi: 10.1249/MSS.
0000000000000605
Potts, G. K., Mcnally, R. M., Blanco, R., You, J. S., Hebert, A. S., Westphall,
M. S., et al. (2017). A map of the phosphoproteomic alterations that occur
after a bout of maximal-intensity contractions. J. Physiol. 595, 5209–
5226.
doi: 10.1113/JP273904
Prior, S. J., Ryan, A. S., Blumenthal, J. B., Watson, J. M., Katzel, L. I., and Goldberg,
A. P. (2016). Sarcopenia is associated with lower skeletal muscle capillarization
and exercise capacity in older adults. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 71,
1096–
1101. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glw017
Puthucheary, Z., Skipworth, J. R., Rawal, J., Loosemore, M., Van Someren, K., and
Montgomery, H. E. (2011). The ACE gene and human performance: 12 years
on. Sports Med. 41, 433–
448. doi: 10.2165/11588720-000000000-00000
Raj, D. S., Moseley, P., Dominic, E. A., Onime, A., Tzamaloukas, A. H., Boyd, A.,
et al. (2008). Interleukin-6 modulates hepatic and muscle protein synthesis
during hemodialysis. Kidney Int. 73, 1054–
1061. doi: 10.1038/ki.2008.21
Raue, U., Trappe, T. A., Estrem, S. T., Qian, H. R., Helvering, L. M., Smith, R. C.,
et al. (2012). Transcriptome signature of resistance exercise adaptations: mixed
muscle and fiber type specific profiles in young and old adults. J. Appl. Physiol.
112, 1625–
1636. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00435.2011
Reidy, P. T., Borack, M. S., Markofski, M. M., Dickinson, J. M., Fry, C. S., Deer,
R. R., et al. (2017a). Post-absorptive muscle protein turnover affects resistance
training hypertrophy. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 117, 853–
866. doi: 10.1007/s00421-
017-3566-4
Reidy, P. T., Fry, C. S., Igbinigie, S., Deer, R. R., Jennings, K., Cope, M. B., et al.
(2017b). Protein supplementation does not affect myogenic adaptations to
resistance training. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 49, 1197–
1208. doi: 10.1249/MSS.
0000000000001224
Reidy, P. T., and Rasmussen, B. B. (2016). Role of ingested amino acids and protein
in the promotion of resistance exercise-induced muscle protein anabolism.
J. Nutr. 146, 155–
183. doi: 10.3945/jn.114.203208
Roberts, M. D., Dalbo, V. J., Sunderland, K. L., Poole, C. N., Hassell, S. E.,
Bemben, D., et al. (2010). IGF-1 splice variant and IGF-1 peptide expression
patterns in young and old human skeletal muscle prior to and following
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
15
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 16
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
sequential exercise bouts. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 110, 961–
969. doi: 10.1007/
s00421-010-1588-2
Roberts, M. D., Holland, A. M., Kephart, W. C., Mobley, C. B., Mumford, P. W.,
Lowery, R. P., et al. (2016). A putative low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet elicits
mild nutritional ketosis but does not impair the acute or chronic hypertrophic
responses to resistance exercise in rodents. J. Appl. Physiol. 120, 1173–
1185.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00837.2015
Rommel, C., Bodine, S. C., Clarke, B. A., Rossman, R., Nunez, L., Stitt, T. N.,
et al. (2001). Mediation of IGF-1-induced skeletal myotube hypertrophy by
PI(3)K/Akt/mTOR and PI(3)K/Akt/GSK3 pathways. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 1009–
1013. doi: 10.1038/ncb1101-1009
Salvadego, D., Domenis, R., Lazzer, S., Porcelli, S., Rittweger, J., Rizzo, G., et al.
(2013). Skeletal muscle oxidative function in vivo and ex vivo in athletes with
marked hypertrophy from resistance training. J. Appl. Physiol. 114, 1527–
1535.
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00883.2012
Schiaffino, S., and Mammucari, C. (2011). Regulation of skeletal muscle growth by
the IGF1-Akt/PKB pathway: insights from genetic models. Skelet. Muscle 1:4.
doi: 10.1186/2044-5040-1-4
Schuelke, M., Wagner, K. R., Stolz, L. E., Hubner, C., Riebel, T., Komen, W.,
et al. (2004). Myostatin mutation associated with gross muscle hypertrophy in
a child. N. Engl. J. Med. 350, 2682–
2688. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040933
Silva, G. J. J., Bye, A., El Azzouzi, H., and Wisloff, U. (2017). MicroRNAs as
important regulators of exercise adaptation. Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 60, 130–
151.
doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2017.06.003
Sinha-Hikim, I., Artaza, J., Woodhouse, L., Gonzalez-Cadavid, N., Singh, A. B.,
Lee, M. I., et al. (2002). Testosterone-induced increase in muscle size in
healthy young men is associated with muscle fiber hypertrophy. Am J.
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 283, E154–
E164. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00502.
2001
Sinha-Hikim, I., Roth, S. M., Lee, M. I., and Bhasin, S. (2003). Testosterone-induced
muscle hypertrophy is associated with an increase in satellite cell number
in healthy, young men. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 285, E197–
E205.
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00370.2002
Snijders, T., Nederveen, J. P., Joanisse, S., Leenders, M., Verdijk, L. B., Van Loon,
L. J., et al. (2017). Muscle fibre capillarization is a critical factor in muscle
fibre hypertrophy during resistance exercise training in older men. J. Cachexia
Sarcopenia Muscle 8, 267–
276. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.12137
Snijders, T., Smeets, J. S., Van Kranenburg, J., Kies, A. K., Van Loon, L. J., and
Verdijk, L. B. (2016). Changes in myonuclear domain size do not precede
muscle hypertrophy during prolonged resistance-type exercise training. Acta
Physiol. 216, 231–
239. doi: 10.1111/apha.12609
Standley, R. A., Liu, S. Z., Jemiolo, B., Trappe, S. W., and Trappe, T. A. (2013).
Prostaglandin E2 induces transcription of skeletal muscle mass regulators
interleukin-6 and muscle RING finger-1 in humans. Prostaglandins Leukot.
Essent. Fatty Acids 88, 361–
364. doi: 10.1016/j.plefa.2013.02.004
Stec, M. J., Kelly, N. A., Many, G. M., Windham, S. T., Tuggle, S. C., and
Bamman, M. M. (2016). Ribosome biogenesis may augment resistance training-
induced myofiber hypertrophy and is required for myotube growth in vitro.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 310, E652–
E661. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00486.
2015
Stefanetti, R. J., Lamon, S., Wallace, M., Vendelbo, M. H., Russell, A. P., and
Vissing, K. (2015). Regulation of ubiquitin proteasome pathway molecular
markers in response to endurance and resistance exercise and training. Pflugers
Arch. 467, 1523–
1537. doi: 10.1007/s00424-014-1587-y
Stouthamer, A. H. (1973). A theoretical study on the amount of ATP required for
synthesis of microbial cell material. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 39, 545–
565.
doi: 10.1007/BF02578899
Terzis, G., Georgiadis, G., Stratakos, G., Vogiatzis, I., Kavouras, S., Manta, P., et al.
(2008). Resistance exercise-induced increase in muscle mass correlates with
p70S6 kinase phosphorylation in human subjects. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 102,
145–
152. doi: 10.1007/s00421-007-0564-y
Tesch, P. A., Thorsson, A., and Kaiser, P. (1984). Muscle capillary supply and fiber
type characteristics in weight and power lifters. J. Appl. Physiol. Respir. Environ.
Exerc. Physiol. 56, 35–
38.
Thalacker-Mercer, A., Stec, M., Cui, X., Cross, J., Windham, S., and Bamman, M.
(2013). Cluster analysis reveals differential transcript profiles associated with
resistance training-induced human skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Physiol.
Genomics 45, 499–
507. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00167.2012
Thalacker-Mercer, A. E., Petrella, J. K., and Bamman, M. M. (2009). Does
habitual dietary intake influence myofiber hypertrophy in response to resistance
training? A cluster analysis. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 34, 632–
639. doi: 10.
1139/H09-038
Timmerman, K. L., Dhanani, S., Glynn, E. L., Fry, C. S., Drummond, M. J.,
Jennings, K., et al. (2012). A moderate acute increase in physical activity
enhances nutritive flow and the muscle protein anabolic response to mixed
nutrient intake in older adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 95, 1403–
1412. doi: 10.3945/
ajcn.111.020800
Tipton, K. D., Hamilton, D. L., and Gallagher, I. J. (2018). Assessing the role of
muscle protein breakdown in response to nutrition and exercise in humans.
Sports Med. 48, 53–
64. doi: 10.1007/s40279-017-0845-5
Trappe, S., Luden, N., Minchev, K., Raue, U., Jemiolo, B., and Trappe, T. A. (2015).
Skeletal muscle signature of a champion sprint runner. J. Appl. Physiol. 118,
1460–
1466. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00037.2015
Trappe, T. A., Carroll, C. C., Dickinson, J. M., Lemoine, J. K., Haus, J. M.,
Sullivan, B. E., et al. (2011). Influence of acetaminophen and ibuprofen on
skeletal muscle adaptations to resistance exercise in older adults. Am. J. Physiol.
Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 300, R655–
R662. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00611.
2010
Trappe, T. A., Fluckey, J. D., White, F., Lambert, C. P., and Evans, W. J. (2001).
Skeletal muscle PGF(2)(alpha) and PGE(2) in response to eccentric resistance
exercise: influence of ibuprofen acetaminophen. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 86,
5067–
5070.
Trappe, T. A., White, F., Lambert, C. P., Cesar, D., Hellerstein, M., and Evans,
W. J. (2002). Effect of ibuprofen and acetaminophen on postexercise muscle
protein synthesis. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 282, E551–
E556. doi: 10.
1152/ajpendo.00352.2001
Van Etten, L. M., Verstappen, F. T., and Westerterp, K. R. (1994). Effect of
body build on weight-training-induced adaptations in body composition and
muscular strength. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 26, 515–
521. doi: 10.1249/00005768-
199404000-00018
Verdijk, L. B., Snijders, T., Drost, M., Delhaas, T., Kadi, F., and Van Loon, L. J.
(2014). Satellite cells in human skeletal muscle; from birth to old age. Age 36,
545–
547. doi: 10.1007/s11357-013-9583-2
Verdijk, L. B., Snijders, T., Holloway, T. M., Van Kranenburg, J., and Van Loon,
L. J. (2016). Resistance training increases skeletal muscle capillarization in
healthy older men. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 48, 2157–
2164. doi: 10.1249/MSS.
0000000000001019
Volek, J. S., Forsythe, C. E., and Kraemer, W. J. (2006). Nutritional aspects of
women strength athletes. Br. J. Sports Med. 40, 742–
748. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.
2004.016709
Walker, D. K., Fry, C. S., Drummond, M. J., Dickinson, J. M., Timmerman, K. L.,
Gundermann, D. M., et al. (2012). PAX7 + satellite cells in young and older
adults following resistance exercise. Muscle Nerve 46, 51–
59. doi: 10.1002/mus.
23266
Wang, D. T., Yin, Y., Yang, Y. J., Lv, P. J., Shi, Y., Lu, L., et al. (2014).
Resveratrol prevents TNF-alpha-induced muscle atrophy via regulation of
Akt/mTOR/FoxO1 signaling in C2C12 myotubes. Int. Immunopharmacol. 19,
206–
213. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.02.002
Wang, M., and Lemos, B. (2017). Ribosomal DNA copy number amplification and
loss in human cancers is linked to tumor genetic context, nucleolus activity,
and proliferation. PLoS Genet. 13:e1006994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.100
6994
Wang, X., and Proud, C. G. (2006). The mTOR pathway in the control of protein
synthesis. Physiology 21, 362–
369. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00024.2006
Watt, K. I., Goodman, C. A., Hornberger, T. A., and Gregorevic, P. (2018).
The hippo signaling pathway in the regulation of skeletal muscle mass and
function. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 46, 92–
96. doi: 10.1249/JES.00000000000
00142
West, D. W., Baehr, L. M., Marcotte, G. R., Chason, C. M., Tolento, L., Gomes,
A. V., et al. (2016). Acute resistance exercise activates rapamycin-sensitive
and -insensitive mechanisms that control translational activity and capacity in
skeletal muscle. J. Physiol. 594, 453–
468. doi: 10.1113/JP271365
White, J. P., Reecy, J. M., Washington, T. A., Sato, S., Le, M. E., Davis, J. M.,
et al. (2009). Overload-induced skeletal muscle extracellular matrix remodelling
and myofibre growth in mice lacking IL-6. Acta Physiol. 197, 321–
332.
doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2009.02029.x
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
16
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
 fphys-09-00834
July 2, 2018
Time: 15:33
# 17
Roberts et al.
Physiological Differences Between Hypertrophic Responders
Wilkinson, D. J., Franchi, M. V., Brook, M. S., Narici, M. V., Williams, J. P.,
Mitchell, W. K., et al. (2014). A validation of the application of D(2)O stable
isotope tracer techniques for monitoring day-to-day changes in muscle protein
subfraction synthesis in humans. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 306, E571–
E579. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00650.2013
Zak, R., Rabinowitz, M., and Platt, C. (1967). Ribonucleic acids associated with
myofibrils. Biochemistry 6, 2493–
2499. doi: 10.1021/bi00860a028
Zamir, O., Hasselgren, P. O., Higashiguchi, T., Frederick, J. A., and Fischer, J. E.
(1992). Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1) induce muscle
proteolysis through different mechanisms. Mediators Inflamm. 1, 247–
250.
doi: 10.1155/S0962935192000371
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Roberts, Haun, Mobley, Mumford, Romero, Roberson, Vann and
McCarthy. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
17
July 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 834
