 By Sarah C.M. 
Roberts, David K. 
Turok, Elise Belusa, 
Sarah Combellick 
and Ushma D. 
Upadhyay
Sarah C.M. Roberts, 
and Ushma D. 
Upadhyay are 
assistant profes-
sors; Elise Belusa is 
research manager; 
Sarah Combellick 
was project direc-
tor—all at Advancing 
New Standards in 
Reproductive Health 
(ANSIRH), University 
of California, San 
Francisco, Oakland. 
David K. Turok is 
associate professor, 
University of Utah, 
Department of Obstet-
rics and Gynecology, 
Salt Lake City.
Volume 48, Number 4, December 2016 
179
A few studies have examined women’s experiences 
with waiting periods and two-visit requirements. A study 
of Tennessee’s waiting period and two-visit requirement 
in 1979 and 1980 found that 77% of abortion patients 
reported no benefi
 t, while 59% reported experiencing 
one or more problems due to the wait.1 While women in 
Tennessee cited some possible benefi
 ts to waiting, they 
reported experiencing fewer benefi
 ts, and more problems, 
than anticipated. On average, women also paid an addi-
tional $24 because of the waiting period, which increased 
costs by 48% for low-income and 14% for higher income 
women. Similarly, a 2009 study of how women in Arizona 
anticipated that a 24-hour waiting period would affect 
them found that most expected additional fi
 nancial diffi
 -
culties and logistical hardships (such as diffi
 culties arrang-
ing child care or taking time off from work), and only a 
minority expected benefi
 ts.8 
The scholarly research has been accompanied by an advo-
cacy discourse. For example, advocates for abortion rights 
(who are opposed to waiting periods) focus on the extent 
to which logistical diffi
 culties of waiting periods and two-
visit requirements prevent women from having abortions.9 
On the other hand, some opponents of abortion rights (who 
favor waiting periods) argue that waiting periods are nec-
essary to ensure that providers give women the time and 
opportunity to change their minds. Previous research has 
State-level abortion restrictions such as parental involve-
ment laws, restrictions on public funding and waiting 
periods have been in place in some U.S. states for almost 
40 years.1–3 Recently, the number of abortion restrictions 
has increased dramatically; more state-level restrictions 
were enacted between 2011 and 2013 than in the previ-
ous decade.4 The severity of restrictions also has increased; 
waiting periods have been lengthened from 24 to 48 or 72 
hours.5 To contribute to the literature on these new, more 
severe restrictions, this study seeks to understand women’s 
experiences with Utah’s 72-hour waiting period.
BACKGROUND
Waiting periods specify the amount of time women seek-
ing an abortion must wait after receiving state-mandated 
abortion information and before having the procedure. 
They are often accompanied by a requirement that women 
receive state-mandated abortion information in person, 
instead of by phone, thereby necessitating two visits. As of 
November 2015, some 27 states had waiting periods, and 
13 had requirements that necessitated two visits.5 While 
24-hour waiting periods do not affect abortion rates, two-
visit requirements are associated with decreases in abor-
tion rates, increases in travel out of state for abortion and 
increases in the proportion of abortions that are performed 
in the second trimester.6,7
Utah’
s 72-Hour Waiting Period for Abortion: Experiences 
Among a Clinic-Based Sample of Women
CONTEXT: In 2012, Utah became the fi
 rst state to enact a 72-hour waiting period for abortion. Despite debate about 
the law’
s potential eff
 ects, research has not examined women’
s experiences with it.
METHODS: A cohort of 500 women recruited at four family planning facilities in Utah in 2013–2014 completed base-
line surveys at the time of an abortion information visit and follow-up telephone interviews three weeks later. Logistic 
regression and coding of open-ended responses were used to examine which women had abortions and, for those who 
did not, their reasons. 
RESULTS: Among the 309 women completing follow-up, 86% had had an abortion, 8% were no longer seeking abor-
tion, 3% had miscarried or discovered they had not been pregnant, and 2% were still seeking abortion; one woman 
was still deciding, and the waiting period had pushed one woman beyond her facility’
s gestational limit for abortion. 
At the information visit, women reported little confl
 ict about the abortion decision (mean score on a scale of 0–100 
was 13.9 for those who eventually had an abortion and 28.5 for others). Low decisional confl
 ict, but not socioeconomic 
status, was associated with having an abortion (odds ratio, 1.1). On average, eight days elapsed between the informa-
tion visit and the abortion.
CONCLUSION: As most women in this cohort were not confl
 icted about their decision when they sought care, the 
72-hour waiting requirement seems to have been unnecessary. Individualized patient counseling for the small minority 
who were confl
 icted when they presented for care may have been more appropriate.
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health, 2016, 48(4):179–187, doi: 10.1363/48e8216
 Utah’
s Waiting Period for Abortion
180 
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health
After asking women which of three options they pre-
ferred for resolving their pregnancy (having an abortion, 
having the baby and raising it, and having the baby and 
placing it for adoption), the survey assessed their level 
of decisional confl
 ict. To measure decisional confl
 ict, we 
used a continuous, 16-item scale that examines how con-
fl
 icted patients are about their health care decision.13 Items 
include “I know which options are available to me,” “I feel 
sure about what to choose” and “I expect to stick with my 
decision.” All items are rated on a 0–4 Likert scale; a mean 
score is calculated and then multiplied by 25 for an over-
all score with a possible value of 0–100. Scores below 25 
are associated with implementing a decision and can be 
considered to represent low confl
 ict; scores above 37.5 
are associated with decision delay or feeling unsure about 
implementation and can be considered to refl
 ect high con-
fl
 ict.13 This scale was originally applied to decision making 
regarding infl
 uenza vaccination and breast cancer screen-
ing,13 and has been used in a wide range of health deci-
sions.14–18 To our knowledge, it has not previously been 
used in an abortion setting. It is considered the gold stan-
dard decisional confl
 ict scale19 and has been found to be 
appropriate, reliable, valid, responsive (i.e., able to detect 
important changes in a study population), interpretable, 
acceptable, and feasible to administer and complete.20 The 
alpha for the decisional confl
 ict scale was 0.93, indicating 
high internal consistency.
We also included measures that might confound our 
primary relationship of interest and measures to describe 
participant characteristics. Demographic and reproductive 
health characteristics included age, household income in 
the past 12 months and gestational age at which pregnancy 
was discovered (all measured continuously); race (white, 
black, Hispanic or other); parity (nulliparous or parous); 
and religion (Protestant, Catholic, Mormon, other religion 
or no religion). Mental health history refl
 ects prior profes-
sional diagnosis of depression or anxiety. Risky drinking in 
the 12 months prior to pregnancy recognition was assessed 
with the AUDIT-C, a screening tool used to identify hazard-
ous drinking or alcohol use disorders, on which a score of 
3 or more out of 12 is considered indicative of risky drink-
ing.21 Drug use in the 12 months prior to pregnancy recog-
nition was based on self-reports of illicit or street drug use, 
or recreational use of prescription drugs. Violence from 
the man involved in the pregnancy indicated whether par-
ticipants said that the man had ever “hit, slapped, pushed, 
kicked, or physically hurt” them in any way. As a measure 
of abortion knowledge, participants were asked which of 
two statements was closer to the truth for fi
 ve common 
abortion myths; they also could answer “don’t know.” 
(The myths were childbirth is safer than abortion, abor-
tion causes depression or anxiety, abortion causes breast 
cancer, most women experience regret after abortion and 
abortion causes infertility.) For each myth, women received 
0 points for endorsing the myth, 0.5 for “don’t know” and 
1 point for selecting the more accurate statement. Scores 
were summed and then divided by 5, yielding an overall 
found that 1–13% of women presenting for abortion care in 
settings with no or minimal (i.e., two-hour) waiting periods 
do not have abortions.1,10–12 According to this research, rea-
sons women do not have an abortion after presenting for one 
include that they miscarried or discovered they had not been 
pregnant, decided to continue the pregnancy, were unable to 
have the abortion because of facility gestational limits and 
were referred to another provider for medical reasons.10–12 
Yet it is not clear the extent to which these fi
 ndings apply to 
settings with either 24-hour or longer waiting periods.
In May 2012, Utah became the fi
 rst state in which a 
72-hour waiting period went into effect. Utah requires 
women to have a face-to-face abortion information visit at 
least 72 hours prior to having the abortion;5 this require-
ment necessitates at least two visits. The primary purpose 
of this study was to examine women’s reasons for not hav-
ing an abortion under the 72-hour waiting period and two-
visit requirement. We also examined costs associated with 
each visit, assessed actual wait between the information 
visit and the abortion, and asked women to identify the 
hardest part of waiting and of making two visits.
METHODS
Study Design
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), research-
ers collaborated with University of Utah family planning 
researchers and four family planning facilities in Utah 
that offered the abortion information visits that women 
are required to make at least 72 hours before they have an 
abortion. One of these facilities also was an outpatient abor-
tion facility—one of four in Utah during the study period. 
UCSF research staff trained facility staff in study procedures. 
Facility staff recruited women who presented for an infor-
mation visit between October 2013 and April 2014. Women 
who read English or Spanish and were older than 15 were 
eligible. Minors were eligible with their assent and con-
sent from one parent. At the information visit, facility staff 
informed women about the study, invited them to partici-
pate, completed informed consent with women interested 
in participating and showed them how to use an iPad to 
complete the baseline self-administered survey. Participants 
completed this survey prior to receiving the state-mandated 
abortion information and any abortion counseling the facil-
ity provided as part of routine care. UCSF research staff 
completed follow-up telephone interviews with participants 
three weeks later. Participants were remunerated with $10 
gift cards for completing the baseline survey and $20 gift 
cards for completing the follow-up interview. This study 
was approved by the UCSF Committee on Human Research.
Data
•Baseline. The baseline survey collected data about pos-
sible predictors of not having an abortion. Our main vari-
ables of interest were socioeconomic status and decisional 
confl
 ict. We used two dichotomous indicators of socioeco-
nomic status: receipt of public assistance in the past 12 
months and employment.
 Volume 48, Number 4, December 2016 
181
information visit was considered as a fi
 xed effect; it was not 
retained because a likelihood ratio test did not indicate it 
improved model fi
 t. Analyses were conducted in Stata 13.0. 
Open-ended responses were coded inductively in 
Microsoft Excel to identify themes. Reasons for not hav-
ing an abortion and for waiting longer than 72 hours were 
coded by the lead author; questions about codes were 
resolved through consensus between the fi
 rst and third 
authors. Responses about the hardest part of waiting and 
of making two visits were coded by the third author after 
she and the fi
 rst author achieved at least 80% interrater 
reliability on 10% of responses.
We also conducted attrition and sensitivity analyses to 
examine possible effects of loss to follow-up. For attrition, 
we compared characteristics of women lost to follow-up 
and those not lost to follow-up, using t tests for continuous 
and chi-square tests for categorical variables.
For sensitivity, the facility in our study that performed 
abortions provided information about the date of abortions 
there for women who were lost to follow-up or had not had 
an abortion by follow-up, per the release of personal health 
information form obtained at study entry. For our fi
 rst sen-
sitivity analysis, we estimated the numerator of those who 
had had an abortion as the sum of three groups: women 
who reported at follow-up that they had had an abortion; 
women lost to follow-up who had signed the release form 
and had an abortion at that facility; and women still preg-
nant at follow-up who had signed the release form and had 
an abortion at the facility. The denominator was the total 
sample.
However, analyses of those who completed follow-up 
indicate that almost 30% had their abortion at another 
facility. Thus, the fi
 rst sensitivity analysis likely yields an 
underestimate, as it did not include abortions at other 
facilities. We thus conducted a second sensitivity analysis. 
For this analysis, we needed to estimate the number lost 
to follow-up who signed release forms and may have had 
abortions at other facilities, as well as the number lost to 
follow-up who did not sign release forms and may have 
had abortions at either the participating facility or another 
one. To estimate the fi
 rst, we used women’s follow-up inter-
view reports of where they had their abortion to calculate 
the ratio of those having abortions at the study facility to 
those having them elsewhere. Multiplying this ratio by the 
number lost to follow-up who had a release form and had 
an abortion at the study facility gave us the number lost to 
follow-up who had a release form and may have had an 
abortion at any facility. We then estimated this number as 
a proportion of those lost to follow-up who had a release 
form, and multiplied that proportion by the number with 
no release form to get the estimated number who were lost 
to follow-up, had no release form and may have had an 
abortion at any facility. Thus, the second sensitivity analysis 
estimated the numerator as the sum of four groups: those 
who reported at follow-up that they had had an abortion; 
those lost to follow-up who had a release form and may 
have had an abortion at any facility; those lost to follow-up 
score with a range of 0–1; lower scores indicated lower 
knowledge.
Two aspects of women’s experiences with the informa-
tion visit also were assessed. The fi
 nancial cost is the sum 
of costs women reported incurring to attend the visit (e.g., 
for transportation, missed work, staying overnight, child 
care). Disclosure measures whether, in order to attend the 
visit, women had had to tell someone who had not previ-
ously known about their pregnancy that they were seeking 
an abortion.
•Follow-up. The follow-up interview included both 
closed- and open-ended questions. The main purpose was 
to assess whether women had had an abortion and, if not, 
their reasons. Those who had not had an abortion were 
further classifi
 ed as having had a miscarriage or discovered 
they had not been pregnant, still seeking abortion, still 
deciding, no longer seeking abortion or being unable to 
have an abortion because of the waiting period. To be clas-
sifi
 ed in the last category, a woman needed to have been 
pushed beyond the gestational limit at the facility where 
she sought care because of the waiting period. Women who 
were still pregnant at follow-up (i.e., all of the above groups 
except those who had had a miscarriage or discovered that 
they were not pregnant) are the group of interest. These 
women were asked an open-ended question about their 
reasons for not having the abortion (“What are the reasons 
you have not had the abortion?”), followed by a closed-
ended question that allowed selection of multiple reasons.
A number of measures explored women’s experiences 
with the abortion visit. Financial cost, like the cost measure 
for the information visit, is the sum of costs women reported 
incurring to make the abortion visit; it does not include the 
cost of the abortion itself, which was measured separately. 
Source of formal fi
 nancial assistance includes insurance, 
Medicaid, abortion funds and clinic discounts. Financial 
help from other people is based on open-ended responses 
about who helped pay for the abortion. Disclosure when 
women used their own money indicates whether they had 
had to tell someone else they were spending the money; 
whom they disclosed to is based on open-ended responses. 
Actual wait is the number of days that elapsed between the 
information visit and the abortion procedure; women who 
waited longer than 72 hours were asked an open-ended 
question about reasons for waiting longer. All women were 
asked open-ended questions about the hardest part of wait-
ing 72 hours, and all those who had the abortion were 
asked the hardest part of making two visits.
Analysis
Most analyses were descriptive. Predictors of still being 
pregnant were assessed through bivariable and multivari-
able logistic regression. Because of the rarity of the out-
come, a directional acyclic graph was used to identify 
variables to include in the model;22 decisional confl
 ict and 
socioeconomic status were considered the main variables 
of interest, and we selected a suffi
 cient set of variables to 
control for confounding. The facility where women had the 
 Utah’
s Waiting Period for Abortion
182 
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health
man involved in the pregnancy. The mean abortion knowl-
edge score was 0.62, indicating that women rejected more 
myths than they endorsed.
At baseline, 95% of women indicated that they would 
prefer to have an abortion, 4% preferred to have the baby 
and raise it, and fewer than 1% preferred to have the baby 
and place it for adoption. The mean decisional confl
 ict score 
was 15 (range, 0–69), indicating low confl
 ict. Seventy-one 
percent of women had scores indicating low confl
 ict, and 
8% had scores indicating high confl
 ict (not shown). 
Eighty-six percent of women who completed follow-up 
(95% confi
 dence interval, 83–90) had had an abortion, 8% 
were no longer seeking abortion, 3% had had a miscarriage 
or discovered they had not been pregnant, and 2% were 
still seeking abortion. One woman was still deciding, and 
one had not had an abortion because of the 72-hour wait-
ing period.
Predictors of and Reasons
For Not Having Abortion
Among the 27 women who reported at follow-up that 
they were no longer seeking an abortion, still deciding 
or pushed beyond the gestational limit, 11 (4% of those 
completing follow-up) had indicated at baseline that they 
preferred to have the baby, nine (3% of those completing 
follow-up) had preferred abortion and had been somewhat 
or highly confl
 icted, and seven (2% of those completing 
follow-up) had preferred abortion and had low confl
 ict. 
The mean confl
 ict score at baseline was 13.9 among those 
who eventually had an abortion and 28.5 among others.
In bivariable analyses, women’s likelihood of still being 
pregnant at follow-up was inversely associated with their 
level of abortion knowledge and the gestational age at preg-
nancy discovery, and positively associated with receipt of 
public assistance and decisional confl
 ict (Table 2). In the 
multivariable model, only decisional confl
 ict and timing of 
discovery of pregnancy were signifi
 cant (odds ratios, 1.1 
and 0.8, respectively). 
The most common response to the open-ended ques-
tion about reasons for not having an abortion was that 
the woman “just couldn’t do it” (Table 3). Although this 
response could be read as indicating a change of mind, the 
nuance tended toward having been confl
 icted to begin with 
and then deciding not to have the abortion. For example, a 
19-year-old, who had given birth twice, commented:
“I have always been against abortion. This would be my 
third child, which is why I considered it. I just couldn’t fi
 nd 
myself to do it.”
Similarly, a 37-year-old, who had given birth four times, 
responded:
“It was a hard decision for me to make in the fi
 rst place, 
and once I made the appointment, it kind of hit home. 
About two days after the [information] appointment, I 
canceled the [abortion] appointment. I couldn’t do it. It’s 
something that I’ve always been against. I had my reasons 
that I thought were good reasons, and then I re-reasoned 
myself out of it.”
who had no release form and may have had an abortion 
at any facility; and those still pregnant at follow-up who 
signed the release form and had an abortion at the study 
facility. The denominator was the total sample.
RESULTS
Sample
Facility staff approached 691 women, or 74% of those who 
presented for an information visit during the study period. 
Eight were ineligible. In all, 500 women consented to par-
ticipate and completed baseline surveys, yielding a response 
rate of 73%. Because of Wi-Fi connectivity and survey soft-
ware problems, baseline data for six participants were lost. 
A total of 309 participants (63%) completed follow-up.
Participants’ average age was 25.6 (Table 1). Two-thirds 
were white, and more than half had no religion. Half were 
nulliparous, and the mean gestational age at which preg-
nancy had been discovered was 5.5 weeks. Most women 
were employed, and one-third received public assistance. 
Mean annual household income was $22,000. Twenty-
seven percent of participants had a history of depression 
or anxiety, 48% engaged in risky drinking, 17% had used 
drugs in the past year and 9% reported violence from the 
TABLE 1. Selected characteristics of participants in a 
study of Utah’s law requiring a 72-hour waiting period 
for abortion, 2013–2014
Characteristic
% or mean 
(N=500)
Age (range, 16.0–41.4)
25.6 
Race
White
65
Black
3
Hispanic
24
Other/mixed race
8
Religion
Protestant
10
Catholic
12
Mormon
19
Other 
5
None
54
Nulliparous
51
Gestational age at which pregnancy was 
discovered (range, 0–21.1 weeks)†
5.5 
Employed
69
Public assistance‡
32
Household income‡ (range, $0–300,000)
21,761 
History of depression/anxiety
27
Risky drinking‡
48
Drug use‡
17
Violence from the man involved in the pregnancy
9
Abortion knowledge (range, 0.1–1.0)
0.62 
Decisional confl
 ict (range, 0–69)
15 
Option preferred at information visit 
Have an abortion
95
Have the baby and raise it
4
Have the baby and place it for adoption 
<1
Facility
1
58
2
21
3
8
4
14
†Four participants reported the same date for their last menstrual period 
and their discovery of the pregnancy, and were coded as having discovered 
the pregnancy at zero weeks. ‡In past 12 months. Notes: Data on charac-
teristics for which a range is shown are means; all others are percentages.
 Volume 48, Number 4, December 2016 
183
cial help from a formal source, mostly abortion funds or 
clinic discounts (19%); 42% received help from another 
person, mostly the man involved in the pregnancy, a boy-
friend or a partner (32%).
Even when women used their own money, 26% had had 
to tell someone else they were spending it. Of these, 77% 
had had to tell the man involved in the pregnancy, a boy-
friend or a partner.
To make logistical arrangements for the information visit, 
6% had had to disclose that they were seeking abortion 
to one or more people, including bosses, coworkers, men 
involved in the pregnancies, family members, friends and 
child care providers.
The next most common reason was fi
 nancial. For exam-
ple, a 20-year-old nulliparous participant reported:
“[I] get paid every week, but every time I think I have 
enough money, it all gets taken out in taxes, so I’m just 
under the amount I need. Every time I try to make an 
appointment, something else comes up that I have to pay.”
The next most common reason women gave for not 
having had the abortion was that other people had come 
through for them. A 30-year-old nulliparous woman said, 
“My boyfriend got his shit together.” And a 24-year-old, 
who had had two births, responded, “I talked with my fam-
ily more about it, and they support me and they are willing 
to help me.”
Three participants reported being “too far along” in preg-
nancy to have an abortion. This sometimes meant that 
women felt too far along for their own comfort. A 33-year-
old participant, who had had two births, explained:
“Had I not had to do the fi
 rst appointment, I would 
have been able to have the abortion earlier. But because 
I had to wait so long to schedule the fi
 rst appointment, 
by the time I was able to gather funds, get child care and 
fi
 nd a way to get to the second appointment, I was 13 
weeks, and I wasn’t comfortable with getting the abortion 
anymore.”
An 18-year-old nulliparous woman discovered at her 
abortion appointment that she was 20 weeks pregnant, 
rather than 14, and was beyond the gestational limit at 
her facility. A 26-year-old, who had given birth once, was 
pushed beyond her facility’s gestational limit because of the 
72-hour waiting period. 
Two women mentioned that the fi
 rst visit was part of 
exploring options, and two mentioned wanting more time 
to think. One reported logistical challenges scheduling the 
abortion appointment.
In response to the closed-ended question,, the top two 
reasons women gave for not having had an abortion were 
a change of mind (cited by 71% of women who were still 
pregnant, or 8% of women overall) and the cost of the pro-
cedure (47% and 5%, respectively). The next four reasons 
related to other people. Whereas women’s open-ended 
responses referred to other people’s having come through 
for them, the closed-ended responses had a different 
nuance: Others had not wanted them to have an abortion, 
they had needed to keep the abortion secret from family or 
employers, and they had needed help with logistics.
Costs
Participants spent a mean of $44 (range, $0–590) on costs 
related to the information visit. Twenty-fi
 ve percent paid 
more than 5% of their monthly household income on these 
costs, and 10% paid more than 17%. Participants who 
had an abortion spent a mean of $103 (range, $0–1,330) 
on costs related to the abortion visit and paid a mean of 
$387 (range, $0–2,280) for the abortion. The costs for the 
information visit represent 11% of the cost of the abortion 
and 9% of the costs of the abortion plus the abortion visit. 
Among women who had an abortion, 20% received fi
 nan-
TABLE 2. Odds ratios (and 95% confi
 dence intervals) from bivariable and multivari-
able analyses assessing characteristics associated with women’s likelihood of still 
being pregnant at follow-up
Characteristic
Bivariable 
(N=300)
Multivariable 
(N=279)
Abortion knowledge 
0.06 (0.01–0.40)**
0.55 (0.05–5.78)
Age
1.01 (0.95–1.08)
1.02 (0.94–1.10)
Risky drinking
0.50 (0.23–1.06)
0.50 (0.20–1.29)
Drug use
0.63 (0.21–1.89)
0.75 (0.21–2.75)
Public assistance
2.99 (1.44–6.18)**
1.70 (0.68–4.28)
Decisional confl
 ict
1.06 (1.04–1.09)***
1.06 (1.03–1.10)***
Employed
0.54 (0.26–1.13)
0.79 (0.31–2.03)
Gestational age at which pregnancy was discovered 
0.81 (0.65–1.00)*
0.79 (0.62–1.00)*
History of depression/anxiety
1.90 (0.90–4.00)
1.73 (0.67–4.45)
*p<.05. **p<.01. ***p<.001. Note: Gestational age at which pregnancy was discovered was missing data for 
more women (16) than any other measure; in a model that used a categorical measure of this variable and 
included a “missing” category, the main substantive fi
 ndings did not change.
TABLE 3. Percentage of women still pregnant at follow-up and of all women 
 
completing follow-up who gave various responses to open- and closed-ended 
 
questions about why they had not had the abortion
Reason
Still pregnant
(N=34)
All
(N=309)
Open-ended 
Just couldn’t do it
53
6
Financial reasons
18
2
Other people came through
12
1
Too far along
9
1
Had been exploring options
6
1
Wanted more time to think
6
1
Logistics 
3
<1
Closed-ended 
Changed mind 
71
8
Cost of the procedure
47
5
Others opposed the abortion
38
4
Needed to keep appointment secret from family
38
5
Needed to keep appointment secret from employer
26
3
Had to get partner or family member to help with logistics†
24
3
No insurance/problems with coverage
24
3
Still deciding about the abortion
15
2
Diffi
 culty fi
 nding time 
15
2
 
Needed to keep appointment secret from partner
14
2
Travel costs 
12
1
Diffi
 culty arranging child care
12
1
Diffi
 culty getting time off from work or school
9
1
Did not know where to go
6
1
Diffi
 culty fi
 guring out how to get to the clinic
6
1
Diffi
 culty fi
 nding a doctor who would do the abortion this far along
3
<1
Diffi
 culty arranging care for an elder or other family member
3
<1
Other
6
1
†Child care, transportation, cost or something else.
 Utah’
s Waiting Period for Abortion
184 
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health
For some, nervousness related to advancing gestation, 
as they feared being too far along for a medication abor-
tion. For example, a 25-year-old nulliparous participant 
reported, “I was just anxious to go in for the procedure. I 
was more nervous that I was maybe more than nine weeks 
along and that I would have to have the surgery.” For oth-
ers, advancing gestation created concern that the fetus was 
getting bigger, that they were developing an attachment to 
it, that they would be beyond their comfort zone for having 
an abortion and that costs would increase. A 22-year-old, 
who had given birth once, responded that it was diffi
 cult 
“just being ready to do it and still having the baby grow 
while you’re trying to wait….When you want to do it, 
you don’t want to wait for it to develop even more.” And a 
36-year-old, who also had had one birth, said:
“I knew the longer it took, the more money it would 
cost….We are living paycheck to paycheck as it is, and if 
I [had] gone one week sooner, it would have been $100 
less.”
Other reported diffi
 culties (mentioned by 6–7% of 
women) were feeling physically sick, with ongoing nausea 
and other pregnancy symptoms, and logistical challenges.
Almost all of the top 10 hardest parts of having to make 
two visits related to logistics and associated costs. Most 
common (reported by 22% of women) was having to miss 
work, but women also mentioned diffi
 culties with travel 
(logistics, cost, distance and the need to arrange for other 
people to travel with them), with scheduling the appoint-
ment and arranging child care, and with the time required. 
The comments of a 30-year-old mother of three, who lived 
in Idaho, refl
 ected many of these diffi
 culties:
“Financially it was just hard. It’s hard to take time away 
from things I could be doing. It made it inconvenient. I 
could have stayed in Utah in between, but I have three 
children, so I couldn’t stay there. I had to make the trip, 
come back home and do the regular stuff, and then plan 
another trip.”
Additional Analyses
In our attrition analyses, only gestational age at which preg-
nancy was discovered was associated with loss to follow-
up; those lost to follow-up reported slightly later discovery 
than others (mean, 5.3 vs. 5.9 weeks). In the fi
 rst sensitiv-
ity analysis, we estimate that 72% of all participants had 
an abortion. In the second one, which takes into account 
that some women may have had abortions at sites other 
than the study facilities, we estimate that 89% of the 500 
participants had an abortion.
DISCUSSION
Overall, Utah’s 72-hour waiting period and two-visit 
requirement did not prevent women who presented for 
information visits at the study facilities from having abor-
tions, but did burden women with fi
 nancial costs, logistical 
hassles and extended periods of dwelling on decisions they 
had already made. They also led some women to worry 
that they may not be able to have the type of abortion they 
Women who had an abortion waited about eight days 
between the information visit and the abortion (mean, 8.8; 
median, 8; mode, 8). The four most common reasons for wait-
ing more than 72 hours were appointment availability (48%), 
the woman’s own logistics (19%), the need to make fi
 nancial 
arrangements (9%) and the need for more time to think (6%).
Hardest Part
The most common diffi
 culty women had with waiting 
was wanting the abortion to be over with (reported by 
22% of those completing follow-up interviews—Table 4). 
Women reporting this diffi
 culty expressed knowing what 
they wanted to do, but feeling that they could not move on 
until they had the abortion. For example, in the words of a 
22-year-old nulliparous woman:
“I had to wait like a week and a half. That was killing me. 
I’m a person that wants to get everything over and done 
with once I’ve made a decision, so that was hard. I wanted 
it over and done with to move on with my life.”
For some, “wanting it to be over with” was expressed 
as frustration at being powerless to implement their deci-
sion. An 18-year-od nulliparous women, for example, said, 
“Knowing that I had to wait after deciding what I wanted to 
do and not having control over my own life and my body 
made me mad.”
Three of the 10 most diffi
 cult aspects of waiting focused on 
the abortion decision: feeling sure about it (reported by 10% 
of women); questioning it (8%); and dwelling on it, without 
necessarily expressing certainty or uncertainty (6%).
Nervousness about the procedure also was common 
(reported by 9% of women). A 39-year-old, who had had 
four births, responded, “Just stress of how the procedure 
is going to go because you just want to get it over with. I 
couldn’t sleep for three nights.”
TABLE 4. Diffi
 culties of the waiting period and of the two-
visit requirement most commonly cited as the hardest 
parts, and percentage of women completing follow-up who 
reported them
Diffi
 culty
%
Waiting period
Wanting the abortion to be over with
22
Gestational age
11
Feeling sure about the decision
10
Feeling nervous about the procedure
9
Questioning the decision 
8
Feeling physically sick
7
Feeling frustrated
6
Scheduling the appointment
6
Dwelling on the decision
6
Missing work
6
Two visits
Taking time off from work
22
Distance to the clinic 
16
Time
13
Scheduling the appointment
8
Arranging child care
7
Cost
6
Waiting 
6
Travel costs
6
Travel arrangements
5
Friend/companion logistics
5
 Volume 48, Number 4, December 2016 
185
that only fi
 nancial and logistical barriers prevent women 
from having abortions. The other side assumes that most 
women are confl
 icted and need extra protection to make 
a decision. Neither is the case. Rather, our data confi
 rm 
fi
 ndings from other studies indicating that the vast major-
ity of women have made a decision when they present for 
abortion and that most who present have an abortion.10–12
Our estimate of the proportion of women with some or 
a high level of confl
 ict is higher than those in some other 
studies of abortion patients.10,11 One possible explanation is 
that some women who presented for the information visit 
were just exploring options at that time. Another possibil-
ity, which should be examined in future research, is that 
confl
 ict among women presenting for care varies across 
states, because of factors such as policy environment and 
abortion attitudes. We note that only a small minority of 
women (8%) had levels of decisional confl
 ict that corre-
spond to a clinical level of concern,19 and this proportion 
is close to estimates of the proportions reporting less than 
high certainty in other studies of abortion patients.10,11 If 
further research continues to confi
 rm that only a minor-
ity are confl
 icted, it would seem more appropriate to use 
individualized patient education and counseling to assist 
those who are confl
 icted—an approach that providers at 
many facilities already take11—than to resort to a blunt pol-
icy instrument like a law that requires all women seeking 
abortion care to face additional logistical hassles and costs.
Limitations and Strengths
Some limitations are worth noting. First, we collected data 
only after the 72-hour waiting period went into effect. Thus, 
we are unable to make comparisons with experiences under 
Utah’s earlier 24-hour waiting period. Second, because only 
a small number of women were still pregnant at follow-
up, we could consider only a small number of measures in 
multivariable analyses. Third, while our response rate was 
very good, our follow-up rate was lower than we had hoped 
(although it was within the range seen in other longitudinal 
abortion studies).29 Our overall proportion who had had 
an abortion at follow-up was within the range of statewide 
estimates of those having an abortion after presenting for 
an information visit in Utah during this same time period,30 
and sensitivity analyses provide upper and lower bounds for 
our estimate. We note that only one variable we examined 
(gestational age at which pregnancy was discovered) was 
associated with loss to follow-up; our multivariable model 
indicated that earlier discovery of pregnancy was associated 
with not having an abortion. That those lost to follow-up 
discovered pregnancy later suggests that more of them may 
have had an abortion. A greater proportion of those lost to 
follow-up having an abortion would be consistent with the 
estimate from our second sensitivity analysis and on the 
higher end of the 95% confi
 dence interval in our main anal-
ysis. Those further along among women lost to follow-up 
could also have been less likely to have an abortion because 
they decided they were too far along or could not fi
 nd a pro-
vider. Fourth, this study was conducted in Utah, a state with 
 
preferred and pushed at least one woman beyond her facil-
ity’s gestational limit for abortion.
Our fi
 ndings raise questions about some aspects of 
advocacy arguments and are consistent with others.  For 
example, although some advocates argue that logistical dif-
fi
 culties presented by two-visit requirements and waiting 
periods make women unable to have abortions,2 this was 
not the case in our study cohort. However, we did fi
 nd that 
having to make two visits created logistical and fi
 nancial 
diffi
 culties, including increasing the cost of having an abor-
tion by about 10%. We also confi
 rmed fi
 ndings from other 
studies indicating that women had diffi
 culty fi
 nding money 
for their abortions.23 While we do not know for sure, the 
increased costs associated with having to make two visits 
may have exacerbated existing challenges women face in 
paying for abortion in a state where Medicaid coverage for 
abortion is available only in limited circumstances,24 as is 
the case in Utah and 32 other states.25
We also found that the waiting period, though mandated 
at 72 hours, actually turned into more than a week. For 
women at early gestations and without pregnancy symp-
toms, the wait did not appear to have had tangible effects, 
although it led to prolonged nervousness about the proce-
dure and forced attention to a decision they had already 
made and were ready to implement. For women who 
preferred medication abortion and women further along 
in their pregnancies, though, the wait potentially contrib-
uted to their not being able to have their preferred type of 
abortion and incurring extra costs. In one case, the waiting 
period pushed a woman past her personal comfort point; 
in another, it pushed a woman beyond her facility’s gesta-
tional limit for abortion.
Other advocates argue that waiting periods are needed 
to give women time to change their minds.26–28 Eight per-
cent of women reported changing their minds. We note 
that a “change of mind” may best describe only those who 
indicated at the information visit that they preferred having 
an abortion and were not confl
 icted about their decision, 
and who then decided to continue their pregnancies. Some 
women who reported changing their minds were confl
 icted 
at the information visit. The fact that women were gener-
ally not changing their minds in the narrower sense is con-
fi
 rmed by multivariable analyses that found that baseline 
decisional confl
 ict was strongly associated with having an 
abortion, as has been found elsewhere.10 Our estimate of 
2% changing their minds from unconfl
 icted at the informa-
tion visit to continuing the pregnancy is in the range of the 
proportions found changing their minds (1–3%) in settings 
with no or minimal waiting periods.1,10,12 It therefore seems 
that requiring women to wait 72 hours may not affect the 
proportion changing their minds, although more research 
should be done using methods that allow for direct com-
parisons of the proportions of women who change their 
minds under varying waiting periods.
To be clear, one side of the advocacy discourse ignores 
the few who are confl
 icted when they present for abortion 
care and then continue their pregnancies, and assumes 
 Utah’
s Waiting Period for Abortion
186 
Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health
a large Mormon, primarily white population. Also, other 
states, such as South Dakota,5 require women to have the 
information visit with the same physician who will provide 
the abortion, thus, in practice, likely limiting the visit to the 
same facility where they have the abortion. Consequently, 
laws such as South Dakota’s could impose greater travel and 
fi
 nancial burdens than those found in our study.
This study also has strengths. First, it contributes to 
understanding women’s experiences with new, harsher 
abortion restrictions. Second, by recruiting women when 
they presented for an information visit and then follow-
ing up with all participants, we were able to identify and 
interview women who did not have abortions after seek-
ing them. Rather than speculating about how restrictions 
affect women—especially women who do not have abor-
tions—we have women’s own descriptions of these expe-
riences. Third, by collecting data at two time points, we 
prospectively examined how variables that preexisted the 
information visit contributed to women’s experiences. Had 
we surveyed women only at follow-up, their retrospective 
responses may have been biased by what they had ended 
up doing. Fourth, we included both closed- and open-
ended responses, and found that the open-ended responses 
added important nuance to the close-ended ones.
Conclusion
As most women in this cohort were not confl
 icted about 
their decision when they sought care, the 72-hour wait-
ing requirement seems to have been unnecessary. 
Individualized patient counseling for the small minority 
who were confl
 icted when they presented for care may 
have been more appropriate.
REFERENCES
1. Lupfer M and Silber BG, How patients view mandatory waiting 
periods for abortion, Family Planning Perspectives, 1981, 13(2):75–79. 
2. Henshaw 
 SK and Wallisch LS, The Medicaid cutoff and abortion 
services for the poor, Family Planning Perspectives, 1984, 16(4):171–
172 & 177–180. 
3. Haas-Wilson D, The economic impact of state restrictions on 
abortion: parental consent and notifi
 cation laws and Medicaid fund-
ing restrictions, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1993, 
12(3):498–511. 
4. Medoff M, Pro-choice versus pro-life: the relationship between state 
abortion policy and child well-being in the United States, Health Care 
for Women International, 2013, doi: 10.1080/07399332.2013.841699.
5. Guttmacher Institute, Counseling and waiting periods for abor-
tion, State Policies in Brief (as of November 2015), 2015, http://www. 
guttmacher.org/statecenter/spibs/spib_MWPA.pdf.
6. Joyce T, Henshaw SK and Skatrud JD, The impact of Mississippi’s 
mandatory delay law on abortions and births, Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 1997, 278(8):653–658. 
7. Joyce TJ et al., The Impact of State Mandatory Counseling and Waiting 
Period Laws on Abortion: A Literature Review, New York: Guttmacher 
Institute, 2009.
8. Karasek, D, Roberts SCM and Weitz TA, Abortion patients’ expe-
rience and perceptions of waiting periods: survey evidence before 
Arizona’s two-visit 24-hour mandatory waiting period law, Women’s 
Health Issues, 2016, 26(1):60–66.
9. Marty R, The next abortion battleground: 72-hour waiting periods, 
Talking Points Memo, Jan. 20, 2015, http://talkingpointsmemo.com/
cafe/battleground-abortion-72-hour-waiting-period, 
10. Gatter M et al., Relationship between ultrasound viewing and pro-
ceeding to abortion, Obstetrics & Gynecology, 2014, 123(1):81–87. 
11. Foster DG et al., Attitudes and decision making among women 
seeking abortions at one U.S. clinic, Perspectives on Sexual and 
Reproductive Health, 2012, 44(2):117–124. 
12. Cameron ST and Glasier A, Identifying women in need of further 
discussion about the decision to have an abortion and eventual out-
come, Contraception, 2013, 88(1):128–132. 
13. O’Connor AM, User Manual—Decisional Confl
 ict Scale, http://deci
sionaid.ohri.ca/docs/develop/User_Manuals/UM_Decisional_Confl
 ict.
pdf Ottawa, Canada: Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 1993 
(updated 2010).
14. Caleshu C et al., Invasive prenatal testing decisions in pregnancy 
after infertility, Prenatal Diagnosis, 2010, 30(6):575–581.
15. Labrecque M et al., Evaluation of the effect of a patient decision aid 
about vasectomy on the decision-making process: a randomized trial, 
Contraception, 2010, 82(6):556–562.
16. Banegas MP et al., Results from a randomized trial of a web-based, 
tailored decision aid for women at high risk for breast cancer, Patient 
Education and Counseling, 2013, 91(3):364–371. 
17. King L et al., Intentions for bilateral mastectomy among newly 
diagnosed breast cancer patients, Journal of Surgical Oncology, 2013, 
107(7):772–776. 
18. Schauer DP et al., Predictors of bariatric surgery among an 
interested population, Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases, 2014, 
10(3):547–552. 
19. Ferron Parayre A et al., Validation of SURE, a four-item clinical 
checklist for detecting decisional confl
 ict in patients, Medical Decision 
Making, 2014, 34(1):54–62. 
20. Kryworuchko J et al., Appraisal of primary outcome measures used 
in trials of patient decision support, Patient Education and Counseling, 
2008, 73(3):497–503. 
21. California Department of Health Care Services, Stable Resource 
Toolkit: AUDIT-C–Overview, no date, http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/services/
medi-cal/Documents/tool_auditc.pdf.
22. Jewell NP
, Statistics for Epidemiology, New York: Chapman & Hall, 
2004.
23. Jones RK, Upadhyay UD and Weitz TA, At what cost? Payment 
for abortion care by U.S. women, Women’s Health Issues, 2013, 
23(3):e173–e178. 
24. Roberts SCM et al., Out-of-pocket costs and insurance cover-
age for abortion in the United States, Women’s Health Issues, 2014, 
24(2):e211–e218. 
25. Guttmacher Institute, State funding of abortion unde 
r Medicaid, 
State Policies in Brief (as of November 2015), 2015, http://www.guttmacher.
org/statecenter/spibs/spib_SFAM.pdf.
26. Basilan M, North Carolina OKs bill seeking to curb abortion with 
extended 72-hour waiting period, Christian Today, June 10, 2015, 
http://www.christiantoday.com/article/north.carolina.oks.bill.seeking.
to.curb.abortion.with.72.hour.waiting.period/55756.htm.
27. Ertelt S, North Carolina passes pro-life bill for 72-hour abortion 
waiting period, Life News, June 4, 2015, http://www.lifenews.com/
2015/06/04/north-carolina-passes-pro-life-bill-for-72-hour-abortion-
waiting-period/.
 Volume 48, Number 4, December 2016 
187
28. Sheppard K, South Dakota advances bill mandating controver-
sial anti-abortion counseling, Mother Jones, Feb. 22, 2011, http://
www.motherjones.com/mojo/2011/02/south-dakota-abortion-crisis-
pregnancy-center-bill.
29. Weitz TA et al., Safety of aspiration abortion performed by nurse 
practitioners, certifi
 ed nurse midwives, and physician assistants under 
a California legal waiver, American Journal of Public Health, 2013, 
103(3):454–461. 
30. Conway H et al., The longest wait: Utah’s move to a 72-h waiting 
period for abortion services, Contraception, 2014. 90(3):303.
Acknowledgments
This study was funded by an anonymous foundation. The sponsor 
had no involvement in study design; in the collection, analysis or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the decision 
to submit the article for publication. The authors thank Rana Barar, 
Mattie Boehler-Tatman, Ivette Gomez, Heather Gould, Sandi Ma, 
Brenly Rowland, Danielle Sinkford and Alejandra Vargas-Johnson 
for research and project assistance, and the facilities in Utah for 
their collaboration.
Author contact: Sarah.Roberts@ucsf.edu
