 Human Reproduction, Vol.31, No.10 pp. 2164–2173, 2016
Advanced Access publication on September 2, 2016
doi:10.1093/humrep/dew186
OPINION
Corticosteroid therapy in assisted
reproduction – immune suppression
is a faulty premise
Sarah A. Robertson1,†*, Min Jin1,2,†, Danqing Yu2,
Lachlan M. Moldenhauer1, Michael J. Davies1, M. Louise Hull1,
and Robert J. Norman1,3
1The Robinson Research Institute and School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia 2Second Affiliated Hospital,
Medical School, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China 3Fertility SA, Level 9, 431 King William Street, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia
*Correspondence address. The Robinson Research Institute and School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
E-mail: sarah.robertson@adelaide.edu.au
Submitted on December 26, 2016; resubmitted on June 15, 2016; accepted on June 30, 2016
ABSTRACT: There is ongoing interest in immune-suppressant corticosteroid drugs such as prednisolone to treat infertility in women with
repeated IVF failure and recurrent miscarriage. The rationale draws on the pervasive but flawed view that immune activation is inconsistent
with normal pregnancy. This ignores clear evidence that controlled inflammation and activation of the immune response is essential for
embryo implantation. Generally, the immune response actively promotes reproductive success – by facilitating endometrial receptivity and
tolerance of the foreign embryo, and promoting vascular adaptation to support placental morphogenesis. The peri-conception immune
response also establishes developmental trajectories that can impact on fetal growth and gestational age at birth. Here, we describe immune
changes accompanying conception that could be impeded by inappropriate corticosteroid administration. While women with specific clinical
conditions may benefit from the anti-inflammatory and immune-deviating actions of prednisolone and related drugs, it is incorrect to assume
a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach. Better diagnostics and more preclinical studies are essential to define patient groups, build evidence for efficacy
and fine-tune treatments so as not to inhibit essential actions of immune cells. We argue that unless overt immune pathology is evident,
utilization of corticosteroids is not warranted and may be harmful. In most women, perturbing immune adaptation at implantation is expected
to adversely influence placental development and impair immune-mediated quality control mechanisms, potentially elevating risk of altered
fetal growth and developmental programming, congenital anomalies and preterm birth.
Key words: IVF failure / recurrent miscarriage / pregnancy / corticosteroid / glucocorticoid / embryo implantation / endometrium /
immunology / immune cells / inflammation
Introduction
Endometrial receptivity is a key limiting factor underpinning implantation
failure after IVF, and recurrent miscarriage (Fox et al., 2016). The immune
system is central to establishing receptivity and initiating pregnancy, with
resident immune cells modulating the decidual response, epithelial-
embryo attachment, trophoblast invasion, vascular adaptation, immune
tolerance and cytokine balance (van Mourik et al., 2009; Robertson et al.,
2015). Immune cells also contribute with stromal cells to sensing and
elimination of chromosomally abnormal embryos (Robertson, 2010;
Macklon and Brosens, 2014). Immune events at implantation in turn affect
placental morphogenesis, impacting fetal development, gestational disor-
ders, timing of birth and perinatal outcome (Redman and Sargent, 2010;
Brosens et al., 2011; Robertson et al., 2015).
Effective therapies for impaired endometrial receptivity are urgently
needed. One candidate drug family is the synthetic glucocorticoids, a
class of corticosteroid hormones with potent and broad-spectrum
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties (Franchimont,
2004; Rhen and Cidlowski, 2005). Prednisolone or related drugs are
proposed to improve the embryo implantation rate after IVF and pro-
tect against miscarriage, when administered from embryo implantation
through the early placentation phase.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 The assumed mode of action is to suppress ‘abnormalities in the
immune system’ thought to attack the embryo or to be otherwise hos-
tile to implantation. In particular, corticosteroids are proposed to
reduce aberrant populations of uterine natural killer (NK) cells, to
‘normalize’ cytokine expression in the endometrium and/or to sup-
press endometrial inflammation (Hasegawa et al., 1998; Michael and
Papageorghiou, 2008; Krigstein and Sacks, 2012).
Demand for corticosteroids is driven in large part by medical and
consumer misunderstanding of immune cells in infertility. A common,
but mistaken and out-dated view, is that the immune response is nor-
mally inhibited in pregnancy (Polak de Fried et al., 1993). In particular,
uterine NK cells are often viewed as ‘killer’ cells that must be dis-
armed, and there is a lack of appreciation of positive actions of these
and other immune cells in establishing pregnancy (Moffett and
Shreeve, 2015). A common interpretation is that immune function is
expendable, so immune suppression by medication must be beneficial
and unlikely to cause harm (Krigstein and Sacks, 2012).
This false perception has been encouraged by studies in women
with autoimmune disorders. Success in this patient group has
prompted broader use of corticosteroids in patients experiencing
repeated IVF failure or recurrent miscarriage in the absence of any
overt immune disorder. The rationale for utilizing corticosteroids in
women without specific immune dysfunction is dubious. Protagonists
draw comfort in a relatively low incidence of serious adverse out-
comes in women who naturally conceive while utilizing corticosteroid
therapy for immune disorders, and conclude from analyzes of fetal
congenital malformations that corticosteroids do not present a major
teratogenic risk (Krigstein and Sacks, 2012).
To date there are no well-controlled, sufficiently powered clinical
trial data to allow confident assessment of the effectiveness and safety
of corticosteroid therapy in unselected women in early pregnancy.
A recent Cochrane meta-analysis of small studies in IVF patient groups
revealed a weakly significant effect on implantation rate (but not live
birth rate) in women conceiving after treatment with peri-implantation
glucocorticoids versus no glucocorticoid (Boomsma et al., 2012). Few
studies have followed up the outcomes of corticosteroid use in IVF
treatment for infant health, but those that do report perinatal out-
comes raise concerns for potential adverse effects on fetal develop-
ment (Motteram et al., 2015).
Here we argue for a more rational view, that corticosteroid therapy
in the absence of a specific immune indication is at this time, unjustified
and potentially risky. However, there may be justification for contin-
ued exploratory investigation of prednisolone in fertility disorders with
specific and defined immune aetiologies that are demonstrably respon-
sive to corticosteroid therapy.
Peri-Implantation
Glucocorticoid Therapy and IVF
Outcomes
Initially, corticosteroids were evaluated for their clinical value in
women experiencing infertility and testing positive for autoantibodies.
Corticosteroids alone or in combination with low-dose aspirin are
reported to improve pregnancy rate after IVF in women with anti-
nuclear antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-thyroid antibodies
or lupus anticoagulant (Hasegawa et al., 1998; Geva et al., 2000;
Revelli et al., 2009).
Subsequent reports claimed that corticosteroids increase pregnancy
rate after IVF, even in women without detectable immune disorders.
One of the first such studies administered high dose corticosteroids
(60 mg of methylprednisolone for 4 days, beginning the day of ovum
retrieval) to IVF patients with tubal factor infertility, reportedly increas-
ing clinical pregnancy and implantation rate (Polak de Fried et al.,
1993). Additional case studies attribute pregnancy success in women
with multiple recurrent miscarriages to preconception corticosteroid
therapy (Ogasawara and Aoki, 2000; Quenby et al., 2003).
Other studies showed no effect of corticosteroids in either high
dose (60 mg of methylprednisone for 4 days) or low dose (prednisol-
one 10 mg per day) on implantation rates in patients receiving routine
IVF or ICSI (Lee et al., 1994; Moffitt et al., 1995; Ubaldi et al., 2002;
Duvan et al., 2006). A case-controlled study investigating combined
adjuvant co-treatments with prednisolone plus low-dose aspirin and
doxycycline in 970 patients showed no significant benefit for implant-
ation or pregnancy rate (Motteram et al., 2015), confirming smaller
earlier studies (Duvan et al., 2006; Revelli et al., 2008). The Cochrane
meta-analysis, incorporating 13 trials (a total of 1759 cycles), con-
cluded there is no clear evidence that peri-implantation corticosteroid
administration improves live birth rates in routine IVF cycles (Boomsma
et al., 2012). However, the use of corticosteroids in women undergoing
standard IVF (but not intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)) was asso-
ciated with an increased pregnancy rate of borderline statistical signifi-
cance (Boomsma et al., 2012), suggesting that amongst unselected
women there may be subsets with undiagnosed immune disorders that
benefit from immunosuppressive therapy. A complicating issue is the
variety of different protocols for corticosteroid administration, and the
different corticosteroid drugs utilized, ranging from prednisolone,
methylprednisolone and dexamethasone to hydrocortisone combined
with prednisolone. The dose schedules and duration of treatment also
vary enormously (Boomsma et al., 2012).
Given these inconsistent findings, there is no consensus view on the
utility of corticosteroids in assisted reproduction and the possible effi-
cacy of peri-implantation corticosteroid therapy remains controversial
in non-selected IVF and ICSI patients. Given the integral role of the
immune response at conception and its significance for progression of
pregnancy and infant health, there is a risk of harm that reasonably
must be taken into account and investigated with transparent informa-
tion given to patients demanding this treatment.
Immune Cell Regulation of
Uterine Receptivity and Embryo
Implantation
During conception and early pregnancy, dynamic changes occur in the
local immune response of the female reproductive tract and local
lymph nodes that influence embryo implantation, progression of preg-
nancy and its outcome. These changes involve cells and mediators of
both the adaptive and the innate immune compartment, and build on
the cyclic immune changes that accommodate hormone fluctuations
over the course of every menstrual cycle.
In the mid-secretory phase of the cycle, the otherwise hostile endo-
metrial
lining
becomes
transiently
accommodating
to
embryo
2165
Corticosteroid therapy in assisted reproduction
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 attachment and invasion (Lessey, 2011). Through a regulated
sequence, with features of a controlled inflammatory response,
macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs) and neutrophils recruited into
endometrial tissues over the menstrual cycle are further boosted
between conception and implantation, supplementing large popula-
tions of uterine NK cells. This is followed by activation of the adaptive
immune compartment, and skewing of the T cell response to generate
a specific class of T cells known as regulatory T cells (Treg cells). Treg
cells exert potent anti-inflammatory effects and these cells are essen-
tial in the implantation site to curtail inflammation, assist in vascular
remodeling, and suppress immune rejection of the foreign conceptus
tissue (Guerin et al., 2009).
The initial phase of decidualisation, embryo attachment and epithelial
breaching is followed by trophoblast invasion through the maternal
decidua to commence placental morphogenesis. As placental tropho-
blasts proliferate and differentiate to form the placental villous struc-
tures, extravillous trophoblasts invade deep into the uterine tissue to
remodel the maternal spiral arteries. This transformation is required to
permit a sufficient maternal blood flow and support optimal placental
function and fetal growth in later gestation, and must commence in the
early phase of placental development (Brosens et al., 2011). Defective
deep placentation underlies the great obstetric syndromes preeclamp-
sia, stillbirth and fetal growth restriction (Brosens et al., 2011).
Trophoblast proliferation, differentiation and invasion as well as the
accompanying vascular changes are influenced directly and indirectly
by uterine leukocytes and cytokines. Leukocytes contributing to early
placental development include uterine NK cells, Treg cells, DCs and
macrophages (Aluvihare et al., 2004; Mor et al., 2011; Moffett and
Colucci, 2014). Activated immune cells play a central role particularly
in the early events that lead to robust deep placentation (Pijnenborg
et al., 2008; van Mourik et al., 2009; Moffett and Colucci, 2014), and
protect from later onset disorders attributable to poor placentation
including preeclampsia and in utero growth restriction (Huppertz,
2008; Redman and Sargent, 2010).
Interventions that suppress or impair immune function in early preg-
nancy can perturb later placental and fetal development and the health
of offspring after birth. Additionally, there is a complex interplay
between different leukocytes, explaining why each subset must be pre-
sent in sufficient abundance and exhibit appropriate activation pheno-
types (Mor et al., 2011; Robertson et al., 2015). Experimental
depletion or perturbation of immune cells in mouse models reveals
severe consequences for decidualisation, implantation and placental
development, consistent with observations in women with infertility
and recurrent miscarriage of altered endometrial leukocyte popula-
tions (Table I).
Corticosteroids and the Uterine
Immune Response
Corticosteroid drugs mimic the endogenous glucocorticoid hormone
cortisol that is released primarily from the adrenal cortex (Rhen and
Cidlowski, 2005). In general terms, glucocorticoids are stress hor-
mones with a wide range of physiological effects including limiting and
resolving inflammation, affecting the generation, differentiation and
function of immune cells with profound consequences for tolerance
and immunity (Franchimont, 2004).
The endometrium has specialized capacity to attenuate local cortisol
bioavailability, with progesterone driving conversion of inert cortisone
to active cortisol through induction of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydro-
genase type 1 (11βHSD1) in decidual stromal cells (Kuroda et al.,
2013). The importance of glucocorticoid signaling in the uterus is
demonstrated in mice with a uterus-specific deficiency in glucocor-
ticoid receptor (GR), which exhibit defective implantation with an
exaggerated inflammatory response (Whirledge et al., 2015). This con-
trasts with the gestational tissues in pregnancy when the fetus and pla-
centa are maintained in a low glucocorticoid environment by placental
expression of 11βHSD2, which inactivates glucocorticoids delivered
via maternal blood (Fowden and Forhead, 2015). Glucocorticoid
excess in pregnancy causes adverse effects in the placenta, fetal growth
restriction and altered fetal development (Seckl and Meaney, 2004).
Leukocytes responsive to cortisol by virtue of GR and mineralocor-
ticoid receptor expression are abundant in the endometrium in
the peri-conception phase, and after implantation in the decidua and
various compartments of the placenta (Bamberger et al., 2001).
Implantation requires mild inflammation and activation of a range of
types of leukocytes, although the inflammatory events must be tightly
controlled and finely orchestrated (Sargent et al., 2006; Dekel et al.,
2014). Inflammation elicited at conception recruits immune cells that
contribute to the events of trophoblast invasion and early placental
development, and allow maternal immune recognition and capacity to
respond to paternally-derived major histocompatibility (MHC) anti-
gens. This active recognition process is required to induce and regulate
populations of uterine NK cells and T cells that promote implantation,
and persist beyond the first trimester to protect the placenta and fetus
from inflammatory injury (Table II).
Thus there is a high likelihood that exogenous corticosteroids sub-
stantially affect the peri-implantation immune response, impairing the
initial phase of immune recognition and responsiveness to the embryo.
This would be expected to impact the quality and strength of immune
tolerance generated, and capacity to support robust placentation, with
consequences for later pregnancy and fetal development. The known
and predicted effects of glucocorticoids on the implantation immune
response are summarized below and in Table I.
Influence on uterine NK cells
Uterine NK cells are the most prominent immune cells in the decidua at
implantation and are key regulators of the vascular changes that accom-
modate and support placental development. Their specific phenotype
and capacity to secrete angiogenic factors appears more critical than
absolute numbers (Lima et al., 2014; Moffett and Colucci, 2014).
Maternal immune recognition of paternally-derived MHC antigens asso-
ciated with trophoblasts of the implanting embryo is a determinant of
the functional phenotypes and changes in uterine NK cells associated
with receptivity to implantation (Moffett and Colucci, 2014).
Some authors report elevated numbers of uterine NK cells and/or
lower percentages of the characteristic CD56 bright CD16-phenotype,
with elevated CD56 dim CD16+ cells in patients with recurrent miscar-
riage (Quenby et al., 1999) and poor IVF outcome (Fukui et al., 1999).
Others are unable to demonstrate a relationship between uterine NK
cells and repeated implantation failures after IVF (Matteo et al., 2007),
and normal variance in numbers over the luteal phase contributes to dif-
ferences between studies (Russell et al., 2013).
2166
Robertson et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 ..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Table I Glucocorticoid-sensitive immune cells contributing to implantation success.
Immune
cell lineage
Requirement for fertility (mouse studies)
Link with infertility in women
Demonstrated/predicted effect of glucocorticoids
Uterine
natural killer
cells (uNK
cells)
Deficiency leads to deficient uterine arterial modification,
abnormal uterine blood flow and compromised placentation,
in utero growth restriction, altered development in offspring
(Lima et al., 2014; Moffett and Colucci, 2014).
uNK cell activation in response to fetal MHC alloantigen is
required to maximize uNK function and decidual blood vessel
modification (Madeja et al., 2011).
uNK cells phenotype is altered in recurrent miscarriage, with
increased CD56dim CD16+ uNKs and decreased CD56bright
CD16- uNK cells (Lachapelle et al., 1996; Vassiliadou et al.,
1999).
uNK cell phenotype is altered in infertile women with
unsuccessful IVF cycles, compared with successful IVF cycles
(Fukui et al., 1999).
NK cells may be elevated in peripheral blood of women with
repeated IVF failure (Thum et al., 2004; Sacks et al., 2012).
uNK cells in mid-luteal endometrium are reduced in number
after prednisolone treatment (Quenby et al., 2005).
DCs
DCs orchestrate and control the adaptive immune
compartment and drive the generation of inducible Treg cells
to suppress inflammation and mediate immune tolerance of
fetal antigens (Blois et al., 2007; Moldenhauer et al., 2009).
Depletion of uterine DCs results in aberrant decidual
vascularization, impaired implantation and anomalies in
placental development (Plaks et al., 2008).
DCs interact with uNK cells to mutually influence phenotype
(Blois et al., 2011).
Reduced capacity for CD14+DC-SIGN+ antigen presenting
cells to drive Treg cell differentiation is likely cause of fewer
inducible Treg cells in preeclampsia (Hsu et al., 2012).
MHCII+ cells (putative dendritic cells) are elevated in the non-
pregnant endometrium of women prone to recurrent
miscarriage (Quenby et al., 1999).
Numbers of endometrial dendritic cells correlate positively
with pregnancy success after endometrial biopsy (Gnainsky
et al., 2010).
Corticosteroids alter phenotype, inhibit maturation and
suppress antigen-presenting function of DCs (Andre et al.,
2009; Segerer et al., 2009).
Corticosteroids impair the ability of DCs to activate T cells and
shift the balance of Th1, Th2 and Treg cells induced
(Franchimont, 2004).
Macrophages Macrophages with an M2 phenotype are required for embryo
implantation, ovarian progesterone synthesis and fetal
development (Pollard, 2009; Care et al., 2013).
CD14+ macrophages are elevated in the non-pregnant
endometrium of women prone to recurrent miscarriage
(Quenby et al., 1999).
Numbers of endometrial macrophages correlate positively with
pregnancy success after endometrial biopsy (Gnainsky et al.,
2010).
Corticosteroids depress myeloid hemopoiesis, inhibiting
macrophage generation and activity (Boumpas et al., 1993).
Corticosteroids shift macrophage phenotype from M1 to M2,
promote phagocytosis, inhibit MHC II expression, block
synthesis of cytokines, prostaglandins and leukotrienes, and
depress tumoricidal and microbicidal activity (Franchimont,
2004).
T cells
Treg cells are essential for implantation and successful
pregnancy(Guerin et al., 2011).
Treg cells interact with NK cells and DCs to influence vascular
adaptation and placental development (Blois et al., 2011).
Antigen-specific peripheral (inducible) T cells arise in lymph
nodes after immune activation to seminal fluid at coitus
(Moldenhauer et al., 2009; Guerin et al., 2011).
Number and suppressive function of decidual Treg cells is
increased by HLA-C mismatch, consistent with requirement
for antigen-driven activation (Tilburgs et al., 2009).
Unexplained infertility and recurrent miscarriage are linked with
altered decidual T cells (Lachapelle et al., 1996; Piccinni et al.,
1998) and reduced Treg cells in peripheral blood and decidua
(Sasaki et al., 2004; Jasper et al., 2006; Winger and Reed,
2011).
Corticosteroids suppress cellular (Th1) immunity and promote
humoral (Th2) immunity (Franchimont, 2004).
Corticosteroids may favor generation of Treg cells to promote
immune tolerance (Franchimont, 2004; Chen et al., 2006).
Treg cells, Regulatory T cells; DCs, dendritic cells; MHC, major histocompatibility.
2167
Corticosteroid therapy in assisted reproduction
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 For convenience, it has become increasingly common to examine
peripheral blood NK cells in women with sub-fertility or history of
recurrent implantation failure, rather than performing an endometrial
biopsy (Thum et al., 2004; Sacks et al., 2012). This approach has two
main shortcomings. Firstly, uterine NK cells are phenotypically differ-
ent from those in peripheral blood and there is no strong correlation
between them. Secondly, the percentage of CD56+ NK cells in per-
ipheral blood in healthy individuals vary hugely, so thresholds for
‘abnormal’ values are set arbitrarily. Recent meta-analyses confirm a
lack of robust evidence to support measuring uterine NK cells either in
peripheral blood or the uterus as clinically useful in predicting infertility
or miscarriage (Seshadri and Sunkara, 2014).
Uterine NK cells express GR, implying that exogenous corticosteroids
act directly on this cell population (Henderson et al., 2003; Tang et al.,
2013). Reduced capacity to attenuate cortisol synthesis in decidual stro-
mal cells may contribute to aberrant uterine NK cells (Kuroda et al.,
2013). A prospective study in 75 women with recurrent miscarriage
demonstrated that after 20 mg of prednisolone on Days 1–21 of the
cycle, numbers of uterine NK cell populations in mid-luteal endomet-
rium were reduced from a median value of 14% before treatment to 9%
afterwards (Quenby et al., 2005). This study has been interpreted as evi-
dence that prednisolone treatment benefits pregnancy success in
women with elevated uterine NK cells and reproductive failure, by sup-
pressing uterine NK cells. However, since pregnancy success and uter-
ine NK cells were not measured in the same women, the causal
relationship remains unproven. Moreover, the effects on uterine NK cell
phenotype have not been examined. This result raises the prospect that
in many women where uterine NK cells are not dysregulated, exogen-
ous glucocorticoids could reduce uterine NK cell numbers and impact
function to interfere with placental vascular adaptation.
Influence on DCs in the endometrium
DCs, the major antigen presenting cells in the endometrium, are
essential for embryo implantation. In the peri-implantation phase, DCs
are recruited into decidual tissues and localize around the implantation
site, representing around 5–10% of all uterine leukocytes.
The specific effect of glucocorticoids on endometrial DCs and the
consequences for embryo implantation have not been investigated.
However, studies on DCs from other tissue sources show consistent
effects. Glucocorticoids impact the function of monocyte-derived DCs
and induce bias towards a tolerance-inducing DC phenotype (Segerer
et al., 2009). Several studies reveal that DCs acquire altered abilities to
support T cell responses after exposure to glucocorticoids, reducing
their overall capacity to stimulate T cell responses and shifting the bal-
ance of T cell subsets in the immune response (Franchimont, 2004).
Glucocorticoids inhibit maturation of DCs by reducing expression of
adhesion and co-stimulatory molecules, suppressing priming and acti-
vation of T effector cells (Andre et al., 2009). Thus it seems likely that
in early pregnancy, exogenous glucocorticoids could impact the cap-
acity of endometrial DCs to take up and process antigens that are
required to stimulate the adaptive immune response to pregnancy
causing alterations to the strength and shape of the T cell response.
Mouse studies also implicate DCs in promoting decidual vascular
development (Plaks et al., 2008) (Table I) and the effects of glucocorti-
coids on this aspect of their function is unknown.
Influence on macrophages
in the endometrium
Macrophages constitute 20–30% of decidual cells and contribute with
dendritic cells to regulating the innate immune response as well as
angiogenesis and tissue remodeling at the site of implantation.
Decidual macrophages are polarized towards an M2-type phenotype,
linked with tissue repair, resolution of inflammation and immunosup-
pression and are implicated in supporting placental morphogenesis
and sustaining immune tolerance toward fetal antigens (Nagamatsu
and Schust, 2010). In the peri-conception period, cytokines released
by macrophages interact with epithelial cells to induce changes to sur-
face
glycosylated
structures
required
for
embryo
attachment
(Nakamura et al., 2012). Over the course of pregnancy macrophages
remain in high abundance in gestational tissues with roles in tissue
restructuring and rapid clearance of apoptotic cells to prevent aberrant
immune activation against fetal alloantigens (Abrahams et al., 2004).
The effect of glucocorticoids on macrophages depends on the
dose and locality of contact. In general terms, glucocorticoids
depress myeloid hemopoiesis, antagonize differentiation of macro-
phages and inhibit their movement into peripheral tissues (Boumpas
et al., 1993). Endogenously produced glucocorticoids steer macro-
phage differentiation towards the M2 phenotype, enhancing phago-
cytosis and antigen uptake, but inhibiting expression of class II
MHC antigens, downregulating release of cytokines IL-1, IL-6 and
TNF, depressing release of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins and
leukotrienes, and inhibiting tumoricidal and microbicidal activity
(Franchimont, 2004).
Endometrial macrophages express GR during the secretory and
menstrual but not proliferative phases, and GR expression correlates
with induction of CXCL2, a potent chemokine and angiogenic factor
induced by cortisol in macrophages (Thiruchelvam et al., 2016). In
appropriate sites and concentrations endogenously produced gluco-
corticoids may assist generation of the M2 phenotype implicated in
endometrial receptivity, but chronic or excessive glucocorticoid
Table II Summary of key points
Immune activation with controlled inflammation is essential for embryo
implantation and progression of pregnancy.
Suppression of immune function is likely to interfere with implantation
and compromise placental development in most women.
Immune cells promote endometrial receptivity through promoting
attachment competence, stimulating vascular remodeling and generating
immune tolerance.
Glucocorticoid administration can reasonably be linked with both
beneficial and harmful effects on fertility and pregnancy, presumably
depending on immune parameters in individual women.
Glucocorticoids are not indicated in women with recurrent miscarriage
or repeated IVF failure unless autoimmune antibodies are evident.
Administration of glucocorticoids in the absence of autoimmunity does
not improve implantation rates and is a risk to healthy pregnancy
outcome.
Well-powered clinical studies with comprehensive analysis of
endometrial immune parameters are required to define whether and
which specific subgroups of women may be responsive to
glucocorticoid treatment.
2168
Robertson et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 exposure would be predicted to suppress macrophage generation,
affecting necessary pro-inflammatory, immune regulatory and angio-
genic functions at implantation.
Influence on regulatory T cell
in the endometrium
T cells make up a smaller proportion of decidual leukocytes but their roles
are instrumental in implantation and placental development. In particular,
T cells of the Treg phenotype identified on the basis of their expression of
the signature transcription factor Foxp3 are crucial for mediating immune
tolerance and suppressing inflammation (Guerin et al., 2009).
Generation of Treg cells for implantation requires an active process of
antigen presentation and T cell activation, which begins in the pro-
inflammatory peri-conception phase with seminal fluid contact and
depends on the actions of tolerogenic dendritic cells (Guerin et al.,
2009). An increase in Treg cells is evident in early pregnancy decidua
with a peak phase at the second trimester (Mjosberg et al., 2009).
Observations in women after coitus are consistent with a priming role
for seminal fluid in activating T cells before embryo implantation
(Sharkey et al., 2012). Reproductive conditions including unexplained
infertility and recurrent miscarriage have been linked with impaired
recruitment of Treg cells, or insufficient differentiation of uterine T cells
into Treg cells (Jasper et al., 2006; Winger and Reed, 2011).
To date, no studies have investigated the impact of peri-
implantation corticosteroid therapy on T cells in the endometrium.
However, several studies indicate dramatic effects on T cell prolifer-
ation, activation and function in other tissues and conditions. In general
terms, prednisolone reduces T cell counts by suppressing generation
of T effector cells that mediate immunity and inflammation, while pro-
moting humoral immunity (Franchimont, 2004). Chronic administra-
tion achieves sustained effects on T cells that rebound once
prednisolone is withdrawn (Hanson et al., 1986).
Several small studies suggest glucocorticoids elevate the frequency
of Treg cells in patients with a wide range of autoimmune diseases
(Franchimont, 2004; Chen et al., 2006; Suarez et al., 2006; Azab et al.,
2008). The improved number and suppressive function in Treg cells
after glucocorticoid administration might be secondary to elevated tol-
erogenic DC function (Luther et al., 2009). However, whether this
reflects a true expansion or simply a shift in the balance of T cell
subsets is unclear. Some studies show an opposite effect, for example,
14 days of prednisolone administration did not induce any increase in
the frequency of circulating Treg cells or their functional competence
(Sbiera et al., 2011). A concern in the reproductive setting is that pred-
nisolone would interfere with the process of Treg cell generation espe-
cially when given during the critical peri-conception phase.
Influence on endometrial angiogenesis
The effects of prednisolone are not limited to immune cells.
Establishing pregnancy is highly dependent on the proper coordination
of several vascular processes at the maternal-fetal interface to ensure
sufficient blood supply to allow optimal placental development.
Inappropriate blood vessel development and blood flow characteris-
tics have been associated with recurrent reproductive failure (Quenby
et al., 2009). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and a range of
other angiogenic factors synthesized by macrophages, dendritic cells
and other cell lineages in the endometrium are potentially differentially
regulated by glucocorticoid exposure (Rhen and Cidlowski, 2005).
Expression of GR suggests direct effects of glucocorticoids in endothe-
lial cells (Henderson et al., 2003) to suppress angiogenesis (Rae et al.,
2009) while indirect effects mediated via endometrial macrophages
may promote angiogenesis (Thiruchelvam et al., 2016).
In women with recurrent miscarriage, prednisolone treatment was
demonstrated to decrease expression of angiogenic factors and
decrease vessel maturation in non-pregnant endometrium (Lash et al.,
2011). Similarly, suppression of VEGF production in ovarian follicles is
thought to explain a possible effect of methylprednisolone administra-
tion in protecting against severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in
women undergoing IVF (Lainas et al., 2002). Effects of glucocorticoids
on macrophage prostaglandin synthesis would be expected to further
attenuate vascular permeability.
Potential impact on immune adaptation
for pregnancy
Of the different leukocyte subsets residing in the endometrium and
ovary, effects of prednisolone administration have been specifically
Figure 1 Potential effects of glucocorticoids on immune cells in the
peri-implantation endometrium. Immune cells including T cells, NK
cells, dendritic cells and macrophages are all required for embryo
implantation and robust placental development. Glucocorticoids
affect the generation, recruitment, activation phenotypes and function
of different immune cells in various ways, as shown. NK, natural killer;
VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; PDGF, platelet-derived
growth factor; TGFB, transforming growth factor β; MHC, major
histocompatibility; IL, interleukin; TH, T helper; Treg, regulatory
T cells; tDC, tolerogenic dendritic cells.
2169
Corticosteroid therapy in assisted reproduction
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 evaluated only for uterine NK cells. The responses of endometrial
T cells, DCs and macrophages are unknown. The effects of prednisol-
one on immune cells in other tissues imply similar actions would occur
in reproductive tissues, although effects in a given individual would be
attenuated by a range of genetic and constitutional factors and expo-
sures that influence immune status. It can be predicted that for many
women with a healthy immune response, exogenous corticosteroids
would affect a wide range of endometrial immune cell types in such a
way as to impact endometrial receptivity, generation of immune toler-
ance, and the vascular adaptations necessary for successful implant-
ation and robust placental development (Fig. 1). In most women,
suppression of peri-conception inflammation might well result in
diminished leukocyte recruitment, perturbation in the phenotypes of
macrophages and dendritic cells, a suppressed T cell response result-
ing in altered Treg cell-mediated tolerance and reduced synthesis of
angiogenic factors. In contrast, it is feasible that in women disposed
towards excessive inflammation and immunity, or insufficient endogen-
ous cortisol synthesis, prednisolone could result in attenuation of the
immune response and a shift in the balance of immune response
towards M2 macrophages, tolerogenic DCs and a stronger Treg cell
response. Clearly more targeted studies are required to specifically
analyze the effects of prednisolone on immune responses in the endo-
metrium and its interaction with other clinical features.
Risk of Adverse Effects in
Women and Infants
To date, there has been no randomized prospective study to evaluate
the effect of first trimester peri-implantation corticosteroid administra-
tion on health of IVF children. Prednisolone maintains a Category D
rating with the Food and Drug Administration in the USA as ‘There is
positive evidence of human fetal risk based on adverse reaction data
from investigational or marketing experience or studies in humans, but
potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women
despite potential risks’, which indicates routine administration is not
indicated.
There is substantial evidence from animal studies that prolonged or
excessive glucocorticoid exposure causes fetal growth impairment and
programming of cardiovascular, metabolic and neuroendocrine disor-
ders (Seckl and Meaney, 2004) with teratogenic effects (Pinsky and
Digeorge, 1965). The literature specifically identifies early pregnancy
as a vulnerable phase for glucocorticoid exposure. Interestingly, stud-
ies in humans demonstrate that high circulating levels of endogenous
maternal cortisol during pregnancy correlate negatively with birth-
weight and program higher blood pressure, altered brain structure and
behavioral disorders in children (Reynolds et al., 2013).
First trimester administration of exogenous corticosteroids in IVF
cycles might well impart similar effects on fetal development by direct
effects of corticosteroids after placental transfer to the fetus and/or
perturbation of the maternal immune response. Since macrophages
and other immune cells are elemental in developmental processes
affecting almost all tissues and systems (Pollard, 2009), altered num-
bers or function of fetal leukocytes would be expected to attenuate a
wide range of events in fetal growth and development. This would be
compounded by the higher affinity for GR of synthetic glucocorticoids
and their relative resistance to inactivation by placental 11βHSD2
(Fowden and Forhead, 2015).
Exogenous glucocorticoids are frequently utilized over the course of
pregnancy by women with autoimmune conditions resulting in fetal
exposure for the entire gestation. The outcomes reveal small but real
risks. In a prospective controlled study of 311 pregnancies with sys-
temic use of glucocorticoids spanning the first trimester, a 64%
increase in miscarriage and 2.1-fold increase in preterm births were
observed compared to control (Gur et al., 2004). An earlier study of
66 pregnant women with autoantibodies and recurrent miscarriage
administered prednisone in combination with aspirin for the duration
of pregnancy showed elevated risk of hypertension, diabetes mellitus
and premature birth (Laskin et al., 1997).
A small number of studies suggest risks potentially attributable to
first trimester exposure. In a large population-based case-control
study, a possible causal association between cleft lip and palate and
use of corticosteroids during the peri-implantation phase and 3 months
into pregnancy was identified (Carmichael and Shaw, 1999). A meta-
analysis of several studies confirmed that while corticosteroids do not
represent a major teratogenic risk, they convey a 3- to 4-fold increase
in oral cleft (Park-Wyllie et al., 2000). A further prospective study of
pregnancies with exposure to glucocorticoids in the first trimester
showed a major anomaly rate of 4.6% in exposed infants, compared to
2.6% of controls (Gur et al., 2004).
In summary, at the very least moderate effects on birthweight and
prematurity, with slightly elevated risk of orofacial cleft seem associated
with first trimester glucocorticoid exposure. Long-term follow-up stud-
ies of children born after first trimester glucocorticoid administration are
clearly required to investigate possible programming effects on cardio-
metabolic and neuroendocrine development, with analyzes of the effect
of dose and duration of treatment, and interactions with clinical and
environmental factors including stress exposure leading to elevated
endogenous cortisol. A clear distinction in risk/benefit analyses must be
made between women required to utilize glucocorticoids for auto-
immune or asthmatic conditions, compared to those where no preexist-
ing indication exists.
Conclusion
The important question of how exogenous glucocorticoids impact
physiologically normal immune activation and inflammatory events in
early pregnancy has not received adequate consideration. A range of
endometrial and decidual immune cells required for normal implant-
ation are likely to be differentially affected by corticosteroids, in ways
that for many women might impair implantation and harm placental
development and fetal growth. Regulation of immune function by
endogenous corticosteroids occurs naturally in the decidualised endo-
metrium to contribute to immune adaptation in pregnancy and in
some women, an impaired decidual response might justify exogenous
glucocorticoid support. Given emerging knowledge of effects of corti-
costeroids on immune function, other immune conditions such as
reduced capacity to generate endometrial Treg cells, might also
respond to tailored corticosteroid therapy in the pre- or peri-
implantation period. However, any routine use of systemic corticos-
teroids beyond the existing indication of autoimmunity must await the
outcome of well-designed randomized prospective studies, to define
2170
Robertson et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 specific subgroups of patients and diagnostic criteria that warrant cor-
ticosteroid administration. These must be accompanied by compre-
hensive analyses of the full range of specific immune parameters that
reasonably could be attenuated by corticosteroids, so that appropriate
treatment protocols can be developed for specific immune diagnoses.
In the absence of compelling evidence and rational justification, the
most prudent course of action must be to avoid corticosteroid use
until an evidence base is built. Future research should embrace a full
analysis of not just benefit, but potential risks on progression of preg-
nancy and outcomes for infants. Further investigation of the utility of
these drugs should be founded in a solid understanding of their mode
of action, and a clear rationale for their application in different clinical
settings.
Authors’ roles
S.A.R. critically analyzed literature and wrote the manuscript; M.J., D.Y.
and L.M.M. assembled and analyzed literature and wrote draft material;
M.J.D., M.L.H. and R.J.N. provided expert advice and contributed to
manuscript revision.
Funding
No external funds were used for this study.
Conflict of interest
None declared.
References
Abrahams VM, Kim YM, Straszewski SL, Romero R, Mor G. Macrophages
and apoptotic cell clearance during pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol
2004;51:275–282.
Aluvihare VR, Kallikourdis M, Betz AG. Regulatory T cells mediate mater-
nal tolerance to the fetus. Nat Immunol 2004;5:266–271.
Andre S, Tough DF, Lacroix-Desmazes S, Lacroix-Desmazes S, Kaveri SV,
Bayry J. Surveillance of antigen-presenting cells by CD4+ CD25+ regula-
tory T cells in autoimmunity: immunopathogenesis and therapeutic
implications. Am J Pathol 2009;174:1575–1587.
Azab NA, Bassyouni IH, Emad Y, Abd El-Wahab GA, Hamdy G, Mashahit
MA. CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells (TREG) in systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE) patients: the possible influence of treatment with corti-
costeroids. Clin Immunol 2008;127:151–157.
Bamberger AM, Milde-Langosch K, Loning T, Bamberger CM. The gluco-
corticoid receptor is specifically expressed in the stromal compart-
ment of the human endometrium. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;
86:5071–5074.
Blois SM, Kammerer U, Alba Soto C, Tometten MC, Shaikly V, Barrientos
G, Jurd R, Rukavina D, Thomson AW, Klapp BF et al. Dendritic cells:
key to fetal tolerance? Biol Reprod 2007;77:590–598.
Blois SM, Klapp BF, Barrientos G. Decidualization and angiogenesis in early
pregnancy: unravelling the functions of DC and NK cells. J Reprod
Immunol 2011;88:86–92.
Boomsma CM, Keay SD, Macklon NS. Peri-implantation glucocorticoid
administration for assisted reproductive technology cycles. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2012;6:CD005996.
Boumpas
DT,
Chrousos
GP,
Wilder
RL,
Cupps
TR,
Balow
JE.
Glucocorticoid therapy for immune-mediated diseases: basic and clinical
correlates. Ann Intern Med 1993;119:1198–1208.
Brosens I, Pijnenborg R, Vercruysse L, Romero R. The ‘Great Obstetrical
Syndromes’ are associated with disorders of deep placentation. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 2011;204:193–201.
Care AS, Diener KR, Jasper MJ, Brown HM, Ingman WV, Robertson SA.
Macrophages regulate corpus luteum development during embryo
implantation in mice. J Clin Invest 2013;123:3472–3487.
Carmichael SL, Shaw GM. Maternal corticosteroid use and risk of selected
congenital anomalies. Am J Med Genet 1999;86:242–244.
Chen X, Oppenheim JJ, Winkler-Pickett RT, Ortaldo JR, Howard OM.
Glucocorticoid amplifies IL-2-dependent expansion of functional FoxP3(+)
CD4(+)CD25(+) T regulatory cells in vivo and enhances their capacity to
suppress EAE. Eur J Immunol 2006;36:2139–2149.
Dekel N, Gnainsky Y, Granot I, Racicot K, Mor G. The role of
inflammation for a successful implantation. Am J Reprod Immunol
2014;72:141–147.
Duvan CI, Ozmen B, Satiroglu H, Atabekoglu CS, Berker B. Does addition
of low-dose aspirin and/or steroid as a standard treatment in non-
selected intracytoplasmic sperm injection cycles improve in vitro fertil-
ization success? A randomized, prospective, placebo-controlled study.
J Assist Reprod Genet 2006;23:15–21.
Fowden AL, Forhead AJ. Glucocorticoids as regulatory signals during intra-
uterine development. Exp Physiol 2015;100:1477–1487.
Fox C, Morin S, Jeong JW, Scott RT Jr, Lessey BA. Local and systemic
factors and implantation: what is the evidence? Fertil Steril 2016;
105:873–884.
Franchimont D. Overview of the actions of glucocorticoids on the immune
response: a good model to characterize new pathways of immuno-
suppression for new treatment strategies. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1024:
124–137.
Fukui A, Fujii S, Yamaguchi E, Kimura H, Sato S, Saito Y. Natural killer cell
subpopulations and cytotoxicity for infertile patients undergoing in vitro
fertilization. Am J Reprod Immunol 1999;41:413–422.
Geva E, Amit A, Lerner-Geva L, Yaron Y, Daniel Y, Schwartz T, Azem F,
Yovel I, Lessing JB. Prednisone and aspirin improve pregnancy rate in
patients with reproductive failure and autoimmune antibodies: a pro-
spective study. Am J Reprod Immunol 2000;43:36–40.
Gnainsky Y, Granot I, Aldo PB, Barash A, Or Y, Schechtman E, Mor G,
Dekel N. Local injury of the endometrium induces an inflammatory
response that promotes successful implantation. Fertil Steril 2010;94:
2030–2036.
Guerin LR, Moldenhauer LM, Prins JR, Bromfield JJ, Hayball JD, Robertson
SA. Seminal fluid regulates accumulation of FOXP3+ regulatory T cells
in the preimplantation mouse uterus through expanding the FOXP3+
cell pool and CCL19-mediated recruitment. Biol Reprod 2011;
85:397–408.
Guerin LR, Prins JR, Robertson SA. Regulatory T-cells and immune toler-
ance in pregnancy: a new target for infertility treatment? Hum Reprod
Update 2009;15:517–535.
Gur C, Diav-Citrin O, Shechtman S, Arnon J, Ornoy A. Pregnancy out-
come after first trimester exposure to corticosteroids: a prospective
controlled study. Reprod Toxicol 2004;18:93–101.
Hanson RG, Peters MG, Hoofnagle JH. Effects of immunosuppressive ther-
apy with prednisolone on B and T lymphocyte function in patients with
chronic type B hepatitis. Hepatology 1986;6:173–179.
Hasegawa I, Yamanoto Y, Suzuki M, Murakawa H, Kurabayashi T,
Takakuwa
K,
Tanaka
K.
Prednisolone
plus
low-dose
aspirin
improves the implantation rate in women with autoimmune condi-
tions
who
are
undergoing
in
vitro
fertilization.
Fertil
Steril
1998;70:1044–1048.
2171
Corticosteroid therapy in assisted reproduction
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Henderson TA, Saunders PT, Moffett-King A, Groome NP, Critchley HO.
Steroid receptor expression in uterine natural killer cells. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2003;88:440–449.
Hsu P, Santner-Nanan B, Dahlstrom JE, Fadia M, Chandra A, Peek M,
Nanan R. Altered decidual DC-SIGN+ antigen-presenting cells and
impaired regulatory T-cell induction in preeclampsia. Am J Pathol
2012;181:2149–2160.
Huppertz B. Placental origins of preeclampsia: challenging the current
hypothesis. Hypertension 2008;51:970–975.
Jasper MJ, Tremellen KP, Robertson SA. Primary unexplained infertility is
associated with reduced expression of the T-regulatory cell transcrip-
tion
factor
Foxp3
in
endometrial
tissue.
Mol
Hum
Reprod
2006;12:301–308.
Krigstein M, Sacks G. Prednisolone for repeated implantation failure
associated with high natural killer cell levels. J Obstet Gynaecol 2012;32:
518–519.
Kuroda K, Venkatakrishnan R, James S, Šucurovic S, Mulac-Jericevic B,
Lucas ES, Takeda S, Shmygol A, Brosens JJ, Quenby S. Elevated periim-
plantation uterine natural killer cell density in human endometrium is
associated with impaired corticosteroid signaling in decidualizing stromal
cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:4429–4437.
Kuroda K, Venkatakrishnan R, Salker MS, Lucas ES, Shaheen F, Kuroda M,
Blanks A, Christian M, Quenby S, Brosens JJ. Induction of 11beta-HSD 1
and activation of distinct mineralocorticoid receptor- and glucocorticoid
receptor-dependent gene networks in decidualizing human endometrial
stromal cells. Mol Endocrinol 2013;27:192–202.
Lachapelle MH, Miron P, Hemmings R, Roy DC. Endometrial T, B, and NK
cells in patients with recurrent spontaneous abortion. Altered profile
and pregnancy outcome. J Immunol 1996;156:4027–4034.
Lainas T, Petsas G, Stavropoulou G, Alexopoulou E, Iliadis G, Minaretzis D.
Administration of methylprednisolone to prevent severe ovarian hypersti-
mulation syndrome in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril
2002;78:529–533.
Lash GE, Bulmer JN, Innes BA, Drury JA, Robson SC, Quenby S.
Prednisolone treatment reduces endometrial spiral artery development
in women with recurrent miscarriage. Angiogenesis 2011;14:523–532.
Laskin CA, Bombardier C, Hannah ME, Mandel FP, Ritchie JW, Farewell V,
Farine D, Spitzer K, Fielding L, Soloninka CA et al. Prednisone and aspirin
in women with autoantibodies and unexplained recurrent fetal loss.
N Engl J Med 1997;337:148–153.
Lee KA, Koo JJ, Yoon TK, Do BR, Ko JJ, Cha KY. Immunosuppression by
corticosteroid has no effect on the pregnancy rate in routine in-vitro fer-
tilization/embryo transfer patients. Hum Reprod 1994;9:1832–1835.
Lessey BA. Assessment of endometrial receptivity. Fertil Steril 2011;96:
522–529.
Lima PD, Zhang J, Dunk C, Lye SJ, Croy BA. Leukocyte driven-decidual
angiogenesis in early pregnancy. Cell Mol Immunol 2014;11:522–537.
Luther
C,
Adamopoulou
E,
Stoeckle
C,
Brucklacher-Waldert
V,
Rosenkranz D, Stoltze L, Lauer S, Poeschel S, Melms A, Tolosa E.
Prednisolone treatment induces tolerogenic dendritic cells and a regula-
tory milieu in myasthenia gravis patients. J Immunol 2009;183:841–848.
Macklon NS, Brosens JJ. The human endometrium as a sensor of embryo
quality. Biol Reprod 2014;91:98.
Madeja Z, Yadi H, Apps R, Boulenouar S, Roper SJ, Gardner L, Moffett A,
Colucci F, Hemberger M. Paternal MHC expression on mouse tropho-
blast affects uterine vascularization and fetal growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2011;108:4012–4017.
Matteo MG, Greco P, Rosenberg P, Mestice A, Baldini D, Falagario T,
Martino V, Santodirocco M, Massenzio F, Castellana L et al. Normal per-
centage of CD56bright natural killer cells in young patients with a history
of repeated unexplained implantation failure after in vitro fertilization
cycles. Fertil Steril 2007;88:990–993.
Michael AE, Papageorghiou AT. Potential significance of physiological and
pharmacological glucocorticoids in early pregnancy. Hum Reprod Update
2008;14:497–517.
Mjosberg J, Svensson J, Johansson E, Hellström L, Casas R, Jenmalm MC,
Boij R, Matthiesen L, Jönsson JI, Berg G et al. Systemic reduction of func-
tionally suppressive CD4dimCD25highFoxp3+ Tregs in human second
trimester pregnancy is induced by progesterone and 17beta-estradiol.
J Immunol 2009;183:759–769.
Moffett A, Colucci F. Uterine NK cells: active regulators at the maternal-
fetal interface. J Clin Invest 2014;124:1872–1879.
Moffett A, Shreeve N. First do no harm: uterine natural killer (NK) cells in
assisted reproduction. Hum Reprod 2015;30:1519–1525.
Moffitt D, Queenan JT Jr, Veeck LL, Schoolcraft W, Miller CE, Muasher SJ.
Low-dose glucocorticoids after in vitro fertilization and embryo trans-
fer have no significant effect on pregnancy rate. Fertil Steril 1995;63:
571–577.
Moldenhauer LM, Diener KR, Thring DM, Brown MP, Hayball JD,
Robertson SA. Cross-presentation of male seminal fluid antigens elicits
T cell activation to initiate the female immune response to pregnancy.
J Immunol 2009;182:8080–8093.
Mor G, Cardenas I, Abrahams V, Guller S. Inflammation and pregnancy:
the role of the immune system at the implantation site. Ann NY Acad Sci
2011;1221:80–87.
Motteram C, Vollenhoven B, Hope N, Osianlis T, Rombauts LJ. Live birth
rates after combined adjuvant therapy in IVF-ICSI cycles: a matched
case-control study. Reprod Biomed Online 2015;30:340–348.
Nagamatsu T, Schust DJ. The contribution of macrophages to normal and
pathological pregnancies. Am J Reprod Immunol 2010;63:460–471.
Nakamura H, Jasper MJ, Hull ML, Aplin JD, Robertson SA. Macrophages
regulate expression of alpha1,2-fucosyltransferase genes in human endo-
metrial epithelial cells. Mol Hum Reprod 2012;18:204–215.
Ogasawara M, Aoki K. Successful uterine steroid therapy in a case with a
history of ten miscarriages. Am J Reprod Immunol 2000;44:253–255.
Park-Wyllie L, Mazzotta P, Pastuszak A, Moretti ME, Beique L, Hunnisett L,
Friesen MH, Jacobson S, Kasapinovic S, Chang D et al. Birth defects after
maternal exposure to corticosteroids: prospective cohort study and
meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Teratology 2000;62:385–392.
Piccinni MP, Beloni L, Livi C, Maggi E, Scarselli G, Romagnani S. Defective
production of both leukemia inhibitory factor and type 2 T-helper cyto-
kines by decidual T cells in unexplained recurrent abortions. Nat Med
1998;4:1020–1024.
Pijnenborg R, Vercruysse L, Hanssens M. Fetal-maternal conflict, tropho-
blast invasion, preeclampsia, and the red queen. Hypertens Pregnancy
2008;27:183–196.
Pinsky L, Digeorge AM. Cleft palate in the mouse: a teratogenic index of
glucocorticoid potency. Science 1965;147:402–403.
Plaks V, Birnberg T, Berkutzki T, Sela S, BenYashar A, Kalchenko V, Mor G,
Keshet E, Dekel N, Neeman M et al. Uterine DCs are crucial for decidua
formation during embryo implantation in mice. J Clin Invest 2008;
118:3954–3965.
Polak de Fried E, Blanco L, Lancuba S, Asch RH. Improvement of clinical
pregnancy rate and implantation rate of in-vitro fertilization-embryo
transfer patients by using methylprednisone. Hum Reprod 1993;8:
393–395.
Pollard JW. Trophic macrophages in development and disease. Nat Rev
Immunol 2009;9:259–270.
Quenby S, Bates M, Doig T, Brewster J, Lewis-Jones DI, Johnson PM,
Vince G. Pre-implantation endometrial leukocytes in women with recur-
rent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 1999;14:2386–2391.
Quenby S, Farquharson R, Young M, Vince G. Successful pregnancy out-
come following 19 consecutive miscarriages: case report. Hum Reprod
2003;18:2562–2564.
2172
Robertson et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Quenby S, Kalumbi C, Bates M, Farquharson R, Vince G. Prednisolone
reduces preconceptual endometrial natural killer cells in women with
recurrent miscarriage. Fertil Steril 2005;84:980–984.
Quenby S, Nik H, Innes B, Lash G, Turner M, Drury J, Bulmer J. Uterine
natural killer cells and angiogenesis in recurrent reproductive failure.
Hum Reprod 2009;24:45–54.
Rae M, Mohamad A, Price D, Hadoke PW, Walker BR, Mason JI, Hillier
SG, Critchley HO. Cortisol inactivation by 11beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase-2 may enhance endometrial angiogenesis via reduced
thrombospondin-1 in heavy menstruation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2009;94:1443–1450.
Redman CW, Sargent IL. Immunology of pre-eclampsia. Am J Reprod
Immunol 2010;63:534–543.
Revelli A, Casano S, Piane LD, Grassi G, Gennarelli G, Guidetti D,
Massobrio M. A retrospective study on IVF outcome in euthyroid patients
with anti-thyroid antibodies: effects of levothyroxine, acetyl-salicylic acid
and prednisolone adjuvant treatments. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2009;7:137.
Revelli A, Dolfin E, Gennarelli G, Ghaemmaghami P, Räikkönen K. Low-
dose acetylsalicylic acid plus prednisolone as an adjuvant treatment in
IVF: a prospective, randomized study. Fertil Steril 2008;90:1685–1691.
Reynolds RM, Labad J, Buss C, Ghaemmaghami P, Räikkönen K.
Transmitting biological effects of stress in utero: implications for mother
and offspring. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013;38:1843–1849.
Rhen T, Cidlowski JA. Antiinflammatory action of glucocorticoids–new
mechanisms for old drugs. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1711–1723.
Robertson
SA.
Immune
regulation
of
conception
and
embryo
implantation-all about quality control? J Reprod Immunol 2010;85:51–57.
Robertson SA, Petroff M, Hunt JS. Chapter 41: The Immunology of
Pregnancy. In: Plant TM, Zeleznik A (eds). Knobil and Neill’s Physiology of
Reproduction, 4th edn. Ireland: Elsevier, 2014;1835–1874.
Russell P, Sacks G, Tremellen K, Gee A. The distribution of immune cells
and macrophages in the endometrium of women with recurrent repro-
ductive failure. III: Further observations and reference ranges. Pathology
2013;45:393–401.
Sacks G, Yang Y, Gowen E, Smith S, Fay L, Chapman M. Detailed analysis
of peripheral blood natural killer cells in women with repeated IVF fail-
ure. Am J Reprod Immunol 2012;67:434–442.
Sargent IL, Borzychowski AM, Redman CW. NK cells and human
pregnancy–an inflammatory view. Trends Immunol 2006;27:399–404.
Sasaki Y, Sakai M, Miyazaki S, Higuma S, Shiozaki A, Saito S. Decidual and per-
ipheral blood CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells in early pregnancy subjects
and spontaneous abortion cases. Mol Hum Reprod 2004;10:347–353.
Sbiera S, Dexneit T, Reichardt SD, Michel KD, van den Brandt J, Schmull S,
Kraus L, Beyer M, Mlynski R, Wortmann S et al. Influence of short-term
glucocorticoid therapy on regulatory T cells in vivo. PLoS One 2011;6:
e24345.
Seckl JR, Meaney MJ. Glucocorticoid programming. Ann NY Acad Sci
2004;1032:63–84.
Segerer SE, Muller N, van den Brandt J, Kapp M, Dietl J, Reichardt HM,
Rieger L, Kämmerer U. Impact of female sex hormones on the matur-
ation and function of human dendritic cells. Am J Reprod Immunol
2009;62:165–173.
Seshadri S, Sunkara SK. Natural killer cells in female infertility and recurrent
miscarriage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update
2014;20:429–438.
Sharkey DJ, Tremellen KP, Jasper MJ, Gemzell-Danielsson K, Robertson
SA. Seminal fluid induces leukocyte recruitment and cytokine and che-
mokine mRNA expression in the human cervix after coitus. J Immunol
2012;188:2445–2454.
Suarez A, Lopez P, Gomez J, Gutiérrez C. Enrichment of CD4+ CD25
high T cell population in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
treated with glucocorticoids. Ann Rheum Dis 2006;65:1512–1517.
Tang AW, Alfirevic Z, Turner MA, Drury JA, Small R, Quenby S. A feasibil-
ity trial of screening women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage for
high uterine natural killer cell density and randomizing to prednisolone
or placebo when pregnant. Hum Reprod 2013;28:1743–1752.
Thiruchelvam U, Maybin JA, Armstrong GM, Greaves E, Saunders PT,
Critchley HO. Cortisol regulates the paracrine action of macrophages
by inducing vasoactive gene expression in endometrial cells. J Leukoc Biol
2016;99:1165–1171.
Thum MY, Bhaskaran S, Abdalla HI, Ford B, Sumar N, Shehata H, Bansal
AS. An increase in the absolute count of CD56dimCD16+CD69+ NK
cells in the peripheral blood is associated with a poorer IVF treatment
and pregnancy outcome. Hum Reprod 2004;19:2395–2400.
Tilburgs T, Scherjon SA, van der Mast BJ, Haasnoot GW, Versteeg VD,
Voort-Maarschalk M, Roelen DL, van Rood JJ, Claas FH. Fetal-
maternal HLA-C mismatch is associated with decidual T cell activation
and induction of functional T regulatory cells. J Reprod Immunol
2009;82:148–157.
Ubaldi F, Rienzi L, Ferrero S, Anniballo R, Iacobelli M, Cobellis L, Greco E.
Low dose prednisolone administration in routine ICSI patients does
not
improve
pregnancy
and
implantation
rates.
Hum
Reprod
2002;17:1544–1547.
van Mourik MS, Macklon NS, Heijnen CJ. Embryonic implantation: cyto-
kines, adhesion molecules, and immune cells in establishing an implant-
ation environment. J Leukoc Biol 2009;85:4–19.
Vassiliadou N, Searle RF, Bulmer JN. Elevated expression of activation
molecules by decidual lymphocytes in women suffering spontaneous
early pregnancy loss. Hum Reprod 1999;14:1194–1200.
Whirledge SD, Oakley RH, Myers PH, Lydon JP, DeMayo F, Cidlowski JA.
Uterine glucocorticoid receptors are critical for fertility in mice through
control of embryo implantation and decidualization. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2015;112:15166–71.
Winger EE, Reed JL. Low circulating CD4(+) CD25(+) Foxp3(+) T regula-
tory cell levels predict miscarriage risk in newly pregnant women with a
history of failure. Am J Reprod Immunol 2011;66:320–328.
2173
Corticosteroid therapy in assisted reproduction
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article-abstract/31/10/2164/2198168 by guest on 02 June 2019
