 Plasmodium-associated changes in human odor
attract mosquitoes
Ailie Robinsona,1, Annette O. Busulab,c,2, Mirjam A. Voetsb, Khalid B. Beshira, John C. Caulfieldd, Stephen J. Powerse,
Niels O. Verhulstb,3, Peter Winskillf, Julian Muwanguzia, Michael A. Birkettd, Renate C. Smallegangeb, Daniel K. Masigag,
W. Richard Mukabanah,i, Robert W. Sauerweinj, Colin J. Sutherlanda, Teun Bousemaa,j, John A. Pickettd,1,4,
Willem Takkenb, James G. Logana,1, and Jetske G. de Boerb,1,5
aFaculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, WC1E 7HT London, United Kingdom; bLaboratory of
Entomology, Wageningen University & Research, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands; cHuman Health, International Centre of Insect Physiology and
Ecology, Nairobi, Kenya; dBiointeractions and Crop Protection, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ Hertfordshire, United Kingdom; eComputational
and Analytical Sciences, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ Hertfordshire, United Kingdom; fMRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling,
Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, W2 1NY London, United Kingdom; gAnimal Health, International Centre of Insect
Physiology and Ecology, Nairobi, Kenya; hSchool of Biological Sciences, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya; iDepartment of Production Ecology, Science for
Health, Nairobi, Kenya; and jMedical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Centre, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Contributed by John A. Pickett, March 14, 2018 (sent for review December 13, 2017; reviewed by David L. Denlinger and Ana Rivero)
Malaria parasites (Plasmodium) can change the attractiveness of their
vertebrate hosts to Anopheles vectors, leading to a greater number
of vector–host contacts and increased transmission. Indeed, naturally
Plasmodium-infected children have been shown to attract more mos-
quitoes than parasite-free children. Here, we demonstrate Plasmo-
dium-induced increases in the attractiveness of skin odor in Kenyan
children and reveal quantitative differences in the production of spe-
cific odor components in infected vs. parasite-free individuals. We
found the aldehydes heptanal, octanal, and nonanal to be produced
in greater amounts by infected individuals and detected by mosquito
antennae. In behavioral experiments, we demonstrated that these,
and other, Plasmodium-induced aldehydes enhanced the attractive-
ness of a synthetic odor blend mimicking “healthy” human odor.
Heptanal alone increased the attractiveness of “parasite-free” natu-
ral human odor. Should the increased production of these aldehydes
by Plasmodium-infected humans lead to increased mosquito bit-
ing in a natural setting, this would likely affect the transmission
of malaria.
malaria transmission | host attractiveness | parasite–vector–host
interactions | aldehydes | disease biomarkers
P
arasite transmission often constitutes a population bottle-
neck: Of the many parasites within one host, only a few are
successfully transmitted to the next (1). Hence, parasites often
evolve to exert influence over the transmission events. The
malaria parasite Plasmodium would benefit from increasing its
infected vertebrate host’s attractiveness to susceptible Anopheles
mosquito vectors, if this resulted in increased contact rates be-
tween the two hosts. Such changes in attractiveness have been
demonstrated in both animal (2–6) and human (7–9) malaria
systems, as well as in other vector-borne disease systems (10–13).
While manipulation of the “attractiveness” phenotype by the
parasite has been suggested (5–9), it is difficult to disentangle
this from some by-product of infection that fortuitously leads to
increased host attractiveness and subsequently transmission.
Body odor, comprising the volatile compounds emitted from the
skin of vertebrates, is the most important cue used by Anopheles
for host location (14). It has been shown that differences in the
composition of skin odor are responsible for the variation in
attractiveness to biting insects known to exist between people
(15, 16), and these differences may be influenced by body
weight and/or surface area, hormones, or genetic factors (17–
19). Human body odor can also be influenced by disease, in-
cluding metabolic disorders, genetic disorders, and infections
(20). A study of Plasmodium infection in mice found such
changes in body odor to be associated with changes in attrac-
tiveness to mosquitoes (6), and another found compositional
changes in skin odor during controlled human malaria infection
(CHMI), with a variable effect on attractiveness (21). While
increased attractiveness of Plasmodium-infected individuals
has been demonstrated in a malaria-endemic setting (9), re-
markably, no study has yet investigated the skin chemistry un-
derlying this phenomenon. Given the crucial importance of body
odor to mosquito host location, and the proposition that body
odor can be altered during disease, here, we hypothesize that in-
fection with Plasmodium parasites changes the odor of humans
and that this influences attractiveness of humans to mosquitoes.
To test this hypothesis, we first confirmed that asymptomatic
Significance
In vector-borne disease systems, there is mounting evidence
that vertebrate hosts become more attractive to disease vectors
during infection, yet in human malaria, the underlying mecha-
nism has not been studied. We identified compounds, including
aldehydes, that are produced in relatively greater amounts in
the skin odor of individuals with malaria, thus demonstrating a
basis for this phenomenon in the cues used during mosquito
host location. By establishing the attractiveness of these com-
pounds to malaria mosquito vectors in laboratory bioassays, we
characterize a process by which Plasmodium infection of hu-
mans could lead to increased mosquito biting. These compounds
may serve as biomarkers of malaria or be used to enhance the
efficacy of chemical lures used to trap mosquitoes.
Author contributions: A.R., A.O.B., N.O.V., M.A.B., R.C.S., D.K.M., W.R.M., R.W.S., T.B., J.A.P.,
W.T., J.G.L., and J.G.d.B. designed research; A.R., A.O.B., M.A.V., J.C.C., J.M., J.A.P., and
J.G.d.B. performed research; A.R., K.B.B., J.C.C., P.W., and J.G.d.B. contributed new re-
agents/analytic tools; A.R., A.O.B., K.B.B., J.C.C., S.J.P., N.O.V., P.W., C.J.S., T.B., W.T., J.G.L.,
and J.G.d.B. analyzed data; and A.R., T.B., J.A.P., W.T., J.G.L., and J.G.d.B. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: D.L.D., The Ohio State University; and A.R., French National Centre for Scien-
tific Research (CNRS).
Conflict of interest statement: A.R., J.G.d.B., J.G.L., and W.T. are inventors on a patent
application filed with the UK Intellectual Property Office (application no. 1805023.7).
Published under the PNAS license.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: Ailie.Robinson@lshtm.ac.uk,
pickettj4@cardiff.ac.uk, James.Logan@lshtm.ac.uk, or J.deBoer@nioo.knaw.nl.
2Present address: Department of Biological and Agricultural Sciences, Kaimosi Friends
University College, Kaimosi, Kenya.
3Present address: Institute of Parasitology, National Centre for Vector Entomology, Uni-
versity of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
4Present address: School of Chemistry, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, United
Kingdom.
5Present address: Netherlands Institute of Ecology, Wageningen 6708 PB, The
Netherlands.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1721610115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online April 16, 2018.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1721610115
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 18
|
E4209–E4218
ECOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 children in Western Kenya were more attractive to mosquitoes
when harboring Plasmodium parasites, before comparing skin
odor composition between Plasmodium-infected and parasite-free
children from the same population. Using analytical chemistry,
and the antennal and behavioral responses of Anopheles mos-
quitoes, we identified and established the role of Plasmodium
infection-associated compounds (IACs) in human body odor.
Results
Attractiveness and Plasmodium Infection. We measured the be-
havioral response of Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto (s.s.) to the
foot odor of 5- to 12-y-old schoolchildren at two sampling time
points, to assess whether Plasmodium infection changes the at-
tractiveness of human hosts to mosquitoes. At time point one
(T1; Fig. 1), foot odor of asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum-
infected and uninfected children was collected on socks for 20 h.
For infected individuals, this occurred immediately after ad-
ministration of the first dose of treatment with the antimalarial
artemether-lumefantrine (AL), which is known to allow residual
parasitemia during this time period (22). Odor samples were
collected in the same manner from the same children 21 d later,
following confirmed parasite clearance (T2; Fig. 1). Odor sam-
ples from participants with malaria parasites were categorized by
those who harbored transmissible gametocyte stages [microscopy
positive and/or >50 gametocytes per microliter by the molecular
diagnostic quantitative nucleic acid sequence-based amplification
(QT-NASBA), which detects female gametocyte Pfs25 mRNA, n =
23] or those with asexual stage parasites (microscopy negative for
gametocytes and/or QT-NASBA gametocytes <50 per microliter,
n = 10). Samples were considered parasite-free (n = 12) when no
parasites were detected by microscopy and 18S quantitative PCR
(qPCR) (23). An. gambiae s.s. mosquitoes were offered the choice
of either T1 or T2 odor samples from the same child, in a dual-
choice cage assay (Fig. S1). The proportion of mosquitoes choos-
ing the odors collected from children at T1 was significantly
affected by parasitological status [generalized linear model
(GLM), F test, P < 0.001]. Mosquitoes were more attracted to
odors collected at T1 from children harboring asexual or
gametocyte-stage parasites relative to T2 odor samples [GLM,
95% confidence intervals (95 CI) 0.55–0.62 and 0.59–0.63, re-
spectively; Fig. 1]. Across both groups, the ratio of attraction to
“infected” (asexual or gametocyte carriers) vs. “parasite-free”
odor was 0.6 to 0.4. Mosquitoes did not differentiate between
T1 and T2 odor samples from parasite-free children, indicating
that the difference observed between T1 and T2 odor was not an
effect of sampling time point (GLM, 95 CI: 0.48–0.54; Fig. 1). This
effect was independent of age, sex, tympanic (in-ear) temperature,
or hemoglobin level at T1. These results indicate that infection
with microscopically observable densities of either asexual-stage
parasites [median, 1,340 (interquartile range; IQR: 480–2,720)
parasites per microliter (p/μL)] or gametocytes [median, 80 (IQR:
40–680) p/μL] is associated with changes in odor profile that in-
crease attraction to mosquitoes. This finding supports previous
studies that demonstrate the heightened attractiveness of in-
fected hosts, although here, by offering foot odor alone, we
preclude the influence of other factors including breath. We did
not observe the gametocyte-specific effect that was described (7–
9), although we cannot rule out the possibility that low densities
of gametocytes in some “asexual” participants contributed to
their increased attractiveness. To determine which chemicals
in body odor are responsible for the observed differences in
attractiveness, we repeat-sampled 56 Plasmodium-infected and
parasite-free children from the same locality, using air entrain-
ment to collect foot odor samples onto polymeric filters for
further analysis.
Antennal Response to Malaria Odor. We analyzed air entrainment odor
extracts using coupled gas chromatography-electroantennography
(GC-EAG) (15). A change in the electric potential across the
antenna resulting from stimulated neuropsychological activity (i.e.,
the EAG response) is caused during olfactory nerve cell response.
This allows detection of compounds to which the mosquitoes are
potentially behaviorally active (Fig. 2). Point-of-care malaria di-
agnostics [rapid diagnostic test (RDT) and microscopy], used to
inform odor sampling from asymptomatic individuals, were retro-
spectively confirmed by using molecular diagnostics. Infected
children were treated after odor sampling, and repeat sampling of
all individuals was attempted 1 and 3 wk later alongside repeat
parasitological diagnoses (Fig. 2). Odor samples from individuals
harboring similar Plasmodium parasite stages or densities were
extracted into solvent and mixed to create blends of “average”
odor with the following infection profiles: (i) Plasmodium in-
fection, no gametocytes; (ii) Plasmodium infection, high-density
gametocytes; and (iii) parasite-free individuals (Table S1). A
further group, (iv) Plasmodium infection, submicroscopic ga-
metocytes, was included due to the frequency of submicroscopic
gametocytemia in endemic infections. P. falciparum gametocyte
densities were determined by Pfs25 mRNA QT-NASBA, while
18S qPCR and duplex qPCR were used to determine P. falci-
parum and Plasmodium densities, respectively. Twenty-two
analytes (Table S2) were found to elicit antennal response in
Anopheles coluzzii (formerly the M-form of An. gambiae s.s.
Giles), including the aldehydes heptanal, octanal, and nonanal.
No EAG-active analytes were specific to any of the infection
Fig. 1.
Effect of parasitological status on An. gambiae s.s. preference for body odor sampled at two time points, one during Plasmodium infection (T1) and
the other following parasite clearance (T2). Blue bars represent attraction to odor from parasite-free samples, and orange bars represent attraction to odor
samples from individuals with parasites. Groups of 10 mosquitoes were given a choice between socks worn by each participant at both T1 and T2, in a dual-
choice cage assay, with the number of mosquitoes that chose the T1 or T2 odor sample being summed over six replicates per participant. Participants were
grouped into those with gametocytes by microscopy or QT-NASBA (at >50 gametocytes per microliter) (n = 23), those with asexual stages only by microscopy
(n = 10), or parasite-free (n = 12). Of those with asexual parasites, three had submicroscopic gametocytes (1–34.9 gametocytes per microliter of blood), and
three were not tested. Predicted mean proportions from the GLM are plotted with 95 CI. *P < 0.05. (GLM included infection status only as predictor of
proportion of mosquitoes attracted to T1 odor samples.)
E4210
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1721610115
Robinson et al.
 profiles (i–iv), indicating that any Plasmodium-induced change
in the compounds used by host-seeking Anopheles must occur
by variation in the relative amounts of compounds that are
present in parasite-free individuals.
Plasmodium IACs. To investigate whether Plasmodium infection
indeed results in quantitative changes in the production of vol-
atile compounds, we compared the profiles of 117 foot and
59 control (empty entrainment bag) odor samples. A total of
56 individuals participated in air entrainment odor sampling
(Fig. 2); however, not all individuals were available at follow-
up time points. Foot odor samples from Plasmodium-infected
individuals were categorized by infection status: those from in-
dividuals with “higher” (>50 p/μL, which approximates the mi-
croscopy limit of detection) and “lower” (<50 p/μL) density
infections and those from individuals harboring microscopic
gametocytes (“total density” categorization). As the prevalence
of non-P. falciparum infections was low [5.05% (n = 5) and
3.96% (n = 4) for P. malariae and P. ovale spp., respectively, at
day 0, and eight of nine had concurrent P. falciparum parasites],
we did not separate samples from individuals with non-falcipa-
rum infections. Our analysis revealed increases in the production
of the aldehydes heptanal, octanal, nonanal, (E)-2-octenal, and
(E)-2-decenal by infected individuals. Increases were broadly
associated with infections of high parasite density, relative to
either low density or production by parasite-free individuals.
High-density infections were also correlated with the presence of
gametocytes in this dataset (Fig. S2C). Heptanal was produced in
significantly greater amounts by individuals with higher parasite
densities (>50 p/μL) relative to parasite-free individuals [residual
maximum likelihood (REML), least significant difference (LSD),
5%; Fig. 3 A and C]. Octanal and nonanal were produced in
significantly greater amounts by individuals with higher-density,
relative to those with lower-density (<50 p/μL), infections
(REML, LSD, 5%; Fig. 3 D, F, G, and I). To investigate further
this seemingly density-dependent effect, we divided the higher-
and lower-density individuals into quartiles, representing “low,”
“medium-low,” “medium-high,” and “high” density. We observed
Fig. 2.
Schematic of protocol (Upper) for odor sampling by air entrainment from Plasmodium-infected individuals, for use in GC-EAG analysis (Lower; here
with An. coluzzii) and direct GC analysis of entire odor profile. Children were recruited for odor sampling in groups of three to represent parasite-free,
asexual parasite carriers, and gametocyte carriers, if parasite prevalence allowed. Following malaria diagnosis by point-of-care methods and odor sampling,
malarious individuals were treated, and the same cohort was resampled on days 8 and 22. Whole blood samples were also taken for retrospective molecular
analysis. During GC-EAG, odor samples are injected by syringe at the inlet directly into the column (1), where they are vaporized, and carried through the
column by the carrier gas (here, hydrogen) (2). During passage through the (50 m) HP1 column, constituents of the sample are separated by GC, and analytes
are split as they elute from the column (3). A proportion is directed, via a heated transfer line (4), into a humidified, purified, airflow (5), which is then directed
over the insect antennae (6), simultaneously to the proportion that is detected by a flame ionization detector on the GC (7). GC analytes are represented by
peaks (GC trace), while antennal response by nerve cell depolarization causes a perturbation in the electroantennographic detection (EAG trace), indicating
entomologically significant analytes. Image courtesy of Iain Robinson (Iain-robinson.com).
Robinson et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 18
|
E4211
ECOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 Fig. 3.
Amount of IACs produced by individuals of differing parasitological status. (A–C) Heptanal, (D–F) octanal, (G–I) nonanal, (J) (E)-2-octenal, (K) (E)-2-
decenal, (L) 2-octanone production (relative to all compounds in odor sample) per group (100-min odor profile sampling). Predicted means (+SE) are given by
linear mixed modeling (REML). See Table S3 for details of the models and Table S4 for SE of the difference (SED) values for comparison of predicted means. Sample
size is in bar ends. *,†P < 0.05 (significant pairwise difference in mean amount between two groups indicated, tested by LSD). A, D, G, J, K, and L, total density
categorization: Gam, microscopic gametocytes; Neg, negative; lower and higher refer to parasite densities of lesser or greater than 50 p/μL. (B, E, and H) Quartile
categorization. Neg and Gam are defined as before. L, low, mean/median parasite density 0.38/0.3, n = 21; M-L, medium-low, mean/median parasite density 16.77/
8.3, n = 17; M-H, medium-high, mean/median parasite density 296.60/214.18, n = 19; H, high, mean/median parasite density 102,669.46/13,304.54, n = 23. For bar
charts CNL(A), solvent control; CNL(B), empty bag control. C–I show raw GC output for heptanal, octanal, and nonanal. Individual traces represent odor samples,
colored according to the parasitological status of the individual from whom the odor sample was taken, Higher-density, lower-density, and negative definitions
are as described above. Gametocyte carriers are excluded for clarity, as compound production spanned higher and lower parasite density groups.
E4212
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1721610115
Robinson et al.
 a clear correlation between increased production of heptanal,
octanal, and nonanal and increased parasite density (Fig. 3 B, E,
and H). The difference in production of nonanal between low, or
negative, and high individuals was significant (REML, LSD, 5%;
Fig. 3H and Table S3). Relative to parasite-free individuals, there
was a trend for all Plasmodium parasite-positive individuals to
produce more of the unsaturated aldehydes (E)-2-octenal and
(E)-2-decenal (Fig. 3 J and K), and for the latter, this differ-
ence was significant if individuals were categorized simply as
Plasmodium-positive or parasite-free (REML, “positive vs. neg-
ative” categories, LSD 5%; Table S3). It is well-established that
aldehydes are among the many volatiles that constitute human
skin odor (24–26), where they are frequently cited as being pre-
dominant (27). Additionally, the ketone 2-octanone was found to
be associated with the presence of microscopic gametocytes
(REML, LSD, 5%; Fig. 3L). Again, ketones are known volatiles of
human skin. For all IACs, we found a quantitative relationship:
The majority of individuals produced these compounds, but the
quantity produced increased with Plasmodium infection. An av-
erage of 177 (SE 5.23) analytes were captured per sample, and the
IACs were disproportionately abundantly produced (Fig. 4),
comprising on average 22.92% of the total odor profile across all
117 samples. When production was ranked relative to all other
compounds sampled, nonanal had a median rank of one, octanal
two, and heptanal five. While specific IACs were produced in
greater amounts by individuals harboring parasites, an overall
increase in volatile emissions from infected persons was not ob-
served (REML, LSD, 5%; Fig. S3), contrary to findings in the
mouse or CHMI system (6, 21). Among the IACs, the antennal
response, observed by GC-EAG to heptanal, octanal, and nona-
nal, suggests that changes in the production of these compounds
could affect mosquito behavior.
Mosquito Response to IAC. To determine whether the IACs were
attractive to mosquitoes, and therefore likely to be responsible
for the increased attractiveness observed in infected individuals,
we tested all six IACs [heptanal, octanal, nonanal, (E)-2-decenal,
(E)-2-octenal, and 2-octanone] in behavioral bioassays with An.
coluzzii. We tested for a behavioral response toward the latter
three compounds because of their positive association with the
presence of parasites in the bloodstream (Fig. 3), despite a lack
of antennal response in An. coluzzii (Table S2). First, the odor of
parasite-free children (worn socks) was supplemented with the
IAC individually and tested at a minimum of two concentrations
each. Of these, adding 10 μL of heptanal at a concentration of
10−8 g/mL to parasite-free odor significantly increased attrac-
tiveness, relative to parasite-free odor alone (GLM, 95 CI: 0.60–
0.84; Fig. 5), while heptanal at a concentration of 10−7 g/mL had
no effect. The attractive concentration is ∼1/10th of the addi-
tional heptanal isolated in odor samples from individuals with
higher-density Plasmodium infections, relative to negative indi-
viduals, over the corresponding time period. This suggests that
elevated emission of heptanal, at specific concentrations, by
parasitemic children could contribute to their increased attrac-
tiveness to mosquitoes. Supplementing with octanal, nonanal,
(E)-2-decenal, (E)-2-octenal, or 2-octanone alone did not induce
altered behavioral responses, despite the EAG activity observed
in response to octanal and nonanal (Fig. S4). We then tested
whether the addition of heptanal to a current best-practice syn-
thetic mosquito lure, MB5 [comprising ammonia, L-(+)-lactic
acid, tetradecanoic acid, 3-methyl-1-butanol, and butan-1-amine
(28)], might further increase attractiveness to mosquitoes.
However, MB5 supplemented with heptanal was equally attractive
as control MB5, at three concentrations (Fig. S4). This suggests
that the attractiveness of heptanal observed with parasite-free odor
was dependent on synergism with other volatile compounds naturally
present, but absent from the synthetic MB5 blend. Because odor
detection and response are highly contextual, this was not an
unexpected outcome. To investigate further the behavioral role
of IACs, but allowing for such synergistic effects between these
compounds, we tested two blends with MB5: Plas 5 contained
the aldehydes found to be associated with increased total para-
site density [heptanal, octanal, nonanal, (E)-2-octenal, and (E)-2-
decenal], and Plas 6 additionally contained the ketone 2-octanone
that was associated specifically with gametocytes. Each was tested
at four concentrations. The Plas 5 blend enhanced attractiveness of
MB5 (1% concentration, GLM, 95 CI: 0.51–0.77; Fig. 5). How-
ever, the Plas 6 blend was not found to increase attractiveness of
MB5 at any concentration (Fig. S4), which suggests that the
gametocyte-associated 2-octanone moderated the attractiveness of
the Plas 5 aldehydes. Given the presence of small amounts of 2-
octanone in parasite-free odor, however (Fig. 3I), which increases
in attractiveness on addition of heptanal (Fig. 5), it appeared that
this repellency of 2-octanone is not observed in the context of
natural human odor. In previous studies describing the increased
attraction of gametocyte carriers, the odor tested included both body
and breath (7, 9), leaving open the possibility that the gametocyte-
specific attraction may have originated in the breath. Indeed,
“malaria-associated” volatile compounds have been identified in the
breath, whose production varied cyclically according to P. falciparum
parasitemia, although no investigation of the mosquito response to
those compounds was undertaken (29). Our behavioral tests showed
Fig. 4.
Comparison of odor profiles from parasite-free individuals vs. those
harboring bloodstream parasites. (A) Representative GC traces from an in-
dividual with a high-density infection (>50 p/μL blood) and low-density in-
fection (<50 p/μL blood). Compounds found to be associated with infection
(other than 2-octanone; not visible due to very small amounts) are anno-
tated. (B) The proportion (percent) that IAC contributed toward the entire
odor profile, grouped by parasitological category (total density categories).
The average number of non-IAC per group (i.e., all other volatile com-
pounds; gray bar) was 171.27 (SE = 5.23) across all groups.
Robinson et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 18
|
E4213
ECOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 that supplementing parasite-free odor with heptanal increased at-
tractiveness to mosquitoes. However, heptanal alone did not in-
crease the attractiveness of a basic synthetic lure, while a blend of
infection-associated aldehydes including heptanal (Plas 5) was at-
tractive. Therefore, in both instances, the increased attraction was
dependent on additive effects among the infection-associated alde-
hydes, which are naturally present in parasite-free odor at lower
concentrations (Fig. 3).
Discussion
Aldehydes are found in the skin odor of various mammalian
species (30) and have been determined to be among the chem-
icals used by hematophagous insects for host location (31). These
oxygenated compounds can be synthesized when reactive oxygen
species attack lipid-dense membrane structures (32), i.e., lipid
peroxidation, caused by oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is
known to characterize malaria infection (33), occurring in the
erythrocytes and liver. Alternatively, or additionally, the alde-
hydes found here may have been produced directly by Plas-
modium parasites: A recent publication found the aldehydes
octanal, nonanal, and decanal to be among volatile compounds
emitted by red blood cell (RBC) cultures that had been sup-
plemented by (E)-4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate
(HMBPP) (34). HMBPP is a precursor in the 2-C-methyl-D-
erythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway, apparently used by
Plasmodium for isoprenoid production, and it was suggested that
HMBPP triggered enhanced release of these compounds from
infected RBCs, with a subsequent impact on mosquito attraction.
Additionally, terpenes were isolated from HMBPP RBCs, and
another study also isolated terpenes above Plasmodium-infected
RBC cultures (35). Although the MEP pathway is a possible
source of terpenes via isoprenoid production in infected RBCs
(iRBCs) (35), the source of terpenes in HMBPP RBCs remains
unknown (34). We did not find an association between Plasmo-
dium infection and the emission of terpenes from the skin, cor-
roborating earlier findings in Plasmodium-infected mice (6). It
should be emphasized that laboratory-based studies of the vol-
atile compounds isolated above iRBC cultures do not charac-
terize the human body odor used by mosquitoes during host
location. As such, they do not fully capture the complex bi-
ological and biochemical host–parasite interactions that occur in
natural Plasmodium infections. In our study, the production of
aldehydes was increased in individuals with Plasmodium infection.
The extent to which parasite-specific release of aldehydes from
iRBCs would contribute to a profound and systemic increase in
aldehyde production, caused by malaria-induced oxidative stress,
remains unexplored. Finally, it is important to note that while the
lipid peroxidation pathway for aldehyde production is well-
established, the skin microbiota is also known to produce alde-
hydes. This is particularly relevant to our study, as odor samples
were taken from the feet. Feet harbor skin microflora that pro-
duce volatiles that are attractive to mosquitoes (36), and dif-
ferences in microflora have been associated with differences in
attractiveness (16).
We demonstrated that elevated production of specific alde-
hydes in skin odor is associated with increased attractiveness to
mosquitoes in Plasmodium-infected people. Our findings are in
accordance with the “deceptive signaling” hypothesis, whereby
host cues already used by host-seeking insects are exaggerated,
increasing the attractiveness of that vertebrate to biting insects,
but when the blood-meal is in fact unfavorable to the insect (37).
If the disadvantages [e.g., reductions in fecundity (38–40) or
shortened lifespan (41–43)] of taking an infected blood-meal
outweigh any advantages [e.g., reduced host defenses (2) or
faster engorgement (44)], the evolution of an infected-host
avoidance phenotype might be expected. Anopheles may less
easily select against an infected-host phenotype comprising
“normal” stimuli. It is possible that the observed changes to skin
odor are specific to P. falciparum, which constituted the majority
of infections in the cohorts that we studied. In similar studies of
mosquito attraction, increases are often associated with the
chronic phase of malaria and/or increased density of blood-
stream gametocytes (2, 5–9). We found that odor from all P.
falciparum-infected individuals was more attractive than that of
parasite-free individuals, and the increased production of IACs
was correlated with total parasite density. Although it is possible
that gametocytes at densities below the detection limit of our
assay (45) contributed to the attractiveness of individuals with
asexual malaria parasites, the greatest production of IACs did
not correlate with gametocyte density. The association between
P. falciparum asexual parasite biomass and gametocyte density is
generally positive (46–48), and we also observed this in our
study. Thus, our findings are in broad agreement with studies
that observed an increase in attractiveness related to the pres-
ence of gametocytes (2, 5–9) or general malaria infection (4).
The compounds we observed to be associated with infection
could be derived from malaria-induced oxidative stress. Al-
though there is in vitro evidence that suggests both octanal and
Fig. 5.
An. coluzzii responses in a dual-port olfactometer to heptanal and a blend of five infection-associated aldehydes, Plas 5. Heptanal (10 μL) at two
concentrations (g/mL) was presented with (yellow bars) and tested against (blue bars) odor (socks) from parasite-free study participants (5- to 12-y-old Kenyan
children) over eight replicates. Plas 5 [heptanal, octanal, nonanal, (E)-2-octenal, and (E)-2-decenal] at four concentrations (10 μL of 100% approximating the
amounts found in the foot odor samples) was presented with (orange bars) and tested against (blue bars) the synthetic lure MB5 [ammonia, L-(+)-lactic acid,
tetradecanoic acid, 3-methyl-1-butanol, and butan-1-amine] over 10/11 replicates. Each replicate tested 30 mosquitoes. Predicted mean proportions and 95 CI
are presented, from two separate GLMs (for heptanal and Plas 5 assays), assuming a binomial distribution and using a logit link function. *P < 0.05. (See Table
S6 for details of the GLMs.)
E4214
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1721610115
Robinson et al.
 nonanal could be produced by RBCs via interactions with com-
ponents of the isoprenoid production pathway (34), found in
Plasmodium parasites, both this and the oxidative stress mech-
anism would result in the observed correlation between in-
creased parasite density and increased compound production.
More generally, this correlation would be observed if IACs were
the by-product of any sequelae of Plasmodium infection, with the
resulting influence on mosquito behavior a coincidental benefit
to the parasite. This raises the question of whether the IACs
found in our study are specific to Plasmodium infection or could
be a general “scent of infection.” Indeed, increased aldehydes
have been found to signify the presence of other diseases (32, 49,
50). However, our data do indicate that the observed increase in
these IACs is specific to Plasmodium infection, because a general
scent of infection might have been expected in malaria parasite-
free children who harbored other infectious organisms, and as
such there would have been no observed difference in IAC
production between the uninfected and infected children in this
study. For example, Schistosoma mansoni was recently found in
51% of 9- to 12-y-old children in the neighboring Asembo Dis-
trict (51) and was likely present in individuals in our malaria
parasite-free cohort. To date, only one study on the effects of
Plasmodium infection on volatile emission in humans included a
control group of bacteria-infected participants, and they found
that increased levels of thioethers in human breath were indeed
malaria-specific (29). Nevertheless, an important follow-up to
our study would be to examine skin odor profiles, and behavioral
responses of mosquitoes toward these, of individuals affected by
other diseases thought to be characterized by similar emissions
but not vectored by an insect.
Although it is not possible to infer from this study whether the
increased production of IACs is under the control of malaria
parasites, it could be argued that if the parasites indirectly
stimulated compound production (e.g., via triggering oxidative
stress), the parasite genes underlying this stimulation would be
selected for via enhanced transmission. However, a mutation
benefitting transmission may be costly to the parasite and would
therefore only be selected if the trade-off resulted in a net in-
crease in transmission. Further studies that explore the relative
costs and benefits of manipulation to the parasite, for example,
through modeling (52), are merited. The implications of iden-
tifying IACs, with their demonstrated impact on mosquito
behavior, are far-reaching: We better understand parasite–
vector–host transmission events and their overdispersed nature
in human populations. These compounds may permit further
improvement of already highly functional lures for trapping
malaria mosquitoes or even serve as biomarkers for malaria,
providing a basis for novel and noninvasive diagnostic tools.
Materials and Methods
Ethics. Study participants were 5- to 12-y-old children local to the Thomas
Odhiambo Campus of icipe in Western Kenya (0°25′48.1″S, 34°12′24.5″E),
including Rusinga Island, in Suba District, Homa Bay County. Participants
were recruited after obtaining signed consent. The study protocol (NON SSC
389) was approved by the Scientific and Ethical Review Committee of the
Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI/RES/7/3/1). Subsequent analyses
were conducted at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
(LSHTM) (ethics reference 8510).
Attractiveness of “Infected Odor” (Socks) by Cage Assays. A cohort of Plasmodium-
infected, asymptomatic (tympanic temperature <37.5 °C) individuals that par-
ticipated in an olfactometer study (9) was studied for the attractiveness
of their skin odor to An. gambiae s.s. Forty-five children were included, of
which there were 23 with microscopic gametocytes or an estimated ga-
metocyte density
of
>50 gametocytes
per
microliter
of
blood
by
QT-NASBA, 10 positive for asexual parasites but not gametocytes by mi-
croscopy, and 12 that tested Plasmodium-parasite free by 18S-qPCR (23).
Samples were collected at two time points: within 24 h of antimalarial
treatment but while children still harbored parasites (22) (T1 samples) and
21 d later (T2 samples). Antimalarial treatment with AL was administered to
Plasmodium-positive individuals according to manufacturer’s instructions
(20 mg of artemether/120 mg of lumefantrine per tablet; Coartem; Novartis),
and socks were put on within 1 h of treatment. Age, hemoglobin (Hb),
weight, and temperature were measured as covariates (9). At day 21 (“after”),
both parasitological testing and participant covariate measurements were
repeated.
Procedures for collection of body odor. Body odors were collected for 20 h on
nylon socks (97% polyamide, 3% elastane, 20 denier; Hema), which were
washed by using 70% ethanol and dried at 70 °C for 2 h before use. Surgical
gloves were worn throughout collection procedures. Children were assisted
in putting on and removing the socks. These were stored in clean glass jars
at −20 °C until use in cage assay experiments. Children were asked not to
bathe during this time, but had no other behavioral restrictions.
Behavioral assays for attractiveness of odor samples. A dual-choice cage assay
was modified (53) to determine the relative attractiveness of odor samples
from T1 and T2. Three World Health Organization bioassay tubes (12.5 cm
long, 5 cm wide) (54) were connected with sliding units between the inner
and outer tubes (Fig. S1). Mosquito cages (15 × 15 × 15 cm) were wrapped
with transparent kitchen cling-film (Chandaria Industries Ltd.) to prevent
movement of volatiles between different assays running in parallel. The
outer tubes were inserted 6 cm into the cages. Per individual, T1 and
T2 samples (sock pairs) were placed in opposing cages, with the feet cut off
to remove environmental soiling.
Six-to 8-d-old, non-blood-fed, female An. gambiae s.s. mosquitoes [Mbita
strain, with published rearing methods (55)] were collected before the ex-
periment and allowed 8 h acclimatization. Ten mosquitoes were released into
the central tube per bioassay, and the gates of the tubes were opened for
15 min to allow mosquitoes to make a choice of odor source. Experiments
were conducted between 18:30 and 22:30 under ambient conditions, in a red
fluorescent-lit room (average temperature, 24.1 °C) with the dual cage cov-
ered by black cotton cloth. After 15 min, mosquito choice was recorded. All
sock pairs were tested simultaneously on the same nights, and in total, each
pair (child) was tested six times, replicating over experimental nights, dual
cage set-ups, and between cages. All disposable equipment was changed, and
cages were cleaned (70% ethanol), between experiments/replicates.
Statistical analysis. Per child, the number of mosquitoes that chose the T1 or
T2 odor sample was summed over six replicates, and the relative attractiveness
of samples was determined as the proportion of mosquitoes that selected a
sample over the total number of mosquitoes that made a choice. A GLM (bi-
nomial distribution, logit link function, and dispersion estimated) was used to
test the effect of parasitological status (parasite-free, asexual, or gametocytes)
on the relative attractiveness. The number of mosquitoes caught in the cage
with the T1 sample was used as the response variable and all mosquitoes caught
in both cages as the binomial total. Covariates associated with participants (age,
sex, Hb, and tympanic temperature measured at T1) were tested, but removed
from the model because they were not significant (P > 0.05, F tests). Per
parasitological group, we used the 95 CI of the predicted proportion of mos-
quitoes choosing T1 odor samples, derived from the GLM, to assess whether
mosquito choice differed significantly from a 50:50 distribution over the two
odor samples. SPSS (2016; Version 24; IBM) was used for the analyses.
Collection of Volatile Odor Samples.
Sampling procedure. In the same locality, a separate cohort of schoolchildren,
of varying Plasmodium infection status, were sampled for foot odor (Fig. 2,
Upper). On day 0, 20 children for whom the parent or guardian had given
full consent were tested for their malaria status by RDT and microscopy.
Tympanic temperature, age, weight, and Hb levels were recorded. Symp-
tomatic children and/or those with a temperature >37.5 °C with RDT posi-
tivity were treated with AL (as described above) and excluded from the
study. Overnight, microscopy was conducted, and three children were selected
for odor sampling, with the intention to sample one child with asexual para-
sites, one with gametocyte stages, and one with no parasites. On day 1, odor
sampling was conducted by air entrainment, after which all malarious children
were treated. Days 0 and 1 constituted round one (R1), and the same proce-
dures were conducted at days 7 and 8 (R2) and days 21 and 22 (R3), with the
intention to repeat-sample the same children at two points posttreatment
(Fig. 2). R1–R3 were repeated for 6 mo between January and June 2014. In
this way, 56 children were repeat-sampled, but a total of 117 odor samples
and 59 accompanying empty bag control samples was achieved, due to loss-
to-follow-up.
Air entrainment. For each child, one foot was placed in a prepared bag (Fresh
and Eazy oven bags, 45 × 50 cm; Meda-Pak), clipped shut around the calf. At
each sampling round (R1–R3), a control (empty) bag was tightly closed and
sampled in the same manner. Bags were fitted with Swagelok fittings at
Robinson et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 18
|
E4215
ECOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 opposing corners, allowing connection to polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
tubing for airflow. Air (charcoal-filtered) was pumped into the top of the
bag and vacuumed from the bottom (both at 500 mL/min), with a 30-min
purge before fitting the polymer filters, to ensure system cleanliness.
Porapak filters were connected (Porapak Q, mesh size 50/80; Supelco Ana-
lytical) and sampled for 100 min, then stored in stoppered glass vials in a cool
box before sealing under filtered nitrogen on the same day. Ampoules were
stored at −20 °C until shipping to LSHTM. Before use, all PTFE tubing,
Swagelok fittings, and glassware were cleaned with 70% ethanol, then
baked in an oven at 150 °C for 2 h. Sampling bags and charcoal filters were
baked in the same manner. Cotton gloves were worn by the investigators
throughout.
Infection status. Odor sampling was informed by RDT [One Step malaria HRPII
and pLDH antigen rapid test (SD BIOLINE, catalog no. 05FK60)], performed as
per manufacturer’s guidelines, and thick and thin blood films were made by
using peripheral blood from a finger prick. Whole blood (50 μL) was stored
in RNAprotect (250 μL; QIAGEN). Retrospectively, DNA/RNA extraction was
performed by using a Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit [with methods as
published (56)], and P. falciparum parasite density and stage V gametocyte
density were determined by 18S qPCR (23) and QT-NASBA (57). Additionally,
dried blood stored on both Whatman No. 3 filter paper [Whatman (wDBS)]
and used RDTs [air-dried and stored in sealed plastic bags containing the
desiccant silica gel (uRDT)] was used as a DNA template. DNA was extracted
from circles (3 mm) punched from the wDBS, and sections (3 × 2 mm) were
cut from the central section of the nitrocellulose strips in the uRDTs (58).
Extraction was performed in a deep well plate by using an automated ex-
traction system (QIAsymphony), with the QIAsymphony DSP DNA mini kit
(QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and a Plasmodium
tRNA methionine-based duplex qPCR was used to measure Plasmodium
density (22). Good correlation in parasite density was obtained between
duplex qPCR by using wDBS or uRDT whole blood template. Where avail-
able, the same DNA extracts were used for species-specific (P. falciparum,
P. ovale spp., and P. malariae) nested PCR (59), with some P. ovale spp. iden-
tifications confirmed by the P. ovale spp. tryptophan-rich antigen (PoTRA)
assay (60).
GC-EAG of Pooled Odor Samples.
GC-EAG odor sample blends. Porapak filters were eluted by using redistilled
diethyl ether (750 μL), and, to approximate an “average” odor per category,
extracts were pooled according to the individual’s parasitological status: (i)
Plasmodium infection, no gametocytes; (ii) high-density P. falciparum ga-
metocytes; (iii) parasite-free individuals; or (iv) Plasmodium infection, sub-
microscopic P. falciparum gametocytes (Table S1). Aliquots (400 μL) of extracts
were mixed, then concentrated (to 60 μL) under a stream of nitrogen
(charcoal-filtered). Glassware, charcoal filters, and PTFE tubing were cleaned
as before.
Experimental set-up. GC-EAG was conducted during the scotophase, using 4- to
8-d-old, unfed female An. coluzzii [N’gousso strain (61)]. Adults were
maintained at 70% relative humidity (RH), with a 12-h light/dark cycle
(scotophase 09:00–21:00) and access to 50% glucose solution. The order of
testing blends was determined by a 5 × 5 Latin square (including control
blend). The mosquito head was dissected, and the palps, proboscis, and half
of the terminal (13th) antennal flagellomere were cut off. The indifferent
electrode was inserted into the back of the head, and the antennal tips were
guided into the recording electrode to complete the circuit (Fig. 2). Elec-
trodes were hand-pulled glass tips inserted over silver wire (diameter
0.37 mm; Harvard Apparatus) and filled with Ringers’ solution (15). GC was
performed on a 7890A machine (Agilent Technologies) with the following
program: oven temperature maintained at 40 °C for 0.5 min, increased by
10 °C per min to 230 °C, then held for 20 min. Blends were injected at 4 μL,
and the eluate was split to the flame ionization detector (FID) and EAG in-
terface at a ratio of 1:1. At the EAG interface, the eluate passed from the
heated splitter column to a stream of charcoal-filtered, humidified air (flow
rate 400 mL/min). This airflow was directed over the antenna at a distance of
5 mm. The signal was amplified 10,000× by the Intelligent Data Acquisition
Controller-4, and signals were analyzed by using EAD 2000 software (both
Syntech). Responses were signified by a depolarization of sufficient ampli-
tude. Peaks that elicited responses in more than three of the six/seven total
repetitions were considered to be EAG-active.
Analysis of Odor Profiles by GC. Instruments used for GC analysis were 7890A,
6890N, and HP6890 (Agilent Technologies). Each was fitted with a cool-on-
column injector, FID, and used hydrogen carrier gas, and 1-μL injections
were performed. All were fitted with an HP1 column, 50 m × 0.32 mm, film
thickness 0.52 μm, and the following program was used: oven temperature
maintained at 40 °C for 0.5 min, increased by 5 °C per min to 150 °C, held for
0.1 min, raised by 10 °C per min to 230 °C, and held for 40 min. Traces were
analyzed by using the R package MALDIquant (62) (R Version 3.3.0, 2016,
The R Foundation for Statistical Computing). In brief, raw x, y coordinates
for GC traces were exported from Agilent ChemStation (C.01.04), and the y
value (height, for 1 μL) was multiplied by total extract to represent actual
amount per sample (nanograms). Following baseline removal, traces were
visually inspected for consistent differences between parasitological group-
ings. Compounds of interest (COIs) were then compared quantitatively, by
integrating peaks in ChemStation, and calculating retention index and amount
relative to a standard series of n-alkanes (C7-C25), using Eq. 1.
Retention index (RI) calculation
RI = 100ððlog10RtX–log10 RtnÞ=ðlog10Rtn + 1–log10 RtnÞÞ + 100n,
[1]
where RtX is the retention time for the COI, Rtn is the retention time for
alkane before the COI, Rtn + 1 is retention time for alkane after the COI, and
n is the number of carbons in alkane before the COI.
Compound identification. Following statistical analysis (below), IACs were
tentatively identified by GC-MS, using either a Micromass Autospec Ultima [a
magnetic sector mass spectrometer equipped with a Programmed Temper-
ature Vaporizing inlet (GL Sciences B.V.)] and Agilent 6890N GC or a Mass
Selective Detector (quad GC-MS). Peaks were compared with MS databases
(National Institute of Standards and Technology). For confirmation of
identification, authentic standards were injected onto two GC columns
(HP1 and DB wax) simultaneously with samples containing those compounds.
Standards were heptanal (Sigma-Aldrich), octanal (Sigma-Aldrich), nonanal
(Sigma-Aldrich), (E)-2-octenal (Acros Organics), (E)-2-decenal (SAFC), and 2-
octanone (Sigma-Aldrich). Identifications were considered certain when the
resultant peak increased in height without increasing in width. Coin-
jections were conducted for all IACs.
Statistical analysis. Any sample that had detectable parasite DNA at amounts
greater than published limits of detection (LOD) for the assays [0.02 p/μL for
18S (23) and 5 p/μL for duplex qPCR (22)] was considered positive, and those
with DNA amounts beneath these thresholds were excluded. Only samples
that were negative by all measures, including at least one molecular di-
agnostic measure, were taken to be negative, other than RDTs for which
positivity was acceptable (on an assumption of positivity due to circulating
HRP-2 protein) (63). Individuals with Plasmodium parasitemia, but without
microscopic gametocytes, were divided into higher and lower parasite
density categories: higher density with >50 p/μL and lower density with between
the LOD and 50 p/μL (Fig. S2A). Categorization was informed by using 18s
qPCR, then duplex qPCR (wDBS > uRDT), then microscopy, according to
assay result availability. Instances suggesting no parasites by 18S qPCR but
with a robust parasite signal from one or more other measures were allocated
to the appropriate positive category. For “quartile” categories, higher- and
lower-density samples (n = 81) were then subdivided into quartiles according
to density (Fig. S2B). Again, samples were allocated according to a hierarchy
of procedures, in the order 18S qPCR > duplex qPCR > microscopy. Where 18S
and/or duplex qPCR result was zero or missing but microscopy was positive, the
film was reread and that value assumed. Two samples with low parasite
density by 18S but high and corresponding density by duplex qPCR and mi-
croscopy were allocated according to the two corresponding outcomes, and
one further lower-density sample was excluded from quartile analysis due to
imprecise parasite density. Gametocyte densities per group, “total density”
categories, are given in Fig. S2C (measured QT-NASBA, where available), and
the correlation between 18S qPCR and duplex qPCR by two templates is in
Fig. S2D.
The association between the production of COI (variate: percentage of
total entrainment) and parasitological category was assessed by linear mixed
models fitted using the method of REML. This modeling allowed for unequal
sample sizes (per parasitological category) and repeated measures on the
same individuals. We tested (F tests) for the main effects of covariates (age,
Hb, day of the year, and weight) before the treatment (parasitological status)
term and for factors (sex and round) after the treatment term, in a forward
selection, parallel-lines, regression analysis approach (Table S3). Pairwise
comparisons between groups of most biological interest were made by using
the LSD at the 5% level (Table S4), and COI demonstrating significant (REML,
LSD, 5%) differences between groups were termed IACs. Data analysis was
conducted by using Genstat (2013, 16th ed.; VSN International).
Behavioral Testing of Candidate Compounds.
Testing IACs individually. Six IACs [heptanal, octanal, nonanal, (E)-2-octenal,
(E)-2-decenal, and 2-octanone] were tested in a background of odor from
the worn nylon socks of 12 parasite-free children (18S qPCR confirmed). Each
E4216
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1721610115
Robinson et al.
 sock pair was cut into 12 strips after removing the foot part, and then
12 bundles were made, each containing a strip from each individual. Bundles
were stored at −20 °C until, and between, experiments. IACs were posi-
tioned downwind and separated from sock bundles by a metal grid, en-
suring no contact. Parasite-free odor (bundles) was tested with or without
individual IAC (in 10 μL of hexane on filter paper) and against the same but
with hexane alone. For each IAC, a decimal dilution series was made (in
hexane) and two/three concentrations chosen, to bracket the differential
amount between significantly different groups (LSD 5%, REML), adjusted to
represent 15 min of compound release (test duration).
Improving a mosquito lure. Next, we verified whether the IAC could improve a
mosquito lure for monitoring or mass trapping of Anopheles. Heptanal, the
most promising candidate from the above experiment, was tested as well as
two blends: Plas 5 contained the IAC that were associated with parasito-
logical positivity [nonanal, heptanal, octanal, (E)-2-decenal, and (E)-2-octe-
nal], and Plas 6 additionally contained the gametocyte-associated 2-octanone
(Fig. 3). Ratios were derived, and amounts of compounds were taken (Table
S5) from predictions for compounds for parasitological groups with signifi-
cantly increased quantity (LSD 5%, REML). Plas 5 and 6 were tested with the
synthetic lure MB5 (28) at four concentrations, each decreasing by a factor of
10 from the 100% concentration (Table S5).
Assay. A triple-chamber dual-port olfactometer (64) was used to test the
preference of 30 5- to 8-d-old female, non-blood-fed An. coluzzii [Suokoko
strain, rearing procedures as published (21)] for parasite-free odor or MB5,
supplemented with IAC or IAC blends, against background odor alone
(parasite-free odor or MB5). Mosquitoes were maintained in a release cage
before testing (for 24 h). Experiments took place during the last 4 h of the
scotophase under near-dark conditions (<1 lx). Mosquitoes were allowed to
fly for 15 min, and then those that had entered the traps with test/control
odors were counted. Each IAC/concentration combination was tested eight
or nine times on different days, and each Plas concentration 10 or 11 times
on different days, rotating treatments between the left and right port of the
olfactometer. Climatic data (RH, temperature, and air pressure) were
recorded in the flight chambers and in the surrounding room.
Statistical analyses. GLMs were used to test the effect of odors (individual IAC/
heptanal/Plas blends) on relative attractiveness (the proportion of mosquitoes
selecting the test odor). GLMs were run as described above [attractiveness of
infected odor (socks) by cage assays], testing parameters associated with the set-
up as additional factors or covariates in the model, and retaining when sig-
nificant (P < 0.05, F test). Sets of compounds were run in separate models
(Table S6). SPSS was used for the analyses.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank all the participants in this study, and their
families, for consenting participation. We are indebted to the field
assistants, David John Odoyo and Geoffrey Omondi Olweru, for all of their
help and hard work. Patrick Sawa (St Jude’s Clinic, icipe), and the Minister for
Education, Mbita district, were most helpful while the study was being con-
ducted. The Sutherland group at LSHTM was kind to allow use of laboratory
space, consumables, and parasitological advice; and Mary Oguike assisted
with PoTRA assays to confirm species-specific PCR where necessary. Mojca
Kristan and Mary Oguike allowed access to and use of An. coluzzii for EAG
experiments at LSHTM, and we thank the staff of the insectaries at icipe for
providing An. gambiae for the cage assay experiments and to Wouter van
Veen and colleagues of the Experimental Zoology Group at Wageningen
University for help with rearing An. coluzzii for IAC behavioral experiments.
Angela Hunt-Cooke reread the malaria films. We also thank Tom Walker and
Tom Ant for reading the manuscript. We thank Iain Robinson for his contri-
bution to the GC-EAG graphics. P.W. received center support from the Medical
Research Council and Department for International Development and research
grant support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. This work was sup-
ported by the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development
(ZonMW TOP Grant 91211038, to W.T and R.W.S.). T.B. is further supported by a
grant from The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (Vidi fellow-
ship; NWO Project 016.158.306). Rothamsted Research receives grant-aided sup-
port from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council of the
United Kingdom.
1. Poulin R (2010) Parasite manipulation of host behavior: An update and frequently
asked questions. Adv Study Behav 41:151–186.
2. Day JF, Edman JD (1983) Malaria renders mice susceptible to mosquito feeding when
gametocytes are most infective. J Parasitol 69:163–170.
3. Coleman RE, Edman JD, Semprevivo LH (1988) Interactions between malaria (Plas-
modium yoelii) and leishmaniasis (Leishmania mexicana amazonensis): Effect of
concomitant infection on host activity, host body temperature, and vector engorge-
ment success. J Med Entomol 25:467–471.
4. Ferguson HM, Rivero A, Read AF (2003) The influence of malaria parasite genetic
diversity and anaemia on mosquito feeding and fecundity. Parasitology 127:9–19.
5. Cornet S, Nicot A, Rivero A, Gandon S (2013) Malaria infection increases bird attrac-
tiveness to uninfected mosquitoes. Ecol Lett 16:323–329.
6. De Moraes CM, et al. (2014) Malaria-induced changes in host odors enhance mosquito
attraction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:11079–11084.
7. Lacroix R, Mukabana WR, Gouagna LC, Koella JC (2005) Malaria infection increases
attractiveness of humans to mosquitoes. PLoS Biol 3:e298.
8. Batista EP, Costa EF, Silva AA (2014) Anopheles darlingi (Diptera: Culicidae) displays
increased attractiveness to infected individuals with Plasmodium vivax gametocytes.
Parasit Vectors 7:251.
9. Busula AO, et al. (2017) Gametocytemia and attractiveness of Plasmodium falciparum-
infected Kenyan children to Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. J Infect Dis 216:291–295.
10. Turell MJ, Bailey CL, Rossi AA (1984) Increased mosquito feeding on rift valley fever
virus-infected lambs. Am J Trop Med Hyg 33:1232–1238.
11. Coleman RE, Edman JD (1988) Feeding-site selection of Lutzomyia longipalpis (Dip-
tera: Psychodidae) on mice infected with Leishmania mexicana amazonensis. J Med
Entomol 25:229–233.
12. Baylis M, Nambiro CO (1993) The effect of cattle infection by Trypanosoma con-
golense on the attraction, and feeding success, of the tsetse fly Glossina pallidipes.
Parasitology 106:357–361.
13. O’Shea B, et al. (2002) Enhanced sandfly attraction to Leishmania-infected hosts.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 96:117–118.
14. Takken W, Knols BG (1999) Odor-mediated behavior of Afrotropical malaria mos-
quitoes. Annu Rev Entomol 44:131–157.
15. Logan JG, et al. (2008) Identification of human-derived volatile chemicals that in-
terfere with attraction of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. J Chem Ecol 34:308–322.
16. Verhulst NO, et al. (2011) Composition of human skin microbiota affects attractive-
ness to malaria mosquitoes. PLoS One 6:e28991.
17. Muirhead-Thomson RC (1951) The distribution of anopheline mosquito bites among
different age groups; a new factor in malaria epidemiology. BMJ 1:1114–1117.
18. Gilbert IH, Gouck HK, Smith N (1966) Attractiveness of men and women to Aedes
aegypti and relative protection time obtained with Deet. Fla Entomol 49:53.
19. Fernández-Grandon GM, Gezan SA, Armour JA, Pickett JA, Logan JG (2015) Herita-
bility of attractiveness to mosquitoes. PLoS One 10:e0122716.
20. Prugnolle F, et al. (2009) Infection and body odours: Evolutionary and medical per-
spectives. Infect Genet Evol 9:1006–1009.
21. de Boer JG, et al. (2017) Odours of Plasmodium falciparum-infected participants in-
fluence mosquito-host interactions. Sci Rep 7:9283.
22. Beshir KB, et al. (2010) Measuring the efficacy of anti-malarial drugs in vivo: Quan-
titative PCR measurement of parasite clearance. Malar J 9:312.
23. Hermsen CC, et al. (2001) Detection of Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites in
vivo by real-time quantitative PCR. Mol Biochem Parasitol 118:247–251.
24. Bernier UR, Booth MM, Yost RA (1999) Analysis of human skin emanations by gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry. 1. Thermal desorption of attractants for the
yellow fever mosquito (Aedes aegypti) from handled glass beads. Anal Chem 71:1–7.
25. Curran AM, Rabin SI, Prada PA, Furton KG (2005) Comparison of the volatile organic
compounds present in human odor using SPME-GC/MS. J Chem Ecol 31:1607–1619.
26. Penn DJ, et al. (2007) Individual and gender fingerprints in human body odour. J R Soc
Interface 4:331–340.
27. Dormont L, Bessière J-M, Cohuet A (2013) Human skin volatiles: A review. J Chem Ecol
39:569–578.
28. Menger DJ, Van Loon JJA, Takken W (2014) Assessing the efficacy of candidate
mosquito repellents against the background of an attractive source that mimics a
human host. Med Vet Entomol 28:407–413.
29. Berna AZ, et al. (2015) Analysis of breath specimens for biomarkers of Plasmodium
falciparum infection. J Infect Dis 212:1120–1128.
30. Jaleta KT, Hill SR, Birgersson G, Tekie H, Ignell R (2016) Chicken volatiles repel host-
seeking malaria mosquitoes. Malar J 15:354.
31. Puri SN, et al. (2006) Electroantennogram and behavioral responses of Culex quin-
quefasciatus (Diptera: Culicidae) females to chemicals found in human skin emana-
tions. J Med Entomol 43:207–213.
32. Fuchs P, Loeseken C, Schubert JK, Miekisch W (2010) Breath gas aldehydes as bio-
markers of lung cancer. Int J Cancer 126:2663–2670.
33. Becker K, et al. (2004) Oxidative stress in malaria parasite-infected erythrocytes: Host-
parasite interactions. Int J Parasitol 34:163–189.
34. Emami SN, et al. (2017) A key malaria metabolite modulates vector blood seeking,
feeding, and susceptibility to infection. Science 4563:1–9.
35. Kelly M, et al. (2015) Malaria parasites produce volatile mosquito attractants. MBio 6:
e00235-15.
36. Verhulst NO, et al. (2009) Cultured skin microbiota attracts malaria mosquitoes. Malar
J 8:302.
37. Mauck KE, De Moraes CM, Mescher MC (2010) Deceptive chemical signals induced by
a plant virus attract insect vectors to inferior hosts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:
3600–3605.
38. Hacker CS (1971) The differential effect of Plasmodium gallinaceum on the fecundity
of several strains of Aedes aegypti. J Invertebr Pathol 18:373–377.
39. Freier JE, Friedman S (1976) Effect of host infection with Plasmodium gallinaceum on
the reproductive capacity of Aedes aegypti. J Invertebr Pathol 28:161–166.
40. Vézilier J, Nicot A, Gandon S, Rivero A (2012) Plasmodium infection decreases fe-
cundity and increases survival of mosquitoes. Proc Biol Sci 279:4033–4041.
41. Anderson RA, Knols BG, Koella JC (2000) Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites increase
feeding-associated mortality of their mosquito hosts Anopheles gambiae s.l.
Parasitology 120:329–333.
42. Ferguson HM, Read AF (2002) Why is the effect of malaria parasites on mosquito
survival still unresolved? Trends Parasitol 18:256–261.
Robinson et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 18
|
E4217
ECOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 43. Dawes EJ, Churcher TS, Zhuang S, Sinden RE, Basáñez MG (2009) Anopheles mortality
is both age- and Plasmodium-density dependent: Implications for malaria trans-
mission. Malar J 8:228.
44. Rossignol PA, et al. (1985) Enhanced mosquito blood-finding success on parasitemic
hosts: Evidence for vector-parasite mutualism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82:7725–7727.
45. Stone W, et al. (2017) A molecular assay to quantify male and female Plasmodium
falciparum gametocytes: Results from 2 randomized controlled trials using prima-
quine for gametocyte clearance. J Infect Dis 216:457–467.
46. Bousema T, Drakeley C (2011) Epidemiology and infectivity of Plasmodium falciparum
and Plasmodium vivax gametocytes in relation to malaria control and elimination.
Clin Microbiol Rev 24:377–410.
47. Koepfli C, et al. (2015) Blood-stage parasitaemia and age determine Plasmodium fal-
ciparum and P. vivax gametocytaemia in Papua New Guinea. PLoS One 10:e0126747.
48. Slater HC, et al. (2015) Assessing the impact of next-generation rapid diagnostic tests
on Plasmodium falciparum malaria elimination strategies. Nature 528:S94–S101.
49. Phillips M, et al. (2007) Volatile biomarkers of pulmonary tuberculosis in the breath.
Tuberculosis (Edinb) 87:44–52.
50. Chen X, et al. (2007) A study of the volatile organic compounds exhaled by lung
cancer cells in vitro for breath diagnosis. Cancer 110:835–844.
51. Butler SE, et al. (2012) Mechanism of anemia in Schistosoma mansoni-infected school
children in Western Kenya. Am J Trop Med Hyg 87:862–867.
52. Vickery WL, Poulin R (2010) The evolution of host manipulation by parasites: A game
theory analysis. Evol Ecol 24:773–788.
53. Okal MN, Francis B, Herrera-Varela M, Fillinger U, Lindsay SW (2013) Water vapour is a
pre-oviposition attractant for the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto.
Malar J 12:365.
54. World Health Organization
(2006) Guidelines for testing mosquito adulticides for
indoor residual spraying and treatment of mosquito nets (World Health Organiza-
tion, Geneva).
55. Busula AO, et al. (2015) Mosquito host preferences affect their response to synthetic
and natural odour blends. Malar J 14:133.
56. Dicko A, et al. (2016) Primaquine to reduce transmission of Plasmodium falciparum
malaria in Mali: A single-blind, dose-ranging, adaptive randomised phase 2 trial.
Lancet Infect Dis 16:674–684.
57. Schneider P, et al. (2004) Quantification of Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes in
differential stages of development by quantitative nucleic acid sequence-based am-
plification. Mol Biochem Parasitol 137:35–41.
58. Cnops L, Boderie M, Gillet P, Van Esbroeck M, Jacobs J (2011) Rapid diagnostic tests as
a source of DNA for Plasmodium species-specific real-time PCR. Malar J 10:67.
59. Snounou G, et al. (1993) High sensitivity of detection of human malaria parasites by
the use of nested polymerase chain reaction. Mol Biochem Parasitol 61:315–320.
60. Oguike MC, et al. (2011) Plasmodium ovale curtisi and Plasmodium ovale wallikeri
circulate simultaneously in African communities. Int J Parasitol 41:677–683.
61. Habtewold T, Duchateau L, Christophides GK (2016) Flow cytometry analysis of the
microbiota associated with the midguts of vector mosquitoes. Parasit Vectors 9:167.
62. Gibb S, Strimmer K (2012) MALDIquant: A versatile R package for the analysis of mass
spectrometry data. Bioinformatics 28:2270–2271.
63. Abba K, et al. (2011) Rapid diagnostic tests for diagnosing uncomplicated P. falci-
parum malaria in endemic countries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev CD008122.
64. Verhulst NO, Weldegergis BT, Menger D, Takken W (2016) Attractiveness of volatiles
from different body parts to the malaria mosquito Anopheles coluzzii is affected by
deodorant compounds. Sci Rep 6:27141.
E4218
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1721610115
Robinson et al.
