 The number of asylum seekers, refugees and internally displaced
people worldwide rose to 20.8 million at the beginning of
2006.1 Western countries have increasingly resorted to policies
aimed at reducing the numbers of individuals seeking residency.
These ‘policies of deterrence’ include the reduction of access to
healthcare services, education and employment as well as an
increase in the practice of detaining individuals who are seeking
asylum2 and the provision of time-limited rather than permanent
protection. Immigration removal centres in the UK are secure
environments where asylum seekers and other categories of
foreign nationals are detained. Individuals are held within these
centres for an indefinite period while awaiting the outcome of
administrative processes regarding their application for leave to
remain in the UK. The majority are deemed by the Home Office
to have exhausted their legal processes and to be ‘failed asylum
seekers’ awaiting removal to their country of origin or to a third
country. Some, however, are still in the process of legal appeal
and others initiate fresh asylum claims while in detention.
Another group that may be detained in these centres are foreign
nationals who have completed prison sentences for offences
committed in the UK and are awaiting or contesting deportation.
Within the UK there is a capacity of 2557 places for immigration
detainees and deportees. In 2005, a total of 29 210 individuals left
detention. Of these, 59% were deported from the UK. The rest
were given temporary leave to remain or were granted bail to live
within the community until the outcome of their claim was
determined.3
Under the 1951 United Nations Convention on the Status of
Refugees, a refugee is an individual who has successfully
completed the legal processes required to achieve permanent
residency within the host country. Refugees are therefore not
detained in immigration removal centres. Asylum seekers are
entitled to recognition as a refugee if they have a well-founded fear
of persecution because of race, religion, nationality, membership
of a social group or political opinion. Asylum seekers have often
experienced
traumatic
events
in
their
country
of
origin.
Individuals detained within immigration removal centres could,
therefore,
be
described
as
a vulnerable
group
particularly
susceptible to the adverse effects on mental health associated with
detention. According to Home Office guidelines, individuals who
are experiencing mental health problems should not be detained
unless there are exceptional circumstances.3
Mental health of asylum seekers
Research suggests that asylum seekers and displaced persons
worldwide report high rates of pre-migration trauma,4 and
therefore of trauma-related mental health problems. In a meta-
analysis of worldwide studies investigating the mental health of
refugees (including asylum seekers and displaced persons), Porter
& Haslam found high rates of psychopathological disorder among
refugees worldwide compared with non-refugee control groups.5
There is therefore consistent evidence to suggest that asylum
seekers and refugees have higher rates of mental health difficulties
than are usually found within the general population. The process
of seeking asylum in Western countries places additional demands
on this group. These include stressful legal processes. In an
Australian study comparing post-migratory stress in refugees,
asylum seekers and immigrants, Silove et al showed that the
‘refugee
determination
process’
(including
interviews
by
immigration officials) was regarded as stressful by asylum seekers.6
In addition, a Dutch study showed that longer asylum processes
result in increased risk of psychiatric disorder.7 The authors also
reported increased anxiety, depression and somatoform disorders
in individuals who had lived in The Netherlands for more than
2 years compared with refugees who had arrived within the
preceding 6 months. Consistent with these findings was the
observation of high rates of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
symptoms in both groups. Post-migratory stressors seem, there-
fore, to be negatively affecting this population, who are already
vulnerable to mental health difficulties as a result of their previous
exposure to traumatic events.
306
Mental health implications of detaining asylum
seekers: systematic review
Katy Robjant, Rita Hassan and Cornelius Katona
Background
The number of asylum seekers, refugees and internally
displaced people worldwide is rising. Western countries are
using increasingly restrictive policies, including the detention
of asylum seekers, and there is concern that this is harmful.
Aims
To investigate mental health outcomes among adult, child
and adolescent immigration detainees.
Method
A systematic review was conducted of studies investigating
the impact of immigration detention on the mental health of
children, adolescents and adults, identified by a systematic
search of databases and a supplementary manual search of
references.
Results
Ten studies were identified. All reported high levels of mental
health problems in detainees. Anxiety, depression and post-
traumatic stress disorder were commonly reported, as were
self-harm and suicidal ideation. Time in detention was
positively associated with severity of distress. There is
evidence for an initial improvement in mental health
occurring subsequent to release, although longitudinal results
have shown that the negative impact of detention persists.
Conclusions
This area of research is in its infancy and studies are limited
by methodological constraints. Findings consistently report
high levels of mental health problems among detainees.
There is some evidence to suggest an independent adverse
effect of detention on mental health.
Declaration of interest
None.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2009)
194, 306–312. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.108.053223
Review article
 Asylum seekers in detention
Asylum seekers who are detained in the host country experience a
further and more specific set of stressors, reflecting the detention
process itself and the detention centre environment, which may
adversely affect their mental health status. These include loss of
liberty, uncertainty regarding return to country of origin, social
isolation, abuse from staff, riots, forceful removal, hunger strikes
and self-harm.8–10 Given the well-documented vulnerability of
asylum seekers as a result of experience of trauma prior to arrival,
a number of clinicians have expressed concern that detention
increases mental health difficulties in adult and child asylum
seekers, and have called for an end to such practices.11–13 This
conflicts with current government policy aimed at reducing
numbers of asylum seekers.2 The practice of detaining asylum
seekers is therefore currently a prominent and contentious issue
in terms of policy, health and social care. These issues are outlined
in more depth by Steel & Silove.14
The aim of this review was to identify studies that have
investigated the impact of immigration detention on the mental
health of detainees held in Australia, the UK and the USA. Studies
that investigated the impact of detention on children and
adolescents were included in the review. The results of these
studies were reviewed in order to consider whether there is
evidence for an association between increased prevalence and
severity of mental health problems and immigration detention.
Method
Search strategy
The search terms ‘asylum’, ‘detention’, ‘depression’, ‘anxiety’ and
‘PTSD’ were used to identify relevant studies in the databases
PsycINFO, PubMed, PubCentral and PILOTS, with a cut-off date
of April 2007. In addition, manual searches of the reference lists of
relevant studies were used to identify further relevant studies.
Inclusion criteria
We included all studies that reported quantitative or qualitative
measures of mental health for children, adolescents or adults
who were either currently detained or who had previously been
detained in immigration detention or removal centres in Australia,
the UK or the USA. Qualitative studies that described consecutive
case series of more than two cases were included.
Exclusion criteria
Single-case studies were excluded. The search strategy outlined
above yielded several commentaries and letters, which were also
excluded, as were review papers, although relevant studies
identified from the references cited within these commentaries were
included. Studies conducted in other countries were excluded.
Selected studies
The above search strategy was carried out by the first author
(K.R.) and resulted in the identification of 49 articles (including
studies that met the inclusion criteria as well as commentaries,
letters, case studies and studies that took a legal or sociological
stance). Uncertainties about whether individual studies met the
inclusion criteria were resolved by discussion between the authors.
This selection process resulted in ten studies being identified for
detailed review.
Results
Studies that met the selection criteria can be grouped into those
reporting on case series and those comparing currently or
formerly detained asylum seekers with a comparison group.
The design, measures, results and findings are summarised in
Table DS1.
Case series
Bracken & Gorst-Unsworth and Arnold et al have both described
opportunistic case series of asylum detainees in the UK.15,16 They
described
therapeutic
and
assessment
work
undertaken
by
clinicians
within
organisations
working
with
refugees
and
asylum
seekers:
the
Medical
Foundation
for
the
Care
of
Victims of Torture (www.torturecare.org.uk) and Medical Justice
(www.medicaljustice.org.uk). Although the studies took place 15
years apart, both describe manifest psychological or psychiatric
difficulties experienced by detainees with whom the authors had
worked. Bracken & Gorst-Unsworth described the evidence
leading to their clinical conclusion that there was a high level of
psychological disturbance and a consistent pattern of symptoms
in each of ten detainees, all of whom had previously experienced
torture.15 This included intense fear and anxiety, sleep disturbance
and nightmares, irritability and frustration, as well as profound
hopelessness and concerns about their own mental health. The
authors did not report the use of any standardised ratings, which
compromises the validity of their results. They described six of the
individuals as expressing anxiety regarding their mental health,
and all ten reporting depressed mood, appetite loss and other
physical problems. Four detainees had suicidal ideation, two of
whom
had
made
actual
suicide
attempts.
Although
these
qualitative
impressions
are
useful
in
indicating
emotional
problems experienced by detained persons, a detailed case study
is provided for only one individual and the extent to which these
experiences are generalisable to other detainees is not addressed.
More recently, Arnold et al reported the results of the medical
assessment of 56 consecutive patients who were either in detention
or had been recently released: 59% fulfilled ICD–10 criteria for
PTSD or depression.16 Adherence to a specified diagnostic tool
increases the validity of these findings but it is unclear how
representative their sample is of the asylum detention population
as a whole. These reports of high levels of mental health problems
among detainees are consistent with a participant–observer
account reported by Sultan & O’Sullivan, an Iraqi doctor who
had been detained in an Australian immigration centre and a
clinical psychologist working at the same facility.17 These authors
suggested that psychological difficulties observed among detainees
increase through successive stages, triggered by negative outcomes
on asylum decisions. Their descriptive reports are supported by
a survey of 33 detainees (predominantly men), using a semi-
structured interview.17 Individuals who had been detained for
over 9 months were invited to participate; the findings represent
89%
of
this
target
population
and
are
therefore
highly
representative of this subsample of detainees. Among those
interviewed, 85% reported chronic depressive symptoms, 65%
reported suicidal ideation, 39% were experiencing paranoid
delusions and 21% showed signs of psychosis. In addition, 57%
of participants required psychotropic medication. Information
regarding the nature of the measures used to rate symptoms was
not provided.
The findings from these case series provide clear documentary
evidence of serious mental health problems among detainees. How-
ever, as collections of case studies they are subject to selection bias
307
Mental health of detained asylum seekers
 Robjant et al
and may not be representative of detainees, many of whom do not
come into contact with these specialist organisations. In addition,
the association between detention experience and poor mental
health is confounded by high rates of previous trauma exposure
in the detainees studied. The extent to which detention can be
described as having an independent negative impact on mental
health is therefore not fully clarified by these reports. However,
the high rate of disorder reported compared with the general
refugee literature and the description of increasing symptom
severity with increasing time in detention at least suggest an
independent or confounding role for the detention process.17
Systematic studies
More systematic methods were used in a small number of studies,
mainly carried out in Australia. Thompson et al compared a group
of 25 detained Tamil asylum seekers from Sri Lanka with a
community-based group of Tamil asylum seekers.18 They also
compared findings with those in non-detained refugees and
migrants from the same ethnic background. The comparison
group data came from a previous study in which levels of
trauma and symptoms had been investigated.19 The authors used
self-report measures commonly applied in research with asylum
seekers and refugees: the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire,20 the
Depression, Anxiety and Somatisation scales of the Hopkins
Symptom Checklist–25,21 as well as the Four Measures of Mental
Health Panic Scale,22 and a measure of exposure to post-migration
stressors designed for the study. Respondents in the detainees
group were more depressed and suicidal, and experienced more
extreme post-traumatic panic and anxiety as well as increased
somatic distress. An additional important finding was that
detained participants had been exposed to a greater number of
trauma experiences. However, levels of pre-migration trauma did
not account entirely for the differences. The authors concluded
that this suggests that the conditions of detention also contributed
to the mental health difficulties experienced by detainees.
Although the descriptive data are useful in demonstrating that
detention was associated with increased incidence of mental health
difficulties on all measures, it is difficult to draw conclusions from
this in the absence of any details regarding the statistical
techniques used or the results of multivariate analyses.
In a study based on a population of Mandaean refugees in
Australia, Steel et al found further evidence for a relationship
between detention and mental health problems.23 Using snowball
sampling techniques, the authors recruited 241 participants
(constituting an estimated
60% of
the
Mandaean
refugee
population living in Sydney) and assessed the prevalence of PTSD
and of major depressive disorder as well as stress factors which
were related to past trauma, detention and temporary protection.
Clinical measures included the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire
and the Hopkins Symptom Checklist–25. The mental and physical
health component summaries of the Medical Outcomes Study –
Short Form were used to measure mental and physical health
status and disability.24 The authors used the Detention Symptom
Checklist to assess adverse effects of particular experiences
associated with detention.25 The authors also compared the effects
of being granted a temporary protection visa v. a permanent
protection visa. Temporary protection is a less secure status,
requiring the holder to demonstrate a need for continued
protection every 3–5 years. Further constraints applied to
temporary protection visa holders include restricted access to
employment and educational opportunities.26 Within this sample,
58% held temporary visas, whereas 42% held permanent visas;
62% of the sample had a history of asylum detention and had been
released, on average, 3 years previously.
Using multivariate analyses, the authors investigated whether
there was an independent effect of detention and of temporary
v. permanent protection visa status. Time in immigration detention
and temporary protection contributed independently to all three
measures of mental health difficulties (P50.05), even when other
significant risk factors such as trauma history, family composition,
age, gender and length of residency were taken into account.
Additional univariate analyses within the group who had
experienced detention showed greater levels of traumatic distress
related specifically to past detention among those who had been
detained for longer than 6 months compared with those who
had been detained for shorter periods. A higher proportion of
those who had been detained in excess of 6 months met diagnostic
cut-offs for PTSD, depression and moderate to severe mental
health-related disability than those who had been detained for
shorter periods or who had not been detained. A parallel study by
the same group investigated the same factors in Persian-speaking
refugees.26 All former detainees rated detention experiences as
causing serious or very serious stress. These included fears of
being sent home, being told they should return home by officers
in detention facilities and language difficulties (reported as
causing serious or very serious stress by 95%). In this study,
42% of participants had temporary protection visa (TPV) status
and 58% held permanent protection visas (PPVs). Temporary
protection visa status included previous experience of detention
for an average of 1 year, whereas holders of a PPV had not
experienced detention. Univariate analyses using two-sample t-tests
showed significantly higher scores in TPV holders compared with
PPV holders on anxiety (P50.001), depression (P50.001), PTSD
(P50.001) and general distress (P=0.003) (as measured by the
General Health Questionnaire27). These differences were not
attributable to experience of pre-migration trauma.
Again, multivariate analyses were used to test whether post-
migration factors had an independent adverse effect. Holding a
TPV was the most significant predictor of PTSD. In order to
explore further the negative impact of post-migration stress, the
number of negative detention experiences, the number of current
living difficulties and current separation from spouse replaced
TPV status in a second multivariate model, as the combination
of these stressors were shown to have ‘almost perfect collinearity’
with TPV status. This second model was used to analyse the
independent effects of these stressors on measures of mental
health and disability, while adjusting for the effects of age, gender
and pre-migration trauma experiences. Of particular interest in
this review is the independent impact of detention. Past detention
stressors predicted PTSD (b=0.47, P50.001) and mental health-
related disability (b=0.30, P50.001), but did not predict anxiety,
depression, general distress and physical health-related disability.
These studies are the first to investigate the mental health
implications of detention followed by temporary compared with
permanent protection. They suggest that the combination of the
detention
experience
and
continued
immigration
status
uncertainty following release is particularly harmful to mental
health. The study by Steel et al shows that the damaging effects
of detention persist following release.23 The use of measures that
have been used widely in refugee research in addition to measures
specifically adapted for detention experiences increases the validity
of findings. Administration of interviews through one native Persian
speaker maximised transcultural validity.26 The use of snowball
sampling techniques resulted in recruitment of a large proportion
of the target populations,23 although as the authors of the study
acknowledge, it is possible that more distressed individuals were
more likely to participate. Studies that have targeted a specific
group are useful in allowing within-group comparisons and in
increasing the number of populations in which these issues have
308
 Mental health of detained asylum seekers
been addressed, although the findings from any one study may not
generalise to other refugee groups from different backgrounds.
In the only longitudinal study we identified, Keller et al looked
at rates of symptoms of depression, anxiety and PTSD in detained
asylum seekers and compared them with rates of mental disorder
at follow-up.10 Initial baseline interviews were conducted with 70
detainees (73% of those eligible) with a median duration of
detention of 5 months. Follow-up data were collected at a median
of 101 days later in 61 of the original participants. Some
participants had been released (n=26) but the rest were still in
detention. The authors used the PTSD sub-scale of the Harvard
Trauma Questionnaire and the Hopkins Symptom Checklist–25
to
measure
anxiety
and
depression.
Spearman
correlation
coefficients were used to examine the relationship between time
in detention and anxiety (r=0.34, P=0.004), depression (r=0.28,
P=0.017) and PTSD symptoms (r=0.28, P=0.019). Consistent with
findings in the Australian studies,23 time in detention was directly
related to severity of symptoms. This was also consistent with
subjective reports; 70% of detainees reported deterioration in their
mental health while in detention. Overall, clinically significant
levels of depression, anxiety and PTSD were found in a high
proportion of detainees in the sample (86%, 77% and 50%
respectively). Independent sample t-tests were used to compare
symptom scores from baseline at follow-up in those who had been
released and those who were still detained. At baseline there was
no significant difference between group scores in those who were
eventually released and those still detained. The difference at
follow-up was significant; however, reductions in symptoms were
observed
at
follow-up
in
those
who
had
been
released
(P50.0001). The repeated-measures design allows for measure-
ment of the effect of release from detention in comparison with
continued detention in two groups of detainees who did not
differ at baseline. These studies consistently suggest a possible
independent effect of detention on mental health.
In the first study to investigate the impact of detention within
the UK, Pourgourides et al provide qualitative explanations of
how detention affects people psychologically.9 In-depth interviews
with 15 male former detainees as well as focus group discussions
(comprising former detainees, members of detainee support
and
campaigning
groups,
professional
advisors
and
health
professionals) informed a grounded theory account of how and
why mental health problems arise in this group. The results of
psychiatric diagnostic interviews with the detainees were reported:
27% were diagnosed with PTSD, 60% with depression, 7% with
panic disorder and 7% with psychosis. Detailed qualitative
findings from the study are outlined at length by the authors
but are not described here. The authors highlighted a number
of specific difficulties unique to the detention experience, which
adversely
affect
mental
health.
The
detention
experience
incapacitates detainees, in that it does not allow utilisation of
usual coping skills, and constitutes a meaningless environment.
Detainees are therefore preoccupied by time and experience
extreme boredom and frustration as well as a sense of having no
future. The potential for the detention environment to reactivate
and exacerbate previous traumas was also raised as a theme. The
authors conclude that the high incidence of hopelessness,
depression and despair among detainees can be regarded as
normal reactions to an abnormal situation, and detention itself
as an ongoing trauma.
Impact of detention on children, adolescents
and their families
Three studies that met our inclusion criteria looked at the impact
of detention on children and their families.17,25,28 In addition to
the observations of mental health problems in adults, the
participant–observer study by Sultan & O’Sullivan also reported
on the effects on children.17 These effects were considered to be
mediated through negative characteristics of the detention
environment itself as well as through the impact of detention on
the parents’ mental well-being. Observed disturbances included
separation anxiety, disruptive conduct, nocturnal enuresis, sleep
disturbances (including nightmares, night terrors and sleep-
walking) and impaired cognitive development. Severe symptoms
of distress (including mutism, refusal to eat and drink, and
stereotypical behaviours) were also reported in some cases. These
reflect observations made by the authors, and unfortunately no
information regarding the prevalence of these observations is
reported, severely limiting the reliability of these data.
Mares & Jureidini reported on ten consecutive referrals made
to a child and adolescent mental health service in Australia from a
detention centre.28 The study involved 16 adults and 20 children
who were detained at the time of the study and had been in
detention for 1–2 years at the time of the first interview. The study
also included a follow-up interview for five families at 12 months.
All participants were interviewed by child psychiatrists or allied
health clinicians and consensus diagnoses were made. The authors
reported that all children had at least one parent with mental
health problems, but only two adults reported mental health
difficulties prior to arriving in Australia. Among the 16 adults
within the sample, 87% had major depression, 56% showed
clinical symptoms of PTSD and 25% had a psychotic illness.
Self-harm was also common – 31% had made significant repeated
attempts. Among children aged less than 5 years, developmental
delays were common. Out of ten such children, half had delays
in language and social development. Emotional and behavioural
dysregulation as well as attachment problems were observed.
Among the children in the older age range (6–17 years) mental
health difficulties were extensive. All ten of these children met
clinical criteria for PTSD. In addition, all ten had major
depression and expressed suicidal ideation. Eight children had
actually engaged in self-harm and the authors noted that a culture
of self-harm existed within the detention centre. Seven had
symptoms of anxiety disorder and half had persistent physical
health symptoms. Children regularly reported boredom, a sense
of
injustice,
sleep
difficulties,
anxiety
regarding
delays
in
educational progress and a sense of shame.
At the 12-month follow-up the well-being of the five families
who were still detained had deteriorated. The authors reported
that an initial improved sense of well-being among families who
had been released from detention had generally not persisted.
However, neither clinical diagnostic information nor outcomes
from self-report measures accompanied these clinical observations
in the report. In addition, the representativeness of these cases for
other families held within this centre is unclear. The initial severity
of the psychopathological symptoms in these children might have
precipitated the initial referral to the service and their subsequent
inclusion in the study.
Steel et al investigated mental health difficulties among
detained families from a single ethnic group in one centre in
Australia,25 by administering psychiatric interviews by telephone.
The ethnic origin of the detainees interviewed was not specified in
order to protect their anonymity. The study sample consisted of
nearly all the members of the particular ethnic group within a
single detention centre, comprising 10 families (14 adults and
20 children) out of 11 families who were eligible. Participants
had been detained for a minimum of 2 years. All adult participants
stated that they had experienced traumatic events prior to leaving
their country of origin as well as en route to Australia. The semi-
structured interviews included the Structured Clinical Interview
309
 Robjant et al
for DSM–IV Axis I Disorders (SCID–IV) for adults and the
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-
age Children – Present and Lifetime version (K–SADS–PL) for
children.29,30 These measures allowed assessment of prevalence
of psychiatric disorder during detention as well as allowing diag-
noses to be made retrospectively for the incidence of mental health
difficulties prior to detention. The interviews also consisted of
measures of
common experiences in
detention
(Detention
Experiences Checklist), as well as a list of nine stress symptoms
taken from standard PTSD measures but focused on the detention
experience itself (designed for this study): the Detention Symptom
Checklist. A parenting questionnaire, again designed for the
purpose of the study, was also included. All adults reported pre-
migration trauma as well as traumatic experiences occurring in
detention.
Psychiatric assessment indicated the prevalence of psychiatric
disorders in adults and children to have increased markedly since
the participants were detained. All adult participants were
diagnosed with major depressive disorder, whereas only 21%
reported symptoms (retrospectively) that would indicate a
diagnosis of depression prior to detention. Two (14%) were
diagnosed in detention with severe depressive disorder with
psychotic features. A large proportion (86%) of adults were also
diagnosed with PTSD while in detention – 50% of these cases were
also retrospectively diagnosed with this. There was also an increase
in suicidal ideation, with 93% of adults experiencing persistent
suicidal ideation. Prior to detention, none of the participants
had experienced persistent suicidal ideation nor had self-harmed;
36% of adults had self-harmed when assessed during detention.
Overall, the authors reported a threefold increase in psychiatric
problems. Parents also reported a marked decrease in their
parenting capabilities since being detained. Only one adult
responded positively to being ‘able to care for and support
children’ and ‘able to control the behaviour of children’ while
detained, whereas all participants stated that they were able to
do this prior to detention.
Similarly to the results for parents, a substantial increase in
psychiatric disorders was reported at the time of assessment
among children. Comparison of the diagnoses made at the time
of assessment while children were detained, with retrospective
diagnoses for incidence of psychiatric disturbance prior to
detention, revealed a tenfold increase in psychiatric difficulties
among these children. All children were diagnosed with at least
one psychiatric disorder at the time of assessment, the majority
(80%) exhibiting multiple disorders. While in detention, 50%
of
the
children
were
diagnosed
with
PTSD
(with
some
re-experiencing symptoms being directly related to events in
detention), all but one child received a diagnosis of major
depressive disorder and 50% were diagnosed with separation
anxiety disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder was also common,
occurring in 45% of cases. Enuresis was present in 20% of the total
sample but in four out of seven children aged 6–10 years, the age
range in which this disorder usually occurs. Suicidal ideation was
reported by 55% of the sample and 25% had self-harmed by
cutting their wrists or head banging. In contrast, prior to
detention, only one child met criteria for multiple disorders
(depression, PTSD and separation anxiety). Two other children
were
retrospectively
diagnosed
with
either
depression
or
separation anxiety prior to being detained.
In addition to these findings of a deterioration in mental
health during detention, the use of the Detention Experiences
Checklist and the Detention Symptom Checklist allowed analysis
of the extent to which current difficulties were directly linked to
detention experiences. All participants reported experiences of
traumatic events occurring
during detention.
‘Sudden
and
upsetting memories of the time in detention’ and ‘images of
threatening or humiliating events in detention’ were reported as
causing distress in all adults and in 90% of the children. Increased
anger and ‘feeling extremely sad and hopeless’ were also reported
by all adults. All of the other nine detention-related symptoms
were reported as causing distress in 86–100% of adults and in
53–90% of children. Although this study is limited by the
methodological
problems
associated
with
administering
interviews by telephone and the possibility of recall bias, the
findings suggest an overall deterioration occurring as a response
both to the detention process itself and to specific detention
experiences.
Discussion
Findings from these studies consistently support an association
between the experience of immigration detention practices and
poor mental health. This association has been demonstrated using
a variety of research methods with individuals detained in varying
contexts in the UK, Australia and the USA, comprising individuals
of all ages and from different ethnic groups. The restriction of this
review to studies in these countries means that the findings may
not be applicable to the experiences of detainees in the rest of
Europe.
All studies found high levels of emotional distress among
individuals who were in detention or who had been previously
detained. Among children, mental health difficulties in com-
bination with developmental and behavioural problems were
observed.17,28 Although in its infancy, research into the effects of
detention has used increasingly sophisticated methods in order
to attempt to identify and isolate the independent effects of
numerous adverse circumstances on the mental health of these
individuals. This has produced evidence that the findings relate
in part to pre-detention trauma experiences, in addition to
detention itself having an independent adverse effect on mental
health.
The combination of quantitative and qualitative findings has
enabled investigation of both the extent and severity of mental
health problems among detainees as well as allowing meaningful
contextualised interpretations of how detention affects individuals.
Anxiety, depression and PTSD in particular have been observed
in all of the studies, although lower prevalence rates of mental
health problems such as psychosis have also been reported.17,25,28
Self-harm and suicidal ideation were also widely reported.15,18,28
Qualitative studies have suggested that psychological factors
influencing the mental health of detainees include feelings of
hopelessness and a sense of injustice.9 This suggests that both
the psychological impact of detention as well as factors relating
to the detention environment may adversely affect mental health.
Sampling methods targeting individuals who had experienced
detention but had been released at the time of the study, as well as
the inclusion of follow-up data, have allowed investigation of the
longer-term impact of detention. Longer periods of detention are
associated with worse outcomes.10,17,23 Symptoms were found to
be linked to specific experiences in detention.25 Although
improvement in symptoms subsequent to release has been
reported,10 Steel et al found that longer periods of detention were
still associated with poorer mental health outcomes 3 years
following release.23 Although few studies have investigated this
issue, these preliminary findings suggest that the harmful effects
of detention remain, despite initial improvement following
release. Further research is required to address the longitudinal
impact of detention on mental health, as well as subsequent social
acculturation processes. This issue is further complicated by the
310
 Mental health of detained asylum seekers
fact that release may or may not be associated with long-term
security in terms of asylum decisions. Continuing uncertainty
about asylum status following release appears to be an important
mediator of post-release outcome.23,26
Research in this field is problematic for a number of practical
and methodological reasons. Researchers report encountering
difficulties in acquiring access to detained asylum seekers. This
reflects the highly politicised context within which this research
is undertaken.14 Many studies have relied on retrospective
measures, which may be subject to recall bias. The small sample
sizes recruited for many of the studies reflect some of these
practical difficulties and unfortunately this limits the possibility
of
statistical
analysis.
A
number
of
studies
only
report
descriptive results.15–17,25,28
Methodological difficulties in measurement and sampling also
limit the reliability, validity and generalisability of findings. In
particular, overreporting of symptoms in order to secure a better
legal outcome has been suggested as a possible source of bias in
many studies. However, as acknowledged by a number of authors,
this is unlikely given the anonymity of the research. In addition,
asylum decisions are made on an evaluation of objective rather
than subjective threat. Emphases on current subjective experiences
are unlikely to influence these decisions. Furthermore, in a
number of studies, participants have reported symptoms and
experiences prior to detention or subsequent to release that are
inconsistent with either a self-serving bias or general over-
reporting of distress.10,25
In terms of measurement, literacy levels, language and cultural
barriers complicate findings in terms of reliability and general-
isability. Extensive efforts have been made to overcome these
difficulties,
including
using
same-language
speakers
with
experience of working with the target populations,26 or the use
of measures that had been translated and back-translated10,23
and used extensively in research with asylum seekers and refugees.
The use of clinical diagnostic measures in some studies has
increased the validity of these results.
The use of targeted sampling of specific groups increases the
validity of results for one ethnic group while limiting the
generalisability of the findings to other groups.18,23,26 Measure-
ment across groups produces the opposite effect.9,10,17,28 Where
targeted sampling has occurred, a high proportion (60%) of the
estimated target sample has been reported.23 An additional
sampling limitation is that a number of studies have recruited
participants through agencies, which are more likely to attract
distressed individuals.15,16,28 The conditions of detention vary
considerably within and across countries, further limiting the
generalisability of findings. In addition, the small sample sizes
studied
and
the
range
and
complexity of
the
difficulties
encountered by asylum seekers before, during and after detention
make it difficult to isolate independent effects. Although the
effects of the detention experience have been evidenced as
statistically independent from those of previous traumas,23,26
confounding variables cannot be fully controlled within the study
designs used.23,26 The use of ethnically matched comparison
groups has, however, been useful in attempting to minimise some
of these limitations.
Despite these limitations, these studies are consistent in their
findings of poor mental health among detained asylum seekers.
There is growing evidence that asylum procedures are increasing
the mental health difficulties of traumatised individuals who are
seeking asylum in the West. Further research is required to
investigate the extent to which detention has an independent toxic
impact. Given the extent and severity of the mental health
problems observed in detained people in three different countries,
research
in
this
area is
urgently
needed.
Qualitative
and
quantitative research aimed at identifying factors that mediate this
relationship is required. In addition, it is imperative that further
research be conducted to ascertain the acute and longitudinal
impact of such practices.
The specific nature of the effect of detention experiences on
the development and maintenance of mental health problems
has important wider implications for research into traumatic
reactions. In particular, the effects of factors within the detention
environment on the maintenance and development of symptoms
and the extent to which symptoms of PTSD can be viewed as an
anticipatory response in those who fear repatriation require
further exploration. Research in this area has important implica-
tions for policies and attitudes regarding immigration procedures,
mental health and human rights. There are a number of ethical
implications for researchers and clinicians working in this area.14
The highly contentious nature of these issues results from the
numerous conflicts of interest between governmental, scientific
and clinical bodies. This has escalated as evidence attesting to
the
harmful
effects
of
detention
on
mental
health
has
accumulated, to the extent that researchers have been accused of
furthering political agendas through research.14 There is a real
danger that research access to people in asylum detention may
be limited by concerns over the political implications of the
research findings. Given the severity of mental health implications
for those held in detention suggested by the studies reviewed here,
it is imperative that access is granted to allow scientific research in
this area to continue.
Katy Robjant, Central and North West London Mental Health Trust, London;
Rita Hassan, Canterbury Christchurch University, Canterbury; Cornelius Katona,
University of Kent, Canterbury, UK
Correspondence: Katy Robjant, Traumatic Stress Service, Clinical Treatment
Centre, Maudsley Hospital, Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AZ, UK. Email:
katy.robjant@thh.nhs.uk
First received 2 Apr 2008, final revision 17 Jul 2008, accepted 20 Aug 2008
References
1 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Refugees by Numbers 2006
Edition. UNHCR, 2006.
2 Silove D, Steel Z, Watters C. Policies of deterrence and the mental health of
asylum seekers. JAMA 2000; 284: 604–11.
3 Heath T, Jeffries R, Pearce S. Asylum statistics United Kingdom 2005.
Home Office Statistical Bulletin 2006; 22 August: 1–90 (http://
www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs06/hosb1406.pdf).
4 Sinnerbrink I, Silove D, Field A, Steel Z, Manicavasagar V. Compounding of
premigration trauma and postmigration stress in asylum seekers. J Psychol
1997; 131: 463–70.
5 Porter M, Haslam N. Predisplacement and postdisplacement factors
associated with mental health of refugees and internally displaced persons.
A meta-analysis. JAMA 2005; 294: 602–12.
6 Silove D, Steel Z, McGorry P, Mohan P. Psychiatric symptoms and living
difficulties in Tamil asylum seekers: comparisons with refugees and
immigrants. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1998; 97: 175–81.
7 Laban CJ, Gernaat H, Komproe IH, Schreuders BA, De Jong J. Impact of a long
asylum procedure on the prevalence of psychiatric disorders in Iraqi asylum
seekers in the Netherlands. J Nerv Ment Dis 2004; 192: 843–51.
8 Fazel M, Silove D. Detention of refugees. BMJ 2006; 332: 251–2.
9 Pourgourides CK, Sashidharan SP, Bracken PJ. A Second Exile: The Mental
Health Implications of Detention of Asylum Seekers in the United Kingdom.
North Birmingham NHS Trust, 1996.
10 Keller AS, Rosenfeld B, Trinh-Shvrin C, Meserve C, Sachs E, Leviss J, et al.
Mental health of detained asylum seekers. Lancet 2003; 362: 1721–3.
11 Salinsky M. Detaining asylum seekers. BMJ 1997; 314: 456.
12 Koopowitz LF, Abhary S. Psychiatric aspects of detention: illustrative case
studies. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2004; 38: 495–500.
311
 Robjant et al
13 Fazel M, Stein A. UK immigration law disregards the best interests of
children. Lancet 2004; 363: 1749–50.
14 Steel Z, Silove D. Science and the common good: indefinite, non-reviewable
mandatory detention of asylum seekers and the research imperative.
Monash Bioeth Rev 2004; 23: 93–102.
15 Bracken P, Gorst-Unsworth C. The mental state of detained asylum seekers.
Psychiatr Bull 1991; 15: 657–9.
16 Arnold FW, Beeks M, Fluxman J, Katona C, de Zulueta F. Unmet medical
needs in detention. BMJ Rapid Response 2006; .
17 Sultan A, O’Sullivan K. Psychological disturbances in asylum seekers held in
long term detention: a participant-observer account. Med J Austr 2001; 175:
593–6.
18 Thompson M, McGorry P. Maribyrnong Detention Centre Tamil survey. In The
Mental Health and Wellbeing of On Shore Asylum Seekers in Australia (eds D.
Silove, Z Steel): 27–30. University of New South Wales, Psychiatry Research
and Teaching Unit, 1998.
19 Steel Z, Silove D, McGorry P, Mohan P. The Tamil survey. In The Mental
Health and Wellbeing of On Shore Asylum Seekers in Australia (eds D Silove,
Z Steel): 13–18. University of New South Wales, Psychiatry Research and
Teaching Unit, 1998.
20 Mollica RF, Caspi-Yavin Y, Bollini P, Truong T, Tor S, Lavelle J. The Harvard
Trauma Questionnaire. Validating a cross-cultural instrument for measuring
torture, trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder in Indochinese refugees.
J Nerv Ment Dis 1992; 180: 111–6.
21 Mollica RF, Wyshak G, de Marneffe D, Khoun F, Lavelle J. Indochinese
versions of the Hopkins Symptom Checklist–25: a screening instrument for
the psychiatric care of refugees. Am J Psychiatry 1987; 144: 497–500.
22 Beiser M, Fleming JAE. Measuring psychiatric disorder among Southeast
Asian refugees. Psychol Med 1986; 16: 627–39.
23 Steel Z, Silove D, Brooks R, Momartin S, Alzuhairi B, Susljik I. Impact of
immigration detention and temporary protection on the mental health of
refugees. Br J Psychiatry 2006; 188: 58–64.
24 Gandek B, Ware JE, Aaronson NK, Apolone G, Bjorner JB, Brazier JE, et al.
Cross-validation of item selection and scoring for the SF–12 Health Survey in
nine countries: results from the IQOLA Project. International Quality of Life
Assessment. J Clin Epidemiol 1998; 51: 1171–8.
25 Steel Z, Momartin S, Bateman C, Hafshejani A, Silove D. Psychiatric status of
asylum seeker families held for a protracted period in a remote detention
centre in Australia. Aust N Z J Public Health 2004; 28: 527–36.
26 Momartin S, Steel Z, Coello M, Aroche J, Silove D, Brooks R. A comparison of
the mental health of refugees with temporary versus permanent protection
visas. Med J Austr 2006; 185: 357–61.
27 Goldberg DP, Williams P. A User’s Guide to the General Health Questionnaire.
nferNelson, 1988.
28 Mares S, Jureidini J. Psychiatric assessment of children and families in
immigration detention clinical, administrative and ethical issues. Aust N Z J
Public Health 2004; 28: 520–6.
29 First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Williams JBW. Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM–V Axis I Disorders Administration Booklet. American Psychiatric Press,
1997.
30 Kaufman J, Birmaher B, Brent D, Rao U, Flynn C, Moreci P, et al. Schedule for
affective disorders and schizophrenia for school age children – present and
lifetime version (K–SADS–PL): initial reliability and validity data. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997; 36: 980–8.
312
The Rose and the Key (1871), J. Sheridan LeFanu
Fiona Subotsky
The Rose and the Key is one of Sheridan Le Fanu’s sensation novels, without any supernatural elements. It is set in England rather than Ireland,
for better sales.
The heroine, Maud, is deceived into entering a lunatic asylum on the pretext that she is visiting the great house of Lady Mardykes. Evidence as
to Maud’s insanity has been gained by a strange evangelical called Elihu Lizard, who notes her playful claims of another identity and puts this
down to delusion. Her mother, Lady Vernon, testifies to a suicide threat. Two sinister doctors, Dr Malkin the local practitioner and Dr
Antomarchi an asylum administrator, collude with Lady Vernon, all hoping to gain by the prevention of Maud’s marriage. Dr Damian, the
upright but distant owner of the asylum, approves the papers but has not seen the patient or understood the family issues. Mr Tintern,
the local magistrate, also eager to keep the approval of Lady Vernon, acts to endorse the arrangement legally.
Dr Michael Antomarchi has the key medical role. Obviously, he is ‘foreign’ and has a striking appearance – with ‘marble feature, strange eyes,
and coal-black square beard.’ He is an expert in mesmerism, and controls the asylum (appropriately named ‘Glareswood’) with his fierce gaze
and stern authority. He cows Maud into compliance by making her witness a forcible shower-bath followed by an emetic, which leaves the
patient nearly dead. Le Fanu steps back from the narrative here, to point out that such a case was indeed investigated by the Lunacy
Commission, but that now such a practice ‘is no longer countenanced by the faculty’.
Antomarchi is ambitious: he hopes to take over the asylum soon, and meanwhile is prepared to take money in excess from Lady Vernon. He
wants to be ‘monarch of all I survey’. The same expression was later used by Henry Maudsley in his autobiographical recollection of his time
as medical superintendent at Cheadle, adapting a verse by William Cowper:
‘I am monarch of all I survey,
I am lord of the fool and the brute,
From the centre all round to the sphere,
My rite there is none to dispute.’
Although Maudsley achieved this, as is the nature in romances the ‘brilliant rogue’ Antomarchi has his evil plans foiled, and is compelled to
leave the country, ending in ‘sore straits’.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2009)
194, 312. doi: 10.1192/bjp.194.4.312
Psychiatrists
in 19th-century
fiction
