 1 
 
Title 
The effect of implementing a smoke-free policy on physical violence within a 
psychiatric inpatient setting 
 
Authors  
Debbie Robson, Gilda Spaducci, Ann McNeill, Duncan Stewart, Tom Craig, 
Mary Yates, Lisa Szatkowski 
 
Author affiliations 
Debbie Robson,  PhD. Addictions Department, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, 4 Windsor Walk, 
Denmark Hill, London, SE5 8BB UK. 
 
Gilda Spaducci, MSc. Health Services and Population Department, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, De 
Crespigny Park, London,  SE5 8AF UK. 
 
Ann McNeill, PhD. Addictions Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
& Neuroscience, King’s College London, 4 Windsor Walk, Denmark Hill, 
London, SE5 8BB. UK and UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies  
 
Duncan Stewart, PhD. Mental Health and Addiction Research Group, 
Department of Health Sciences, University of York, Heslington, York, YO10 
5DD, UK.  
 
Tom JK Craig, PhD, FRCPsyc. Health Services and Population Department, 
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, 
De Crespigny Park, London, SE5 8AF UK. 
 
Mary Yates,   MSc. South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,  
Bethlem Royal Hospital, Monks Orchard Road, Beckenham, Kent, BR3 3BX 
UK. 
 
 
 2 
 
Lisa Szatkowski, PhD. Division of Epidemiology and Public Health, School of 
Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham City Hospital, Hucknall Road 
Nottingham, NG5 1PB, UK and UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies,  
 
Corresponding Author: Dr Debbie Robson, PhD. Senior Post Doc 
Researcher in Tobacco Addiction, National Addiction Centre, Addictions 
Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's 
College London, Addiction Sciences Building, 4 Windsor Walk, Denmark Hill, 
London SE5 8BB, UK. Email: deborah.robson@kcl.ac.uk 
 
Conflicts of interest: None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
ABSTRACT  
Background: Smoke-free policies are important to protect health and reduce 
health inqualities.  A major barrier to policy implementation in psychiatric 
hospitals  is staff concern that physical violence will increase. We aimed to 
assess the effect of implementing a comprehensive smoke-free policy on 
rates of physical assaults in a large UK mental health organisation.  
Methods: We conducted an interrupted time series analysis of incident 
reports of physical assault 30 months before and 12 months after the 
implementation of the policy using a quasi-Poisson generalised additive mixed 
model.  
Findings: There were 4,550 physical assaults over the study period; 4.9% of 
which were smoking-related.  When adjusted for temporal and seasonal 
trends and key confounders, there was a 39% reduction in the number of 
physical assaults per month following the policy introduction compared to 
beforehand (Incidence Rate Ratio  0.61, 95% CI 0.53-0.70, p<0.001).  
Interpretation: The introduction of a comprehensive smoke-free policy in a 
large psychiatric organisation appeared to reduce the incidence of physical 
assaults. Adequately resourced smoke–free policies could be part of broader 
violence reduction strategies in psychiatric settings.  
 
Funder  
The research was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) 
Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care South 
London at King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. The views 
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the 
NIHR or the Department of Health. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 
Research In Context Panel 
Evidence before this study 
We conducted an up to date search of electronic databases MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, and PsycINFO from date of inception to October 2016 using 
combinations of terms related to diagnosis, hospital, smoking and violence, 
(e.g.  “schizophrenia” OR “psychosis” OR “severe mental illness OR “mental 
hospital” OR “mental health unit” OR “psychiatric unit” AND “smoking” OR 
“smoking cessation” OR “cigarettes” OR “smok*” OR “smokefree policies” OR 
“smoking ban” AND “violen*” OR “assault” OR “aggression”). We identified 
seven studies that focused on physical violence following smoke-free policy 
implementation: four reported a decrease in physical violence following 
implementation; two that reported no change; one found an increase in 
violence towards staff, but a reduction in patient toward patient violence. A 
further two studies combined rates of verbal and physical violence, one 
reporting no change and another reporting an increase, which continued after 
the policy was discontinued. There were methodological differences between 
studies: the shortest evaluations were one month pre and post policy 
implementation and the longest two years post policy implementation; sample 
size ranged from 119 to 298; a variety of measures of violence were used 
including observational rating scales and incident reports. No study controlled 
for time, seasonality and potential confounders that may have impacted on 
rates of violence. 
 
Added value of this study 
This is the first study to evaluate the effect of implementing a comprehensive 
smoke-free policy in mental health settings on rates of violence by using a 
robust methodology, which takes into account other variables that may 
influence trends over time.  
 
Implications of all the available evidence 
Our study adds to the preponderance of previous findings that implementing 
smoke-free policies do not lead to an increase in physical violence, as is often 
feared by mental health clinicians. Providing that implementation of policies 
are supported by adequately resourced treatment pathways and delivered by 
 5 
 
a competent workforce, mental health organisations should not delay in 
implementing such policies because of the fear of physical violence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
 
Introduction  
Smoking tobacco during an admission to a psychiatric hospital has been a 
longstanding accepted and expected cultural norm, and a major contributor to 
the health inequalities experienced by people using these services. Recently, 
this smoking culture has been challenged; many countries have introduced 
smoke-free policies in mental health settings in line with policies in other 
enclosed public places.1,2 In 2013, the National Institute of Health and Clinical 
Excellence (NICE)3,4 recommended that  psychiatric organisations in England, 
Wales and Northern Ireland implement comprehensive smoke-free policies 
that incorporate: 1) clinical pathways to improve the identification, referral, and 
treatment  of smokers; 2) staff training; 3) prohibition of smoking in hospital 
grounds and buildings and 4) no staff-facilitated smoking. Findings from 
surveys suggest that a major barrier to implementing smoke-free policies is 
staff perceptions that they will result in increased physical violence.5  
 
Staff who work in psychiatric services are often exposed to violence during 
the course of their work. A meta-analysis by Iozzino and colleagues of 35 
studies including 23,972 inpatients, reported that 17% committed at least one 
violent act during a hospital admission.6  In 2014/15 there were 45,220 
physical assaults against UK National Health Service (NHS) staff working in 
psychiatric settings, accounting for 187 assaults per 1000 staff 7  compared to 
19,167 assaults in general acute settings, a rate of 21 per 1000 staff.7 The 
adverse impact of violence cannot be overemphasised, and includes injury, 
fear, low morale, stress, staff absence and loss of productivity.8,9 
 
Previous evidence of the impact of smoke free policies on physical violence 
found: a reduction,10–13 no change,14,15 or an increase in violence towards 
staff but a reduction in patient toward patient violence.16 Two studies which 
combined verbal and physical violence found no change,18 and an increase.19  
Methodological differences between studies are evident and no previous 
study controlled for time, seasonality and potential confounders that may have 
impacted rates of violence. Rigorous methods for evaluating intended and 
unintended consequences of smoke-free policies are needed.  
 
 7 
 
Aim of study: To investigate the effect of implementing a comprehensive 
smoke-free policy, on rates of physical assaults in a large UK psychiatric 
organisation.  
 
Methods 
Study design  
We used an interrupted time series design (ITS), increasingly the method of 
choice for evaluating the impact of a policy change or quality improvement 
initiatives.19 ITS is one of the more robust quasi-experimental research 
designs, particularly when the investigator does not have control over the 
implementation of an intervention, or when a randomised controlled trial is 
unfeasible.20 The method allows the incidence of an outcome after policy 
introduction  to be compared to that beforehand, whilst filtering out the effect 
of any underlying temporal or seasonal changes or variations in other 
potentially confounding variables.21 For example, people with schizophrenia 
are more likely to perpetrate violence on in patient units compared to other 
patients,7 and so fewer schizophrenia admissions in a given month may result 
in a lower rate of violence. 
 
Setting and participants 
The study took place within the inpatient wards of South London and 
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust (SLaM), a psychiatric NHS health 
organisation in London, England. SLaM has four hospitals, with approximately 
50 wards and 800 beds. It provides a wide range of specialist services to a 
population of approximately 1.1 million. An indoor smoke-free policy was 
implemented in 2008, after which smokers were escorted to ward gardens for 
short supervised periods throughout the day to smoke; in July 2014 an 
average of 2 hours, 23 minutes a day of clinical time was spent per ward 
supervising smoking.22 Preparations to go smoke-free began 12 months 
before the policy was introduced, including engagement events for staff and 
patients; enhancing the electronic patient health record to include mandatory 
recording of smoking status; supporting staff to reduce smoking breaks, staff 
education and training. A comprehensive smoke-free policy across the four 
hospital sites started from 1st October 2014. The smoke-free policy includes: 
 8 
 
1) the prohibition of smoking in the buildings and grounds of all hospital 
premises; 2) no staff-facilitated smoking and 3) a tobacco dependence 
treatment pathway. Treatment includes offering smokers nicotine replacement 
therapy (NRT) within 30 minutes of arrival on the ward, combination NRT for 
the duration of admission from either ward staff trained in smoking cessation 
or dedicated hospital tobacco dependence treatment advisors. The use of 
disposable e-cigarettes is allowed; these are purchased by patients rather 
than supplied by the hospital, patients can use them in single bedrooms but 
not communal areas and if used need to be included in the patient’s care 
plan. The policy is supported by an ongoing staff training programme in 
smoking cessation and management of temporary abstinence.  
 
Participants were those receiving inpatient treatment on adult wards up to 30 
months before the policy was implemented and up to 12 months after (1st 
April 2012 - 30th September 2015); violence was reported and recorded 
consistently during this time. The study period provided 42 data points (30 
before the policy commenced and 12 after) to allow us to assess and model 
any seasonal variation in violence over the course of each year. Patients from 
38 wards caring for people with psychosis, mood, addiction and dementia 
disorders were included. Forensic wards were excluded as patients had been 
exposed to a comprehensive smoke-free policy longer than patients in adult 
wards. Patients in children and adolescent wards were excluded because 
smoking has historically been prohibited on those wards. 
  
Data collection and sources 
Violence: The primary outcome was defined as the total number of physical 
assaults per month, including both patient-toward-patient and patient-toward-
staff assaults, which were individually specified as two secondary outcomes. 
Incidents of physical assault recorded in ‘Datixweb’, an online patient safety 
reporting system were collected. Details of physical assaults towards staff are 
reported annually to NHS Protect, a central body whose purpose is to manage 
intelligence on violence against NHS staff. Datixweb has previously been 
used in studies of patient safety incidents.22,23 Staff are required to record 
details of incidents of violence within 24 hours of an event. The record is 
 9 
 
completed online with mandatory structured fields to identify date, ward and 
location; a free text description of the incident and injuries sustained is 
required. The staff member who observed the incident usually completes the 
online form, whilst the most senior person on duty is responsible for ensuring 
that the incident is reported. The report goes through a further level of scrutiny 
by a senior manager.  
 
For the purpose of this study, we defined physical assault according to NHS 
Protect’s definition, ‘The intentional application of force against the person 
without lawful justification resulting in physical injury or personal discomfort.’ 7 
We adhered to the specific requirements for physical assault according to 
NHS Protect, which include: 1) physical contact must be made directly 
(person to person) or indirectly (use of a weapon, object, liquid or spittle); 2) 
an intentional act of assault that is unlawful, unwanted or unwarranted; 3) 
incidents of assault with no visible injury; 4) assaults occurring during 
restraint.  We further defined assaults related to smoking if the record of the 
antecedent to the assault included a smoking related term (e.g. 
smoke/smoking/cig/cigarettes/tobacco/fag/roll up(s)/roll up/rolli(e)/water 
pipe/cigar).  
 
We excluded all incidents of recorded non-physical assault, also using the 
NHS Protect’s definition - ‘The use of inappropriate words or behaviour 
causing distress and/or constituting harassment.’ 7 We therefore excluded 
verbal abuse, attempted assaults (without contact), threats, intimidation, 
harassment, damage to property, racism and inappropriate sexual language 
or behaviour. Although we recognise that such behaviours are very 
distressing and harmful, because only physical assaults are reported to NHS 
Protect, physical violence is more reliably recorded than verbal violence. Also, 
clinical experience suggests that many staff tolerate verbal abuse as an 
‘inevitable’ part of the job and under-report it.  
 
Anonymous reports were extracted and coded from Datixweb by a researcher 
(GS) into a locked Excel spreadsheet. Each report was categorised as a 
smoking or non-smoking related physical assault based on the definitions 
 10 
 
described above. As these reports had already been checked by a senior 
manager, only one person coded the data. Where there was any uncertainty 
(in 30% of reports), cases were discussed with a second researcher (DR) and 
a consensus decision agreed.  There were several occasions where one 
incident report contained assaults directed towards more than one member of 
staff/patient. If the number of victims was clearly stated in the report we 
counted the exact number of assaults. However if the report was vague but 
only inferred more than one staff had been assaulted, we counted these as 
two assaults. If a person was hit multiple times within the same incident, we 
counted it as one assault.  
 
Other variables: For all patients who were present on the wards each month, 
data were collected on demographic and clinical characteristics of known 
potential confounders of violence on inpatient units. These were: patient 
gender (percentage of males); patient age (percentage of patients under 45); 
the percentage with schizophrenia or a schizotypal or delusional disorder 
(indicated by ICD-10 codes F20-29); the percentage with a mood or affective 
disorder (ICD-10 codes F30-39); and the percentage who had been sectioned 
under the Mental Health Act. We also collected data on the percentage 
recorded as smokers. Demographic and clinical characteristics were collected 
using the Clinical Record Interactive Search (CRIS) system which is part of 
the NIHR Maudsley Mental Health Biomedical Research Centre and 
Dementia Unit.24 CRIS allows researchers to access anonymised information 
from patient electronic health records and to search against structured (age, 
gender etc.) and unstructured fields (user-defined text strings). Results are 
returned in spreadsheet format and are exportable as CSV files for further 
analysis. The total number of occupied bed days in each month was provided 
by SLaM and used to account for variations in the number of patients ‘at risk’ 
of being involved in a violent incident. 
 
Ethical approval 
We received audit approval from SLaM’s internal clinical audit department to 
extract data from Datixweb and from the CRIS Oversight Committee, 
responsible for ensuring all research projects using CRIS comply with ethical 
 11 
 
and legal guidelines. CRIS has ethical approval as an anonymised data 
resource for secondary analyses from Oxfordshire Research Ethics 
Committee (reference number 08/H0606/71). 
 
Statistical methods 
We used a quasi-Poisson generalised additive mixed model (GAMM)25 to 
model the monthly incidence of physical assaults as a function of several 
explanatory variables. We included in the model a binary exposure variable 
(coded zero prior to the introduction of the smoke-free policy and one 
afterwards) in order to estimate an incidence rate ratio (IRR) for the impact of 
the policy. The underlying temporal trend in the number of incidents was 
captured using a thin plate spline and a cyclic-cubic spline was used to model 
seasonality. Data on potentially confounding variables, as defined above, were 
included in each model in order to account for the characteristics of patients 
being treated each month. The total number of occupied bed days in each 
month was included as an offset term in the model.  
 
Given the relatively small number of data points (42) and the danger of over-
parameterisation, we first built models to estimate the impact of the policy 
adjusting only for the underlying time trend and seasonality. We then added all 
other potential confounding variables to the model and used a backwards-fitting 
approach to build a parsimonious model taking a p-value of <0.05 as an 
indicator of parameter significance. We examined model residuals for normality 
and any evidence of remaining autocorrelation between data points and where 
necessary fitted an autocorrelated error term. We report adjusted R2 values as 
an indicator of model fit.  
 
Data on smoking status were missing for 16.7% of patients each month on 
average (range 9.6-33.1%). In the primary analyses these patients were 
excluded from the calculation of the percentage of patients recorded as 
smokers. However, in a sensitivity analysis we re-fitted parsimonious models 
including these patients in the calculation, first by assuming patients with 
missing data were smokers (worst-case scenario) and second by assuming 
they were non-smokers (best-case scenario). Data management was carried 
 12 
 
out in Microsoft Excel and the function ‘gamm’ from the library ‘mcgv’26 and the 
statistical software RStudio version 0.99.47327 was used to model the data.  
 
Role of the funding source 
The funder had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data 
interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full 
access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision 
to submit for publication. 
 
Results 
There were 4,550 physical assaults across the study period: 2,916 were 
patient-toward-staff assaults and 1,634 patient-toward-patient. Assaults related 
to smoking accounted for 4.9% of the overall violence. Over the study period, 
747,338 occupied bed days of care were delivered to patients. The 
characteristics of patients were: 57% (n=10,269) male; 60% (n=10,813) under 
45 years of age; 40% (n=7180) had a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia or 
related disorder (ICD-10, F20-29), 20% (n=3,598) a mood disorder (F.30-39) 
and the remainder other diagnoses e.g. dementia, addiction disorder; 44% 
(n=8,007) were formally detained under mental health legislation. Excluding 
patients who had smoking status missing, 78% (11,779/15,128) were current 
smokers. Figure 1 shows the number of assaults per month over the duration 
of the study.  It shows considerable monthly variation throughout, but suggests 
a reduction after the introduction of the smoke-free policy.  Table 1 shows the 
results of the partly-adjusted and parsimonious GAMM models used to estimate 
the IRR for the change in number of assaults per month after the introduction 
of the smoke-free policy. 
 
 
Insert figure 1 about here please 
Insert table 1 about here please 
 
The results adjusted for all significant confounders suggest there was a 39% 
reduction in the number of violent assaults per month overall in the period after 
the introduction of the policy compared to before (IRR 0.61, 95% CI 0.53-0.70). 
 13 
 
There was a 47% reduction in the number of patient-toward-staff assaults (IRR 
0.53, 95% CI 0.44-0.63, p<0.001) and a 15% reduction in the number of patient-
toward-patient assaults (IRR 0.85, 95% CI 0.80-0.92, <0.001). 
 
Imputation of missing smoking data did not materially affect the direction and 
statistical significance of the IRRs estimated from the parsimonious models 
(table 2). There were, however, some small differences in the variables 
included as significant in these models, including smoking status, which was 
not retained in the model for all assaults, and in the magnitude of the effect 
estimates.  
 
Insert table 2 about here please  
 14 
 
Discussion  
There was a significant reduction in the number of physical assaults after the 
introduction of the comprehensive smoke-free policy, when controlling for time, 
seasonality and confounders of violence.  Tentatively, there appears to have 
been a larger decline in patient-toward-staff violence compared to patient-
toward-patient violence.  
 
Limitations: The method we used cannot attribute causality nor distinguish 
between the effects of two or more policies introduced at the same time, but we 
believe the smoke-free policy was the only new policy to be implemented 
across the whole organisation during the study period. We were unable to 
separate the data for confounders for individual wards so could not assess the 
smoke-free policy separately by ward. The models assume no change over 
time in the composition of the population at risk; we accounted for this to an 
extent by including several variables to indicate the characteristics of the case-
mix of patients being treated each month.  
 
Based on the relatively small number of data points, and over-parameterisation 
evident in the negative values of the adjusted R2 values for some outcomes, 
the results should be treated with caution. The relatively small values of 
adjusted R2 suggest we have only captured a small proportion of the variance 
in the time series. It is likely there are other variables which influence the 
number of incidents but which we did not have data on to incorporate into the 
model. These include data on alcohol and illicit substance use, which were only 
available for 31% of patients and previous history of physical violence which is 
not consistently recorded in electronic case notes. Missing data for smoking 
status (16.7%) had greatest impact on results for patient-on-staff assaults, but 
the direction and significance of effects remained.  We acknowledge that patient 
demographics, clinical characteristics and patient behaviours are not the only 
determinants of violence on inpatient units.  Other potential contributory factors 
include staff variables, features of the physical environment and external 
influences such as family stress,28,29 but these data were not available.  
 
 15 
 
Strengths: This study examined physical violence for nearly 750,000 bed days 
of care over a three year period. To our knowledge this is the first study to 
evaluate the impact of a smoke-free policy on physical assaults using a robust 
method which takes into account underlying temporal and seasonal trends as 
well as the influence of potential confounding factors in order to isolate the 
effect of the intervention. We assessed one aspect of violence (physical 
assaults) whereas some previous studies have combined verbal, physical 
violence, violence towards property and other disruptive behaviours,17,18 
making it difficult to interpret the true extent of physical violence following the 
implementation of the smoke-free policy. The catchment area of the 
organisation where the study took place (SLaM) is broadly representative of 
psychiatric  organisations across London, in terms of age, gender, ethnicity, 
education and social deprivation,24 although we acknowledge they may differ 
from the rest of the UK. A new way of reporting violent incidents was introduced 
at the start of our study period which was sustained throughout, thus making it 
unlikely that changes in the way our outcome was reported were being falsely 
attributed to the smoke-free policy.  
 
The contribution of violence directly related to smoking was minimal over the 
whole study period. This may reflect reliance on clinicians’ written reports 
which varied in quantity and quality and it is possible that the contribution of 
smoking to incidents was under-reported.   Nevertheless, the introduction of 
the smoke-free policy had a wider impact on physical violence at least in the 
short term. It is important to recognise that the smoke-free policy includes 
tobacco dependence treatment, staff training, and allowing the use of e-
cigarettes. A systematic review of violence in psychiatric inpatient settings 
found staff-patient interactions to be the most frequent antecedent to violence 
and aggression,28 so the provision of tobacco dependence treatment, staff 
training or other aspects of the policy may contribute to changing the culture 
of how psychiatric staff address smoking with patients.  Confidence in the 
findings would be increased by repetition of the study in other settings.  The 
apparent increase in assaults towards the end of the study period may be the 
result of variations in confounding factors. More data with a longer post-policy 
data period would help to elucidate whether immediate impacts were 
 16 
 
sustained.   Our findings are in accordance with the preponderance of 
previous research that show a decrease or no change in physical violence10–17 
following the implementation of a smoke-free policy.  
 
Psychiatric organisations and policy makers need to address the belief that 
smoking helps prevent aggression in inpatient settings. Staff often confuse 
tobacco withdrawal symptoms with mental health symptoms.30 Nicotine has a 
half-life of approximately two hours, resulting in withdrawal symptoms soon 
after a cigarette is smoked, including restlessness, irritability and a 
preoccupation with finding opportunities to smoke. Smoking a cigarette during 
a period of withdrawal will appear to calm the patient, as nicotine blood levels 
are replenished; this is easily misinterpreted as evidence that smoking is 
therapeutic and necessary to prevent agitation. Supporting patients to 
temporarily abstain from smoking without the discomfort of nicotine withdrawal 
or encouraging a quit attempt can be achieved by promptly offering inpatient 
smokers NRT on admission, increasing the dose for heavily dependent 
smokers and education on the benefits of NRT compared to smoking tobacco.31 
 
Concerns about violence are impeding the introduction of smoke-free policies 
worldwide and such concerns may not be substantiated. Instead, adequately 
resourced smoke–free policies could be part of broader violence reduction 
strategies in psychiatric settings.  
 
Author contributions 
Conception: Debbie Robson. Methods (design) Debbie Robson, Gilda 
Spaducci, Ann McNeill, Duncan Stewart, Tom Craig, Lisa Szatkowski. (Data 
collection) Gilda Spaducci, Debbie Robson, Mary Yates. Analysis: Lisa 
Szatkowski. Drafting, revising article & final approval of the version to be 
submitted: Debbie Robson, Gilda Spaducci, Ann McNeill, Duncan Stewart,  
Tom Craig, Mary Yates, Lisa Szatkowski.  
 
Acknowledgements: thank you to 1) South London and Maudsley NHS 
Foundation Trust; 2) NIHR Biomedical Research Centre and Dementia 
Biomedical Research Unit (BRU) at South London and Maudsley NHS 
 17 
 
Foundation Trust and the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, 
King’s College London; 3) NIHR CLAHRC Yorkshire & Humber   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
 18 
 
 
1 
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organisations 
Accreditation Manual for Hospitals. Chicago. JCAH 1992 
2 
Scollo MM and Winstanley  MH. Tobacco in Australia: Facts and 
issues. Melbourne: Cancer Council Victoria; 2016. 
www.TobaccoInAustralia.org.au 
3 
The National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence.  Smoking 
acute, maternity, and mental health services. London: NICE; 2013. 
4 
Britton J. Treating smokers in mental health settings. The Lancet 
Psychiatry 2015; 2(5): 364-65  
5 
Lawn S and Pols R. Smoking bans in psychiatric inpatient settings? A 
review of the research. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2005; 39(10): 866-85.  
6 
Iozzino L, Ferrari C, Large M, Nielssen O, de Girolamo G.Prevalence 
and risk factors of violence by psychiatric acute inpatients: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 2015 10(6): e0128536. 
7 
NHS Protect Publications NHS Business Services Authority [Internet]. 
Nhsbsa.nhs.uk. 2016 [cited 16 October 2016]. Available from: 
http://www.nhsbsa.nhs.uk/3645.aspx 
8 
Needham I, Abderhalden C, Halfens R, Fischer J, Dassen T. Non-
somatic effects of patient aggression on nurses: a systematic review. Journal 
of Advanced Nursing 2005; 49(3): 283-96.  
9 
Foster C, Bowers L, Nijman H. Aggressive behaviour on acute 
psychiatric wards: prevalence, severity and management. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing 2007; 58(2): 140-49. 
10 
Cormac I, Creasey S, McNeill A, Ferriter M, Huckstep B, D’Silva K. 
Impact of a total smoking ban in a high secure hospital. The Psychiatrist 2010; 
34: 413-7 
11 
Haller E, McNeil DE, Binder RL. Impact of a smoking  ban on a locked 
psychiatric unit. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 1996; 57(8): 329-23 
12 
Quinn J, Inman JD, Fadow P. Results of the conversion to a tobacco 
free environment in a state psychiatric hospital. Administration and Policy in 
Mental Health 2000; 27(6): 451-53 
 19 
 
13 
Rautner UK, de Nesnera A, Grandfield S. Up in smoke? Linking patient 
assaults to a psychiatric hospital’s smoking ban. Journal of Psychosocial 
Nursing 1997; 35(4): 35-40 
14 
Hempel A, Kownacki R, Malin D, Ozone S, Cormack T, Sandoval B et 
al. Effect of a total smoking ban in a maximum security psychiatric hospital. 
Behavioral Sciences & the Law 2002; 20(5): 507-522. 
15 
Velasco J, Eels T, Anderson R, Mark H, Ryabik B, Mount R et al. A two 
year follow up on the effects of a smoking ban in an inpatient psychiatric 
service. Psychiatric Services 1996;47(8):869-71. 
16 
Harris G, Parle D, Gagné J. Effects of a tobacco ban on long-term 
psychiatric patients. The Journal of Behavioral Health Services & Research 
2006; 34(1): 43-55 
17 
Voci S, Bondy S, Zawertailo L, Walker L, George T, Selby P. Impact of 
a smoke-free policy in a large psychiatric hospital on staff attitudes and 
patient behavior. General Hospital Psychiatry 2010; 32(6): 623-30. 
18 
Campion J, Lawn S, Brownlie A, Hunter E, Gynther B, Pols R. 
Implementing smoke-free policies in mental health inpatient units: learning 
from unsuccessful experience. Australas Psychiatry 2008;16(2):92-7.  
19 
Szatkowski L, Coleman T, McNeill A, Lewis S.  The impact of the 
introduction of smoke-free legislation on prescribing of stop-smoking 
medications in England. Addiction 2011;106: 1827-34 
20 
Penfold R and Zhang F. Use of interrupted time series analysis in 
evaluating health care quality improvements. Academic Pediatrics 2013; 
13(6): S38-S44.  
21 
Robson D, Yates M, Craig T, Healey A, McNeill A. Time to smoke: 
facilitating smoking breaks in mental health inpatient settings: Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research 2016; 18(8): 1794-97.  
22 
Singh I, Okeke J, Edwards C. Outcome of in-patient falls in hospitals 
with 100% single rooms and multi-bedded wards. Age and Ageing 2015; 
44(6): 1032-35.  
23 
Irwin A, Ross J, Seaton J, Mearns K. Retrospective analysis of DATIX 
dispensing error reports from Scottish NHS hospitals. International Journal of 
Pharmacy Practice 2011; 19(6): 417-23.  
 20 
 
24 
Stewart R, Soremekun M, Perera G, Broadbent M, Callard F, Denis M 
et al. The South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust Biomedical 
Research Centre (SLAM BRC) case register: development and descriptive 
data. BMC Psychiatry 2009; 9(1).  
25 Wood S. N. Generalized additive models: an introduction with R. (Boca 
Raton: Chapman and Hall, 2006 
26 
Wood S. Fast stable restricted maximum likelihood and marginal 
likelihood estimation of semiparametric generalized linear models. Journal of 
the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 2010; 73(1): 
3-36.  
27 
RStudio Team (2015). RStudio: Integrated Development for R. 
RStudio, Inc., Boston, MA. http://www.rstudio.com/.  
28 
Papadopoulos C, Ross J, Stewart D, Dack C, James K, Bowers L. The 
antecedents of violence and aggression within psychiatric in-patient settings. 
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 2012; 125(6): 425-39.  
29 
Bowers L, Allan T Simpson A, Jones J, Van Der Merwe M and Jeffery. 
D Identifying key factors associated with aggression on acute inpatient 
psychiatric wards. Issues in Mental Health 2009: 30:4, 260-27 
30 
Lawn S, Campion J. Achieving Smoke-Free Mental Health Services: 
Lessons from the Past Decade of Implementation Research. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 2013;10(9):4224-44. 
31 
Leyro T, Hall S, Hickman N, Kim R, Hall S, Prochaska J. Clinical 
Management of Tobacco Dependence in Inpatient Psychiatry: Provider 
Practices and Patient Utilization. Psychiatric Services 2013; 64(11):1161-65. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 
 
Figure 1: Number of physical assaults per month (vertical line indicates 
introduction of comprehensive smoke-free policy) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 
Table 1: Incident rate ratios estimated by GAMM  
 
All physical assaults  
Patient-toward-staff assaults 
Patient-toward-patient 
assaults 
 
Adjusted for 
time and 
month 
Parsimonious 
model 
Adjusted for 
time and 
month 
Parsimonious 
model 
Adjusted for 
time and 
month 
Parsimonious 
model 
Incidence rate ratio (IRR) 
0.66 
0.61 
0.64 
0.53 
0.65 
0.85 
95% CI 
0.57-0.77 
0.53-0.70 
0.55-0.74 
0.44-0.63 
0.53-0.80 
0.80-0.92 
p-value 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
Variables included in model: 
Thin plate spline for underlying time trend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cyclic cubic spline for month 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients male 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients aged <45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients who smoke 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients with schizophrenia/ schizotypal/ 
delusional disorder (F20-29) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients with mood/ affective disorder (F30-39) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients sectioned under Mental Health Act 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Autocorrelated residuals 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
Adjusted R2 
0.116 
-0.083 
0.123 
0.197 
-0.087 
-0.234 
 Included in the model.   MA= moving average   
 
 
 
 
 23 
 
Table 2: Parsimonious models assuming patients with missing smoking data are either smokers (worst case scenario) or non-
smokers (best case scenario) 
 
 
All physical assaults 
Incidents of patient-on-
staff assaults 
Incidents of patient-on-
patient assaults 
 
Assume 
smokers 
(worst case 
scenario) 
Assume 
non-
smokers 
(best case 
scenario) 
Assume 
smokers 
(worst case 
scenario) 
Assume 
non-
smokers 
(best case 
scenario) 
Assume 
smokers 
(worst case 
scenario) 
Assume 
non-
smokers 
(best case 
scenario) 
Incidence rate ratio (IRR) 
0.69 
0.69 
0.73 
0.69 
0.85 
0.85 
95% CI 
0.57-0.84 
0.57-0.84 
0.68-0.79 
0.64-0.74 
0.80-0.92 
0.80-0.92 
p-value 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
Variables included in model: 
Thin plate spline for underlying time trend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cyclic cubic spline for month 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients male 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients aged <45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients who smoke 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients with schizophrenia/ schizotypal/ 
delusional disorder (F20-29) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients with mood/ affective disorder 
(F30-39) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% patients sectioned under Mental Health 
Act 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Autocorrelated residuals 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
MA(1) 
Adjusted R2 
0.169 
0.169 
0.065 
0.151 
-0.234 
-0.234 
 Included in model.   MA=moving average 
