 N E U R O D E G EN E R A T I V E D I SE A S E
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Transplantation of wild-type mouse hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells ameliorates deficits in
a mouse model of Friedreich’s ataxia
Celine J. Rocca,1 Spencer M. Goodman,1 Jennifer N. Dulin,2 Joseph H. Haquang,1 Ilya Gertsman,1
Jordan Blondelle,3 Janell L. M. Smith,1 Charles J. Heyser,2 Stephanie Cherqui1*
Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is an incurable autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease caused by reduced
expression of the mitochondrial protein frataxin due to an intronic GAA-repeat expansion in the FXN gene.
We report the therapeutic efficacy of transplanting wild-type mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
(HSPCs) into the YG8R mouse model of FRDA. In the HSPC-transplanted YG8R mice, development of muscle
weakness and locomotor deficits was abrogated as was degeneration of large sensory neurons in the dorsal
root ganglia (DRGs) and mitochondrial capacity was improved in brain, skeletal muscle, and heart. Transplanted
HSPCs engrafted and then differentiated into microglia in the brain and spinal cord and into macrophages
in the DRGs, heart, and muscle of YG8R FRDA mice. We observed the transfer of wild-type frataxin and Cox8
mitochondrial proteins from HSPC-derived microglia/macrophages to FRDA mouse neurons and muscle myocytes
in vivo. Our results show the HSPC-mediated phenotypic rescue of FRDA in YG8R mice and suggest that this
approach should be investigated further as a strategy for treating FRDA.
INTRODUCTION
Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is a multisystemic autosomal recessive dis-
ease predominantly caused by GAA-repeat hyperexpansion within the
first intron of the frataxin gene (FXN) (1). Long GAA repeats cause re-
duced expression of frataxin, a highly conserved mitochondrial protein
mainly expressed in mitochondria-rich tissues including the nervous
system, muscle, and heart (2). Although its function is not fully eluci-
dated, frataxin is known to be an iron-binding protein participating in
Fe-S cluster assembly. In the absence of frataxin, iron accumulates with-
in mitochondria, leading to defective iron-mediated biosynthetic pro-
cesses and increased oxidative stress (3–5). Pathologically, frataxin
insufficiency leads to spinocerebellar neurodegeneration, ataxia, muscle
weakness, and cardiomyopathy (1, 6). The primary pathological cause
of the neuropathy is the loss of large sensory neurons in the dorsal root
ganglia (DRGs), particularly in the lumbar region (7, 8), and the atrophy
of dentate nuclei in the cerebellum (9). The transgenic YG8R mouse
model, which exclusively expresses two mutant human FXN transgenes
(hFXN) containing GAA expansions, develops progressive neurological
degeneration with locomotor and coordination deficits and muscle
weakness (10). Among transgenic FRDA mouse models expressing
human FXN with expanded repeats, YG8R is the most severe model
exhibiting substantial coordination and locomotor deficits by 3 months
of age (11, 12).
Human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) from the
bone marrow are ideal candidates for use in regenerative medicine and
cell replacement therapy because of their ease of isolation, self-renewal
capacity, and safety. Although the ability of HSPC transplantation to
rescuenonhematopoietictissueremainscontentious,wepreviouslydem-
onstrated that a single systemic transplant of wild-type mouse HSPCs
led to long-term kidney, eye, and thyroid preservation in a mouse model
of the multisystemic lysosomal storage disorder cystinosis (13–16). In
this mouse model, the disease phenotype was rescued by the differen-
tiation of wild-type HSPCs into macrophages that delivered lysosomes
bearingfunctionalcystinosin into diseasedhostcells potentially through
long tubular extensions known as tunneling nanotubes (17). Tunneling
nanotubes have been described as an intercellular delivery route for
chemical mediators, proteins, and organelles such as lysosomes and
mitochondria (18–20). We hypothesized that transplantation of wild-
type mouse HSPCs could provide a delivery vehicle for functional fra-
taxin and thereby alleviate disease progression in a mouse model of
FRDA in which the mice express the mutant human frataxin (FXN)
gene. Here, we report that wild-type mouse HSPC transplantation into
young YG8R mice rescued many aspects of the FRDA phenotype in-
cluding coordination and locomotion deficits and vacuolar degenera-
tion of DRG neurons.
RESULTS
Transplantation of wild-type mouse HSPCs prevents the
onset of severe locomotor deficits in YG8R mice
To investigate the potential of wild-type mouse HSPC transplantation
for treating FRDA, we intravenously injected lethally irradiated 2-month-
old YG8R (mfxn−/− hFXN+) mice with wild-type green fluorescent
protein (GFP)–expressing or DsRed-expressing Sca1+ mouse HSPCs
(n = 13). Donor-derived HSPC engraftment ranged from 35 to 96%
(expressed as a percentage of GFP-positive white blood cells in peripheral
blood) (table S1). As controls, we analyzed wild-type YG8R littermates
(n = 16), nontransplanted YG8R littermates (n = 4), or lethally ir-
radiated YG8R mice transplanted with YG8R (mfxn−/− hFXN+) HSPCs
(n = 5). YG8R mice exhibited a progressive decrease in locomotor ac-
tivity and coordination deficits by 3 months of age (10, 12). Thus, we
assessed sensory function, motor function, and muscle strength for each
group at both 5 and 9 months of age (3 and 7 months after transplan-
tation, respectively). No difference in performance was observed in any
of the behavioral tests at either time point between nontransplanted
YG8R mice and those transplanted with mfxn−/− hFXN+ (control)
1Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 2Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 3Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: scherqui@ucsd.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
1 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 HSPCs (Fig. 1A), indicating that neither irradiation nor transplantation
with mfxn−/− hFXN+ HSPCs ameliorated the disease phenotype. Com-
paredtowild-typemice,YG8Rmiceandthosetransplantedwithmfxn−/−
hFXN+ (control) HSPCs displayed reduced open-field locomotor activ-
ity, impaired coordination in the rotarod test, and alterations in gait, as
well as decreased forelimb grip strength at both time points (Fig. 1A),
consistent with previous reports (10, 12). In contrast, YG8R mice trans-
planted with wild-type mouse HSPCs exhibited normal locomotor ac-
tivity and muscle strength at both 3 and 7 months after transplantation
(Fig. 1A). Together, these data demonstrated that wild-type mouse
HSPC transplantation in 2-month-old YG8R mice rescued the progres-
sive neurobehavioral and muscular deficits characteristic of this FRDA
animal model. In contrast to our previous findings in a cystinosis model
(14, 16), the YG8R mouse exhibiting the lowest percentage of donor-
derived cell engraftment (35%; table S1) still exhibited physiological res-
cue of the behavioral deficits (table S2).
Wild-type mouse HSPC transplantation prevents the
degeneration of large sensory neurons in YG8R mice
Neuropathology in FRDA results, in part, from degeneration of large
sensory neurons in DRGs (8), causing the formation of large vacuoles
within the lumbar DRGs of YG8R mice (10). Vacuolar accumulation in
lumbar level 5 (L5) DRG neurons was detected in 9-month-old YG8R
control mice with no significant difference in vacuolar area between
nontransplanted and mfxn−/− hFXN+ HSPC-transplanted YG8R mice
(P = 0.5408; Fig. 1B). In contrast, YG8R mice transplanted with wild-
type mouse HSPCs exhibited a significant reduction in vacuolar area
that was comparable to that of wild-type mice (P < 0.005; Fig. 1B).
Fig. 1. Neurobehavioral testing in YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type mouse HSPCs. (A) Neurobehavioral testing (open field, rotarod, gait, and grip strength)
was performed for wild-type (WT) mice (n = 16), nontransplanted YG8R control mice (YG8R; n = 4), YG8R mice transplanted with YG8R mfxn−/− hFXN+ HSPCs (YG8R/
YG8R HSPCs; n = 5), and YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type HSPCs (YG8R/WT HSPCs; n = 13) at both 5 and 9 months of age. Locomotor activity was tested using an
open-field test, coordination was tested using a rotarod test, gait was tested using an automated gait analysis system, and muscle strength was tested using a forelimb
grip strength test. Data are means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005 and ***P < 0.0005. For statistical comparison of three experimental groups, a mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with age of testing as a within-subjects variable was used, followed by independent sample t test. (B) Nissl-stained sections of the lumbar DRGs (L5) from
representative 9-month-old wild-type mice (n = 15), YG8R control mice (n = 4), YG8R/YG8R HSPCs (n = 4), and YG8R/WT HSPCs (n = 11). Large vacuoles are shown by
red arrows. Scale bars, 100 mm. Graph depicts total vacuolar area per DRG area (right). Data are means ± SEM. **P < 0.005 and ***P < 0.0005 (Mann-Whitney non-
parametric test corrected for multiple testing by the Bonferroni correction). (C) Representative confocal images from a WT GFP+ HSPC-transplanted YG8R mouse 7 months
after transplantation, stained with anti-GFP (green) and anti-NeuN (red) antibodies. Left: Image of a DRG. Scale bar, 100 mm (top). Magnified image with scale bar, 20 mm
(below). Right: Images of cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spinal cord. Scale bars, 250 mm. (D) Confocal images of the DRG and spinal cord from a YG8R mouse transplanted
with GFP+ HSPCs show engrafted cells (GFP; green) with neurons (NeuN; blue) and the Iba1 microglial marker (red). Scale bars, 30 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
2 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Wild-type mouse HSPCs differentiate into phagocytic cells
after engraftment in the mouse nervous system
Given that FRDA affects the central nervous system (CNS) in addition
to peripheral sensory neurons (8), we next investigated the engraftment
and differentiation of wild-type mouse HSPCsin different regions of the
YG8R mouse nervous system. We found substantial engraftment of
GFP+ HSPC-derived cells within the DRGs, spinal cord, and peripheral
nerves, and as expected, most of the neurons appeared to be myelinated
(Fig. 1C and fig. S1). Within the DRGs in all spinal cord regions, donor
cells were found in close proximity to neurons and were immunoreactive
for the macrophage markers CD68 and major histocompatibility
complex class II (MHCII), as well as Iba1, characterizing these cells as
DRG-resident macrophages (Fig. 1, C and D, and fig. S2, A and B)
(21). In the spinal cord of the recipient YG8R mice, HSPC-derived cells
wereabundantintheascendingsensoryaxontracts,withinthedorsaland
ventral roots, motor neuron pools, and dorsal spinal cord gray matter
(Fig. 1, C and D). These cells were >99% Iba1+ and CD68+, whereas
fewer cells expressed MHCII (~30%; fig. S2, A to C), indicating their
microglial identity (22, 23). Three-dimensional (3D) visualization of
the engrafted spinal cord that was subjected to tissue clearing showed
that a high concentration of engrafted HSPC-derived cells was found in
close proximity to perivascular regions, suggesting that these cells may
have infiltrated the CNS via the vasculature (video S1). Graft-derived
cells were also detected throughout the gray and white matter in the
brain, brainstem, and cerebellum of transplanted YG8R mice (Fig.
2A). The vast majority (>99%) of HSPC-derived cells within all regions
of the brain displayed the typical ramified morphology of microglia and
expressed CD68 and Iba1 but were not immunoreactive for MHCII,
demonstrating that these cells were microglial cells (Fig. 2B and fig.
S2, A, B, and D) (24). Perivascular infiltration in the brain was further
demonstrated by the presence of GFP+ HSPC-derived cells in close
proximity to blood vessels (fig. S2E), especially in the highly vascular-
ized choroid plexus (fig. S2F), as previously described (25).
Wild-type mouse HSPC transplantation restores frataxin
expression and normalizes mitochondrial function in the
brains of YG8R mice
Analysis of murine frataxin (mFxn) expression in the mouse brain con-
firmed that tissue engraftment of the HSPC-derived cells correlated
with partial restoration of mFxn expression in transplanted mice com-
pared to nontransplanted YG8R control mice, although mFxn expres-
sion did not reach that of wild-type animals. Residual expression of
mFxn was also detected in YG8R mice, most likely because of cross-
reactivity of the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers
with human FXN (Fig. 2C). Mitochondrial dysfunction in FRDA is
associated with an increase in oxidized proteins within tissues (10, 26).
Compared to wild-type control mice, oxidized proteins were signifi-
cantly higher (P < 0.05) in the cerebrum of YG8R mice and those trans-
planted with mfxn−/− hFXN+ HSPCs (Fig. 2D). Wild-type mouse HSPC
transplantation resulted in attenuation of the accumulation of oxidized
proteins in YG8R mice to amounts comparable to that found in wild-
type animals, suggesting restoration of mitochondrial function in the
transplanted mice (Fig. 2D).
In addition, mitochondrial function was assessed using mitochon-
drial PCR array profiling (27) in the cerebrum of wild-type, YG8R,
and HSPC-transplanted YG8R mice. Expression of mitochondrial
genes crucial for a wide variety of processes ranging from control of ap-
optosis to oxidative phosphorylation was altered in the YG8R animals.
Of the 89 genes tested, 15.7% showed an increase of at least twofold over
wild-type mice, whereas only 4.4% of the genes were up-regulated in
transplanted YG8Rmice (Fig. 2E). Of these genes, five were significantly
up-regulated in YG8R mice compared to wild-type animals, including
several members of the solute carrier family of inner mitochondrial
membrane transporters and other proteins involved in mitochondrial
lipid metabolism (P < 0.05; Fig. 2E). No significant differences were ob-
served between YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type mouse HSPCs
and wild-type animals (Fig. 2E).
Wild-type mouse HSPCs are engrafted in the YG8R mouse
heart and muscle, reducing iron deposition and decreasing
skeletal muscle atrophy
An increase in oxidized proteins was also demonstrated in the skeletal
muscle of YG8R control mice relative to wild-type mice, although this
was not significant; normal amounts of oxidized proteins were found in
the skeletal muscle of transplanted YG8R mice (P = 0.0798; Fig. 3A).
Furthermore, in skeletal muscle biopsies, we quantified by mass spec-
trometry lactate and pyruvate, metabolites that have been shown to be
elevated in some mitochondrial diseases (28). There was a significant
increase in the lactate-to-pyruvate ratio in the skeletal muscle of YG8R
mice compared to wild-type mice (P < 0.0005), which was corrected
in the HSPC-transplanted YG8R animals (Fig. 3B).
In addition to neurological deficits, FRDA patients also develop a
progressive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (29, 30). Thus, we investi-
gated the potential impact of HSPC transplantation on heart pathology
in YG8R mice. However, cardiomyopathy is very mild in this mouse
model (10), and no phenotype was found in the YG8R mice compared
to wild-type mice at 9 months of age (fig. S3A). Evidence of cellular iron
metabolic dysregulation in the form of iron deposition in cardiomyo-
cytes has been observed in FRDA patients (31) and in 14- to 18-month-
old YG22 mice (another FRDA mouse model expressing one copy of
the mutated human frataxin gene) (10, 32). We observed iron deposi-
tion in mouse cardiomyocytes, as revealed by Perl’s staining of heart
sections from 18-month-old nontransplanted YG8R mice; this deposi-
tion was significantly decreased in YG8R mice transplanted with wild-
type mouse HSPCs (P = 0.042; Fig. 3C).
In both heart and skeletal muscle tissues, mFxn expression was
increased in the wild-type HSPC-transplanted mice compared to
YG8R control mice (Fig. 3, D and E). Confocal microscopy analysis re-
vealed large numbers of GFP+ cells engrafted in these tissues in HSPC-
transplanted YG8R animals (Fig. 3, F and G). The engrafted GFP+ cells
expressedCD68and MHCII (fig. S3, BandC),indicating that these cells
were macrophages.
To investigate potential muscular atrophy in YG8R mice, we
measured the expression of two muscle-specific E3 ubiquitin ligases,
muscle RING finger 1 (MuRF-1) and muscle atrophy F-box/atrogin-1,
and a member of the transforming growth factor–b superfamily, myo-
statin, which are all increased during skeletal muscle atrophy (33, 34).
Expression of MuRF-1, atrogin-1, and myostatin was increased in the
skeletal muscle from YG8R mice compared to wild-type mice (although
this was not significant for atrogin-1). In contrast, expression of these
three muscle proteins was normal in the transplanted YG8R mice (Fig.
3H), demonstrating the rescue of this defect by transplantation of wild-
type mouse HSPCs.
Macrophages deliver frataxin to YG8R mouse fibroblasts
We previously reported that in the lysosomal storage disorder cystino-
sis, mouse HSPC-derived macrophages promote functional rescue of
diseased cells through a lysosomal corrective mechanism (17). Hence,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
3 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 2. Transplanted wild-type mouse HSPCs engraft throughout the YG8R mouse brain. (A) Representative transverse section of the brain of a YG8R mouse 7 months after
transplantation with wild-type mouse GFP+ HSPCs, labeled with anti-GFP (green) and anti-NeuN (red) antibodies. Scale bar, 1 mm. Magnified image #1 of the brain shows the
periventricular regions including the corpus callosum (cc), lateral septal nuclei (LS), caudate putamen (CP), anterior cingulate area (ACA), and the somatosensory cortex (M1 and
S2). VL, lateral ventricle. Scale bar, 150 mm. Magnified image #2 of the mouse brain shows the ventral striatum including the anterior commissure (aco), nucleus accumbens (ACB),
lateral septal nuclei, and caudate putamen. Scale bar, 150 mm. Magnified image #3 shows the ventral pallidum (PAL) and the ventral striatum, including the islands of Calleja (isl)
and the olfactory tubercle (OT). Scale bar, 150 mm. Lower panels depict the gray and white matter of the brain stem and cerebellum. Scale bar, 500 mm. Insets magnify the dentate
nucleus (DN) of the cerebellum and the spinal trigeminal nucleus (Sp) of the brain stem. Scale bar, 50 mm. (B) Confocal images of YG8R mouse brain labeled with anti-GFP (green),
anti-Iba1 (red), and anti-NeuN (blue) antibodies. Scale bar, 30 mm. (C) Quantification of murine frataxin mRNA expression in the cerebellum from wild-type mice (n = 14), YG8R mice
(n = 8), and YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type mouse HSPCs (n = 13). Data are represented as fold change relative to wild type normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH). Data are means ± SEM. **P < 0.005 and ***P < 0.0005 (one-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Student’s t test). (D) Representative Western blot showing
protein oxidation in the cerebrum from one wild-type mouse, one YG8R nontransplanted mouse, one YG8R mouse transplanted with YG8R HSPCs (YG8R/YG8R HSPCs), and one
YG8R mouse transplanted with wild-type HSPCs (YG8R/WT HSPCs), with (+) or without (−) a 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNP) derivatization reagent. Cerebrum tissue from
9-month-old YG8R control mice (n = 4) and YG8R/YG8R HSPC mice (n = 4) was compared to that from wild-type mice (n = 6) and YG8R/WT HSPCs (n = 6). Data are means ±
SEM. *P < 0.05 (one-tailed t test). Tub, tubulin; a.u., arbitrary units. (E) Scatterplots of mitochondrial gene expression changes in the cerebrum (n = 3) from wild-type animals
compared to YG8R nontransplanted control mice (left) or YG8R/WT HSPCs mice (middle). The center line represents no change in gene expression, and up-regulated and
down-regulated genes at a fold change of 2 or greater are noted by yellow and blue dots, respectively. mRNA changes that are significantly different between groups are
represented on a separate bar graph (right). Data are means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005, compared to wild-type mice (one-way ANOVA, followed by post
hoc Student’s t test).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
4 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 3. Transplanted wild-type mouse HSPCs
are engrafted in the heart and muscle of
YG8R recipient mice. (A) Representative Western
blot showing protein oxidation in the skeletal
muscle of one wild-type mouse, one YG8R control
mouse (YG8R), and one YG8R mouse transplanted
with wild-type mouse HSPCs (YGR8/WT HSPCs),
with (+) or without (−) a 2,4-dinitrophenylhydra-
zine derivatization reagent. Nine-month-old
YG8R control mice [which included nontrans-
planted YG8R mice (n = 4) and YG8R mice trans-
planted with YG8R HSPCs (n = 5)] were compared
to wild-type mice (n = 16) and YG8R mice trans-
planted with wild-type mouse HSPCs (YG8R/WT
HSPCs; n = 13). Error bars indicate SEM. *P <
0.05. NS, statistically nonsignificant (one-tailed
t test). (B) Quantification of lactate and pyruvate
by mass spectrometry (represented as a ratio) in
muscle tissues from wild-type mice (n = 6), YG8R
nontransplanted control mice (n = 3), and YG8R
mice transplanted with wild-type mouse HSPCs
(n = 5). Error bars indicate SEM. *P < 0.05 and
***P < 0.0005 (one-way ANOVA, followed by
post hoc Student’s t test). (C) Representative
Perl’s staining of heart sections from an 18-month-
oldwild-typemouse,YG8Rnontransplantedmouse,
and YG8R mouse transplanted with wild-type
HSPCs; blue staining indicates iron deposition.
Scale bars, 50 and 15 mm (inset). The associated
bar graph shows iron quantification in heart
sections from wild-type mice (n = 4), YG8R control
mice [nontransplanted (n = 2) and YG8R mice
transplanted with YG8R HSPCs (n = 2)], and
YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type mouse
HSPCs (n = 3). Error bars indicate SEM. *P < 0.05
(one-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Student’s
t test). (D and E) Quantification of murine frataxin
mRNA expression in the heart (D) and skeletal
muscle (E) from wild-type mice (n = 12), YG8R
nontransplanted control mice (YG8R; n = 7), and
YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type mouse
HSPCs (YG8R/WT HSPCs; n = 11). Data are repre-
sented as fold change relative to wild-type nor-
malized to GAPDH; error bars indicate SEM. *P <
0.05, **P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005 (one-way ANOVA,
followed by post hoc Student’s t test). (F) Heart
section from a YG8R mouse 7 months after trans-
plantation with wild-type mouse HSPCs, stained
with anti-GFP (green) antibody, the cardiomyo-
cyte marker anti–a-actinin (magenta) antibody,
and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) nuclear
stain (blue). Scale bar, 150 mm. Magnified images
on the right showthe leftventricle (bottom)and the
baseoftheaorta(top).Scalebars,50mm.(G)Skeletal
muscle section from a YG8R mouse 7 months
after transplantation with wild-type mouse HSPCs,
stained with anti-GFP (green) antibody, filamen-
tous actin dye phalloidin (magenta) antibody,
and DAPI nuclear stain (blue). Scale bar, 150 mm.
Magnified image of the skeletal muscle (inset).
Scale bar, 50 mm. (H) Quantification of murine
MuRF-1, atrogin-1, and myostatin mRNA expression in the skeletal muscle from wild-type mice (n = 5), YG8R nontransplanted control mice (n = 5), and YG8R mice transplanted
with wild-type mouse HSPCs (n = 5). Data are represented as fold change relative to wild-type normalized to GAPDH; error bars indicate SEM. *P < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA, followed by
post hoc Student’s t test).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
5 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 we asked whether phagocytic cells could also mediate the transfer of
frataxin into mfxn−/− hFXN+ mouse fibroblasts in vitro. We cocultured
fibroblasts harvested from YG8R mouse neonatal skin with macro-
phages isolated from the bone marrow of cytochrome c oxidase subunit
VIII (Cox8)–GFP DsRed mice that ubiquitously expressed the mitochon-
drial Cox8 protein fused to GFP and the cytosolic DsRed reporter (35, 36).
Usingliveimaging,weobservedthattheCox8-GFPproteinwastransferred
from the DsRed-expressing macrophages to the mfxn−/− hFXN+ fibro-
blasts (Fig. 4A and video S2). In parallel, we used macrophages stably
transduced with a lentiviral vector (LV) containing the human mito-
chondrial frataxin gene tagged with GFP (LV-hFXN-GFP). Mito-
chondria were then labeled with MitoTracker Red in the coculture
assay. Movement of hFXN-GFP–bearing mitochondria was observed
from the macrophages to the diseased fibroblasts, and hFXN-GFP
could be observed in the recipient FRDA mouse fibroblasts (Fig. 4B
and video S3).
Wild-type mouse HSPC-derived microglia and macrophages
transfer mitochondrial proteins to YG8R mouse neurons
in vivo
To assess whether transfer of mitochondrial proteins occurred in vivo,
we transplanted YG8R mice with HPSCs isolated from DsRed Cox8-
GFP mice. Cox8-GFP punctae were detected not only within the
DsRed-expressing microglial cells but also within neurons in the
YG8R mouse brain, spinal cord, and DRGs (Fig. 4C and fig. S4). We
typically observed that neurons containing Cox8-GFP were in contact
with one or more DsRed+ microglial branch extensions (Fig. 4C), and
GFP+ punctae were also observed within these microglial processes (Fig.
4D). Quantification in spinal cord tissue revealed that about 50% of
neurons contained Cox8-GFP staining (see Fig. 4E and fig. S5 for quan-
tification methodology). Transfer of frataxin from microglia to neurons
was also demonstrated by transplanting YG8R mice with HSPCs
isolated from DsRed transgenic mice and stably transduced with LV-
hFXN-GFP (Fig. 4F). In addition, evidence of transfer was apparent
in the heart and skeletal muscle, in which Cox8-GFP was detected in
recipient mouse muscle myocytes that were next to graft-derived
macrophages (fig. S4B). Together, these results suggest that mitochon-
drial protein transfer occurs from microglia to neuronal cells and that
this transfer may be involved in HSPC-mediated rescue of the FRDA
phenotype in the YG8R mouse model.
DISCUSSION
There is a pressing need to identify effective therapies for FRDA, a de-
bilitating neurodegenerative disease for which there remains no treat-
ment. To date, preclinical studies using stem cells or gene therapy have
had limited success or have been restricted to assessment of improve-
ments in specific tissues (29, 37–39). A recent in vivo study reported the
prevention and reversal of severe cardiomyopathy in a skeletal muscle
conditional frataxin-knockout mouse model after intravenous injection
of AAV9 (adeno-associated virus serotype 9)–hFXN complementary
DNA (cDNA) (29). Here, we demonstrated that a single transplant of
wild-type mouse HSPCs into young adult YG8R mice prevented the
development of FRDA pathology, including neurobehavioral deficits,
muscle weakness, and degeneration of DRG sensory neurons. The
key advantage of exogenous HSPC transplantation is the capacity of
these cells to permanently repopulate the bone marrow and migrate
from their niche to differentiate into phagocytic cell types within
multiple tissues (17). HSPCs may even be able to transmigrate across
the blood-brain barrier and engraft within the CNS as differentiated mi-
croglia (24, 25, 40, 41). This phenomenon is enhanced by tissue injury
(24, 42, 43) or by using busulfan-mediated myeloablation instead of
total body irradiation (44). We show that transplanted wild-type mouse
HSPCs differentiated into microglial cells in the CNS of the YG8R re-
cipient mice and into macrophages in the DRGs, peripheral nerves,
skeletal muscle, and heart, the primary sites of FRDA pathology.
We showed a reduction in oxidative stress in HSPC-treated YG8R
mouse tissues compared to that in tissues of YG8R nontransplanted mice
or animals transplanted with YG8R HSPCs. Oxidative stress is a major
component of FRDA pathogenesis and may account for neuronal degen-
eration (45). Oxidative stress has also recently been shown to induce
DNA damage and elevation of poly(adenosine 5′-diphosphate–ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP1) expression in frataxin-deficient microglial
cells, which resulted in increased microglial activation (46). Because
PARP1 activation leads to increased inflammatory cytokine expression
in microglial cells (47), these findings suggest that oxidative stress may
induce neuroinflammatory-mediated neurodegeneration in FRDA.
Hence, the robust neurological phenotypic rescue we observed in
HSPC-transplanted YG8R mice may be, in part, due to the replacement
of the frataxin-deficient microglial cells by wild-type microglia. Mito-
chondrial function was assessed by mitochondrial PCR array profiling
in the cerebrum of YG8R mice. Our findings showed a number of up-
regulated genes (>2-fold change) in YG8R mice compared to wild-type
mice (13 of 84 genes). In contrast, very few changes in expression were
identified between wild-type mice and HSPC-transplanted YG8R mice
(four genes), and none was identified with a significant difference.
Among the significantly up-regulated genes in YG8R mice versus
wild-type mice, there were 25 genes from the solute mitochondrial
carrier protein family (P < 0.05) (48), including Mipep, an important
component of the human mitochondrial import machinery implicated
in developmental delay (49), and the fatty acid transporter Cpt1b, which
is up-regulated in posttraumatic stress disorder (50).
Cellular iron metabolism dysregulation was first demonstrated in
FRDA by Lamarche and colleagues (31), who reported the presence
of iron deposits in cardiomyocytes of patients. Here, we demonstrated
the presence of abundant iron deposits in heart sections from nontrans-
planted YG8R control mice, whereas very few were observed in wild-
type mice or YG8R mice transplanted with wild-type mouse HSPCs,
suggesting that there was normal iron metabolism in the transplanted
YG8R mice. In contrast, preclinical and clinical data using an iron che-
lator as a potential therapeutic agent showed a limited beneficial effect
on some neurological functions but worsening of gait and posture (51).
We propose that a frataxin transfer mechanism is involved in FRDA
phenotypic rescue after wild-type mouse HSPC transplantation to
YG8R mice. After hFXN-GFP–expressing murine HSPC transplanta-
tion into YG8R mice, we observed the transfer of human frataxin-
GFP from the mouse HSPC-derived microglia/macrophages to YG8R
mouse neurons in the brain, spinal cord, and DRGs and to myocytes in
the skeletal muscle and heart. We also demonstrated the transfer of the
mitochondrial protein Cox8, suggesting nonselective transfer of mito-
chondrial proteins. This raises several questions that remain to be
answered. First, are entire mitochondria transferred from donor phago-
cytic cells to neurons or is this transfer limited to mitochondrial pro-
teins? Second, is the main route of transfer through vesicular
exchange or intercellular membrane connections? We previously re-
ported that HSPC-derived macrophages in recipient mouse kidney
could deliver cystinosin-containing lysosomes to proximal tubular cells
through tunneling nanotubes in a mouse model of cystinosis (17). In
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
6 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 this context, tunneling nanotubes crossing the basement membrane of
kidney tubular cells seemed to be the only route possible across the con-
tinuous, dense tubular basement membrane. The transfer of mitochon-
dria through tunneling nanotubes has been previously shown in vitro in
response to cellular stress (52). Here, we showed in vitro that frataxin
and Cox8 mitochondrial proteins could be transferred from donor
macrophages to frataxin-deficient fibroblasts. In vivo, we observed
the mitochondrial proteins frataxin-GFP and Cox8-GFP within recipi-
ent YG8R mouse neurons, with about 50% of neurons containing
Cox8-GFP in the spinal cord. There are several potential routes for this
transfer, including vesicular exchange of genetic material (53), release of
mitochondria-containing vesicles (54), or as shown recently, transfer
from astrocytes to neurons in a cerebral ischemia mouse model (55).
An alternative possibility is the microglia-to-neuron transfer of
mitochondria through microglial branch extensions directly in contact
with neurons. Microglial processes are dynamic, actively retracting and
expanding, and capable of making direct contact with neurons, especial-
ly during injury (56, 57).
There are two main limitations to our study. First, the mild delayed
cardiac phenotype of YG8R mice fails to accurately reflect FRDA disease
progression in human patients. Second, we were unable to demonstrate
the route and mechanism of frataxin correction after transplantation in
vivo. Further extensive studies with alternative animal models of FRDA
will be required before definitive conclusions can be drawn.
Our findings demonstrate that a single infusion of wild-type mouse
HSPCs into the YG8R FRDA mouse model resulted in the engraftment
and differentiation of these cells into microglia/macrophages in the
brain,spinalcord, DRGs,skeletalmuscle,andheart,leadingtotherescue
of the disease phenotype. Our work suggests that this strategy could be a
potential approach for treating FRDA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The goals of this study were (i) to investigate whether wild-type mouse
HSPC transplantation could prevent progressive deficits in the YG8R
Fig. 4. Wild-type mouse HSPC-derived cells
deliver frataxin and Cox8 to FRDA cells in vitro
and in vivo. (A and B) Representative frames
from confocal imaging movies of YG8R mouse fi-
broblasts (F) cocultured with (A) primary macro-
phages (M) isolated from a DsRed Cox8-GFP
transgenic mouse (video S2) or (B) IC-21 macro-
phages transduced with LV-hFXN-GFP and stained
with aMitoTracker Red(video S3). Scale bars, 10mm.
(C) Representative confocal images of brain
sections from a YG8R mouse transplanted with
DsRed+ HSPCs (control; see video S4) and those
of brain and spinal cord sections from a YG8R
mousetransplantedwithDsRed+/Cox8-GFP+HSPCs
at 7 months after transplantation, labeled with an
anti-NeuN antibody (blue) (see fig. S4 for the DRG,
heart, and muscle). White arrows depict Cox8-GFP
in recipient mouse neurons in the brain and spinal
cord (see videos S5 and S6 for 3D visualization).
Scale bars, 10 mm. (D) Representative confocal
images of a spinal cord section from a YG8R
mouse transplanted with DsRed+/Cox8-GFP+
HSPCs at 7 months after transplantation, labeled
with an anti-NeuN antibody (blue). White arrows
depict Cox8-GFP within branch extensions of the
DsRed+ microglial cell. Scale bar, 5 mm. (E) Quan-
tification of neurons containing Cox8-GFP in the
cervical spinal cord gray matter of YG8R mice
transplanted with DsRed+/Cox8-GFP+ HSPCs at
7 months after transplantation (see fig. S4 for the
description of the automatic unbiased quantifica-
tion method). (F) Representative confocal images
of brain and spinal cord sections from a YG8R
mouse transplanted with DsRed+ HSPCs trans-
duced with LV-hFXN-GFP at 7 months after trans-
plantation and stained with anti-mCherry (red)
and anti-NeuN (blue) antibodies. Scale bars, 10 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
7 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mouse model of FRDA, (ii) to determine whether wild-type mouse
HSPC transplantation could prevent tissue damage caused by frataxin
deficiency, and (iii) to investigate the mechanism by which HSPC-
derived cells participated in the rescue of the FRDA phenotype. We
transplanted 13 2-month-old YG8R FRDA mice with wild-type mouse
HSPCs and compared them to 16 wild-type mice and 4 nontrans-
planted YG8R FRDA mice. To ensure that neither irradiation nor trans-
plantation was responsible for the improved phenotype observed in the
transplanted mice, we also included five YG8R mice transplanted with
mouse FRDA HSPCs. Two months after transplantation, we measured
donor HSPC engraftment, which ranged between 35 and 96% engraft-
ment. Neurobehavioral testing (open field, rotarod, gait, and grip
strength) was performed for all the groups at 5 and 9 months of age
by a behavioral core facility in a blinded fashion. Mice were euthanized
at 9 months of age, and tissues were collected for cellular, molecular, and
histological analyses.
Animals
YG8R mice with a deletion of murine Fxn gene (mFxn) and expressing
a mutant human FXN gene (hFXN) containing 190 + 90 GAA-repeat
expansion were generated in a C57BL/6J background, as previously de-
scribed (10, 58). Breeding pairs consisted of females heterozygous for
Fxn and males heterozygous for Fxn and hemizygous for FXN [B6.
Cg-Fxntm1Mkn Tg(FXN)YG8Pook/J] and were purchased from the
Jackson Laboratory. YG8R andwild-type mice usedascontrolsforthese
studies were obtained from these breeders. Genotyping was performed
using the following primers: mfxn, 5′-CTTCCCTCTACCCTGCCTTC-
3′ (forward) and 5′- GGAGAACAGTGGACACAGTAACA-3′ (reverse);
PGK-NEO, 5′- CATCGCCTTCTATCGCCTTCT-3′; FXN, 5′-GGGCA-
GATAAAGGAAGGAGATAC-3′ (forward) and 5′-ACGATAGGG-
CAACACCAATAA-3′ (reverse).
Transgenic mice constitutively expressing GFP [C57BL/6-
Tg(ACTB-EGFP)1Osb/J] or DsRed [B6.Cg-Tg(CAG-DsRed*MST)
1Nagy/J] were also purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. The
mtGFP-Tg transgenic mice [C57BL/6J-Tg(CAG-Cox8/EGFP)49Rin]
expressing the Cox8-GFP mitochondrial fusion protein (35, 36) were
provided by the RIKEN BioResource Center through the National
BioResource Project of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Sci-
ence and Technology (MEXT). mtGFP-Tg mice were backcrossed
with DsRed-Tg mice to produce DsRed-mtGFP-Tg mice. Genotyping
for mtGFP was carried out by PCR, as previously described (36). Mice
were maintained in a temperature- and humidity-controlled animal
facility, with a 12-hour light/dark cycle and free access to water and
food. Both male and female mice were used in all experiments. All
mice were bred at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD)
vivarium, and all protocols were approved by the UCSD Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee.
Frataxin-GFP lentivirus construction, production, and titer
The self-inactivating LV, pCCL-EFS-X-WPRE (pCCL)–GFP, was used
for stable gene transfer in HSPCs and macrophages. The vector back-
bone contains the intron-less human elongation factor 1a promoter to
drive transgene expression (59, 60). The human FXN cDNA (633 base
pairs; clone ID 5300379, GE Healthcare) corresponding to the canonical
frataxin (isoform I) found in mitochondria (61) was amplified by PCR
using the primers 5′-TTAGGATCCATGTGGACTCTCG-3′ (forward)
and 5′-AGAGGATCCAGCATCTTTTCCG-3′ (reverse) and inserted
into pCCL-GFP at the Bam HI restriction site in phase with the GFP
cDNA. LV was produced and titered as previously described (62).
Bone marrow cell isolation, transduction, transplantation,
and engraftment
Bone marrow cells were flushed from the femurs of 6- to 8-week-old
YG8R, GFP transgenic, DsRed transgenic, or DsRed mtGFP transgenic
mice. HSPCs were isolated by immunomagnetic separation using anti-
Sca1 antibody conjugated to magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Sca1+
cells were directly transplanted by tail vein injection of 1 × 106 cells re-
suspended in 100 ml of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) into lethally
irradiated (7 gray; X-Rad 320, PXi) YG8R mice. Before transplantation,
Sca1+ cells from the DsRed transgenic mice were first transduced with
LV-hFXN-GFP using a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 in the
presence of polybrene (4 mg/ml) in RetroNectin-coated (20 g/ml)
24-well plates at a density of 2 × 106 cells per well for 16 hours in Stem-
Span medium (STEMCELL Technologies) supplemented with stem cell
factor, thrombopoietin, FLT3 ligand (100 ng/ml each), and interleukin-
6 (20 ng/ml) cytokines (PeproTech). Bone marrow cell engraftment of
the transplanted cells was measured in peripheral blood 2 months after
transplantation; blood samples freshly harvested from the tails were
treated with red blood cell lysis buffer (eBioscience) and subsequently
analyzed by flow cytometry (BD Accuri C6, BD Biosciences) to deter-
mine the proportion of GFP- or DsRed-expressing cells.
Neurobehavioral tests
Wild-type mice, YG8R mice, YG8R mice transplanted with mfxn−/−
hFXN+ HSPCs, and YG8R mice transplanted with either wild-type
mouse GFP or DsRed/mtGFP-labeled HSPCs were tested at both 5
and 9 months of age before being sacrificed for tissue analysis. Rotarod
analysis was performed using a Rota-Rod Series 8 apparatus (Ugo Basile).
The rod was a knurled plastic dowel (diameter, 6.0 cm) set at a height of
30 cm. During training, the mice were placed on the stationary rotarod
for 30 s before the trial was initiated. Then, each mouse was given four
trials per day, with a 60-s intertrial interval on the accelerating rotarod (4
to 40 rpm over 5 min). The latency to fall was recorded for each trial.
Locomotoractivitywasmeasuredusinganautomatedmonitoringsystem
(Kinder Associates). Polycarbonate cages (42 × 22 × 20 cm) containing a
thin layer of bedding material were placed into frames (25.5 × 47 cm)
mounted with photocell beams. Each mouse was placed into the open
field, and all movements were recorded over a 60-s testing period. Grip
strength was measured using a device consisting of a 10-cm-long T-
shaped bar connected to a digital dynamometer (Ugo Basile). Animals
were held by the tail and placed before the bar, allowed to grip the bar
with their forelimbs, and then gently pulled backward until the bar was
released. Ten consecutive measurements were made for each animal, and
both the average and maximal readouts were recorded. Gait measure
(stride length) was collected using an automated gait analysis system
(CatWalk, Noldus Instruments). Animals were placed at one end of
the walkway and allowed to run down the length of the walkway, as
two light sources illuminated the surface contact of paws with the glass
floor, producing an image of a paw print. During locomotion, the glass
walkway was filmed from below by a video camera. The CatWalk
software program was used to analyze recorded footage, define individual
paw prints (for example, left forepaw and right hindpaw), and give read-
outs of multiple parameters of gait. Testing was administered daily
for 5 days. Only unbroken bouts of locomotion, during which animals
ran down the walkway at a consistent speed, were used for analysis.
Primary fibroblast and macrophage isolation and transduction
Fibroblasts were generated from skin biopsiesof neonate of YG8R mice.
Cultures were maintained using high-glucose Dulbecco’s modified
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
8 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Eagle’s medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bo-
vine serum (FBS; Gibco, Life Technologies) and 1% penicillin/strepto-
mycin (PenStrep; Gibco) at 37°C under 5% CO2. Primary macrophages
from DsRed mtGFP mice were derived from bone marrow cells. Bone
marrow cells were flushed from the femurs of 6- to 8-week-old mice and
kept in culture in RPMI 1640 with 10% FBS, 1% PenStrep, and 10%
L929conditionedmedium(29) at 37°Cunder5%CO2. Formacrophage
transduction with pCCL-FXN-eGFP, the IC-21 macrophage cell line
was used (American Type Culture Collection catalog #TIB-186) and
cultured in RPMI 1640 (Gibco). Six-well plates were coated with Retro-
Nectin (20 ml/ml; Takara Bio) following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. IC-21 macrophages were plated at a density of 250,000 cells in
2 ml per well and transduced with pCCL-FXN-eGFP using an MOI
of 15. Medium was changed 24 hours after transduction.
Live imaging
YG8R fibroblasts were cocultured with DsRed Cox8-GFP or macro-
phages stably transduced with a lentivirus expressing hFXN-GFP, as
previously described (17). Briefly, 75,000 fibroblasts were cocultured
with an equal number of macrophages in glass-bottomed culture dishes
(MatTek Corp.). hFXN-GFP cocultures were stained with 50 nM
MitoTracker (Invitrogen) for 45 min before imaging. Confocal live
imaging was performed 1 and 2 days later using PerkinElmer Ultra-
View Vox Spinning Disk Confocal with ×40 [numerical aperture
(NA), 1.30] and ×60 (NA, 1.42) oil objective at 37°C under 5% CO2.
Images were captured, processed, and analyzed using the Volocity
software (PerkinElmer).
Mouse frataxin quantitative reverse transcription PCR
Total RNA was prepared from snap-frozen skeletal muscle, brain, and
heart biopsies using the RNeasy Lipid and Fibrous Tissue kits (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was then prepared
using iScript cDNA Synthesis kit (Bio-Rad). Commercial TaqMan
probes specific to mouse frataxin were used to quantitate expression
(Applied Biosystems).
Measurement of oxidative stress
Protein lysates from tissues directly snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen af-
ter dissection were prepared using radioimmunoprecipitation assay
buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) containing proteases inhibitors (Roche), as
previously described (63). For each assay, 20 mg of protein was used
after total protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic
acid (BCA) assay. Proteins were then derivatized by adding 1× 2,4-
dinitrophenylhydrazine solution contained in the OxyBlot Protein
Oxidation Detection kit (Chemicon International) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were applied to electrophoresis
and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. After
blocking with 1% BSA/PBS–Tween 20, membrane was incubated with
rabbit anti-dinitrophenyl antibody, followed by a goat anti-rabbit
horseradish peroxidase conjugate, and visualized using the ECL kit
(Pierce). Protein amounts were normalized using an anti-tubulin
(ab6161, Abcam) antibody, and band intensity was quantified using
the ImagePro software (Media Cybernetics).
Mouse mitochondria RT2 Profiler PCR Array
RNA was isolated from the cerebrum using the RNeasy Lipid Tissue
Mini kit (Qiagen),and0.5 mg of the sample wasthen reverse-transcribed
with the iScript cDNA Synthesis kit (Bio-Rad). Samples were mixed
with SYBR green, equally loaded into all wells of the Mouse Mitochon-
dria RT2 Profiler PCR Array (catalog no. PAMM-087Z, Qiagen), and
amplified as per the manufacturer’s recommendation on the CFX96
thermocycler (Bio-Rad). Ct data were exported, and fold change was
calculated using the DCt method between sample genes and a panel
of housekeeping controls.
Lactate/pyruvate analysis
Muscle biopsies (10 mg) were homogenized in ice in 1 ml of ice-cold
40% acetonitrile (containing 0.1% formic acid/40% methanol/20%
H2O) using a tissue grinder (Dounce), followed by centrifugation for
10 min at 13,000g. The extraction solution contained a stable isotope
of lactate (13C3 sodium lactate, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc.).
Supernatants were removed, dried in a SpeedVac/lyophilizer system,
and resuspended in 150 ml of 0.1% formic acid. Pellets were redissolved
in 0.1 N NAOH, and protein content was measured using BCA assay.
Five microliters of eachresuspended supernatant was injectedon a C18-
PFP HPLC column (MAC-MOD Analytical), as previously described
(64), and coupled to an API 4000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
(AB Sciex). Molecular reaction monitoring for lactate (89 > 43), 13C3
lactate (92 > 45), and pyruvate (87 > 43 and 87 > 87) was used during
the acquisition. Lactate and pyruvate peaks were both normalized to
13C3 lactate. Both lactate and pyruvate were further normalized to pro-
teincontent(inmilligrams)beforecalculationofthefinallactate/pyruvate
(L/P) peak area ratios used in Fig. 3B. Because the ratio is expressed in
terms of normalized peak areas, the ratio values should not be confused
with those determined from absolute concentration measurements, as
performed in previous studies measuring L/P but still effective for exam-
ining relative differences between cohorts.
Vacuole imaging and quantification
DRGs from L5 were collected, sectioned at 30-mm intervals using a cry-
ostat, and mounted on gelatin-coated slides. DRG sections were stained
with thionin (Nissl stain) for visualization of neuronal cell bodies. Three
DRGs per subject were acquired at a magnification of ×60 using a BZ-
X700 fluorescence microscope (Keyence). The presence of vacuoles in
each DRG was traced and measured by a blinded experimenter in
duplicate using ImageJ; vacuoles were defined as extremely circular
white (Nissl-negative) areas with smooth edges within DRG neurons.
Thenumberofvacuolesand areaof vacuolarspace relativetoentirearea
of each DRG section were compared across genotypes.
Heart histology and iron quantification
For histological preparations, terminally anesthetized mice were fixed
by intracardial perfusion with 10% formalin. Fixed tissues were
dissected, embedded in paraffin wax, and sectioned by standard
methods. Sections were deparaffinized and stained using Perl’s tech-
nique to detect ferric iron, as previously described (10). Whole-heart
sections were imaged on an Keyence fluorescence microscope, and a
single wide-field image was stitched together. Using the ImagePro Pre-
mier software (Media Cybernetics), quantification of iron staining was
assessed by isolating the blue channel, measuring the area of signal, and
then dividing from the total area of the section. Values were reported
normalized to wild type.
Immunofluorescence and image acquisition
Heart and muscle tissues were fixed in 5% paraformaldehyde (PFA),
equilibrated in 20% sucrose overnight, and frozen in Tissue-Tek opti-
mal cutting temperature (OCT) medium at −80°C (Sakura Finetek
USA); 10-mm sections were cut. The DRG, brain, and spinal cord tissue
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
9 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 were fixed in PFA, cryopreserved in 30% sucrose, and frozen in OCT
medium. For DRGs, tissue was cut into 20-mm sections and directly
mounted to gelatin-coated slides. For the brain and spinal cord, tissue
was sectioned to 30 mm and collected as free-floating sections. For im-
munofluorescence, tissues were incubated with the following antibodies:
rat anti-CD68 (1:100; 137001, BioLegend), biotin rat anti-MHCII
(1:100; 553622, BD Pharmigen), rabbit anti-GFP (1:500; ab290, Abcam),
chicken anti-GFP (1:1500; ab13970, Abcam), rabbit anti-Iba1 (1:1500;
#019-19741, Wako), goat anti-mCherry (1:1000; AB0040, Sicgen),
mouse anti-NeuN (1:500; MAB377, Millipore), rabbit anti-MBP (1:200;
AB980, Millipore), mouse anti-NF200 (1:500; MAB5262, Millipore),
mouse anti–a-actinin (1:400; Sigma-Aldrich), rabbit anti–von
Willebrand factor (1:300; Chemicon), DAPI (1:500; Molecular Probes),
and BODIPY-phalloidin (1:100; Molecular Probes). The appropriate
Alexa Fluor–conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) were used
for the visualization of antigens. Images were acquired using an LSM
880 confocal microscope with Airyscan (Zeiss), a Keyence BZ-X710
digital microscope system for high-resolution stitching images of tissue
sections, or an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope for live imaging.
Confocal image stackswere analyzed withthe Imarissoftware (Bitplane,
Oxford Instruments).
Quantification of neuronal correction
The entire gray matter region of lumbar spinal cord sections from
three YG8R mice transplanted with Cox8-GFP HSPCs and an non-
transplanted control was stained with NeuN and imaged at 20× on
an LSM 880 confocal microscope (Zeiss). NeuN+ neuronal cells
were outlined and counted using the ImagePro Plus software
(Media Cybernetics) and then assessed for GFP positivity, which
was reported as a percentage of total NeuN cells (fig. S4). All ac-
quisition, filtration, and processing steps were performed identical-
ly on the GFP channel between all samples.
Optical clearing of mouse spinal cord
A 6-mm segment of the cervical spinal cord from a mouse at 3 months
after transplantation with DsRed+ HSPCs was processed for op-
tical clearing, as previously described (65). Briefly, PFA-fixed tis-
sue was infused with hydrogel monomer solution (4% PFA, 4%
acrylamide, and 0.05% bis-acrylamide) and was thermally polymer-
ized. Lipids were then passively extracted in SDS-containing borate
buffer at 37°C for 4 weeks until the tissue was cleared. Clarified
tissue was incubated in RapiClear CS for 1 day and mounted using
a WillCo dish. Tissues were then imaged using an Olympus
FV1200 system equipped with a 10× water immersion objective
(NA, 0.6; working distance, 3 mm; stack size, 1.65 mm; step size,
5 mm).
Statistics
We did not exclude any animals from our experiments. Experi-
menters were blinded to the genotype of the specific sample to ev-
ery extent possible. We did not perform any power calculation
analysis. All data displayed normal variance, except DRG vacuole
measurements. For normal data and mitochondrial PCR array data,
we performed one-way ANOVA, followed by post hoc Student’s t
test, to determine the statistical significance using GraphPad Prism
7.01 (GraphPad Software). Oxidative stress measurements used
one-tailed t tests with the assumption that YG8R mouse tissue ox-
idation would be higher. For vacuole measurements, we used the
Mann-Whitney nonparametric test corrected for multiple testing
by the Bonferroni correction. In vitro experiments were performed
in biological triplicates. Error bars denote SEM. Significance is in-
dicated as follows: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005, and ***P < 0.0005.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/413/eaaj2347/DC1
Fig. S1. Transplanted HSPCs are engrafted in the peripheral nerves of YG8R mice.
Fig. S2. Transplanted HSPCs differentiate into macrophages in the DRG and into microglia in
the spinal cord and brain of YG8R mice.
Fig. S3. Transplanted HSPCs differentiate into macrophages in the heart and muscle of YG8R
mice.
Fig. S4. HSPC-derived macrophages deliver mitochondrial proteins to neurons in the DRG and
to myocytes in the heart and skeletal muscle.
Fig. S5. Quantification of Cox8-GFP transfer from HSPC-derived microglia to YG8R mouse neurons.
Table S1. Donor-derived HSPC engraftment in YG8R mice transplanted with either GFP+ or
DsRed Cox8-GFP+ HSPCs.
Table S2. Behavioral performance of low-engrafted YG8R mice (that is, less than 50% of donor-
derived engrafted cells) compared to wild-type mice, transplanted YG8R mice with high
engraftment (that is, more than 50% of donor-derived engrafted cells), and YG8R
nontransplanted control mice.
Video S1. 3D visualization of spinal cord tissue from YG8R mice at 3 months after
transplantation with wild-type mouse DsRed+ HSPCs.
Video S2. The mitochondrial protein Cox8-GFP is transferred from macrophages to FRDA
mouse fibroblasts in vitro.
Video S3. The human mitochondrial frataxin gene tagged with GFP is transferred from
macrophages to FRDA mouse fibroblasts in vitro.
Video S4. DsRed microglia connect to multiple neurons in the brain tissue of YG8R mice.
Video S5. Cox8-GFP mitochondrial proteins are transferred from a DsRed microglial cell to
multiple neurons in the brain tissue of YG8R mice.
Video S6. Cox8-GFP mitochondrial proteins are transferred from a DsRed microglial cell to
multiple neurons in the spinal cord tissue of YG8R mice.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. V. Campuzano, L. Montermini, M. D. Moltò, L. Pianese, M. Cossée, F. Cavalcanti, E. Monros,
F. Rodius, F. Duclos, A. Monticelli, F. Zara, J. Cañizares, H. Koutnikova, S. I. Bidichandani,
C. Gellera, A. Brice, P. Trouillas, G. De Michele, A. Filla, R. De Frutos, F. Palau, P. I. Patel,
S. Di Donato, J.-L. Mandel, S. Cocozza, M. Koenig, M. Pandolfo, Friedreich’s ataxia:
Autosomal recessive disease caused by an intronic GAA triplet repeat expansion. Science
271, 1423–1427 (1996).
2. H. Koutnikova, V. Campuzano, F. Foury, P. Dollé, O. Cazzalini, M. Koenig, Studies of
human, mouse and yeast homologues indicate a mitochondrial function for frataxin. Nat.
Genet. 16, 345–351 (1997).
3. S. Adinolfi, C. Iannuzzi, F. Prischi, C. Pastore, S. Iametti, S. R. Martin, F. Bonomi, A. Pastore,
Bacterial frataxin CyaY is the gatekeeper of iron-sulfur cluster formation catalyzed by
IscS. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 390–396 (2009).
4. J. D. Cook, K. Z. Bencze, A. D. Jankovic, A. K. Crater, C. N. Busch, P. B. Bradley,
A. J. Stemmler, M. R. Spaller, T. L. Stemmler, Monomeric yeast frataxin is an iron-binding
protein. Biochemistry 45, 7767–7777 (2006).
5. O. Gakh, S. Park, G. Liu, L. Macomber, J. A. Imlay, G. C. Ferreira, G. Isaya, Mitochondrial iron
detoxification is a primary function of frataxin that limits oxidative damage and preserves
cell longevity. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 467–479 (2006).
6. M. H. Parkinson, S. Boesch, W. Nachbauer, C. Mariotti, P. Giunti, Clinical features
of Friedreich’s ataxia: Classical and atypical phenotypes. J. Neurochem. 126 (suppl. 1),
103–117 (2013).
7. M. Pandolfo, Friedreich ataxia: The clinical picture. J. Neurol. 256 (suppl. 1), 3–8 (2009).
8. A. H. Koeppen, J. E. Mazurkiewicz, Friedreich ataxia: Neuropathology revised. J.
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 72, 78–90 (2013).
9. K. Solbach, O. Kraff, M. Minnerop, A. Beck, L. Schöls, E. R. Gizewski, M. E. Ladd, D. Timmann,
Cerebellar pathology in Friedreich’s ataxia: Atrophied dentate nuclei with normal iron
content. Neuroimage Clin. 6, 93–99 (2014).
10. S. Al-Mahdawi, R. M. Pinto, D. Varshney, L. Lawrence, M. B. Lowrie, S. Hughes, Z. Webster,
J. Blake, J. M. Cooper, R. King, M. A. Pook, GAA repeat expansion mutation mouse
models of Friedreich ataxia exhibit oxidative stress leading to progressive neuronal and
cardiac pathology. Genomics 88, 580–590 (2006).
11. S. Anjomani Virmouni, V. Ezzatizadeh, C. Sandi, M. Sandi, S. Al-Mahdawi, Y. Chutake,
M. A. Pook, A novel GAA-repeat-expansion-based mouse model of Friedreich’s ataxia.
Dis. Model. Mech. 8, 225–235 (2015).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
10 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 12. S. Anjomani Virmouni, C. Sandi, S. Al-Mahdawi, M. A. Pook, Cellular, molecular and
functional characterisation of YAC transgenic mouse models of Friedreich ataxia.
PLOS ONE 9, e107416 (2014).
13. H. P. Gaide Chevronnay, V. Janssens, P. Van Der Smissen, C. J. Rocca, X. H. Liao, S. Refetoff,
C. E. Pierreux, S. Cherqui, P. J. Courtoy, Hematopoietic stem cells transplantation can
normalize thyroid function in a cystinosis mouse model. Endocrinology 157, 1363–1371
(2016).
14. C. J. Rocca, A. Kreymerman, S. N. Ur, K. E. Frizzi, S. Naphade, A. Lau, T. Tran, N. A. Calcutt,
J. L. Goldberg, S. Cherqui, Treatment of inherited eye defects by systemic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 56, 7214–7223 (2015).
15. K. Syres, F. Harrison, M. Tadlock, J. V. Jester, J. Simpson, S. Roy, D. R. Salomon, S. Cherqui,
Successful treatment of the murine model of cystinosis using bone marrow cell
transplantation. Blood 114, 2542–2552 (2009).
16. B. A. Yeagy, F. Harrison, M.-C. Gubler, J. A. Koziol, D. R. Salomon, S. Cherqui, Kidney
preservation by bone marrow cell transplantation in hereditary nephropathy. Kidney Int.
79, 1198–1206 (2011).
17. S. Naphade, J. Sharma, H. P. Gaide Chevronnay, M. A. Shook, B. A. Yeagy, C. J. Rocca,
S. N. Ur, A. J. Lau, P. J. Courtoy, S. Cherqui, Brief reports: Lysosomal cross-correction
by hematopoietic stem cell-derived macrophages via tunneling nanotubes. Stem Cells 33,
301–309 (2015).
18. S. Domhan, L. Ma, A. Tai, Z. Anaya, A. Beheshti, M. Zeier, L. Hlatky, A. Abdollahi,
Intercellular communication by exchange of cytoplasmic material via tunneling
nano-tube like structures in primary human renal epithelial cells. PLOS ONE 6, e21283
(2011).
19. S. Sisakhtnezhad, L. Khosravi, Emerging physiological and pathological implications of
tunneling nanotubes formation between cells. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 94, 429–443 (2015).
20. K. C. Vallabhaneni, H. Haller, I. Dumler, Vascular smooth muscle cells initiate proliferation
of mesenchymal stem cells by mitochondrial transfer via tunneling nanotubes. Stem Cells
Dev. 21, 3104–3113 (2012).
21. B.-H. T. Ton, Q. Chen, G. Gaina, C. Tucureanu, A. Georgescu, C. Strungaru, M.-L. Flonta,
D. Sah, V. Ristoiu, Activation profile of dorsal root ganglia Iba-1 (+) macrophages varies
with the type of lesion in rats. Acta Histochem. 115, 840–850 (2013).
22. A. Romero, E. Romero-Alejo, N. Vasconcelos, M. M. Puig, Glial cell activation in the spinal
cord and dorsal root ganglia induced by surgery in mice. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 702, 126–134
(2013).
23. A. B. Schmitt, G. A. Brook, A. Buss, W. Nacimiento, J. Noth, G. W. Kreutzberg, Dynamics
of microglial activation in the spinal cord after cerebral infarction are revealed
by expression of MHC class II antigen. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 24, 167–176
(1998).
24. J. Priller, A. Flügel, T. Wehner, M. Boentert, C. A. Haas, M. Prinz, F. Fernández-Klett,
K. Prass, I. Bechmann, B. A. de Boer, M. Frotscher, G. W. Kreutzberg, D. A. Persons,
U. Dirnagl, Targeting gene-modified hematopoietic cells to the central nervous system:
Use of green fluorescent protein uncovers microglial engraftment. Nat. Med. 7,
1356–1361 (2001).
25. M. A. Eglitis, É. Mezey, Hematopoietic cells differentiate into both microglia and
macroglia in the brains of adult mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 4080–4085
(1997).
26. J. B. Schulz, T. Dehmer, L. Schöls, H. Mende, C. Hardt, M. Vorgerd, K. Bürk, W. Matson,
J. Dichgans, M. F. Beal, M. B. Bogdanov, Oxidative stress in patients with Friedreich ataxia.
Neurology 55, 1719–1721 (2000).
27. J. Kim, J. P. Moody, C. K. Edgerly, O. L. Bordiuk, K. Cormier, K. Smith, M. F. Beal,
R. J. Ferrante, Mitochondrial loss, dysfunction and altered dynamics in Huntington’s
disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 19, 3919–3935 (2010).
28. B. H. Robinson, Lactic acidemia and mitochondrial disease. Mol. Genet. Metab. 89, 3–13
(2006).
29. M. Perdomini, B. Belbellaa, L. Monassier, L. Reutenauer, N. Messaddeq, N. Cartier,
R. G. Crystal, P. Aubourg, H. Puccio, Prevention and reversal of severe mitochondrial
cardiomyopathy by gene therapy in a mouse model of Friedreich’s ataxia. Nat. Med. 20,
542–547 (2014).
30. F. Weidemann, S. Störk, D. Liu, K. Hu, S. Herrmann, G. Ertl, M. Niemann, Cardiomyopathy
of Friedreich ataxia. J. Neurochem. 126 (suppl. 1), 88–93 (2013).
31. J. B. Lamarche, M. Côté, B. Lemieux, The cardiomyopathy of Friedreich’s ataxia
morphological observations in 3 cases. Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 7, 389–396 (1980).
32. H. Puccio, D. Simon, M. Cossée, P. Criqui-Filipe, F. Tiziano, J. Melki, C. Hindelang, R. Matyas,
P. Rustin, M. Koenig, Mouse models for Friedreich ataxia exhibit cardiomyopathy,
sensory nerve defect and Fe-S enzyme deficiency followed by intramitochondrial iron
deposits. Nat. Genet. 27, 181–186 (2001).
33. S. C. Bodine, L. M. Baehr, Skeletal muscle atrophy and the E3 ubiquitin ligases MuRF1 and
MAFbx/atrogin-1. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 307, E469–E484 (2014).
34. J. Rodriguez, B. Vernus, I. Chelh, I. Cassar-Malek, J. C. Gabillard, A. Hadj Sassi, I. Seiliez,
B. Picard, A. Bonnieu, Myostatin and the skeletal muscle atrophy and hypertrophy
signaling pathways. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 71, 4361–4371 (2014).
35. H. Shitara, M. Shimanuki, J.-I. Hayashi, H. Yonekawa, Global imaging of mitochondrial
morphology in tissues using transgenic mice expressing mitochondrially targeted
enhanced green fluorescent protein. Exp. Anim. 59, 99–103 (2010).
36. H. Shitara, H. Kaneda, A. Sato, K. Iwasaki, J.-I. Hayashi, C. Taya, H. Yonekawa, Non-invasive
visualization of sperm mitochondria behavior in transgenic mice with introduced
green fluorescent protein (GFP). FEBS Lett. 500, 7–11 (2001).
37. F. Lim, G. M. Palomo, C. Mauritz, A. Giménez-Cassina, B. Illana, F. Wandosell, J. Díaz-Nido,
Functional recovery in a Friedreich’s ataxia mouse model by frataxin gene transfer using
an HSV-1 amplicon vector. Mol. Ther. 15, 1072–1078 (2007).
38. P. M. Vyas, W. J. Tomamichel, P. M. Pride, C. M. Babbey, Q. Wang, J. Mercier, E. M. Martin,
R. M. Payne, A TAT–frataxin fusion protein increases lifespan and cardiac function in
a conditional Friedreich’s ataxia mouse model. Hum. Mol. Genet. 21, 1230–1247 (2012).
39. J. Jones, A. Estirado, C. Redondo, J. Pacheco-Torres, M.-S. Sirerol-Piquer,
J. M. Garcia-Verdugo, S. Martinez, Mesenchymal stem cells improve motor functions and
decrease neurodegeneration in ataxic mice. Mol. Ther. 23, 130–138 (2015).
40. T. R. Brazelton, F. M. V. Rossi, G. I. Keshet, H. M. Blau, From marrow to brain: Expression of
neuronal phenotypes in adult mice. Science 290, 1775–1779 (2000).
41. É. Mezey, K. J. Chandross, G. Harta, R. A. Maki, S. R. McKercher, Turning blood into brain:
Cells bearing neuronal antigens generated in vivo from bone marrow. Science 290,
1779–1782 (2000).
42. R. C. Rennert, M. Sorkin, R. K. Garg, G. C. Gurtner, Stem cell recruitment after injury:
Lessons for regenerative medicine. Regen. Med. 7, 833–850 (2012).
43. C. V. Borlongan, L. E. Glover, N. Tajiri, Y. Kaneko, T. B. Freeman, The great migration of
bone marrow-derived stem cells toward the ischemic brain: Therapeutic implications for
stroke and other neurological disorders. Prog. Neurobiol. 95, 213–228 (2011).
44. F. L. Wilkinson, A. Sergijenko, K. J. Langford-Smith, M. Malinowska, R. F. Wynn,
B. W. Bigger, Busulfan conditioning enhances engraftment of hematopoietic donor-
derived cells in the brain compared with irradiation. Mol. Ther. 21, 868–876 (2013).
45. T. Yokota, K. Igarashi, T. Uchihara, K.-i. Jishage, H. Tomita, A. Inaba, Y. Li, M. Arita, H. Suzuki,
H. Mizusawa, H. Arai, Delayed-onset ataxia in mice lacking a-tocopherol transfer protein:
Model for neuronal degeneration caused by chronic oxidative stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 98, 15185–15190 (2001).
46. Y. Shen, M. Z. McMackin, Y. Shan, A. Raetz, S. David, G. Cortopassi, Frataxin deficiency
promotes excess microglial DNA damage and inflammation that is rescued by PJ34.
PLOS ONE 11, e0151026 (2016).
47. R. I. Martínez-Zamudio, H. C. Ha, PARP1 enhances inflammatory cytokine expression
by alteration of promoter chromatin structure in microglia. Brain Behav. 4, 552–565
(2014).
48. F. Palmieri, The mitochondrial transporter family (SLC25): Physiological and pathological
implications. Pflugers Arch. 447, 689–709 (2004).
49. M. K. Eldomery, Z. C. Akdemir, F.-N. Vögtle, W.-L. Charng, P. Mulica, J. A. Rosenfeld,
T. Gambin, S. Gu, L. C. Burrage, A. Al Shamsi, S. Penney, S. N. Jhangiani, H. H. Zimmerman,
D. M. Muzny, X. Wang, J. Tang, R. Medikonda, P. V. Ramachandran, L.-J. Wong,
E. Boerwinkle, R. A. Gibbs, C. M. Eng, S. R. Lalani, J. Hertecant, R. J. Rodenburg,
O. A. Abdul-Rahman, Y. Yang, F. Xia, M. C. Wang, J. R. Lupski, C. Meisinger, V. R. Sutton,
MIPEP recessive variants cause a syndrome of left ventricular non-compaction, hypotonia,
and infantile death. Genome Med. 8, 106 (2016).
50. L. Zhang, H. Li, X. Hu, D. M. Benedek, C. S. Fullerton, R. D. Forsten, J. A. Naifeh, X. Li, H. Wu,
K. N. Benevides, T. Le, S. Smerin, D. W. Russell, R. J. Ursano, Mitochondria-focused gene
expression profile reveals common pathways and CPT1B dysregulation in both rodent
stress model and human subjects with PTSD. Transl. Psychiatry 5, e580 (2015).
51. M. Pandolfo, L. Hausmann, Deferiprone for the treatment of Friedreich’s ataxia.
J. Neurochem. 126 (suppl. 1), 142–146 (2013).
52. K. Liu, K. Ji, L. Guo, W. Wu, H. Lu, P. Shan, C. Yan, Mesenchymal stem cells rescue injured
endothelial cells in an in vitro ischemia–reperfusion model via tunneling nanotube like
structure-mediated mitochondrial transfer. Microvasc. Res. 92, 10–18 (2014).
53. K. Ridder, S. Keller, M. Dams, A.-K. Rupp, J. Schlaudraff, D. Del Turco, J. Starmann, J. Macas,
D. Karpova, K. Devraj, C. Depboylu, B. Landfried, B. Arnold, K. H. Plate, G. Höglinger,
H. Sültmann, P. Altevogt, S. Momma, Extracellular vesicle-mediated transfer of genetic
information between the hematopoietic system and the brain in response to
inflammation. PLOS Biol. 12, e1001874 (2014).
54. M. N. Islam, S. R. Das, M. T. Emin, M. Wei, L. Sun, K. Westphalen, D. J. Rowlands, S. K. Quadri,
S. Bhattacharya, J. Bhattacharya, Mitochondrial transfer from bone-marrow–derived
stromal cells to pulmonary alveoli protects against acute lung injury. Nat. Med. 18, 759–765
(2012).
55. K. Hayakawa, E. Esposito, X. Wang, Y. Terasaki, Y. Liu, C. Xing, X. Ji, E. H. Lo, Transfer of
mitochondria from astrocytes to neurons after stroke. Nature 535, 551–555 (2016).
56. M.-È. Tremblay, R. L. Lowery, A. K. Majewska, Microglial interactions with synapses are
modulated by visual experience. PLOS Biol. 8, e1000527 (2010).
57. H. Wake, A. J. Moorhouse, S. Jinno, S. Kohsaka, J. Nabekura, Resting microglia directly
monitor the functional state of synapses in vivo and determine the fate of ischemic
terminals. J. Neurosci. 29, 3974–3980 (2009).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
11 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 58. S. Al-Mahdawi, R. M. Pinto, P. Ruddle, C. Carroll, Z. Webster, M. Pook, GAA repeat instability in
Friedreich ataxia YAC transgenic mice. Genomics 84, 301–310 (2004).
59. T. Dull, R. Zufferey, M. Kelly, R. J. Mandel, M. Nguyen, D. Trono, L. Naldini, A
third-generation lentivirus vector with a conditional packaging system. J. Virol. 72,
8463–8471 (1998).
60. D. Zychlinski, A. Schambach, U. Modlich, T. Maetzig, J. Meyer, E. Grassman, A. Mishra,
C. Baum, Physiological promoters reduce the genotoxic risk of integrating gene vectors.
Mol. Ther. 16, 718–725 (2008).
61. S. Pérez-Luz, A. Gimenez-Cassina, I. Fernández-Frías, R. Wade-Martins, J. Diaz-Nido,
Delivery of the 135 kb human frataxin genomic DNA locus gives rise to different frataxin
isoforms. Genomics 106, 76–82 (2015).
62. F. Harrison, B. A. Yeagy, C. J. Rocca, D. B. Kohn, D. R. Salomon, S. Cherqui, Hematopoietic
stem cell gene therapy for the multisystemic lysosomal storage disorder cystinosis. Mol.
Ther. 21, 433–444 (2013).
63. V. Campuzano, L. Montermini, Y. Lutz, L. Cova, C. Hindelang, S. Jiralerspong, Y. Trottier,
S. J. Kish, B. Faucheux, P. Trouillas, F. J. Authier, A. Dürr, J.-L. Mandel, A. Vescovi,
M. Pandolfo, M. Koenig, Frataxin is reduced in Friedreich ataxia patients and is associated
with mitochondrial membranes. Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 1771–1780 (1997).
64. I. Gertsman, J. A. Gangoiti, B. A. Barshop, Validation of a dual LC-HRMS platform for
clinical metabolic diagnosis in serum, bridging quantitative analysis and untargeted
metabolomics. Metabolomics 10, 312–323 (2014).
65. K. Chung, J. Wallace, S.-Y. Kim, S. Kalyanasundaram, A. S. Andalman, T. J. Davidson,
J. J. Mirzabekov, K. A. Zalocusky, J. Mattis, A. K. Denisin, S. Pak, H. Bernstein,
C. Ramakrishnan, L. Grosenick, V. Gradinaru, K. Deisseroth, Structural and molecular
interrogation of intact biological systems. Nature 497, 332–337 (2013).
Acknowledgments: We thank P. Cattaneo for the help with the heart confocal microscopy
analysis, L. Faget for the help with the open-field testing, and L. Ye for the imaging of
CLARITY samples. We acknowledge the RIKEN BioResource Center for providing the
C57BL/6J-Tg(CAG-Cox8/EGFP)49Rin mice. Funding: This work was supported by the NIH
(grants R21-NS090066 and RO1-DK090058), the Cystinosis Research Foundation, the
Sanford Stem Cell Clinical Center, and the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine
(CIRM). J.N.D. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Craig H. Neilson
Foundation. J.H.H. received Eureka! Scholarship for biological sciences majors. The UCSD
Neuroscience Microscopy Shared Facility was funded by the grant P30-NS047101. Author
contributions: C.J.R. and S.M.G. designed, collected and analyzed the data, and wrote the
manuscript. J.N.D. collected, processed, and imaged neural tissues and wrote the
manuscript. J.H.H. and J.L.M.S. participated in the molecular experiments and virus vector
generation and production. I.G. designed and collected the mass spectrometry data.
J.B. collected and processed muscle and cardiac tissues. C.J.H. performed the behavioral
testing (open field, rotarod, gait, and grip strength). S.C. conceived and supervised the study
and wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: S.C. is inventor on a patent entitled
“Methods of treating mitochondrial disorders” (#20378-201301) and is a shareholder of
GenStem Therapeutics Inc. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and materials availability: Reagents and mouse models described here are accessible
through a material transfer agreement.
Submitted 16 September 2016
Resubmitted 31 January 2017
Accepted 13 June 2017
Published 25 October 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaj2347
Citation: C. J. Rocca, S. M. Goodman, J. N. Dulin, J. H. Haquang, I. Gertsman, J. Blondelle,
J. L. M. Smith, C. J. Heyser, S. Cherqui, Transplantation of wild-type mouse hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells ameliorates deficits in a mouse model of Friedreich’s ataxia. Sci.
Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E P O R T
Rocca et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2347 (2017)
25 October 2017
12 of 12
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 deficits in a mouse model of Friedreich's ataxia
Transplantation of wild-type mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells ameliorates
L. M. Smith, Charles J. Heyser and Stephanie Cherqui
Celine J. Rocca, Spencer M. Goodman, Jennifer N. Dulin, Joseph H. Haquang, Ilya Gertsman, Jordan Blondelle, Janell
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaj2347
, eaaj2347.
9
Sci Transl Med 
transfer of mitochondrial proteins from HSPC-derived phagocytic cells to FRDA neurons and muscle myocytes.
protein dysfunction was restored in the brain, skeletal muscle, and heart of the FRDA mice, potentially through
rescue of the disease phenotype, including locomotor defects and muscle weakness. In addition, mitochondrial 
. show that wild-type hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) transplantation could lead to the
et al
Rocca 
muscle weakness, and cardiomyopathy and for which there is no treatment. Using a mouse model of FRDA, 
Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is a lethal hereditary disease characterized by ataxia, neurodegeneration,
Cell therapy for Friedreich's ataxia
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/413/eaaj2347
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/10/23/9.413.eaaj2347.DC1
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/413/eaaj2347#BIBL
This article cites 65 articles, 9 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 3, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
