 Official ERS/ATS clinical practice
guidelines: noninvasive ventilation
for acute respiratory failure
The Harvard community has made this
article openly available.  Please share  how
this access benefits you. Your story matters
Citation
Rochwerg, B., L. Brochard, M. W. Elliott, D. Hess, N. S.
Hill, S. Nava, P. Navalesi, et al. 2017. “Official ERS/ATS
clinical practice guidelines: noninvasive ventilation for acute
respiratory failure.” The European Respiratory Journal 50
(2): 1602426. doi:10.1183/13993003.02426-2016. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016.
Published Version
doi:10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
Citable link
http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:34491883
Terms of Use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH
repository, and is made available under the terms and conditions
applicable to Other Posted Material, as set forth at http://
nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:dash.current.terms-of-
use#LAA
 Official ERS/ATS clinical practice
guidelines: noninvasive ventilation for
acute respiratory failure
Bram Rochwerg
1, Laurent Brochard2,3, Mark W. Elliott4, Dean Hess5,
Nicholas S. Hill6, Stefano Nava7 and Paolo Navalesi8 (members of the steering
committee); Massimo Antonelli9, Jan Brozek1, Giorgio Conti9, Miquel Ferrer10,
Kalpalatha Guntupalli11, Samir Jaber12, Sean Keenan13,14, Jordi Mancebo15,
Sangeeta Mehta16 and Suhail Raoof17,18 (members of the task force)
@ERSpublications
ERS/ATS evidence-based recommendations for the use of noninvasive ventilation in acute respiratory
failure http://ow.ly/NrqB30dAYSQ
Cite this article as: Rochwerg B, Brochard L, Elliott MW, et al. Official ERS/ATS clinical practice
guidelines: noninvasive ventilation for acute respiratory failure. Eur Respir J 2017; 50: 1602426 [https://doi.
org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016].
ABSTRACT
Noninvasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) is widely used in the acute care setting for acute
respiratory failure (ARF) across a variety of aetiologies. This document provides European Respiratory
Society/American Thoracic Society recommendations for the clinical application of NIV based on the
most current literature.
The guideline committee was composed of clinicians, methodologists and experts in the field of
NIV. The committee developed recommendations based on the GRADE (Grading, Recommendation,
Assessment, Development and Evaluation) methodology for each actionable question. The GRADE
Evidence to Decision framework in the guideline development tool was used to generate recommendations.
A number of topics were addressed using technical summaries without recommendations and these are
discussed in the supplementary material.
This guideline committee developed recommendations for 11 actionable questions in a PICO (population–
intervention–comparison–outcome) format, all addressing the use of NIV for various aetiologies of ARF. The
specific conditions where recommendations were made include exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, de novo hypoxaemic respiratory failure, immunocompromised
patients, chest trauma, palliation, post-operative care, weaning and post-extubation.
This document summarises the current state of knowledge regarding the role of NIV in ARF. Evidence-
based recommendations provide guidance to relevant stakeholders.
This article has supplementary material available from erj.ersjournals.com
Received: Dec 09 2016 | Accepted after revision: June 15 2017
This document was endorsed by the ERS Executive Committee in July 2017 and approved by the ATS Board of
Directors in June 2017.
The guidelines published by the European Respiratory Society (ERS) incorporate data obtained from a comprehensive
and systematic literature review of the most recent studies available at the time. Health professionals are encouraged to
take the guidelines into account in their clinical practice. However, the recommendations issued by this guideline may
not be appropriate for use in all situations. It is the individual responsibility of health professionals to consult other
sources of relevant information, to make appropriate and accurate decisions in consideration of each patient’s health
condition and in consultation with that patient and the patient’s caregiver where appropriate and/or necessary, and to
verify rules and regulations applicable to drugs and devices at the time of prescription.
Conflict of interest: Disclosures can be found alongside this article at erj.ersjournals.com
Copyright ©ERS 2017
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
Eur Respir J 2017; 50: 1602426
TASK FORCE REPORT
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES
 Affiliations:
1Dept of Medicine, Dept of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada. 2Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada. 3Keenan Research Centre and Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St Michael’s Hospital, Toronto,
ON, Canada. 4Dept of Respiratory Medicine, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, UK. 5Respiratory Care
Dept, Massachusetts General Hospital and Dept of Anesthesia, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
6Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. 7Dept of
Specialistic, Diagnostic and Experimental Medicine, Respiratory and Critical Care, Sant’Orsola Malpighi
Hospital, Alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. 8Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Dept
of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy. 9Dept of Anesthesiology and
Intensive Care Medicine, Catholic University of Rome, A. Gemelli University Hospital, Rome, Italy. 10Dept of
Pneumology, Respiratory Institute, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona and CIBERES, Barcelona,
Spain. 11Depts of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 12Dept
of Critical Care Medicine and Anesthesiology (DAR B), Research Unit INSERM U1046, Saint Eloi University
Hospital and Montpellier School of Medicine, Montpellier, France.
13Division of Critical Care Medicine,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 14Dept of Critical Care Medicine, Royal Columbian
Hospital, New Westminster, BC, Canada. 15Servei de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona,
Spain. 16Mount Sinai Hospital and Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. 17Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
18Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY, USA.
Correspondence: Stefano Nava, Dept of Specialistic, Diagnostic and Experimental Medicine, Respiratory and
Critical Care, Sant’Orsola Malpighi Hospital, Alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, Via Zamboni 33,
40126 Bologna, Italy. E-mail: Stefanava@gmail.com
Introduction
The purpose of the current European Respiratory Society (ERS)/American Thoracic Society (ATS)
guidelines is to provide evidence-based recommendations on the application of noninvasive ventilation
(NIV) in acute respiratory failure (ARF). We also address some practical issues relating to NIV application
and maintenance. As much as possible, we pose questions in a PICO (population–intervention–
comparison–outcome)
format
and
use
the GRADE
(Grading
of
Recommendations,
Assessment,
Development and Evaluation) methodology to assess the certainty of the evidence. However, some of the
questions were best addressed with technical summaries without formal recommendations. These
summaries and a brief narrative literature review are provided in the supplementary material. In this
document, NIV includes noninvasive variable positive airway pressure (most commonly “bilevel”) devices
consisting of a higher inspiratory positive airway pressure and a lower expiratory pressure as well as
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) delivered using various nasal, oronasal and facial interfaces.
Methods
Committee composition
The guideline committee was composed of clinicians and experts in the field of NIV. Members were either
physicians (pulmonologists or intensivists) or respiratory therapists. Two clinician-methodologists with
expertise in evidence synthesis and the guideline development process provided GRADE support.
Committee members signed a confidentiality agreement and disclosed all potential conflicts of interest
according to the policies of the ERS and ATS.
Evidence review and development of clinical recommendations
The committee developed recommendations based on the GRADE methodology for each actionable
question [1]. The committee chose the clinical questions based on perceived clinical importance and
prioritisation based on sampling of the committee members. The methodologists performed pragmatic
literature searches, screening of potential studies for inclusion, pooling of outcome data when appropriate
and evidence summary/analysis. The methodologists designed a search strategy for each question using
medical subject heading keywords and text words limited to human studies or nonindexed citations and
articles in English or in any language with English abstracts. The Ovid platform was used to search
MEDLINE and the Cochrane Registry of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL). A single reviewer screened all
potential references for inclusion. The last update of the search was performed in November 2016.
The committee selected outcomes of interest for each question and these were explicitly rated for their
relative importance (from the perspective of a patient with respiratory failure) from “not important” to
“critical” [2]. Ranking outcomes by their relative clinical importance helps to focus on those that are most
relevant to patients and may lead to improved clarification during potential disagreements in decision
making. Rankings of all outcomes were agreed upon through consensus of the committee. The critical
outcomes prioritised for this guideline effort were: mortality, need for intubation and nosocomial
pneumonia. These prioritised outcomes applied to all actionable questions except the one pertaining to
palliation (Question 7), for which the panel prioritised patient-reported dyspnoea as the critical outcome
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
2
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 of interest. For questions where critical outcome data was unavailable, other important outcomes are
presented as part of the evidence synthesis.
The certainty in effect estimates for each outcome were then categorised as high, moderate, low or very
low according to the GRADE process. The GRADE Evidence to Decision framework in the guideline
development tool was used to help facilitate discussion around each recommendation [3, 4]. The
Evidence
to
Decision
framework
ensures
each
of
the
following
factors
are
considered
in
recommendation
development:
quality
of
the
evidence,
balance
of
desirable
and
undesirable
consequences of compared management options, assumptions about the values and preferences
associated with the decision, implications for resource use and health equity, acceptability of
intervention to stakeholders, and feasibility of implementation. Recommendations and their strength
were decided by consensus. The entire committee agreed on the final wording of each recommendation
and rationale with further qualifications for each recommendation (e.g. subgroup considerations,
justification and implementation considerations).
Each recommendation was designated as “strong” or “conditional” [5]. As outlined by GRADE, we used
the
phrasing
“we
recommend”
for
strong
recommendations
and
“we
suggest”
for
conditional
recommendations. Table 1 provides an interpretation of these recommendations by stakeholders (patients,
clinicians and healthcare policy makers). Further description and details of the methodology used to
compose these guidelines can be found in the supplementary material.
Manuscript preparation
For each of the recommendations, a narrative summary was provided for contextualisation and then a
justification section, which summarised pooled estimates of effect, certainty of evidence and relevant
Evidence to Decision framework factors. The committee was divided into pairs or groups of three who were
responsible for composing individual components of the guidelines (organised by recommendation). Articles
cited in the narrative reviews were selected by the authors to highlight the evidence relied upon to arrive at
the recommendation (usually the largest, most significant or most directly relevant to our PICO question).
These manuscript components were then collated by the executive to ensure cohesiveness and distributed to
the entire committee for vetting and review. Feedback was provided by electronic communication. The final
approved version was submitted to each co-sponsoring professional society for peer review.
Confidentiality agreement and conflict of interest management
Committee members signed a confidentiality agreement and disclosed all potential conflicts of interest
according to the ERS policies. The co-chairs were responsible for reviewing all potential conflicts of
interest of committee members with the staff of the ERS. After review, there was no limitation of
committee member’s involvement in the recommendation formulation process. The methodologists
participated in discussions, but were nonvoting participants.
How to use these guidelines
These ERS/ATS evidence-based guidelines for the use of NIV in critically ill patients provide the basis for
stakeholders to make rational, informed decisions. Clinicians, patients, third-party payers, institutional
TABLE 1 Interpretation of strong and conditional recommendations for stakeholders (patients, clinicians and healthcare policy
makers)
Strong recommendation
Weak recommendation
For patients
Most individuals in this situation would want the
recommended course of action and only a small
proportion would not.
The majority of individuals in this situation would want the
suggested course of action, but many would not.
For clinicians
Most individuals should receive the recommended course
of action. Adherence to this recommendation according
to the guideline could be used as a quality criterion or
performance indicator. Formal decision aids are not
likely to be needed to help individuals make decisions
consistent with their values and preferences.
Different choices are likely to be appropriate for different
patients and therapy should be tailored to the individual
patient’s circumstances. Those circumstances may
include the patient or family’s values and preferences.
For policy makers
The recommendation can be adapted as policy in most
situations including for the use as performance
indicators.
Policy making will require substantial debates and
involvement of many stakeholders. Policies are also more
likely to vary between regions. Performance indicators
would have to focus on the fact that adequate deliberation
about the management options has taken place.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
3
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 review committees, other stakeholders or the courts should never view these recommendations as dictates.
No recommendation can take into account all of the often-compelling unique individual clinical
circumstances. Therefore, no one charged with evaluating a healthcare professional’s actions should view
these recommendations as absolute. Statements regarding the underlying values and preferences as well as
qualifying remarks accompanying each recommendation are integral to the recommendations and serve to
facilitate more accurate interpretation; they should be included when quoting recommendations from these
guidelines.
PICO questions and recommendations
Question 1: Should NIV be used in COPD exacerbation?
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations are a very common reason for admission to
hospital. Approximately 20% of patients hospitalised for COPD present with [6] or develop hypercapnic
respiratory failure [7], which is an indicator of an increased risk of death [6–8]. ARF leading to acute or
acute-on-chronic respiratory acidosis, later referred to in this guideline as acute respiratory acidosis,
develops when the respiratory muscles fail to achieve adequate alveolar ventilation despite high levels of
diaphragmatic activity [9]. It is likely that hyperinflation during exacerbation also contributes to
respiratory muscle compromise. When faced with a load that exceeds the capacity of the respiratory
muscle pump, a rapid shallow breathing pattern develops which is characterised by an increased
respiratory rate with small tidal volumes. Although this is not always beneficial in terms of respiratory
muscle energy expenditure, this pattern seems to have a complex pathophysiological mechanism and
occurs at the expense of adequate alveolar ventilation. As a consequence, the level of arterial carbon
dioxide (CO2) rises and respiratory acidosis ensues. Measuring respiratory rate, observing chest and
abdominal wall movement, and obtaining a sample of arterial blood are therefore key in the initial
assessment of the patient at risk of acute respiratory acidosis (pH ⩽7.35). Many patients with COPD are
hypercapnic at baseline and the development of acidosis indicates acute-on-chronic hypercapnic
respiratory failure.
Bilevel NIV may be considered in COPD patients with an acute exacerbation in three clinical settings [10]:
1) To prevent acute respiratory acidosis, i.e. when the arterial CO2 tension (PaCO2) is normal or elevated
but pH is normal (see Question 1a).
2) To prevent endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation in patients with mild to
moderate acidosis and respiratory distress, with the aim of preventing deterioration to a point when
invasive ventilation would be considered (see Question 1b).
3) As an alternative to invasive ventilation in patients with severe acidosis and more severe respiratory
distress (see Question 1b).
Bilevel NIV may also be used as the only method for providing ventilatory support in patients who are not
candidates for or decline invasive mechanical ventilation.
Question 1a: Should NIV be used in ARF due to a COPD exacerbation to prevent the development
of respiratory acidosis?
One randomised study [11] of 52 patients with COPD comparing bilevel NIV to standard oxygen therapy
used inclusion criteria of recent onset of shortness of breath and a pH >7.30 (average pH of randomised
patients was within the normal range), suggesting that most enrolled patients had not developed acute
respiratory acidosis. NIV was poorly tolerated and there was no effect of NIV on intubation rate (8% in
NIV arm and 7% in control arm) or mortality (4% in NIV arm and 7% in control arm). However, there
was a decrease in Borg dyspnoea score with NIV compared with standard oxygen therapy at 1 h and on
day 2. When one outlier was removed from the analysis, there was a statistically significant reduction in
hospital length of stay with bilevel NIV compared with the control group (5 versus 7 days).
In three other studies (two randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and one prospective observational study
[12–14]) the mean pH was only very mildly acidotic, suggesting again that patients without acute
respiratory acidosis were included; none of these studies showed an advantage to bilevel NIV. In a large
study (n=342) in which bilevel NIV was started within 24–48 h of admission compared with standard
oxygen therapy, in patients with a mean pH at randomisation of 7.35, there was a decrease in patients
meeting criteria for intubation with NIV (1.4% versus 4.6%; p=0.002), but no difference in mortality [15].
Subgroup analysis of patients with a pH >7.35 (n=151) showed a beneficial effect of NIV for patients
meeting clinical criteria for intubation versus those that did not (9 out of 80 versus 2 out of 71; p=0.045)
but not for mortality. However, NIV was started much later than in other studies (24–48 h after
admission) and the number of patients deteriorating to the point at which endotracheal intubation was
considered necessary was surprisingly high, considering the mild acidosis. The main focus in hypercapnic
patients with COPD who are not acidotic should be medical therapy and, most importantly, oxygen
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
4
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 targeted to a saturation of 88–92% [16]. AUSTIN et al. [17] showed a better survival in COPD patients
being transferred to hospital when oxygen was delivered to achieve this range of saturation.
Recommendation
We suggest NIV not be used in patients with hypercapnia who are not acidotic in the setting of a COPD
exacerbation. (Conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis was very imprecise but demonstrated that bilevel NIV does not reduce
mortality (RR 1.46, 95% CI 0.64–3.35) and decrease the need for intubation (RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.18–0.72).
Given the lack of consistent evidence demonstrating benefit in those without acidosis and the potential for
harm, the committee decided on a conditional recommendation against bilevel NIV in this setting.
Question 1b: Should NIV be used in established acute hypercapnic respiratory failure due to a
COPD exacerbation?
Bilevel NIV to prevent intubation
Patients with a pH of 7.25–7.35, in the absence of a metabolic cause for the acidosis, would normally not be
deemed to require intubation and mechanical ventilation. It is in this group that there is the strongest
evidence base to support the use of bilevel NIV [11–34]. An improvement in either pH or respiratory rate,
or ideally both, is a good predictor of a successful outcome with NIV; in those that will respond, response is
almost universally seen within the first 1–4 h after NIV initiation [35]. Bilevel NIV reduces the sensation of
dyspnoea, the need for immediate intubation, and intensive care unit (ICU) and probably hospital length of
stay, and improves survival. There is a reduction in both respiratory and nonrespiratory infectious
complications [36, 37]. No clinical trials have shown a worse outcome with bilevel NIV compared with
standard nonventilatory management, although there was a trend towards increased mortality with NIV in
one study that included some patients with COPD, which was attributed to a delay in escalation to invasive
mechanical ventilation [14]. Bilevel NIV has been shown to be cost-effective in this patient group [38].
Bilevel NIV as an alternative to first-line endotracheal intubation
Two studies have compared bilevel NIV directly with invasive ventilation [24, 27]. The mean pH was 7.20,
significantly lower than in the studies discussed earlier. In the study of CONTI et al. [24], survival was
similar in both groups, but in patients in whom NIV was successful the advantages included shorter
duration of ICU and hospital stay, fewer complications, reduced need for de novo oxygen supplementation,
and fewer hospital readmissions in the subsequent year. There were important exclusions: the need for
urgent intubation due to respiratory arrest, apnoeic episodes, psychomotor agitation requiring sedation,
heart rate <60 beats·min–1 and systolic arterial pressure <80 mmHg. The study of JURJEVIC et al. [27]
enrolled patients similar to those in the CONTI et al. [24] study, but inclusion criteria and primary
end-points were not clearly defined. The authors found that invasive ventilation was associated with more
rapid improvement in physiological abnormalities in the first few hours, but was also associated with a
longer total duration of ventilation and ICU stay. Mortality was similar in the two groups. Patients
receiving bilevel NIV had fewer episodes of ventilator-associated pneumonia and less requirement for
tracheostomy. Coma has been described as a contraindication to NIV, but in a large case series DIAZ et al.
[39] showed no difference in outcome between patients with and without hypercapnic coma. Bilevel NIV
in the ICU for COPD exacerbation is also cost-effective, with one Canadian study showing a cost savings
of CAD3442 per patient admission [40].
Recommendations
We recommend bilevel NIV for patients with ARF leading to acute or acute-on-chronic respiratory
acidosis (pH ⩽7.35) due to COPD exacerbation. (Strong recommendation, high certainty of evidence.)
We recommend a trial of bilevel NIV in patients considered to require endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation, unless the patient is immediately deteriorating. (Strong recommendation, moderate
certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that bilevel NIV decreased mortality (relative risk (RR)
0.63, 95% CI 0.46–0.87; high certainty) and decreased the need for intubation (RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.33–0.52;
moderate certainty) in this population. There was also a decrease in nosocomial pneumonia with bilevel
NIV (OR 0.26, 95% CI 0.08–0.81; low certainty).
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
5
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Based on this evidence review, the committee felt the anticipated desirable effects of bilevel NIV in
patients with acute hypercapnic respiratory failure due to a COPD exacerbation definitely outweighed the
anticipated undesirable effects. This is true across the severity spectrum, but increasing caution must be
used towards the more severe end.
Implementation considerations
1) Bilevel NIV should be considered when the pH is ⩽7.35, PaCO2 is >45 mmHg and the respiratory rate
is >20–24 breaths·min–1 despite standard medical therapy.
2) Bilevel NIV remains the preferred choice for patients with COPD who develop acute respiratory
acidosis during hospital admission. There is no lower limit of pH below which a trial of NIV is
inappropriate; however, the lower the pH, the greater risk of failure, and patients must be very closely
monitored with rapid access to endotracheal intubation and invasive ventilation if not improving.
Question 2a: Should NIV be used in ARF due to cardiogenic pulmonary oedema?
Over 30 trials have been published on the use of CPAP and/or NIV compared with standard therapy or
each other for patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. The majority are small single-centre
trials that span a period of 30 years, during which cardiogenic pulmonary oedema management,
particularly in the setting of acute coronary syndrome, has evolved along with trial inclusion and exclusion
criteria. Patients in cardiogenic shock have been almost universally excluded from trials and thus are not
included in our NIV recommendations. Many trials have also excluded patients requiring acute
revascularisation and some have excluded patients with acute coronary syndrome.
The pathophysiology of respiratory failure during cardiogenic pulmonary oedema includes decreased
respiratory system compliance and alveolar flooding due to high capillary pressure associated or not with left
ventricular systolic dysfunction [41]. NIV (including both bilevel and CPAP) in this context has the ability to
improve respiratory mechanics and facilitate left ventricular work by decreasing left ventricular afterload [42].
This is facilitated by the decrease in negative pressure swings generated by the respiratory muscles.
In 2008, GRAY et al. [43] published the largest multicentre trial from 26 emergency departments, in which
1069 patients were randomised to CPAP, bilevel NIV or standard oxygen therapy. This trial found
physiological improvement in the CPAP and bilevel NIV groups compared with the standard group, but
no difference in intubation rate or mortality at 7 and 30 days. However, interpretation of the results is
limited by the high crossover rate (56 out of 367 patients (15%) in the oxygen group crossed over to
bilevel NIV). Subsequently, five systematic reviews [44–48] that have incorporated the data from GRAY
et al. [43], as well as other new trials, have been published. They consistently conclude that: 1) NIV
decreases the need for intubation, 2) NIV is associated with a reduction in hospital mortality, 3) NIV is
not associated with increased myocardial infarction (a concern raised by the first study comparing NIV
and CPAP [49]), and 4) CPAP and NIV have similar effects on these outcomes.
Recommendation
We recommend either bilevel NIV or CPAP for patients with ARF due to cardiogenic pulmonary oedema.
(Strong recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding included
evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV decreased mortality (RR 0.80, 95% CI 0.66–0.96; moderate
certainty) and decreased the need for intubation (RR 0.60, 95% CI 0.44–0.80; low certainty) in this
population. An increase in myocardial infarction was seen in the NIV group although this was based on a
very low certainty of evidence (OR 1.18, 95% CI 0.95–1.48). Based on this evidence review, the committee
felt the anticipated desirable effects of NIV patients with ARF due to cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
definitely outweighed the anticipated undesirable effects. Given the justifiable reluctance to include patients
with acute coronary syndrome or cardiogenic shock in studies evaluating NIV for cardiogenic pulmonary
oedema, the above recommendation does not apply to these subgroups. The recommendation is inclusive of
both bilevel NIV and CPAP, as the current evidence summary demonstrates significant benefit of both
interventions compared with standard care, and insufficient evidence to recommend one modality over the
other. CPAP has advantages over bilevel NIV of simpler technology, easier synchronisation and potentially
less expensive equipment, but the importance of these has not been adequately assessed.
Question 2b: Should a trial of CPAP prior to hospitalisation be used to prevent deterioration in
patients with ARF due to cardiogenic pulmonary oedema?
Six single-centre RCTs have evaluated the use of CPAP or bilevel NIV to treat cardiogenic pulmonary
oedema in the pre-hospital setting. Four trials focused on acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema and two
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
6
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 included a subset of cardiogenic pulmonary oedema patients within a general population of patients with
ARF (THOMPSON et al. [50]: 44 out of 69 cardiogenic pulmonary oedema; ROESSLER et al. [51]: 25 out of 49
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema). The studies were heterogeneous, with four using CPAP and two using
bilevel NIV, and they were conducted in different settings. Five studies were conducted in Europe with a
physician supporting the ambulance staff; one study was conducted in Canada, with pre-hospital care and
study procedures managed by ambulance staff alone. The intubation rates varied among studies, suggesting
potential differences in severity of illness or experience of the ambulance attendants. One study compared
early versus delayed NIV [52], while the rest used a control arm of usual medical therapy.
Recommendation
We suggest that CPAP or bilevel NIV be used for patients with ARF due to cardiogenic pulmonary
oedema in the pre-hospital setting. (Conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV decreased mortality (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.45–
1.70; moderate certainty) and decreased the need for intubation (RR 0.31, 95% CI 0.17–0.55; low
certainty) in this population. In general, oxygenation and patients’ dyspnoea scores improved more rapidly
with CPAP or bilevel NIV compared with control. Some studies showed a reduction in mortality
associated with use of bilevel NIV [50], but this effect was inconsistent.
Heterogeneity in trial design, support personnel and patient selection prevent a firm recommendation
regarding the use of NIV for cardiogenic pulmonary oedema in the pre-hospital setting. Overall, the
results are favourable, but we emphasise the need for appropriate training and adequate infrastructure,
including coordination with emergency departments before initiating a programme. More research is
needed, including pre-hospital use of bilevel NIV versus CPAP, selection of patients, personnel on
ambulances and role of communication with emergency departments.
Question 3: Should NIV be used in ARF due to acute asthma?
The main feature of acute asthma is a sudden and reversible episode of bronchoconstriction, leading to an
increase in airways resistance that varies in severity. The acute change in mechanical load (mainly
resistive) generates hyperinflation, increased respiratory muscle effort and dyspnoea. Hyperinflation also
reduces respiratory muscle efficiency and thus the respiratory muscle pump may ultimately become
exhausted, leading to hypercapnia [53].
NIV is used, together with conventional pharmacological treatment, with the aim to decrease the
respiratory muscle work that is much increased during the episodes of acute bronchoconstriction, to
improve ventilation, decrease the sensation of dyspnoea, and ultimately avoid intubation and invasive
mechanical ventilation.
Possibly because the magnitude of the problem is small (i.e. episodes of acute asthma requiring ICU
admission are uncommon), there is not much published research in this field. One physiological study
gives some support to the use of CPAP. This study [54] showed that in asthmatic individuals subjected to
histamine challenge causing acute bronchoconstriction, the use of CPAP (average 12 cmH2O), compared
with spontaneous breathing, substantially decreased the pressure–time product of the respiratory muscles
(an index of energy utilisation), which was explained by a change in mechanics and breathing pattern.
A few uncontrolled studies and RCTs have compared NIV versus routine care in patients with acute
asthma [55, 56]. Uncontrolled studies have shown physiological improvements in selected patients,
whereas the RCTs and a meta-analysis have not shown differences in clinically relevant outcomes when
comparing NIV with usual care [57]. A retrospective observational study by FERNANDEZ et al. [58]
described three types of patients admitted in the ICU for acute asthma: those with acute severe near-fatal
asthma requiring emergency intubation, those responding well to medical therapy (the majority) and a
small subgroup not responding well to medical therapy, who in this study were treated with NIV, mostly
with success. RCTs in asthma mostly considered physiological end-points such as improvement in peak
flows and suggested some beneficial effects.
In a recent retrospective cohort study [59] conducted in 97 US hospitals during a 4-year period, the use of
NIV in patients with acute asthma was 4% (556 out of 13930) and the use of invasive ventilation was 5%
(668 out of 13930). Failure rate (defined as intubation) of NIV was 4.7% (26 patients). Hospital mortality
rates in those who received invasive mechanical ventilation without a previous trial of NIV, those who
failed a NIV attempt and those who succeeded on NIV were 14.5%, 15.4% and 2.3%, respectively.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
7
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Recommendation
Given the uncertainty of evidence we are unable to offer a recommendation on the use of NIV for ARF
due to asthma.
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV has an unclear effect on mortality, intubation
(RR 4.48, 95% CI 0.23–89.23; very low certainty) or ICU length of stay (mean difference 0.3 higher, 95%
CI 0.63 lower to 1.23 higher) in this population. NIV does appear to improve forced expiratory volume in
1 s (mean difference 14.02 higher, 95% CI 7.73–20.32 higher; low certainty) and peak expiratory flow
(mean difference 19.97 higher, 95% CI 15.01–24.93 higher; low certainty). The lack of evidence precludes
making a recommendation regarding the use of NIV for acute asthma. Studies have demonstrated a more
rapid reversal of airway obstruction and a reduced need for hospitalisation compared with standard therapy
that could reflect a bronchodilator effect of positive airway pressure, but in the absence of any evidence to
show a beneficial effect of NIV on intubation rate or survival, the committee considered that the potential
desirable effects have not been shown to outweigh the risks of adverse effects. However, given the possibility
of overlap between asthma and COPD, bilevel NIV may be considered in a subgroup of patients diagnosed
with asthma who are behaving more like patients with COPD (i.e. fixed airway obstruction).
Question 4: Should NIV be used for ARF in immunocompromised patients?
ARF is the main indication for ICU admission in immunocompromised patients. Currently available
literature supports the use of NIV as a first-line approach for managing mild to moderate ARF in selected
patients with immunosuppression of various aetiologies. Several studies have reported clinical benefits of
NIV, although strict monitoring in the ICU and prompt availability of invasive mechanical ventilation are
mandatory [60–62]. A large observational multicentre Italian survey investigated the clinical impact of
NIV use in 1302 haematological patients admitted to the ICU with ARF [63]. The authors, after a
propensity score analysis, confirmed the role of NIV as an independent predictor of survival. Similarly,
early CPAP has been reported as a practical, simple and inexpensive method to prevent deterioration of
respiratory function and complications in such patients [64]. However, in a recent multicentre randomised
trial of 374 immunocompromised subjects, early NIV, compared with standard oxygen, was not associated
with clinical benefits in mortality, ICU-acquired infections, duration of mechanical ventilation or length of
ICU stay [65].
In addition, a more recent post hoc analysis of immunosuppressed patients enrolled in a larger trial of
patients with ARF suggested no benefit of NIV, either for intubation or survival [66].
Recommendation
We suggest early NIV for immunocompromised patients with ARF. (Conditional recommendation,
moderate certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to a decrease in mortality (RR 0.68,
95% CI 0.53–0.88; moderate certainty), the need for intubation (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.58–0.87; moderate
certainty) and the rates of nosocomial pneumonia (RR 0.39, 95% CI 0.20–0.76; low certainty) in this
population.
Based
on
this
evidence
review,
the
anticipated
desirable
effects
of
NIV
in
immunocompromised patients with ARF outweigh undesirable consequences in most settings. The
recommendation is inclusive both of bilevel NIV and early CPAP as the current evidence demonstrates the
benefit of both interventions compared with standard care. In addition, one recent RCT [67] showed
benefits of high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy over bilevel NIV with regard to intubation and
mortality, and more study is required to determine whether this modality has advantages over NIV in
immunocompromised patients with ARF.
Question 5: Should NIV be used in de novo ARF?
De novo respiratory failure refers to respiratory failure occurring without prior chronic respiratory disease.
Most patients in this category have hypoxaemic respiratory failure, usually defined as significant
hypoxaemia (arterial oxygen tension/inspiratory oxygen fraction ratio (PaO2/FIO2) ⩽200), tachypnoea
(respiratory rate >30–35 breaths·min–1) and a non-COPD diagnosis (e.g. pneumonia and/or acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)). Although included in some of the studies, patients with
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema or with post-operative respiratory distress are not considered here because
their pathophysiology is different and the indications and outcomes for NIV differ.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
8
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Defining whether a patient has all the features of ARDS [68] may be difficult or impossible in
nonintubated patients because precise measurement of the actual inspired fraction of oxygen is unavailable
and positive end-expiratory pressure is not used or its level is uncertain (e.g. with high-flow oxygen).
Therefore, we considered studies on patients with hypoxaemic respiratory failure, community-acquired
pneumonia and ARDS in the same category. NIV is used in these patients with the aims of improving
oxygenation, facilitating ventilation, decreasing the work of breathing and dyspnoea, avoiding intubation,
and reducing the complications associated with invasive mechanical ventilation.
Limitations of NIV in achieving some of these aims relative to invasive ventilation in patients with de novo
ARF include its lack of efficacy in reducing work of breathing, in contrast to hypercapnic respiratory
failure where its ability to reduce work of breathing has been clearly demonstrated. In ARDS patients, it
has been shown that the use of noninvasive inspiratory pressure support can decrease the inspiratory
effort compared with no inspiratory assistance only if sufficient pressure support is added [69]. Of
concern, the tidal volume can also be significantly higher during NIV, especially when substantial
inspiratory pressure is delivered, and further exacerbated by the high inspiratory demand seen in patients
with acute hypoxic respiratory failure [70]. Therefore, the total pressure dissipated to inflate the lungs can
be excessive during NIV. Such large transpulmonary pressures and the resulting large tidal volumes may
exacerbate lung injury if prolonged over time. It is possible, although not proven, that NIV is especially
useful in patients who do not substantially increase their tidal volume, but further work is needed in this
area [71].
Invasive ventilation for hypoxaemic respiratory failure clearly reduces work of breathing and permits
paralysis if total control of breathing is desired, effects that can redistribute blood flow from the respiratory
muscles to other organs in patients with shock and hence help to treat shock itself [72]. The ability of NIV
to achieve optimal pressures to reduce the work of breathing reliably in acute hypoxaemic respiratory
failure is challenging because the high pressures often required increase air leaks, gastric insufflation and
patient intolerance [69]. Thus, the ability to use lung protective ventilator strategies (such as maintaining a
low tidal volume of 6 mL·kg−1 of predicted body weight) may be more difficult with NIV than with
invasive ventilation [73, 74]. Some evidence even supports the idea that spontaneous ventilation can
induce harm similar to ventilator-induced lung injury in situations of severe lung injury [75–77], which
raises a note of caution when using NIV that combines spontaneous effort with ventilator support.
Hypoxaemia and high work of breathing return immediately when NIV is removed, explaining the risk
associated with NIV interruptions. This may be ameliorated, as suggested by some recent trials, by the use
of high-flow nasal cannula therapy (using a specialised nasal cannula to deliver heated and humidified
oxygenated gas at flows between 30 and 60 L·min–1) during breaks or using longer sessions of NIV [78].
Also, the duration of NIV and its tolerance may depend on the type of interface used; recent evidence
suggests that the use of a helmet may offer better tolerance over prolonged periods [79–82].
Potential uses of NIV for de novo ARF include as a preventive strategy for avoiding intubation. One pilot
study on patients with “early” ARDS (PaO2/FIO2 >200 and ⩽300) showed avoidance of intubation and
reduced cytokine levels as favourable outcomes [83]. However, this study has not been replicated. NIV has
also been studied as an alternative to intubation, with occasional reports showing benefit [84]. Positive
studies
on
hypoxaemic,
nonhypercapnic
respiratory
failure,
mainly
caused
by
community-
or
hospital-acquired pneumonia, have enrolled carefully selected patients who are cooperative with no
associated major organ dysfunction, cardiac ischaemia or arrhythmias, and with no limitations in clearing
secretions [29, 60, 85–87], which may explain the benefits seen.
Until recently, almost all studies on NIV for de novo ARF compared it with oxygen delivered with
standard air entrainment (Venturi masks) or reservoir masks. Recently, high-flow nasal cannula therapy
has been shown to offer several advantages compared with NIV, including better tolerance and dead space
reduction [88]. One recent RCT reported a survival benefit of high-flow nasal cannula over standard
oxygen therapy and bilevel NIV, although the primary end-point of intubation was not significantly
different
[67]. Although high-flow nasal cannula therapy is not specifically addressed in these
recommendations, it may assume an important role in the therapy of de novo respiratory failure in the
future.
The main risk of NIV for the indication of de novo ARF is to delay a needed intubation [86]. Early
predictors of NIV failure include higher severity score, older age, ARDS or pneumonia as the aetiology for
respiratory failure, or a failure to improve after 1 h of treatment [89]. Although the reasons for a poorer
outcome are not completely understood, patients with NIV failure have higher tidal volumes before
intubation [71] and develop more complications after intubation [90]. Studies have shown that NIV failure
is an independent risk factor for mortality specifically in this population, although careful patient selection
seems to reduce this risk [91, 92].
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
9
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Recommendation
Given the uncertainty of evidence we are unable to offer a recommendation on the use of NIV for de novo
ARF.
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to a decrease in mortality (RR 0.83,
95% CI 0.65–1.05) and the need for intubation (RR 0.75, 95% CI 0.63–0.89), although these were both
based on a low certainty of evidence. In highly selected cooperative patients with isolated respiratory
failure, NIV has been shown in experienced hands to prevent intubation [85]. The overall effect in the
studies is positive on this end-point, but not for other end-points such as mortality. Specific risks have
been described with NIV and there is not enough evidence to recommend its use. Further research is
needed and this question requires re-appraisal in the future. Considering that some studies have identified
populations likely to succeed with NIV, a trial of NIV might be offered to a patient with hypoxaemic
respiratory failure, community-acquired pneumonia or early ARDS if they are being managed by an
experienced clinical team, are carefully selected (no contraindications such as abnormal mental status,
shock or multiorgan system failure), are closely monitored in the ICU, reassessed early after starting NIV
and intubated promptly if they are not improving.
Question 6: Should NIV be used in ARF in the post-operative setting?
Surgery, particularly that approaching the diaphragm, anaesthesia and post-operative pain may all have
deleterious effects on the respiratory system, causing hypoxaemia, a decrease in lung volume and
atelectasis due to diaphragm dysfunction [93]. These modifications of respiratory function occur early after
surgery and diaphragm dysfunction may last up to 7 days, leading to an important deterioration in arterial
oxygenation [94]. Maintenance of adequate oxygenation and avoidance of symptoms of respiratory distress
in the post-operative period are of major importance, especially when pulmonary complications such as
ARF occur [95, 96].
Both bilevel NIV and CPAP are frequently used in these clinical situations. Imaging studies have shown
that the use of NIV may increase lung aeration and decrease the amount of atelectasis during the
post-operative period of patients undergoing major abdominal surgery [93]. Physiological studies have
shown that CPAP and bilevel NIV are effective at improving lung aeration and arterial oxygenation and
decreasing the amount of atelectasis without adverse haemodynamic effects during the post-operative
period after extubation [93, 97].
Supra-diaphragmatic surgery
One RCT demonstrated that in patients who developed respiratory failure during the post-operative period
of lung cancer resection, NIV decreased the need for re-intubation and reduced hospital mortality [98].
STEPHAN et al. [96] reported that, in 830 patients following cardiothoracic surgery with or at risk for
respiratory failure, the use of high-flow nasal cannula therapy compared with intermittent NIV did not
result in a worse rate of treatment failure defined as need for re-intubation.
Abdominal and/or pelvic surgery
In a prospective observational study in patients who had respiratory failure after abdominal surgery, JABER
et al. [99] reported that the use of NIV resulted in avoidance of intubation in 67% cases, and a reduction
in the hospital length of stay and mortality, compared with intubated patients. In a randomised trial on 40
patients
undergoing
solid
organ
transplantation
(mainly
liver
transplantation)
and
developing
post-operative respiratory failure, ANTONELLI et al. [60] found that NIV improved oxygenation and
decreased the need for tracheal intubation compared with conventional therapy. SQUADRONE et al. [100]
evaluated the use of helmet-CPAP after abdominal surgery in 209 patients who developed hypoxaemia
without respiratory symptoms immediately after extubation. Their early use of CPAP significantly
decreased the incidence of re-intubation from 10% to 1% (p=0.005). JABER et al. [95] recently reported the
results of a multicentre RCT including 298 patients with hypoxaemic ARF following abdominal surgery.
The use of NIV compared with standard oxygen therapy reduced the risk of tracheal re-intubation within
7 days (46% versus 33%; p=0.03) and the incidence of healthcare-associated infections (31% versus 49%;
p=0.003).
Recommendation
We suggest NIV for patients with post-operative ARF. (Conditional recommendation, moderate certainty
of evidence.)
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
10
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to a decrease in mortality (RR 0.28,
95% CI 0.09–0.84; moderate certainty), the need for intubation (RR 0.27, 95% CI 0.12–0.61; low certainty)
and the incidence of nosocomial pneumonia (RR 0.20, 95% CI 0.04–0.88; very low certainty) in this
post-operative population. Both CPAP and bilevel NIV counter the pathophysiological mechanisms
predisposing to post-operative respiratory failure. The evidence suggests that both are effective to improve
clinical outcomes in patients with post-operative ARF, particularly those with abdominal and thoracic
surgery, but also after cardiac surgery. NIV reduces intubation rates, nosocomial infections, lengths of stay,
morbidity and mortality. Before initiating NIV in post-operative patients with ARF, surgical complications
such as anastomotic leak or intra-abdominal sepsis should be addressed first. Then, if the patient is
cooperative and able to protect the airway, NIV can be initiated safely.
Question 7: Should NIV be used in patients with ARF receiving palliative care?
In palliative care, the intensity of breathlessness frequently worsens as death approaches. Patients and their
families expect symptomatic relief of this devastating symptom. Clinicians often respond by providing
opioids, a highly effective treatment for this symptom but with a number of potentially undesirable
side-effects, including excessive sedation.
The Society of Critical Care Medicine charged a Task Force to provide guidance for the use of NIV in
palliative care settings [101]. Apart from type 1 patients in whom NIV is a life support with no limitation
of therapy, the authors identified distinct goals for patients in palliative settings; identifying a “type 2”
scenario in which a patient has decided to forego intubation, but still wants to receive salvage NIV therapy
with the goal of surviving the hospitalisation. “Type 3” patients seek symptom alleviation, mainly
dyspnoea, and survival is not a goal for these patients. Most of these type 3 patients, with the support of
their families, are interested in ensuring comfort while dying, but some may also be interested in
prolonging their lives for a few hours while maintaining cognition and the ability to communicate as they
await relatives or to finalise their affairs. In this context, NIV would be considered effective if it improves
breathlessness and respiratory distress without causing other troubling consequences, such as mask
discomfort or unduly prolonging life. One large observational study on patients using NIV in ICUs found
that those in whom NIV was a ceiling for therapy had the same quality of life as patients with no
treatment limitations if they survived to day 90 [102].
Two RCTs in patients with advanced cancer have evaluated the efficacy of NIV in reducing dyspnoea. HUI
et al. [103] showed a similar improvement in dyspnoea scores between NIV and high-flow oxygen, while a
larger multicentre study [104] demonstrated a significantly greater reduction in breathlessness using NIV,
especially in the hypercapnic subgroup of patients. Interestingly, the latter investigation showed that NIV
might reduce the dose of morphine necessary to palliate dyspnoea, maintaining better cognitive function.
Overall, NIV had a similar rate of acceptance by patients compared with oxygen therapy (∼60%).
Recommendation
We suggest offering NIV to dyspnoeic patients for palliation in the setting of terminal cancer or other
terminal conditions. (Conditional recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV improved patient dyspnoea as assessed by the
Borg scale (mean difference 0.89 lower, 95% CI 0.79–0.99 lower; moderate certainty) and led to decreased
morphine requirements (mean difference 32.4 mg lower, 95% CI 17.4–47.4 lower; low certainty). The
effect on respiratory rate and oxygenation was less clear due to significant imprecision (both very low
certainty in evidence). The small number of studies, heterogeneity in trial design and the relatively low
acceptance rate of this technique in this scenario prevent a firm recommendation regarding the use of NIV
as a palliative tool. Overall, the results are favourable, but we emphasise the need for appropriate patient
selection and staff training, especially where the use of NIV is not usual practice (i.e. palliative care unit).
No recommendation was made for type 2 patients, lacking RCT evidence; however, in the observational
studies, the use of NIV in “do not intubate” patients was associated, at least in some subsets of patients
(COPD and congestive heart failure), with a surprisingly high (>30–60%) hospital survival and a 3-month
quality of life equivalent to patients treated with NIV and having no limitation placed on support.
Question 8: Should NIV be used in ARF due to chest trauma?
The utility of bilevel NIV or CPAP for treatment of respiratory failure in chest trauma patients has been
investigated in three RCTs [105–107] and in a small subgroup of patients enrolled in a fourth trial [85].
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
11
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Two of these studies compared NIV versus supplemental oxygen [85, 107], while the other two used
invasive mechanical ventilation as control [105, 106].
A single-centre RCT randomised 69 trauma patients with at least four unilateral rib fractures to receive
either CPAP or invasive mechanical ventilation [105]. Two out of 33 patients in the CPAP group died in
hospital compared with none of the invasively ventilated patients (p>0.05). Patients randomised to CPAP
had a significantly shorter ICU length of stay and less nosocomial pneumonia. A second RCT randomised
52 patients with multiple rib fractures and hypoxia to either CPAP or invasive ventilation [106], but no
statistical difference was observed in any of the outcomes considered.
A third study randomised chest trauma patients with any injury and respiratory failure to NIV or
high-flow oxygen therapy (>10 L·min–1) [107]. The study was stopped early after a second interim analysis
after 50 patients had been included. Patients enrolled in this study were significantly more hypoxaemic
(mean PaO2/FIO2 100±34.5) than those in other studies. Significantly fewer intubations were performed in
patients randomised to receive NIV (RR 0.20, 95% CI 0.05–0.87), resulting in a significant decrease in ICU
length of stay with NIV.
The last study was a multicentre RCT that randomised patients with respiratory failure from multiple
aetiologies to receive NIV versus standard oxygen therapy [85]. 17 out of 105 hypoxaemic patients (16%)
that were enrolled had a presenting diagnosis of chest trauma. Outcome data for mortality and intubation
was presented for the chest trauma subgroup, but no significant difference between groups was seen for
either of these outcomes.
Recommendation
We suggest NIV for chest trauma patients with ARF. (Conditional recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to a decrease in mortality (RR 0.55,
95% CI 0.22–1.41; moderate certainty), the need for intubation (OR 0.21, 95% CI 0.06–0.74; moderate
certainty) and the incidence of nosocomial pneumonia (OR 0.29, 95% CI 0.13–0.64; low certainty) in this
population. There was also a decrease in ICU length of stay (mean difference 2.47 lower, 95% CI 1.5–3.45
lower). The dearth of studies, heterogeneity in trial design, different comparators (i.e. oxygen or invasive
ventilation), different severities of patients at enrolment and different causes of ARF (i.e. rib fracture or
flail chest) prevent us from making a definitive recommendation. However, given the positive overall
results, we suggest a cautious NIV trial in these patients when pain is controlled and hypoxaemia not
severe.
Question 9: Should NIV be used in ARF due to pandemic viral illness?
The use of NIV for severe acute respiratory syndrome and other airborne diseases has been assessed in
several observational studies and remains controversial. These studies reported NIV failure rates of 30%
and 33% [108, 109], with no evidence of viral spread to caregivers who took appropriate precautions.
More recently, NIV was also used in patients with ARF due to influenza A H1N1 infection, with failure
rates ranging between 13% and 77% [110–112]. However, no randomised clinical trial has assessed the
efficacy of NIV in such pandemics.
Recommendation
Given the uncertainty of evidence we are unable to offer a recommendation for this question.
Justification
Despite the lack of any RCTs, the positive data from most of the observational studies and the
controversial issue of possible increased risk of passing infection on to caregivers, we consider the prior
recommendations against the use of NIV for pandemics as unsupportable. Although a cautious NIV trial
in carefully selected patients at experienced centres, in a protected environment (i.e. negative pressure
rooms), may be reasonable, further research is needed before a recommendation is possible.
Question 10: Should NIV be used in ARF following extubation from invasive mechanical
ventilation?
Re-intubation following extubation failure is a major clinical problem. Rates of extubation failure as high
as 23.5% have been reported [113]. In contrast to patients who are successfully extubated, those who are
re-intubated because of post-extubation respiratory failure are characterised as having a worse prognosis,
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
12
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 even after controlling for level of severity, which suggests a direct adverse effect of re-intubation itself on
patient outcomes [114].
As re-intubation is associated with increased mortality, any strategy aimed at reducing the rate of
post-extubation respiratory failure and avoiding re-intubation deserves consideration. NIV might be a
means to avoid re-intubation either by treating post-extubation respiratory failure when it develops or
preventing it from developing at all by instituting NIV immediately after extubation. As these are different
questions, they are best considered and discussed separately. For the sake of clarity, post-operative patients
are not considered in this section.
Question 10a: Should NIV be used to prevent respiratory failure post-extubation?
The benefits of early application of NIV soon after extubation have been assessed in unselected patients
(i.e. any patients after planned extubation) and in at-risk patients. For most included studies, at-risk
included patients >65 years or those with underlying cardiac or respiratory disease.
Unselected patients
In 1999, JIANG et al. [115] enrolled 93 consecutive patients following planned (60.2%) or unplanned
(39.8%) extubation, who were randomised either to preventive NIV (treatment group) or standard
treatment (control group). They found no difference in the rate of re-intubation between the two groups.
In the 37 patients in whom extubation was unplanned, the re-intubation rate was 38% compared with 11%
in the 56 patients undergoing planned extubation [115]. More recently, SU et al. [116] enrolled 406
unselected patients extubated after passing a spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). Consistent with the
previous study [115], compared with standard treatment, NIV did not decrease the rate of re-intubation.
ICU mortality also was not significantly different [116]. Overall, in unselected patients post-extubation,
NIV provides no benefit compared with standard oxygen therapy.
At-risk patients
Two multicentre RCTs evaluated whether NIV could prevent re-intubation when applied immediately
after planned extubation to selected patients at high risk of post-extubation respiratory failure [117, 118].
NAVA et al. [117] enrolled 97 patients who were randomised 1 h after extubation, following a successful
SBT, to receive either NIV (minimum 8 h·day–1 for 2 days) or standard treatment (oxygen therapy). NIV
reduced the rate of re-intubation, which resulted in a reduced ICU mortality. FERRER et al. [118]
randomised 162 patients considered to be at risk for extubation failure to either NIV (near-continuously
for 24 h) or oxygen therapy only. NIV decreased the number of patients developing post-extubation
respiratory failure and ICU mortality; however, the rate of re-intubation, ICU and hospital length of stay,
and hospital mortality were not significantly different between the two groups. A post hoc analysis showed
that NIV improved hospital and 90-day survival in the subgroup of patients who developed hypercapnia
during the SBT prior to extubation [118]. Subsequent to these observations, the same authors enrolled a
select group of 106 patients with chronic respiratory disorders developing hypercapnia during the SBT to
investigate the benefits of NIV, as opposed to oxygen therapy alone, after extubation [119]. The rate of
respiratory failure after extubation was lower in the NIV group than in the controls. While ICU and
hospital mortality were not different between the treatment and control groups, the 90-day survival rate
was significantly improved in the NIV group, as opposed to controls.
Two small single-centre trials (40 patients each) also randomised patients to NIV or standard treatment
after planned extubation [120, 121]. KIHLNANI et al. [120] enrolled COPD patients and found no
differences in intubation rate or ICU and hospital lengths of stay. In a small group of patients for whom
the only inclusion criterion was mechanical ventilation for >72 h because of ARF, predominantly
secondary to COPD exacerbations, ORNICO et al. [121] found a reduction in re-intubation and death in the
NIV group.
Recommendations
We suggest that NIV be used to prevent post-extubation respiratory failure in high-risk patients
post-extubation. (Conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence.)
We suggest that NIV should not be used to prevent post-extubation respiratory failure in non-high-risk
patients. (Conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding included
evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to a decrease in mortality (RR 0.41, 95% CI 0.21–
0.82; moderate certainty) and the need for intubation (RR 0.75, 95% CI 0.49–1.15; low certainty). There are
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
13
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 some inconsistencies regarding the criteria for considering patients at high risk of extubation failure. Recent
work reports that patients >65 years and with underlying cardiac or respiratory disease are at high risk for
extubation failure with a re-intubation rate >30% if both comorbidities are present and >20% if one of the
two is present [122]. Early NIV after planned extubation decreases both intubation rate and mortality in
patients at high risk of extubation failure. Patients with an unplanned extubation are a higher risk group and
further studies should specifically address the use of NIV in this group.
Question 10b: Should NIV be used in the treatment of respiratory failure that develops
post-extubation?
Following the positive findings of case series and case–control studies, two RCTs compared NIV with
conventional treatment (oxygen therapy) in patients who developed respiratory failure after planned
extubation [123, 124].
KEENAN et al. [123] investigated the role of NIV, compared with standard treatment, to avert re-intubation in 78
patients who developed respiratory distress, defined as tachypnoea and use of respiratory accessory muscles,
within 48 h of extubation. This single-centre RCT did not find any beneficial effect of NIV on re-intubation,
ICU and hospital mortality or length of ICU and hospital stay. In a multicentre RCT, ESTEBAN et al. [124]
enrolled 221 patients with respiratory failure defined by at least two of the following: hypoxaemia, respiratory
acidosis, tachypnoea or respiratory distress within 48 h of extubation; patients were randomised to NIV or
standard treatment. The trial showed no benefit from NIV on re-intubation and ICU length of stay. ICU
mortality was higher in the NIV group, suggesting that it was harmful, probably by delaying intubation. A
meta-analysis performed by LIN et al. [125] in 2014 on these two studies indicates no benefit of NIV compared
with standard treatment with respect to re-intubation rate and mortality.
Recommendation
We suggest that NIV should not be used in the treatment of patients with established post-extubation
respiratory failure. (Conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence.)
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding
included evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to an increase in mortality (RR 1.33,
95% CI 0.83–2.13, low certainty), with an uncertain effect on intubation (RR 1.02, 95% CI 0.83–1.25, low
certainty). The use of NIV to avoid re-intubation in patients with overt respiratory distress and/or
respiratory failure consequent to failed planned extubation is not advisable. However, because of some
limitations in the trials this statement is not definitive. In particular, in the study by ESTEBAN et al. [124],
the use of NIV as rescue therapy had a much higher success rate than in those who received it as initial
treatment, there was a lack of experience of NIV in some participating centres and there was very limited
enrolment rate at some sites. In addition, both the KEENAN et al. [123] and ESTEBAN et al. [124] studies had
few COPD patients (∼10%), so this recommendation may not apply to post-extubation COPD patients
with respiratory failure. Further studies are needed.
Question 11: Should NIV be used to facilitate weaning patients from invasive mechanical
ventilation?
NIV has been shown to be as effective as invasive mechanical ventilation in improving breathing pattern,
reducing inspiratory effort and maintaining adequate gas exchange during the weaning phase in selected
patients intubated and ventilated for hypercapnic ARF [126]. Based on this physiological rationale, NIV
has been utilised in these patients as a means to speed up the weaning process, while avoiding the
side-effects and complications of invasive ventilation.
BURNS et al. [127] identified 16 RCTs enrolling a total of 994 participants, mostly with COPD. Of the 16
studies,
nine
included
only
patients
with
COPD
[128–136],
six
included
mixed
populations
(predominantly hypercapnic) [137–142] and one small pilot study included only hypoxaemic patients
[143]. Compared with conventional weaning using either a progressive reduction of inspiratory support or
SBTs, NIV was associated with a significant decrease in mortality (RR 0.53, 95% CI 0.36–0.80; 994
patients). The pooled data showed a significant reduction in the proportion of weaning failures with NIV
(RR 0.63, 95% CI 0.42–0.96). There were also significant reductions in ventilator-associated pneumonia
(RR 0.25, 95% CI 0.15–0.43; 953 patients), ICU (mean difference −5.59 days, 95% CI −7.90 to −3.28) and
hospital (mean difference −6.04 days, 95% CI −9.22 to −2.87) length of stay, total duration of mechanical
ventilation (mean difference −5.64 days, 95% CI −9.50 to −1.77), and duration of invasive ventilation
(mean difference −7.44 days, 95% CI −10.34 to −4.55). Weaning time and weaning failure were no
different between NIV and conventional weaning (mean difference −0.25 days, 95% CI −2.06 to 1.56).
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
14
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 Of the 16 studies, the largest multicentre RCT (including 208 patients randomised to three groups
receiving either conventional weaning through the endotracheal tube, early extubation followed by NIV or
early extubation followed by oxygen therapy) resulted in similar rates of re-intubation in all three groups
(30%, 32%, and 37%, respectively; p-value nonsignificant) [138]. However, the cumulative rates of weaning
success were significantly better in patients randomised to the NIV group. The reason for this discrepancy
in re-intubation versus weaning success was related to the use of NIV as a rescue treatment for patients
who failed conventional weaning and oxygen therapy.
Recommendations
We suggest NIV be used to facilitate weaning from mechanical ventilation in patients with hypercapnic
respiratory failure. (Conditional recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence.)
We do not make any recommendation for hypoxaemic patients.
Justification
See forest plots and the evidence profile in the supplementary material for further details regarding included
evidence. Pooled analysis demonstrated that NIV use led to a decrease in mortality (RR 0.54, 95% CI 0.41–
0.70; moderate certainty), weaning failure (RR 0.61, 95% CI 0.48–0.79; low certainty) and the incidence of
ventilator-associated pneumonia (RR 0.22, 95% CI 0.15–0.32; low certainty) in this population. Based on this
evidence review, the committee felt the anticipated desirable effects of NIV applied immediately following
extubation in patients with an acute COPD exacerbation who fail the SBT outweigh the anticipated
undesirable effects. The intricacies of using NIV for weaning are more difficult (compared with other
indications) and therefore the committee felt more comfortable with a conditional, rather than a strong,
recommendation. Centres must have adequate experience using NIV in this setting before considering use.
Conclusions
Based on a systematic review of the literature, and building upon previous meta-analyses and guidelines,
we make recommendations regarding the current use of NIV for various forms of respiratory failure
encountered in acute care settings (table 2). Our recommendations are largely in line with guidelines
published within the past 15 years, but there have been incremental alterations as new studies and
information have become available. We anticipate that some of these recommendations will change in the
future as new studies are completed, especially regarding the use of NIV as opposed to other emerging
technologies such as high-flow nasal cannula therapy and extracorporeal CO2 removal. We emphasise that
these guidelines should not be interpreted as absolute and should be implemented based on patient
factors, including individual values and preferences, only in combination with clinical judgement. We also
refer readers to the supplementary material in which we address a number of issues related to practical
application of NIV that have not been subject to the GRADE process.
References
1
Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction – GRADE evidence profiles and
summary of findings tables. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64: 383–394.
TABLE 2 Recommendations for actionable PICO questions
Clinical indication#
Certainty of evidence¶
Recommendation
Prevention of hypercapnia in COPD exacerbation
⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation against
Hypercapnia with COPD exacerbation
⊕⊕⊕⊕
Strong recommendation for
Cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
⊕⊕⊕
Strong recommendation for
Acute asthma exacerbation
No recommendation made
Immunocompromised
⊕⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation for
De novo respiratory failure
No recommendation made
Post-operative patients
⊕⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation for
Palliative care
⊕⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation for
Trauma
⊕⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation for
Pandemic viral illness
No recommendation made
Post-extubation in high-risk patients (prophylaxis)
⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation for
Post-extubation respiratory failure
⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation against
Weaning in hypercapnic patients
⊕⊕⊕
Conditional recommendation for
#: all in the setting of acute respiratory failure; ¶: certainty of effect estimates: ⊕⊕⊕⊕, high; ⊕⊕⊕, moderate; ⊕⊕, low; ⊕, very low.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
15
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 2
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines: 2. Framing the question and deciding on important
outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64: 395–400.
3
GRADE
Working
Group.
Guideline
Development
Tool.
2014.
http://gdt.guidelinedevelopment.org/app/
handbook/handbook.html Date last accessed: January 17, 2017.
4
Alonso-Coello P, Oxman AD, Moberg J, et al. GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic and
transparent approach to making well informed healthcare choices. 2: Clinical practice guidelines. BMJ 2016; 353:
i2089.
5
Andrews JC, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 15. Going from evidence to
recommendation – determinants of a recommendation’s direction and strength. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 66:
726–735.
6
Plant PK, Owen J, Elliott MW. One year period prevalence study of respiratory acidosis in acute exacerbation of
COPD; implications for the provision of non-invasive ventilation and oxygen administration. Thorax 2000; 55:
550–554.
7
Roberts CM, Stone RA, Buckingham RJ, et al. Acidosis, non-invasive ventilation and mortality in hospitalised
COPD exacerbations. Thorax 2011; 66: 43–48.
8
Jeffrey AA, Warren PM, Flenley DC. Acute hypercapnic respiratory failure in patients with chronic obstructive
lung disease: risk factors and use of guidelines for management. Thorax 1992; 47: 34–40.
9
Brochard L, Isabey D, Piquet J, et al. Reversal of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive lung disease by
inspiratory assistance with a face mask. N Engl J Med 1990; 323: 1523–1530.
10
Nava S, Navalesi P, Conti G. Time of non-invasive ventilation. Intensive Care Med 2006; 32: 361–370.
11
Keenan SP, Powers CE, McCormack DG. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation in patients with milder
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations: a randomized controlled trial. Respir Care 2005; 50:
610–616.
12
Barbe F, Togores B, Rubi M, et al. Noninvasive ventilatory support does not facilitate recovery from acute
respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 1996; 9: 1240–1245.
13
Bardi G, Pierotello R, Desideri M, et al. Nasal ventilation in COPD exacerbations: early and late results of a
prospective, controlled study. Eur Respir J 2000; 15: 98–104.
14
Wood KA, Lewis L, Von Harz B, et al. The use of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in the emergency
department. Chest 1998; 113: 1339–1346.
15
Collaborative Research Group of Noninvasive Mechanical Ventilation for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease. Early use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: a multicentre randomized controlled trial. Chin Med J 2005; 118: 2034–2040.
16
O’Driscoll BR, Howard LS, Davison AG. BTS guideline for emergency oxygen use in adult patients. Thorax 2008;
63: Suppl. 6, vi1–vi68.
17
Austin MA, Wills KE, Blizzard L, et al. Effect of high flow oxygen on mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease patients in prehospital setting: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2010; 341: c5462.
18
Angus RM, Ahmed AA, Fenwick LJ, et al. Comparison of the acute effects on gas exchange of nasal ventilation
and doxapram in exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax 1996; 51: 1048–1050.
19
Avdeev SN, Tretyakov AV, Grigoryants RA, et al. Issledovanie primeneniia neinvazivnoi ventiliatsii legkikh pri
ostroi dykhatel’noi nedostatochnosti na fone obostreniia khronicheskogo obstruktivnogo zabolevaniia legkik.
[Study of the use of noninvasive ventilation of the lungs in acute respiratory insufficiency due exacerbation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.] Anesteziol Reanimatol 1998; 3: 45–51.
20
Bott J, Carroll MP, Conway JH, et al. Randomised controlled trial of nasal ventilation in acute ventilatory failure
due to chronic obstructive airways disease. Lancet 1993; 341: 1555–1557.
21
Brochard L, Mancebo J, Wysocki M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 1995; 333: 817–822.
22
Carrera M, Marin JM, Anton A, et al. A controlled trial of noninvasive ventilation for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease exacerbations. J Crit Care 2009; 24: 473–414.
23
Celikel T, Sungur M, Ceyhan B, et al. Comparison of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation with standard
medical therapy in hypercapnic acute respiratory failure. Chest 1998; 114: 1636–1642.
24
Conti G, Antonelli M, Navalesi P, et al. Noninvasive vs. conventional mechanical ventilation in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease after failure of medical treatment in the ward: a randomized trial.
Intensive Care Med 2002; 28: 1701–1707.
25
del Castillo D, Barrot E, Laserna E, et al. Ventilacion no invasiva por soporte de presion en pacientes con
enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva cronica en insuficiencia respiratoria aguda hipercapnica ingresados en una
unidad de hospitalizacion convencional de neumologia. [Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation for acute
respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in a general respiratory ward.] Med Clin 2003; 120:
647–651.
26
Dikensoy O, Ikidag B, Filiz A, et al. Comparison of non-invasive ventilation and standard medical therapy in
acute hypercapnic respiratory failure: a randomised controlled study at a tertiary health centre in SE Turkey. Int J
Clin Pract 2002; 56: 85–88.
27
Jurjevic M, Matic I, Sakic-Zdravcevic K, et al. Mechanical ventilation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients, noninvasive vs. invasive method (randomized prospective study). Coll Antropol 2009; 33: 791–797.
28
Khilnani GC, Saikia N, Banga A, et al. Non-invasive ventilation for acute exacerbation of COPD with very high
PaCO2: a randomized controlled trial. Lung India 2010; 27: 125–130.
29
Kramer N, Meyer TJ, Meharg J, et al. Randomized, prospective trial of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
in acute respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 151: 1799–1806.
30
Martin TJ, Hovis JD, Costantino JP, et al. A randomized, prospective evaluation of noninvasive ventilation for
acute respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161: 807–813.
31
Nava S, Grassi M, Fanfulla F, et al. Non-invasive ventilation in elderly patients with acute hypercapnic
respiratory failure: a randomised controlled trial. Age Ageing 2011; 40: 444–450.
32
Plant PK, Owen JL, Elliott MW. Early use of non-invasive ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease on general respiratory wards: a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2000; 355: 1931–1935.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
16
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 33
Schmidbauer W, Ahlers O, Spies C, et al. Early prehospital use of non-invasive ventilation improves acute
respiratory failure in acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Emerg Med J 2011; 28: 626–627.
34
Thys F, Roeseler J, Reynaert M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for acute respiratory failure: a prospective
randomised placebo-controlled trial. Eur Respir J 2002; 20: 545–555.
35
Plant PK, Owen JL, Elliott MW. Non-invasive ventilation in acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: long term survival and predictors of in-hospital outcome. Thorax 2001; 56: 708–712.
36
Girou E, Brun-Buisson C, Taille S, et al. Secular trends in nosocomial infections and mortality associated with
noninvasive ventilation in patients with exacerbation of COPD and pulmonary edema. JAMA 2003; 290:
2985–2991.
37
Girou E, Schortgen F, Delclaux C, et al. Association of noninvasive ventilation with nosocomial infections and
survival in critically ill patients. JAMA 2000; 284: 2361–2367.
38
Plant PK, Owen JL, Parrott S, et al. Cost effectiveness of ward based non-invasive ventilation for acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: economic analysis of randomised controlled trial. BMJ
2003; 326: 956–961.
39
Diaz GG, Alcaraz AC, Talavera JCP, et al. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation to treat hypercapnic coma
secondary to respiratory failure. Chest 2005; 127: 952–960.
40
Keenan SP, Gregor J, Sibbald WJ, et al. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in the setting of severe, acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: more effective and less expensive. Crit Care Med 2000;
28: 2094–2102.
41
Lenique F, Habis M, Lofaso F, et al. Ventilatory and hemodynamic effects of continuous positive airway pressure
in left heart failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 155: 500–505.
42
D’Andrea A, Martone F, Liccardo B, et al. Acute and chronic effects of noninvasive ventilation on left and right
myocardial function in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: a speckle tracking echocardiographic
study. Echocardiography 2016; 33: 1144–1155.
43
Gray A, Goodacre S, Newby DE, et al. Noninvasive ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. N Engl J
Med 2008; 359: 142–151.
44
Potts JM. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation: effect on mortality in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema: a
pragmatic meta-analysis. Pol Arch Med Wewn 2009; 119: 349–353.
45
Weng CL, Zhao YT, Liu QH, et al. Meta-analysis: noninvasive ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Ann Intern Med 2010; 152: 590–600.
46
Mariani J, Macchia A, Belziti C, et al. Noninvasive ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Card Fail 2011; 17: 850–859.
47
Vital FM, Ladeira MT, Atallah AN. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (CPAP or bilevel NPPV) for
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 5: CD005351.
48
Cabrini L, Landoni G, Oriani A, et al. Noninvasive ventilation and survival in acute care settings: a comprehensive
systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care Med 2015; 43: 880–888.
49
Mehta S, Al-Hashim AH, Keenan SP. Noninvasive ventilation in patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary
edema. Respir Care 2009; 54: 186–195.
50
Thompson J, Petrie DA, Ackroyd-Stolarz S, et al. Out-of-hospital continuous positive airway pressure ventilation
versus usual care in acute respiratory failure: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Emerg Med 2008; 52: 232–241.
51
Roessler MS, Schmid DS, Michels P, et al. Early out-of-hospital non-invasive ventilation is superior to standard
medical treatment in patients with acute respiratory failure: a pilot study. Emerg Med J 2012; 29: 409–414.
52
Plaisance P, Pirracchio R, Berton C, et al. A randomized study of out-of-hospital continuous positive airway
pressure for acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema: physiological and clinical effects. Eur Heart J 2007; 28:
2895–2901.
53
Leatherman J. Mechanical ventilation for severe asthma. Chest 2015; 147: 1671–1680.
54
Martin JG, Shore S, Engel LA. Effect of continuous positive airway pressure on respiratory mechanics and
pattern of breathing in induced asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1982; 126: 812–817.
55
Murase K, Tomii K, Chin K, et al. The use of non-invasive ventilation for life-threatening asthma attacks:
changes in the need for intubation. Respirology 2010; 15: 714–720.
56
Ganesh A, Shenoy S, Doshi V, et al. Use of noninvasive ventilation in adult patients with acute asthma
exacerbation. Am J Ther 2015; 22: 431–434.
57
Lim WJ, Mohammed Akram R, Carson KV, et al. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for treatment of
respiratory failure due to severe acute exacerbations of asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012; 12: CD004360.
58
Fernandez MM, Villagra A, Blanch L, et al. Non-invasive mechanical ventilation in status asthmaticus. Intensive
Care Med 2001; 27: 486–492.
59
Stefan MS, Nathanson BH, Lagu T, et al. Outcomes of noninvasive and invasive ventilation in patients
hospitalized with asthma exacerbation. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2016; 13: 1096–1104.
60
Antonelli M, Conti G, Bufi M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for treatment of acute respiratory failure in patients
undergoing solid organ transplantation: a randomized trial. JAMA 2000; 283: 235–241.
61
Elliott MW, Steven MH, Phillips GD, et al. Non-invasive mechanical ventilation for acute respiratory failure. BMJ
1990; 300: 358–360.
62
Adda M, Coquet I, Darmon M, et al. Predictors of noninvasive ventilation failure in patients with hematologic
malignancy and acute respiratory failure. Crit Care Med 2008; 36: 2766–2772.
63
Gristina GR, Antonelli M, Conti G, et al. Noninvasive versus invasive ventilation for acute respiratory failure in
patients with hematologic malignancies: a 5-year multicenter observational survey. Crit Care Med 2011; 39:
2232–2239.
64
Squadrone V, Massaia M, Bruno B, et al. Early CPAP prevents evolution of acute lung injury in patients with
hematologic malignancy. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36: 1666–1674.
65
Lemiale V, Mokart D, Resche-Rigon M, et al. Effect of noninvasive ventilation vs oxygen therapy on mortality
among immunocompromised patients with acute respiratory failure: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015; 314:
1711–1719.
66
Frat JP, Ragot S, Girault C, et al. Effect of non-invasive oxygenation strategies in immunocompromised patients
with severe acute respiratory failure: post-hoc analysis of a randomized trial. Lancet Respir Med 2016; 4: 646–652.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
17
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 67
Frat JP, Thille AW, Mercat A, et al. High-flow oxygen through nasal cannula in acute hypoxemic respiratory
failure. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 2185–2196.
68
Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD, Thompson BT, et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: the Berlin Definition.
JAMA 2012; 307: 2526–2533.
69
L’Her E, Deye N, Lellouche F, et al. Physiologic effects of noninvasive ventilation during acute lung injury. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2005; 172: 1112–1118.
70
Kallet RH, Diaz JV. The physiologic effects of noninvasive ventilation. Respir Care 2009; 54: 102–115.
71
Carteaux G, Millan-Guilarte T, De Prost N, et al. Failure of noninvasive ventilation for de novo acute hypoxemic
respiratory failure: role of tidal volume. Crit Care Med 2016; 44: 282–290.
72
Viires N, Silly G, Aubier M, et al. Regional blood flow distribution in dog during induced hypotension and low
cardiac put out. J Clin Invest 1983; 72: 935–947.
73
The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with
traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 2000;
342: 1301–1308.
74
Bellani G, Laffey JG, Pham T, et al. Epidemiology, patterns of care, and mortality for patients with acute
respiratory distress syndrome in intensive care units in 50 countries. JAMA 2016; 315: 788–800.
75
Mascheroni D, Kolobow T, Fumagalli R, et al. Acute respiratory failure following pharmacologically induced
hyperventilation: an experimental animal study. Intensive Care Med 1988; 15: 8–14.
76
Yoshida T, Torsani V, Gomes S, et al. Spontaneous effort causes occult pendelluft during mechanical ventilation.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 188: 1420–1427.
77
Yoshida T, Uchiyama A, Matsuura N, et al. Spontaneous breathing during lung-protective ventilation in an
experimental acute lung injury model: high transpulmonary pressure associated with strong spontaneous
breathing effort may worsen lung injury. Crit Care Med 2012; 40: 1578–1585.
78
Frat JP, Brugiere B, Ragot S, et al. Sequential application of oxygen therapy via high-flow nasal cannula and
noninvasive ventilation in acute respiratory failure: an observational pilot study. Respir Care 2015; 60: 170–178.
79
Antonelli M, Conti G, Pelosi P, et al. New treatment of acute hypoxemic respiratory failure: noninvasive pressure
support ventilation delivered by helmet – a pilot controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2002; 30: 602–608.
80
Esquinas Rodriguez AM, Papadakos PJ, Carron M, et al. Clinical review: helmet and non-invasive mechanical
ventilation in critically ill patients. Crit Care 2013; 17: 223.
81
Vargas F, Thille A, Lyazidi A, et al. Helmet with specific settings versus facemask for noninvasive ventilation.
Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 1921–1928.
82
Brambilla AM, Aliberti S, Prina E, et al. Helmet CPAP vs. oxygen therapy in severe hypoxemic respiratory failure
due to pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2014; 40: 942–949.
83
Zhan Q, Sun B, Liang L, et al. Early use of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation for acute lung injury: a
multicenter randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2012; 40: 455–460.
84
Antonelli M, Conti G, Rocco M, et al. A comparison of noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation and
conventional mechanical ventilation in patients with acute respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 1998; 339: 429–435.
85
Ferrer M, Esquinas A, Leon M, et al. Noninvasive ventilation in severe hypoxemic respiratory failure: a
randomized clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 168: 1438–1444.
86
Brochard L, Lefebvre JC, Cordioli RL, et al. Noninvasive ventilation for patients with hypoxemic acute
respiratory failure. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 35: 492–500.
87
Keenan SP, Sinuff T, Burns KE, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the use of noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation and noninvasive continuous positive airway pressure in the acute care setting. CMAJ 2011; 183:
E195–E214.
88
Dysart K, Miller TL, Wolfson MR, et al. Research in high flow therapy: mechanisms of action. Respir Med 2009;
103: 1400–1405.
89
Antonelli M, Conti G, Moro ML, et al. Predictors of failure of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in
patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure: a multi-center study. Intensive Care Med 2001; 27: 1718–1728.
90
Mosier JM, Sakles JC, Whitmore SP, et al. Failed noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation is associated with an
increased risk of intubation-related complications. Ann Intensive Care 2015; 5: 4.
91
Demoule A, Chevret S, Carlucci A, et al. Changing use of noninvasive ventilation in critically ill patients: trends
over 15 years in francophone countries. Intensive Care Med 2016; 42: 82–92.
92
Demoule A, Girou E, Richard JC, et al. Benefits and risks of success or failure of noninvasive ventilation.
Intensive Care Med 2006; 32: 1756–1765.
93
Jaber S, Chanques G, Jung B. Postoperative noninvasive ventilation. Anesthesiology 2010; 112: 453–461.
94
Warner M. Preventing postoperative pulmonary complications. the role of the anesthesiologist. Anesthesiology
2000; 92: 1467–1472.
95
Jaber S, Lescot T, Futier E, et al. Effect of noninvasive ventilation on tracheal reintubation among patients with
hypoxemic respiratory failure following abdominal surgery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 315:
1345–1353.
96
Stephan F, Barrucand B, Petit P, et al. High-flow nasal oxygen vs noninvasive positive airway pressure in
hypoxemic patients after cardiothoracic surgery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015; 313: 2331–2339.
97
Chiumello D, Chevallard G, Gregoretti C. Non-invasive ventilation in postoperative patients: a systematic review.
Intensive Care Med 2013; 37: 918–929.
98
Auriant I, Jallot A, Herve P, et al. Noninvasive ventilation reduces mortality in acute respiratory failure following
lung resection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 164: 1231–1235.
99
Jaber S, Delay J, Sebbane M, et al. Outcomes of patients with acute respiratory failure after abdominal surgery
treated with noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation. Chest 2005; 128: 2688–2695.
100
Squadrone V, Coha M, Cerutti E, et al. Continuous positive airway pressure for treatment of postoperative
hypoxemia: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005; 293: 589–595.
101
Curtis JR, Cook DJ, Sinuff T, et al. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in critical and palliative care
settings: understanding the goals of therapy. Crit Care Med 2007; 35: 932–939.
102
Azoulay E, Kouatchet A, Jaber S, et al. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation in patients having declined tracheal
intubation. Intensive Care Med 2013; 39: 292–301.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
18
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 103
Hui D, Morgado M, Chisholm G, et al. High-flow oxygen and bilevel positive airway pressure for persistent
dyspnea in patients with advanced cancer: a phase II randomized trial. J Pain Symptom Manage 2013; 46:
463–473.
104
Nava S, Ferrer M, Esquinas A, et al. Palliative use of non-invasive ventilation in end-of-life patients with solid
tumours: a randomised feasibility trial. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14: 219–227.
105
Bolliger CT, Van Eeden SF. Treatment of multiple rib fractures. Randomized controlled trial comparing
ventilatory with nonventilatory management. Chest 1990; 97: 943–948.
106
Gunduz M, Unlugenc H, Ozalevli M, et al. A comparative study of continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP) and intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) in patients with flail chest. Emerg Med J 2005; 22:
325–329.
107
Hernandez G, Fernandez R, Lopez-Reina P, et al. Noninvasive ventilation reduces intubation in chest
trauma-related hypoxemia: a randomized clinical trial. Chest 2010; 137: 74–80.
108
Cheung TM, Yam LY, So LK, et al. Effectiveness of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in the treatment of
acute respiratory failure in severe acute respiratory syndrome. Chest 2004; 126: 845–850.
109
Han F, Jiang YY, Zheng JH, et al. [Acute respiratory failure and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
treatment in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome.] Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi 2004; 27:
593–597.
110
Belenguer-Muncharaz A, Reig-Valero R, Altaba-Tena S, et al. Utilizacion de la ventilacion mecanica no invasiva
en neumonia grave por virus H1N1. [Noninvasive mechanical ventilation in severe pneumonia due to H1N1
virus.] Med Intensiva 2011; 35: 470–477.
111
Estenssoro E, Rios FG, Apezteguia C, et al. Pandemic 2009 influenza A in Argentina: a study of 337 patients on
mechanical ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 182: 41–48.
112
Masclans JR, Perez M, Almirall J, et al. Early non-invasive ventilation treatment for severe influenza pneumonia.
Clin Microbiol Infect 2013; 19: 249–256.
113
Boles JM, Bion J, Connors A, et al. Weaning from mechanical ventilation. Eur Respir J 2007; 29: 1033–1056.
114
Thille AW, Harrois A, Schortgen F, et al. Outcomes of extubation failure in medical intensive care unit patients.
Crit Care Med 2011; 39: 2612–2618.
115
Jiang JS, Kao SJ, Wang SN. Effect of early application of biphasic positive airway pressure on the outcome of
extubation in ventilator weaning. Respirology 1999; 4: 161–165.
116
Su CL, Chiang LL, Yang SH, et al. Preventive use of noninvasive ventilation after extubation: a prospective,
multicenter randomized controlled trial. Respir Care 2012; 57: 204–210.
117
Nava S, Gregoretti C, Fanfulla F, et al. Noninvasive ventilation to prevent respiratory failure after extubation in
high-risk patients. Crit Care Med 2005; 33: 2465–2470.
118
Ferrer M, Valencia M, Nicolas JM, et al. Early noninvasive ventilation averts extubation failure in patients at risk:
a randomized trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 173: 164–170.
119
Ferrer M, Sellares J, Valencia M, et al. Non-invasive ventilation after extubation in hypercapnic patients with
chronic respiratory disorders: randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2009; 374: 1082–1088.
120
Khilnani GC, Galle AD, Hadda V, et al. Non-invasive ventilation after extubation in patients with chronic
obstructive airways disease: a randomised controlled trial. Anaesth Intensive Care 2011; 39: 217–223.
121
Ornico SR, Lobo SM, Sanches HS, et al. Noninvasive ventilation immediately after extubation improves weaning
outcome after acute respiratory failure: a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2013; 17: R39.
122
Thille AW, Boissier F, Ben-Ghezala H, et al. Easily identified at-risk patients for extubation failure may benefit
from noninvasive ventilation: a prospective before–after study. Crit Care 2016; 20: 48.
123
Keenan SP, Powers C, McCormack DG, et al. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation for postextubation
respiratory distress: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002; 287: 3238–3244.
124
Esteban A, Frutos-Vivar F, Ferguson ND, et al. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation for respiratory failure
after extubation. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 2452–2460.
125
Lin C, Yu H, Fan H, et al. The efficacy of noninvasive ventilation in managing postextubation respiratory failure:
a meta-analysis. Heart Lung 2014; 43: 99–104.
126
Vitacca M, Ambrosino N, Clini E, et al. Physiological response to pressure support ventilation delivered before
and after extubation in patients not capable of totally spontaneous autonomous breathing. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2001; 164: 638–641.
127
Burns KE, Meade MO, Premji A, et al. Noninvasive ventilation as a weaning strategy for mechanical ventilation
in adults with respiratory failure: a Cochrane systematic review. CMAJ 2014; 186: E112–E122.
128
Zheng R, Liu L, Yang Y. Prospective randomized controlled clinical study of sequential non-invasive following
invasive mechanical ventilation in patients with acute respiratory failure induced COPD. Chin J Emerg Med 2005;
14: 21–25.
129
Chen J, Qiu D, Tao D. [Time for extubation and sequential noninvasive mechanical ventilation in COPD
patients with exacerbated respiratory failure who received invasive ventilation.] Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za
Zhi 2001; 24: 99–100.
130
Nava S, Ambrosino N, Clini E, et al. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation in the weaning of patients with
respiratory failure due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
1998; 128: 721–728.
131
Prasad SB, Chaudhry D, Khanna R. Role of noninvasive ventilation in weaning from mechanical ventilation in
patients of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: an Indian experience. Indian J Crit Care Med 2009; 13:
207–212.
132
Collaborating Research Group for Noninvasive Mechanical Ventilation of Chinese Respiratory Society.
Pulmonary infection control window in treatment of severe respiratory failure of chronic obstructive pulmonary
diseases: a prospective, randomized controlled, multi-centred study. Chin Med J 2005; 118: 1589–1594.
133
Zou SH, Zhou R, Chen P, et al. [Application of sequential noninvasive following invasive mechanical ventilation
in COPD patients with severe respiratory failure by investigating the appearance of pulmonary-infection-
control-window.] Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban 2006; 31: 120–124.
134
Gamal MR, Ashraf ZM, Rania NM. Noninvasive ventilation in the weaning of patients with acute-on-chronic
respiratory failure due to COPD. Chest 2004; 126: Suppl. 4, 755S.
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
19
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
 135
Wang X, Du X, Zhang W. Observation of the results and discussion on the timing of transition from invasive
mechanical ventilation to noninvasive ventilation in COPD patients with concomitant acute respiratory failure.
Shandong Med J 2004; 44: 4–6.
136
Agmy GM, Metwally MM. Noninvasive ventilation in the weaning of patients with acute-on-chronic respiratory
failure due to COPD. Egyptian J Chest Dis Tuberculosis 2012; 61: 84–91.
137
Tawfeek MM, Ali-Elnabtity AM. Noninvasive proportional assist ventilation may be useful in weaning patients
who failed a spontaneous breathing trial. Egyptian J Anaesthes 2012; 28: 89–94.
138
Girault C, Bubenheim M, Abroug F, et al. Noninvasive ventilation and weaning in patients with chronic
hypercapnic respiratory failure: a randomized multicenter trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011; 184: 672–679.
139
Ferrer M, Esquinas A, Arancibia F, et al. Noninvasive ventilation during persistent weaning failure: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 168: 70–76.
140
Trevisan CE, Vieira SR. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation may be useful in treating patients who fail weaning
from invasive mechanical ventilation: a randomized clinical trial. Crit Care 2008; 12: R51.
141
Hill NS, Lin D, Levy M. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) to facilitate extubation after acute
respiratory failure: a feasibility study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161: B18.
142
Girault C, Daudenthun I, Chevron V, et al. Noninvasive ventilation as a systematic extubation and weaning
technique in acute-on-chronic respiratory failure: a prospective, randomized controlled study. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1999; 160: 86–92.
143
Vaschetto R, Turucz E, Dellapiazza F, et al. Noninvasive ventilation after early extubation in patients recovering
from hypoxemic acute respiratory failure: a single-centre feasibility study. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38:
1599–1606
https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02426-2016
20
ERS/ATS GUIDELINES | B. ROCHWERG ET AL.
