 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Environmental Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envres
Environmental chemicals and breast cancer: An updated review of
epidemiological literature informed by biological mechanisms☆
Kathryn M. Rodgers⁎, Julia O. Udesky, Ruthann A. Rudel, Julia Green Brody
Silent Spring Institute, 320 Nevada Street, Newton, MA 02460, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Endocrine disruptors
Toxicology
Breast development
Mammary carcinogens
Prevention
A B S T R A C T
Background: Many common environmental chemicals are mammary gland carcinogens in animal studies, acti-
vate relevant hormonal pathways, or enhance mammary gland susceptibility to carcinogenesis. Breast cancer’s
long latency and multifactorial etiology make evaluation of these chemicals in humans challenging.
Objective: For chemicals previously identified as mammary gland toxicants, we evaluated epidemiologic studies
published since our 2007 review. We assessed whether study designs captured relevant exposures and disease
features suggested by toxicological and biological evidence of genotoxicity, endocrine disruption, tumor pro-
motion, or disruption of mammary gland development.
Methods: We systematically searched the PubMed database for articles with breast cancer outcomes published in
2006–2016 using terms for 134 environmental chemicals, sources, or biomarkers of exposure. We critically
reviewed the articles.
Results: We identified 158 articles. Consistent with experimental evidence, a few key studies suggested higher risk
for exposures during breast development to dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), dioxins, perfluorooctane-
sulfonamide (PFOSA), and air pollution (risk estimates ranged from 2.14 to 5.0), and for occupational exposure to
solvents and other mammary carcinogens, such as gasoline components (risk estimates ranged from 1.42 to 3.31).
Notably, one 50-year cohort study captured exposure to DDT during several critical windows for breast devel-
opment (in utero, adolescence, pregnancy) and when this chemical was still in use. Most other studies did not
assess exposure during a biologically relevant window or specify the timing of exposure. Few studies considered
genetic variation, but the Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project reported higher breast cancer risk for polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in women with certain genetic variations, especially in DNA repair genes.
Conclusions: New studies that targeted toxicologically relevant chemicals and captured biological hypotheses
about genetic variants or windows of breast susceptibility added to evidence of links between environmental
chemicals and breast cancer. However, many biologically relevant chemicals, including current-use consumer
product chemicals, have not been adequately studied in humans. Studies are challenged to reconstruct exposures
that occurred decades before diagnosis or access biological samples stored that long. Other problems include
measuring rapidly metabolized chemicals and evaluating exposure to mixtures.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.08.045
Received 28 April 2017; Received in revised form 28 August 2017; Accepted 29 August 2017
☆ All authors are employed at Silent Spring Institute, a 501(c)3 scientific research organization dedicated to studying environmental factors and women’s health.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: rodgers@silentspring.org (K.M. Rodgers), udesky@silentspring.org (J.O. Udesky), rudel@silentspring.org (R.A. Rudel), brody@silentspring.org (J.G. Brody).
Abbreviations: 4-ABP, 4-aminobiphenyl; CI, confidence interval; CrI, credible interval; AA-Hb, acrylamide-hemoglobin; AcE, acetylcholinesterase; AhR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor;
APFO, ammonium perfluorooctanoate; AR, androgen receptor; BBMP, 2,2-bis(bromomethyl)-1,3-propanediol; BER, base excision repair; BPA, bisphenol A; COMT, catechol-O-methyl-
transferase; CYP, cytochrome p450; CYPs, cytochrome p450 enzymes; DCE, 1,2 dichloroethylene; DDE, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; DDT, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane; DEHP,
bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate; DEP, diethyl phthalate; DES, diethylstilbestrol; DnBP, di-n-butyl phthalate; EDCs, endocrine disrupting chemicals; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay; EPA, Environmental Protection Agency; ERα, estrogen receptor alpha; ERβ, estrogen receptor beta; ER+/-, estrogen receptor positive/negative; EtO, ethylene oxide; ETS,
environmental tobacco smoke; GST, glutathione s-transferase; HCB, hexachlorobenzene; HCH, hexachlorocyclohexane; HER1, human epidermal growth factor receptor 1; HER2, human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2; HR, hazard ratio; HR+/-, hormone receptor positive/negative; HRT, hormone replacement therapy; IARC, International Agency for Research on
Cancer; IBCERCC, Interagency Breast Cancer and Environment Research Coordinating Committee; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; IOM, Institute of Medicine; MeSH, Medical
Subject Headings; NATA, National Air Toxics Assessment; NER, nucleotide excision repair; NIEHS, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; NTP, National Toxicology
Program; OCPs, organochlorine pesticides; OP, organophosphate; OR, odds ratio; PAHs, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; PBB, polybrominated biphenyl; PBDEs, polybrominated
diphenyl ethers; PCBs, polychlorinated biphenyls; PCE, tetrachloroethylene; PFASs, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctane sulfonate;
PFOSA, perfluorooctane-sulfonamide; PM, particulate matter; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; PPD, p-Phenylenediamine; SIR, standardized incidence ratio; TCDD,
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin; TCE, trichloroethylene; TDBPP, tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate; TEB, terminal end bud; TEXB, total xenoestrogen burden; VOCs, volatile
organic compounds
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
0013-9351/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
MARK
 1. Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women worldwide. The
U.S. incidence rate is stable but among the world’s highest, and in-
cidence is increasing globally (Forouzanfar et al., 2011). The National
Cancer Institute estimates that the cost of breast cancer care will reach
$20.5 billion in the U.S. in 2020 (Mariotto et al., 2011).
High penetrance inherited genes contribute to 5–10% of breast
cancers (Campeau et al., 2008; Martin and Weber, 2000), leaving a
substantial portion of overall cases with potential for prevention.
Modifiable risk factors include pharmaceutical hormones, lack of ex-
ercise, alcohol consumption, weight gain after menopause, nulliparity,
late childbearing, and not lactating (Adami et al., 2008). In addition,
mechanistic and rodent studies as well as epidemiology suggest that
environmental chemicals likely play a role, and chemical links to breast
cancer have been identified as a research priority (IBCERCC, 2013;
IOM, 2012).
We previously reviewed literature on environmental pollutants and
breast cancer in 2007 (Brody et al., 2007) and found the evidence
generally
supported
positive
associations
with
PAHs
and
poly-
chlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in combination with certain genetic
polymorphisms, and for solvents and dioxins. Methodological problems
included lack of highly exposed and unexposed populations for com-
parisons, inadequate exposure assessment, and study designs that did
not capture exposure at the biologically relevant time, so that null re-
sults were uninformative. To update our assessment, in this paper we
paired a summary of biological evidence with a review of epidemiolo-
gical studies from the past 10 years. Our goal is to distill results from
studies that use the strongest methods to evaluate hypotheses that ac-
cord with biological evidence. A limitation of this review is that we did
not include several active areas of study relevant to breast cancer
prevention: light at night (Gu et al., 2015; Hill et al., 2015; IARC 2010d;
Li et al., 2015; Sturgeon et al., 2014; Travis et al., 2016), non-ionizing
radiation (NTP, 2016a; West et al., 2013), or metals (Byrne et al., 2013;
NIEHS BCERP), because these topics are outside of our mechanistic area
of expertise.
1.1. Known risk factors as models for environmental chemicals and breast
cancer
Both laboratory and human evidence support a role for chemicals
acting by (1) genotoxic action, (2) alteration of mammary gland de-
velopment or hormone responsiveness, and (3) hormonal tumor pro-
motion. These pathways, described briefly here, provide a helpful fra-
mework for considering epidemiological studies of chemically-induced
breast cancer. Additional biological evidence for specific chemicals is
incorporated in each section of this review.
Genotoxic agents damage genetic material in a cell, which may lead
to cancer-causing mutations (Lee et al., 2013). The progression from
damaged DNA to cancer includes other processes, such as genomic in-
stability,
inflammation,
and
immune
suppression
(Hanahan
and
Weinberg, 2011). Ionizing radiation, which increases breast cancer risk
in both males and females (Land et al., 2003; Little and McElvenny,
2016), is a model for the genotoxic action expected from classical
carcinogens. Exposure to ionizing radiation most strongly increases
breast cancer risk when it occurs in early life (e.g., before age 20 for
atomic bomb survivors (Land et al., 2003) and medical radiation
(Henderson et al., 2010)). Mammary cells are thought to be most sus-
ceptible to damage from carcinogens during adolescence and before
pregnancy, when the cells are rapidly proliferating and not yet fully
differentiated (Russo and Russo, 2004).
Second, exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) in early
life may alter breast development and increase adult susceptibility to
breast cancer. For example, the synthetic estrogen diethylstilbestrol
(DES) causes alterations in mammary gland structure and gene ex-
pression in rodents and was associated with breast cancer after age 40
in a U.S. cohort of women who were exposed in utero (Hoover et al.,
2011). Animal studies have found that perinatal exposure to DES can
increase terminal end bud (TEB) and ductal formation during puberty
(Fielden et al., 2002; Hovey et al., 2005; Rudel et al., 2011a), sug-
gesting a mechanism for increased breast cancer risk. Prenatal exposure
to hormones and some chemicals that alter mammary development also
increase mammary tumors when animals are challenged with a carci-
nogen during puberty (reviewed in Rudel et al., 2011a). The prenatal
period, puberty, and pregnancy, when cells proliferate and differ-
entiate, are critical windows for exposures that alter mammary gland
development, as reviewed in Rudel et al. (2011a) and Russo and Russo
(2004), although the relationship between mammary morphological
changes and breast cancer risk is not well understood (Rudel et al.,
2011a).
Third, some EDCs may act closer to the time of diagnosis by pro-
moting tumor growth through estrogen- or progesterone-mediated
pathways or other hormonal responses (Lee et al., 2014; Rudel et al.,
2014). Increased breast cancer in women taking hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) is a model for this pathway. The increase in risk persists
for five years after stopping therapy and then diminishes (Roth et al.,
2014). Higher levels of estradiol are also a risk factor for post-
menopausal breast cancer via a genomic response that increases cell
proliferation or inhibits apoptosis, leading to tumor growth (Yager and
Davidson, 2006). Further, chemicals that activate enzymes involved in
estradiol metabolism or synthesis, such as cytochrome p450 enzymes
(CYPs), may contribute to breast cancer through downstream effects on
endogenous estrogen, and progesterone is also important in controlling
cell proliferation in the adult breast (Brisken et al., 2015).
An additional consideration for biological hypotheses is that breast
cancer is a heterogeneous disease. While the link between tumor sub-
type (e.g. hormone receptor (HR) positive vs negative) and prognosis/
responsiveness to treatment is well-established, differences in etiologic
pathways underlying tumor subtypes and disease types (e.g. pre- vs
postmenopausal) are not well understood.
Further, our review includes breast cancer incidence, mortality, and
survival as outcomes. The mechanistic pathways outlined above are
relevant to consider for incidence, the outcome of interest in the ma-
jority of the studies we reviewed. From a biological perspective, breast
cancer mortality and survival are related to tumor aggressiveness and
treatability. Because HR positive tumors have better survival due to
hormone-targeted treatment, hormone-dependent tumor promotion
may also be a relevant pathway for survival. However, the current lack
of understanding of the etiological factors that lead to aggressive tu-
mors, including HR negative tumors, limits hypotheses about relevant
mechanisms for survival and mortality.
2. Methods
2.1. Study identification and selection
We searched PubMed for peer-reviewed articles published in
English from June 2006 through June 2016 that reported on human
studies of breast cancer and environmental pollutants. Searches in-
cluded “breast cancer” in combination with terms for specific chemicals
(excluding pharmaceuticals), chemical groups, and product classes,
from the following sources: (1) terms used in Brody et al. (2007), (2)
three chemicals identified as mammary carcinogens by the National
Toxicology Program (NTP) since 2007, (3) chemicals classified as po-
tential mammary carcinogens with substantial population exposure by
Rudel et al. (2014), (4) chemicals identified as mammary gland de-
velopmental disruptors by Rudel et al. (2011a), (5) “xenoestrogen
burden,” and (6) terms for consumer products (consumer products,
flame retardant, hair dye, personal care products). We truncated certain
terms (occupation, air pollution) to make the search more flexible;
added MeSH terms (such as “hazardous waste”) from relevant articles;
and employed an “etiology filter” (Harvey Cushing/John Jay Whitney
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
153
 Medical Library). Search terms are listed in Table S1.
We screened abstracts for relevance in two phases. Abstracts were
first
screened
by
SC
(abstracts
2006–2010)
or
KR
(abstracts
2010–2016), using inclusion and exclusion criteria summarized in
Table 1. To check the accuracy of screening, in June-July 2016, a third
reviewer (SF) repeated the search, screened a portion of identified ab-
stracts, and recorded decisions in AbstrackrBETA (Abstrackr). This pro-
gram generates an algorithm based on the user’s screening decisions to
predict the relevance of remaining abstracts (Wallace et al., 2012).
After SF screened 987 of the 3133 unique abstracts, identifying 209
articles for full-text review, Abstrackr predicted that none of the rest
were relevant. Conflicts between decisions in the first and second round
of screening were resolved by a fourth reviewer (JU). Nine additional
articles were identified from related PubMed searches outside the sys-
tematic search. Of the 218 articles identified by abstract screening, 158
remained eligible after full-text review. Table 1 indicates the number of
articles excluded based on each criterion during full-text review.
2.2. Biological evidence
We used International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
monographs, the NTP Report on Carcinogens, and published literature
to evaluate breast-cancer-related biological activity of chemicals. We
summarized chemical uses, human exposure, and laboratory evidence
of mammary carcinogenicity, developmental disruption, and other ac-
tions that could contribute to breast cancer.
2.3. Data extraction and synthesis
To critically review eligible articles, we evaluated inclusion criteria
for participants, appropriateness of controls and reference groups, ex-
posure assessment, control for confounding, and the strength of asso-
ciations. We focused on the validity and precision of exposure assess-
ment, timing and duration of exposure, length of follow-up after
exposure to allow for disease latency, and whether the range of studied
exposures provided a strong contrast. In recent years, the recommended
approach for identifying confounders has shifted toward an emphasis
on using causal diagrams to encode a priori knowledge/hypotheses;
these diagrams are then used to assess relationships between measured
and unmeasured variables and determine which variables should be
adjusted or otherwise accounted for in the analysis (Greenland et al.,
1999; Hernan et al., 2002). For example, causal diagrams can help
identify variables on the causal pathway, which should not be con-
sidered confounders. In our previous review, we discussed the potential
for known breast cancer risk factors to mediate associations between
chemical exposures and breast cancer (Brody et al., 2007). In the cur-
rent review, studies of female breast cancer were considered minimally
controlled for confounding if they included age and reproductive his-
tory as potential confounders. Our assessment was based on con-
founders considered at any point in the analysis, not just those included
in the final adjusted effect estimate. We also noted whether studies
considered body size, physical activity, HRT/oral contraceptives, al-
cohol use and/or family history, and indicated any relevant findings
from these analyses in supplemental tables.
In extracting results, we relied on adjusted relative risks if they were
reported, and prioritized effect estimates that (1) captured a hypothe-
sized biologically relevant window or gene-environment interaction,
(2) allowed evaluation of a dose-response (rather than ever/never ex-
posure), and/or (3) considered occupational exposure to specific agents
with hypothesized breast cancer mechanisms (e.g. rodent mammary
carcinogens). We also extracted data on analyses that stratified by
tumor subtype or menopausal status to assess etiologic heterogeneity.
For studies that we considered useful for hypothesis generation (e.g.
ecological studies, job title studies), we focused on positive findings.
Our assessments of each article, including comments about potential
bias and about biologically relevant features of exposure (timing, gene
interaction) and disease (menopausal status, tumor subtype) captured
by the study, are shown in Supplemental Tables S2–S11 and in our
freely
accessible
online
database,
available
at
URL:
http://
sciencereview.silentspring.org.
For each exposure group, we discussed consistency of findings for
studies that considered relevant biological features. Unless otherwise
specified, we limited our synthesis of results to studies that were at least
minimally controlled for confounding, as described above (93 of 158
studies we reviewed) and occupational cohort studies with an internal
comparison (3 additional studies). These occupational cohorts are less
vulnerable to confounding, because we expect the comparison group to
be similar in breast cancer risk factors, such as socioeconomic status,
education, and access to health care. We also discussed, with qualifi-
cation, three studies that did not meet the above criteria but captured a
unique
exposure
or
exposure
scenario
(Ghisari
et
al.,
2014;
Sathiakumar and Delzell, 2009; Sung et al., 2007). We drew conclusions
about the overall strength of evidence from studies with at least
minimal control for confounding, adequate exposure assessment, and
no identified major sources of bias.
3. Results & discussion
Since 2006, we identified 151 new reports and 7 meta-analyses of
epidemiologic studies of environmental pollutants and breast cancer.
Table 1
Criteria for Excluding Articles from Review.
Exclusion criteria
# Excludeda
1
Articles that did not report risk estimate or other statistical comparison from an epidemiologic study with a human breast cancer outcome.
29
2
Review articles, commentaries, or other articles not reporting new research results.
2
3
Earlier reports that were superseded by more recently published results.
0
4
Study results concerning diet, tobacco smoke, shift work, pharmaceuticals, metals, or natural disasters.
14
5
Studies of occupations (including work in offices, schools, and stores) for which existing data do not support a reasonable inference about exposure to a
specific chemical or mixture that has been characterized and hypothesized to affect breast cancer.
6
6
Studies of occupations with likely exposure to ionizing radiation for which the environmental pollutant exposure was not assessed independently of ionizing
radiation.
4
7
Occupational studies in which the exposure was defined as work in a nonindustrial occupation and there was no control for confounding or evidence that the
exposed and comparison groups were similar for reproductive risk factors.
2
8
Occupational studies in which the exposed group was predominantly exposed < 1 year.
0
9
Studies of female breast cancer with five or fewer exposed women.
0
10
Studies of male breast cancer with < 1 observed or expected case.
0
11.
Meta-analyses that combined studies with non-comparable exposure measures.
1
a # Excluded refers to the number of articles excluded among 218 that were eligible for full-text review. Two papers, not shown in the table above, were excluded because one was
already included in our previous review and the other was primarily an analysis of BMI and breast cancer, with no assessment of the main effect of an environmental pollutant.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
154
 Fifty-two studies used geographic location to estimate exposure, some
employing detailed residential histories and individual-level exposure
models. Thirty-nine used biological measures, and the rest considered
employment records or self-report of occupational or other exposures.
The
persistent
bioaccumulative
organochlorines
DDT/di-
chlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE) and PCBs remained frequently-
studied, though nearly all studies still relied on biological measure-
ments collected at or after diagnosis, which may capture exposures
relevant to tumor promotion but not earlier stages of breast cancer
development. Reports on air pollution increased, constituting nearly
one-third of the studies we reviewed. Gene-environment interactions
were considered in 18 reports, mostly studies of PAHs from the Long
Island Breast Cancer Study Project (LIBCSP). Few studies considered
current pesticides or consumer product chemicals. New studies of oc-
cupational exposures to organic solvents improved on earlier methods
by collecting detailed job histories and employing industrial hygiene
assessments to estimate cumulative lifetime exposure.
Appropriateness of comparison groups remains a concern in occu-
pational studies, with many studies using the general population as a
comparison group or including people employed in white collar jobs at
the same facility, although many jobs with relevant chemical exposures
are held by blue-collar workers. Historically, breast cancer incidence
has decreased with declining socioeconomic status (SES), as measured
by various markers including education, occupational class (e.g. skilled
vs unskilled, white- vs blue-collar), and income (Faggiano et al., 1997).
Further, the healthy worker effect may be a concern, because blue
collar work tends to be more physically active (Brighenti-Zogg et al.,
2016; Steele and Mummery, 2003). A recent analysis among women
with a family history of breast cancer found reduced breast cancer risk
among women who were “active” in the majority (> 75%) of their
lifetime work compared to those who were not (Ekenga et al., 2015b;
Lahmann et al., 2007). When the comparison group is at a higher risk
for breast cancer, effect estimates for an exposure can be biased.
The most informative studies match study design with mechanistic
evidence and biological hypotheses. Fig. 1 serves as a framework for
this review by summarizing hypothesized biological actions and re-
levant windows of exposure for which there is experimental evidence of
mammary gland effects for chemicals in each group. Fig. 1 also shows
the distribution of studies (excluding meta-analyses) by the exposure
window captured; nearly two thirds of analyses – including 44% of
those that were at least minimally controlled for confounding – were
not designed to capture exposure during a specific window of breast
development or before menopause, limiting their potential to identify
effects via some of the hypothesized biological pathways. Tables 3A–3D
summarize findings for the studies that minimally controlled for con-
founding and also included biologically relevant features: exposures in
early life, pre- vs. postmenopausal diagnosis, gene variants, and ana-
lysis by tumor type. These tables are organized as follows (3A: persis-
tent EDCs and unspecified pesticides, 3B: PAH biomarkers and air
pollution, 3C: consumer product chemicals and drinking water, and 3D:
organic solvents and occupations/occupational exposures).
Two cohorts in particular provide unique opportunities to examine
relevant periods of exposure. In the Child Health and Development
Studies (CHDS), blood samples collected during pregnancy or shortly
after childbirth in the 1950s and 1960s allowed evaluation of breast
cancer risks associated with OCP and PCB exposures in early life, in-
cluding in utero, during a period of high exposures (Cohn et al., 2007,
2012, 2015). Key findings from this cohort are highlighted in Fig. 2 and
Fig. 1. Few breast cancer epidemiology studies 2006–2016 assessed exposure during a biologically relevant window; the majority did not specify the timing of exposure. Biological
Activity: Check marks indicate that there is experimental evidence for this type of activity for a chemical or chemicals in this group. Lack of a check mark does not indicate null findings.
NA means not applicable. G (Genotoxic): Genotoxic chemicals are expected to affect breast cancer diagnosis after 10–20 years latency and are more potent while the breast is developing.
RMC (Rodent mammary carcinogens): Rodent MCs induce tumors when given to adult animals. EA (Endocrine Active): Diverse endocrine active chemicals alter mammary gland
development, a period that extends through the first pregnancy, and alter susceptibility to cancer.
indicates experimental evidence of mammary gland developmental disruption.
Estrogenic or progestogenic chemicals are expected to act as tumor promoters within 5 years of diagnosis. Asterisk (*) indicates that there is experimental evidence of estrogen-responsive
cell proliferation for a chemical or chemicals in this group. Environmental chemicals have so far not been screened for progestogenic activity. Exposure Window: Color indicates the
number of articles that captured each window of exposure. Pre-pregnancy includes studies that examined exposure before first childbirth or before any pregnancy. This figure does not
include meta-analyses. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
155
 discussed in Sections 3.1.2 and 3.1.3, including positive associations
between DDT components and later breast cancer in both mothers and
daughters and for PCB congeners and breast cancer in the mothers
(results not reported for the daughters). More recently, the Danish
National Birth Cohort (DNBC) collected blood samples from women
during early pregnancy between 1996 and 2002 (Bonefeld-Jorgensen
et al., 2014) and, through 2010, found elevated breast cancer risk with
the highest blood PFOSA levels (Section 3.4.5).
Other innovations included studies that investigated mixtures of
chemicals using an integrated measure of activity from known and
unknown estrogenic substances in blood (Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al.,
2011; Pastor-Barriuso et al., 2016) and the comprehensive prospective
exposure assessment for the Sister Study. The Sister Study enrolled
women between 2003 and 2009 who had a sister with breast cancer but
were themselves breast cancer-free and conducted detailed interviews
at baseline, including questions about occupational and residential
histories, proximity to traffic or agriculture and use of certain products,
and whether those exposures occurred during specific critical windows
(NIEHS).
We summarized results by chemical exposure type, focusing on the
most informative studies, as described in Section 2.3. Biological me-
chanisms are explained in most detail when they are first introduced,
and the order for the chemical groupings is designed to progressively
build on this information. Table 2 shows how we organized the litera-
ture we reviewed. Studies with more than one exposure category (e.g.,
PCBs and OCPs) are reviewed in both relevant sections of the paper, and
results for specific chemicals are included in relevant chemical sections
(e.g., occupational PCB exposure is covered in PCBs instead of occu-
pation).
3.1. Persistent endocrine disrupting chemicals
We consider dioxins, PCBs and OCPs together as persistent EDCs,
although they have distinct activity profiles. These chemicals are not
expected to act as classical carcinogens in the breast because they have
low genotoxic activity and do not produce mammary tumors in stan-
dard experiments in adult rodents (Rudel et al., 2011a, 2014). How-
ever, persistent EDCs may contribute to breast cancer by altering
mammary gland development or hormone responsiveness, especially
with exposures in early life, as in the example of DES explained earlier.
They may also promote tumor growth through estrogen- or proges-
terone-mediated pathways, like HRT (Lee et al., 2014; Rudel et al.,
2014). Some persistent EDCs, like dioxins, bind to the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR), a nuclear transcription factor that influences gene ex-
pression, enzyme metabolism, and hormone signaling pathways (NTP,
2016b). Persistent EDCs bioaccumulate in fat, and studies with biolo-
gical samples typically measure levels in blood (serum or plasma),
though a few use adipose tissue from the breast or elsewhere. When
non-fasting blood samples are used, most analyses consider lipid con-
tent, but methods vary. The most common method is to standardize by
dividing chemical mass by mass of lipid in the sample; another ap-
proach includes lipid measures as a covariate in regression models (see
“exposure measure” column in supplemental tables for lipid control
measure used in each study). Dioxins, PCBs, and OCPs each represent a
mixture of related chemicals that vary in biological activity and meta-
bolic half-life. Concentrations in blood can reflect the source of ex-
posure, time since exposure, and individual variation in metabolism.
3.1.1. Dioxins
Dioxins are a mixture of chemicals produced from combustion and
industrial processes involving chlorine, including production of pesti-
cides,
bleached
paper,
and
polyvinyl
chloride
(United
Nations
Environment Programme, 2005). Incineration of medical and municipal
waste and sewage sludge and backyard burning of trash are the most
significant
sources
in
the
environment
(National
Center
for
Environmental Assessment Office of Research and Development, 2006).
Most human exposure is from fat in contaminated food, including milk,
eggs, fish, and meat. Epidemiologic studies generally assess dioxin ex-
posure based on geographical location in relation to a known point
source or in an area where dioxin was measured in soil; other methods
include job exposure matrices (JEMs) and rarely, in biological samples.
3.1.1.1. Biological
evidence. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin
(TCDD)
is
the
most
potent
dioxin.
IARC
classified
TCDD
as
carcinogenic to humans based on risk of lung cancer, soft-tissue
sarcoma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and all cancers combined in
occupationally exposed populations (IARC 2012b). TCDD is not
genotoxic; its carcinogenicity is thought to result from oxidative
damage
and
tumor
promotion
through
pathways
that
interrupt
apoptosis (Knerr and Schrenk, 2006; Tsuchiya et al., 2005), which are
likely related to activation of the AhR (NTP, 2016b). Dioxins interfere
with estrogen signaling through ER-AhR cross talk (Boverhof et al.,
2006; Matthews and Gustafsson, 2006). Rodent studies show contrary
effects at different life stages. Mammary gland development was altered
in studies of both pubertal (Brown and Lamartiniere, 1995) and in utero
(Brown et al., 1998) exposure; after in utero exposure, a carcinogen
challenge showed increased susceptibility (Brown et al., 1998). In
contrast, adult exposure reduced mammary tumors and suppressed
metastasis in mice, presumably due to anti-estrogenic activity via ER-
AhR crosstalk (Boverhof et al., 2006; Kociba et al., 1978; Matthews and
Gustafsson, 2006; Wang et al., 2011).
3.1.1.2. Epidemiologic studies. Of eight new studies of dioxins and
breast cancer, two reports following women after the 1976 industrial
accident in Seveso, Italy, are of particular interest because they
evaluated women with exposure specifically to TCDD, rather than a
mixture, and compare them with an unexposed group. The Seveso
Women’s Health Study (SWHS) measured TCDD in blood samples from
women aged zero to 40 and living in the most-contaminated areas at
the time of the accident. Most of the samples were collected within a
year after the accident, but 9% were collected 2–21 years later. The
elimination half-life of TCDD is estimated at 5–10 years in adults but
varies with age, with evidence of much shorter half-lives in infants and
children (Kerger et al., 2006), so kinetic models were used to estimate
Table 2
Chemical order and grouping for results.
Section
Persistent EDCs
3.1
Dioxins
3.1.1
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
3.1.2
DDT/DDE and organochlorine pesticides (OCPs)
3.1.3
Xenoestrogen burden
3.1.4
Non-OCPs/unspecified pesticides
3.2
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), air pollution, vehicular
exhaust
3.3
PAH biomarkers
3.3.2.1
Job history and geographic location
3.3.2.2
Consumer product chemicals
3.4
Bisphenol A (BPA)
3.4.1
Phthalates
3.4.2
Nonlyphenols
3.4.3
Hair dyes & straighteners
3.4.4
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs)
3.4.5
Flame retardants
3.4.6
Drinking water
3.5
Organic solvents
3.6
Occupation
3.7
Work with ethylene oxide
3.7.1.1
Work with styrene and 1,3-butadiene
3.7.1.2
Work with aromatic amines
3.7.1.3
Work with acrylamide and other acrylamide exposure
3.7.1.4
Work in various industries
3.7.1.5
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
156
 Table 3A
Breast cancer findings for dioxins, PCBs, OCPs, non-OCPs and unspecified pesticides in epidemiological studies with designs that considered key features from experimental evidence: windows of susceptibility, genetic susceptibility, or heterogeneity
of disease.
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
Dioxins
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for exposure to Seveso accident at age 0-40 (Warner et al.,
2011)
PCBs
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for some PCB congeners, ↓ for PCB 167 at pregnancy in
CHDS (postmenopausal cancers not studied) (Cohn et al.,
2012)
↓ for increasing total PCBs (Itoh et al., 2009)↑ for some PCB
groups (Recio-Vega et al., 2011)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↓ for increasing total PCBs (Itoh et al., 2009)↑ for all PCB
groups (Recio-Vega et al., 2011)↔ for PCB groupings in
DDCH study (premenopausal cancers not studied) (Brauner
et al., 2014)
↔ for CYP1B1 or COMT gene variants and PCB
groupings in DDCH study (premenopausal
cancers not studied) (Brauner et al., 2014)
MS: Pre + post
TT: ER+/-, PR+/-, p53+/-,
low/moderate/high expression
of HER2/neu
↔ for total PCBs in Women’s CARE Study (Gatto et al., 2007)
TT: ER-/PR- & ER+/PR-
↓ for increasing total PCBs (Itoh et al., 2009)
TT: ER+, PR+, HER2+, E-
Cadherin+, p53+
↑ for some but not all tumor types for different PCB
congeners (Arrebola et al., 2016)
OCPs
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for p,p’-DDT, ↓ for o,p’-DDT at pregnancy among CHDS
mothers <age 14 in 1945 (postmenopausal cancers not
studied) (Cohn et al., 2007)↔ for seeing fogger truck
<1972 at age < 20 or age <14 in LIBCSP (White et al.,
2013)↑ for in utero p,p'-DDT and o,p’-DDT (stronger for o,p'-
DDT) in CHDS (postmenopausal cancers not studied) (Cohn
et al., 2015) and for ever been fogged or sprayed as child &
for ever been fogged or sprayed and age 0-18 at time of peak
DDT use in Sister Study (Niehoff et al., 2016)
Some ↑ for different OCPs (Iwasaki et al., 2008)↓ for some
OCPs (Itoh et al., 2009) ↑ for DDE exposure in meta-analysis
(Ingber et al., 2013) and for total xenoestrogen burden
(Pastor-Barriuso et al., 2016)
TT: HER2+
↑ for in utero o,p’-DDT in CHDS daughters age < 50
(postmenopausal cancers not studied) (Cohn et al., 2015)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↔ for seeing fogger truck <1972 at age < 20 or age <14 in
LIBCSP (White et al., 2013)↑ for ever been fogged or
sprayed as child and for ever fogged or sprayed and age 0-
18 at time of peak DDT use in Sister Study (Niehoff et al.,
2016)
Some ↑ for different OCPs (Iwasaki et al., 2008) Some ↑ and ↓
for different OCPs (Itoh et al., 2009) ↑ for DDE exposure in
meta-analysis (Ingber et al., 2013); for total xenoestrogen
burden (Pastor-Barriuso et al., 2016); and for 5 + 15 year
mortality (worse survival) among LIBCSP cases for DDT,
DDE, chlordane (premenopausal cases not studied
separately) (Parada et al., 2016b)
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↔ for seeing fogger truck <1972 at age < 20 or age <14 in
LIBCSP (White et al., 2013)
TT: ER+/PR+
↑ for seeing fogger truck <age 14, <age 20, and at any age
≤1972 in LIBCSP (White et al., 2013) ↔ for ever been
fogged or sprayed as child; ↑ ever fogged or sprayed and age
0-18 at time of peak DDT use in Sister Study (Niehoff et al.,
2016)
↓ for some OCPs and ↑ for other OCPs (Itoh et al., 2009)
TT: ER-/PR-, ER+/PR-, ER
+/PR+
↓ for some OCPs and ↑ for other OCPs (Itoh et al., 2009)
TT: ER+
↓ for trans-nonachlor (meta-analysis) (Khanjani et al., 2007)
(continued on next page)
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
157
 Table 3A (continued)
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
TT: ER-
↔ for trans- and cis- nonachlor (meta-analysis) (Khanjani et
al., 2007)
TT: ER+, PR+, p53-,
moderate/high expression of
HER2
↑ for DDE in Women’s CARE Study (Gatto et al., 2007)
TT: ER+, PR+, HER2+, E-
Cadherin+, p53+
Some ↑ and ↓ for HCB; ↑risk for p,p-DDE & some tumor
subtypes (Arrebola et al., 2016)
Unspecified
pesticides and
non-OCPS
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for some residential farm exposures <age 18 in Sister Study
(Niehoff et al., 2016)
↑ for occupational pesticide use in Sister Study (Ekenga et al.,
2015a) Some ↑ for different OP pesticides in AHS (Lerro et
al., 2015)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for some residential farm exposures <age 18 in Sister Study
(Niehoff et al., 2016)
Some ↑ for different OP pesticides in AHS (Lerro et al., 2015)
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for observed pesticide spray drift ≤ age 20 (El-Zaemey et
al., 2013)
↔ for fungicide exposure and CYP1A1*2A
polymorphisms (Ashley-Martin et al., 2012)
TT: ER+/PR+
Some ↑ for various OP pesticides in AHS (Lerro et al., 2015) &
for different residential farm exposures <age 18 in Sister
Study (Niehoff et al., 2016)
TT: ER-/PR-
Some ↑ for various OP pesticides in AHS (Lerro et al., 2015)
TT: HR+, HR-
↑ for occupational pesticide use in Sister Study (Ekenga et al.,
2015a)
AHS = Agricultural Health Study, CARE = Women’s Contraceptive and Reproductive Experiences Study, CHDS = Child Health and Development Studies, DDCH = Danish Diet Cancer and Health study, LIBCSP = Long Island Breast Cancer Study
Project, SWHS = Shanghai Women’s Health Study, PCBs = polychlorinated biphenyls, OCPs = organochlorine pesticides, DDT = dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, OP = organophosphate.
TT = tumor type, MS = menopausal status
↑ = statistically significant elevated risk or OR > 1.1; ↓ = statistically significant decreased risk; ↔ = no increased or significantly decreased risks.
This table summarizes results from analyses that captured relevant exposure and disease features suggested by toxicological and biological evidence of genotoxicity, endocrine disruption, tumor promotion, or disruption of mammary gland
development. This table includes studies that at least minimally controlled for confounding (at least age and reproductive history). The studies also reported other analyses. Additional details about the studies, including exposure measures and
study population, are found in supplemental tables S2-S5, organized by chemical or exposures investigated.
a Breast development occurs in utero, during puberty, and in early adulthood through the first pregnancy.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
158
 Table 3B
Breast cancer findings for PAH biomarkers and air pollution in epidemiological studies with designs that considered key features from experimental evidence: windows of susceptibility, genetic susceptibility, or heterogeneity of disease.
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
PAH biomarkers in
LIBCSP
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ mortality (worse survival) for PAH-DNA adducts
among cases (Sagiv et al., 2009)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ mortality (worse survival) for PAH-DNA adducts
among cases (Sagiv et al., 2009)
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for PAH-DNA adducts and IGHMBP2 polymorphism (Shen et al.,
2006); apoptosis-related polymorphisms (Crew et al., 2007a);
some NER genes (Crew et al., 2007b; Shen et al., 2008), any 3 GST
polymorphisms (McCarty et al., 2009); & with different gene
promoter methylation status (White et al., 2015).
Limited evidence of ↑ for PAH-DNA adducts and TP53
polymorphisms & mutations (Gaudet et al., 2008; Mordukhovich et
al., 2010)
TT: ER+/PR+, ER-/
PR-
↑ mortality (worse survival) for PAH-DNA adducts
among cases (Sagiv et al., 2009)
TT: ER+/PR+, ER-/
PR+, ER+/PR- & ER-/
PR-
↑ for DNA-PAH adducts and different gene promoter methylation
status (White et al., 2015)
Air pollution
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for residential exposure to traffic in early life (Nie et
al., 2007)
↑ for some MGCs in ambient air at residence in CTS
(Garcia et al., 2015); for NO2 exposure at residence,
particularly when considering long-term residential
history (Hystad et al., 2015); for closer residential
proximity to large roads in NHSII (Hart et al., 2016);
for traffic exposure in LIBCSP (Mordukhovich et al.,
2016b); and for occupational diesel and gasoline
exhaust in BCEES (Rai et al., 2016)
Some ↑ for residential proximity and residential duration
to different polluting industries (Pan et al. 2011)
↔ for PM10, PM2.5, PM2.5-10 at residence in NHSII (Hart et
al., 2016)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for residential exposure to traffic in early life (Nie et
al., 2007) and for occupational PAH (any and
petroleum-related) exposure <age 36 (premenopausal
cancers not studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↑ for occupational PAH exposure (Labreche et al., 2010);
for NO2 exposure at residence >10 years before
diagnosis (Crouse et al., 2010); & for NO2 exposure at
residence in DDCH Study (Raaschou-Nielsen et al.,
2011) (premenopausal cancers not studied); for NO2
exposure at residence, particularly considering long-
term residential history (Hystad et al., 2015); for some
MGCs in ambient air at residence in CTS (Garcia et al.,
2015); and for closer residential proximity to large
roads in NHSII (Hart et al., 2016)
Some ↑ for residential proximity and duration to
different polluting industries (Pan et al., 2011)
↔ for proximity to major street or high traffic on nearby
street (Raaschou-Nielsen et al., 2011); occupational
diesel and gasoline exhaust in BCEES (Rai et al., 2016);
and for traffic exposure in LIBCSP (Mordukhovich et
al., 2016b)
(continued on next page)
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
159
 Table 3B (continued)
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
↔ for PM10, PM2.5-10 and ↓ for PM2.5 at residence in
NHSII (Hart et al., 2016)
TT: ER+/PR+
↑ for occupational PAH (any and petroleum-related)
exposure <age 36 (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↑ for lifetime occupational PAH (any and petroleum-
related) exposure (premenopausal cancers not studied)
(Labreche et al., 2010)
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for some indoor PAH exposure <age 20 in LIBCSP
(White et al., 2014)
↑ w/ GST variants and some indoor PAH exposure in LIBCSP (White
et al., 2014); w/ NER polymorphisms (Mordukhovich et al.,
2016a) and p53-mutation and residential traffic exposure in
LIBCSP (Mordukhovich et al., 2016b)
↔ for occupational diesel or gasoline exposures before
first childbirth (Rai et al., 2016)
TT: ER+/PR+
↑ for some MGCs (Garcia et al., 2015) and for some EDCs
(R Liu et al., 2015) in ambient air at residence in CTS;
for closer residential proximity to large roads & for
PM2.5-10 at residence in NHSII (Hart et al., 2016); and
for NO2 exposure at residence (Reding et al., 2015)
↔ for residential traffic exposure in LIBCSP
(Mordukhovich et al., 2016b) and for PM10 & PM2.5 in
NHSII (Hart et al., 2016)
TT: ER-/PR-
↑ for some MGCs in ambient air at residence in CTS
(Garcia et al., 2015); for some EDCs in ambient air at
residence in CTS (R Liu et al., 2015); for closer
residential proximity to large roads in NHSII (Hart et
al., 2016); and for residential traffic exposure in
LIBCSP (Mordukhovich et al., 2016b)
↔ for NO2 exposure at residence (Reding et al., 2015)
and for PM10, PM2.5, PM2.5-10 at residence in NHSII
(Hart et al., 2016)
BCEES = Breast Cancer Environment and Employment Study, CTS = California Teachers Study, DDCH = Danish Diet Cancer and Health study, LIBCSP = Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project, NHSII = Nurses Health Study II, PAH = polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon, MGC = mammary gland carcinogen, EDC = endocrine disrupting chemical.
TT = tumor type, MS = menopausal status
↑ = statistically significant elevated risk or OR > 1.1; ↓ = statistically significant decreased risk; ↔ = no increased or significantly decreased risks.
This table summarizes results from analyses that captured relevant exposure and disease features suggested by toxicological and biological evidence of genotoxicity, endocrine disruption, tumor promotion, or disruption of mammary gland
development. This table includes studies that at least minimally controlled for confounding (at least age and reproductive history). The studies also reported other analyses. Additional details about the studies, including exposure measures and
study population, are found in supplemental tables S6-S7, organized by chemical or exposures investigated.
a Breast development occurs in utero, during puberty, and in early adulthood through the first pregnancy.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
160
 Table 3C
Breast cancer findings for consumer product chemicals and drinking water in epidemiological studies with designs that considered key features from experimental evidence: windows of susceptibility, genetic susceptibility, or heterogeneity of
disease.
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
Consumer Product
Chemicals
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for some PFAS exposures at pregnancy, and ↓ for PFHxS (women
in this study were predominantly premenopausal) (Bonefeld-
Jorgensen et al., 2014)
↑ for some hair relaxer use in women < age 45 in BWHS (Rosenberg et al.,
2007)
↑ for DEP exposure, and ↓ for BBzP and DOP (Lopez-Carrillo et al., 2010)b
↔ for hair relaxer use <age 10 in BWHS (Rosenberg et al., 2007)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for hair relaxer use <age 10 in BWHS (Rosenberg et al., 2007)
↑ for some hair relaxer use for women ≥ age 45 in BWHS (Rosenberg et al.,
2007)
↑ for DEP exposure and ↔ for BBzP and DOP (Lopez-Carrillo et al., 2010)b
↔ for BPA in PBCS (premenopausal cancers not studied) (Trabert et al.,
2014)b
TT: ER-
↑ for BPA in PBCS (Trabert et al., 2014)b
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for hair dye use at age 20-29, especially among women born
before 1960 (Heikkinen et al., 2015)
↑ and ↓ risk for PPAR variants and
exposure to some phthalates (Martinez-
Nava et al., 2013)b
Drinking water
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for early adulthood exposure to nitrate in drinking water.
(Espejo-Herrera et al., 2015)c
↔ for long-term and recent exposure to nitrate in drinking water (Espejo-
Herrera et al., 2015)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for early adulthood exposure to nitrate in drinking water
(Espejo-Herrera et al., 2015)
↑ for long-term and recent exposure to nitrate in drinking water (Espejo-
Herrera et al., 2015) and for highest level of nitrate in drinking water (pre-
menopausal cancers not studied) (Inoue-Choi et al., 2015)
MS: Pre + post
TT: ER+
↑ for nitrate in drinking water (Espejo-Herrera et al., 2015)
TT: ER-
↔ for nitrate in drinking water (Espejo-Herrera et al., 2015)
BWHS = Black Women’s Health Study, PBCS = Polish Breast Cancer Study, BPA = bisphenol A, PFAS = polyfluorinated alkyl substances, PFHxS = perfluorohexane sulfonic acid, DEP = diethyl phthalate, BBzP = butylbenzyl phthalate, DOP =
di-n-octyl phthalate.
TT = tumor type, MS = menopausal status
↑ = statistically significant elevated risk or OR > 1.1; ↓ = statistically significant decreased risk; ↔ = no increased or significantly decreased risks.
This table summarizes results from analyses that captured relevant exposure and disease features suggested by toxicological and biological evidence of genotoxicity, endocrine disruption, tumor promotion, or disruption of mammary gland
development. This table includes studies that at least minimally controlled for confounding (at least age and reproductive history). The studies also reported other analyses. Additional details about the studies, including exposure measures and
study population, are found in supplemental tables S8-S9, organized by chemical or exposures investigated.
a Breast development occurs in utero, during puberty, and in early adulthood through the first pregnancy.
b Chemical has short half-life in the body, and exposure estimate relied on a single measurement, which may not be representative.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
161
 Table 3D
Breast cancer findings for organic solvents and occupations/occupational exposures in epidemiological studies with designs that considered key features from experimental evidence: windows of susceptibility, genetic susceptibility, or heterogeneity
of disease.
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
Organic solvents
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for occupational exposure to total solvents, but not benzene specifically
(Peplonska et al., 2010); for several types of occupational solvent exposures in
BCEES (Glass et al., 2015); & for occupational solvent exposure in Sister Study
(Ekenga et al., 2015a)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for occupational solvent exposure < age 36 (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↑ for lifetime occupational solvent exposure (premenopausal cancers not studied)
(Labreche et al., 2010); for occupational exposure to total solvents, but not
benzene specifically (Peplonska et al., 2010); & for several types of
occupational solvent exposures in BCEES (Glass et al., 2015)
↔ for occupational solvent exposure in Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2015a)
TT: ER+/PR+ & ER
+/PR-
↑ for occupational solvent exposure < age 36 (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↑ for lifetime occupational solvent exposure (premenopausal cancers not studied)
(Labreche et al., 2010)
TT: ER-/PR-
↔ for occupational solvent exposure < age 36 (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↑ for lifetime occupational solvent exposure (premenopausal cancers not studied)
(Labreche et al., 2010)
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for occupational solvent exposure before first childbirth and <age 20 in Sister
Study (Ekenga et al., 2014) and for some occupational solvent exposures in
BCEES (Glass et al., 2015)
TT: ER+/PR+
↔ for occupational solvent exposure (Peplonska et al., 2010)
TT: ER+/PR-, ER-/
PR- and ER-/PR+
↑ for occupational solvent exposure (Peplonska et al., 2010)
TT: ER+
↑ for occupational solvent exposure before first childbirth and < age 20 in
Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2014)
↑ for several types of occupational solvent exposures in BCEES (Glass et al., 2015)
& for occupational solvent exposure in Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2014)
TT: ER-
↔ for occupational solvent exposure before first childbirth, ↑ for exposure <age
20 in Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2014)
↑ for several types of occupational solvent exposures in BCEES (Glass et al., 2015)
↔ for occupational solvent exposure in Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2014)
TT: HR+
↑ for occupational solvent exposure in Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2015a)
TT: HR-
↑ for occupational solvent exposure in Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2015a)
Occupation
MS: Premenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for several occupations (Brophy et al., 2012) (Peplonska et al., 2007) and for
occupational exposures to some specific agents in Sister Study (Ekenga et al.,
2015a)
MS: Postmenopausal
TT: Non-specific
↑ for several occupational exposures <age 36 (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↔ for postmenopausal cancer (Olesen et al., 2008) & ↑ for mortality (worse
survival) (Olsen et al., 2012) with acrylamide adducts in DDCH
(premenopausal cancers were not studied)
↑ for occupational exposures to some specific agents (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010) and in the Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2015a)
↑ for several occupations (Brophy et al., 2012) (Peplonska et al., 2007)
TT: ER+
↑ for acrylamide adducts in DDCH, both incidence (Olesen et al., 2008) &
mortality (worse survival) (Olsen et al., 2012) (premenopausal cancers were
not studied)
TT: ER-
↔ for acrylamide adducts in DDCH, incidence (Olesen et al., 2008)
(premenopausal cancers were not studied)
TT: ER+/PR+ & ER
+/PR-
↑ for different occupational exposures < age 36 (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
↑ for different lifetime occupational exposures (premenopausal cancers not
studied) (Labreche et al., 2010)
MS: Pre + post
TT: Non-specific
↑ for some occupations in early life windows (Brophy et al., 2012)
TT: ER+
↑ for ≥ 1 year of occupational aromatic/heterocyclic amine exposure (Rabstein
et al., 2010)
(continued on next page)
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
162
 1976 levels for the later samples (Warner et al., 2011); while this
approach appears valid, it would have been useful if the authors had
presented data comparing those with modeled and measured TCDD
(e.g. distribution of risk factors and TCDD levels). Over 32 years of
follow-up, breast cancer risk increased for each 10-fold increase of
lipid-standardized TCDD in serum (HR 1.44; 95% CI 0.89–2.33)
(Warner et al., 2011). Risk was increased for 0–10 years (unadjusted
HR 2.91; 95% CI 0.90–9.44) and 11–20 years (unadjusted HR 2.23;
95%
CI
1.09–4.56)
but
not
for
21–32
years
of
follow-up
(unatabledjusted HR 1.06; 95% CI 0.58–1.93). The women exposed
earliest in life are now 40 and the average age of the cohort is 51, so
future analysis will reveal whether the period of increased risk has
passed. Another study of a larger ‘residential’ cohort of Seveso women
(Pesatori et al., 2009) did not meet our criteria for discussion but is
reviewed in Table S2.
Of the remaining studies, one found increased breast cancer in-
cidence in European men with higher PCB and dioxin exposure based
on job questionnaires (Villeneuve et al., 2010), while the rest did not
meet our criteria for discussion. See Table S2 for our assessments and
summaries from these studies.
3.1.2. Polychlorinated biphenyls
PCBs, a group of 209 aromatic compounds (congeners) with various
chlorine substitution patterns, were used globally in electrical equip-
ment and other industrial applications from the 1920s until the late
1970s – early 1980s (IARC 2016b). They persist in fatty foods like fish
and in indoor air and dust contaminated with caulk, building materials,
or floor finishes containing PCBs (Rudel et al., 2008). PCBs are fat so-
luble and generally have half-lives from 3 to 15 years in humans, with
higher chlorinated congeners having longer half-lives (IARC, 2016b).
The mix of congeners in blood reflects the exposure source, for example
fish versus occupational or indoor air exposure (Freels et al., 2007;
Rudel et al., 2008).
3.1.2.1. Biological evidence. IARC classifies PCBs as carcinogenic to
humans based on evidence of malignant melanoma and positive
associations with breast cancer and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (IARC,
2016b).
Some
congeners
(PCB-126
and
PCB-118)
and
highly
chlorinated commercial mixtures (Araclor 1260, Araclor 1254, and
Kanechlor 500) exhibit dioxin-like activity and bind to the AhR, while
other congeners, or their metabolites, have various cancer-related
activity, including tumor promotion, estrogen activity, and CYP
Table 3D (continued)
Exposure
Disease type
Exposure Window
Early Lifea
Other
Other + gene interaction
TT: PR+
↑ for ≥ 1 year of occupational aromatic/heterocyclic amine exposure (Rabstein
et al., 2010)
TT: ER-
↑ for several occupations (Brophy et al., 2012)
TT: ER+/PR+ and
ER+/PR-
↑ for several occupations (Brophy et al., 2012)
TT: HR+ and HR-
↑ for occupational exposure to some specific agents in Sister Study (Ekenga et al.,
2015a)
BCEES = Breast Cancer Environment and Employment Study, DDCH = Danish Diet Cancer and Health study.
TT = tumor type, MS = menopausal status
↑ = statistically significant elevated risk or OR > 1.1; ↓ = statistically significant decreased risk; ↔ = no increased or significantly decreased risks.
This table summarizes from analyses that captured relevant exposure and disease features suggested by toxicological and biological evidence of genotoxicity, endocrine disruption, tumor promotion, or disruption of mammary gland development.
This table includes studies that at least minimally controlled for confounding (at least age and reproductive history). The studies also reported other analyses. Additional details about the studies, including exposure measures and study population,
are found in supplemental tables S10-S11, organized by chemical or exposures investigated.
a Breast development occurs in utero, during puberty, and in early adulthood through the first pregnancy.
Fig. 2. Elevated breast cancer risk from exposure to DDT components and PCB congeners
during susceptible windows of breast development in 3 reports from the Child Health and
Development Studies. Analyses from the same publication are grouped by color. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article).
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
163
 induction (DeCastro et al., 2006; IARC 2016b; Soto et al., 1995).
Individual
differences
in
PCB
metabolism—for
example,
polymorphisms in CYP1A1 may lead to increased formation of
carcinogenic PCB metabolites— may also influence response to
exposure (Brody et al., 2007). Hydroxy-PCB metabolites appear more
estrogenic than parent PCBs (Blair et al., 2000). More recent tests for
genotoxicity that include metabolic activation have found that many
PCB
congeners
produce
increased
DNA
adducts
and
oxidative
metabolites, which may damage DNA (Jeong et al., 2008; Ludewig
et al., 2008; Spencer et al., 2009).
3.1.2.2. Epidemiologic studies. We reviewed 24 studies of PCBs and
breast cancer in 15 countries, including three meta-analyses (Table S3).
While most measured PCBs in serum, a few assessed exposure in
adipose tissue, and several combined job history questionnaires or
plant records with JEMs. Nine studies did not meet our criteria for
discussion. To differentiate different mixtures, investigators took
various approaches to define exposure groups, for example grouping
by higher and lower chlorination, binding affinity to AhR and ER, or
phenobarbital-like
CYP
induction,
primarily
based
on
groupings
proposed by Wolff et al. (1997). Studies also analyzed individual
congeners.
Some studies found positive associations with the PCBs identified by
Wolff et al. (1997) as CYP1A/2B phenobarbital-type inducers, which
may toxify other chemicals or affect hormone levels. The strongest
study design, from the CHDS, measured serum PCBs in women who had
just given birth between 1959 and 1967, a period of peak PCB use, and
followed them to age 50 (Cohn et al., 2012). The study is of particular
interest because exposures during pregnancy reflect a vulnerable
window when breast cells are rapidly proliferating and, in a first full-
term pregnancy, differentiating. CYP-inducing congeners as a group
were not associated with breast cancer in the CHDS, but analysis by
individual congeners showed that women in the highest quartile of PCB
203 exposure had six times higher odds of breast cancer compared to
women in the lowest quartile (OR 6.34; 1.85–21.73; p trend < 0.001).
Across other studies of CYP-inducing PCBs, blood levels at the time
of diagnosis were positively associated with overall breast cancer
(Arrebola et al., 2015; Pastor-Barriuso et al., 2016; Recio-Vega et al.,
2011), some tumor sub-types (Arrebola et al., 2016) and worse survival
among cases (Parada et al., 2016a), though these findings were mostly
non-significant. Meta-analyses that included Cohn et al. (2012) pro-
duced significant positive meta-ORs for individual CYP-inducing con-
geners PCB 99 and 183 (Leng et al., 2016), and for CYP-inducer
groupings and individual congeners (PCBs 99, 153, 180, 183 and 203)
(Zhang et al., 2015). On the other hand, Brauner et al. (2014) did not
find an association for a group of CYP-inducing congeners in pro-
spectively collected buttock adipose tissue from postmenopausal
women in the Danish Diet & Health Study (DDHS), and Holmes et al.
(2014) observed non-significant negative associations for individual
CYP-inducing congeners in a case-control study of Alaskan Natives.
Inconsistent findings may be the result of measuring different congeners
and groupings in different tissue types (blood vs adipose), using dif-
ferent methods of control for serum lipids, and/or methodologic pro-
blems, particularly regarding the appropriateness of controls in some
studies (Arrebola et al., 2015; Holmes et al., 2014; Recio-Vega et al.,
2011) (Table S3).
Other congeners and groupings of interest include potentially es-
trogenic PCBs and dioxin-like PCBs. Recio-Vega et al. (2011) found
significantly elevated odds for estrogenic PCBs among post-menopausal
women, and Leng et al.’s (2016) meta-analysis indicated a positive as-
sociation for potentially estrogenic PCB 187. The Zhang et al. (2015)
meta-analysis reported increased risk for the AhR-active PCB grouping,
and Parada et al. (2016a) observed non-significantly worse 5-year
survival among cases with higher limited dioxin-like anti-estrogenic
PCBs in the LIBCSP. In contrast, the AhR-active PCB 167 and estrogenic
187 were protective in CHDS (Cohn et al., 2012), and a higher ratio of
203 to the sum of 167 and 187 increased risk, while Brauner et al.
(2014) found no evidence of association for any congener groupings –
including
potentially
estrogenic
and
dioxin-like
–
among
post-
menopausal women in the DDHS. These findings demonstrate that ef-
fects may vary by timing of exposure and congener or congener ratios,
which is consistent with the diverse biological activity of the congeners.
Analyses that examined a sum of individual congeners (Itoh et al.,
2009; Roy et al., 2015) or estimates of total PCBs (Gatto et al., 2007)
tended to have null or significantly negative ORs, except for Recio-Vega
et al. (2011), discussed above, possibly because total PCB measures are
not sensitive to the different biological activities of the congeners.
Our previous review summarized studies showing PCB exposure
increased breast cancer only among women with a particular CYP1A1
polymorphism (Brody et al., 2007), and this remains an interesting area
for further study, because CYPs can affect both PCB metabolism and
endogenous hormone levels. In one study that considered CYP poly-
morphisms, there was no evidence for effect modification of the PCB-
breast cancer relationship by COMT or CYP1B1 polymorphisms in
postmenopausal Danish women (Brauner et al., 2014). The only other
study of PCBs and CYP interaction was not able to consider confounders
beyond age and serum cotinine because of the small sample size
(Ghisari et al., 2014) (see Table S3).
In occupational settings, incidence was elevated with increasing
cumulative PCB exposure (HR 1.33; 95% CI: 1.14–1.56) among non-
white women, but decreased among white women, in a cohort of female
employees at U.S. capacitor manufacturing plants (Silver et al., 2009).
However, the non-white women had higher PCB exposure and nearly
all were employed at one plant, suggesting a different exposure for
these women. As noted in Section 3.1.1, odds of breast cancer were
elevated in men with greater exposure to PCBs and dioxins combined
(OR 2.1; 95% CI: 1.0–4.5; based on 9 cases with ≥ median exposure)
(Villeneuve et al., 2010).
Since PCBs have a mix of activities and different exposure sources
lead to different patterns of congeners, future studies in general popu-
lations should consider evaluating congener profiles (e.g. from indoor
air or from fish) separately, although this may not be necessary in oc-
cupational studies when the exposure profile is consistent within the
group. In addition, given that so many studies have relied on the bio-
logical-activity congener groups proposed by Wolff et al. (1997), it
might be worthwhile to update the definitions with modern mechan-
istic tests. A stronger basis for predicting the likely exposure scenarios
associated with different congener fingerprints in blood would make it
easier to group study participants with most-similar exposures (timing
and sources), and this could strengthen analyses.
3.1.3. DDT/DDE and organochlorine pesticides
Exposure to OCPs such as DDT, aldrin, endrin, and dieldrin has
decreased since the 1970s and 1980s, when these once widely-used
pesticides were banned or phased out in many countries, but they are
still found in blood, urine, and environmental samples. The World
Health Organization recommends indoor spraying of DDT under certain
conditions for malaria control (WHO, 2011). Lindane and dicofol are
still used for lice control (CDC, 2016) and on cotton and fruit crops
(U.S. EPA, 1998), respectively.
3.1.3.1. Biological evidence. OCPs display diverse endocrine activity in
vitro and in animal models. Kojima et al. (2004) tested 29 OCPs in
estrogen receptor alpha (ERα), estrogen receptor beta (ERβ), and
androgen receptor (AR) transactivation assays that test for receptor
agonism/antagonism; 11 OCPs, including o,p′-DDT, p,p′-DDT, p,p′-
DDE, p,p′-DDD, cis- and trans- chlordane, dicofol, and heptachlor
epoxide showed positive activity for all three tests of ERα and ERβ
agonism and AR inhibition. Anti-androgenic activity has been reported
for DDE, a metabolite of DDT that bioaccumulates in meat and dairy
products (Kelce et al., 1995). Androgenic action may reduce estrogen-
driven cell proliferation, but anti-androgenic action may have the
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
164
 reverse effect, as has been demonstrated in pre-pubertal mice with
localized DDE exposure (Johnson et al., 2012). DDT and other OCPs
also induce CYP enzymes (Li and Kupfer, 1998), which mediate
metabolism of estrogen and other toxicants. Several studies show that
low levels of OCPs can act additively, for example inducing cell
proliferation in MCF-7 cells (Scholze et al., 2014; Soto et al., 1994).
Experimental studies in animals have shown specific effects on the
mammary gland or on cancer. Rats exposed during puberty to o,p′-DDT
had increased cell proliferation in terminal structures, which differ-
entiate into alveolar and lobular structures during puberty and preg-
nancy (Brown and Lamartiniere, 1995). Rats exposed in utero to diel-
drin had under-developed alveolar structures in the mammary gland
(Tarraf et al., 2003). Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) increases serum es-
trogen levels in adult rats and stimulates human epidermal growth
factor 1 (HER1) pathway in mammary tumors (Pena et al., 2012).
A 2015 IARC summary statement classified lindane as carcinogenic
based on non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in agricultural workers and DDT as
probably carcinogenic to humans based on non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
and testicular cancer in case-control studies. The statement notes mixed
results for breast cancer in humans with early life exposure to DDT
(IARC, 2015), but it was published before the Cohn et al. (2015) study
of in utero exposure, discussed below. Dieldrin and aldrin (which is
metabolized to dieldrin) were classified as probably carcinogenic to
humans based on breast cancer and on liver tumors in animal studies
(IARC 2016c). IARC lists chlordecone, HCB, mirex, and toxaphene as
reasonably expected to be carcinogenic to humans, and has thus far
noted
insufficient
data
for
chlordane,
heptachlor,
hexa-
chlorocyclohexane (HCH) and methoxychlor (IARC, 1979). The 2016
NTP Report on Carcinogens maintained IARC’s (1979) classifications
(NTP, 2016b).
3.1.3.2. Epidemiological studies. We identified 24 studies of OCPs;
fifteen met our criteria for discussion (Table S4), with all but two
measuring OCPs in blood or adipose tissue. DDT remains the most-
studied OCP in relation to breast cancer. DDE, a breakdown product
and persistent metabolite of DDT, is frequently measured as an
indicator for lifetime DDT exposure. New findings continue to show
little evidence of association between late-life DDE residues and breast
cancer (Arrebola et al., 2015; Boada et al., 2012; Gatto et al., 2007;
Holmes et al., 2014; Ingber et al., 2013; Itoh et al., 2009; Xu et al.,
2010). However, DDE levels reflect both metabolized DDT and direct
exposure to DDE in diet and likely do not correctly rank individuals
with regard to DDT exposure (Snedeker, 2001). Case-control studies
that measured o,p-DDT and p,p-DDT at diagnosis were also generally
null (Boada et al., 2012; Holmes et al., 2014; Itoh et al., 2009).
Several studies since 2006 took new approaches that help address
exposure assessment challenges. For example, Parada et al. (2016b)
measured DDT at diagnosis and analyzed 5-year survival among breast
cancer cases in the LIBCSP. Women in the second and third tertiles of
p,p′-DDT serum levels had significantly higher odds of dying of breast
cancer. The LIBCSP and Sister Study both assessed acute DDT exposure
early in life by asking women whether they had seen or chased after
fogger trucks. Findings suggested increased risk for premenopausal
breast cancers among Sister Study participants who reported this ex-
posure (Niehoff et al., 2016) and elevated odds of ER+/PR+ tumors in
the LIBCSP (White et al., 2013). Recall bias is a concern, but these as-
sessments that capture a biologically relevant exposure period are more
persuasive than blood measures from adult women long after DDT was
banned.
The most compelling new analyses came from the Child Health and
Development Studies (CHDS), the only study with blood samples ob-
tained while DDT was in use. CHDS took advantage of a unique quasi-
experiment within the cohort, which comprises women born both be-
fore and after DDT came into widespread use in 1945. Among women
who could have been exposed during early life because they were
younger than 14 in 1945, those in the highest tertile of serum p,p′-DDT
had five times higher odds of developing breast cancer before age 50
than women in the lowest tertile (Cohn et al., 2007). Conversely, o,p′-
DDT was inversely associated with breast cancer. The authors theorize
that p,p′-DDT is a better measure of childhood exposure, because it is
more persistent, or the differing effects could be due to different me-
tabolic intermediates. A subsequent analysis captured in utero exposure
by following daughters born to the CHDS mothers. With follow-up
through age 52, odds of breast cancer were significantly elevated in
daughters whose mothers had higher levels of o,p′-DDT, (OR 3.7; 95%
CI 1.5–9.0) at the time of their births. Higher levels of o,p′-DDT were
also associated with higher odds of human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) positive breast cancer (OR 4.6; 95% CI 1.1–19.7)
(Cohn et al., 2015). The authors suggest that o,p’-DDT may be a better
measure of current exposure (prenatal for the daughters), since it is
rapidly metabolized, while p,p′-DDT may be a better measure for the
analysis in the mothers, where blood levels during pregnancy were used
to estimate earlier adolescent exposures (Cohn et al., 2015).
The only other analysis of DDT measured in prospectively collected
samples – the Japan Public Health Center-based Prospective (JPHC)
Study – obtained blood samples 10–15 years after DDT was banned
from women aged 40–69 (Iwasaki et al., 2008). After 7–12 years of
follow-up, the study found no overall associations between p,p′-DDT or
DDE and breast cancer, although ORs were non-significantly increased
among premenopausal women in the highest quartile of p,p′-DDT (OR
2.45; 95% CI 0.70–8.63) and p,p′-DDE (OR 2.30; 95% CI 0.73–7.23). In
addition to the timing of exposure measurement, an important differ-
ence between CHDS and JPHC is that the effect estimates for particular
DDT components in CHDS were mutually adjusted for other DDT-re-
lated compounds (See Table S4), an approach meant to account for
concurrent exposure to the technical mixture and its metabolites. JPHC
did not use this method (Iwasaki et al., 2008). Statistical methods for
analyzing exposure to mixtures of chemicals are currently an important
area of study (Taylor et al., 2016).
Several studies reported findings for OCPs other than DDT. A meta-
analysis of studies from 1966 to 2006 suggested that geometric mean
levels of heptachlor were significantly higher in cases than controls and
that odds of breast cancer were higher for women with higher blood
levels of aldrin (Khanjani et al., 2007). Both findings were based on two
studies. There have been a few positive findings in the past 10 years for
β-HCH and breast cancer in case-control (Arrebola et al., 2015; Holmes
et al., 2014) and cross-sectional (Xu et al., 2010) studies; for HCB and
tumor characteristics (positive association with ER+ and with HR+,
negative association with E-cahderin) (Arrebola et al., 2016). However,
Iwasaki et al. (2008) found no evidence for effects of any of these
chemicals in the prospective JPHC Study. Differences in findings could
reflect underlying differences in absolute levels and/or the distribution
of levels in the populations studied, but inconsistent reporting of crude
versus lipid-standardized values prevents evaluation of this possibility.
In the LIBCSP, five-year survival among cases was worse for the upper
versus lower tertile of chlordane in blood (Parada et al., 2016b). This
association was only significant when controlling for lipids as an in-
dependent covariate, rather than lipid-standardizing values, empha-
sizing that the choice of method for lipid control can be critical.
3.1.4. Xenoestrogen burden
A new approach to exposure assessment for diverse mixtures of
EDCs is to use functional assays of a specific biological activity to
provide an integrated measure. Serum is usually divided into more- and
less-polar fractions. Polar fractions include endogenous estrogens as
well as some EDCs, such as nonylphenol. Less polar fractions contain
persistent EDCs like PCBs, DDT, and other OCPs.
Two studies used a functional assay to measure estrogenic activity
in serum in relation to breast cancer (Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al., 2011;
Pastor-Barriuso et al., 2016). In a case-control study in Spain, Pastor-
Barriuso et al. (2016) used the E-screen assay (Soto et al., 1995) to
measure total xenoestrogen burden (TEXB). The upper versus lower
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
165
 tertile of lipophilic xenoestrogen burden (TEXB-α) was associated with
3 times the odds of breast cancer (OR, 3.45; 95% CI: 1.50–7.97). This
association was attenuated in a model that mutually adjusted for the
fraction containing endogenous hormones and polar xenoestrogens
(TEXB-β) (OR, 1.80; 95% CI: 0.63–5.09), but as the authors discuss,
adjusting for the TEXB-β fraction could introduce rather than reduce
bias by creating a negative association between the TEXB-α fraction
and endogenous hormones. Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al. (2011) reported
no difference in xenoestrogen activity (based on 7 cases) but sig-
nificantly elevated androgenic activity in the lipophilic serum fraction
in a small number of cases compared to controls among Inuit women, a
population highly exposed to persistent pollutants.
3.2. Non-organochlorine or unspecified pesticides
Exposure assessment for non-persistent pesticides poses additional
challenges beyond those already discussed, because even if biological
samples are obtained during a relevant etiologic period, exposure to
these chemicals is generally episodic and no lasting markers of exposure
have been identified. The studies reviewed here assessed exposure using
(1) self-report of occupational or personal pesticide use or (2) modeling
based on geographic location in combination with sampling of nearby
wells or records of agricultural land use or pesticide application.
3.2.1. Biological evidence
Organophosphate (OP) pesticides such as parathion, malathion, and
chlorpyrifos are acetylcholinesterase (AcE) inhibitors. Concerns have
focused on neurotoxicity (U.S. EPA, 2014, 2016b) but experimental
evidence indicates OPs may also affect mammary gland development
and endocrine pathways. For example, Cabello et al. (2001) reported
increased TEB formation and mammary tumors in rats exposed during
late puberty to malathion or parathion at levels high enough to inhibit
AcE. Eserine, another AcE inhibitor, produced similar outcomes, and
effects were blocked by atropine, which competes with AcE inhibitors,
suggesting these OPs may act on the mammary gland through an AcE
mechanism (Cabello et al., 2001). In another study, malathion, estra-
diol, and the two combined altered mammary gland structure and in-
duced mammary tumors in rats (Calaf and Echiburu-Chau, 2012). On
the other hand, chlorpyrifos altered mammary gland development and
circulating hormone levels at doses below US Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) benchmark dose for AcE inhibition, indicating AcE may
not be the most sensitive endpoint (U.S. EPA, 2014; Ventura et al.,
2016). Effects on mammary gland development are not captured in
recent EPA evaluations for these pesticides (U.S. EPA, 2014, IARC
2016b).
The common herbicide atrazine also affects mammary gland de-
velopment in rodents. Rats exposed in utero experienced delayed
mammary gland development that persisted into adulthood (Rayner
et al., 2005). Atrazine exposure in adult rats increased mammary tu-
mors; however, it also produced persistent estrus, leading some reviews
to conclude that this mechanism is not relevant to humans (Cooper
et al., 2000; FIFRA, 2000). EPA’s atrazine registration used inhibition of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone from rodent hypothalamus as the
basis for the protective benchmark dose (U.S. EPA 2006c). Enoch et al.
(2007) reported rat mammary gland changes following exposure to
atrazine metabolites at levels found in drinking water below the EPA
benchmark dose.
3.2.2. Epidemiological studies
We identified 15 studies of organophosphate pesticides, atrazine,
fungicides, or unspecified pesticides (Table S5). Most did not collect
information on timing, duration, or intensity (e.g. frequency) of ex-
posure. Many relied on retrospective self-reports that are vulnerable to
recall bias, but two prospective studies, the Agricultural Health Study
(AHS) and Sister Study, avoid this problem. Exposure misclassification
can still be a concern because of difficulty accurately reporting product
use. For home pesticides, specific chemicals were not identified, al-
though we know that chlorpyrifos and diazinon were often used in
homes from the 1950s–60s until the early 2000s (U.S. EPA, 2006a,b).
Among studies of particular pesticides, follow-up of spouses in the
AHS provided the first evidence for an association between personal
application of organophosphate pesticides and breast cancer (Lerro
et al., 2015). Breast cancer risk was higher among wives who reported
use of any of 10 OP pesticides before enrollment (Lerro et al., 2015).
Analyses of individual pesticides suggested that chlorpyrifos (RR, 1.41;
95% CI: 1.00–1.99) and terbufos (RR 1.52; 95% CI: 0.97–2.36) might be
driving the overall association. A study in rural Wisconsin found no
association between modeled residential atrazine levels in drinking
water and breast cancer, but only 9 women had estimated exposures
above the U.S. EPA maximum contaminant level (McElroy et al., 2007).
The other atrazine study did not meet our criteria for discussion.
Four studies examined living on or near agricultural land. The Sister
Study found higher breast cancer risk among women who lived on a
cotton or tobacco farm (but not on or near a farm in general or any
other type of farm) for at least 12 months before age 18 (Niehoff et al.,
2016). El-Zaemey et al. (2013) observed increased breast cancer for
women who had lived near a farm and noticed pesticide drift, with a
stronger association among women who first noticed drift before age
20. The authors used sensitivity analyses to evaluate possible effects of
recall bias; assuming 10% over-reporting by cases and 20% under-re-
porting by controls; risk estimates were still positive but no longer
significant. A case-control study of living in areas with fungicide use on
Prince Edward Island, Canada, found no association, but the authors
note that all residents, including the “reference group,” may be exposed
at high levels (Ashley-Martin et al., 2012). Brody et al. (2006) found no
association between breast cancer and drinking water from areas im-
pacted by pesticide application.
Several studies examined self-reported home or occupational use of
unspecified pesticides. The Cape Cod Breast Cancer and Environment
Study found elevated odds of breast cancer among women who used
insect repellents often or very often compared to never (OR, 1.5; 95%
CI: 1.0–2.3) (Zota et al., 2010), while the LIBCSP found no association
for insect repellents but higher risk in all quintiles of lifetime applica-
tions of indoor and lawn/garden pesticides (no evidence of dose re-
sponse) (Teitelbaum et al., 2007). Differences between Cape Cod and
the LIBCSP could reflect differences in regional pesticide practices,
particular questions asked, and/or greater statistical power in the larger
LIBCSP. By contrast, studies in New York (Farooq et al., 2010) and
Australia (El-Zaemey et al., 2014) found little evidence of association
between outdoor or indoor home-pesticide use and breast cancer. The
Cape Cod Study also tried to evaluate recall bias by stratifying analyses
by whether participants’ believed that chemicals contribute to breast
cancer (Zota et al., 2010). The theory is that if a positive association is
driven by recall bias, it will only occur among women who believe that
chemicals or pesticides cause breast cancer. However, comparing re-
sults with a parallel analysis of family history (a risk factor known to be
reported with little bias) suggested this strategy can be misleading in
attributing effects to recall bias (Zota et al., 2010). Studies of self-re-
ported occupational exposure found no association but were limited by
relatively small numbers (< 65) of exposed women (Ekenga et al.,
2015a; El-Zaemey et al., 2014); one study in men also reported no as-
sociation for high vs never exposure, based on 10 exposed cases
(Villeneuve et al., 2010).
Additional follow-up from prospective studies like the AHS and
Sister Study may shed light on effects of current use pesticides.
Synthetic pyrethroids, for example, have a range of endocrine effects,
including estrogenic activity in breast cancer cell lines (Go et al., 1999;
Mnif et al., 2011). The use of these chemicals in some insect repellents
may underlie the elevated OR in the Cape Cod Study (Zota et al., 2010).
Only Lerro et al. (2015) examined tumor subtypes and reported that the
association for chlorpyrifos might be specific to ER-/PR- tumors, based
on 11 cases.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
166
 3.3. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, air pollution, vehicular exhaust
Air pollution comprises pollutants from many sources, including
power generation, transportation, and industry. Components include
particulate matter (PM); metals; air toxics, including volatile organic
compounds (VOCs); polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs, formed
by combustion of organic materials and commonly found in cooked
foods); and nitro-PAHs, which are generated largely from diesel-pow-
ered vehicles.
3.3.1. Biological evidence
IARC designates outdoor air pollution as carcinogenic to humans
based on mechanistic, animal, and epidemiological evidence (IARC
2016a). Many individual air pollutants are genotoxic, and some are
estrogenic or anti-estrogenic. In toxicological and epidemiologic stu-
dies, PM has been found to induce oxidative stress, which can form free
radicals that damage DNA, and inflammation, which can lead to
changes – including oxidative stress – that contribute to cancer (re-
viewed by Valavanidis et al. (2008)).
PAHs are the most-studied component of air pollution in relation to
breast cancer and include hundreds of compounds and their metabolites
with different biologic activities. The NTP and IARC identify 15 PAHs
and several nitro-PAHs as reasonably anticipated to be human carci-
nogens (IARC, 2013; NTP, 2016b). Rudel et al. (2014) identified 13
PAHs and nitro-PAHs that specifically caused mammary gland tumors
in animal models.
Like PCBs, PAHs have anti-estrogenic and estrogenic activity. Many
bind with the AhR, activating CYP-mediated metabolism and producing
DNA-reactive metabolites and oxygen radicals that can form DNA ad-
ducts and, in turn, genetic mutations (IARC 2010a). Because the AhR
influences expression of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 enzymes, risk
from individual PAHs may be related to their AhR binding affinities
(Nebert et al., 2004). Anti-estrogenic effects are hypothesized to arise
from CYP1A1 induction (Santodonato, 1997) and from AhR-ER cross-
talk (Arcaro et al., 1999; Matthews and Gustafsson, 2006). Conversely,
hydroxyl-PAH metabolites have been shown to be estrogenic in vitro
and in vivo (Kummer et al., 2008; Nishihara et al., 2000; Van de Wiele
et al., 2005). PAHs also activate CYP3A4 via PXR receptor (Luckert
et al., 2013), and in this way can affect estrogen metabolism. Genetic
variations in the CYP and GST gene families may affect PAH metabo-
lism, and other genes, such as those involved in DNA repair, tumor
promotion, and apoptosis, affect the cascade of events on pathways to
cancer, so these may modify response to PAHs and are good targets for
subgroup analyses in epidemiological studies.
Some VOCs from vehicle exhaust, including 1,3-butadiene, ethylene
oxide (EtO), and benzene (also in gasoline), are human carcinogens
with strong evidence of genotoxicity and increased mammary tumors in
animal models (IARC 2012a; NTP, 2016b; Rudel et al., 2007). We re-
view the mechanistic action of benzene and EtO in sections on organic
solvents (Section 3.6) and occupational exposures (Section 3.7), re-
spectively.
3.3.2. Epidemiologic studies
Breast cancer studies of PAHs and air pollution increased notably in
the past 10 years, with nearly 50 new reports, although several did not
meet our criteria for discussion (See Table S7). Measuring DNA adducts
in blood and modeling residential air pollution were common exposure
assessment methods; a few studies used questionnaires for occupational
exposure. Self-reported residential and occupational history are con-
sidered reliable measures (Reider and Hubble, 2000; Teschke et al.,
2002), though reports of specific agents at work could be susceptible to
recall bias or non-differential misclassification.
3.3.2.1. Biomarker studies. Biomarkers of PAHs include bulky DNA
adducts and PAH-DNA adducts in blood and PAH metabolites in
urine. These are thought to capture exposure from air pollution,
tobacco, and diet. PAH-DNA adducts are considered an early effect
marker for cancer. Bulky adducts are non-specific, capturing adducts of
aromatic amines, hormones, and other hydrophobic compounds in
addition to PAHs. Both methods often use white blood cells, which
represent exposures over weeks to months, an advantage over urinary
metabolites, which reflect exposures over days (Godschalk et al., 2003;
Miller-Schulze et al., 2013). Measurement in normal tissue is rarely
available, but Rundle et al. (2000) found an association between PAH-
DNA adducts in breast tissue and breast cancer, using reduction
mammoplasty samples as controls.
One difficulty in interpreting adducts as exposure measures is that
they have not been consistently related to self-reported PAH sources.
For example, smokers do not consistently have higher bulky- or PAH-
DNA adduct levels than non-smokers (Gammon et al., 2002; Saieva
et al., 2011). One possibility is that the presence of adducts is governed
more strongly by genetic variation in response to PAHs rather than
exposure, as reviewed by Gammon and Santella (2008). In this case, the
biological measures might help distinguish “susceptibility X exposure”
groups.
The LIBCSP analyzed gene-adduct interactions using PAH-specific
DNA adducts and, as reported in our 2007 review, found associations
between PAH-DNA adducts and premenopausal breast cancer (Gammon
et al., 2004); a non-significant additive interaction between PAH-DNA
adducts and the XRCC1 399Gln allele, important for DNA repair, among
never-smokers (Shen et al., 2005); and a significant joint effect of ad-
duct levels and the Gln/Gln genotype of XPD, a gene involved in nu-
cleotide excision repair (NER) (Terry et al., 2004). The LIBCSP also
previously reported positive associations between lifetime smoked/
grilled food intake and postmenopausal breast cancer; smoking and ER
+/PR+ tumors; long-term exposure to environmental tobacco smoke
and breast cancer; and estimated traffic-related PAH exposure during
early life, menarche, and before first childbirth and breast cancer
(Gammon and Santella, 2008).
New LIBCSP results added to the findings for DNA repair genes
(Table S6). Crew et al. (2007b) evaluated additional NER pathway
genes and reported a significant joint OR for PAH-DNA adduct levels
above the median and a different XPD polymorphism (Asn/Asn geno-
type) as well as a non-significant multiplicative interaction between
detectable adducts and variant alleles for ERCC1, which may affect
mRNA stability. The association between detectable adducts and breast
cancer was higher in LIBCSP women with a polymorphism of IGHMBP2,
but the interaction was not significant (Shen et al., 2006).
The LIBCSP also considered genes associated with tumor suppres-
sion and apoptosis. Interestingly, odds of ER+/PR+ breast cancer were
significantly elevated among cases with detectable PAH-DNA adducts
and methylated versus unmethylated RAR-β promoter (measured in
tumor tissue) on the multiplicative scale (pinteraction, 0.03), and nearly
significantly
elevated
among
cases
with
methylated
versus
un-
methylated APC promotor (pinteraction, 0.09) (White et al., 2015). RAR-β
and APC are tumor suppressor genes, with APC implicated in DNA re-
pair, so promotor methylation could inactivate these genes and prevent
effective anti-tumor activities (White et al., 2015). There was suggestive
evidence that the apoptosis-related FAS1377 gene might modify the
association between PAH-DNA adducts and breast cancer (Crew et al.,
2007a), and limited evidence for effect modification by polymorphisms
or mutations of TP53, a tumor suppressor gene (Gaudet et al., 2008;
Mordukhovich et al., 2010). Mordukhovich et al.’s (2010) analysis in-
dicated that PAH adducts might be associated with particular sub-
groups of p53 mutations (e.g., frameshift mutations) that occurred in a
small number of tumors, but the estimates were not significant.
Only one new analysis in the LIBSCP considered genes involved in
PAH metabolism. Results suggested that women with detectable PAH-
DNA adducts and any three polymorphisms in the GST gene, a gene
involved with PAH metabolism, had significantly elevated odds of
breast cancer (McCarty et al., 2009), though the statistical test for in-
teraction was not significant (p, 0.43). A previous LIBCSP report found
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
167
 that GSTA1 variant alleles and smoking were associated with increased
breast cancer risk (Ahn et al., 2006), but other analyses were incon-
clusive (Terry and Goodman, 2006). Additional investigation into var-
iations in CYP enzymes could be helpful. For example, studies have
shown that among coke oven workers, variations in DNA adduct levels
are associated with CYP mutations (Huang et al., 2012; Zhang et al.,
2000).
Of note, several gene variants analyzed in the LIBCSP did not appear
to modify the association between PAH-DNA adducts and breast cancer.
These included polymorphisms of NER pathway genes XPA, XPF, XPG
(Crew et al., 2007b), and XPC (Shen et al., 2008) and methylation status
of ESR1, PGR, BRCA1, CCND2, CDH1, DAPK1, GSTP1, H1N1, CDKN2A,
RASSF1A, and TWIST1 (White et al., 2015).
Findings from prospective studies used different exposure measures
from the studies reviewed thus far. In the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) cohort, Saieva et al.
(2011) examined bulky DNA adducts in Italian women and reported a
weak, non-significant association, while Lee et al. (2010) found no as-
sociation for urinary biomarkers of PAH metabolites and oxidative
stress in the Shanghai Women’s Health Study. Potential considerations
include the following: (1) urinary metabolites capture exposure during
a very brief window (days), as compared to DNA adducts (months) and
self-report/location-based exposure estimates (years), (2) PAH meta-
bolites do not capture individual differences in DNA repair capacity and
(3) bulky adducts are not specific to PAHs, though the method for
measuring them is more sensitive than the ELISA method for PAH ad-
ducts (Gammon et al., 2004; Saieva et al., 2011).
Additional evaluation of a role for PAHs in tumor progression, as
suggested by an earlier case-control study (Tang et al., 2002), would be
of interest, as would studies that analyze specific PAH mixtures, such as
occupational exposures. The one analysis that examined survival in the
LIBCSP did not find strong evidence of an association, but it lacked
information about stage at diagnosis, which could be critical, and did
not consider gene interactions (Sagiv et al., 2009). New, more-specific
PAH- DNA adduct measures could help differentiate exposure sources.
3.3.2.2. Job history and geographic location studies. A few case-control
studies assessed PAHs and vehicle exhaust using job history, which has
the advantage of integrating exposures over time and clarifying the
exposure source. In Canada, Labreche et al. (2010) estimated lifetime
occupational PAH exposure among postmenopausal women using job
questionnaires and found higher odds of breast cancer for each 10-year
increase in duration of exposure. Odds ratios were highest for exposure
before age 36 and particularly from petroleum sources (OR per 10-year
increase, 2.38; 95% CI: 1.00–5.67) compared to PAHs from any source
(OR per 10-year increase, 1.75; 95% CI: 0.99–3.10). The Sister Study
similarly found increased breast cancer risk with higher levels of
exposure to gasoline or petroleum products (Ekenga et al., 2015a),
and Rai et al. (2016) found non-significantly elevated odds of
premenopausal breast cancer with occupational exposure to diesel
and gasoline exhaust.
The most common method for air pollution exposure assessment,
however, was geographic location, and several interesting findings came
from studies that captured relevant biological features. Among studies
that considered tumor subtypes, significantly higher risk of ER+/PR+
tumors was reported per 5.8 ppb NO2 estimated at baseline address in
the Sister Study (HR, 1.10; 95% CI: 1.02–1.19, pinteraction, 0.04) (Reding
et al., 2015). The California Teachers Study (CTS) found significant
positive associations between ER+/PR+ tumors and upper versus lower
quintile of some ambient mammary gland carcinogens estimated at the
census-tract level at the midpoint of the 1995–2011 study period (NATA
2002 data) (Garcia et al., 2015), as well as significantly elevated risk of
ER-/PR- tumors for the upper vs. lower quintiles of ambient benzene
(Garcia et al., 2015), cadmium, and arsenic (R Liu et al. 2015). In the
LIBCSP, Mordukhovich et al. (2016a) estimated residential traffic-re-
lated PAHs and reported a significant elevation in ER-/PR- breast cancer
compared to other subtypes for recent traffic-PAH ≥ 95th versus < 50th
percentile. Follow-up examining nine NER and base excision repair ge-
netic variants found significantly elevated joint odds of breast cancer
among women with the Gln/Gln genotype of XPD and the highest tertile
of estimated traffic-PAH (OR, 2.09; 95% CI: 1.13–3.90, pinteraction, 0.04)
(Mordukhovich et al., 2016b), which is consistent with the previously
reported interaction between XPD and PAH-DNA adducts in the LIBCSP
(Terry et al., 2004). On the other hand, Hart et al. (2016) did not find an
association between estimated residential PM and tumor subtypes over
18 years of follow-up in the Nurses Health Study II, which could reflect a
true lack of association, or that the other studies used different measures
of air pollution or captured tumor promoting effects close to diagnosis.
Only a few studies considered early life exposure or menopausal status. A
case-control study using the LIBCSP model to estimate traffic-related
PAHs in Western New York found that women with the highest com-
pared to lowest exposures at menarche had elevated risk of pre-
menopausal breast cancer (OR 2.07; 95% CI: 0.91–4.72) (Nie et al.,
2007). In this study, exposure at menarche was not known for post-
menopausal women, but exposure at first birth was associated with
significantly increased risk (OR 2.58, 95% CI: 1.15–5.83). Both of these
associations were stronger among non-smokers. In a Canadian study,
odds of breast cancer were non-significantly elevated among pre-
menopausal women living within 3.2 km of petroleum refineries (based
on 8 cases) and steel mills (Pan et al., 2011).
For overall breast cancer, results from studies of geographic location
and air pollution were mixed. Prospective studies of modeled re-
sidential PM2.5, PM10, NO2 or NOX (considered markers of traffic pol-
lution) were mostly null (Hart et al., 2016; Raaschou-Nielsen et al.,
2011; Reding et al., 2015), while case-control studies showed nearly
significant positive findings for NO2 and breast cancer (Crouse et al.,
2010; Hystad et al., 2015; Shekarrizfard et al., 2015). PM and NOx were
not considered in case-control studies. The difference in findings be-
tween studies of NO2 may be because the analysis from the prospective
Sister Study did not stratify by menopausal status (Reding et al., 2015),
while the case-control studies were either limited to postmenopausal
women (exposure estimated at diagnosis) (Crouse et al., 2010) or pre-
sented stratified results suggesting a somewhat stronger association
among premenopausal than postmenopausal women, for exposure
based on 18 years of residential history (Hystad et al., 2015). Findings
from two prospective analyses of residential proximity to major
roadway were also mixed; the Nurses Health Study reported non-sig-
nificant positive associations with closer proximity (Hart et al., 2016),
while the Danish Diet, Cancer and Health Study found no association
(Raaschou-Nielsen et al., 2011). EPA 2002 census-tract estimates of
several ambient endocrine disruptors (including diesel) (R Liu et al.
2015) and mammary carcinogens (Garcia et al., 2015) were not asso-
ciated with overall breast cancer in the prospective CTS.
Interestingly, when White et al. (2016) considered various PAH
sources (active smoking, residential environmental tobacco smoke
(ETS), diet, traffic-related and indoor stove/fireplace use) in the LIBCSP
together in one mixed effects model, ORs for individual sources all
remained elevated, with p < 0.05 for synthetic log burning and re-
sidential ETS from spouse. The highest OR was for exposure to several
PAH sources (smoking, residential ETS from spouse, grilled/smoked
meat intake, and stove/fireplace use) compared to low or no exposure
to all sources (OR, 1.45; 95% CrI: 1.02–2.04), and results were similar
but not significant when high exposure to traffic-related PAHs was in-
cluded in the model, based on 9 cases and 9 controls exposed to all PAH
exposure sources. White et al. (2014) also found a significant positive
association for synthetic log burning, and that GST variants may in-
crease breast cancer risk with greater frequency of log burning.
3.4. Consumer product chemicals
The focus on consumer product chemicals and breast cancer in-
creased since 2006, pursuing hypotheses from animal studies. We
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
168
 reviewed studies of bisphenol A (BPA), phthalates, nonylphenols, hair
dyes and straighteners, per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances
(PFASs), and flame retardants (Table S8). Exposure to consumer pro-
duct chemicals is commonly assessed in blood or urine. Important
considerations for exposure assessment include the rapid metabolism of
some of these chemicals, including BPA and phthalates. Consequently,
blood levels may not accurately reflect exposures, and intra-individual
variability is high from spot urine samples, so single urine measures
may not represent long term exposures (Calafat et al., 2013). In addi-
tion, sample contamination is a concern because some of these che-
micals are used in sample collection containers and some are in la-
boratory equipment. While self-reported product use is employed in
major cohorts (Taylor et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2005), only hair dye
was assessed by self-report among the studies we reviewed here. Self-
reports are subject to recall bias in case-control studies and non-dif-
ferential misclassification in all studies.
3.4.1. BPA
Bisphenol A, synthesized in 1891 as a synthetic estrogen, has been
used since the 1950s to make highly durable plastics such as poly-
carbonate. Food packaging appears to be the major source of exposure
for the general population (Rudel et al., 2011b).
3.4.1.1. Biological evidence. BPA’s endocrine disrupting abilities have
been demonstrated in numerous experimental studies, including cell
proliferation in estrogen-sensitive breast cancer cell lines (Alonso-
Magdalena et al., 2012; Andersen et al., 1999; Okada et al., 2008;
Vandenberg et al., 2009). US EPA’s high throughput chemical testing
program, ToxCast™, ranked BPA among the most endocrine active of
309 chemicals based on its activity in estrogen, androgen, and other
nuclear receptors (Reif et al., 2010). In utero and perinatal exposure
alters
mammary
gland
development
and
induces
pre-neoplastic
mammary gland lesions in rodent studies (Acevedo et al., 2013;
Mandrup et al., 2016; Paulose et al., 2015; Tharp et al., 2012);
pubertal exposure in rats also modifies mammary gland development
(Colerangle and Roy, 1997). In some studies, effects at lowest doses are
not observed at higher doses, suggesting possible non-monotonicity in
dose response. The free form of BPA (unconjugated) is the active form,
and ingested BPA is rapidly metabolized to conjugated metabolites
(Doerge et al., 2010, 2011; Taylor et al., 2008, 2011), which are readily
detected in urine (Teeguarden et al., 2013). There is controversy about
whether levels of free (active) BPA in human blood are above the level
required to produce biological activity (Teeguarden et al., 2013;
Vandenberg
and
Prins,
2016).
A
diverse
set
of
approaches
to
estimating circulating free BPA levels in blood in humans indicate
concentrations are in the sub-picomolar range, and most experimental
animal studies have used higher doses (Teeguarden et al., 2013, 2016).
Higher levels of free BPA in blood may be expected in special exposure
scenarios, such as medical settings where IVs deliver fluids containing
BPA or workplaces where fumes are inhaled from melting or curing
polycarbonate.
3.4.1.2. Epidemiological studies. The one study of BPA that met our
criteria for discussion found no evidence supporting an association
between conjugated-BPA metabolites and breast cancer (Trabert et al.,
2014). However, the study did not measure exposure in early life, the
time when effects are seen in rodent studies, and it used one-time
measures, which likely do not reflect individuals’ typical exposure
(Braun et al., 2012).
3.4.2. Phthalates
Phthalates are a group of chemicals used as plasticizers in diverse
products, including building materials, medical equipment, and food
contact materials; they are also used as solvents in many consumer
products, including fragrances. Food packaging, vinyl flooring, and
plasticizers are major exposure sources of higher molecular weight
phthalates, like bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), while fragrances
and cosmetics are important sources for lower molecular weight
phthalates, like diethyl phthalate (DEP) (Harley et al., 2016; Rodgers
et al., 2014).
3.4.2.1. Biological evidence. Many studies have reported endocrine
disruption and toxic effects on the developing male reproductive
system with exposure to high molecular weight phthalates (Fabjan
et al., 2006). DEP, a low molecular weight phthalate, does not show
similar EDC activity (Gray et al., 2000). A few studies have reported
endocrine disruption in females, including changes in progesterone
levels in pregnant rats exposed to di-n-butyl phthalate (DnBP) and
estradiol levels in primates following in utero exposure to DEHP (Gray
et al., 2006; Tomonari et al., 2006). Altered development of mammary
tissue was observed in mice exposed to MEHP in utero (Moyer and
Hixon, 2012) and in rats exposed to DnBP in utero through lactation
(Lee et al., 2004). Additionally, a study that exposed adult rats to high
levels of DEHP observed decreased estradiol levels and anovulation
(Lovekamp-Swan and Davis, 2003).
3.4.2.2. Epidemiological
studies. Two
hospital-based
case-control
studies in Alaska and Mexico assessed phthalates and breast cancer
using one-time measurements of monoester metabolites in urine.
Monoester
or
oxidative
metabolites
in
urine
are
the
preferred
biomarkers
because
of
contamination
concerns
when
measuring
parent compounds (Calafat et al., 2013). In Alaska, Holmes et al.
(2014) reported an elevated OR for the DEHP metabolite MEHP (OR
2.43, 95% CI: 1.12–5.24) but not for MEP, which did show an
association with breast cancer in the Mexico study (Lopez-Carrillo
et al., 2010). The MEP levels in the Mexico Study (Lopez-Carrillo et al.,
2010) were much higher than in Alaska (Holmes et al., 2014). Although
MEP, a metabolite of DEP, is not an EDC, it may be a marker for
fragrance or other endocrine-active exposures that could explain the
association with breast cancer. Additional analysis of the study in
Mexico suggested an association between urinary DEHP metabolites
and breast cancer in a subgroup with a polymorphism in the PPARγ
gene (Martinez-Nava et al., 2013). However both the Mexico and
Alaska studies were critically limited by the use of one-time urine
measurements. As with BPA, phthalates are rapidly metabolized and
excreted, so there can be substantial intra-individual variability (Braun
et al., 2012). Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) for repeated
samples vary with the specific phthalate and indicate that multiple spot
urine samples over multiple days are required to produce a stable
exposure estimate (Hauser et al., 2004; Preau et al., 2010).
Other case-control studies estimated phthalate exposure using self-
report. A large study of European men found non-significantly elevated
odds of breast cancer associated with phthalate exposure above the
median (with 3 exposed cases), assessed from lifetime occupational
history (Villeneuve et al., 2010). Breast cancer was also significantly
associated with frequency of lifetime use of household cleaners and air
fresheners in the Cape Cod Study (Zota et al., 2010). Dodson et al.
(2012a) showed these products can contain DEP and DEHP, among
other chemicals.
3.4.3. Nonylphenols
Nonylphenols belong to the family of alkylphenols, which are
widely used as surfactants in detergents, “inert” ingredients in pesti-
cides, and as additives to some plastics (Dodson et al., 2012a). Cleaners,
detergents, food packaging, cosmetics, and pesticides are major sources
of exposure for nonylphenols (U.S. EPA, 2010). They have been phased
out of household detergents, and additional restrictions were being
considered by EPA (U.S. EPA, 2010).
3.4.3.1. Biological evidence. Nonylphenol, included in the family of
alkylphenols, is estrogenic (Jie et al., 2010; Kochukov et al., 2009;
Preuss et al., 2006) and increases cell proliferation in estrogen-sensitive
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
169
 breast cancer cells (In et al., 2015). Rats exposed during puberty
showed altered mammary gland development (Moon et al., 2007;
Odum et al., 1999).
3.4.3.2. Epidemiological
studies. Villeneuve
et
al.
(2010)
found
significantly elevated odds of male breast cancer with occupational
alkylphenol exposure above the median (OR, 3.3; 95% CI: 1.1–9.9)
based on self-reported job history and industrial hygiene assessment.
3.4.4. Hair dyes and straighteners
In the U.S., nearly 75% of women report ever using hair dye
(Rollison et al., 2006), and hair straighteners or relaxers have grown in
popularity,
with
higher
use
among
women
of
African
descent
(Gavazzoni Dias, 2015).
3.4.4.1. Biological evidence. Aromatic amines in some hair dyes raise
concern due to their mutagenicity in animal models (Rudel et al.,
2014). Dermal application of common hair dyes resulted in increased
mammary tumors in rats but not mice (IARC 2010c). The commonly
used hair dye, p-Phenylenediamine (PPD), has been found to be
contaminated by 4-aminobiphenyl (4-ABP) (Turesky et al., 2003), an
aromatic amine and known carcinogen, based on bladder cancer (IARC
2010c). Rats subcutaneously treated with 4-ABP also developed
mammary tumors (IARC 2010c). 4-ABP DNA adducts from breast
milk were associated with Arkansas women’s use of hair coloring
products (Ambrosone et al., 2007), indicating hair dye is an exposure
source of 4-ABP. Chemical hair straighteners can contain formaldehyde
or formaldehyde-releasing ingredients; formaldehyde is a known
human carcinogen, based on nasopharyngeal cancer and leukemia
(IARC 2012a).
3.4.4.2. Epidemiological studies. Three studies analyzed self-reported
hair dye use and breast cancer. A Finnish case-control study reported
a significantly higher risk for ever use, cumulative number of hair dye
episodes, and first use before age 30 (Heikkinen et al., 2015), while the
Shanghai Women’s Health Study found no association for hair dye use
or duration of use in the previous three years (Mendelsohn et al., 2009).
While the case-control study could be subject to recall bias, the
Shanghai study problematically classified women who had not used
hair dye within the past three years as “never users,” even though
breast cancer may originate from much earlier exposures. In fact, the
Finnish study showed increased risk for women who first used hair dye
at ages 20–29 but not 40 and older. Types (temporary, permanent,
bleach) and colors of dyes likely are different between these study
populations. The Black Women’s Health Study did not find any
significant associations with chemical hair straighteners, considering
frequency or duration of use and age at first use (Rosenberg et al.,
2007).
3.4.5. Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs)
PFASs include hundreds of chemicals with highly fluorinated carbon
chains. They have many commercial applications because of their non-
stick and stain-resistant properties. The general population is exposed
through food contamination, food contact materials, consumer pro-
ducts, and contaminated drinking water. Occupational exposure is
likely in firefighting, textile production, and food processing. Longer
carbon chain PFASs, such as C8, or perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), have
been common, but with manufacturer phase-outs (U.S. EPA, 2009), the
use of shorter-chain PFASs is increasing. Many PFASs are persistent and
water soluble and so have emerged as important drinking water con-
taminants in many communities (Hu et al., 2016).
3.4.5.1. Biological evidence. PFOA and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid
(PFOS) are two of the most researched PFASs in terms of toxicity and
exposure; research is ongoing to understand the toxicity of newer
PFASs. PFOA is persistent in the body, partitioning to the liver and
blood. No metabolic transformations occur, and the half-life in humans
is estimated to be 3–4 years (Olsen et al., 2007). Epidemiological
studies from the C8 Science Panel found that PFOA is associated with
kidney and testicular cancers (Barry et al., 2013) and decreased
immune response (Looker et al., 2014), and animal studies indicate
that PFOA causes liver and kidney toxicity (Wolf et al., 2012),
immunotoxicity
(Yang
et
al.,
2002),
effects
on
the
developing
mammary gland (White et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2009), and male
reproductive toxicity (York et al., 2010). Effects on the developing
mammary gland were observed at lower doses than other effects (New
Jersey DWQI Health Effects Subcommittee, 2016; U.S. EPA 2016a), and
one rodent cancer study showed equivocal evidence of increased
mammary gland tumors (Sibinski, 1987). While PFOA binds with the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARα) and other
receptors, including ERα (reviewed by Peters and Gonzalez, 2011), the
modes of action leading to adverse effects are not entirely understood
(New Jersey DWQI Health Effects Subcommittee, 2016).
Although there is limited evidence of mammary gland effects as-
sociated with PFOS, one study with adult rats found significantly in-
creased benign mammary tumors with low doses of PFOS in diet, but a
significant decrease in the high dose group (European Food Safety
Authority, 2008).
3.4.5.2. Epidemiological studies. Four studies reported on PFASs, with
one capturing a critical window of exposure. Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al.
(2014) did not find a significant association for PFOA measured in
blood samples collected during early pregnancy and breast cancer
10–15 years later in the Danish National Birth Cohort, but mean age of
the women at enrollment was under 30, so they were still young at
follow up. These authors note significantly elevated odds of breast
cancer among the women in the highest compared to the lowest quintile
of PFOSA, which breaks down in the body to PFOS, with no evidence of
dose-response. Because PFOA alters developing mammary glands, it
would be informative to follow the daughters from these pregnancies
for breast outcomes. In another study, Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al. (2011)
reported significantly higher blood levels of PFOS and PFOA among 31
cases compared to controls among Inuit women in Greenland, as well as
a non-significant 20% increase in the odds of breast cancer for every
one ng/ml increase of PFOA (based on 7 cases). As previously noted
(Section 3.1.4), this population is highly exposed to a number of
chemicals (e.g. PCBs, OC pesticides), making it difficult to attribute
risk to individual compounds (Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al., 2011). A
follow-up study by Ghisari et al. (2014) examined PFASs and certain
polymorphisms in CYP and COMT genes, though the analysis did not
control for confounding by breast cancer risk factors (See Table S8). In
the only study of occupational exposure, a study funded by 3M, Raleigh
et al. (2014) evaluated breast cancer risk in relation to modeled
ammonium perfluorooctanoate (APFO) concentrations in air at two
3M plants, but did not control for breast cancer risk factors or specify
whether estimates were among male or female workers (See Table S8).
3.4.6. Flame retardants
Flame retardants include diverse chemicals used in consumer pro-
ducts, including textiles, furniture, insulation, and plastics (Dodson
et al., 2012b). People are primarily exposed through dust or direct
contact, as these chemicals are often not bound to their substrate and
migrate into air and dust (Lorber, 2008). Use patterns have changed
over time as some flame retardants, such as polybrominated diphenyl
ethers (PBDEs) and tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate (TDBPP), were
phased out or banned while others have come into use as substitutes
(Dodson et al., 2012b).
3.4.6.1. Biological
evidence. Flame
retardants
TDBPP
and
2,2-bis
(bromomethyl)-1,3-propanediol (BBMP) produce mammary tumors in
animal studies (NTP, 2016b). However, based on the Chemical
Carcinogenesis
Research
Information
System
database
(Tonxnet,
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
170
 2016), PBDEs appear not to have been tested for carcinogenicity in
rodents. PBDE mixtures have also increased cell proliferation in
estrogen-sensitive breast cancer cells (Li et al., 2012; Mercado-
Feliciano and Bigsby, 2008), and a study that exposed rats to a
commercial mixture of PBDEs, during and after gestation, showed
changes in mammary gland development (Kodavanti et al., 2010),
indicating they act via multiple pathways.
3.4.6.2. Epidemiological studies. We identified three studies of flame
retardant exposure and breast cancer. Hurley et al. (2011) found no
association between California women’s adipose levels of PBDEs and
breast cancer, while Holmes et al. (2014) reported non-significantly
increased risk with BDE-47 blood levels in Alaskan Native women.
Terrell et al. (2016) observed nearly-significantly elevated odds of
breast cancer (OR 2.60, 95% CI: 0.93–7.27; based on 9 cases) among
women with higher blood levels of polybrominated biphenyl (PBB)
measured 30+ years prior, following contamination of the food supply.
PBB flame retardants are structurally similar to PCBs and are thought to
exert toxicity in similar ways (Lauby-Secretan et al., 2013).
3.5. Drinking water
Drinking water is often contaminated with domestic wastewater,
fertilizer, other agricultural chemicals (Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2), and
industrial contaminants (Sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2 and 3.6) from local land
uses and discharges. Domestic wastewater (sewage) is a source of
consumer product chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and excreted natural
hormones (Section 3.4).
3.5.1. Epidemiological studies
Here we review four studies of drinking water that measure was-
tewater contamination or a proxy; two studies of solvent-contaminated
drinking water are reviewed in Section 3.6. On Cape Cod, MA, Brody
et al. (2006) did not find an association for estimated historical nitrate-
N, a marker of wastewater contamination, but the authors note the
analysis was limited by reliance on average concentrations across
multiple water sources in each district. On the other hand, Gallagher
et al. (2010) reported marginally elevated odds of breast cancer among
women ever exposed to drinking water contaminated with wastewater,
based on a model of contamination from the Barnstable (Cape Cod)
Water Pollution Control Facility. Of note, some of the drinking water
wells were also contaminated by VOCs from a local airport or sur-
rounding septic systems (Schaider et al., 2010).
The Iowa Women’s Health Study and the Multicase-control Study in
Spain did not find any significant associations between nitrate in
drinking water and breast cancer (Espejo-Herrera et al., 2015; Inoue-
Choi et al., 2015). However, the Iowa study found a significant positive
association between higher versus lower nitrate levels among women
with adequate folate intake, which the authors hypothesize could be
related to tumor promoting actions of folate (Inoue-Choi et al., 2015).
There was no evidence of an interaction with folate in the Spain study
(Espejo-Herrera et al., 2015), where the estimated nitrate and folate
intake were both lower than in Iowa.
Disinfection byproducts and other contaminants of drinking water
remain understudied.
3.6. Organic solvents
Among 30 organic solvents known to cause mammary gland tumors
in animal studies (Rudel et al., 2007, 2014), benzene, alcohol, and
methylene chloride are well studied and may inform hypotheses about
some other solvents. Occupational use is a primary source of exposure
for methylene chloride and, historically and outside the U.S., for ben-
zene. Occupations with solvent exposure include dry cleaning, elec-
tronics manufacturing, leather and fur processing, and metal, auto,
textile, and some military work (Peplonska et al., 2010). Major addi-
tional sources of benzene include gasoline, vehicle exhaust, and tobacco
smoke (Rudel et al., 2014).
Table 4
Breast cancer-related modes of action for 3 solvents.
Solvent type
Alcohol
Aromatic hydrocarbon
Halogenated hydrocarbon
Example
Ethanol
Benzene
Methylene chloride
IARC classification and
evidence of breast
cancer
• IARC carcinogen (IARC, 2010b)
• Alcohol (ingested) increases ER+ tumors, and
consumption before first childbirth increases risk
(Liu et al., 2015b).
• Alcohol consumption increases blood estrogen
(Frydenberg et al., 2015; IARC, 2010b)
• IARC carcinogen (IARC, 2012c)
• Benzene produces increased mammary
carcinomas in many animal studies (IARC,
2012c)
• IARC possible human carcinogen (IARC, 1999)
• Inhaled methylene chloride is associated with
benign mammary tumors in rats (IARC, 1999;
NTP, 1986)
• 5 structurally similar halogenated organic
solvents also induce rodent mammary tumors
(Rudel et al., 2007)
Hypothesized modes of
action
When ingested:
• ROS formation from oxidative metabolism
by CYP2E1 (IARC, 2012c)
• CYP2E1 polymorphisms modify
relationship between air benzene and blood
micronuclei—a measure of genotoxicity
(Zhang et al., 2014).
• Possible non-classical interaction with AhR
(Badham and Winn, 2007)
• DNA damage via GST metabolism (Bruhn
et al., 1998; Hallier et al., 1994)
• The GST pathway forms formaldehyde, is
associated with DNA damage, and is influenced
by polymorphisms in GSTT1 genes (Bruhn et al.,
1998; Hallier et al., 1994).
• CYP2E1 secondary metabolic pathway (EU,
2012; U.S. EPA, 2011)
• Genotoxicity from major metabolite,
acetaldehyde, and DNA adduct formation (Y Liu
et al., 2015b)
• ROS formation from oxidative metabolism by
CYP2E1 (Liu et al., 2015b)
• Increased estrogen, possibly due to effects on
hormone homeostasis, resulting in tumor
promotion (Al-Sader et al,. 2009)
• Altered mammary gland development in rats
before first pregnancy (Liu et al., 2015b)
• Altered methylation patterns linked to folate
deficiency from chronic alcohol use (IARC,
2010b; Y Liu et al., 2015b; Seitz et al., 2012)
ROS = reactive oxygen species, IARC= International Agency for Research on Cancer, AhR = aryl hydrocarbon receptor
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
171
 3.6.1. Biological evidence
IARC classifies benzene (IARC 2012c) and ingested alcohol (IARC
2010b) as carcinogenic to humans, and methylene chloride as possibly
carcinogenic based on sufficient animal evidence and some evidence of
breast cancer (IARC, 1999). The classification for alcohol is based on
human evidence of breast, liver, and other cancers. Benzene has not
been extensively studied in women and the IARC classification is based
on leukemia, but the IOM described the association with breast cancer
as suggestive (IOM, 2012).
All three solvents are rapidly cleared and are metabolized by the P450
enzymes, particularly CYP2E1 (IARC 2010b). While many CYPs are in-
volved in hormone regulation, including CYPs induced by PAHs and di-
oxins, CYP2E1 does not have a recognized role in hormone homeostasis.
Differences in structure and biologic activity among these solvents lead to
differences in metabolism and potential carcinogenic mechanisms, and
there are important data gaps related to endocrine effects, including on the
mammary gland. The route of exposure can also influence tumorigenicity,
because first pass metabolism in the liver may make chemicals more or
less harmful, and inhaled chemicals can bypass the liver, entering the
bloodstream directly. In animals, inhaled methylene chloride results in
lung and liver cancers and benign mammary tumors, while oral exposure
studies are inconclusive (IARC, 1999). Epidemiologic studies generally
measure ingested alcohol, while methylene chloride and benzene are
usually inhaled. The hypothesized breast cancer mechanisms for each of
the three solvents are summarized in Table 4.
Overall, solvents may act throughout the life course to create ge-
netic damage by the activity of their metabolites. Although mechanistic
studies of solvents have not focused on the breast, we anticipate that
these pathways are likely to be active in the breast as well.
3.6.2. Epidemiological studies
Since 2006, epidemiological studies added to earlier evidence of an
association between organic solvents and breast cancer when exposure
was earlier in life and/or of longer duration (Brody et al., 2007). Most
studies of solvents – other than alcohol consumption – investigated
mixtures in occupational settings assessed from detailed interviews
(Table S10).
Several studies reported increased risk of breast cancer with solvent
exposure in the early reproductive years. The Sister Study found a
significant positive trend in breast cancer risk with increasing duration
of solvent work before first childbirth (p = 0.04) and an increased risk
of ER+ tumors among women ever vs never exposed during this
window (HR, 1.39; 95% CI: 1.03–1.86) (Ekenga et al., 2014). Studies
that examined “ever” exposure to solvents before first childbirth (Glass
et al., 2015) or duration of exposure before age 36 (Labreche et al.,
2010) also reported suggestive positive findings, and Labreche et al.
(2010) found a significant association between exposure before age 36
and ER+/PR- tumors. Overall, ever/never solvent use was only weakly
associated with breast cancer in the Sister Study (OR, 1.1; 95% CI:
0.9–1.3) (Ekenga et al., 2015a), highlighting the importance of con-
sidering timing and duration of exposure, and tumor subtypes.
Changing regulations created distinctive exposure scenarios in some
studies. Sung et al. (2007) reported that female workers in a solvent-
contaminated Taiwan electronics factory had an elevated rate of breast
cancer compared to the general population (SIR, 1.68; 95% CI:
1.11–2.42). Though the study is limited by lack of formal control for
breast cancer risk factors, it provides a unique natural experiment; risk
was significantly elevated among women employed before June 20,
1974, when solvent use became regulated, but not among those em-
ployed after the regulation. Based on factory records, the authors be-
lieve that trichloroethylene (TCE) was the main solvent affected by the
1974 regulation (Sung et al., 2007). Similarly, in the U.S., the Sister
Study observed elevated ER+ breast cancer risk (HR, 1.28; 95% CI:
1.01 – 1.62) among women who first worked at a job with solvent
exposure before 1980 and no association for later years, which could
reflect the impact of regulatory change in the 1970s (Ekenga et al.,
2014).
In addition to the findings for ER+ tumors and exposure in early
adulthood described above, Glass et al. (2015) found higher odds of ER
+ tumors considering self-reported ‘ever vs never’ occupational ex-
posure to solvents in Australia. Conversely, in a Polish population-based
study, Peplonska et al. (2010) reported a significant association be-
tween > 10 years solvent exposure and ER-/PR- tumors but not other
subtypes, suggesting a mechanism other than hormonal tumor promo-
tion. Analyses stratified by menopausal status showed a significant
trend in risk of breast cancer diagnosis with increasing duration of
exposure to organic solvents among premenopausal (p = 0.026) but
not postmenopausal women in the Polish study (Peplonska et al., 2010),
and non-significantly elevated ORs for benzene, aromatic solvents,
aliphatic compounds and chlorinated solvents among premenopausal
women in the Australia study (Glass et al., 2015).
Other investigations of occupational exposure to specific solvents –
benzene, TCE, methylene chloride – tended to be limited by (1) the use
of breast cancer mortality as an indicator of disease, which is not a
sensitive measure of incidence given high survival rates for some breast
cancer sub-types; (2) lack of control for confounding; and (3) using the
general population as a comparison group (See Table S10). The ex-
ception was a study by Oddone et al. (2014), which limited the analysis
of TCE exposure in an Italian electrical manufacturing cohort to blue
collar workers, and found elevated odds of breast cancer among women
who ever worked with TCE (OR among women who worked at the
factory for 10+ years, 2.10; 95% CI: 1.21, 3.66).
Two studies evaluated solvents in drinking water, which includes
ingestion, dermal contact, and inhalation exposure pathways. Gallagher
et al. (2011) updated previous exposure estimates (Aschengrau et al.,
1998) from tetrachloroethylene-contaminated drinking water on Cape
Cod, MA, with an improved water flow model, and again observed
elevated risk among women with high tetrachloroethylene (PCE) ex-
posure (OR, 1.3; 95% CI: 0.9–1.9). Ruckart et al. (2015) reported a non-
significant elevated risk of breast cancer among male Marines ever
stationed at Camp Lejeune during a period when water serving the base
was contaminated with TCE, PCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene. Sug-
gestive positive associations were found for high cumulative exposure
to PCE, 1,2 dichloroethylene (DCE), and vinyl chloride. The PCE finding
is limited by the small number of highly-exposed participants (n, 10).
Four of the studies of occupational solvents considered alcohol con-
sumption because of recognized interactions between these exposures,
especially via CYP2E1. Among women ever exposed to any organic sol-
vents or to benzene specifically, Peplonska et al. (2010) found no sig-
nificant difference in ORs in women who had ever versus never consumed
alcohol. Two studies adjusted for alcohol consumption (Labreche et al.,
2010; Oddone et al., 2014), while Glass et al. (2015) found no difference
in the effect estimate for solvent exposure when controlling for alcohol
consumption so did not include it in the final model.
3.7. Occupation
Job histories in combination with exposure matrices that link jobs to
chemicals can be used to reconstruct occupational exposures to some
chemicals or mixtures. Job titles are often used as proxies for exposure
to all of the chemicals in a particular workplace; this helps address
concerns about studying individual chemicals independently when we
know that exposures are often concurrent (Braun et al., 2016). Table 5
includes toxicologically relevant information about five chemicals or
chemical groups (ethylene oxide, styrene, 1,3-butadiene, aromatic
amines, acrylamide) with occupational exposures that we have not yet
discussed. We also report on occupations with potential exposures to
chemicals previously discussed in this review.
3.7.1. Epidemiological studies
Most studies of job titles and breast cancer in the last 10 years ad-
dressed some earlier methodological concerns: New studies controlled
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
172
 for confounding by reproductive risk factors, collected job histories
from participants rather than employment records, and focused on in-
cidence rather than mortality, which is not a sensitive indicator of
disease risk (Brody et al., 2007). However, low statistical power due to
small numbers of women in particular job sectors remains an important
limitation. In addition, variation in job title coding limits comparisons
of consistency across broad job surveys (defined here as studies ana-
lyzing > 10 job categories/industries). In studies with comparisons to
the general population, true associations between jobs and breast
cancer may be underestimated as a result of the healthy worker effect.
Here we report on ten studies of occupational exposure to chemicals not
previously discussed, and ten job title studies, most of which were
broad surveys. Seven studies did not meet our criteria for discussion
(Table S11).
3.7.1.1. Work with ethylene oxide. A retrospective study in a cohort of
Swedish sterilant workers at medical equipment plants indicated a
possible dose response with ethylene oxide (EtO) and breast cancer:
women with medium exposure had an elevated IRR of 2.76 (95% CI
1.20–6.33), and women with the highest cumulative exposure had an
IRR of 3.55 (95% CI 1.58–7.93), compared to women with lowest
cumulative exposure (Mikoczy et al., 2011). In a broad job survey,
Peplonska et al. (2007) reported null results for ever versus never
exposure to EtO (OR, 0.9; 95% CI: 0.6–1.4). Several investigators
reported associations between breast cancer and work in healthcare,
where potential exposures include ethylene oxide, solvents, therapeutic
agents, shift work, and ionizing radiation. Studies observed positive
associations for female nurses (Kjaer and Hansen, 2009; Santi et al.,
2015; Villeneuve et al., 2011), medical and health care workers (Ji
et al., 2008), and among males in health and social work (8 exposed
cases) (Villeneuve et al., 2010). Peplonska et al. (2007) also found
higher odds of breast cancer for female nurses in specialty hospitals (OR
= 2.2; 95% CI: 1.1 – 4.6) but not for registered nurses overall.
3.7.1.2. Work with styrene and 1,3-butadiene. Only one study measured
occupational exposure to styrene and butadiene; other studies in the
rubber industry used job titles or estimated exposure to other agents. In
a cohort of eight North American rubber manufacturing plants, women
with the highest cumulative exposures to styrene and to butadiene had
elevated breast cancer mortality (OR for 1,3 butadiene, 1.9; 95% CI:
0.8–4.4; OR for styrene, 1.5; 95% CI: 0.6–3.4; both based on 9 breast
cancer deaths in the high exposed group) compared to women with no
exposure (Sathiakumar and Delzell, 2009). Because styrene and 1,3
butadiene are correlated in this industry, the authors did not attempt to
model independent effects of these chemicals. The lack of control for
breast cancer risk factors is a concern for this analysis because the
comparison group is the general population. Additional evidence for the
rubber industry included a significant trend in breast cancer mortality
across quartiles of cumulative exposure to aromatic amines in a rubber
tire manufacturing plant, based on 11 breast cancer deaths (de Vocht
et al., 2008). Findings across job title studies were generally positive
but not significant, with elevated odds for work in the manufacture of
plastic and rubber products, (Ji et al., 2008; Villeneuve et al., 2011),
including in a male cohort (6 exposed cases) (Villeneuve et al., 2010).
Table 5
Additional chemicals with occupational exposure and biological evidence relevant to breast cancer.
Chemical
Sources of Exposure
Biological evidence
Ethylene oxide
• Occ: Work in healthcare and industrial settings, where EtO is used as a
sterilant; work in the production of a variety of consumer goods (e.g. textiles,
plasticizers, solvents, cosmetics, soaps, and glycol ethers) (IARC, 2008)
• GP: low levels through contact with sterilized products, including medical
products, cosmetics, tobacco smoke, and food (NTP, 2016b)
• IARC and NTP carcinogen based on evidence of lymphatic tumors in
humans, mixed evidence of hematopoietic and breast cancer in humans,
and evidence of mammary gland tumors in animals following inhalation
(IARC, 2008; NTP, 2016b)
• Direct alkylating agent, forms DNA and hemoglobin adducts in animals and
is genotoxic and mutagenic
• In humans, EtO produced from endogenous ethylene forms DNA adducts,
but evidence for DNA adduct formation from exogenous EtO exposure is
weak (IARC, 2008)
• Primarily eliminated via hydrolysis to ethylene glycol; further metabolism
of ethylene glycol may produce another agent, glycoaldehyde, with DNA-
damaging potential
• GST is the secondary metabolic pathway (IARC, 2008)
Styrene
• Occ: Work in plastics and synthetic rubber production as well as work with
styrene-containing products such as paints and adhesives (IARC, 2002; NTP,
2016b)
• GP: Cigarettes, vehicle exhaust, building materials and consumer products
(NTP, 2016b)
• IARC human carcinogen with mixed findings for mammary tumors in
animals (IARC, 2002)
• Genotoxic actions may be driven by DNA adduct formation by its primary
metabolite, styrene-7,8-oxide via CYP2E1 metabolism (IARC, 2002; NTP,
2016b)
1,3-Butadiene
• Occ: Work in petroleum refining, manufacture of rubber and plastic products
(IARC, 2012b; NTP, 2016b)
• GP: Gasoline, vehicle exhaust, cigarettes, heating of certain cooking oils (e.g.
canola oil) (NTP, 2016b)
• IARC and NTP carcinogen based on haematolymphatic malignancies in
humans with evidence for mammary tumors (malignant and benign) in
animals following inhalation (IARC, 2012a; NTP, 2016b)
• Metabolism by CYP2E1, GST and EH-catalyzed hydrolysis pathways
involves formation of epoxide intermediates – epoxybutene, diepoxybutane
and epoxybutanediol – that are genotoxic and can form DNA adducts
(IARC, 2012a; NTP, 2016b)
Aromatic amines • Occ: Used in production of food packaging, dyes, rubber, inks, textiles, paints,
uncured polyurethane foam, spray-in insulation, sealants and coatings (NLM,
2017; NTP, 2016b)
• GP: paints, hair and textile dyes, breast implants, tobacco smoke (NTP, 2016b)
• 15 aromatic amines produce mammary gland tumors in rodent cancer
bioassays (Rudel et al,. 2014)
Acrylamide
• Occ: Work in paper making, wastewater treatment, & production of permanent
press fabrics (NTP, 2016b)
• GP: Food packaging (paper and adhesives), heating of starchy foods, tobacco
smoke, wastewater treatment byproducts, and some consumer products (NTP,
2016b)
• IARC possible human carcinogen based on DNA damage in humans and
animals and genetic mutations in animals (IARC, 1994)
• Produces mammary tumors in female rats with chronic oral exposure
• Partially metabolized via cytochrome P450 to produce glycidamide, a
mutagenic metabolite. Glycidamide forms DNA adducts and glycidamide
and acrylamide both form hemoglobin adducts, leading to genotoxic action
(IARC, 1994)
Occ = occupational exposure, GP = general population exposure, IARC = International Agency for Research on Cancer, NTP = National Toxicology Program, EtO = ethylene oxide,
GST = Glutathione S-transferase, EH = epoxide hydrolase
Chemicals included in this table were not reviewed prior to Section 3.7 and have relevant occupational exposures.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
173
 However, one study found no increased risk for rubber and plastics
manufacturing work (Peplonska et al., 2007).
3.7.1.3. Work with aromatic amines. A population based case-control
study in Germany assessed exposure to aromatic and heterocyclic
amines from self-reported work with film development, the rubber
industry, hair dyes, leather, textiles, paper, painting, and tar (Rabstein
et al., 2010). The study found non-significant positive associations for
ER+ and PR+ breast cancers. This also adds to the evidence of
increased breast cancer mortality with aromatic amine exposure in
rubber manufacturing (Section 3.7.1.2).
3.7.1.4. Work with acrylamide and other acrylamide exposure. A few
studies had positive findings for acrylamide. One study of job titles
observed significantly higher odds of breast cancer in the paper
industry, which is a source of acrylamide exposure (Oddone et al.,
2013). In the prospective, population-based Danish Diet Cancer and
Health study, increasing levels of acrylamide-hemoglobin (AA-Hb)
adducts in blood measured in postmenopausal women 0–7 years
before diagnosis were associated with increased risk of ER+ breast
cancer, with a suggestion of higher risk among smokers (Olesen et al.,
2008), and with worse survival among non-smokers with ER+ breast
cancer (Olsen et al., 2012). However, hemoglobin adducts represent
recent exposure and are not source-specific. Adduct levels measured in
workers,
mostly
men,
in
acrylamide
manufacturing
(up
to
34,000 pmol/g) or work with grout (up to 17,000 pmol/g) (NTP,
2016b) are much higher than those reported in the Danish study
(95th percentile for non-smokers: 137 pmol/g, for smokers: 389 pmol/
g) (Olsen et al., 2012), so studying acrylamide in female workers could
be more informative than in a general population.
3.7.1.5. Work in various industries. Among broad job surveys, Brophy
et al.’s (2012) large, population-based case control study in Ontario,
Canada, employed the most comprehensive exposure assessment,
including consideration of biological features relevant to breast
cancer. Specifically, the authors analyzed breast cancer in relation to
estimated exposure (high, medium, or low) in particular job sectors and
in sub-analyses stratified by windows of susceptibility, menopausal
status, and tumor subtypes. Analysis of eight “major” job sectors
showed significantly higher odds of breast cancer for women working
at least 10 years in high-exposure jobs in farming (OR, 1.34; 95% CI:
1.03–1.74), plastics (OR, 2.43; 95% CI: 1.39–4.22), and metalworking
(OR, 1.73, 95% CI: 1.02–2.92). Additional support for risk associated
with farming came from studies that found significant positive
associations for work in agriculture, as well as work in healthcare or
auto manufacturing following previous work in agriculture (Brophy
et al., 2006); work on a cotton plantation (4 exposed cases), and as a
technician in agriculture, engineering, and forestry (Ji et al., 2008);
and, among men, work in forestry or logging (7 exposed cases)
(Villeneuve et al., 2010). Studies that included jobs or agents related
to metalworking found significant positive associations for work with
soldering material (Ekenga et al., 2015a), work as welders, pipeline
workers, and metal installers (7 exposed cases) (Ji et al., 2008). No
increase
in
breast
cancer
mortality
was
found
for
an
internal
comparison of work with oil-based or water-based metal working
fluids (Friesen et al., 2012). These findings add to earlier evidence for
increased breast cancer risk for farming occupations and for exposure to
metalworking fluids, cited in our previous review (Brody et al., 2007).
Considering more specific “minor” job sectors, Brophy et al. (2012)
reported higher odds of breast cancer for women working at least 10
years in high-exposure jobs in the canning industry, which the authors
state is associated with BPA inhalation. Ji et al. (2008) also found a
significant positive association with canning, pickling, and preserved
food workers (4 exposed cases) in the Shanghai Women’s Health Study.
Brophy et al. (2012) found increased breast cancer odds with plastics-
related work in the auto industry, and in small enterprise auto industry.
Other findings relevant to work in the auto industry included sig-
nificantly higher odds of breast cancer among men ever employed as
motor vehicle mechanics and in sale and repair of motor vehicles
(Villeneuve et al., 2010) and significantly elevated risk with more than
10 years in motor vehicle and trailer manufacturing (Villeneuve et al.,
2011). Work in the auto industry has many possible exposures, in-
cluding gasoline and petroleum products, which could involve benzene,
PAHs, and air pollutants, for which we have already discussed me-
chanistic hypotheses (See Section 3.6 and Section 3.3). The Sister Study
found a positive association for breast cancer with high compared to
low exposure to gasoline or other petroleum products (OR = 2.5; 95%
CI: 1.1–5.9) (Ekenga et al., 2015a).
Brophy et al.’s (2012) additional analyses by time period of ex-
posure suggested that associations for plastics work in the auto in-
dustry, metalworking, and canning were stronger for cumulative ex-
posure during the window between menarche and first pregnancy than
in subsequent periods. The odds ratio during this period was significant
only for plastics workers, and a test of trend across time periods was not
reported. Additional analyses suggested that the associations might be
specific to tumor sub-type (canning: ER+/PR- and ER- tumors; me-
talworking: ER+/PR+ tumors; plastics: ER+/PR+ tumors; farming:
ER- tumors), though confidence intervals were wide. Odds ratios for
canning and plastics appeared to be higher among premenopausal than
postmenopausal women.
Several studies considered exposures in the textile industry, in-
cluding solvents, dyes, stain-resistant treatments and flame retardant
chemicals (Liu et al., 2014; Singh and Chadha, 2016). Studies that
quantified occupational exposure found significantly or nearly sig-
nificantly elevated odds of breast cancer for high exposure to dyes and
inks (Ekenga et al., 2015a); lifetime exposure to inks, and exposure to
inks before age 36 (Labreche et al., 2010); lifetime exposure to acrylic
and rayon fibers (Labreche et al., 2010); exposure before age 36 to wool
and nylon fibers (Labreche et al., 2010); initiation of work in tailoring
and sewing > 20 years before diagnosis (9 exposed cases) (Ji et al.,
2008); and for less than 10 years of exposure to wool fibers, 10–20
years of exposure to mixed fibers, and 10–20 years of cutting and
sewing work (Ray et al., 2007). Conversely, when Ray et al. (2007)
estimated exposure to cotton dust in a cohort of textile workers in
Shanghai, they observed a protective effect, particularly when allowing
for a 20 year lag. They also reported a protective association with en-
dotoxin, a bacterial contaminant of cotton dust, and hypothesized that
their findings could reflect endotoxin’s induction of an inflammatory
response that may inhibit proliferation of cancer cells. Across broad
surveys, statistically significant positive associations included work in
the textile industry (Oddone et al., 2013; Shaham et al., 2006) and
among textile, apparel, and furnishing machine operators and tenders
and hand sewing occupations (Peplonska et al., 2007). Two studies
reported non-significant positive associations for spinning and weaving
(Peplonska et al., 2007; Villeneuve et al., 2011).
Several occupations involving chemicals relevant to breast cancer
had statistically significant positive findings in just one study; while
these could be chance findings, they give some information about
possibly promising areas for future study. Such hypothesis-generating
findings included elevated breast cancer odds ratios for male painters (7
exposed
cases)
and
furniture
manufacturers
(9
exposed
cases)
(Villeneuve et al., 2010); for women ever employed in non-metallic
mineral manufacturing or chemical manufacturing (Villeneuve et al.,
2011); printing machine operators and tenders (Peplonska et al., 2007);
and electrical manufacturing (Oddone et al., 2014). A study of career
firefighters by Daniels et al. (2014) did not meet our inclusion criteria
for this review because these authors did not control for confounding in
their comparison to the general population (see Table 1); however,
their finding of increased breast cancer incidence and mortality among
career female firefighters should be a focus of further study given the
many breast cancer-relevant exposures, including PAHs, combustion
byproducts, flame retardants and PFASs.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
174
 4. Conclusion
4.1. Strength of epidemiologic evidence
New epidemiological studies add to evidence that EDCs and che-
micals that are mammary carcinogens in animal models influence the
risk of breast cancer. Increased breast cancer risk was observed in key
studies of exposure during breast development to PAHs and air pollu-
tion, DDT, dioxins and PFOSA, and occupational exposure to solvents
and other agents. Contributions in the past decade include the devel-
opment and maturation of several cohorts with prospective assessment
of exposures during relevant windows of susceptibility, assessment of
individual-level residential and occupational histories related to ex-
posure, and, in two studies, the use of a functional assay for estro-
genicity to account for chemical mixtures.
Four notable studies – three focused on exposure in early life and
one that uses a functional assay – provide evidence that exposure to
persistent EDCs is associated with breast cancer. 1) The CHDS linked
exposures to constituents of DDT and PCBs to later breast cancer out-
comes in two generations (Cohn et al., 2007, 2012, 2015). 2) The
Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC) reported that higher blood
PFOSA during early pregnancy was significantly associated with breast
cancer before age 40 (Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al., 2014). 3) Women who
were under 40 years old at the time of the 1976 Seveso dioxin explosion
and had higher blood levels of TCDD had significantly higher breast
cancer risk after 11–20 years of follow up (Warner et al., 2011). 4)
Increased breast cancer risk was observed with increasing levels of
xenoestrogen burden in serum at diagnosis, measured as estrogenic
activity in cell culture (Pastor-Barriuso et al., 2016).
Among LIBCSP women, genetic variants appear to modify the as-
sociation between PAH-DNA adduct levels and breast cancer, particu-
larly genes associated with DNA repair and apoptotic signaling. To
evaluate the reproducibility and relevance of these observations, the
EPIC cohort and other cohorts with archived biological samples could
measure PAH-specific (rather than bulky) DNA adducts and consider
effect modification by genetic variants, as well as menopausal status
and tumor sub-types.
Case-control studies of modeled traffic-related or occupational ex-
posure to air pollution provide evidence of increased risk, including
studies that considered early life exposures and menopausal status.
However, findings were mostly null in several prospective cohorts,
possibly because they used different methods to estimate air pollution,
or because they did not evaluate early life exposure or menopausal
status.
Since our 2007 review, the strength of evidence increased for higher
breast cancer risk from solvents, particularly from exposure in younger
women and for longer periods of time. Future studies of solvents – and
other agents that are metabolized by CYP2E1 – should consider effect
modification from alcohol consumption, as well as CYP, and, when
relevant, GST gene variants. Evaluating whether endogenous estrogen
levels are affected by solvent exposure could also help elucidate me-
chanisms.
In occupational studies, associations with breast cancer were ob-
served for many specific agents and for job classifications that involve
exposure to mammary carcinogens or EDCs. Elevated risks were seen
with exposure to aromatic amines (de Vocht et al., 2008), ethylene
oxide (Mikoczy et al., 2011), dyes/inks (Ekenga et al., 2015a) and
petroleum/gasoline (Ekenga et al., 2015a; Labreche et al., 2010; Rai
et al., 2016). Additionally, exposures before age 36 to solvents, textiles,
and inks were associated with postmenopausal breast cancer (Labreche
et al., 2010). Higher risk occupations with plausible mammary carci-
nogen or EDC exposure included: farming (Brophy et al., 2006, 2012; Ji
et al., 2008), plastics (Brophy et al., 2012), metal work (Brophy et al.,
2012), automotive work (Brophy et al., 2012; Villeneuve et al., 2010,
2011), textiles (Peplonska et al., 2007; Ray et al., 2007; Shaham et al.,
2006), healthcare (Ji et al., 2008; Kjaer and Hansen, 2009; Santi et al.,
2015), chemical, mineral product, and motor vehicle manufacturing
(Villeneuve et al., 2011) and rubber manufacturing (Villeneuve et al.,
2010).
We were unable, however, to draw conclusions about the strength of
evidence for tumor promotion from studies of persistent EDCs measured
later in life. Despite appropriate control for confounding and adequate
exposure measurements, most studies did not distinguish pre- from
post-menopausal cancers, and among those that did, differences in the
particular measures analyzed (e.g. individual PCB congener vs grouping
vs total PCBs) and in the methods used to control for lipids hindered
comparison across studies. Similarly, while there is animal evidence of
mammary gland developmental disruption for several current use pes-
ticides and consumer product chemicals, few of the epidemiologic
studies we reviewed were both free of serious methodologic limitations
and designed to capture a relevant window of exposure. It will be in-
formative to follow the DNBC and Sister Study, which have prospective
measures of exposure (biological and self-report, respectively) to con-
sumer product chemicals.
The overall body of evidence is strengthened by the consistency
between experimental studies and epidemiology. For example, human
studies of dioxin and DDT that had long follow-up and captured ex-
posure during periods of breast development complement animal stu-
dies that show alterations in the mammary gland from early exposure to
these chemicals. Animal evidence for dioxin also indicates increased
susceptibility of the mammary gland to carcinogens after early ex-
posure, but this effect has not been investigated for DDT. PAHs, air
pollution, solvents, and additional occupational exposures are both
carcinogenic and hormonally active. Based on carcinogenicity, we ex-
pect effects of early life exposure and interactions with cell-repair
genes, and positive associations consistent with these hypotheses were
reported in human studies in the past decade. Predictions based on the
hormonal activity of these exposures are less clear, because different
chemicals within the mixtures have different mechanistic effects.
4.2. Research needs
Research needs include continued support of unique cohorts with
prospective exposure measurements from early life; some of these co-
horts are young, so further follow-up is likely to be informative.
Shorter-term studies that focus on particular windows of susceptibility
and use intermediate effect markers such as puberty timing, breast
density, lactation, or omics outcomes can help address barriers related
to the long latency of breast cancer and provide further insight about
underlying breast cancer mechanisms. The NIEHS Breast Cancer and
the Environment Research Program is an example of this approach and
is strengthened by inclusion of parallel studies in experimental models
and humans (NIEHS BCERP). Our review adds confidence that experi-
mental toxicology can guide epidemiologic study design, including the
choice of chemicals, exposure biomarkers, windows of susceptibility,
and genetic polymorphisms.
We noted several areas for improvement for cohort and other stu-
dies. While occupational exposure assessments have improved, more
appropriate comparison groups are needed to avoid confounding by
differences in baseline risk between exposed and unexposed popula-
tions. Further, the lack of consistency in the approach to confounder
control and results presentation across studies is a significant barrier to
integrating knowledge across studies. Only a few studies, including the
Sister Study (Ekenga et al., 2014, 2015a; Niehoff et al., 2016) and
LIBCSP (Mordukhovich et al., 2010, 2016a, 2016b; Parada et al.,
2016a, 2016b; White et al., 2013, 2014), explicitly used a priori
knowledge and hypotheses about underlying causal structures to select
confounders to include in models. In contrast, most studies selected
confounders based on statistical criteria (e.g. the “10% rule”), which
can increase rather than control bias, in either direction (Hernan et al.,
2002). One important example is the consideration of lipids in analyses
of chemicals in blood that partition to fat, such as the persistent EDCs.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
175
 As reviewed by O’Brien et al. (2017), simulation studies demonstrate
the potential impact of the decision to control for lipids and the choice
of method for control; for example, in Schisterman et al.’s (2005)
analysis, the commonly employed lipid standardization method was
prone to bias under all but one possible causal model. It is thus essential
that investigators consider and communicate what they hypothesize to
be the underlying model. It would also be helpful if studies that choose
to normalize their chemical concentrations to lipid levels present the
non-standardized measures as well. A similar issue arises in reports of
gene-environment interactions, where different choices for the re-
ference group can hinder comparisons. Knol and VanderWeele (2012)
provide excellent advice for standardizing presentation of interaction
analyses.
One important barrier to progress is that many exposures are
complex mixtures of chemicals that have varied biological activities, for
example PCBs and PAHs. Commonly-used summary exposure bio-
markers can be difficult to interpret, because variation between study
participants can reflect different exposure sources (representing dif-
ferent mixtures), varied time since exposure, and/or individual varia-
tion in chemical metabolism. Studies of gene-environment interactions
can clarify effects of variation in metabolism. Studies that separate
participants with different types of exposures (e.g., tobacco use versus
air pollution) allow investigation of more homogenous mixtures and
may yield more consistent results. An alternative approach is to use
measures that represent a relevant biological activity across multiple
chemicals, for example estrogenic activity or DNA damage. Two studies
reviewed here were the first to use this approach in blood, measuring
estrogenic activity in the non-polar fraction that does not include en-
dogenous estrogens (Bonefeld-Jorgensen et al., 2011; Pastor-Barriuso
et al., 2016). This innovation generates new questions about the in-
terpretation of high or low estrogenic activity in blood, and methods to
measure other types of activity are also needed. Indeed, an approach
that integrates biologically similar effects in common mixtures is an
NIEHS priority (Carlin et al., 2013). Recent results suggest that some
carcinogens, such as ionizing radiation and tobacco smoke, appear to
produce a distinctive mutation signature in the tumor that can be dis-
cerned with DNA sequencing (Alexandrov et al., 2016; Behjati et al.,
2016), and these signatures may be useful for retrospective exposure
assessment or translation from animals to humans.
Challenges in epidemiology also highlight the need for better che-
mical testing and risk assessment approaches that are relevant to breast
cancer, so we can predict increased risks and reduce exposures. Recent
papers describing biological characteristics of carcinogens (Smith et al.,
2016) and breast carcinogens (Schwarzman et al., 2015) represent
important new work in this area. As noted in this review, effects on
mammary gland development have been reported as the most sensitive
effect in animal studies for PFOA, chlorpyrifos, and atrazine, yet EPA
risk assessments did not use these findings because of methodological
questions (U.S. EPA 2006c, 2014, 2016a; Ventura et al., 2016), raising
concern that the EPA assessments are not protective for mammary
gland effects. Developing methods to assess effects on mammary gland
development is a critical research and policy need (Rudel et al., 2011a;
Tucker et al., 2015).
4.3. Public health implications
Because breast cancer is so common and incidence is increasing as
countries industrialize worldwide, risks from widespread exposure to
environmental chemicals pose an important public health problem,
even if the increased individual risks are modest (Bellinger, 2012). New
human evidence supports exposure reduction for air pollutants, organic
solvents and other chemicals that are mammary gland carcinogens in
animal models. While DDT and PCBs have been mostly phased out and
blood levels are falling, the evidence that past exposures during early
life contribute to later breast cancers suggests precaution in the use of
other
chemicals
that
disrupt
mammary
gland
development
in
toxicological studies. A precautionary approach is especially important
because study methods are limited, short of a 50-year study, to evaluate
the life-long risks to humans from these chemicals – including in-
gredients in current-use consumer products. Epidemiological evidence
continues to support the recommendations of the IOM and IBCERCC
that developing in vitro and in vivo chemical screening tests is a
priority to inform decisions about chemical use (IBCERCC, 2013; IOM,
2012). The parallels between epidemiological and toxicological evi-
dence also strengthen confidence that experimental evidence can guide
public health decisions when human evidence is not available. Further,
because replication of epidemiologic findings for environmental che-
micals and breast cancer is often not possible, public health decisions
should give increased weight to the few studies, such as the CHDS, that
have appropriate biological samples, the ability to capture windows for
breast development, participant
information to control for con-
founding, and long-term follow up.
Funding
This work was funded by charitable gifts to Silent Spring Institute
and grants from Avon Foundation for Women (Grant Nos. 05-2016-023,
02-2015-027, and 1068-10).
Acknowledgments
We thank Stephanie Chan, Tara Krishna, and Sophie Freije for
searching and reviewing epidemiological articles.
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the
online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.08.045.
References
Abstrackr. Available: 〈http://abstrackr.cebm.brown.edu/〉 [accessed 1 Aug 2016.
Acevedo, N., Davis, B., Schaeberle, C.M., Sonnenschein, C., Soto, A.M., 2013. Perinatally
administered bisphenol a as a potential mammary gland carcinogen in rats. Environ
Health Perspect 121, 1040–1046.
Adami, H., Hunter, D.J., Trichopoulos, D., 2008. Textbook of cancer epidemiology, 2nd
ed. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ahn, J., Gammon, M.D., Santella, R.M., Gaudet, M.M., Britton, J.A., Teitelbaum, S.L.,
et al., 2006. Effects of glutathione S-transferase A1 (GSTA1) genotype and potential
modifiers on breast cancer risk. Carcinogenesis 27, 1876–1882.
Al-Sader, H., Abdul-Jabar, H., Allawi, Z., Haba, Y., 2009. Alcohol and breast cancer: the
mechanisms explained. J Clin Med Res 1, 125–131.
Alexandrov, L.B., Ju, Y.S., Haase, K., Van Loo, P., Martincorena, I., Nik-Zainal, S., et al.,
2016. Mutational signatures associated with tobacco smoking in human cancer.
Science 354, 618–622.
Alonso-Magdalena, P., Ropero, A.B., Soriano, S., Garcia-Arevalo, M., Ripoll, C., Fuentes,
E., et al., 2012. Bisphenol-A acts as a potent estrogen via non-classical estrogen
triggered pathways. Mol Cell Endocrinol 355, 201–207.
Ambrosone, C.B., Abrams, S.M., Gorlewska-Roberts, K., Kadlubar, F.F., 2007. Hair dye
use, meat intake, and tobacco exposure and presence of carcinogen-DNA adducts in
exfoliated breast ductal epithelial cells. Arch Biochem Biophys 464, 169–175.
Andersen, H.R., Andersson, A.M., Arnold, S.F., Autrup, H., Barfoed, M., Beresford, N.A.,
et al., 1999. Comparison of short-term estrogenicity tests for identification of hor-
mone-disrupting chemicals. Environ Health Perspect 107 (Suppl 1), 89–108.
Arcaro, K.F., O'Keefe, P.W., Yang, Y., Clayton, W., Gierthy, J.F., 1999. Antiestrogenicity of
environmental polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in human breast cancer cells.
Toxicology 133, 115–127.
Arrebola, J.P., Belhassen, H., Artacho-Cordon, F., Ghali, R., Ghorbel, H., Boussen, H.,
et al., 2015. Risk of female breast cancer and serum concentrations of organochlorine
pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls: a case-control study in Tunisia. Sci Total
Environ 520, 106–113.
Arrebola, J.P., Fernandez-Rodriguez, M., Artacho-Cordon, F., Garde, C., Perez-Carrascosa,
F., Linares, I., et al., 2016. Associations of persistent organic pollutants in serum and
adipose tissue with breast cancer prognostic markers. Sci Total Environ 566-567,
41–49.
Aschengrau, A., Paulu, C., Ozonoff, D., 1998. Tetrachloroethylene-contaminated drinking
water and the risk of breast cancer. Environ Health Perspect 106 (Suppl 4), 947–953.
Ashley-Martin, J., VanLeeuwen, J., Cribb, A., Andreou, P., Guernsey, J.R., 2012. Breast
cancer risk, fungicide exposure and CYP1A1*2A gene-environment interactions in a
province-wide case control study in Prince Edward Island, Canada. Int J Environ Res
Public Health Vol. 9 (Part 2012/07/04), 1846–1858.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
176
 Badham, H.J., Winn, L.M., 2007. Investigating the role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
in benzene-initiated toxicity in vitro. Toxicology 229, 177–185.
Barry, V., Winquist, A., Steenland, K., 2013. Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposures and
incident cancers among adults living near a chemical plant. Environ Health Perspect
121, 1313–1318.
Behjati, S., Gundem, G., Wedge, D.C., Roberts, N.D., Tarpey, P.S., Cooke, S.L., et al., 2016.
Mutational signatures of ionizing radiation in second malignancies. Nat Commun 7,
12605.
Bellinger, D.C., 2012. A strategy for comparing the contributions of environmental che-
micals and other risk factors to neurodevelopment of children. Environ Health
Perspect 120, 501–507.
Blair, R.M., Fang, H., Branham, W.S., Hass, B.S., Dial, S.L., Moland, C.L., et al., 2000. The
estrogen receptor relative binding affinities of 188 natural and xenochemicals:
structural diversity of ligands. Toxicol Sci 54, 138–153.
Boada, L.D., Zumbado, M., Henriquez-Hernandez, L.A., Almeida-Gonzalez, M., Alvarez-
Leon, E.E., Serra-Majem, L., et al., 2012. Complex organochlorine pesticide mixtures
as determinant factor for breast cancer risk: a population-based case-control study in
the Canary Islands (Spain). Environ Health Vol. 11 (Part 2012/04/27), 28.
Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E.C., Long, M., Bossi, R., Ayotte, P., Asmund, G., Kruger, T., et al.,
2011. Perfluorinated compounds are related to breast cancer risk in Greenlandic
Inuit: a case control study. In:. Environ Health Vol. 10 (Part 2011/10/08), 88.
Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E.C., Long, M., Fredslund, S.O., Bossi, R., Olsen, J., 2014. Breast
cancer risk after exposure to perfluorinated compounds in Danish women: a case-
control study nested in the Danish National Birth Cohort. Cancer Causes Control 25,
1439–1448.
Boverhof, D.R., Kwekel, J.C., Humes, D.G., Burgoon, L.D., Zacharewski, T.R., 2006.
Dioxin induces an estrogen-like, estrogen receptor-dependent gene expression re-
sponse in the murine uterus. Mol Pharmacol 69, 1599–1606.
Braun, J.M., Gennings, C., Hauser, R., Webster, T.F., 2016. What Can Epidemiological
Studies Tell Us about the Impact of Chemical Mixtures on Human Health? Environ
Health Perspect 124, A6–9.
Braun, J.M., Smith, K.W., Williams, P.L., Calafat, A.M., Berry, K., Ehrlich, S., et al., 2012.
Variability of urinary phthalate metabolite and bisphenol A concentrations before
and during pregnancy. Environ Health Perspect 120, 739–745.
Brauner, E.V., Loft, S., Wellejus, A., Autrup, H., Tjonneland, A., Raaschou-Nielsen, O.,
2014. Adipose tissue PCB levels and CYP1B1 and COMT genotypes in relation to
breast cancer risk in postmenopausal Danish women. Int J Environ Health Res 24,
256–268.
Brighenti-Zogg, S., Mundwiler, J., Schupbach, U., Dieterle, T., Wolfer, D.P., Leuppi, J.D.,
et al., 2016. Physical Workload and Work Capacity across Occupational Groups. PLoS
One 11, e0154073.
Brisken, C., Hess, K., Jeitziner, R., 2015. Progesterone and Overlooked Endocrine
Pathways in Breast Cancer Pathogenesis. Endocrinology 156, 3442–3450.
Brody, J.G., Aschengrau, A., McKelvey, W., Swartz, C.H., Kennedy, T., Rudel, R.A., 2006.
Breast cancer risk and drinking water contaminated by wastewater: a case control
study. In:. Environ Health Vol. 5, 28.
Brody, J.G., Moysich, K.B., Humblet, O., Attfield, K.R., Beehler, G.P., Rudel, R.A., 2007.
Environmental pollutants and breast cancer: epidemiologic studies. Cancer 109,
2667–2711.
Brophy, J.T., Keith, M.M., Gorey, K.M., Luginaah, I., Laukkanen, E., Hellyer, D., et al.,
2006. Occupation and breast cancer: a Canadian case-control study. In:. Ann N Y
Acad Sci Vol. 1076, 765–777.
Brophy, J.T., Keith, M.M., Watterson, A., Park, R., Gilbertson, M., Maticka-Tyndale, E.,
et al., 2012. Breast cancer risk in relation to occupations with exposure to carcino-
gens and endocrine disruptors: a Canadian case–control study. In:. Environ Health
Vol. 11 (Part 2012/11/21), 87.
Brown, N.M., Lamartiniere, C.A., 1995. Xenoestrogens alter mammary gland differ-
entiation and cell proliferation in the rat. Environ Health Perspect 103, 708–713.
Brown, N.M., Manzolillo, P.A., Zhang, J.X., Wang, J., Lamartiniere, C.A., 1998. Prenatal
TCDD and predisposition to mammary cancer in the rat. Carcinogenesis 19,
1623–1629.
Bruhn, C., Brockmoller, J., Kerb, R., Roots, I., Borchert, H.H., 1998. Concordance between
enzyme activity and genotype of glutathione S-transferase theta (GSTT1). Biochem
Pharmacol 56, 1189–1193.
Byrne, C., Divekar, S.D., Storchan, G.B., Parodi, D.A., Martin, M.B., 2013. Metals and
breast cancer. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 18, 63–73.
Cabello, G., Valenzuela, M., Vilaxa, A., Duran, V., Rudolph, I., Hrepic, N., et al., 2001. A
rat mammary tumor model induced by the organophosphorous pesticides parathion
and malathion, possibly through acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Environ Health
Perspect 109, 471–479.
Calaf, G.M., Echiburu-Chau, C., 2012. Synergistic effect of malathion and estrogen on
mammary gland carcinogenesis. Oncol Rep 28, 640–646.
Calafat, A.M., Koch, H.M., Swan, S.H., Hauser, R., Goldman, L.R., Lanphear, B.P., et al.,
2013. Misuse of blood serum to assess exposure to bisphenol A and phthalates. Breast
Cancer Res 15, 403.
Campeau, P.M., Foulkes, W.D., Tischkowitz, M.D., 2008. Hereditary breast cancer: new
genetic developments, new therapeutic avenues. Hum Genet 124, 31–42.
Carlin, D.J., Rider, C.V., Woychik, R., Birnbaum, L.S., 2013. Unraveling the health effects
of environmental mixtures: an NIEHS priority. Environ Health Perspect 121, A6–8.
CDC.2016. Parasites - Lice - Head Lice: Treatment. Atlanta, GA:Center for Disease Control
and Prevention.〈http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/lice/head/treatment.html〉 [ac-
cessed November 22, 2016.
Cohn, B.A., La Merrill, M., Krigbaum, N.Y., Yeh, G., Park, J.-S., Zimmermann, L., et al.,
2015. DDT Exposure in Utero and Breast Cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
Cohn, B.A., Terry, M.B., Plumb, M., Cirillo, P.M., 2012. Exposure to polychlorinated bi-
phenyl (PCB) congeners measured shortly after giving birth and subsequent risk of
maternal breast cancer before age 50. Breast Cancer Res Treat 136, 267–275.
Cohn, B.A., Wolff, M.S., Cirillo, P.M., Sholtz, R.I., 2007. DDT and breast cancer in young
women: new data on the significance of age at exposure. In:. Environ Health Perspect
Vol. 115, 1406–1414.
Colerangle, J.B., Roy, D., 1997. Profound effects of the weak environmental estrogen-like
chemical bisphenol A on the growth of the mammary gland of Noble rats. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 60, 153–160.
Cooper, R.L., Stoker, T.E., Tyrey, L., Goldman, J.M., McElroy, W.K., 2000. Atrazine dis-
rupts the hypothalamic control of pituitary-ovarian function. Toxicol Sci 53,
297–307.
Crew, K.D., Gammon, M.D., Terry, M.B., Zhang, F.F., Agrawal, M., Eng, S.M., et al., 2007.
Genetic polymorphisms in the apoptosis-associated genes FAS and FASL and breast
cancer risk. In:. Carcinogenesis Vol. 28, 2548–2551.
Crew, K.D., Gammon, M.D., Terry, M.B., Zhang, F.F., Zablotska, L.B., Agrawal, M., et al.,
2007. Polymorphisms in nucleotide excision repair genes, polycyclic aromatic hy-
drocarbon-DNA adducts, and breast cancer risk. In:. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev Vol. 16, 2033–2041.
Crouse, D.L., Goldberg, M.S., Ross, N.A., Chen, H., Labreche, F., 2010. Postmenopausal
breast cancer is associated with exposure to traffic-related air pollution in Montreal,
Canada: a case-control study. In:. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 118 (Part 2010/10/
07), 1578–1583.
Daniels, R.D., Kubale, T.L., Yiin, J.H., Dahm, M.M., Hales, T.R., Baris, D., et al., 2014.
Mortality and cancer incidence in a pooled cohort of US firefighters from San
Francisco, Chicago and Philadelphia (1950-2009). Occup Environ Med 71, 388–397.
de Vocht, F., Sobala, W., Peplonska, B., Wilczynska, U., Gromiec, J., Szeszenia-
Dabrowska, N., et al., 2008. Elaboration of a quantitative job-exposure matrix for
historical exposure to airborne exposures in the Polish rubber industry. Am J Ind Med
51, 852–860.
DeCastro, B.R., Korrick, S.A., Spengler, J.D., Soto, A.M., 2006. Estrogenic activity of
polychlorinated biphenyls present in human tissue and the environment. Environ Sci
Technol 40, 2819–2825.
Dodson, R.E., Nishioka, M., Standley, L.J., Perovich, L.J., Brody, J.G., Rudel, R.A., 2012.
Endocrine disruptors and asthma-associated chemicals in consumer products.
Environ Health Perspect 120, 935–943.
Dodson, R.E., Perovich, L.J., Covaci, A., Van den Eede, N., Ionas, A.C., Dirtu, A.C., et al.,
2012. After the PBDE phase-out: a broad suite of flame retardants in repeat house
dust samples from California. Environ Sci Technol 46, 13056–13066.
Doerge, D.R., Twaddle, N.C., Vanlandingham, M., Brown, R.P., Fisher, J.W., 2011.
Distribution of bisphenol A into tissues of adult, neonatal, and fetal Sprague-Dawley
rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 255, 261–270.
Doerge, D.R., Twaddle, N.C., Woodling, K.A., Fisher, J.W., 2010. Pharmacokinetics of
bisphenol A in neonatal and adult rhesus monkeys. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 248,
1–11.
Ekenga, C.C., Parks, C.G., D'Aloisio, A.A., DeRoo, L.A., Sandler, D.P., 2014. Breast cancer
risk after occupational solvent exposure: the influence of timing and setting. Cancer
Res Vol. 74 (Part 2014/06/01), 3076–3083.
Ekenga, C.C., Parks, C.G., Sandler, D.P., 2015. Chemical exposures in the workplace and
breast cancer risk: A prospective cohort study. Int J Cancer 137, 1765–1774.
Ekenga, C.C., Parks, C.G., Sandler, D.P., 2015. A prospective study of occupational phy-
sical activity and breast cancer risk. Cancer Causes Control 26, 1779–1789.
El-Zaemey, S., Heyworth, J., Fritschi, L., 2013. Noticing pesticide spray drift from agri-
cultural pesticide application areas and breast cancer: a case-control study. Aust N Z J
Public Health Vol. 37 (Part 2014/06/04), 547–555.
El-Zaemey, S., Heyworth, J., Glass, D.C., Peters, S., Fritschi, L., 2014. Household and
occupational exposure to pesticides and risk of breast cancer. Int J Environ Health
Res 24, 91–102.
Enoch, R.R., Stanko, J.P., Greiner, S.N., Youngblood, G.L., Rayner, J.L., Fenton, S.E.,
2007. Mammary gland development as a sensitive end point after acute prenatal
exposure to an atrazine metabolite mixture in female Long-Evans rats. Environ Health
Perspect 115, 541–547.
Espejo-Herrera, N., Cantor, K.P., Malats, N., Silverman, D.T., Tardon, A., Garcia-Closas,
R., et al., 2015. Nitrate in drinking water and bladder cancer risk in Spain. Environ
Res 137, 299–307.
European Food Safety Authority, 2008. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Contaminants
in the Food chain on Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), perfluorooctanoic acid
(PFOA) and their salts. The EFSA. Journal 1–131.
European Union.2012. Opinion on Dichloromethane.〈http://ec.europa.eu/health/
scientific_committees/consumer_safety/docs/sccs_o_118.pdf〉 [accessed July 22,
2014.
Fabjan, E., Hulzebos, E., Mennes, W., Piersma, A.H., 2006. A category approach for re-
productive effects of phthalates. Crit Rev Toxicol 36, 695–726.
Faggiano, F., Partanen, T., Kogevinas, M., Boffetta, P., 1997. Socioeconomic differences in
cancer incidence and mortality. IARC Sci Publ 65–176.
Farooq, U., Joshi, M., Nookala, V., Cheriyath, P., Fischman, D., Graber, N.J., et al., 2010.
Self-reported exposure to pesticides in residential settings and risk of breast cancer: a
case-control study. Environ Health Vol. 9, 30.
Fielden, M.R., Fong, C.J., Haslam, S.Z., Zacharewski, T.R., 2002. Normal mammary gland
morphology in pubertal female mice following in utero and lactational exposure to
genistein at levels comparable to human dietary exposure. Toxicol Lett 133, 181–191.
FIFRA. 2000. Atrazine: Hazard and Dose-Response Assessment and Characterization.
Arlington:Environmental Protection Agency. 〈http://www.epa.gov/scipoly/sap/
meetings/2000/june27/finalatrazine.pdf〉.
Forouzanfar, M.H., Foreman, K.J., Delossantos, A.M., Lozano, R., Lopez, A.D., Murray,
C.J., et al., 2011. Breast and cervical cancer in 187 countries between 1980 and 2010:
a systematic analysis. Lancet 378, 1461–1484.
Freels S, Chary LK, Turyk M, Piorkowski J, Mallin K, Dimos J, et al. 2007. Congener
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
177
 profiles of occupational PCB exposure versus PCB exposure from fish consumption.
Friesen, M.C., Betenia, N., Costello, S., Eisen, E.A., 2012. Metalworking fluid exposure
and cancer risk in a retrospective cohort of female autoworkers. Cancer Causes
Control 23, 1075–1082.
Frydenberg, H., Flote, V.G., Larsson, I.M., Barrett, E.S., Furberg, A.S., Ursin, G., et al.,
2015. Alcohol consumption, endogenous estrogen and mammographic density
among premenopausal women. Breast Cancer Res 17, 103.
Gallagher, L.G., Vieira, V.M., Ozonoff, D., Webster, T.F., Aschengrau, A., 2011. Risk of
breast cancer following exposure to tetrachloroethylene-contaminated drinking
water in Cape Cod, Massachusetts: reanalysis of a case-control study using a modified
exposure assessment. Environ Health 10, 47.
Gallagher, L.G., Webster, T.F., Aschengrau, A., Vieira, V.M., 2010. Using residential
history and groundwater modeling to examine drinking water exposure and breast
cancer. In:. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 118, 749–755.
Gammon, M.D., Sagiv, S.K., Eng, S.M., Shantakumar, S., Gaudet, M.M., Teitelbaum, S.L.,
et al., 2004. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts and breast cancer: a
pooled analysis. Arch Environ Health 59, 640–649.
Gammon, M.D., Santella, R.M., 2008. PAH, genetic susceptibility and breast cancer risk:
an update from the Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. Eur J Cancer 44,
636–640.
Gammon, M.D., Santella, R.M., Neugut, A.I., Eng, S.M., Teitelbaum, S.L., Paykin, A., et al.,
2002. Environmental toxins and breast cancer on Long Island. I. Polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon DNA adducts. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 11, 677–685.
Garcia, E., Hurley, S., Nelson, D.O., Hertz, A., Reynolds, P., 2015. Hazardous air pollu-
tants and breast cancer risk in California teachers: a cohort study. Environ Health
14, 14.
Gatto, N.M., Longnecker, M.P., Press, M.F., Sullivan-Halley, J., McKean-Cowdin, R.,
Bernstein, L., 2007. Serum organochlorines and breast cancer: a case-control study
among African-American women. In:. Cancer Causes Control Vol. 18, 29–39.
Gaudet, M.M., Gammon, M.D., Bensen, J.T., Sagiv, S.K., Shantakumar, S., Teitelbaum,
S.L., et al., 2008. Genetic variation of TP53, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-related
exposures, and breast cancer risk among women on Long Island, New York. In:.
Breast Cancer Res Treat Vol. 108, 93–99.
Gavazzoni Dias, M.F., 2015. Hair cosmetics: an overview. Int J Trichology 7, 2–15.
Ghisari, M., Eiberg, H., Long, M., Bonefeld-Jorgensen, E.C., 2014. Polymorphisms in
phase I and phase II genes and breast cancer risk and relations to persistent organic
pollutant exposure: a case-control study in Inuit women. In:. Environ Health Vol. 13
(Part 2014/03/19), 19.
Glass, D.C., Heyworth, J., Thomson, A.K., Peters, S., Saunders, C., Fritschi, L., 2015.
Occupational exposure to solvents and risk of breast cancer. Am J Ind Med 58,
915–922.
Go, V., Garey, J., Wolff, M.S., Pogo, B.G., 1999. Estrogenic potential of certain pyrethroid
compounds in the MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cell line. Environ Health Perspect
107, 173–177.
Godschalk, R.W., Van Schooten, F.J., Bartsch, H., 2003. A critical evaluation of DNA
adducts as biological markers for human exposure to polycyclic aromatic compounds.
J Biochem Mol Biol 36, 1–11.
Gray Jr., L.E., Laskey, J., Ostby, J., 2006. Chronic di-n-butyl phthalate exposure in rats
reduces fertility and alters ovarian function during pregnancy in female Long Evans
hooded rats. Toxicol Sci 93, 189–195.
Gray Jr., L.E., Ostby, J., Furr, J., Price, M., Veeramachaneni, D.N., Parks, L., 2000.
Perinatal exposure to the phthalates DEHP, BBP, and DINP, but not DEP, DMP, or
DOTP, alters sexual differentiation of the male rat. Toxicol Sci 58, 350–365.
Greenland, S., Pearl, J., Robins, J.M., 1999. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research.
Epidemiology 10, 37–48.
Gu, F., Han, J., Laden, F., Pan, A., Caporaso, N.E., Stampfer, M.J., et al., 2015. Total and
cause-specific mortality of U.S. nurses working rotating night shifts. Am J Prev Med
48, 241–252.
Hallier, E., Schroder, K.R., Asmuth, K., Dommermuth, A., Aust, B., Goergens, H.W., 1994.
Metabolism of dichloromethane (methylene chloride) to formaldehyde in human
erythrocytes: influence of polymorphism of glutathione transferase theta (GST T1-1).
Arch Toxicol 68, 423–427.
Hanahan, D., Weinberg, R.A., 2011. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 144,
646–674.
Harley, K.G., Kogut, K., Madrigal, D.S., Cardenas, M., Vera, I.A., Meza-Alfaro, G., et al.,
2016. Reducing Phthalate, Paraben, and Phenol Exposure from Personal Care
Products in Adolescent Girls: Findings from the HERMOSA Intervention Study.
Environ Health Perspect 124, 1600–1607.
Hart, J.E., Bertrand, K.A., DuPre, N., James, P., Vieira, V.M., Tamimi, R.M., et al., 2016.
Long-term Particulate Matter Exposures during Adulthood and Risk of Breast Cancer
Incidence in the Nurses' Health Study II Prospective Cohort. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 25, 1274–1276.
Harvey Cushing/John Jay Whitney Medical Library. Available: 〈http://library.medicine.
yale.edu/tutorials/577〉 [accessed 2 Dec 2016.
Hauser, R., Meeker, J.D., Park, S., Silva, M.J., Calafat, A.M., 2004. Temporal variability of
urinary phthalate metabolite levels in men of reproductive age. Environ Health
Perspect 112, 1734–1740.
Heikkinen, S., Pitkaniemi, J., Sarkeala, T., Malila, N., Koskenvuo, M., 2015. Does Hair
Dye Use Increase the Risk of Breast Cancer? A Population-Based Case-Control Study
of Finnish Women. PLoS One 10, e0135190.
Henderson, T.O., Amsterdam, A., Bhatia, S., Hudson, M.M., Meadows, A.T., Neglia, J.P.,
et al., 2010. Systematic review: surveillance for breast cancer in women treated with
chest radiation for childhood, adolescent, or young adult cancer. Ann Intern Med 152
(444-455), W144–454.
Hernan, M.A., Hernandez-Diaz, S., Werler, M.M., Mitchell, A.A., 2002. Causal knowledge
as a prerequisite for confounding evaluation: an application to birth defects
epidemiology. Am J Epidemiol 155, 176–184.
Hill, S.M., Belancio, V.P., Dauchy, R.T., Xiang, S., Brimer, S., Mao, L., et al., 2015.
Melatonin: an inhibitor of breast cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer 22, R183–204.
Holmes, A.K., Koller, K.R., Kieszak, S.M., Sjodin, A., Calafat, A.M., Sacco, F.D., et al.,
2014. Case-control study of breast cancer and exposure to synthetic environmental
chemicals among Alaska Native women. In:. Int J Circumpolar Health Vol. 73 (Part
2014/12/03), 25760.
Hoover, R.N., Hyer, M., Pfeiffer, R.M., Adam, E., Bond, B., Cheville, A.L., et al., 2011.
Adverse health outcomes in women exposed in utero to diethylstilbestrol. N Engl J
Med 365, 1304–1314.
Hovey, R.C., Asai-Sato, M., Warri, A., Terry-Koroma, B., Colyn, N., Ginsburg, E., et al.,
2005. Effects of neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol, tamoxifen, and toremifene on
the BALB/c mouse mammary gland. Biol Reprod 72, 423–435.
Hu, X.C., Andrews, D.Q., Lindstrom, A.B., Bruton, T.A., Schaider, L.A., Grandjean, P.,
et al., 2016. Detection of Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) in U.S.
Drinking Water Linked to Industrial Sites, Military Fire Training Areas, and
Wastewater Treatment Plants. Environ Sci Technol Lett 3, 344–350.
Huang, G., Guo, H., Wu, T., 2012. Genetic variations of CYP2B6 gene were associated
with plasma BPDE-Alb adducts and DNA damage levels in coke oven workers. Toxicol
Lett 211, 232–238.
Hurley, S., Reynolds, P., Goldberg, D., Nelson, D.O., Jeffrey, S.S., Petreas, M., 2011.
Adipose levels of polybrominated diphenyl ethers and risk of breast cancer. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 129, 505–511.
Hystad, P., Villeneuve, P.J., Goldberg, M.S., Crouse, D.L., Johnson, K., 2015. Exposure to
traffic-related air pollution and the risk of developing breast cancer among women in
eight Canadian provinces: A case-control study. Environ Int Vol. 74 (Part 2014/12/
03), 240–248.
IARC, 1979. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to
Humans, volume 20: Some Halogenated Hydrocarbons. International Agency for
Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈https://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/
vol1-42/mono20.pdf〉.
IARC, 1994. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 60:
Acrylamide. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈http://
monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol60/mono60-16.pdf〉.
IARC, 1999. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 71:
Dichloromethane. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.
〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol71/mono71-10.pdf〉 accessed July
22, 2014.
IARC, 2002. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 82:
Some Traditional Herbal Medicines, Some Mycotoxins, Napthalene and Styrene.
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈https://monographs.
iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol82/mono82.pdf〉.
IARC, 2008. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 97:
Ethylene Oxide. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈http://
monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol97/mono97-7.pdf〉.
IARC, 2010. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 92:
Some Non-heterocyclic Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Some Related
Exposures Lyon. International Agency for Research on Cancer, France. 〈http://
monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol92/mono92.pdf〉.
IARC, 2010. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 96:
Alcohol Consumption and Ethyl Carbamate. International Agency for Research on
Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol96/
mono96.pdf〉 accessed Jul 22, 2014 96.
IARC, 2010. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 99:
Some Aromatic Amines, Organic Dyes, and Related Exposures Lyon. International
Agency for Research on Cancer, France. 〈https://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/
Monographs/vol99/mono99.pdf〉.
IARC, 2010. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume 98:
Painting, Firefighting and Shiftwork. International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France. 〈https://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol98/mono98-8.
pdf〉.
IARC, 2012. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, vo-
lume 100F: Chemical Agents and Related Occupations. International Agency for
Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/
vol100F/mono100F.pdf〉.
IARC, 2012. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume
100F: 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzopara-dioxin, 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran,
and 3,3′,4,4′,5-pentachlorobiphenyl. International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol100F/mono100F-
27.pdf〉.
IARC, 2012. A Review of Human Carcinogens, volume 100F: Benzene. International
Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, pp. 2014. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/
ENG/Monographs/vol100F/mono100F-24.pdf〉 accessed July 22.
IARC, 2013. Agents Classified by the IARC Monographs, Volumes 1–109. International
Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/
Classification/ClassificationsAlphaOrder.pdf〉 accessed 13 Dec 2013.
IARC, 2015. Carcinogenicity of lindane, DDT, and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid.
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈https://www.iarc.fr/
en/media-centre/pr/2015/pdfs/pr236_E.pdf〉.
IARC, 2016. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume
109: Outdoor Air Pollution. International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol109/mono109.pdf〉.
IARC, 2016. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, volume
107: Polychlorinated Biphenyls and Polybrominated Biphenyls. International Agency
for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. 〈http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/
Monographs/vol107/mono107.pdf〉.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
178
 IARC, 2016. Carcinogenicity of pentachlorophenol and some related compounds.
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/S1470-2045(16)30513-7.
IBCERCC (Interagency Breast Cancer and Environmental Research Coordinating
Committee). 2013. Breast Cancer and the Environment, Prioritizing Prevention.
〈https://www.niehs.nih.gov/about/assets/docs/breast_cancer_and_the_environment_
prioritizing_prevention_508.pdf〉.
In, S.J., Kim, S.H., Go, R.E., Hwang, K.A., Choi, K.C., 2015. Benzophenone-1 and non-
ylphenol stimulated MCF-7 breast cancer growth by regulating cell cycle and me-
tastasis-related genes via an estrogen receptor alpha-dependent pathway. J Toxicol
Environ Health A 78, 492–505.
Ingber, S.Z., Buser, M.C., Pohl, H.R., Abadin, H.G., Murray, H.E., Scinicariello, F., 2013.
DDT/DDE and breast cancer: a meta-analysis. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 67, 421–433.
Inoue-Choi, M., Jones, R.R., Anderson, K.E., Cantor, K.P., Cerhan, J.R., Krasner, S., et al.,
2015. Nitrate and nitrite ingestion and risk of ovarian cancer among postmenopausal
women in Iowa. Int J Cancer 137, 173–182.
IOM, 2012. Breast Cancer and the Environment: A Life Course Approach. Institute of
Medicine, Washington, DC. 〈http://www.nap.edu/catalog/13263/breast-cancer-
and-the-environment-a-life-course-approach〉.
Itoh, H., Iwasaki, M., Hanaoka, T., Kasuga, Y., Yokoyama, S., Onuma, H., et al., 2009.
Serum organochlorines and breast cancer risk in Japanese women: a case-control
study. In:. Cancer Causes Control Vol. 20, 567–580.
Iwasaki, M., Inoue, M., Sasazuki, S., Kurahashi, N., Itoh, H., Usuda, M., et al., 2008.
Plasma organochlorine levels and subsequent risk of breast cancer among Japanese
women: a nested case-control study. In:. Sci Total Environ Vol. 402, 176–183.
Jeong, Y.C., Walker, N.J., Burgin, D.E., Kissling, G., Gupta, M., Kupper, L., et al., 2008.
Accumulation of M1dG DNA adducts after chronic exposure to PCBs, but not from
acute exposure to polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons. Free Radic Biol Med 45,
585–591.
Ji, B.T., Blair, A., Shu, X.O., Chow, W.H., Hauptmann, M., Dosemeci, M., et al., 2008.
Occupation and breast cancer risk among Shanghai women in a population-based
cohort study. In:. Am J Ind Med Vol. 51, 100–110.
Jie, X., Yang, W., Jie, Y., Hashim, J.H., Liu, X.Y., Fan, Q.Y., et al., 2010. Toxic effect of
gestational exposure to nonylphenol on F1 male rats. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod
Toxicol 89, 418–428.
Johnson, N.A., Ho, A., Cline, J.M., Hughes, C.L., Foster, W.G., Davis, V.L., 2012.
Accelerated mammary tumor onset in a HER2/Neu mouse model exposed to DDT
metabolites locally delivered to the mammary gland. Environ Health Perspect 120,
1170–1176.
Kelce, W.R., Stone, C.R., Laws, S.C., Gray, L.E., Kemppainen, J.A., Wilson, E.M., 1995.
Persistent DDT metabolite p,p'-DDE is a potent androgen receptor antagonist. Nature
375, 581–585.
Kerger, B.D., Leung, H.W., Scott, P., Paustenbach, D.J., Needham, L.L., Patterson Jr., D.G.,
et al., 2006. Age- and concentration-dependent elimination half-life of 2,3,7,8-tet-
rachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in Seveso children. Environ Health Perspect 114,
1596–1602.
Khanjani, N., Hoving, J.L., Forbes, A.B., Sim, M.R., 2007. Systematic review and meta-
analysis of cyclodiene insecticides and breast cancer. J Environ Sci Health C Environ
Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev 25, 23–52.
Kjaer, T.K., Hansen, J., 2009. Cancer incidence among large cohort of female Danish
registered nurses. Scand J Work Environ Health 35, 446–453.
Knerr, S., Schrenk, D., 2006. Carcinogenicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in
experimental models. Mol Nutr Food Res 50, 897–907.
Knol, M.J., VanderWeele, T.J., 2012. Recommendations for presenting analyses of effect
modification and interaction. Int J Epidemiol 41, 514–520.
Kochukov, M.Y., Jeng, Y.J., Watson, C.S., 2009. Alkylphenol xenoestrogens with varying
carbon chain lengths differentially and potently activate signaling and functional
responses in GH3/B6/F10 somatomammotropes. Environ Health Perspect 117,
723–730.
Kociba, R.J., Keyes, D.G., Beyer, J.E., Carreon, R.M., Wade, C.E., Dittenber, D.A., et al.,
1978. Results of a two-year chronic toxicity and oncogenicity study of 2,3,7,8-tet-
rachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 46, 279–303.
Kodavanti, P.R., Coburn, C.G., Moser, V.C., MacPhail, R.C., Fenton, S.E., Stoker, T.E.,
et al., 2010. Developmental exposure to a commercial PBDE mixture, DE-71: neu-
robehavioral, hormonal, and reproductive effects. Toxicol Sci 116, 297–312.
Kojima, H., Katsura, E., Takeuchi, S., Niiyama, K., Kobayashi, K., 2004. Screening for
estrogen and androgen receptor activities in 200 pesticides by in vitro reporter gene
assays using Chinese hamster ovary cells. Environ Health Perspect 112, 524–531.
Kummer, V., Maskova, J., Zraly, Z., Neca, J., Simeckova, P., Vondracek, J., et al., 2008.
Estrogenic activity of environmental polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in uterus of
immature Wistar rats. Toxicol Lett 180, 212–221.
Labreche, F., Goldberg, M.S., Valois, M.F., Nadon, L., 2010. Postmenopausal breast cancer
and occupational exposures. In:. Occup Environ Med Vol. 67, 263–269.
Lahmann, P.H., Friedenreich, C., Schuit, A.J., Salvini, S., Allen, N.E., Key, T.J., et al.,
2007. Physical activity and breast cancer risk: the European Prospective Investigation
into Cancer and Nutrition. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16, 36–42.
Land, C.E., Tokunaga, M., Koyama, K., Soda, M., Preston, D.L., Nishimori, I., et al., 2003.
Incidence of female breast cancer among atomic bomb survivors, Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, 1950-1990. Radiat Res 160, 707–717.
Lauby-Secretan, B., Loomis, D., Grosse, Y., El Ghissassi, F., Bouvard, V., Benbrahim-
Tallaa, L., et al., 2013. Carcinogenicity of polychlorinated biphenyls and poly-
brominated biphenyls. Lancet Oncol 14, 287–288.
Lee, H.R., Hwang, K.A., Nam, K.H., Kim, H.C., Choi, K.C., 2014. Progression of breast
cancer cells was enhanced by endocrine-disrupting chemicals, triclosan and octyl-
phenol, via an estrogen receptor-dependent signaling pathway in cellular and mouse
xenograft models. Chem Res Toxicol 27, 834–842.
Lee, K.H., Shu, X.O., Gao, Y.T., Ji, B.T., Yang, G., Blair, A., et al., 2010. Breast cancer and
urinary biomarkers of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon and oxidative stress in the
Shanghai Women's Health Study. In:. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev Vol. 19,
877–883.
Lee, K.Y., Shibutani, M., Takagi, H., Kato, N., Takigami, S., Uneyama, C., et al., 2004.
Diverse developmental toxicity of di-n-butyl phthalate in both sexes of rat offspring
after maternal exposure during the period from late gestation through lactation.
Toxicology 203, 221–238.
Lee, S.J., Yum, Y.N., Kim, S.C., Kim, Y., Lim, J., Lee, W.J., et al., 2013. Distinguishing
between genotoxic and non-genotoxic hepatocarcinogens by gene expression pro-
filing and bioinformatic pathway analysis. Sci Rep 3, 2783.
Leng, L., Li, J., Luo, X.M., Kim, J.Y., Li, Y.M., Guo, X.M., et al., 2016. Polychlorinated
biphenyls and breast cancer: A congener-specific meta-analysis. Environ Int 88,
133–141.
Lerro, C.C., Koutros, S., Andreotti, G., Friesen, M.C., Alavanja, M.C., Blair, A., et al., 2015.
Organophosphate insecticide use and cancer incidence among spouses of pesticide
applicators in the Agricultural Health Study. Occup Environ Med 72, 736–744.
Li, H.C., Kupfer, D., 1998. Mechanism of induction of rat hepatic CYP2B and 3A by the
pesticide methoxychlor. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 12, 315–323.
Li, W., Ray, R.M., Thomas, D.B., Davis, S., Yost, M., Breslow, N., et al., 2015. Shift work
and breast cancer among women textile workers in Shanghai, China. Cancer Causes
Control 26, 143–150.
Li, Z.H., Liu, X.Y., Wang, N., Chen, J.S., Chen, Y.H., Huang, J.T., et al., 2012. Effects of
decabrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE-209) in regulation of growth and apoptosis of
breast, ovarian, and cervical cancer cells. Environ Health Perspect 120, 541–546.
Little, M.P., McElvenny, D.M., 2016. Male Breast Cancer Incidence and Mortality Risk in
the Japanese Atomic Bomb Survivors - Differences in Excess Relative and Absolute
Risk from Female Breast Cancer. Environ Health Perspect.
Liu, R., Nelson, D.O., Hurley, S., Hertz, A., Reynolds, P., 2015. Residential exposure to
estrogen disrupting hazardous air pollutants and breast cancer risk: the California
Teachers Study. Epidemiology 26, 365–373.
Liu, X., Guo, Z., Krebs, K.A., Pope, R.H., Roache, N.F., 2014. Concentrations and trends of
perfluorinated chemicals in potential indoor sources from 2007 through 2011 in the
US. Chemosphere 98, 51–57.
Liu, Y., Nguyen, N., Colditz, G.A., 2015. Links between alcohol consumption and breast
cancer: a look at the evidence. Womens Health (Lond Engl) 11, 65–77.
Looker, C., Luster, M.I., Calafat, A.M., Johnson, V.J., Burleson, G.R., Burleson, F.G., et al.,
2014. Influenza vaccine response in adults exposed to perfluorooctanoate and per-
fluorooctanesulfonate. Toxicol Sci 138, 76–88.
Lopez-Carrillo, L., Hernandez-Ramirez, R.U., Calafat, A.M., Torres-Sanchez, L., Galvan-
Portillo, M., Needham, L.L., et al., 2010. Exposure to phthalates and breast cancer
risk in northern Mexico. In:. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 118, 539–544.
Lorber, M., 2008. Exposure of Americans to polybrominated diphenyl ethers. J Expo Sci
Environ Epidemiol 18, 2–19.
Lovekamp-Swan, T., Davis, B.J., 2003. Mechanisms of phthalate ester toxicity in the fe-
male reproductive system. Environ Health Perspect 111, 139–145.
Luckert, C., Ehlers, A., Buhrke, T., Seidel, A., Lampen, A., Hessel, S., 2013. Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons stimulate human CYP3A4 promoter activity via PXR. Toxicol
Lett 222, 180–188.
Ludewig, G., Lehmann, L., Esch, H., Robertson, L.W., 2008. Metabolic Activation of PCBs
to Carcinogens in Vivo - A Review. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 25, 241–246.
Mandrup, K., Boberg, J., Isling, L.K., Christiansen, S., Hass, U., 2016. Low-dose effects of
bisphenol A on mammary gland development in rats. Andrology 4, 673–683.
Mariotto, A.B., Yabroff, K.R., Shao, Y., Feuer, E.J., Brown, M.L., 2011. Projections of the
cost of cancer care in the United States: 2010-2020. J Natl Cancer Inst 103, 117–128.
Martin, A.M., Weber, B.L., 2000. Genetic and hormonal risk factors in breast cancer. J
Natl Cancer Inst 92, 1126–1135.
Martinez-Nava, G.A., Burguete-Garcia, A.I., Lopez-Carrillo, L., Hernandez-Ramirez, R.U.,
Madrid-Marina, V., Cebrian, M.E., 2013. PPARgamma and PPARGC1B polymorph-
isms modify the association between phthalate metabolites and breast cancer risk.
In:. Biomarkers Vol. 18 (Part 2013/07/20), 493–501.
Matthews, J., Gustafsson, J.A., 2006. Estrogen receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
signaling pathways. Nucl Recept Signal 4, e016.
McCarty, K.M., Santella, R.M., Steck, S.E., Cleveland, R.J., Ahn, J., Ambrosone, C.B.,
et al., 2009. PAH-DNA adducts, cigarette smoking, GST polymorphisms, and breast
cancer risk. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 117, 552–558.
McElroy, J.A., Gangnon, R.E., Newcomb, P.A., Kanarek, M.S., Anderson, H.A., Brook,
J.V., et al., 2007. Risk of breast cancer for women living in rural areas from adult
exposure to atrazine from well water in Wisconsin. In:. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol
Vol. 17, 207–214.
Mendelsohn, J.B., Li, Q.Z., Ji, B.T., Shu, X.O., Yang, G., Li, H.L., et al., 2009. Personal use
of hair dye and cancer risk in a prospective cohort of Chinese women. In:. Cancer Sci
Vol. 100 (Part 2009/04/24), 1088–1091.
Mercado-Feliciano, M., Bigsby, R.M., 2008. The polybrominated diphenyl ether mixture
DE-71 is mildly estrogenic. Environ Health Perspect 116, 605–611.
Mikoczy, Z., Tinnerberg, H., Bjork, J., Albin, M., 2011. Cancer incidence and mortality in
Swedish sterilant workers exposed to ethylene oxide: updated cohort study findings
1972-2006. In:. Int J Environ Res Public Health Vol. 8 (Part 2011/07/22),
2009–2019.
Miller-Schulze, J.P., Paulsen, M., Kameda, T., Toriba, A., Tang, N., Tamura, K., et al.,
2013. Evaluation of urinary metabolites of 1-nitropyrene as biomarkers for exposure
to diesel exhaust in taxi drivers of Shenyang, China. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 23,
170–175.
Mnif, W., Hassine, A.I.H., Bouaziz, A., Bartegi, A., Thomas, O., Roig, B., 2011. Effect of
Endocrine Disruptor Pesticides: A Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 8,
2265–2303.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
179
 Moon, H.J., Han, S.Y., Shin, J.H., Kang, I.H., Kim, T.S., Hong, J.H., et al., 2007.
Gestational exposure to nonylphenol causes precocious mammary gland development
in female rat offspring. J Reprod Dev 53, 333–344.
Mordukhovich, I., Beyea, J., Herring, A.H., Hatch, M., Stellman, S.D., Teitelbaum, S.L.,
et al., 2016. Vehicular Traffic-Related Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Exposure
and Breast Cancer Incidence: The Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project (LIBCSP).
Environ Health Perspect 124, 30–38.
Mordukhovich, I., Beyea, J., Herring, A.H., Hatch, M., Stellman, S.D., Teitelbaum, S.L.,
et al., 2016. Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes, traffic-related polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon exposure and breast cancer incidence. Int J Cancer 139, 310–321.
Mordukhovich, I., Rossner Jr., P., Terry, M.B., Santella, R., Zhang, Y.J., Hibshoosh, H.,
et al., 2010. Associations between polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-related ex-
posures and p53 mutations in breast tumors. In:. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 118,
511–518.
Moyer, B., Hixon, M.L., 2012. Reproductive effects in F1 adult females exposed in utero to
moderate to high doses of mono-2-ethylhexylphthalate (MEHP). Reprod Toxicol 34,
43–50.
National Center for Environmental Assessment Office of Research and Development. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency2006. An Inventory of Sources and Environmental
Releases of Dioxin-Like Compounds in the United States for the Years 1987, 1995,
and 2000. Available: 〈http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/dioxin/2006/dioxin.pdf〉
[accessed 17 Feb 2015.
Nebert, D.W., Dalton, T.P., Okey, A.B., Gonzalez, F.J., 2004. Role of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-mediated induction of the CYP1 enzymes in environmental toxicity and
cancer. J Biol Chem 279, 23847–23850.
New Jersey DWQI Health Effects Subcommittee. 2016. Public review draft of Health-
based maximum contaminant level support document: Perfluoroooctanoic acid
(PFOA).New Jersey Drinking Water Quality Institute Health Effects Subcommittee.
〈http://www.nj.gov/dep/watersupply/pdf/pfoa-hb–mcl-public-review-
draftwithappendices.pdf〉.
Nie, J., Beyea, J., Bonner, M.R., Han, D., Vena, J.E., Rogerson, P., et al., 2007. Exposure to
traffic emissions throughout life and risk of breast cancer: the Western New York
Exposures and Breast Cancer (WEB) study. Cancer Causes Control Vol. 18, 947–955.
Niehoff, N.M., Nichols, H.B., White, A.J., Parks, C.G., D'Aloisio, A.A., Sandler, D.P., 2016.
Childhood and Adolescent Pesticide Exposure and Breast Cancer Risk. Epidemiology
27, 326–333.
NIEHS (National Institute of Environmental Health Research). The Sister Study.
Available: 〈https://sisterstudy.niehs.nih.gov/English/about.htm〉 [accessed 7 June
2017.
NIEHS BCERP (National Institute of Environmental Health Research Breast Cancer and
the Environment Research Program). Impact of environmental metal/metalloid ex-
posures on mammographic breast density, a marker of breast cancer. Available:
〈https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/supported/centers/breast-cancer/grantees/
georgetown/index.cfm〉 [accessed 24 Dec 2016.
NIEHS BCERP (National Institute of Environmental Health Research Breast Cancer and
the Environment Research Program). Breast Cancer & the Environment Research
Program home page. Available: 〈http://bcerp.org/index.htm〉 [accessed 24 Dec
2016.
Nishihara, T., Nishikawa, J., Kanayama, T., Dakeyama, F., Saito, K., Imagawa, M., et al.,
2000. Estrogenic activities of 517 chemicals by yeast two-hybrid assay. J Health Sci
46, 282–298.
NLM. 2017. Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB).National Library of Medicine.
NTP.1986. NTP Technical Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of
Dichloromethane (methylene chloride) (CAS NO. 75-09-2) in F344/N rats and
B6C3FT mice (inhalation studies). Research Triangle Park, NC. 〈http://ntp.niehs.nih.
gov/ntp/htdocs/lt_rpts/tr306.pdf〉.
NTP.2016a. Report of partial findings from the national toxicology program carcino-
genesis studies of cell phone radiofrequency radiation in Hsd: Sprague Dawley® SD
rats (whole body exposures). Research Triangle Park, NC.〈http://biorxiv.org/
content/biorxiv/early/2016/06/23/055699.full.pdf〉.
NTP.2016b. Report on Carcinogens, 14th Edition. Research Triangle Park, NC:United
States National Toxicology Program. 〈http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/roc14〉 [accessed
08 MARCH 2017.
O'Brien, K.M., Upson, K., Buckley, J.P., 2017. Lipid and Creatinine Adjustment to
Evaluate Health Effects of Environmental Exposures. Curr Environ Health Rep 4,
44–50.
Oddone, E., Edefonti, V., Scaburri, A., Vai, T., Bai, E., Modonesi, C., et al., 2014. Female
breast cancer and electrical manufacturing: results of a nested case-control study. J
Occup Health 56, 369–378.
Oddone, E., Edefonti, V., Scaburri, A., Vai, T., Crosignani, P., Imbriani, M., 2013. Female
breast cancer in Lombardy, Italy (2002-2009): a case-control study on occupational
risks. Am J Ind Med 56, 1051–1062.
Odum, J., Pyrah, I.T., Soames, A.R., Foster, J.R., Van Miller, J.P., Joiner, R.L., et al., 1999.
Effects of p-nonylphenol (NP) and diethylstilboestrol (DES) on the Alderley Park
(Alpk) rat: comparison of mammary gland and uterus sensitivity following oral ga-
vage or implanted mini-pumps. J Appl Toxicol 19, 367–378.
Okada, H., Tokunaga, T., Liu, X., Takayanagi, S., Matsushima, A., Shimohigashi, Y., 2008.
Direct evidence revealing structural elements essential for the high binding ability of
bisphenol A to human estrogen-related receptor-gamma. Environ Health Perspect
116, 32–38.
Olesen, P.T., Olsen, A., Frandsen, H., Frederiksen, K., Overvad, K., Tjonneland, A., 2008.
Acrylamide exposure and incidence of breast cancer among postmenopausal women
in the Danish Diet, Cancer and Health Study. Int J Cancer 122, 2094–2100.
Olsen, A., Christensen, J., Outzen, M., Olesen, P.T., Frandsen, H., Overvad, K., et al.,
2012. Pre-diagnostic acrylamide exposure and survival after breast cancer among
postmenopausal Danish women. In:. Toxicology Vol. 296 (Part 2012/04/03), 67–72.
Olsen, G.W., Burris, J.M., Ehresman, D.J., Froehlich, J.W., Seacat, A.M., Butenhoff, J.L.,
et al., 2007. Half-life of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate,per-
fluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical production
workers. Environ Health Perspect 115, 1298–1305.
Pan, S.Y., Morrison, H., Gibbons, L., Zhou, J., Wen, S.W., DesMeules, M., et al., 2011.
Breast cancer risk associated with residential proximity to industrial plants in
Canada. In:. J Occup Environ Med Vol. 53 (Part 2011/04/16), 522–529.
Parada Jr., H., Wolff, M.S., Engel, L.S., Eng, S.M., Khankari, N.K., Neugut, A.I., et al.,
2016. Polychlorinated biphenyls and their association with survival following breast
cancer. Eur J Cancer 56, 21–30.
Parada Jr., H., Wolff, M.S., Engel, L.S., White, A.J., Eng, S.M., Cleveland, R.J., et al., 2016.
Organochlorine insecticides DDT and chlordane in relation to survival following
breast cancer. Int J Cancer 138, 565–575.
Pastor-Barriuso, R., Fernandez, M.F., Castano-Vinyals, G., Whelan, D., Perez-Gomez, B.,
Llorca, J., et al., 2016. Total Effective Xenoestrogen Burden in Serum Samples and
Risk for Breast Cancer in a Population-Based Multicase-Control Study in Spain.
Environ Health Perspect 124, 1575–1582.
Paulose, T., Speroni, L., Sonnenschein, C., Soto, A.M., 2015. Estrogens in the wrong place
at the wrong time: Fetal BPA exposure and mammary cancer. Reprod Toxicol 54,
58–65.
Pena, D., Pontillo, C., Garcia, M.A., Cocca, C., Alvarez, L., Chiappini, F., et al., 2012.
Alterations in c-Src/HER1 and estrogen receptor alpha signaling pathways in mam-
mary gland and tumors of hexachlorobenzene-treated rats. Toxicology 293, 68–77.
Peplonska, B., Stewart, P., Szeszenia-Dabrowska, N., Lissowska, J., Brinton, L.A.,
Gromiec, J.P., et al., 2010. Occupational exposure to organic solvents and breast
cancer in women. In:. Occup Environ Med.
Peplonska, B., Stewart, P., Szeszenia-Dabrowska, N., Rusiecki, J., Garcia-Closas, M.,
Lissowska, J., et al., 2007. Occupation and breast cancer risk in Polish women: a
population-based case-control study. In:. Am J Ind Med Vol. 50, 97–111.
Pesatori, A.C., Consonni, D., Rubagotti, M., Grillo, P., Bertazzi, P.A., 2009. Cancer in-
cidence in the population exposed to dioxin after the "Seveso accident": twenty years
of follow-up. In:. Environ Health Vol. 8, 39.
Peters, J.M., Gonzalez, F.J., 2011. Why toxic equivalency factors are not suitable for
perfluoroalkyl chemicals. Chem Res Toxicol 24, 1601–1609.
Preau Jr., J.L., Wong, L.Y., Silva, M.J., Needham, L.L., Calafat, A.M., 2010. Variability
over 1 week in the urinary concentrations of metabolites of diethyl phthalate and di
(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate among eight adults: an observational study. Environ Health
Perspect 118, 1748–1754.
Preuss, T.G., Gehrhardt, J., Schirmer, K., Coors, A., Rubach, M., Russ, A., et al., 2006.
Nonylphenol isomers differ in estrogenic activity. Environ Sci Technol 40,
5147–5153.
Raaschou-Nielsen, O., Andersen, Z.J., Hvidberg, M., Jensen, S.S., Ketzel, M., Sorensen, M.,
et al., 2011. Air pollution from traffic and cancer incidence: a Danish cohort study.
In:. Environ Health Vol. 10 (Part 2011/07/21), 67.
Rabstein, S., Bruning, T., Harth, V., Fischer, H.P., Haas, S., Weiss, T., et al., 2010. N-
acetyltransferase 2, exposure to aromatic and heterocyclic amines, and receptor-de-
fined breast cancer. Eur J Cancer Prev 19, 100–109.
Rai, R., Glass, D.C., Heyworth, J.S., Saunders, C., Fritschi, L., 2016. Occupational ex-
posures to engine exhausts and other PAHs and breast cancer risk: A population-
based case-control study. Am J Ind Med 59, 437–444.
Raleigh, K.K., Alexander, B.H., Olsen, G.W., Ramachandran, G., Morey, S.Z., Church, T.R.,
et al., 2014. Mortality and cancer incidence in ammonium perfluorooctanoate pro-
duction workers.
In:. Occup Environ Med Vol. 71. pp. 500–506.
Ray, R.M., Gao, D.L., Li, W., Wernli, K.J., Astrakianakis, G., Seixas, N.S., et al., 2007.
Occupational exposures and breast cancer among women textile workers in
Shanghai. Epidemiology 18, 383–392.
Rayner, J.L., Enoch, R.R., Fenton, S.E., 2005. Adverse effects of prenatal exposure to
atrazine during a critical period of mammary gland growth. Toxicol Sci 87, 255–266.
Recio-Vega, R., Velazco-Rodriguez, V., Ocampo-Gomez, G., Hernandez-Gonzalez, S.,
Ruiz-Flores, P., Lopez-Marquez, F., 2011. Serum levels of polychlorinated biphenyls
in Mexican women and breast cancer risk. In:. J Appl Toxicol Vol. 31 (Part 2011/04/
12), 270–278.
Reding, K.W., Young, M.T., Szpiro, A.A., Han, C.J., DeRoo, L.A., Weinberg, C., et al.,
2015. Breast Cancer Risk in Relation to Ambient Air Pollution Exposure at Residences
in the Sister Study Cohort. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 24, 1907–1909.
Reider, C.R., Hubble, J.P., 2000. Test-retest reliability of an epidemiological instrument
for Parkinson's disease. J Clin Epidemiol 53, 863–865.
Reif, D.M., Martin, M.T., Tan, S.W., Houck, K.A., Judson, R.S., Richard, A.M., et al., 2010.
Endocrine profiling and prioritization of environmental chemicals using ToxCast
data. Environ Health Perspect 118, 1714–1720.
Rodgers, K.M., Rudel, R.A., Just, A.C., 2014. Phthalates in food packaging, consumer
products, and indoor environments. In: In: Snedeker, S.M. (Ed.), Toxicants in food
packaging and household plastics: Exposure and health risks to consumers. Humana
Press, pp. 31–60.
Rollison, D.E., Helzlsouer, K.J., Pinney, S.M., 2006. Personal hair dye use and cancer: a
systematic literature review and evaluation of exposure assessment in studies pub-
lished since 1992. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev 9, 413–439.
Rosenberg, L., Boggs, D.A., Adams-Campbell, L.L., Palmer, J.R., 2007. Hair relaxers not
associated with breast cancer risk: evidence from the black women's health study.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16, 1035–1037.
Roth, J.A., Etzioni, R., Waters, T.M., Pettinger, M., Rossouw, J.E., Anderson, G.L., et al.,
2014. Economic return from the Women's Health Initiative estrogen plus progestin
clinical trial: a modeling study. Ann Intern Med 160, 594–602.
Roy, D., Morgan, M., Yoo, C., Deoraj, A., Roy, S., Yadav, V.K., et al., 2015. Integrated
Bioinformatics, Environmental Epidemiologic and Genomic Approaches to Identify
Environmental and Molecular Links between Endometriosis and Breast Cancer. Int J
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
180
 Mol Sci 16, 25285–25322.
Ruckart, P.Z., Bove, F.J., Shanley 3rd, E., Maslia, M., 2015. Evaluation of contaminated
drinking water and male breast cancer at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune. North
Carolina: a case control study. Environ Health 14, 74.
Rudel, R.A., Ackerman, J.M., Attfield, K.R., Brody, J.G., 2014. New Exposure Biomarkers
as Tools For Breast Cancer Epidemiology, Biomonitoring, and Prevention: A
Systematic Approach Based on Animal Evidence. Environ Health Perspect.
Rudel, R.A., Attfield, K.R., Schifano, J.N., Brody, J.G., 2007. Chemicals causing mammary
gland tumors in animals signal new directions for epidemiology, chemicals testing,
and risk assessment for breast cancer prevention. Cancer 109, 2635–2666.
Rudel, R.A., Fenton, S.E., Ackerman, J.M., Euling, S.Y., Makris, S.L., 2011. Environmental
exposures and mammary gland development: state of the science, public health im-
plications, and research recommendations. Environ Health Perspect 119, 1053–1061.
Rudel, R.A., Gray, J.M., Engel, C.L., Rawsthorne, T.W., Dodson, R.E., Ackerman, J.M.,
et al., 2011. Food packaging and bisphenol A and bis(2-ethyhexyl) phthalate ex-
posure: findings from a dietary intervention. Environ Health Perspect 119, 914–920.
Rudel, R.A., Seryak, L.M., Brody, J.G., 2008. PCB-containing wood floor finish is a likely
source of elevated PCBs in residents' blood, household air and dust: a case study of
exposure. Environ Health 7, 2.
Rundle, A., Tang, D., Hibshoosh, H., Estabrook, A., Schnabel, F., Cao, W., et al., 2000. The
relationship between genetic damage from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
breast tissue and breast cancer. Carcinogenesis 21, 1281–1289.
Russo J, Russo, Irma H.,. 2004. Molecular Basis of Breast Cancer: Prevention and
Treatment:Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Sagiv, S.K., Gaudet, M.M., Eng, S.M., Abrahamson, P.E., Shantakumar, S., Teitelbaum,
S.L., et al., 2009. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA adducts and survival among
women with breast cancer. In:. Environ Res Vol. 109, 287–291.
Saieva, C., Peluso, M., Masala, G., Munnia, A., Ceroti, M., Piro, S., et al., 2011. Bulky DNA
adducts and breast cancer risk in the prospective EPIC-Italy study. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 129, 477–484.
Santi, S.A., Meigs, M.L., Zhao, Y., Bewick, M.A., Lafrenie, R.M., Conlon, M.S., 2015. A
case-control study of breast cancer risk in nurses from Northeastern Ontario, Canada.
Cancer Causes Control 26, 1421–1428.
Santodonato, J., 1997. Review of the estrogenic and antiestrogenic activity of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons: relationship to carcinogenicity. Chemosphere 34, 835–848.
Sathiakumar, N., Delzell, E., 2009. A follow-up study of mortality among women in the
North American synthetic rubber industry. In:. J Occup Environ Med Vol. 51,
1314–1325.
Schaider, L.A., Rudel, R.A., Ackerman, J.M., Brody, J.G., 2010. Residential history and
groundwater modeling. Environ Health Perspect 118 a378; author reply a378-379.
Schisterman, E.F., Whitcomb, B.W., Louis, G.M., Louis, T.A., 2005. Lipid adjustment in
the analysis of environmental contaminants and human health risks. Environ Health
Perspect 113, 853–857.
Scholze, M., Silva, E., Kortenkamp, A., 2014. Extending the applicability of the dose
addition model to the assessment of chemical mixtures of partial agonists by using a
novel toxic unit extrapolation method. PLoS One 9, e88808.
Schwarzman, M.R., Ackerman, J.M., Dairkee, S.H., Fenton, S.E., Johnson, D., Navarro,
K.M., et al., 2015. Screening for Chemical Contributions to Breast Cancer Risk: A Case
Study for Chemical Safety Evaluation. Environ Health Perspect 123, 1255–1264.
Seitz, H.K., Pelucchi, C., Bagnardi, V., La Vecchia, C., 2012. Epidemiology and patho-
physiology of alcohol and breast cancer: Update 2012. Alcohol Alcohol 47, 204–212.
Shaham, J., Gurvich, R., Goral, A., Czerniak, A., 2006. The risk of breast cancer in relation
to health habits and occupational exposures. In:. Am J Ind Med Vol. 49, 1021–1030.
Shekarrizfard, M., Valois, M.F., Goldberg, M.S., Crouse, D., Ross, N., Parent, M.E., et al.,
2015. Investigating the role of transportation models in epidemiologic studies of
traffic related air pollution and health effects. Environ Res 140, 282–291.
Shen, J., Beth Terry, M., Gammon, M.D., Gaudet, M.M., Teitelbaum, S.L., Eng, S.M., et al.,
2006. IGHMBP2 Thr671Ala polymorphism might be a modifier for the effects of ci-
garette smoking and PAH-DNA adducts to breast cancer risk. In:. Breast Cancer Res
Treat Vol. 99, 1–7.
Shen, J., Gammon, M.D., Terry, M.B., Teitelbaum, S.L., Eng, S.M., Neugut, A.I., et al.,
2008. Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group C genotypes/diplotypes play
no independent or interaction role with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons-DNA ad-
ducts for breast cancer risk. In:. Eur J Cancer Vol. 44, 710–717.
Shen, J., Gammon, M.D., Terry, M.B., Wang, L., Wang, Q., Zhang, F., et al., 2005.
Polymorphisms in XRCC1 modify the association between polycyclic aromatic hy-
drocarbon-DNA adducts, cigarette smoking, dietary antioxidants, and breast cancer
risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 14, 336–342.
Sibinski L. 1987. Two year oral (diet) toxicity/carcinogenicity study of fluorochemical
FC-143 in rats. 3M Company/Riker Exp. No. 0281CR0012. St. Paul, MN:3M
Company/Riker.
Silver, S.R., Whelan, E.A., Deddens, J.A., Steenland, N.K., Hopf, N.B., Waters, M.A., et al.,
2009. Occupational exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and risk of breast cancer.
In:. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 117, 276–282.
Singh, Z., Chadha, P., 2016. Textile industry and occupational cancer. J Occup Med
Toxicol 11, 39.
Smith, M.T., Guyton, K.Z., Gibbons, C.F., Fritz, J.M., Portier, C.J., Rusyn, I., et al., 2016.
Key Characteristics of Carcinogens as a Basis for Organizing Data on Mechanisms of
Carcinogenesis. Environ Health Perspect 124, 713–721.
Snedeker, S.M., 2001. Pesticides and breast cancer risk: a review of DDT, DDE, and
dieldrin. Environ Health Perspect 109 (Suppl 1), 35–47.
Soto, A.M., Chung, K.L., Sonnenschein, C., 1994. The pesticides endosulfan, toxaphene,
and dieldrin have estrogenic effects on human estrogen-sensitive cells. Environ
Health Perspect 102, 380–383.
Soto, A.M., Sonnenschein, C., Chung, K.L., Fernandez, M.F., Olea, N., Serrano, F.O., 1995.
The E-SCREEN assay as a tool to identify estrogens: an update on estrogenic
environmental pollutants. Environ Health Perspect 103 (Suppl 7), 113–122.
Spencer, W.A., Lehmler, H.J., Robertson, L.W., Gupta, R.C., 2009. Oxidative DNA adducts
after Cu(2+)-mediated activation of dihydroxy PCBs: role of reactive oxygen species.
Free Radic Biol Med 46, 1346–1352.
Steele, R., Mummery, K., 2003. Occupational physical activity across occupational cate-
gories. J Sci Med Sport 6, 398–407.
Sturgeon, S.R., Doherty, A., Reeves, K.W., Bigelow, C., Stanczyk, F.Z., Ockene, J.K., et al.,
2014. Urinary levels of melatonin and risk of postmenopausal breast cancer: women's
health initiative observational cohort. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 23,
629–637.
Sung, T.I., Chen, P.C., Jyuhn-Hsiarn Lee, L., Lin, Y.P., Hsieh, G.Y., Wang, J.D., 2007.
Increased standardized incidence ratio of breast cancer in female electronics workers.
BMC Public Health Vol. 7, 102.
Tang, D., Cho, S., Rundle, A., Chen, S., Phillips, D., Zhou, J., et al., 2002. Polymorphisms
in the DNA repair enzyme XPD are associated with increased levels of PAH-DNA
adducts in a case-control study of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 75, 159–166.
Tarraf, C., El-Sabban, M., Bassam, R., Beyrouthy, M., Chamoun, J., Talhouk, R., 2003.
Functional consequence of exposure to dieldrin on mammary development and
function. Food Addit Contam 20, 819–828.
Taylor, J.A., Vom Saal, F.S., Welshons, W.V., Drury, B., Rottinghaus, G., Hunt, P.A., et al.,
2011. Similarity of bisphenol A pharmacokinetics in rhesus monkeys and mice: re-
levance for human exposure. Environ Health Perspect 119, 422–430.
Taylor, J.A., Welshons, W.V., Vom Saal, F.S., 2008. No effect of route of exposure (oral;
subcutaneous injection) on plasma bisphenol A throughout 24h after administration
in neonatal female mice. Reprod Toxicol 25, 169–176.
Taylor, K.W., Baird, D.D., Herring, A.H., Engel, L.S., Nichols, H.B., Sandler, D.P., et al.,
2017. Associations among personal care product use patterns and exogenous hor-
mone use in the NIEHS Sister Study. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol.
Taylor, K.W., Joubert, B.R., Braun, J.M., Dilworth, C., Gennings, C., Hauser, R., et al.,
2016. Statistical Approaches for Assessing Health Effects of Environmental Chemical
Mixtures in Epidemiology: Lessons from an Innovative Workshop. Environ Health
Perspect 124, A227–A229.
Teeguarden, J., Hanson-Drury, S., Fisher, J.W., Doerge, D.R., 2013. Are typical human
serum BPA concentrations measurable and sufficient to be estrogenic in the general
population? Food Chem Toxicol 62, 949–963.
Teeguarden, J.G., Twaddle, N.C., Churchwell, M.I., Doerge, D.R., 2016. Urine and serum
biomonitoring of exposure to environmental estrogens I: Bisphenol A in pregnant
women. Food Chem Toxicol 92, 129–142.
Teitelbaum, S.L., Gammon, M.D., Britton, J.A., Neugut, A.I., Levin, B., Stellman, S.D.,
2007. Reported residential pesticide use and breast cancer risk on Long Island, New
York. In:. Am J Epidemiol Vol. 165, 643–651.
Terrell, M.L., Rosenblatt, K.A., Wirth, J., Cameron, L.L., Marcus, M., 2016. Breast cancer
among women in Michigan following exposure to brominated flame retardants.
Occup Environ Med 73, 564–567.
Terry, M.B., Gammon, M.D., Zhang, F.F., Eng, S.M., Sagiv, S.K., Paykin, A.B., et al., 2004.
Polymorphism in the DNA repair gene XPD, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-DNA
adducts, cigarette smoking, and breast cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 13, 2053–2058.
Terry, P.D., Goodman, M., 2006. Is the association between cigarette smoking and breast
cancer modified by genotype? A review of epidemiologic studies and meta-analysis.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 15, 602–611.
Teschke, K., Olshan, A.F., Daniels, J.L., De Roos, A.J., Parks, C.G., Schulz, M., et al., 2002.
Occupational exposure assessment in case-control studies: opportunities for im-
provement. Occup Environ Med 59, 575–593 discussion 594.
Tharp, A.P., Maffini, M.V., Hunt, P.A., VandeVoort, C.A., Sonnenschein, C., Soto, A.M.,
2012. Bisphenol A alters the development of the rhesus monkey mammary gland.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 8190–8195.
Tomonari, Y., Kurata, Y., David, R.M., Gans, G., Kawasuso, T., Katoh, M., 2006. Effect of
di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) on genital organs from juvenile common mar-
mosets: I. Morphological and biochemical investigation in 65-week toxicity study. J
Toxicol Environ Health A 69, 1651–1672.
Tonxnet. United States National Library of Medicine2016. Chemical Carcinogenesis
Research Information System. Available: 〈https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/
htmlgen?CCRIS.htm〉 [accessed 23 Dec 2016 2016].
Trabert B, Falk RT, Figueroa JD, Graubard BI, Garcia-Closas M, Lissowska J, et al. 2014.
Urinary bisphenol A-glucuronide and postmenopausal breast cancer in Poland. In:
Cancer Causes Control, Part 2014/09/06.
Travis, R.C., Balkwill, A., Fensom, G.K., Appleby, P.N., Reeves, G.K., Wang, X.S., et al.,
2016. Night Shift Work and Breast Cancer Incidence: Three Prospective Studies and
Meta-analysis of Published Studies. J Natl Cancer Inst 108.
Tsuchiya, Y., Nakajima, M., Yokoi, T., 2005. Cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism of
estrogens and its regulation in human. Cancer Lett 227, 115–124.
Tucker, D.K., Macon, M.B., Strynar, M.J., Dagnino, S., Andersen, E., Fenton, S.E., 2015.
The mammary gland is a sensitive pubertal target in CD-1 and C57Bl/6 mice fol-
lowing perinatal perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) exposure. Reprod Toxicol 54, 26–36.
Turesky, R.J., Freeman, J.P., Holland, R.D., Nestorick, D.M., Miller, D.W., Ratnasinghe,
D.L., et al., 2003. Identification of aminobiphenyl derivatives in commercial hair
dyes. Chem Res Toxicol 16, 1162–1173.
U.S. EPA.1998. Reregistration eligibility decision: Dicofol. Washington, D.C.:United
States Environmental Protection Agency.〈https://archive.epa.gov/pesticides/
reregistration/web/pdf/0021red.pdf〉.
U.S. EPA.2006a. Registration eligibility decision: Diazinon, Case 0238. Washington D.
C:United States Environmental Protection Agency.
U.S. EPA.2006b. Registration eligibility decision: Chlorpyrifos, Case 0100. Washington D.
C:United States Environmental Protection Agency.
U.S. EPA. 2006c. Cumulative Risk From Triazine Pesticides. Docket number EPA-HQ-
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
181
 OPP-2005-0481. Washington, D.C.:United States Environmental Protection Agency.
〈www.regulations.gov〉.
U.S. EPA.2009. Long-Chain Perfluorinated Chemicals (PFCs) Action Plan. Washington,
DC:United States Environmental Protection Agency.〈https://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2016-01/documents/pfcs_action_plan1230_09.pdf〉.
U.S. EPA.2010. Nonylphenol (NP) and nonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs) action plan. RIN
2070-ZA09]. Washington, DC:United States Environmental Protection Agency.
〈https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-09/documents/rin2070-za09_
np-npes_action_plan_final_2010-08-09.pdf〉.
U.S. EPA. 2011. Toxicological Review of Dichloromethane (Methylene Chloride) (CAS No.
75-09-2) in Support of Summary Information on the Integrated Risk Information
System (IRIS). EPA/635/R-10/003. Washington, DC:United States Environmental
Protection Agency. 〈https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris/iris_documents/documents/
toxreviews/0070tr.pdf〉.
U.S. EPA. 2014. Revised Chlorpyrifos Human Health Risk Assessment. Washington D.C.
:United States Environmental Protection Agency. 〈www.regulations.gov〉 [accessed
Docket number EPA-HQ-OPP-2008-0850.
U.S. EPA. 2016a. Drinking Water Health Advisory for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA).
EPA 822-R-16-005. Washington, D.C.:United States Environmental Protection
Agency. 〈https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-05/documents/pfoa_
health_advisory_final_508.pdf〉.
U.S. EPA.2016b. Malathion: Human Health Draft Risk Assessment for Registration
Review. Washington D.C.:United States Environmental Protection Agency.〈https://
www3.epa.gov/pesticides/Malathion-Human-Health-Draft-Risk-Assessment-for-
Registration-Review.pdf〉.
United Nations Environment Programme. 2005. Ridding the world of POPs: a guide to the
Stockholm Convention on persistent organic pollutants. Available: 〈http://www.
pops.int/documents/guidance/beg_guide.pdf〉 [accessed 13 Dec 2013.
Valavanidis, A., Fiotakis, K., Vlachogianni, T., 2008. Airborne particulate matter and
human health: toxicological assessment and importance of size and composition of
particles for oxidative damage and carcinogenic mechanisms. J Environ Sci Health C
Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev 26, 339–362.
Van de Wiele, T., Vanhaecke, L., Boeckaert, C., Peru, K., Headley, J., Verstraete, W., et al.,
2005. Human colon microbiota transform polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to es-
trogenic metabolites. Environ Health Perspect 113, 6–10.
Vandenberg, L.N., Maffini, M.V., Sonnenschein, C., Rubin, B.S., Soto, A.M., 2009.
Bisphenol-A and the great divide: a review of controversies in the field of endocrine
disruption. Endocr Rev 30, 75–95.
Vandenberg, L.N., Prins, G.S., 2016. Clarity in the face of confusion: new studies tip the
scales on bisphenol A (BPA). Andrology 4, 561–564.
Ventura, C., Nieto, M.R., Bourguignon, N., Lux-Lantos, V., Rodriguez, H., Cao, G., et al.,
2016. Pesticide chlorpyrifos acts as an endocrine disruptor in adult rats causing
changes in mammary gland and hormonal balance. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
156, 1–9.
Villeneuve, S., Cyr, D., Lynge, E., Orsi, L., Sabroe, S., Merletti, F., et al., 2010. Occupation
and occupational exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals in male breast cancer: a
case-control study in Europe.
In:. Occup Environ Med Vol. 67. pp. 837–844.
Villeneuve, S., Fevotte, J., Anger, A., Truong, T., Lamkarkach, F., Gaye, O., et al., 2011.
Breast cancer risk by occupation and industry: analysis of the CECILE study, a po-
pulation-based case-control study in France. American Journal of Industrial Medicine
Vol. 54, 499–509.
Wallace B, Small K, Brodley C, Lau J, Trikalinos T. Deploying an interactive machine
learning system in an evidence-based practice center: abstracker. In: Proceedings of
the ACM International Health Informatics Symposium (IHI), 2012.
Wang, T., Wyrick, K.L., Meadows, G.G., Wills, T.B., Vorderstrasse, B.A., 2011. Activation
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by TCDD inhibits mammary tumor metastasis in a
syngeneic mouse model of breast cancer. Toxicol Sci 124, 291–298.
Warner, M., Mocarelli, P., Samuels, S., Needham, L., Brambilla, P., Eskenazi, B., 2011.
Dioxin exposure and cancer risk in the Seveso Women's Health Study. In:. Environ
Health Perspect Vol. 119, 1700–1705.
West, J.G., Kapoor, N.S., Liao, S.Y., Chen, J.W., Bailey, L., Nagourney, R.A., 2013.
Multifocal Breast Cancer in Young Women with Prolonged Contact between Their
Breasts and Their Cellular Phones. Case Rep Med 2013, 354682.
White, A.J., Chen, J., McCullough, L.E., Xu, X., Cho, Y.H., Teitelbaum, S.L., et al., 2015.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-DNA adducts and breast cancer: modifica-
tion by gene promoter methylation in a population-based study. Cancer Causes
Control 26, 1791–1802.
White, A.J., Teitelbaum, S.L., Stellman, S.D., Beyea, J., Steck, S.E., Mordukhovich, I.,
et al., 2014. Indoor air pollution exposure from use of indoor stoves and fireplaces in
association with breast cancer: a case-control study. Environ Health 13, 108.
White, A.J., Teitelbaum, S.L., Wolff, M.S., Stellman, S.D., Neugut, A.I., Gammon, M.D.,
2013. Exposure to fogger trucks and breast cancer incidence in the Long Island Breast
Cancer Study Project: a case-control study. In:. Environ Health Vol. 12 (Part 2013/
03/19), 24.
White, S.S., Calafat, A.M., Kuklenyik, Z., Villanueva, L., Zehr, R.D., Helfant, L., et al.,
2007. Gestational PFOA exposure of mice is associated with altered mammary gland
development in dams and female offspring. Toxicol Sci 96, 133–144.
WHO (World Health Organization), 2011. The use of DDT in malaria vector control: WHO
position statement. World Health Organization. 〈http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/69945/1/WHO_HTM_GMP_2011_eng.pdf〉.
Wolf, C.J., Schmid, J.E., Lau, C., Abbott, B.D., 2012. Activation of mouse and human
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) by perfluoroalkyl
acids (PFAAs): further investigation of C4-C12 compounds. Reprod Toxicol 33,
546–551.
Wolff, M.S., Camann, D., Gammon, M., Stellman, S.D., 1997. Proposed PCB congener
groupings for epidemiological studies. Environ Health Perspect 105, 13–14.
Xu, X., Dailey, A.B., Talbott, E.O., Ilacqua, V.A., Kearney, G., Asal, N.R., 2010.
Associations of serum concentrations of organochlorine pesticides with breast cancer
and prostate cancer in U.S. adults. In:. Environ Health Perspect Vol. 118, 60–66.
Yager, J.D., Davidson, N.E., 2006. Estrogen carcinogenesis in breast cancer. N Engl J Med
354, 270–282.
Yang, C., Tan, Y.S., Harkema, J.R., Haslam, S.Z., 2009. Differential effects of peripubertal
exposure to perfluorooctanoic acid on mammary gland development in C57Bl/6 and
Balb/c mouse strains. Reprod Toxicol 27, 299–306.
Yang, Q., Xie, Y., Alexson, S.E., Nelson, B.D., DePierre, J.W., 2002. Involvement of the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha in the immunomodulation caused
by peroxisome proliferators in mice. Biochem Pharmacol 63, 1893–1900.
York, R.G., Kennedy Jr., G.L., Olsen, G.W., Butenhoff, J.L., 2010. Male reproductive
system parameters in a two-generation reproduction study of ammonium per-
fluorooctanoate in rats and human relevance. Toxicology 271, 64–72.
Zhang, G.H., Ye, L.L., Wang, J.W., Ren, J.C., Xu, X.W., Feng, N.N., et al., 2014. Effect of
polymorphic metabolizing genes on micronucleus frequencies among benzene-ex-
posed shoe workers in China. Int J Hyg Environ Health 217, 726–732.
Zhang, J., Huang, Y., Wang, X., Lin, K., Wu, K., 2015. Environmental Polychlorinated
Biphenyl Exposure and Breast Cancer Risk: A Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies.
PLoS One 10, e0142513.
Zhang, J., Ichiba, M., Feng, Y., Pan, G., Hanaoka, T., Yamano, Y., et al., 2000. Aromatic
DNA adducts in coke-oven workers, in relation to exposure, lifestyle and genetic
polymorphism of metabolic enzymes. Int Arch Occup Environ Health 73, 127–135.
Zheng, W., Chow, W.H., Yang, G., Jin, F., Rothman, N., Blair, A., et al., 2005. The
Shanghai Women's Health Study: rationale, study design, and baseline character-
istics. Am J Epidemiol 162, 1123–1131.
Zota, A.R., Aschengrau, A., Rudel, R.A., Brody, J.G., 2010. Self-reported chemicals ex-
posure, beliefs about disease causation, and risk of breast cancer in the Cape Cod
Breast Cancer and Environment Study: a case-control study. In:. Environ Health Vol.
9, 40.
K.M. Rodgers et al.
Environmental Research 160 (2018) 152–182
182
