 Switch-mediated activation and retargeting of
CAR-T cells for B-cell malignancies
David T. Rodgersa, Magdalena Mazagovaa, Eric N. Hamptona, Yu Caob, Nitya S. Ramadossa,1, Ian R. Hardya,2,
Andrew Schulmana, Juanjuan Dua, Feng Wanga, Oded Singera,3, Jennifer Maa, Vanessa Nuneza, Jiayin Shena,4,
Ashley K. Woodsa, Timothy M. Wrighta, Peter G. Schultza,b,5, Chan Hyuk Kima,5, and Travis S. Younga,5
aDepartment of Biology, California Institute for Biomedical Research, La Jolla, CA 92019; and bDepartment of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for
Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037
Contributed by Peter G. Schultz, December 11, 2015 (sent for review October 23, 2015; reviewed by Carl H. June and Kevan M. Shokat)
Chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cell therapy has produced
impressive results in clinical trials for B-cell malignancies. However,
safety concerns related to the inability to control CAR-T cells once
infused into the patient remain a significant challenge. Here we
report the engineering of recombinant antibody-based bifunc-
tional switches that consist of a tumor antigen-specific Fab molecule
engrafted with a peptide neo-epitope, which is bound exclusively
by a peptide-specific switchable CAR-T cell (sCAR-T). The switch
redirects the activity of the bio-orthogonal sCAR-T cells through the
selective formation of immunological synapses, in which the sCAR-T
cell, switch, and target cell interact in a structurally defined and
temporally controlled manner. Optimized switches specific for CD19
controlled the activity, tissue-homing, cytokine release, and pheno-
type of sCAR-T cells in a dose-titratable manner in a Nalm-6 xenograft
rodent model of B-cell leukemia. The sCAR–T-cell dosing regimen
could be tuned to provide efficacy comparable to the correspond-
ing conventional CART-19, but with lower cytokine levels, thereby
offering a method of mitigating cytokine release syndrome in clin-
ical translation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this methodol-
ogy is readily adaptable to targeting CD20 on cancer cells using the
same sCAR-T cell, suggesting that this approach may be broadly
applicable to heterogeneous and resistant tumor populations, as
well as other liquid and solid tumor antigens.
chimeric antigen receptor T cell | autologous cell therapy |
antibody engineering | cancer | leukemia
R
ecent clinical studies of chimeric antigen receptor T
(CAR-T) cells in heavily pretreated patients with B-cell
malignancies have demonstrated sustained remissions. CARs
endow patient-derived T cells with the ability to recognize and
eliminate cancer cells through a surface-displayed single-chain
antibody variable domain (scFv) coupled to intracellular co-
stimulatory and activation domains (1, 2). By linking the speci-
ficity of antibody recognition with T-cell–mediated cytotoxicity,
CAR-T cells are highly efficacious against antigen-positive tu-
mor cells in an HLA-independent manner. Thus far, the
greatest clinical successes have been achieved by targeting the
pan–B-cell antigen CD19 (CART-19) in patients with relapsed
refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) (3). The success of
CART-19 in treating patients who have previously failed treatment
with the CD19 bispecific blinatumomab highlights the benefits of
genetic engineering approaches that enhance the cellular immune
response to tumors (4).
Despite impressive success in early-stage clinical trials, con-
ventional CAR-T cells have limitations associated with the lack
of control over their activation and expansion in vivo (5). For
example, CAR-T cells undergo rapid proliferation (up to 104-fold
expansion) upon encountering antigen-positive cells in the patient,
which has resulted in serious cases of tumor lysis syndrome (TLS)
and fatal cytokine release syndrome (CRS) (6–8). Further com-
plications may be caused by the persistent on-target activity
of CAR-T cells. For example, in the case of CART-19, engineered
T cells indiscriminately kill malignant and normal B cells, leading
to long-term B-cell aplasia (9, 10). Finally, the fixed antigen-
specificity of conventional CAR-T cells precludes the targeting of
antigen-loss escape mutants, which has recently been shown to be
a source of relapse in up to 10% of ALL patients undergoing
CART-19 therapy (4, 10–12).
Approaches to improving CAR–T-cell safety have included
the use of kill switches that can eliminate CAR-T cells in the case
of severe toxicity (13, 14). However, kill switches do not provide
control over T-cell activation and expansion, and result in the
irreversible elimination of potentially therapeutic CAR-T cells.
More recently, a split chimeric receptor has been described that
dimerizes in the presence of a small molecule, and thereby
provides tunable CAR–T-cell activity (15). However, this
approach is still limited by the fixed antigen-specificity of conven-
tional CAR design. Alternatively, strategies that use antibody-
based switches to mediate the interaction between the CAR-T cell
and target cell enable full control over both activity and speci-
ficity (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A) (16–18). By combining the titrat-
ability of antibody-based therapies with the efficacy of genetically
modified CAR-T cells, this approach has the potential to prevent
CRS and TLS through improved control of the CAR–T-cell
Significance
Chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cell therapy has produced
promising results in clinical trials but has been challenged by
the inability to control engineered cells once infused into the
patient. Here we present a generalizable method of controlling
CAR-T cells using peptide-engrafted antibody-based molecular
switches that act as a bridge between the target cell and CAR-T
cell. We show that switches specific for CD19 govern the activity,
tissue-homing, cytokine release, and phenotype of switchable
CAR-T cells in a dose-titratable manner using xenograft mouse
models of B-cell leukemia. We expect that this method of tuning
CAR-T cell responses will provide improved safety and versatility
of CAR–T-cell therapy in the clinic.
Author contributions: D.T.R., T.M.W., P.G.S., C.H.K., and T.S.Y. designed research; D.T.R.,
M.M., E.N.H., Y.C., N.S.R., I.R.H., A.S., O.S., J.M., V.N., J.S., and A.K.W. performed research;
J.D. and F.W. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; T.M.W., P.G.S., C.H.K., and T.S.Y.
analyzed data; and D.T.R., P.G.S., and T.S.Y. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: C.H.J., University of Pennsylvania; and K.M.S., University of California,
San Francisco.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1Present address: Shriram Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305.
2Present address: Fate Therapeutics, San Diego, CA 92121.
3Present address: Viral Vector Core, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
4Present address: Department of Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Public Health Clinical
Center, Fudan University, Shanghai 201508, China.
5To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: schultz@scripps.edu, chkim@calibr.org,
or tyoung@calibr.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1524155113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524155113
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2016
|
E459–E468
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 activation. The modularity of such an approach allows targeting
of a broader range of antigens by a single switchable CAR-T
(sCAR-T) cell, which may be an effective strategy for addressing
antigen-loss relapse mutations and heterogeneous tumors.
Here we describe a method of switch-mediated activation and
retargeting of CAR-T cells in which antibody-based switches are
engineered by the introduction of peptide neo-epitopes (PNE) at
defined locations in an antigen-specific antibody. The sCAR-T
cell binds the PNE and no endogenous tissue or antigen, and is
therefore strictly dependent on the presence of the switch for
activation. We show that this approach affords control over the
geometry of the immunological synapse between the sCAR-T
cell, switch, and target cell, and allows rapid optimization of
activity, which results in excellent potency in vitro and in vivo
that is comparable to a conventional CAR-T cell. Given the
breadth of prior research on CART-19, along with the need for a
solution to the CRS and long-term B-cell aplasia associated with
its clinical use, we initially developed this methodology in the
context of CD19-expressing B-cell malignancies. However, we
also show that this approach is readily adaptable to target CD20-
expressing cells, suggesting that sCAR-T cells may be applicable
to a wide-range of tumor antigens.
Results
Design of an Orthogonal sCAR-T Cell. A 14-aa PNE sequence from
the yeast transcription factor GCN4 was chosen as the target of
the sCAR. This sequence does not occur in the human proteome
and thereby provides an orthogonal interaction between the
sCAR-T cell and switch. Moreover, high-affinity antibodies against
this peptide have been previously developed by directed evolu-
tion (19–21). To determine the risk of immunogenicity associ-
ated with engraftment of this nonhuman sequence into an
antibody fragment (Fab) to create a switch, we performed an in
silico immunogenicity analysis of the PNE linked to the N terminus
of the light or heavy chains of a model, therapeutically approved
antibody (Herceptin) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1B). This analysis
predicted the PNE graft to have a low probability of inducing an
antibody response in the context of a prototypical antibody and
supported its use in generating switches. To generate switch
molecules specific for the CD19 antigen, the PNE was in-
troduced at defined sites in the anti-CD19 antibody FMC63 (22).
This antibody clone is used in the most widely studied conven-
tional CART-19 construct in clinical trials and thus provides a
direct comparison for the sCAR–T-cell system (23). By varying
the stoichiometry and site of PNE engraftment in FMC63,
we could systematically vary the valency and orientation of the
Fig. 1.
Relative orientations and in vitro activity of switches. (A) Schematic depicting the immunological synapse between the sCAR, switch, and antigen
(Left); ribbon diagrams depicting the different switch designs (Right), where the light chain is shown in gold, heavy chain in green, and PNE in blue; the rigid
linker on HCNT is shown in gray. The diagrams are oriented such that the antigen-binding interface is at the top. (B) Cytotoxicity of sCAR-T cells against CD19+
RS4;11 cells with titration of anti-CD19 Fab switch molecules. Corresponding IgG designs are shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S5A. (C) Table of EC50 values of
cytotoxicity from B. (D) Cytotoxicity of sCAR-T cells against CD19− K562 cells with the anti-CD19 Fab switch molecules. Corresponding IgG switches are shown
in SI Appendix, Fig. S5B. (E) IL-2 released from sCAR-T cells cultured with RS4;11 or K562 and 1-nM anti-CD19 Fab switches. Gray asterisks denote significance
compared with wild-type switch and black asterisks denote significance between switches. (F) Cytotoxicity of sCAR-T cells against CD20+ Raji cells with the
anti-CD20 Fab switch molecules. (G) IL-2 released from sCAR-T cells cultured with Raji cells and 1 nM anti-CD20 Fab switches. All assays were performed with
effector to target (E:T) = 10:1 and 24 h incubation. Cytotoxicity was assessed by LDH release. Data are represented as mean ± SD. Where listed, values next to
switches show EC50 of cytotoxicity. Significance was calculated using the Student’s t test, where **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001.
E460
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524155113
Rodgers et al.
 antigen-binding region of the antibody switch relative to the scFv
on the T-cell surface (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1A). Four
fusions of the PNE were generated by linking the PNE to the
N or C terminus (NT or CT, respectively) of the heavy or light
chains (HC or LC, respectively) of the Fab with short peptide
linkers. We found that a GGGGS linker was suitable in all
positions except for fusion to the N terminus of the heavy chain
(HCNT), which afforded increased yields with a putative helical
forming EAAAK sequence motif (24) (SI Appendix). In addition,
we inserted the PNE directly into loops of the constant region 1
(C1) in the center of the heavy and light chains using a strategy
similar to one we had previously developed for direct peptide-
antibody loop fusions (25–27). These C1 constructs provided yet
another distinct binding orientation of the sCAR relative to the
target antigen, which could be preferable for certain antibody
epitopes on target antigens. Finally, the PNE was engrafted into
both the heavy and light chains to create bivalent switches (NTBV,
CTBV, C1BV). The PNE-engrafted switch molecules were effi-
ciently expressed in Fab and IgG format using transient trans-
fections in HEK cells, with yields 50–100% that of wild-type
FMC63 antibody (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 A and B). Engraftment of
the PNE at all sites in the Fab had minimal impact on protein
stability and antigen binding as determined by thermal melt assays
(SI Appendix, Fig. S3A) and flow cytometry-based binding to
CD19+ RS4;11 (EC50 = 5.6 nM ± 6.3) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B),
respectively.
To create a sCAR-T cell that recognizes the switch, a sCAR
was developed using the 52SR4 antibody, which selectively binds
the PNE with high affinity (Kd = 5.2 pM, reported) (21). The
52SR4 scFv was incorporated into a second generation CAR
construct harboring the human CD8 hinge (spacer), CD8 trans-
membrane, 4-1BB costimulatory, and CD3ζ activation domains.
This design is identical to the second generation CAR used by
June and coworkers in CART-19 (28). Lentiviral transduction of
this construct into freshly isolated human PBMCs demonstrated
efficient surface expression with transduction efficiencies of 50–
75%, which were comparable to the FMC63-based CART-19
(29) (SI Appendix, Fig. S4A). Switches bound to sCAR-T cells and
not to untransduced T cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S4B), demon-
strating that the sCAR–T-cell–switch interaction is highly specific.
Site and Valency of PNE Engraftment Affects sCAR–T-Cell Potency in
Vitro. To empirically determine the optimal switch design for
CD19, we tested the potency of each switch in vitro. All switches
elicited dose-dependent lysis of CD19+ RS4;11 cells in the
presence of sCAR-T cells at picomolar concentrations (Fig. 1 B
and C and SI Appendix, Fig. S5A). There was a clear structure
activity relationship between cytotoxicity and the location of the
PNE in the antibody. Switches with the PNE engrafted proximal
to the antigen binding site (LCNT, HCNT, NTBV) were gen-
erally more potent than switches with the PNE engrafted at the
C1 (LCC1, HCC1, C1BV) or C terminus (LCCT, HCCT, CTBV)
of the Fab region. No significant lysis of CD19− K562 cells was
observed for any Fab or IgG switch design, even at concentra-
tions 103-fold higher than the EC50 (Fig. 1D and SI Appendix,
Fig. S5B). In addition, wild-type anti-CD19 Fab and IgG lacking
the PNE peptide did not induce significant cytotoxicity, dem-
onstrating a strict requirement for PNE-mediated immunological
synapse formation. We chose to further pursue switches in the
Fab format rather than IgG because the Fab has a shorter
pharmacokinetic half-life, which we predicted would enable greater
temporal control over the response in vivo.
Consistent with the cytotoxicity results, all switches induced
robust IL-2 release (Fig. 1E), with the N-terminal PNE switches
providing greater IL-2 responses than the constant region or
C-terminal PNE switch molecules. Notably, the NTBV switch
induced the greatest IL-2 production against RS4;11 cells, in-
dicating a potential benefit of engagement of two sCARs with
one switch. Again, addition of the switches did not stimulate
cytokine release in the presence of sCAR-T cells and CD19−
K562 cells, confirming that switch binding to the sCAR-T cell
alone is not sufficient for activation (Fig. 1E). Consistent with
the cytokine release data, markers of T-cell activation (CD25+,
CD69+) on sCAR-T cells were only up-regulated by the switches
in the presence of CD19+ RS4;11 cells and not CD19− K562 cells
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5C). These results clearly demonstrate that
sCAR–T-cell effector function, as measured by activation, cyto-
kine production, and target cell killing, is dependent on the
presence of both a target antigen and switch.
To determine whether the same sCAR-T cell could be used to
target other antigens relevant to B-cell malignancies, a similar
panel of switches was constructed to bind CD20-expressing
cancer cells based on the anti-CD20 antibody Ofatumumab
(OFA) (SI Appendix, Fig. S2C) (30). Along with CD19, CD20 is
an important pan–B-cell marker and the most widely targeted
B-cell antigen in the clinic. To develop the anti-CD20 switch, the
OFA antibody was chosen because it binds a membrane proximal
epitope (31), which might lead to enhanced activity because of
the close association of the T cell and cancer cell. Switches were
generated in a fashion similar to the CD19 switches. Consistent
with the trend for FMC63, N-terminal PNE switches were found
to be more cytotoxic than C-terminal PNE switches (EC50 = 1.1–
6.8 pM vs. 4.7–15 pM, respectively) against CD20+ Raji cells
(Fig. 1F). In addition, anti-CD20 N-terminal PNE switches
stimulated higher levels of cytokine release than C terminus PNE
switches (Fig. 1G).
Optimization of the sCAR Design Improves Activity in Vitro. We hy-
pothesized that the increased activity of switches with the PNE
engrafted proximal to the antigen binding domain was the result
of a decreased overall distance between the sCAR-T cell and
target cell (32). To determine whether the distance could be
further shortened to increase activity, we modified the hinge
region of the sCAR itself (also referred to as the spacer domain),
which connects the anti-PNE scFv to the transmembrane domain
of the sCAR. The initial sCAR design used a 45-aa CD8-based
hinge identical to that of conventional CART-19. To test a
shorter hinge, this region of the sCAR was replaced with a 12-aa
sequence derived from the hinge of IgG4 (SI Appendix, SI Methods
and Fig. S6A). As expected, the IgG4-hinge–based sCAR-T cells
had increased cytotoxicity in the presence of the LCNT switch
against RS4;11 cells compared with CD8-hinge–based sCAR-T
cells (Fig. 2A), while retaining antigen specificity for CD19+ cells
(Fig. 2B and SI Appendix, Fig. S7A).
We also hypothesized that the increased cytokine induction
observed with the bivalent NTBV switch reflected an effect of
increased valency on sCAR–T-cell activation. To test whether
this notion could be translated to the IgG4 sCAR design, a
serine-to-proline mutation [S228P relative to the IgG4 molecule
(33)] was incorporated in the IgG4 hinge to enhance interchain
sCAR disulfide formation (IgG4m) (SI Appendix, Fig. S6A).
Consistent with previous reports, Western blot analysis confirmed
that the sCAR and CART-19 CD8-based hinges formed sponta-
neous disulfide dimers in the absence of CAR stimulation (SI
Appendix, Fig. S6B) (34). Dimers also formed for the IgG4m-
based sCAR hinge containing the S228P mutation, but not for the
IgG4 hinge lacking this mutation. As expected, the maximum cell
lysis and EC50 of cytotoxicity of the IgG4m sCAR against RS4;11
cells with the LCNT switch were increased compared with the
IgG4 sCAR lacking the S228P mutation (Fig. 2A). This result is
consistent with Riddell and coworkers, in which the same IgG4m
hinge design increased the activity of anti-ROR1 conventional
CAR-T cell compared with other hinge designs in their study (35,
36). However, no corresponding monomeric IgG4 hinge was
compared in that study. Thus, our result supports that the S228P
Rodgers et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2016
|
E461
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 mutation in the IgG4 hinge confers increased sCAR–T-cell ac-
tivation through dimerization of the sCAR.
We next determined the additive effect of switch and hinge
design on sCAR activity, and compared this with conventional
CART-19. Each switch design was empirically tested in combi-
nation with each hinge design in dose–response for cytotoxicity,
cytokine release, and up-regulation of activation markers in the
presence of RS4;11 cells. As expected, the observed trend was
that cytotoxicity increased as the PNE engraftment site moved
from the C-to-N terminus and as the hinge design was shortened
from the 45-aa CD8 design to the 12-aa IgG4 design; this was
further increased with the IgG4m design (Fig. 2A and SI
Appendix, Fig. S7A). Correspondingly, IL-2 release with 1-nM
switch was greater with the N-terminal PNE switches (HCNT,
LCNT, NTBV) and the IgG4 and IgG4m hinges than with the
C-terminal PNE switches (HCCT, LCCT, NTCT) and CD8 hinge
(Fig. 2B). The NTBV switch increased IL-2 production from CD8
sCAR-T cells by 50% but did not have a significant impact on
sCAR-T cells harboring the IgG4 or IgG4m hinges. We expect this
may be a result of steric clashes with the shorter IgG4 and IgG4m
hinges, which prevent binding of two sCARs to two N-terminal
PNEs on one bivalent switch molecule. The trend in switch design
on the up-regulation of T-cell activation markers was similar to
that observed for cytotoxicity and cytokine production, with the
greatest activation observed in response to the LCNT switch (Fig.
2C). Collectively, the LCNT switch with the IgG4m sCAR-T cell
demonstrated the greatest cytotoxicity compared with other switch/
hinge designs and afforded cytokine release and up-regulation of
T-cell activation markers that were significantly greater against
CD19+ RS4;11 cells.
Specificity of sCAR–T-cell activation is a critical design con-
sideration for switch-based control. Therefore, to confirm that
the improved activity of the IgG4m sCAR did not sacrifice
specificity, we repeated the assays above on CD19− K562 cells.
The IgG4m sCAR did not cause significant lysis of K562 cells
with up to 10 nM of any switch molecule (Fig. 2D and SI
Appendix, Fig. S8 A and B), nor did the IgG4m sCAR pro-
duce IL-2 in the presence of K562 cells and any of the
switches (SI Appendix, Fig. S8C). Furthermore, the IgG4m
sCAR-T cells did not exhibit significant up-regulation of
activation markers compared with nontransduced (mock)
cells in the absence of the PNE-engrafted switch and target
antigen (Fig. 2E). Taken together, these data confirmed
that the improved activity of the IgG4m sCAR did not result
in antigen-independent activation. Finally, the activity of
sCAR-T cells on RS4;11 cells could be fully inhibited by the
addition of an excess of soluble, synthetic PNE peptide,
further demonstrating the requirement of a switch for activity
(SI Appendix, Fig. S8D).
To test whether the improved IgG4m hinge design extends to
the anti-CD20 OFA switches, we tested the anti-CD20 switches
with IgG4m sCAR-T cells on CD20+ Raji cells. As expected,
cytotoxicity was increased with the IgG4m sCAR for all CD20
switches compared with CD8 sCAR-T cells (Fig. 2F). Un-
expectedly, however, the trend in anti-CD20 switch design with
the IgG4m sCAR was opposite to what was observed with the
CD8 sCAR (Fig. 1G). In this case the C-terminal PNE switches
were 10- to 100-fold more potent than the N-terminal PNE
switches. We hypothesized that this is because of the membrane
proximal epitope of the OFA on CD20, which may require ad-
ditional distance between the PNE and antigen-binding interface
of the Fab when the hinge region of the sCAR is short, to alle-
viate steric clashes at the immunological synapse. Collectively
the above studies demonstrate that the activity of sCAR-T cells
Fig. 2.
Activity of sCAR hinge designs. (A) Cytotoxicity of sCAR-T cells with CD8, IgG4, or IgG4m hinges, or nontransduced T cells (mock) against CD19+ RS4;11
cells with titration of the anti-CD19 LCNT switch molecule. (B) IL-2 released from sCAR-T cells cultured with RS4;11 cells and 1-nM anti-CD19 Fab switches; gray
asterisks denote significance between CART-19 and sCAR-T cells and black asterisks denote significance between sCAR–T-cell hinges; mean values for CART-19
is indicated by dotted horizontal line. (C) Quantification of the T-cell activation assay in the presence of 1 nM of each anti-CD19 Fab switch. (D) Cytotoxicity as
described in A against CD19− K562 cells. (E) Activation of sCAR-T cells with IgG4m hinge or mock cells in the presence of RS4;11 cells with or without 1-nM
LCNT Fab switch measured by flow cytometry with staining for CD25 and CD69. (F) Cytotoxicity of sCAR-T cells against CD20+ Raji cells with titration of anti-
CD20 Fab switch molecules. Values listed next to switches show EC50 of cytotoxicity. All cytotoxicity and cytokine assays were performed with E:T = 10:1 and
24 h incubation. Cytotoxicity was assessed by LDH release. Data are represented as mean ± SD, and statistical significance was calculated using the one-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s posttest (B and D), where *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
E462
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524155113
Rodgers et al.
 can be significantly enhanced through both sCAR hinge and
switch design and underscore the advantages of being able to
optimized each.
Switch and Hinge Design Effects on Tumor Clearance in Vivo. To
investigate the activity of sCAR-T cells in vivo, we evaluated
tumor regression in a xenograft model of B-cell leukemia using
luciferized human B-ALL Nalm-6 cells in immunodeficient
NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice. In this model,
mice without treatment succumb to disease within 21 d. First, to
understand the impact of CAR hinge design on in vivo efficacy,
mice were inoculated with Nalm-6, followed by intravenous in-
jection of CD8, IgG4, or IgG4m sCAR-T cells 6 d later (SI
Appendix, Fig. S9A). Based on our in vitro results, we chose the
anti-CD19 LCNT switch to test in this model. This switch was
dosed intravenous (0.5 mg/kg) every other day for 10 d and tu-
mor regression was followed by in vivo imaging (IVIS) of the
luciferase signal from Nalm-6 cells (Fig. 3A). In line with the in
vitro data, both IgG4 and IgG4m sCAR-T cells afforded a sig-
nificant decrease in tumor burden, whereas CD8 sCAR-T cells
had minimal impact on disease compared with untreated con-
trols (Fig. 3B). Increased T-cell counts in the peripheral blood at
day 17 corresponded with reduced tumor burden and revealed
that the IgG4m sCAR-T cells provided significantly greater
T-cell expansion compared with the IgG4 or CD8 hinge designs
(Fig. 3C). Based on this result, the IgG4m sCAR construct was
chosen for further in vivo analysis.
Next, we determined the effect of switch graft position and
valency on in vivo efficacy. As with the previous model, IgG4m
sCAR-T cells were injected 6 d after tumor inoculation and mice
were treated every other day (starting at day 6) with the LCNT,
HCNT, NTBV, LCC1, or HCCT switches (0.5 mg/kg) (Fig. 3D).
Analogous to the in vitro data, the N-terminally grafted switches
(LCNT, HCNT, and NTBV) afforded the greatest reduction in
tumor burden, whereas switches with the PNE at the middle
(LCC1) or C terminus (HCCT) provided little control (Fig. 3E).
T-cell counts at day 20 correlated with reduction of tumor bur-
den and indicated the LCNT switch provided the greatest T-cell
expansion (Fig. 3F). In agreement with our in vitro data, the
combination of the LCNT switch with the IgG4m sCAR resulted
in the greatest efficacy in vivo and thus was used in subsequent
studies to explore the effect of switch-dosing regimen.
Clearance of Nalm-6 with the IgG4m sCAR-T cell and the
LCNT switch in the above model was observed to occur rapidly
during the first 96 h of treatment. To further investigate IgG4m
sCAR T-cell proliferation and localization during this time in-
terval, Nalm-6 engrafted NSG mice were sorted into four groups
and were treated with IgG4m sCAR-T cells (with or without the
LCNT switch), conventional CART-19 (with no switch), or no
cells. Each group was divided into five cohorts per treatment
regimen, which were analyzed at 8, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h after
T-cell infusion. Daily dosing of the LCNT switch (0.5 mg/kg)
reduced tumor burden within 24 h and continued to shrink the
tumor to the limit of luminescence detection (∼103–104 p/s/cm2/sr)
within 96 h (Fig. 4A). The rate of clearance during this time was
not significantly different from CART-19 (Fig. 4B). Human IL-2
in peripheral blood peaked at similar levels at 24 h for CART-19
and at 48 h for sCAR-T cells, and decreased as tumor was
cleared (Fig. 4B). As expected, IgG4m sCAR-T cells in the ab-
sence of switch had no effect on disease progression in this
Fig. 3.
In vivo activity of switch and hinge designs in Nalm-6 xenograft model. NSG mice were inoculated with CD19+ Nalm-6 cells. After 6 d the mice were
injected with luciferin and imaged on an IVIS before being randomly sorted into groups (n = 5) with representative tumor burden. Next, 40 × 106 sCAR-T cells
with a transduction efficiency of 50–75% were infused intravenously and switch-dosing commenced every other day at 0.5 mg/kg for 10 d. Tumor burden was
followed by IVIS. (A) Representative IVIS images depicting three of the mice from each of the groups treated with the CD8, IgG4, or IgG4m sCAR-T cells and
LCNT Fab switch are shown. (B) Quantified tumor burden (as average radiance from luciferase activity from each mouse) from A during switch-dosing period
(n = 5). (C) Enumeration of T cells in peripheral blood from A at day 17 by flow cytometry using CountBright Beads (Thermo). (D) Representative IVIS images
depicting three of the mice from each of the groups treated with the IgG4m sCAR-T cells and the anti-CD19 Fab switch designs indicated. (E) Quantified tumor
burden from D during the switch-dosing period (n = 5). (F) Enumeration of T cells in peripheral blood from D at day 20 by flow cytometry as in C. Asterisks
indicate significance from LCNT Fab group. Data are represented as mean ± SEM, and statistical significance was calculated using the two-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni’s posttest (B and E) (shown for final time-point only) or by one-tailed Student’s t test (C and F), where *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001;
ns, not significant.
Rodgers et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2016
|
E463
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 model, confirming requirement of switch dosing for in vivo an-
titumor effect. We also tracked IgG4m sCAR-T cells and tumor
in the spleen, lung, liver, and peripheral blood by flow cytometry
over the 96 h. During this time, Nalm-6 cells were only detect-
able in the lung and liver (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A). Correspond-
ingly, significantly increased levels of sCAR-T cells were found in
the lung and liver at 96 h in mice dosed with the LCNT switch
compared with mice not treated with switch (Fig. 4C). Switch
dosing did not increase sCAR–T-cell recruitment to the spleen
where tumor burden was not detectable. In the organs assessed,
sCAR-T cells had proliferated significantly more in the mice
treated with LCNT switch (by dye dilution experiments) compared
with no switch treatment, again demonstrating the requirement
for the switch for sCAR–T-cell expansion (Fig. 4D and SI
Appendix, Fig. S9B). The magnitude of sCAR–T-cell pro-
liferation when dosed with the LCNT switch was comparable to
that of CART-19 in both the liver and lung (SI Appendix, Fig. S9C).
Taken together, these results indicate that the IgG4m sCAR-T
cells dosed with the LCNT switch can expand and eliminate tumor
burden with comparable efficacy to conventional CART-19.
Dose-Dependent Control of sCAR–T-Cell Activity in Vivo. To de-
termine the minimal dose frequency required for a sustained
response with the IgG4m sCAR-T cells, we tested every day,
every other day, or every fifth day dosing of the LCNT switch
(0.5 mg/kg) for 15 d in the Nalm-6 model. Every day and every
other day dosing yielded comparable rates of tumor regression,
which was sustained for >100 d after dosing was discontinued
(Fig. 5A and SI Appendix, Fig. S10A). Mice that died between
days 40 and 100 (open circles) had no evidence of disease; ex-
piration in these cases was attributed to xenogeneic graft vs. host
disease caused by human T cells in the NSG mouse, as previously
described (37). Dosing every fifth day (three total dosages)
greatly decreased and stabilized disease burden at a low level,
but did not completely clear disease based on luciferase signal.
This finding corresponds with the expected short half-life for the
Fab-based switch in the mouse. Residual disease in this group
relapsed when dosing was discontinued indicating that the ac-
tivity of the sCAR-T cells toward the Nalm-6 cells had been
turned “off” in the absence of the switch; nevertheless sCAR-T
cells were still detectable in blood up to 64 d after injection (SI
Appendix, Fig. S10B).
Control of cytokine production in vivo is important to prevent
CRS in patients receiving CAR–T-cell therapy. To investigate
the potential of switch-regulated IgG4m sCAR-T cells to achieve
reduced cytokine release in vivo, we correlated switch dosage
with cytokine release by the IgG4m sCAR-T cells in the Nalm-6
model. Mice dosed everyday with 0.05, 0.5, or 2.5 mg/kg of the
LCNT switch showed a dose-dependent increase in serum IL-2,
IFN-γ, and TNF-α at 24 h (Fig. 5B) that correlated with dose-
dependent reductions in tumor burden by day 10 (Fig. 5C).
Cytokine production in the 0.5- and 2.5-mg/kg groups was not
significantly different from CART-19 at 24 h for all cytokines,
except for serum TNF-α, which was decreased in the 2.5-mg/kg
group compared with CART-19. However, all cytokines in the
0.05-mg/kg group were significantly lower than CART-19.
To determine if treatment with the lower dose of 0.05 mg/kg
could be efficacious, despite lower levels of cytokine production,
Fig. 4.
sCAR–T-cell expansion and localization during tumor clearance. NSG mice were inoculated with Nalm-6 as described in Fig. 3. (A) After 6 d, mice were
sorted into four groups. Three groups containing five cohorts of mice with representative tumor burden before being injected intravenously with 40 × 106
CART-19, IgG4m sCAR-T cells with (+) LCNT Fab switch, or no T cells (PBS group). A fourth group consisted of two cohorts (n = 3) of mice injected intravenously
with IgG4m sCAR-T cells without (−) LCNT Fab switch were analyzed at 8 h and 96 h only. LCNT Fab dosing (0.5 mg/kg) in the (+) group was started with initial
T-cell infusion and continued daily for 5 d. Luminescence was measured at 8 h and subsequently every 24 h, as indicated. All cells were labeled with eFluor
450 cell proliferation dye before injection. (B) Quantified tumor burden (radiance, left axis, solid line) and quantified human IL-2 (pg/mL, right axis, dashed
line) in peripheral blood from each cohort shown in A at each time point. Gray lines indicate tumor burden in PBS and IgG4m sCAR–T-cell −LCNT Fab controls.
(C) The proportion of leukocytes that were human CD3+CD4/8+ in the blood, spleen, lungs and liver at 96 h in the +LCNT and −LCNT groups was quantified by
flow cytometry. (D) Relative proliferation of T cells in the spleen, lung, and liver at 96 h in +LCNT and −LCNT Fab groups, determined by eFluor 450 dye
dilution shown as 1/mean fluorescence intensity. Data are represented as means ± SEM, and statistical significance was calculated using the one-tailed
Student’s t test (C and D), where *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
E464
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524155113
Rodgers et al.
 dosing of the LCNT switch was carried out every day for 10 d in
the Nalm-6 model. At this low dose, tumor clearance was cor-
respondingly slower compared with the conventional CART-19
and previous models, but still reached the limit of detection by
the final day of dosing (day 16) (Fig. 5D). The Nalm-6 tumor
relapsed in the 0.05-mg/kg treatment group at day 30 (15 d after
the final dose), at which time the luciferase signal was signifi-
cantly higher than for CART-19 treatment. These mice were
retreated with a higher dose of the LCNT switch (0.5 mg/kg) for
an additional 10 d. This retreatment regimen effectively de-
creased tumor signal to equivalent levels as CART-19 within 5 d
and the mice remained tumor-free for >35 d after the final dose
of the second treatment period. Thus, IgG4m sCAR-T cells in
combination with an escalating switch-dose regimen can control
cytokine release, while still providing efficacy comparable to
conventional CART-19. This titration approach to reducing tu-
mor burden with a lower initial dose of switch followed by in-
creasing sCAR T-cell activity by escalating the switch dose may
be an effective strategy for avoiding CRS in the clinic.
Persistent memory phenotypes have been correlated with
complete remissions in CAR–T-cell therapy clinical trials for
leukemia (38). To understand whether the switch dose can in-
fluence IgG4m sCAR–T-cell populations, we dosed NSG mice
bearing the Nalm-6 tumor xenograft with 0.05-, 0.5-, or 2.5-mg/kg
LCNT switch and analyzed the expression of CD45RA and
CD62-L on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood after
21 d (5 d after the final dose). The 2.5-mg/kg group demon-
strated significant expansion of the CD45RA+CD62L− terminal
effector memory expressing CD45RA (TEMRA) compartment
in both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells compared with the lower-dose
groups (Fig. 5E and SI Appendix, Fig. S10C). Conventional
CART-19 exhibited the greatest increase in TEMRA population,
consistent with strong activation through the direct CAR design.
Conversely, the lower-dose groups that received 0.05 and 0.5 mg/kg
of switch had significantly larger populations of CD45RA−CD62L+
central memory cells compared with the 2.5-mg/kg group, which
we hypothesize is a result of lower levels of stimulation during
the initial dosing period. Thus, this result may indicate a po-
tential benefit derived from low-dose treatment of sCAR-T
cells during the initial stages of tumor clearance. Collectively,
these results demonstrate that switch dose can control the activity,
tissue-localization, cytokine release, and phenotype of sCAR-T
cells in the Nalm-6 xenograft model with efficacy comparable to
the corresponding conventional CART-19.
Discussion
We have demonstrated that protein engineering can be used to
create antibody-based switches that redirect the activity of bio-
orthogonal anti-PNE sCAR-T cells to tumors. Moreover, we
show this methodology allows one to systematically optimize the
activity of the sCAR by varying the geometry and valency of the
switch molecule. Similar approaches have been described using
antibodies that are nonspecifically or enzymatically labeled with
small-molecule haptens to redirect the activity antihapten CARs
(16, 17). However, these systems do not easily allow for opti-
mization of the immunological synapse between the CAR-T cell,
antibody, and target cell. The importance of the spatial orien-
tation between the T cell and target cell demonstrated in our
studies is in agreement with several recent studies using conven-
tional CARs, which showed that variation in the epitope location
Fig. 5.
Influence of switch dosing regimen on sCAR–T-cell activation and efficacy. NSG mice (n = 3) were inoculated with Nalm-6 and 6 d later were engrafted
with IgG4m sCAR-T cells (transduction efficiency and CD4:CD8 ratio of injected cells: 60%, 1:1.23) as described in Fig. 3. (A) Quantified tumor burden from
groups dosed every day (q.d.), every other day (q.a.d.), or every fifth day (q.5.d.) with 0.5 mg/kg LCNT. Dosing was carried out for 15 d starting at day 6
(corresponding with IgG4m sCAR–T-cell infusion), as indicated by gray shading (day 6–21). The NS group received IgG4m sCAR-T cells and injections of PBS.
Open circles denote the death of individual mice without evidence of tumor burden and likely reflect graft vs. host disease. Triangles in the q.5.d. group
indicates mouse expiration because of increasing tumor burden (n = 3). (B) Levels of IL-2, IFN-γ, and TNF-α at 24 h after first dose, from groups dosed every day
with 0, 0.05, 0.5, or 2.5 mg/kg of LCNT. CART-19 is labeled as “(19)” (n = 5). (C) Quantified tumor burden by IVIS from groups in B after 10 d. (D) Quantified
tumor burden from mice dosed with 0.05 mg/kg LCNT for 10 d indicated by gray shading (day 6–16). Dosing was resumed at 0.5 mg/kg when the average
tumor burden in group became significantly higher than CART-19 control at day 30, indicated by an asterisk and second gray shading (day 30–40). Triangles
indicate the death of individual mice with significant tumor burden (n = 5). Transduction efficiency and CD4:CD8 ratio of injected cells: CART19 = 68%, 1:1.63
and sCAR-T = 75%, 1:1.89. (E) The phenotype of T cells in the peripheral blood from (B and C) after 21 d as the proportion of CD3+CD4/CD8+ by flow
cytometry with staining for CD62-L and CD45RA (n = 5). Statistical significance was calculated using the one-tailed Student’s t test (B, C, and E), where
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001; NS, not significant.
Rodgers et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2016
|
E465
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 of different targeting scFvs require compensatory CAR hinge
designs for efficient CAR–T-cell activity (35, 36, 39, 40).
In the context of CD19 targeting, switches with the PNE
engrafted at the N terminus (HCNT, LCNT, NTBV), proximal
to the antigen-binding interface of FMC63, were found to be
superior to switches with the PNE grafted at the C terminus
(HCCT, LCCT, CTBV). Although the epitope of FMC63 and
corresponding structure of the CD19 antigen are not known (41),
we hypothesized that this trend was because of a decreased
distance between the target cell and sCAR-T cell. In the case of
the immunological synapse formed by the native T-cell receptor,
the distance between the T cell and antigen presenting cell is
reported to be ∼130–150 Å (42, 43). This distance is important to
sterically exclude inhibitory phosphatases such as CD45 and
CD148 from the synapse, which act to dephosphorylate signal-
ing molecules and down-regulate T-cell activation (44). It is
likely that the longer synapse resulting from the C-terminal
switches (∼70 Å longer than the N-terminal switches) is unable
to sterically exclude these inhibitory molecules, resulting in less-
productive sCAR signaling. The increase in sCAR–T-cell activity
observed when the sCAR hinge was shortened from 45 amino
acids to 12 amino acids supports this hypothesis. A similar re-
lationship was observed in the accompanying publication which
reports a sCAR-T cell specific for FITC and a FMC63-based
switch molecule that is site-specifically modified with FITC (45).
FITC conjugation sites near the antigen-binding interface
afforded better activity than sites distal to the binding interface.
Moreover, we have shown, in that study, that nonspecific con-
jugation of switches with FITC did not provide sufficient in vivo
activity to clear Nalm-6 tumor (45). Collectively, these studies
underscore the importance of switch structure on optimizing
immunological synapse geometry, which directly impacts sCAR–
T-cell activity.
Switches based on the OFA antibody scaffold that target
CD20 exhibited a trend similar to the FMC63 antibody when
paired with sCAR-T cells harboring the CD8-based hinge. In-
terestingly, when the sCAR hinge was shortened to the 12-aa
IgG4m hinge, the trend for OFA switches was reversed and
C-terminal PNE switches afforded better activity than N-terminal
switches. Although the structure of CD20 antibody is also un-
known, the OFA antibody is reported to bind a small, mem-
brane proximal loop of the multipass transmembrane CD20
antigen (31). In this case, it is likely that the distance created by
the N-terminal OFA switches with the IgG4m sCAR is too
short to enable efficient synapse formation between the sCAR
and CD20. Alternatively, the large adjacent loop domain of the
CD20 antigen may create a steric hindrance for binding of the
IgG4m sCAR. We observed a similar effect supporting this hy-
pothesis in our work with site-specific FITC conjugation on the
anti-CD22 antibody m971 (45). In this case, the m971 antibody
has a membrane proximal epitope on CD22 (39) and several large
modular domains that may sterically preclude binding. Corre-
spondingly, the m971 switches were optimal with FITC placed at
sites distal from the antigen-binding interface. Thus, the geometry
of the immunological synapse is a key parameter to consider when
designing switches and highlights the requirement for precise
control over switch structure, which cannot be accomplished with
previously reported platforms.
A central tenant of the sCAR-T cells described here is the
orthogonality of PNE-engrafted switches in that they only in-
teract with the target cell and sCAR and no other immune re-
ceptors or cell types. Recently, Campana and coworkers reported
a CD16 (Fc receptor)-based CAR-T cell for use in combination
with therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (46). However, CD16
indiscriminately binds to therapeutic and naturally occurring an-
tibodies, which yields the potential for any endogenous antibody to
activate the CD16-CAR. This lack of orthogonality has the po-
tential to cause off-target effects. Thus, in the development of
orthogonal switches, Fabs may be desirable because their lack of
an Fc domain removes the possibility of an Fc receptor-mediated
off-target binding. In addition, the smaller size and shorter half-
life of Fab molecules [∼12–20 h for Fab (47) vs. 10 d for IgG (48)]
is also expected to provide better tumor penetration and greater
temporal control over sCAR–T-cell activation in clinical trans-
lation. We expect this will correlate with every other day or twice a
week dosing in the clinic.
To assess the efficacy of the sCAR–T-cell approach in vivo, we
chose the Nalm-6 xenograft model. Because the Nalm-6 tumor
lacks CD80 and CD86 coreceptors, it is difficult to treat and has
become a standard for CAR-T therapy adjudication (49). Our
sCAR–T-cell platform was able to eliminate Nalm-6 with com-
parable efficacy to conventional CART-19 T cells. Interestingly,
differences in the in vitro lytic activity of switch/hinge designs
that were generally less than 10-fold by EC50 were highly am-
plified for in vivo tumor elimination, reinforcing the need for
careful in vitro design to provide robust in vivo activity. In ad-
dition to eliminating the tumor, in vivo expansion and trafficking
of sCAR-T cells to sites of disease was demonstrated to be re-
liant on switch dosing. Conventional CAR–T-cell expansion and
trafficking in human trials have been shown to be predictive of
clinical responses (50). Importantly, serum levels of human cy-
tokines IL-2, TNF-α, and IFN-γ were tightly controlled by LCNT
switch dose. The exception was TNF-α, which was not in-
creased in the 2.5-mg/kg group compared with the 0.5-mg/kg
group, suggesting a potential maximum induction of this cytokine
with 0.5 mg/kg LCNT; however, it is also possible that TNF-α in
the 2.5-mg/kg group peaked earlier than 24 h, which was not
captured in this experiment.
A key finding of this study was that sCAR-T cells treated with
lower levels of LCNT switch (0.05 mg/kg) provided clearance of
Nalm-6 at a slower rate and with lower levels of cytokine release.
This finding suggests that low-dose switch treatment could be an
effective method of mitigating CRS and TLS in the treatment of
patients with high tumor burdens. When tumor relapsed at day
30, mice were retreated with a higher dose of 0.5 mg/kg to ensure
clearance. Because of the lower tumor burden at this stage, ex-
cessive cytokine release would not be expected. The titration of
sCAR–T-cell “on” activity to prevent CRS and TLS in the clinic
would be a significant paradigm shift from proposed use of kill
switches which can only turn “off” the CAR–T-cell response in
the case of an adverse event (14).
Another key finding of the dose-titration study was the impact
of switch dose on sCAR–T-cell phenotype. This experiment
demonstrated a potential advantage to low-dose (0.05 mg/kg)
switch treatment in its ability to maintain a larger CD62-L+ central
memory compartment compared with high-dose (2.5 mg/kg)
treatment, which produced more TEMRA cells at day 21 (15 d
after T-cell infusion). The formation of central memory CAR-T
cells has been shown to provide prolonged persistence in clinical
trials, and persistence has been correlated with sustained remis-
sions for ALL and chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients (51, 52).
In the sCAR–T-cell system, clinical persistence will also be critical
to enable redosing strategies in the case of relapse. Thus, the
ability to affect CAR–T-cell phenotype through dosing par-
adigms may be advantageous. We are currently exploring the
impact of sCAR–T-cell phenotype on persistence in surrogate,
syngeneic mouse models.
Toward translating sCAR-T cells to the clinic, we have initi-
ated humanization and in silico prediction of T-cell epitopes for
the murine 52SR4-based sCAR and FMC63-based switch to
reduce the risk of development of human anti-mouse (HAMA)
antibodies. We expect this will be important to ensure orthogo-
nality of the sCAR–T-cell/switch interaction is not compromised
by a HAMA response and to prevent immunological clearance of
sCAR-T cells. Although the PNE sequence does not occur in the
human proteome, it cannot be excluded that antigenic mimicry
E466
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524155113
Rodgers et al.
 could lead to off-target activation. Toward understanding this
risk, we have initiated tissue cross-reactivity studies with the
52SR4 scFv.
In summary, sCAR-T cells represent a promising new para-
digm in cell therapy that have the potential for improved safety
and versatility compared with current T-cell therapies. We are
currently testing sCAR-T cells in solid tumor models where the
ability to titrate therapy to minimize organ toxicity due to shared
antigen expression and bystander cellular toxicity may be critical
(53). In addition, this added control over sCAR–T-cell activity
may allow engineered cells to be turned off after tumor elimi-
nation to allow healthy B cells to repopulate in leukemia and
lymphoma patients who are in remission. Indeed, in the com-
panion article we show that switch discontinuation can lead to
the restoration of the peripheral blood B cells in a surrogate
mouse model using anti-FITC CAR-T cells and FITC labeled
anti-murine CD19 switches (45). Finally, we expect that the
ability of sCAR-T cells to target more than one antigen in vivo by
codelivery of CD19 and CD20 switches may be an effective
method to prevent relapse as a result of antigen-loss escape
mutations in patients (11), and may provide improved efficacy in
the treatment of cancers with heterogeneous antigen expression.
Furthermore, the development of a single, universal sCAR-T cell
is expected to obviate the development of a new CAR for each
target and off-set the cost of cell therapy by standardizing vector
design, cell manufacture, and treatment protocols across multiple
indications.
Materials and Methods
Cell Lines and Human T Cells. RS4;11, Raji, and K562 cells were purchased from
ATCC and cultured as per ATCC recommendations. Nalm-6 cells transduced
with a GFP and firefly luciferase were kindly provided by R. Kochenderfer
(National Cancer Institute) and cultured as per ATCC recommendations.
Human T cells were obtained by Ficoll-Pacque purification of peripheral blood
monocytes from normal donor whole blood from The Scripps Research In-
stitute’s Normal Blood Donor Service at Scripps General Clinical Research
Center, under the appropriate The Scripps Research Institute’s Institutional
Review Board approval. Transduced CAR-T cells were subsequently cultured
in Aim-V media supplemented with 5% (vol/vol) heat-inactivated human
serum (Valley Biomedical) and 300 IU/mL of IL-2 (R&D Systems).
Cytotoxicity Assays. Cytotoxicity assays were carried out using the CytoTox 96
Non-Radioactive Cytotoxicity Assay (Promega). CAR-T cells were incubated
with target cells at an effector: target cell ratio of 10:1, while maintaining a
total cell concentration of 1 × 106/mL. The CAR-T cells used in these assays
had a transduction efficiency of 50–75%, when different CAR designs were
being compared mock-transduced cells were used to normalize the per-
centage of CAR+ cells used in the assay. Switch was added to each well at a
concentration of 1,000–0.01 pM and the cells were incubated for 37 °C for
20–24 h in complete RPMI with 5% (vol/vol) heat-inactivated FCS. LDH levels
were measured in the assay supernatants as per the manufacturer’s pro-
tocol: briefly, the maximum cell lysis was determined by target cell lysis using
the 10% (vol/vol) cell lysis solution. Target cell cytotoxicity was calculated
using the following formula: Cytotoxicity = 100 × [((sCAR-T cell + target cell +
switch) – (sCAR-T cell + target cell))/(max target cell lysis − target cells alone)].
Cytokines in the cytotoxicity assay supernatants were analyzed using the
Human Th1/Th2 Cytokine Bead Array kit II (CBA; BD). T-cell activation was
measured using the cells from the cytotoxicity asasy, which were stained
with anti-human CD3 (APC), anti-human CD25 (PE), and anti-human CD69
(PerCP) (Biolegend) and analyzed by flow cytometry to determine the pro-
portion of CD3+ T cells that were activated (CD25+ CD69+).
Xenograft Mouse Models. Female NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (NSG)
mice, 9–11 wk of age, were purchased from Jackson Laboratories and
maintained in the Calibr vivarium on a 12-h light cycle with access to food
and water ad libitum. All protocols were approved by the Institutional An-
imal Care and Use Committee at Calibr. To carry out the xenograft models,
NSG mice were inoculated with 5 × 105 luciferized Nalm-6 intravenously (day
0). On day 6, 40 × 106 CAR-T cells (50–75% CAR+) were infused intravenously;
unless otherwise stated, switches were dosed 6 h later. Mice were killed
upon losing more that 15% of body weight or the development of hind limb
paralysis. Graft vs. host disease was defined in indicated animals as hair loss,
behavioral changes, and clear decrease in health not attributable to Nalm-6
luciferase signal. Tumor burden was measured by IVIS and was quantified as
radiance in the region of interest, which was generally the area of one
mouse. Fifty microliters of murine blood was drawn at 24 h and every 10 d
after T-cell infusion (maximum of five times) to determine serum cytokine
concentrations using the CBA kit, described above, and T-cell counts. T cells
were analyzed in the blood of these mice at the stated time points by flow
cytometry using: anti-CD3 (APC or PerCP), anti-CD4 (PerCP or PE/Cy7), anti-
CD8 (PE or BV421), CD45RA (PE), or CD62-L (APC) (BioLegend), and were
enumerated using the count bright beads (BD). T cells were defined as
CD3+ and either CD4+ or CD8+. Cells were analyzed using an LSR-II flow
cytometer (BD).
Statistical Analysis. Statistical significance and EC50 values were calculated
using GraphPad software. Unless otherwise stated, in vitro data were ana-
lyzed using the one-tailed Student’s t test and in vivo data were analyzed by
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s posttest or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s
posttest. Data acquired from in vitro assays using experimental replicates are
presented ± SD and data acquired in vitro or in vivo using biological replicates
are presented ± SEM. *P < 0.5, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
Additional methods can be found in the SI Appendix.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. James Kochenderfer for use of the
luciferized Nalm-6 cell line, and Dr. Inder Verma for assistance with lentiviral
constructs. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant
R01 GM062159-14 (to P.G.S.).
1. Sadelain M, Brentjens R, Rivière I (2013) The basic principles of chimeric antigen re-
ceptor design. Cancer Discov 3(4):388–398.
2. Kochenderfer JN, et al. (2013) Donor-derived CD19-targeted T cells cause regression
of malignancy persisting after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Blood 122(25):4129–4139.
3. June CH, et al. (2014) Engineered T cells for cancer therapy. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 63(9):969–975.
4. Grupp SA, et al. (2013) Chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells for acute lymphoid
leukemia. N Engl J Med 368(16):1509–1518.
5. Uttenthal BJ, Chua I, Morris EC, Stauss HJ (2012) Challenges in T cell receptor gene
therapy. J Gene Med 14(6):386–399.
6. Römer PS, et al. (2011) Preculture of PBMCs at high cell density increases sensitivity of
T-cell responses, revealing cytokine release by CD28 superagonist TGN1412. Blood
118(26):6772–6782.
7. Xu XJ, Zhao HZ, Tang YM (2013) Efficacy and safety of adoptive immunotherapy using
anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor transduced T-cells: A systematic review of phase I
clinical trials. Leuk Lymphoma 54(2):255–260.
8. Brentjens R, Yeh R, Bernal Y, Riviere I, Sadelain M (2010) Treatment of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia with genetically targeted autologous T cells: Case report
of an unforeseen adverse event in a phase I clinical trial. Mol Ther 18(4):
666–668.
9. Kalos M, et al. (2011) T cells with chimeric antigen receptors have potent antitumor
effects and can establish memory in patients with advanced leukemia. Sci Transl Med
3(95):95ra73.
10. Lee DW, et al. (2015) T cells expressing CD19 chimeric antigen receptors for acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia in children and young adults: A phase 1 dose-escalation
trial. Lancet 385(9967):517–528.
11. Evans AG, et al. (2015) Evolution to plasmablastic lymphoma evades CD19-directed
chimeric antigen receptor T cells. Br J Haematol 171(2):205–209.
12. Maude SL, et al. (2014) Chimeric antigen receptor T cells for sustained remissions in
leukemia. N Engl J Med 371(16):1507–1517.
13. Straathof KC, et al. (2005) An inducible caspase 9 safety switch for T-cell therapy.
Blood 105(11):4247–4254.
14. Di Stasi A, et al. (2011) Inducible apoptosis as a safety switch for adoptive cell therapy.
N Engl J Med 365(18):1673–1683.
15. Wu CY, Roybal KT, Puchner EM, Onuffer J, Lim WA (2015) Remote control of thera-
peutic T cells through a small molecule-gated chimeric receptor. Science 350(6258):
aab4077.
16. Tamada K, et al. (2012) Redirecting gene-modified T cells toward various cancer types
using tagged antibodies. Clin Cancer Res 18(23):6436–6445.
17. Urbanska K, et al. (2012) A universal strategy for adoptive immunotherapy of cancer
through use of a novel T-cell antigen receptor. Cancer Res 72(7):1844–1852.
18. Urbanska K, Powell DJ (2012) Development of a novel universal immune re-
ceptor for antigen targeting: To infinity and beyond. OncoImmunology 1(5):
777–779.
19. Hanes J, Jermutus L, Weber-Bornhauser S, Bosshard HR, Plückthun A (1998) Ribosome
display efficiently selects and evolves high-affinity antibodies in vitro from immune
libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95(24):14130–14135.
Rodgers et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2016
|
E467
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
 20. Mössner E, Koch H, Plückthun A (2001) Fast selection of antibodies without antigen
purification: Adaptation of the protein fragment complementation assay to select
antigen-antibody pairs. J Mol Biol 308(2):115–122.
21. Zahnd C, et al. (2004) Directed in vitro evolution and crystallographic analysis of a
peptide-binding single chain antibody fragment (scFv) with low picomolar affinity.
J Biol Chem 279(18):18870–18877.
22. Zola H, et al. (1991) Preparation and characterization of a chimeric CD19 monoclonal
antibody. Immunol Cell Biol 69(Pt 6):411–422.
23. Bridgeman JS, Hawkins RE, Hombach AA, Abken H, Gilham DE (2010) Building better
chimeric antigen receptors for adoptive T cell therapy. Curr Gene Ther 10(2):77–90.
24. Chen X, Zaro JL, Shen WC (2013) Fusion protein linkers: Property, design and func-
tionality. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 65(10):1357–1369.
25. Liu T, et al. (2014) Rational design of CXCR4 specific antibodies with elongated CDRs.
J Am Chem Soc 136(30):10557–10560.
26. Liu T, et al. (2015) Functional human antibody CDR fusions as long-acting therapeutic
endocrine agonists. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112(5):1356–1361.
27. Zhang Y, et al. (2013) Functional antibody CDR3 fusion proteins with enhanced
pharmacological properties. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 52(32):8295–8298.
28. Milone MC, et al. (2009) Chimeric receptors containing CD137 signal transduction
domains mediate enhanced survival of T cells and increased antileukemic efficacy in
vivo. Mol Ther 17(8):1453–1464.
29. Zhang H, et al. (2007) 4-1BB is superior to CD28 costimulation for generating CD8+
cytotoxic lymphocytes for adoptive immunotherapy. J Immunol 179(7):4910–4918.
30. Zhang B (2009) Ofatumumab. MAbs 1(4):326–331.
31. Teeling JL, et al. (2006) The biological activity of human CD20 monoclonal antibodies
is linked to unique epitopes on CD20. J Immunol 177(1):362–371.
32. Qin H, et al. (2015) Eradication of B-ALL using chimeric antigen receptor-expressing
T cells targeting the TSLPR oncoprotein. Blood 126(5):629–639.
33. Aalberse RC, Schuurman J (2002) IgG4 breaking the rules. Immunology 105(1):9–19.
34. Classon BJ, et al. (1992) The hinge region of the CD8 alpha chain: Structure, antige-
nicity, and utility in expression of immunoglobulin superfamily domains. Int Immunol
4(2):215–225.
35. Hudecek M, et al. (2015) The nonsignaling extracellular spacer domain of chimeric
antigen receptors is decisive for in vivo antitumor activity. Cancer Immunol Res 3(2):
125–135.
36. Hudecek M, et al. (2013) Receptor affinity and extracellular domain modifications
affect tumor recognition by ROR1-specific chimeric antigen receptor T cells. Clin
Cancer Res 19(12):3153–3164.
37. Barrett DM, et al. (2013) Regimen-specific effects of RNA-modified chimeric antigen
receptor T cells in mice with advanced leukemia. Hum Gene Ther 24(8):717–727.
38. Terakura S, et al. (2012) Generation of CD19-chimeric antigen receptor modified
CD8+ T cells derived from virus-specific central memory T cells. Blood 119(1):72–82.
39. Haso W, et al. (2013) Anti-CD22-chimeric antigen receptors targeting B-cell precursor
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 121(7):1165–1174.
40. Jensen MC, Riddell SR (2015) Designing chimeric antigen receptors to effectively and
safely target tumors. Curr Opin Immunol 33:9–15.
41. Grada Z, et al. (2013) TanCAR: A novel bispecific chimeric antigen receptor for cancer
immunotherapy. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 2:e105.
42. Srivastava S, Riddell SR (2015) Engineering CAR-T cells: Design concepts. Trends
Immunol 36(8):494–502.
43. Wang R, Natarajan K, Margulies DH (2009) Structural basis of the CD8 alpha beta/
MHC class I interaction: Focused recognition orients CD8 beta to a T cell proximal
position. J Immunol 183(4):2554–2564.
44. Chakraborty AK, Weiss A (2014) Insights into the initiation of TCR signaling. Nat
Immunol 15(9):798–807.
45. Ma J, et al. (2015) Versatile strategy for controlling the specificity and activity of
engineered T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:E450–E458.
46. Kudo K, et al. (2014) T lymphocytes expressing a CD16 signaling receptor exert
antibody-dependent cancer cell killing. Cancer Res 74(1):93–103.
47. Flanagan RJ, Jones AL (2004) Fab antibody fragments: Some applications in clinical
toxicology. Drug Saf 27(14):1115–1133.
48. Wang W, Wang EQ, Balthasar JP (2008) Monoclonal antibody pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 84(5):548–558.
49. Brentjens RJ, et al. (2007) Genetically targeted T cells eradicate systemic acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia xenografts. Clin Cancer Res 13(18 Pt 1):5426–5435.
50. Kalos M, June CH (2013) Adoptive T cell transfer for cancer immunotherapy in the era
of synthetic biology. Immunity 39(1):49–60.
51. Li XC, Kloc M, Ghobrial RM (2013) Memory T cells in transplantation—Progress and
challenges. Curr Opin Organ Transplant 18(4):387–392.
52. Riddell SR, et al. (2014) Adoptive therapy with chimeric antigen receptor-modified
T cells of defined subset composition. Cancer J 20(2):141–144.
53. Morgan RA, et al. (2010) Case report of a serious adverse event following the ad-
ministration of T cells transduced with a chimeric antigen receptor recognizing
ERBB2. Mol Ther 18(4):843–851.
E468
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1524155113
Rodgers et al.
