 A craniofacial-specific monosynaptic circuit enables heightened 
affective pain
Erica Rodriguez1, Katsuyasu Sakurai1, Jennie Xu1, Yong Chen2, Koji Toda3, Shengli Zhao1, 
Bao-Xia Han1, David Ryu1, Henry Yin3, Wolfgang Liedtke2, and Fan Wang1,*
1Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA
2Department of Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA
3Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA
Abstract
Humans often rank craniofacial pain as more severe than body pain. Evidence suggests that a 
stimulus of the same intensity induces stronger pain in the face than the body. However, the 
underlying neural circuitry for the differential processing of facial versus bodily pain remains 
unknown. Interestingly, the lateral parabrachial nucleus (PBL), a critical node in the affective pain 
circuit, is activated more strongly by noxious stimulation of the face than the hindpaw. Using a 
novel activity-dependent technology called CANE developed in our lab, we identified and 
selectively labeled noxious stimuli-activated PBL neurons, and performed comprehensive 
anatomical input-output mapping. Surprisingly, a hitherto uncharacterized monosynaptic 
connection between cranial sensory neurons and the PBL-nociceptive neurons was uncovered. 
Optogenetic activation of this monosynaptic craniofacial-to-PBL projection induced robust escape/
avoidance behaviors and stress calls, whereas optogenetic silencing specifically reduced facial 
nociception. The monosynaptic circuit revealed here provides a neural substrate for heightened 
craniofacial affective pain.
Introduction
Noxious stimuli experienced by the head and facial region are detected and conveyed to the 
central nervous system (CNS) by sensory neurons located in the trigeminal (TG) ganglia, 
whereas noxious stimuli affecting extracranial regions are sensed and relayed to the CNS via 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to F.W. (fan.wang@duke.edu). 
Author Contributions
F.W and E.R. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. E.R performed majority of the experiments and data analysis. K.S 
performed some independent CANE capture experiments, bilateral fiber implantations and the place escape/avoidance (PEA) 
behavioral experiments. K.T. analyzed PEA results (blind to genotype). J.X performed immunohistochemistry, quantified axon 
projections, and quantified cells in Fos and transsynaptic experiments (blind to experimental conditions). Y.C. performed all the face 
and hindpaw von Frey assays (blind to genotypes). D.R quantified cells in a subset of colocalization experiments. S.Z produced all the 
CANE-LV and CANE-RV viruses. B.-X.H. took care of mouse husbandry and genotyping. H.Y. and W.L. provided critical equipment 
and reagents. F.W. and E.R. wrote the manuscript with the help from W.L.
Competing Financial Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 December ; 20(12): 1734–1743. doi:10.1038/s41593-017-0012-1.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 primary sensory neurons residing in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG). Humans generally rank 
head and facial pain as much more severe and emotionally draining than body pain. For 
example, two of the arguably most severe chronic pain conditions are trigeminal neuralgia 
and cluster headaches1–3. Craniofacial pain sensation is qualitatively different from bodily 
nociception as shown in human experiments, where repeated application of noxious heat to 
the face induces sensitization, yet similar stimulation applied to the hand induced 
habituation4. Fear induced by pain in human subjects was rated higher for face than for 
extremities, despite comparable ratings of the pain intensity5. fMRI studies further revealed 
that face pain resulted in higher levels of amygdala activation compared to the same 
intensity stimulation applied to the hand6. Despite these studies, the neuro-biological 
underpinning for heightened craniofacial pain remained enigmatic.
“Suffering” and “fear of pain” are emotional aspects of pain that are not processed by the 
canonical discriminative pathway via the spino-thalamic-cortical somatosensory circuits. 
Instead, these feelings are relayed by the less-studied affective pain pathway, where 
nociceptive afferent information is routed from second-order neurons to the lateral 
parabrachial nucleus (PBL) onto various limbic regions, such as the central amygdala (CeA), 
the bed nucleus stria terminalis (BNST), the lateral hypothalamus (LHA), the anterior 
cingulate and the insular cortices (aka the spino-parabrachial circuit)7–9. Interestingly, it was 
suggested that subregions of the PBL, a critical relay node in the affective pain circuit, might 
be differentially activated by noxious stimuli applied to the face versus the extremities in 
rats10,11.
In this study, we show that painful stimuli applied to the face activate more PBL neurons and 
do so more bilaterally compared to those applied to paw. We utilize our novel activity-
dependent technology called CANE12 to identify PBL-nociceptive neurons and their 
connections with the affective pain system. We further discover the circuit mechanism 
underlying the more robust activation of PBL by noxious facial stimuli and show that 
activation of this circuit drives strong aversive behaviors, whereas inhibition specifically 
reduces craniofacial nociception.
Results
Noxious facial stimuli activate the lateral parabrachial nucleus more robustly and 
bilaterally compared to noxious bodily stimuli
We injected 4% formalin (a noxious chemical) either unilaterally into the whisker pad, or 
unilaterally into one hindpaw, and immunostained for the immediate early gene Fos as a 
marker for activated neurons in the PBL (Fig. 1a). Whisker pad formalin injection activated 
the PBL with significantly more Fos+ neurons than paw injection of an equivalent amount of 
formalin (Fig. 1c; Whisker: 952 ± 100.7; Paw: 616 ± 75.1 total Fos+ neurons; P = 0.04; n = 
7), especially in the external lateral sub-nucleus of the PBL (PB-el) (Fig. 1b). Furthermore, 
unilateral formalin whisker pad injection induced Fos+ neurons in PB-el bilaterally with a 
trend of more Fos+ cell on the ipsilateral side (Fig. 1b, d; Contra: 213.8 ± 32.8; Ipsi: 281.5 
± 22.3 Fos+ neurons; P = 0.053; n = 4). By contrast, unilateral paw formalin injection 
preferentially activated the contralateral PB-el with significantly more Fos+ neurons on the 
contralateral than on the ipsilateral side (Fig. 1b, d; Contra: 253.3 ± 24.1; Ipsi: 129.7 ± 14.3 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fos+ neurons; P < 0.01; n = 3), which is consistent with the fact that spino-parabrachial 
projection neurons in dorsal spinal cord are known to predominantly send axons to the 
contralateral side9,10. Additionally, consistent with the fact that the affective pain circuit 
does not discriminate the types of pain7, we found that capsaicin, formalin, and even the 
minor pain associated with control injection of saline unilaterally into the whisker pad all 
activated the PBL neurons (including neurons in PB-el) compared to no-injection controls, 
with formalin the most potent stimulus to evoke Fos+ neurons (Supplementary Fig. 1a, b; 
Home Cage: 73 ± 26; Saline: 421 ± 94; Capsaicin: 673 ± 72; Formalin: 952 ± 101 Fos+ 
neurons, n = 3,3,3,4). In the same animals, we also observed Fos+ neurons in spinal 
trigeminal nucleus caudalis (Sp5C), which was expected since Sp5C is a main relay in the 
trigeminal-thalamic-cortical pain pathway (Supplementary Fig. 1c, n = 3)11,13,14.
PBL neurons activated by noxious facial stimuli are molecularly heterogeneous
Two-color fluorescence in situ hybridization further showed that most Fos+ PBL-nociceptive 
neurons were slc17a6+ (i.e. vGlut2+) (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b; glutamatergic; 80 ± 1%, n 
= 3), while only a minority of Fos+ cells were gad1/2+ (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b; 
GABAergic; 7 ± 2%, n = 3). A recent study showed that the gene calca encoding calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (CGRP) is expressed in PB-el15. These CGRP+ PB-el neurons were 
activated by intense foot shock, and transmitted affective pain signals to the CeA14. We 
therefore decided to focus on CGRP expression and found a subset of Fos+ PBL-nociceptive 
neurons in the ventral region indeed expressed CGRP (Supplementary Fig. 2c-d; 56 ± 5% of 
ventral; 2 ± 1% of dorsal; 34 ± 3% of total Fos+ PBL-nociceptive pain neurons were CGPR+; 
n = 3). Another marker, the Forkhead box protein P2 (FoxP2), implicated in circuits related 
to vocal communication and sodium intake, has also been found to be expressed in the 
PBL16,17. We found that again only a subset of Fos+ PBL neurons in the dorsal region 
expressed FoxP2 (Supplementary Fig. 2c-d; 9 ± 4% of ventral; 46 ± 10% of dorsal; 21 ± 5% 
of total Fos+ PBL-nociceptive neurons were FoxP2+; n = 3).
CANE is efficient and selective in activity-dependent capturing of facial nociceptive relay 
PBL neurons
How might noxious facial stimuli activate more neurons in the PBL, particularly in the PB-
el, compared to noxious bodily stimuli, especially on the ipsilateral side? To answer this 
question, we needed to identify neurons that provide presynaptic inputs to face-nociception-
activated PBL neurons. Previous studies using anterograde and retrograde tracer dyes labeled 
the general afferents to the entire PBL region9,13,14,18,19. However, the PBL contains diverse 
populations of neurons in addition to neurons responsive to noxious stimuli, such as cells 
activated by innocuous warm and cool temperatures, as well as cells responsive to various 
taste stimuli20,21. The PBL is also known for its significant role in regulating instinctive 
behavior, namely thirst for water, sodium appetite and hunger for food22–24. Thus, tracer 
based studies lack the resolution to identify specific inputs to the PBL-nociceptive neurons. 
Since CGRP and FoxP2 only label subsets of PBL-nociceptive neurons (Supplementary Fig. 
2c-d), we reasoned that transsynaptic tracing of inputs to either CGRP+ or FoxP2+ neurons 
may miss certain types of inputs that innervate the non-CGRP+, or non-FoxP2+ PBL-
nociceptive neurons. We therefore turned to our newly developed technology called CANE 
for viral-genetic tagging of transiently-activated neurons to capture noxious stimuli-activated 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PBL neurons. CANE uses a pseudotyped lentivirus or rabies virus to selectively infect Fos+ 
neurons genetically engineered to transiently express the receptor for the pseudotyped 
viruses (FosTVA mice), and consequently, the viruses mediate expression of desired 
transgenes in activated cells12.
We first validated that CANE could indeed selectively label PBL-nociceptive neurons. In a 
two-bout experimental paradigm, CANE was used to capture PBL neurons activated by a 
noxious stimulus (capsaicin or formalin injection) by co-injecting CANE-LV-Cre and AAV-
flex-GFP into the PBL. Three weeks later, the same animal was given a second painful 
stimulus to induce Fos expression and sacrificed for immunostaining (Fig. 2a). In both 
capsaicin-capsaicin, and formalin-formalin paradigms, 55 ± 3% (n=9) and 55 ± 2% (n=9) of 
CANE-captured PBL neurons were Fos+, respectively (Fig. 2 d, f, h, i). This indicated that 
the second noxious injection reactivated many (~55%) of the same cells excited by the first 
stimulus. By contrast, without noxious stimulation, there was only a small number of 
background captured neurons (due to Fos-expression in PBL induced by handling/restraining 
the animals but without application of noxious stimuli), which had significantly less overlap 
with Fos+ neurons induced by noxious stimuli (Fig. 2b, e, h, i; 27± 3% CANE+ cells were 
Fos+ in no stimulus-formalin paradigm (n=5; P < 0.0001); 31 ± 5% CANE+ cells were Fos+ 
in the no stimulus-capsaicin paradigm (n=4; P < 0.0001)). In the capsaicin-saline paradigm, 
36 ± 3% CANE-captured cells were Fos+ activated by saline injection (Fig. 2e, h, n=4; P = 
0.0005), consistent with the fact that saline injection only caused moderate PBL activation. 
Previous electrophysiological studies reveal that the same PBL neurons could be activated by 
different noxious modalities25, prompting us to ask whether CANE-captured capsaicin-
activated PBL neurons overlapped with formalin-activated neurons and vice versa. Indeed, 
we observed a similar percentage of CANE+ neurons that were Fos+ regardless of whether 
the capsaicin-formalin paradigm was used (51 ± 2%; n = 7) or vice-versa (55 ± 2%; n = 6) 
(Fig. 2c, h, i). We also examined the overlap between CANE-captured face-activated PBL-
nociceptive neurons and Fos+ cells induced by contralateral hindpaw nociception and vice 
versa. About 30% of CANE+ neurons were Fos+ in both whisker-hindpaw and hindpaw-
whisker nociception paradigms (Fig. 2g, j; W:H, 26 ± 3%; H:W, 33 ± 4%, n = 6). Our 
observations are consistent with the current concept that the PBL mediated affective pain 
circuit plays a limited role in discriminating the types and locations of injury25,26. As an 
additional control for the specificity of CANE, we co-injected CANE-LV-Cre, AAV-flex-
GFP (CANE::GFP), and AAV-tdTomato into the PBL after formalin injection into the 
whisker pad, and compared the labeling resulted from the two viral methods. CANE::GFP 
labeled a specific subset of PBL neurons, whereas AAV-tdTomato labeled a majority of 
neurons at the injection site (Supplementary Fig. 3, n = 4), thus further confirming the 
specificity of our method.
PBL-nociceptive neurons project axons to multiple emotion- and instinct-related centers in 
the brain
We next traced the axonal projections of CANE::GFP-captured PBL-nociceptive neurons. 
The targets of PBL-nociceptive neurons include: the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis 
(BNST, where PBL axons form large axonal boutons surrounding BNST neuron cell bodies), 
the paraventricular thalamic nucleus (PVT), the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (PVH), CeAc (the capsular division), the ventral tegmental area (VTA), the ventrolateral 
periaqueductal grey (PAGvl), the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST) and the intermediate 
reticular nucleus in the hindbrain (IRt) (Fig. 2k-r). Quantitative measurements of the 
densities of innervation (n = 3) using a previously described method12,27 showed that the 
majority of projections were ipsilateral with small numbers of axons innervating the 
contralateral side (Fig. 2q). A schematic summary of the projections is shown (Fig. 2r). 
Notably, all the targets of PBL-nociceptive neurons contained Fos+ neurons induced by 
noxious facial stimulation (Fig. 2k-p, green signals).
PBL-nociceptive neurons receive reciprocal inputs from emotion-related limbic regions 
and bilateral inputs from various reticular brainstem regions
Having validated that CANE selectively captured PBL-nociceptive neurons that relay signal 
to emotion- and instinct-related centers, we mapped the presynaptic inputs to these neurons 
using a CANE-based transsynaptic tracing method12. Briefly, CANE-LV-Cre and the helper 
virus AAV-SynP-DIO-TVA-EGFP-RG28 were co-injected into the ipsilateral PBL to express 
the TVA receptor, rabies glycoprotein G, and GFP selectively in the PBL neurons which 
were activated by formalin injection into the whisker pad. Two weeks later, CANE-RV-
mCherry was injected into the same location in PBL. The GFP/mCherry double-positive 
neurons are the starter PBL-nociceptive neurons, while mCherry+ neurons outside of the PBL 
are presynaptic neurons (Fig. 3a, b). We observed mCherry+ neurons in BNST, CeAm 
(medial division), and several hypothalamic nuclei including the PVH, substantia nigra pars 
compacta (SNpc), PAGvl, brainstem reticular regions, NST, spinal trigeminal nucleus 
caudalis (Sp5C), and the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Fig. 3c-j, m; quantification 
represents numbers of labeled presynaptic neurons/number of starter neurons; n = 6). Note 
that the labeled neurons in the reticular regions, NST, and Sp5C neurons were distributed 
bilaterally with an ipsilateral dominance (Fig. 3m; number of transsynaptically labeled cells/
number of starter cell: Ipsi. [IRt: 6.3 ± 1.3; PCRt: 6.4 ± 1.4; MRn: 1.3 ± 0.4; GRn: 3.1 ± 0.7; 
NST: 1.9 ± 0.7; Sp5C: 5.3 ± 1.6]; Contra. [IRt: 0.9 ± 0.2; PCRt: 1.4 ± 0.5; MRn: 3.8 ± 0.8; 
GRn: 2.1 ± 0.5; NST: 0.8 ± 0.2; Sp5C: 0.5 ± 0.2]), consistent with previous dye tracing 
studies9,13,14,18,19. Additionally, there were a few labeled cells in the contralateral PBL (Fig. 
3m; 0.7 ± 0.2). A schematic summary of the projections is shown (Fig. 3o).
CANE-captured PBL-nociceptive neurons receive direct input from primary sensory 
neurons in the ipsilateral trigeminal ganglion
Interestingly, transsynaptically labeled mCherry+ neurons were also observed in the 
ipsilateral TG, but not in any of the DRG on either side (n = 6, Fig. 3k, l), suggesting that 
TG sensory neurons innervating head and face provide direct monosynaptic inputs to 
ipsilateral PBL-nociceptive neurons. A few previous anatomical studies hinted at the 
possibility of a direct TG-PB connection29–32. Interestingly, transsynaptic tracing of inputs 
to hindpaw formalin-activated PBL-nociceptive neurons also revealed labeled neurons in TG 
but not in any DRG (n = 4, Fig. 3n), suggesting craniofacial but not body primary sensory 
neurons provide direct, monosynaptic inputs onto PBL-nociceptive neurons. The result is 
also consistent with the idea that some PBL-nociceptive neurons receive convergent inputs 
from both face and body. We examined the expression of IB4 (a marker for non-peptidergic 
c fibers), CGRP, TrpV1 (the receptor for capsaicin and a marker for a subset of c fibers and a 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 small subset of Aδ fibers), and NF200 (a marker for both Aδ and Aβ fibers) among the 
transsynaptically labeled TG neurons. The TG neurons directly presynaptic to the PBL 
included NF200+ (45 ± 4%), TrpV1+ (38.5 ± 4%), CGRP+ (26.2 ± 7%), and IB4+ cells (12 
± 4%; n = 8; Fig. 3p, q). Taken together, the transsynaptic tracing studies suggest that there 
are two separate pathways transmitting craniofacial nociception from TG to the PBL: (1) the 
previously known indirect TG→Sp5C→PBL and (2) the newly revealed direct TG→PBL 
projection. By contrast, there is only one indirect pathway transmitting somatosensory body 
nociception from DRG to the PBL: DRG→spinal dorsal horn→PBL.
Notably, a previous study using TrpV1::PLAP mice observed that fibers from a possible 
primary afferent source of TrpV1-lineage neurons were present in the PBL, especially in the 
PB-el29,32. The authors speculated that the TrpV1+ fibers may have emerged from TG 
neurons which could provide an alternative circuit contributing to craniofacial pain 
experience29,32. These previous findings, in addition to our finding that ~40% of 
transsynaptically labeled TG neurons are TrpV1+, led us to postulate that TrpV1+ fibers may 
be a major source of noxious TG inputs to PB-el. Therefore, we performed neonatal 
intraperitoneal (IP) injection of AAV to selectively label periphery-derived TrpV1-Cre+ 
axons33,34,35. Briefly, Cre-dependent AAV9-flex-GFP was injected into TrpV1-Cre33 mouse 
pups at postnatal day 1–2. The IP injection resulted in selective labeling of TrpV1-Cre+ 
primary sensory neurons with GFP without labeling of TrpV1-Cre+ CNS neurons (Fig. 3r, s 
and Supplementary Fig. 4, n = 3). Furthermore, axonal terminals from labeled TrpV1+ 
primary sensory neurons were observed near nociceptive Fos+ neurons in PB-el and in Sp5C 
(Fig. 3t; Fos was induced by capsaicin injection into the ipsilateral whisker pad).
We further designed a TrpV1-Cre and retrograde-FlpO intersectional strategy 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a) to determine whether PBL projecting TG neurons also project to 
Sp5C. Briefly, retrograde-lentivirus expressing either FlpO (RG-LV-hSyn-FlpO, n=4) or 
Cre-dependent FlpO (RG-LV-hSyn-DIO-FlpO, n=6) was injected into PB in TrpV1-Cre; 
Ai65 mice (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Retrograde-lentivirus infects axons and is transported 
back to cell bodies36,37. Ai65 is a Cre and Flp co-dependent tomato reporter38. In this 
strategy, only TrpV1-Cre expressing neurons that project axons into PB will express both 
Cre and FlpO, and therefore only these neurons will express tomato, allowing us to visualize 
their cell bodies and axon projections. The Cre-dependent RG-LV-hSyn-DIO-FlpO gave 
sparser labeling results than the RG-LV-hSyn-FlpO. We observed tdTomato+ neurons in 
ipsilateral TG (Supplementary Fig.5c, f) but not in any DRG (data not shown). Interestingly, 
tdTomato+ axons can be seen in both PBL and in Sp5C (Supplementary Fig. 5b, d, e, g), 
indicating that at least some of the labeled TG neurons project bifurcated axons to innervate 
both PBL and Sp5C. The peripheral axons of labeled TrpV1-Cre+ TG→PBL neurons form 
either free-nerve endings or circular endings around hair follicles (Supplementary Fig. 5h).
TrpV1-Cre+ primary trigeminal sensory neurons provide functional monosynaptic 
excitatory input onto PBL-pain neurons
To directly examine whether TG→PBL axons form functional synaptic connections in PBL, 
we injected Cre-dependent AAV9-flex-ChR2-YFP into TrpV1-Cre pups intrapeitoneally to 
express channelrhodospin-YFP (ChR2-YFP) in peripheral TrpV1-Cre+ neurons 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (TrpV1Cre::ChR2), and performed whole-cell patch clamp recording of PBL neurons in 
slices from these animals (Fig. 4a). Photoactivation of TrpV1Cre::ChR2+ terminals elicited 
excitatory post-synaptic currents (EPSCs) in 15 out of 54 neurons (Fig. 4b, c and 
Supplementary Fig. 6). Furthermore, the EPSCs persisted in the presence of action potential 
blockade using 1 µM TTX and 100 µM 4-AP (Fig. 4b). In a complementary set of 
experiments, we captured PBL-pain neurons using CANE-RV-mCherry in TrpV1Cre::ChR2 
animals (Fig. 4d). In 6 CANE-captured mCherry+ PBL-pain neurons, photoactivation of 
TrpV1+ terminals elicited EPSCs that were not blocked by TTX (Fig. 4e, f). These results 
corroborate and extend the circuit tracing findings that the inputs from TG TrpV1-Cre+ 
fibers to PBL-nociceptive neurons are monosynaptic and excitatory.
Activation of TrpV1-Cre+ axon terminals in PBL induces robust aversive behavior and 
audible vocalization
To address the behavioral impact of the direct TG→PBL monosynaptic projection in awake 
behaving animals, we asked whether its activation would be sufficient to elicit aversive 
responses in a modified real-time place escape/avoidance (PEA) assay, which has been used 
in recent studies to assay affective components of pain39–41. Optic fibers were implanted 
bilaterally above PB-el in either TrpV1Cre::ChR2 mice (n = 8) or control mice 
TrpV1Cre::GFP (n = 3) mice (Fig. 4g). Mice were habituated and placed in a two-chamber 
arena. Their behaviors were recorded under three conditions: (i) freely exploring with no 
stimulation for 10 min (baseline), followed by (ii) 10 min of conditioned photoactivation 
when the mouse is in its preferred chamber (stimulation), and followed again by (iii) 10 min 
without stimulation (post-stimulation). Upon photo stimulation of TrpV1Cre+ axons in PB-
el, TrpV1Cre::ChR2 mice immediately fled to the opposite chamber (Fig. 4h; Video 1), and 
subsequently they moved less and spent significantly more time on the un-stimulated side 
(Fig. 4h, j-k, Video 1; P < 0.0001). In the post-stimulation period, some but not all mice still 
showed avoidance of the chamber in which they received photostimulation (Fig. 4j-k). Light 
illumination had no effect on movement and behavior of the control TrpV1Cre::GFP mice 
(Fig. 4i, j, l; Video 2; P = 0.66). These results suggest that the optogenetic stimulation of the 
TG→PBL monosynaptic projection caused a drastic aversive effect likely due to activation 
of the downstream affective pain pathway.
We further wanted to determine whether optogenetic activation would be sufficient to induce 
an aversive affective memory using the conventional conditioned place aversion (CPA) assay 
(Supplementary Fig. 7a). Mice were habituated first by placing them in the two-chamber 
arena and allowing free exploration. Subsequently, they were subjected to two days of 
conditioning: mice were paired with photostimulation in the preferred chamber for 15 min 
and four hours later, they were placed in the non-preferred chamber with no stimulation for 
15 min. On the fourth day, they explored the arena freely with no light stimulation for 10 
min (post-stimulation). All TrpV1Cre::ChR2 mice (n = 7) spent less time in the chamber 
where they were stimulated previously (Supplementary Fig. 7b, c; P = 0.008). Light 
illumination had no effect on the movement and behavior of the control TrpV1Cre::GFP 
mice (n = 5; Supplementary Fig. 7d, e; P = 0.258). These results suggest that repeated 
optogenetic activation of the TG→PBL monosynaptic projection induces an aversive 
memory.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We further recorded audios of mice placed in a circular arena (Fig. 4m). Optogenetic 
activation of TrpV1-Cre+ afferents in PB-el induced audible vocalizations in 
TrpV1Cre::ChR2 (n = 8) resembling distress calls, but not in control TrpV1Cre::GFP mice 
(n = 3) (Fig. 4n, Supplementary Fig. 8, Videos 3, 4, on average 66 ± 7 pips with 2 ± 0.2 pips/
second were elicited; P < 0.0001). Distress vocalization stopped when laser light was turned 
off. Post-hoc immunostaining conducted after photo-stimulation of the TrpV1Cre::ChR2 
axon terminals in the PBL showed marked Fos expression in this region, whereas only 
background Fos expression was observed in Sp5C (Supplementary Fig. 9a, b), indicating 
that there was little back propagation of activities from PBL axon-terminal photo-stimulation 
to the axon branches of TG sensory neurons in Sp5C. Post-hoc immunostaining after photo-
stimulating TrpV1Cre::GFP axon terminals only showed background level Fos expression 
(Supplementary Fig. 9c, n = 5). Taken together, these data demonstrate that activating the 
direct axonal projection from TrpV1-Cre+ terminals in PB-el is sufficient to induce robust 
escape/avoidance behavior, aversive memory, and audible distress vocalizations, which are 
surrogates of pain behavior and pain-associated negative affect.
Silencing TrpV1-Cre+ axon terminals in PBL partially reduces mechanical allodynia in face 
but not in hindpaw after capsaicin injection
We next asked whether silencing the direct TG→PBL monosynaptic projection would affect 
pain-related behaviors. Previous studies showed that the optogenetic silencer 
archaerhodopsin (Arch) could effectively silence nociceptors including TrpV1+ 
neurons42,43. We therefore used the neonatal IP injection strategy to express eArch44 or GFP 
in TrpV1-Cre+ sensory neurons. Optic fibers were implanted bilaterally above PB-el in 
TrpV1Cre::eArch mice (n = 9) or TrpV1Cre::GFP (n = 8) mice (Fig. 5a, b). A von Frey test 
was used to assess the mechanical threshold of face or paw withdrawal responses before and 
after capsaicin injections into the whisker pad or hindpaw, and with or without photo-
silencing of TrpV1-Cre+ axons in PBL (Fig. 5a). After capsaicin injection into either the face 
or the paw, both TrpV1Cre::eArch and TrpV1Cre::GFP mice drastically lowered the 
withdrawal threshold in responses to von Frey application to face or paw, respectively (Fig. 
5c, d). Hence, capsaicin-injection induced mechanical allodynia in both face and hindpaw as 
expected (Fig. 5c, d). Importantly, eArch-mediated photo-silencing of TrpV1-Cre+ axons in 
PB-el partially alleviated the capsaicin induced allodynia in the face but had no effect on the 
mechanical hypersensitivity of the hindpaw (Fig. 5c, d; face P = 0.0046, paw P = >0.9999). 
Light illumination had no effect on TrpV1Cre::GFP mice (Fig. 5c, d; P = >0.9999). These 
results confirmed that the TG→PBL direct pathway indeed specifically contributes to face 
nociception.
We further tested whether photo-silencing of TrpV1-Cre+ axons in PBL after facial capsaicin 
injection would elicit conditioned place preference for the light illuminated chamber. The 
effect of capsaicin only lasts about 20 min, we therefore performed a real-time place 
preference (RTPP) assay (Fig. 5e, 10 min no light and 10 min with light illumination in the 
non-preferred chamber). After capsaicin injection into the whisker pad, TrpV1Cre::eArch 
mice spent significantly more time in the chamber with photo-silencing of the TrpV1-Cre+ 
terminals in PBL (Fig. 5f, n = 6, P = 0.029). By contrast, control TrpV1Cre::GFP mice show 
no preference (Fig. 5g, n = 7, P = 0.6). Taken together, these data demonstrated that when 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice are subjected to noxious facial stimulation, silencing the neural activity of the direct 
TG→PBL pathway reduces facial allodynia and induces place preference, indicating that 
this pathway contributes significantly to the manifestation of facial-pain equivalents.
Discussion
In this study, we discovered that nociceptive trigeminal afferents transmit painful signal to 
the affective pathway through both the direct monosynaptic TG→PBL and the indirect 
disynaptic TG→Sp5C→PBL projections. Previously Panneton et al injected neural tracer 
WGA-HRP into the peripheral anterior ethmoidal nerve (AEN), which is originated from 
TG and innervate the nasal cavity, and observed labeled afferent fibers in regions near 
PBL31. In a follow-up study, the authors showed that trigeminal rhizotomy resulted in loss of 
CGRP expressing fibers innervating the PBL30. These and other studies have implied a 
possible direct TG→PBL pathway29–32, but did not provide synaptic or behavior evidence to 
support this possibility. Here we used a combination of activity-dependent tagging, 
monosynaptic transsynaptic tracing, intersectional genetic labeling, optogenetic-assisted 
slice electrophysiology, and in vivo optogenetic activation and silencing experiments to 
definitely establish the monosynaptic connection between TG and PBL-nociceptive neurons, 
and revealed the important functions of this pathway in craniofacial pain-related aversive 
behaviors.
Our findings have several important implications. First, the dual and bilateral pain-
transmitting pathways compared to the single indirect DRG→dorsal horn→PBL pathway 
could explain why similar intensity stimuli applied to face activate more PBL neurons than 
when applied to limbs. This could in turn lead to heightened and bilateral activations of the 
affective pain responses, such as a higher level and more persistent activation of CeA, 
BNST, hypothalamus, and insular cortex through the axonal projections from PBL-
nociceptive neurons (Fig. 2k-r). This projection pattern can provide a circuit basis for the 
perception of trigeminally-mediated pain as more severe, fear-inducing and emotionally-
draining than other body pain. The monosynaptic TG→PBL connection also provides a 
mechanism for rapid, short-latency direct connections of nociceptive inputs from the head 
and face to brain centers involved in homeostatic regulation and emotional 
processing5,6,15,21,23,45. Second, current palliative neurosurgical procedures aimed at 
alleviating refractory trigeminal pain target the descending spinal trigeminal tract 
(Supplementary Fig. 10) including making thermal lesions, referred to as “dorsal root entry 
zone coagulation” (DREZ), to lesion pain-transmitting pathways in Sp5C, a contemporary 
adaptation of the classic trigeminal tractotomy46,47. Based on our study, DREZ coagulation 
will only lesion the TG→Sp5C connection, while leaving the TG→PBL connection intact 
(Supplementary Fig. 10). This may explain the lack of therapeutic response or post-operative 
pain relapse in some patients subjected to trigeminal DREZ surgery46–48. Future surgical 
procedures should consider severing both TG→Sp5C and the TG→PBL connection for 
providing invasive palliation of chronic, refractory orofacial pain, e.g. for trigeminal 
neuralgia. Notably, our discovery presented here critically relied on the CANE methodology, 
although CANE does have qualifiers, namely the 60~90min waiting interval between the 
stimulus application and the surgery (in order for Fos/TVA protein to reach peak levels) 
inevitably resulted in some background labeling. Nevertheless, CANE is still the most well-
Rodriguez et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 validated tool to selectively label and transsynaptically trace the presynaptic inputs to 
transiently activated neurons as shown here and in our previous studies12. Our input-output 
circuit mapping of PBL-nociceptive neurons revealed many limbic centers that are 
reciprocally connected with PBL, providing a circuit basis for understanding closely 
associated and clinically highly-relevant comorbidities with pathologic trigeminal pain, 
namely anxiety, depression, disturbance of circadian rhythm and altered intake 
behavior2,3,47–50. Future studies on mechanisms underlying chronic craniofacial pain 
disorders can now take advantage of this circuit diagram including the newly unveiled 
monosynaptic TG→PBL pathway to identify specific maladaptive plasticity in each of the 
nodes in the circuit, and hopefully effectively revert them.
Online Methods
Animal Statement
All experiments were conducted according to protocols approved by The Duke University 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Animals
Adult (p30-p60) male and female C57B/L6 mice (Jackson Laboratory) were used for 
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. Male and female FosTVA mice12 (Jackson 
Laboratory, stock 027831) were used for capturing PBL-nociceptive neurons with the CANE 
technology, immunohistochemistry, electrophysiology, and input-output circuit mapping. 
Male and female Ai65D38 mice expressing a Cre and Flp double-dependent STOP cassette 
in front of the tdTomato reporter (Jackson Laboratories, stock 024109) were used for Cre/
FlpO based tracing of TrpV1Cre+ neurons that project to PBL. Male and Female TrpV1-Cre 
mice33 were used for behavioral testing for both ChR2 or eArch experimental and GFP 
control groups, as well as electrophysiology experiments. Male and female Ai32 mice 
expressing a Cre-dependent ChR2 (Jackson Laboratories, stock 024109) were used for 
electrophysiology experiments. All mice were housed in a vivarium with normal light/dark 
cycles in cages with 1–5 mice. A day prior to experiments, we singly housed mice. We used 
two exclusion criteria for our subjects: (1) poor recovery or other health concerns following 
surgical intervention or (2) missed injection or implantation target, as determined by 
histological analysis. Animals were randomly selected from each litter. Random group 
allocation was maintained throughout the study, within constraints set by availability of in-
house, purpose-bred lines. Experimenter blinding was sufficient to control for selection bias. 
Furthermore, behavioral analysis relied on objective, automatized measurements.
Viruses
CANE-LV-Cre (titer, 5×108 ifu/ml; pLenti-hSynapsin-Cre-WPRE [Addgene Plasmid 
#86641]; CANE-LV envelope [Addgene Plasmid #86666]) and CANE-RV-mCherry (titer, 
5×108 ifu/ml) were produced as previously described12. FuGB2-coated RG-LV-hSyn-FlpO 
and RG-LV-hSyn-DIO-FlpO were produced and concentrated as described previously36. 
pAAV-SynP-DIO-TVA-EGFP-RG (pAAV-SynP-DIO-sTpEpB)28 was packaged in serotype 
AAV2/rh8 by the University of Pennsylvania Vector Core. AAV-CAG-flex-GFP, AAV-EF1α-
Rodriguez et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 flex-ChR2(H134R)-eYFP51 and AAV-EF1α-DIO-eARCH-eYFP44 were purchased from the 
University of Pennsylvania Vector Core.
Surgery
Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane in a stereotaxic frame (David Kopf Instruments) 
and small craniotomies were made over the target area. To target the PBL, mice were 
mounted in the stereotaxic frame at an angle such that lambda was ~180 µm ventral to 
bregma (in practice, 140–240 µm). The stereotaxic coordinates of virus injection and 
custom-made optic fiber (200 µm core diameter, Thorlabs) were AP - 4.25 ± .15 mm, ML 
1.45 ± .15 mm, and DV −3.2 ± .1 mm. The thin glass capillary was slowly lowered to the 
target site to minimize the brain injury. Virus was delivered into the target site at a flow rate 
of 100 nl per min using a pulled thin glass capillary (Warner Instruments) connected to an 
UltraMicroPump controlled by a SYS-Micro4 Controller 15 (World Precision Instruments).
For transsynaptically labeling experiment, CANE-LV-Cre and AAV-SynP-DIO-TVA-EGFP-
RG were co-injected in animals subjected to 4% formalin injection; injected animals were 
singly housed for 2 weeks followed by CANE-RV-mCherry injection. For retrograde 
labeling experiment, RG-LV-hSyn-FlpO or RG-LV-hSyn-DIO-FlpO were injected in 
TrpV1Cre::Ai65D animals.
For neonatal intraperitoneal (IP) injections, postnatal day 1–2 pups were anesthetized with 
hyperthermia. 6 weeks after neonatal IP injection, mice were subjected to bilateral 
implantation of a custom-made optic fiber. After another 1~2 weeks of recovery, implanted 
animals were subjected to behavioral testing.
The injected viruses and the waiting period for viral transgene expression for the different 
experiments are: for experiments in Figure 2, CANE-LV-Cre (500 nl) together with AAV-
CAG-flex-GFP (300 nl), waiting >10 days or > 4 weeks; for experiments in Figure 3(a-o), 
CANE-LV-Cre (500 nl) together with AAV-SynP-DIO-TVA-EGFP-RG (200 nl), waiting 2 
weeks, then CANE-RV-mCherry (1:200 dilution, 300 nl), waiting additional 10 days; for 
experiment in Figure 4(d-f), CANE-RV-mCherry (1:200 dilution, 300 nl), waiting 3 days. 
For experiments in Figure 3(r-t) & 4(a-c, g-m), AAV9-CAG-flex-GFP (5 µL) or AAV9-
EF1α-DIO-hChR2-eYFP (5 µL), waiting 4–6 weeks. For experiments in Figure 5, AAV9-
EF1α -DIO-eArch-eYFP (8 µL), waiting 4–6 weeks. For experiments in Supplemental 
Figure 5, RG-LV-h-Syn-DIO-FlpO or RG-LV-hSyn-FlpO (800 nL), waiting 3 weeks.
Immunohistochemistry
All mice were deeply anaesthetized with isoflurane, and then transcardially perfused with 
ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 (4% PFA). Dissected brain 
samples were then post-fixed overnight in 4% PFA at 4 °C, cryoprotected in a 20% sucrose 
solution in PBS at 4 °C, frozen in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. Compound (Sakura) and stored at 
−80 °C until sectioning. Trigeminal and dorsal root ganglion samples were sliced at 20 µm 
using a cryostat (Leica Biosystems). All other coronal brain sections were sliced at 60–80 
µm. The serial brain sections were collected in a 24 well plate and washed with PBS for 3 
times. The sections were blocked with 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS with 0.3% 
Triton X-100 (Blocking solution) at room temperature for 1 h. The sections were treated 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with 1st antibody in blocking solution at 4°C for overnight. The sections were washed 3 
times followed by secondary antibody treatment at 4°C for 2 hours. Sections were counter 
stained NeuroTrace fluorescent Nissl stain (fluorescent Nissl stain) (Invitrogen, N-21479) or 
4’, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma, D9564). After this incubation, sections were 
washed, mounted and coverslipped. The primary antibodies used in this study are: goat anti-
Fos12 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc52-g, 1:300), rabbit anti-CGRP52 (Millipore, AB15360, 
1:1000), sheep anti-FoxP217 (R&D Systems, AF5647, 1:5000), rabbit anti-NF20053 (Sigma, 
N4142, 1:200), GS-IB4-Alexa 488–conjugated (Invitrogen, I21411, 1:1000), rabbit anti-
VR1(TrpV1)54 (Abcam, ab31895, 1:1000), and rabbit anti-GFP12 (Abcam, ab290, 1:1000). 
The secondary antibodies are: Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-goat (Jackson immunoresearch, 
705-545-147 1:1,000), Cy3 donkey anti-goat (Jackson immunoresearch, 705-165-147, 
1:1,000), Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit (Jackson immunoresearch, 703-545-155, 
1:1,000), Cy3 donkey anti-rabbit (Jackson immunoresearch, 711-165-152, 1:1,000), and 
Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-sheep (Abcam, ab150181, 1:1000)
Floating section in situ hybridization
For each mouse, six 60 µm sections containing the PBL were collected and in situ was 
performed as described previously36. Gad1, Gad2, vGlut2 and Fos probes were created as 
previously described12,37, and Gad1 and Gad2 probes were applied as a mixed probe. The 
probes were alternated across all sections to ensure that one posterior section and one 
anterior section from each region was analyzed with each probe type.
Image Acquisition and Quantification
Samples were imaged using a Zeiss 700 laser scanning confocal microscope. In situ samples 
were imaged at 20× resolution at three z-positions. All z-positions for each slice were 
merged into a single image in Adobe Photoshop CS6 for quantification. All other samples 
were imaged at 10× resolution. The captured neurons and Fos expressing neurons in all 
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization experiments were manually counted, and 
percentages were calculated within each animal before averaging percentages across 
animals.
Axonal projections from captured PBL-nociceptive neurons was quantified using a method 
previously described12, 28. The projection density for ROI’s was quantified across every 
other 80 µm coronal section. The data was normalized between animals by their own values 
in CeA (Central Amygdala). ROI’s with densities in which the total pixel numbers of GFP-
labeled axons divided by the area of the nuclei was less than 0.1 were excluded.
Again, using a method previously described12, the number of transsynaptically labeled 
neurons from captured PBL-nociceptive neurons was quantified across every other 80 µm 
coronal section. Numbers of labeled cells in each ROI were manually counted. The data was 
normalized between animals by dividing with the number of starter neurons (GFP and 
mCherry double positive neurons in the PBL) in each animal.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Behavioral experiments for Fos immunostaining
Adult male and female C57B/L6 mice at ages more than 6 weeks were singly housed at least 
one day before noxious stimulation. Singly housed mice were directly perfused to stain for 
background Fos expression. For visualizing Fos expression induced by nociceptive stimuli, 
mice were lightly anesthetized with isoflurane, and unilaterally injected with 10 µL of saline, 
or 4% capsaicin, or 4% formalin into either the whisker pad or the hindpaw and returned to 
their home cage. 90 minutes later, the animals were perfused (as described in the method for 
immunostaining above).
Behavioral experiments for capturing PBL-nociceptive neurons with CANE virus
A brief description of CANE method: in FosTVA mice, activated neurons transiently express 
Fos which induces expression of a destabilized TVA (dsTVA) receptor. Lentivirus or 
deficient rabies virus pseudotyped with an engineered mutated envelope protein (CANE 
envelope) specifically binds cells expressing high-level TVA receptor, which are strongly 
Fos+ neurons. In this way, CANE-viruses selectively infect Fos+ neurons and deliver desired 
transgenes to be expressed in Fos+ neurons.
Here, adult male and female FosTVA mice at ages more than 6 weeks were singly housed for 
at least one day, and then either handled without injection, or handled and subjected to 
noxious stimulation. Briefly, mice were taken out of their home cage, placed in the 
anesthesia chamber, lightly anesthetized with isoflurane, and injected unilaterally with 10 µL 
of saline or 4% capsaicin or 4% formalin into either the whisker pad or the hindpaw, and 
returned to their home cage. 60–90min later, mice were anesthetized and undergo stereotaxic 
surgery for CANE-virus injection. Note that PB is a relatively large area and formalin/
capsaicin activated neurons spread along both the dorsal-ventral as well as anterior-posterior 
axes; while we only injected CANE virus once using one stereotaxic coordinate, so we could 
only capture some of the neurons. Additionally, injections of formalin/capsaicin in whisker 
pad on different days could not hit the identical site, and this likely resulted in activation 
(Fos+) of overlap but none-identical populations of PB neurons.
Electrophysiological recording in acute brainstem slices
Four weeks after intraperitoneal injection of AAV9-EF1a-flex-ChR2-eYFP into TrpV1-Cre 
P1-2 mice, or 3 days after injection of CANE-RV-mCherry into the PBL of TrpV1-
Cre::Ai32;FosTVA mice, mice were anesthetized with isofluorane, and transcardially 
perfused in ice-cold NMDG artificial cerebrospinal fluid (NMDG-ACSF; containing 92 mM 
NMDG, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 30 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM HEPES, 2 mM 
glucose, 5 mM sodium ascorbate, 2 mM thiourea, 3 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM MgSO4, 
0.5 mM CaCl2), and bubbled with 5% CO2 / 95% O2. The brain was then extracted and 
sectioned into 250 µm thick sagittal slices using a vibratome (VT-1000S, Leica 
Microsystems) containing ice-cold oxygenated NMDG-ACSF. Sagittal sections including 
the PBL were then bubbled in same solution at 37 °C for 8 min, and transferred to bubbled, 
modified-HEPES ACSF at room temperature (20–25 °C; 92 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.2 
mM NaH2PO4, 30 mM NaHCO3, 20 mM HEPES, 2 mM glucose, 5 mM sodium ascorbate, 
2 mM thiourea, 3 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM MgSO4, 2 mM CaCl2) for at least 1 h before 
recording. Recordings were performed in a submerged chamber, superfused with 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 continuously bubbled ACSF (125 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 26 mM 
NaHCO3, 20 mM glucose, 2 mM CaCl2, 1.3 mM MgSO4) at near-physiological 
temperature (34 ± 1°C). Cells expressing GFP were visualized by infrared differential 
interference contrast and fluorescence video microscopy (Examiner.D1, Zeiss). Whole-cell 
current clamp recordings were amplified with Multiclamp 700B (filtered at 2 kHz), digitized 
with Digidata 1440A (5 kHz), and recorded using pClamp 10 software (Axon). Both 
unlabeled and mCherry+ PBL cells surrounded by axon terminals expressing a virally 
encoded fluorescent marker (ChR2-EYFP) were visualized by infrared differential 
interference contrast and fluorescence video microscopy (Examiner.D1, Zeiss). Whole-cell 
voltage-clamp recordings were amplified with Multiclamp 700B (filtered at 2 kHz), 
digitized with Digidata 1440A (5 kHz), and recorded using pClamp 10 software (Axon). The 
patch-clamp electrode (4–6 MΩ) was filled with an intracellular solution containing 130 mM 
D-gluconic acid, 130 mM CsOH, 5 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, 12 mM phosphocreatine, 3 
mM MgATP, 0.2 mM Na2GTP, 1 mM EGTA. Photostimulation was performed using a 473 
nm LED (CoolLED, pE4000) controlled by pClamp 10 software (Axon). Light intensity was 
set to be 100% for generation of spikes in the axon terminals of projecting 
TrpV1Cre::ChR2+ neurons with a pulse length of 10 ms. To confirm whether post-synaptic 
currents were monosynaptic, tetrodotoxin (TTX; 1 µM) was initially bath applied, followed 
by a combination of TTX and 4-aminopyridine (4-AP; 100 µM).
All electrophysiology data were analyzed off-line using Neuromatic package (Think 
Random) in Igor Pro software (WaveMetrics). Off-line analysis was performed by averaging 
five traces. Light-evoked EPSC and IPSC peak amplitude, half-width, onset latency, time to 
peak, rise time, and decay time were analyzed. The onset latency of the light-evoked EPSCs 
and IPSCs was defined as the time from the onset of the stimulus to the first measurable 
deflection of the potential from the baseline. Similarly, time to peak was defined as the time 
from the onset of the stimulus to the peak of the potential. Rise time and decay time were 
defined as the time between 10% and 90% of the rise or decay of the potential, respectively.
Optogenetic activation of TrpV1Cre::ChR2+ sensory afferent terminals in PBL in a real-time 
place escape/avoidance (PEA) test and in circular chamber for audio recording
Channelrhodopsin (ChR2) or control GFP was expressed in TrpV1-Cre+ primary sensory 
neurons by neonatal IP injection of either AAV9-EF1α-DIO-hChR2-eYFP or AAV9-CAG-
Flex-GFP in TrpV1-Cre pups (as described above). Six weeks later, virus injected mice were 
implanted with custom-made optic fibers which were placed above PB-el on both sides and 
fixed on the skull with dental cement (Parkell). One week later, the animals were subjected 
to a 2-chamber real-time PEA test in light cycle, using a modified method described 
previously55,56. The size of custom-made behavior chamber is 50.1×27.7×31.2 cm, made 
with clear acrylic Plexiglas that had distinct stripe patterns from one another. For 
optogenetic stimulation, laser is delivered through patch cables attached to the implanted 
optic fiber as described previously12. The mouse is placed in the center of the box and 
allowed to explore both chambers without light stimulation (pre-stimulation) for 10 min. 
Generally, after exploration, the mouse shows a small preference for one of the two 
chambers. Subsequently, blue light stimulation (10 Hz, 20 ms pulse-width, ~3.5 mW) is 
delivered whenever the mouse enters or stays in the preferred chamber, and light is turned 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 OFF when the mouse moves to the other chamber (stimulation phase, total 10 min). Finally, 
the mouse can freely explore both chambers without blue light stimulation (post-stimulation) 
for 10 min. We recorded behavioral data via a webcam (Logitech web-camera, PN 
960-000764) interfaced with Bonsai software57. Real-time laser stimulation was controlled 
by Bonsai software through Arduino with a custom-made Arduino sketch (Arduino UNO, 
A00073). After 1 week, the same group of mice were subjected to another behavioral test, 
where the mouse was placed in a circular field in a sound proof chamber. The mouse’s 
movements and audible vocalizations were recorded from the top of field using the webcam 
with audio control at a frame rate 30 fps. The experimental mouse was placed in the center 
of the circular field and allowed to explore freely. Blue light was delivered as described 
above. The duration of each light stimulation was 30 s and the interval between light stimuli 
was > 2 min. The number of light stimulation for each mouse in each behavioral test was 4. 
The number of pips was calculated for each interval and averaged offline.
After all behavior tests were completed, the mice were given a train of strong light 
stimulations (15s on and 15 s off, 50 ms pulses, 10 Hz, ~3.5 mW, repeated 3 times) to elicit 
ChR2- or photo stimulation-dependent Fos expression in their home cage. Subsequently, 
animals were perfused at 90 minutes after the final stimulation and processed for Fos 
immunostaining.
Optogenetic activation of TrpV1Cre::ChR2+ sensory afferent terminals in PBL in a classical 
conditioned place aversion (CPA) test
Channelrhodopsin (ChR2) or control GFP was expressed in TrpV1-Cre+ primary sensory by 
neonatal IP injection of either AAV9-EF1α-DIO-hChR2-eYFP or AAV9-CAG-Flex-GFP in 
TrpV1-Cre pups (as described above). Six weeks later, virus injected mice were implanted 
with custom-made optic fibers which were placed above PB-el on both sides and fixed on 
the skull with dental cement (Parkell). One week later, the animals were subjected to a 2-
chamber classic conditioned place aversion (CPA) test in same behavior chamber used for 
PEA. The mouse is first habituated to the chamber on day 1. On day 2, the mouse is placed 
in the center of the box and allowed to explore both chambers without light stimulation (pre-
stimulation) for 10 min. Generally, after exploration, the mouse shows a small preference for 
one of the two chambers. In the following two days (day 3 and day 4), the mouse is closed 
off in the non-preferred chamber with no stimulation for 15 min in the morning, and then 
closed off in the preferred chamber with blue light stimulation (10 Hz, 20 ms pulse-width, 
~3.5 mW) for 15 min in the afternoon. On the final day (day 5), the mouse can explore both 
chambers without blue light stimulation (post-stimulation) for 10 min, and their behaviors 
are recorded and analyzed.
Optogenetic silencing of TrpV1Cre::eArch+ sensory afferent terminals in PBL in von Frey 
tests and real-time place preference (RTPP) test
Enhanced archaerhodospin (eArch) or control GFP was expressed in TrpV1-Cre+ primary 
sensory by neonatal IP injection of either AAV9-EF1α-DIO-eARCH-eYFP or AAV9-CAG-
Flex-GFP in TrpV1-Cre pups (as described above). Six weeks later, virus injected mice were 
implanted with custom-made optic fibers which were placed above PB-el on both sides and 
fixed on the skull with dental cement (Parkell). More than one week later, the animals were 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subjected to von Frey tests. All mice were first habituated to handling and testing equipment 
at least 30 min before experiments. Behavioral responses to mechanical stimuli applied to 
face or hindpaw at baseline (without capsaicin injection) were examined first and both in the 
absence and in the presence of photo illumination. Subsequently, capsaicin (Sigma-Aldrich, 
1µg/10µl, dissolved in normal saline with 4% ethanol and 4% tween-80) was subcutaneously 
injected into either right hindpaw or right whisker pad. Between 10 and 20 min after 
capsaicin injection, behavioral responses to mechanical stimuli were tested either in the 
absence or the presence of photo-silencing/illuminating of TrpV1-Cre+ axons in PBL. The 
mice were tested for hindpaw and face responses on different days with a randomized order 
(i.e. some were tested for face first, others were tested for paw responses first). There was at 
least one week interval separating the paw versus face (or vice versa) tests. For the hindpaw 
test, mice were individually placed on an elevated metallic wire mesh floor in polyethylene 
cages (4x4x5.5 inch, Comerio-VA, Italy). A graded series of von Frey filaments (0.04–2g, 
Stoelting) was inserted through the mesh floor and applied to the plantar surface of the 
hindpaw. For face test, mice were individually placed in a custom-made box (3x3x4 inch) 
with the top, bottom and four walls made of silver wire mesh and allowed for free 
movement. Again, a graded series of von Frey filaments (0.02–1g) was inserted through the 
mesh wells from the lateral side and applied to the skin of the vibrissa pad within the 
infraorbital nerve territory. A brisk withdrawal of the paw or head was considered a positive 
response. Mice were tested 3 times with at least 2 withdrawal behaviors out of 3 trials 
indicated a positive result. Mechanical threshold was defined as the minimum force 
necessary to elicit a response58–61. For optogenetic silencing during von Frey tests, a 
continuous green light (561nm) stimulation (~12 mW) was delivered during both the 
hindpaw and face tests (with and without capsaicin injections). Again, mice were tested 3 
times with at least 2 withdrawal behaviors out of 3 trials indicated a positive result. 
Mechanical threshold was defined as the minimum force necessary to elicit a response.
TrpV1Cre::eArch and TrpV1Cre::GFP mice were also subjected to a real-time place 
preference test (RTPP). Individual mouse was placed in the center of the box and allowed to 
explore both chambers without light stimulation (baseline) for 10 min. Generally, after 
exploration, the mouse shows a small preference for one of the two chambers. After 
recording the baseline behavior, individual mouse was injected with 5µl 4% capsaicin into 
the left whisker pad and placed in the chamber again to freely explore both chambers 
without light stimulation (no stimulation) for 10 min again. Subsequently, a continuous 
green light stimulation (561 nm, ~12 mW) was delivered through the optic fiber to silence 
the TrpV1Cre::eArch+ fibers (or illuminate the control GFP+ fibers) in PBL whenever the 
mouse entered or stayed in the non-preferred chamber, and light was turned OFF when the 
mouse moved to the other chamber (total 10 min of real-time stimulation). We recorded 
behavioral data via a webcam (Logitech web-camera, PN 960-000764) interfaced with 
Bonsai software57. Real-time laser stimulation was controlled by Bonsai software through 
Arduino with a custom-made Arduino sketch (Arduino UNO, A00073). Matlab codes for 
controlling laser and triggering stimulation are available upon request. Subsequently, 
animals were perfused for post-hoc analysis.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Statistics
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, but our sample sizes are 
similar to those reported in previous publications12,62,63. Values in text are reported as mean 
± standard error of mean. All data (with the exception of behavioral data for the real-time 
PEA test) were analyzed using two-tailed paired and unpaired Student’s t test between 2 
groups (experimental or control), or in the case of multiple groups, one-way or two-way 
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test. The criterion for statistical significance was P < 0.05. 
Regarding the assumption of normality for large/medium data sets, D'Agostino and Pearson 
normality test was used. When the sample size was less than four, Shapiro-Wilk normality 
test was used. We provided mean values with associated standard error of the mean values. 
To determine whether the variance was similar between the groups that are being statistically 
compared, F test was used for t tests, and Brown-Forsythe was used for one-way ANOVA. 
The results showed that the variance was similar.
Behavioral data for real-time PEA and RTPP tests were analyzed using one-way repeated 
measures ANOVA with Matlab R2016a. The statistical test was used for ChR2 group and 
GFP group independently. For PEA, the preference of the stimulation side between PRE 
(no-stim), STIM, and POST (no-stim) periods was compared. For RTPP, the preference of 
the stimulation side between Baseline, No Stimulation, and Stimulation periods was 
compared. Tukey’s test was used post-hoc. Behavioral data for von Frey tests were analyzed 
using two-way repeated measures ANOVA. The statistical test was used for face test and 
hindpaw test independently. For both tests, both between and within eArch and GFP groups 
was across conditions were compared.
A detailed Life Sciences Reporting Summary is available.
Data availability
The data collected in this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Code availability
All custom-written MatLab code used in this study is available at https://github.com/
wanglab-duke/craniofacial-specific-monosynaptic-circuit-for-affective-pain
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Takatoh for helping with method to quantify axon innervation densities, K. Tschida and T. Gibson for 
helping with vocalization quantification and analysis, V. Prevosto for helping with statistics. We also thank T. 
Gibson, M. Fu, K. Tschida, T. Stanek, V. Prevosto, and R.R. Ji for providing input and support throughout the 
project. We also thank S. Lisberger, and R. Mooney for critically reading of this manuscript. E. Rodriguez. is 
supported by a F31 DE025197-03 fellowship. Y. Chen. is supported by K12DE022793. W. Liedtke is supported by 
DE018549. This work is supported by NIH Grant DP1MH103908 to F.Wang.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Waldman, SD. Atlas of common pain syndromes. Elsevier Health Sciences; 2011. 
2. Zakrzewska JM, Wu J, Williams MM, Phillips N, Pavitt SH. Evaluating the impact of trigeminal 
neuralgia. Pain. 2017
3. Smith JG, et al. The psychosocial and affective burden of posttraumatic neuropathy following 
injuries to the trigeminal nerve. Journal of orofacial pain. 2013; 27:293–303. [PubMed: 24171179] 
4. Schmidt K, Schunke O, Forkmann K, Bingel U. Enhanced Short-Term Sensitization of Facial 
Compared With Limb Heat Pain. The Journal of Pain. 2015; 16:781–790. [PubMed: 26043953] 
5. Schmidt K, et al. The differential effect of trigeminal vs. peripheral pain stimulation on visual 
processing and memory encoding is influenced by pain-related fear. NeuroImage. 2016; 134:386–
395. [PubMed: 27015710] 
6. Moulton EA, et al. Capsaicin-induced thermal hyperalgesia and sensitization in the human 
trigeminal nociceptive pathway: An fMRI study. NeuroImage. 2007; 35:1586–1600. [PubMed: 
17407825] 
7. Hunt SP, Mantyh PW. The molecular dynamics of pain control. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 2001; 
2:83–91. [PubMed: 11252998] 
8. Gauriau C, Bernard J-FF. Pain pathways and parabrachial circuits in the rat. Experimental 
physiology. 2002; 87:251–258. [PubMed: 11856971] 
9. Craig AD. Distribution of brainstem projections from spinal lamina I neurons in the cat and the 
monkey. The Journal of comparative neurology. 1995; 361:225–248. [PubMed: 8543660] 
10. Hermanson O, Blomqvist A. Subnuclear localization of FOS-like immunoreactivity in the rat 
parabrachial nucleus after nociceptive stimulation. The Journal of comparative neurology. 1996; 
368:45–56. [PubMed: 8725293] 
11. Hermanson O, Blomqvist A. Subnuclear localization of FOS-like immunoreactivity in the 
parabrachial nucleus after orofacial nociceptive stimulation of the awake rat. The Journal of 
comparative neurology. 1997; 387:114–123. [PubMed: 9331175] 
12. Sakurai K, et al. Capturing and Manipulating Activated Neuronal Ensembles with CANE 
Delineates a Hypothalamic Social-Fear Circuit. Neuron. 2016; 92:739–753. [PubMed: 27974160] 
13. Slugg RM, Light AR. Spinal cord and trigeminal projections to the pontine parabrachial region in 
the rat as demonstrated with Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin. The Journal of comparative 
neurology. 1994; 339:49–61. [PubMed: 8106661] 
14. Cechetto DF, Standaert DG, Saper CB. Spinal and trigeminal dorsal horn projections to the 
parabrachial nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology. 1985; 240:153–160. [PubMed: 
3840498] 
15. Han S, Soleiman MT, Soden ME, Zweifel LS, Palmiter RD. Elucidating an Affective Pain Circuit 
that Creates a Threat Memory. Cell. 2015; 162:363–374. [PubMed: 26186190] 
16. Gaub S, Fisher SE, Ehret G. Ultrasonic vocalizations of adult male Foxp2 mutant mice: behavioral 
contexts of arousal and emotion. Genes, Brain and Behavior. 2016; 15:243–259.
17. Geerling JC, et al. FoxP2 expression defines dorsolateral pontine neurons activated by sodium 
deprivation. Brain research. 2011; 1375:19–27. [PubMed: 21108936] 
18. Ding YQ, Takada M, Shigemoto R, Mizuno N. Trigeminoparabrachial projection neurons showing 
substance P receptor-like immunoreactivity in the rat. Neuroscience research. 1995; 23:415–418. 
[PubMed: 8602281] 
19. Tokita K, Inoue T, Boughter JD. Afferent connections of the parabrachial nucleus in C57BL/6J 
mice. Neuroscience. 2009; 161:475–488. [PubMed: 19327389] 
20. Nishijo H, Norgren R. Parabrachial neural coding of taste stimuli in awake rats. Journal of 
neurophysiology. 1997; 78:2254–2268. [PubMed: 9356379] 
21. Nakamura K, Morrison SF. A thermosensory pathway that controls body temperature. Nature 
Neuroscience. 2007; 11:62–71. [PubMed: 18084288] 
22. Alhadeff AL, Golub D, Hayes MR, Grill HJ. Peptide YY signaling in the lateral parabrachial 
nucleus increases food intake through the Y1 receptor. American journal of physiology. 
Endocrinology and metabolism. 2015; 309:66.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 23. Davern PJ. A role for the lateral parabrachial nucleus in cardiovascular function and fluid 
homeostasis. Frontiers in physiology. 2014; 5:436. [PubMed: 25477821] 
24. Menani JV, De Luca LA, Johnson AK. Role of the lateral parabrachial nucleus in the control of 
sodium appetite. American journal of physiology. Regulatory, integrative and comparative 
physiology. 2014; 306:10.
25. Bester H, Menendez L, Besson JM, Bernard JF. Spino (trigemino) parabrachiohypothalamic 
pathway: electrophysiological evidence for an involvement in pain processes. Journal of 
neurophysiology. 1995; 73:568–585. [PubMed: 7760119] 
26. Bernard JF, Besson JM. The spino(trigemino)pontoamygdaloid pathway: electrophysiological 
evidence for an involvement in pain processes. Journal of neurophysiology. 1990; 63:473–490. 
[PubMed: 2329357] 
27. Oh SW, et al. A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature. 2014; 508:207–214. [PubMed: 
24695228] 
28. Kohara K, et al. Cell type-specific genetic and optogenetic tools reveal hippocampal CA2 circuits. 
Nature Neuroscience. 2014; 17:269–279. [PubMed: 24336151] 
29. Cavanaugh DJ, et al. Restriction of transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 to the peptidergic subset 
of primary afferent neurons follows its developmental downregulation in nonpeptidergic neurons. J 
Neurosci. 2011; 31:10119–10127. [PubMed: 21752988] 
30. Panneton WM, Gan Q. Direct reticular projections of trigeminal sensory fibers immunoreactive to 
CGRP: potential monosynaptic somatoautonomic projections. Front Neurosci. 2014; 8:136. 
[PubMed: 24926231] 
31. Panneton WM, Gan Q, Juric R. Brainstem projections from recipient zones of the anterior 
ethmoidal nerve in the medullary dorsal horn. Neuroscience. 2006; 141:889–906. [PubMed: 
16753263] 
32. Cavanaugh DJ, et al. Trpv1 reporter mice reveal highly restricted brain distribution and functional 
expression in arteriolar smooth muscle cells. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:5067–5077. [PubMed: 
21451044] 
33. Mishra SK, Tisel SM, Orestes P, Bhangoo SK, Hoon MA. TRPV1-lineage neurons are required for 
thermal sensation. The EMBO Journal. 2011; 30:582–593. [PubMed: 21139565] 
34. Foust KD, Poirier A, Pacak CA, Mandel RJ. Neonatal intraperitoneal or intravenous injections of 
recombinant adeno-associated virus type 8 transduce dorsal root ganglia and lower motor neurons. 
Human gene therapy. 2008; 19:61–70. [PubMed: 18052722] 
35. Machida A, et al. Intraperitoneal administration of AAV9-shRNA inhibits target gene expression in 
the dorsal root ganglia of neonatal mice. Molecular Pain. 2013; 9:1–10. [PubMed: 23279936] 
36. Stanek E, Rodriguez E, Zhao S, Han B-XX, Wang F. Supratrigeminal Bilaterally Projecting 
Neurons Maintain Basal Tone and Enable Bilateral Phasic Activation of Jaw-Closing Muscles. J 
Neurosci. 2016; 36:7663–7675. [PubMed: 27445144] 
37. Bellavance MA, et al. Parallel Inhibitory and Excitatory Trigemino-Facial Feedback Circuitry for 
Reflexive Vibrissa Movement. Neuron. 2017; 95:673–682. [PubMed: 28735746] 
38. Madisen L, et al. Transgenic mice for intersectional targeting of neural sensors and effectors with 
high specificity and performance. Neuron. 2015; 85:942–958. [PubMed: 25741722] 
39. Baastrup C, Jensen T, Finnerup N. Pregabalin attenuates place escape/avoidance behavior in a rat 
model of spinal cord injury. Brain research. 2010; 1370:129–135. [PubMed: 21070753] 
40. LaBuda CJ, Fuchs PN. A Behavioral Test Paradigm to Measure the Aversive Quality of 
Inflammatory and Neuropathic Pain in Rats. Experimental Neurology. 2000; 163:490–494. 
[PubMed: 10833324] 
41. Zhang Z, et al. Role of Prelimbic GABAergic Circuits in Sensory and Emotional Aspects of 
Neuropathic Pain. Cell Reports. 2015; 12:752–759. [PubMed: 26212331] 
42. Daou I, et al. Optogenetic Silencing of Nav1.8-Positive Afferents Alleviates Inflammatory and 
Neuropathic Pain. eNeuro. 2016; 3
43. Li B, et al. A novel analgesic approach to optogenetically and specifically inhibit pain transmission 
using TRPV1 promoter. Brain Res. 2015; 1609:12–20. [PubMed: 25797803] 
44. Chow BY, et al. High-performance genetically targetable optical neural silencing by light-driven 
proton pumps. Nature. 2010; 463:98–102. [PubMed: 20054397] 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Sato M, et al. The lateral parabrachial nucleus is actively involved in the acquisition of fear 
memory in mice. Molecular Brain. 2015; 8:1–15. [PubMed: 25571783] 
46. Moffie D. Late results of bulbar trigeminal tractotomy Some remarks on recovery of sensibility. 
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry. 1971; 34:270–274.
47. Rahimpour S, Lad SP. Surgical Options for Atypical Facial Pain Syndromes. Neurosurgery clinics 
of North America. 2016; 27:365–370. [PubMed: 27325003] 
48. Romaniello A, Iannetti GD, Truini A, Cruccu G. Trigeminal responses to laser stimuli. 
Neurophysiologie Clinique/Clinical Neurophysiology. 2003; 33:315–324. [PubMed: 14678845] 
49. DeSouza DD, Moayedi M, Chen DQ, Davis KD, Hodaie M. Sensorimotor and Pain Modulation 
Brain Abnormalities in Trigeminal Neuralgia: A Paroxysmal, Sensory-Triggered Neuropathic 
Pain. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8
50. Kuner R. Central mechanisms of pathological pain. Nature Medicine. 2010; 16:1258–1266.
51. Zhang F, et al. Optogenetic interrogation of neural circuits: technology for probing mammalian 
brain structures. Nat. Protocols. 2010; 5:439–456. [PubMed: 20203662] 
52. Röhn TA, et al. A virus-like particle-based anti-nerve growth factor vaccine reduces inflammatory 
hyperalgesia: potential long-term therapy for chronic pain. J Immunol. 2011; 186:1769–80. 
[PubMed: 21191068] 
53. Xu ZZ, et al. Inhibition of mechanical allodynia in neuropathic pain by TLR5-mediated A-fiber 
blockade. Nature Medicine. 2015; 21:1326–1331.
54. Koh WU, et al. Perineural pretreatment of bee venom attenuated the development of allodynia in 
the spinal nerve ligation injured neuropathic pain model; an experimental study. BMC 
Complement Altern Med. 2014; 14:431. [PubMed: 25366818] 
55. Jennings JH, et al. Distinct extended amygdala circuits for divergent motivational states. Nature. 
2013; 496:224–228. [PubMed: 23515155] 
56. Stamatakis AM, Stuber GD. Activation of lateral habenula inputs to the ventral midbrain promotes 
behavioral avoidance. Nature neuroscience. 2012
57. Lopes G, et al. Bonsai: an event-based framework for processing and controlling data streams. 
Frontiers in neuroinformatics. 2015; 9:7. [PubMed: 25904861] 
58. Silva JR, et al. Neuroimmune-Glia Interactions in the Sensory Ganglia Account for the 
Development of Acute Herpetic Neuralgia. J Neurosci. 2017; 37:6408–6422. [PubMed: 28576938] 
59. Peng C, et al. miR-183 cluster scales mechanical pain sensitivity by regulating basal and 
neuropathic pain genes. Science. 2017; 356:1168–1171. [PubMed: 28572455] 
60. Kim YS, et al. Central terminal sensitization of TRPV1 by descending serotonergic facilitation 
modulates chronic pain. Neuron. 2014; 81:873–887. [PubMed: 24462040] 
61. Aita M, Byers MR, Chavkin C, Xu M. Trigeminal injury causes kappa opioid-dependent allodynic, 
glial and immune cell responses in mice. Mol Pain. 2010; 6:8. [PubMed: 20109235] 
62. Zhang Y, et al. Identifying Local and Descending Inputs for Primary Sensory Neurons. J Clin 
Invest. 2015; 125:3782–3794. [PubMed: 26426077] 
63. Zhang Y, Chen Y, Liedtke W, Wang F. Lack of evidence for ectopic sprouting of genetically 
labeled Aβ touch afferents in inflammatory and neuropathic trigeminal pain. Mol Pain. 2015; 
11:18. [PubMed: 25880319] 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Lateral parabrachial nucleus (PBL) is differentially activated by the same noxious 
stimulus applied to the face versus hindpaw
(a) Schematic illustration of Fos induction protocol. Ninety minutes after 10 µL 4% formalin 
was injected, brainstem slices containing PBL were stained for Fos expression. (TG, 
trigeminal ganglion; Sp5C, trigeminal nucleus, caudalis; DRG, dorsal root ganglion; S.C., 
spinal cord)
(b) Representative images of Fos+ neurons in PBL after formalin injection into right whisker 
pad (top) and right hindpaw (bottom). Large white dash circle (left) indicates the entire 
structure of PBL, whereas small white dash circle (right) indicates ventral region of PBL 
including PB-el. Blue; DAPI stain. Scale bar, 200 µm.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (c) Total numbers of Fos+ neurons in PBL on both sides combined (n = 4, 3; two-tailed 
unpaired student’s t test; *P = 0.0445; t4.962 =2.674).
(d) Numbers of Fos+ neurons in ipsilateral (magenta) and contralateral (teal) PB-el in mice 
unilaterally injected with formalin into one whisker pad (n = 4) or one hindpaw (n = 3 mice; 
two-way ANOVA; W: P = 0.0533; H: **P = 0.0090; F1, 5 = 32.75). Data are mean ± SEM.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Capturing and mapping the axonal projection targets of PBL-nociceptive neurons
(a) Schematic illustration of strategy to express GFP in nociceptive relay PBL neurons in 
FosTVA mice using CANE.
(b-g) Examination of CANE-captured neurons activated by the first stimulus (magenta) 
versus Fos+ neurons activated by the second stimulus (green) in the PBL. In all six 
paradigms, CANE method was used to capture neurons activated by stimulus/no stimulus, 
and 2 weeks later, Fos was induced by the second stimulus. Blue, DAPI. Scale bars, 10 µm.
(h-j) The percentage of Fos+ neurons among CANE+ neurons. Data are mean ± SEM. (from 
left to right: ((h) n =4, 9, 7, 4; one-way ANOVA; ****P = <0.0001, **P = 0.0005, P = 
0.3952, P = 0.3223; **P = 0.0005, *P = 0.0047; F3, 20 = 12.49
(i) n = 5, 5, 9; one-way ANOVA; ****P = <0.0001, ****P = <0.0001, P = 0.6876; F2, 17 = 
52.17
(j) n = 3, 3; two-tailed unpaired student’s t test; P = 0.2759; t3.505=1.289).
(k-p) Representative images of axonal projections from captured formalin activated PBL 
(magenta) in several brain nuclei expressing Fos (green) induced by formalin. (Inset: 
Rodriguez et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Schematic of coronal view of location [in red box] in brain). * in panel k denotes very large 
terminal boutons from labeled PBL axons in BNST, some of boutons surround the Fos+ 
BNST neuron cell bodies.
(q) Quantification of normalized density of innervations (total pixels divided by the area of 
each nucleus; n = 3). All data shown are mean ± SEM.
(r) Schematic summary for output targets of PBL-nociceptive neurons. BNST, bed nucleus of 
the stria terminalis; PVH, paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus; PVT, paraventricular 
nucleus of the thalamus; CeAC, central amygdalar nucleus, capsular part; SNPC, substantia 
nigra pars compacta; PAGvl, ventrolateral periaqueductal gray; NST, nucleus solitary tract; 
IRt, intermediate reticular tract. Scale bars, (k, o) 20 µm. (l-n, p) 50 µm. (n =3) Data are 
mean ± SEM.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Transsynaptic labeling of presynaptic neurons for PBL-nociceptive neurons reveals the 
direct TG→PBL pathway
(a) Schematic illustration for transsynaptic tracing of presynaptic inputs to PBL-nociceptive 
neurons.
(b) Representative image of CANE-RV-mCherry-infected PBL-nociceptive neurons. Green, 
PBL-nociceptive neurons expressing TVA and RG. Red, RV-mCherry+. Yellow, starter cells. 
Scale bar, 10 µm.
(c-l) Representative images of transsynaptically labeled neurons in several brain regions. 
Scale bars, (c-h, k-l) 50 µm (i) 100 µm (j) 20 µm
Rodriguez et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (m) Quantification of transsynaptically labeled neurons in each brain area contralateral (teal) 
and ipsilateral (magenta) to injected site after whisker pad formalin injection and (n) after 
hindpaw formalin injection. The value is normalized against the number of starter neurons 
and averaged across animals. Data are mean ± SEM (n = 6; n = 3).
(o) Schematic summary for input sources for PBL-nociceptive neurons. BNST, bed nucleus 
of the stria terminalis; PVH, paraventricular of the hypothalamus; LHA, lateral 
hypothalamus; CeA, central amygdalar nucleus, medial; SNPC, substantia nigra pars 
compacta; PAG, periaqueductal gray; DRN, dorsal raphe nucleus; Reticular Nuclei: (PRn, 
pontine reticular nuclei; IRt, intermediate reticular tract; PCRt, parvicellular reticular tract, 
MRn, medullary reticular nuclei; GRn, gigantocellular reticular nuclei); NST, nucleus 
solitary tract; Sp5C, trigeminal nucleus, caudalis; TG, trigeminal ganglion; DRG, dorsal root 
ganglion. S.C., spinal cord (dorsal horn).
(p) Molecular characterization of transsynaptically labeled trigeminal ganglion (TG) 
neurons. Green; bottom to top: IB4+, CGRP+, NF200+, TrpV1+. Left, colocalized 
transsynaptically labeled TG neurons. Right, non-colocalized labeled TG neurons. Scale bar, 
20 µm.
(q) Percentage of transsynaptically labeled trigeminal ganglion neurons expressing IB4, 
CGRP, NF200, or TrpV1. (n = 8; one-way ANOVA; *P = 0.0135, ***P = 0.0008, *P = 
0.0468, ****P = <0.0001, ****P = <0.0001, P = 0.4653; F3, 27 = 22.7). Data are mean ± 
SEM.
(r) Schematic illustration and timeline of intraperitoneal injection in 1–2 day old TrpV1-Cre 
pup with AAV9-CAG-flex-GFP. Four weeks after injection, TrpV1Cre::GFP mouse was 
injected with capsaicin in the whisker pad and stained for Fos (n = 4 mice).
(s) Representative image of trigeminal ganglion with TrpV1Cre::GFP+ neurons. Scale bar, 
200 µm.
(t) Representative image of PBL with TrpV1Cre::GFP+ axon terminals (Green) and 
capsaicin-induced Fos+ neurons (magenta). Scale bar, 50 µm (high mag).
Rodriguez et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Optogenetic activation of TrpV1-Cre+ sensory axons activates PBL-nociceptive neurons 
and elicits aversive behavior and stress calls in a real-time place escape/avoidance task
(a) Schematic illustration of intraperitoneal injection of a 1–2 day old TrpV1-Cre pup (n = 
3), followed by optogenetic-assisted whole cell patch-clamp recording from a PBL neuron in 
acute brain slices
(b) Representative traces from a cell showing no light-evoked IPSC at a holding potential of 
10mV, but observed to have light-evoked EPSC at a holding of −65mV. Cell, held at −65 
mV, was bath applied with 1µM TTX, followed by 100 µM 4-AP and 1µM TTX, showing a 
light-evoked monosynaptic EPSC.
(c) Averaged current amplitude is shown. Data are mean ± SEM. (closed circles, individual 
cells, n = 15).
(d) Representative high-mag image of TrpV1Cre::ChR2+ axon terminals and CANE-RV-
mCherry captured PBL-pain neurons. (n = 3 mice; Scale bar, 50 µm).
(e) Representative of an mCherry+ PBL-pain neuron recorded to have light-evoked EPSC at 
a holding of −65mV. Cell was bath applied with 1µM TTX, followed by 100 µM 4-Ap and 
1µM TTX, showing a light-evoked monosynaptic EPSC.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (f) Averaged current amplitude is shown. Data are mean ± SEM. (closed circles, individual 
cells, n = 6).
(g) Schematic illustration of real-time place escape/avoidance (PEA) test.
(h) Representative spatial tracking map showing the location of an experimental mouse 
before, during, and after optogenetic stimulation of TrpV1Cre::ChR2+ axon terminals in the 
PBL in the preferred chamber.
(i) Representative spatial tracking map showing the location of a control mouse before, 
during, and after illuminating TrpV1Cre::GFP+ axon terminals in the PBL in the preferred 
chamber.
(j) Percentage of preference (per 30 seconds) the experimental and control groups had 
before, during, and after optogenetic stimulation (n = 8 & 3) shown across time (min). Data 
are mean ± SEM.
(k) Quantification of time theTrpV1Cre::ChR2 group spent in preferred chamber before, 
during, and after optogenetic stimulation (n = 8 one-way repeated measures ANOVA; ****P 
= <0.0001, *P = 0.0128, ****P = <0.0001; F2, 14 = 49.41). Data are mean ± SEM.
(l) Quantification of time the TrpV1Cre::GFP group spent in preferred chamber before, 
during, and after light illumination (n = 3; one-way repeated measures ANOVA; P = 0.8867, 
P = 0.6377, P = 0.8886; F2, 6 = 0.4412). Data are mean ± SEM.
(m) Schematic illustration of vocalization recording chamber.
(n) Quantification of frequency of pips induced by optogenetic stimulation of 
TrpV1Cre::ChR2 (experimental) or TrpV1Cre::GFP (control) axon terminals in the PBL. 
Data are mean ± SEM. (ChR2, n = 8; GFP, n = 3; two-tailed unpaired student’s t test; **P = 
<0.0001; t7 =10.13).
Rodriguez et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Optogenetic silencing of TrpV1-Cre+ axon terminals in PBL selectively reduces face 
allodynia after capsaicin injection
(a) Schematic illustration of intraperitoneal injection of a 1–2 day old TrpV1-Cre pup 
followed by a face and hindpaw von Frey tests in the same individual mice in 
TrpV1Cre::eArch (n = 9) and TrpV1Cre::GFP groups (n = 8). The order of face versus 
hindpaw tests was randomized. Each mouse was tested before and after 10 µL 4% capsaicin 
was injected into either face or hindpaw.
(b) Representative post-hoc image of TrpV1Cre::eArch+ axon terminals in PBL and labeled 
TrpV1Cre::eArch+ cell bodies in TG (n = 9 mice; Scale bars, 50 µm).
Rodriguez et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (c) Quantification of mechanical thresholds of face withdrawal responses in von Frey tests. 
Measurements were taken before and after capsaicin injection into right whisker pad, as well 
as without and with optogenetic silencing in TrpV1Cre::eArch (n = 9) or in control 
TrpV1Cre::GFP groups (n = 8, two-way repeated measures ANOVA; (eArch vs. GFP) P = 
>0.9999, P = >0.9999, P = >0.9999, *P = 0.0440; (no light vs light) eArch: P = >0.9999, 
**P = 0.0046, GFP: P = >0.9999, P = >0.9999; F (3, 45) = 2.671). Data are mean ± SEM.
(d) Quantification of mechanical thresholds of hindpaw withdrawal responses in von Frey 
tests. Measurements were taken before and after capsaicin injection into right hindpaw, as 
well as without and with optogenetic silencing in TrpV1Cre::eArch (n = 9) or in 
TrpV1Cre::GFP groups (n = 8, two-way repeated measures ANOVA; (Arch vs. GFP) P = 
>0.9999, P = >0.9999, P = >0.9999, >0.9999; (no light vs light) Arch: P = >0.9999, 
P=>0.9999, GFP: P = >0.9999, P = >0.9999; F (3, 45) = 0.03048). Data are mean ± SEM.
(e) Schematic illustration of real-time place preference (RTPP) test of mouse injected with 
capsaicin into left whisker pad.
(f) Quantification of time the experimental group spent in non-preferred chamber before 
capsaicin, after capsaicin, and without or with optogenetic silencing (n = 6 one-way repeated 
measures ANOVA; P = 0.5356, *P = 0.0174, **P = 0.0031; F2, 10 = 10.92). Data are mean ± 
SEM.
(g) Quantification of time the control group spent in non-preferred chamber before 
capsaicin, after capsaicin, and without or with optogenetic silencing (n = 7; one-way 
repeated measures ANOVA; P = 0.7320, P = 0.2086, P = 0.5537; F2, 10 = 1.695). Data are 
mean ± SEM.
Rodriguez et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
