 Intercellular transmission of the unfolded protein response 
promotes survival and drug resistance in cancer cells
Jeffrey J. Rodvold1, Kevin T. Chiu1, Nobuhiko Hiramatsu2, Julia K. Nussbacher3, Valentina 
Galimberti1, Navin R. Mahadevan1, Karl Willert3, Jonathan H. Lin2, and Maurizio Zanetti1,*
1Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Medicine and Moores Cancer Center, University of 
California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
2Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
3Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA.
Abstract
Increased protein translation in cells and various factors in the tumor microenvironment can 
induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which initiates the unfolded protein response (UPR). 
We have previously reported that factors released from cancer cells mounting a UPR induce a de 
novo UPR in bone marrow–derived myeloid cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells that facilitates 
protumorigenic characteristics in culture and tumor growth in vivo. We investigated whether this 
intercellular signaling, which we have termed transmissible ER stress (TERS), also operates 
between cancer cells and what its functional consequences were within the tumor. We found that 
TERS signaling induced a UPR in recipient human prostate cancer cells that included the cell 
surface expression of the chaperone GRP78. TERS also activated Wnt signaling in recipient 
cancer cells and enhanced resistance to nutrient starvation and common chemotherapies such as 
the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and the microtubule inhibitor paclitaxel. TERS-induced 
activation of Wnt signaling required the UPR kinase and endonuclease IRE1. However, TERS-
*Corresponding author. mzanetti@ucsd.edu. 
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencesignaling.org/cgi/content/full/10/482/eaah7177/DC1
Fig. S1. TERS transmission and reception occur among various human cancer cell lines.
Fig. S2. Nutrient-starved TERS-primed cells have increased viability during nutrient deprivation.
Fig. S3. Bortezomib does not affect UPR transcription between vehicle- and TERS-primed cells but is less cytotoxic to TERS-primed 
cells.
Fig. S4. TERS-primed LNCaP cells are protected from paclitaxel cytotoxicity.
Fig. S5. TERS CM promotes abundance in β-catenin.
Fig. S6. Validation of PC3.TOP reporter system.
Fig. S7. MEF KO cells have selective sensitivity to TERS.
Fig. S8. Population fitness of TERS-primed cells.
Fig. S9. Histology analysis of TC1 vehicle- and TERS-primed tumors.
Author contributions: J.J.R. designed and performed the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. K.T.C. designed 
and performed the experiments. N.H. created cell-tagging constructs, performed Western blot analysis, and aided in luciferase assays. 
J.K.N. designed the CRISPR system. V.G. performed TERT luciferase assay experiments. N.R.M. analyzed the data and provided 
suggestions for the experimental design. K.W. provided the TOP.GFP construct and provided guidance on Wnt signaling. J.H.L. 
provided the ATF6 reporter and provided constructive criticisms on ER-related studies. M.Z. helped design experiments and wrote the 
manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Signal. ; 10(482): . doi:10.1126/scisignal.aah7177.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 induced enhancement of cell survival was predominantly mediated by the UPR kinase PERK and 
a reduction in the abundance of the transcription factor ATF4, which prevented the activation of 
the transcription factor CHOP and, consequently, the induction of apoptosis. When implanted in 
mice, TERS-primed cancer cells gave rise to faster growing tumors than did vehicle-primed cancer 
cells. Collectively, our data demonstrate that TERS is a mechanism of intercellular communication 
through which tumor cells can adapt to stressful environments.
INTRODUCTION
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in solid tumors results from a dysregulation of protein 
synthesis, folding, secretion, and aberrant glycosylation, which are heightened by 
microenvironmental stimuli such as nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, oxidative stress, and 
chronic viral infection (1, 2). To cope with ER stress, tumor cells initiate an evolutionarily 
conserved signaling process known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), which is 
coordinated by three ER transmembrane-bound sensors—inositol-requiring transmembrane 
kinase/endoribonuclease 1α (IRE1α), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), and protein 
kinase R–like ER kinase (PERK)—which are maintained inactive in unstressed cells through 
luminal association with the ER chaperone glucose-regulated protein 78 [GRP78; also 
known as binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP)] (3). Upon excessive client protein burden, 
GRP78 disassociates from these three sensor proteins to preferentially bind unfolded or 
misfolded proteins, enabling each sensor to activate downstream signaling cascades that 
attempt to normalize protein folding and secretion. PERK phosphorylates eukaryotic 
initiation factor 2α (eIF2α), resulting in selective inhibition of translation to reduce ER 
client protein load. IRE1α autophosphorylates, oligomerizes, and activates its 
endoribonuclease function that generates a spliced isoform of X-box binding protein–1 
(XBP-1s), which drives the production of various ER chaperones. ATF6 translocates to the 
Golgi, where it is cleaved into its functional form and acts in tandem with XBP-1s to restore 
ER homeostasis (4). Persistent ER stress activates the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-
binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), which can initiate apoptosis (5).
The role of the UPR in tumorigenesis and cancer progression is typically distinguished by 
cell-intrinsic functions, which enhance cell fitness and survival, and cell-extrinsic functions, 
which are mediated by soluble messenger molecules released by cancer cells undergoing a 
UPR that co-opt recipient cells (6–10). In support of the former, conditional homozygous 
knockout (KO) of Grp78 in the prostate of mice with Pten inactivation protects against 
cancer growth (11), whereas the inactivation of PERK or expression of a dominant-negative 
PERK mutant in cancer cells yields smaller and less aggressive tumors in mice (12). Human 
tumor cells have high amounts of GRP78 (13), which confers resistance to chemotherapy 
(14). In addition, the translocation of GRP78 to the cell surface is proposed to serve as a 
signaling molecule that activates phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) (15, 16), which promotes 
proliferation. As to cell-extrinsic effects, we previously found that cancer cells undergoing a 
UPR can transmit ER stress to bone marrow–derived myeloid cells, macrophages, and 
dendritic cells (6–10) and impart these cells with a mixed proinflammatory/
immunosuppressive phenotype (10) that is associated with defective activation of naïve 
CD8+ T cells (8). The existence of a similar UPR-based cell-nonautonomous 
Rodvold et al.
Page 2
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 communication in Caenorhabditis elegans, which promotes stress resistance and organismal 
longevity (17), suggests that this phenomenon may be evolutionarily conserved (18). We 
propose that it may also be leveraged by the tumor to promote its survival and outgrowth.
The induction of the UPR in cancer cells triggers the release of soluble factors that are able 
to transmit ER stress to recipient myeloid cells (7–9). We termed this phenomenon 
transmissible ER stress (TERS). Here, we investigated whether TERS is operative among 
cancer cells and what the consequence of this phenomenon might be in recipient cancer 
cells. Our findings reveal a hitherto unappreciated role for a UPR-based intercellular 
signaling mechanism within tumors through which tumor cells gain fitness and the 
capability to cope with metabolic, proteotoxic, or genotoxic stress. Additionally, because 
spatial heterogeneity in UPR activation within a tumor correlates with tumor growth rates 
(19), the phenomenon may ultimately contribute to the clonal heterogeneity and fitness of 
tumor cells in vivo.
RESULTS
Prostate cancer cells transmit ER stress to homologous and heterologous cancer cells
We generated conditioned medium (CM), herein called TERS-conditioned medium (TERS 
CM), using the human prostate cancer cell line PC3 cultured with the sarcoplasmic/
endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ (SERCA)–adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) inhibitor 
thapsigargin (Tg), as previously described (7). Unstressed homologous PC3 cells (Fig. 1, A 
and B) or heterologous DU145 cells (Fig. 1C) were cultured in TERS CM or CM from 
vehicle-treated (control) cells (Veh CM) for 5 days. These “recipient” cells were harvested 
on days 1, 3, and 5 and analyzed by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR) for the expression of three key UPR genes: GRP78, spliced XBP-1 
(XBP-1s), and CHOP (Fig. 1, A and C). GRP78 protein abundance was also analyzed by 
Western blot (Fig. 1B). TERS CM treatment engaged a global UPR in both cell lines 
throughout the 5-day culture period as well as promoted inflammation, as determined by 
gene expression for IL-6 (Fig. 1D) in PC3-treated cells. ER stress transmission was not 
limited to human prostate cancer cells; the same phenomenon occurred in other human 
cancer cell lines, including breast and pancreatic cancer cells (fig. S1). This suggests that 
TERS, as a phenomenon, is not restricted to only affect recipient myeloid cells and is 
independent of the type of transmitting and recipient cancer cells.
The ER-resident chaperone GRP78 plays numerous roles in the tumorigenesis of various 
organs, including the prostate (20). GRP78 also translocates to the surface of prostate cancer 
cells (15, 16, 20), where it serves as a signaling molecule for cell growth by activating PI3K 
(15, 16). The 2-day treatment with TERS CM markedly increased cytoplasmic expression of 
GRP78 (Fig. 1E). By staining for the C terminus of GRP78, which is surface-exposed upon 
translocation to the cell membrane (21), we found that TERS CM provided a progressive 
translocation of surface GRP78 (sGRP78) that began on day 3 and persisted through day 5 
(Fig. 1F). This suggests that TERS may be a stimulus to induce the translocation of GRP78 
to the cell surface.
Rodvold et al.
Page 3
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TERS endows recipient tumor cells with a unique UPR
We reasoned that because TERS CM induced the progressive translocation of the ER-
resident chaperone GRP78 to the cell surface, a short-term exposure to TERS CM could 
alter ER function and dynamics. Tumor cells in vivo may be subject to UPR-based cell-
nonautonomous effects in a transient and possibly iterative manner as a result of cell-
intrinsic or tumor microenvironment–borne perturbations (6, 22). To mimic the stochastic 
way ER stress transmission among cancer cells may occur in vivo, naïve PC3 cells were 
treated with TERS CM or Veh CM for 2 days followed by a 2-day rest period in standard 
growth medium to enable the resolution of ER stress (Fig. 2A). At the end of the rest period, 
we noted that PC3 cells had a substantial increase in sGRP78 abundance (Fig. 2B). In light 
of previous reports that found that this translocation corresponds with improved 
cytoprotection and chemoresistance (23–25), we provisionally conclude that sGRP78 
abundance in TERS CM–cultured cells was reflective of a functionally unique population 
potentially better able to cope with a subsequent UPR. We termed these cells “TERS-
primed,” because this ER stress adaptation is reminiscent of earlier observations that cells 
exposed to protracted mild ER stress undergo an adaptive UPR (26).
To study the consequences of TERS priming on the response to physiological tumor 
microenvironmental stressors, TERS- and vehicle-primed PC3 cells were challenged by 
nutrient deprivation through culture in glucose- and serum protein–free medium for 48 
hours. TERS-primed cells had increased protein abundance of GRP78 compared with 
vehicle-primed cells under both normal and nutrient-deprived conditions, despite the fact 
that nutrient starvation markedly increased GRP78 in vehicle-primed cells (Fig. 2C). We 
also found reduced transcriptional activation of UPR genes in the TERS-primed cells (fig. 
S2A). The differential expression of GRP78 led us to investigate whether PERK was also 
differentially affected between TERS- and vehicle-primed cells. Under nutrient (glucose and 
serum)–deprived conditions, we found a distinct decrease in the amount of phosphorylated 
PERK and eIF2α in TERS-primed cells relative to vehicle-primed cells (Fig. 2D). TERS-
primed cells also displayed a marked reduction in the abundance of ATF4 and the 
downstream protein CHOP during nutrient deprivation (Fig. 2D). Notably, the PERK 
pathway in TERS-primed cells was also repressed under standard cell culture conditions 
relative to vehicle-primed cells. These findings suggested that TERS priming differentially 
affects PERK pathway activation, providing protection from CHOP-mediated apoptotic 
signaling due to diminished ATF4 activation. We quantified the viability of vehicle- or 
TERS-primed PC3 cells cultured in glucose/serum-depleted or glucose/serum-replete by 
annexin V staining and found that cell survival was greater in TERS-primed cultures than in 
vehicle-primed cultures (Fig. 2E). This cytoprotection against nutrient starvation similarly 
occurred in TERS-primed DU145 and LNCaP cells (fig. S2, B and C). These findings 
demonstrate that TERS signaling improves the recipient cancer cells’ ability to survive 
amidst nutrient starvation that is common in the tumor microenvironment.
TERS-primed cells are protected against proteasome inhibition–mediated toxicity
Bortezomib (Velcade) is a proteasome inhibitor used in the treatment of multiple myeloma 
(27) and is also proposed for the treatment of solid tumors, including prostate cancer (28, 
29). Its mechanism of action involves the induction of unresolvable ER stress, leading to 
Rodvold et al.
Page 4
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 apoptosis (30). We investigated whether TERS priming also impinges on bortezomib-
mediated cytotoxicity. Whereas bortezomib evoked no significant transcriptional differences 
in UPR genes between vehicle- and TERS-primed PC3 cells (fig. S3A), the treatment of 
bortezomib increased total GRP78 levels in both vehicle- and TERS-primed PC3 cells. 
However, TERS-primed cells maintained increased protein abundance throughout the 
titration of the drug (Fig. 3A). These results confirm that bortezomib induces a UPR and that 
TERS-primed cells display a larger amount of GRP78 during bortezomib-induced stress. We 
found a similar trend in relation to surface abundance of GRP78: Bortezomib treatment 
increased sGRP78 in vehicle-primed cells, albeit modestly, as well as in TERS-primed cells 
relative to unstimulated conditions (Fig. 3B). However, bortezomib-treated TERS-primed 
cells displayed a marked increase in sGRP78 over bortezomib-treated vehicle-primed cells 
(Fig. 3B). The cytotoxicity of bortezomib is reportedly mediated through ATF4-dependent 
activation, whereas IRE1α signaling is dispensable for its effects (31). We therefore 
compared the relative PERK response between TERS- and vehicle-primed PC3 cells after 
bortezomib exposure. Although there appeared to be relatively comparable amounts of 
phosphorylated PERK and eIF2α in bortezomib-treated, TERS CM–cultured, or Veh CM–
cultured cells, TERS-primed cells had substantially reduced abundance of ATF4 and CHOP 
protein relative to vehicle-primed cells in response to bortezomib (Fig. 3C). Because GRP78 
and ATF4 can play cytoprotective roles, we probed the viability of TERS-and vehicle-
primed PC3 cells in response to bortezomib. TERS-primed cells had improved survival over 
vehicle-primed cells across a 2-log titration of bortezomib (Fig. 3D). TERS-primed DU145 
and LNCaP cells were similarly protected against bortezomib (fig. S3, B and C).
We next probed the durability of TERS-induced cytoprotection in bortezomib cytotoxicity. 
We reasoned that increased GRP78 abundance signaled the presence of an adaptive UPR 
pursuant to TERS priming, providing cells with a greater ability to cope with bortezomib 
cytotoxicity. Although GRP78 abundance decreased under both conditions in the 5 days 
after cells were rested (meaning, returned to normal medium), GRP78 was maintained at a 
greater abundance in TERS-primed cells than in vehicle-primed cells (Fig. 3E). This 
correlated with persistent cytoprotection from bortezomib (Fig. 3F).
TERS protects against non–UPR-mediated cytotoxicity
Cytoprotection from UPR-inducing noxae prompted us to investigate whether TERS-primed 
cells are also protected against genotoxicity. Paclitaxel, a microtubule stabilizer that is 
frequently used to treat patients with various types of solid tumors, including prostate 
cancer, did not induce transcriptional activation of the UPR in either vehicle- or TERS-
primed PC3 cells, on the basis of UPR-related gene expression (Fig. 4A) or protein 
abundance (Fig. 4, B and C). Although this is at odds with a previous report that found that 
paclitaxel initiates a UPR (32), cell- and tissue-specific differences may account for the 
discrepancy. We then determined the effect of TERS priming on paclitaxel-mediated 
cytotoxicity. Forty-eight hours after treatment, the percentage of apoptotic cells in vehicle-
primed PC3 cells was markedly higher than that in TERS-primed PC3 cells (Fig. 4D). 
Similar results were observed using LNCaP cells (fig. S4).
Rodvold et al.
Page 5
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Paclitaxel promotes apoptosis in part by causing cell cycle arrest in the form of a mitotic 
block in early M phase or, for those cells progressing through aberrant mitosis, in G1 phase 
(33, 34). Because TERS-mediated resistance to paclitaxel appeared to be independent of ER 
stress induction, we explored the possibility that TERS priming affects the cell cycle. A 5-
bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) analysis revealed that unstimulated TERS-primed cells were 
twice as enriched in the G2/M phase compared with vehicle-primed cells (Fig. 4E), 
suggesting that the cytoprotective effect of TERS is derived from preventing progression 
through the M phase. Because the G2/M-phase arrest enables DNA damage repair during the 
cell cycle before mitotic entry in response to genotoxic stress (35), we also explored whether 
TERS priming affects the DNA damage response caused by paclitaxel. Staining for γ-
H2AX, a marker for double-stranded DNA breaks, was detected in response to paclitaxel in 
both vehicle- and TERS-primed PC3 cells, but TERS-primed cells had fewer γ-H2AX foci 
per cell than vehicle-primed cells (Fig. 4F). Collectively, we infer that these findings suggest 
that TERS protects cancer cells against DNA damage during chemotherapy-induced 
genotoxicity.
TERS promotes β-catenin–mediated Wnt signaling
One possible mechanism accounting for cytoprotection and an enrichment in the G2/M 
phase could be the activation of Wnt signaling, given that it has been demonstrated that Wnt 
signaling is predominant during the G2/M phase (36). Specifically, we thought that TERS 
could stabilize β-catenin, a subunit of the cadherin protein complex and an intracellular 
signal transducer of the Wnt pathway (37, 38). We analyzed PC3 cells cultured in TERS CM 
for 5 days and monitored the transcriptional activation of CTNNB1 and its negative 
regulator, AXIN2 (39). We found that TERS CM modestly increased CTNNB1 transcription 
on day 1, which continued to increase on days 3 and 5. TERS CM also increased the 
transcription of AXIN2 during the latter days (Fig. 5A). Because Wnt signaling is 
suppressed by degradation of β-catenin, we examined the abundance of β-catenin in LNCaP 
cells 48 hours after treatment and found that TERS CM increased its abundance (fig. S5). 
Because AXIN2 activation occurred on day 3, the delayed kinetics suggested that TERS 
activation of the Wnt pathway is unlikely to involve a Wnt ligand. To better elucidate the 
kinetics of TERS-mediated Wnt signaling, we transduced PC3 cells with the T cell factor 
(TCF) optimal promoter (TOP) reporter system, which expresses green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) when TCF is transcriptionally activated by the nuclear translocation of β-catenin (40–
42). We observed reporter activation in these cells within 24 hours of treatment with GSK-
XV (fig. S6, A and B), a small-molecule inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase–3 (GSK-3), 
which stimulates Wnt signaling (43). Progressive activation of the TOP reporter was 
observed throughout TERS priming (Fig. 5B). From these data thus far, we concluded that 
TERS activates Wnt signaling and likely does so independently of a canonical Wnt ligand 
(44). To elucidate whether Wnt signaling provides cytoprotection, we treated LNCaP cells 
with human recombinant, soluble WNT3a protein (rWNT3a) for 2 days and then challenged 
them with nutrient deprivation, bortezomib, or paclitaxel. Wnt signaling provided 
cytoprotection from nutrient deprivation but not from bortezomib or paclitaxel (fig. S6C). 
Surprisingly, rWNT3a provided no protection against paclitaxel but only against nutrient 
starvation. This direct way to drive Wnt signaling perhaps provides adaptive responses in 
cells, which do not entirely mimic TERS-mediated cytoprotection.
Rodvold et al.
Page 6
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The observation that TERS initiates Wnt signaling is, to our knowledge, the first to suggest a 
link between the UPR and Wnt signaling. To see whether UPR signaling is necessary per se 
for TERS-mediated Wnt stimulation, PC3.TOP cells were cultured in TERS CM for 48 
hours in the absence or presence of either an IRE1α inhibitor [4μ8C (45)] or a PERK 
inhibitor [GSK2656157 (46)] and probed for Wnt signaling using the TOP reporter system 
by flow cytometry. IRE1α inhibition prevented TOP expression, whereas PERK inhibition 
had no effect (Fig. 5, C and D). This finding suggested that TERS induces Wnt signaling 
through IRE1α activation. To determine whether ER stress is per se sufficient to drive Wnt 
signaling, we treated PC3. TOP cells with the canonical ER stress inducer tunicamycin with 
or without 4μ8C or GSK2656157 and analyzed TOP reporter expression. Tunicamycin did 
not induce TOP reporter expression (Fig. 5E), indicating that TERS-induced Wnt signaling 
may not occur through ER stress. That IRE1α activity was necessary for TERS-mediated 
Wnt signaling led us to hypothesize that IRE1α’s role in TERS-induced Wnt induction was 
independent of its function in ER stress signaling. To investigate this hypothesis, we 
incubated PC3.TOP cells with rWNT3a and either 4μ8C or GSK2656157 (Fig. 5F). 
Unexpectedly, 4μ8C inhibited TOP expression, whereas GSK2656157 had apparently no 
substantial effect. These findings suggest that TERS-induced Wnt signaling in recipient 
cancer cells is not merely attributable to pharmacologically induced ER stress but is 
nevertheless dependent on IRE1α signaling. The precise mechanism(s) and their influence 
in TERS-mediated cytoprotection remain to be fully determined.
Because β-catenin can transcriptionally activate telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) 
(47) and TERT is reportedly cytoprotective independent of the catalytic activity of 
telomerase (48, 49), we hypothesized that the cytoprotective effects of TERS could be due to 
activation of TERT, potentially via β-catenin. To this end, we probed the effect of TERS on 
TERT. We found no change in TERT transcription in PC3 cells cultured in TERS CM for 48 
hours (Fig. 5G). To confirm this finding, we used a luciferase reporter gene assay for the 
TERT promoter (50). In repeat experiments, transiently transfected LNCaP cells cultured in 
TERS CM for 48 hours showed no evidence of TERT promoter activation (Fig. 5H). 
However, under parallel treatment conditions, cells transfected with a luciferase reporter 
gene for the ATF6 promoter had robust activation (Fig. 5H), ruling out confounding effects 
associated with transfection or with the potency of TERS CM. In light of these results, we 
then explored the possibility that the transmission of ER stress could cause the redistribution 
of TERT inside the cells. Previous studies showed that during oxidative stress (51) or after 
treatment with Tg (49), TERT gradually accumulates in the cytoplasm where it allegedly 
plays cytoprotective roles. By confocal microscopy, TERS CM–cultured PC3 cells showed a 
marked accumulation of the TERT protein in the cytoplasm compared with Veh CM–
cultured cells (Fig. 5I). Collectively, these findings show a correlation between TERS and 
cytoplasmic TERT accumulation, which could not be established as a causal relationship 
between β-catenin and TERT relocalization to the cytosol. We could not also establish 
whether the β-catenin/Wnt/TERT axis is the sole mechanism responsible for cytoprotection. 
Further exploration will be needed to address this issue.
Rodvold et al.
Page 7
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The PERK pathway mediates TERS-induced cytoprotective effects
Next, we sought to better understand the mechanism behind TERS-mediated cytoprotection, 
which could not be fully explained through the Wnt axis. In our initial experiments, we had 
noted that the PERK pathway was differentially affected in TERS-primed cells relative to 
control cells by there being a marked decrease in ATF4 and CHOP protein, particularly 
during nutrient starvation and under bortezomib stress conditions. These findings may each 
explain cytoprotection by TERS, independent of Wnt signaling. Concordantly, the PERK 
pathway and its downstream effector ATF4 have been implicated in prosurvival signaling 
during nutrient deprivation (52, 53) and bortezomib (31) and paclitaxel (54) cytotoxicities. 
We therefore hypothesized that the PERK pathway is central to the facilitation of TERS-
induced cytoprotection. We leveraged mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) to first confirm 
that the TERS-induced cytoprotective effects existed in nontransformed cells. Wild-type 
MEF cells were primed with Veh CM or TERS CM generated from murine prostate cancer 
TRAMP C1 (TC1) cells and then challenged for 48 hours by either nutrient starvation, 
bortezomib, or taxol, and cell viability was determined by 7-aminoactinomycin D (7AAD) 
exclusion. TERS-primed MEF cells survived better than their vehicle-primed counterpart in 
each stress condition (Fig. 6A), confirming that TERS is not restricted to cancer cells. We 
next challenged PERK KO MEFs using the same approach and found that the cytoprotection 
gains in wild-type cells were lost in each instance (Fig. 6B). Furthermore, PERK KO MEFs 
had markedly reduced survival relative to control cells after a 2-day culture in TERS CM 
(fig. S7A). This demonstrates that the PERK pathway is key to the cellular adaptation 
induced by TERS, which leads to improved cell survival. On the other hand, we found that 
the role of IRE1α and ATF6 was not as unambiguous, in that IRE1α and ATF6 KO MEFs 
did not have complete loss of cytoprotection across the three challenge conditions as it was 
in the case of PERK KO cells (fig. S7, B and C). We conclude that whereas IRE1α and 
ATF6 likely play contributory roles toward cytoprotection, perhaps through cross-
communication among the arms of the UPR, PERK signaling is centrally involved in 
mediating the cytoprotective effects of TERS priming. Our findings recognize PERK as the 
central facilitator of TERS-mediated cytoprotection.
To further validate this finding, we leveraged CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced 
short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9) technology to target ATF4, which 
we found to be down-regulated during TERS priming (Figs. 2D and 3C). We designed 
guides targeting exon 2 of the ATF4 gene using the px458 Cas9 plasmid (Fig. 6C). 
Transfected 293XT cells were positively sorted on the basis of GFP positivity. Selected 
clones were confirmed for deletion of the target exon by PCR blot analysis (Fig. 6D). ATF4 
deletion appeared to inhibit TERS-induced cytoprotection in recipient 293XT cells versus 
their wild-type counterparts (Fig. 6, E and F). Together, these data demonstrate that the UPR 
and particularly the PERK-ATF4 axis are necessary for TERS-mediated cytoprotection.
TERS-primed cells are more tumorigenic in vivo
Because TERS enabled cells to better cope with various noxae in culture, we hypothesized 
that TERS could provide cancer cells with growth advantage over naïve cancer cells in a 
coculture system. To this end, we tagged murine TC1 cells through stable transduction with 
a red fluorescent protein (RFP) gene driven by the cytomegalovirus promoter. Tagged or 
Rodvold et al.
Page 8
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 untagged TC1 cells were then separately primed with TC1 Veh CM or TERS CM, 
respectively (Fig. 7A). The cell populations were then admixed and challenged with one of 
the following conditions: Tg, 2-deoxy-D-glucose, bortezomib, or paclitaxel. After a 24-hour 
challenge, we measured the relative percentage of live cells among RFP-positive versus 
RFP-negative cell populations. TERS-primed TC1 cells emerged as the prevalent cell 
population in each challenge condition (Fig. 7B). To control for any confounding factors due 
to ectopic RFP expression, priming conditions were reversed (meaning, TC1.RFP were 
TERS-primed and TC1 were vehicle-primed) and cocultured with identical challenges. We 
observed a similar trend (fig. S8). Thus, we conclude that TERS-primed cancer cells have a 
survival advantage over control cells, a conclusion that could bear considerable relevance to 
cell dynamics in the tumor microenvironment.
To test this possibility in vivo, we injected TERS- or vehicle-primed murine TC1 cells 
subcutaneously into C57BL/6mice. To eliminate host variability, TERS- and vehicle-primed 
cells were injected into opposite flanks of the same mouse. TERS-primed tumors became 
palpable on day 8, whereas control tumors emerged only after 14 days (Fig. 7C). On day 19 
after injection, the average volume of TERS-primed tumors was substantially larger than 
that of vehicle-primed tumors. At sacrifice (day 30), tumors derived from TERS-primed 
cells were significantly greater in weight (Fig. 7D) and size (Fig. 7E) than those derived 
from vehicle-primed cells. Histological analysis, including hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
and Ki-67 staining, indicated no marked differences in morphology or proliferation between 
the two groups (fig. S9). Because TERS-primed cells had no proliferative advantage over 
vehicle-primed cells, as reflected in the lack of enrichment in G1 phase (Fig. 4E) and Ki-67 
staining (fig. S9), we conclude that the advantage of TERS-primed tumors over vehicle-
primed tumors was the consequence of acquired adaptive fitness.
DISCUSSION
A UPR-based cell-nonautonomous regulation of tumorigenesis is an emerging concept in 
tumor biology and immunobiology (6, 18). This new idea stems from the observation that 
cancer cells experiencing a UPR release soluble factor(s) able to reproducibly transmit ER 
stress and elicit a UPR in CD11b+ macrophages and dendritic cells (7–9, 55). Here, we 
demonstrate that a similar intercellular signaling event confers a prosurvival phenotype and 
clonal fitness to cancer cells upon challenge with microenvironmental and exogenous 
stressors.
One aspect of this TERS-induced phenotype was the initiation of Wnt signaling. β-Catenin 
is a central effector of the Wnt pathway and is involved in diverse cellular processes, 
including growth, differentiation, and transcription of Wnt-responsive genes (37, 38, 56), 
while driving the expression of several oncogenes, for example, c-Myc, Cyclin D1, and 
Nos2 (57–59). TERS-mediated Wnt signaling activation required IRE1α. Because canonical 
ER stress conditions did not mimic this effect, we conclude that TERS-mediated Wnt 
signaling activation is unique. Although Wnt signaling driven by recombinant WNT 
provided cytoprotective effects during nutrient starvation, this phenomenon may be 
independent from, or unrelated to, TERS-mediated cytoprotection. The full interaction and 
dynamics of the TERS/Wnt pathways remain to be fully elucidated. Wnt signaling was 
Rodvold et al.
Page 9
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recently shown to occur in circulating prostate cancer cells of patients with antiandrogen 
resistance (60).
A salient finding of our study is the marked decrease in PERK-ATF4 activation in TERS-
primed cells. Although unexpected, this finding provided a possible clue into the mechanism 
of cytoprotection. The activation of the PERK pathway leads to the transcription and 
translation of ATF4, which itself coordinates the activation of the downstream target CHOP 
to drive apoptosis (3). Here, we show that in TERS-primed cells, this classical cascade of 
events was substantially decreased because TERS-primed cells subject to nutrient 
deprivation or bortezomib treatment showed a pattern of ATF4 and downstream CHOP 
reduction. Although it has been reported that ATF4 can be regulated independently of the 
stress response (61), our data support a central role of the PERK-ATF4 axis in TERS-
induced cellular fitness. In this context, we found that the prosurvival adaptive response to 
TERS required the attenuation of PERK and ATF4 activation, an effect lost through the 
deletion of the PERK or ATF4 genes. Arguably, TERS may fine-tune ATF4 to promote 
cytoprotection. In support of our conclusion, mild ER stress conditions were reported to 
promote the degradation of two downstream ATF4 targets, CHOP and GADD34, and lead to 
cellular adaptation and survival (26). A slow translation of ATF4 was found to confer 
cytoprotection (62), presumably by preventing the activation of CHOP. Thus, because ATF4 
can exert opposing roles in controlling cell fate (survival versus apoptosis), depending on its 
state of activation and abundance, we view ATF4 as a cellular rheostat able to gauge the 
effects of TERS in receiver cancer cells.
Other effects may also contribute to cytoprotection in TERS-primed cells. One possibility is 
the progressive increase in surface expression of GRP78 induced by TERS priming. GRP78 
is considered the master regulator of the UPR (63, 64) and has been directly implicated in 
tumor progression in murine models of cancer (11, 65, 66). High levels of GRP78 predict 
poor prognosis in a variety of carcinoma (67), the development of therapy resistance, and 
cancer recurrence (68). GRP78 surface expression, although a relatively less characterized 
phenomenon (23, 69), has been shown to mediate growth signals for cancer cells through 
PI3K/AKT signaling and promote chemoresistance (15, 16, 70). Because surface 
relocalization of GRP78 was not associated with increased transcription, it is possible that 
TERS signaling induces posttranslational modifications of GRP78 to improve its overall 
function and stability, for instance, through AMPylation of Thr518 (71). A mild adaptive 
UPR promotes GRP78 protein half-life stability while not affecting its gene transcription 
(26). This demonstrates that some UPR-driven stimuli favor the stabilization of GRP78, as 
we observed in our durability experiments (Fig. 3, E and F). The abundance of the GRP78 
chaperone would allow cells to better cope with subsequent pressures. Thus, a second 
possibility is that TERS-induced adaptive fitness reflects a stable level of chaperones. A 
final alternative mechanism to explain cytoprotection is TERT, which we found to 
accumulate in the cytoplasm. Through its noncanonical functions (72), TERT protects cells 
from apoptosis, enhances genomic stability and DNA repair (73), and attenuates ER stress–
induced cell death (48). The mechanisms of TERS on receiver cells discussed above are 
summarized in the model shown in Fig. 8.
Rodvold et al.
Page 10
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The cell-extrinsic effects of the tumor UPR represent a novel mechanism through which 
cancer cells adapt to tumor microenvironmental noxae (hypoxia, nutrient starvation, 
biosynthetic errors, and viral infection) and apoptosis-inducing chemotherapeutic agents. An 
unresolved aspect of our work concerns the exact chemical nature and identity of TERS. 
Undergoing studies show that TERS is present at markedly low abundance in cancer cell 
CM, making it particularly arduous to isolate to purity. Recent reports emphasized the role 
of by-products of lipid oxidation (74, 75) as responsible actors in phenomena closely related 
to TERS. However, we have verified that, by mass spectrometry and bioactivity assays, 
TERS is not the products claimed in these reports but is instead a unique factor yet to be 
conclusively isolated. Although work on the final identification of TERS is continuing, the 
results of the present study show that a UPR-based cell-nonautonomous regulation among 
cancer cells endows receiver cells with cellular fitness by exerting a selective pressure. 
Because cytoprotection is relatively durable, one can also predict that daughter cells of the 
initial receiver cells may also be protected, suggesting that TERS may have epigenetic 
consequences on target cells. In light of the unique regulation of both UPR- and Wnt-related 
genes, it is likely that TERS affects other cellular processes, such as autophagy, which may 
also bolster cell survival. Notably, TERS-primed cells did not have a proliferative advantage 
over vehicle-primed cells but rather a fitness advantage. Therefore, the persistence of a 
TERS-primed population within the tumor microenvironment may lay dormant until a new 
selective pressure initiates the emergence of the fittest clones.
Our findings corroborate the conclusions of recent reports that showed that individual tumor 
cells within a uniform genetic lineage can acquire functionally different behaviors in vivo, 
implying that functional clonal diversity may reflect the outgrowth of cells with greater 
fitness and extended survival generated by cell-nonautonomous signaling and processes (76, 
77). Accordingly, future management of cancer should take into consideration these new 
aspects of cancer cell dynamics within the tumor microenvironment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and cell culture
PC3, LNCaP, DU145, and TC1 prostate cancer cells and 293XT cells were grown in RPMI 
or Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Corning) supplemented with 10% FBS 
(HyClone) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/L-glutamine, nonessential amino acids, sodium 
pyruvate, and HEPES (cDMEM). All cell lines were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2O2. All 
cell lines were mycoplasma-free as determined by PCR assay (SouthernBiotech). MEF lines 
(gift from J. Lin) were previously derived and described: PERK KO (78), IRE1α KO (79), 
and ATF6 KO (80). They were cultured under standard cDMEM conditions.
TERS CM generation
Transmitting cells as specified in each experiment were induced to undergo ER stress 
through treatment with Tg (300 nM) (Enzo Life Sciences) for 2 hours. Control cells were 
similarly treated with an equal volume of vehicle (0.02% EtOH). Cells were washed twice 
with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Corning) and then incubated in fresh, 
standard growth medium for 16 hours. CM was then harvested, centrifuged for 10 min at 
Rodvold et al.
Page 11
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2000 rpm, filtered through a 0.22-µm filter (Millipore), and used to treat cells. For TERS 
priming, CM was generated from homologous cells unless otherwise specified.
Nutrient starvation studies
To create nutrient starvation conditions, cells were washed two times with PBS and cultured 
in glucose-free DMEM (Gibco) supplemented only with 1% penicillin/streptomycin.
Reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction
RNA was harvested from cells using the NucleoSpin II Kit (Macherey-Nagel). The 
concentration and purity of RNA were quantified on a NanoDrop (ND-1000) 
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed with NanoDrop software version 3.8.0. 
RNA was normalized between conditions, and complementary DNA (cDNA) was generated 
using a High-Capacity cDNA Synthesis kit (Life Technologies). RT-qPCR was performed on 
an ABI 7300 Real-Time PCR system using TaqMan reagents for 50 cycles under universal 
cycling conditions according to the manufacturer’s specifications (Kapa Biosystems). Target 
gene expression was normalized to β-actin, and relative expression was determined using the 
−ΔΔCt relative quantification method. Validated FAM-labeled human HSPA5 (GRP78) 
(catalog no. Hs00607129_gH, Life Technologies), XBP-1s (forward: 5′-
CCGCAGCAGGTGCAGG-3′; reverse: 5′-GAGTCAATACCGCCAGAATCCA-3′) 
(Integrated DNA Technologies), DDIT3 (CHOP) (catalog no. Hs00358796_g1, Life 
Technologies), IL-6 (catalog no. Hs00985639_m1, Life Technologies), CTNNB1 (β-catenin) 
(catalog no. Hs00355049_m1, Life Technologies), AXIN2 (forward: 5′-
GACAGTGAGATATCCAGTGATGC-3′; reverse: 5′-
GTTTCTTACTGCCCACACGATA-3′) (Integrated DNA Technologies), hTERT (forward: 
5′-CGGTTGAAGGTGAGACTGG-3′; reverse: 5′-GCACGGCTTTTGTTCAGATG-3′) 
(Integrated DNA Technologies), and VIC-labeled human β-actin TaqMan primer/probe sets 
(catalog no. 4326315E, Life Technologies) were used.
Flow cytometry
Apoptosis assays were performed on single-cell suspensions, stained with fluorescein 
isothiocyanate (FITC)–conjugated annexin V and PI using the FITC Annexin V Apoptosis 
Detection Kit (BD Biosciences). Data were acquired on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD 
Biosciences) and analyzed using CellQuest Pro (BD Biosciences) and FlowJo software (Tree 
Star). For sGRP78 detection, single-cell suspensions were washed once with PBS and then 
stained with goat polyclonal antibody to surface-expressed human GRP78 (catalog no. 
SC-1051, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Cells were then washed with PBS and counterstained 
with FITC-labeled donkey polyclonal antibody to goat immunoglobulin (Ig) (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology). Stained cells were washed again with PBS and resuspended in 7AAD 
staining buffer and analyzed by flow cytometry by 7AAD exclusion. Cell cycle analysis was 
performed using FITC-BrdU Flow Kit (BD Biosciences) per the manufacturer’s protocol.
TOP reporter system
Lentiviral TOP-GFP construct was previously described (42) and was a gift from K. Willert. 
PC3 cells were transduced with lentivirus supplemented with polybrene (4 µg/ml; Sigma) for 
Rodvold et al.
Page 12
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 48 hours. After incubation, cells were cultured in standard growth medium for 24 hours. 
Positively transduced cells were selected under puromycin (1 µg/ml) for 2 weeks. PC3.TOP 
cells were then treated as described and analyzed for TOP activity using a FACSCalibur flow 
cytometer probing for GFP expression on 7AAD-negative cells. Stimulation of PC3.TOP 
cells with rWNT3a (20 ng/ml; HumanZyme) was performed for 48 hours. UPR inhibitors 
4μ8C (Axon MedChem) and GSK2656157 (Selleckchem) were used at the dose indicated in 
Fig. 5.
Promoter activity assays
The TERT core promoter luciferase construct was previously designed (50) through the 
insertion of wild-type promoter sequence into the pGL4.10 (Promega) vector and was a gift 
from J. Costello (University of California, San Francisco). The ATF6 luciferase reporter 
construct was previously designed (80) and was provided by J. Lin. Cells were transiently 
transfected for 18 hours with Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher) with either the TERT or 
the ATF6 promoter construct. For normalization control, cells were concomitantly 
transfected with a Renilla plasmid driven by the TK promoter (Promega). Transiently 
transfected cells were washed, treated as specified in the text, and subsequently analyzed for 
luciferase and Renilla expression using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay (Promega) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Confocal microscopy
Cells were plated on glass slides in a tissue culture plate and treated as specified in Figs. 1, 
4, and 5. After treatment, the medium was gently removed by aspiration. Cells were then 
washed with cold PBS and fixed using 4% formaldehyde (Fisher Scientific) for 15 min. The 
formaldehyde solution was gently removed by aspiration, and the cells were washed three 
times with PBS. The fixed cells were then blocked/permeabilized with 5% bovine serum 
albumin (BSA) (Fisher Scientific) and 0.3% Triton X-100 (Fisher Scientific) in PBS for 1 
hour. Cells were washed three times with PBS and then probed with antibodies to hTERT 
(catalog no. SC7215, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), β-catenin (catalog no. 8480P, Cell 
Signaling Technology), or GRP78 (catalog no. SC-1050, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) by 
incubating at the manufacturer’s recommended dilution in PBS-BSA at 4°C overnight. After 
incubation with the primary antibody, cells were washed three times with PBS and 
counterstained with an FITC-conjugated antibody as follows: polyclonal donkey antibody to 
goat Ig (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for hTERT or polyclonal goat antibody to rabbit Ig 
(Biomeda) for β-catenin and GRP78, in the dark for 1 hour. Cells were then washed three 
times with PBS and mounted onto microscope slides using the ProLong Gold Antifade 
Reagent with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Invitrogen). Once mounted, the slides were 
imaged using a BIOREVO BZ-9000 microscope or a Zeiss LSM 510 laser scanning 
confocal microscope at the University of California at San Diego (UCSD) Microscopy Core. 
Staining for γ-H2AX was performed according to (81).
Western blot analysis
After treatment, PC3, DU145, or LNCaP cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and 
suspended in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer: 1× RIPA buffer and a 
cocktail of protease inhibitors (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Cell lysates were centrifuged at 
Rodvold et al.
Page 13
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16,000g for 15 min, and the supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was 
determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Samples were 
heat-denatured, and equal concentrations of protein were loaded onto a 4 to 20% Mini-
PROTEAN TGX Precast Gels (Bio-Rad), electrophoresed, and transferred onto 0.2-µm 
polyvinylidene difluoride membrane in tris-glycine transfer buffer containing 20% 
methanol. The membranes were then blocked with 5% nonfat milk in tris-buffered saline 
(TBS) containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBS-T) for 1 hour at room temperature. The membranes 
were then incubated with the specified primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Membranes 
were washed for 5 min at room temperature three times by TBS-T, incubated with a 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–labeled secondary antibody in 5% nonfat milk for 1 hour at 
room temperature, and washed for 5 min at room temperature three times in TBS-T. Bound 
antibodies were detected by chemiluminescence reaction using Pierce ECL Blotting 
Substrate (Thermo Scientific). The following primary antibodies were used: mouse 
monoclonal antibody to human GRP78 (BD Biosciences), rabbit monoclonal antibody to 
human PERK (Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit monoclonal antibody to phospho-eIF2α 
(Ser51) (Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit polyclonal antibodies to human ATF4 (CREB-2) 
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse monoclonal antibody to human CHOP (GADD153) 
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit polyclonal antibodies to human HSP90 (GeneTex), and 
HRP-conjugated goat antibodies to β-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Secondary 
antibodies were HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG or anti-rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology).
Cell tagging
The tRFP (tag red fluorescent protein) cDNA was amplified from pTRIPZ plasmid (Open 
Biosystems) by PCR using a specific primer (forward: 5′-
ttggtaccgagctcggatccGCCACCATGAGCGAGCTG-3′; reverse: 5′-
ccctctagatgcatgctcgagTTATCTGTGCCCCAGTTTGC-3′). The amplified tRFP fragment 
was purified by agarose gel and assembled with pLPC-puro retrovirus vector digested with 
Hind III and Xho I using the Gibson Assembly Master Mix (New England Biolabs). For 
retrovirus packaging, Phoenix-Ampho cells in a 10-cm dish were transfected with 10 µg of 
plasmid using PEI-Max (1 µg/µl; Polysciences Inc.), and the supernatant containing 
retrovirus particles was collected at 48 and 72 hours after transfection. TC1 cells were 
retrovirally transduced with tRFP using polybrene (8 µg/ml). Puromycin selection was 
initiated 2 days after transduction, and cells were maintained in the presence of puromycin 
(5 µg/ml) until use.
In vivo studies
TC1 cells were primed with Veh CM or TERS CM. Cells were enzymatically detached from 
plastic and resuspended in PBS at a final concentration of 5 × 106 cells/ml. C57BL/6 mice 
were injected with 100 µl of vehicle cell suspension into the left flank and 100 µl of TERS-
primed cells in the contralateral right flank. Mice were initially monitored for tumor take by 
palpation. When tumors became palpable, tumor size was determined through two-
dimensional caliper measurements every 3 days. Mice were sacrificed when a tumor reached 
20 mm in any one dimension, per UCSD animal welfare standards, or at 30 days after 
implantation. Tumor volume was calculated using the following ellipsoid formula: V = ½(H 
Rodvold et al.
Page 14
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ×W2). Upon mouse sacrifice, tumors were resected. For histological analysis, tumors were 
frozen in optimum cutting temperature compound and processed at the UCSD histology 
core, and stained for Ki-67 or H&E.
CRISPR/Cas9 studies
Two pairs of Cas9 guides were designed using the CHOPCHOP (82) software (available at 
http://chopchop.cbu.uib.no/). The sequences for guide 1 were 
caccgGCAACGTAAGCAGTGTAGTC (forward) and aaacGACTACACTGCTTACGTTGCc 
(reverse), and the sequences for guide 2 were caccgGGATTTGAAGGAGTTCGACT 
(forward) and aaacAGTCGAACTCCTTCAAATCCc (reverse) (lowercase letters indicate 
overhangs). Guides were cloned into the SpCas9-2A-GFP (px458) backbone modified to 
contain an eIF1α promoter (px458-ef1a) (83). Px458 was a gift from F. Zhang (Addgene 
plasmid #48138). Briefly, Cas9 guides were then purchased as oligonucleotides from 
Integrated DNA Technologies. These oligonucleotide guide pairs were phosphorylated, 
annealed, and ligated into Bbs I–digested px458 backbone. The ligated plasmid was then 
transformed into DH5α bacteria and grown on carbenicillin plates overnight at 37°C. Single 
colonies were picked and cultured overnight, the plasmids were isolated by Miniprep or 
Midiprep (Invitrogen), and the sequence was validated. 293XT cells were grown in DMEM 
with 10% FBS. Twenty-four hours before transfection with the guide-containing px458-ef1a 
plasmids (using Lipofectamine 3000), 8 × 104 cells/cm2 were seeded onto six-well plates. 
Three days after transfection, cells were sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting on the 
basis of GFP positivity. Cells were then cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS for at least 1 
week, validated, and used in TERS priming experiments. To demonstrate Cas9 efficiency, 
genomic DNA was isolated and PCR-amplified using GoTaq (Promega) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. The PCR product was then resolved on a 0.8% agarose gel and 
imaged under ultraviolet light.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Costello (University of California, San Francisco) for providing the TERT core promoter luciferase 
construct; J. Lin (UCSD) for the ATF6 luciferase reporter; K. Willert (UCSD) for providing the lentiviral TOP-GFP 
construct; and F. Zhang for the Addgene px458 plasmid.
Funding: This work was supported by U.S. Department of Defense grant W81XWH-12-1-0156 to M.Z. and NIH 
R01NS088485, NIH U54OD020351, and VA BX002284 to J.H.L. J.J.R. acknowledges the support of the Frank H. 
and Eva B. Buck Foundation. N.H. was supported by a Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Postdoctoral 
Fellowship for Research Abroad.
References
1. Heazlewood CK, Cook MC, Eri R, Price GR, Tauro SB, Taupin D, Thornton DJ, Png CW, 
Crockford TL, Cornall RJ, Adams R, Kato M, Nelms KA, Hong NA, Florin THJ, Goodnow CC, 
McGuckin MA. Aberrant mucin assembly in mice causes endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
spontaneous inflammation resembling ulcerative colitis. PLOS Med. 2008; 5:e54. [PubMed: 
18318598] 
Rodvold et al.
Page 15
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. He B. Viruses, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and interferon responses. Cell Death Differ. 2006; 
13:393–403. [PubMed: 16397582] 
3. Walter P, Ron D. The unfolded protein response: From stress pathway to homeostatic regulation. 
Science. 2011; 334:1081–1086. [PubMed: 22116877] 
4. Yamamoto K, Sato T, Matsui T, Sato M, Okada T, Yoshida H, Harada A, Mori K. Transcriptional 
induction of mammalian ER quality control proteins is mediated by single or combined action of 
ATF6α and XBP1. Dev. Cell. 2007; 13:365–376. [PubMed: 17765680] 
5. Zinszner H, Kuroda M, Wang X, Batchvarova N, Lightfoot RT, Remotti H, Stevens JL, Ron D. 
CHOP is implicated in programmed cell death in response to impaired function of the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Genes Dev. 1998; 12:982–995. [PubMed: 9531536] 
6. Mahadevan NR, Zanetti M. Tumor stress inside out: Cell-extrinsic effects of the unfolded protein 
response in tumor cells modulate the immunological landscape of the tumor microenvironment. J. 
Immunol. 2011; 187:4403–4409. [PubMed: 22013206] 
7. Mahadevan NR, Rodvold J, Sepulveda H, Rossi S, Drew AF, Zanetti M. Transmission of 
endoplasmic reticulum stress and pro-inflammation from tumor cells to myeloid cells. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011; 108:6561–6566. [PubMed: 21464300] 
8. Mahadevan NR, Anufreichik V, Rodvold JJ, Chiu KT, Sepulveda H, Zanetti M. Cell-extrinsic effects 
of tumor ER stress imprint myeloid dendritic cells and impair CD8+ T cell priming. PLOS ONE. 
2012; 7:e51845. [PubMed: 23272178] 
9. Cullen SJ, Fatemie S, Ladiges W. Breast tumor cells primed by endoplasmic reticulum stress 
remodel macrophage phenotype. Am. J. Cancer Res. 2013; 3:196–210. [PubMed: 23593541] 
10. Rodvold JJ, Mahadevan NR, Zanetti M. Immune modulation by ER stress and inflammation in the 
tumor microenvironment. Cancer Lett. 2015; 380:227–236. [PubMed: 26525580] 
11. Fu Y, Wey S, Wang M, Ye R, Liao C-P, Roy-Burman P, Lee AS. Pten null prostate tumorigenesis 
and AKT activation are blocked by targeted knockout of ER chaperone GRP78/BiP in prostate 
epithelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2008; 105:19444–19449. [PubMed: 19033462] 
12. Bi M, Naczki C, Koritzinsky M, Fels D, Blais J, Hu N, Harding H, Novoa I, Varia M, Raleigh J, 
Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ, Bell J, Ron D, Wouters BG, Koumenis C. ER stress-regulated 
translation increases tolerance to extreme hypoxia and promotes tumor growth. EMBO J. 2005; 
24:3470–3481. [PubMed: 16148948] 
13. Li J, Lee AS. Stress induction of GRP78/BiP and its role in cancer. Curr. Mol. Med. 2006; 6:45–
54. [PubMed: 16472112] 
14. Ranganathan AC, Zhang L, Adam AP, Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Functional coupling of p38-induced up-
regulation of BiP and activation of RNA-dependent protein kinase–like endoplasmic reticulum 
kinase to drug resistance of dormant carcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:1702–1711. [PubMed: 
16452230] 
15. Misra UK, Deedwania R, Pizzo SV. Activation and cross-talk between Akt, NF-κB, and unfolded 
protein response signaling in 1-LN prostate cancer cells consequent to ligation of cell surface-
associated GRP78. J. Biol. Chem. 2006; 281:13694–13707. [PubMed: 16543232] 
16. Zhang Y, Tseng C-C, Tsai Y-L, Fu X, Schiff R, Lee AS. Cancer cells resistant to therapy promote 
cell surface relocalization of GRP78 which complexes with PI3K and enhances PI(3,4,5)P3 
production. PLOS ONE. 2013; 8:e80071. [PubMed: 24244613] 
17. Taylor RC, Dillin A. XBP-1 is a cell-nonautonomous regulator of stress resistance and longevity. 
Cell. 2013; 153:1435–1447. [PubMed: 23791175] 
18. Zanetti M, Rodvold JJ, Mahadevan NR. The evolving paradigm of cell-nonautonomous UPR-based 
regulation of immunity by cancer cells. Oncogene. 2015; 35:269–278. [PubMed: 25893303] 
19. Spiotto MT, Banh A, Papandreou I, Cao H, Galvez MG, Gurtner GC, Denko NC, Le QT, Koong 
AC. Imaging the unfolded protein response in primary tumors reveals microenvironments with 
metabolic variations that predict tumor growth. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:78–88. [PubMed: 20028872] 
20. Arap MA, Lahdenranta J, Mintz PJ, Hajitou A, Sarkis AS, Arap W, Pasqualini R. Cell surface 
expression of the stress response chaperone GRP78 enables tumor targeting by circulating ligands. 
Cancer Cell. 2004; 6:275–284. [PubMed: 15380518] 
Rodvold et al.
Page 16
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. Ray R, de Ridder GG, Eu JP, Paton AW, Paton JC, Pizzo SV. The Escherichia coli subtilase 
cytotoxin A subunit specifically cleaves cell-surface GRP78 protein and abolishes COOH-
terminal-dependent signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 2012; 287:32755–32769. [PubMed: 22851173] 
22. Grivennikov SI, Greten FR, Karin M. Immunity, inflammation, and cancer. Cell. 2010; 140:883–
899. [PubMed: 20303878] 
23. Ni M, Zhang Y, Lee AS. Beyond the endoplasmic reticulum: Atypical GRP78 in cell viability, 
signalling and therapeutic targeting. Biochem. J. 2011; 434:181–188. [PubMed: 21309747] 
24. Quinones QJ, de Ridder GG, Pizzo SV. GRP78: A chaperone with diverse roles beyond the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Histol. Histopathol. 2008; 23:1409–1416. [PubMed: 18785123] 
25. Shin BK, Wang H, Yim AM, Le Naour F, Brichory F, Jang JH, Zhao R, Puravs E, Tra J, Michael 
CW, Misek DE, Hanash SM. Global profiling of the cell surface proteome of cancer cells uncovers 
an abundance of proteins with chaperone function. J. Biol. Chem. 2003; 278:7607–7616. 
[PubMed: 12493773] 
26. Rutkowski DT, Arnold SM, Miller CN, Wu J, Li J, Gunnison KM, Mori K, Sadighi Akha AA, 
Raden D, Kaufman RJ. Adaptation to ER stress is mediated by differential stabilities of pro-
survival and pro-apoptotic mRNAs and proteins. PLOS Biol. 2006; 4:e374. [PubMed: 17090218] 
27. Richardson PG, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, Irwin D, Stadtmauer EA, Facon T, Harousseau J-L, 
Ben-Yehuda D, Lonial S, Goldschmidt H, Reece D, San-Miguel JF, Bladé J, Boccadoro M, 
Cavenagh J, Dalton WS, Boral AL, Esseltine DL, Porter JB, Schenkein D, Anderson KC. 
Assessment of Proteasome Inhibition for Extending Remissions (APEX) Investigators, Bortezomib 
or high-dose dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. N. Engl. J. Med. 2005; 352:2487–
2498. [PubMed: 15958804] 
28. Papandreou CN, Daliani DD, Nix D, Yang H, Madden T, Wang X, Pien CS, Millikan RE, Tu S-M, 
Pagliaro L, Kim J, Adams J, Elliott P, Esseltine D, Petrusich A, Dieringer P, Perez C, Logothetis 
CJ. Phase I trial of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in patients with advanced solid tumors 
with observations in androgen-independent prostate cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2004; 22:2108–2121. 
[PubMed: 15169797] 
29. Papandreou CN, Logothetis CJ. Bortezomib as a potential treatment for prostate cancer. Cancer 
Res. 2004; 64:5036–5043. [PubMed: 15289299] 
30. Lee A-H, Iwakoshi NN, Anderson KC, Glimcher LH. Proteasome inhibitors disrupt the unfolded 
protein response in myeloma cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2003; 100:9946–9951. [PubMed: 
12902539] 
31. Armstrong JL, Flockhart R, Veal GJ, Lovat PE, Redfern CPF. Regulation of endoplasmic reticulum 
stress-induced cell death by ATF4 in neuroectodermal tumor cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2010; 285:6091–
6100. [PubMed: 20022965] 
32. Jeon YJ, Khelifa S, Ratnikov B, Scott DA, Feng Y, Parisi F, Ruller C, Lau E, Kim H, Brill LM, 
Jiang T, Rimm DL, Cardiff RD, Mills GB, Smith JW, Osterman AL, Kluger Y, Ronai ZA. 
Regulation of glutamine carrier proteins by RNF5 determines breast cancer response to ER stress-
inducing chemotherapies. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:354–369. [PubMed: 25759021] 
33. Jordan MA, Toso RJ, Thrower D, Wilson L. Mechanism of mitotic block and inhibition of cell 
proliferation by taxol at low concentrations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1993; 90:9552–9556. 
[PubMed: 8105478] 
34. Woods CM, Zhu J, McQueney PA, Bollag D, Lazarides E. Taxol-induced mitotic block triggers 
rapid onset of a p53-independent apoptotic pathway. Mol. Med. 1995; 1:506–526. [PubMed: 
8529117] 
35. DiPaola RS. To arrest or not to G2-M cell-cycle arrest: Commentary re: A. K. Tyagi et al., Silibinin 
strongly synergizes human prostate carcinoma DU145 cells to doxorubicin-induced growth 
inhibition, G2-M arrest, and apoptosis. Clin. Cancer Res., 8: 3512–3519, 2002. Clin. Cancer. Res. 
2002; 8:3311–3314. [PubMed: 12429616] 
36. Davidson G, Niehrs C. Emerging links between CDK cell cycle regulators and Wnt signaling. 
Trends Cell Biol. 2010; 20:453–460. [PubMed: 20627573] 
37. Willert K, Nusse R. β-Catenin: A key mediator of Wnt signaling. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 1998; 
8:95–102. [PubMed: 9529612] 
Rodvold et al.
Page 17
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 38. Clevers H, Nusse R. Wnt/β-catenin signaling and disease. Cell. 2012; 149:1192–1205. [PubMed: 
22682243] 
39. Ikeda S, Kishida S, Yamamoto H, Murai H, Koyama S, Kikuchi A. Axin, a negative regulator of 
the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3β and β-catenin and promotes GSK-3β-
dependent phosphorylation of β-catenin. EMBO J. 1998; 17:1371–1384. [PubMed: 9482734] 
40. Veeman MT, Slusarski DC, Kaykas A, Louie SH, Moon RT. Zebrafish prickle, a modulator of 
noncanonical Wnt/Fz signaling, regulates gastrulation movements. Curr. Biol. 2003; 13:680–685. 
[PubMed: 12699626] 
41. Fuerer C, Nusse R. Lentiviral vectors to probe and manipulate the Wnt signaling pathway. PLOS 
ONE. 2010; 5:e9370. [PubMed: 20186325] 
42. Fernandez A, Huggins IJ, Perna L, Brafman D, Lu D, Yao S, Gaasterland T, Carson DA, Willert K. 
The WNT receptor FZD7 is required for maintenance of the pluripotent state in human embryonic 
stem cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014; 111:1409–1414. [PubMed: 24474766] 
43. Atilla-Gokcumen GE, Williams DS, Bregman H, Pagano N, Meggers E. Organometallic 
compounds with biological activity: A very selective and highly potent cellular inhibitor for 
glycogen synthase kinase 3. Chembiochem. 2006; 7:1443–1450. [PubMed: 16858717] 
44. Logan CY, Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. 
Biol. 2004; 20:781–810. [PubMed: 15473860] 
45. Cross BCS, Bond PJ, Sadowski PG, Jha BK, Zak J, Goodman JM, Silverman RH, Neubert TA, 
Baxendale IR, Ron D, Harding HP. The molecular basis for selective inhibition of unconventional 
mRNA splicing by an IRE1-binding small molecule. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012; 
109:E869–E878. [PubMed: 22315414] 
46. Axten JM, Romeril SP, Shu A, Ralph J, Medina JR, Feng Y, Li WHH, Grant SW, Heerding DA, 
Minthorn E, Mencken T, Gaul N, Goetz A, Stanley T, Hassell AM, Gampe RT, Atkins C, Kumar 
R. Discovery of GSK2656157: An optimized PERK inhibitor selected for preclinical development. 
ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 2013; 4:964–968. [PubMed: 24900593] 
47. Hoffmeyer K, Raggioli A, Rudloff S, Anton R, Hierholzer A, Del Valle I, Hein K, Vogt R, Kemler 
R. Wnt/β-catenin signaling regulates telomerase in stem cells and cancer cells. Science. 2012; 
336:1549–1554. [PubMed: 22723415] 
48. Hosoi T, Inoue Y, Nakatsu K, Matsushima N, Kiyose N, Shimamoto A, Tahara H, Ozawa K. TERT 
attenuated ER stress-induced cell death. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2014; 447:378–382. 
[PubMed: 24746472] 
49. Zhou J, Mao B, Zhou Q, Ding D, Wang M, Guo P, Gao Y, Shay JW, Yuan Z, Cong Y-S. 
Endoplasmic reticulum stress activates telomerase. Aging Cell. 2014; 13:197–200. [PubMed: 
24119029] 
50. Bell RJ, Rube HT, Kreig A, Mancini A, Fouse SD, Nagarajan RP, Choi S, Hong C, He D, 
Pekmezci M, Wiencke JK, Wrensch MR, Chang SM, Walsh KM, Myong S, Song JS, Costello JF. 
The transcription factor GABP selectively binds and activates the mutant TERT promoter in 
cancer. Science. 2015; 348:1036–1039. [PubMed: 25977370] 
51. Haendeler J, Hoffmann J, Brandes RP, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S. Hydrogen peroxide triggers 
nuclear export of telomerase reverse transcriptase via Src kinase family-dependent 
phosphorylation of tyrosine 707. Mol. Cell Biol. 2003; 23:4598–4610. [PubMed: 12808100] 
52. B’chir W, Maurin A-C, Carraro V, Averous J, Jousse C, Muranishi Y, Parry L, Stepien G, 
Fafournoux P, Bruhat A. The eIF2α/ATF4 pathway is essential for stress-induced autophagy gene 
expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:7683–7699. [PubMed: 23804767] 
53. Ye J, Kumanova M, Hart LS, Sloane K, Zhang H, De Panis DN, Bobrovnikova-Marjon E, Diehl 
JA, Ron D, Koumenis C. The GCN2-ATF4 pathway is critical for tumour cell survival and 
proliferation in response to nutrient deprivation. EMBO J. 2010; 29:2082–2096. [PubMed: 
20473272] 
54. Notte A, Rebucci M, Fransolet M, Roegiers E, Genin M, Tellier C, Watillon K, Fattaccioli A, 
Arnould T, Michiels C. Taxol-induced unfolded protein response activation in breast cancer cells 
exposed to hypoxia: ATF4 activation regulates autophagy and inhibits apoptosis. Int. J. Biochem. 
Cell Biol. 2015; 62:1–14. [PubMed: 25724736] 
Rodvold et al.
Page 18
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 55. Condamine T, Kumar V, Ramachandran IR, Youn J-I, Celis E, Finnberg N, El-Deiry WS, 
Winograd R, Vonderheide RH, English NR, Knight SC, Yagita H, McCaffrey JC, Antonia S, 
Hockstein N, Witt R, Masters G, Bauer T, Gabrilovich DI. ER stress regulates myeloid-derived 
suppressor cell fate through TRAIL-R-mediated apoptosis. J. Clin. Invest. 2014; 124:2626–2639. 
[PubMed: 24789911] 
56. Nusse R, Fuerer C, Ching W, Harnish K, Logan C, Zeng A, ten Berge D, Kalani Y. Wnt signaling 
and stem cell control. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2008; 73:59–66. [PubMed: 
19028988] 
57. He TC, Sparks AB, Rago C, Hermeking H, Zawel L, da Costa LT, Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler 
KW. Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science. 1998; 281:1509–1512. 
[PubMed: 9727977] 
58. Tetsu O, McCormick F. β-Catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells. 
Nature. 1999; 398:422–426. [PubMed: 10201372] 
59. Du Q, Park KS, Guo Z, He P, Nagashima M, Shao L, Sahai R, Geller DA, Hussain SP. Regulation 
of human nitric oxide synthase 2 expression by Wnt β-catenin signaling. Cancer Res. 2006; 
66:7024–7031. [PubMed: 16849547] 
60. Miyamoto DT, Zheng Y, Wittner BS, Lee RJ, Zhu H, Broderick KT, Desai R, Fox DB, Brannigan 
BW, Trautwein J, Arora KS, Desai N, Dahl DM, Sequist LV, Smith MR, Kapur R, Wu C-L, Shioda 
T, Ramaswamy S, Ting DT, Toner M, Maheswaran S, Haber DA. RNA-seq of single prostate 
CTCs implicates noncanonical Wnt signaling in antiandrogen resistance. Science. 2015; 
349:1351–1356. [PubMed: 26383955] 
61. Ben-Sahra I, Hoxhaj G, Ricoult SJH, Asara JM, Manning BD. mTORC1 induces purine synthesis 
through control of the mitochondrial tetrahydrofolate cycle. Science. 2016; 351:728–733. 
[PubMed: 26912861] 
62. Walter F, Schmid J, Düssmann H, Concannon CG, Prehn JHM. Imaging of single cell responses to 
ER stress indicates that the relative dynamics of IRE1/XBP1 and PERK/ATF4 signalling rather 
than a switch between signalling branches determine cell survival. Cell Death Differ. 2015; 
22:1502–1516. [PubMed: 25633195] 
63. Bertolotti A, Zhang Y, Hendershot LM, Harding HP, Ron D. Dynamic interaction of BiP and ER 
stress transducers in the unfolded-protein response. Nat. Cell Biol. 2000; 2:326–332. [PubMed: 
10854322] 
64. Lee AS. Glucose-regulated proteins in cancer: Molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential. 
Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2014; 14:263–276. [PubMed: 24658275] 
65. Jamora C, Dennert G, Lee AS. Inhibition of tumor progression by suppression of stress protein 
GRP78/BiP induction in fibrosarcoma B/C10ME. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1996; 93:7690–
7694. [PubMed: 8755537] 
66. Dong D, Ni M, Li J, Xiong S, Ye W, Virrey JJ, Mao C, Ye R, Wang M, Pen L, Dubeau L, Groshen 
S, Hofman FM, Lee AS. Critical role of the stress chaperone GRP78/BiP in tumor proliferation, 
survival, and tumor angiogenesis in transgene-induced mammary tumor development. Cancer Res. 
2008; 68:498–505. [PubMed: 18199545] 
67. Lee AS. GRP78 induction in cancer: Therapeutic and prognostic implications. Cancer Res. 2007; 
67:3496–3499. [PubMed: 17440054] 
68. Daneshmand S, Quek ML, Lin E, Lee C, Cote RJ, Hawes D, Cai J, Groshen S, Lieskovsky G, 
Skinner DG, Lee AS, Pinski J. Glucose-regulated protein GRP78 is upregulated in prostate cancer 
and correlates with recurrence and survival. Hum. Pathol. 2007; 38:1547–1552. [PubMed: 
17640713] 
69. Gonzalez-Gronow M, Selim MA, Papalas J, Pizzo SV. GRP78: A multifunctional receptor on the 
cell surface. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2009; 11:2299–2306. [PubMed: 19331544] 
70. Gonzalez-Gronow M, Cuchacovich M, Llanos C, Urzua C, Gawdi G, Pizzo SV. Prostate cancer 
cell proliferation in vitro is modulated by antibodies against glucose-regulated protein 78 isolated 
from patient serum. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:11424–11431. [PubMed: 17145889] 
71. Preissler S, Rato C, Chen R, Antrobus R, Ding S, Fearnley IM, Ron D. AMPylation matches BiP 
activity to client protein load in the endoplasmic reticulum. Elife. 2015; 4:e12621. [PubMed: 
26673894] 
Rodvold et al.
Page 19
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 72. Li Y, Tergaonkar V. Noncanonical functions of telomerase: Implications in telomerase-targeted 
cancer therapies. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:1639–1644. [PubMed: 24599132] 
73. Sharma GG, Gupta A, Wang H, Scherthan H, Dhar S, Gandhi V, Iliakis G, Shay JW, Young CS, 
Pandita TK. hTERT associates with human telomeres and enhances genomic stability and DNA 
repair. Oncogene. 2003; 22:131–146. [PubMed: 12527915] 
74. Cubillos-Ruiz JR, Silberman PC, Rutkowski MR, Chopra S, Perales-Puchalt A, Song M, Zhang S, 
Bettigole SE, Gupta D, Holcomb K, Ellenson LH, Caputo T, Lee A-H, Conejo-Garcia JR, 
Glimcher LH. ER stress sensor XBP1 controls anti-tumor immunity by disrupting dendritic cell 
homeostasis. Cell. 2015; 161:1527–1538. [PubMed: 26073941] 
75. Cao W, Ramakrishnan R, Tyurin VA, Veglia F, Condamine T, Amoscato A, Mohammadyani D, 
Johnson JJ, Zhang LM, Klein-Seetharaman J, Celis E, Kagan VE, Gabrilovich DI. Oxidized lipids 
block antigen cross-presentation by dendritic cells in cancer. J. Immunol. 2014; 192:2920–2931. 
[PubMed: 24554775] 
76. Kreso A, O’Brien CA, van Galen P, Gan OI, Notta F, Brown AMK, Ng K, Ma J, Wienholds E, 
Dunant C, Pollett A, Gallinger S, McPherson J, Mullighan CG, Shibata D, Dick JE. Variable 
clonal repopulation dynamics influence chemotherapy response in colorectal cancer. Science. 
2013; 339:543–548. [PubMed: 23239622] 
77. Marusyk A, Tabassum DP, Altrock PM, Almendro V, Michor F, Polyak K. Non-cell-autonomous 
driving of tumour growth supports sub-clonal heterogeneity. Nature. 2014; 514:54–58. [PubMed: 
25079331] 
78. Harding HP, Zhang Y, Bertolotti A, Zeng H, Ron D. Perk is essential for translational regulation 
and cell survival during the unfolded protein response. Mol. Cell. 2000; 5:897–904. [PubMed: 
10882126] 
79. Urano F, Wang X, Bertolotti A, Zhang Y, Chung P, Harding HP, Ron D. Coupling of stress in the 
ER to activation of JNK protein kinases by transmembrane protein kinase IRE1. Science. 2000; 
287:664–666. [PubMed: 10650002] 
80. Wu J, Rutkowski DT, Dubois M, Swathirajan J, Saunders T, Wang J, Song B, Yau GD-Y, Kaufman 
RJ. ATF6α optimizes long-term endoplasmic reticulum function to protect cells from chronic 
stress. Dev. Cell. 2007; 13:351–364. [PubMed: 17765679] 
81. Hayashi MT, Cesare AJ, Fitzpatrick JAJ, Lazzerini-Denchi E, Karlseder J. A telomere-dependent 
DNA damage checkpoint induced by prolonged mitotic arrest. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2012; 
19:387–394. [PubMed: 22407014] 
82. Montague TG, Cruz JM, Gagnon JA, Church GM, Valen E. CHOPCHOP: A CRISPR/Cas9 and 
TALEN web tool for genome editing. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:W401–W407. [PubMed: 
24861617] 
83. Ran FA, Hsu PD, Wright J, Agarwala V, Scott DA, Zhang F. Genome engineering using the 
CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat. Protoc. 2013; 8:2281–2308. [PubMed: 24157548] 
Rodvold et al.
Page 20
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Prostate cancer cells undergoing ER stress can transmit an ER stress response to recipient 
cells
(A) Expression of the indicated mRNA (by RT-qPCR) in PC3 cells cultured for 1, 3, or 5 
days in Veh CM or TERS CM (n = 2 per condition). Gene expression was normalized to Veh 
CM day 1. RQ, relative quantification. Inset shows gel banding for unspliced (XBP-1u) and 
spliced (XBP-1s) XBP-1. (B) Western blot analysis for GRP78 abundance in whole-cell 
lysates from PC3 cells cultured as described in (A). V, Veh CM; T, TERS CM. (C) RT-qPCR 
in DU145 cells as described in (A) treated with PC3 generated Veh CM or TERS CM (n = 2 
per condition). Gene expression was normalized to Veh CM day 1 condition to determine 
Rodvold et al.
Page 21
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relative quantification. (D) RT-qPCR analysis for IL-6 expression in PC3 cells cultured with 
Veh CM or TERS CM as described in (A). Values are normalized to Veh CM day 1 (n = 2 
per condition). (E) Confocal microscopy for GRP78 in Veh CM– or TERS CM–treated PC3 
cells for 48 hours. Scale bars, 25 µm. (F) Flow cytometry analysis of surface abundance of 
GRP78 (sGRP78) in Veh CM– or TERS CM–cultured, unpermeabilized PC3 cells. Data are 
means ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, paired two-tailed Student’s t tests. Data 
in (C) to (E) are representative of two experiments; data in (A), (B), and (F) are from three 
independent experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 22
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. TERS-primed cancer cells display a unique UPR and are protected against nutrient 
deprivation
(A) Treatment design of TERS priming: 2-day culture in Veh CM or TERS CM followed by 
2-day rest period. Cells were then challenged and analyzed as indicated. (B) Flow cytometry 
analysis for surface abundance of GRP78 in vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells grown in 
standard growth medium. (C) Western blot analysis of GRP78 in vehicle (V)– or TERS (T)–
primed PC3 cells after 48-hour culture in standard growth medium (cDMEM) or in nutrient-
deprived condition [-Glu/FBS (fetal bovine serum)]. (D) Western blot analysis of proteins of 
the PERK pathway in vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells after 48-hour culture in cDMEM 
or in -Glu/FBS. (E) Apoptosis analysis by flow cytometry detection of annexin V in vehicle- 
or TERS-primed PC3 cells after 48-hour culture in cDMEM or in -Glu/FBS (each plot 
Rodvold et al.
Page 23
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 represents at least 10,000 events per condition). Data in (D) are representative of two 
experiments; data in (B), (C), and (E) are from three or more independent experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 24
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. Proteasome inhibition–mediated cytotoxicity is less effective in TERS-primed cells
(A) Western blot analysis of GRP78 in vehicle (V)– or TERS (T)–primed PC3 cells after 24-
hour culture with various concentrations of bortezomib (Bz). (B) Flow cytometry analysis 
for the abundance of GRP78 (sGRP78) on the surface of vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells 
24 hours after EtOH control solution or bortezomib (100 nM) treatment. Data are shown 
individually and as an overlay for comparison. (C) Western blot analysis of PERK pathway 
proteins of vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells 24 hours after addition of bortezomib. (D) 
Apoptosis analysis by annexin V/propidium iodide (PI) staining in vehicle- or TERS-primed 
PC3 cells 24 hours after addition of bortezomib (each plot represents at least 10,000 events 
per condition). (E) Western blot of GRP78 expression in vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells 
cultured in cDMEM and harvested at the specified postpriming day. (F) Percent live cells 
determined by flow cytometry analysis of annexin V/PI apoptosis staining in vehicle- or 
TERS-primed PC3 cells treated with EtOH control solution or bortezomib (100 nM). Data in 
(A), (C), and (E) are representative of two experiments; data in (B) and (F) are from three 
experiments; data in (D) are from five independent experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 25
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. TERS-primed cells are protected against genotoxic insults in the absence of ER stress
(A) Vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells treated with increasing concentrations of paclitaxel 
and analyzed after 24 hours by RT-qPCR for relative gene expression of UPR genes. 
Samples were normalized to 0 µM vehicle–primed gene expression (n = 2 per condition). 
(B) Western blot analysis of GRP78 in PC3-primed cells treated with paclitaxel for 24 hours. 
(C) Western blot analysis of PERK signaling in PC3 vehicle- or TERS-primed cells treated 
with paclitaxel for 24 hours. PC3 cells treated with Tg (300 nM) serve as positive control. 
(D) Annexin V apoptosis assay of primed PC3 cells untreated or treated with paclitaxel for 
48 hours (each plot represents at least 10,000 events per condition). (E) Cell cycle analysis 
as determined by BrdU incorporation in vehicle- or TERS-primed PC3 cells (each plot 
represents at least 10,000 events per condition). (F) DNA double-stranded breaks visualized 
through γ-H2AX staining (pink) and imaged by confocal microscopy in vehicle- or TERS-
primed PC3 cells after 24-hour treatment with paclitaxel (1 µM). Scale bars, 100 µm. Data in 
(B), (C), and (F) are representative of two experiments; data in (A), (D), and (E) are from 
three or more independent experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 26
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. TERS induces WNT signaling and cytoplasmic export of TERT
(A) RT-qPCR analysis of the transcriptional activation of CTNNB1 and AXIN2 of Veh CM– 
or TERS CM–treated PC3 cells throughout 5 days of culture with CM resupplementation 
every other day. Relative quantification of gene expression of samples is normalized to Veh 
CM day 1 condition (n = 2 per group). (B) TOP-GFP expression of PC3 cells during TERS 
priming, determined by flow cytometry (at least 10,000 events were analyzed per condition). 
PC3.TOP cells treated with Veh CM or TERS CM for 48 hours in the absence or presence of 
(C) the IRE1α inhibitor 4μ8C or (D) the PERK inhibitor GSK2656157 and measured for 
mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). MFI expression was then normalized to Veh CM 
uninhibited value (n = 2; at least 10,000 events were analyzed per condition). (E) 
Normalized MFI expression of PC3.TOP cells treated with tunicamycin (5 µg/ml) for 48 
hours during IRE1α or PERK inhibition (n = 2; at least 10,000 events were analyzed per 
condition). (F) Normalized MFI expression of PC3.TOP stimulated for 48 hours with 
Rodvold et al.
Page 27
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recombinant WNT3a (rWNT3a) (20 ng/ml) during IRE1α or PERK inhibition (n = 2; at 
least 10,000 events were analyzed per condition). (G) hTERT RT-qPCR analysis of 48-hour 
Veh CM– or TERS CM–treated PC3 cells (n = 3 per condition). (H) Relative firefly TERT 
promoter-luciferase or ATF6 promoter-luciferase of dually transfected LNCaP cells. Cells 
were treated with LNCaP Veh CM or TERS CM for 48 hours and normalized for expression 
by Renilla-luciferase (n = 3 per condition). **P < 0.01, Student’s t test (paired two-tailed). 
(I) Immunofluorescence staining for TERT in PC3 cells treated for 48 hours. Scale bars, 25 
µm. Error bars represent SEM. Data in (C), (D), and (H) are representative of two 
experiments; data in (A), (B), (F), (G), and (I) are from at least three independent 
experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 28
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. PERK signaling is necessary for TERS-mediated cytoprotection
(A and B) Survival of (A) wild-type (WT) or (B) PERK KO MEFs primed by TC1 Veh CM 
or TERS CM and challenged for 48 hours as specified (Tx, paclitaxel). Survival determined 
by flow cytometry analysis via 7AAD exclusion. Percent (%) survival calculated by 
normalizing the percent live (7AAD−) population of the unstimulated condition for each line 
(n = 2 per group; at least 10,000 events analyzed per condition). (C) CRISPR/Cas9 design of 
guide targets within the ATF4 gene. (D) PCR detection of ATF4 WT and ATF4 CRISPR 
293XT cells. WT 293XT (E) and ATF4 CRISPR 293XT (F) cells were primed with PC3 
Veh CM or TERS CM, and survival was measured by 7AAD exclusion after 48 hours of 
treatment, as specified (n = 2 per condition; at least 10,000 events were analyzed per 
condition). Error bars represent SEM. Data in (A), (B), and (D) are representative of two 
experiments; data in (E) and (F) are from three independent experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 29
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. TERS-primed murine prostate cancer cells have improved cellular fitness in vitro and in 
vivo
(A) Cartoon of coculture experimental design. Briefly, RFP-tagged TC1 cells (TC1-RFP) are 
primed with homologous Veh CM, whereas untagged TC1 cells are primed with TERS CM. 
After priming, cell populations are cocultured overnight and subsequently challenged. (B) 
Flow cytometry analysis to determine the percent RFP+ (vehicle-primed) and RFP− (TERS-
primed) TC1 cells, 7AAD excluded, after 24-hour treatment with Tg, 2-deoxyglucose 
(2DG), bortezomib, or paclitaxel (n = 2 per coculture; at least 10,000 events were analyzed 
per condition). (C) Growth kinetics of vehicle- or TERS-primed TC1 cells subcutaneously 
Rodvold et al.
Page 30
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 injected into immunocompetent C57BL/6 mice (n = 5 per group). (D) Weight of vehicle- or 
TERS-primed tumors after 30 days. (E) Gross visualization of excised tumors. **P < 0.01, 
Student’s t test (paired two-tailed). Error bars are SEM. Data are representative of two 
independent experiments.
Rodvold et al.
Page 31
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 8. Model of TERS-mediated signaling in cancer cells
We propose a model in which cancer cells exposed to TERS undergo an adaptive UPR that 
involves diverse signaling events. One effect is the activation of Wnt signaling. TERS drives 
Wnt signaling through the activation of the TCF. This effect appears to be IRE1α-
dependent. The other relevant event is cytoprotection. In this case, TERS engages PERK but 
also leads to reduced ATF4 activation. Reduced levels of ATF4 are insufficient to drive full 
activation of apoptosis through the downstream CHOP target (red strikethrough). In this 
respect, ATF4 serves as a rheostat for cell survival. TERS also increases the amounts of 
GRP78, both intracellularly and at the cell surface. Finally, TERS induces the export of 
TERT to the cytoplasm. These effects, possibly in combination, promote cytoprotection and, 
ultimately, cell fitness to endogenous (nutrient) and exogenous (chemotherapeutic) stress.
Rodvold et al.
Page 32
Sci Signal. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
