  
 
 43
Roland D, Snelson E. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2019;104:43–48. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199
Learning and teaching
‘So why didn’t you think this baby 
was ill?’ Decision-making in 
acute paediatrics
damian roland,1,2 edward Snelson3,4
1SAPPHIRE Group, Health 
Sciences, Leicester University, 
Leicester, UK
2Paediatric Emergency Medicine 
Leicester Academic (PEMLA) 
Group, Leicester Hospitals, 
Leicester, UK
3Sheffield Children’s Hospital, 
Sheffield, UK
4Sheffield Hallam University, 
Sheffield, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Damian Roland, SAPPHIRE 
Group, Health Sciences, 
Leicester University, Leicester 
LE1 7RH, UK;  
dr98@ 
leicester. 
ac. 
uk
Received 4 September 2017
Revised 10 January 2018
Accepted 17 January 2018
Published Online First 
1 March 2018
To cite: Roland D, Snelson E. 
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 
2019;104:43–48.
AbstrAct
Determining severity of illness and undertaking 
an adequate risk assessment is a fundamental 
part of acute paediatric practice. This review 
highlights physiology, communication, heuristics 
and external elements as factors which influence 
decision-making and discusses how incidence of 
disease and seniority of clinician impact might 
influence outcomes.
IntroductIon
At the core of the practice of acute paedi-
atrics is an underlying conundrum. The 
chance of serious disease is low but the 
consequences of not treating specific 
illnesses are devastating. In the developed 
world, despite widespread immunisation, 
this task is no easier now than it was 10 
years ago. While the search for valid 
biomarkers and validated scoring systems 
continues at pace, there have been no 
significant innovations in diagnostic tools 
to aid the recognition of serious illness in 
a generation of paediatrics.1 
Rosie is an 18 
month girl who presents to 
the Emergency Department with a 3 
day 
history of fever and increasing parental 
concern that she isn’t eating or drinking 
enough. Today she has had a couple of 
vomits and her mother has described her 
as ‘shaky’. She is clearly coryzal and looks 
miserable, but not irritable. Tempera-
ture is 39.1, she has a pulse of 167 and a  
respiratory rate of 38. Her central  
capillary refill time is below 3 
s and her 
peripheral return is 3 
s. She feels very hot 
on the chest but has cold hands and feet.
The diagnostic approach to the child 
above, while shaped in some part by 
(inter)-national guidance, is still very 
much in the hands of the senior deci-
sion-makers—clinicians of both paediatric 
and non-paediatric backgrounds who have 
experience in the management of ill chil-
dren. The decision to discharge, observe, 
investigate and treat, at its core, is based 
on the application of experience. How are 
these decision-making processes shaped 
and how can we refine and improve them 
to safely reduce admissions and more 
effectively target those children needing 
interventions? This article explores the art 
and science of decision-making in acute 
paediatrics to help clinicians and educa-
tors understand the processes they may be 
unconsciously using every day so that they 
too can teach others.
A common problem
Although the probability of diagnosing a 
life-limiting infection is low,2 the stakes in 
any acute paediatric assessment are high. 
High expectations follow the respon-
sibility of decision-making in an acute 
paediatric consultation. If the clinician 
makes a diagnosis that later turns out to 
be wrong, the question will inevitably be 
asked, ‘At the time why wasn’t it clear that 
the diagnosis was X?’ Notwithstanding 
gross negligence there are four factors 
(physiology, communication, heuristics 
and external factors) that complicate the 
process of diagnosis.
The nature of paediatric physiology
Physiological values are complex in paedi-
atrics. They are more than complicated 
because although there are published 
‘normal values’ which will guide the 
clinician in knowing whether a child is 
tachycardic or tachypnoeic, these are in 
fact reference ranges that were initially 
based on expert opinion.3 Although meta- 
analysis shows these reference ranges to 
be at least somewhat valid,4 it is probably 
safest not to think of them as ‘normal 
ranges’ at all since much of the data 
includes children in abnormal circum-
stances. Indeed, the clinician who relies 
on these values will by definition be 
unlikely to have a ‘normal’ child in front 
of them. What is the normal heart rate of 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199 on 1 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Roland D, Snelson E. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2019;104:43–48. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199
44
Learning and teaching
a 10-month-old infant with ear-ache, a temperature 
of 37.9 and is due a feed? Physiological values have 
a huge importance in paediatric assessment; however, 
they must be interpreted in context and often only 
become useful when a trend is established. This is 
particularly challenging in a primary care or emergency 
medicine setting, where it is not desirable to observe 
every patient. Furthermore while in secondary care 
it is usual practice to observe a patient following the 
administration of an antipyretic to reduce distress (not 
fever), there is no evidence to suggest that response to 
antipyretics has a predictive value in determining the 
presence or absence of serious disease.5 It has also been 
found that temperature–pulse charts perform worse 
than pulse alone.6 The observation (always post hoc) of 
the presence of ‘unacknowledged’ tachycardia is often 
highlighted in serious care reviews. This leads to very 
defensive medicine when determining management 
plans in infants with raised heart rates, whereas cohort 
evidence does not support using heart rate alone as 
a decision-making aid.7 This results in a dissonance 
between the decisions that a clinician would like to 
make based on the child they see in front of them, and 
the child that is described in the observations charts. 
Often the challenge is finding physiological objective 
evidence to support a decision already made, based on 
the overall judgement of degree of illness.
The variability of communication
Decision-making relies on information, and one of the 
key components of paediatric practice is the challenge 
of history taking. Much of what the clinician hears 
during a paediatric history is inferred or requires inter-
preting. For example, a parent may report ear pain on 
the basis of witnessed ear pulling or they may report 
foot pain on the basis of a limp. The first parent is 
likely to be right, while in the second case the source 
of the pain is far less certain. Clinicians must not only 
learn how symptoms manifest but also how they are 
commonly reported, which the authors find to be 
strongly influenced by carer anxiety.
Another key difference is the complexity of paedi-
atric examination. How exactly does one do a cranial 
nerve examination on a 4-day-old infant? What does it 
mean when you palpate a 2-year-old child’s abdomen 
and they cry? Is this a sign of pain or resentment of 
strangers? Clinicians must innovate (blowing on a 
4-day-old infant’s face gives quite a lot of cranial nerve 
information), extrapolate (If unable to see in a child’s 
throat, knowing that they have just eaten a packet of 
crisps and drunk a carton of fruit juice may be all the 
information needed) and economise (the child cried as 
soon as the clinician went near them, therefore other 
information will have to be relied on when assessing 
their abdomen) in order to achieve the best possible 
examination. All these examples demonstrate skills 
that are difficult to teach, and all must be observed 
and experienced. Regardless of a clinician’s knowledge 
(eg, of the cranial nerves), the application of how to 
interpret and put into context the outcome of that 
knowledge requires repeated exposure. Learning the 
decision-making process does require exposure to 
patients at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels. 
A developing issue will also be the communication and 
use of big data in the deployment of artificial intel-
ligence. As diagnostic systems combine, that is, one 
programme to analyse past presentations, presenting 
complaint, observations and special tests to generate 
an overall level of risk, it will be vital that ‘risk’ is 
applied and explained appropriately. The diagnosis of 
disease still remains a very human endeavour, but the 
medical community must be prepared to develop with 
new approaches and techniques8 and determine how 
best to have these discussions with families and carers.
The heuristics used by clinicians and how they are affected by cognitive 
biases
A heuristic (or more precisely a heuristic technique) 
is ‘any approach to problem solving, learning, or 
discovery that employs a practical method not guar-
anteed to be optimal or perfect, but sufficient for 
the immediate goals’ (https:// 
en. 
wikipedia. 
org/ 
wiki/ 
Heuristic). Heuristics are used, often unconsciously, by 
experienced clinicians to amalgamate the large amount 
of information they obtain by history taking and 
examination. Heuristics are a blessing and a curse. It 
would be impossible to safely see the large number of 
children needed per shift if a detailed problem-solving 
approach was adopted involving a dissection of all 
components of a history with a minutiae examination. 
At the same time our heuristics create potential biases9 
(table 1) which, if not recognised, may well result in 
serious harm or even death for the patient and a debil-
itating second victim phenomena for the professionals 
involved.
To avoid falling into traps you first need to be aware 
that the traps exist in the first place. Kahneman and 
colleagues have popularised the concept of fast and 
slow thinking: the distinction between instinctive (type 
Table 1 A selection9 of cognitive biases originally described 
by Croskerry
Confirmation bias
Looking for evidence to support a preconceived 
opinion, rather than looking for information to 
prove oneself wrong
Diagnosis 
momentum 
Accepting a previous diagnosis without sufficient 
scepticism
Framing effect 
Making a decision based on the positive (or 
negative) way in which situation presented
Overconfidence 
bias 
Over-reliance on one’s own ability, intuition and 
judgement
Premature closure Similar to ‘confirmation bias’ but more ‘jumping 
to a conclusion’
Self-satisfying bias The ‘eureka’ moment that stops all further 
thought
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199 on 1 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Roland D, Snelson E. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2019;104:43–48. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199
45
Learning and teaching
1 thinking) and more reflective, analytical cognition 
(type 2).10 This model relates to clinicians in day-to-day 
practice when it comes to achieving a balance between 
efficiency and effectiveness. Clinicians may employ 
type 1 (fast) thinking which allows them to make 
frequent, reflex decisions in order to deal with a large 
volume of patients in a short period of time. This more 
intuitive way of thinking is less appropriate when that 
same clinician is faced with a complex diagnosis or 
an infrequently encountered clinical scenario. To be 
successful in these cases, the clinician is likely to need 
type 2 (slow) thought processes which bring together a 
number of decision-making facets.
Its application in practice, however, is not a simple 
case of avoiding snap judgements. In emergency situ-
ations, the intuitive recognition of a tension pneumo-
thorax may be life saving. Furthermore, overthinking 
problems can create clinical dilemmas (and much 
confusion for parents/carers) with no net benefit. 
Conversely if we do not have weights or measures to 
keep our unconscious in check, then it is inevitable that 
patients will slip through the net. One counter-mea-
sure to biases is the application of Bayesian statistics. 
At any given moment patients have prior probability of 
disease based on demographics and risk factors. Risk 
of disease alters following a test result, which can be 
anything from observation to the latest meningococcal 
disease biomarker (figure 1).
The impact of external factors: parents/carers and/or the clinical 
environment
Bradley is a 4 
year old boy. Yesterday he tried to swing 
on some monkey bars, slipped and hit is head on the 
edge of step after a fall of perhaps a 2–3 
m. He wasn’t 
knocked out and despite a bump to his head appeared 
well in himself an hour later. However in the evening 
he was noted to be not himself and vomited a cou-
ple of times before tea. On arrival in the Emergency  
Department he has vomited a couple of more times. 
His parents say he is pale and is definitely not himself.  
Examination reveals no focal abnormality.
The decision to scan a child’s head is also a good 
example of differing agendas in the decision-making 
process (table 2). The National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines are designed around 
a principle of ALARA (radiation exposure should be As 
Low As Reasonably Achievable) which means that the 
purpose of a scan should really be to detect treatable 
injury. While a clinician may be comfortable with this 
principle, since it protects children from harmful radi-
ation, parents may prefer certainty and push for a head 
scan even when the chances of harm from the scan are 
greater than the likelihood of treatable brain injury.
Differing agendas can potentially create a dangerous 
understanding gap in a paediatric consultation.11 12 
Take the example of one of the most common presen-
tations in child health: the febrile child. A doctor sees 
a 2-year-old child with a history of cough and fever. 
Working through the above agendas, they establish 
that the child is well hydrated, that they have all the 
signs of a viral upper respiratory tract infection and 
no signs of pneumonia, sepsis or meningitis. Thus the 
clinician’s agendas are fulfilled. However, in terms of 
the parent’s agendas, the clinician is unable to treat 
the cough and is unable to give a specific time frame 
for when the symptoms will resolve. However, it is the 
third parental agenda listed above which provides the 
greatest paradox since it is completely at odds with 
good safety-netting. To safely discharge the patient, 
the clinician must in fact warn the parent of the possi-
bility that secondary infection is possible and therefore 
when to seek a further assessment.
the impact of incidence of disease
One of the most consistent challenges in paediatrics is 
the overall low probability of significant pathology. The 
clinician faces a decision between a path of reassurance 
and avoidance of overtreatment/overinvestigation, or 
a path of investigation or possibly empirical treatment. 
The likelihood that investigations or treatments will 
be of value is greatly reduced when the probability of 
significant pathology is very low (palpable but other-
wise uncomplicated cervical lymph nodes in children). 
There are few examples in paediatrics where a partic-
ular presentation has such a high chance of finding 
something significant that investigation is always 
needed (as in Henoch-Schonlein purpura where urine 
dipstick is always needed).
Nor is the probability factor that influences the 
decision-making a constant. Vaccination rates have, 
for example, altered the probability that a petechial 
rash might be due to meningococcal infection. Often, 
guidelines lag behind such shifting sands, partly due 
to a lack of published data to confirm that things 
Figure 1 Using Bayesian statistics. 
Table 2 Differences between clinician and parent/carer and 
child or young person (CYP) agendas
Clinician agenda
Parent/carer/CYP agenda
 
► Identifying any immediate danger 
that requires action
 
► Making a robust diagnosis
 
► Rule out rare but significant 
possibilities
 
► Relief of pain and other symptoms
 
► Certainty that illness will resolve
 
► Certainty that there will be no long-
term consequences
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199 on 1 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Roland D, Snelson E. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2019;104:43–48. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199
46
Learning and teaching
have changed and partly due to the inevitable delay 
from publication of new evidence to inclusion in the 
guidelines.
Decision tools in paediatrics are rarely as sensi-
tive and specific as we need them to be. The NICE 
febrile child guideline, perhaps the most used decision 
tools in paediatrics in the UK, has a poor sensitivity 
and specificity.13 By contrast, the head injury imaging 
guidelines are a rare example of a decision tool which 
has achieved specificity without sacrificing sensitivity.
When approaching a clinical scenario, doctors tend 
to use a combination of Bayesian probability (making 
and assessment of the likelihood of a particular diag-
nosis) and hypothetico-deductive technique (formu-
lating a hypothesis which can be tested). Both are 
problematic, especially in paediatrics. Take the diag-
nosis of asthma in the under-5-year age group—a hotly 
debated subject.
Ahmed is a three 
year old boy. He has had several epi-
sodes of wheeze requiring inhalers, which started when 
he was two 
years old. Initially these were all triggered 
by respiratory tract infections, however the two most 
recent episodes had no apparent trigger. Following the 
second episode, the doctor considers the pros and cons 
of giving a steroid inhaler and the parent asks if Ahmed 
has asthma.
Atopic asthma is rare in the under-5-year-old age 
group, however, there are children who have recur-
rent episodes of wheeze which are not exclusively 
exacerbated by respiratory tract infections. A clinician 
would rightly consider (Bayesian probability) the fact 
that the most common reason by far for a 3-year-old 
child to have recurrent episodes of wheeze is viral-in-
duced wheeze. Improbability is not impossibility, 
however, and because the incidence of a disease at 
different ages tends to map to a curve, there is always 
an outlying possibility of an early presentation. Even 
considering risk factors is of little help here. In fact, 
the latest British Thoracic Society-Scottish Intercolle-
giate Guidelines Network guidance for the diagnosis of 
asthma has de-emphasised family history of atopy due 
to the fact that this is a poor indicator of a diagnosis. 
So, if probability does not give the answer, what about 
a test to confirm or refute the hypothesis (hypothetic- 
deductive technique)? Unfortunately, there is no perfect 
test for asthma, and this is especially true the younger 
the patient. For this reason, many treat the introduc-
tion of a steroid inhaler as the test itself, leaving them 
at risk of confirmation bias if the episodes self-resolve.
The combination of rare versus common diagnosis, 
with no good test to distinguish between them, is a 
recurring theme in paediatrics. Essentially, every benign 
diagnosis has an evil twin, and it is often very difficult 
to tell them apart. This is just as true for the question 
that is asked in primary and secondary care every day 
around the world—does this child have an uncompli-
cated viral illness or do they have early sepsis? The 
odds are always going to favour viral illness but the 
cost of being wrong is the potential loss of a child’s 
life. The inability to prove a negative is one of the 
biggest challenges of decision-making in paediatrics.
senior decision-makers and the use of gut feeling
Since diagnosis in acute paediatrics cannot rely on 
tests or decision tools,14 15 many guidelines point the 
way to a ‘senior decision-maker’. This term remains 
ill-defined but is a crucial aspect of the process which 
allows children to receive a safe and accurate clinical 
assessment. Clinicians with the necessary experience 
in assessing children do not tend to rely on guidelines 
or tests to make decisions (though will use these where 
appropriate).16
Sitting alongside a number of well-described educa-
tional and mathematical diagnostic approaches such 
as the hypothetico-deductive technique and Bayesian 
probabilities is the innate sense that a diagnosis or 
management pathway is the correct thing to do. This 
utilisation of gestalt and gut feeling is a core prac-
tice of senior decision-makers. The terms are used 
interchangeably but this is not linguistically correct. 
Gestaltic philosophy describes the way the conscious 
mind comes together to perceive things, with gestalt 
defined as ‘an organized whole that is perceived as 
more (or other dependant on some translations) 
than the sum of its parts’. Over time this has come to 
describe the way that a clinician may take a number of 
different facets of information and bring them together 
to make a decision. This decision may be contrary to 
some of the individual pieces of information, that is, 
the senior decision-maker choosing not to emergently 
treat the tachycardic, tachypnoeic and febrile child 
with antibiotics as the presence of coryza with a miser-
able, not irritable, nature indicating the overall disease 
process is likely to be viral in origin. Gut feeling has 
been defined as an intuitive feeling that something was 
wrong even if the clinician was unsure why.17 Research 
varies on the impact of gut feeling in clinical practice 
but it may be as good or better at identifying ill chil-
dren than individual features such as cyanosis.18 Our 
inability as a medical community to encapsulate the 
concept of gut feeling so that training can be improved 
either implies it is true tacit knowledge (something 
that is functional but is difficult to describe) or that 
more intensive research, likely to need the involve-
ment of cognitive psychologists, is required.19 20 This 
is an important avenue of research as currently there 
are no standards in exploring the use of gestalt and gut 
feeling by clinicians in training21 and some conditions 
are very dependent on the adequacy of gut feeling as a 
decision-making aid. This is very true for sepsis in the 
acute care setting. When the diagnosis has been made, 
the management pathway is clear but it is the diagnosis 
(often only definitely made when the management 
pathway has been used), or the consideration of the 
diagnosis, that is important to prevent morbidity and 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199 on 1 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Roland D, Snelson E. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2019;104:43–48. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199
47
Learning and teaching
mortality. While screening tools aid those with inex-
perience, the deployment of antibiotics in all children 
meeting red flag criteria is neither sustainable nor in 
keeping with antimicrobial guardianship. Paediatrics 
contains many ‘spectrum’ diseases (figure 2), and in 
the absence of sensitive biomarkers it is likely that 
gestalt and gut feeling will be used for some time 
to come. This spectrum evolves over time so that a 
child may present on the left side and be appropri-
ately discharged only to return 24 
hours later on the 
right hand. Decisions taken may have been entirely 
appropriate with the given information.22 The ability 
to develop clinical intuition is a process which is devel-
oped over repeated clinical contacts, often refined by 
trial and error. The point at which one becomes intu-
itive in assessing childhood illness is likely to depend 
on several factors. While the number of patient 
contacts is likely to be the greatest of these, good feed-
back processes and the ability to learn from error is 
certainly a major factor in developing a sixth sense for 
when a child has a serious illness or injury. Education 
and supervision therefore remain a core component 
of improving medical care, and we recommend that 
those involved in decision-making in paediatrics make 
full use of any resource that involves the passing on 
of expertise as a way of accessing the tacit knowledge 
developed by others. Educators can use the strategies 
in box 1 to improve learner’s decision-making.
There exists a great deal of tacit knowledge among 
those clinicians who assess children. Because this 
knowledge sits outside the evidence base, it is not 
easily included in guidelines or decision-making tools. 
It should be possible to extract this knowledge in a 
valid way through the use of tools such as the Delphi 
method. Doing so may reveal the key elements of deci-
sion-making that only develop through the experience 
that comes from repeated patient contacts. This is a 
largely untapped resource which has until now almost 
exclusively relied on clinician to clinician discussions 
and may well explain the popularity of social media 
as a platform to have these grey-area debates.23 While 
face-to-face discussions will always be a valuable 
resource, they are a scarce commodity for many at the 
point of decision-making. The publication of large-
scale consensus opinion would go a long way to the 
development of this important but complex element 
of the decision-making process.
conclusIon
Decision-making in paediatrics is influenced by a 
number of factors, some dependent on child and 
some on the clinician. Recognising cognitive biases, 
providing access to senior decision-makers and further 
understanding the role of intuition in clinical practice, 
are all important in improving outcomes for children 
Figure 2 A sepsis spectrum. 
Box 1 Strategies for clinical educators to improve 
learners’ decision-making (via Roland, Have we 
forgotten to teach how to think)21
 
► Provide adequate and appropriate clinical exposure
 
► Don’t assume teaching about cognitive biases will enable 
learners to avoid making them
 
► Trainers must consider discussing why decisions were 
made, not just what decision was made
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199 on 1 March 2018. Downloaded from 
 Roland D, Snelson E. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2019;104:43–48. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199
48
Learning and teaching
in acute paediatrics. Clinicians should use published 
evidence, guidelines, decision-making tools and avail-
able expertise wherever possible to improve their 
understanding of how to make the best decision in 
any given clinical scenario. One of the most signifi-
cant factors in decision-making, the development and 
application of tacit knowledge, is poorly understood 
and is a potential area for research which may greatly 
influence the improvement of decision-making in 
paediatrics.
Twitter @damian_roland 
Contributors Both authors contributed equally to the article.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with 
the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, 
which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided 
the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2019. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Zar HJ, Andronikou S, Nicol MP
. Advances in the diagnosis of 
pneumonia in children. BMJ 2017;358:j2739.
 2 Royal College of Paediatric and Child Health (RCPCH). Why 
children die: death in infants, children and young people in 
the UK Part A May 2014. 2014 https://www. 
rcpch. 
ac. 
uk/ 
sites/ 
default/ 
files/ 
page/ 
Death% 
20in% 
20infants,% 
20children% 
20and% 
20young% 
20people% 
20in% 
20the% 
20UK. 
pdf 
(accessed 2 Jan 2018).
 3 O'Leary F, Hayen A, Lockie F, et al. Defining normal ranges 
and centiles for heart and respiratory rates in infants and 
children: a cross-sectional study of patients attending an 
Australian tertiary hospital paediatric emergency department. 
Arch Dis Child 2015;100:733–7.
 4 Fleming S, Thompson M, Stevens R, et al. Normal ranges 
of heart rate and respiratory rate in children from birth to 
18 years of age: a systematic review of observational studies. 
Lancet 2011;377:1011–8.
 5 Nice. Feverish illness in children NICE Guideline 160, 2013. 
Updated Aug 2016.
 6 Brent AJ, Lakhanpaul M, Ninis N, et al. Evaluation of 
temperature-pulse centile charts in identifying serious 
bacterial illness: observational cohort study. Arch Dis Child 
2011;96:368–73.
 7 Wilson PM, Florin TA, Huang G, et al. Is Tachycardia at 
discharge from the pediatric emergency department a cause 
for concern? A nonconcurrent cohort study. Ann Emerg Med 
2017;70:268–76.
 8 Chang AC. Big data in medicine: the upcoming artificial 
intelligence. Prog Pediatr Cardiol 2016;43:91–4.
 9 Roland D, McCaffery K, Davies F. Scoring systems in 
paediatric emergency care: Panacea or paper exercise? J 
Paediatr Child Health 2016;52:181–6.
 
10 Kahneman D. Thinking fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux, 2011.
 
11 Kai J. What worries parents when their preschool children are 
acutely ill, and why: a qualitative study. BMJ 1996;313:983–6.
 
12 Neill SJ, Jones CH, Lakhanpaul M, et al. Parents' help-
seeking behaviours during acute childhood illness at home: 
A contribution to explanatory theory. J Child Health Care 
2016;20:77–86.
 
13 Kerkhof E, Lakhanpaul M, Ray S, et al. The predictive value of 
the NICE "red traffic lights" in acutely ill children. PLoS One 
2014;9:e90847.
 
14 Van den Bruel A, Thompson MJ, Haj-Hassan T, et al. 
Diagnostic value of laboratory tests in identifying serious 
infections in febrile children: systematic review. BMJ 
2011;342:d3082–11.
 
15 Verbakel JY, Van den Bruel A, Thompson M, et al. How well 
do clinical prediction rules perform in identifying serious 
infections in acutely ill children across an international 
network of ambulatory care datasets? BMC Med 2013;11:10.
 
16 Roland D, Matheson D. New theory from an old technique: 
the Rolma matrices. Clin Teach 2012;9:143–7.
 
17 Van den Bruel A, Thompson M, Buntinx F, et al. Clinicians' 
gut feeling about serious infections in children: observational 
study. BMJ 2012;345:e6144.
 
18 Van den Bruel A, Haj-Hassan T, Thompson M, et al. 
Diagnostic value of clinical features at presentation to identify 
serious infection in children in developed countries: a 
systematic review. Lancet 2010;375:834–45.
 
19 Polanyi M. The tacit dimension. London: Routledge, 1967.
 
20 Collins H. Tacit and explicit knowledge. Chicago and London: 
The University of Chicago Press, 2010.
 
21 Roland D. Have we forgotten to teach how to think? Emerg 
Med J 2017;34:68–9.
 
22 Green SM, Nigrovic LE, Krauss BS. Sick kids look sick. Ann 
Emerg Med 2015;65:633–5.
 
23 Roland D. Social media and the digital health arena. Future 
Hosp J 2017;4:184–8.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://ep.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2017-313199 on 1 March 2018. Downloaded from 
