 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 1
REVIEW
published: 21 August 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01506
Edited by:
Pedro Alexandre Costa,
Instituto Universitário de Ciências
Psicológicas, Sociais e da Vida,
Portugal
Reviewed by:
Michelle Lowe,
University of Bolton, United Kingdom
Magdalena Zadkowska,
University of Gda ´
nsk, Poland
*Correspondence:
Giulia Giardina
giulia.giardina@edu.unito.it
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Gender, Sex and Sexuality Studies,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 04 May 2018
Accepted: 30 July 2018
Published: 21 August 2018
Citation:
Rollè L, Giardina G, Caldarera AM,
Gerino E and Brustia P (2018) When
Intimate Partner Violence Meets Same
Sex Couples: A Review of Same Sex
Intimate Partner Violence.
Front. Psychol. 9:1506.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01506
When Intimate Partner Violence
Meets Same Sex Couples: A Review
of Same Sex Intimate Partner
Violence
Luca Rollè, Giulia Giardina*, Angela M. Caldarera, Eva Gerino and Piera Brustia
Department of Psychology, University of Torino, Turin, Italy
Over the past few decades, the causes of and intervention for intimate partner violence
(IPV) have been approached and studied. This paper presents a narrative review on IPV
occurring in same sex couples, that is, same sex IPV (SSIPV). Despite the myth that
IPV is exclusively an issue in heterosexual relationships, many studies have revealed the
existence of IPV among lesbian and gay couples, and its incidence is comparable to
(Turell, 2000) or higher than that among heterosexual couples (Messinger, 2011; Kelley
et al., 2012). While similarities between heterosexual and lesbian, gay, and bisexual
(LGB) IPV were found, unique features and dynamics were present in LGB IPV. Such
features are mainly related to identifi
cation and treatment of SSIPV in the community
and to the need of taking into consideration the role of sexual minority stressors. Our
fi
ndings show there is a lack of studies that address LGB individuals involved in IPV;
this is mostly due to the silence that has historically existed around violence in the LGB
community, a silence built on fears and myths that have obstructed a public discussion
on the phenomenon. We identifi
ed the main themes discussed in the published studies
that we have reviewed here. The reviews lead us to the conclusion that it is essential
to create a place where this subject can be freely discussed and approached, both by
LGB and heterosexual people.
Keywords: same sex intimate partner violence, same-sex couple, LGB, domestic violence, IPV, treatment
INTRODUCTION
Over the past few decades, intimate partner violence (IPV) has received increasing interest from
mental health experts. According to the World Health Organization (2012), IPV is related to
any behavior between a couple that involves acts of physical and sexual violence, emotional and
psychological abuse, and controlling behavior. According to numerous authors, the expression
“IPV” represents a form of violence that both men and women can enact, with no regard to age,
marital status, or sexual orientations (Capaldi et al., 2007; Ali et al., 2016). The consequences of IPV
on mental health and general wellbeing have also been outlined in numerous studies (Campbell,
2002; Anderson et al., 2008; Murray and Mobley, 2009; Giordano et al., 2014; Costa et al., 2015).
The lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) population faces more difficult outcomes compared
to the heterosexual population “across different life domains, including mental and physical
health, subjective wellbeing, employment, poverty, homelessness, and social exclusion”
(Perales and Todd, 2018, p. 190). IPV in the LGB population has not been studied as frequently
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 2
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
as in the heterosexual population: in 2015, research on LGB
IPV constituted a mere 3% of the total research on the subject
(Edwards et al., 2015). Even though there are a few studies on
Same-Sex Intimate Partner Violence (SSIPV), they highlight that
the phenomenon occurs at a rate that is comparable (Turell,
2000) or even higher than heterosexual IPV (Messinger, 2011;
Kelley et al., 2012; Barrett and St.Pierre, 2013). It can be
difficult to identify LGB IPV prevalence rates due to the different
methodologies used in the researches. However, according to one
of the most recent and representative study reports, almost one-
third of sexual minority males and one-half of sexual minority
women in the United States affirmed they were victims of physical
or psychological abuse in a romantic relationship. In addition,
over 50% of gay men and almost 75% of lesbian women reported
that they were victims of psychological IPV (Breiding et al., 2013).
Breiding et al. (2013) identified that 4.1 million people of the
LGB community have experienced IPV in their lifetime in the
United States.
Life-time prevalence of IPV in LGB couples appeared to be
similar to or higher than in heterosexual ones: 61.1% of bisexual
women, 43.8% of lesbian women, 37.3% of bisexual men, and
26.0% of homosexual men experienced IPV during their life,
while 5.0% of heterosexual women and 29.0% of heterosexual
men experienced IPV. When episodes of severe violence were
considered, prevalence was similar or higher for LGB adults
(bisexual women: 49.3%; lesbian women: 29.4%; homosexual
men: 16.4%) compared to heterosexual adults (heterosexual
women: 23.6%; heterosexual men: 13.9%) (Breiding et al., 2013).
Messinger (2011) highlighted that all forms of abuse were
more likely to occur in homosexual and bisexual couples than
in heterosexual ones. Moreover, he hypothesized that a higher
percentage violence was caused by unique risk factors linked
to minority stress that is experienced only by LGB people. In
addition, the study highlighted that lesbian women were at higher
risk of being involved in IPV, followed by heterosexual women,
gay men, and heterosexual men. Furthermore, bisexual people
appeared to be the most abused group compared to the others;
bisexual women, specifically, were more likely to be victims of
every type of IPV, excluding psychological IPV.
Most researches on the prevalence of SSIPV have been
conducted on a North American population, while some minor
studies are focused on Australian (Leonard et al., 2008), Chinese
(Chong et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2013), South African (Eaton
et al., 2013), and British populations (Guasp, 2012): the results
reported similar or even higher IPV rates compared to those
for North American populations. Chard et al. (2012), in their
transnational research, evidenced the differences in prevalence
rates among various countries: participants were recruited
through advertisements on Facebook in the United States,
Canada, Australia, United Kingdom, Republic of South Africa
(RSA), Brazil, Nigeria, Kenya, and India. Their findings showed
similar rates between United States and the other nations, while
the rate of physical abuse appeared to be similar or more likely
to occur in Australia, Brazil, Republic of South Africa, and the
United Kingdom than in the United States.
In Italy, two studies were conducted on lesbian IPV—one
by Moscati (2016) (as part of a European project) and a
survey by Arcilesbica (2011). Moscati (2016) work was mainly
focused on the absence of protective laws for lesbian women
victims of IPV, and Arcilesbica (2011) attempted to estimate IPV
prevalence among Italian lesbian women. The sample comprised
102 lesbian women, mostly Italian (88.2%). Participants answered
a questionnaire containing 29 multiple-choice questions. In
over one case out of five (20.6% of the total), the interviewee
admitted to be afraid of her partner coming back home. Further,
41.2% of women occasionally hid something from their partners
because they were afraid of their reactions. In addition, 14.7%
of lesbian women declared that they were always afraid of their
partners. Almost half of the interviewees identified the damage
resulting from a couple fight as psychological; physical damage
was reported by 5.9% of the interviewees (Arcilesbica, 2011).
In the light of such findings, it is apparent that LGB IPV needs
to be studies further. Nonetheless, public opinion considers LGB
abuse as a rare phenomenon: this opinion is particularly strong
with regard to bisexual and lesbian women, often idealized as
being in peaceful and utopian relationships, far from the violence
and aggression that is commonly associated with “typical” male
virility (Glass and Hassouneh, 2008; Barnes, 2010). Such a
stereotype can be an obstacle to lesbian victims in recognizing
that a partner behavior is abusive and not normal (Seelau and
Seelau, 2005).
Previous research has suggested the need of further research
on the issue: LGB IPV has a double invisible nature that is
responsible of the lack of studies on it. In the past, health experts
found many obstacles in accessing research and data on SSIPV, a
fact that implicated negative consequences in terms of prejudice
and misinformation in addition to the more obvious outcomes
(Messinger, 2011).
AIMS
In the light of the background outlined above, this paper presents
a narrative review aimed at (1) providing an overview, through
a selective narrative review, of the psychological literature on
LGB IPV, with a specific focus on treatments and interventions
addressed both to victims and perpetrators, and (2) identifying,
from the literature, suggestions for future directions in research
for LGB-oriented psychological and community services in
relation to IPV and the themes outlined by the overview.
METHOD
A literature research was conducted by using the following
databases: PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES, PubMed, and Google
Scholar. The search criteria was that eligible studies should have
been published in English or Italian, between 1995 and 2017, and
focused on the main features of LGB IPV.
The following combinations of keywords were used to conduct
the research: (1) Same-sex intimate partner violence OR, SSIPV
OR, LGB intimate partner violence OR, LGB IPV; (2) Same-
sex domestic violence OR, LGB domestic violence; (3) Lesbian
domestic violence; (4) Gay domestic violence; (5) Bisexual
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 3
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
domestic violence; (6) Prevalence; (7) Minority stress; (8)
Treatment; and (9) Intervention.
Table 1 presents the selection criteria applied to select the
papers.
We created a dataset of the selected papers and conducted a
thematic analysis (TA) in order to outline patterns of meaning
across the reviewed studies (Braun and Clarke, 2006), using a
semantic approach. Braun and Clarke (2006) provided guidelines
for conducting the TA, which included a process organized in six
phases: (1) Familiarization with the data; (2) coding; (3) searching
for themes; (4) reviewing themes; (5) defining and naming themes;
and (6) writing up.
Thus, after the Familiarization phase, we assigned each article
with a short label that identified the main results that could be
relevant to our aims (Coding phase). Thereafter, we identified
broader patterns of meaning, each representing a candidate
theme to which the papers were allocated. Next, we stepped
into the Reviewing themes phase and checked back the candidate
themes confronting them with the studies dataset. We attempted
to define more inclusive thematic areas by combining specific
candidate themes and by selecting a pool of the most frequent
ones, which led us to the Defining and naming themes phase. As
a result of this process, we identified the six main themes that
were focused on in the studies: silence around the phenomenon;
association with Sexual Minority Stress; assessment and treatment;
couple and group interventions; victims’
treatments; and access to
services offering help and support.
RESULTS
The first outcome of the research included 4700 sources,
from which we eliminated duplicates, researches published in
languages other than English and Italian, contributions from
books or sources other than published articles and surveys. After
this selection process, 119 studies met the inclusion criteria for
this review.
Silence Around Violence
Understanding LGB IPV prevalence and related factors may be
difficult because of the silence that has historically existed around
violence in the LGB community. Research has revealed that in
the LGB community, several common fears became an obstacle
for a public discussion on the phenomenon. For example, an
aspect frequently claimed was that recognizing IPV in the LGB
community may be used to stigmatize the community itself,
thereby contributing to building additional oppression and social
marginalization (Kaschak, 2001; Ristock, 2003). Similarly, the
feminist community was averse to discussing the phenomenon,
particularly when it involved lesbian couples: a public discussion
on lesbian IPV may increase negative reactions to feminism and
female homosexuality; on the other hand, it may minimize the
concern regarding male violence against women (McLaughlin
and Rozee, 2001; Ristock, 2001, 2003).
Furthermore,
culturally
created
ideologies
regarding
masculinity
and
femininity
may
discourage
IPV
victims
from openly discussing their experience. This happens when
the perceived stigma reinforces their own stereotype that
homosexual men are less masculine than heterosexual men,
or the one that lesbian IPV is harmless (because women are
not physically strong and dangerous) (Ristock and Timbang,
2005). Buttell and Cannon (2015) stated that IPV was not about
genders, but more about power and control dynamics; thus, to
assess and treat IPV, particularly LGB IPV, it is pointless to take
into account gender-related stereotypes (Brown, 2008; Little
and Terrance, 2010). However, the main resistance from the
feminist community came from the risk that discussing lesbian
IPV may threaten a feminist belief regarding women’s abuse,
usually perpetrated by men who are influenced by misogyny
and patriarchy. Gender and power were the main factors in this
theory; therefore, lesbian victimization was considered both
impossible (because of the inconsistency due to the absence
of a man in the equation) or explained by the assimilation
among lesbian women of misogyny and homophobia, which
is subsequently projected on to their partners as women and
homosexuals (Ristock and Timbang, 2005).
Many LGB individuals experienced additional victimization
and homophobia when they reported the abuse to police (Barnes,
1998; Burke et al., 2002; Bentley et al., 2007; Guadalupe-Diaz and
Yglesias, 2013). The LGB community Legal Rights and Protection
Laws are intended to protect the LGB community (Moscati,
2016).
Bunker Rohrbaug (2006) indicated that one of the most
pervasive and alarming myth was considering violence as a
mutual conflict, particularly when the violence occurred in a gay
couple, because men “fight equally,” as they are assumed to have
comparable physical strength. This myth was legitimized by the
societal attitude with regard to tolerating violence expressions
between men, expressions that were considered admissible and
often normalized as a means of dispute resolution or because of
greater congruence between violence and male roles (Baker et al.,
2013).
This idea implicated serious issues because not only did
it created obstacles in providing services for homosexual
victims but it also contributed to increasing the tendency to
minimize IPV severity (McClennen, 2005). Such an assumption
TABLE 1 | Inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
(a) Researches published between 1995 and 2018
(a) Researches published before 1995
(b) Researches published in English or Italian languages
(b) Researches published in languages other than English and Italian
(c) Focus on SSIPV
(c) Contributions from books or sources different from published articles
(d) Include combinations of search terms and key words listed in the Method section
and surveys.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 4
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
could neglect the study of other types of violence apart from
the physical one, such as psychological abuse (Finneran and
Stephenson, 2013). One of the reasons for why the “mutual fight
myth” was so pervasive is related to researches that reported
how common it was for a partner to be violent (Carvalho et al.,
2011; Edwards and Sylaska, 2013). This myth was proved to
be unfounded when motivations why partners fight back were
considered. In this regard, several researches (Merrill and Wolfe,
2000; Bartholomew et al., 2006) attested that self-defense was
the most common cause that victims reported to justify their
fighting back. Further studies (Bartholomew et al., 2008; Little
and Terrance, 2010; Bimbi et al., 2011) also investigated the
victim fighting-back phenomenon and suggested that, because of
the mutuality, the distinction between survivor and perpetrator
might be less clear in LGB communities. Ristock (2001) affirms
that fighting back was not only self-defense but also a claim
to power and higher position between the couple. A further
hypothesis supposed that additional and hidden power dynamics
may contribute to the occurrence of IPV. These issues reinforced
the illusion that violence was mutual (Ristock and Timbang,
2005). Moreover, the belief that it would be easier for gay men
to leave an abusive relationship needs to be considered. This idea
arose from another stereotype related to homosexual men being
unable to be involved in a stable relationship and often and easily
changing partners instead LGB relationship can be as stable as
heterosexual ones (Gates, 2015).
Several studies (Austin et al., 2002; Girshick, 2002; Balsam
and Szymanski, 2005; Bornstein et al., 2006; Messinger, 2011;
Galletly et al., 2012) claimed how bisexual people experienced
an additional stress related to IPV because of the lack of
support from the LGB community. Bisexual people were doubly
marginalized, not being recognized by lesbian and gay people as
part of their community and, simultaneously, being stigmatized
by heterosexuals. The assumption that bisexual people use the
heterosexual privilege leads to the fact that a lot of lesbian and
gay people believe that the victimization of bisexual people is not
as serious as that of lesbian and gay people. Davidson and Duke
(2009) showed that bisexual people were victims of the law system
and the services to the same extent. Moreover, studies showed
that biphobia within the LGB community increased the risk
of IPV between bisexual partners and, simultaneously, reduced
help-giving resources (Austin et al., 2002; Girshick, 2002; Balsam
and Szymanski, 2005; Bornstein et al., 2006; Messinger, 2011;
Galletly et al., 2012).
Without overlooking the peculiar aspects of the LGB
community, authors compared the general patterns, types,
impact and cycle of violence of LGB IPV and heterosexual
IPV (McLaughlin and Rozee, 2001; Hequembourg et al., 2008).
Like heterosexual victims, homosexual and bisexual people
experienced emotional, physical, and sexual abuse. The outcomes
were severe, and included physical injury, social isolation,
property destruction and loss, and disruption to work, education,
and career development (Buford et al., 2007; Chard et al., 2012;
Barrett, 2015). Moreover, victims often reported that the abuse
was not mutual and was instead suffered, and the consequences
of it made them feel trapped, hopeless, and isolated (Ferraro and
Johnson, 2000; McClennen, 2005). There were also similarities
with regard to the reasons for remaining with the abusive partner.
Both heterosexual and homosexual victims commonly listed the
following aspects as reasons to stay: love for the partner, financial
and emotional dependency on the partner, (Merrill and Wolfe,
2000). A further resemblance was the connection between stress,
violence, and use of substances (Buford et al., 2007; Cain et al.,
2008): IPV was related both to depression and substance use
among LG people with a previous IPV history, who appeared to
have a higher tendency of drug abuse (Kelley et al., 2011).
Gill et al. (2013) highlighted that the higher prevalence rate
of HIV in the LGB population also constituted an important
difference in their experience of IPV. Merrill and Wolfe (2000)
results showed that the main reasons why HIV-positive IPV
victims did not leave the relationship were linked to the fear of
becoming sick and dying alone or of dating in the context of
the disease. On the other hand, HIV-positive partners remained
in the relationship because they did not want to abandon their
sick partners. The authors argued that IPV increased vulnerability
to risks associated with HIV transmission, which in turn affects
medical care, mental health, adherence to therapy, frequency of
follow-up; in addition, they found that IPV contributed per se to
HIV transmission, directly through forced unprotected sex with a
partner or indirectly by impairing the victim’s ability to negotiate
safer sex. Individuals may experience difficulties in negotiating
safer sex for several reasons, including the perception of being
unable to have control over sex, fear of violence, and unequal
power distributions in the relationship (Bowen and Nowinsky,
2012; Gill et al., 2013). In light of these data, it can be said that IPV
may be common among people living with HIV. Therefore, it is
essential that all service providers screen and provide assistance
for issues relating to safer sex, similarly, all HIV service providers
should screen for IPV and discuss safety within the context of
abusive relationships and helping their clients have safer sex
(Heintz and Melendez, 2006).
Even though this fact represented an issue in the heterosexual
population, LGB people were more affected by it. In fact, in
Merrill and Wolfe (2000) study the lack of knowledge about
IPV was the third most commonly reported cause to remain
in an abusive relationship. This might be due to the fact that
historically, IPV was defined and studied in a heterosexual
perspective, excluding any mention of same-gender relationships
(Glass and Hassouneh, 2008; Little and Terrance, 2010). There
are few existing examples of educational campaigns on LGB IPV,
although the research proved how this kind of interventions
is effective in encouraging battered people to report the abuse.
Consequently, LGB partners involved in violence, and people
close to them (services providers, family, friends), evaluated the
battering as less dangerous or not harmful at all, and it usually
took a longer time to recognize it as an abuse (Dixon and
Peterman, 2003; Barrett, 2015).
SEXUAL MINORITY STRESS
Carvalho et al. (2011) argued that LGB people experience
unique stressors related to the condition of being a part
of a sexual minority. These stressors, that appear to be
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 5
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
associated to IPV, reflected the experience of Sexual Minority
Stress, a model developed by Meyer (2003) with regard to
members of a stigmatized group who experienced unique
and additional stressors that nobody outside the group could
ever experience. This model included internalized stressors
(internalized homophobia, disclosure, and stigma consciousness)
and externalized stressors (actual experiences of violence,
discrimination, and harassment) (Meyer, 2003). Research showed
how internalized stressors were positively correlated to physical,
sexual, and psychological IPV (Balsam and Szymanski, 2005;
Bartholomew et al., 2006; Carvalho et al., 2011; Edwards and
Sylaska, 2013); on the contrary, externalized stressors were
not related to any form of IPV, particularly when they were
considered with internalized minority stressors (Balsam and
Szymanski, 2005; Bartholomew et al., 2006; Edwards and Sylaska,
2013).
Thus, studies mainly focused on internalized minority
stressors, such as Internalized Homophobia, establishing that
IPV perpetrators addressed their negative emotions, originally
self-addressed as homosexuals, to their partners. People with
internalized homophobia have been deprived by partners of
positive emotions with regard to their sexual orientation and
reinforced their sense of responsibility in provoking the abuse
(Balsam and Szymanski, 2005; Carvalho et al., 2011). Carvalho
et al. (2011) reported that internalized homophobia and IPV were
related in lesbian couples and influenced by the quality of the
relationship. Therefore, both couples’ variables and individual
experiences were equally fundamental in understanding the
homosexual IPV phenomenon (Balsam and Szymanski, 2005;
Carvalho et al., 2011). Although the relationship between
internalized homophobia and IPV was proven, data suggested
that it was not strong (D’Lima et al., 2014). This result
might be due to the fact that research participants showed
low levels of internalized homophobia, because it is rare that
LGB people with high levels of internalized homophobia would
cooperate for any LGB study. A further cause could be that the
sample comprised highly educated white people (Carvalho et al.,
2011).
Two researchers reported that disclosure was positively related
to the risk of physical and psychological IPV: Bartholomew et al.
(2006) analyzed a sample comprising homosexual and bisexual
men, while Carvalho et al. (2011) studied the phenomenon
among lesbian women. Such findings may be due to the fact
that being openly out implied a longer period of time of being
victimized by the partner but also the opposite: a shorter time in
LGB relationships could imply lower chances to be involved in
an abusive one (Bartholomew et al., 2006; Carvalho et al., 2011).
With regard to this last aspect, perpetrators could intimidate
the victim by threatening to oust them in front of their family,
employer, landlord, former partner, or current guardian of their
children (Borne et al., 2007; Carvalho et al., 2011).
The Consciousness Stigma has been the last internalized
minority stressor studied in relation to IPV. Carvalho et al. (2011)
indicated that stigma consciousness increased the likelihood
of IPV. IPV perpetrators and victims reported high stigma
consciousness rates; thus, it can be assumed that IPV makes
people more worried about stigma consciousness and that it is
positively correlated to the tendency to ignore abuse in order to
protect IPV victims from the homophobic legal system.
Such results match with high stigma consciousness rates in
people who are expected to suffer discrimination and be forced
to avoid discriminating situations (Pinel, 1999; Derlega et al.,
2003). To what we know, literature offers several evidences
regarding the connection between minority stressors and SSIPV.
As mentioned earlier, internalized stressors and IPV were
strongly correlated. Some studies (Balsam and Szymanski, 2005;
Carvalho et al., 2011; Finneran and Stephenson, 2014) showed the
existence of a relationship between experienced discrimination
and a higher risk of IPV. On the other hand, studies on
the relationship between experienced discrimination and risk
of SSIPV victimization are contradictory: some indicated the
existence of such a relationship (Carvalho et al., 2011; Andrews
et al., 2014; Finneran and Stephenson, 2014), while some denied
it (Barrett and St.Pierre, 2013; Andrews et al., 2014).
These
findings
suggest
that
the
connection
between
discrimination
about
sexual
orientation
(based
on
other
people emotions and beliefs) and IPV is not completely clear,
but that a relation between victimization and individual
feelings regarding one’s own sexual orientation (internalized
homophobia and stigma consciousness) exists (Edwards et al.,
2015). However, it should be noted that such considerations are
the result of cross-sectional studies, thereby making it difficult
to determine whether a factor developed prior to, during, or
after the occurrence of IPV. This implies that it is important
to be cautious in generalizing such findings; instead, further
research must be conducted on predictors and associated factors
(Edwards et al., 2015). Moreover, clinicians should be aware
that minority stressors are one of the main obstacles for people
who have experienced or are involved in IPV and seeking help,
and what could assist them: it was proven that heterosexism
exacerbates difficulties in reporting the abuse to the police
and in accessing in services for LGB people (Carvalho et al.,
2011). IPV victims can be reluctant in seeking legal assistance,
fearing discrimination or adequate legal protection. Balsam
(2001) observed that over 60% of lesbian women who were
interviewed decided not to leave the abusive partner because
of lack of resources, and a majority of the sample did not
seek help in a women’s shelter. In line with Balsam (2001)
and Buford et al. (2007) emphasize that services and shelters
were often unprepared to support homosexual victims of
IPV.
Overstreet and Quinn (2013) created the IPV Stigmatization
Model
to
explain
barriers
to
seeking
help.
The
model
described three aspects of the individual experience: “stigma
internalization,” “anticipated stigma,” and “cultural stigma.”
Stigma internalization referred to the impact of internalized
negative beliefs regarding IPV, which can influence individuals’
help-seeking behaviors and psychological distress. Surviving IPV
can cause guilt, shame, and self-blame, all of which are challenges
in seeking help for decreased self-efficacy. Anticipated stigma,
that also functions at the interpersonal level, was regarding
concerns related to whether others will react with disapproval
or rejection toward the survivor when they learn about the IPV,
thereby affecting the decision to seek help. Lastly, cultural stigma
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 6
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
referred to the notion that IPV victims provoked their own
victimization.
LGB IPV ASSESSMENT AND
TREATMENT
The first program for SSIPV was developed in United States
and strictly connected or identical to the ones for heterosexual
population (Dixon and Peterman, 2003; Ristock and Timbang,
2005). However, a specific risk was highlighted in considering
IPV as a universal experience, since this assumption implicated
that the treatment might be the same for each person (Ford
et al., 2013). There were similar aspects between heterosexual
and homosexual IPV relationships, therefore policies and services
tailored for heterosexual may be helpful to design specific
interventions for LGB population (Dixon and Peterman, 2003;
Ristock and Timbang, 2005). Heterosexual model can be the
starting point for treatments addressed to LGB people, who
deserve interventions based on their own peculiar experiences
and needs (Finneran et al., 2013).
Renzetti (1996) examined the outcomes of the application
of an unspecific treatment that did not consider sexual
orientation and gender. In that study, 566 North American
services were involved, part of the National Directory of
Domestic Violence Programs, mostly addressing IPV heterosexual
victims. Almost 96% of the workers declared that they were
indiscriminately welcoming and responsive to all kind of
people seeking help, according to a non-discrimination policy.
However, there was discord between the statements made by
mental health providers and the victims’ reports. In fact, just
one out of ten victims received particular care specifically
directed to lesbian women, but the remainder claimed that
operators did not make any effort to comply with their needs.
Other researches (Giorgio, 2002; Helfrich and Simpson, 2006)
conducted in the United States confirmed this condition: victims
reported heterosexism, discrimination, stigma, ridicule, disbelief,
additional abuse, and hostility from services. Cheung et al. (2009)
conducted a global Internet-based study on Asian men accessing
services as IPV victims. Authors reported that gay men were not
perceived as domestic violence service consumers unless they
were perpetrators (Cheung et al., 2009). On the other hand,
lesbian women highlighted a heterosexist language adopted by
emergency, primary care, and other service providers (Dixon and
Peterman, 2003). It is considered that services are rarely available
for LGB people, and when they are, it is often difficult to access
them, particularly in rural areas (Jeffries and Kay, 2010; Ford
et al., 2013). Thus, it appears clear how heterosexual IPV, widely
studied, can be considered as a starting point to better investigate
and address homosexual couple abuse, without overlooking LGB-
specific factors (Finneran et al., 2013).
LGB-Tailored Assessment
Because of the multiple barriers and the invisibility of the
problem in the context of IPV services, the role of the victims’
health care providers is critical. While it was found that in the
United States many emergency departments, shelters, agencies,
and clinics had IPV advocacy programs, most of these programs
historically failed in responding adequately to abuse in LGB
groups (Brown and Groscup, 2009; Hines and Douglas, 2011;
Armstrong et al., 2014). Goodman et al. (2015) contended that
during initial steps, services providers should recognize the
problem, offer empathic support, ensure safety, and help the
victim gain distance from a dangerous situation. Healthcare
workers should screen for IPV in LGB patients and understand
how patterns of IPV are different for these patients (Banks and
Fedewa, 2012; Armstrong et al., 2014): standard approaches to
IPV screening may be ineffectual for LGB people (Cavacuiti and
Chan, 2008). Ard and Makadon (2011) highlighted the need for a
sensitive and accurate assessment, which they discussed through
clinical, institutional, educational, and research suggestions. The
authors indicated that providers must be alert to the possibility of
IPV as a cause of distress and illness among their LGB patients.
Thus, according to them, clinicians should first inquire about
sexual orientation in a sensitive and open manner, rather than
simply screening for IPV (Ard and Makadon, 2011). Further,
clinicians must use an inclusive language, avoiding any type of
homophobic attitude, beginning from the first contact with the
client (Eliason and Schope, 2001; Finneran et al., 2013). Ard
and Makadon (2011) also highlighted how assessing LGB IPV
fulfilled an important educational role for their LGB clients,
because of the invisible nature of the phenomenon. Merrill
and Wolfe (2000) discussed “recognition failure” as the failure
to recognize intimate violent behaviors and, therefore, to seek
or offer help such because of widespread ignorance regarding
SSIPV. Several authors support public and specialized education
believing that it would reduce the incidence of this phenomenon,
by promoting earlier help-seeking and strengthening informal
and formal support systems for victims (McClennen, 2005; Borne
et al., 2007).
Merrill and Wolfe (2000) recommended similar suggestions,
considering that SSIPV assessment and treatment should include
the following aspects:
(1) A specific training on assessing and responding to LGB
IPV, because many providers did not accurately detect
and compassionately respond as they did to heterosexual
victims.
(2) Education regarding homophobia and heterosexism, which
often led to the assumption that the violence was not as
serious as in heterosexual cases, that it was more likely to
be mutual, that the perpetrator was always a man and the
victim was a woman, or that it was somehow easier for a
victim of SSIPV to stop and leave the abusive relationship.
(3) The development of appropriate response protocols for law
enforcement professionals. A case of inadequate attitude
was offered by police officers, since they often did not
recognize partners as members of a couple (particularly
if partners defined themselves as roommates because they
were scared) and did not know how to identify the abusers
at an SSIPV crime scene, relying upon gender as the sole
criteria. Consequently, in LGB IPV cases, officers frequently
did not arrest anyone, arrested either party, or the wrong
person.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 7
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
(4) A combination of past and current history of IPV during
the screening, in shelters and other agencies; this suggestion
was made with the aim of a better understanding of violence
forms and patterns of abuse.
(5) The development of individualized treatment plans that
must include a safety plan (which comprised three steps
according to the authors—the first step is to identify signs
of escalation, the second one is to predict the next violent
episode, and the third step is to plan how to respond
self-protectively) and supportive psychotherapy, finalized
to reinforce client’s strength and self-determination. The
psycho-educational intervention could list and define
abusive behaviors and perpetrator tactics, examining the
psychological consequences of violence, describing the
cycle of violence, and going beyond common prejudices
regarding LGB IPV.
(6) An assessment of both partners’ HIV status, since it
was proved that HIV status played an important role in
remaining in abusive relationships. As an application of
this suggestion, in 2013, Finneran et al. (2013) created a
short form to screen SSIPV. The tool included additional
domains of IPV not currently found in screening tools,
such as monitoring behaviors, controlling behaviors, and
HIV-related IPV.
LGB-Tailored Treatments
Even if research testified serious lacks in existing services
(Herrmann and Turell, 2008; Brown and Groscup, 2009;
Hines and Douglas, 2011), Ristock and Timbang (2005)
reported examples of innovative programs developed within LGB
communities. They introduced different interventions compared
to heterosexual IPV protocols, serving both survivors and
perpetrators. For example, they offered batterer intervention
programs as well as advocacy programs to help LGB people access
the legal justice system (The Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center)
(Ristock and Timbang, 2005). Further, two approaches focused
on the specific needs of queer women in San Francisco were the
one promoted by The Queer Asian Women’
s Shelter (Chung and
Lee, 1999) and the one from Queer Asian and Pacific Islander
Women (Lee and Utarti, 2003): they attempted to better respond
to IPV and address the complexities of being part of a small
marginalized community such as the LGB one, teaching how to
ask service providers for help. Similarly, the Washington State
Coalition Against Domestic Violence developed a protocol for
working with friends and family members of IPV victims. As the
research highlights, most of the time, victims of violence asked
friends and family for help before accessing services, thereby
giving them a primary supporting role.
In certain cases, services were associated with community-
based initiatives that involved holding workshops and forums
to address healthy relationships (Cronin et al., 2017). Ristock
and Timbang (2005) and highlighted how discussion on building
healthy relationships appeared to be more welcomed from lesbian
victims than support groups for survivors. This fact might be due
to victims’ concerns regarding their privacy, which was protected
during conversations on several topics connected to violence.
Such discussion may explore other issues such as expectation in
relationships, negotiating differences, power issues, and warning
signs of abuse rather than identifying who experienced violence
and respecting participants privacy. Another objective was also
to shift from organizational interventions to a community-
based prevention to support health relationships and provide
information and prevention to lesbian communities (Fonseca
et al., 2009; Ford et al., 2013). The variety of approaches
presented attempt to better respond to local settings rather than
standardizing programs (Hatzenbuehler et al., 2015).
Another attempt to provide adequate services to LGB people
was made by The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) in 2013
that allowed the creation of services in the United States that are
specifically designed for LGB victims of IPV and a legislation
with regard to their rights. The act explicitly included a non-
discrimination clause that prohibited LGB individuals from being
turned away from shelters or other programs funded by The
Violence Against Women Act (Armstrong et al., 2014).
Further, several treatments and programs have been developed
for individuals who experienced IPV. Some programs focused
exclusively on treating the symptoms experienced by the victims,
while others attempted to break the cycle of violence through
interventions addressed for batterers. The types of interventions
ranged from couple and group interventions to individual
psychotherapy (Fountain and Skolnik, 2007; Herrmann and
Turell, 2008; Dykstra et al., 2013; Armstrong et al., 2014; Quillin
and Strickler, 2015).
Couple and Group Interventions
Lesbian, gay, and bisexual partners often ask for treatment as
a couple, and it is only after an initial assessment it becomes
evident that the relationship is abusive. Frequently, with the aim
of protecting victims, clinicians recommend separate services
and refuse to provide couple therapy (Borne et al., 2007). In
certain cases, this attitude was damaging and resulted in clients
discontinuing treatment or seeking a different therapy (Istar,
1996). Merrill and Wolfe (2000) found that couple therapy was
disadvantageous in IPV cases because it made it more difficult
for victims to end the relationship and giving violence the label
of “couple issues.” It also made it particularly difficult for the
therapist to guarantee victims’ safety after therapy: occasionally,
it created additional violence because of certain statements made
by the therapist. Moreover, the authors indicated that couple
therapy hindered an accurate assessment of the abuse because
of victims’ fear of repercussions. In certain cases, it damaged
partners because of therapist counter-transference, who believed
it was right to punish the violent person in the couple in order
to protect the victim instead of sticking to therapy (Merrill and
Wolfe, 2000).
Dykstra et al. (2013), in their review on IPV treatment
effectiveness, found that couple therapy can be an effective
treatment and it is occasionally necessary, particularly during
the initial phases, to adequately assess the dynamics of the
relationship. Moreover, an accurate assessment of the violence
and the associated risks should be required in considering couple
violence as a treatment option; this would enable the provision
of the most suitable assistance for the couple in terms of defining
or redefining problems, which can be treated through individual
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 8
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
treatment plans (Borne et al., 2007). Couples therapy can provide
a safe space where relationships can be discussed and negotiated
(Gilbert et al., 2017). On the other hand, couples therapy can
be self-defeating if one or both of the partners presents issues
that would best be previously acknowledged through individual
counseling (Borne et al., 2007).
The effectiveness of couple therapy increased when combined
with either individual or group therapy (Ristock and Timbang,
2005; Gilbert et al., 2017). Coleman (2003) highlighted that the
optimal treatment for perpetrators is group therapy combined
with long-term psychoanalytic psychotherapy or psychoanalysis.
Dykstra et al. (2013) evidenced that group therapy can be
extremely useful in treating IPV and create room for improving
emotional and social functioning. Group therapy made it possible
to experience support and confrontation in a safe space, thereby
avoiding isolation—a common consequence of victimization.
The peer group assisted individuals with reliability by challenging
unhealthy conduct and encouraging healthy behaviors. On the
other hand, perpetrators too had the opportunity to learn
new cognitive and behavioral strategies for managing their
abusive impulses and express their emotions in a functional and
structured manner (Buttell and Cannon, 2015). Occasionally, in
case patients refuse to participate in group therapy, group therapy
activities can be adapted to individual cases. Coleman (2003)
listed some specific techniques: time-outs, control logs, and
the Iceberg Exercise (that helped patients to identify emotions
underlying their anger).
Victims’ Treatments
A few studies on treatment for LGB IPV victims were conducted
in the United States (Browning et al., 1991; McClennen
et al., 2002; Dixon and Peterman, 2003; Buford et al., 2007;
Fountain and Skolnik, 2007; Ard and Makadon, 2011; Franklin
and Jin, 2016). Studies showed that individual mental health
counseling can result in good outcomes for SSIPV victims.
Couple counseling with victim and abuser was found to be
less effective because victims may fear repercussions from
the information given during the session (such as details
of the victimization) (Buford et al., 2007; Winstead et al.,
2017). In spite of these findings, research has indicated
that psychology graduate students and clinicians have the
inclination to suggest couples counseling instead of individual
counseling for LGB IPV victims more often than for different-
gender victims (Wise and Bowman, 1997; Poorman et al.,
2003).
Two types of counseling proposed as ideal for SSIPV victims
were the person-centered approach and Gestalt therapy. These
approaches allowed victims to gradually feel more trustful toward
therapists and thus become aware of their status, the suffered
abuse, and the associated consequences to it (Dietz, 2002).
Moreover, it encourages therapists to enable victims to direct the
session, thereby learning, in this manner, how to effectively direct
their lives. Dixon and Peterman (2003) found that because of
the strong motivation to accept help, victims’ awareness about
the abuse was believed to be longer-lasting. This fact granted
victims to gain and adopt useful resources to bring an end
to the abusive condition and obtain independence from the
partner.
Interventions Addressed to the Abusers
In the United States, it is not unusual for abusers to participate
in psycho-educative programs finalized to reduce the risk of
committing violence on partners in the future. These programs
are called “batterer intervention programs” and are based on the
following two models (Price and Rosenbaum, 2009; Buttell and
Cannon, 2015):
• Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), which aims to stop
violent inclinations and build useful resources directed to solve
couple issues.
• The Duluth Model, finalized to disassemble and eliminate
patriarchal beliefs in abusive men who were consequently
encouraged to feel that they are right to control women.
Dykstra et al. (2013) highlight that the Duluth model, alone
or combined with CBT techniques, was the most frequently used
program in the treatment of abusers. Both approaches do not
consider the peculiarities of LGB couples and the role played by
factors such as homophobia (Buttell and Cannon, 2015).
Moreover, the Duluth model, based on the patriarchal
ideology, was originally designed just for heterosexual couples;
however, it was subsequently applied to LGB perpetrators
(although in the United States the groups, during the treatment,
were often separated according to sexual orientation, even
if the programs were mostly the same for both groups)
(Price and Rosenbaum, 2009; Buttell and Cannon, 2015). This
feminist psycho-educational approach is focused on re-education
toward the development of more adaptive attitudes, improving
communication proficiency, and ultimately eliminating violent
behaviors (Buttell and Cannon, 2015). To the best of our
knowledge, there are no studies to test the impact of such
treatment on the LGB population (Stith et al., 2012) and the
few researches on heterosexual population show limited positive
effects (Babcock et al., 2004; Stith et al., 2012). Buttell and Cannon
(2015) stated that scholars applying a post-structuralist feminist
framework to IPV argued that a one-size-fits-all treatment
model for IPV perpetrators (e.g., the Duluth model) should be
replaced by culturally relevant and specific treatment options
for LGB perpetrators. In their opinion, treatment interventions
should address issues of sexism, homophobia, racism, and
classism in order to address the ways society materially
disadvantages some while privileging others (Buttell and Cannon,
2015).
Cannon et al. (2016) analyzed 3,246 questionnaire sent to
directors of domestic violence perpetrator programs in the North
American Domestic Violence Intervention Program Survey, in
the United States and Canada. The results highlight that the most
common approach to LGB batterers was a one-to-one approach
instead of a group therapy, due to the difficulties for LGB people
to express openly express themselves in heterosexual groups, two
programs were projected for the LGB population.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 9
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
Cross-National/Cross-Cultural
Differences
Many interventions were developed in the North American
context (Istar, 1996; Merrill and Wolfe, 2000; Dixon and
Peterman, 2003; Lee and Utarti, 2003; Ristock and Timbang,
2005; Borne et al., 2007; Fountain and Skolnik, 2007; Herrmann
and Turell, 2008; Price and Rosenbaum, 2009; Hines and
Douglas, 2011; Dykstra et al., 2013; Armstrong et al., 2014; Buttell
and Cannon, 2015; Quillin and Strickler, 2015), while a few
existed in Canada (Senn and St.Pierre, 2010; Cannon et al., 2016;
Barata et al., 2017) and Australia (Leonard et al., 2008; Jeffries
and Kay, 2010). Some interventions were addressed to a specific
ethnic group, such as Asians (Chung and Lee, 1999; Lee and
Utarti, 2003; Cheung et al., 2009), or black people (Helfrich and
Simpson, 2014). Moreover, IPV services where more accessible
in urban centers where the LGB community was well developed
and rooted than in rural areas (Jeffries and Kay, 2010; Ford et al.,
2013). To the best of our knowledge, specific researches have
addressed to IPV assessment/treatment for the LGB population
in other countries.
ACCESS TO SERVICES OFFERING HELP
AND SUPPORT
Because of the impact of homophobia, homosexual and bisexual
people may have a significantly more difficult time finding and
receiving appropriate help than heterosexual ones, particularly
when other variables such as income, ethnicity, and immigration
status were held constant (Ard and Makadon, 2011; Barata et al.,
2017).
Lesbian, gay, and bisexual victims of IPV access treatments
through a wide range of help-giving resources, which can be
distinguished into informal (family, friends, acquaintances) and
formal resources (support groups, LGB community agencies,
hotlines and shelters for IPV victims, medical health-care
providers, and the criminal justice system). LGB victims of IPV
were prone to seek help from informal resources (particularly
friends) (Scherzer, 1998; Merrill and Wolfe, 2000; Turell, 2000),
although there was a rather high percentage of people who turned
to health care providers and family (Scherzer, 1998; Merrill
and Wolfe, 2000; Turell, 2000); on the contrary, organizations
specifically designed with the purpose of addressing IPV seemed
to have the lowest utilization rates (Lanzerotti, 2006). In terms
of the gender of the victim, it emerged that lesbian women had
the tendency to seek help from all types of resources equally,
while gay men were more prone to turn to the police to report
victimizations (Cornell-Swanson and Turell, 2006; Senn and
St.Pierre, 2010).
These results confirmed the need for specific interventions
for LGB people, particularly considering that the health system
offered low quality support, beginning from the fact that health
professionals who assessed heterosexual female patients for IPV
typically did not similarly screen lesbian or bisexual female
patients or male patients of any sexual orientation in the
same manner (Jeffries and Kay, 2010; O’Neal and Parry, 2015;
Barata et al., 2017). McClennen et al. (2002) identified that a
7–33% of the victims evaluated the health system support as
valid. Several studies highlighted that many interventions were
perceived as unsatisfying because of homophobic (Tigert, 2001;
Helfrich and Simpson, 2006, 2014) or superficial attitudes,
denying the seriousness of the violence—“women are not as
violent to one another” and “men can protect themselves” (Chung
et al., 2008; Fonseca et al., 2010). These findings are consistent
with Seelau and Seelau (2005) that considers perpetrators as
more aggressive if the victim was a woman instead of a
man. Male perpetrators were judged more blame-worthy than
female perpetrators. Overall, male–female IPV was considered
more dangerous than female–male, male–male, or female–female
abuse. Significantly, the gender of the survivor, not sexual
identity, was the most prominent factor in predicting witness
response. In accordance with this, Arnocky and Vaillancourt
(2014) work suggested that men, regardless of sexual identity,
were less likely to recognize that they were being abused than
women. To date, trainings on LGB IPV received by operators
appear to be lacking, while the operators often believe to have an
appropriate competence regarding heterosexual IPV (Senn and
St.Pierre, 2010; Hancock et al., 2014).
CONCLUSION
The literature on LGB IPV is recent and limited compared to the
one on heterosexual IPV. However, a growing body of empirical
research does exist, thereby offering important observations and
considerations regarding LGB IPV. Previous studies primarily
examined the prevalence of IPV in the homosexual and bisexual
population (Turell, 2000; Messinger, 2011; Barrett and St.Pierre,
2013; Breiding et al., 2013), LGB specific features in IPV (Merrill
and Wolfe, 2000; Balsam and Szymanski, 2005; Bartholomew
et al., 2006; Carvalho et al., 2011; Edwards and Sylaska, 2013; Gill
et al., 2013) and barriers to treatment (McClennen et al., 2002;
Ard and Makadon, 2011). There are only a few publications on
treatments and interventions for LGB IPV (Browning et al., 1991;
McClennen et al., 2002; Dixon and Peterman, 2003; Ristock and
Timbang, 2005; Buford et al., 2007; Fountain and Skolnik, 2007;
Herrmann and Turell, 2008; Ard and Makadon, 2011; Quillin
and Strickler, 2015). They can be classified into counseling
interventions, particularly for victims (Dietz, 2002; Dixon and
Peterman, 2003; Poorman et al., 2003; Buford et al., 2007;
Franklin and Jin, 2016), and therapy: couple (Istar, 1996; Borne
et al., 2007; Dykstra et al., 2013; Buttell and Cannon, 2015), group
(Coleman, 2003; Ristock and Timbang, 2005; Buttell and Cannon,
2015), and for perpetrators (Babcock et al., 2004; Dykstra et al.,
2013; Buttell and Cannon, 2015).
Despite the myth that IPV is only an issue in heterosexual
relationships,
its
occurrence
among
LGB
couples
was
demonstrated to be comparable to or higher than heterosexual
cases (Messinger, 2011; Kelley et al., 2012; Barrett and St.Pierre,
2013;
Breiding
et
al.,
2013).
While
similarities
between
heterosexual and LGB IPV (such as general patterns, types,
outcomes, cycle of violence and use of substances) were
found (McLaughlin and Rozee, 2001; Buford et al., 2007;
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 10
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
Cain et al., 2008; Hequembourg et al., 2008), unique features and
dynamics were present in LGB IPV, which were implicated in
identifying and treating IPV among the community (Merrill and
Wolfe, 2000; Carvalho et al., 2011; Bowen and Nowinsky, 2012;
Gill et al., 2013).
Even though literature on LGB IPV is lacking in general,
there is a need for research specifically on treatment (Dupont
and Sokoloff, 2005). Results suggested that several obstacles
prevent LGB people from getting help in case of IPV (Alhusen
et al., 2010; O’Neal and Parry, 2015), heterosexism above all.
IPV victims can be reluctant in seeking assistance, fearing
discrimination (Giorgio, 2002; Helfrich and Simpson, 2006;
Carvalho et al., 2011). Rarely a solution was offered to help LGB
people in accessing treatment for IPV, and authors recommended
modifications to standard treatments or programs (Calton
et al., 2015; O’Neal and Parry, 2015). Studies showed that
services and shelters were often unprepared to support IPV
homosexual and bisexual victims (Buford et al., 2007; Cannon
et al., 2016; Barata et al., 2017). In the United States, many
emergency departments, shelters, agencies, and clinics had IPV
advocacy programs; most of these programs historically failed
in responding adequately to abuse in LGB groups (Brown and
Groscup, 2009; Ford et al., 2013; Armstrong et al., 2014). The
majority of the researches takes into consideration only North
American services and programs existing in urban centers, while
rural areas or other countries were not investigated (Jeffries
and Kay, 2010; Ford et al., 2013). Comparing the few programs
specializing in SSIPV treatment to traditional protocol, they
were modified in assessing processes for sexual identity, in
helping SSIPV victims in accessing the legal justice system, and
in avoiding stigmatization (Merrill and Wolfe, 2000; Ristock
and Timbang, 2005; Armstrong et al., 2014; Cannon et al.,
2016). However, studies did include recommendations in order
to focus on LGB-specific treatment. While many researchers
recommended modified versions of IPV treatment, no one
empirically studied whether LGB people benefit more from
modified versions of treatment than standard treatments (Stith
et al., 2012).
It is crucial to address an additional issue related to the
cultural and social context: the fact that we found studies on
treatment only in the North-American context indicates a lack
of research in this field in other countries; however, it is possible
that some studies were not present in international databases.
The reviewed literature suggested the need of a psychological
treatment designed on specific LGB necessities and finalized to
guarantee new useful resources and develop self-determination
(Merrill and Wolfe, 2000; Calton et al., 2015; O’Neal and Parry,
2015). Intervention for LGB IPV victims and perpetrators should
be part of an integrate and complete treatment plan that can
involve couples or individual treatment but, in any case, that
should be adapted to each specific situation. In line with such
considerations, adequate training for mental health providers and
standard guidelines for assessment and treatment may lead to
more positive outcomes. Improvements should concern victims’
well-being and satisfaction and treatment features, such as the
durability of the treatment effects; moreover, a new approach
may define an easier accessibility to services (Alhusen et al., 2010;
Ard and Makadon, 2011; Banks and Fedewa, 2012). Since IPV
appears to be an issue as common and serious in same-gender
relationships as in heterosexual ones, policies and practices
should update to guarantee the same degree of protection
(Brown, 2008).
Because of the lack of program specialized in addressing
SSIPV it would be important that the emerging IPV programs
should provide outreach and educational services by cooperating
with the community and offering several services, beginning from
direct and physical resources such as shelters, food and clothing,
transportation, financial and legal assistance, 24-h hotlines and
individual and group therapy. Although traditional battered
women’s shelters can be recognized as a model for LGB agencies,
some changes should be made: for example, a more inclusive
language and a focus on experiences of individuals rather than
gender, which can make LGB people more comfortable in
disclosing abuse. IPV is still a partially unknown issue in the
LGB community, which may minimize warning signs and this
is why the LGB community needs to be specifically targeted
for education regarding IPV and recognize its signs (Coleman,
2003; Dixon and Peterman, 2003; Dutton et al., 2009; Ard and
Makadon, 2011; Bowen and Nowinsky, 2012; Calton et al., 2015;
O’Neal and Parry, 2015; Cannon et al., 2016).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GG and LR took overall responsibility for the creation of the
frame used in this review and the selection of the papers. GG,
AC, and EG searched for the articles discussed in the review. LR
and PB supervised the entire work. All the authors were involved
in the discussion, writing and revision of the manuscript, and
approved the final version of the manuscript to be published.
REFERENCES
Alhusen,
J.
L.,
Glass,
N.,
and
Lucea,
M.
B.
(2010).
Perception
of
and
experience
with
system
responses
to
female
same-sex
intimate
partner
violence.
Partner
Abuse
1,
443–462.
doi:
10.1891/1946-6560.
1.4.443
Ali, P. A., Dhingra, K., and McGarry, J. (2016). A literature review of intimate
partner violence and its classifications. Aggress. Violent Behav. 31, 16–25.
doi: 10.1016/j.avb.2016.06.008
Anderson, M. L., Bonomi, A. E., Carrell, D. S., Fishman, P. A., Reid, R. J., Rivara,
F. P., et al. (2008). Intimate partner violence among men. Am. J. Prev. Med. 34,
478–485. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2008.01.029
Andrews, R., Herrick, A., Munstanski, B., Schnarrs, P. W., and Stall, R. (2014).
A syndemic of psychosocial health disparities and associations with risk for
attempting suicide among young sexual minority men. Am. J. Public Health 104,
287–294. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2013.301744
Arcilesbica. (2011). Eva Contro Eva: I Convegno Sulla Violenza di Genere, 3–17.
Roma: Arcilesbica Roma.
Ard, K. L., and Makadon, H. J. (2011). Addressing intimate partner violence
in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender patients. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 26,
930–933. doi: 10.1007/s11606-011-1697-6
Armstrong, A., Modi, M. N., and Palmer, S. (2014). The role of violence against
women act in addressing intimate partner violence: a public health issue.
J. Womens Health 23, 253–259. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2013.4387
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 11
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
Arnocky, S., and Vaillancourt, T. (2014). Sex differences in response to
victimization by an intimate partner: more stigmatization and less help-seeking
among males. J. Aggress. Maltreatment. Trauma 23, 705–724. doi: 10.1080/
10926771.2014.933465
Austin, S. B., Freed, L. H., Freedner, N., and Yang, Y. W. (2002). Dating violence
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual adolescents: results from a community survey.
J. Adolesc. Health 31, 469–474. doi: 10.1016/S1054-139X(02)00407-X
Babcock, J. C., Green, C. E., and Robie, C. (2004). Does batterers’ treatment work?
A meta-analysis review of domestic violence treatment. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 23,
1023–1053. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2002.07.001
Baker, N. L., Buick, J. D., Kim, S. R., Moniz, S., and Nava, K. L. (2013). Lessons
from examining same-sex intimate partner violence. Sex Roles 69, 182–192.
doi: 10.1007/s11199-012-0218-3
Balsam, K. F. (2001). Nowhere to hide: lesbian battering, homophobia, and
minority stress. Women Ther. 23, 25–37. doi: 10.1300/J015v23n03_03
Balsam, K. F., and Szymanski, D. M. (2005). Relationship quality and domestic
violence in women’s same-sex relationships: the role of minority stress. Psychol.
Women Q 29, 258–269. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2005.00220.x
Banks, J. R., and Fedewa, A. L. (2012). Counselors’ attitudes toward domestic
violence in same sex versus opposite-sex relationships. J. Multicult. Couns. Dev.
40, 194–205. doi: 10.1002/j.2161-1912.2012.00017.x
Barata, P., Fante-Coleman, T., Furman, E., and Wilson, C. (2017). “It’s a gap in
awareness”: exploring service provision for LGBTQ2S survivors of intimate
partner violence in Ontario, Canada. J. Gay Lesbian Soc. Serv. 29, 1–16.
doi: 10.1080/10538720.2017.1365672
Barnes, P. G. (1998). It’s just a quarrel. Am. Bar Assoc. J. 84, 24–25.
Barnes, R. (2010). ‘Suffering in a silent vacuum’: woman-to-woman partner abuse
as a challenge to the lesbian feminist vision. Fem. Psychol. 21, 233–239.
doi: 10.1177/0959353510370183
Barrett, B. J. (2015). Domestic Violence in the LGBT Community. Available
at: http://socialwork.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199975839.001.
0001/acrefore-9780199975839-e-1133
Barrett, B. J., and St.Pierre, M. (2013). Intimate partner violence reported
by lesbian-, gay-, and bisexual-identified individuals living in Canada: an
exploration of within group variations. J. Gay Lesbian Soc. Serv. 25, 1–23.
doi: 10.1080/10538720.2013.751887
Bartholomew, K., Landolt, M., Oram, D., Stanley, J. L., and Taylor, T. (2006).
Intimate violence in male same-sex relationships. J. Fam. Violence 21, 31–41.
doi: 10.1007/s10896-005-9008-9
Bartholomew, K., Oram, D., Regan, K. V., and White, M. A. (2008). Patterns of
abuse in male same-sex relationships. Violence Vict. 23, 617–639. doi: 10.1891/
0886-6708.23.5.617
Bentley, H., Buzawa, E., Faggiani, D., Hirschel, D., and Pattavina, A. (2007).
A comparison of the police-response to heterosexual versus same-sex
intimate partner violence. Violence Against Women 13, 374–394. doi: 10.1177/
1077801207299206
Bimbi, D. S., Izienicki, H., Kelly, B. C., and Parsons, J. T. (2011). The intersection
of mutual partner violence and substance use among urban gays, lesbians, and
bisexuals. Deviant Behav. 32, 379–404. doi: 10.1080/01639621003800158
Borne, H. F., de la Bretonne, D., Kulkin, H. S., Laurendine, J., and Williams, J.
(2007). A review of research on violence in same gender couples: a
resource for clinicians. J. Homosex 53, 71–87. doi: 10.1080/0091836080
210138
Bornstein, D. R., Fawcett, J., Senturia, K. D., Shiu-Thornton, S., and Sullivan, M.
(2006). Understanding the experiences of lesbian, bisexual and trans survivors
of domestic violence: a qualitative study. J. Homosex. 51, 159–181. doi: 10.1300/
J082v51n01_08
Bowen, E., and Nowinsky, S. N. (2012). Partner violence against heterosexual
and gay men: prevalence and correlates. Aggress. Violent Behav 17, 36–56.
doi: 10.1016/j.avb.2011.09.005
Braun, V., and Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res.
Psychol. 3, 77–101. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Breiding, M. J., Chen, J., and Walters, M. L. (2013). The National Intimate
Partner and Sexual Violence Survey (NISVS): 2010 Findings of Victimization
by Sexual Orientation. Atlanta, GA: National center for injury prevention
and control.
Brown, C. (2008). Gender-role implications on same-sex intimate partner abuse.
J. Fam. Violence 23, 457–462. doi: 10.1007/s10896-008-9172-9
Brown, M. J., and Groscup, J. (2009). Perceptions of same-sex domestic violence
among crisis center staff. J. Fam. Violence 24, 87–93. doi: 10.1007/s10896-008-
9212-5
Browning, C., Dworkin, S. H., and Reynolds, A. L. (1991). Affirmative
psychoterapy for lesbian women. Couns. Psychol. 19, 177–196. doi: 10.1177/
0011000091192004
Buford, A. P., Mobley, A. K., Murray, C. E., and Seaman-Dejohn, M. M. (2007).
Same-sex intimate partner violence: dynamics, social context, and counselling
implications. J. LGBT Issues Couns. 1, 7–30. doi: 10.1300/J462v01n04_03
Bunker Rohrbaug, J. (2006). Domestic violence in same-gender relationships. Fam,
Court. Rev. 44, 287–299. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-1617.2006.00086.x
Burke, T. W., Jordan, M. L., and Owen, S. S. (2002). Cross national comparison
of gay and lesbian domestic violence. J. Contemp. Crim. Justice 18, 231–257.
doi: 10.1177/1043986202018003003
Buttell, F., and Cannon, C. (2015). Illusion of inconclusion: the failure of the gender
paradigm to account for intimate partner violence in LGBT relationships.
Partner Abuse 6, 65–77. doi: 10.1891/1946-6560.6.1.65
Cain, D., Cherry, C., Eaton, L., Fuhrel, A., Kalichman, S. C., Kaufman, M., et al.
(2008). Examining factors co-existing with interpersonal violence in lesbian
relationships. J. Fam. Violence 23, 697–705. doi: 10.1007/s10896-008-9194-3
Calton, J. M., Cattaneo, B. L., and Gebhard, K. T. (2015). Barriers to help seeking
for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer survivors of intimate partner
violence. Trauma Violence Abuse 17, 5. doi: 10.1177/1524838015585318
Campbell, J. C. (2002). Health consequences of intimate partner violence. Lancet
359, 1331–1336. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08336-8
Cannon, C., Hamel, J., Buttell, F., and Ferreira, R. J., (2016). A survey of domestic
violence perpetrator programs in the United States and Canada: findings and
implications for policy and intervention. Partner Abuse 7, 226–276. doi: 10.
1891/1946-6560.7.3.226
Capaldi, D. M., Kim, H. K., and Shortt, J. W. (2007). Observed initiation and
reciprocity of physical aggression in young, at-risk couples. J. Fam. Violence 22,
101–111. doi: 10.1007/s10896-007-9067-1
Carvalho, A. F., Derlega, V. J., Lewis, R. J., Viggiano, C., and Winstead,
B. A. (2011). Internalized sexual minority stressors and same sex intimate
partner violence. J. Fam. Violence 26, 501–509. doi: 10.1007/s10896-011-
9384-2
Cavacuiti, C., and Chan, E. (2008). Gay abuse screening protocol (GASP):
screening for abuse in gay male relationships. J. Homosex. 54, 423–438.
doi: 10.1080/00918360801991455
Chard, A., Finneran, C., Sineath, C., Stepheneon, R., and Sullivan, P. (2012).
Intimate partner violence and social pressure among gay men in six countries.
West J. Emerg. Med. 13, 260–271. doi: 10.5811/westjem.2012.3.11779
Cheung, M., Leung, P., and Tsui, V. (2009). Asian male domestic violence victims;
Services exclusive for men. J. Fam. Violence 24, 447–462. doi: 10.1007/s10896-
009-9240-9
Chong, E. S., Kwong, M. M., and Mak, W. W. (2010). Prevalence of same-
sex intimate partner violence in Hong Kong. Public Health 124, 149–152.
doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2010.02.002
Chung, C., and Lee, S. (1999). Raising Our Voices: Queer Asian’
s Women Response
to Relationship Violence. San Francisco, CA: Family violence prevention fund.
Chung, G. H., Fonseca, C., Hardesty, J. L., Khaw, L., and Oswald, R. F. (2008).
Lesbian mothering in the context of intimate partner violence. J. Lesbian Stud.
12, 2–3. doi: 10.1080/10894160802161364
Coleman, V. E. (2003). Treating the lesbian batterer. J. Aggress. Maltreatment
Trauma 7, 159–205. doi: 10.1300/J146v07n01_08
Cornell-Swanson, L., and Turell, S. C. (2006). Not all alike: within-group difference
in seeking help for same-sex relationship abuses. J. Gay Lesbian Soc. Serv. 18,
71–88. doi: 10.1300/J041v18n01_06
Costa, B. M., Curtis, A., Day, A., Kaestle, C. E., Miller, P., Toumbourou,
J. W., et al. (2015). Longitudinal predictors of domestic violence perpetration
and victimization: a systematic review. Aggress. Violent Behav 24, 261–272.
doi: 10.1016/j.avb.2015.06.001
Cronin, T. J., Halford, W. K., Lyons, A., Pachankis, J. E., and Pepping, C. A. (2017).
Couple interventions for same-sex couples: a consumer survey. Couple Fam.
Psychol. 6, 258–273. doi: 10.1037/cfp0000092
Davidson, M. M., and Duke, A. (2009). Same-sex intimate partner violence: lesbian,
gay, and bisexual affirmative outreach and advocacy. J. Aggress. Maltreatment
Trauma 18, 795–816. doi: 10.1080/10926770903291787
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 12
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
Derlega, V. J., Griffin, J. L., Krowinski, A. C., and Lewis, R. J. (2003). Stressors for
gay men and lesbians: life stress, gay-related stress, stigma consciousness, and
depressive symptoms. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol 22, 716–729. doi: 10.1521/jscp.22.6.
716.22932
Dietz, C. (2002). Working with lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered abuse
survivors. J. Prog. Hum. Serv. 12, 27–49. doi: 10.1300/J059v12n02_03
Dixon, C. G., and Peterman, L. M. (2003). Domestic violence beteen same-sex
partners: implications for counselling. J. Couns. Dev. 81, 40–47. doi: 10.1002/
j.1556-6678.2003.tb00223.x
D’Lima, G. M., Gumienny, L. A., Kelley, M. L., and Milletich, R. J. (2014).
Predictors of women’s same-sex partner violence perpetration. J. Fam. Violence
29, 653–664. doi: 10.1007/s10896-014-9620-7
Dupont, I., and Sokoloff, N. J. (2005). Domestic violence at the intersections
of race, class, and gender. Violence against women 11, 38–64. doi: 10.1177/
1077801204271476
Dutton,
D.,
Goldeson,
J.,
Greaves,
C.,
and
Spidel,
A.
(2009).
Female
perpetrators of intimate partner violence: within-Group heterogeneity,
related
psychopathology,
and
a
review
of
current
treatment
with
recommendations for the future. J. Aggress. Maltreatment Trauma 18,
752–769. doi: 10.1080/10926770903231791
Dykstra, R., Eckhardt, C. I., Murphy, C. M., Sprunger, J., Whitaker, D. J.,
and Woodard, K. (2013). The effectiveness of intervention programs for
perpetrators and victims of intimate partner violence. Partner abuse 4, 196–231.
doi: 10.1891/1946-6560.4.2.196
Eaton, L. A., Kalichman, S. C., Pieterse, D., Pitpitan, E. V., Sikkema, J. K.,
Skinners, D., et al. (2013). Men who report recent male and female sex partners
in Cape town, south Africa: an understudiend and underdeserved population.
Arch. Sex. Behav. 42, 7. doi: 10.1007/s10508-013-0077-1
Edwards, K. M., Neal, A. M., and Sylaska, K. M. (2015). Intimate partner violence
among sexual minority population; A critical review of the literature and agenda
for future research. Psychol. Violence 5, 112–121. doi: 10.1037/a0038656
Edwards, K. M., and Sylaska, K. M. (2013). The perpetration of intimate partner
violence among LGBTQ college youth: the role of minority stress. J. Youth
Adolesc. 42, 1721–1731. doi: 10.1007/s10964-012-9880-6
Eliason, M. J., and Schope, R. (2001). Does “don’t ask don’t tell” apply to health
care? Lesbian, gay, and bisexual people’s disclosure to health care providers. J
Gay Lesbian Med Assoc 5, 125–134. doi: 10.1023/A:1014257910462
Ferraro, K. J., and Johnson, M. P. (2000). Research on domestic violence in the
1990s: making distinctions. J. Marriage Fam 62, 948–963. doi: 10.1111/j.1741-
3737.2000.00948.x
Finneran, C., Hall, C. D., Sato, K., Stephenson, R., and Williams, W. (2013).
Towards the development of an intimate partner violence screening tool for
gay and bisexual men. West. J. Emerg. Med. 14, 390–400. doi: 10.5811/westjem.
3.2013.15597
Finneran, C., and Stephenson, R. (2013). Intimate partner violence among men
who have sex with men: a systematic review. Trauma Violence Abuse 14,
168–185. doi: 10.1177/1524838012470034
Finneran, C., and Stephenson, R. (2014). Intimate partner violence, minority stress,
and sexual risk-taking among US men who have sex with men. J. Homosex. 61,
288–306. doi: 10.1080/00918369.2013.839911
Fonseca, C. A., Hardesty, C. L., and Oswald, R. F. (2010). Lesbian mothers’
counseling experiences in the context of intimate partner violence. Psychol.
Women Q. 34, 286–296. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2010.01575.x
Fonseca, L. K., Hardsty, J. L., and Oswald, R. F. (2009). Lesbian/bisexual
mothers and intimate partner violence: help seeking in the context of social
and legal vulnerability. Violence against women 17, 28–46. doi: 10.1177/
1077801209347636
Ford, C. L., Hilton, K. L., Holt, S. L., and Slavin, T. (2013). Intimate partner violence
prevention services and resources in Los Angeles: issues, needs and challenges
for assisting lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender clients. Health Promot. Pract.
14, 841–849. doi: 10.1177/1524839912467645
Fountain,
K.,
and
Skolnik,
A.
A.
(2007).
Lesbian,
Gay,
Bisexual
and
Transgender Domestic Violence in the United States in 2006: A Report of
the National Coalition of Anti-violence Program. Available at: https://avp.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/04/2006_NCAVP_DV_Report.pdf
Franklin, C. A., and Jin, H. A. (2016). Intimate Partner Violence Among Sexual
Minority Populations. Huntsville, AL: Sam Houston State University.
Galletly, C., Herrmann, M. M., Hollander, G., and Turell, S. C. (2012). Lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender communities’ readiness for intimate partner violence
prevention. J. Gay Lesbian Soc. Serv. 24, 289–310. doi: 10.1080/10538720.2012.
697797
Gates, G. J. (2015). Marriage and family: LGBT individuals and same-sex couples.
Future Child. 25, 67–87. doi: 10.1353/foc.2015.0013
Gilbert, P., Kirby, J. N., Lyons, A., McNair, R., Pepping, C. A., and Petrocchi, N.
(2017). A tailored compassion-focused therapy program for sexual minority
young adults with depressive symptomatology: study protocol for a randomized
controlled trial. BMC psychology 5:5. doi: 10.1186/s40359-017-0175-2
Gill, M. J., Krentz, H. B., and Siemieniuk, A. C. (2013). Intimate partner violence
and HIV: a review. Curr. HIV/AIDS Rep. 10, 380–389. doi: 10.1007/s11904-013-
0173-9
Giordano, P. C., Jhonson, W. L., Longmore, M. A., and Manning, W. D.
(2014). Intimate partner violence and depressive symptoms during adolescence
and young adulthood. J. Health Soc. Behav 55, 39–55. doi: 10.1177/
0022146513520430
Giorgio,
G.
(2002).
Speaking
silence:
definitional
dialogue
in
abuse
lesbian
relationships.
Violence
against
women
8,
1233–1259.
doi: 10.1177/107780102320562709
Girshick, L. B. (2002). No Sugar, No Spice: reflections on research on woman-to-
woman sexual violence. Violence Against women 8, 1500–1520. doi: 10.1177/
107780102237967
Glass, N., and Hassouneh, D. (2008). The influence of gender role stereotyping
on women’s experiences of female same-sex intimate partner violence. Violence
Against Women 14, 310–325. doi: 10.1177/1077801207313734
Goodman, L., Putnins, S., and Thomas, K. A. (2015). “I have lost everything”: trade-
offs of seeking safety from intimate partner violence. Am. J. Orthopsychiatry 85,
170–180. doi: 10.1037/ort0000044
Guadalupe-Diaz, X. L., and Yglesias, J. (2013). Who’s Protected?” Exploring
perceptions of domestic violence law by lesbians, gays and bisexuals. J. Gay
Lesbian Soc. Serv. 25, 465–485. doi: 10.1080/10538720.2013.806881
Guasp, A. (2012). Gay and Bisexual Men’
s Health Survey. London: Stonewall.
Hancock, R., Levingston, K., and McAuliffe, G. (2014). Factors impacting counselor
competency with sexual minority intimate partner violence victims. J. LGBT
Issues Couns. 8, 74–94. doi: 10.1080/15538605.2014.853640
Hatzenbuehler, M. L., Pachankis, J. E., Parsons, J. T., Rendina, H. J., and Safren,
S. A. (2015). LGB-affirmative cognitive-behavioral therapy for young adult gay
and bisexual men: a randomized controlled trial of a transdiagnostic minority
stress approach. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol 83, 875–889. doi: 10.1037/ccp0000037
Heintz, A. J., and Melendez, R. M. (2006). Intimate partner violence and HIV/STD
risk among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals. J. Interpers.
Violence 21, 193–208. doi: 10.1177/0886260505282104
Helfrich, C. A., and Simpson, E. K. (2006). Improving services for lesbian clients:
what do domestic violence need to do? Health Care Women Int. 27, 344–361.
doi: 10.1080/07399330500511725
Helfrich,
C.
A.,
and
Simpson,
E.
K.
(2014).
Oppression
and
barriers
to
service
for
black,
lesbian
survivors
of
intimate
partner
violence.
J.
Gay
Lesbian
Soc.
Serv.
26,
441–465.
doi:
10.1080/10538720.2014.
951816
Hequembourg, A. L., Parks, K. A., and Vetter, C. (2008). Sexual identity and gender
differences in substance use and violence: an exploratory study. J. LGBT Issues
Couns. 2, 174–198. doi: 10.1080/15538600802119301
Herrmann, M. M., and Turell, S. C. (2008). ‘Family’ support for family
violence: exploring community support system for lesbian and bisexual women
who have experienced abuse. J. Lesbian Stud 12, 211–224. doi: 10.1080/
10894160802161372
Hines, D. A. and Douglas, E. M., (2011). The reported availability of US domestic
violence services to victims who vary by age, sexual orientation, and gender.
Partner abuse 2, 3–30. doi: 10.1891/1946-6560.2.1.3
Istar, A. (1996). Couple assessment: identyifing and interventing in domestic
violence in lesbian relationships. J. Gay Lesbian Soc. Serv. 4, 93–106.
doi: 10.1300/J041v04n01_10
Jeffries, S., and Kay, M. (2010). Homophobia, heteronormativism and hegemonic
masculinity: male same-sex intimate violence from the perspective of
Brisbane service providers. Psychiatr. Psychol. Law 17, 412–423. doi: 10.1080/
13218710903566953
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
 fpsyg-09-01506
August 17, 2018
Time: 18:40
# 13
Rollè et al.
Violence in Same Sex Couples
Kaschak, E. (2001). Intimate Betrayal: Domestic Violence in Lesbian Relationships.
Binghamton, NY: The Haworth Press, Inc.
Kelley, M. L., Klostermann, K., Mignone, T., and Milletich, R. J. (2011). Alcholism
and partner aggression among gay and lesbian couples. Aggress. Violent Behav
16, 115–119. doi: 10.1016/j.avb.2011.01.002
Kelley, M. L., Lewis, R. J., Milletich, R. J., and Woody, A. (2012). Minority
stress, substance use, and intimate partner violence among sexual minority
women.
Aggress.
Violent
Behav.
17,
115–119.
doi:
10.1016/j.avb.2012.
02.004
Lanzerotti, R. (2006). 2005-06 Youth Relationship Violence Survey Findings.
San Francisco, CA: Love and justice project of community united against
violence.
Lee, S., and Utarti, H. (2003). Creating Community, Hope and Change.
San Francisco, CA: Family violence prevention fund.
Leonard, W., Mitchell, A., Patel, S., and Pitts, M. (2008). Coming Forward: The
Underreporting of Heterosexist Violence and Same-Sex Partner Abuse in Victoria.
Melbourne: La Trobe University.
Little, B., and Terrance, C. (2010). Perceptions of domestic violence in lesbian
relationships: stereotypes and gender role expectations. J. Homosex. 57,
429–459. doi: 10.1080/00918360903543170
Liu, K. L., Xiao, S., and Yu, Y. (2013). Dating violence among gay men in China.
J. Interpers. Violence 28, 2491–2504. doi: 10.1177/0886260513479028
McClennen, J. C. (2005). Domestic violence between same-gender partners: recent
findings and future research. J. Interpers. Violence 20, 149–154. doi: 10.1177/
0886260504268762
McClennen, J. C., Summers, A. B., and Vaughan, C. (2002). Gay man’s domestic
violence: dynamics, help-seeking behaviors, and correlates. J. Gay Lesbian Soc.
Serv. 14, 23–49. doi: 10.1300/J041v14n01_02
McLaughlin, E. M., and Rozee, P. D. (2001). Knowledge about heterosexual
versus lesbian battering among lesbians. Women Ther. 23, 39–58. doi: 10.1300/
J015v23n03_04
Merrill, G. S., and Wolfe, V. A. (2000). Battered gay men: an exploration of abuse,
help seeking, and why they stay. J. Homosex. 39, 1–30. doi: 10.1300/J082v
39n02_01
Messinger, A. M. (2011). Invisible victims: same-sex IPV in the national violence
against women survey. J. Interpers. Violence 26, 2228–2243. doi: 10.1177/
0886260510383023
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and
bisexual populations: conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychol. Bull.
129, 674–697. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674
Moscati, M. F. (2016). “Italia,” in La violenza domestica e di appuntamento verso
donne LBT nell’
Unione Europea, ed. G. Viggiani (London: Wildy, Simmonds
and Hill Publishing), 87–105.
Murray, C. E., and Mobley, A. K. (2009). Empirical research about same-sex
intimate partner violence: a methodological review. J. Homosex. 56, 361–386.
doi: 10.1080/00918360902728848
O’Neal, E. M., and Parry, M. M. (2015). Help-seeking behavior among same-sex
intimate partner violence victims: an intersectional argument. Criminol. Crim.
Just. L Soc. 16, 51–67.
Overstreet, N. M., and Quinn, D. M. (2013). The intimate partner violence
stigmatization model and barriers to help seeking. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych. 35,
109–122. doi: 10.1080/01973533.2012.746599
Perales, F., and Todd, A. (2018). Structural stigma and the health and wellbeing
of Australian LGB populations: exploiting geographic variation in the results
of the 2017 same-sex marriage plebiscite. Soc. Sci. Med 208, 190–199.
doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.05.015
Pinel, E. C. (1999). Stigma consciousness: the psychological legacy of social
stereotypes. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 76, 114–128. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.76.1.114
Poorman, P. B., Seelau, E. P., and Seelau, S. M. (2003). Perceptions of domestic
abuse in same-sex relationships and implications for criminal justice and mental
health responses. Violence Vict. 18, 659–669. doi: 10.1891/vivi.2003.18.6.659
Price, B. J., and Rosenbaum, A. (2009). Batterer intervention programs: a report
from the field. Violence Vict. 24, 757–770. doi: 10.1891/0886-6708.24.6.757
Quillin, D., and Strickler, E. (2015). Starting and Sustaining LGBTQ Antiviolence
Programs in a Southern State. Partner abuse 6, 78–106. doi: 10.1891/1946-6560.
6.1.78
Renzetti, C. M. (1996). The poverty of services for battered lesbians. J. Gay Lesbian
Soc. Serv. 4, 61–68. doi: 10.1300/J041v04n01_07
Ristock, J. L. (2001). Decentering heterosexuality: responses of feminist counselors
to abuse in lesbian relationships. Women Ther. 23, 59–72. doi: 10.1300/
J015v23n03_05
Ristock, J. L. (2003). Exploring dynamics of abusive lesbian relationships:
preliminary analysis of a multi-site, qualitative study. Am. J. Community
Psychol. 31, 3–4. doi: 10.1023/A:1023971006882
Ristock,
J.
L.,
and
Timbang,
N.
(2005).
Relationship
violence
in
lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender/queer (LGBTQ) communities. Available at:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/23b6/1c0642d6b09fe881fc4c3e465e59905dccc
6.pdf
Scherzer, T. (1998). Domestic violence in lesbian relationships: findings of the
lesbian relationships research project. J. Fam. Stud. 2, 29–47. doi: 10.1300/
J155v02n01_03
Seelau, E. P., and Seelau, S. M. (2005). Gender-role stereotypes and perceptions of
heterosexual, gay and lesbian domestic violence. J. Fam. Violence 20, 363–371.
doi: 10.1007/s10896-005-7798-4
Senn, C. Y., and St.Pierre, M. (2010). External barriers to help-seeking ecountered
by Canadian gay and lesbian victims of intimate partner abuse: an application of
the barrier model. Violence Vict 25, 536–554. doi: 10.1891/0886-6708.25.4.536
Stith, S. M., McCollum, E. E., Amanor-Boadu, Y., and Smith, D. (2012). Systemic
perspectives on intimate partner violence treatment. J. Marital Fam. Ther 38,
220–240. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-0606.2011.00245.x
Tigert, L. M. (2001). The power of shame: lesbian battering as a manifestation of
homophobia. Women Ther. 23, 73–85. doi: 10.1300/J015v23n03_06
Turell, C. S. (2000). A descriptive analysis of same-sex relationship violence for a
diverse sample. J. Fam. Violence 15, 281–293. doi: 10.1023/A:1007505619577
Winstead, B. A., Lewis, R. J., Kelley, M. L., Mason, T. B., Fitzgerald, H. N.,
and Calhoun, D. (2017). “Intervention for violence and aggression in gay
and lesbian relationships,” in The Wiley Handbook of Violence and Aggression,
ed. P. Sturmey (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons), 1–13. doi: 10.1002/
9781119057574.whbva077
Wise, A. J., and Bowman, S. L. (1997). Comparison of beginning counselors’
responses to lesbian vs. heterosexual partner abuse. Violence Vict. 12, 127–135.
World Health Organization (2012). Understanding and Addressing Violence Against
Women. Geneva: World Health Organization. Available at: http://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/10665/77432/1/WHO_RHR_12.36_eng.pdf
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Rollè
, Giardina, Caldarera, Gerino and Brustia. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1506
