 Effects of intermittent versus continuous dieting
on weight and body composition in obese and
overweight people: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Item Type
info:eu-repo/semantics/article
Authors
Roman, Yuani M.; Dominguez, Mariah C.; Easow, Tommy M.;
Pasupuleti, Vinay; White, C. Michael; Hernandez, Adrian V.
DOI
10.1038/s41366-018-0204-0
Publisher
Nature Publishing Group
Journal
International Journal of Obesity
Rights
info:eu-repo/semantics/embargoedAccess
Download date
03/06/2019 14:18:26
Link to Item
http://hdl.handle.net/10757/624649
 Effects of intermittent versus continuous dieting on weight 
and body composition in obese and overweight people: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials 
(  Article in press  ) 
 
Roman, Y.M.a,  
 
Dominguez, M.C.a, 
 
Easow, T.M.a, 
 
Pasupuleti, V.b, 
 
White, C.M.a, 
 
Hernandez, A.V.a,cEmail Author 
 
View Correspondence (jump link) 
 
aHealth Outcomes, Policy, and Evidence Synthesis (HOPES) Group, 
School of Pharmacy, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, United States 
 
bProEd Communications, Inc, Cleveland, OH, United States 
 
cSchool of Medicine, Universidad Peruana de Ciencias Aplicadas (UPC), 
Lima, Peru 
Abstract View references (26) 
Background: Intermittent dieting may be an alternative to continuous dieting for 
weight reduction. Objective: To evaluate the effect of intermittent dieting versus 
continuous dieting on weight and body composition in overweight or obese 
adults. Design: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs). Five databases were searched until February 2018 for RCTs 
comparing intermittent versus continuous dieting. Intermittent dieting consisted 
of two types: regular intermittent was caloric restriction interspersed with days of 
weight maintenance or ad libitum eating; intensified intermittent was caloric 
restriction interspersed with days of even lower caloric restriction. Continuous 
was continual caloric restriction. Primary outcomes were weight, body fat, lean 
mass, waist circumference, hip circumference, and energy expenditure. Data 
were pooled by the inverse variance method using random-effects models and 
expressed as mean differences (MD) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI). 
Results: Nine trials met the inclusion criteria (n = 782), six comparing regular 
intermittent vs continuous (n = 553), and three comparing intensified intermittent 
vs continuous (n = 229). Populations were heterogeneous: obese only in five 
studies, and overweight or obese (mixed) in four studies. Lean mass was 
significantly lower in regular intermittent vs continuous (MD −0.86 kg; 95% CI 
−1.62 to −0.10; p = 0.03). No differences were found for the remaining 
outcomes for both comparisons (regular intermittent or intensified intermittent vs 
continuous). There was low heterogeneity of effects across trials. Subgroup 
effects by time to follow-up, gender, per-protocol versus intention-to-treat, 
enforced exercise, and diabetes were similar to main analyses. Conclusions: 
This systematic review in obese and overweight individuals showed that regular 
intermittent dieting decreased lean mass compared to continuous dieting. There 
were no differences in effects for either intermittent vs continuous interventions 
 across all other outcomes. In contrast to previous systematic reviews, this study 
suggested that lean mass is better preserved in continuous dieting compared to 
regular intermittent dieting. © 2018, Springer Nature Limited. 
SciVal Topic Prominence 
  
Topic: Fasting | Weight Loss | intermittent fasting 
Prominence percentile: 91.361 
  
 
ISSN: 03070565 
 
CODEN: IJOBD 
 
Source Type: Journal 
 
Original language: English 
 
DOI: 10.1038/s41366-018-0204-0 
 
Document Type: Article in Press 
 
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group 
 
