 REVIEW ARTICLE
Progress and challenges towards targeted delivery
of cancer therapeutics
Daniel Rosenblum1, Nitin Joshi2,3, Wei Tao
4, Jeffrey M. Karp2,3 & Dan Peer
1
Targeted delivery approaches for cancer therapeutics have shown a steep rise over the past
few decades. However, compared to the plethora of successful pre-clinical studies, only 15
passively targeted nanocarriers (NCs) have been approved for clinical use and none of the
actively targeted NCs have advanced past clinical trials. Herein, we review the principles
behind targeted delivery approaches to determine potential reasons for their limited clinical
translation and success. We propose criteria and considerations that must be taken into
account for the development of novel actively targeted NCs. We also highlight the possible
directions for the development of successful tumor targeting strategies.
A
pproaches for targeted delivery of therapeutics in cancer typically involves systemic
administration of therapeutics packaged in nanocarriers (NCs) or localized delivery of
therapeutics to the diseased tissue. Encapsulation of therapeutic molecules (e.g., small
molecule inhibitors, chemotherapy, RNAi, etc.) in NCs can improve their solubility and bioa-
vailability, alter their bio-distribution, and can also facilitate entry into the target cell. “Passively”
targeted NCs, which utilize the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect1, are the most
extensively explored strategy for targeting cancer systemically. However, only a small percentage
of these NCs accumulate even in high-EPR xenografted tumors (less than 1% according to a
recent meta-analysis study2). This could be due to multiple physiological barriers (Fig. 1) and a
high degree of stochasticity involved in NCs extravasation through the tumor vasculature2. A
major proportion of NCs are also cleared by the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS); some
get physically “stuck” in the sinusoids of the liver and others are taken up by hepatocytes and
Kupffer cells3,4.
Though multiple passively targeted NCs have been approved over the past 20 years, none of
their actively targeted counterparts have advanced past clinical trials. Multiple recent reviews
have summarized the current clinical status of actively targeted NCs5–7. Over 40,000 studies
published in the last 10 years have focused on active targeting strategies and substantial progress
has been made toward our understanding of how NCs interact with cells and tissues. However,
we still have not been able to overcome the challenges presented by physiological barriers
(Fig. 1), such as tumor penetration, tumor heterogeneity, relative hypoxia, and endosomal
escape, which have limited the therapeutic benefit of actively targeted NCs. Also, the regulatory
hurdles and the relatively complex scale-up of the manufacturing process of actively targeted
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
OPEN
1 Laboratory of Precision NanoMedicine, School of Molecular Cell Biology and Biotechnology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of
Materials Sciences and Engineering, Iby and Aladar Fleischman Faculty of Engineering; Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Cancer Biology Research
Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel. 2 Center for Nanomedicine and Division of Engineering in Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 3 Harvard-Massachusetts Division of Health Science and Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 4 Center for Nanomedicine and Department of Anesthesiology and, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. These authors contributed equally: Daniel Rosenblum, Nitin Joshi, Wei Tao. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to J.M.K. (email: jmkarp@bwh.harvard.edu) or to D.P. (email: peer@tauex.tau.ac.il)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 NCs pose additional challenges toward the translation of actively
targeted NCs into clinical practice.
Active cellular targeting strategies involve utilizing affinity
ligands on the surface of NCs for specific homing, increased
retention at the target site, and uptake by the target cells8. These
ligands are selected to bind to overexpressed or clustered recep-
tors on diseased tissues and cell surfaces (e.g., HER2, folate
receptor, CD44, etc.)1,8–10. However, actively targeted NCs must
first reach the target to take advantage of this increased affinity
and avidity. Efficient passive targeting is therefore a prerequisite
for NCs designed to systemically target tumor specific-cells or the
extracellular matrix (ECM). Our understanding of EPR-related
phenomena and its effect on NCs’ accumulation and penetration
into tumors is mostly based on fast-growing xenografted mice
models with dense vasculature, which does not recapitulate the
majority of solid tumors in humans9,11. Several approaches have
therefore been suggested to augment (e.g., TNF-α, angiotensin-II,
and sonoporation) or bypass (loco-regional delivery, vasculature
targeting, etc.) the EPR effect in low-EPR tumors or tumors in
secluded
organs (e.g.,
brain,
bone, ovaries,
bladder,
etc.),
respectively.
Additional
obstacle
toward
maximizing
the
efficacy
of
NCs is pre-mature release of therapeutics. Several strategies
have been devised to overcome this issue, including the
development
of
stimuli-responsive
NCs.
However,
these
features
add
another
level
of
complexity
to
the
NC
design.
In this review, we critically discuss the challenges and reasons
behind limited clinical success of targeted delivery approaches in
cancer treatment, in-spite of the huge number of published
reports demonstrating their therapeutic potential in pre-clinical
models. We also propose the focus areas for future research that
will enable successful clinical translation of promising strategies
for targeted delivery of cancer therapeutics.
Crossing physiological barriers
Passive targeting and the EPR effect. Passively targeted NCs first
reached the clinic 22 years ago with the approval of PEGylated
liposomal doxorubicin (DOXIL™)12. Passive targeting of NCs
occurs due to unique characteristics of solid tumors (i.e., leaky
vasculature and defective lymphatic drainage), which allow NCs
to preferentially accumulate in the tumor. This phenomenon, first
described in 1986 by Matsumura and Maeda, is known as the
EPR effect13,14. A number of passively targeted NCs are currently
in clinical use (e.g., Doxil™, Abraxane™, Marqibo™, DaunoXome™,
and Onivyde™ in the US; Myocet™ and Mepact™ in Europe;
Genexol-PM™ in Korea; and SMANCS™ in Japan)7. Other than
that, several other NCs, including EndoTAG-1, AZD2811, and
CPX-1 have also demonstrated safety and/or therapeutic effects in
clinical studies15–17. Although most of these NCs simply alter the
pharmacokinetics, toxicological profile, or solubility of drugs, few
have also shown significant survival benefits and improvement in
therapeutic efficacy over the parent drug in clinical studies. One
example is Abraxane™ (nab-paclitaxel) that demonstrated sig-
nificantly higher response rates compared to standard paclitaxel
in a phase III trial conducted in patients with metastatic breast
cancer18. Similarly, CPX-351 (Vyxeos™)—a recent FDA approved
liposomal formulation of cytarabinee–daunorubicin combination
has showed an improved overall survival of 9.56 months com-
pared to 5.95 months as observed with cytarabine and daunor-
ubicin given in their free form in patients with newly diagnosed
high-risk acute myeloid leukemia19. This is extremely encoura-
ging for the field and opens up new opportunities in utilizing NCs
as delivery vehicles for multiple drugs.
Therapeutic efficacy of passively targeted NCs is impacted by
the heterogeneity of the EPR effect within and between different
tumors. Variable endothelial gaps (ranging from one to hundreds
of nanometers) result in non-uniform extravasation of NCs into
the tumor20. The tumor periphery is less permeable than the
hypoxic core, which suggests that NCs should extravasate more
frequently at the core than the periphery. However, multiple
studies indicate the opposite—intravenously administered NCs
extravasate
more
frequently
in
the
tumor
periphery21,22.
Furthermore, permeability is not the only limiting factor; NC
extravasation has also been shown to be governed by perfusion,
which displays both spatial and temporal heterogeneity within a
tumor, adding another level of complexity to controlling NC
extravasation23. Additionally, physiochemical properties such as
size
and
shape
also
affect
NC
extravasation
and
Endothelial barriers
a
c
b
Clearance by MPS system
Kupffer cell
Cellular barriers
Endosomal
escape
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of main physiological barriers faced by passive and active targeted NCs. a NCs face endothelial barriers in the process of their
extravasation into the tumor tissue; illustration of the blood–brain barrier as an example. b Uptake of NCs by the target cells and their escape from the
endo-lysosomal system into the cytotosl are the major cellular barriers. c Hepatic Kupffer cells as an example of mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS),
which results in the clearence of systemically administered NCs, reducing their half-life and effective dose
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 accumulation24,25. Even NCs that do cross the vasculature and
extravasate into the tumor are impeded by the interstitial tumor
matrix, which forms a barrier to their deep penetration into the
tumor tissue. Reduction in the particle size significantly reduces
the diffusional hindrance, thereby improving its penetration into
the interstitial matrix. For example, Wong et al. proposed a
multistage approach wherein a gelatin particle 100 nm in
diameter upon its extravasation into the tumor tissue is reduced
to a 10 nm particle via degradation by tumor-associated matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs)26. Similar approaches using different
NCs have also been reported by many other groups27–29.
Although promising, these approaches have not yet been
evaluated clinically.
The size and geometry of NCs has also been shown to impact
their other interactions with physiological barriers and tumor
microenvironment. For example, Tang et al. compared the
biological profiles of silica nanoconjugates with three different
sizes (20, 50, and 200 nm) through both experiments and
mathematical modeling30.The 50-nm NCs demonstrated the
highest tumor penetration, most efficient uptake by tumor cells
and slowest tumor clearance, resulting in highest tumor tissue
retention integrated over time and highest efficacy against both
primary
and
metastatic
tumors
in
vivo.
Similar
findings
correlating size of NCs to their biological effects have also been
reported by multiple other groups. Other physicochemical
properties of NCs, including shape, elasticity and surface charge
can also impact the interaction of NCs with physiological barriers
and tumor microenvironment and therefore can be crucial to
optimize NC design and maximize their biological function. For
example, the shape of NCs has been reported to be a crucial factor
in determining their blood circulation, ability to marginate in
blood vessels, and uptake by tumor cells and macrophages31–34.
Elasticity of NCs can also impact their biological fate, including
blood circulation and tumor uptake. Anselmo et al. demonstrated
that softer nanoparticles (10 kPa) result in prolonged blood
circulation
compared
to
harder
nanoparticles
(3000 kPa)
in vivo35. Overall, physiochemical properties of NCs can
substantially impact their accumulation, retention, and penetra-
tion in tumors. However, Sykes et al. demonstrated that the
optimization of physiochemical properties of NCs is specific to
the target tumor’s pathophysiology, and therefore must be
personalized to each tumor type and stage to maximize
therapeutic efficacy36.
Our current understanding of EPR effectiveness is limited by
the scarcity of data obtained using pre-clinical tumor models that
accurately recapitulate solid tumors in humans. In fact, the most
commonly used subcutaneous tumor xenografts are rapidly
growing, resulting in very high-EPR tumors that could provide
a false impression of the therapeutic benefit of NCs in therapies
that rely on passive EPR-based targeting11. There is also limited
patient-based experimental data on the EPR phenomenon itself
and its effect on drug accumulation in the tumor site that
translates into clinical efficacy11. Further investigation of the EPR
in various human tumors and the development of better
preclinical models is therefore essential for the design of NCs
with better tumor penetration and therapeutic outcome9,10.
Recently, Theek et al. investigated the correlation between tumor
vascularization and EPR-based passive targeting in a subcuta-
neous tumor model37. Utilizing both contrast-enhanced func-
tional
ultrasound
and
computed
tomography-fluorescence
molecular techniques, they demonstrated heterogeneous accu-
mulation
of
10-nm
near
infrared-labeled
polymeric
NCs
(pHPMA-Dy750) within and between the tumors (5%–12%).
Similarly, Hansen et al. recently developed copper-64-loaded
PEGylated liposomes and evaluated the EPR effect of these
liposomes by microPET/CT imaging38. Evaluation of 11 dogs
bearing spontaneous solid tumors revealed that while the EPR
effect is a predominant feature in few solid tumors (e.g.,
carcinoma), resulting in high liposome accumulation, it could
not be generalized to all solid tumors. In a more advanced study,
Miller et al. showed that an FDA-approved 30-nm carboxymethyl
dextran–coated magnetic nanoparticle (MNP) (ferumoxytol)
could be used as a surrogate or companion particle to predict
intratumoral transport, pharmacokinetics (PK), and distribution
of a therapeutic NC based on poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid)-b-
poly(ethylene glycol) (PLGA-PEG)39. Recently, Lee et al., utilized
64Cu-labeled HER2-targeted liposomes and PET/CT to quantify
drug accumulation in 19 patients with HER2 positive metastatic
breast cancer40. The peak liposomes accumulation was observed
at 24–48 h and patients were classified based on 64Cu-liposomal
lesion deposition using a cut-point that is comparable to a
response threshold that was measured in preclinical studies.
Patients
with
high
64Cu-liposomal
lesion
deposition
were
associated with more favorable treatment outcomes. These studies
demonstrate that utilizing imaging techniques for evaluation and
characterization of EPR could eventually enable clinicians to pre-
select patients with high-EPR tumors who are likely to respond to
passively targeted NCs, thus remarkably improving therapeutic
outcomes.
A recent meta-analysis of pre-clinical data on NC-based
delivery platforms for tumors published over the past 10 years
suggested that a median of about 0.7% of the injected dose (ID) of
NCs reaches the target tumors2. In absolute terms, this number
seems small, raising serious questions about the efficiency of the
EPR effect and strengthening concerns regarding treatment of
low-EPR tumors. However, in relative terms, a delivery efficiency
of 0.7% for NCs is substantially higher than the delivery efficiency
for most of the conventional formulations of chemotherapeutics
that are currently dominant in the clinic, including docetaxel,
paclitaxel, and doxorubicin41–44. For example, a pre-clinical study
by Vlerken et al. demonstrated delivery efficiency of 0.6% ID for
paclitaxel-loaded NCs compared to 0.2% ID for free paclitaxel41.
This is encouraging and clearly establishes the advantage of NCs
for tumor targeted drug delivery. However, delivery efficiency of
NCs can be further improved in absolute terms to maximize their
therapeutic benefit. Augmenting EPR effects using angiotensin II-
induced hypertension or heat-based vasodilation could be one
solution, though either technique could complicate the clinical
translation of NCs. Another potential and relatively translatable
solution, especially for low-EPR tumors is the development of
sophisticatedly engineered delivery systems that exploit non-EPR
approaches for tumor targeting. For example, Xu et al. developed
an injectable nanoparticle generator (iNPG) that does addresses
the concerns with multiple physiological barriers45. Specifically,
the iNPG is a discoidal micrometer-sized nanoporous silicon
particle that can be loaded with drug polymer conjugates.
Demonstrating tumor accumulation due to natural tropism and
enhanced vascular dynamics, the iNPG releases the drug polymer
conjugate, which self-assembles to form nanoparticles that are
transported to the perinuclear region, thereby bypassing the drug
efflux pump. iNPG showed greater efficacy in MDA-MB-231 and
4T1 mouse models of metastatic breast cancer compared to its
individual components and other current therapeutic formula-
tions. Development of such rationally engineered systems could
significantly improve the delivery efficiency of NCs.
Cell-mediated
delivery of NCs
could
be another
EPR-
independent approach to enhance tumor targeting in low-EPR
tumors or certain metastatic tumor locations that are unreachable
by passive targeting. This approach exploits the ability of certain
cell types to home or migrate to such tumors46. Huang et al.
harnessed the inherent ability of T-cells to traffic throughout the
lymphatic system by conjugating nanocapsules encapsulating the
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 topoisomerase I drug SN-38 to the cell surface47. Cell-mediated
delivery resulted in 90-fold increase of SN-38 concentrations in
lymph nodes than free drug, administered systemically at 10-fold
higher doses, and also prolonged median survival by 35 days with
no evidence of toxicity. In addition to targeting low-EPR tumors,
immune cell-mediated delivery of NCs can also elicit improved
tumor accumulation in disseminated tumors and metastases. This
could open new avenues for safer targeted delivery of immuno-
modulating molecules such as IFN-γ, which can promote
differentiation of tumor-promoting M2 macrophages to anti-
tumor M1 macrophages. Furthermore, using tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes or CAR T-cells for targeted delivery of NCs loaded
with immunomodulating agents might enable a synergetic dual-
arm treatment, augmenting anti-tumor immune responses with
tumor targeting, and/or modulation of immunosuppressive cells.
However, this approach is limited to therapeutics with low
toxicity to normal carrier cells.
Active targeting has great potential and greater challenges.
Active cellular targeting was developed as a complementary
strategy to passively targeted NCs for improving tumor locali-
zation of NCs by increasing their targeting efficiency and
increasing retention at the target site44,48,49. However, Kirpotin
et al. established that incorporation of targeting ligands on the
surface of NCs increases their cellular internalization by the target
cells without affecting overall tumor localization50. This was also
confirmed by Shmidt and Wittrup, who developed a mechanistic
model for better understanding and predicting the complicated
relationships between molecular size, binding affinity, and tumor
targeting51. Their model predicts that for NCs with diameters
≥50 nm active targeting does not significantly increase the tumor
localization of NCs compared to non-targeted NCs. This is a
major difference between actively targeted NCs compared to
small molecules and antibodies.
Since targeting ligands on NCs facilitate their uptake by target
cells, this strategy has been utilized to enhance the delivery of
high molecular weight molecules (macromolecules, e.g., proteins,
RNA, DNA, etc.) to their target cells. These molecules are
sensitive to enzymatic degradation and cannot cross the cell
membrane to reach their active site within target cells. However,
actively targeted NCs aimed at macromolecule delivery face
additional physiological barriers arising from their interaction
with their target cells. One of the major barriers is escaping the
endocytic pathway. After endocytosis, NCs are directed to
subcellular locations by intracellular trafficking mechanisms,
which may have a detrimental effect on the fate of the NCs. For
example, NCs that are internalized through clathrin-mediated
endocytosis (e.g., transferrin-targeted NCs) would enter the
degradative pathway and eventually be degraded in lyso-
somes11,13,52. Multiple strategies have been tested to facilitate
endosomal escape of NCs into the cytosol, such as pore-
formation peptides and proteins, pH-buffering substances utiliz-
ing the “proton sponge effect” and fusogenic NCs53. However,
endosomal escape of NCs in vivo remains extremely challenging.
Another complexity resides in the endosomes recycling process.
A study by Sahay et al. demonstrated that the vast majority (70%)
of siRNA containing Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) that were
internalized underwent exocytosis53. Gilleron et al. recently
investigated the intracellular fate of siRNA-containing LNPs
in vitro and in vivo54. Utilizing quantitative fluorescence imaging
and electron microscopy, they demonstrated that the endosomal
escape of siRNA in hepatocytes occurs at very low efficiency
(1–2%) and only when the LNPs reside in a specific compartment
sharing early and late endosome characteristics54. This discovery
emphasizes the importance of improving our understanding of
the mechanisms of endosomal escape in different cell types to
achieve improved cargo delivery efficiency, which in turn could
yield better therapeutic outcomes with fewer off-target effects.
Furthermore, this could have wide implications in terms of
reducing the toxicity and economic concerns.
Traditionally, choosing a target for actively targeted NCs is
based on “classical” or disease markers (e.g., CD19 for B-cell
malignancies, HER2 for breast cancer, etc.). While these targets
are clinically relevant for therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, they
might not be suitable for efficient NC internalization and escape
from the endosome when the therapeutics need to be delivered
intracellularly (e.g., nucleic acids, intrabodies, etc.). Therefore,
targets should be screened not only based on their expression
levels, but also by their ability to enable rapid internalization and
efficient endosomal escape. Overall, the design of actively targeted
NCs as delivery vehicles is complex, since factors such as the NC’s
architecture, ligand conjugation chemistry, and the choice of the
ligand contribute to the efficacy of the delivery system.
Additional complexity resides in the vast heterogeneity within
and between tumors and the presence of tumor and metastasis
supporting stroma (e.g., tumor-associated macrophages, fibro-
blasts, etc.)55. The majority of active, cell-specific NCs target a
single cell-surface receptor on tumor cells, thus disregarding
tumor heterogeneity and promoting selection toward the survival
of resistant clones. Consequently, current treatment usually
results in apparent partial or complete responses, which in most
cases followed by a resistant tumor relapse and mortality56.
Ultimately, we argue that the development of a novel class of NCs
with versatile targeting moieties or combining several NCs with
different targeting moieties is crucial for improving efficacy.
Conjugation of targeting ligands to NCs results in a relatively
complex manufacturing process compared to passive NCs, due to
the additional steps of chemical synthesis and purification.
Although this has not been the foremost limiting factor in clinical
translation of actively targeted NCs, it does pose a significant
challenge toward bench to bed translation of this approach due to
more quality control steps, increased cost, and longer timelines.
Recently, Kedmi et al., presented a possible solution to simplify
the manufacturing process of actively targeted NCs and control
the targeting agent orientation of the NCs’ surface57. In this
study, they utilized a lipidated single chain Fv-based linker
platform that can self-assemble into lipid-based NCs and bind
IgGs from a certain isotype. The incorporation of the linker to the
lipid NCs by self-assembly resolves the complexity of the
chemical conjugation of antibodies to NCs as well as the need
for removal of unbound antibodies. Furthermore, the use of
linkers that can bind different targeting moieties can enable the
development of a single versatile NC platform that can be
redirected to different cellular targets simply by mixing with
different targeting moieties. Such strategies might enable a real
breakthrough in overcoming the challenges posed by tumor
heterogeneity, without making the manufacturing process of NCs
more complex.
From protein corona to an immune barrier. Many factors
including the route of administration and the coating formed by
serum proteins and opsonins (also known as the protein corona)
have been shown to affect the targeting efficiency of NCs (Fig. 2),
as well as the release profiles of encapsulated therapeutics,
clearance by the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), immu-
nogenicity, and therapeutic efficacy9,11,21,58. For example, the
formation of protein corona could affect many properties of NCs
including size, stability and surface properties that define their
cellular uptake, intracellular trafficking, pharmacokinetics, bio-
distribution, and toxicity59,60. In addition, the protein corona
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 might mask the NC’s targeting ligands, compromising the tar-
geting capabilities61. There have been numerous in vitro studies
on
NCs–protein
interactions;
however,
the
correlation
of
NCs–protein interaction in vivo with aforementioned biological
responses are not yet extensively evaluated. NCs–protein inter-
actions also restrict NCs’ circulation life due to the promotion of
opsonization and recognition by MPS. However, it is worth
noting that in tumors with a large volume of blood flow, NCs may
not require a long circulation time to achieve effective tumor
accumulation. There may also be undesirable interactions
between NCs and the immune system, which in turn could lead
to immunostimulation or immunosuppression. For example, the
ability of some cationic NCs to activate toll-like receptor (TLR)
signaling is well established62, but we know little about the
immunological interaction of NCs with intracellular receptors
such as the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-
like receptors (NLRs) and the inflammasome.
Various surface-coated molecules have been utilized to provide
“stealth” properties to NCs during systemic circulation; the most
common being PEG63,64. However, there is increasing evidence
that the “stealthness” of PEGylated NCs is hampered by
unwanted adverse effects such as complement activation, which
may result in hypersensitivity reactions and even anaphylaxis65,66.
The inadvertent recognition of NCs by the immune system may
elicit a multilevel immune response, eventually leading to toxicity,
adverse effects in the host and/or lack of therapeutic benefit. Thus
it has become crucial to predict these reactions with the NC
surface at the molecular level using appropriate pre-clinical
models. This task becomes more complex in the development of
actively targeted NCs. For example, when decorated with full-
length IgG molecules as a targeting moiety, these NCs are
recognized by the MPS via Fc receptors. This challenge could be
overcome by either using smaller antibody fragments (e.g., scFv,
Fab, F(ab)’2, etc.) or other homing molecules (e.g., aptamers,
natural ligands, etc.). Functionalizing NCs with “self” markers is
another strategy to limit the interactions of NCs with serum
proteins and immune system during systemic circulation67–70.
Targeted NCs in blood circulation
Mistargeting caused by protein corona coating
Serum proteins
and opsonins
Protein corona-coated NCs
Nano-bio interactions
a
Protein corona-
coated NCs
Particle properties
b
NCs
g
e Tumor microenvironment
& tissue penetration
Biodistribution
% ID/g tissue
Heart
Liver
Spleen
Tumor
Kidney
Lung
Size
c
Time
f
Cellular uptake
& intracellular trafficking
Plasma concentration
Pharmacokinetics
d
Time
Released content
Release of therapeutics
Fig. 2 The impact of nano–bio interactions on the systemically administrated NCs. a During systemic circulation, targeted NCs get coated with serum
proteins and opsonins, which impacts the targeting efficiency and many other properties of NCs, including b particle size, c pharmacokinetics, d release
profiles, e tissue penetration, f cellular uptake and intrecellular trafficking and g biodistribution (ID injected dose)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 Overall, nano–bio interaction is an extremely important
research area in the development of NCs. In addition to
NC–protein interaction and NC–immune system interaction
during blood circulation, NC–ECM and NC–cell interaction are
also crucial and have been discussed in the previous sections.
With
continuous
improvements
in
our
understanding
of
nano–bio interactions, more effective strategies could be devel-
oped to improve the targeted delivery of therapeutics to tumors.
Active versus passive targeting. Passively targeted NCs, which
rely solely on the EPR effect, may be insufficient to achieve effi-
cient tumor targeting. We need more systematic studies to
understand the interaction of NCs with physiological barriers,
and the cues identified from those should be used to develop
more sophisticated strategies. Utilizing natural tropism of certain
cells toward specific tissues and harnessing tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes are other strategies to improve NC accumulation in
tumors. Recent advances in NC engineering have enabled over-
coming some of the physiological barriers (e.g., ionizable lipids
for endosomal escape71–73 and multi-layered NCs for tissue and
cellular targeting74–76). Tools to evaluate the interaction of NCs
with the immune system are already being developed (e.g.,
complement activation assays, cytokine induction, anti-NC anti-
body response, interferon response, and lymphocyte activation
assays) and will enable better prediction of NC-mediated toxicity
in design of future clinical trials.
Active targeting strategies are much more complex than
passive approaches. In addition to the challenges associated with
physiological barriers and tumor heterogeneity, a major challenge
is posed by the complex design and engineering of these systems,
which can complicate their pharmaceutical development and
scale-up under good manufacturing practice (GMP) production
and add significantly to the cost of the therapy. SynerGene
Therapeutics’ SGT-94, a NC made from cationic liposomes
encapsulating tumor suppressor gene RB94 and decorated with
an anti-transferrin receptor (TfR) single-chain antibody fragment
is an example of an actively targeted NC with a relatively simple
design; it is now in a Phase I trial in patients with genitourinary
tumors.
Despite multiple complexities, one major advantage of actively
targeted NCs is their ability to target disseminated locations
throughout the body, potentially revolutionizing the treatment of
hematological malignancies (i.e., leukemia and lymphoma) and of
metastatic lesions in which EPR does not play a role. However, to
ensure clinical success of actively targeted NCs, significant efforts
and criticism should be exercised in the design of preclinical
tumor models to ensure better recapitulation of the human
disease, including both solid and hematological malignancies.
Additionally, for both passive and active targeting strategies,
the development of companion diagnostic imaging technologies
to evaluate the targeting efficiency of NCs is crucial. Pre-selection
of suitable patients and tailoring treatments to specific patients
will improve tumor accumulation, treatment efficacy, and
therapeutic outcomes. Furthermore, excluding unsuitable patients
will reduce the incidences of adverse reactions and unnecessary
treatments, reducing the expenses of both governmental health
authorities and health insurance companies.
Considerations for developing actively targeted nanocarriers.
While developing actively targeted NCs, various design and bio-
logical considerations must be taken along with building a sui-
table experimental system to evaluate the efficacy of these systems
(Fig. 3). In the case of targeted NCs intended for solid tumors,
ideally it is essential to choose a model that recapitulates as much
as possible the human tumor. Optimal size and physio-chemical
properties should be determined by tumor architecture (density,
ECM organization, etc.) and the extent of EPR effect. In addition,
tools for EPR quantification should be developed in parallel to
efficacy models. If the tumor site is accessible, other adminis-
tration routes, for example, local delivery should be considered,
thus by-passing the need of EPR effect. When choosing the target
receptor and targeting moiety, several criteria should be met. In
addition to choosing an exclusively or over-expressed target,
several other factors must also be considered, depending on the
cargo of the NCs. For example, if the active site of action for the
cargo is intracellular (e.g., nucleic acids and proteins) and it
cannot diffuse through the cell membrane, receptor internaliza-
tion pathway is critical. In such cases, receptors that internalize
via pathways that bypass the destructive endocytic pathway is
preferable. Furthermore, the ability of receptor to internalize
could be affected by the targeting moiety and NCs properties,
such as, the binding site, receptor cluster formation, targeting
moiety’s density, etc. Therefore, several targeting moieties and
with varying densities for each receptor should be examined. If
Establishment of a suitable
(spontaneous, orthotropic, etc.
tumor model)
Choose a suitable NC’s
(building blocks, size,
shape, surface charge, etc.)
Characterize tumor
architecture & markers
Low
EPR
Local administration/
non-EPR approaches
Systemic
administration
Evaluate in vivo efficacy,
toxicity & bio-distribution
High EPR
(or liquid
tumors)
Evaluate the
EPR effect
Choose a tumor target
(over-expressed,
internalized, non-
internalized, clinical
relevance, etc.)
Choose a suitable ligand
(Internalizing, non-
internalizing, etc.),
determine optimal ligand
density & drug
Evaluate toxicity,
immunogenicity
(complement activation,
cytokine induction),
efficacy in vitro
Fig. 3 Schematic illustration of the proposed workflow in the development of actively targeted NCs
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 the NCs are intended to serve as a drug depot at the tumor site,
non-internalizing and non-active strategies should be considered,
thus prolonging the NCs retention at tumor site. Extra efforts
should be taken in understanding the targeting moiety–receptor
interaction in the context of NCs. For many years, many groups
have tried to maximize the number of targeting moieties on each
NC in order to exploit the avidity of multiple targeting moieties.
However, there are evidences showing that this concept does not
take into consideration the effects of multiple receptor binding on
the target cells. Receptor clustering could activate various sig-
naling cascades that could results in cell activation, proliferation,
etc. and provoke various adverse effects. High targeting ligand
density might also create a steric hindrance that could affect the
receptor accessibility and increase the size of NCs. Furthermore,
the strong binding by increased affinity and avidity might impact
the endosomal escape of NCs upon internalization and may also
affect drug release. The effect and complexity of the density of the
targeting moiety was demonstrated in a recent paper by Colombo
et al.77. In this work they used antibody-functionalized gold NCs
with either single or two different types of antibodies. Although as
expected, the NCs harboring two antibodies on their surface
showed moderate improvement in in vitro targeting compared to
NCs with single antibody, the opposite phenomenon was
observed in vivo. These results highlight the concept that tar-
geting ligand density should be optimized both in vitro and
in vivo using imaging modalities and efficacy studies. To con-
clude, in order to exploit the advantages of actively targeted NCs,
several criteria and considerations should be systematically
addressed. Furthermore, additional tools, which will enable con-
trolling the ligand density on NCs and will allow systematic study
of the targeted NC–receptor interaction are lacking and must be
developed.
Controlled switch nanocarriers. An additional hurdle that limits
the therapeutic efficacy of NCs is the premature and non-specific
release of the encapsulated therapeutics. Developing stimuli-
responsive NCs that can respond to specific microenvironments,
releasing the therapeutics “on-demand” in a spatio-temporally
controlled fashion is an attractive solution. The first report sug-
gesting the use of stimuli-responsive NCs for cancer therapy came
out in the late 1970s78 that described temperature-responsive
liposomes for enhanced local drug release by hyperthermia. Since
then, extensive studies in this arena have explored many new
materials and stimuli amenable to the development of targeted
and stimuli-responsive NCs in cancer therapy. Making NCs
responsive to the tumor microenvironment enables spatio-
temporal control of therapeutic release, offering a promising
strategy to overcome the issue of premature release from NCs in
systemic circulation. Designing stimuli-responsive NCs involves
the use of biocompatible materials that can undergo hydrolytic
cleavage, protonation, or a conformational change in response to
an intrinsic or extrinsic stimulus. This approach can therefore be
simple or highly complex, depending on the choice of the sti-
mulus and the response/sensitivity of the chosen materials.
Although a wide range of stimuli and a diverse library of
responsive materials enable great flexibility in designing stimuli-
responsive NCs, their bench-to-bed side translation is not simple.
One major obstacle is the complex chemistry involved in most of
these systems, which complicates their pharmaceutical develop-
ment and scalability. Variations in intrinsic stimuli like pH,
enzymes, and reducing agents between preclinical and clinical
models also pose a challenge (Fig. 4). On the other hand, because
extrinsic stimuli such as heat, light, electric fields, ultrasound, and
magnetic fields can be controlled more precisely than intrinsic
stimuli. Stimuli-responsive NCs that have reached clinical trials
and received approval are based on extrinsic stimuli (e.g., Ther-
moDox, NanoTherm, and MTC-DOX)79. Another common
attribute among these three clinically used/evaluated stimuli-
Challenge:
Challenge:
Scalability
Sensitivity to stimulus
Biocompatibility/toxicity
Endothelial cells
Nanoparticles
Tumor
tissue
Blood vessel
EPR effect
Stimuli - responsive
drug release
Design
challenges:
Temperature
Magnetic field
Electric field
Light
Ultrasound
Tissue penetration
and localization
Compliance with
providing the stimulus
Intrinsic stimuli
Extrinsic stimuli
Low pH
Tumor cell
Drug
Redox
Enzyme
Variations between
preclinical and clinical
models
Fig. 4 Challenges to clinical translation of stimuli-responsive NCs. Controlled-switch NCs designed to prevent premature drug release face challenges
associated with the type of stimulus on which they are based. Other than that, additional design challenges for the NCs themeselves include scalability,
sensitivity, and response to the stimulus, biocompatibility, and toxicity
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 responsive NCs is their simple design, which significantly facili-
tated their scale-up and translation. Extrinsic stimuli-based NCs
hold immense potential for clinical translation in the near future;
however, a few challenges still remain, including limited tissue
penetration of the stimuli, poor control over their localization to
prevent non-specific cell death in the surrounding tissues, and
compliance with providing the stimuli (Fig. 4).
Another important concern regarding stimuli-responsive NCs
is their biocompatibility; this is an issue especially when chemical
synthesis is involved. Therefore, clinical translation of these
systems requires extensive toxicity evaluation. Thus, a promising
and translatable stimuli-responsive nanoparticle formulation
should be one that involves off-the-shelf biomaterials, no major
chemical modification and an extrinsic stimulus.
External stimuli-based tumor localization. In addition to eli-
citing spatiotemporally controlled drug release from NCs, exter-
nal stimuli, especially magnetic field, and ultrasound can also be
used for tumor localization of NCs. This can be achieved by two
different approaches. In one approach, the external stimuli may
directly guide the NCs to the tumor site. For example, Foy et al.
demonstrated that a short (1 h) exposure of a murine tumor to
magnetic field resulted in enhanced accumulation of systemically
administered magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) in the tumor80.
Multiple other reports have also successfully demonstrated
magnetic tumor targeting of NCs in a number of models81,82.
Another approach to achieve external stimuli-mediated tumor
localization of NCs involves the use of the stimulus to disrupt the
physiological barrier, for example, the endothelium barrier,
facilitating the extravasation of NCs into the target tissue. Watson
et al. demonstrated the utility of ultrasound to enhance liposome
accumulation in tumors by reducing their intratumoral pressure
and increasing their vascular permeability83. Similarly, Aryal et al.
utilized ultrasound to temporarily permeabilize the blood–brain
barrier (BBB) and the blood–tumor barrier84. With multiple
sessions of focused ultrasound they demonstrated improved
therapeutic effect of liposomal doxorubicin in rat glioma model.
In another interesting approach, external stimuli mediated
tumor targeting can be synergistically combined with active
targeting, resulting in enhanced accumulation of NCs in the
tumor tissue and increased therapeutic efficacy. For example,
Schleich et al. developed RGD grafted PLGA-based nanoparticles
loaded with paclitaxel and superparamagnetic iron oxides for dual
targeting of tumor as a result of magnetic targeting and active
targeting85.
Compared
to
non-targeted
or
single
targeted
nanoparticles, the combination of active targeting and magnetic
targeting strategies resulted in increased nanoparticle accumula-
tion in the tumor tissue and improved therapeutic efficacy.
Similar findings have been reported by Cui et al. who developed a
dual-targeting strategy based on PLGA nanoparticles combining
the magnetic field guidance and TfR binding42.
Although promising, the approach of combining external
stimuli mediated targeting and active targeting may involve
complex design, which may impact translatability. Therefore,
careful consideration must be given to the design criteria of NCs
aimed
toward
such
dual
targeting
approaches.
Additional
challenges include limited tissue penetration of the external
stimuli and compliance with providing the stimuli.
Bypassing physiological barriers via local delivery. Despite their
immense potential, multiple physiological barriers must be
overcome by passively and actively targeted NCs to achieve
improved efficacy in clinic. Since bypassing systemic adminis-
tration can help overcome such barriers, local delivery of the
therapeutics directly into the diseased compartment is an
attractive strategy. Certain compartments in the body including
lung, bladder, brain, peritoneum, and eye can be considered
unique as they can be accessed locally for the administration of
therapeutics (Fig. 5). Local delivery can significantly improve
pharmacological benefit at the disease site and reduce systemic
toxicity compared to systemic administration. Various carriers
such as liposomes, microparticles, polymeric films, and hydrogels
have been developed for localized delivery to increase local resi-
dence time of the therapeutics and enable controlled release.
However, although in vitro and preclinical proofs of concept have
been reported for a number of NCs for local delivery in cancers,
very few have reached the clinical stage. To the best of our
knowledge, the only clinically approved platform for local deliv-
ery of chemotherapeutics is Gliadel®, a poly(carboxyphenox-
ypropane/sebacic acid) (PCPP:SA) anhydride wafer containing
3.85% biodegradable carmustine (BCNU) to treat malignant
gliomas86. These wafers are placed along the surface of the
resection cavity during surgery and can sustain release of drug for
3 weeks. However, poor penetration of the drug through the
interstitial matrix and the invasiveness of the tumor cells that
spread around the brain limit the efficacy of these wafers. To
resolve this issue, Sawyer et al. combined polymeric controlled
release with convection-enhanced delivery (CED) and developed
camptothecin (CPT)-loaded poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
nanoparticles that are guided via CED to a stereotactically defined
location in the brain. This allows simultaneous control of loca-
tion, diffusion, and duration of drug release86.
Local delivery of therapeutics in tumors can be further
improved by developing hybrid approaches combining local drug
delivery with other approaches, including active-targeting strategy
and stimulus triggered drug release. Recently, Cohen et al. utilized
a hybrid approach combining active-targeting strategy with local
drug delivery87. Actively targeted hyaluronan (HA)-coated lipid
nanoparticles (HA-LNPs) were administered locally to the brain
in a U87MG orthotopic glioblastoma mouse model. These HA-
LNPs encapsulating siRNA against Pololike kinase 1 (a G2/M
transition regulator) demonstrated 80% gene knockdown in vivo
and prolonged survival (≥60%) compared to control mice. In
another example, Liu et al. developed implantable nanofibers for
localized, near infrared (NIR) triggered delivery of doxorubicin42.
These studies demonstrate the strong advantage of combining
local delivery with other approaches, thus bypassing formerly
intractable physiological barriers while augmenting therapeutic
internalization and release within the target cells.
Even though this approach may be limited to certain specific
cancers, it has immense potential, especially for localized
chemotherapy of primary tumors that have not metastasized
and when surgical resection is contraindicated. Also, for debulking
surgeries that require either adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemother-
apy to minimize loco-regional recurrence, localized delivery of
chemotherapeutics may result in better therapeutic outcomes with
reduced toxicity compared to systemic chemotherapy. For
example, intraperitoneal chemotherapy before or after debulking
surgery in ovarian cancer has shown therapeutic outcomes
superior to systemic therapy88. Use of NCs in such cases can
further improve efficacy due to prolonged local residence time of
the therapeutics and their controlled release. As an example,
tumor bed implantation of paclitaxel eluting polymeric films
composed of poly(glycerol monostearate-co-caprolactone), follow-
ing complete surgical resection showed superior efficacy compared
with intravenous paclitaxel in preventing loco-regional recurrence,
improving overall survival in murine recurrent sarcoma and non-
small cell lung cancer models89,90.
Clinical success of localized therapeutic delivery approaches in
cancer treatment requires addressing multiple challenges includ-
ing physiological and technological barriers that are specific to the
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 type of cancer, as indicated in Fig. 5. In addition, one major
limitation of localized therapeutic delivery approaches in the
context of cancer is the inability to target metastases or
disseminated tumors; therefore, combining local delivery of
therapeutics with other delivery strategies could provide a better
package with improved outcomes.
Regulatory and industry barriers. In addition to the challenges
discussed above, obstacles related to commercialization and
approval of NCs by the regulatory authorities are to date the most
prominent hurdles that need to be overcome to bridge the bench-
bed gap. One such obstacle is the rarity of good laboratory
practices (GLP) conditions and questions regarding the validity
and reproducibility of scientific results in the academic setting is a
barrier to their collaboration with the pharmaceutical industry.
GLP guidelines were established in response to the discovery of
problems with quality and data integrity in several toxicology
studies in the 1970s91. The FDA and later on the European
Medicines Agency (EMA) adopted regulations dictating minimal
standards for conducting pre-clinical laboratory studies, aimed at
the commercialization of therapeutics regulated by these reg-
ulatory authorities. We argue that adopting GLP in academic pre-
clinical studies is crucial to promote academia-industry colla-
borations, which will help in the clinical translation of academi-
cally discovered therapeutics in general, and in particular NCs.
However, it is also important to realize that not all academic pre-
clinical studies necessarily require GLP. For example, incorpor-
ating GLP is not crucial and may be too labor intensive for pre-
clinical studies that aim to establish proof of concept for a new
biological mechanism or technology. In some cases, it might even
slow down the translation. On the other hand, GLP is truly critical
when demonstrating the promise of the technology in compre-
hensive functional pre-clinical models with the aim of translation.
Since GLP adoption can significantly increase the overall costs of a
preclinical study, careful consideration of the aims of the study
may help determine whether GLP is required or not. We also
argue that funding organizations should allocate funds specifically
for GLP, especially for proposals that have already demonstrated
proof of concept and are aimed at translation.
Due to structural and chemical complexity of NCs, classical
regulatory tools may not be appropriate for evaluating their safety
and efficacy. Also, the need for placebo-controlled treatment
regimens may need to be reconsidered. The FDA has already
initiated the Nanotechnology Regulatory Science Research Plan,
to address major scientific gaps in knowledge, methods, and tools
Brain cancer
Lung cancer
Eye cancer (Retinoblastoma)
Local injection
IP bolus injection
Peritoneum/ovarian cancer
Topical delivery
Implants/reservoirs
Implants/ reservoirs
Topical gels/films/particles
Microneedles
Barrier disruption (ultrasound)
Skin cancer (melanoma)
Bladder cancer
Intravesical delivery
Indwelling devices
Challenge: Accessing posterior
segment of the eye and increasing
intra-vitreal half life
Biodegradable implants/reservoirs
Convection - enhanced delivery
Intranasal delivery
Challenge: Non-uniform
drug distribution and low diffusion 
Challenge: Pulmonary compatibility
of particles
Aerosol (Liposomes, polymeric particles,
porous nanoparticles, aggregates particles,
inorganic particles)
Challenge: sustained
release of drug to prevent
non-specific toxic effect
while maintaining therapeutic dose
in peritoneum
Challenge: Minimizing
systemic absorption through
the skin 
Challenge: Drug penetration for deeply
embedded tumors
Fig. 5 Biological and technical barriers to the success of local drug delivery. Local administration is a promising strategy for targeted drug delivery in certain
cancers. However, there are still some cancer-specific biological and technical barriers that need to be overcome by the clinical success of this approach
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 required to make regulatory assessments of NCs and other
nanomaterials92. This initiative defined five major criteria to be
addressed: physio-chemical characterization, preclinical models,
risk characterization, risk assessment, and risk communication. A
direct example of the fruits of this initiative is the establishment
of the Nanotechnology Characterization Lab (NCL), which
performs thorough evaluations of nanoparticles received from
academia, government, and industry. A standardized analytical
cascade is employed to test physiochemical properties, pre-
clinical toxicology, pharmacology, and efficacy both in vitro and
in vivo (Table 1). This process enables academic laboratories and
companies to gather all the needed data for filing an Investiga-
tional New Drug (IND) application to the FDA within one year.
Both academia and industry must utilize such resource funding
platforms for clinical translation of their NC-based therapeutics.
Consideration should also be given to the design of clinical trials,
including selection of patient population for evaluating NC-based
therapeutics. Recently, BIND-014 (PSMA-targeted docetaxel nano-
particle) failed to achieve the primary end-points in two different
phase 2 clinical trials for treating non-small cell lung cancer and
advanced cervical and head and neck cancer, respectively. We
believe that this failure stresses the need for a paradigm shift in
designing clinical trials with NCs for cancer therapy. Patient pre-
selection based on the extent of EPR, the presence of target receptor
and tumor heterogeneity, the ability of the actively targeted NC to
bind to the target receptor and the need for companion diagnostics
are crucial for achieving better therapeutic outcomes. A pioneering
clinical study in that direction was conducted recently by
Merrimack Pharmaceuticals to determine if tumor accumulation
of ferumoxytol (FMX) iron nanoparticles, as determined by
quantitative
MRI,
may
predict
response
to
nanoliposomal
irinotecan (nal-IRI)93. The study showed that tumors which
presented with high accumulation of FMX were more responsive to
nal-IRI. We believe that such initiatives together with patient pre-
selection will play an important role in bridging the bench-bed gap,
promoting the development of highly characterized NCs with
detailed safety and efficacy profiles together with more suitable
clinical course. This will improve the chances of NCs to reach the
clinic, making the promise of NCs a reality.
Future outlook. So should one uses active cellular targeting
approach? Well it is all depends on the pathological location of
the tumor, it’s heterogeneity, and it’s biology (i.e., resistance,
aggressiveness and the ability to fast metastasize). Passive
targeting approach has great therapeutic potential; however, it is
currently limited by the heterogeneity of the EPR effect and the
physiological barriers associated with it. Development of rapid
quantitative EPR-imaging technologies is therefore crucial for
assessing the EPR effect. Applying such imaging technologies in
humans should be enthusiastically pursued, as this could be a
relatively quick source of critical information for future NC
design. Furthermore, such technologies could provide clinicians
with companion diagnostic tools useful in pre-selection of
patients who would respond to EPR-based therapies, improving
therapeutic outcomes. Actively targeted NCs can offer great
advantages in treating hematological malignancies; however, in
solid tumors they must rely on passive targeting for tumor
accumulation, and therefore suffer from the same limitations as
passively targeted NCs. Cellular barriers to successful intracellular
delivery of the encapsulated therapeutics and complex design are
some additional factors specific to the actively targeted NCs that
limit their clinical success. To overcome these challenges, we have
devised criteria and considerations that must be taken into
account while developing actively targeted NCs.
The design of passively or actively-targeted NCs should also
consider the deposition of a protein corona in physiological
environment, and its consequences on biodistribution, targeting,
release of therapeutics, therapeutic efficacy, and toxicity. New
strategies to develop NCs with controllable/predictable biological
identity are therefore necessary for accelerating the clinical
translation of NCs. For the development of stimuli-responsive
NCs to prevent premature release, other design challenges, such
as the sensitivity of the NCs to the stimuli, scalability, and toxicity
of the NCs, should also be carefully.
Several approaches have been suggested for bypassing the EPR
effect, including strategies that utilize exogenous cell-mediated
delivery of NCs to deliver therapeutics or immune-modulating
payloads in tumors. Utilizing such strategies might provide real
breakthroughs in the treatment of low-EPR solid tumors,
hematological tumors, and metastatic lesions. Local delivery of
therapeutics using NCs, implants, hydrogels, etc., can bypass
physiological barriers associated with EPR, acting as an attractive
strategy in the treatment of locally accessible tumors.
Finally, the development of better and more predictive pre-
clinical animal models and adoption of GLP and standardization
guidelines in academia are necessary to bridge the bench-bed gap.
Such standardizations (that should include better size, surface and
toxicity characterization) coupled with better understanding of
Table 1 Bridging the bench-bed gap. Summary of the key pre-clinical characterizations included in the standardized analytical
cascade set by the Nanotechnology Characterization Lab (NCL) to guide both academic and non-academic research labs to
gather required data for filing an investigational new drug application to the FDA
1. Physico-chemical
characterization
2. In Vitro Characterization
3. In VivoCharacterization
4. Design of clinical trial and
patient pre-selection
Physical properties:size, density,
surface area, porosity, etc.
LAL Assays
Efficacy evaluation: therapeutics,
imaging
Evaluation of the extent of
EPR: MRI, PET imaging, etc.
before and during clinical
trials.
Surface characterization: charge,
hydrophilicity, surface chemistry,
solubility, etc.
Targeting efficiency: cell binding and
internalization
Disposition:Tissue distribution,
clearance, half-life, exposure, etc.
Target receptor profiling:MRI,
PET imaging, immune
staining of tumor biopsies,
etc.
Stability assessment
Drug release
Single-and repeated-dose toxicity
Batch-to-batch reproducibility:
purity, sterility, uniformity, etc.
Immunological evaluation:hemolysis, platelet
aggregation, plasma corona, complement
activation, phagocytosis, cytokine release,
etc.
Immunotoxicity
Toxicity: oxidative stress, cytotoxicity, etc.
Efficacy evaluation
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 tumor biology and identification of real biomarkers that can
predict responders and non-responder in advance will most likely
increase the success rate of translation of novel NCs into clinical
practice. The Nanotechnology Regulatory Science Research Plan
and similar programs established by the health authorities should
be utilized to evaluate the efficacy and safety of NCs, thereby
unleashing their true potential.
Received: 21 August 2017 Accepted: 5 March 2018
References
1.
Peer, D. et al Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer therapy. Nat.
Nano 2, 751–760 (2007). A comprehensive review on NCs for cancer therapy,
this is one of the highest impact papers on the field.
2.
Wilhelm, S. et al Analysis of nanoparticle delivery to tumours. Nat. Rev.
Mater. 1, 16014 (2016). Conducted a meta analysis demonstrating that less
than 1% of NCs reaching tumor site in tumors with high EPR, this paper
highlight the need to improve NCs targeting ability.
3.
Sadauskas, E. et al. Kupffer cells are central in the removal of nanoparticles
from the organism. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 4, 1–7 (2007).
4.
Blanco, E., Shen, H. & Ferrari, M. Principles of nanoparticle design for
overcoming biological barriers to drug delivery. Nat. Biotech. 33, 941–951 (2015).
5.
Anselmo, A. C. & Mitragotri, S. Nanoparticles in the clinic. Bioeng.Transl.
Med. 1, 10–29 (2016).
6.
Kumari, P., . & Ghosh, B. & Biswas, S. Nanocarriers for cancer-targeted drug
delivery. J. Drug Target 24, 179–191 (2015).
7.
Shi, J., Kantoff, P. W., Wooster, R. & Farokhzad, O. C. Cancer nanomedicine:
progress, challenges and opportunities. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17, 20–37 (2017).
8.
Saha, R. N., Vasanthakumar, S., Bende, G. & Snehalatha, M. Nanoparticulate
drug delivery systems for cancer chemotherapy. Mol. Membr. Biol. 27,
215–231 (2010).
9.
Alexis, F., Pridgen, E., Molnar, L. K. & Farokhzad, O. C. Factors affecting the
clearance and biodistribution of polymeric nanoparticles. Mol. Pharm. 5,
505–515 (2008).
10. Byrne, J. D., Betancourt, T. & Brannon-Peppas, L. Active targeting schemes
for nanoparticle systems in cancer therapeutics. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 60,
1615–1626 (2008).
11. Bogart, L. K. et al. Nanoparticles for imaging, sensing, and therapeutic
intervention. ACS Nano 8, 3107–3122 (2014).
12. Barenholz, Y. Doxil®—the first FDA-approved nano-drug: lessons learned. J.
Control. Release 160, 117–134 (2012).
13. Rosenblum, D. & Peer, D. Omics-based nanomedicine: the future of
personalized oncology. Cancer Lett. 352, 126–136 (2014).
14. Matsumura, Y. & Maeda, H. A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics
in cancer chemotherapy: mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins
and the antitumor agent smancs. Cancer Res. 46, 6387–6392 (1986).
15. Awada, A. et al. A randomized controlled phase II trial of a novel composition
of paclitaxel embedded into neutral and cationic lipids targeting tumor
endothelial cells in advanced triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Ann.
Oncol. 25, 824–831 (2014).
16. Burris, H. A. et al. A phase I, open-label, first-time-in-patient dose escalation
and expansion study to assess the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of
nanoparticle encapsulated Aurora B kinase inhibitor AZD2811 in patients
with advanced solid tumours. J. Clin. Oncol. 35, TPS2608–TPS2608 (2017).
17. Batist, G. et al. A multicenter, phase II study of CPX-1 liposome injection in
patients (pts) with advanced colorectal cancer (CRC). J. Clin. Oncol. 26,
4108–4108 (2008).
18. Gradishar, W. J. et al. Phase III trial of nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel
compared with polyethylated castor oil-based paclitaxel in women with breast
cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 23, 7794–7803 (2005).
19. Lancet, J. E. et al. Final results of a phase III randomized trial of CPX-351
versus 7 + 3 in older patients with newly diagnosed high risk (secondary)
AML. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 7000–7000 (2016).
20. Chauhan, V. P. & Jain, R. K. Strategies for advancing cancer nanomedicine.
Nat. Mater. 12, 958–962 (2013).
21. Yuan, F. et al. Vascular permeability in a human tumor xenograft: molecular
size dependence and cutoff size. Cancer Res. 55, 3752–3756 (1995).
22. Lee, H., Hoang, B., Fonge, H., Reilly, R. M. & Allen, C. In vivo distribution of
polymeric nanoparticles at the whole-body, tumor, and cellular levels. Pharm.
Res. 27, 2343–2355 (2010).
23. Ernsting, M. J., Murakami, M., Roy, A. & Li, S.-D. Factors controlling the
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution and intratumoral penetration of
nanoparticles. J. Control. Release 172, 782–794 (2013).
24. CabralH et al. Accumulation of sub-100 nm polymeric micelles in poorly
permeable tumours depends on size. Nat. Nano 6, 815–823 (2011).
25. Kolhar, P. et al. Using shape effects to target antibody-coated nanoparticles to
lung and brain endothelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 10753–10758 (2013).
26. Wong, C. et al. Multistage nanoparticle delivery system for deep penetration
into tumor tissue. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 2426–2431 (2011).
27. Tong, R., Hemmati, H. D., Langer, R. & Kohane, D. S. Photoswitchable
nanoparticles for triggered tissue penetration and drug delivery. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 134, 8848–8855 (2012).
28. Tong, R., Chiang, H. H. & Kohane, D. S. Photoswitchable nanoparticles for
in vivo cancer chemotherapy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 19048–19053 (2013).
29. Li, H.-J. et al. Stimuli-responsive clustered nanoparticles for improved tumor
penetration and therapeutic efficacy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
4164–4169 (2016).
30. Tang, L., Fan, T. M., Borst, L. B. & Cheng, J. Synthesis and biological response
of size-specific, monodisperse drug–silica nanoconjugates. ACS Nano 6,
3954–3966 (2012).
31. Toy, R., Peiris, P. M., Ghaghada, K. B. & Karathanasis, E. Shaping cancer
nanomedicine: the effect of particle shape on the in vivo journey of
nanoparticles. Nanomed 9, 121–134 (2014).
32. Smith, B. R. et al. Shape matters: intravital microscopy reveals surprising
geometrical dependence for nanoparticles in tumor models of extravasation.
Nano. Lett. 12, 3369–3377 (2012).
33. Barua, S. et al. Particle shape enhances specificity of antibody-displaying
nanoparticles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 3270–3275 (2013).
34. Ananta, J. S. et al. Geometrical confinement of gadolinium-based contrast agents
in nanoporous particles enhances T1 contrast. Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 815 (2010).
35. Anselmo, A. C. et al. Elasticity of nanoparticles influences their blood
circulation, phagocytosis, endocytosis, and targeting. ACS Nano 9, 3169–3177
(2015).
36. Sykes, E. A. et al. Tailoring nanoparticle designs to target cancer based on
tumor pathophysiology. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E1142–E1151 (2016).
37. Theek, B. et al. Characterizing EPR-mediated passive drug targeting using
contrast-enhanced functional ultrasound imaging. J. Control. Release 182,
83–89 (2014).
38. Hansen, A. E. et al. Positron emission tomography based elucidation of the
enhanced permeability and retention effect in dogs with cancer using copper-
64 liposomes. ACS Nano 9, 6985–6995 (2015).
39. Miller, M. A. et al. Predicting therapeutic nanomedicine efficacy using a
companion magnetic resonance imaging nanoparticle. Sci. Transl. Med. 7,
314ra183 (2015).
40. Lee, H. et al. 64Cu-MM-302 positron emission tomography quantifies
variability of enhanced permeability and retention of nanoparticles in relation
to treatment response in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Clin. Cancer
Res. 23, 4190–4202 (2017).
41. van Vlerken, L. E., Duan, Z., Little, S. R., Seiden, M. V. & Amiji, M. M.
Biodistribution and pharmacokinetic analysis of paclitaxel and ceramide
administered in multifunctional polymer-blend nanoparticles in drug resistant
breast cancer model. Mol. Pharm. 5, 516–526 (2008).
42. Cui, Y. et al. Dual-targeting magnetic PLGA nanoparticles for codelivery of
paclitaxel and curcumin for brain tumor therapy. ACS Appl. Mater. &
Interfaces 8, 32159–32169 (2016).
43. Peer, D. & Margalit, R. Tumor-targeted hyaluronan nanoliposomes increase
the antitumor activity of liposomal doxorubicin in syngeneic and human
xenograft mouse tumor models. Neoplasia 6, 343–353 (2004).
44. Shi, J., Xiao, Z., Kamaly, N. & Farokhzad, O. C. Self-assembled targeted
nanoparticles: evolution of technologies and bench to bedside translation. Acc.
Chem. Res. 44, 1123–1134 (2011).
45. Xu, R. et al. An injectable nanoparticle generator enhances delivery of cancer
therapeutics. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 414–418 (2016).
46. Levy, O. et al. A prodrug-doped cellular Trojan Horse for the potential
treatment of prostate cancer. Biomaterials 91, 140–150 (2016).
47. Huang, B. et al. Active targeting of chemotherapy to disseminated tumors
using nanoparticle-carrying T cells. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 291ra294 (2015).
Harnessed the inherent ability of T-cells to traffic throughout the lymphatic
system to deliver therapeutics to disseminated tumors. This work might
impact our way to treat disseminated tumors.
48. Bertrand, N., Wu, J., Xu, X., Kamaly, N. & Farokhzad, O. C. Cancer
nanotechnology: the impact of passive and active targeting in the era of
modern cancer biology. Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev. 66, 2–25 (2014).
49. Farokhzad, O. C. & Langer, R. Impact of nanotechnology on drug delivery.
ACS Nano 3, 16–20 (2009).
50. Kirpotin, D. B. et al. Antibody targeting of long-circulating lipidic
nanoparticles does not increase tumor localization but does increase
internalization in animal models. Cancer Res. 66, 6732 (2006).
51. Schmidt, M. M. & Wittrup, K. D. A modeling analysis of the effects of
molecular size and binding affinity on tumor targeting. Mol. Cancer Ther. 8,
2861 (2009).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
 52. Sahay, G., Alakhova, D. Y. & Kabanov, A. V. Endocytosis of nanomedicines. J.
Control. Release.: Off. J. Control. Release. Soc. 145, 182–195 (2010).
53. Sahay, G. et al. Efficiency of siRNA delivery by lipid nanoparticles is limited by
endocytic recycling. Nat. Biotech. 31, 653–658 (2013).
54. Gilleron, J. et al. Image-based analysis of lipid nanoparticle-mediated siRNA
delivery, intracellular trafficking and endosomal escape. Nat. Biotech. 31,
638–646 (2013).
55. Meacham, C. E. & Morrison, S. J. Tumour heterogeneity and cancer cell
plasticity. Nature 501, 328–337 (2013).
56. Ryan, S. et al. Target acquired: progress and promise of targeted therapeutics in
the treatment of prostate cancer. Curr. Cancer Drug. Targets 15, 394–405 (2015).
57. Kedmi, R. et al A modular platform for targeted RNAi therapeutics. Nat.
Nanotechnol 13, 214–219 (2018). Developed a versatile self assembeled
delivery platform that can be easliy modified to target various cell type, this
technology enable to tackle tumor heterogeneity.
58. Bertrand, N. & Leroux, J.-C. The journey of a drug-carrier in the body: an
anatomo-physiological perspective. J. Control. Release 161, 152–163 (2012).
59. Mahmoudi, M., Bertrand, N., Zope, H. & Farokhzad, O. C. Emerging
understanding of the protein corona at the nano-bio interfaces. Nano Today
11, 817–832 (2016).
60. Caracciolo, G. & Farokhzad, O.C. & Mahmoudi, M. Biological identity of
nanoparticles in vivo: clinical implications of the protein corona. Trends
Biotechnol. 35, 257–264 (2017).
61. Salvati, A. et al. Transferrin-functionalized nanoparticles lose their targeting
capabilities when a biomolecule corona adsorbs on the surface. Nat. Nano 8,
137–143 (2013).
62. Kedmi, R., Ben-Arie, N. & Peer, D. The systemic toxicity of positively charged
lipid nanoparticles and the role of Toll-like receptor 4 in immune activation.
Biomaterials 31, 6867–6875 (2010).
63. Walkey, C. D., Olsen, J. B., Guo, H., Emili, A. & Chan, W. C. Nanoparticle size
and surface chemistry determine serum protein adsorption and macrophage
uptake. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 2139–2147 (2012).
64. Schöttler, S. et al. Protein adsorption is required for stealth effect of poly
(ethylene glycol)- and poly(phosphoester)-coated nanocarriers. Nat. Nano 11,
372–377 (2016).
65. Dobrovolskaia, M. A. & McNeil, S. E. Immunological properties of engineered
nanomaterials. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2, 469–478 (2007).
66. Szebeni, J., Muggia, F., Gabizon, A. & Barenholz, Y. Activation of complement
by therapeutic liposomes and other lipid excipient-based therapeutic products:
prediction and prevention. Adv. Drug. Deliv. Rev. 63, 1020–1030 (2011).
67. Rodriguez, P. L. et al. Minimal “self” peptides that inhibit phagocytic clearance
and enhance delivery of nanoparticles. Science 339, 971 (2013).
68. Parodi, A. et al. Synthetic nanoparticles functionalized with biomimetic
leukocyte membranes possess cell-like functions. Nat. Nano 8, 61–68 (2013).
69. Farokhzad, O. C. Nanotechnology: platelet mimicry. Nature 526, 47–48
(2015).
70. Hu, Q. et al. Anticancer platelet-mimicking nanovehicles. Adv. Mater. 27,
7043–7050 (2015).
71. Semple, S. C. et al. Rational design of cationic lipids for siRNA delivery. Nat.
Biotech. 28, 172–176 (2010).
72. Tam, Y. Y. C., Chen, S. & Cullis, P. R. Advances in lipid nanoparticles for
siRNA delivery. Pharmaceutics 5, 498–507 (2013).
73. Ramishetti, S. & Landesman-Milo, D. & Peer, D. Advances in RNAi
therapeutic delivery to leukocytes using lipid nanoparticles. J. Drug Target. 24,
780–786 (2016).
74. Mi, Y. et al. Enzyme-responsive multistage vector for drug delivery to tumor
tissue. Pharmacol. Res. 113, 92–99 (2016).
75. Tasciotti, E. et al. Mesoporous silicon particles as a multistage delivery system
for imaging and therapeutic applications. Nat. Nano 3, 151–157 (2008).
76. Poon, Z., Chang, D., Zhao, X. & Hammond, P. T. Layer-by-layer nanoparticles
with a pH sheddable layer for in vivo targeting of tumor hypoxia. ACS nano 5,
4284–4292 (2011).
77. Colombo, M. et al. Tumour homing and therapeutic effect of colloidal
nanoparticles depend on the number of attached antibodies. Nat. Commun. 7,
13818 (2016).
78. Yatvin, M. B., Weinstein, J. N., Dennis, W. H. & Blumenthal, R. Design of
liposomes for enhanced local release of drugs by hyperthermia. Science 202,
1290–1293 (1978).
79. Mura, S., Nicolas, J. & Couvreur, P. Stimuli-responsive nanocarriers for drug
delivery. Nat. Mater. 12, 991–1003 (2013).
80. Foy, S. P. et al. Optical imaging and magnetic field targeting of magnetic
nanoparticles in tumors. ACS Nano 4, 5217–5224 (2010).
81. Cole, A. J. et al. Polyethylene glycol modified, cross-linked starch-coated iron
oxide nanoparticles for enhanced magnetic tumor targeting. Biomaterials 32,
2183–2193 (2011).
82. Cole, A. J., David, A. E., Wang, J., Galbán, C. J. & Yang, V. C. Magnetic brain
tumor targeting and biodistribution of long-circulating PEG-modified, cross-
linked starch-coated iron oxide nanoparticles. Biomaterials 32, 6291–6301
(2011).
83. Watson, K. D. et al. Ultrasound increases nanoparticle delivery by reducing
intratumoral pressure and increasing transport in epithelial and
epithelial–mesenchymal transition tumors. Cancer Res. 72, 1485 (2012).
84. Aryal, M., Vykhodtseva, N., Zhang, Y.-Z., Park, J. & McDannold, N. Multiple
treatments with liposomal doxorubicin and ultrasound-induced disruption of
blood–tumor and blood–brain barriers improve outcomes in a rat glioma
model. J. Control. Release 169, 103–111 (2013).
85. Schleich, N. et al. Comparison of active, passive and magnetic targeting to
tumors of multifunctional paclitaxel/SPIO-loaded nanoparticles for tumor
imaging and therapy. J. Control. Release 194, 82–91 (2014).
86. Sawyer, A. J. et al. Convection-enhanced delivery of camptothecin-loaded
polymer nanoparticles for treatment of intracranial tumors. Drug Deliv.
Transl. Res. 1, 34–42 (2011).
87. Cohen, Z. R. et al. Localized RNAi therapeutics of chemoresistant grade IV
glioma using hyaluronan-grafted lipid-based nanoparticles. ACS Nano 9,
1581–1591 (2015).
88. Cristea, M., Han, E., Salmon, L. & Morgan, R. J. Practical considerations in
ovarian cancer chemotherapy. Ther. Adv. Med. Oncol. 2, 175–187 (2010).
89. Liu, R. et al. Paclitaxel-eluting polymer film reduces locoregional recurrence
and improves survival in a recurrent sarcoma model: a novel investigational
therapy. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 19, 199–206 (2012).
90. Liu, R. et al. Prevention of local tumor recurrence following surgery using low-
dose chemotherapeutic polymer films. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 17, 1203–1213
(2010).
91. Baldeshwiler, A. M. History of FDA good laboratory practices. Qual. Assur. J.
7, 157–161 (2003).
92. Sanhai, W. R., Spiegel, J. & Ferrari, M. A critical path approach to advance
nanoengineered medical products. Drug Discov. Today: Technol. 4, 35–41
(2007).
93. Ramanathan, R. K. et al. Correlation between ferumoxytol uptake in tumor
lesions by MRI and response to nanoliposomal irinotecan in patients with
advanced solid tumors: a pilot study. Clin. Cancer Res. 23, 3638 (2017).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by grants from the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley
Nanotechnology Research Fund, the Len and Susan Mark Ovarian Cancer Fund, the
Israel Science Foundation (1178/16), the Dotan Center for Hemato-Oncology at Tel Aviv
University, the Lewis Trust for Blood Cancer, and by the ERC grant LeukoTheranostics
(# 647410) awarded to D.P. This work was also supported in part by the Prostate Cancer
Foundation and NIH R01 grant HL095722 to J.M.K.
Author contributions
All authors wrote the manuscript.
Additional information
Competing interests: D.P. declares financial interest in Quiet Therapeutics, ART
Biosciences, and SEPL pharma. J.M.K. holds equity in Alivio Therapeutics, a company
that has an option to license IP generated by J.M.K. and that may benefit financially if the
IP is licensed and further validated. The interests of J.M.K were reviewed and are subject
to a management plan overseen by his institution in accordance with its conflict of
interest policies. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|  (2018) 9:1410 
| DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-03705-y| www.nature.com/naturecommunications
