 June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
1
Review
published: 19 June 2017
doi: 10.3389/fped.2017.00121
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 
Diagnosis and Management in 
Young People: A Primer
Peter C. Rowe1, Rosemary A. Underhill 2*, Kenneth J. Friedman3, Alan Gurwitt4,  
Marvin S. Medow5, Malcolm S. Schwartz6, Nigel Speight7, Julian M. Stewart8,  
Rosamund Vallings9 and Katherine S. Rowe10
1 
Division of General Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
United States, 2 
Independent Researcher, Palm Coast, FL, United States, 3 
Pharmacology and Physiology, New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, 4 
Yale Child Study Center, Harvard Medical School, University of Connecticut 
School of Medicine, Newton Highlands, MA, United States, 5 
Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, United States, 6 
Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States, 7 
Paediatrician, Durham, United Kingdom, 8 
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, New York Medical College, 
Valhalla, NY, United States, 9 
Primary Care/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Clinic, Howick Health and Medical, Auckland, New 
Zealand, 10 
Department of General Medicine, Royal Children’s Hospital, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a complex disease that 
affects children and adolescents as well as adults. The etiology has not been estab-
lished. While many pediatricians and other health-care providers are aware of ME/CFS, 
they often lack essential knowledge that is necessary for diagnosis and treatment. Many 
young patients experience symptoms for years before receiving a diagnosis. This primer, 
written by the International Writing Group for Pediatric ME/CFS, provides information 
necessary to understand, diagnose, and manage the symptoms of ME/CFS in children 
and adolescents. ME/CFS is characterized by overwhelming fatigue with a substantial 
loss of physical and mental stamina. Cardinal features are malaise and a worsening of 
symptoms following minimal physical or mental exertion. These post-exertional symp-
toms can persist for hours, days, or weeks and are not relieved by rest or sleep. Other 
symptoms include cognitive problems, unrefreshing or disturbed sleep, generalized or 
localized pain, lightheadedness, and additional symptoms in multiple organ systems. 
While some young patients can attend school, on a full or part-time basis, many others 
are wheelchair dependent, housebound, or bedbound. Prevalence estimates for pediat-
ric ME/CFS vary from 0.1 to 0.5%. Because there is no diagnostic test for ME/CFS, diag-
nosis is purely clinical, based on the history and the exclusion of other fatiguing illnesses 
by physical examination and medical testing. Co-existing medical conditions including 
orthostatic intolerance (OI) are common. Successful management is based on determin-
ing the optimum balance of rest and activity to help prevent post-exertional symptom 
worsening. Medications are helpful to treat pain, insomnia, OI and other symptoms. 
The published literature on ME/CFS and specifically that describing the diagnosis and 
management of pediatric ME/CFS is very limited. Where published studies are lacking, 
recommendations are based on the clinical observations and practices of the authors.
Keywords: myalgic encephalomyelitis, chronic fatigue syndrome, pediatric, adolescent, diagnosis, management, 
postural tachycardia syndrome, joint hypermobility
Edited by: 
Alberto Spalice, 
Policlinico Umberto I, Italy
Reviewed by: 
Gouri Rao Passi, 
Choithram Hospital and 
 
Research Centre, India 
 
Kumar Sannagowdara, 
 
Medical College of Wisconsin, 
United States
*Correspondence:
Rosemary A. Underhill 
petro8888@aol.com
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Neuropediatrics, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Pediatrics
Received: 20 March 2017
Accepted: 08 May 2017
Published: 19 June 2017
Citation: 
Rowe PC, Underhill RA, Friedman KJ, 
Gurwitt A, Medow MS, Schwartz MS, 
Speight N, Stewart JM, Vallings R 
and Rowe KS (2017) Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/ 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 
Diagnosis and Management in 
Young People: A Primer. 
Front. Pediatr. 5:121. 
doi: 10.3389/fped.2017.00121
 2
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
PReFACe
Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME), also known as chronic fatigue 
syndrome (CFS) or ME/CFS, affects children and adolescents 
as well as adults. This primer has been written to provide the 
information necessary to understand, diagnose, and manage 
the symptoms of ME/CFS in children and adolescents. Some 
information in this primer overlaps with information in a 
similar primer for adults “Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis, Primer for Clinical Practitioners” that was 
published under the sponsorships of the IACFS/ME and is avail-
able at www.iacfsme.org. This pediatric primer was developed to 
cover the many unique aspects of the diagnosis and management 
of pediatric ME/CFS.
The published literature on pediatric ME/CFS is modest. 
Many studies on ME/CFS have only enrolled adults. Where it 
has been helpful, we have sometimes cited studies in adults and 
this is explained in the text. Where published studies are lack-
ing, our recommendations are based on the clinical expertise of 
experienced medical practitioners.
The text was developed by consensus of the members of 
International Writing Group for Pediatric ME/CFS who have 
made every effort to ensure that the information is accurate and 
up to date. Statements, opinions, and study results published in 
this primer are those of the authors and the studies cited. The 
recommendations contained in any part of this primer do not 
indicate an exclusive course of treatment or course of action. 
Nothing contained in this primer should serve as a substitute for 
the medical judgment of a treating provider.
iNTRODUCTiON AND OveRview
Pediatric myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(ME/CFS) is a complex disease characterized by overwhelming 
fatigue and a substantial loss of physical and cognitive function. 
The etiology is uncertain and there is no curative treatment. 
The cardinal feature is a sensation of feeling ill (malaise) and 
worsening of symptoms following minimal physical or mental 
exertion. This post-exertional worsening can persist for hours, 
days, or weeks, and is not relieved by rest or sleep. Other symp-
toms include unrefreshing or disturbed sleep, cognitive impair-
ment, and a multitude of immune, neurological, and autonomic 
symptoms. Orthostatic intolerance (OI) is a common co-morbid 
condition.
Significant pathophysiological changes found in ME/CFS 
show that it is an organic/physical illness. Secondary psychologi-
cal symptoms can be present in some patients as occurs in many 
other chronic illnesses, but psychological factors have not been 
shown to be the cause.
Nomenclature
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME) and chronic fatigue syndrome 
(CFS) were names given to two well-documented cluster 
outbreaks of a clinically similar illness in London, UK in 1955 
and in NV, USA in 1984. Several different but overlapping case 
definitions have been published for ME and for CFS to aid in 
diagnosing sporadic cases. Research studies tend to use the term 
CFS because a case definition was written for this purpose (1). 
The name CFS has been criticized for trivializing the illness (2), 
and it can be confused with the non-specific term chronic fatigue, 
which is a common symptom in other illnesses. The World Health 
Organization classifies ME as a disease of the central nervous 
system, G93.3 (3).
Less common names for the illness include chronic fatigue 
immune dysfunction syndrome, myalgic encephalopathy and 
neuro-endocrine-immune dysfunction syndrome. In 2015 a 
new name, SEID and a new case definition were suggested (2). 
Currently the new name is under discussion and the new case 
definition has not yet been clinically validated. This publication 
will use the acronym ME/CFS.
Symptoms of ME/CFS sometimes follow an acute illness, such 
as influenza or infectious mononucleosis (4). If symptoms resolve 
within 6 months, the term post-infectious fatigue syndrome is 
used to describe the illness.
epidemiology
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is globally 
endemic. Most cases are sporadic, but cluster outbreaks have 
occurred worldwide. In several outbreaks the illness has been 
prominent in schoolchildren (5, 6). In sporadic cases the disease 
is not thought to be transmitted by casual contact. ME/CFS affects 
all ages, races and socioeconomic groups. In sporadic ME/CFS, 
two peak ages of onset are seen, 11–19 years in young patients 
and 30–39 years in adults (7). Although adolescents are more 
likely than younger children to have ME/CFS, children as young 
as 2 years old have developed the illness (5, 8). In adolescents, 
approximately 3–4 times as many girls as boys have ME/CFS. 
There are less data on the sex ratio in younger children. Estimates 
of the prevalence of pediatric ME/CFS vary in different studies 
from 0.1 to 0.5% (9, 10). Research studies have shown that 84–91% 
of adult patients who satisfy diagnostic criteria for ME/CFS have 
not been diagnosed (11, 12). We are aware of one comparable 
study having been done in children and adolescents (13).
Presentation, Course of the illness, 
Prognosis
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome can begin 
suddenly, gradually, or with an abrupt increase in the intensity and 
frequency of milder chronic symptoms. There can be a history of 
repeated minor relapsing and remitting prodromal illnesses over 
the months or years preceding the onset. An acute onset of fever 
and viral-like symptoms is common, and the onset also can be 
marked by severe orthostatic symptoms. ME/CFS can follow a 
known illness such as infectious mononucleosis (4). A gradual 
onset is more common in younger children and can occur over 
months or years.
While all patients experience a substantial loss of physical 
and cognitive functioning, there is a wide spectrum of severity. 
Mildly affected young people might be able to attend school 
full-time or part-time, but they might have to limit sport and 
after-school activities and have frequent school absences. ME/
CFS has been found to be the most common cause of long-term 
absence from school (9, 13–16). More severely affected young 
 3
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
people can be wheelchair dependent, housebound, or bedbound. 
The more impaired might even have difficulty participating in 
home tutoring sessions. In young persons with ME/CFS, overall 
self-reported quality of life is often lower than in other illnesses 
such as diabetes, epilepsy, and cystic fibrosis (17, 18).
Symptoms often fluctuate significantly during the day and 
from day-to-day. Commonly, patients are slow to get moving 
upon awakening, with somewhat better function later in the 
day. Reduced ability to function after activity (physical, cogni-
tive, emotional, orthostatic stress, or academic pressure)—often 
referred to as “a crash” by patients—with prolonged recovery is 
a feature. In girls, ME/CFS symptoms are often worse at or just 
before the menstrual period. The unpredictable level of function 
from day-to-day can interfere with planning ahead for school 
attendance, social outings, or family obligations.
The course of ME/CFS is very unpredictable but must often 
be measured in years, not weeks or months. Remissions and 
relapses are common. Relapses can be caused by overexertion, 
infectious illnesses or failure to recover from a “crash” (see above). 
Dramatic improvement sometimes occurs in the first 4 years, but 
slow improvement over time is more likely.
It is generally accepted that young people with ME/CFS 
have a more favorable prognosis than adults. There have been 
few studies with sufficient numbers and duration of follow-up 
to be confident of the findings, but factors such as severity of 
symptoms or age at onset have not been shown to be reliable 
predictors of long-term outcomes. In a follow-up study of nearly 
700 young people the average duration of illness of those who 
report having “recovered” was 4–5 years with a range from 1 
to 15 years. By 5 years, 60% reported recovery, and by 12 years, 
88% reported recovery. Of those who reported recovery, about 
one-third admitted to modifying their activities to remain feel-
ing well (19). Several other studies found that although many 
patients improved, 20–48% showed no improvement or actually 
had worse fatigue and physical impairment at follow-up times 
ranging from 2 to 13 years (20–22). Even among those who report 
having completely recovered, many describe persistent symptoms 
that are not reported by healthy individuals (20).
Feedback from young people indicated that an important 
determinant of their functioning as adults was the effort made 
to enable them to remain engaged in education. This might have 
followed relatively unconventional pathways but it enabled them 
to remain socially connected and to feel they were able to achieve 
their aspirations fully or in part. From this group, more than 95% 
were either studying or working part or fulltime (23).
Diagnosis
No valid, reliable, laboratory test that confirms the diagnosis is 
currently available. The diagnosis of ME/CFS is purely clinical 
and is based on the history and the exclusion of other fatiguing 
illnesses by physical examination and medical testing. Routine 
blood tests are usually normal. If the typical symptom pattern is 
not recognized, the diagnosis will be overlooked. The diagnosis 
depends on the patient’s symptoms meeting the criteria of one 
of several overlapping case definitions (1, 2, 24–27). Most of the 
case definitions were developed for adults and they can exclude 
some young people with ME/CFS. Some case definitions are also 
quite complex to use in primary care and some do not require the 
cardinal symptom of post-exertional exacerbation of symptoms 
to be present. We recommend the diagnostic criteria shown in 
Section “Clinical Diagnosis.”
Role of the Health Practitioner in 
Diagnosis and Management
Young people who appear to have ME/CFS should be evaluated 
by a physician. A comprehensive history, a thorough physical 
examination, and appropriate laboratory testing are necessary 
to make the diagnosis and to exclude other fatiguing illnesses. 
Co-morbid illnesses are common and require appropriate treat-
ment (see Comorbid Medical Conditions). Some patients with 
an initial diagnosis of ME/CFS are later found to have a different 
treatable illness.
Establishing a diagnosis frequently provides the patient and 
parents much relief. Early diagnosis of ME/CFS can lessen the 
impact of the illness through timely support and intervention. 
The unequivocal advice for careful avoidance of overexertion can 
help to both avoid deterioration and facilitate improvement.
Since there is no medication or intervention which will cure 
ME/CFS, clinical care focuses on managing symptoms and 
improving function. A management plan might include:
• Educating the patient, the parents, the family, and the school 
about the illness (e.g., using handouts, see Appendices C–E).
• Guidance on determining the optimum balance of rest and 
activity to help prevent post-exertional symptom worsening.
• Advice on diet, social interactions, and education.
• The treatment of symptoms with non-pharmacological inter-
ventions and/or medications.
• Regular assessment of progress and watchfulness for the emer-
gence of other illnesses.
The chronicity of ME/CFS signifies the need for continuing 
management and periodic re-evaluation. Regular monitoring can 
support the young patient and uncover a change of symptoms, 
or the emergence of a new illness. Young patients can do well 
when treated in a primary care setting, but given the complexity 
of this illness, appropriate referral to other health practitioners 
(preferably those familiar with ME/CFS) is often needed.
The health practitioner has an important role helping to ensure 
that the young patient receives the most appropriate schooling by 
educating the young person’s school personnel about the effect of 
the illness on scholastic performance, and providing appropriate 
documentation to education authorities.
eTiOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSiOLOGY
The underlying etiology of ME/CFS has not been established. 
Well-documented pathophysiological changes demonstrate that 
ME/CFS is a multisystem physical disease, not a psychological 
disorder. The wide variety of pathophysiological findings has 
led to multiple hypotheses for etiology. These include: infectious 
agents, immune dysfunction, autoimmune disorders, circulatory 
abnormalities, neuroendocrine disorders, metabolic distur-
bances, brain dysfunction, toxins, genetic susceptibility, abnormal 
gene expression, or a combination of any of these mechanisms.
 4
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
etiological Factors
There is evidence that several predisposing and precipitating fac-
tors can contribute to the illness, but evidence for perpetuating 
factors is limited.
Predisposing Factors
Being female is a predisposing factor in post-pubertal adolescents. 
The prevalence of ME/CFS is 3–4 times higher in adolescent girls 
than in boys (9, 28). There is less information on the sex ratio 
in younger children. Genetic factors may produce a susceptibil-
ity to the illness in some families. Studies have shown that in 
approximately 20% of patients, ME/CFS affects more than one 
family member and in 90% of them, the affected relatives were 
genetically related (29). The prevalence of ME/CFS was found to 
be 5.1% in the offspring of mothers with ME/CFS (29). Another 
study showed an excess relative risk for developing ME/CFS in 
first (2.7), second (2.3), and third (1.9) degree relatives (30). Twin 
studies have shown that the concordance rate for a ME/CFS-like 
illness was 55% in monozygotic twins and 19% in dizygotic twins 
(31). Approximately 60% of adolescents with ME/CFS have 
joint hypermobility, compared to approximately 20% of healthy 
adolescents (32). The mechanism by which this changes the risk 
of illness is not understood.
Precipitating Factors
Sporadic cases of ME/CFS can be preceded (triggered) by: a viral, 
bacterial, or parasitic infection, an immunization, significant 
physical or emotional trauma, overexertion, (“overtraining”) 
chronic sleep deprivation, exposure to a toxin, or an atypical 
adverse reaction to a medication. In some patients no precipitat-
ing factor can be identified.
Perpetuating Factors
It is difficult to determine factors that perpetuate the illness, 
although it has been suggested that factors that aggravate the 
illness can also contribute to its persistence. Few studies have 
investigated this issue. Aggravating factors include: failure to 
diagnose the illness promptly, resulting in poor management in 
the early stages of the illness, overexertion resulting in “crashes,” 
stress, inadequate sleep, and co-morbid conditions, such as OI.
Pathophysiological Basis for Symptoms
Despite the wide variability in precipitating factors and in 
pathophysiological findings, there appear to be some common 
underlying mechanisms behind the most prevalent symptoms.
Infection
Although sporadic cases are more common, ME/CFS can also 
occur in cluster outbreaks, suggesting an important etiologic role 
for microbial pathogens. This assumption is supported by the 
common pattern of an abrupt onset in association with flu-like 
symptoms in many sporadic cases. In the absence of evidence of 
persistent replication of an infectious agent, the main scientific 
debate currently centers around whether there is an occult active 
persistent infection or whether infectious agents have been 
cleared, but have triggered chronic symptoms due to a maladap-
tive host immunologic response.
Pediatric ME/CFS sometimes follows an acute infection, 
including most prominently Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). After 
monospot-positive infectious mononucleosis, 13%, 7%, and 4% 
of adolescents met criteria for ME/CFS at 6, 12, and 24 months 
after infection, respectively (4). As in adults, the most important 
factor associated with developing ME/CFS was the severity of the 
initial illness, as reflected by the number of days spent in bed with 
acute symptoms (33). Several other ubiquitous infectious agents 
or their antibodies have been found in patients with ME/CFS 
and their presence can influence symptom severity. Although 
individual cases of ME/CFS have been identified in association 
with B. burgdorferi, cytomegalovirus, human herpesvirus 6, 
Coxsackie virus, enterovirus, adenovirus, or parvovirus B19, a 
large Norwegian pediatric study did not identify a prominent 
etiologic role for any of these organisms (34).
Some studies in adult patients with ME/CFS report benefit 
from anti-viral treatment, suggestive of a viral pathophysiology, 
but other studies have not confirmed the efficacy of anti-viral 
treatment (35–37). We are not aware of studies of anti-viral agents 
in young patients.
Immune Dysfunction
Another prominent theory is that ME/CFS symptoms can be 
a consequence of a prolonged immunologic host response to 
infection. A limited number of immunological studies have been 
performed in pediatric patients. Studies in adults show immune 
system changes that are often inconsistent and tend to wax and 
wane over time (38). The most consistent immune responses are: 
immune activation, defective cell-mediated immunity, decreased 
natural killer cell (NK) cytotoxic activity that correlates with the 
severity of the illness (39, 40) and the occasional finding of low 
levels of autoantibodies including rheumatoid factor, anti-thyroid 
antibodies, anti-gliadin, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, and cold 
agglutinins in some patients. These immune responses are not 
unique to ME/CFS.
In pediatric patients, evidence of poor NK cell function is less 
robust than in adults (41), but few studies have been performed. 
Individual studies have reported cutaneous anergy (42), increased 
prevalence of autoantibodies (41), a beneficial response to intra-
venous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (42), increased rates of apoptosis 
in peripheral white blood cells (43), and abnormal T-cell inhibi-
tory or proliferative responses to stimuli (44). Although one small 
study showed elevations or reductions in some cytokine popula-
tions (45), a larger investigation found no evidence of cytokine 
abnormalities (46). Very little research has been devoted as to 
whether allergies, food intolerance, or mast cell activation play a 
contributing role in the pathophysiology of ME/CFS symptoms.
A small randomized trial in adults demonstrated improvement 
in ME/CFS symptoms after rituximab-mediated B-cell depletion 
(47), but there have been no pediatric studies.
Circulatory Abnormalities
Lightheadedness is very common in pediatric ME/CFS, and 
prolonged upright posture can aggravate other symptoms, 
including fatigue, headache, nausea, and cognitive dysfunction 
(48–50). Controlled studies have shown a higher prevalence of 
postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and neurally mediated 
 5
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
hypotension (NMH) in pediatric patients with ME/CFS (49, 
51–55). More work is needed to define the causes of NMH and 
POTS. Both can follow infectious illnesses, and themselves can 
be secondary to autoimmune phenomena. Other circulatory 
abnormalities in pediatric ME/CFS include a delayed recovery 
of cerebral oxygenation after a brief period of standing compared 
to healthy controls (54), and the demonstration that cognitive 
problems are exacerbated by orthostatic stress (50, 56).
Low blood volume has also been found in some adult patients 
with ME/CFS (57–60). The initiation of treatments directed at OI 
can sometimes relieve ME/CFS symptoms in pediatric as well as 
adult patients (see Orthostatic Intolerance).
Neuroendocrine Abnormalities
The similarity in symptoms between ME/CFS and adrenal insuffi-
ciency has prompted investigation into abnormal hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis function in both adults and adolescents. 
Several (albeit not all) pediatric ME/CFS studies have identified 
statistically lower cortisol levels and urine cortisol:creatinine 
values in ME/CFS patients compared to healthy controls (34, 
44, 61–63). However, the cortisol values in those with ME/CFS 
are still within the normal range, raising questions regarding 
the clinical relevance of these findings. Treating ME/CFS with 
supplemental cortisol brings only modest clinical benefits, and 
in adult studies is associated with the development of potentially 
life-threatening adrenal insufficiency (64).
Brain Imaging Abnormalities
The high prevalence of cognitive dysfunction has focused atten-
tion on the hypothesis that abnormalities in the central nervous 
system are important in the pathophysiology of ME/CFS. Using 
several brain imaging techniques, some small studies in adults 
have shown a variety of differences between ME/CFS patients and 
controls including increased activation of microglia or astrocytes 
(65), volume loss in white and gray matter (66, 67), reductions 
in absolute cerebral blood flow (68), and increased ventricular 
lactate (69, 70). Both pediatric and adult studies have shown 
that patients activate a wider distribution of neural resources to 
perform a specific cognitive task (71–73). Improving brain blood 
flow improves cognitive performance in those with ME/CFS (74).
Metabolic Abnormalities
Profound exhaustion and post-exertional worsening of symptoms 
are hallmarks of ME/CFS. Adult studies have shown impaired 
oxygen consumption during exercise and activation of anaerobic 
metabolic pathways in the early stages of exercise (75, 76). When 
exercise testing is conducted on two consecutive days, there is 
a decline in exercise performance and an abnormal recovery 
response (decline in VO2 max) on the second day (77, 78). In 
single day pediatric exercise studies, those with CFS exercised 
less efficiently than controls who had recovered from mononu-
cleosis, but significant differences in peak work capacity were not 
found (79).
These findings in adults, together with increased ventricular 
lactate have led to the hypothesis that ME/CFS symptoms might 
be due to a problem in mitochondrial bioenergetics and ATP 
production (80, 81). Thus far, the exact role of mitochondrial 
dysfunction in ME/CFS has not been clearly established.
Gene Studies
Studies in adult patients with ME/CFS have shown alterations in 
the expression of genes controlling immune modulation, oxida-
tive stress and apoptosis. Several subtypes were reported, and the 
presence of some of these subtypes, correlated with symptom 
severity (82, 83). Moderate exercise increased the expression of 
sensory, adrenergic and immune genes in patients with ME/CFS, 
but not in controls (83). Epigenetic differences between those with 
ME/CFS and healthy controls have recently been described (84).
The prevailing theories related to pathophysiological mecha-
nisms are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Circulatory dys-
function, for example, can be caused by infections and immune 
mechanisms, and in turn can have effects on inflammation, oxy-
gen delivery to cells, and microglial activation. A more complete 
discussion of the potential pathophysiological mechanisms of 
ME/CFS symptoms is beyond the scope of this primer.
ADOLeSCeNT DeveLOPMeNT
Puberty is defined as the time when a young person’s body, feel-
ings, and relationships change from those of a child into those of 
an adult. Changes occurring in the young person’s body include a 
growth spurt, enlargement of the genitalia, development of andro-
gen hair, and the onset of sexual functions including ejaculation 
or menses. Striking emotional and psychological changes occur. 
Puberty is a time of significant development of self-awareness, 
abstract thinking, increased sensitivity, and mood changes.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome preced-
ing puberty can impact the development of both the physical, 
pubertal changes, and the young person’s emotional state and 
self-image. There can be delay or acceleration of pubertal changes 
or alteration of physiological processes including hypo-function 
or, less commonly, hyper-function of the neuroendocrine system. 
The development of ME/CFS following puberty can be associated 
with a delay in normal, psychological development fostered by 
social isolation. Cessation of menstruation can also occur and 
this can be of great concern to the patient.
Puberty, with its physiological changes, can also significantly 
exacerbate pre-existing ME/CFS symptoms. The risk of develop-
ing ME/CFS increases after puberty especially in females com-
pared to males. The post-pubertal F:M sex ratio is 3–4:1.
CLiNiCAL DiAGNOSiS
The diagnosis of ME/CFS is based on a careful clinical history, 
recognition of the pattern of symptoms, and the exclusion 
of other illnesses that might explain the symptom complex. 
Currently, there is no valid, reliable laboratory test that confirms 
the diagnosis. Moreover, although the physical examination is not 
entirely normal, there are no specific diagnostic clinical signs and 
frequently the patient does not look ill. The diagnosis is often 
overlooked or delayed and is sometimes made retrospectively 
when the child is older.
 6
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
Several varied clinical criteria are currently used to diagnose 
ME/CFS in children and adolescents. None have been clinically 
validated in formal studies. The 1994 Fukuda case definition (1), 
see Appendix A, is often used, but was designed for research pur-
poses in adults and can exclude some young patients with ME/
CFS and include others, who are later found to have another ill-
ness (27). The 2003 Canadian clinical case definition (CCC) (24) 
is widely used in adults, because it emphasizes the core symptoms 
of the illness. A pediatric case definition based on the CCC was 
published in 2006 (27). The latter is somewhat complex for use 
in clinical practice. The following diagnostic criteria are offered 
by our experienced clinicians and are based on their collective 
experience and insight. The criteria provide useful diagnostic 
sensitivity within a heterogeneous pediatric ME/CFS patient 
population. A symptom severity scoring system is included to 
increase the specificity of the diagnostic criteria.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is char-
acterized by numerous symptoms in multiple body systems, but 
its diagnosis requires only the presence of a group of specific, 
core symptoms.
• The cardinal feature of ME/CFS is malaise and the exacer-
bation of symptoms after a variety of forms of effort (most 
commonly physical or cognitive activity or orthostatic stress). 
Post-exertional symptoms can persist for hours, days, or weeks 
and are not relieved by rest. This symptom is uncommon in 
other illnesses.
• Other core symptoms are impaired physical and/or cognitive 
function, fatigue, sleep disturbance, cognitive symptoms, and 
pain.
• Some or all symptoms are present every day (symptoms often 
fluctuate significantly in intensity during the day or from 
day-to-day).
• Symptoms are mostly moderate to severe.
• Symptoms have persisted or recurred for at least 6 months 
 
(a provisional diagnosis and appropriate management can be 
instituted before 6 months).
• Other fatiguing illnesses must be excluded by history, physical 
examination, and medical testing.
The diagnostic criteria are set out as a Clinical Diagnostic 
Worksheet which can be used in clinical practice. The worksheet 
can also be completed at follow-up visits to confirm the diag-
nosis, or track progress. Additional symptoms can be present 
in multiple organ systems. Those that are commoner in young 
patients include (a) orthostatic intolerance (OI): prolonged 
upright posture can induce symptoms such as lightheaded-
ness, increased fatigue, cognitive worsening, headaches, and/
or nausea. Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) or NMH 
is often present, (b) hypersensitivities to light, noise, touch, 
odors. and/or medications, (c) thermo-regulatory imbalance 
including low body temperature, intolerance to heat and cold, 
and cold hands and feet, (d) gastrointestinal symptoms such 
as abdominal pain, nausea, and anorexia, (e) worsening of 
fatigue in the days before and during the onset of menses can 
occur in young women, and (f) other co-morbid conditions can 
be present and are discussed in detail in Section “Comorbid 
Medical Conditions.”
The pattern of ME/CFS symptoms is distinctive and the diag-
nosis can easily be made in most cases, but there can be some 
diagnostic challenges. Younger children, especially those under 
10 years of age, might not report symptoms accurately. They 
might not remember having experienced full health and might 
assume tiredness is normal. The first sign of the illness might be 
the child’s marked limitation of physical and/or mental activity, 
noticed by a parent or a teacher. Young patients with ME/CFS 
might not necessarily recognize that they have symptoms such 
as cognitive problems or malaise until their health has improved. 
Some patients might not consider themselves as having post-
exertional symptoms because they have learned to pace their 
activities. Symptoms of ME/CFS wax and wane over time. Some 
patients might report that one particular symptom was present 
previously, but has improved by the clinic visit. Symptoms that 
persist are more easily recalled.
Patient History
It is critical to allocate enough time for a careful, comprehensive 
history to be taken from the patient and the parents. The his-
tory is not only vital to diagnosis, but also taking the history in 
a thorough and empathetic manner engenders the trust of the 
patient and family, shows that the clinician takes the patient’s 
illness seriously, and is an important prelude to management. 
Teenagers usually need an opportunity for discussion without a 
parent present. The initial evaluation might require more than 
one office visit because the history is sometimes lengthy and the 
patient might lack sufficient stamina. Some patients might need 
to lie down during office visits. For other seriously ill patients, 
an office visit might be impossible, and they require home visits.
The clinician might find it helpful to first ask the patient to list 
current symptoms in order of severity, to get a sense of the areas that 
will need to be explored. It is important to ask the patient and the 
parents what are their major concerns. This can be an opportunity 
to correct misinterpretations, e.g., “I think I might have cancer.” 
Then the history requires attention to the full range of defining 
symptoms of ME/CFS, recording both frequency and severity.
Information about diet, sleep patterns, depressed mood, anxi-
ety, school performance, relationships with family and friends, 
drug use, and family and developmental history needs to be 
obtained. The family history might reveal other family members 
with ME/CFS symptoms and there is also a higher prevalence 
of disorders such as fibromyalgia, joint hypermobility, tempo-
romandibular joint dysfunction, anxiety, syncope, and irritable 
bowel disease.
To assess function, ask about what happens when the young 
person tries to do activities that she/he previously tolerated, and 
about activities the individual must now limit or avoid. This can 
indicate very significant life changes and losses experienced by 
the patient.
Frequent monitoring of the patient once every 1–3 months, 
depending on the level of illness severity is important. Young 
patients who are ill appreciate continuing care. Functional 
improvement can be judged by determining how much activ-
ity generates post-exertional worsening of symptoms. Progress 
should be measured over time, rather than at a single clinic visit. 
In patients who are improving, fatigue is often the last symptom 
 PeDiATRiC Me/CFS: CLiNiCAL DiAGNOSTiC wORKSHeeT:
Patient Name _____________________________________________________ Patient ID ________________________  
Date __________
Criteria for the diagnosis of ME/CFS in children and adolescents:
• Impaired function, post-exertional symptoms, fatigue, sleep disturbance, neurocognitive problems, and pain.
• Some or all symptoms are present every day (symptoms often fluctuate significantly in intensity during the day or from day-to-day).
• The symptoms are mostly moderate to severe.
• Symptoms have persisted or recurred for at least 6 months (a provisional diagnosis and appropriate management can be instituted before 6 months).
• Other fatiguing illnesses have been excluded by history, physical examination, and medical testing
Have the following symptoms persisted or recurred during the past 
6 months?
Present
Symptom severity in the past month: absent 
(0), mild (1), moderate (2), and severe (3)
1. Impaired function: there is loss of mental and/or physical stamina and a substantial 
reduction in ability to take part in personal, educational, and/or social activities
Yes [  ] No [  ]
2. Post-exertional symptoms: normal activity or mild/moderate exertion is followed by 
worsening of malaise, fatigue, and other symptoms. Recovery takes more than 24 h
Yes [  ] No [  ]
3. Fatigue: the fatigue is not the result of ongoing exertion, is not relieved by rest, and 
is medically unexplained. Fatigue can worsen with prolonged upright posture
Yes [  ] No [  ]
4. Sleep problems: sleep is unrefreshing with disturbed quantity or rhythm that can 
include daytime hypersomnia, nighttime insomnia, and day/night reversal
Yes [  ] No [  ]
5. Cognitive problems: any of the following: difficulty in concentration or focusing, 
difficulty understanding information and/or expressing thoughts, difficulty finding 
words or numbers, impaired short-term memory, absent mindedness, slowness of 
thought. Cognitive problems can be provoked by, or worsen with prolonged upright 
posture and/or physical or mental activity. Some young patients may not recognize 
these problems, but they might be noticed by a parent or teacher.
Yes [  ] No [  ]
6. Pain: can be widespread or localized, commonly seen are: chronic daily 
headaches, myalgias, abdominal pain, joint pains, sore throats, and painful lymph 
nodes. Pain can be worsened by prolonged upright posture. Rarely is pain absent
Yes [  ] No [  ]
Total symptom severity score:
Other symptoms present in many, but not all, pediatric patients with Me/CFS:
  Orthostatic intolerance: prolonged upright posture can induce symptoms that can include lightheadedness, increased fatigue, cognitive worsening, headaches, 
and/or nausea. Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) or neurally mediated hypotension (NMH) are often present.
  Hypersensitivities: to light, noise, touch, odors, and medications.
  Thermo-regulatory imbalance: low body temperature, intolerance to heat and cold, and/or cold hands and feet.
  Gastrointestinal symptoms: abdominal pain, nausea and/or anorexia.
To diagnose Me/CFS:
• Symptom criteria 1, 2, and 3 are present together with at least two of criteria 4, 5, and 6: Yes [  ] No [  ]
• Symptoms are present for 6 months and some or all symptoms are present daily: Yes [  ] No [  ]
• No other diagnosis found from the history, physical examination, and medical testing: Yes [  ] No [  ]
• Symptom severity score: 0–4 ME/CFS unlikely; 5–12 mild/moderate ME/CFS; 13–18 moderate/severe ME/CFS
_______ Patient meets criteria for ME/CFS.
_______ Full criteria not met. Patient should be monitored and symptoms should be managed.
7
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
to resolve, since young patients often prefer to increase their 
activities and tolerate the resulting fatigue. The practitioner must 
be alert for the emergence of new symptoms. They might not be 
related to ME/CFS, but due to another illness.
Physical examination
A thorough physical examination, including a neurological exam 
is important to exclude other causes of fatigue. Physical signs in 
ME/CFS are subtle and none are diagnostic. Many patients do not 
look ill, but noticeable facial pallor is sometimes apparent and often 
precedes the onset of extreme tiredness in the patient. The pallor 
can be associated with sub-orbital dark shadows. The pharynx 
can show non-exudative pharyngitis and cervical and axillary 
lymph nodes might be palpable and tender. Muscle tenderness 
is a feature of co-morbid juvenile fibromyalgia. Fibromyalgia is 
less common in children with ME/CFS than in adults. The hands 
and feet can be unusually cold and dependent rubor of the legs 
is often present when standing or sitting. The physical exam 
should include an assessment for common co-morbid conditions 
such as OI [heart rate (HR) and blood pressure (BP) sitting and 
standing], joint hypermobility, and postural dysfunctions (see 
Comorbid Medical Conditions).
 TABLe 3 | Common conditions in the differential diagnosis of ME/CFS.
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Athletic overtraining syndrome
• Bowel disorders: celiac disease, 
inflammatory bowel disease, and 
eosinophilic gastroenteritis
• Chiari malformation or cervical spine 
stenosis
• Lyme disease and other tick-borne 
infections
• Major depression
• Narcolepsy
• Obstructive or central apnea
• Post-concussion syndrome
• Severe anemias
• Systemic lupus erythematosis and 
similar autoimmune conditions
• Untreated hypo- or hyper-thyroidism
TABLe 2 | Investigation of ME/CFS: tests to be considered when indicated.
• Allergic: skin tests, RAST tests, serum tryptase
• Cardiac: chest x-ray, EKG (ECG), echocardiogram in those with heart 
murmurs, tilt testing for those with prominent orthostatic symptoms but no 
hemodynamic abnormalities in the office 10-min standing test
• Endocrine/metabolic: morning cortisol, FSH, LH, estradiol, testosterone, 
prolactin, lactate, pyruvate, IGF-1 and IGF-3, thyroid autoantibodies
• Gastrointestinal: upper GI endoscopy, colonoscopy, gastric emptying study, 
HIDA scan, ultrasound of gallbladder
• Gynecological: ultrasound, laparoscopy, ovarian venogram (to evaluate for 
ovarian varices)
• Immunological: anti-double stranded DNA, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies, quantitative immunoglobulins, functional antibodies, response to 
pneumococcal vaccination
• Infectious diseases: infectious mononucleosis, lyme, and other tick-borne 
diseases (Babesia microti, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia chaffeensis) 
in endemic areas
• Neurological: MRI studies if Chiari malformation, cervical stenosis, tethered 
spinal cord, or MS are suspected
• Pulmonary: pulmonary function tests
• Sleep: polysomnography, multiple sleep latency testing
• Urological: cystoscopy
TABLe 1 | Investigation of ME/CFS: routine laboratory testing.
• Complete blood count with 
differential
• Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
• Electrolytes
• Calcium
• Phosphate
• Fasting glucose
• C-reactive protein
• Liver function: bilirubin, 
alkaline phosphatase, gamma 
glutamyl transaminase, alanine 
transaminase, aspartate 
transaminase
• Total protein, albumin/globulin ratio
• Renal function: urea, creatinine, 
glomerular filtration rate
• Thyroid function: thyroid stimulating 
hormone, free thyroxine (free T4)
• Anti-nuclear antibodies
• Iron studies: serum iron and transferrin 
or ferritin
• Vitamin B 12 and folate
• Vitamin D3, 25-hydroxy cholecalciferol
• Celiac screening: tissue 
transglutaminase IgA and IgG, with 
serum IgA
• Urinalysis
8
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
At illness onset, pyrexia can be present and this can persist 
for some weeks. If fever is present several months into the ill-
ness, other causes of fever should be sought. In established cases, 
slightly subnormal temperature, 96.8–98.0°F (36.0–36.7°C), is 
common. Some children with ME/CFS have higher resting HRs 
than expected and occasional patients have resting hypotension. 
More commonly, HR and BP abnormalities emerge in response 
to upright posture. The diagnosis and management of ortho-
static problems is discussed in the section “Comorbid Medical 
Conditions.”
Laboratory Testing
Basic laboratory studies (Table 1) should be performed to iden-
tify other causes of fatigue and any organ system dysfunction. 
Most routine laboratory tests are within the normal range, and 
do not correlate with overall function, even in the presence of 
substantial debilitation. Measures of iron stores, vitamin B12 
level, and screening for celiac disease are recommended because 
of their subtle or absent manifestations on physical examination.
Additional testing (Table 2) is based on history, examination 
and laboratory findings. For example, a search for infections 
such as Lyme disease depends on the symptoms and on whether 
the young patient resides in, or has traveled to, endemic areas. 
Serology for some infectious illnesses can be weakly positive. 
Although standard serology for EBV and CMV can help with 
categorizing whether the illness might have been initiated by 
these organisms, these test results usually do not change manage-
ment. MRIs of the brain and spine are not routinely indicated, but 
clearly are important if there are abnormal neurological signs.
Differential Diagnosis, exclusionary 
Medical Conditions
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome should not 
be diagnosed if the patient has an identifiable medical or primary 
psychiatric condition that could plausibly account for the pre-
senting symptoms. If ME/CFS symptoms persist after adequate 
treatment of other confounding illnesses, a diagnosis of ME/CFS 
can be considered.
Fatigue is an early symptom in many medical conditions and 
can be present before the appearance of the diagnostic features of 
the underlying illness. Careful follow-up over time is needed in 
order to identify illnesses that might mimic ME/CFS in their early 
stages. The presence of post-exertional malaise and exacerbation 
of symptoms after increased cognitive or physical effort increases 
the likelihood that ME/CFS is the correct diagnosis. The more 
common conditions in the differential diagnosis are shown 
in Table 3. For a more comprehensive list of the less common 
disorders in the differential diagnosis, see Appendix B. If there 
is diagnostic uncertainty and referral is necessary, it should be 
preferably to a specialist familiar with ME/CFS.
Co-existing Medical Conditions
A number of non-exclusionary conditions can co-exist with ME/
CFS (Table 4). If present, co-existing conditions should be evalu-
ated independently and treated appropriately. Some co-existing 
medical conditions that are seen significantly often in young 
patients with ME/CFS and significantly reduce the patient’s 
functional capacity are discussed in more detail in the section 
“Comorbid Medical Conditions.”
Cognitive impairment
Cognitive deficits (sometimes called “brain fog”) are some of 
the most functionally disabling symptoms of ME/CFS. They 
are of great concern to children and adolescents because they 
impact their ability to learn and attend school (see The School 
System). Cognitive impairments are similar in both adult and 
 TABLe 4 | Non-exclusionary overlapping conditions.
Autoimmune
Sicca syndrome
Gastrointestinal
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Gastroesophageal reflux
GI motility disturbances
IgE-mediated food allergy, non-IgE mediated milk protein or 
other food protein hypersensitivity
Irritable bowel syndrome
Lactose/fructose intolerance
Neurological
Chiari 1 malformation
Migraines
Thoracic outlet syndrome
Hypersensitivity to light, touch, sound, odors, and medicines
Respiratory
Allergic rhinitis
Asthma
Chronic sinusitis
Cardiovascular
Autonomic dysfunction
Mitral valve prolapse
Orthostatic intolerance
Neurally mediated hypotension
Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
Delayed orthostatic hypotension  
or tachycardia
Gynecological
Dysmenorrhea
Endometriosis
Pelvic congestion syndrome/pelvic venous  
incompetence
Premenstrual syndrome/dysphoric disorder
Vulvodynia
Rheumatological
Joint hypermobility syndrome
Juvenile fibromyalgia
Myofascial pain syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Temporomandibular joint disease
Endocrine/metabolic
Insulin resistance
Hypoglycemia
Metabolic syndrome
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Severe obesity
Sleep disorders
Periodic limb movement disorder
Restless leg syndrome
Hematological
Iron deficiency
Mast cell activation disorder
Urinary
Interstitial cystitis
9
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
young patients with ME/CFS. Slow mental processing speed, 
impaired working memory, poor learning of new information, 
difficulty with word retrieval, increased distractibility, decreased 
concentration and attention span, and inability to multitask may 
be found (85–87).
The severity of cognitive problems fluctuates together with 
disease activity both during the day and from day-to-day. 
Cognitive deficits can be related to abnormal neurological 
pathophysiology and reduced cerebral blood flow (see Etiology 
and Pathophysiology).
Any form of mental activity can be followed by diminished 
cognitive functioning as well as other post-exertional symptoms 
in a manner similar to the exacerbation following physical exer-
tion. Cognitive symptoms can also be aggravated by a multitude 
of other factors including: pain (especially headaches), poor 
sleep, prolonged upright posture, a noisy classroom, eye fatigue 
from staring at a computer screen for too long, carrying heavy 
books around school, and social interactions. Young patients 
might be motivated to keep up with their peers and push them-
selves mentally, physically, and socially beyond their comfort 
zone, and suffer cognitive consequences. Cognitive problems can 
also be exacerbated by the stress of living with a chronic (often 
undiagnosed) illness (see Psychological Reactions Secondary to 
ME/CFS: Distinction from Depression and Anxiety Disorders).
Psychological Reactions Secondary to 
Me/CFS: Distinction from Depression  
and Anxiety Disorders
Studies focusing on psychological problems in pediatric ME/CFS 
patients are limited. In this section, available studies have been 
supplemented by the insights of our experienced clinicians. It is 
important to distinguish: (a) normal emotional reactions to ME/
CFS from (b) clinically significant psychiatric symptoms such 
as depression or anxiety secondary to ME/CFS and from (c) a 
primary psychiatric illness such as Major Depressive Disorder 
(MDD) or an anxiety disorder without co-existing ME/CFS.
Emotional Responses to a Chronic Illness
Emotional responses to the difficulties of ME/CFS are common. 
These responses are similar to the responses of young patients 
with other chronic illnesses. Grief and anger can arise over 
illness-related losses, from negative responses to the illness 
from family members, friends and school staff, and from the 
pervasive stigmatization of this particular illness. Apprehension 
commonly follows the onset of an illness, which can be undi-
agnosed and about which there is generally ignorance. There 
can be frustration with the inability to do things that were easily 
done beforehand. Outbursts of weeping can stem from excessive 
tiredness and/or feeling overwhelmed. Emotional distress can 
also occur because of disbelief by others regarding the reality of 
the illness, or by the prescription of inappropriate remedies by 
health-care providers.
Some young patients despair of medical care and plead to 
decline hospital admission, due to previously experiencing the 
hostile and disbelieving attitudes of some health care providers 
and/or the exacerbation of their illness by increased hospital-
related activity and the noisy environment. These emotional 
responses to the illness do not ordinarily rise to the level of a 
psychiatric disorder, but occasionally, psychiatric symptoms are 
more severe, and a clinically diagnosable, psychiatric disorder 
can co-exist with ME/CFS.
Identifying Clinically Significant Depression and 
Anxiety Co-Existing with ME/CFS
The most common secondary psychiatric symptoms are depres-
sion and anxiety. These symptoms can be present together in the 
young patient. Clinically significant depression and anxiety can 
 TABLe 5 | Symptom comparison between depression/anxiety disorders and ME/CFS in children and adolescents.
Symptoms
Depression/anxiety 
disorders
Me/CFS
Comments
Fatigue, lack of energy, difficulty 
sleeping, cognitive problems, weight 
gain, or loss
Yes
Yes
These symptoms occur in both conditions. In ME/CFS, fatigue tends to fluctuate during the 
day and from day-to-day
Absence from school
Yes
Yes
ME/CFS is the most common medical cause of prolonged absence from school
Depression, feeling sad for no 
apparent reason
Yes
Sometimes
Young patients with ME/CFS might be sad, discouraged and fed up. Clinical depression is 
more likely in those who encounter disbelief in the reality of their illness
Anxiety
Yes
Sometimes
In young patients with ME/CFS, anxiety can be associated with having an undiagnosed 
illness, ignorance about ME/CFS, and/or skepticism about the reality of the illness from 
family members, physicians, or staff at school. Panic attacks are occasionally seen. There is 
a higher degree of anxiety in young patients with co-morbid OI and joint hypermobility
Feelings of worthlessness, guilt, low 
self-esteem
Yes
No
Occasionally, young patients with ME/CFS feel guilty because the illness has caused family 
disruption. These feelings are secondary to the illness
Anhedonia (lack of interest and/
or pleasure in activities previously 
enjoyed)
Yes
No
Young patients with ME/CFS often wish to engage in previous activities but are physically 
unable to do so. They might still enjoy previous activities even when the activities exceed 
their energy limits. Patients with depressive illness do not wish to engage in, or enjoy 
previous activities, but are physically able to do so
Severe depression with suicidal 
thinking
Yes
No
Severe depression with suicidal thinking is not present in ME/CFS without co-morbid major 
depressive disorder
Lack of interest in friendships/
relationships
Yes
No
Young patients with ME/CFS often want to socialize, but are physically and cognitively 
unable to do so. Patients with depressive illness often do not wish to socialize
Post-exertional symptom worsening
No
Yes
This is a hallmark of ME/CFS. Patients with Depression/Anxiety often feel better after 
exertion.
Orthostatic intolerance (OI)
Occasionally
Sometimes
Much more common in young patients with ME/CFS
Hypersensitivities to light noise, 
odors, and medications
No
Sometimes
Common in young patients with ME/CFS. Can contribute to feeling anxious and 
overwhelmed
Difficulty with thermoregulation, low 
body temperature, and intolerance 
to heat and cold
No
Sometimes
Common in young patients with ME/CFS
10
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
be uncovered by clinical evaluation and the use of standardized 
questionnaires. Occasionally depression or anxiety predate the 
onset of the illness, but distinctive, abnormal, pre-illness person-
ality characteristics have not been identified in young ME/CFS 
patients.
Identifying psychological disorders in younger children can be 
difficult. They might not manifest depressed mood, as they might 
not be developmentally able to sense, and verbalize their moods. 
Rather, they might show behavioral symptoms such as irritability, 
low frustration tolerance, tantrums, somatic complaints, and/or 
withdrawal.
Many young patients with ME/CFS are miserable and dis-
couraged (fed up) by being ill, but are not necessarily depressed. 
There is a higher incidence of clinical depression when the young 
patient has encountered disbelief in the reality of her/his illness.
In otherwise healthy young people, approximately 2% of 
children and 4–8% of adolescents have a diagnosable, major 
depressive disorder (MDD). Less severe episodes of depression 
can be seen in another 5–10% of children and adolescents. In 
adolescents, twice as many females as males meet criteria for 
depression. In one large study of ~400 patients with ME/CFS, 
25% had clinical depression using the Beck scale, while the 
baseline level of depression in the adolescent population was 
20% (88).
Raised apprehension levels are a common response to illness. 
Anxiety secondary to ME/CFS can arise with the illness onset and 
persist because the illness affects all aspects of the young person’s 
life. Clinical observation suggests that the incidence of panic 
attacks might be higher in young patients with ME/CFS than in 
a normal population of teenagers. Clinical observation has also 
shown a higher degree of anxiety in patients with co-morbid OI 
and joint hypermobility. It is postulated that the anxiety might be 
associated with raised levels of catecholamines and reduced brain 
blood flow in these conditions.
Differentiating ME/CFS from Primary Depressive and 
Anxiety Disorders without Co-Existing ME/CFS
This can be challenging. Symptoms common to both ME/CFS 
and psychiatric illness include fatigue, change in activity levels, 
reluctance to engage in social activities, difficulty sleeping, poor 
memory and concentration, appetite/weight changes and absence 
from school.
Some features distinguishing ME/CFS from primary psychi-
atric illnesses are shown in Table 5. In patients with ME/CFS, 
long-lasting post-exertional exacerbation of fatigue and other 
symptoms can follow mild exertion or even normal activity, 
whereas patients with major depression or anxiety often feel 
better after increased activity, exercise, or mental effort. OI, 
 11
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
hypersensitivities to light, noise and medications and/or low 
body temperature, and intolerance to heat and cold are typical of 
ME/CFS, but not typical of psychiatric illnesses. Young women 
with ME/CFS often experience greater premenstrual mood 
lability.
Most teenagers with ME/CFS are highly motivated to recover 
and return to their previous lives. They generally have a strong 
desire to be more active, but cannot tolerate the necessary exer-
tion. In contrast, patients with major depression do not have the 
desire to be more active but could be.
Adolescents with MDD show depressed mood, a sense of 
worthlessness or guilt, low self-esteem, loss of interest in social-
izing and in previously enjoyable circumstances (anhedonia), and 
a lack of interest in the future. Although these are typical symp-
toms of MDD, some young people with ME/CFS (but without 
co-morbid depressive illness) might also feel guilty because their 
illness has disrupted their family, and a parent might have had 
to give up work to care for them. They might also be reluctant to 
make plans to socialize, because they know from past experience 
that they might find themselves at the time of the event to be 
too ill to participate, have to cancel, and let down their friends. 
Anhedonia has not been reported in ME/CFS unless MDD was 
also present. Young people with ME/CFS often take much pleas-
ure in previous activities, even if the activities exceed their energy 
reserves and cause subsequent symptom exacerbation.
In young people with MDD suicidal thoughts and suicide 
attempts can occur, more so in adolescents than in younger 
children. If suicidal thoughts are present a suicide evaluation 
should be done and referral to a child psychiatrist is often helpful. 
Suicidal thoughts are only seen in ME/CFS when MDD is also 
present.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome has a 
significant impact on a young patient’s parents and siblings. This 
impact of the illness on family members can have a secondary 
effect on the patient (see Impact of ME/CFS on the Family). 
Psychiatric symptoms persisting during the recovery phase of 
ME/CFS can make it difficult to determine whether the patient’s 
limitations are due to ME/CFS, or due to associated psychiatric 
illness.
Psychiatric Illnesses That May be Misdiagnosed in 
Young Patients with ME/CFS
Lack of familiarity with the clinical diagnostic features of ME/
CFS and skepticism about its existence has often resulted in a 
misdiagnosis with one of the following conditions:
• Factitious disorder by proxy (Munchausen syndrome by proxy, 
fabricated or induced illness) (FDP/MSBP).
• School refusal (school phobia).
• Pervasive refusal syndrome (PRS).
• Somatoform disorder.
Factitious Disorder by Proxy (Munchausen’s 
Syndrome by Proxy, Fabricated or Induced Illness)
In cases of FDP/MSBP, the perpetrator, usually the mother, 
induces illness in the victim who is often her very young child. 
[The average age of patients with FDP/MSBP is 4 years old and 
50% of patients are <2 years old (89)] Such cases are extremely 
rare. Most pediatricians only see 1–2 cases in their whole profes-
sional careers. FDP/MSBP can be difficult to diagnose but it is a 
diagnosis that needs to be made as it is a form of child abuse and 
can result in death of the child.
FDP/MSBP is sometimes falsely diagnosed in young persons 
with ME/CFS. A report in the press showed that of 143 young 
persons diagnosed with ME/CFS, but alleged to be victims of 
FDP/MSBP, (who were assisted by a charity), none were found to 
be cases of FDP/MSBP (90).
Thus, the treating physician might need to firmly establish the 
diagnosis of ME/CFS and show how ME/CFS differs from MSBP/
FDP. Some distinguishing features are shown in Table 6 (89).
During history taking, the parents sometimes refuse permis-
sion for the clinician to speak to the young person without a 
parent being present. The young patient and parents might have 
had previous unhappy or unhelpful experiences with other pro-
fessionals. Similarly, a young person with ME/CFS may turn to 
her/his parents when being questioned. This is a natural response 
in an ill child who has cognitive dysfunction. These behaviors by 
themselves do not support a diagnosis of FDP/MSBP. Suspicion 
of FDP/MSBP can result in referral to child protection services 
(CPS). Young persons with ME/CFS placed in CPS do not fare 
well. When separated from their parents and sent to live with 
foster parents or admitted to psychiatric institutions, their ME/
CFS symptoms have often worsened.
School Refusal (School Phobia)
School refusal has an estimated prevalence of 1–5% and is more 
common than ME/CFS. It occurs predominately in children 
less than 12 years of age (91). Children with school refusal fail 
to attend school because attendance causes emotional distress 
and anxiety. At the prospect of going to school, the young person 
exhibits behavioral symptoms, including temper tantrums, cry-
ing, angry outbursts, threats to hurt her/himself, and/or a variety 
of somatic complaints, such as nausea, dizziness, pains, diarrhea, 
or trembling.
In contrast, young people with ME/CFS usually want to attend 
school but are prevented from doing so by physical limitations. 
Other distinguishing features of ME/CFS are post-exertional 
malaise with exacerbation of other symptoms and OI. Symptoms 
of school refusal improve once the child is allowed to stay at home 
and resolve during weekends and school vacations. By contrast, 
in the young patient with ME/CFS, symptoms persist during 
weekends and school vacations, but can improve slightly due to 
decreased activity. During convalescence from severe ME/CFS, 
the young patient might find it difficult to return to school, having 
been absent for a variable period of time, having lost contact with 
many of her/his friends and because of concern those symptoms 
might worsen. Such hesitancy should not be misdiagnosed as 
“school refusal.” It should be managed with understanding by the 
parents, the physician and school personnel.
Pervasive Refusal Syndrome
This condition describes a young patient who has despaired of any 
help from medical care and has lost all hope, as if wanting to die 
and, therefore, rejects medical care. It is extremely rare. Individual 
case reports are still being published. The young person refuses 
 TABLe 6 | Comparison between ME/CFS and factitious disorder/Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy/fabricated or induced illness.
Pediatric Me/CFS
Factitious disorder by proxya
Prevalence
Approximately 100–500 per 100,000
Very rare, approximately 0.4–2 per 100,000
Age and age range
Peak age 10–17 years, range 2–17 years
Average age 4 years; >50% of patients are aged <2 years; extremely 
rare in adolescents
Symptoms
Consistent pattern of symptoms: reduction in activity, post-
exertional worsening of symptoms, fatigue and loss of stamina, 
unrefreshing sleep, cognitive problems, orthostatic intolerance and 
headaches; a history of surgeries is uncommon
No consistent symptoms. Most frequently reported are: apnea/
cyanosis, anorexia/feeding problems, diarrhea, seizures, asthma, 
allergy, fevers, behavioral problems, and other sometimes bizarre 
symptoms, a history of surgeries is common
Clinical signs
Intermittent conspicuous facial pallor, acrocyanosis, joint 
hypermobility common, blood pressure can fall or heart rate rise on 
prolonged standing
No consistent clinical signs, many patients have multiple surgical 
scars
Orthostatic intolerance (OI)
Many patients have POTS or NMH
Not reported
Blood testing
Routine blood tests usually normal
Routine blood tests can show bizarre abnormalities
Neuroimaging
Neuroimaging can reveal defects in brain perfusion and/or 
metabolism
No reports of neuroimaging
Multiple doctors seen
Common
Common
Hospital admissions
Hospital admissions unusual
Hospital admissions very common
Medical knowledge
Parents can be very knowledgeable about ME/CFS
Parent/perpetrator can be knowledgeable about medical conditions
School absence
Common, it is the most common medical cause of prolonged 
school absence
Most patients are pre-school age. Common in school-age patients 
Separation from parents
Detrimental. Patient does not recover, illness often worsens
Patient improves/recovers when separated from a parent/ 
perpetrator
Mortality
Extremely low
Approximately 10% in patients and 25% in patients’ siblings
aShaw et al. (89).
12
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
food and fluids, and might pull out IV cannulas and nasogastric 
tubes. It has occurred in young patients with neoplastic disease 
sickened by too many interventions and it has been described 
subsequent to sexual abuse. PRS is sometimes wrongly diagnosed 
in very severe cases of ME/CFS, when the young patient is physi-
cally incapable of sitting up or even swallowing. In contrast to 
PRS, the young person with severe ME/CFS usually wants to get 
better and co-operates with medical help such as tube feeding. 
Management of the two conditions consists of the avoidance of 
stress, medical help with nutrition, assistance with living con-
fined to bed, and an empathetic form of management to which 
the young person gives consent. A mistaken diagnosis of PRS in 
a patient with very severe ME/CFS can result in transfer of care 
to a psychiatrist whose management might include detrimental 
regimes, such as forced exercise and separation from family.
Somatoform Disorders
Somatoform disorders are psychiatric disorders that cause bod-
ily symptoms that cannot be traced back to a physical cause. 
Prior to diagnosing a somatoform disorder, it is necessary to 
rule out medical conditions with overlapping symptoms, (such 
as ME/CFS). Symptoms such as pain occur in both ME/CFS 
and somatoform disorders, but post-exertional exacerbation of 
symptoms and orthostatic hypotension are found in ME/CFS, 
but not in somatoform disorders. Serious deterioration can 
occur in young patients with ME/CFS who are misdiagnosed 
as having somatoform disorder and given psychiatric treatment 
that includes rigidly enforced exercise.
Other Psychiatric Conditions
Some additional psychiatric conditions might need to be dif-
ferentiated from ME/CFS. ME/CFS symptoms such as poor 
concentration and loss of short-term memory, noticed in 
the patient’s classroom, can sometimes lead to an erroneous 
diagnosis of attention deficit disorder without hyperactivity. If 
the young patient is unable to eat properly due to nausea and 
gastrointestinal symptoms, ME/CFS must be distinguished from 
an eating disorder. ME/CFS may also need to be distinguished 
from substance abuse.
MANAGeMeNT/TReATMeNT
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome impacts 
a young person’s entire life. Coping with debilitating medical 
symptoms, changed relationships within the family, absence 
from school, and loss of socializing with peers can all result 
from the illness. These losses can trigger confusion and crisis. 
Often the patient might not have been diagnosed and might 
not have received appropriate help from previous health 
practitioners, since the young person may not look ill and may 
have a normal physical examination as well as normal routine 
laboratory tests.
Given the paucity of peer-reviewed literature on the manage-
ment of ME/CFS in this age group, this chapter is a compendium 
of the experience of several clinicians, each of whom has treated 
children and adolescents with ME/CFS for over 20 years. The 
chapter provides recommendations primarily for ambulatory 
 13
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
patients who are able to attend office visits even if using a wheel-
chair. Special consideration is given in the section “Severely 
Affected and Very Severely Affected Young Patients” for young 
people who are housebound or bedridden.
Approach to Management
Currently, there is no treatment protocol or intervention which 
will cure ME/CFS. The role of the physician is, therefore, first, 
to do no harm, second, to try to improve daily function, expand 
activity, and ameliorate specific symptoms, and third to sup-
port the patient and the family. School personnel often need to 
be educated about ME/CFS and made aware that ME/CFS is a 
physical/organic illness, not a psychological disorder. We caution 
against reliance on internet-based information because much 
of it is anecdotal, uncorroborated, and may be designed to sell 
unproven products or services.
Due to variation in symptoms and co-morbid conditions, 
no single approach works for all patients. Management requires 
careful attention by the patient, the family and the practitioner 
to factors that provoke symptoms and a willingness to try several 
approaches before improvement is achieved.
Most young people can achieve functional improvement. But 
even in the absence of improvement, the practitioner can help 
affected young people simply by continuing to evaluate them, 
providing encouragement, and discussing any new treatments 
that emerge. A survey of adolescents with ME/CFS found that 
doctors were considered to be most helpful when they validated 
the illness, acknowledged its effects, provided ongoing support, 
and monitored progress (23).
Management is based on: early diagnosis, educating the 
patient, the family and school personnel about the illness, deter-
mining the dominant causes of post-exertional symptoms, treat-
ing symptoms with non-pharmacological and pharmacological 
interventions, providing guidance on activity, diet, maintaining 
social contacts and educational opportunities, and monitoring 
progress.
Establishing the diagnosis of ME/CFS and acknowledging 
that the patient has a recognized illness can produce much 
relief. In explaining the illness, it is important to reassure the 
patient that the illness is real despite often normal blood-test 
findings and the potential for functional improvement should be 
emphasized. A firm diagnosis can relieve fears of other illnesses 
such as malignant disease, relieve fears of imminent mortality, 
validate the presence of symptoms, facilitate the development 
of a therapeutic partnership with the patient and family, enable 
the establishment of a management plan, and help organiza-
tions such as the young person’s school to provide appropriate 
education.
Misinformation or absence of information about ME/CFS is 
common. Educating the patient, the parents, the wider family 
and school personnel about the illness is important, e.g. provid-
ing handouts (Appendices C–E). Sometimes, school personnel 
and child protection services might need to be persuaded that 
their misapprehension that the young patient has factitious dis-
order by proxy (Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy) or pervasive 
refusal syndrome is wrong and that these mis-diagnoses can 
seriously harm the young patient.
Clinical management can be improved by the following 
suggestions:
• Obtain a written list of the patient’s most troublesome 
symptoms.
• Agree with the patient and family to focus on a limited number 
of symptoms.
• Recommend that a family member write down or record 
medical advice.
In reviewing the patient’s most troublesome symptoms, spe-
cial attention should be paid to those factors which exacerbate 
symptoms, e.g., upright posture. Then a decision can be made 
about which symptoms should be addressed first.
Management focuses on non-pharmacological and pharma-
cological interventions. Medication can be most helpful in the 
relief of some individual symptoms. Since many pediatric patients 
with ME/CFS respond to much lower than standard doses of 
medication (1/2 or 1/4 of the usual dose), the dosage should start 
low and be increased slowly. In general any change in medication 
should be made one medication at a time, so that any favorable or 
unfavorable effects can be attributed to one medication.
Guidance needs to be given on an activity plan that helps the 
young person to function. Adolescent patients are encouraged 
to propose a personal, optimal balance of social, physical, and 
academic activities (and include something pleasurable outside 
of the home). Very little else is under their control. At each visit, 
the activity plan can be adjusted, in relation to symptom severity 
or improvement. Advice on schooling depends on the severity of 
the illness (see “The School System”).
Successful symptom management requires a regular review 
of symptoms and symptom severity. Visits every 1–3 months 
or so, depending on level of severity can be helpful. In patients 
who are improving, fatigue can be one of the last symptoms to 
subside. Young people often expand their activity level as they 
start to improve, preferring to tolerate some symptoms rather 
than remain on restricted activities so as to experience less 
fatigue. Thus, measuring improvement by asking solely about 
fatigue can underestimate progress. Functional improvement can 
be judged by determining how much activity it takes to provoke 
post-exertional worsening of symptoms. It can be helpful to use 
questionnaires/forms which measure activity, cognitive function, 
and mood to quantify the severity of the illness, and document 
progress. Brief questionnaires used in some pediatric ME/CFS 
studies include the Functional Disability Inventory (92), PedsQL 
(93), and Wood Mental Fatigue Inventory (94). Progress should 
be measured over months or years, rather than at a single clinic 
visit.
The young patient should be encouraged to report any changes 
or additional symptoms as symptoms of ME/CFS wax and wane. 
The physician might need to determine whether new or changing 
symptoms represent an altered ME/CFS symptomology, the onset 
of common co-morbid conditions, or whether new symptoms are 
suggestive of an alternative diagnosis. Changes to medications 
and/or their dosages might be required. Reassurance that medical 
advice from the treating physician will continue to be available 
can help the patient and family cope with the disease. Telephone 
or Skype contact can serve the same purpose for those who are 
 TABLe 8 | Medications for headaches.
Medication
Usual adolescent 
dose
Comments
Supplements
Riboflavin
200 mg bid or 400 mg 
daily
Available as a single supplement or in 
combination with others (e.g., MigreLief)
Co-enzyme Q10
300 mg daily in 2–3 
divided doses
Magnesium
250 mg daily
Antihistamines
Pizotifen
1–1.5 mg nightly
Helpful for co-morbid insomnia and 
for poor appetite. Can cause weight 
gain. Pizotifen is not available in all 
countries
Cyproheptadine
2–8 mg nightly
Tricyclics
Amitriptyline
10–25 mg nightly 
(Up to 50 mg may be 
tolerated)
Useful for co-morbid fibromyalgia and 
abdominal hyperalgesia. Can cause 
lightheadedness and fatigue even 
at low doses. Can take 4 weeks to 
become effective.
TABLe 7 | Medications for sleep.
Medication
Usual adolescent dose
Comments
Melatonin
3 mg (range 1–12 mg)
Use dose that is effective given 
half to 1 h before bedtime
Diphenhydramine
25 mg at bedtime
Can cause excessive sedation 
or dry mouth
Tricyclics (TCAs)
Amitriptyline
Dothiepin
10–25 mg at bedtime
25 mg at bedtime
Can be helpful for pain and 
headaches. Can cause 
weight gain, dry mouth, 
lightheadedness, and excessive 
sedation
Clonazepam
0.5–1 mg at bedtime
Helpful if anxiety is affecting 
sleep. Can help restless leg 
syndrome. Using low doses, 
taken only at night, physiological 
dependence is unlikely
14
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
more severely affected and unable to travel, or those who are 
geographically remote.
The Acute Stage of Me/CFS
In the early, acute, febrile stage of ME/CFS, the diagnosis can 
be uncertain and other causes of fever need to be considered. 
Adequate rest and activity management are the mainstays of 
treatment. Premature resumption of activity or attempts to return 
to school can result in a relapse or increased severity of symptoms.
Sleep Problems
Patients with ME/CFS experience unrefreshing sleep. Disturbed 
sleep patterns include difficulty falling or staying asleep, frequent 
awakenings, vivid dreams, day/night reversal, and hypersomnia. 
For many young patients, naps are important to get through 
the day, but marked daytime sleepiness can result from condi-
tions such as sleep apnea. Sleepiness can be measured using the 
Epworth sleepiness scale (95).
Hypersomnia (sleeping for up to 20 h a day) can occur in the 
early stages of the illness and can persist for weeks and occasion-
ally months. Young people who sleep for more than 12 h at a time 
can develop dehydration. During wakeful periods, the young 
patient’s parents/caregivers need to ensure adequate hydration 
and nourishment. When oral hydration and nourishment are 
inadequate, tube feeding is necessary. If hypersomnia persists for 
months, the young person should be evaluated by a sleep special-
ist, preferably one who is familiar with ME/CFS.
Conventional sleep hygiene measures for insomnia in other-
wise healthy people can be ineffective in young people with ME/
CFS, but the following measures can be helpful:
• Balance daytime activity with rest (pacing of activity), to avoid 
post-exertional symptom exacerbation, which can interfere 
with sleep (see Fatigue, Post-Exertional Symptoms, Exercise 
Intolerance).
• Eliminate caffeine-containing beverages in the late afternoon 
and evening.
• Avoid television, computers, and electronic devices before 
and after bedtime, (light from electronic devices can aggravate 
insomnia and fatigue).
• A carbohydrate snack at bedtime might be helpful (96).
If insomnia or sleep reversal is profound, sleep medications, 
can be started at a low-dose. The risk of adverse effects needs to 
be balanced with the gains from a better night’s sleep and sleep-
ing the same hours as other family members. The medications 
chosen should be safe for long-term use and should be taken early 
enough to be effective at bed time. Non-pharmacological rem-
edies can include herbal teas, such as Chamomile. Commonly 
used medications are listed in Table 7. For more severe problems, 
Zolpidem and trazodone can be used with caution. Controlling 
pain (see Pain) will often help sleep.
Pain
Pain in ME/CFS can be widespread or localized. Sometimes pain 
is so severe that the patient is unable to tolerate even a gentle 
touch. Common types of pain include: headache, abdominal 
pain, myalgia, joint pain, sore throat, lymph nodes, eye pain and 
occasionally pelvic pain or dysuria (97, 98). It is important to treat 
localized pain such as headache, because pain can amplify other 
symptoms.
Chronic, daily headaches, which can fluctuate in severity from 
week-to-week, are common. If they are episodic, a diagnosis of 
migraine should be considered. Possible triggers include inade-
quate sleep, stress, skipped meals, specific foods and supplements 
(including, but not limited to chocolates, nuts, and aspartame). 
Initial intervention focuses on avoiding the common triggers. 
Migraine-prevention drugs are worth a trial for both episodic and 
non-episodic chronic, daily headaches. Commonly used medica-
tions are shown in Table 8. Beta blockers can help headaches that 
are associated with OI (see Orthostatic Intolerance).
Myalgia and pain from co-morbid fibromyalgia can be found 
in from 10 to 30% of pediatric patients with ME/CFS and is 
less common than in adults (98). Abdominal pain and Nausea 
are common (98, 99). Abdominal hyperalgesia may also occur. 
Gastrointestinal motility disorders can be present, especially in 
patients with OI.
Helpful, non-pharmacological remediation for pain includes: 
pacing of activity to avoid flare-ups (see Fatigue, Post-Exertional 
 TABLe 9 | Medications for generalized pain.
Medication
Usual adolescent 
dose
Comments
Tricyclics
See Table 7
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or SNRis
Sertraline HCl
Escitalopram
Venlafaxine HCl
Duloxetine HCl
Bupropion HCl
25–100 mg daily
5–20 mg daily
37.5–225 mg daily
20–60 mg daily
150–300 mg daily
Consider in patients with co-morbid 
anxiety or depression. These 
medications should not be stopped 
suddenly. Patients should be weaned 
very gradually off them, especially 
duloxetine. Duloxetine can be helpful 
for fibromyalgia
Anticonvulsants
Topiramate 
(Topamax)
25–100 mg bid
Helpful for widespread pain, 
continuous headaches, and 
fibromyalgia. Can cause weight loss
Gabapentin
300–1,200 mg tid
Adverse effects of topiramate include 
suicidal feelings and cognitive 
problems with doses >50 mg daily
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
25–50 mg at 
night increasing to 
25–100 mg tid
Gabapentin can cause somnolence 
and weight gain
Valproic acid
250–500 mg bid
15
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
Symptoms, Exercise Intolerance), hot or cold packs for treat-
ment of tender points, warm baths, muscle liniments, physical 
therapy, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, acupunc-
ture, massage, yoga or Tai Chi, biofeedback, and mindfulness-
based stress reduction techniques. These interventions might 
not be effective in some patients and might be poorly tolerated 
in others.
For persistent pain, medications might be needed. Over-the-
counter medications such as aspirin, acetaminophen, paracetamol 
and NSAIDS are rarely effective for ME/CFS pain, but NSAIDS 
can ameliorate dysmenorrhea. Topical treatment for pain 
includes lidocaine patches. Some commonly used prescription 
pain medications and their dosages for adolescents are listed in 
Table 9. We recommend beginning at a low-dose and increasing 
very cautiously. If pain is generalized, the higher dosages might 
be needed. Multiple trials of medication might be necessary to 
achieve adequate relief.
Young people with severe pain sometimes need strong anal-
gesics. Opiates are occasionally necessary. Their use requires full 
documentation. For young people with complex pain syndromes, 
referral to a pain clinic (preferably one that is familiar with ME/
CFS) might be helpful. We have received anecdotal information 
from some young patients that their chronic pain was improved 
by the use of cannabis or synthetic cannabinoids. There have been 
no clinical trials of this medication.
Fatigue, Post-exertional Symptoms, 
exercise intolerance
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is charac-
terized by the body’s inability to produce adequate energy for the 
normal range of human activity. Patients with ME/CFS experi-
ence persisting, overwhelming, physical and cognitive exhaus-
tion that is not relieved by rest or sleep. There is a loss of physical 
and mental stamina. Sometimes there is a feeling of being tired 
and wired (overstimulated). Fatigue in ME/CFS is pathological. 
It is qualitatively and quantitatively different from the normal 
fatigue experienced by healthy people following exertion which 
is relieved by a good night’s sleep.
Following even minor physical, cognitive or orthostatic activ-
ity, the fatigue and other ME/CFS symptoms are worsened. This 
worsening of symptoms can occur any time from immediately 
following activity, to up to 48 hours following activity and it can 
last for days or weeks or months. This phenomenon is the cardinal 
feature of ME/CFS.
Although the overall mechanism for triggering post- 
exertional symptoms is currently unknown, fatigue, post-exer-
tional symptoms and exercise intolerance in ME/CFS might be 
related to defective energy metabolism. Aerobic metabolism has 
been shown to be impaired in adult patients with ME/CFS (100). 
This impairment leads to an increased reliance on anaerobic 
metabolism which is much less efficient at producing energy.
Activity and Exercise
Activities of daily living, education and social contact related 
activities can comprise a tolerable amount of energy expenditure 
for some patients, but these activities can comprise an excessive 
amount of activity for others. Adding an exercise program to the 
schedule of a young person who can barely manage to cope with 
limited educational activities can be counterproductive. Exercise 
has been promoted as therapeutic in patients with ME/CFS, but 
many patients drop out of exercise studies because exercise clearly 
made them worse (101). Some individuals with ME/CFS mistak-
enly over-exercise in an attempt to reduce fatigue and then incur 
post-exertional relapse. No studies have shown that exercise can 
produce a cure for ME/CFS.
Occasionally an excess of caution in young patients and/or 
their care givers can result in too much rest. Prolonged periods of 
complete bed rest should be avoided except in the most severely 
affected patients. Studies in adults have shown that 2 weeks of 
complete bed rest can be followed by a substantial reduction 
in plasma volume, and by OI (102). Striking the right balance 
between rest and activity while avoiding post-exertional symp-
toms requires trial and error.
However, for some patients with less severe ME/CFS, or dur-
ing a remission, a suitable exercise program can improve function 
and provide some enjoyment. Any exercise program should not 
take priority over activities of daily living, education and sociali-
zation. Special care also needs to be taken to ensure that exercise 
is not advanced too rapidly or too soon, as by definition, excessive 
exercise can exacerbate ME/CFS symptoms.
Pacing of Activities and the Energy Envelope
Young people with ME/CFS often do better when they (and their 
parents) learn to adapt their lifestyles to live within their capabili-
ties, and pace or spread out their activities so that they can avoid 
a boom and bust cycle of over-activity on a given day followed 
by a “crash” the following day. Remaining as active as possible 
while avoiding post-exertional flare-ups delineates an optimal 
zone of activity termed the “energy envelope.” It has been shown 
in adults that fatigue severity declines when patients stay within 
their energy envelope (103).
 16
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
Activities can be planned by the young patient over a weekly 
period. She/he should be encouraged to balance intellectual, 
social and physical activities, and to make a commitment to 
undertake segments of each component regularly. This allows the 
patient and family members to regain some control over their 
lives. It must be remembered that activity levels fluctuate from 
day-to-day and patients sometimes experience set-backs in their 
available energy reserves. Family members need to recognize that 
set-backs can occur and any activity plan needs to be flexible.
Recommendations for Improving Activity Levels
Guidelines for exercise in healthy, but sedentary young people are 
inappropriate for patients with ME/CFS, because strict adherence 
to these guidelines can cause post-exertional relapse. For some 
young patients, it might be necessary to first treat their OI and 
improve their ability to remain upright before any exercise can 
be adequately tolerated. Consultation with a physical therapist 
or rehabilitation specialist knowledgeable about ME/CFS is often 
helpful.
For the Most Impaired Young People
Advice for those who are homebound or confined to bed can be 
found in Section “Severely Affected and Very Severely Affected 
Young Patients.”
For the Moderately Impaired
Exercise while lying down should be advised when exercise while 
sitting or standing is poorly tolerated. Manual forms of physical 
therapy to improve mobility can be a bridge to tolerating exer-
cise without prolonged exacerbations, especially for those with 
impaired range of motion on examination (104). Exercise should 
begin with as little as 1–2 min of gentle stretching followed by rest. 
When recovery has occurred another 1–2 min can be attempted. 
When stretching exercises do not trigger post-exertional symp-
toms, intervals of recumbent exercise can be added such as leg 
lifts while supine, or the use of a recumbent stationary bicycle. 
The individual can be encouraged to increase the duration of 
activity very gradually, provided that the prior period of activity 
has not aggravated symptoms, until a reasonable exercise volume 
has been achieved. Rest between activities is needed, and young 
people are advised to avoid the “push-crash” cycle of excessive 
activity on a good day followed by prolonged post-exertional 
collapse. Exercise in a swimming pool is sometimes better toler-
ated, provided the water is not too warm, as there is an external 
counter-pressure from the water that can improve circulatory 
function.
Mildly Impaired Patients
Leisurely walking with an initial duration of 5–15 min followed 
by a rest is suggested. The duration or pace of the walking can be 
increased gradually provided post-exertional symptoms do not 
occur.
Higher Functioning Patients
An exercise program might involve joining some organized 
sporting activities at school, but with modified participation. The 
effect of exercise on ME/CFS should be discussed with the stu-
dent, her/his parents and the school personnel. Everyone should 
be reminded that when the patient feels that she/he has done 
enough, she/he must stop and rest and never force her/himself 
to achieve more. Fluctuations in illness severity are also common 
and patients might find that they need to reduce their activities 
for a period of time.
Medications for Fatigue
Trials of medications for fatigue have not been conducted in 
children and adolescents with ME/CFS. A limited number of con-
trolled trials have been conducted in adults. Dexamphetamine, 
5–10 mg twice daily for 4 weeks was tested in 20 adults with ME/
CFS. The dexamphetamine group had a significant improvement 
in Fatigue Severity Scale scores at the end of the trial (105). 
Methylphenidate 10 mg twice daily for 4 weeks was tested in 60 
adults with ME/CFS. Compared to placebo, it reduced the severity 
of fatigue and concentration problems (106). Lisdexamphetamine 
was helpful for executive function, fatigue and pain in adults 
with CFS in a small randomized trial (107). Modafinil has been 
shown to be effective for fatigue in adults with multiple sclerosis. 
When tested in 14 adults with ME/CFS the treatment effect was 
uncertain, but these data need to be viewed with caution due to 
the small number of patients tested (108).
Low vitamin B12 levels can be associated with fatigue, cogni-
tive problems, balance difficulties, and hypotension. This has led 
some clinicians to administer vitamin B12 injections to adults 
with ME/CFS in an attempt to improve symptoms and func-
tion. The typical dose used is 1,000 μg IM weekly for 4 weeks to 
assess the response and estimate the duration of effect (typically 
3–7 days). A patient survey of treatment rated results as good by 
some patients (109). There have however been no randomized 
placebo controlled trials of vitamin B12 for ME/CFS in young 
people.
Many patients self-medicate with caffeine in coffee and popu-
lar energy drinks. While this can be useful, patients should be 
cautioned against consuming excessive amounts of caffeine as 
this can cause tachycardia and agitation.
Medications for fatigue might need to be reserved for poten-
tially exhausting occasions such as school exams. If effective, 
the young person should try to avoid exceeding their individual 
energy envelope.
Cognitive impairment
Cognitive difficulties are an integral part of ME/CFS and they 
have a significant impact on schooling. Advice on educational 
accommodations is given in Section “The School System.” The 
young patient needs to recognize issues that aggravate cognitive 
difficulties and when possible, avoid them. Aggravating factors 
include mental and physical activity; distraction by noise or 
bright lights; and prolonged standing.
Cognitive problems can be improved by:
• Pacing of activities: the young person should be mentally 
active for short periods of time, followed by adequate periods 
of rest; she/he should learn to recognize when she/he is tired.
• Performing mental work lying down can sometimes be better 
than sitting up.
• The effective treatment of insomnia, pain, depression, and/or 
anxiety.
• Snacks and frequent drinks.
• Self-medicating with caffeine-containing drinks.
 17
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
• The use of prescribed stimulants such as low-dose methyl-
phenidate can benefit some patients; the patient should be 
warned that there is a risk that a sense of well-being can lead 
to over-activity.
• Learning to cope with the stress of having a chronic illness (see 
Support and Coping Skills).
immune System Support
A limited number of trials of intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) have been undertaken in adults, with mixed results. 
In adolescent patients a double blind placebo controlled 
randomized trial of IVIG 1 g/kg monthly (max dose 60 g) for 
3 months was found to have moderate effectiveness for overall 
function (a combination of school attendance, school work, 
social activities, and physical activities). Patients also reported 
general improvements in all ME/CFS symptoms, many reporting 
feeling completely well by the 6-month follow-up. The placebo 
group also improved but more gradually, matching the function-
ing of the intervention group after 5–7 years of follow-up. The 
trial showed that the benefit from IVIG was in reducing the 
duration of illness (42). However, IVIG is relatively expensive, 
is not always available due to health insurance restrictions and 
other limitations and it can be associated with serious adverse 
effects, e.g., aseptic meningitis after infusion, and anaphylaxis in 
those with IgA deficiency (110).
Depression and Anxiety
Mild or moderate secondary psychiatric problems often can be 
managed by the primary care physician, provided the physician 
feels comfortable with informal counseling. Giving support and 
encouragement to the patient can be adequate treatment. Various 
forms of support and psychotherapy helpful for learning to cope 
with the illness are given in Section “Support and Coping Skills.” 
When referral to a child psychiatrist or psychologist is needed, it 
is likely to be more successful if she/he is familiar with ME/CFS.
The treatment of other symptoms of ME/CFS such as pain or 
insomnia can also help to relieve emotional distress. If antide-
pressant medications are indicated, it should be noted that young 
patients with ME/CFS often respond to a smaller than expected 
dosages of these medications and careful follow-up is important.
Support and Coping Skills
The young person with ME/CFS needs to learn to adapt to the 
reality of the illness, and integrate it into a meaningful life despite 
sometimes severe physical limitations. Above all, the young 
patient needs to develop a sense of achievement in her/his life, 
however, small.
All aspects of the young person’s life might need to be 
addressed. She/he might need to deal not only with physical and 
cognitive limitations, but also with misunderstanding of the ill-
ness, fear, grief, anger, guilt and isolation. Sometimes having ME/
CFS can result in abnormal illness behavior, such as denial of the 
reality of the illness.
A patient’s needs early in the illness might differ from her/his 
needs in later years, as health improvement is being achieved. 
Young patients should be encouraged to verbalize their fears 
and needs. Only the young person her/himself knows how she/
he really feels. For instance, many young people fear getting 
behind their peers academically, never being able to catch up, 
and consequently losing friends. There should be opportunity to 
talk things through with a trusted professional who understands 
the illness. Although the parents can be present, the discussion 
should be primarily with the patient, so that she/he is also 
involved in decision making and feels part of the team approach. 
Teenagers usually need an opportunity for discussion without a 
parent present.
Our experience suggests that the following elements of basic 
supportive therapy can be helpful:
• Exploring what the patient and her/his parents already know 
about the illness.
• Teaching the patient and her/his family about ME/CFS and 
correcting any misinformed notions about cause, course of the 
illness and forms of management.
• Making it clear that ME/CFS is a medical/biological illness, but 
that often there can be understandable, secondary, emotional 
reactions.
• Clarifying and discussing the patient’s and family’s particular 
anxieties and mood changes.
• Discussing strategies such as pacing of activities (see Fatigue, 
Post-Exertional Symptoms, Exercise Intolerance) that enable 
the patient to live within the limitations of the illness.
• Ensuring the medical management of symptoms.
• Making clear that you (as the treating physician and/or 
 
therapist) will be available as new questions arise and setting 
up follow-up appointments.
These steps can be carried out by the primary care physician 
if she/he is comfortable doing so. If not, or if the patient’s situa-
tion is complex or severe, a social worker, psychologist, or child 
psychiatrist, preferably one who is knowledgeable about ME/
CFS, can be consulted.
Coping Skills Training
Young patients with ME/CFS benefit from practical suggestions 
for coping with chronic illness. For example, it can be helpful to 
provide strategies for demystifying the illness and explaining it to 
other people: ME/CFS is like having mononucleosis (glandular 
fever) and then not recovering from it.
We recommend:
• A private space at home, so that the young patient’s rest will 
be undisturbed and she/he is able to work without being 
distracted.
• Developing a daily routine, especially for patients who are 
housebound.
• Attempting to achieve a normal day/night cycle, to help the 
patient fit in with the family’s daily schedule and make school 
possible.
• Encouraging participation in education, however minimal, but 
without undue pressure (see The School System).
• Providing time for meeting with friends and for family treats.
• Incorporating rewards for achievements.
• Joining a local patient support group (if available, and if it has 
competent leadership).
• The use (when appropriate) of stress reduction techniques 
such as music, visualization, self-hypnosis and/or mindful-
ness-based cognitive therapy (111).
 18
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
The benefit of CBT as a psychotherapeutic intervention for ME/
CFS is currently ambiguous. CBT has been shown to be help-
ful for some pediatric ME/CFS patients (112–115). However, 
in adults, the effect size of CBT is rather modest and the effects 
are not always sustained (116). CBT can produce adverse effects 
 
(101). The assertion that CBT can “reverse” or cure the illness 
is not supported by follow-up studies (117) and immunological 
changes found in the illness have been shown not to be reversed 
by CBT (118).
The hypothesis underlying the rationale for the use of CBT 
in ME/CFS patients proposes that the patient’s poor health is 
perpetuated by avoidance of activity and by maladaptive fears, 
such as anxiety about symptoms that emerge after activity (119). 
CBT aims to improve coping with the illness by changing these 
“maladaptive cognitive responses” and encouraging graded 
exercise as well as incremental increases in other activities. The 
notion that the illness is perpetuated solely by dysfunctional 
attitudes and beliefs is speculative, lacks empirical support and 
is not consistent with our current understanding of the patho-
physiology of ME/CFS (see Etiology and Pathophysiology). This 
hypothesis has led to patients being blamed for failure to recover, 
because, in the view of the therapist, they have not changed their 
so called “maladaptive cognitive responses.” Furthermore, CBT 
that includes rigidly enforced graded exercise frequently leads to 
severe relapse in patients with ME/CFS.
Nevertheless, some of the elements of CBT are part of a com-
mon sense management of many medical problems, provided 
they are introduced in a pragmatic and flexible manner to help 
individuals cope with chronic illness (113–115, 120, 121). These 
elements include recommendations already given in this section. 
It is most important for a patient with ME/CFS that any attempt to 
increase her/his activity level or to exercise be flexible, rather than 
rigid, permitting the patient to avoid exceeding her/his energy 
limit. The patient should also be advised that CBT does not cure 
the illness, but it can help in learning to live within its limitations. 
CBT is not always available and it can be costly. It is likely to be 
more successful if the therapist is knowledgeable about ME/CFS.
Dietary Management
This section discusses nutrition in patients who are able to take 
adequate nourishment by mouth. Patients unable to maintain 
adequate nourishment by mouth are discussed in the section 
on the severely affected (see Severely Affected and Very Severely 
Affected Young Patients).
Many young people with ME/CFS experience a variety of 
gastrointestinal symptoms that can interfere with nutrition. 
Common complaints are: lack of appetite, especially in the 
morning, nausea, abdominal pain that might or might not be 
associated with eating, heartburn, feeling “full” even after a small 
meal, abdominal bloating, and discomfort that can be associated 
with particular foods, e.g., dairy or wheat. Co-morbid gastroin-
testinal conditions are present in some young patients. These are 
discussed in the section “Gastrointestinal Issues.”
Reduced food intake can stem from food fads. The young per-
son might be a fussy eater, might claim to be “allergic” to almost 
all foods, or might be fearful that certain foods make the illness 
worse. Some young people with ME/CFS have a very disordered 
body clock—up all night, asleep all day—making mealtimes very 
awkward. As a result of these problems, some young people with 
ME/CFS develop weight loss. Alternatively, others become obese 
due to lack of exercise or increased “snacking” for an energy boost, 
from boredom, or occasionally due to increased appetite from 
medications. If there is no logical explanation, weight changes 
should be investigated.
Parental concern and pressure to eat more can contribute to 
stress in the family. The goal is for the young person to get a bal-
anced nutritional diet, including food they enjoy, with plenty of 
variety. Educating the patient about how the body needs fuel to 
function and provide energy can be helpful.
We recommend
• Regular, small meals, little and often, and between meal snacks.
• Plentiful salt for those with co-morbid OI.
• Avoid too much fluid with meals if experiencing bloating.
• A carbohydrate snack at bedtime or if wakeful during the night 
can encourage sleep.
Extra foods that can be incorporated in the diet in some cir-
cumstances include: yogurt, if the illness began with or is com-
plicated by gastrointestinal infection, ginger drinks for nausea, 
peppermint for indigestion, or garlic to help overcome/prevent 
infection. Evidence for these being helpful is anecdotal. Snacks 
should be readily available and nutritious, but include some 
treats. In school, permission might be needed to have snacks and 
drinks readily available, particularly during long exams.
Fluid intake should be liberal:
• Drinks should be readily available, water is ideal, do not 
“over-drink.”
• Electrolyte drinks can be helpful, avoid those containing 
fermentable oligo-, di-, mono-saccharides and polyols 
(FODMAPs) (see “Supplements”).
• Avoid alcohol and too much caffeine (coffee, cola, energy 
drinks).
Supplements
If the diet is good, supplements should not be needed, although 
sometimes they can be beneficial. Occasionally, an excess of sup-
plements can cause problems e.g., too much vitamin C can lead 
to diarrhea. The following supplements may sometimes be useful:
• Vitamin D if patient lacks sunlight, due to light sensitivity or 
if seldom outside. Low vitamin D levels can be associated with 
headaches and pain and these symptoms improve with raising 
vitamin D blood levels.
• Magnesium at bedtime can help with pain and cramps (take 
with apple juice or apple to aid absorption), it also helps relieve 
constipation.
• Vitamin B12 injections can help with low energy/brain fog, or 
vitamin B12 can be taken as sub-lingual tablets.
• Probiotics can help irritable bowel symptoms, or if taking 
antibiotics.
• Iron tablets for iron deficiency with/without anemia (the cause 
of anemia should be determined), take with citrus juice to aid 
absorption.
 19
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
Recent attention has focused on dietary FODMAPs. These 
are short chain carbohydrates (oligosaccharides, disaccharides, 
monosaccharides and related alcohols) that are commonly 
found in the modern western diet and are poorly absorbed in 
the small intestine. They include short chain polymers of fruc-
tose (fructans), galactose (galactans), disaccharides (lactose), 
monosaccharides (fructose), and sugar alcohols (polyols) such 
as sorbitol, mannitol, xylitol and maltitol. There is evidence that 
restriction of FODMAPs can have a beneficial effect for those 
with irritable bowel syndrome and other functional gastrointes-
tinal disorders. It might, therefore, be useful to restrict the dietary 
intake of these types of carbohydrates for ME/CFS patients with 
co-morbid gastrointestinal symptoms.
Alternative and Complementary Medicine
Many alternative and complementary therapies have been 
promoted for ME/CFS. It is difficult to determine whether these 
therapies actually work, because the symptoms of ME/CFS vary 
so much from day-to-day. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 
acupuncture, massage, pilates, and yoga can help pain in some 
adults, but no published studies have assessed their benefit in 
young people.
The clinician should identify the use of herbal/natural rem-
edies or supplements. The contents of complementary medicines 
are not regulated for dose or composition. Caution must be 
exercised regarding side effects because if used with prescribed 
medications, there can be interactions.
Unfortunately, in the hope of a cure, parents of young patients 
with ME/CFS often ask the young patient to try costly, non-
established and speculative treatments but find little or no clinical 
improvement. Feedback from young people with ME/CFS indi-
cated that 80% had tried up to 30 different alternative therapies. 
Only massage for pain relief and “good dietary advice” achieved 
“some benefit” in up to 30% of patients. A common comment 
from the patients was that they “were glad when their parents 
stopped shopping around for a cure.” (23). A review of alternative 
medicine studies in adults with ME/CFS revealed generally poor 
methodologies and limited evidence of any benefit (122, 123).
CO-MORBiD CONDiTiONS
Co-morbid conditions are seen frequently in young patients 
with ME/CFS and are major contributors to illness severity. 
Their successful management can result in substantial lessening 
of the burden of illness. A list of co-morbid conditions is given 
in Table 4. This section will discuss those co-morbid condi-
tions that can have a significant impact on the illness, including 
orthostatic intolerance, joint laxity, gynecological problems, gas-
trointestinal problems, allergies, intolerances and neuroanatomic 
abnormalities.
Orthostatic intolerance (Oi)
The term OI refers to a group of conditions in which symptoms 
worsen with quiet upright posture and are improved but not 
always abolished by lying down. Typical symptoms are those 
of cerebral hypo-perfusion or sympathetic activation. Studies 
report higher rates of OI in pediatric patients with ME/CFS than 
in healthy children and higher rates than in adult patients with 
ME/CFS. An estimated 60–95% of young patients with ME/CFS 
have orthostatic symptoms (49). OI is more common in girls after 
puberty (sex ratio 3:1). OI can follow an infectious illness or an 
immunization.
Because there are more patients needing help with the man-
agement of OI than specialists trained to meet their needs, we 
have included the salient points of diagnosis and management 
of OI in this section. There is more detailed information on the 
pathophysiology and testing for OI in Appendix G.
Symptoms of OI in young patients can precede the onset of 
ME/CFS or they can arise a period of time after the onset of ME/
CFS. Some young patients with symptoms of OI do not develop 
symptoms of ME/CFS, while in others, the concurrent diagnosis 
of ME/CFS has been missed, because symptoms such as post-
exertional worsening have not been asked about.
Orthostatic symptoms include any of the following: increased 
fatigue, lightheadedness, white-outs or black-outs of the visual 
field, visual dimming, mental fog, headaches, nasuea, pain, or 
shortness of breath. Upright posture consistently aggravates 
ME/CFS symptoms and patients report worsening fatigue and 
other symptoms while standing in line, in hot environments like 
a shower, or in the summer heat. Many patients adopt postural 
counter-maneuvers—such as sitting with knees to chest, doing 
homework in a reclined position, crossing the legs when stand-
ing, fidgeting in line—but are not aware of why they have done 
so. Some adolescents might not report lightheadedness, so asking 
about symptoms that emerge during prolonged upright posture 
can be revealing.
Characteristic physical appearances include facial pallor and 
a reddish-purple discoloration of the dependent limbs (acro-
cyanosis) when sitting or standing for more than a few minutes. 
Symptoms of OI can occur without prominent changes in heart 
rate and blood pressure, but are often associated with objective 
circulatory disorders. Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) 
is the most common, neurally mediated hypotension (NMH) is 
less common, and orthostatic hypotension (OH) is uncommon in 
pediatric patients. The detection of POTS, NMH, and OH require 
a prolonged period of orthostatic stress and they can be missed 
with brief duration 1–2 min orthostatic vital sign measurements. 
We recommend a 10 min standing test in all young people with 
ME/CFS to ascertain whether orthostatic symptoms occur and 
determine whether POTS and/or OH are present (Table 10). 
Patients with NMH are generally symptomatic soon after stand-
ing, but longer duration tilt table testing is required to elicit the 
hypotension. Tilt table testing requires referral to a specialist 
center and is costly.
POTS: In adolescents, this diagnosis requires the reproduction 
of orthostatic symptoms together with a 40 bpm change in HR, 
from supine to 10 min upright, or a HR of ≥120 (124). Some 
individuals who have POTS early in upright posture go on to 
develop NMH if the orthostatic challenge is prolonged beyond 
10 min.
Neurally mediated hypotension requires the production of 
orthostatic symptoms with a 25 mm Hg drop in systolic BP, 
 TABLe 10 | Orthostatic testing.
in-office standing tests
Five minutes supine, then at least 10 min of quiet standing, leaning against a 
wall, with instructions to the young person to remain still, not fidget or shift her/
his weight. Changes in HR and BP should be recorded each minute, supine 
and upright, along with intensity of orthostatic symptoms and fatigue on a 
0–10 scale. The patient must be carefully observed due to the risk of syncope. 
The development of pallor, warmth, and/or nausea can be prodromal signs of 
hypotension or syncope. This test will identify POTS and orthostatic hypotension 
(OH), but is usually not sufficiently prolonged for neurally mediated hypotension 
(NMH)
Head-up tilt table tests
HR and BP are measured supine and during 70° head-up tilt. POTS or OH can 
be identified by 10 min tests. Prolonged testing of 40–45 min might be required 
to identify NMH
For further details on orthostatic testing and standing test data sheet see Appendix G.
20
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
usually without an increase in HR, and can be associated with 
junctional rhythm (recognized by a loss of P waves on the EKG) at 
the time of pre-syncope or syncope. The terms vasovagal syncope, 
neurocardiogenic syncope and NMH are synonymous. Syncope 
need not be present to make the diagnosis of NMH, as many 
affected individuals with lightheadedness and other symptoms 
sit or lie down before fainting.
Orthostatic hypotension is defined by a BP reduction of at least 
20 mm Hg systolic or 10 mm Hg diastolic within the first 3 min 
of upright posture (124). This problem is rarely seen in pediatric 
patients except at times of hypovolemia, such as febrile illness, 
acute dehydration, hemorrhage, adrenal insufficiency, or exces-
sive histamine release.
Management/Treatment
The lack of treatment studies in young people with OI and the 
lack of specialists with experience in OI contribute to difficulties 
in managing this condition. Some young patients have character-
istic symptoms of OI, but at the time of testing have a standing 
HR rise or BP fall which is insufficient to diagnose POTS, NMH, 
or OH. They might still benefit from treatment.
The first step in management is non-pharmacological and 
emphasizes four main points: (a) avoid conditions that increase 
pooling of blood, (b) improve venous return to the heart, 
 
(c) avoid depletion of salt and water and other causes of low blood 
volume, and (d) avoid increasing catecholamines beyond their 
baseline levels (which can be elevated).
Avoid Pooling of Blood
This involves avoiding prolonged standing or sitting, such as by 
moving around during longer classroom lectures, standing and 
stretching periodically to break up study sessions, and shopping 
at off hours. Patients should avoid saunas, hot-tubs and sunbath-
ing, and take short, cool baths, and showers. Large meals and high 
carbohydrate intake can interfere with orthostatic tolerance by 
contributing to a shift of blood volume to the splanchnic circula-
tion. Small, frequent meals are often better tolerated.
Improve Venous Return to the Heart
Adolescents can utilize the muscle pump of the lower limbs by 
e.g., crossing their legs and shifting from one leg to the other 
while standing, sitting with their knees higher than their hips, 
or with their knees to their chests, or by performing leg muscle 
contraction exercises before standing. Sitting on a high stool with 
the legs dangling freely should be avoided, as there is no resist-
ance to blood pooling in the legs. Some adolescents find they can 
sit longer without symptoms if they put their feet on a low foot 
rest, or sit with one leg folded under the buttocks.
Compression garments such as support hose with 20–30 mm 
Hg compression can be helpful (waist-high garments are more 
effective than thigh-high, which are more effective than knee-
high). Some adolescents derive benefit from wearing body shaper 
garments or abdominal binders.
A time-honored recommendation to improve blood volume 
is to elevate the head of the bed slightly by 10–15o. While this is 
not comfortable for everyone, it can help the body retain fluid at 
night (125, 126).
Avoid Depletion of Salt and Water
Patients need to drink 2–3 liters of fluid daily and take in adequate 
sodium. We recommend drinking fluids every 2 h during the 
day. There is no specific amount of sodium that works for each 
individual. Food should be salted according to taste and supple-
mental buffered salt tablets should be considered if needed. Oral 
rehydration fluids can also be beneficial. Healthy higher sodium 
food options include dill pickles, olives, tomato juice, soups, salsa, 
salted nuts, and soy sauce.
Avoid Increasing Catecholamines
Epinephrine (Epi) and norepinephrine (NE) levels are increased 
in those with OI and worsen with upright posture. Physiological 
stressors, including pain and emotional distress, can elevate 
catecholamine levels even higher. Stress avoidance can help with 
symptom management.
Examine whether medications are helping or making symp-
toms worse. For example, in those with asthma, beta-adrenergic 
agonists like albuterol and salbutamol mimic the effects of Epi, and 
can contribute to tremulousness and lightheadedness in patients 
with OI. While beta-agonists are not completely contraindicated, 
we try to use inhaled glucocorticoids, sodium chromoglycate, or 
montelukast for asthma control. Medications that promote vaso-
dilation, such as niacin, phenothiazine anti-emetics and narcotic 
analgesics are better avoided or minimized. Although low doses 
of tricyclic antidepressants used for headache, pain, and insomnia 
might be tolerated, higher doses can aggravate hypotension.
Caffeine intake (including soft drinks or coffee) can help 
symptoms by acting as a vasoconstrictor, but some patients expe-
rience adverse effects. Alcohol consumption usually aggravates 
OI symptoms.
The second step in management is to treat other ME/CFS 
symptoms and co-morbid conditions. Treating symptoms, espe-
cially pain and sleep problems, can improve OI symptoms.
The third step in management is pharmacological interven-
tion, aiming for monotherapy, but often rational poly-therapy 
produces better symptom control. All medications should be 
started at low doses and increased very slowly. Some medications 
are listed in Table 11. Some physicians recommend a low-dose 
beta blocker or midodrine as the first-line agents. Alternatively 
 TABLe 11 | Medications for treating orthostatic intolerance (OI) in adolescents.
Medication
Usual dose for Oi
Comments
vasoconstrictors
Midodrine
Start at 2.5 mg q 4 h while awake. Increase every 3–7 days by 
2.5 mg to optimal dose or max. of 10 mg q 4 h while awake
First-line therapy for those with low blood pressure (BP) (SBP < 100 or 
low normal BP). Monitor BP as supine hypertension can occur. Avoid 
prior to bedtime
Methylphenidate
Immediate-release form: 5–10 mg bid, increasing gradually to 
15–40 mg/day
First-line therapy for those with prominent cognitive dysfunction, 
personal or family history of ADHD, joint hypermobility. The optimum 
dosage of dextroamphetamine is usually half the optimum dose of 
methylphenidate
Dextroamphetamine
Sustained-release form: 5–10 mg q AM. Increase by 5–10 mg q 
AM weekly until optimal dose or 15–40 mg daily
volume expanders
Sodium chloride
Oral: 1 g tablets with meals
IV: 1–2 L over 1–2 h
IV saline is seldom practical over the longer term, but can help restore 
baseline function after illnesses or as emergency “rescue” therapy
Fludrocortisone
0.05 mg daily for 1 week, then 0.1 mg daily. Increase gradually to 
maximum of 0.2 mg daily
First-line therapy in those with baseline hypotension or increased salt 
appetite. Add KCl 10 m Eq for every 0.1 mg fludrocortisone to prevent 
hypokalemia
Hormonal Contraceptives  
Medroxyprogesterone
Most are fine. Conventional dosage or continuous pills for 84 days 
(one period every 3 months)
First-line therapy for females with dysmenorrhea or when symptoms 
worsen with menses. Drospirenone containing pills can have diuretic 
effect
Desmopressin acetate
0.1 mg at bedtime, increasing to 0.2 mg daily
Useful for those with nocturia. Monitor for hyponatremia
Sympathetic tone modifiers
Beta blockers
Atenolol
12.5–25 mg daily, increase by 12.5 mg increments until optimal 
effect. Usual dose
First-line therapy for those with resting heart rate >100, anxiety 
or prominent headache. Higher doses can aggravate fatigue and 
lightheadedness.
Propranolol
0.5–1 mg/kg body weight
10–20 mg 3–4 times daily
Pyridostigmine bromide 
Rapid release: 30 mg daily, increase by 30 mg every 3–7 days to 
60 mg BID or TID. Sustained-release: 180 mg daily
Effective in both POTS and neurally mediated hypotension. Can also 
help with GI motility problems
Clonidine
0.05 mg at bedtime. Increase after 1 week to 0.1 mg nightly. 
Occasionally higher doses tolerated
Consider in those with anxiety, problems with attention or insomnia. 
Reported to improve blood volume
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor/SNRi
Escitalopram
5 mg daily for 2–4 weeks, increase to 10 mg daily up to max. of 
40 mg daily
Consider for dysthymia, depression, or anxiety
Duloxetine
20–30 mg daily for 2 weeks, increase to max of 60–90 mg daily
Consider if myalgias are prominent
Sertraline
25–100 mg daily
21
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in non-depressed patients with NMH 
refractory to other therapies (128). In those with fibromyalgia, 
duloxetine (a SNRI) can be effective for pain, independent of its 
effect on mood. When symptoms such as anxiety, pain, dysthy-
mia, or premenstrual syndrome are present, these medications 
might also be chosen.
The use of several medications with different pharmacologic 
effects, e.g., a vasoconstrictor, a mineralocorticoid, and a beta 
blocker concurrently might be necessary for the improvement of 
severe OI. Among those refractory to treatment, it is important 
to question whether the OI is exacerbated by another co-morbid 
condition.
Selected individuals with OI in whom medications have failed 
to help have occasionally been managed with weekly infusions 
of IV saline until symptoms stabilize. Some clinicians also utilize 
IV saline infusions as “rescue therapy” when orthostatic symp-
toms become more intense (such as after an infection). Because 
an initial medication can be selected from Table 11 depending on 
the specifics of the patient’s condition and existing co-morbidi-
ties. For example: beta blockers might be chosen for those with 
elevated supine HRs, fludrocortisone might be chosen if there 
is a low resting BP or an increased salt appetite. Midodrine is 
efficacious in treating syncope, but 4 hourly dosing makes it less 
convenient to take when in school. Stimulants can be helpful in 
those with fatigue and prominent cognitive symptoms.
Adolescent girls with dysmenorrhea, acne or peri-menstrual 
exacerbation of OI symptoms can benefit from hormonal contra-
ceptive therapy (127). Sometimes the young patient fares better 
when treated with continuous combined hormonal regimens that 
bring one menstrual period every 90 days. A long-acting inject-
able progesterone can be considered. The mechanism by which 
hormones improve OI is not entirely clear.
Improvements in symptoms and in responses to upright 
tilt have been reported after treatment with selective serotonin 
 22
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
individuals with OI are usually hypovolemic, they can withstand 
a rapid infusion of 2 L of normal saline over 1–2 h. Infusions 
provide a more rapid restoration of intravascular volume and a 
larger intake of sodium than is possible orally. Peripheral IV lines 
are preferred, as the placement of PICC or central lines poses a 
risk of local infection or bacteremia (129). The efficacy of this 
practice has not been studied in a randomized trial and more 
formal study is needed.
Joint Hypermobility, Connective Tissue 
Laxity, ehler’s-Danlos Syndrome
Some 60% of young patients who meet the criteria for ME/
CFS also have joint hypermobility, compared with about 20% 
of healthy adolescents (32). Although joint hypermobility is a 
physical trait that can confer advantages in athletics and dance, 
some patients with joint hypermobility also have constitutional 
symptoms including tiredness, difficulty sleeping, gastrointes-
tinal symptoms, arthralgias, myalgias, lightheadedness, and OI 
suggestive of undiagnosed co-morbid ME/CFS.
Joint hypermobility is one of the clinical features of Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome (EDS) (130). Other features of this heritable 
connective tissue disorder can include: stretchy or fragile skin, 
delayed wound healing, easy bruising, unusually wide or thin 
scars, striae in the absence of marked weight changes, blue 
sclerae, easy eversion of the upper eyelids, and a positive Gorlin’s 
sign (the ability to touch the tongue to the tip of the nose). Some 
with EDS develop early onset of varicose veins. In the classical 
form of EDS there can be hemosiderin deposition around the 
knees and shins. Those with the hypermobile form of EDS are 
more likely than those with other forms of EDS to have OI 
 
(131, 132). Constitutional symptoms that overlap with symptoms 
of ME/CFS are common in EDS. Fatigue and pain are substantial 
contributors to impaired quality of life in EDS (133, 134). The 
mechanism for the overlap of ME/CFS and joint hypermobility 
or EDS has not been explained.
Clinicians can have an increased index of suspicion for joint 
hypermobility if their patients have been swimmers, dancers, and 
gymnasts. In taking the history, the clinician should ask whether 
the patient has had subluxations or dislocations (including 
“nursemaid’s elbow” in early childhood), and whether the patient 
can perform “tricks” with their joints. Joint hypermobility can be 
overlooked unless the clinician performs specific measurements 
such as the Beighton score, a nine point measure in which scores 
of 4 or higher indicate joint hypermobility. To obtain a Beighton 
score, the examiner needs a goniometer to measure joint angle, 
assigning one point for the ability to dorsiflex each fifth finger 
past 90°, one point on each side for bringing the thumb to the 
forearm, one for more than 190° of hyperextension at each elbow, 
one point for more than 10° of hyperextension of each knee, and 
the ninth point is for the ability to place the palms on the floor 
bending over at the waist, with the legs straight. Some with joint 
hypermobility can have associated postural dysfunctions such 
as thoracic kyphosis, scoliosis, a head-forward posture, lumbar 
lordosis, and pes planus.
Diagnosing joint hypermobility is important, as the condition 
can be associated with pain, add to the burden of illness in ME/
CFS and it requires different approaches in physical therapy. The 
evaluation and management of these patients often is helped by 
consultation with a physical therapist. For the treatment/manage-
ment of pain (see “Pain”).
Gynecological issues
Common problems for adolescent females with ME/CFS are the 
exacerbation of ME/CFS symptoms (especially OI) in the week 
before and during the menses, and the onset of, or an increase 
in severity of, gynecological symptoms, including dysmenor-
rhea, menorrhagia, pelvic pain and premenstrual syndrome. An 
occasional problem is cessation of the menses following the onset 
of ME/CFS (see Adolescent Development). In older adolescents, 
sexual activity can cause post-exertional symptom exacerbation.
Dysmenorrhea
Clinical experience has shown that in some adolescents, the onset 
of dysmenorrhea may be concurrent with the onset of ME/CFS 
and menstrual symptoms can improve as ME/CFS symptoms 
improve.
Endometriosis
In adolescents with ME/CFS who have co-morbid endometriosis, 
pelvic pain and associated gastrointestinal or urinary symptoms 
are typically worse during the menstrual cycle. Adolescents with 
endometriosis are more likely than their adult counterparts to 
report pelvic pain that is also (or only) non-cyclical. The pain is 
often minimally responsive to oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) and 
NSAIDs. Associated symptoms can include constipation, pain 
with defecation, and urinary symptoms such as dysuria, urgency, 
frequency, and hematuria. Dyspareunia can also be present.
Pelvic Congestion Syndrome (PCS)
A less well recognized problem that can cause chronic pelvic pain, 
associated with low BP and chronic fatigue, is PCS (135–137). 
While this condition is more common in multiparous women, 
it can occasionally be present in adolescents with ME/CFS. 
It is associated with varicose ovarian and internal iliac veins. 
Symptoms include chronic, non-cyclical, pelvic pain and perineal 
heaviness, occasionally associated with lower back pain. Pain is 
usually present throughout the month, but often worsens with the 
menses. Unlike endometriosis, this form of pelvic pain worsens 
at the end of the day or with prolonged standing due to progres-
sive distention of varicosities in the pelvis. Also in contrast to 
endometriosis, PCS symptoms get better with prolonged supine 
posture or after a night in bed. Vulvar and thigh varices are less 
common in adolescents with PCS than in adults.
Treatment
Adolescents with dysmenorrhea and/or peri-menstrual symp-
toms often feel better on an OCP and OI symptoms can also 
improve (127). The OCP can be given in monthly cycles, but for 
peri-menstrual symptoms, patients often do better when the pill 
is taken continuously for 3 months, e.g., an active pill daily for 
84 days then one week of placebo pills to induce a menstrual 
period every 90 days. Intramuscular Depoprovera (medroxy-
progesterone acetate) can also be effective. For menorrhagia, 
the patient should be tested for the presence of iron deficiency 
 23
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
anemia and this should be treated if present. The menorrhagia 
might respond to an OCP or to cyclokapron (tranexamic acid), 
1 g tid during the period. For persisting pelvic pain, consultation 
with a gynecologist is often helpful.
Gastrointestinal issues
Some young people severely affected by ME/CFS and mostly 
bedbound might be unable to maintain hydration and adequate 
nourishment orally. These patients require tube feeding (see 
Severely Affected and Very Severely Affected Young Patients).
Abdominal pain, nausea and reduced appetite are common in 
young patients with ME/CFS. Gastrointestinal conditions which 
can be present include: gastroesophageal reflux, gastrointestinal 
motility disorders, celiac disease and non-celiac gluten sensitiv-
ity, lactose intolerance, food allergies (e.g., nut, milk, eggs, and 
wheat), post-infectious or irritable bowel syndrome and consti-
pation. These conditions should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of gastrointestinal complaints and if present should be 
treated appropriately.
Another recently recognized gastrointestinal problem that 
can be present in up to a third of adolescents with ME/CFS is 
intolerance of specific food proteins (138). Milk protein is the 
most common offending food, but soy, wheat, and egg proteins 
can also cause symptoms. Many young patients are unaware that 
milk or other specific proteins are a problem, because immediate 
reactions are absent, and symptoms can be delayed for several 
hours after ingestion.
Symptoms that indicate the possibility of a non-IgE-mediated 
allergy or an intolerance of a food protein are: (a) epigastric or 
abdominal pain, (b) gastroesophageal reflux symptoms (heart-
burn, retro-sternal discomfort, acid taste in the mouth, sometimes 
a mucousy form of vomiting), and (c) appetite disturbance (early 
satiety, picky appetite) (138, 139).
Other associated symptoms can include recurrent aphthous 
ulcers, intermittent fevers, headaches (including migraines), 
worsening lightheadedness, myalgias, sinusitis, and either 
constipation or diarrhea. Skin testing in people with delayed gas-
trointestinal hypersensitivities is usually negative. Unless delayed 
food protein hypersensitivities are adequately addressed, they 
can obscure any improvements that might accompany otherwise 
effective treatments.
A history of suspected food intolerances should be taken. If the 
specific symptoms mentioned above are present and intolerance 
to a specific food is suspected, a trial of strict dietary elimination 
of the offending food for 2–4 weeks can be undertaken. Provided 
that the initial food that has been restricted, based on the history 
is the culprit, and the elimination diet is strict enough, intestinal 
symptoms usually begin to resolve after 10–14 days (sometimes 
sooner). If allergic individuals have already been restricting the 
offending food and then are inadvertently re-exposed, their 
symptoms will return. This occurrence provides support for the 
diagnosis. For persisting abdominal symptoms, consultation with 
a gastroenterologist can be helpful.
Allergies
Allergies are more common in young patients with ME/CFS than 
in otherwise healthy young people and they often predate the 
onset of ME/CFS (140). In contrast to non-IgE mediated allergies 
(see Gastrointestinal Issues), IgE-mediated allergies are recog-
nized by the presence of immediate allergic symptoms, including 
wheezing, pruritus, urticaria, lip and tongue swelling, and more 
severe features of anaphylaxis. Skin prick tests and RAST blood 
tests are abnormal in those with IgE-mediated allergies. A mast 
cell activation syndrome (MCAS) might be present.
The importance of MCAS has likely been underappreciated in 
the past. Symptoms can include fatigue, lightheadedness, facial 
flushing, rashes, itching, hives, bone and muscle pain, nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, brain fog, migraines, and 
intolerance to multiple medications (141, 142). Joint hyper-
mobility is also associated with a MCAS and a subset of POTS 
patients have MCAS (143). Some of these symptoms overlap 
with symptoms of ME/CFS. Recent work has identified heredi-
tary elevations in tryptase (an enzyme released after mast cell 
activation) among those with POTS, joint hypermobility, and 
atopic disorders (144). Clinicians should have a higher index 
of suspicion for MCAS in those diagnosed with ME/CFS who 
report the symptoms listed above. Treatment of MCAS involves 
antihistamines and medications to stabilize the mast cell mem-
brane such as cromolyn, quercetin and the leukotriene receptor 
antagonists zafirlukast and montelukast. Several detailed reviews 
of the clinical features, diagnostic tests and treatments of MCAS 
are available (141–143, 145).
Neuroanatomic Abnormalities
Some reports have shown an overlap of symptoms between ME/
CFS and anatomic abnormalities such as Chiari I malformations, 
congenital cervical stenosis, cervical instability, tethered spinal 
cord, and thoracic outlet syndrome (146, 147). Taken together, 
these disorders represent a very small proportion of those with 
ME/CFS, but their prevalence can be higher among more severely 
affected patients or those unresponsive to the usual interventions. 
Symptoms 
of 
these 
various 
abnormalities 
can 
include: 
sub- 
occipital 
headaches, made worse by neck flexion or extension, coughing, 
or straining, back and leg pain, problems swallowing, weakness, 
coordination difficulties, numbness in the face and limbs, and/
or frequent urination. A neurological examination might reveal 
nystagmus, diplopia, absence of the gag reflex, hyper-reflexia and 
decreased sensation in the pelvis and lower limb. In those with 
prominent symptoms including headache, evaluation needs to 
exclude intracranial hypertension and intracranial hypotension. 
Referral to a neurologist can be helpful.
Oral and Dental issues
Dental and orofacial problems are found in many young people 
with ME/CFS, but are often neglected because the young patient 
is too ill to make dental office visits. Correction of dental problems 
can improve overall health. Commonly reported problems are 
xerostomia (dry mouth), dental caries, periodontal disease, brux-
ism, temporomandibular joint disorder (TMD) and impacted 
third molar teeth.
Dental visits can be stressful, result in lingering discomfort 
and debilitating fatigue and recovery can be prolonged. Young 
patients with ME/CFS and orthostatic problems might not 
 24
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
tolerate prolonged sitting in the dental chair and some young 
patients have difficulty in maintaining an open mouth for the 
duration of dental treatment.
During dental procedures, discomfort can be minimized 
by the use of a mouth prop to maintain an open posture of the 
mouth. The smallest size mouth prop that is effective should be 
used. Dentists also need to be familiar with the clinical features of 
OI and be prepared to treat patients at risk of developing syncope. 
Treatment planning of elective dentistry in more extensive cases 
should allow time between appointments to recover from fatigue.
Dry mouth can exist on its own, result from the effects of 
medications or from co-morbid medical conditions. It can lead 
to rampant dental caries, exacerbation of periodontal disease, 
or oral candidiasis. Standard treatment includes increasing oral 
moistness with regular fluid intake, fluoride supplementation for 
home use, and professional dental prophylaxis.
Treatment for dental caries and periodontal disease follows 
standard dental practice. For those who might be concerned 
about whether mercury amalgam fillings should be avoided, all 
scientific and medical/dental organizations support the safety of 
amalgam.
Local anesthetics for pain relief in dental work are well-
tolerated, but many young patients with ME/CFS and co-morbid 
OI can develop serious side effects (syncope) from the use of 
the epinephrine (Epi)/(adrenalin) which is included with local 
anesthetic agents. In these patients, a local anesthetic can be used 
without Epi. If a local anesthetic with added Epi is required, it 
should be administered with caution.
Temporomandibular joint disorders (TMD) and bruxism 
(tooth grinding) are more prevalent in ME/CFS patients than in 
the population at large and joint hypermobility co-morbid with 
ME/CFS is a risk factor. Bruxism often results in loss of tooth 
structure and can exacerbate TMD. These conditions can cause 
significant TM joint pain and/or headache. They should be con-
sidered in the differential diagnosis of headache in patients with 
ME/CFS. For bruxism, an occlusal guard can be prescribed to 
protect the dentition and help to alleviate TMD symptoms.
The overall approach to the management of impacted third 
molars (wisdom teeth) in young patients with ME/CFS is 
conservative. Asymptomatic impacted teeth that appear as if 
they will not erupt or if there is room for proper eruption, are 
monitored. If the teeth are partially erupted, symptomatic and/
or are affecting (or will potentially affect) the existing oral/dental 
condition, the third molars are generally removed. The impact 
on the patient of tooth removal is related to the difficulty of the 
extraction. In those patients who would be most affected by long, 
difficult procedures and the possible need for IV or general anes-
thesia with a significant post-operative recovery time, we would 
recommend a more conservative approach. Each case must be 
evaluated individually.
AReAS OF SPeCiAL CLiNiCAL CONCeRN
Severely Affected and very Severely 
Affected Young Patients
Some young patients with ME/CFS are severely ill and are 
wheelchair dependent, housebound, or bedridden, sometimes 
for months or years. Many are too debilitated to be brought to 
a doctor’s office. Severe post-exertional symptoms can result if 
a visit to a hospital emergency room should become necessary. 
Published data on the characteristics of this group are lacking. 
Our clinicians estimate that about 5–10% of patients might be 
severely affected and 2–5% might be very severely affected and 
bedridden at some time during the course of the illness, but no 
studies have confirmed these numbers. The course of the severe 
form of the illness is unpredictable. Many severely affected young 
patients do show varying degrees of improvement with time and 
some manage to return to full activities. A few remain severely 
affected.
Severely ill young patients are often difficult to manage and 
frequently have received little help from medical practitioners. 
They can be socially isolated and frequently have to confront dis-
belief in the reality of their illness from family members, school 
personnel, social workers and physicians. They are in need of a 
great deal of practical help, emotional support and comfort. In 
addition to medical supervision they might require support from 
home health services and aides perhaps overseen by a nurse man-
ager. The patient’s caregivers might also require support. They are 
under great stress and can sometimes benefit from counseling.
A vital part of management is to gain the trust of the young 
patient and caregivers by reassuring them that the illness is 
recognized as a physical illness, it is taken very seriously, that 
the autonomy of the young patient will be respected, and that 
all management/treatment options that are offered will be fully 
discussed with the patient and caregivers and informed consent 
will be requested prior to implementation of any therapy. The 
patient can be reassured that improvement is common, even if it 
takes months or years, and that recovery is possible, but cannot 
be guaranteed.
Very Severely Affected Patients
At the far end of the illness spectrum are the very severely 
affected patients. These patients are fortunately, relatively rare. 
Consequently, the average practitioner can be quite unprepared 
when confronted by such a patient who is so extremely ill with 
ME/CFS. These young patients are in an exceedingly unpleasant 
situation. Not only are the symptoms very distressing in their own 
right but the patient often feels helpless and afraid and is totally 
dependent on her/his caretakers.
Clinical Features of the very severely affected can include:
• A very high degree of symptom severity.
• Bedridden with profound weakness.
• Severe body pain and hyperesthesia.
• Marked sensitivity to sound, light, touch, odors, some foods, 
and/or medications.
• Hyper-somnolence in the early stages.
• Severe nausea, difficulty swallowing, occasionally requiring 
tube feeding.
• Difficulty getting to a toilet, requiring the use of a bottle, bed-
pan, diapers, and/or indwelling catheter.
• Difficulty communicating their needs to a caregiver, due to 
speech difficulties or exhaustion.
• Severe limitations of mental activity, including short-term 
memory impairment.
 25
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
• Severe OI, might be unable to tolerate sitting up in bed.
• Difficulty tolerating being washed in bed due to hyperesthesia.
• Emotional changes secondary to the illness: patients can 
be very frightened and struggle with feelings of frustration, 
despair, and anger.
• Vitamin D deficiency in housebound patients and prolonged 
bed rest can lead to osteopenia.
Management of the Very Severely Affected
Our advice is based on clinical experience, as there is little 
literature on this subject. Ideally one physician should accept 
responsibility for the patient’s care for the duration of the severe 
stage of the illness. If the patient is cared for at home, home visits 
are necessary. Further advice can also be given by telephone 
consultations or by e-mail. If the patient is very severely affected 
from the outset, confirmation of the diagnosis is first necessary. 
Where there is a marked deterioration in a moderately severely 
affected patient, the practitioner might need to exclude other ill-
nesses. Consultation with physicians from other disciplines, who 
are familiar with ME/CFS, can be helpful. While remaining opti-
mistic, the physician might find that she/he will need to accept 
the continuing severity of the illness. Likewise, the patient and 
the family might need to adjust their expectations to very modest 
levels. Although there are therapeutic options (see below), results 
of therapy are variable. Therefore, targets or predictions for recov-
ery should be avoided.
The two best environments in which to care for the very 
severely affected patient are (a) the home and (b) an institution 
where long-term supportive care and symptom relief are the 
priorities and where staffs are familiar with the illness. Because 
of noise and bustle, a general hospital might be unsuitable. 
However, if general hospital care becomes necessary, attempts 
should be made to find a facility where the patient can be nursed 
in a very quiet location. We should caution that well-meaning 
attempts by hospital staff at too rapid “rehabilitation” (forcing 
the young patient to increase her/his activities too quickly) can 
lead to serious deterioration.
The best people to take care of the young patient are usually 
the parents. If the patient has to be admitted to an institution, 
attempts should be made to have one or two individual nurses be 
assigned to the patient.
Management Guidelines
• Protect the patient from undue physical, cognitive, and emo-
tional stress.
• A very quiet environment that might include a darkened room.
• The use of patient eye pads can allow the physician to examine 
the patient in a low ambient light.
• Maintain fluid and nutritional intake by early recourse to tube 
feeding.
• General nursing care to consist of gentle help with turning, 
skin care and toileting, diapers might be necessary.
• Prevention of venous thrombosis by passive physiotherapy.
More detailed information on further management strategies 
is available (148).
Symptomatic Treatment
Medications should be limited to those absolutely necessary and 
initially prescribed in very low doses and they should be increased 
slowly, as tolerated.
• Provide generous pain relief (including opioids if necessary).
• Treat problems such as migraine, dysmenorrhea and ortho-
static symptoms.
• Consider vitamin D supplementation in view of lack of expo-
sure to sunlight.
• In rare cases that remain bedbound for prolonged periods, 
consider bisphosphonates for prevention of osteoporosis.
Therapeutic Options
• Immunoglobulin therapy has shown some benefit in two ran-
domized trials (see Immune System Support). It can be given 
IV or IM. The IM injection can be painful.
• Regular use of IV saline can be helpful (see Orthostatic 
Intolerance).
Prognosis of Very Severe ME/CFS
There is no published literature on prognosis in very severely 
affected young patients with ME/CFS. One follow-up study for 
a period of 7–10 years, of 24 young patients classified as hav-
ing severe ME/CFS, found that 7 remained severely affected, 15 
improved and were no longer classified as severe and 2 patients 
had recovered (149).
Activity Management for the Homebound Patient
While cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and graded exercise 
therapy (GET) have been promoted as of value in mild and mod-
erate ME/CFS, there is no evidence that they are of therapeutic 
value in very severely affected patients. Inflexible, pre-ordained 
GET is often harmful and leads to exacerbation of symptoms in 
severe cases. However, movement is important to help reduce 
stiffness, maintain range of motion and prevent contractures. In 
very severely affected patients who are confined to bed, move-
ment is limited to tolerated activities of daily living. For those 
who can tolerate touch, a knowledgeable physical therapist can 
provide gentle, passive range-of-motion activity and gentle, pas-
sive stretching for brief periods of time (1 min at a time followed 
by a rest).
Any increase of activity, including moving around in bed, 
needs to be determined by the young patient her/himself. 
When possible, the gradual resumption of some activities of 
daily living can be encouraged, but the patient should not be 
pressured into this. Orthostatic symptoms might need to be 
treated before the patient is able to sit up for very long. Even 
when the patient can sit up, activity/physical therapy is usually 
easier when lying flat. Further progress is shown when the 
patient can tolerate sitting out of bed in a chair. When there 
is progress to the point that standing up is possible, minimal 
leisurely walking, for a few minutes daily can be tried. Any 
activity program should allow severely ill patients to pace 
themselves and stay within their energy envelope, however 
small that might be.
 26
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
The Possible impact of Me/CFS  
on the Family
A child or adolescent affected with ME/CFS presents challenges 
for the entire family. The challenges are similar to those faced by 
families of children with other chronic illnesses such as leukemia 
or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, but with the additional chal-
lenges of widespread disbelief in the authenticity of the illness, the 
pervasive social stigma associated with a diagnosis of ME/CFS 
and a paucity of medical professionals who are knowledgeable 
about the illness.
In our experience, the majority of families draw on their 
strengths. The parents are usually able provide the necessary 
care, and siblings learn to cope with diminished parental atten-
tion. When families cope well with their child’s illness, the risk of 
emotional damage to siblings is minimized.
Difficulties can arise when family members are ill-informed 
about the illness, when they do not believe that the young patient 
has a physical illness, when one parent needs to cease working 
in order to take care of the sick young person, when there is 
only one parent and the young person is too ill to go to school 
and has to be left at home alone, or when the school system is 
unable or unwilling to provide suitable education for the patient. 
As with other chronic illnesses, pre-existing marital difficulties 
can be compounded by the strain of dealing with a sick child. 
Sometimes disbelief in the authenticity of their child’s illness has 
led the non-custodial parent to report the custodial parent to 
social services as a potential case of child neglect or factitious 
and induced Illness/Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy. Members 
of the wider extended family who show disbelief in the illness can 
also cause problems, even from a distance.
Research has shown that siblings of young patients with ME/
CFS are more anxious than normal adolescents. Siblings identi-
fied factors having a negative impact on their lives, as lack of 
knowledge about the illness, change in their role in the family, 
lack of communication within the family, new restrictions placed 
on family life, change of parental focus, emotional reaction to 
having a sick sibling, and the social stigma of being the sibling of 
a young person with ME/CFS. Communication within the family, 
social support and extra activities were found to have a positive 
impact (150).
Helpful strategies to support the family can include:
• Participation of both parents in the evaluation and manage-
ment of the patient.
• Educating the immediate family about the illness and ensuring 
that siblings receive age-appropriate information.
• Enabling extended family members to also be informed about 
ME/CFS, with the goal of fostering their support of the nuclear 
family.
• Encouraging communication between family members about 
management of the illness.
• Having the treating physician serve as an advocate for the 
patient with her/his school system.
immunizations
Most young patients with ME/CFS tolerate standard immuniza-
tions. Immunization against human papilloma virus and hepa-
titis B are important for long-term health. Yearly immunization 
against influenza will prevent the serious relapse that can follow 
this illness. If possible, it should be administered when the patient 
is relatively well and it should be followed by 2–3 days of rest. 
Post immunization relapse has been reported, but is uncommon. 
Immunization of other family members can also help to protect 
the patient.
Considerations Regarding Surgery
In general, young patients with ME/CFS requiring surgery 
tolerate anesthesia well. Prior discussion with the surgeon and 
anesthesiologist/anesthetist about this illness and issues such as 
OI, pain control, and possible extended recovery times should be 
addressed. Further recommendations are given in Appendix F.
THe SCHOOL SYSTeM
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is the most 
common cause of prolonged school absence due to illness (9, 
13–16) and undiagnosed ME/CFS is also a frequent cause of poor 
school attendance. Absence from school is usually due to poor 
physical and cognitive function.
Sometimes, a knowledgeable teacher or a school nurse has 
been the first to suspect the illness in a student with undiagnosed 
ME/CFS. Some educators however, have less understanding of 
ME/CFS and view ME/CFS as a behavioral issue (151).
Teachers, school nurses and education officials need to be edu-
cated about ME/CFS and how it affects young people and their 
schooling. An educational fact sheet giving information about the 
disease and its impact on education is included in Appendix D.
It is helpful for school personnel to be aware of the following. 
The illness is very unpredictable. Symptoms vary widely between 
patients and wax and wane. Large fluctuations in illness severity 
can occur making planning and school attendance a challenge. 
Some students are able to attend school daily, others can only 
manage a part-time schedule, while others are homebound or 
bedbound. Early in the illness, students might be too ill to attend 
school and this situation can sometimes persist for months 
or years. Sometimes a student who is able to go school might 
appear fine one day and the next day they may be unable to go 
to school, and that inability to attend might continue for several 
weeks. Sometimes the student may be able to attend school in the 
early part of the week, but can’t manage Thursday and Friday. A 
common pattern of absence is that following the summer break, 
students with ME/CFS are able to start the school term enthusias-
tically, but are incapable of keeping up with the increased activity 
involved in maintaining their school schedule over time. They 
“run out of steam” and this can result in a prolonged absence from 
school. While this might raise suspicions of truancy, or school 
refusal in some school personnel, the student usually wants to 
attend school, but is too ill to do so.
The importance of education
The physician might need to take an active role in supporting 
young people with ME/CFS and ensure that they receive an edu-
cation that is appropriate for their physical condition. Long-term 
follow-up of young people with ME/CFS shows that engagement 
in education is a key issue that improves their ability to function 
regardless of whether or not they recover (23, 42). Students can 
 27
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
become demoralized if they are asked to withdraw from school. 
Education helps students to fulfill their aspirations and allows 
important aspects of their lives such as socializing with their peer 
group, to develop (152). It widens the range of possible occupa-
tions in later life. Work that is low skilled is usually more physi-
cally demanding. Although students with ME/CFS have cognitive 
dysfunction and reduced energy reserves, intellectual reasoning 
is frequently retained and most students with ME/CFS are capable 
of keeping up with their peers in some academic classes provided 
that the number of their classes is strictly limited (153).
Relationship between the School, the 
Student, the Family, and the Treating 
Physician
During regular appointments with the young patient, the physician 
should ask how school is going. The clinician needs to be sensitive 
to the relationship between the young person, her/his parents, 
and the school. Many families have followed a long and circuitous 
route to a diagnosis and the young patient can be months or years 
behind in school by the time a diagnosis is reached. The young 
patient and parents often perceive dealing with the school to be 
very stressful, especially so when they face disbelief about their 
“invisible” illness from teachers, other parents, and the young 
patient’s classmates (153). Compounding these stresses, parents 
see that their child’s academic performance has deteriorated and 
they might fear that she/he will not receive an education that 
eventually allows for employment and independent living. Many 
parents need to place their own lives and/or careers “on hold” 
in order to stay at home and take care of the young person. If 
both parents need to work, that can be problematic for the young 
patient at home alone.
Students who have understanding teachers, a flexible pro-
gram, and assistance from sympathetic advocates often need 
less help from medical and psychological professionals. Schools 
differ in their response to a student with ME/CFS. Some schools 
are cooperative from the outset, while others resist the diagnosis, 
ignore the treating physician’s letters, do not follow the physi-
cian’s recommendations and might reach the point of becoming 
adversarial. Other schools might appear to agree with the rec-
ommendations yet never follow through with implementation. 
Some schools might try to make a homebound student with 
ME/CFS return to school too early in order to save money on 
services such as homebound teaching. Some educators view ME/
CFS as a behavioral issue and in some instances, have instituted 
legal proceedings because they have wrongly believed that the 
cause of school absence in a student with ME/CFS was due to 
psychological factors such as school refusal, or the extremely 
rare condition of factitious disorder by proxy (Munchausen’s 
syndrome by proxy). As a result, young people seriously ill with 
ME/CFS have been removed from the care of their parents, 
sometimes for years.
impact of Me/CFS Symptoms on Learning
Several prominent ME/CFS symptoms affect the student’s ability 
to learn. Cognitive problems (often described as “brain fog”) are 
evident in most students even if they are less severely affected. 
Students experience mental confusion, forgetfulness, difficulty 
concentrating, a short attention span and a slowing of mental pro-
cessing speed. Working memory can be significantly reduced and 
there is often increased distractibility, which can be exacerbated 
by noise in the classroom (85–87). IQ scores might be lower than 
the scores of healthy peers (154). Cognitive problems can some-
times mimic attention deficit disorder without hyperactivity. For 
those with more severe illness, cognitive problems are very limit-
ing. Generally, if students are homebound, the most that they 
can manage are one or two essential or core subjects. Although 
not easy and requiring a real commitment, completing school 
work can give the student a real sense of achievement, which is 
important. The homebound student usually needs regular help 
from someone such as a Visiting/Homebound Teacher.
Students with ME/CFS are often unable to handle simple 
math calculations. They might be able to complete the steps to 
solve a complex problem correctly, but can make simple addition, 
subtraction, or multiplication mistakes. Teachers should be aware 
of this problem when grading tests (153).
Many young people with ME/CFS also experience orthostatic 
intolerance. Educators need to be aware that it is difficult for these 
students to stand or even sit for prolonged periods of time. These 
students might need to move around during lessons. They might 
also need access to drinks and salty snacks especially during test-
ing. They might also be physically unable to complete long exams 
in one sitting.
Returning to school after a long absence can be a challenge. 
The illness might have occurred at a time when the student is 
transitioning to a new school and she/he might not be familiar 
with how the new school functions. The student might also have 
lost touch with her/his peer group. If the student needs to travel 
long distances to school, this is very tiring. The situation needs to 
be handled with understanding and patience.
educational Plan
Students with ME/CFS often need a personalized school sched-
ule. The legal and procedural requirements for students to receive 
services for their disabilities vary significantly from place to place 
and are beyond the scope of this Primer.
Ideally, young people with ME/CFS will undergo an evalua-
tion process and an educational plan should be developed by the 
school after consultation with the student, the student’s parents 
and the student’s physician. Neuropsychological testing is not 
routinely recommended to investigate the cognitive symptoms 
of ME/CFS for several reasons. First, affected ME/CFS patients 
often do not tolerate testing when they are at their most symp-
tomatic, when cognitive problems might be identified. If tested 
on a relatively good day, they might not have scores that differ 
from healthy individuals. Second, neuropsychological testing 
in adolescents with ME/CFS is often only abnormal if the study 
sample is enriched with those who are reporting more difficulty 
with attention and memory (85, 86), or in the setting of concur-
rent physiological challenges such as during head-up tilt testing 
 
(50, 56). Third, this kind of testing is often not covered by insur-
ance, and can be costly. At a practical level, the testing usually 
does not alter the suggested management, which most often is to 
decrease the volume of academic work.
 28
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
ReFeReNCeS
1. Fukuda K, Straus SE, Hickie I, Sharpe MC, Dobbins JG, Komaroff A. The 
chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive approach to its definition and 
study. International Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Study Group. Ann Intern Med 
(1994) 121(12):953–9. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-121-12-199412150-00009 
2. Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome: Redefining an Illness. Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for 
Because ME/CFS symptom severity varies widely, clinicians 
should, whenever possible, recommend specific educational 
accommodations (see later) that are appropriate for the severity 
of symptoms. A sample physician’s letter that can be used in the 
evaluation process can be found in Appendix E.
Regular communication with the school is helpful. For exam-
ple, a supplemental doctor’s note given to the parents can forewarn 
the school that a change in medication can have an adverse effect 
on the student’s ability to function under the provisions of his or 
her educational plan. When the clinician can be seen by teachers 
and school administrators as a partner and a valuable resource, 
the process of accommodating a student with ME/CFS leads to 
better results.
educational Accommodations
Any of the following can be recommended, depending on the 
student’s physical condition:
In the school:
• A person designated as a single point of contact for both teach-
ers and the family.
• A shortened day/shortened week; the student might arrive late, 
leave early, attend school for only part of the day and/or only 2 
or 3 days a week; students with sleep reversal might not be able 
to manage morning classes.
• A reduction in course load and flexible scheduling where only 
classes in selected subjects are attended.
• A quiet place to rest if fatigue is evident to the student or the 
teacher.
• Use of the elevator to access different floors.
• Exemption from or modification of, the physical education 
program.
• Provide homebound instruction or Distance Education for 
students who are partly or completely homebound.
In the classroom:
• Provide two sets of textbooks—one for school and one for home.
• Use the buddy system, so that someone can take notes in class, 
allow taping of classes, and/or give the student an outline of 
material taught.
• Permit the use of electronic devices such as a laptop or tablet 
and allow work to be completed and submitted online.
• Permit a student with orthostatic intolerance to move around 
during classes.
• Allow salty snacks and a water bottle for use in the classroom 
and especially during long tests.
• Provide tutorial or homebound instruction for work missed or 
if the student is too ill to attend school.
Assessments/Testing:
• Allow flexibility with assignments and deadlines as well as 
modifications of the number of problems and/or assignments 
to be completed.
• Significant extended time might be needed for testing as well 
as adjusted time of day for assessments, depending on the time 
when the student functions best.
• Tests/Final Exams might need to be given over several days 
and/or sessions with water and snacks available.
Sports
Symptoms of ME/CFS frequently worsen after physical exertion. 
Some students might be able to participate in a short physical 
activity, but not an activity that requires stamina. The student 
needs to be able to recognize when she/he is experiencing the 
onset of fatigue and inform the teacher. When this occurs, the 
student must stop and rest. The student might want to continue, 
but failure to stop and rest at the onset of increased fatigue often 
causes a serious and prolonged relapse of symptoms. Students 
with ME/CFS should never be pressured to push themselves to 
their limits.
Social Development
The classroom and the school lunchroom might be the only place 
where the student with ME/CFS is able to socialize with her/his 
peers. When possible, these opportunities should be facilitated 
(152, 153). Access to extra-curricular activities is also important 
for social reasons. Students who are unable to attend school often 
feel isolated at home, and miss their friends.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
The text of this monograph was developed by consensus of all the 
authors, and all authors agree to the content of the manuscript. 
Drafts of the main chapters were revised extensively by the entire 
group until consensus was achieved.
ACKNOwLeDGMeNTS
We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the following: 
Faith Newton Ed.D., Department of Education, Delaware State 
University, Dover, DE, USA contributed Section “The School 
System” and Appendix D. Evan Spivak, DDS, Department 
of Pediatric Dentistry, Rutgers School of Dental Medicine, 
Newark, NJ, USA contributed Section “Oral and Dental 
issues.” Appendix F is based upon “Considerations Prior to 
Surgery for Adult ME/CFS Patients” by Dr. Charles W Lapp 
MD, Director, Hunter-Hopkins Center, Charlotte, NC, USA, 
with permission.
FUNDiNG
The authors are most grateful to “Solve ME/CFS Initiative” 
which funded the publication of this manuscript from the SMCI 
Medical Education Fund. The funder had no role in the writing 
or the approval of the manuscript.
 29
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press (2015).
3. World Health Organization. International Classification of Diseases 
(ICD). (2016). Available from: http://apps.who.int/classifications/icd10/
browse/2016/en#/G90-G99
4. Katz BZ, Shiraishi Y, Mears CJ, Binns HJ, Taylor R. Chronic fatigue syn-
drome following infectious mononucleosis in adolescents. Pediatrics (2009) 
124(1):189–93. doi:10.1542/peds.2008-1879 
5. Bell KM, Cookfair D, Bell DS, Reese P, Cooper L. Risk factors associated with 
chronic fatigue syndrome in a cluster of pediatric cases. Rev Infect Dis (1991) 
13(Suppl 1):S32–8. doi:10.1093/clinids/13.Supplement_1.S32 
6. Siggurdsson B, Sigurjonasson J, Siggurdsson JH, Thorkelsson J, Gudmundsson 
JR. Disease epidemic in Iceland simulating poliomyelitis. Am J Hyg (1950) 
52(2):222–3. 
7. Bakken I, Tveito K, Gunnes N, Ghaderi S, Stoltenberg C, Trogstad L, et al. Two 
age peaks in the incidence of chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomy-
elitis: a population-based registry study from Norway 2008-2012. BMC Med 
(2014) 12(1):167. doi:10.1186/s12916-014-0167-5 
8. Davies S, Crawley E. Chronic fatigue syndrome in children aged 11 years old 
and younger. Arch Dis Child (2008) 93:419–22. doi:10.1136/adc.2007.126649 
9. Nijhof SL, Maijer K, Bleijenberg G, Uiterwaal C, Kimpen JLL, van de Putte EM. 
Adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome: prevalence, incidence, and morbidity. 
Pediatrics (2011) 127(5):E1169–75. doi:10.1542/peds.2010-1147 
10. Rimes KA, Goodman R, Hotopf M, Wessely S, Meltzer H, Chalder T. Incidence, 
prognosis, and risk factors for fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome in 
adolescents: a prospective community study. Pediatrics (2007) 119(3):e603–9. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2006-2231 
11. Reyes M, Nisenbaum R, Hoaglin DC, Unger ER, Emmons C, Randall B, et al. 
Prevalence and incidence of chronic fatigue syndrome in Wichita, Kansas. 
Arch Intern Med (2003) 163:1530–6. doi:10.1001/archinte.163.13.1530 
12. Jason LA, Richman JA, Rademaker AW, Jordan KM, Plioplys AV, Taylor RR, 
et al. A community-based study of chronic fatigue syndrome. Arch Intern Med 
(1999) 159(18):2129–37. doi:10.1001/archinte.159.18.2129 
13. Crawley EM, Emond AM, Sterne JAC. Unidentified chronic fatigue syndrome/
myalgic encephalomyelitis (cfs/me) is a major cause of school absence: sur-
veillance outcomes from school-based clinics. BMJ Open (2011) 1(2):e000252. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000252 
14. Dowsett EG, Colby J. Long-term sickness absence due to me/cfs in UK 
schools: an epidemiological study with medical and educational implications. 
J Chronic Fatigue Syndr (1997) 3(2):29–42. doi:10.1300/J092v03n02_04 
15. Crawley EM, Sterne JA. Association between school absence and physical 
function in paediatric chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalopathy. 
Arch Dis Child (2009) 94(10):752–6. doi:10.1136/adc.2008.143537 
16. Smith MS, Martin-Herz SP, Womack WM, Marsigan JL. Comparative study of 
anxiety, depression, somatization, functional disability, and illness attribution 
in adolescents with chronic fatigue or migraine. Pediatrics (2003) 111:e376–81. 
doi:10.1542/peds.111.4.e376 
17. Kennedy G, Underwood C, Belch JJF. Physical and functional impact of 
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis in childhood. Pediatrics 
(2010) 125(6):e1324–30. doi:10.1542/peds.2009-2644 
18. Winger A, Kvarstein G, Wyller VB, Ekstedt M, Sulheim D, Fagermoen E, et al. 
Health related quality of life in adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome: a 
cross-sectional study. Health Qual Life Outcomes (2015) 13:96. doi:10.1186/
s12955-015-0288-3 
19. Rowe KS, Moon J. What is the natural history of chronic fatigue syndrome in 
young people? Oral presentation IACFS/ME conference Ottawa. Bull IACFS/
ME Fall (2011). p. 129. 
20. Bell DS, Jordan K, Robinson M. Thirteen-year follow-up of children and 
adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome. Pediatrics (2001) 107(5):994–8. 
doi:10.1542/peds.107.5.994 
21. Gill AC, Dosen A, Ziegler JB. Chronic fatigue syndrome in adolescents: a 
follow-up study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med (2004) 158(3):225–9. doi:10.1001/
archpedi.158.3.225 
22. Van Geelen SM, Bakker RJ, Kuis W, Van De Putte EM. Adolescent chronic 
fatigue syndrome: a follow-up study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med (2010) 
164(9):810–4. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.145 
23. Rowe KS, Moon J. What is the natural history of chronic fatigue syndrome in 
young people? Paper Presented at IACFS/ME Biennial International Conference 
Ottawa Canada Sept 24-26 2011, Bulletin IACFS/ME. Ottawa (2011). Abstract 
p129.
24. Carruthers BM, Jain AK, De Meirleir KL, Peterson DL, Klimas NG, Lerner AM, 
 
et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: clinical working 
case definition, diagnostic and treatment protocols. J Chronic Fatigue Syndr 
(2003) 11(1):7–116. doi:10.1300/J092v11n01_02 
25. Carruthers BM, van de Sande MI, De Meirleir KL, Klimas NG, Broderick 
G, Mitchell T, et al. Myalgic encephalomyelitis: international consensus 
criteria. J Intern Med (2011) 270(4):327–38. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2796.2011. 
02428.x 
26. Holmes GP, Kaplan JE, Gantz NM, Komaroff AL, Schonberger LB, Straus SE, 
et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome: a working case definition. Ann Intern Med 
(1988) 108(3):387–9. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-108-3-387 
27. Jason LA, Bell DS, Rowe K, Van Hoof ELS, Jordan K, Lapp C, et al. A pediatric 
case definition for myalgic encephalomyelitis and chronic fatigue syndrome. 
J Chronic Fatigue Syndr (2006) 13(2–3):1–44. doi:10.1300/J092v13n02_01 
28. Knight S, Harvey A, Lubitz L, Rowe K, Reveley C, Veit F, et al. Paediatric 
chronic fatigue syndrome: complex presentations and protracted time to 
diagnosis. J Paediatr Child Health (2013) 49:919–24. doi:10.1111/jpc.12425 
29. Underhill R, O’Gorman R. The prevalence of chronic fatigue syndrome and 
chronic fatigue among family members of CFS patients. J Chronic Fatigue 
Syndr (2006) 13(1):3–13. doi:10.1300/J092v13n01_02 
30. Albright F, Light K, Light A, Bateman L, Cannon-Albright LA. Evidence for 
a heritable predisposition to chronic fatigue syndrome. BMC Neurol (2011) 
11:62. doi:10.1186/1471-2377-11-62 
31. Buchwald D, Herrell R, Ashton S, Belcourt M, Schmaling K, Sullivan P, et al. A 
twin study of chronic fatigue. Psychosom Med (2001) 63(6):936–43.
32. Barron DF, Cohen BA, Geraghty MT, Violand R, Rowe PC. Joint hypermobil-
ity is more common in children with chronic fatigue syndrome than in healthy 
controls. J Pediatr (2002) 141:421–5. doi:10.1067/mpd.2002.127496 
33. Jason LA, Katz BZ, Shiraishi Y, Mears C, Im Y, Taylor RR. Predictors of 
post-infectious chronic fatigue syndrome in adolescents. Health Psychol Behav 
Med (2014) 2(1):41–51. doi:10.1080/21642850.2013.869176 
34. Sulheim DE, Fagermoen E, Winger A, Andersen AM, Godang K, Muller F, 
et al. Disease mechanisms and clonidine treatment in adolescent chronic 
fatigue syndrome: a combined cross-sectional and randomized clinical trial. 
Supplementary Online Content. JAMA Pediatr (2014) 168(Suppl eTable 
8):22–3. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.4647 
35. Straus SE, Dale JK, Tobi M, Lawley T, Preble O, Blaese RM, et al. Acyclovir treat-
ment of the chronic fatigue syndrome: lack of efficacy in a placebo-controlled 
trial. N Engl J Med (1988) 319:1692–8. doi:10.1056/NEJM198812293192602 
36. Montoya JG, Kogelnik AM, Bhangoo M, Lunn MR, Flamand L, Merrihew LE, 
et al. Randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of valganci-
clovir in a subset of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Med Virol (2013) 
85:2101–9. doi:10.1002/jmv.23713 
37. Diaz-Mitoma F, Turgonyi E, Kumar A, Lim W, Larocque L, Hyde BM. Clinical 
improvement in chronic fatigue syndrome is associated with enhanced natural 
killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity: the results of a pilot study with Isoprinosine. 
J Chronic Fatigue Syndr (2003) 11:71–95. doi:10.1300/J092v11n02_06 
38. Natelson BH, Haghighi MH, Ponzio NM. Evidence for the presence of 
immune dysfunction in chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 
(2002) 9(4):747–52. doi:10.1128/CDLI.9.4.747-752.2002
39. Hardcastle SL, Brenu EW, Johnston S, Nguyen T, Huth T, Ramos S, et al. 
Longitudinal analysis of immune abnormalities in varying severities of 
chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis patients. J Transl Med 
(2015) 13:299. doi:10.1186/s12967-015-0653-3 
40. Klimas N, Salvato FR, Morgan R, Fletcher MA. Immunologic abnormalities in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin Microbiol (1990) 28(6):1403–10. 
41. Itoh Y, Shigemori T, Igarashi T, Fukunaga Y. Fibromyalgia and chronic 
fatigue 
syndrome 
in 
children. 
Pediatr 
Int 
(2012) 
54(2):266–71. 
doi:10.1111/j.1442-200X.2011.03514.x 
42. Rowe KS. Double-blind randomized controlled trial to assess the efficacy 
of intravenous gammaglobulin for the management of chronic fatigue 
syndrome in adolescents. J Psychiatr Res (1997) 31(1):133–47. doi:10.1016/
S0022-3956(96)00047-7 
43. Kennedy G, Khan F, Hill A, Underwood C, Belch JJF. Biochemical and vascu-
lar aspects of pediatric chronic fatigue syndrome. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 
(2010) 164(9):817–23. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.157 
 30
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
44. Kavelaars A, Kuis W, Knook L, Sinnema G, Heijnen CJ. Disturbed 
 
neuroendocrine-immune interactions in chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab (2000) 85(2):692–6. doi:10.1210/jc.85.2.692 
45. Broderick G, Katz BZ, Fernandes H, Fletcher MA, Klimas N, Smith FA, et al. 
Cytokine expression profiles of immune imbalance in post-mononucleosis 
chronic fatigue. J Transl Med (2012) 10:191. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-10-191 
46. Wyller VB, Sørensen O, Sulheim D, Fagermoen E, Ueland T, Mollnes TE. 
Plasma cytokine expression in adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain 
Behav Immun (2015) 46:80–6. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2014.12.025 
47. Fluge O, Bruland O, Risa K, Storstein A, Kristoffersen EK, Sapkota D, et al. 
Benefit from B-lymphocyte depletion using the anti-CD20 antibody ritux-
imab in chronic fatigue syndrome. A double-blind and placebo-controlled 
study. PLoS One (2011) 6:e26358. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0026358 
48. Rowe PC, Bou-Holaigh I, Kan JS, Calkins H. Is neurally mediated hypoten-
sion an unrecognized cause of chronic fatigue? Lancet (1995) 345:623–4. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(95)90525-1 
49. Stewart JM, Gewitz MH, Weldon A, Arlievsky N, Li K, Munoz J. Orthostatic 
intolerance in adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. Pediatrics (1999) 
103(1):116–21. doi:10.1542/peds.103.1.116 
50. Stewart JM, Medow MS, Messer ZR, Baugham IL, Terilli C, Ocon AJ. Postural 
neurocognitive and neuronal activated cerebral blood flow deficits in 
young chronic fatigue syndrome patients with postural tachycardia syn-
drome. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2012) 302:H1185. doi:10.1152/
ajpheart.00994.2011 
51. Bou-Holaigah I, Rowe PC, Kan J, Calkins H. Relationship between neurally 
mediated hypotension and the chronic fatigue syndrome. JAMA (1995) 
274:961–7. doi:10.1001/jama.1995.03530120053041 
52. Galland BC, Jackson PM, Sayers RM, Taylor BJ. A matched case control study 
 
of orthostatic intolerance in children/adolescents with chronic fatigue syn-
drome. 
Pediatr 
Res 
(2008) 
63(2):196–202. 
doi:10.1203/PDR.0b013e31815ed612 
53. Katz BZ, Stewart JM, Shiraishi Y, Mears CJ, Taylor R. Orthostatic tolerance 
testing in a prospective cohort of adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome 
and recovered controls following infectious mononucleosis. Clin Pediatr 
(2012) 51:835–9. doi:10.1177/0009922812455094 
54. Tanaka H, Matsushima R, Tamai H, Kajimoto Y. Impaired postural cerebral 
hemodynamics in young patients with chronic fatigue with and without ortho-
static intolerance. J Pediatr (2002) 140:412–7. doi:10.1067/mpd.2002.122725 
55. Wyller VB, Due R, Saul JP, Amlie JP, Thaulow E. Useful-ness of an abnormal 
cardiovascular response during low-grade head-up tilt-test for discriminating 
adolescents with chronic fatigue from healthy controls. Am J Cardiol (2007) 
99:997–1001. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.10.067 
56. Ocon AJ, Messer ZR, Medow MS, Stewart JM. Increasing orthostatic stress 
impairs neurocognitive functioning in chronic fatigue syndrome with 
postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Sci (2012) 122(5):227–38. doi:10.1042/
CS20110241 
57. Hurwitz BE, Coryell VT, Parker M, Martin P, Laperriere A, Klimas NG, et al. 
Chronic fatigue syndrome: illness severity, sedentary lifestyle, blood volume 
and evidence of diminished cardiac function. Clin Sci (2010) 118(2):125–35. 
doi:10.1042/CS20090055 
58. Okamoto LE, Raj SR, Peltier A, Gamboa A, Shibao C, Diedrich A, et al. 
Neurohumoral and haemodynamic profile in postural tachycardia and chronic 
fatigue syndromes. Clin Sci (2012) 122(4):183–92. doi:10.1042/CS20110200 
59. Streeten DHP, Bell DS. Circulating blood volume in chronic fatigue syndrome. 
J Chronic Fatigue Syndr (1998) 4(1):3–11. doi:10.1300/J092v04n01_02 
60. Streeten DHP, Thomas D, Bell DS. The roles of orthostatic hypotension, ortho-
static tachycardia, and subnormal erythrocyte volume in the pathogenesis of 
the chronic fatigue syndrome. Am J Med Sci (2000) 320(1):1–8. doi:10.1016/
S0002-9629(15)40790-6 
61. Nijhof SL, Rutten JMTM, Uiterwaal C, Bleijenberg G, Kimpen JLL, 
 
van de Putte EM. The role of hypocortisolism in chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 
(2014) 
42:199–206. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen. 
2014.01.017 
62. Segal TY, Hindmarsh PC, Viner RM. Disturbed adrenal function in ado-
lescents with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2005) 
18(3):295–301. doi:10.1515/JPEM.2005.18.3.295 
63. Tomoda A, Jhodoi T, Miike T. Chronic fatigue syndrome and abnormal bio-
logical rhythms in school children. J Chronic Fatigue Syndr (2001) 8(2):29–37. 
doi:10.1300/J092v08n02_03 
64. McKenzie R, O’Fallon A, Dale J, Demitrack M, Sharma G, Deloria M, et al. Low-
dose hydrocortisone for treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA (1998) 280:1061–6. doi:10.1001/jama.280.12.1061 
65. Nakatomi Y, Mizuno K, Ishii A, Wada Y, Tanaka M, Tazawa S, et al. 
Neuroinflammation in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic 
encephalomyelitis: an 11c-(r)-pk11195 pet study. J Nucl Med (2014) 55:945–50. 
doi:10.2967/jnumed.113.131045 
66. Barnden LR, Crouch B, Kwiatek R, Burnet R, Mernone A, Chryssidis S, 
et al. A brain MRI study of chronic fatigue syndrome: evidence of brainstem 
dysfunction and altered homeostasis. NMR Biomed (2011) 24(10):1302–12. 
doi:10.1002/nbm.1692 
67. Puri BK, Jakeman PM, Agour M, Gunatilake KD, Fernando KA, Gurusinghe AI, 
 
et al. Regional grey and white matter volumetric changes in myalgic enceph-
alomyelitis (chronic fatigue syndrome): a voxel-based morphometry 3 t mri 
study. Br J Radiol (2012) 85(1015):e270–3. doi:10.1259/bjr/93889091 
68. Yoshiuchi K, Farkas J, Natelson BH. Patients with chronic fatigue syndrome 
have reduced absolute cortical blood flow. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging (2006) 
26:83–6. doi:10.1111/j.1475-097X.2006.00649.x 
69. Murrough JW, Mao X, Collins KA, Kelly C, Andrade G, Nestadt P, et al. 
Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome measured by 1h mrs 
imaging at 3.0 t. II: comparison with major depressive disorder. NMR Biomed 
(2010) 23(6):643–50. doi:10.1002/nbm.1512 
70. Shungu DC, Weiduschat N, Murrough JW, Mao X, Pillemer S, Dyke JP, et al. 
Increased ventricular lactate in chronic fatigue syndrome. III. Relationships 
to cortical glutathione and clinical symptoms implicate oxidative stress in 
disorder pathophysiology. NMR Biomed (2012) 25(9):1073–87. doi:10.1002/
nbm.2772 
71. Cook DB, O’Connor PJ, Lange G, Steffener J. Functional neuroimaging 
correlates of mental fatigue induced by cognition among chronic fatigue syn-
drome patients and controls. Neuroimage (2007) 36(1):108–22. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2007.02.033 
72. Mizuno K, Tanaka M, Tanabe HC, Joudoi T, Kawatani J, Shigihara Y, et al. Less 
efficient and costly processes of frontal cortex in childhood chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Neuroimage Clin (2015) 9:355–68. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2015.09.001 
73. Schmaling KB, Lewis DH, Fiedelak JI, Mahurin R, Buchwald DS. Single-photon 
emission computerized tomography and neurocognitive function in patients 
with chronic fatigue syndrome. [Erratum appears in psychosom med. 2003 
Mar–Apr; 65(2):210]. Psychosom Med (2003) 65(1):129–36. doi:10.1097/01.
PSY.0000038942.33335.9B 
74. Medow MS, Sood S, Messer Z, Dzogbeta S, Terilli C, Stewart JM. Phenylephrine 
alteration of cerebral blood flow during orthostasis: effect on N-back per-
formance in chronic fatigue syndrome. J Appl Physiol (2014) 117:1157–64. 
doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00527.2014 
75. Jones DE, Hollingsworth KG, Jakovljevic DG, Fattakhova G, Pairman J, 
Blamire AM, et al. Loss of capacity to recover from acidosis on repeat exercise 
in chronic fatigue syndrome: a case-control study. Eur J Clin Invest (2012) 
42(2):186–94. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2362.2011.02567.x 
76. Van Ness JM, Snell CR, Stevens SR. Diminished cardiopulmonary capacity 
during post-exertional malaise. J Chronic Fatigue Syndr (2007) 14:77–85. 
doi:10.1300/J092v14n02_07 
77. Keller BA, Pryor JL, Giloteaux L. Inability of myalgic encephalomyelitis/ 
chronic fatigue syndrome patients to reproduce VO2peak indicates functional 
impairment. J Transl Med (2014) 12(1):104. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-12-104 
78. Snell CR, Stevens SR, Davenport TE, Van Ness JM. Discriminative validity of 
metabolic and workload measurements for identifying people with chronic 
fatigue syndrome. Phys Ther (2013) 93(11):1484–92. doi:10.2522/ptj.20110368 
79. Katz BZ, Boas S, Shiraishi Y, Mears CJ, Taylor R. Exercise tolerance testing 
in a prospective cohort of adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome and 
recovered controls following infectious mononucleosis. J Pediatr (2010) 
157(3):468–472,472.e461. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.03.025 
80. Booth NE, Myhill S, McLaren-Howard J. Mitochondrial dysfunction and 
the pathophysiology of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome 
(ME/CFS). Int J Clin Exp Med (2012) 5(3):208–20. 
81. Wallace DC. A mitochondrial bioenergetic etiology of disease. J Clin Invest 
(2013) 123(4):1405–12. doi:10.1172/JCI61398 
82. Kerr J, Petty R, Burke B, Gough J, Fear D, Sinclair LI, et al. Gene expression 
subtypes in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyeli-
tis. Infect Dis (2008) 197(8):1171–84. doi:10.1086/533453 
 31
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
83. Light AR, White AT, Hughen RW, Light KC. Moderate exercise increases 
expression for sensory, adrenergic, and immune genes in chronic fatigue syn-
drome patients but not in normal subjects. J Pain (2009) 10(10):1099–112. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2009.06.003 
84. de Vega WC, Vernon SD, McGowan PO. DNA methylation modifications 
associated with chronic fatigue syndrome. PLoS One (2014) 9:e104757. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0104757 
85. Haig-Ferguson A, Tucker P, Eaton N, Hunt L, Crawley E. Memory and atten-
tion problems in children with chronic fatigue syndrome or myalgic enceph-
alopathy. Arch Dis Child (2009) 94(10):757–62. doi:10.1136/adc.2008.143032 
86. Tucker P, Haig-Ferguson A, Eaton N, Crawley E. What to do about attention 
and memory problems in children with CFS/ME: a neuropsychological 
approach. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry (2011) 16(2):215–23. doi:10.1177/ 
1359104511403585 
87. Cockshell SJ, Mathias JL. Cognitive functioning in chronic fatigue syn-
drome: a meta-analysis. Psychol Med (2010) 40:1253–67. doi:10.1017/
S0033291709992054 
88. Rowe KS. Does depression at presentation impact on outcomes for young 
people with CFS? IACFS/ME Conference. San Francisco (2014).
89. Shaw RJ, Dayal S, Hartman JK, DeMaso DR. Factitious disorder by proxy: 
pediatric condition falsification. Harv Rev Psychiatry (2008) 16(4):215–24. 
doi:10.1080/10673220802277870 
90. M.E. Parents Fury at Child Abuse Claims. (2015). Available from: www.
meassociation.org.uk/2015/06/m-e-parents-fury-at-child-abuse-claims-
sunday-express-21-june-2015/
91. Fremont WP. School refusal in children and adolescents. Am Fam Physician 
(2003) 68(8):1555–60. 
92. Walker LS, Greene JW. The functional disability inventory: measuring a 
neglected dimension of child health status. J Pediatr Psychol (1991) 16:39–58. 
doi:10.1093/jpepsy/16.1.39 
93. Varni JW, Seid M, Kurtin PS. PedsQL 4.0: reliability and validity of 
the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory version 4.0 generic core scales 
in healthy and patient populations. Med Care (2001) 39:800–12. 
doi:10.1097/00005650-200108000-00006 
94. Bentall RP, Wood GC, Marrinan T, Deans C, Edwards RHT. A brief 
mental fatigue questionnaire. Br J Clin Psychol (1993) 32:375–9. doi:10.111
1/j.2044-8260.1993.tb01070.x 
95. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth 
sleepiness scale. Sleep (1991) 14(6):540–5. doi:10.1093/sleep/14.6.540 
96. Peuhkuri K, Sihvola N, Korpela R. Diet promotes sleep duration and quality. 
Nutr Res (2012) 32(5):309–19. doi:10.1016/j.nutres.2012.03.009 
97. Bell DS. Chronic fatigue syndrome in children. J Chronic Fatigue Syndr 
(1995) 1:9–33. doi:10.1300/J092v01n01_03 
98. Bell DS, Bell KM, Cheney PR. Primary juvenile fibromyalgia syndrome and 
chronic fatigue syndrome in adolescents. Clin Infect Dis (1994) 18(Suppl 
1):S21–3. doi:10.1093/clinids/18.Supplement_1.S21 
99. Rowe KS, Rowe KJ. Symptom patterns of children and adolescents with 
chronic fatigue syndrome. In:  Nirbhay THO,  Singh N,  Ashvind NS, editors. 
International Perspectives on Child and Adolescent Mental Health. (Vol. 2), 
Kuala Lumpur: Elsevier (2002). p. 395–421.
100. Vermeulen RC, Kurk RM, Visser FC, Sluiter W, Scholte HR. Patients with 
chronic fatigue syndrome performed worse than controls in a controlled 
repeated exercise study despite a normal oxidative phosphorylation capacity. 
J Transl Med (2010) 8:93. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-8-93 
101. Twisk FN, Maes M. A review on cognitive behavorial therapy (CBT) and 
graded exercise therapy (GET) in myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/ chronic 
fatigue syndrome (CFS): CBT/GET is not only ineffective and not evi-
dence-based, but also potentially harmful for many patients with ME/CFS. 
Neuro Endocrinol Lett (2009) 30(3):284–99. 
102. Takenaka KY, Suzuki Y, Uno K, Sato M, Komuro T, Haruna Y, et al. 
Effects of rapid saline infusion on orthostatic intolerance and autonomic 
tone after 20 days bed rest. Am J Cardiol (2002) 89:557–61. doi:10.1016/
S0002-9149(01)02296-2 
103. Jason LA, Muldowney K, Torres-Harding S. The energy envelope theory 
and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. AAOHN J (2008) 
56(5):189–95. doi:10.3928/08910162-20080501-06 
104. Rowe PC, Marden CL, Flaherty MAK, Jasion SE, Cranston EM, Johns AS, 
et al. Impaired range of motion of limbs and spine in chronic fatigue syn-
drome. J Pediatr (2014) 165:360–6. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.04.051 
105. Olson LG, Ambrogetti A, Sutherland DC. A pilot randomized controlled 
trial of dexamphetamine in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. 
Psychosomatics (2003) 44:38–43. doi:10.1176/appi.psy.44.1.38 
106. Blockmans D, Persoons P, van Houdenhove B, Bobbaers H. Does methylphe-
nidate reduce the symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome? Am J Med (2006) 
119:167.e23–30. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2005.07.047 
107. Young JL. Use of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate in treatment of executive 
functioning deficits and chronic fatigue syndrome: a double blind, placebo- 
controlled study. Psychiatry Res (2013) 207:127–33. doi:10.1016/j.psychres. 
2012.09.007 
108. Randall DC, Cafferty FH, Shneerson JM, Smith IE, Llewelyn MB, File SE. 
Chronic treatment with modafanil may not be beneficial in patients with 
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Psychopharmacol (2005) 19:647–60. doi:10.1177/ 
0269881105056531 
109. Regland B, Forsmark S, Halaouate L, Matousek M, Peilot B, Zachrisson O, 
et al. Response to vitamin B12 and folic acid in myalgic encephalomyelitis 
and fibromyalgia. PLoS One (2015) 10(4):e0124648. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0124648 
110. Bonilla FA. Intravenous immunoglobulin: adverse reactions and management. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol (2008) 122:1238–9. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2008.08.033 
111. Rimes KA, Wingrove J. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for people with 
chronic fatigue syndrome still experiencing excessive fatigue after cognitive 
behaviour therapy: a pilot randomized stud. J Clin Psychol Psychotherapy 
(2013) 20(2):107–17. doi:10.1002/cpp.793 
112. Knight SJ, Scheinberg A, Harvey AR. Interventions in pediatric chronic 
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: a systematic review. J Adolesc 
Health (2013) 53(2):154–65. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.03.009 
113. Knoop H, Stulemeijer M, de Jong LW, Fiselier TJ, Bleijenberg G. Efficacy of 
cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome: 
long-term follow-up of a randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics (2008) 
121(3):e619–25. doi:10.1542/peds.2007-1488 
114. Nijhof SL, Priesterbach LP, Uiterwaal CS, Bleijenberg G, Kimpen JL, van de 
Putte EM. Internet-based therapy for adolescents with chronic fatigue syn-
drome: long-term follow-up. Pediatrics (2013) 131(6):e1788–95. doi:10.1542/
peds.2012-2007 
115. Stulemeijer M, de Jong LW, Fiselier TJ, Hoogveld SW, Bleijenberg G. 
Cognitive behaviour therapy for adolescents with chronic fatigue syndrome: 
randomised controlled trial. BMJ (2005) 330(7481):14; Erratum in: BMJ 
(2005) 330(7495):820. doi:10.1136/bmj.38301.587106.63 
116. O’Dowd H, Gladwell P, Rogers CA, Hollinghurst S, Gregory A. Cognitive 
behavioural therapy in chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomised controlled 
trial of an outpatient group programme. Health Technol Assess (2006) 
10(37):iii–iv,ix–x,1–121. doi:10.3310/hta10370 
117. Price JR, Mitchell E, Tidy E, Hunot V. Cognitive behavioural therapy for 
chronic fatigue syndrome in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2008) 
3:CD001027. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001027 
118. Lloyd AR, Hickie I, Brockman A, Hickie C, Wilson A, Dwyer J, et al. 
Immunologic and psychologic therapy for patients with chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Med (1993) 
94(2):197–203. doi:10.1016/0002-9343(93)90183-P 
119. Friedberg F, Sohl S. Cognitive-behavior therapy in chronic fatigue syndrome: 
is improvement related to increased physical activity? J Clin Psychol (2009) 
65:423–42. doi:10.1002/jclp.20551 
120. Nijhof SL, Bleijenberg G, Uiterwaal CS, Kimpen JL, van de Putte EM. 
Effectiveness of internet-based cognitive behavioural treatment for adoles-
cents with chronic fatigue syndrome (FITNET): a randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet (2012) 379(9824):1412–8. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60025-7 
121. Van Houdenhov B, Luyten P. Treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome: how to 
find a ’new equilibrium’? Patient Educ Couns (2009) 77:153–4. doi:10.1016/j.
pec.2009.09.001 
122. Alraek T, Lee MS, Choi TY, Cao H, Liu J. Complementary and alternative 
medicine for patients with chronic fatigue syndrome: a systematic review. 
BMC Complement Altern Med (2011) 11:87. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-11-87 
123. Porter NS, Jason LA, Boulton A, Bothne N, Coleman B. Alternative medical 
interventions used in the treatment and management of myalgic encepha-
lomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. J Altern Complement 
Med (2010) 16(3):235–49. doi:10.1089/acm.2008.0376 
124. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, Benditt DG, Benarroch E, Biaggioni 
I, et al. Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic hypotension, 
 32
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin 
Auton Res (2011) 21:69–72. doi:10.1007/s10286-011-0119-5 
125. MacLean AR, Allen EV. Orthostatic hypotension and orthostatic tachycardia: 
treatment with the “head-up” bed. JAMA (1940) 115:2162–7. doi:10.1001/
jama.1940.02810510038010 
126. Van Lieshout JJ, ten Harkel ADJ, Wieling W. Fludrocortisone and sleeping 
in the head-up position limit the postural decrease in cardiac output in 
autonomic failure. Clin Auton Res (2000) 10:35–42. doi:10.1007/BF02291388 
127. Boehm KE, Kip KT, Grubb BP, Kosinski DJ. Neurocardiogenic syncope: 
response to hormonal therapy. Pediatrics (1997) 99:623–5. doi:10.1542/
peds.99.4.623 
128. Grubb BP, Samoil D, Kosinski D, Kip K, Brewster P. Use of sertraline chloride 
in the treatment of refractory neurocardiogenic syncope in children and 
adolescents. J Am Coll Cardiol (1994) 24:480–4. doi:10.1016/0735-1097(94) 
90308-5 
129. Moak JP, Leong D, Fabian R, Freedenberg V, Jarosz E, Toney C, et al. 
Intravenous hydration for management of medication-resistant orthostatic 
intolerance in the adolescent and young adult. Pediatr Cardiol (2015) 
37(2):278–82. doi:10.1007/s00246-015-1274-6 
130. Malfait F, De Paepe A. The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Adv Exp med Biol 
(2014) 802:129–43.
131. Rowe PC, Barron DF, Calkins H, Maumenee IH, Tong PY, Geraghty 
MT. Orthostatic intolerance and chronic fatigue syndrome associated 
with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. J Pediatr (1999) 135:494–9. doi:10.1016/
S0022-3476(99)70173-3 
132. De Wandele I, Calders P, Peersman W, Rimbaut S, De Backer T, Malfait F, et al. 
Autonomic symptom burden in the hypermobility type of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome: a comparative study with two other EDS types, fibromyalgia, and 
healthy controls. Semin Arthritis Rheum (2014) 44(3):353–61. doi:10.1016/j.
semarthrit.2014.05.013 
133. Rombaut L, Malfait F, Cool A, de Paepe A, Calders P. Musculoskeletal 
complaints, physical activity and health-related quality of life among patients 
with the Ehlers–Danlos syndrome hypermobility type. Disabil Rehabil (2010) 
32(16):1339–45. doi:10.3109/09638280903514739 
134. Voermans NC, Knoop H, van de Kamp N, Hamel BC, Bleijenberg G, van 
Engelen BG. Fatigue is a frequent and clinically relevant problem in Ehlers-
Danlos Syndrome. Semin Arthritis Rheum (2010) 40:267–267. doi:10.1016/j.
semarthrit.2009.08.003 
135. Beard RW, Reginal PW, Wadsworth J. Clinical features of women with 
chronic lower abdominal pain and pelvic congestion. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
(1988) 95:153–61. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.1988.tb06845.x 
136. Venbrux AC, Lambert DL. Embolization of the ovarian veins as a treatment 
for patients with chronic pelvic pain caused by pelvic vein incompetence 
(pelvic congestion syndrome). Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol (1999) 11:395–9. 
doi:10.1097/00001703-199908000-00006 
137. Venbrux AC, Chang AH, Kim HS, Montague BJ, Hebert JB, Arepally A, 
et al. Pelvic congestion syndrome (pelvic venous incompetence): impact 
of ovarian and internal iliac vein embolotherapy on menstrual cycle and 
chronic pelvic pain. J Vasc Interv Radiol (2002) 13:171–8. doi:10.1016/
S1051-0443(07)61935-6 
138. Rowe PC, Marden CL, Jasion SE, Cranston EM, Flaherty MA, Kelly KJ. Cow’s 
milk protein intolerance in adolescents and young adults with chronic fatigue 
syndrome. Acta Paediatr (2016) 105(9):e412–8. doi:10.1111/apa.13476 
139. Kelly KJ, Lazenby AJ, Rowe PC, Yardley JH, Perman JA, Sampson HA. 
Eosinophilic esophagitis attributed to gastroesophageal reflux: improvement 
with an amino acid-based formula. Gastroenterology (1995) 109:1503–12. 
doi:10.1016/0016-5085(95)90637-1 
140. Evans M, Barry M, Im Y, Brown A, Jason LA. An investigation of symptoms 
predating CFS onset. J Prev Interv Community (2015) 43(1):54–61. doi:10.10
80/10852352.2014.973240 
141. Afrin LB. Presentation, diagnosis, and management of mast cell activation 
syndrome. In: Murray DB, editor. Mast Cells. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science 
Publishers, Inc. (2013). p. 155–232.
142. Akin C, Valent P, Metcalfe DD. Mast cell activation syndrome: proposed diag-
nostic criteria. J Allergy Clin Immunol (2010) 126:1099–104. doi:10.1016/j.
jaci.2010.08.035 
143. Shibao C, Arzubiaga C, Jackson Roberts L, Raj S, Black B, Harris P, 
et al. Hyperadrenergic postural tachycardia syndrome in mast cell 
activation disorders. Hypertension (2005) 45:385–90. doi:10.1161/01.
HYP.0000158259.68614.40 
144. Lyons JJ, Sun G, Stone KD, Nelson C, Wisch L, O’Brien M, et al. Mendelian 
inheritance of elevated serum tryptase associated with atopy and connective 
tissue abnormalities. J Allergy Clin Immunol (2014) 133:1471–4. doi:10.1016/j.
jaci.2013.11.039 
145. Molderings GJ, Brettner S, Homann J, Afrin LB. Mast cell activation disease: 
a concise practical guide for diagnostic workup and therapeutic options. 
J Hematol Oncol (2011) 4:10. doi:10.1186/1756-8722-4-10 
146. Heffez DS, Ross RE, Shade-Zeldow Y, Kostas K, Shah S, Gottschalk R, et al. 
Clinical evidence for cervical myelopathy due to Chiari malformation and 
spinal stenosis in a non-randomized group of patients with the diagnosis 
of fibromyalgia. Eur Spine J (2004) 13:516–23. doi:10.1007/s00586-004- 
0672-x 
147. Milhorat TH, Chou MW, Trinidad EM, Kula RW, Mandell M, Wolpert 
C, et al. Chiari I malformation redefined: clinical and radiographic 
findings for 364 symptomatic patients. Neurosurgery (1999) 44:1005–17. 
doi:10.1097/00006123-199905000-00042 
148. Collingridge E. Severe ME/CFS: A Guide to Living. Great Britain: AYME 
(2010). p. 1–140.
149. Speight AN, Kumar P, Sabai J. Paediatric Chronic Fatigue Syndrome in One 
Health Authority–Epidemiology, Spectrum of Severity and Natural History. 
Alison Hunter Memorial Foundation Clinical and Scientific Meeting. Cardiff
 
(2001). 
Available 
from: 
http://adc.bmj.com/content/archdischild/82/
suppl_1/A55.full.pdf (accessed May 21, 2017).
150. Velleman S, Collins SM, Beasant L, Crawley E. Psychological wellbeing 
and quality-of-life among siblings of paediatric CFS/ME patients: a 
mixed-methods study. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry (2016) 21(4):618–33. 
doi:10.1177/1359104515602373 
151. Newton F. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. National Association of Special 
Education Teachers. (2014). Available from: www.naset.org/3349.0.html
152. Bell DS, Carruthers BM. Teach-me: A Sourcebook for Teachers of Young People 
with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Fibromyalgia 
Syndrome. 2nd ed. Nepean, ON: National ME/FM Action Network 
(2005). Available from: http://mefmaction.com/images/stories/Support/
Teach_Me_Eng.pdf
153. Newton F. Improving Academic Success for students with myalgic enceph-
alomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Fatigue Biomed Health Behav (2015) 
3(2):97–103. doi:10.1080/21641846.2015.1004831 
154. Nijhof LN, Nijhof SL, Bleijenberg G, Stellato RK, Kimpen JL, Hulshoff
 
Pol HE, et al. The impact of chronic fatigue syndrome on cognitive func-
tioning in adolescents. Eur J Pediatr (2016) 175(2):245–52. doi:10.1007/
s00431-015-2626-1 
155. Ang-Lee MK, Moss J, Yuan CS. Herbal medications and perioperative care. 
JAMA (2001) 286(2):208–16. 
156. Low PA, Sandroni P, Joyner M, Shen WK. Postural tachycardia 
syndrome 
(POTS). 
J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol 
(2009) 
20:352–8. 
doi:10.1111/j.1540-8167.2008.01407.x 
157. Rowe PC, Bou-Holaigah I, Kan JS, Calkins H. Is neurally mediated hypo-
tension an unrecognised cause of chronic fatigue? Lancet (1995) 345:623–4. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(95)90525-1 
158. Stewart J, Weldon A, Arlievsky N, Li K, Munoz J. Neurally mediated hypo-
tension and autonomic dysfunction measured by heart rate variability during 
head-up tilt testing in children with chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Auton Res 
(1998) 8:221–30. doi:10.1007/BF02267785 
159. Wyller VB, Saul JP, Amlie JP, Thaulow E. Sympathetic predominance of 
cardiovascular regulation during mild orthostatic stress in adolescents 
with chronic fatigue. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging (2007) 27:231–8. 
doi:10.1111/j.1475-097X.2007.00743.x 
160. Wyller VB, Saul JP, Walloe L, Thaulow E. Sympathetic cardiovascular con-
trol during orthostatic stress and isometric exercise in adolescent chronic 
fatigue syndrome. Eur J Appl Physiol (2008) 102:623–32. doi:10.1007/
s00421-007-0634-1 
161. Wyller VB, Thaulow E, Amlie JP. Treatment of chronic fatigue and orthostatic 
intolerance with propranolol. J Pediatr (2007) 150:654–5. doi:10.1016/j.
jpeds.2007.03.012 
162. Rowell L. Human Cardiovascular Control. New York: Oxford University Press 
(1992).
 33
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
163. Medow MS, Stewart JM, Sanyal S, Mumtaz A, Sica D, Frishman WH. 
Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of orthostatic hypotension 
and vasovagal syncope. Cardiol Rev (2008) 16:4–20. doi:10.1097/
CRD.0b013e31815c8032 
164. Weiling W, Shepherd JT. Initial and delayed circulatory responses to ortho-
static stress in normal humans and in subjects with orthostatic intolerance. 
Int Angiol (1992) 11:69–82. 
165. Wyller VB, Evang JA, Godang K, Solhjell KK, Bollerslev J. Hormonal 
alterations in adolescent chronic fatigue syndrome. Acta Paediatr (2010) 
99:770–3. doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2010.01701.x 
166. Fortney SM, Schneider VS, Greenleaf JE. The physiology of bed rest. 
In:  Fregley MJ,  Blatters CM, editors. Handbook of Physiology. Section 4: 
Environmental Physiology. (Vol. II), New York: Oxford University Press 
(1996). p. 889–939.
167. Hyatt KH, Jacobson LB, Schneider VS. Comparison of 70o tilt, LBNP, and 
passive standing as measures of orthostatic tolerance. Aviat Space Environ 
Med (1975) 46:801–8. 
168. Rosen SG, Cryer PE. Postural tachycardia syndrome: reversal of sympathetic 
hyperresponsiveness and clinical improvement during sodium loading. Am 
J Med (1982) 72:847–50. doi:10.1016/0002-9343(82)90559-9 
169. Benditt DG, Ermie C, Padamilan B, Samniah N, Sakaguchi S. Catecholamine 
response during hemodynamically stable upright posture in individuals with 
and without tilt-table induced vasovagal syncope. Europace (2003) 5:65–70. 
doi:10.1053/eupc.2002.0271 
170. Goldstein DS, Eldadah B, Holmes C, Pechnik S, Moak J, Sharabi Y. 
Neurocirculatory abnormalities in chronic orthostatic intolerance. 
Circulation (2005) 111:839–45. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000155613.20376.CA 
171. Sandroni P, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Benarroch EE, Shen WK, Low PA. Certain 
cardiovascular indices predict syncope in the postural tachycardia syndrome. 
Clin Auton Res (1996) 6:225–31. doi:10.1007/BF02291138 
172. Rowe PC, Calkins H, DeBusk K, McKenzie R, Anand R, Sharma G, et al. 
Fludrocortisone acetate to treat neurally mediated hypotension in chronic 
fatigue syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA (2001) 285:52–9. 
doi:10.1001/jama.285.1.52 
173. Kanjwal K, Sheikh M, Karabin B, Kanjwal Y, Grubb BP. Neurocardiogenic 
syncope coexisting with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome in 
patients suffering from orthostatic intolerance: a combined form of 
autonomic dysfunction. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol (2011) 34:549–54. 
doi:10.1111/j.1540-8159.2010.02994.x 
174. Stewart JM, Clarke D. “He’s dizzy when he stands up”: an introduction to ini-
tial orthostatic hypotension. J Pediatr (2011) 158(3):499–504. doi:10.1016/j.
jpeds.2010.09.004 
175. Tanaka H, Fujita Y, Takenaka Y, Kajiwara S, Masutani S, Ishizaki Y, 
et al. Japanese clinical guidelines for juvenile orthostatic dysregulation 
version 1. Pediatr Int (2009) 51:169–79. doi:10.1111/j.1442-200X.2008. 
02783.x 
176. Schondorf R, Low PA. Idiopathic postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: 
an attenuated form of acute pandysautonomia? Neurology (1993) 43:132–7. 
doi:10.1212/WNL.43.1_Part_1.132 
177. Raj SR. Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS). Circulation (2013) 
127:2336–42. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.144501 
178. Stewart JM. Common syndromes of orthostatic intolerance. Pediatrics (2013) 
131:1–13. doi:10.1542/peds.2012-2610 
179. Singer W, Sletten DM, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Brands CK, Fischer PR, Low PA. 
Postural tachycardia syndrome in children and adolescents: what is abnor-
mal? J Pediatr (2012) 160:222–6. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.08.054 
180. Grubb BP. Neurocardiogenic syncope. N Engl J Med (2005) 352:1004–10. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMcp042601 
181. Wieling W, Ganzeboom KS, Saul JP. Reflex syncope in children and adoles-
cents. Heart (2004) 90:1094–100. doi:10.1136/hrt.2003.022996 
182. Jhanjee R, Can I, Benditt DG. Syncope. Dis Mon (2009) 55:532–85. 
doi:10.1016/j.disamonth.2009.04.004 
183. van Lieshout JJ, Wieling W, Karemaker JM, Eckberg DL. The vasovagal 
response. Clin Sci (1991) 81:575–86. doi:10.1042/cs0810575 
184. Jardine DL, Melton IC, Crozier IG, Bennett SI, Donald RA, Ikram H. 
Neurohormonal response to head-up tilt and its role in vasovagal syncope. 
Am J Cardiol (1997) 79:1302–6. doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(9X)00084-9 
185. Rose MS, Koshman ML, Spreng S, Sheldon R. The relationship between 
health-related quality of life and frequency of spells in patients with syncope. 
J Clin Epidemiol (2000) 53:1209–16. doi:10.1016/S0895-4356(00)00257-2 
186. Kenney RA, Graham LA. Chronic fatigue syndrome symptoms common in 
patients with vasovagal syncope. Am J Med (2001) 110:242–3. doi:10.1016/
S0002-9343(00)00704-X 
187. Legge H, Norton M, Newton JL. Fatigue is significant in vasovagal syncope 
and is associated with autonomic symptoms. Europace (2008) 10:1095–101. 
doi:10.1093/europace/eun164 
188. Martinez-Lavin M. Biology and therapy of fibromyalgia. Stress, the stress 
response system, and fibromyalgia. Arthritis Res Ther (2006) 9:216. 
doi:10.1186/ar2146 
189. Stewart JM, Gewitz MH, Weldon A, Munoz J. Patterns of orthostatic intoler-
ance: the orthostatic tachycardia syndrome and adolescent chronic fatigue. 
J Pediatr (1999) 135:218–25. doi:10.1016/S0022-3476(99)70025-9 
190. Benditt DG, Ferguson DW, Grubb BP, Kapoor WN, Kugler J, Lerman 
BB, et al. Tilt table testing for assessing syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol (1996) 
28:263–75. doi:10.1016/0735-1097(96)00236-7 
191. Moya A, Sutton R, Ammirati F, Blanc JJ, Brignole M, Dahm JB, et al. 
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope (version 2009). 
Eur Heart J (2009) 30:2631–71. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehp298 
192. Sheldon R. Tilt testing for syncope: a reappraisal. Curr Opin Cardiol (2005) 
20:38–41. 
193. Natale A, Akhtar M, Jazayeri M, Dhala A, Blanck Z, Deshpande S, et al. 
Provocation of hypotension during head-up tilt testing in subjects with no 
history of syncope or presyncope. Circulation (1995) 92:54–8. doi:10.1161/01.
CIR.92.1.54 
194. Naschitz JE, Rosner I, Rozenbaum M, Gaitini L, Bistritzki I, Zuckerman E, 
et al. The capnography head-up tilt test for evaluation of chronic fatigue syn-
drome. Semin Arthritis Rheum (2000) 30:79–86. doi:10.1053/sarh.2000.9201 
195. Razumovsky AY, DeBusk K, Calkins H, Snader S, Lucas KE, Vyas P, et al. 
Cerebral and systemic hemodynamics changes during upright tilt in 
chronic fatigue syndrome. J Neuroimaging (2003) 13:57–67. doi:10.111
1/j.1552-6569.2003.tb00158.x 
196. Natelson BH, Intriligator R, Cherniack NS, Chandler HK, Stewart 
JM. Hypocapnia is a biological marker for orthostatic intolerance in 
some patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Dyn Med (2007) 6:2. 
doi:10.1186/1476-5918-6-2 
197. Strickberger SA, Benson DW, Biaggioni I, Callans DJ, Cohen MI, Ellenbogen 
KA, et al. AHA/ACCF scientific statement on the evaluation of syncope. J Am 
Coll Cardiol (2006) 47:473–84. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2005.12.019 
198. Bloomfield DM, Kaufman ES, Bigger JT, Fleiss J, Rolnitzky L, Steinman 
R. Passive head-up tilt and actively standing up produce similar overall 
changes in autonomic balance. Am Heart J (1997) 134:316–20. doi:10.1016/
S0002-8703(97)70140-6 
199. Plash WB, Diedrich A, Biaggioni I, Garland EM, Paranjape SY, Black BK, 
et al. Diagnosing postural tachycardia syndrome: comparison of tilt testing 
compared with standing haemodynamics. Clin Sci (Lond) (2012) 124:109–14. 
doi:10.1042/CS20120276 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that this monograph was 
written in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Rowe, Underhill, Friedman, Gurwitt, Medow, Schwartz, Speight, 
Stewart, Vallings and Rowe. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or 
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor 
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance 
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.
 APPeNDiX A
1994 Fukuda Research Case Definition for 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS)
Patients can be classified as having CFS if they meet the follow-
ing criteria:
 
1. The individual has had severe, clinically evaluated, persist-
ing or relapsing fatigue for six or more consecutive months. 
The fatigue is not due to ongoing exertion or other medical 
conditions associated with fatigue. The fatigue significantly 
interferes with daily activities and work.
 
2. The individual has four or more of the following symptoms, 
persisting, or relapsing and concurrent with the fatigue:
Autoimmune/rheumatology
Autoimmune hepatitis
Rheumatoid and other inflammatory arthritis
Sjogren syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Wegener’s granulomatosis
Hematological/immunological
Anemias
Common variable immunodeficiency
Leukemia/lymphoma
Post-cancer fatigue
Psychiatric
Anorexia Nervosa
Bipolar disorder
Chronic psychosocial stress
Generalized anxiety disorder
Major depressive disorder
Personality disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Infections
Acute mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus, CMV)
Brucellosis
Coxsackie virus
Giardia and other intestinal parasites
Hepatitis B or C
HIV
Leptospirosis
Lyme and other tick-borne infections
Babesia microti
anaplasma phagocytophilum
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Parvovirus B19
Post-infectious fatigue syndrome
Q fever
Toxoplasmosis
Tuberculosis
Cardiovascular/autonomic
Aberrant coronary artery,
coronary aneurysms
Cardiomyopathy
Coarctation of the aorta
Patent foramen ovale
Primary dysautonomia
Pulmonary hypertension
Rheumatic fever
Valvular disease (congenital and acquired)
Respiratory
Aspergillosis
Asthma/allergies
Chronic sinusitis
Cystic fibrosis
Sarcoidosis
Sleep disorders
Central apnea
Klein-Levin syndrome
Narcolepsy
Obstructive apnea
Periodic leg movements
Endocrine/Metabolic
Addison’s disease
Gonadal dysfunction syndromes
Hyper- and hypo-thyroidism
Hyper- and hypo-calcemia
Inborn errors of metabolism
Metabolic syndrome
Pituitary tumors or disorders
Toxic substances
Alcohol or drug misuse
Ciguatera poisoning
Lead or mercury poisoning
Organophosphate poisoning
Reactions to medications, e.g., antihistamines, 
antipsychotics, sedatives, tricyclic antidepressants
Neuromuscular/neuroanatomic
Cervical spine stenosis
Chiari I malformation
Cranio-cervical instability
Tethered spinal cord
Inflammatory myopathies
Mitochondrial disorders
Multiple Sclerosis
Muscular dystrophy syndromes
Myasthenia gravis
Neuropathies
Post-concussion syndrome
Gastrointestinal/nutritional
Celiac Disease
Chronic liver disease
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Pancreatic insufficiency
Vitamin D and B12 deficiency
Other conditions
Athletic overtraining or underperformance syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Mast cell activation syndromes
• Post-exertional malaise lasting more than 24 h
• Unrefreshing sleep
• Significant impairment of short-term memory or concen-
tration
• Muscle pain
• Pain in the joints without swelling or redness
• Headaches of a new type, pattern, or severity
• Tender lymph nodes in the neck or armpit
• A sore throat that is frequent or recurring
 
3. A thorough medical history, physical examination, mental 
status examination, and laboratory tests are necessary to 
identify other conditions with similar symptoms that require 
treatment. The diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome cannot 
be made without such an evaluation.
APPeNDiX B
Common conditions in the differential diagnosis of pediatric ME/CFS.
34
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 APPeNDiX C
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome in Children and 
Adolescents—Fact Sheet
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/
CFS) is a complex disease characterized by the body’s inability 
to produce sufficient energy for the normal range of human 
activity. There is severe, overwhelming fatigue with a substantial 
loss of physical and mental stamina. The patient’s energy reserves 
are substantially reduced. The cardinal feature is a worsening of 
symptoms and malaise (feeling ill) following minimal physical or 
mental exertion. This can persist for hours, days, or weeks and is 
not relieved by rest or sleep. Other symptoms include: cognitive 
problems (“brain fog”), unrefreshing or disturbed sleep, light-
headedness, a variety of painful conditions, and other symptoms 
in multiple body systems.
ME/CFS occurs worldwide. In different countries, it is labeled 
chronic fatigue syndrome, myalgic encephalomyelitis or the 
acronym, ME/CFS. A new name, systemic exertion intolerance 
disease (SEID) has been proposed, but is not in general use. The 
name “chronic fatigue syndrome” has been criticized because it 
can be confused with “chronic fatigue,” which is common in many 
other illnesses.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome usu-
ally occurs as sporadic (isolated) cases, but in 20% of patients 
it affects more than one family member. Clusters of cases or 
outbreaks of the illness (epidemics) have been found worldwide 
and in several of these outbreaks the illness has been prominent 
in schoolchildren.
ME/CFS in Children and Adolescents
At least one million Americans are thought to have ME/CFS and 
a substantial but unknown number are under the age of 18 years. 
Adolescents 12–17 years old are more likely than younger chil-
dren to develop ME/CFS, but children as young as four years of 
age have developed the disease. In adolescents more girls than 
boys have ME/CFS.
Cause of the Disease
The cause of ME/CFS is unknown, but several factors may be 
involved. In some families, genetic factors may produce a sus-
ceptibility to the illness. Frequently the illness follows an acute 
infection such as infectious mononucleosis and immune system 
changes found in ME/CFS are similar to changes found in some 
viral infections. No known infectious agent has been shown to be 
the cause and in sporadic (non-epidemic) cases, the illness is not 
thought to be transmissible by casual contact. Occasionally, ME/
CFS is triggered by a toxin, an immunization, or by major trauma. 
ME/CFS is not a psychological illness. Depression and anxiety 
can occur secondary to ME/CFS, as occurs in other chronic ill-
nesses, but Major Depression and ME/CFS can be distinguished 
by behavioral, immunological, and hormonal testing.
Symptoms and Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ME/CFS is made from the characteristic pat-
tern of symptoms and the exclusion of other fatiguing illnesses 
because there is no medical test for the disease. Many patients 
remain undiagnosed. The main diagnostic features of the illness 
have been incorporated into several different case definitions. We 
recommend the following clinical diagnostic criteria which have 
been found to be useful in pediatric patients:
• There is loss of mental and/or physical stamina and a substan-
tial reduction in ability to take part in personal, educational 
and/or social activities.
• There is a new onset of fatigue that is not the result of ongoing 
exertion and is not relieved by rest. Fatigue can worsen with 
prolonged upright posture.
• Normal activity or mild/moderate exertion is followed by 
malaise (feeling ill) and worsening of ME/CFS symptoms. 
Recovery can take days, weeks, or months
• Sleep is unrefreshing, with disturbed quantity or rhythm that 
can include daytime hypersomnia, nighttime insomnia, day/
night reversal.
• Any of the following cognitive problems can be present: dif-
ficulty in concentration, impaired short-term memory, diffi-
culty understanding information and/or expressing thoughts, 
difficulty finding words or numbers, absent mindedness, or 
slowness of thought. Cognitive problems can worsen with pro-
longed upright posture and/or with physical or mental activity.
• Pain can be widespread or localized. Commonly seen are: 
chronic daily headaches, pains in the muscles, the abdomen, 
the joints, and/or the lymph nodes and/or sore throats. Pains 
can be worsened by prolonged upright posture. Rarely is pain 
absent.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome symp-
toms often fluctuate significantly in intensity during the day, or 
from day-to-day. To diagnose ME/CFS some or all symptoms 
must be present every day. The symptoms’ intensity must be 
mostly moderate to severe and symptoms must have persisted 
or recurred for at least 6 months (a provisional diagnosis and 
appropriate management can be instituted before 6 months). 
Other fatiguing illnesses must be excluded by history, physical 
examination, and medical testing.
Other symptoms that can be present in many, but not all, 
pediatric patients are:
• Orthostatic intolerance: prolonged upright posture can induce 
lightheadedness, increased fatigue, cognitive worsening, head-
aches and/or nausea.
• Hypersensitivity to light, noise, touch, odors and/or 
medications.
• Thermo-regulatory imbalance: low body temperature, intoler-
ance to heat and/or cold, or cold hands and feet.
• Gastrointestinal symptoms: abdominal pain, nausea, or 
anorexia.
Young people with ME/CFS often do not look ill but can 
appear noticeably pale. Routine blood tests are frequently nor-
mal, but specialized testing can show abnormalities in patients’ 
immune, nervous or cardiovascular systems, or in cellular energy 
production.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome has 
often been misdiagnosed as School Refusal (school phobia), or as 
35
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy (a condition in which a parent 
fabricates their child’s illness).
Progress and Recovery
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome in adoles-
cents usually starts suddenly with a fever and flu-like symptoms. 
Sometimes the onset is gradual. In younger children, a gradual 
onset over months or years is more likely. It can be difficult to 
diagnose ME/CFS in younger children because they may not 
recognize that their fatigue and other symptoms are abnormal. 
The diagnosis can be made retrospectively when the child is 
older. The first sign of the illness might be the child’s marked 
limitation of activity, noticed by a parent or teacher. Young 
people with ME/CFS can be very ill at the onset of the illness, 
but because routine blood tests are frequently normal, the diag-
nosis is often uncertain. Even when no other illness is found, a 
definitive diagnosis of ME/CFS cannot be made for 6 months, 
but a provisional diagnosis can be made sooner. Early diagnosis 
can lessen the impact of the illness by ensuring an appropriate 
management plan.
The severity of ME/CFS varies. Some young patients are 
severely disabled and bedridden, while others can go to school and 
a few can even do sports. Most are between these extremes. Over 
time, slow improvement is likely. Recovery rates are uncertain but 
rates of up to 40% have been reported. Dramatic improvement 
is more likely to occur in the first four years. Remissions and 
relapses are common. Relapses can be caused by overexertion or 
by infectious illnesses. Young patients whose health improves to 
near pre-illness levels are likely to find that they need more rest 
than their contemporaries.
Management/Treatment
Establishing the diagnosis of ME/CFS can relieve uncertainty 
in the minds of the patient and the parents. There is currently 
no medication or intervention that will cure the disease. 
Management differs between individuals. Determining the opti-
mum balance of rest and activity (pacing of activities) can help 
prevent post-exertional worsening of symptoms. Medications 
are helpful to treat pain, insomnia, and orthostatic intolerance. 
Young patients with ME/CFS commonly respond to lower dos-
ages of many medications. Advice on nutrition can be helpful. 
Supportive psychotherapy can sometimes benefit mildly affected 
young patients, but inflexible, graded exercise (GET) is harmful 
and can lead to worsening of symptoms.
Education
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is the most 
common medical cause of long-term absence from school. Most 
students with ME/CFS fall behind in their education. Students 
with ME/CFS might need a personalized school schedule and 
the school might need to provide reasonable accommodations 
and/or home tutoring. Legal and procedural requirements for 
students to receive services for their disabilities vary significantly 
from place to place.
36
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 APPeNDiX D
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome: Fact Sheet for Schools
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) 
is characterized by the body’s inability to produce sufficient 
energy for the normal range of human activity and the patient’s 
energy reserves are substantially reduced. The main symptoms 
include:
• Severe, overwhelming fatigue with loss of mental and/or phys-
ical stamina and a substantial reduction in ability to take part 
in personal, educational and/or social activities.
• The cardinal symptom of worsening of symptoms and malaise 
(feeling ill) following minimal physical or mental exertion 
which can persist for hours, days, or weeks and is not relieved 
by rest
• Cognitive problems (“brain fog”), unrefreshing or disturbed 
sleep and a variety of painful conditions (rarely pain is absent). 
Cognitive problems may worsen with prolonged upright 
posture.
There is no medical test for the illness. The diagnosis is made 
from (a) the characteristic pattern of symptoms (b) some or all 
of the above symptoms must be present every day for at least 
6 months, (c) symptoms must be moderate or severe, and (d) 
other fatiguing illnesses must be ruled out by history, physical 
exam, and medical testing
Additional symptoms are often present and include:
• Orthostatic intolerance, which is the development of symp-
toms due to prolonged upright posture (standing or sitting) 
that result in lightheadedness (and sometimes passing out), 
increased fatigue, cognitive worsening, headaches, and/or 
nausea.
• Hypersensitivities to light, noise, touch, odors, and/or 
medications.
• Problems with thermoregulation such as low body tempera-
ture, intolerance to heat and cold and/or cold hands, and feet.
• Gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain, nausea, 
and/or loss of appetite.
ME/CFS often starts suddenly following a viral illness, but it 
can start gradually. Symptoms can vary unpredictably in severity 
from day-to-day and from week-to-week. Students with ME/
CFS often do not look ill, but can appear to be very pale. The 
cause of ME/CFS is unknown, but the disease is not thought to be 
transmitted by casual contact. There is currently no medication 
or intervention that will cure ME/CFS. Successful management 
is directed toward determining the optimum balance of rest and 
activity to help prevent post-exertional worsening of symptoms. 
Medications are helpful to treat pain, insomnia, orthostatic intol-
erance and other symptoms
Educational Implications
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is the most 
common cause of long-term absence from school due to illness. 
Absence from school is usually due to poor physical and cognitive 
function, not behavioral factors. Some students can attend school 
daily, others can manage part-time, while others are homebound 
and some are confined to bed. Sometimes a student has enough 
energy for school at the start of the week, but is unable to manage 
school on Thursday and Friday. ME/CFS is unpredictable. A stu-
dent might appear fine one day but the next day might be unable 
to come to school, sometimes for several weeks. There might also 
be long periods where she/he is unable to complete schoolwork 
at home.
Most students with ME/CFS experience worsening of their 
school performance as ME/CFS symptoms impact education. 
Cognitive problems include confusion, difficulty with con-
centration, slow information processing, short-term memory 
problems, impaired word retrieval, and easy distractibility. 
These problems can manifest in several ways. If the teacher has 
asked the student to complete a task and she/he is interrupted, 
she/he might not remember what the teacher asked her/him 
to do. The student might require extra time to answer ques-
tions or complete assignments. The student might temporarily 
lose the ability to retrieve information learned the day before. 
Classroom noise can worsen distractibility. This distractibility 
can result in teachers perceiving that the student is uninter-
ested, or cannot pay attention. Students with ME/CFS may 
be unable to handle simple math calculations. They can often 
complete the steps to solve a complex calculus problem, but 
make simple addition or multiplication mistakes. Intellectual 
reasoning is usually retained in spite of cognitive problems, 
and many students are capable of taking academic classes with 
their peers, provided that that the number of their classes is 
strictly limited.
Symptoms of ME/CFS worsen after physical exertion. 
Participation in sports can deplete the student’s energy reserves. 
Some students may manage a short physical activity, but not an 
activity that requires stamina. The student needs to be able to rec-
ognize when she/he is experiencing the onset of fatigue, inform 
the teacher and must stop and rest. The student might want to 
participate, but failure to stop and rest at the onset of increased 
fatigue can cause a serious relapse of symptoms. Students with 
ME/CFS should never be pressured to push themselves to their 
limits.
Educational Accommodations
Students may need a personalized school schedule. The following 
accommodations can be helpful:
In the school:
• A single point of contact for teachers.
• A shortened day/week, the student might need to come in late, 
leave early, and/or attend school for only 2 or 3 days a week.
• A reduction in course load and flexible scheduling where only 
classes in selected subjects are attended.
• A quiet place for the student to rest if fatigue is evident to the 
student or the teacher.
• Use of the elevator to access different floors.
• Exemption from, or modification of, the physical education 
program.
• Provide homebound instruction or “Distance Education” for 
students who are partly or completely homebound.
37
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 In the classroom:
• Provide two sets of textbooks—one for school and one for 
home.
• Give clear directions with frequent feedback.
• Help the student to organize work with the use of an assign-
ment book and/or online calendar to record assignments and 
work completed.
• Use the buddy system, so that someone can take notes in class, 
allow taping of classes, and/or give the student an outline of 
material taught.
• Use multi-sensory instruction, e.g., visual aids like graphic 
organizers and non-linguistic representations to better suit the 
learning style of the student.
• Teach tasks serially instead of having the student multitask, 
break work down into manageable segments—short frequent 
projects are better than long-term projects.
• Permit the use of electronic devices such as a laptop or tablet 
and allow work to be completed online.
• Permit a student with orthostatic intolerance to move around 
during classes and allow salty snacks and a water bottle in the 
classroom.
• Provide tutorial or homebound instruction, if the student is 
too sick to attend school.
• Allow flexibility with assignments and deadlines, and modifi-
cations of the number of problems and/or assignments to be 
completed.
Assessments/testing
• Test knowledge of material in multiple ways, e.g., oral instead 
of written tests, or course work instead of exams.
• Extended time and a quiet room might be needed for testing as 
well as adjusted time for assessments depending on the time of 
day when the student functions best.
• Tests/Final Exams may need to be given over several days or 
sessions, with water and snacks available.
Curriculum
• Identification/prioritization of essential content.
• Focus on mastery of skills rather than completion of 
assignments.
• Use of frequent short-term projects instead of long-term 
projects.
• A reduction in the number and length of assignments, proj-
ects, quizzes, and tests.
Social Development
The classroom and the school cafeteria might be the only place 
where the student with ME/CFS is able to socialize with her/his 
peers. When possible, this should be facilitated. Access to extra-
curricular activities is also important for social reasons.
Resources
National Association of Special Education Teachers Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome, www.naset.org/3349.0.html. Association of 
young people with ME, AYME www.ayme.org.uk. Association 
of New Zealand Myalgic Encephalopathy Society, www.azmes.
org.nz. 
38
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 APPeNDiX e
Sample Physician’s Letter
This letter is an example and it needs to be adapted so that it 
is applicable to the student’s country and is very specific for the 
student’s particular symptoms.
Dear Special Education Administrator:
Or Special educational needs co-ordinating officer:
Or School Principal:
Jane XXXX is under my care for myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). This illness has caused Jane 
to experience severe fatigue and a lack of physical and mental 
stamina. Jane’s body is unable to produce sufficient energy for 
the normal range of activities for her age and her energy reserves 
are substantially reduced. If Jane exceeds her diminished energy 
reserves, it can take her several days, weeks, or even months to 
recover.
The illness has caused Jane to have cognitive problems, muscle 
pains, poor sleep and increased sensitivity to light, to noise and to 
a cold environment. Jane also tends to feel faint if she has to stand 
up for any length of time. Jane’s cognitive problems can cause 
her to have difficulty concentrating, understanding complex 
concepts, remembering words, working with numbers, a poor 
working memory and increased distractibility. Classroom noise 
can worsen these difficulties. It is important to note that intel-
ligence is not compromised by this illness and provided that Jane 
has appropriate accommodations, she can be expected to attain 
educational success.
The occurrence and severity of Jane’s symptoms are quite 
unpredictable and vary from day-to-day. The illness may result 
in Jane missing a significant numbers of days during the school 
year, or she might need to arrive late or leave early from school. 
Jane will only be able to manage a reduced subject load. It will 
therefore be necessary for the school to be accommodating 
and flexible in response to Jane’s likely absences and reduced 
curriculum.
Currently, Jane is not well enough to engage in any sports. 
Please excuse her from physical education activities until I am 
able to confirm if and when her health has improved enough that 
these activities will not make her illness worse.
I support an application for educational services appropriate 
to Jane’s needs. A list of my recommendations for accommoda-
tions and modifications for Jane is attached. Please let me know 
if I can be of further assistance.
Sincerely,
XXXXXXXXXXXXX, MD
39
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 APPeNDiX F
Pediatric Patients with Me/CFS 
Anticipating Surgery: Special 
Considerations*
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome is a com-
plex, debilitating disease characterized by severe overwhelming 
fatigue with a substantial loss of physical and mental functional 
capacity. The cardinal feature is malaise and worsening of 
symptoms following minimal physical or mental exertion which 
can persist for hours, days, or weeks and is not relieved by rest 
or sleep. Other symptoms include cognitive impairment, non-
restorative sleep, generalized, or localized pain, and immune, 
neurological and/or autonomic symptoms. Remissions and 
relapses are common.
Most young people with ME/CFS demonstrate vasovagal 
syncope, postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS), neurally medi-
ated hypotension (NMH) and increased venous pooling on tilt 
table testing. Syncope can be precipitated by catecholamines (epi-
nephrine), sympathomimetics (isoproterenol), and vasodilators 
(nitric oxide, nitroglycerin, α-blockers, and hypotensive agents). 
Care should be taken to hydrate patients prior to surgery and 
avoid drugs that stimulate neurogenic syncope or lower BP. Many 
patients benefit from extra IV fluids in the perioperative period.
Propofol, midazolam, and fentanyl are generally well-tolerated. 
However, studies in adults have shown that some patients with 
ME/CFS can be sensitive to histamine-releasing anesthetic agents 
(such as pentothal) and muscle relaxants (curare, Tracrium, and 
Mevacurium). If possible, they are best avoided. Young patients 
can also be extremely sensitive to sedative medications—includ-
ing benzodiazepines and antihistamines.
Herbs and complementary and alternative therapies are often 
used by patients with ME/CFS. The anesthesiologist/anesthetist 
should ask patients about such therapies (155). Of most concern 
are:
• Garlic, gingko, and ginseng—can increase bleeding by inhibit-
ing platelet aggregation.
• Ephedra (ma huang)—can cause hemodynamic instability, 
hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmia.
• Kava and valerian (increase sedation).
• Echinacea—allergic reactions and possible immunosuppres-
sion with long-term use.
• St. John’s Wort—multiple pharmacological interactions due to 
induction of Cytochrome P450 enzymes.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists recommends that 
all herbal medications be discontinued 2–3 weeks before an 
elective procedure. Stopping kava (also known as awa, kawa, and 
intoxicating pepper) can trigger withdrawal, so this herbal should 
be tapered over 2–3 days.
Although early studies have shown mild HPA depression in 
some adolescents with ME/CFS (62), supplemental cortisol is 
seldom needed unless the patient is severely ill. Those patients 
who are being supplemented with cortisol should have their doses 
doubled or tripled before and after surgery.
Mild immunological abnormalities can be found in this illness, 
but patients are not immunocompromised and are, no more sus-
ceptible to opportunistic infections than the general population.
Summary Recommendations
Ask about herbs and supplements, and advise patients to taper 
them off at least 1 week before surgery.
• Hydrate the patient prior to surgery. Consider additional 
post-operative fluids.
• Use hypotensive agents, sympathomimetics, catecholamines, 
and vasodilators with caution.
• Use sedating drugs sparingly.
*Based upon “Considerations Prior To Surgery for Adult ME/
CFS Patients” by Dr. CW Lapp MD, Director, Hunter-Hopkins 
Center.
40
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 APPeNDiX G
Orthostatic intolerance
Individuals with OI develop an exacerbation of symptoms with 
quiet upright posture and the amelioration (although not neces-
sarily complete resolution) of those symptoms with recumbency 
(156). OI can be associated with a variety of treatable circulatory 
disorders, the most commonly recognized of which in pediatric 
ME/CFS are postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and NMH 
(48–55, 157).
The main symptoms of chronic OI are shown in Table A1. 
These clinical features usually are attributed to two prominent 
physiological changes in response to upright posture: 1. a 
reduction in cerebral blood flow, and 2. an exaggerated adr-
energic compensatory response to upright posture (156). As 
can be readily appreciated, the symptoms in Table A1 overlap 
with many of the features of ME/CFS, including fatigue, 
exercise intolerance, cognitive problems, and headaches. In 
all controlled studies, compared to healthy individuals, those 
with pediatric ME/CFS have a higher prevalence of abnormal 
circulatory responses to upright tilt testing or prolonged 
standing (48–55). Studies that employ measures of HR vari-
ability consistently demonstrate a sympathetic predominance 
of HR variability in pediatric ME/CFS (or a relative loss of 
parasympathetic activity) (158, 159), along with elevated levels 
of supine catecholamines compared with healthy adolescents 
(160). The relevance of OI syndromes for ME/CFS extends to 
the fact that open (unblinded) treatment of the circulatory 
abnormalities is associated with improvement in ME/CFS 
symptoms and function in a large proportion of adolescents 
(48, 51, 157, 161).
Physiologic Responses to Upright Posture
In response to standing, approximately 500–750 mL of an adult’s 
blood volume is redistributed to vessels below the level of the 
heart. A similar circulatory change is thought to occur in ado-
lescents. At all ages, the response to the gravitational pooling of 
blood is a reduction in blood return to the heart, in turn leading 
to a drop in cardiac output, less stretch of baroreceptors, and ulti-
mately less blood flow to the brain. The nervous system response 
involves an increase in sympathetic neural outflow, improved 
vasoconstriction, up to a 40 bpm increase in HR, and the return 
of enough venous blood to maintain BP and cerebral perfusion 
(162–164). Symptoms of OI can appear when these adjustments 
do not occur in an efficient manner.
Figure A1 illustrates the three main physiological contributors 
to OI: excessive dependent pooling of blood, low blood volume, 
and an exaggerated catecholamine response. A variety of patho-
physiologic influences can contribute to increased peripheral 
pooling of blood or decreased vasoconstriction. Those with 
ME/CFS often have low blood volume (57–59), which has been 
associated with lower renin:aldosterone ratios (58) and with 
lower ADH levels (165). Physical inactivity results in reductions 
in plasma volume, thereby aggravating symptoms of OI and 
interfering further with daily function (102, 166, 167). In patients 
with increased pooling of blood in the peripheral circulation or 
low blood volume (or both), the assumption of upright posture 
is associated with less return of blood to the heart, and a mark-
edly increased catecholamine response (168, 169). Goldstein has 
suggested that the relative balance of Epi to NE can influence 
the pattern of circulatory response (170). ME/CFS patients with 
more NE can maintain BP longer because NE has vasoconstric-
tor properties, while its effects on the heart cause tachycardia. 
In contrast, Epi causes skeletal muscle vasodilation, and can 
therefore contribute more to hypotension. Patients who develop 
tachycardia early during tilt table testing can develop NMH as 
the orthostatic stress becomes more prolonged, usually 5–59 min 
after the initial orthostatic tachycardia (171–173). As described 
in this Primer, the treatments of these disorders overlap almost 
completely.
Forms of Oi in Me/CFS
Orthostatic Hypotension
Orthostatic hypotension is defined by a sustained BP reduction 
of at least 20 mm Hg systolic or 10 mm Hg diastolic during the 
first 3 min after assuming an upright posture (124). This problem 
is rarely seen in children except at times of febrile illness, acute 
dehydration, hemorrhage, adrenal insufficiency, excessive hista-
mine release, or as a response to certain medications.
TABLe A1 | Symptoms of orthostatic intolerance (in approximate order of 
frequency of occurrence).
Fatigue
Intolerance of low impact 
exercise
Lightheadedness
Near-syncope or syncope
Blurring of vision
Headaches
Problems with short-term 
memory and concentration 
nausea
Chest pain
Palpitations
Diaphoresis
Tremulousness
Vomiting
FiGURe A1 | The three main pathophysiologic influences on orthostatic 
intolerance (OI) are shown in this Figure. Increased pooling of blood, or 
defective vasoconstriction in the lower half of the body, along with lower 
intravascular volume are each important, and can be present in the same 
individual. Upon assumption of an upright posture, exaggerated sympathetic 
nervous system and adrenal hormone responses lead to increased release of 
epinephrine (Epi) and norepinephrine (NE). It is postulated that the relative 
balance of NE to Epi is one factor in determining whether the phenotype of 
OI is POTS or neurally mediated hypotension (NMH). Some patients with 
POTS in the early phase of orthostatic testing go on to develop a classic 
NMH pattern later in the test.
41
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 A more common pediatric variant, termed initial orthostatic 
hypotension (IOH), is characterized by a transient drop in BP 
immediately after standing, but resolving within 60 s. Its recogni-
tion requires a continuous beat-to-beat BP measurement device. 
The diagnosis is missed by standard, automated sphygmoma-
nometer measurements (174, 175). Although this is not usually 
a condition that requires clinical treatment, chronic orthostatic 
symptoms (e.g., LH) in those with IOH have been reported (54), 
suggesting that they can develop other orthostatic abnormalities 
(such as POTS or NMH) on more prolonged monitoring.
Postural Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS)
Postural tachycardia syndrome is increasingly being recognized 
as the most common form of OI in pediatric ME/CFS. As is the 
case for pediatric ME/CFS, postural tachycardia syndrome is 
more common in females than males, is more common after the 
onset of puberty, and often follows an apparent infectious illness 
 
(124, 156, 176–178).
POTS should only be diagnosed (a) if there is no OH in the 
first 3 min of standing or tilt testing, (b) if there is an increase in 
HR of ≥40 beats per minute (bpm) from recumbent to upright in 
the first 10 min of standing or passive upright tilt, or if there is a 
HR >120 bpm during the first 10 min upright (124). The adult HR 
criterion is lower, a 30 bpm change; using the adult HR definition 
would mis-classify approximately 40% of healthy adolescents as 
having POTS (179). Therefore, a 40 bpm increase in HR is neces-
sary as the criterion for adolescents.
Regardless of age, the diagnosis of POTS also requires that 
(c) the HR changes must be accompanied by the provocation of 
typical orthostatic symptoms. POTS should not be diagnosed by 
a HR elevation alone, if the individual is dehydrated, or is being 
treated with vasodilating medications. Conversely, the diagnosis 
can be obscured if the individual is tested after consumption of 
substances that increase plasma volume, such as salt tablets, or if 
the patient is being treated with serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or 
stimulant medications. All these can be used to treat OI.
Neurally Mediated Hypotension
Neurally mediated hypotension was initially identified in pedi-
atric and adult ME/CFS in the mid-1990s (48, 49, 51). Reported 
frequencies of POTS were substantially lower in the early reports. 
For reasons that are unclear, POTS is now recognized more fre-
quently, possibly related to increased dietary sodium intake in 
ME/CFS subjects over time, to the duration of orthostatic stress, 
or to other as yet unidentified factors.
Reflex forms of hypotension and syncope include vasovagal 
syncope, neurocardiogenic syncope, delayed OH, and NMH 
(180). The latter term is the most accurate description of the 
events seen in ME/CFS patients who have chronic daily orthos-
tatic symptoms in the absence of clinical syncope and develop a 
characteristic drop in BP during tilt testing.
Neurally mediated hypotension in both children and adults 
is defined as at least a 25 mm Hg reduction in systolic BP with 
a slowing of the HR at the time of pre-syncope or hypotension, 
identified during standing or upright tilt table testing, and asso-
ciated with provocation of characteristic orthostatic symptoms 
(48). It occurs after the 3 min cutoff for OH. HR can be elevated 
early in the test, but slows when hypotension becomes severe. Like 
ME/CFS, NMH is more common in females (180). Hypotension 
can be missed if the period of orthostatic testing lasts less than 
10 min; the diagnosis usually requires prolonged head-up tilt 
testing for 40–60 min (51).
The pathophysiology of NMH is reviewed elsewhere 
 
(163, 180–184), but as in POTS, in NMH the reduction in venous 
return initiates a series of responses that ultimately results in 
withdrawal of sympathetic tone and relatively unopposed vagal 
tone. Sympathetic withdrawal in turn leads to vasodilation, and 
if the individual remains upright, the ultimate result can be either 
a profound drop in BP or syncope, occasionally associated with 
a junctional bradycardia or brief periods of asystole. Marked 
elevations in Epi levels are present in the period before syncope 
 
(169, 184). Factors that can provoke NMH include prolonged 
standing, heat, sudden stretch of mechanoreceptors in the gas-
trointestinal tract, bladder, and lungs, the sight of blood, and situ-
ations involving pain (180). Often a combination of precipitating 
factors is present.
Although many subjects with NMH only have isolated episodes 
of syncope separated by long periods of normal function, chronic 
daily orthostatic symptoms can also be present. Chronic fatigue 
as well as impaired quality of life is reported in those referred 
for evaluation of recurrent syncope (185–187). Approximately 
25% of patients evaluated for chronic OI by some groups have 
had neurocardiogenic syncope without POTS (170). Thus, not all 
chronic OI is related to POTS physiology. More work is needed to 
determine the mechanisms by which cognitive symptoms persist 
despite adequate control of HR and BP.
While there is variability in the rates of OI reported in adult 
studies of ME/CFS, provocation of fatigue with orthostatic stress 
is almost universal at all ages among those with ME/CFS and in 
the related condition fibromyalgia (50, 188). In pediatric ME/
CFS, rates of OI exceed 90% of affected subjects (157, 189) and 
differences in cardiovascular responses can be detected with as 
little as 20° of upright stress (55).
Individuals who experience chronic symptoms of OI but do 
not meet criteria for POTS or NMH on orthostatic testing can 
be classified as having low orthostatic tolerance. Treatment can 
be offered in the same manner as it would be for those with con-
firmed circulatory disorders, provided symptoms are sufficiently 
severe.
Testing for Oi
Two main forms of testing for OI—standing tests and head-up 
tilt tests—are used in clinical practice. Methods for conducting 
each test vary. There is no gold standard test for OI, and we do 
not know all of the pathophysiological contributors to symp-
toms such as lightheadedness, as some classical “orthostatic” 
symptoms can be reproduced by maneuvers that do not involve 
upright posture.
Head-Up Tilt Table Testing
Head-up tilt table testing this is usually performed with a motor-
ized table with a foot board for weight-bearing (190). The patient 
lies supine, loosely restrained by safety straps to prevent injury 
42
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 if loss of consciousness occurs. After a variable period of supine 
rest, usually 15 min but in some studies up to 60 min, the tilt 
table is brought upright, usually to 60–70 °. Higher angles for tilt 
testing can produce syncope in healthy controls. The duration 
of upright tilt also varies between centers, depending on which 
form of OI is being evaluated. Tilt testing for 10 min is sufficient 
to detect POTS, but upright tilt for 45–60 min is required for 
detection of NMH. A variety of methodological factors can 
affect tilt response (190–192), including the degree of movement 
permitted, the ambient temperature, the duration of the pre-tilt 
fast, whether the patient is permitted to remain on medications, 
the pre-test sodium intake, instrumentation (arterial catheters are 
associated with higher rates of syncope), pharmacological agents 
used to provoke hypotension [e.g., isoproterenol (193), nitroglyc-
erine], and the definition of an abnormal test (192). We do not 
endorse reproduction of syncope as the end point of testing, as 
POTS and NMH can be identified and the table returned to the 
horizontal position before syncope occurs. In most laboratories, 
HR is monitored continuously, as is BP, although intermittent 
BP measurements are performed in some centers, approximately 
every 1–2 min for 5–10 min, then every 5 min unless pre-syncopal 
symptoms are identified. Some laboratories measure end-tidal 
CO2 to detect orthostatic hypocapnia (194–196). Before and dur-
ing the test, at approximately 5 min intervals, the patient is asked 
to rate changes in symptoms on a 0–10 scale (lightheadedness, 
warmth, fatigue, headache, shortness of breath, mental fogginess, 
and pain).
Not all individuals with ME/CFS and orthostatic symptoms 
require head-up tilt testing. For example, if the clinical history 
is consistent with neurocardiogenic syncope, head-up tilt test-
ing is no longer thought to be necessary for the diagnosis (191, 
192, 197). We would caution that care must be taken in the 
most impaired individuals with ME/CFS given the potential for 
an increase in symptoms during and after the tilt test. In this 
group, brief orthostatic supine, seated, and standing vital signs 
over 1–3 min in some instances are sufficient as an indication 
of orthostatic tolerance. In all individuals with ME/CFS who 
develop a provocation of their typical symptoms during the tilt 
test, we recommend administration of 1–2 L of normal saline as 
a means of improving autonomic tone and avoiding a prolonged 
post-tilt exacerbation in ME/CFS symptoms (172).
Standing Tests
Two forms of standing tests are described in the ME/CFS litera-
ture: active standing (59, 60) and leaning against a wall (131). 
Either form of standing test can be performed in a medical office. 
The test does not require specialist consultation or specialized 
equipment, and is much less costly than a tilt table test. The 
duration of supine rest before the test varies, but a consistent 
baseline HR and BP in adolescents can be obtained within 
5–15 min. Although the duration of upright posture can be as 
long as 60 min (59), most centers perform a 10-min standing 
test to identify POTS and to ascertain for worsening of ME/CFS 
symptoms during orthostasis, acknowledging that such a brief 
period of testing will miss many instances of NMH. As in the 
head-up tilt test, symptoms are recorded immediately before 
standing and at 1–2 min intervals when upright. The test must 
be witnessed to avoid the potential for injury in the event of 
syncope. Movements such as fidgeting and tensing the lower 
limb muscles are discouraged. See OI: Standing Test protocol and 
Standing Test Data Sheet.
Few papers have compared the various orthostatic testing 
methods. When tilt testing and active standing have been 
compared, this has usually been just for brief periods of upright 
posture (167, 198). During the first 5 min upright, tilt and active 
standing generate similar HR changes (167, 198, 199). Beyond the 
first 5 min, however, Plash and colleagues recently demonstrated 
that passive tilt testing provokes a larger HR change in those with 
POTS than does active standing (199). Application of lower body 
negative pressure is a method of orthostatic testing, but it is rarely 
performed outside of research settings (160).
Oi: Standing Test Protocol
The standing test begins with the subject lying supine with an 
automated BP cuff set to measure the baseline HR and BP. These 
are recorded each minute for 5 min. At the fifth minute, the 
patient’s current symptom intensity is rated on a scale of 0–10.
The patient is then instructed to stand, leaning back against 
a wall in a comfortable but motionless position. The patient’s 
feet should be 2–6 inches away from the wall. The HR and BP 
are recorded and any symptoms are noted each minute for a 
maximum of 10 min. At the conclusion of the standing period 
the patient is instructed to lie supine again, while the BP, HR, and 
symptom intensity are measured for a further 2 min.
Specific instructions for the patient are as follows:
“We’d like you to stand as still as possible for up to 10 minutes. 
During the standing test you must be as motionless as possible 
in order to get an accurate result. Therefore, try not to wiggle 
your toes or fingers, scratch your nose, or move your arms or 
legs. We will monitor for any movements and will remind you 
not to move or wiggle. We want you to tell us if you are feeling 
anything different or uncomfortable during the test. Be as specific 
as possible. We need to know if you feel you can’t stay stand-
ing any longer, and if this is the case you can sit down. It is not 
necessary to remain standing for the entire 10 minutes, but we’d 
like to measure how long you can do this. Each minute we will 
check your blood pressure and heart rate with an automatic blood 
pressure measuring device.”
Comments
If the subject reports any symptoms, list these in the comments 
column of the data form, corresponding to the time recorded for 
the BP and HR. The comment section should also note if and 
when the subject had to sit down and mention whether the BP 
and HR were performed sitting or while still standing.
Definitions
Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS): an increase in HR of at 
least 30 beats per minute (bpm) in adults or 40 bpm in adoles-
cents from the supine baseline to the maximum HR during the 
10 min of standing, together with the reproduction of orthostatic 
symptoms. Florid POTS is considered any HR >120 bpm.
Orthostatic hypotension: a reduction in systolic BP of >20 mm 
Hg or in diastolic BP >10 mm Hg in the first 3 min.
43
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
 Neurally mediated hypotension: at least a 25 mm Hg decrease 
in systolic BP from baseline supine values, with no associated 
increase in HR, together with the emergence of pre-syncopal 
symptoms.
Oi Standing Test Data Sheet
Name: ______________________ 
Date of Test: ___________
Medications in last 2 weeks: ____________________________
Heart Rate
Blood Pressure
Symptoms, Comments
Supine
1 min
2 min
3 min
4 min
5 min
Standing
1 min
2 min
3 min
4 min
5 min
6 min
7 min
8 min
9 min
10 min
Supine
1 min
2 min
44
Rowe et al.
Pediatric ME/CFS: Diagnosis and Management
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 121
