 Memory retrieval by activating engram cells in mouse models of 
early Alzheimer’s disease
Dheeraj S. Roy1, Autumn Arons1,2, Teryn I. Mitchell1, Michele Pignatelli1, Tomás J. Ryan1,2, 
and Susumu Tonegawa1,2,*
1RIKEN-MIT Center for Neural Circuit Genetics at the Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, 
Department of Biology and Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, 
USA
Summary
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive memory 
decline and subsequent loss of broader cognitive functions1. Memory decline in early stages of 
Alzheimer’s is mostly limited to episodic memory, for which the hippocampus (HPC) plays a 
crucial role2. However, it has been uncertain whether the observed amnesia in early stages of 
Alzheimer’s is due to disrupted encoding and consolidation of episodic information, or an 
impairment in the retrieval of stored memory information. Here we show that in transgenic mouse 
models of early Alzheimer’s, direct optogenetic activation of hippocampal memory engram cells 
results in memory retrieval despite the fact that these mice are amnesic in long-term memory tests 
when natural recall cues are utilized, revealing a retrieval, rather than a storage impairment. Prior 
to amyloid plaque deposition, the amnesia in these mice is age-dependent3–5, which correlates 
with a progressive reduction of spine density of hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) engram cells. We 
show that optogenetic induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) at perforant path (PP) synapses of 
DG engram cells restores both spine density and long-term memory. We also demonstrate that an 
ablation of DG engram cells containing restored spine density prevents the rescue of long-term 
memory. Thus, selective rescue of spine density in engram cells may lead to an effective strategy 
for treating memory loss in early stages of Alzheimer’s disease.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.T. (; Email: tonegawa@mit.edu) 
Author Contributions D.R. and S.T. contributed to the study design. D.R., A.A., T.M., M.P., and T.R. contributed to the data 
collection and interpretation. D.R. cloned all constructs. D.R. and A.A. conducted the surgeries, behavior experiments, and 
histological analyses. D.R. and S.T. wrote the paper. All authors discussed and commented on the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature.
Published as: Nature. 2016 March 24; 531(7595): 508–512.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Main text
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of brain degeneration, and typically 
begins with impairments in cognitive functions1. Most research has focused on 
understanding the relationship between memory impairments and the formation of two 
pathological hallmarks seen in late stages of AD: extracellular amyloid plaques and 
intracellular aggregates of tau protein1–2. Early phases of AD have received relatively less 
attention, although synaptic phenotypes have been identified as major correlates of cognitive 
impairments in both human patients and mouse models3,6. Several studies have suggested 
that the episodic memory deficit of AD patients is due to ineffective encoding of new 
information7–9. However, since cognitive measures used in these studies rely on memory 
retrieval, it is not possible to rigorously discriminate between impairments in information 
storage and disrupted retrieval of stored information. This issue has an important clinical 
implication: if the amnesia is due to retrieval impairments, memory could be restored by 
technologies involving targeted brain stimulation.
A mouse model of AD (hereafter referred to as “AD mice”)10 overexpresses the delta exon 9 
variant of presinilin-1 (PS1), in combination with the Swedish mutation of amyloid 
precursor protein (APP). Consistent with previous reports3–5, 9-month old AD mice showed 
severe plaque deposition across multiple brains regions (Fig. 1a), specifically in the DG (Fig. 
1b) and medial entorhinal cortex (EC) (Fig. 1c); in contrast, 7-month old AD mice lacked 
amyloid plaques (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1a–d). Focusing on these two age groups 
of AD mice, we quantified short-term (1 hr; STM) and long-term (24 hr; LTM) memory 
formation using contextual fear conditioning (CFC) (Fig. 1e). Nine-month old AD mice 
were impaired in both STM and LTM, which suggested a deficit in memory encoding (Fig. 
1k–o). In contrast, 7-month old AD mice showed normal levels of training-induced freezing 
(Fig. 1f) and normal STM (Fig. 1g), but were impaired in LTM (Fig. 1h). Neither control nor 
7-month old AD mice displayed freezing behavior in a neutral context (Fig. 1i). In the DG of 
7-month old AD mice, the levels of cells which are immediate early gene cFos-positive 
following CFC training were normal, but were lower compared to control mice following 
LTM tests (Fig. 1j). The density of DG granule cells and motor behaviors were normal in 
these mice (Extended Data Fig. 1e–k). Thus, these behavioral- and cellular-level 
observations confirmed that 7-month old AD mice serve as a mouse model of early AD 
regarding memory impairments.
Recently, molecular, genetic and optogenetic methods to identify neurons that hold traces, or 
engrams, of specific memories have been established11–12. Using this technology, several 
groups have demonstrated that DG neurons activated during CFC learning are both 
sufficient11–14 and necessary15 for subsequent memory retrieval. In addition, our recent 
study found that engram cells under protein synthesis inhibitor-induced amnesia were 
capable of driving acute memory recall if they are directly activated optogenetically14. In the 
present study, we have applied this memory engram cell identification and manipulation 
technology to 7-month old AD mice to determine whether memories could be retrieved in 
early stages of the disease. Because it is known that the EC/HPC network is among the 
earliest to show altered synaptic/dendritic properties and these alterations have been 
suggested as underlying the memory deficits in early AD16–17, we focused on labeling the 
Roy et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 DG component of CFC memory engram cells of 7-month old AD mice using a double 
adeno-associated virus system (Fig. 1p–q and see Methods). While on a doxycycline (DOX) 
diet, DG neurons completely lacked ChR2-EYFP labeling, one day off DOX was sufficient 
to permit robust ChR2-EYFP expression in control mice (Fig. 1r–s and Extended Data Fig. 
2a–c), as well as in 7-month old AD mice (Fig. 1t–u).
As expected, these engram-labeled early AD mice were amnesic a day after CFC training 
(Fig. 1v). But, remarkably, these mice froze on the next day in a distinct context (Context B) 
as robustly as equivalently treated control mice in response to blue light stimulation of the 
engram cells (Fig. 1w). This light-specific freezing was not observed using on DOX mice 
(Extended Data Fig. 2d–f). A natural recall test conducted on the third day in the 
conditioning context (Context A) revealed that the observed optogenetic engram reactivation 
did not restore memory recall by natural cues in early AD mice (Fig. 1x). This was the case 
even after multiple rounds of light activation of the engram cells (Extended Data Fig. 3). We 
replicated the successful optogenetic rescue of memory recall in two other models of early 
AD: a triple transgenic line obtained by mating c-fos-tTA mice with double transgenic 
APP/PS1 mice (Extended Data Fig. 4a–g) and a widely used triple transgenic AD model18 
(PS1/APP/tau, Extended Data Fig. 4h–m). These data show that DG engram cells in 7-
month old mouse models of early AD are sufficient to induce memory recall upon 
optogenetic reactivation, which indicates a deficit of memory retrievability during early AD-
related memory loss.
Reduced dendritic spines have been implicated in memory impairments of AD3. In addition, 
our recent study of protein synthesis inhibitor-induced amnesia found reduced engram-cell 
specific dendritic spine density14. We detected an age-dependent (Extended Data Fig. 5a) 
decrease in dendritic spine density of DG engram cells in early AD mice (Fig. 2a–c), 
showing that long-term memory impairments of early AD correlate with dendritic spine 
deficits of DG engram cells (Extended Data Fig. 5b). The inability to generate newborn 
neurons in the DG could play a role in the development of AD-specific cognitive deficits19. 
However, early AD mice showed similar levels of neurogenesis in DG compared to control 
mice, which were quantified using doublecortin staining (DCX, Extended Data Fig. 1l–q). 
We recently proposed that the persistent cellular connectivity between multiple engram cell 
ensembles is a fundamental mechanism of memory information retention14. We labeled 
putative CFC memory engram cells in both medial EC (MEC) and lateral EC (LEC) with 
oChIEF20 (a variant of ChR2) and simultaneously labeled CFC memory engram cells in the 
DG with EYFP (Fig. 2d). With this procedure, perforant path terminals are also labeled with 
oChIEF (Fig. 2e–f). One day after footshocks, we optogenetically activated these terminals 
and quantified the overlap between putative DG engram cells (i.e. EYFP+, green) and DG 
cells in which the endogenous cFos (red) had been activated by the optogenetic activation of 
oChIEF+ perforant paths. Both control and early AD mice showed above-chance and 
indistinguishable levels of cFos+/EYFP+ overlap, indicating the preferential functional 
connectivity between engram cells is maintained in the early AD mice (Fig. 2g–i).
We then hypothesized that the reversal of dendritic spine deficits in DG engram cells of 
early AD mice may rescue long-term memory. To investigate this possibility, we took 
advantage of previous findings that spine formation can be induced rapidly by long-term 
Roy et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 potentiation (LTP)21–22 and that LTP can be induced in vivo using light activation of 
oChIEF23. We validated learning-dependent labeling, with oChIEF, of neurons in MEC (Fig. 
3a–c and Extended Data Fig. 6a–c) and LEC (Fig. 3d) as well as perforant path (PP) 
terminals in the DG (Fig. 3e–f). In vivo extracellular recording upon light stimulation of 
oChIEF+ EC axonal terminals in DG showed a reliable spiking response of DG cells in 
anesthetized control mice (Fig. 3g). Further, in HPC slices from control mice we 
successfully induced LTP in DG cells using a previously established optical LTP protocol23 
(Fig. 3h–j). These biocytin-filled DG cells revealed an increase in spine density following in 
vitro optical LTP (Extended Data Fig. 6d).
In early AD mice, in vivo application of the engram-specific optical LTP protocol restored 
spine density of DG engram cells to control levels (AD+100 Hz, Fig. 3k–l). Furthermore, 
this spine restoration in early AD mice correlated with amelioration of long-term memory 
impairments observed during recall by natural cues (Fig. 3m), an effect which persisted for 
at least 6 days after training (AD rescue+DTR+saline group, Fig. 3p). The LTP-induced 
spine restoration and behavioral deficit rescue were protein-synthesis dependent (Extended 
Data Fig. 7). The rescued memory was context-specific (Extended Data Fig. 8a). In addition, 
long-term memory recall of age-matched control mice was unaffected by this optical LTP 
protocol (Extended Data Fig. 8b). In contrast, applying the optical LTP protocol to a large 
portion of excitatory PP terminals in the DG (i.e., with no restriction to the PP terminals 
derived from EC engram cells) did not result in long-term memory in early AD mice 
(Extended Data Fig. 9). To confirm the correlation between restoration of spine density of 
DG engram cells and amelioration of long-term memory impairments, which were both 
induced by the optical LTP protocol, we compared the overlap of natural recall cue-induced 
cFos+ cells and CFC training-labeled DG engram cells after an application of the engram-
specific LTP protocol to early AD mice (Fig. 3n). Early AD mice that did not receive the 
optical LTP protocol showed low levels of cFos+/EYFP+ overlap compared to control mice 
upon natural recall cue delivery. In contrast, early AD mice that went through the optical 
LTP protocol showed cFos+/EYFP+ overlap similar to that of control mice (Fig. 3n). Thus, 
these data suggest that spine density restoration in DG engram cells contributes to the rescue 
of long-term memory in early AD mice.
Because of the highly redundant connectivity between EC and DG24, it is possible that the 
extensive optical LTP protocol also augmented spine density in some non-engram DG cells. 
To establish a link between the spine rescue in DG engram cells and the behavioral rescue of 
early AD mice, we developed an engram-specific ablation25 virus. We confirmed that this 
diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR)-mediated method efficiently ablated DG engram cells 
following diphtheria toxin (DT) administration (Fig. 3o), while leaving the nearby DG 
mossy cells intact (Extended Data Fig. 10). By simultaneously labeling axonal terminals of 
PP with oChIEF and DG engram cells with DTR, we examined the effect of DG engram cell 
ablation following optical LTP-induced behavioral rescue (Fig. 3p). Within-animal 
comparisons (Test 1 vs. Test 2) showed a decrease in freezing behavior of LTP-rescued AD 
mice in which DG engram cells were ablated. These data strengthen the link between DG 
engram cells with restored spine density and the long-term behavioral rescue in early AD 
mice.
Roy et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 To examine if the optical LTP-induced behavioral rescue could be applied to DG engram 
cells from other learning experiences, we labeled memory engrams for inhibitory avoidance 
or novel object location in early AD mice (Fig. 4a). Early AD mice showed memory 
impairments in inhibitory avoidance (IA) memory and novel object location (NOL) spatial 
memory (Fig. 4b–c). Optical LTP-induced spine rescue at the PP-DG engram synapses was 
sufficient to reverse long-term memory impairments of early AD mice in both behavioral 
paradigms, thus demonstrating the versatility of our engram-based intervention.
Prior studies that examined early stages of AD found correlations between memory 
impairments and synaptic pathology at the EC PP input into the DG3–4,6. It has been 
proposed that these early cognitive deficits are a failure of memory encoding based on 
behavioral observations in human patients8–9. Here, however, we have shown that 
optogenetic activation of hippocampal cells active during learning elicits memory recall in 
mouse models of early AD. To our knowledge, this is the first rigorous demonstration that 
memory failure in early AD models reflects an impairment in the retrieval of information. 
Further support for a memory retrieval impairment in early AD comes from the fact that 
impairments are in long-term memory (at least one day long), but not in short-term memory 
(~1 hr after training), which is consistent with a retrieval deficit. The retrieval deficit in early 
AD models is similar to memory deficits observed in amnesia induced by impairing memory 
consolidation via protein synthesis inhibitors14. The underlying mechanism of memory 
failure in early AD patients may not necessarily parallel the molecular and circuit 
impairments observed in mouse models of early AD. For instance, some early AD patients 
can exhibit amyloid plaque deposition years before the onset of cognitive decline9. However, 
converging data on the underlying mechanism for genetically- and pharmacologically-
induced amnesia in animal models increase the possibility that similar memory retrieval-
based failures may also operate in an early stage of AD patients. While we have shown that 
amnesia in early AD mice is a deficit of memory retrieval, it remains possible that the long-
term maintenance of memory storage may also gradually become compromised as the 
disease proceeds from the early stage to more advanced stages, and eventually lost with 
neuronal degeneration. Further research will investigate these possibilities.
Our conclusions apply to episodic memory, which involves processing by hippocampal and 
other medial temporal lobe (MTL) structures. In the literature9, it is widely recognized that 
early AD patients exhibit non-episodic memory deficits as well, which would involve brain 
structures other than the MTL. Additional work is required to examine mechanisms 
underlying cognitive impairments in these other types of memories. Nevertheless, our 
findings already contribute to a better understanding of memory retrieval deficits in several 
cases of early AD, and may apply to other pathological conditions, such as Huntington’s 
disease8 in which patients show difficulty in memory recall.
Consistent with several studies highlighting the importance of dendritic spines3,6,14,26 in 
relation to memory processing, we observed an engram-cell specific decrease in spine 
density that correlated with memory deficits in early AD. Natural rescue of memory recall in 
early AD mice required the DG engram cells in which synaptic density deficits have been 
restored by an application of in vivo optical LTP protocols to the EC cells activated by 
specific learning. In contrast, the application of optical LTP protocols to a much wider array 
Roy et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 of excitatory EC cells projecting to the DG, which may be analogous to deep brain 
stimulation (DBS), did not rescue memory in AD mice. A potential explanation for this 
observation is that DG granule cells (GCs) may contribute to a variety of memories through 
their partially overlapping engram cell ensembles in a competitive manner, and that 
activation of a large number of these ensembles simultaneously may interfere with a 
selective activation of an individual ensemble. Thus, activation of a more targeted engram 
cell ensemble may be a key requirement for effective retrieval of the specific memory, which 
is difficult to achieve with the current DBS strategy.
Genetic manipulations of specific neuronal populations can have profound effects on 
cognitive impairments of AD27. We propose that strategies applied to engram circuits can 
support long-lasting improvements in cognitive functions, which may provide insights and 
therapeutic value for future approaches that rescue memory in AD patients.
Methods
Subjects
The APP/PS110 double transgenic AD mice, originally described as Line 85, were obtained 
from Jackson Laboratory (stock number 004462). Under the control of mouse prion 
promoter elements, these mice express a chimeric mouse/human APP transgene containing 
Swedish mutations (K595N/M596L) as well as a mutant human PS1 transgene (delta exon 9 
variant). To label memory engram cells in APP/PS1 mice, we generated a triple transgenic 
mouse line by mating c-fos-tTA11,28 transgenic mice with APP/PS1 double transgenic mice. 
The PS1/APP/tau18 triple transgenic AD mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory 
(stock number 004807). These 3xTg-AD mice express a mutant human PS1 transgene 
(M146V), a human APP transgene containing Swedish mutations (KM670/671NL) and a 
human tau transgene harboring the P301L mutation. All mouse lines were maintained as 
hemizygotes. Mice had access to food and water ad libitum and were socially housed in 
numbers of two to five littermates until surgery. Following surgery, mice were singly housed. 
For behavioral experiments, all mice were male and 7–9 months old. For optogenetic 
experiments, mice had been raised on food containing 40 mg kg−1 DOX for at least one 
week before surgery, and remained on DOX for the remainder of the experiments except for 
the target engram labeling days. For in vitro electrophysiology experiments, mice were 24–
28 days old at the time of surgery. All experiments were conducted in accordance with U.S. 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Department of Comparative Medicine and Committee of Animal Care.
Viral constructs
Our previously established method11 for labeling memory engram cells combined c-fos-tTA 
transgenic mice with a doxycycline (DOX)-sensitive adeno-associated virus (AAV). 
However, in this study, we modified the method using a double-virus system to label 
memory engram cells in the early AD mice, which already carry two transgenes. The pAAV-
c-fos-tTA plasmid was constructed by cloning a 1 kb fragment from the c-fos gene (550 bp 
upstream of c-fos exon I through 35 bp into exon II) into an AAV backbone using the KpnI 
restriction site at the 5′ terminus and the SpeI restriction site at the 3′ terminus. The AAV 
Roy et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 backbone contained the tTA-Advanced29 sequence at the SpeI restriction site. The pAAV-
TRE-ChR2-EYFP and pAAV-TRE-EYFP constructs were previously described11–12. The 
pAAV-TRE-oChIEF-tdTomato20 plasmid was constructed by replacing the ChR2-EYFP 
fragment from the pAAV-TRE-ChR2-EYFP plasmid using NheI and MfeI restriction sites. 
The pAAV-CaMKII-oChIEF-tdTomato plasmid was constructed by replacing the TRE 
fragment from the pAAV-TRE-oChIEF-tdTomato plasmid using BamHI and EcoRI 
restriction sites. The pAAV-TRE-DTR-EYFP25 plasmid was constructed by replacing the 
ChR2 fragment from the pAAV-TRE-ChR2-EYFP plasmid using EcoRI and AgeI restriction 
sites. AAV vectors were serotyped with AAV9 coat proteins and packaged at the University 
of Massachusetts Medical School Gene Therapy Center and Vector Core. Viral titers were 
1.5 × 1013 genome copy (GC) ml−1 for AAV9-c-fos-tTA, AAV9-TRE-ChR2-EYFP and 
AAV9-TRE-EYFP, 1 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV9-TRE-oChIEF-tdTomato, 4 × 1013 GC ml−1 
for AAV9-CaMKII-oChIEF-tdTomato and 2 × 1013 GC ml−1 for AAV9-TRE-DTR-EYFP.
Surgery and optic fiber implants
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane or 500 mg kg−1 avertin for stereotaxic injections14. 
Injections were targeted bilaterally to the DG (−2.0 mm AP, +/− 1.3 mm ML, −1.9 mm DV), 
MEC (−4.7 mm AP, +/− 3.35 mm ML, −3.3 mm DV) and LEC (−3.4 mm AP, +/− 4.3 mm 
ML, −4.0 mm DV). Injection volumes were 300 nl for DG and 400 nl for MEC and LEC. 
Viruses were injected at 70 nl min−1 using a glass micropipette attached to a 10 ml Hamilton 
microsyringe. The needle was lowered to the target site and remained for 5 min before 
beginning the injection. After the injection, the needle stayed for 10 min before it was 
withdrawn. A custom DG implant containing two optic fibers (200 mm core diameter; Doric 
Lenses) was lowered above the injection site (−2.0 mm AP, +/− 1.3 mm ML, −1.7 mm DV). 
The implant was secured to the skull with two jewelry screws, adhesive cement (C&B 
Metabond) and dental cement. An opaque cap derived from the top part of an Eppendorf 
tube protected the implant. Mice were given 1.5 mg kg−1 metacam as analgesic and allowed 
to recover for 2 weeks before behavioral experiments. All injection sites were verified 
histologically. As criteria, we only included mice with virus expression limited to the 
targeted regions.
Systemic injection of kainic acid
For seizure experiments11, mice were taken off DOX for 1 day and injected intraperitoneally 
with 15 mg kg−1 kainic acid (KA). Mice were returned to DOX food 6 hours after KA 
treatment and perfused the next day for immunohistochemistry procedures.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were dispatched using 750–1000 mg kg−1 avertin and perfused transcardially with 
PBS, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were extracted and incubated in 4% 
PFA at room temperature overnight. Brains were transferred to PBS and 50 μm coronal 
slices were prepared using a vibratome. For immunostaining14, each slice was placed in PBS 
+ 0.2% Triton X-100 (PBS-T), with 5% normal goat serum for 1 hr and then incubated with 
primary antibody at 4°C for 24 hr. Slices then underwent three wash steps for 10 min each in 
PBS-T, followed by 1 hr incubation with secondary antibody. After three more wash steps of 
10 min each in PBS-T, slices were mounted on microscope slides. All analyses were 
Roy et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 performed blind to the experimental conditions. Antibodies used for staining were as 
follows: to stain for ChR2-EYFP, DTR-EYFP or EYFP alone, slices were incubated with 
primary chicken anti-GFP (1:1000, Life Technologies) and visualized using anti-chicken 
Alexa-488 (1:200). For plaques, slices were stained using primary mouse anti-β-amyloid 
(1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich) and secondary anti-mouse Alexa-488 (1:500). cFos was stained 
with rabbit anti-cFos (1:500, Calbiochem) and anti-rabbit Alexa-568 (1:300). Adult newborn 
neurons were stained with guinea pig anti-DCX (1:1000, Millipore) and anti-guinea pig 
Alexa-555 (1:500). Neuronal nuclei were stained with mouse anti-NeuN (1:200, Millipore) 
and Alexa-488 (1:200). DG mossy cell axons were stained with mouse anti-CR (1:1000, 
Swant) and Alexa-555 (1:300).
Cell counting
To characterize the expression pattern of ChR2-EYFP, DTR-EYFP, EYFP alone and 
oChIEF-tdTomato in control and AD mice, the number of EYFP+/tdTomato+ neurons were 
counted from 4–5 coronal slices per mouse (n = 3–5 mice per group). Coronal slices 
centered on coordinates covered by optic fiber implants were taken for DG quantification 
and sagittal slices centered on injection coordinates were taken for MEC and LEC. 
Fluorescence images were acquired using a Zeiss AxioImager.Z1/ApoTome microscope 
(20X). Automated cell counting analysis was performed using ImageJ software. The cell 
body layers of DG granule cells (upper blade), MEC or LEC cells were outlined as a region 
of interest (ROI) according to the DAPI signal in each slice. The number of EYFP+/
tdTomato+ cells per section was calculated by applying a threshold above background 
fluorescence. Data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel with the Statplus plug-in. A similar 
approach was applied for quantifying Aβ plaques, cFos+ neurons and adult newborn (DCX+) 
neurons. Total engram cell reactivation calculated as ((cFos+ EYFP+)/(Total DAPI+)) × 100. 
Chance overlap calculated as ((cFos+/Total DAPI+) × (EYFP+/Total DAPI+)) × 100. 
Percentage of adult newborn neurons expressing neuronal markers was calculated as 
((NeuN+ DCX+)/(Total DCX+) × 100. DAPI+ counts were approximated from 5 coronal/
sagittal slices using ImageJ. All counting experiments were conducted blind to experimental 
group. Researcher 1 trained the animals, prepared slices and randomized images, while 
Researcher 2 performed semi-automated cell counting. Statistical comparisons were 
performed using unpaired t tests: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
Spine density analysis
Engram cells were labeled using c-fos-tTA-driven synthesis of ChR2-EYFP or EYFP alone. 
The EYFP signal was amplified using immunohistochemistry procedures after which 
fluorescence z-stacks were taken by confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM700) using a 40X 
objective. Maximum intensity projections were generated using ZEN Black software (Zeiss). 
Four mice per experimental group were analyzed for dendritic spines. For each mouse, 30–
40 dendritic fragments of 10 μm length were quantified (n = 120–160 fragments per group). 
To measure spine density of DG engram cells with a focus on entorhinal cortical inputs, 
distal dendritic fragments in the middle-to-outer molecular layer (ML) were selected. For 
CA3 and CA1 engram cells, apical and basal dendritic fragments were selected. To compute 
spine density, the number of spines counted on each fragment was normalized by the 
cylindrical approximation of the surface of the specific fragment. Experiments were 
Roy et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 conducted blind to experimental group. Researcher 1 imaged dendritic fragments and 
randomized images, while Researcher 2 performed manual spine counting.
In vitro recordings
Following isoflurane anesthesia, brains were quickly removed and used to prepare sagittal 
slices (300 μm) in an oxygenated cutting solution at 4°C with a vibratome14. Slices were 
incubated at room temperature in oxygenated ACSF until the recordings. The cutting 
solution contained (in mM): 3 KCl, 0.5 CaCl2, 10 MgCl2, 25 NaHCO3, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 10 D-
glucose, 230 sucrose, saturated with 95%O2-5%CO2 (pH 7.3, osmolarity of 340 mOsm). 
The ACSF contained (in mM): 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 25 NaHCO3, 1.2 
NaH2PO4, 10 D-glucose, saturated with 95%O2-5% CO2 (pH 7.3, 300 mOsm). Individual 
slices were transferred to a submerged experimental chamber and perfused with oxygenated 
ACSF warmed at 35°C (+/− 0.5°C) at a rate of 3 ml min−1 during recordings. Current or 
voltage clamp recordings were performed under an IR-DIC microscope (Olympus) with a 
40X water immersion objective (0.8 NA), equipped with four automatic manipulators (Luigs 
& Neumann) and a CCD camera (Hamamatsu). Borosilicate glass pipettes (Sutter 
Instruments) were fabricated with resistances of 8–10 MΩ. The intracellular solution (in 
mM) for current clamp recordings was: 110 K-gluconate, 10 KCl, 10 HEPES, 4 ATP, 0.3 
GTP, 10 phosphocreatine, 0.5% biocytin (pH 7.25, 290 mOsm). Recordings used two dual 
channel amplifiers (Molecular Devices), a 2 kHz filter, 20 kHz digitization and an 
ADC/DAC data acquisition unit (Instrutech) running on custom software in Igor Pro 
(Wavemetrics). Data acquisition was suspended whenever the resting membrane potential 
was depolarized above −50 mV or the access resistance (RA) exceeded 20 MΩ. Optogenetic 
stimulation was achieved using a 460 nm LED light source (Lumen Dynamics) driven by 
TTL input with a delay onset of 25 μs (subtracted offline for latency estimation). Light 
power on the sample was 33 mW/mm2. To test oChIEF expression, EC cells were stimulated 
with a single light pulse of 1 s, repeated 10 times every 5 s. DG granule cells were held at 
−70 mV. Optical LTP protocol: 5 min baseline (10 blue light pulses of 2 ms each, repeated 
every 30 s) was acquired before the onset of the LTP protocol (100 blue light pulses of 2 ms 
each at a frequency of 100 Hz, repeated 5 times every 3 min) and the effect on synaptic 
amplitude was recorded for 30 min (1 pulse of 2 ms every 30 s). Potentiation was observed 
in 6 out of 30 cells and results were statistically confirmed using a two-tailed paired t test. 
Experiments were performed in the presence of 10 μM gabazine (Tocris) and 2 μM 
CGP55845 (Tocris). Recorded cells were recovered for morphological identification using 
streptavidin CF633 (Biotium).
In vivo recordings
Multi-unit responses to optical stimulation were recorded in the DG of mice injected with a 
cocktail of AAV9-c-fos-tTA and AAV9-TRE-oChIEF-tdTomato viruses into MEC/LEC. 
Mice were anesthetized (10 ml kg−1) using a mixture of ketamine (100 mg ml−1)/xylazine 
(20 mg ml−1) and placed in the stereotactic system. Anesthesia was maintained by booster 
doses of ketamine (100 mg kg−1). An optrode consisting of a tungsten electrode (0.5 MΩ) 
attached to an optic fiber (200 μm core diameter), with the tip of the electrode extending 
beyond the tip of the fiber by 300 μm, was used for simultaneous optical stimulation and 
extracellular recording. The power intensity of light emitted from the optrode was calibrated 
Roy et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 to about 10 mW, consistent with the power used in behavioral assays. oChIEF+ cells were 
identified by delivering 20 ms light pulses (1 Hz) to the recording site every 50–100 μm. 
After light-responsive cells were detected, multi-unit activity in response to trains of light 
pulses (200 ms) at 100 Hz was recorded. Data acquisition used an Axon CNS Digidata 
1440A system. MATLAB analysis was performed, as previously described12.
Behavior assays
Experiments were conducted during the light cycle (7 am to 7 pm). Mice were randomly 
assigned to experimental groups for specific behavioral assays immediately after surgery. 
Mice were habituated to investigator handling for 1–2 minutes on three consecutive days. 
Handling took place in the holding room where the mice were housed. Prior to each 
handling session, mice were transported by wheeled cart to and from the vicinity of the 
behavior rooms to habituate them to the journey. For natural memory recall sessions, data 
were quantified using FreezeFrame software. Optogenetic stimulation interfered with the 
motion detection, and therefore all light-induced freezing behavior was manually quantified. 
All behavior experiments were analyzed blind to experimental group. Unpaired student’s t-
tests were used for independent group comparisons, with Welch’s correction when group 
variances were significantly different. Given behavioral variability, initial assays were 
performed using a minimum of 10 mice per group to ensure adequate power for any 
observed differences. Experiments that resulted in significant behavioral effects were 
replicated three times in the laboratory. Following behavioral protocols, brain sections were 
prepared to confirm efficient viral labeling in target areas. Animals lacking adequate 
labeling were excluded prior to behavior quantification.
Contextual fear conditioning
Two distinct contexts were employed14. Context A were 29 × 25 × 22 cm chambers with 
grid floors, opaque triangular ceilings, red lighting, and scented with 1% acetic acid. Four 
mice were run simultaneously in four identical context A chambers. Context B consisted of 
four 30 × 25 × 33 cm chambers with perspex floors, transparent square ceilings, bright white 
lighting, and scented with 0.25% benzaldehyde. All mice were conditioned in context A 
(two 0.60 mA shocks of 2 s duration in 5 min), and tested (3 min) in contexts A and B one 
day later. Experiments showed no generalization in the neutral context B. All experimental 
groups were counter-balanced for chamber within contexts. Floors of chambers were 
cleaned with quatricide before and between runs. Mice were transported to and from the 
experimental room in their home cages using a wheeled cart. The cart and cages remained in 
an anteroom to the experimental rooms during all behavioral experiments. For engram 
labeling, mice were kept on regular food without DOX for 24 hours prior to training. When 
training was complete, mice were switched back to food containing 40 mg kg−1 DOX.
Open field
Spontaneous motor activity was measured in an open field arena (52 × 26 cm) for 10 min. 
All mice were transferred to the testing room and acclimated for 30 min before the test 
session. During the testing period, lighting in the room was turned off. The apparatus was 
cleaned with quatricide before and between runs. Total movements (distance traveled and 
velocity) in the arena were quantified using an automated infrared (IR) detection system 
Roy et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 (EthoVision XT, Noldus). The tracking software plotted heat maps for each mouse, which 
was averaged to create representative heat maps for each genotype. Raw data was extracted 
and analyzed using Microsoft Excel.
Engram activation
For light-induced freezing behavior, a context distinct from the CFC training chamber 
(context A) was used. These were 30 × 25 × 33 cm chambers with perspex floors, square 
ceilings, white lighting, and scented with 0.25% benzaldehyde. Chamber ceilings were 
customized to hold a rotary joint (Doric Lenses) connected to two 0.32 m patch cords. All 
mice had patch cords fitted to the optic fiber implant prior to testing. Two mice were run 
simultaneously in two identical chambers. ChR2 was stimulated at 20 Hz (15 ms pulse 
width) using a 473 nm laser (10–15 mW), for the designated epochs. Testing sessions were 
12 min in duration, consisting of four 3 min epochs, with the first and third as light-off 
epochs, and the second and fourth as light-on epochs. At the end of 12 min, the mouse was 
detached and returned to its home cage. Floors of chambers were cleaned with quatricide 
before and between runs.
In vivo optical LTP
One day after CFC training and engram labeling (DG+PP terminals) in control and early AD 
groups, mice were placed in an open field arena (52 × 26 cm) after patch cords were fitted to 
the fiber implants. Following a 15 min acclimatization period, mice with oChIEF+ PP 
engram terminals in the DG received the optical LTP23 protocol (100 blue light pulses of 2 
ms each at a frequency of 100 Hz, repeated 5 times every 3 min). This in vivo protocol was 
repeated 10 times over a 3 hour duration. After induction, mice remained in the arena for an 
additional 15 min before returning to their home cage. To apply optical LTP to a large 
portion of excitatory MEC neurons, an AAV virus expressing oChIEF-tdTomato under the 
CaMKII promoter, rather than a c-fos-tTA/TRE virus (i.e., engram labeling), was used. For 
protein synthesis inhibition experiments, immediately after the in vivo LTP induction 
protocol mice received 75 mg kg−1 anisomycin (Aniso) or an equivalent volume of saline 
(Saline) intra-peritoneally. Mice were then returned to their home cages. An hour later, a 
second injection of Aniso or Saline was delivered.
Inhibitory avoidance
A 30 × 28 × 34 cm unscented chamber with transparent square ceilings and intermediate 
lighting was used. The chamber consisted of two sections, one with grid flooring and the 
other with a white light platform. During the conditioning session (1 min), mice were placed 
on the light platform, which is the less preferred section of the chamber (relative to the grid 
section). Once mice entered the grid section of the chamber (all four feet), 0.80 mA shocks 
of 2 s duration were delivered. On average, each mouse received 2–3 shocks per training 
session. After 1 min, mice were returned to their home cage. The next day, latency to enter 
the grid section of the chamber as well as total time on the light platform was measured (3 
min test).
Roy et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Novel object location
Spatial memory was measured in a white plastic chamber (28 × 28 cm) that had patterns 
(series of parallel lines or circles) on opposite walls. The apparatus was unscented and 
intermediate lighting was used. All mice were transferred to the behavioral room and 
acclimated for 30 min before the training session. On day 1, mice were allowed to explore 
the chamber with patterns for 15 min. On days 2 and 3, mice were introduced into the 
chamber that had an object (7 cm tall glass flask filled with metal beads) placed adjacent to 
either patterned wall. The position of the object was counter-balanced within each genotype. 
On day 4, mice were placed into the chamber with the object either in the same position as 
the previous exposure (familiar) or at a novel location based on wall patterning. Frequency 
of visits to the familiar and novel object locations was quantified using an automated 
detection system (EthoVision XT, Noldus). Total time exploring the object was also 
measured (nose within 1.5 cm of object). The tracking software plotted heat maps based on 
exploration time, which was averaged to create representative heat maps for each genotype. 
Raw data was extracted and analyzed using Microsoft Excel.
Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Characterization of 7-month old early AD mice
a–d, Images showing hippocampal Aβ+ plaques lacking in control mice (a, b) and 7-month 
old AD mice (c), which showed an age-dependent increase in 9-month old AD mice (d). e–f, 
Images showing neuronal nuclei (NeuN) staining of DG granule cells in control (e) and 7-
month old AD (f) mice. g, NeuN+ fluorescence intensity of the granule cell layer from 
control and AD sections shown in e–f (n = 8 mice per group). h–i, Heat maps showing 
exploratory behavior in an open field arena from control (h) and 7-month old AD (i) mice. 
j–k, Distance traveled (j) and velocity (k) did not differ between control and AD groups (n = 
9 mice per group). l–m, Images showing adult newborn neurons (DCX+) in DG sections 
from control mice (l) that are double positive for NeuN (m). n, Percentage of NeuN+ cells 
Roy et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 among DCX+ cells (n = 3 mice). o–p, Images showing DCX+ neurons in DG sections from 
control (o) and AD (p) groups (n = 4 mice per group). q, DCX+ cell counts from control and 
AD mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Figure 2. Labeling and engram activation of early AD mice on DOX
a, Mice are taken off DOX for 24 hours in the home cage (HC) and subsequently trained in 
CFC. DG sections (n = 3 mice per group) revealed 2.05% ChR2-EYFP labeling in the HC, 
consistent with the previously established engram tagging strategy11. b, Mice were injected 
with a virus cocktail of AAV9-c-fos-tTA and AAV9-TRE-ChR2-EYFP. After one day off 
DOX, kainic acid was used to induce seizures. Image showing efficient labeling throughout 
the DG. c, ChR2-EYFP cell counts from DG sections shown in b (n = 3 mice). d, Behavioral 
schedule for optogenetic activation of DG engram cells. e, Memory recall 1 day after 
training (Test 1) showed less freezing of AD mice compared to control mice (n = 8 mice per 
group). f, Engram activation with blue light stimulation (left). Average freezing for the two 
light-off and light-on epochs (right). Statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t 
tests; **P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Chronic DG engram activation in early AD mice did not rescue long-
term memory
a, Behavioral schedule for repeated DG engram activation experiment. b, AD mice in which 
a DG memory engram was reactivated twice a day for two days (AD+ChR2) showed 
increased STM freezing levels compared to memory recall prior to engram reactivation 
(ChR2-STM test, n = 9 mice per group). c, Memory recall 1 day after repeated DG engram 
activations (ChR2-LTM test). N.S., not significant. Statistical comparisons are performed 
using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Figure 4. Engram activation restores fear memory in triple transgenic and 
PS1/APP/tau models of early AD
a, Triple transgenic mouse line obtained by mating c-fos-tTA transgenic mice11,28 with 
double transgenic APP/PS1 AD mice10. These mice combined with a DOX-sensitive AAV 
virus permits memory engram labeling in early AD. b, Triple transgenic mice were injected 
with AAV9-TRE-ChR2-EYFP and implanted with an optic fiber targeting the DG. c, Image 
showing DG engram cells of triple transgenic mice 24 hours after CFC. d, ChR2-EYFP cell 
counts from control and triple transgenic AD mice (n = 5 mice per group). e, Behavioral 
schedule for engram activation. f, Memory recall 1 day after training (Test 1) showed less 
freezing of triple transgenic AD mice compared to control mice (n = 10 mice per group). g, 
Engram activation with blue light stimulation (left). Average freezing for the two light-off 
and light-on epochs (right). h, Triple transgenic AD model (3xTg-AD) as previously 
reported18. A cocktail of AAV9-c-fos-tTA and AAV9-TRE-ChR2-EYFP viruses were used to 
label memory engrams in 3xTg-AD mice. i, Image showing memory engram cells in the DG 
of 3xTg-AD mice 24 hours after CFC. j, ChR2-EYFP cell counts from DG sections of 
Roy et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 control and 3xTg-AD mice (n = 4 mice per group). k, Behavioral schedule for engram 
activation. l, Memory recall 1 day after training (Test 1) showed less freezing of 3xTg-AD 
mice compared to control mice (n = 9 mice per group). m, Engram activation with blue light 
stimulation (left). Average freezing for the two light-off and light-on epochs (right). 
Statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Data are 
presented as mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Figure 5. Dendritic spines of engram cells in 7-month old early AD mice
a, Average dendritic spine density of DG engram cells showed an age-dependent decrease in 
7-month old APP/PS1 AD mice (n = 7032 spines) as compared to 5-month old AD mice (n 
= 4577 spines, n = 4 mice per group). Dashed line represents spine density of control mice 
(1.21). b, (Left) Average dendritic spine density of CA3 engram cells in control (n = 5123 
spines) and AD mice (n = 6019 spines, n = 3 mice per group). (Right) Average dendritic 
spine density of CA1 engram cells in control (n = 9120 spines) and AD mice (n = 7988 
spines, n = 5 mice per group). N.S., not significant. Statistical comparisons are performed 
using unpaired t tests; **P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. High fidelity responses of oChIEF+ cells and dendritic spines of DG 
engram cells after in vitro optical LTP
a, Entorhinal cortex (EC) cells were injected with a virus cocktail containing AAV9-TRE-
oChIEF-tdTomato for activity-dependent labeling. b, Image showing a biocytin-filled 
oChIEF+ stellate cell in EC. c, 100 Hz (2 ms pulse width) stimulation of an oChIEF+ cell 
across 20 consecutive trials. Spiking responses exhibit high fidelity. d, Average dendritic 
spine density of biocytin-filled DG cells showed an increase following optical LTP induction 
in vitro (n = 1452 spines, n = 6 cells). Statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t 
tests; *P < 0.05. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Figure 7. Behavioral rescue and spine restoration by optical LTP is protein-
synthesis dependent
a, Modified behavioral schedule for long-term rescue of memory recall in AD mice in the 
presence of saline or anisomycin (left). Memory recall 2 days after LTP induction followed 
by drug administration showed less freezing of AD mice treated with anisomycin (AD + 100 
Hz + Aniso) compared to saline treated AD mice (AD + 100 Hz + Saline, n = 9 mice per 
group; right). Dashed line represents freezing level of control mice (48.53). b, Average 
Roy et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 dendritic spine density in early AD mice treated with anisomycin after LTP induction (n = 
4810 spines) was decreased compared to saline treated AD mice (n = 6242 spines, n = 4 
mice per group). Dashed line represents spine density of control mice (1.21). Statistical 
comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05. Data are presented as mean ± 
SEM.
Extended Data Figure 8. Rescued early AD mice behavior in a neutral context and control mice 
following in vivo optical LTP
a, After the long-term rescue of memory recall in AD mice (Test 2, Fig. 3m), animals were 
placed in an untrained neutral context to measure generalization (n = 10 mice per group). 
Rescued AD mice (AD+100 Hz) did not display freezing behavior. b, (Left) Average 
dendritic spine density of DG engram cells from control mice remained unchanged 
following optical LTP induction in vivo (Control + 100 Hz, n = 4211 spines, n = 3 mice; 
Control data from Figure 2c). (Right) The behavioral rescue protocol applied to early AD 
mice (Fig. 3m) was tested in age-matched control mice (n = 9 mice per group). Similar 
freezing levels were observed following optical LTP (Test 2) as compared to memory recall 
prior to the 100 Hz protocol (Test 1). N.S., not significant. Statistical comparisons are 
performed using unpaired t tests. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. Optical LTP using a CaMKII-oChIEF virus did not rescue memory in 
early AD mice
a, AAV virus expressing oChIEF-tdTomato under a CaMKII promoter. b, CaMKII-oChIEF 
virus injected into MEC and LEC. c–d, Images showing tdTomato labeling in a large portion 
of excitatory MEC neurons (c) as well as the PP terminals in DG (d). e, In vivo optical LTP 
protocol23. f, Behavioral schedule for long-term rescue of memory recall in AD mice (left). 
In contrast to the engram-specific strategy, long-term memory could not be rescued by 
stimulating a large portion of excitatory PP terminals in the DG (right; n = 9 mice per 
group). N.S. not significant. Statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests. 
Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Extended Data Figure 10. Normal DG mossy cell density after engram cell ablation
Roy et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 a–d, Images showing DG engram cells after saline treatment (a) and the corresponding 
calretinin positive (CR+) mossy cell axons (b). DTR-EYFP engram cell labeling after DT 
treatment (c) and the respective CR+ mossy cell axons (d). e, CR+ fluorescence intensity of 
mossy cell axons from saline and DT treated DG sections shown in a–d (n = 8 mice per 
group). Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Acknowledgments
We thank X. Liu for the c-fos-tTA construct; S. Huang, T. Okuyama, and T. Kitamura for help with experiments; W. 
Yu, S. LeBlanc, and X. Zhou for technical assistance; L. Brenner for proofreading; and all members of the 
Tonegawa laboratory for their support. We thank Minmin Luo for sharing the DTR coding sequence. This work was 
supported by the RIKEN Brain Science Institute, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the JPB Foundation (to 
S.T.).
References
1. Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol Rev. 2001; 81:741–766. 
[PubMed: 11274343] 
2. Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure. Science. 2002; 298:789–791. [PubMed: 
12399581] 
3. Jacobsen JS, et al. Early-onset behavioral and synaptic deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:5161–5166. [PubMed: 16549764] 
4. Hsia AY, et al. Plaque-independent disruption of neural circuits in Alzheimer’s disease mouse 
models. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 96:3228–3233. [PubMed: 10077666] 
5. Mucke L, et al. High-level neuronal expression of Aβ1-42 in wild-type human amyloid protein 
precursor transgenic mice: synaptotoxicity without plaque formation. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:4050–
4058. [PubMed: 10818140] 
6. Terry RD, et al. Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the 
major correlate of cognitive impairment. Ann Neurol. 1991; 30:572–580. [PubMed: 1789684] 
7. Granholm E, Butters N. Associative encoding and retrieval in Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s 
disease. Brain Cognition. 1988; 7:335–347. [PubMed: 2969744] 
8. Hodges JR, Salmon DP, Butters N. Differential impairment of semantic and episodic memory in 
Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s diseases: a controlled prospective study. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 1990; 53:1089–1095. [PubMed: 2149861] 
9. Weintraub S, Wicklund AH, Salmon DP. The neuropsychological profile of Alzheimer disease. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012; 2:a006171. [PubMed: 22474609] 
10. Jankowsky JL, et al. Mutant presenilins specifically elevate the levels of the 42 residue β-amyloid 
peptide in vivo: evidence for augmentation of a 42-residue γ secretase. Hum Mol Genet. 2004; 
13:159–170. [PubMed: 14645205] 
11. Liu XL, et al. Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall. 
Nature. 2012; 484:381–385. [PubMed: 22441246] 
12. Ramirez S, et al. Creating a false memory in the hippocampus. Science. 2013; 341:387–391. 
[PubMed: 23888038] 
13. Redondo RL, et al. Bidirectional switch of the valence associated with a hippocampal contextual 
memory engram. Nature. 2014; 513:426–430. [PubMed: 25162525] 
14. Ryan TJ, Roy DS, Pignatelli M, Arons A, Tonegawa S. Engram cells retain memory under 
retrograde amnesia. Science. 2015; 348:1007–1013. [PubMed: 26023136] 
15. Denny CA, et al. Hippocampal memory traces are differentially modulated by experience, time, 
and adult neurogenesis. Neuron. 2014; 83:189–201. [PubMed: 24991962] 
16. Harris JA, et al. Transsynaptic progression of amyloid-β-induced neuronal dysfunction within the 
entorhinal-hippocampal network. Neuron. 2010; 68:428–441. [PubMed: 21040845] 
17. Hyman BT, Van Hoesen GW, Kromer LJ, Damasio AR. Perforant pathway changes and the 
memory impairment of Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol. 1986; 20:472–481. [PubMed: 3789663] 
Roy et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 18. Oddo S, et al. Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease with plaques and tangles: 
intracellular Aβ and synaptic dysfunction. Neuron. 2003; 39:409–421. [PubMed: 12895417] 
19. Rodriguez JJ, et al. Impaired adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of a triple transgenic mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One. 2008; 3:e2935. [PubMed: 18698410] 
20. Lin JY, Lin MZ, Steinbach P, Tsien RY. Characterization of engineered channelrhodopsin variants 
with improved properties and kinetics. Biophys J. 2009; 96:1803–1814. [PubMed: 19254539] 
21. Maletic-Savatic M, Malinow R, Svoboda K. Rapid dendritic morphogenesis in CA1 hippocampal 
dendrites induced by synaptic plasticity. Science. 1999; 283:1923–1927. [PubMed: 10082466] 
22. Engert F, Bonhoeffer T. Dendritic spine changes associated with hippocampal long-term synaptic 
plasticity. Nature. 1999; 399:66–70. [PubMed: 10331391] 
23. Nabavi S, et al. Engineering a memory with LTD and LTP. Nature. 2014; 511:348–352. [PubMed: 
24896183] 
24. Tamamaki N, Nojyo Y. Projection of the entorhinal layer II neurons in the rat as revealed by 
intracellular pressure-injection of neurobiotin. Hippocampus. 1993; 3:471–480. [PubMed: 
8269038] 
25. Zhan C, et al. Acute and long-term suppression of feeding behavior by POMC neurons in the 
brainstem and hypothalamus, respectively. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:3624–3632. [PubMed: 23426689] 
26. Tonegawa S, Liu X, Ramirez S, Redondo RL. Memory engram cells have come of age. Neuron. 
2015; 87:918–931. [PubMed: 26335640] 
27. Cisse M, et al. Reversing EphB2 depletion rescues cognitive functions in Alzheimer model. Nature. 
2011; 469:47–52. [PubMed: 21113149] 
28. Reijmers LG, Perkins BL, Matsuo N, Mayford M. Localization of a stable neural correlate of 
associative memory. Science. 2007; 317:1230–1233. [PubMed: 17761885] 
29. Urlinger S, et al. Exploring the sequence space for tetracycline-dependent transcriptional 
activators: novel mutations yield expanded range and sensitivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2000; 
97:7963–7968. [PubMed: 10859354] 
Roy et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Optogenetic activation of memory engrams restores fear memory in early AD mice
a–c, Aβ plaques in 9-month old AD mice (a), in DG (b), and in EC (c). d, Plaque counts in 
hippocampal sections (n = 4 mice per group). e, CFC behavioral schedule (n = 10 mice per 
group). f–i, Freezing levels of 7-month old AD groups during training (f), STM test (g), 
LTM test (h) or exposure to neutral context (i). j, cFos+ cell counts in the DG of 7-month old 
mice following CFC training or LTM test, represented in f, h (n = 4 mice per group). k–n, 
Freezing levels of 9-month old AD mice during training (k), STM test (l), LTM test (m) or 
exposure to neutral context (n). o, cFos+ cell counts in the DG of 9-month old mice (n = 3 
mice per group) following CFC training represented in k. p, Virus-mediated engram labeling 
strategy using a cocktail of AAV9-c-fos-tTA and AAV9-TRE-ChR2-EYFP. q, AD mice were 
injected with the two-viruses bilaterally and implanted with an optic fiber bilaterally into the 
DG. r, Behavioral schedule and DG-engram cell labeling (see Methods). s, ChR2-EYFP+ 
cell counts from DG sections shown in r (n = 3 mice per group). ND, not detected. t, 
Behavioral schedule for optogenetic activation of DG engram cells. u, ChR2-EYFP+ cell 
counts from 7-month old mice (n = 5 mice per group). v, Memory recall in Context A 1 day 
after training (Test 1, n = 9 mice per group). w, Freezing by blue light stimulation (left). 
Average freezing for two light-off and light-on epochs (right). x, Memory recall in Context 
Roy et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 A 3 days after training (Test 2). Statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Neural correlates of amnesia in early AD mice
a–b, Images showing dendritic spines from DG engram cells of control (a) and AD (b) 
groups. c, Average spine density showing a decrease in AD mice (n = 7032 spines) 
compared to controls (n = 9437 spines, n = 4 mice per group). d, For engram connectivity, 
MEC/LEC and DG cells were injected with virus cocktails. e, Engram connectivity 
behavioral schedule. Mice (n = 4 per group) were either given a natural exploration session 
(Light −) or a PP engram terminal stimulation session (Light +) in an open field. f, Image 
showing simultaneous labeling of engram terminals (red) and engram cells (green). Green 
terminals reflect mossy cell axons. g–h, Images showing cFos+/EYFP+ overlap in the DG. i, 
cFos+/EYFP+ counts from control and AD mice. Chance overlap (0.24) calculated (see 
Methods) and indicated by the dashed line. Statistical comparisons are performed using 
unpaired t tests; **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Reversal of engram-specific spine deficits rescues memory in early AD mice
a, Engram-specific optical LTP using two viruses. b, Virus cocktail injected into MEC/LEC. 
c–e, Images showing oChIEF labeling 24 hours after CFC: in MEC on DOX (left) and off 
DOX (right; c); in LEC off DOX (d); in DG off DOX (sagittal; e). Scale bar shown in c, 
applies to d and e. f, oChIEF+ cell counts (n = 3 mice per group). g, In vivo spiking of DG 
neurons in response to 100 Hz light applied to PP terminals. h, Optical LTP protocol23. i–j, 
In vitro responses of DG cells after optical LTP. Image showing biocytin-filled DG cell 
receiving oChIEF+ PP terminals (coronal; i). Excitatory post-synaptic potentials (EPSPs) 
showing a 10% increase in amplitude (n = 6 cells; j). k, For in vivo optical LTP at EC-DG 
synapses, MEC/LEC and DG cells were injected with virus cocktails. l, Protocol for in vivo 
spine restoration of DG engram cells in AD mice (left). Images showing dendritic spines of 
DG engram cells following LTP (middle). A two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-
hoc tests revealed a spine density restoration in AD+100 Hz mice (F1,211 = 7.21, P < 0.01, 
13025 spines, n = 4 mice per group; right). Dashed line represents control mice spine density 
(1.21). m, Behavioral schedule for memory rescue in AD mice (left). A two-way ANOVA 
with repeated measures followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed restored freezing in 
AD+100 Hz mice (F1,36 = 4.95, P < 0.05, n = 10 mice per group; right). Dashed line 
represents control mice freezing (48.53). n, Following rescue, mice were perfused for cFos+/
EYFP+ overlap cell counts. Chance estimated at 0.22. N.S., not significant. o, Construct for 
ablation of engram cells using DTR (left). Images showing DG engram cells after saline/DT 
Roy et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 administration (middle). DTR-EYFP cell counts (n = 5 mice per group; right). p, Behavioral 
schedule testing the necessity of engram cells following spine restoration (left). Memory 
recall showed less freezing of AD mice treated with DT (AD rescue + DTR + DT) compared 
to saline treated mice (n = 9 mice per group; right). Dashed line represents freezing of non-
stimulated early AD mice (20.48). Unless specified, statistical comparisons are performed 
using unpaired t tests; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Data are presented as mean ± 
SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Recovery of multiple types of hippocampal-dependent memories from amnesia in early 
AD
a, MEC/LEC and DG cells were injected with virus cocktails (left). Behavioral schedule for 
engram labeling (right). b, IA long-term rescue (n = 10 mice per group). Recall test 1 
showed decreased latency and time on platform for AD mice. A two-way ANOVA with 
repeated measures followed by Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed a recovery of IA memory 
in early AD mice (Latency: F1,27 = 25.22, P < 0.001; Time on platform: F1,27 = 6.46, P < 
0.05; Recall test 2). c, NOL long-term rescue (n = 15 mice per group). Average heat maps 
showing exploration time for familiar or novel locations (left or right, respectively). White 
circles represent object location. Recall test 1 showed comparable exploration of familiar 
locations by control and AD mice, however AD mice showed decreased exploration of novel 
locations. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures followed by Bonferroni post-hoc 
tests revealed a recovery of NOL memory in early AD mice (F1,56 = 5.87, P < 0.05; Recall 
test 2). Unless specified, statistical comparisons are performed using unpaired t tests; *P < 
0.05, **P < 0.01. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Roy et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 16.
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
HHMI Author Manuscript
